Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Who's in the driver's seat? Identifying causative variants of
colorectal cancer


Colorectal Cancer (CRC) is one of the leading causes of mortality in the
US, being the third most common cancer among both men and women. While an
exact cause of CRC has not yet been elucidated, the existence of a clear
heritable genetic component has been established. With the recent surge
of data from Genome-Wide Association Studies, a handful of CRC-associated
loci have been identified via tagSNPs. While the probability of the
tagSNPs themselves being the causative variants is low, the key may lie
among the number of single-base variants linked to each tagSNP. It is
crucial, in order to enhance our understanding CRC tumorigenesis, to
extract these functional variants from the pool of associated SNPs and
validate their causative significance within the cell.This project
combines bioinformatics and functional experiments to both identify and
assess the role of functional variants in CRC pathogenesis. One of the
major hurdles in understanding the role of CRC risk-associated SNPs is
the fact that virtually all variants lie in Non-Protein Coding Region,
often tens of thousands of bases away from flanking genes. By combining
variant data from publically available databases, such as that of the
ENCODE project, this research presents a method to prioritize all
variants within a set of disease-associated loci based on potential
regulatory functionality in silico. With this technique, we have
identified a handful of SNPs with functional potential that may be
functioning specifically in CRC initiation. In parallel, we are in the
process of developing a method to effectively produce isogenic cell lines
modeling the appropriate variant alleles, utilizing the CRISPR/Cas9
system to stimulate homologous recombination in the presence of a donor
template. With this method, transcriptional and regulatory changes within
the cell due to the single-base genomic edit can be measured in order to
characterize these functional variants. Utilizing this technology, we
have been able to create our first SNP model of SNP rs6983267, a known
functional variant whose risk SNP promotes CRC development by means of
increased binding and activation of WNT signaling pathway elements, c-Myc
and -Catenin. The ultimate goal of this project is to better understand
the role of CRC risk-associated variants, the result of which could have
substantial clinical relevance in the generation of new therapies and
diagnostics for the treatment of CRC.

