Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phase 1 randomized, open-label, fixed-sequence, 2-period study
of the effect of multiple doses of rifampin on palbociclib (PD-0332991)
pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers


BackgroundRifampin is a strong inducer of multiple Phase 1 and Phase 2
metabolic enzymes including cytochrome (CYP) P450 3A4 and
sulfotransferases (SULT). In vitro, the metabolism of palbociclib occurs
primarily through CYP3A4 and SULT2A1; thus, coadministration of rifampin
and palbociclib could result in decreased exposure of
palbociclib.MethodsThis open-label, 2-period, fixed-sequence study
assessed the effect of multiple oral doses of rifampin on single-dose
palbociclib pharmacokinetics (PK) in 15 healthy volunteers
(ClinicalTrials.gov; NCT01953731). Each subject received the following
treatments: Period 1, oral palbociclib 125 mg on day 1; Period 2, oral
rifampin 600 mg for 12 days and oral palbociclib 125 mg on day 8 (washout
of 12 days between the 2 palbociclib doses). Serial blood sampling for
palbociclib PK was performed predose and up to 120 hours post-palbociclib
dose in both periods. Plasma concentrations of palbociclib were measured
using validated high-performance liquid chromatography tandem mass
spectrometry methods. Palbociclib plasma PK parameters were estimated
using standard non-compartmental methods.ResultsMedian time to maximum
plasma concentration (Tmax) and mean half-life (t1/2) were shorter with
palbociclib plus rifampin relative to palbociclib alone. Adjusted
geometric mean palbociclib AUCinf (area under the curve from time zero to
infinity) and Cmax (maximal plasma concentration) following treatment
with rifampin (242.5 ngh/mL and 15.52 ng/mL, respectively) were
considerably lower relative to palbociclib administered alone (1568
ngh/mL and 51.42 ng/mL). Generally, study treatments were well tolerated
with no reported serious adverse events; 1 subject discontinued due to
liver function test abnormalities after receiving rifampin alone for 7
days in Period 2.ConclusionsTreatment with multiple doses of rifampin
with palbociclib decreased total (AUCinf) and peak (Cmax) palbociclib
exposure by approximately 85% and 70%, respectively, versus palbociclib
alone. Palbociclib was well tolerated when administered alone or in
combination with rifampin. Based on these results, concurrent
administration of palbociclib with strong CYP3A inducers should be
avoided.

