Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression patterns of scavenger receptor B-1 (SR-B1) to guide
biomimetic HDL gold nanoparticle therapy


Introduction: Treatment options for many advanced cancers are fairly
limited. New therapies that can open new paradigm are urgently needed. We
have recently developed a novel synthetic biomimetic HDL gold
nanoparticle (HDL NP) that demonstrated anti-tumor activity in cancer
cells via apoptosis (Yang et al. PNAS, 2013) Its activity correlated with
the expression of scavenger receptor-B1 (SR-B1) that binds to natural
HDLs and HDL NPs. SR-B1 is a high-affinity HDL receptor that facilitates
the bidirectional flux of free cholesterol and the transport of
esterified cholesterol to cells. The mechanism of action of HDL NPs
involved alterations in cholesterol flux and metabolism as well as
cholesterol-based cell-signaling pathways. Understanding the expression
patterns of SR-B1 in various human cancers can assist in developing HDL
NP therapy to broader indications.Methods: We used Oncomine Research
Edition public database to assess the gene expression levels of SR-B1 in
various human cell lines, cancer tissues, and normal tissues. T test was
use to compare cell line with the highest SR-B1 expression with the rest
of cell lines of various tumor types. Also comparison was made between
resected human cancer tissues and their counterpart normal tissues across
various histologies. Each significant t test results from all publicly
available array datasets within Oncomine were counted and compared among
different tumor types.Results: First, we compared the mRNA levels of
SR-B1 in human cancer tissues with those of normal tissues. Twenty
different tumor types were included. Among 20 different datasets of renal
cell carcinoma, 12 (60%) revealed statistically significant increase in
SR-B1 expression in cancer compared with normal renal tissue samples.
Other tumor types that showed 10% of databsets demonstrating the same
pattern of expression were esophageal (44%, 4/9), melanoma (43%, 3/7),
gastric (26%, 6/23), leukemia (21%, 6/29), lymphoma (20%, 6/30),
colorectal (19%, 7/36), liver (15%, 2/13), and prostate cancer (15%,
3/20). Second, we compared the mRNA levels of SR-B1 across various human
cancer cell lines. Among 17 different datasets that contain cancer cell
lines including melanoma cell lines, melanoma was found to have the
highest level of SR-B1 expression compared with the rest of the cell
lines of various cancer types in 11 (65%) datasets. Other tumor types
associated with 10% of datasets demonstrating the same highest level of
SR-B1 expression were liver (33%, 4/12), kidney (12%, 2/17), and leukemia
(11%, 2/19).Discussion: We found that renal cell carcinoma, melanoma, and
hepatocellular carcinoma were among the cancers that expressed higher
levels of SR-B1 compared with other cancers as well as with their normal
tissues. These tumors merit further investigation as targets for HDL NP
therapy either in the form of mono-therapy or in combination.

