Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Solute carrier family group of membrane transporter gene
alteration in collecting duct renal cell carcinoma


Collecting duct renal cell carcinoma (CDC) is a rare (1-3%) type of
kidney cancer, aggressive in nature, associated with poor prognosis and
limited response to treatments such as cisplatin/gemcitabine and tyrosine
kinase inhibitors. Accordingly, there is an unmet need for understanding
the molecular alterations associated with CDC and the development of
novel effective therapeutic agents for this disease. Since cisplatin
based therapy is widely used to manage CDC and the response is often very
limited, we investigated the possible molecular alteration(s) associated
with cisplatin resistance in CDC. RNA sequence analysis was performed on
5 CDC cases to evaluate gene expression profiles. Immunohistochemical
analysis was performed on 6 cases of CDC tumor samples (2 cases included
in sequencing) and their matched normal kidneys arranged in a tissue
microarray to assess the representative overexpressed genes. Clinical
annotation was evaluated to determine the association of gene expression
with cisplatin based therapy response and survival. RNA sequencing
analysis data revealed the upregulation of 2879 genes and the
downregulation of 1951 genes in CDC tumors, as compared to matched
normals. Among the altered genes, many of them were transporters. Since
transporters play a significant role in drug resistance mechanism(s),
particularly in cisplatin resistance, we investigated the Solute Carrier
(SLC) family group of membrane transporter genes and found 41 genes
upregulated (log2 fold change of 6.4 to 1.0) and 95 genes downregulated
(log2 fold change of -8.4 to -0.8). The number of altered SLC family
genes was 136 (41 upregulated and 95 downregulated), which is 3.8 percent
(136 out of 4830) of the total gene alterations and 45.3% (136 out of
300) of the SLC group of family members, indicating their significance in
CDC. The critical analysis of individual amino acid transporters of SLC
family genes from the upregulated group led us to investigate three
transporters: SLC7A11 (xCT, cystine transporter), SLC1A3 (GLAST,
glutamate and aspartate transporter), and SLC6A7 (PROT, proline
transporter), which are known to be drug resistance markers. RNA sequence
data showed the upregulation of SLC7A11 and SLC1A3 mRNA in 75% of the
cases (3 out of 4), with SLC6A7 upregulated in 100% of the cases (4 out
of 4). Immunohistochemical analysis of 6 CDC tumors revealed the
overexpression of xCT, a known marker for cisplatin resistance in 66% (4
out of 6) of the cases. Kaplan Meyer survival analysis revealed the worst
survival for CDC patients with xCT overexpression. Our results
demonstrate for the first time that overexpression of xCT, a known
cisplatin resistance marker, is associated with CDC. These results
suggest that xCT targeted combination therapies may be beneficial to CDC
patients.

