Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Poor survival associated with NUAK1 overexpression in serous
ovarian cancer may be explained by chemotherapy resistance


Objectives: The purpose of this study was to identify and validate novel
gene transcripts associated with poor prognosis ovarian cancer.Methods:
Clinical, pathologic, outcomes and transcriptomics data for 22,277
probesets were downloaded for each of 1,183 eligible patients
representing six datasets. Cohorts 1 (n = 638) and 2 (n = 545) were used
for discovery and validation, respectively. Associations with survival
were evaluated using univariate Cox modeling with Wald test and
Kaplan-Meier method with log rank test. Odds ratios were evaluated using
the Mantel-Haenszel test. NUAK1 expression in ovarian cancer cell lines
was examined using immunoblotting.Results: There were 293 (1.3%)
probesets whose expression was associated with survival in serous ovarian
cancer patients in cohort 1 that passed false discovery correction, and
19 of these, including NUAK1, validated in cohort 2 (qObjectives: The
purpose of this study was to identify and validate novel gene transcripts
associated with poor prognosis ovarian cancer.Methods: Clinical,
pathologic, outcomes and transcriptomics data for 22,277 probesets were
downloaded for each of 1,183 eligible patients representing six datasets.
Cohorts 1 (n = 638) and 2 (n = 545) were used for discovery and
validation, respectively. Associations with survival were evaluated using
univariate Cox modeling with Wald test and Kaplan-Meier method with log
rank test. Odds ratios were evaluated using the Mantel-Haenszel test.
NUAK1 expression in ovarian cancer cell lines was examined using
immunoblotting.Results: There were 293 (1.3%) probesets whose expression
was associated with survival in serous ovarian cancer patients in cohort
1 that passed false discovery correction, and 19 of these, including
NUAK1, validated in cohort 2 (q<0.05). Women with high versus low
transcript expression of NUAK1 had worse survival (hazard ratio = 1.4,
95% confidence interval = 1.2-1.64) and increased odds of being diagnosed
at advanced age with late stage disease in addition to experiencing
suboptimal debulking and earlier disease progression. Higher levels of
NUAK1 protein were observed in a panel of chemoresistant versus
chemosensitive ovarian cancer cells lines.Conclusions: Overexpression of
NUAK1, also known as AMPK-related protein kinase 5 (ARK5) and a survival
factor in nutrient starved cells with low oxygen tension, was identified
and validated to predict poor prognosis in a cohort of 1,183 serous
ovarian cancer patients, and to be associated with chemoresistance using
in vitro models of platinum and taxane resistance in human ovarian cancer.

