Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defective expression of partition-defective 3 (PAR-3) is
associated with adverse prognostic factors in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma


Esophageal cancer is the sixth leading cause of cancer mortality and
squamous cell carcinoma is a prevalent histological subtype worldwide.
The partition-defective 3 (PAR-3) protein belongs to a partition
defective complex that controls polarity, which is mainly composed of
PAR-3, PAR-6, and atypical protein kinase C (aPKC). PAR-3 contains one
self-oligomerization domain in the N-terminus, three PDZ protein
interaction domains and one aPKC-binding domain. Owing to these domains,
PAR-3 is able to form a conserved protein complex with PAR-6 and aPKC. In
mammalian epithelial cells, PAR complex assembles at tight junctions, and
plays a role in controlling apical-basal polarity, asymmetric cell
division, and directional cell migration. It is well known that disrupted
cell polarity is a feature of epithelial cancers. Therefore, it is
believed that PAR proteins may be involved in multiple aspects of
oncogenesis and tumor-promoting function. We previously detected a
homozygous deletion of PAR-3 gene in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC) cell lines by a high-density oligonucleotide microarray approach.
(Oncogene 28:2910-2918, 2009). A copy number loss of PAR-3 gene was
observed in 15% of primary ESCC tumors. The expression of PAR-3 mRNA was
significantly reduced in 70% of ESCC tumors when compared with their
nontumorous tissue counterparts. Exogenous expression of PAR-3 gene in
ESCC cells lacking this gene (KYSE30 cells) enhanced the recruitment of
Zonula occludens 1 (ZO-1), a marker of tight junctions, to sites of
cell-cell contact. Conversely, knockdown of PAR-3 gene in ESCC cells
expressing this gene disrupted ZO-1 localization at cell-cell borders.
Although our previous findings suggested that deletion and reduced
expression of PAR-3 gene may be a novel mechanism that drives the
progression of ESCC, the clinical relevance of PAR-3 in ESCC tumor
progression was not known. In the present study, we aimed to investigate
the expression pattern of PAR-3 protein in primary ESCC tumors and to
clarify any potential relationship between the PAR-3 expression and
clinicopathological parameters. Immunohistochemical analyses showed that
PAR-3 protein was expressed at the basal layer of the normal squamous
epithelium of the esophagus, esophageal glands proper and the duct of
esophageal glands. Both normal esophageal cells and ESCC tumor cells
showed granular cytoplasmic staining and particularly strong membranous
staining of PAR-3 protein. PAR-3 protein expression was lost in 20 (37%)
of 74 primary ESCC tumors. Loss of PAR-3 protein expression was
significantly associated with invasion depth (P = 0.0065) and lymph node
metastasis (P = 0.03). Our results suggest that loss of PAR-3 protein
expression may lead to tumor progression and subsequent lymph node
metastasis in ESCC.

