Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High fat diet induced DNA methylation at transcription factor
binding region and repressed gene expression of a metastasis suppressor
E-cadherin in primary site of murine metastatic breast cancer (MBC), and
promoted invasion of MBC cells to lung and liver


Breast cancer (BC) is the most prevalent type of cancer among women in
the US. BC survival rate has long been compromised by metastasis.
Consumption of a high fat diet (HFD) is associated with increased BC
risk. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain inconclusive.
E-cadherin (Cdh1) is a metastasis suppressor, the loss of which promotes
tumor invasion. We aimed to examine the effects of a HFD containing 47%
kcal from fat on metastatic breast cancer (MBC) using preclinical
syngeneic mouse models. To access the dietary effect on metastatic
mammary tumor, we injected MBC cells into the mammary duct of BALB/c
mice. To evaluate the dietary effect on the spread of MBC from bone to
lung and liver tissues, MBC cells were inoculated into tibia cavity of
BALB/c mice. Growth of MBC at the injection and inoculation site, and
invasion of MBC to other organs were monitored in real-time by the
bioluminescence imaging (BLI) system. Three weeks post injection, animals
were sacrificed and tissues samples were collected. In summary, our
results showed that HFD promoted the invasion of MBC cells to lung and
liver of mice. H&E staining showed that there were significantly more
lung tumors in the HFD group than control group in the tibial injected
animals (12.91.6, 8.91.1, PBreast cancer (BC) is the most prevalent type
of cancer among women in the US. BC survival rate has long been
compromised by metastasis. Consumption of a high fat diet (HFD) is
associated with increased BC risk. However, the underlying molecular
mechanisms remain inconclusive. E-cadherin (Cdh1) is a metastasis
suppressor, the loss of which promotes tumor invasion. We aimed to
examine the effects of a HFD containing 47% kcal from fat on metastatic
breast cancer (MBC) using preclinical syngeneic mouse models. To access
the dietary effect on metastatic mammary tumor, we injected MBC cells
into the mammary duct of BALB/c mice. To evaluate the dietary effect on
the spread of MBC from bone to lung and liver tissues, MBC cells were
inoculated into tibia cavity of BALB/c mice. Growth of MBC at the
injection and inoculation site, and invasion of MBC to other organs were
monitored in real-time by the bioluminescence imaging (BLI) system. Three
weeks post injection, animals were sacrificed and tissues samples were
collected. In summary, our results showed that HFD promoted the invasion
of MBC cells to lung and liver of mice. H&E staining showed that there
were significantly more lung tumors in the HFD group than control group
in the tibial injected animals (12.91.6, 8.91.1, P<0.05), as well as more
mice with liver tumors in HFD group (7 out of 16 mice with liver tumors
in HFD group, 0 out of 17 mice with liver tumors in control group).
Expression of Cdh1mammary tumor of mice was decreased by HFD. Intensity
of methylation at the CpG-rich promoter region, where transcription
factors bind, was increased by HFD in the mammary tumor. As the first to
report that HFD induced DNA methylation and decreased the expression of
Cdh1 in the metastatic mammary tumor, we proposed a mechanism by which
HFD enhanced the invasiveness of MBC. Having laid a base and provided
clues on HFD and MBC, this study also shed light on the intriguing
interactions of nutrient epigenome and BC. Future studies are needed to
further extrapolate our findings into the link between diet and disease
in BC patients.

