Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spheroid-based high throughput screening for identification of
molecules targeting different tumor microenvironment characteristics


In recent years, cell-based evaluation of drug-induced phenotypic changes
has become an important strategy in high throughput drug screening (HTS).
However, due to the lack of clinically relevant in vitro models,
phenotype-based screening has not resulted in the identification of as
many successful compounds as initially assumed. Thus, an application of
the long-known multicellular tumor spheroid (MCTS) model for HTS has
recently gained attention, as MCTS mimic the complex in vivo situation
more closely than standard monolayer cell cultures. However, due to major
difficulties with formation of uniform spheroids in a large scale,
application of MCTS for HTS has been limited.We focused our efforts on
the development of spheroid-based HTS systems in 384-well format for the
identification of molecules targeting different tumor microenvironment
characteristics. For spheroid formation we used two colorectal cancer
cell lines, HCT116 and HT-29, both constitutively expressing green
fluorescent protein (GFP). During the spheroid formation process, culture
medium was either changed every 4 days or left unchanged. This approach
resulted in the generation of two different spheroid models from the each
cell line - one representing tumor regions with the sufficient access to
nutrients; the other simulating parts with more harsh conditions.
Spheroids formed with medium change were more proliferative and less
dependent on oxygen. By measuring spheroid GFP fluorescence intensity we
could non-invasively monitor drug action over time. First screens
revealed a group of drugs particularly effective in quiescent spheroids
compared with proliferating spheroids and monolayer cell cultures. All of
the compounds inhibited mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. The
screen confirmed mitochondrial respiration as a promising target for
treatment of dormant cells in nutrient-deprived tumor regions and
identified molecules with previously unrecognized potential for further
clinical advancement.Another screening system was developed to identify
drugs that directly influence the immune components of tumor
microenvironment. Spheroids are formed by co-culturing cancer cells with
human primary monocytes. Over the culture period, monocytes differentiate
into tumor-associated macrophages. First pilot experiments showed
promising results and more extensive screens are planned.For
characterization of drug effects at the transcriptome level, a
spheroid-based gene expression profiling method is under development. The
method will enable high throughput analysis of transcripts from spheroids
treated with chemical libraries.In conclusion, we here present a novel
approach to HTS, which by utilizing diverse MCTS models has a potential
to identify molecules directly targeting tumor-specific microenvironment
components.

