Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Common long noncoding RNAs (lncRNA) with altered expression levels
in colorectal adenoma and carcinoma


Background: Among several functions long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) are
known to act as crucial epigenetic regulators of cell proliferation.
Their expression level alterations can lead to cancer formation.
Identification of lncRNA expression profiles in colorectal adenoma and
cancer (CRC) would be beneficial to expand our knowledge of CRC
development.Aims: This study aimed to identify differentially expressed
long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) in colorectal adenoma and CRC
cases.Materials and methods: Total RNA was isolated from 94 human colonic
biopsy samples (27 CRCs, 29 colonic adenomas, 38 normal donors without
evidence of disease) with Qiagen Mini Kit. Expression levels of lncRNAs
were analyzed with HGU133Plus2.0 microarrays (Affymetrix). Affymetric
probe sets of 2090 lncRNAs already represented on this array type were
extracted with non-coding (NR) Refseq IDs. Furthermore, total RNA
including miRNAs was isolated from 20 independent biopsy samples (7 CRCs,
6 colonic adenomas, 7 normal donors without evidence of disease) with
High Pure miRNA Isolation Kit (Roche) and expression levels of 40.914
non-protein coding transcripts were analyzed by using Human Transcriptome
Array 2.0 (Affymetrix). Data were analysed using Expression Console and
Transcriptome Analysis Console softwares (Affymetrix).Results: According
to HGU133Plus2.0 microarray results 3 significantly upregulated lncRNAs
were identified in adenomas and 4 in CRCs, while 10 significantly
downregulated lncRNAs were found in adenomas and 12 in CRC compared to
the healthy controls (pBackground: Among several functions long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) are known to act as crucial epigenetic
regulators of cell proliferation. Their expression level alterations can
lead to cancer formation. Identification of lncRNA expression profiles in
colorectal adenoma and cancer (CRC) would be beneficial to expand our
knowledge of CRC development.Aims: This study aimed to identify
differentially expressed long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) in colorectal
adenoma and CRC cases.Materials and methods: Total RNA was isolated from
94 human colonic biopsy samples (27 CRCs, 29 colonic adenomas, 38 normal
donors without evidence of disease) with Qiagen Mini Kit. Expression
levels of lncRNAs were analyzed with HGU133Plus2.0 microarrays
(Affymetrix). Affymetric probe sets of 2090 lncRNAs already represented
on this array type were extracted with non-coding (NR) Refseq IDs.
Furthermore, total RNA including miRNAs was isolated from 20 independent
biopsy samples (7 CRCs, 6 colonic adenomas, 7 normal donors without
evidence of disease) with High Pure miRNA Isolation Kit (Roche) and
expression levels of 40.914 non-protein coding transcripts were analyzed
by using Human Transcriptome Array 2.0 (Affymetrix). Data were analysed
using Expression Console and Transcriptome Analysis Console softwares
(Affymetrix).Results: According to HGU133Plus2.0 microarray results 3
significantly upregulated lncRNAs were identified in adenomas and 4 in
CRCs, while 10 significantly downregulated lncRNAs were found in adenomas
and 12 in CRC compared to the healthy controls (p<0.05; -1logFc1). On the
basis of the Human Transcriptome array results -analyzing broader range
of non-coding RNAs- 76 upregulated lncRNAs were detected in adenomas and
97 in CRC, while 51 downregulated lncRNAs were found in adenomas and 45
in CRC compared to the healthy controls (pBackground: Among several
functions long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) are known to act as crucial
epigenetic regulators of cell proliferation. Their expression level
alterations can lead to cancer formation. Identification of lncRNA
expression profiles in colorectal adenoma and cancer (CRC) would be
beneficial to expand our knowledge of CRC development.Aims: This study
aimed to identify differentially expressed long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA)
in colorectal adenoma and CRC cases.Materials and methods: Total RNA was
isolated from 94 human colonic biopsy samples (27 CRCs, 29 colonic
adenomas, 38 normal donors without evidence of disease) with Qiagen Mini
Kit. Expression levels of lncRNAs were analyzed with HGU133Plus2.0
microarrays (Affymetrix). Affymetric probe sets of 2090 lncRNAs already
represented on this array type were extracted with non-coding (NR) Refseq
IDs. Furthermore, total RNA including miRNAs was isolated from 20
independent biopsy samples (7 CRCs, 6 colonic adenomas, 7 normal donors
without evidence of disease) with High Pure miRNA Isolation Kit (Roche)
and expression levels of 40.914 non-protein coding transcripts were
analyzed by using Human Transcriptome Array 2.0 (Affymetrix). Data were
analysed using Expression Console and Transcriptome Analysis Console
softwares (Affymetrix).Results: According to HGU133Plus2.0 microarray
results 3 significantly upregulated lncRNAs were identified in adenomas
and 4 in CRCs, while 10 significantly downregulated lncRNAs were found in
adenomas and 12 in CRC compared to the healthy controls (p<0.05;
-1logFc1). On the basis of the Human Transcriptome array results
-analyzing broader range of non-coding RNAs- 76 upregulated lncRNAs were
detected in adenomas and 97 in CRC, while 51 downregulated lncRNAs were
found in adenomas and 45 in CRC compared to the healthy controls (p<0.05;
-1logFc1). 100% of the lncRNAs showing significant gene expression
alteration on HGU133Plus2.0 arrays showed similar expression alteration
tendency on Human Transcriptome arrays in the adenoma vs. normal and 88%
in the CRC vs. normal comparisons. Interestingly, 44% of lncRNAs
upregulated in CRC samples showed significantly elevated expression
(pBackground: Among several functions long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) are
known to act as crucial epigenetic regulators of cell proliferation.
Their expression level alterations can lead to cancer formation.
Identification of lncRNA expression profiles in colorectal adenoma and
cancer (CRC) would be beneficial to expand our knowledge of CRC
development.Aims: This study aimed to identify differentially expressed
long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) in colorectal adenoma and CRC
cases.Materials and methods: Total RNA was isolated from 94 human colonic
biopsy samples (27 CRCs, 29 colonic adenomas, 38 normal donors without
evidence of disease) with Qiagen Mini Kit. Expression levels of lncRNAs
were analyzed with HGU133Plus2.0 microarrays (Affymetrix). Affymetric
probe sets of 2090 lncRNAs already represented on this array type were
extracted with non-coding (NR) Refseq IDs. Furthermore, total RNA
including miRNAs was isolated from 20 independent biopsy samples (7 CRCs,
6 colonic adenomas, 7 normal donors without evidence of disease) with
High Pure miRNA Isolation Kit (Roche) and expression levels of 40.914
non-protein coding transcripts were analyzed by using Human Transcriptome
Array 2.0 (Affymetrix). Data were analysed using Expression Console and
Transcriptome Analysis Console softwares (Affymetrix).Results: According
to HGU133Plus2.0 microarray results 3 significantly upregulated lncRNAs
were identified in adenomas and 4 in CRCs, while 10 significantly
downregulated lncRNAs were found in adenomas and 12 in CRC compared to
the healthy controls (p<0.05; -1logFc1). On the basis of the Human
Transcriptome array results -analyzing broader range of non-coding RNAs-
76 upregulated lncRNAs were detected in adenomas and 97 in CRC, while 51
downregulated lncRNAs were found in adenomas and 45 in CRC compared to
the healthy controls (p<0.05; -1logFc1). 100% of the lncRNAs showing
significant gene expression alteration on HGU133Plus2.0 arrays showed
similar expression alteration tendency on Human Transcriptome arrays in
the adenoma vs. normal and 88% in the CRC vs. normal comparisons.
Interestingly, 44% of lncRNAs upregulated in CRC samples showed
significantly elevated expression (p<0.05) already in adenoma samples
(e.g. upregulated CRNDE, lincFAM75A7-18, linc-FAM135A, lincDUSP26-1 and
downregulated linc-DCLK3-2, linc-AMN1, linc-SOD3-2, lincFAM55D compared
to healthy controls) containing lncRNAs already associated with CRC or
other types of cancer.Conclusion: The identified lncRNAs with
significantly altered expression levels sequence can play a central role
in the regulation of transcription during colorectal adenoma-carcinoma.
Common up- or downregulated lncRNAs in colorectal adenoma and in CRC
samples can be the basis of further investigations in order to enhance
early detection of the colorectal cancer development.

