Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-6 induces SPINK1 in colorectal cancer


Inflammation is known to promote colorectal cancer (CRC) tumorigenesis,
but the underlying molecular mechanisms are still being uncovered.
Proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) stimulates growth and
survival signaling in CRC cells. Inflammatory signals regulate also the
production and activity of proteases and their inhibitors. Serine
protease inhibitor Kazal type1 (SPINK1, aka tumor-associated trypsin
inhibitor, TATI) is expressed in several tissues and over-expression of
SPINK1 predicts an unfavorable outcome in many cancers, including colon
cancer. The SPINK1 gene contains an IL-6 responsive element and in
addition to being a protease inhibitor, it also acts as an acute phase
reactant and a growth factor. The aim of this study was to assess the
connection between IL-6 and SPINK1 and the effect of this signaling to
growth and invasion of CRC cells. The following expression analyses and
functional assays were used: quantitative PCR, immunohistochemistry,
immunofluorometric assays, Western blotting, cell proliferation and
migration assays. The results of this study show that CRC cell lines
Colo205 and HT-29 express SPINK1 and secrete it into the culture medium.
In Colo205 and HT-29 cells IL-6 dose-dependently increased the mRNA
expression and protein levels of SPINK1. The baseline secretion was lower
in the Colo205 cells, and significantly more IL-6 was required for the
dose-dependent induction of SPINK1 expression in these cells as compared
to HT-29 cells. Interestingly, in Colo205 the baseline levels of secreted
tumor-associated trypsinogen-1 and -2 (TAT-1 and -2), the key targets of
SPINK1 protease inhibitory action, were much higher than in HT-29 cells.
In these cells IL-6 led to concomitant increase in the secretion of TAT-1
and -2, whereas in HT-29 cells the TAT-1 and -2 levels remained
constantly low. IL-6 at concentrations giving the maximum SPINK1
induction did not increase the proliferation of Colo205 or HT-29 cells;
however the motility of these cells was increased in response to this
proinflammatory cytokine. Mechanistically, addition of IL-6 led to
activation of the canonical signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (Stat3) pathway, as indicated by Stat3 phosphorylation in
both Colo205 and HT-29 cells. Taken together, our results indicate a
connection between inflammatory response and increased SPINK1 levels.
Elevated serum SPINK1 has been shown to be an independent prognostic
factor in colon cancer. As SPINK1 acts as a growth factor in some
cancers, it has also been suggested as a therapeutic target. Therefore
assessment of SPINK1 expression and function has several potentially
important clinical applications in colorectal and other cancers.

