Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MBD3 regulates chromatin accessibility at active promoters


Chromatin structure is tightly regulated in cells and its dysregulation
is associated with diseases such as cancer. The Mi-2/NuRD (Nucleosome
Remodeling Deacetylase) complex is postulated to organize chromatin
structure using its nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylase
activities. MBD3 is an integral component of NuRD, which potentially
targets the complex to the specific sites of the genome. Recently, we
have demonstrated that MBD3/NuRD targets regulatory elements of active
genes, a finding diametrically opposed to historical models depicting
NuRD as a co-repressor localized to transcriptionally non-permissive
chromatin. Moreover, MBD3 co-localized with RNA polymerase II (pol II) at
loci where promoter-enhancer loops are formed. Although our previous
findings shed light on the role of NuRD in the regulation of active
genes, the detailed mechanism of how NuRD is involved in transcriptional
regulation is yet not fully understood. To investigate this question, we
have developed a next generation, tagmentation based chromatin
immunoprecipitation method followed by massively parallel sequencing
(ChIP-nexo), which substantially increased the resolution of the
MBD3/NuRD mapping. ChIP-nexo defined MBD3/NuRD localization at high
resolution, showing accumulation of MBD3 at active promoters with a dip
at transcription start site, suggesting an active role of NuRD in
modulation of the cell-type specific transcriptional network. To
interrogate the detailed functions of NuRD at active promoters, we
conducted MNase-seq using conditions which measures both nucleosome
positioning and sensitivity, in MBD3 depleted cells. Depletion of MBD3
changed the accessibility of nucleosomes at promoters, while maintaining
overall nucleosome positioning. These data indicate an active regulatory
function of NuRD in fine tuning the transcriptional network by modulating
transcription rates of pol II. We propose that NuRD may be involved in
establishing cell type specific gene expression patterns in diverse cell
types by organizing promoter nucleoprotein architecture.

