Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of G9a inhibitors by AlphaLisa technology and hit
confirmation using MT-Glo


Epigenetic processes control gene expression and play a major role in
cell proliferation, survival and differentiation. Dysregulation of
epigenetic mechanisms may lead to alterations in gene expression,
resulting in cellular transformation and malignant outgrowth. Epigenetic
enzymes are recognized as promising therapeutic targets for the treatment
of cancer. Inventiva has several research programs in epigenetics, with
specific focus on histone lysine methyltransferases (HKMTs). Emerging
evidence suggests that G9a, a HKMT, able to mono and dimethylate H3K9
leading to the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes, plays a
predominant role in lung and ovarian cancers. To identify novel G9a
inhibitors, we used an AlphaLisa assay, with a histone H3-derived peptide
and a specific antibody against H3K9me2. The assay, in 384-well format,
displayed a robust Z-factor (0.84) with a signal to noise ratio around
800. We screened Inventiva's proprietary compound library using this
assay. Three hundred thirty-six hits inhibited G9a by more than 60% (Hit
rate: 0.14%). Despite the advantages offered by AlphaLisa technology,
such as high S/N ratios and straightforward automation, this technology
has been reported to generate a high number of false positives. In order
to confirm the activity of our hits, we used a different technology, the
methyltransferase Glo (MT-Glo) assay, which measures the reaction product
SAH by luminescence read-out. Out of the 336 identified compounds, 75
were confirmed by this orthogonal screening (Hit confirmation rate: 22%).
Additional compound characterization is ongoing to allow the selection of
the best hit series for chemical optimization.In conclusion, the
AlphaLisa assay, coupled with MT-Glo assay allowed the identification and
confirmation of potent hits against G9a, as chemical starting points for
our hit-to-lead optimization program.

