Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct temporal regulation of RET isoform internalization: Roles
of clathrin and AP2


The RET receptor tyrosine kinase is an important contributor to kidney
and enteric nervous system development. In normal development, RET
signaling regulates cell proliferation, migration, survival and
differentiation, but RET is also implicated in growth and spread of
several human cancers. Activating mutations of RET are drivers of
inherited and sporadic thyroid cancers, while expression of wildtype RET
receptors in breast and pancreatic cancers has been associated with
enhanced tumor invasion, metastasis and poor disease prognosis. RET is
expressed as two major isoforms, RET9 and RET51, that have unique 9 or 51
amino acid C-terminal tails, respectively. These isoforms induce unique
phosphorylation patterns on intracellular tyrosine residues,
differentially bind downstream signalling proteins, and possess different
intrinsic abilities to cause cellular transformation. We have previously
shown that RET isoforms are internalized from the cell surface into
endosomal compartments in response to glial cell line derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF) ligand stimulation, but the specific
mechanisms of RET trafficking remain to be elucidated. Here, we used
total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy to demonstrate that RET
internalization occurs through clathrin coated pits (CCPs). Activated RET
receptors colocalize with clathrin, but not caveolin, at sites of CCPs.
The RET51 isoform is rapidly and robustly recruited to CCPs upon GDNF
stimulation, while RET9 recruitment occurs more slowly and is less
pronounced. We showed that the clathrin-associated adaptor protein
complex 2 (AP2) is important for RET internalization. Our data establish
that interactions with the AP2 complex promote RET receptor
internalization via clathrin-mediated pathways but that RET9 and RET51
have distinct internalization kinetics that may contribute to the
functional differences between RET isoforms which are critical to
regulating RET's contribution to tumorigenesis and normal development.
These data may also have clinical importance, as they characterize key
regulatory events for an important oncogene that may in future indicate
biologically relevant targets for therapeutic interventions in
RET-associated tumors.

