Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular similarity of Barretts-associated and gastro-esophageal
junction adenocarcinomas


The incidence of Barretts-derived esophageal adenocarcinomas (EAC) and
gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinomas (GEJAC) are rapidly increasing
in western countries. Our recent efforts identified cell surface peptides
that target Barretts(BE)-associated EAC for early detection by
fluorescent endoscopy however these markers only identify a subset of
tumors due to molecular heterogeneity. We also observe that >30% of
esophagectomy patients present with GEJAC with no evidence of Barrett's
metaplasia. Although the etiology of both cancers appears similar, a
detailed molecular comparison of EAC and GEJAC is lacking. Our goal was
to compare molecular profiles for these two cancer types to develop a
panel of either universal, or cancer-type specific cell surface markers
to facilitate early detection. We utilized two pre-existing datasets that
performed whole-exome sequencing and copy number variation (CNV) analysis
in a combined cohort of GEJAC and EACs. When assessing the rate of
non-silent mutations, gene specific mutations, and CNV changes, no
significance differences were observed between GEJAC and EAC. For a
comparative characterization of the expression profiles of EAC and GEJAC
we utilized Affymetrix mRNA analysis of 123 GEJAC and EAC. Normal gastric
and esophageal squamous tissues were used as controls. Principal
component analysis of the tumors showed little separation between the two
tumor classes (PC#1 and #3, p-value = .03 for t-test of EAC vs. GEJAC).
When performing ANOVA analysis of GEJAC and EAC we observed 305 genes
with p-value1.3. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the 123 tumors
revealed two main clusters (Cluster 1 n = 58, Cluster 2 n = 64) with no
enrichment of tumor type in either cluster (Clus. 1 vs. Clus. 2, GEJAC
and EAC p-value = 0.067). These observations suggest that there few
differences at the transcription level between GEJAC vs. EAC.
Multi-platform (mutation, CNV and mRNA expression) molecular
characterization of GEJAC and EAC tumors revealed no significant
differences between tumor types suggesting that shared molecular
processes are likely involved in the development of these tumors. We then
used the 123 GEJAC/EAC expression data, along with our previous cohort of
46 samples representing BE progression to EAC, in order to identify
potential cell surface coding genes specifically overexpressed within the
combined cancer cohort. We identified >20 cell surface coding genes that
were over-expressed (FC>2, p-valueThe incidence of Barretts-derived
esophageal adenocarcinomas (EAC) and gastroesophageal junction
adenocarcinomas (GEJAC) are rapidly increasing in western countries. Our
recent efforts identified cell surface peptides that target
Barretts(BE)-associated EAC for early detection by fluorescent endoscopy
however these markers only identify a subset of tumors due to molecular
heterogeneity. We also observe that >30% of esophagectomy patients
present with GEJAC with no evidence of Barrett's metaplasia. Although the
etiology of both cancers appears similar, a detailed molecular comparison
of EAC and GEJAC is lacking. Our goal was to compare molecular profiles
for these two cancer types to develop a panel of either universal, or
cancer-type specific cell surface markers to facilitate early detection.
We utilized two pre-existing datasets that performed whole-exome
sequencing and copy number variation (CNV) analysis in a combined cohort
of GEJAC and EACs. When assessing the rate of non-silent mutations, gene
specific mutations, and CNV changes, no significance differences were
observed between GEJAC and EAC. For a comparative characterization of the
expression profiles of EAC and GEJAC we utilized Affymetrix mRNA analysis
of 123 GEJAC and EAC. Normal gastric and esophageal squamous tissues were
used as controls. Principal component analysis of the tumors showed
little separation between the two tumor classes (PC#1 and #3, p-value =
.03 for t-test of EAC vs. GEJAC). When performing ANOVA analysis of GEJAC
and EAC we observed 305 genes with p-value1.3. Unsupervised hierarchical
clustering of the 123 tumors revealed two main clusters (Cluster 1 n =
58, Cluster 2 n = 64) with no enrichment of tumor type in either cluster
(Clus. 1 vs. Clus. 2, GEJAC and EAC p-value = 0.067). These observations
suggest that there few differences at the transcription level between
GEJAC vs. EAC. Multi-platform (mutation, CNV and mRNA expression)
molecular characterization of GEJAC and EAC tumors revealed no
significant differences between tumor types suggesting that shared
molecular processes are likely involved in the development of these
tumors. We then used the 123 GEJAC/EAC expression data, along with our
previous cohort of 46 samples representing BE progression to EAC, in
order to identify potential cell surface coding genes specifically
overexpressed within the combined cancer cohort. We identified >20 cell
surface coding genes that were over-expressed (FC>2, p-value<0.01) in
both GEJAC and EAC, when compared to normal tissue and BE mucosa. Three
of the candidates were chosen for qPCR validation and also protein
expression using commercial antibodies and an esophageal tumor tissue
microarray. Developing a comprehensive panel of cell surface markers able
to discriminate the majority of EAC and GEJAC will be an essential step
towards integration of image-based technology into existing early
detection screening programs. Supported NCI U54 CA163059

