Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SK053, a small molecule inhibitor of enzymes involved in
allosteric disulfide bonds formation, shows potent anti-leukemic effects
and induces differentiation of human AML cells


Although differentiation-inducing agents have significantly improved the
management of acute promyelocytic leukemia, no significant progress has
been made in the treatment of other acute myeloid leukemias (AML).
Numerous proteins involved in tumor development have so-called allosteric
disulfide bonds amenable to modifications affecting protein structure and
function. We have developed SK053, a small molecule and
mechanism-selective inhibitor of enzymes involved in allosteric disulfide
bonds formation such as thioredoxin, thioredoxin reductase and protein
disulfide isomerase (PDI). The aim of our studies was to evaluate
anti-leukemic activity of SK053 in human AML cells.To validate if SK053
targets PDI, a binding assay and an insulin turbidimetric activity assay
were used. Cytostatic/cytotoxic effects in HL60, NB4, KG-1 and MOLM14
cells as well as in primary AML cells were assessed with trypan blue
exclusion. Differentiation of AML cells was studied with
May-Grnwald-Giemsa staining, nitro blue tetrazolium reduction assay and
flow cytometry analysis of CD11b, CD14 and CD15 levels and by RNA
sequencing, qRT-PCR and western blotting (WB).We observed covalent
binding of SK053 to PDI and inhibition of its enzymatic activity with
IC50 of 10 M. Since PDI blocks translation of CCAAT enhancer binding
protein alpha (CEBPA), a transcription factor crucial for neutrophils
maturation, we evaluated the potential of SK053 to induce differentiation
and cytostatic/cytotoxic effects in human AML cells. SK053 exerts
significant cytostatic/cytotoxic activity in human AML cells (HL60, NB4,
KG-1 and MOLM14), and induces differentiation of AML blasts into more
mature myeloid cells. Incubation of AML cells with SK053 induced
expression of CEBPA and hexokinase 3 mRNA in quantitative RT-PCR and
increased amount of CEBPA protein in nuclear fraction measured in WB.
Finally, SK053 induces differentiation of primary leukemic cells freshly
isolated from AML patients. RNA-seq analysis revealed that incubation of
HL60 cells with SK053 down-regulates mRNA for MYC and ID1 oncogenes as
well as for histone proteins. Expression of other genes of mature myeloid
lineage such as adhesion molecules (collagen type XV, fibronectin I,
MAC-1), hydrolytic enzymes (carboxypeptidase, proteinase 3, CA12
anhydrase, ADAM19 metalloprotease), proteoglycan 2 (core of eosinophilic
granules) and PGLYRP3 (peptidoglycan recognition protein 3) was
significantly up-regulated. The GeneOntology analysis done with the
RNAseq results revealed enrichment of gene transcripts regulating myeloid
cells differentiation.SK053 exerts potent anti-leukemic activity and
induces differentiation of numerous types of human AML cells. Targeting
allosteric disulfide bonds with small molecule inhibitors presents a
promising therapeutic strategy in AML.

