Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monocytic Gr-1+/CD11b+ myeloid cells are necessary for natural
killer cells to eradicate glioma and are inhibited by tumor-derived
galectin-1


We have recently demonstrated that natural killer (NK) cells eradicate
galectin-1 (gal-1)-deficient glioma (Baker et al, Cancer Research. 2014.
Sep 15;74(18):5079-90). Here we present our progress towards
understanding the cellular mechanism(s) by which NK cells eradicate such
tumors. We demonstrate that monocytic Gr-1+/CD11b+ myeloid cells are
required to stimulate NK-mediated lysis of gal-1-deficient glioma.
Immunodepletion of Gr-1+ cells in RAG1-/- mice permits lethal
gal-1-deficient glioma formation despite the presence of NK cells,
demonstrating that Gr-1+ cells (i.e. myeloid cells) are necessary for
NK-mediated tumor rejection in vivo. We also demonstrate that the effect
of glioma-derived gal-1 is to conceal glioma cells from recognition by NK
cells by inhibiting myeloid-NK cell crosstalk. In vitro experiments
reveal that gal-1-deficient glioma cells stimulate cross-activation
between NK cells and monocytic Gr-1+/CD11b+ myeloid cells, causing the
myeloid cells to morph into a phenotypically distinct cell population
reminiscent of macrophages or dendritic cells. Cell-killing assays show
that monocytic Gr-1+/CD11b+ myeloid cells significantly enhance
NK-mediated glioma cell lysis in vitro. Recombinant mouse gal-1 protein
inhibits the myeloid cell enhancement of NK-mediated tumor lysis, but
fails to suppress intrinsic NK-mediated tumor lysis. This result strongly
suggests that the role of glioma-derived gal-1 is to suppress the ability
of monocytic myeloid cells to stimulate cytotoxic potential in NK cells.
Further in vivo experiments also reveal that RAG1-/- mice bearing
gal-1-deficient glioma have 7-fold more Gr-1+/CD11b+ myeloid cells
present within the tumor microenvironment 48hrs after tumor implantation
compared to gal-1-expressing tumors. Together our data show that
glioma-derived gal-1 acts to potently suppress anti-glioma NK immune
surveillance through a tripartite mechanism involving: (1) the inhibition
of myeloid cell recruitment into the brain tumor microenvironment, (2)
the suppression of enhanced NK-mediated glioma lysis stimulated by
monocytic myeloid cells, and (3) an increased resistance to NK-mediated
glioma cell lysis. We now aim to identify the molecular factors used by
gal-1-deficient glioma cells to stimulate monocytic myeloid cell
activation and the factors that myeloid cells use to in turn amplify NK
cell cytotoxicity.

