Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of plasma biomarker concentration changes resulting
from the administration of the Vascular Disrupting Agent BNC105 across 3
clinical trials in mesothelioma, ovarian and renal cancer


BNC105 is a tubulin depolymerisation agent. Its activity includes effects
on both cancer cells and on solid tumor microvasculature. BNC105 shows
evidence of strong anti-cancer efficacy in vitro and in animal models. In
solid tumors its efficacy is driven by selective destruction of tumor
vasculature (Vascular Disrupting Agent - VDA) and direct action on tumor
cells through suppression of their proliferation. In non-proliferating
blood cancers (e.g. Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia) BNC105 activates
pro-apoptotic proteins, which mediate cancer cell death. BNC105P may be
useful in the treatment of human cancers both as a monotherapy and also
in combination therapies. To date BNC105 has been evaluated in
mesothelioma as a monotherapy, in ovarian cancer in combination with
gemcitabine/carboplatin and in renal cancer in combination with
everolimus. Seventy nine (79) patients receiving intravenous
administrations of BNC105 in these trials were blood sampled at baseline
and following BNC105 administration. The plasma concentrations of a panel
of 83 plasma analytes were investigated for changes resulting from the
administration of BNC105. Here, we report data across the three clinical
trials on plasma biomarkers that consistently change in response to the
administration of BNC105. Our findings include a number of biomarkers
that have not been previously associated with the action of a VDA.
Significant increases within 3 hours following BNC105 administration were
observed across all studies regardless of monotherapy or combination.
These included Ferritin, IL-8, IL-10, IL-16, MIP1B, MCP-1, TNFR2, and
MMP9. Decreases in several markers were also observed that included
Alpha-2 Macroglobulin, Myoglobin, PAI-1, TIMP-1. Correlation of biomarker
changes to 6 month Progression free survival (6MPFS) was undertaken in 44
patients treated with BNC105+everolimus in the phase II renal cancer
trial. This analysis resulted in the identification of 4 plasma analytes
where changes from baseline were associated with progression free
survival at 6 months. Taken together, the biomarker program that has
accompanied the clinical development of BNC105 has allowed the
identification of exploratory plasma biomarkers associated with treatment
with a VDA that can potentially identify patient populations that respond
better to treatment. These results will support the continued development
of BNC105 in biomarker-guided clinical trial designs.

