Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The advanced strategy for novel EGCG derivative modified liposome
with high targeting ability to tumor


Purpose: The aim of this study is increase of antitumor effect and
decrease of adverse effect by liposomes which have high affinity with 67
kDa laminin receptor (67LR). It was reported that 67LR is expression
specifically on tumor cell membrane. When (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate
(EGCG) as one of the green tea polyphenol are connected with 67LR,
apoptosis is induced on tumor cells. On the other hand, liposome is often
used for cancer chemotherapy. Then we have studied about EGCG modified
liposome containing antitumor agent as drug delivery system. In this
study, important strategies are 3 points. The first point is targets to
67LR on tumor cell by EGCG modification around liposomal membrane. The
second point is to induce apoptosis mediated by 67LR. Last point is to
increase antitumor effect by antitumor agent loaded into liposome. Based
on these strategies, EGCG modified liposome was evaluated in vivo
distribution.Methods: Three derivatives were synthesized for EGCG
modification on liposomal membrane. The liposome with each EGCG
derivative were prepared and assessed by measuring particle sizes and
zeta potentials. EGCG was only modified liposome (EL) and both EGCG and
polyethyleneglycol (PEG) were modified liposome (EPL). On P388 leukemia
cells, cytotoxicity was evaluated by WST-8 assay and shown IC50. In the
distribution study, C57BL/6 mice were injected (i.v.) each liposome, and
collected blood and removed organs with definite time after
injection.Results and Discussion: Synthesized EGCG derivatives with
di-palmitoyl base were inserted directly into liposomal membrane. Two
structures of other derivatives obtained PEG or is able to connect with
PEG. In all liposomes, the particle sizes were from 100 to 200 nm and
zeta potentials were negative charge. The cytotoxicity of EL was stronger
than EGCG unmodified liposome. Moreover, 50% inhibitory concentration of
EPL was smaller than EL, namely the cytotoxicity of EPL was strong. It
was suggested that this effect was mediated with 67LR needed gallate base
in the structure of EGCG because EPL showed strong effect compared with
EL. The EGCG derivative in EL had di-palmitoyl base at gallate base, and
its bind was not free. In mice experiment, EL rapidly disappeared from
the blood circulation after injection. This concentration was one
sixteenth of common PEG modified liposome at 15 min after injection. On
the other hand, accumulation levels into liver and spleen as
reticuloendothelial system (RES) reached high level immediately after
injection. This phenomenon indicated that disappearance of EL depends on
RES trap. EPL which had EGCG-PEG was significantly improved blood
circulating time. In conclusion, it was expected that EGCG-PEG modified
liposome (EPL) maintains long circulation time in blood, and increases
targeted ability to tumor cells and antitumor activity.

