Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaulate biomarkers in NSCLC tumors receiving neoadjuvant
chemotherapy


In previous study, we have evaluated the ability of histopathologic
response criteria to predict overall survival (OS) and disease free
survival (DFS) and observed that the percentage of residual viable tumor
cells were associated with OS and DFS in 192 NSCLC patients receiving
neoadjuvant chemotherapy. In current study, we examined the selected
protein biomarkers by IHC in surgical specimens of 98 NSCLC patients
receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy. All NSCLC patients treated with
neoadjuvant chemotherapy received a platinum and taxane-based. For IHC
analysis of protein markers, we selected candidate biomarkers (VEGFR2,
EZH2, ERCC1 and Rad51) on the basis of the literature. Next, the results
of VEGFR2, EZH2, ERCC1 and Rad51 expression were analyzed with regard to
pathologic response and overall survival time of the patients. The
surgical pathologic stage, percentage of viable tumor cells and Rad51
were associated with OS in 98 NSCLC patients receiving neoadjuvant
chemotherapy in univariate and multivariate analysis. We found that
patients with high-level expression of Rad51 had a poorer prognosis than
did those with low-level expression. We observed that Rad51 expression
was associated with pathologic response (viable tumor cells). However,
there is no association between VEGFR2, EZH2, or ERCC1 expression and
pathologic response (viable tumor cells). We further examined K-Ras and
EGFR Mutation in these NSCLC tumors receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
We analyzed the hotsport mutations in K-Ras gene (Codon 12 and 13) and
EGFR gene (Exon 19 and 21) by pyrosequencing and confirmed by direct
sequencing method in 98 NSCLC tumors receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
We observed both methods had similar results on these patients samples.
The L858R mutation results in an amino acid substitution at position 858
in EGFR, from a leucine (L) to an arginine (R). This mutation occurs
within exon 21, which encodes part of the kinase domain,We found K-Ras
mutation tended to be associated with OS, but not EGFR mutation. There is
no association between percentage of viable tumor cells, VEGFR2, EZH2,
ERCC1, Rad51 expression and K-Ras or EGFR mutation.

