Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer associated macrophage-like cells as a blood-based biomarker
for the screening of solid tumors


Background:Blood-based biopsies can be used as a non-invasive method to
recover both Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs) and Circulating Cancer
Associated Macrophage-Like cells (CAMLs) from the blood of cancer
patients. CAMLs are a newly-defined circulating immune cell type,
described as a subtype of circulating stromal cells, known to engulf
tumor cells/debris. CAMLs are identified by their large size, 30-300
microns, and aberrant nuclear structure. We studied the peripheral blood
of cancer patients to ascertain the prevalence, specificity and
sensitivity of CAMLs in relation to their disease status at presentation,
including a variety of benign and malignant diseases. We supply evidence
that this previously unidentified circulating cell can be used as a
screening tool to detect solid tumors in numerous malignancy subtypes in
all disease stages.Methods:CellSieveTM microfilters were used to isolate
CAMLs from 7.5 mL of whole peripheral blood. The pore size of CellSieveTM
is 7 microns, capable of isolating both CTCs and CAMLs based on size.
Collected cells were fixed, permeabilized, and stained with DAPI and
antibodies against cytokeratin 8, 18 and 19, CD14, and CD45. CAMLs were
defined as enlarged, multinuclear cells with diffuse cytoplasmic
cytokeratin staining, and/or CD14+, and/or CD45+. CTCs were defined as
filamentous cytokeratin cells that are CD45-.Study 1: Blinded peripheral
blood samples from 61 cancer patients were tested, including Stage I-IV
breast, pancreatic, lung and prostate cancers, and newly diagnosed,
untreated patients. Non-blinded blood samples from 30 healthy volunteers
served as controls.Study 2: Double blinded peripheral blood samples from
20 patients with abnormal mammogram results were drawn at time of tissue
biopsy and screened. After analysis, unblinding showed a distribution of
malignant breast disease (n = 10), benign (n = 8), or atypical
hyperplasia (AH) (n = 2).Results:Study 1: CAMLs were found in 94%
patients with Stage III/IV cancers, 87% with Stage I/II cancers, and 89%
of all patients, regardless of cancer type. Specifically, CAMLs were
found in 77% of prostate, 100% of pancreatic, 80% of lung, and 100% of
breast patient samples. CAMLs were not found in healthy control samples
(sensitivity: 84-96%, Specificity: 100%, PPV: 100%, NPV: 88-97%).Study 2:
CAMLs were found in 8 patients with malignant disease, 2 with benign
disease, and 2 with AH (sensitivity: 80%, Specificity: 75%, PPV: 80%,
NPV: 75%)Conclusions:We present evidence that CAMLs can be used as a
non-invasive blood based biopsy, to detect the anatomical presence of
solid malignancies and potentially pre-malignant lesions. The presence of
CAMLs in newly diagnosed patient samples suggests their use as a blood
biomarker for early stage cancer screening in a broad population.
Preliminary data from a double blind breast cancer study suggests that
CAMLs may differentiate between benign and malignant breast diseases.

