Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of collagen receptor discoidin domain receptor-1 (DDR1)
reduces colon cancer cell migration and metastasis


Accumulating evidence suggests that a unique set of receptor tyrosine
kinases, known as discoidin domain receptors (DDRs), plays a role in
cancer progression by regulating the interactions of tumor cells with
their surrounding collagen matrix. We investigated the role of DDR1 in
the tumor progression of colorectal cancer.We examined the DDR1 mRNA and
protein expression levels in a series of human colorectal cancer cell
lines by RT-PCR and Western blotting. We also analyzed the DDR1 protein
expression in 27 surgical specimens of colorectal cancer by
immunohistochemistry. Migration, invasion, and proliferation assays were
conducted with a high-content time-lapse assay system in a series of
colon cancer cell lines. Nilotinib, a well-known DDR1 inhibitor, and
DDR1-silenced colon cancer cells were used for inhibition of DDR1
tyrosine kinase activity. In an in vivo study, we orthotopically
implanted KM12SM human colon cancer cells into the cecum of nude mice and
administered nilotinib (100 mg/kg/day) by daily oral gavage. After 4
weeks of treatment, primary tumors and metastatic lesions were resected,
and specimens were analyzed histologically.DDR1 mRNA and protein
expression was observed in the human colon cancer cell lines and in
cancer cells of most of the surgical specimens. Colon cancer cell lines
KM12SM, KM12c, LoVo, and HT29 exposed to nilotinib (20 M) showed reduced
migration. When incubated with type I collagen, however, these cells
showed increased migratory activity. Nilotinib treatment significantly
inhibited this effect. The migratory activity of DDR1-silenced cells was
not affected by nilotinib treatment. The orthotopic xenografts grew
invasively as aggressive tumors with a stromal reaction, but under
nilotinib treatment, the stromal reaction was reduced, and tumors grew
expansively. In addition, the numbers of lymph node metastases were
significantly reduced.Disruption of DDR1 attenuated colon cancer cell
migration and led to altered primary tumor morphology and to impaired
lymph node metastasis. DDR1 may be a promising therapeutic target in
patients with colon cancer.

