Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of the estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and
PTEN in endometrial cancers from women with type II diabetes mellitus


Objectives: The anti-diabetic drug, metformin, has been found to decrease
proliferation, reduce estrogen receptor (ER) expression and inhibit
downstream targets of the mTOR pathway in a pre-operative window study in
endometrial cancer patients. Thus, we compared the endometrial cancers
between patients with Type II diabetes taking metformin versus those not
on metformin, in regards to expression of ER, progesterone receptor (PR)
and PTEN.Methods: Patients with Type II diabetes who underwent surgical
staging for endometrial cancer at our institution were identified. These
patients were divided into two cohorts based on whether or not they were
on metformin. The use of insulin and other anti-diabetic agents was
recorded. Using triplicate cores from surgical specimens, a tissue
microarray was constructed from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
hysterectomy specimens. ER, PR and PTEN expression was measured by
immunohistochemistry in both the epithelial and stromal components of the
tumors. H scores were calculated, averaged among the triplicate cores,
and compared between the two groups using Mann-Whitney U test and
negative binomial regression analysis.Results: Triplicate cores were
obtained from 162 endometrial cancers from patients with Type II
diabetes. Of the 162 patients, 102 (63%) were taking metformin and 60
(37%) were not on metformin. Median BMI for metformin users and non-users
was 40 and 37, respectively (p = 0.04). There was no significant
difference in tumor stage, grade or histology between the two groups.
There was no association between metformin use and PR or PTEN expression.
There was a trend towards higher ER expression in the non-metformin
users, which was statistically significant for stromal cells (p = 0.04)
but not for epithelial cells (p = 0.13). However, when adjusting for age,
BMI, race, tumor grade and stage, there was no association between
metformin use and ER expression. The median H score for ER did differ
between tumors from patients on metformin only (median 26) versus insulin
only (median 91), but this was not statistically significant.Conclusions:
Expression of ER, PR and PTEN in endometrial cancers did not differ
amongst patients with Type II diabetes regardless of whether their
diabetes treatment regimen involved metformin or insulin. Further studies
are underway to compare the endometrial cancers of metformin users versus
non-users in regards to other insulin and mTOR signaling targets.

