Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of angiogenesis contributes to enhanced radiation
response in tumors following MDM2 inhibition by AMG 232


MDM2-p53 interaction and downstream signaling impacts cellular response
to DNA damage. AMG 232 is a potent small molecule inhibitor that blocks
the interaction of MDM2 and p53. We previously elucidated the capacity of
AMG 232 to augment radiation response across a spectrum of human tumor
cell lines and xenografts. In the current study, we examine the capacity
of AMG 232 to inhibit angiogenesis and assess the resultant impact on AMG
232-induced radiosensitivity.We first examined the impact of AMG 232 on
the growth and radiosensitivity of human umbilical vein endothelial
(HUVEC) and dermal lymphatic endothelial cells (HDLEC). We found that AMG
232 inhibited the proliferation of both endothelial cell types in a dose
dependent manner. Importantly, treatment with AMG 232 significantly
reduced angiogenesis-related tube formation in both endothelial cell
types. Using clonogenic survival analysis, we identified that treatment
with AMG 232 significantly enhanced radiosensitivity. Immunoblot analysis
showed that combined treatment with AMG 232 and radiation resulted in a
profound impact on molecules involved in cell cycle progression, DNA
damage repair, and apoptosis signaling, including FoxM1, ATM/ATR, CHK2,
Rad51, and Bax. Flow cytometric analysis also showed a significant cell
cycle arrest in G2/M phase with an increase of DNA damage related H2AX
level at 48 hrs following radiation and AMG 232 treatment. In H460 and
SJSA-1 tumor xenografts, we found a markedly increased antitumor capacity
of AMG 232 when combined with radiation. Immunohistochemical analysis
revealed a significant reduction of cellular proliferation and vascular
density in both tumor types following combined treatment of AMG 232 and
radiation. Taken together, these findings reveal the potential
anti-angiogenic capacity of AMG 232 that may contribute to augmentation
of radiation response previously observed in tumor xenograft studies. A
detailed investigation is in progress to examine changes in the tumor
microenvironment following AMG 232 and radiation treatment, including
hypoxia and vascular normalization, to assess their respective impact on
tumor response to radiation.

