Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of the pan-PIM kinase inhibitor INCB053914 in models of
acute myelogenous leukemia


The PIM family of serine-threonine protein kinases (PIM1, PIM2 and PIM3)
was initially identified as preferential integration sites of the Moloney
murine leukemia virus in E-myc mice, resulting in perinatal
lymphomagenesis. Molecular characterization has revealed that PIM kinases
drive cell proliferation and survival in a number of hematological
malignancies beyond lymphomas by mediating responses to cytokines, growth
factors and cellular stress. Overexpression of various PIM kinase family
members in these malignancies has been associated with poor overall
survival and with resistance to chemotherapeutic agents. Therefore,
development of a pan-PIM inhibitor may be useful in the treatment of
hematological malignancies, both as a single agent and in combination
with chemotherapy or targeted agents. The in vitro and in vivo activity
of INCB053914, a pan-PIM kinase inhibitor, was determined in a panel of
acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) cell lines. Greater than half of all AML
cell lines tested were sensitive to single agent INCB053914, with
anti-proliferative IC50 potencies The PIM family of serine-threonine
protein kinases (PIM1, PIM2 and PIM3) was initially identified as
preferential integration sites of the Moloney murine leukemia virus in
E-myc mice, resulting in perinatal lymphomagenesis. Molecular
characterization has revealed that PIM kinases drive cell proliferation
and survival in a number of hematological malignancies beyond lymphomas
by mediating responses to cytokines, growth factors and cellular stress.
Overexpression of various PIM kinase family members in these malignancies
has been associated with poor overall survival and with resistance to
chemotherapeutic agents. Therefore, development of a pan-PIM inhibitor
may be useful in the treatment of hematological malignancies, both as a
single agent and in combination with chemotherapy or targeted agents. The
in vitro and in vivo activity of INCB053914, a pan-PIM kinase inhibitor,
was determined in a panel of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) cell lines.
Greater than half of all AML cell lines tested were sensitive to single
agent INCB053914, with anti-proliferative IC50 potencies <100 nM.
Consistent with recent findings, the majority of these sensitive cell
lines expressed higher levels of CD25, which is co-regulated with PIM
through the JAK/STAT signaling pathway and which may serve as a biomarker
for PIM sensitivity in AML. INCB053914 suppressed the phosphorylation of
multiple PIM kinase substrates and, in a compensatory manner, increased
PIM kinase expression in both cell lines and primary AML patient samples.
The potency of INCB053914 to suppress BAD phosphorylation in vivo in
MOLM16 tumors is consistent with its potency in blocking BAD
phosphorylation in MOLM16 cells spiked into human whole blood in vitro.
Dose dependent tumor growth inhibition (TGI) was seen in mice bearing
MOLM16 tumors, with maximal TGI achieved with 12-20 hours of MOLM16 WB
IC50 coverage. Synergistic activity was seen in vivo in the KG1 model
when INCB053914 was administered with cytarabine, a standard of care
therapy for AML. Further studies were undertaken to assess the potential
for combined PIM inhibition with other targeted agents. Because the PIM
kinases have been shown to regulate c-myc expression levels, agents whose
activity has been shown to be influenced by c-myc levels or to regulate
c-myc expression were examined. The combination of INCB53914 with the
pan-BET inhibitor INCB54329 in MOLM16 xenografts synergistically
decreased pBAD and c-myc levels in tumors, resulting in enhanced
efficacy. Synergy was also seen when INCB53914 was combined with the
pan-FGFR inhibitor INCB54828 in KG1 xenografts harboring the FOP-FGFR1
translocation, suggesting that this combination might be useful in this
rare patient population as well as other diseases driven by oncogenic
FGFR activation. Taken together, these data support the utility of PIM
inhibition in AML patients as monotherapy and in combination with other
targeted agents.

