Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: De-differentiation of CD45+ hematopoietic cells to CD45- stromal
cells in vitro


Bone marrow (BM) consists of both hematopoietic cells and
non-hematopoietic stromal cells, which support hematopoiesis. Recent
reports have suggested that some non-hematopoietic BM cells, such as
multipotent adult progenitor cells, can produce hematopoietic stem and/or
progenitor cells. It has been speculated that non-hematopoietic BM
stromal cells may generate myeloid malignancy following conversion of
non-hematopoietic cells to hematopoietic cells. To study the conversion
of non-hematopoietic cells (CD45-) to hematopoietic cells (CD45+), we
used the NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) mouse model of myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS). NHD13 mice develop MDS which mimics the human condition in terms
of peripheral blood (PB) cytopenias, ineffective hematopoiesis, and
transformation to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Two cell lines (251 and
63B) established from NHD13 mice with AML grow as a combination of
adherent and suspension cells. Upon sub-culture of the suspension cells,
the suspension cells become adherent. Although the suspension cells are
almost entirely (>95%) CD45+, the adherent cells are only 50% CD45+,
suggesting that a substantial fraction of the CD45+ cells became CD45-.
In conjunction with acquisition of CD45, the cell lines acquire Mac-1,
CD16/32 and F4/80 positivity, which are lost upon loss of CD45. In order
to rule out the possibility that a small fraction of CD45- cells in the
suspension phase (99.85%) population of CD45+ cells. After 14 days of
sub-culture, FACS revealed that 46% of the cells were now CD45-,
demonstrating conversion of CD45+ cells to CD45- cells. To further
explore this finding, CD45+ and CD45- populations were purified and
expression of the NHD13 transgene (driven by the pan-hematopoietic Vav1
promoter) was determined by Q-PCR to be 100-fold higher in the CD45+
fraction compared to the CD45- fraction. These results demonstrate that
the cell lines can cycle between non-hematopoietic and hematopoietic
cells.To determine if the cell lines have retained malignant potential,
we transplanted irradiated recipients via intravenous injection. One of 3
recipients transplanted with 110^6 cells showed low level engraftment
[1.7% of peripheral blood (PB) cells] at week 24 post-transplant.
Remarkably, this mouse was leukemic 2 weeks later, with splenomegaly,
anemia, and monocytosis (8.57 K/uL), and donor engraftment of 17-53% in
the PB, BM, and spleen. To improve engraftment, we used intra-femoral
injection, which resulted in consistent engraftment at 6 weeks in the PB.
This experiment is ongoing; at 9 weeks one recipient has developed
lymphopenia and anemia, suggesting the possibility of malignant
transformation. Taken together, these findings suggest that malignant
cells can cycle between stromal and hematopoietic cells, and support the
hypothesis that non-hematopoietic BM cells may be an important part of
the malignant clone in patients with MDS and AML.

