Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL8, VEGF and IGF-1 rescue ovarian cancer cells undergoing
ARHI-mediated- autophagic cell death


Each year in the US, more than 22,000 women develop ovarian cancer.
Despite progress in surgery and chemotherapy, the disease still proves
lethal in 70% of cases. One of the most important factors contributing to
poor outcomes is the ability of drug resistant ovarian cancer cells to
remain dormant for years after treatment, only to grow progressively and
kill their host. Judging from sites of recurrence, most dormant ovarian
cancer cells are found on the surface of the peritoneal cavity, often in
small, poorly vascularized collagenous scars observed at second look
operations. Previously, we reported that more than 80% of persistent,
dormant drug resistant ovarian cancers express DIRAS3 and are undergoing
autophagy. Autophagy can drive cancer cell survival or cell death
depending on the context. Our group has found that autophagy and tumor
dormancy can be regulated by an imprinted tumor suppressor gene, DIRAS3
(ARHI), which is downregulated in 60% of ovarian cancers. Re-expression
of DIRAS3 induces autophagy by inhibiting PI3K and mTOR signaling,
displacing Bcl-2 from Beclin to form the autophagy initiating complex,
inducing ATG4 and decorating the autophagosome membrane where it
co-localizes with LC3II. Re-expression of DIRAS3 in cell culture produces
cell death within 72 hours, whereas re-expression of DIRAS3 in xenografts
produces cell growth arrest and tumor dormancy. When DIRAS3 levels are
reduced after 6 weeks of induction, xenografts grow promptly. Our current
experiments were designed to determine whether survival of autophagic
cells in vivo requires permissive levels of VEGF, IL-8 and IGF-1 which
are often found in the tumor microenvironment. In cell culture,
SKOv3-DIRAS3 cells can be rescued from DIRAS3-induced autophagic cell
death in culture by co-incubation with VEGF, IGF-1 and IL-8. Treatment
with anti-VEGF, anti-IL8 and anti-IGF-1 antibodies, individually and in
combination, slowed the outgrowth of dormant autophagic ovarian cancer
cells. Treatment of dormant xenografts with the same monoclonal
antibodies against VEGF, IL-8 and IGFR with or without CQ not only
delayed outgrowth when DOX was withdrawn, but cured a fraction of mice.
Re-expression of DIRAS3 reduced expression of IGF-1 receptor, but not
VEGF and IL8 receptors. Treatment of ovarian cancer cells with VEGF, IL-8
and IGF-1 reduced DIRAS3's ability to induce autophagy and inhibit both
AKT and mTOR activity. These preclinical studies lay the groundwork
supporting the notion that treatment with a combination of anti-VEGF,
anti-IL8 and anti-IGF-1 antibodies can prevent the outgrowth of dormant
cells even after DIRAS3 expression is lost, providing key insights into
the mechanism of tumor dormancy and more importantly promoting
translation of these finding to the clinic to treat dormant ovarian
cancer cells.

