Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of estrogen receptors alpha and beta in the balance between
proliferation and surveillance


Estrogens have paradoxical effects in both promoting and preventing
breast cancer. The proliferative actions of estrogens promote the
expansion of both normal mammary epithelium and breast cancer. But
estrogen also activates p53-mediated surveillance and apoptotic pathways
to eliminate cells with potential oncogenic mutations. This is
exemplified by tumor regression in response to high dose
estrogen-treatment in postmenopausal breast cancer. Estrogens mediate
their effects through the activation of two estrogen receptor subtypes:
Estrogen Receptor alpha (ER)and Estrogen Receptor beta (ER). Our
objective is to examine the contribution of these receptors in mediating
surveillance as opposed to proliferation by comparing selective estrogen
receptor agonists with 17-estradiol (E2) for induction of proliferation
and surveillance in three model systems: (1) in vivo mouse model, (2) in
vitro MCF7-tet-off-ER model, and (3) an ex-vivo human mammary explant
model. Selective activation of ER with the agonist diarylpropionitrile
(DPN) in vivo enhances p53-mediated apoptosis in the mouse mammary
epithelium without stimulating proliferation. In addition,
radiation-induced apoptosis is significantly reduced in mice lacking ER
(ERKO). E2 or the ER selective agonist pyrazole triol (PPT) induced the
expression of estrogen response genes including progesterone receptor and
amphiregulin in all three models. DPN-mediated activation of ER failed to
induce the expression of these genes. The ER agonist DPN selectively
induced the expression of genes that repress proliferation including TGF
and inhibitors of canonical WNT signaling, WNT5a and AXIN2. DPN was also
more potent in stimulating EGR1, a modulator of p53 activity, and CEBPd,
a pro-apoptotic gene. Conclusions: The ability of DPN and ER to
potentiate surveillance pathways while limiting proliferation suggests
that ER agonists may provide a new approach for chemoprevention of breast
cancer.

