Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A quantitative analysis of paclitaxel-induced mitotic catastrophe
of MDA-MB-231 cells by high frequency ultrasound


In recent years, high-frequency ultrasound (HFUS) has shown promise of
non-invasively detecting tumor death in response to chemotherapy.
However, those studies have been limited to ultrasound B-mode and
immunohistochemical image comparison over extended periods of time (24
hours). The purpose of this study was to evaluate the relationship of
quantified HFUS spectral parameters to the dynamics of tumor cell death
in MDA-MB-231 cell samples exposed to paclitaxel chemotherapy. Several
ultrasound parameters were investigated, including the, attenuation,
spectral slope, spectral y-intercept, midband fit, estimated scatterer
diameter and estimated scatterer concentration. Changes in these
spectral-based parameters were evaluated in their capacity to respond to
various cell death events, including mitochondrial depolarization,
caspase activation, phosphatidylserine exposition, and membrane selective
permeability compromise, as determined by flow cytometry analysis.
Standard histology and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) permitted
further investigation of possible candidates responsible for the changes
detected using ultrasound. Based on TEM, negative TUNEL staining, and
cell cycle analysis it was found that paclitaxel at 1mM induces mitotic
catastrophe as the main cell death modality. The spectral slope
correlated strongly (r2 = 0.89) with the percentage of cells arrested at
the G2/M checkpoint and exhibited an opposite trend to that of systems
undergoing classical apoptosis, suggesting that it may be a prime
biophysical marker for differentiating modalities of tumor cell death.
Midband fit increases through time suggested an increase in the
concentration of acoustic scatterers. The formation of condensed
chromatin condensates of a 1 micron or greater diameter in the course of
paclitaxel-induced mitotic catastrophe, as revealed by TEM, were
hypothesized to act as large intracellular scatterers and correlated with
the increase in ultrasound midband fit. Midband fit showed the strongest
correlation of all parameters (r2 = 0.99) when plotted against the
percentage of the cell population expected to possess these scattering
structures, establishing the first quantitative correlation of ultrasound
parameters to a cell death index. These findings support that HFUS
spectral parameters may be used to quantify the degree of cell death and
predict the efficacy of chemotherapeutic treatment within a short
post-treatment timeframe.

