Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly adaptable triple-negative breast cancer cells as a suitable
model for testing epigenetic therapies


A major obstacle in developing effective therapies against solid tumors
stems from an inability to adequately model the rare subpopulation of
panresistant cancer cells that may often drive the disease. We propose a
strategy for optimally modeling highly abnormal and highly adaptable
human triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells, and evaluating
therapies for their ability to eradicate such cells. To overcome the
shortcomings often associated with cell culture models, we have
incorporated several features in our model including a selection of
highly adaptable cancer cells based on their ability to survive a
metabolic challenge. We have shown that metabolically adaptable (MA) TNBC
cells efficiently metastasize to multiple organs in nude mice. Recently
we have found that MA cells selected from SUM149 cell line feature an
embryo-like gene expression, which may be important in generating tumor
heterogeneity and therapy-resistance. Our results obtained thus far with
a variety of anticancer agents support the validity of the model of
realistic panresistance and suggest that it could be used for developing
anticancer agents that would overcome panresistance. The cancer cells
most responsible for panresistance are heterogeneous, and the likelihood
that a particular test therapy will affect these cells is difficult to
predict. Our testing strategy, which involves long-term evaluation of
anticancer agents on MA cells in parallel with the parental cell line, is
optimized to investigate the effects of potential therapeutic compounds
on panresistance. This approach can not only help choose superior
therapies for clinical trials, but also suggest strategies for overcoming
therapeutic resistance in a timely manner. Considering an important role
of chromatin in panresistance, we evaluated two promising chromatin
modifiers- a bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 and a Jumonji histone demethylase
inhibitor JIB-04 for their ability to overcome panresistance in our
model. Both these compound appear promising in different cancer models.
We are evaluating these compounds for efficacy in eradicating MA cells;
we are testing these compounds to determine whether they are effective as
single-agents and/or whether they can sensitize MA cells to
chemotherapies. Our results indicate that a long treatment with either
JQ1 or JIB-04 sensitizes MA cells to chemotherapeutic drugs doxorubicin
and paclitaxel. Our results support the utility of our approach in
discovering effective anticancer therapies against a heterogeneous and
evolving disease like TNBC. Supported by a State of Texas Grant for Rare
and Aggressive Cancers.

