Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Calothrixin A, a metabolite from Calothrix cyanobacteria, inhibits
class I histone deacetylases leading to suppression of cell growth and
induction of apoptosis in human melanoma cells


Traditionally, natural products have played a major role in drug
discovery by serving as the source of earliest medicine. In spite of the
scientific advancements and the promise of alternative drug discovery
strategies in the recent decades, there is still a shortage of drugs
leading to clinical trials for various diseases. Calothrixin B and its
N-oxide derivative, calothrixin A are two bioactive metabolites isolated
from the cyanobacteria Calothrix. Calothrixins possess a wide array of
biological activities and they are effective in inhibiting the growth of
various human cancer cells at nanomolar concentrations. The present study
was undertaken to elucidate whether calothrixin A has the ability to
block the growth of melanoma cells, as melanoma is the leading cause of
death due to skin diseases in the United States. Here, we report that
treatment of human melanoma cells (A375 and Hs294t) with calothrixin A
significantly inhibited the activity of histone deacetylases (HDACs)
while enhanced the activity of histone acetylation (HAT) in melanoma
cells. Calothrixin A inhibited HDAC activity by 10-60% in A375 cells and
20-50% in Hs294t cells in a dose-dependent manner when cells were treated
for 24 h. Whereas, HAT activity was increased significantly in melanoma
cells in a dose-dependent (0, 0.4, 0.8, 1.6 M) manner. Class I HDACs have
been considered as potential therapeutic targets for the treatment of
cancers. Western blot analysis revealed that the treatment of melanoma
cells with calothrixin A resulted in a dose-dependent decrease in the
levels of class I HDAC proteins (HDAC 1, 2, 3 and 8). These epigenetic
changes in melanoma cells by calothrixin A were associated with
significant reduction in cell viability of melanoma cells (4-64% in A375;
4-80% in Hs294t cells) in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Further,
treatment of cells with calothrixin A resulted in reactivation of tumor
suppressor gene, as evident by the enhanced expression of Cip1/WAF1/p21
protein. HDACs also regulate many biologic processes, including cell
cycle regulation and cell differentiations. Western blot analysis
revealed that treatment of melanoma cells with calothrixin A resulted in
reduction in the levels of regulatory proteins of G0/G1 phase of cell
cycle, such as cyclins (cyclin D1 and D2) and cyclin dependent kinases
(CDKs). Flow cytometry analysis revealed that calothrixin A enhanced
apoptotic cell death of melanoma cells, which was associated with the
increased expression of proapoptotic protein Bax and decreased expression
of antiapoptotic proteins (Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL). In conclusion, our study
demonstrates for the first time that calothrixin A has the ability to
block the growth of melanoma cells and it is mediated through targeting
class I HDACs in micromolar concentrations.Keywords: Calothrixin A,
Cyanobacteria, Calothrix, HDAC, Melanoma

