Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquisition of estrogen independence induces TOB1-related
mechanisms supporting breast cancer cell proliferation


Approximately 70% of newly diagnosed breast cancers express high levels
of estrogen receptor alpha (ER). However, de novo and acquired drug
resistance to anti-estrogen agents limit the treatment of such patients,
requiring the use of cytotoxic chemotherapy; many such patients have a
poor prognosis. Therefore, resistance to therapies targeting the estrogen
pathway remains a challenge in the treatment of estrogen-receptor
positive breast cancer. To address this challenge, a system biological
approach by screening a library of siRNAs targeting an estrogen receptor-
and aromatase-centered network, was used and identified 46 genes that are
dispensable in estrogen-dependent MCF7 cells, but are selectively
required for the survival of estrogen-independent MCF7-derived cells, and
multiple additional estrogen-independent breast cancer cell lines.
Integration of this information identified a tumor suppressor gene TOB1
as a critical determinant of estrogen-independent estrogen-receptor
positive breast cell survival. Depletion of TOB1 selectively promoted G1
phase arrest and sensitivity to AKT and mTOR inhibitors in
estrogen-independent cells but not estrogen-dependent cells.
Phosphoproteomic profiles (results from reverse phase protein array,
RPPA) under basal conditions and following TOB1 depletion identified
significant signaling network reprogramming by TOB1 that differed in
estrogen-sensitive and estrogen-resistant cell lines. These data support
a novel function for TOB1 in mediating survival of estrogen-independent
breast cancers. The translational significance of this new molecular
mechanism of estrogen independence in human breast cancer will be fully
determined when TOB1 inhibitors are developed to enable in vivo
validation studies. These studies also provide evidence for combining
TOB1 inhibition and AKT/mTOR inhibition as a therapeutic strategy, which
have potential translational significance for the management of patients
with estrogen receptor-positive breast cancers.

