Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Albumin-chitosan hybrid onconase nanocarriers for mesothelioma
therapy


Onconase (ONC) is a member of a ribonuclease superfamily that has potent
cytostatic activity against malignant mesothelioma (MM). However, the
recent clinical trials have failed due to unfavorable biopharmaceutical
characteristics. The objective of this investigation was to develop
BSA-chitosan based hybrid nanoformulations for the efficient delivery of
ONC to MM while minimizing the exposure to normal tissues. Taguchi
Orthogonal Array L9 type design was used to formulate ONC loaded albumin
nanocarriers (ONC-ANC). The ONC-ANC surface was hybridized using varying
chitosan concentrations ranging between 0.100-0.175%w/v to form various
ONC loaded hybrid nanocarriers (ONC-HNC). The obtained data set was
analyzed by principal component analysis (PCA) and principal component
regressions (PCR) to decode the effects of investigated design variables.
ONC-ANC were found to have a mean particle size of 15.78 0.24 nm ( =
-21.89 0.11 mV). PCA showed positive correlations between investigated
design variables like the bovine serum albumin (BSA) concentration,
ethanol dilution, and total ethanol with formulated nanocarrier particle
size and entrapment efficiency (EE). PCR showed that the particle size
depends on BSA, ethanol dilution, and total ethanol content, while EE was
only influenced by BSA content. Further analysis of chitosan and TPP
effects used for coating of ONC-ANC by PCR confirmed their positive
impacts on the particle size, zeta potential, and prolongation of ONC
release compared to uncoated ONC-ANC. PCR analysis of preliminary
stability studies showed increase in the particle size and zeta potential
at lower pH. However, particle size, zeta potential, and EE of developed
HNC were below 63 nm, 31 mV, and 96%, respectively, indicating their
stability under subjected buffer conditions. Out of the developed
formulations, HNC showed enhanced inhibition of cell viability with lower
IC50 against human MM-REN cells compared to ONC and ONC-ANC. This might
be attributed to the better cell uptake of HNC, which was confirmed in
the cell uptake fluorescence studies. These studies indicated that a
developed nanotherapeutic approach might prove beneficial in reducing the
therapeutic dose of ONC, minimizing adverse side effects by limiting the
exposure of ONC to normal tissues, and help in the development of new
therapeutic formulations and routes of administration.

