Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of H3K9 acetylation and tri-methylation in stem cell
radiosensitivity


Radiation therapy is often associated with normal tissue injury as an
undesired side effect. This is promoted by the depletion of normal stem
cells and a decreased regenerative capacity of the affected organs. To
reduce normal tissue injury during radiotherapy protective treatments
have to be developed that improve stem cell survival without protecting
tumor cells. In this study we investigate the acetylation and methylation
of histone 3 at lysine 9 (H3K9), that is responsive to DNA damage and
uniquely regulated in stem cells, as potential target for the development
of radioprotective therapeutics.We analyzed stem cells in mouse tissue
niches in vivo, murine embryonic stem cells in culture and neural stem
cells freshly isolated from newborn mouse pups. We investigate repair
factors, histone modifications and apoptosis pathways by
immunofluorescence staining, western blotting and flow cytometry after
X-ray irradiation or micro-irradiation of individual cells. H3K9
modifying enzymes are targeted with inhibitors, activators, RNA
interference or overexpression by plasmid transfection and the effect on
stem cells radiosensitivity evaluated.We show that stem cells are highly
radio-sensitive and have reduced DNA repair with low activation of DNA
damage factors like ATM. We screened for stem cell specific levels of
histone modifications that are responsive to DNA damage and discovered
that stem cells of adult tissue niches like brain and testis as well as
murine embryonic and neuronal stem cells show very high levels of H3K9ac,
while H3K9me3 levels are decreased. In tumor cells H3K9 acetylation
(H3K9ac) was shown to be reduced after damage induction, while H3K9
tri-methylation (H3K9me3) is increased to fully activate the repair
factor ATM. We hypothesize that in stem cells, an inept transition
between H3K9 acetylation and tri-methylation prevents robust activation
of ATM leading to high radiosensitivity. In agreement with this
hypothesis, we find reduced down-regulation of H3K9ac in stem cells at
the DNA damage sites. To transiently improve the H3K9ac/me3 switch in
stem cells in order to enhance activation of DNA repair factors and stem
cell survival after irradiation, we aim to transiently reduce H3K9
acetylation by targeting the responsible acetyltransferases and
deacetylases. We show expression levels of H3K9 modifying enzymes in stem
cells before and after irradiation as well as preliminary results of the
effect of down- or up-regulation of H3K9 modifying enzymes on stem cell
radiosensitivity.We conclude that elevated H3K9 acetylation and reduced
H3K9 tri-methylation levels in stem cells and their responsible H3K9
modifying enzymes are potential targets to improve ATM activation and
stem cell survival after irradiation.

