Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Time-resolved functional perfusion-based analysis of peptide vs.
antibody tumor penetration by photoacoustics


Introduction: Bicycle Therapeutics is developing bicyclic peptide
binders, targeting MT1-MMP (a matrix metalloproteinase involved in tumor
metastasis) to deliver toxic agents specifically to tumor cells. Due to
their high affinity, small size, enhanced tumor penetration, fully
synthetic nature and rapid clearance bicyclic peptide drug conjugates
(BDCs) may overcome some of the limitations of the antibody drug
conjugate (ADC) format. Photoacoustic imaging is an emerging technology
that combines the most compelling features of optical imaging and
ultrasound, providing both high optical contrast and high ultrasound
resolution at depth. Photoacoustic imaging's unique properties make it
superior to other modalities in generating information-rich structural
and functional images in multiple critical disease areas, including
applications within cancer, cardiovascular disease, and inflammation.
Here, a fluorescent-labeled Bicycle peptide (Alexa680), and a
corresponding antibody (Alexa750), both bind to the same domain
(hemopexin) on MMP14, to measure tumor penetration simultaneously. Both
bind to the same domain (hemopexin) on MMP14 with similar
(low/subnanomolar) affinities. Functional perfusion was measured by
Indocyanine Green (ICG) dynamic imaging. By utilizing photoacoustics, we
were able to discriminate regions of high and low perfusion in the tumor
and measure the amount of each labeled material.Methods: Female Nude mice
were implanted with human fibrosarcoma cell line (HT-1080)
subcutaneously. HT-1080 is known to express large amounts of MMP14. While
anesthesized with isofluorane, a tail vein catheter was introduced and
the animal placed into a photoacoustic 3D imager (Nexus 128, Endra Inc.
Ann Arbor, MI). The fluore-labeled Bicycle Peptide and Antibody were
injected and a 30-minute dynamic scan was acquired for both labels
simultaneously. This was followed by a 3-minute ICG scan.Results: Using
the ICG scan, regions of high and low perfusion were determined and used
to quantify compound penetration. The Bicycle peptide was shown to
accumulate into highly perfused regions over the antibody. In the lower
perfused regions the bicycle peptide was also shown to amass at higher
amounts over the antibody in regions of high vascular
perfusion.Conclusion: Using photoacoustics we were able to show regions
of low perfusion were accessible by the Bicycle peptide, to a greater
extent than the antibody. Relatively low perfusion in localized tumor
refund can limit therapeutic effect. The delivery of a therapeutic using
a peptide with high tumor affinity and penetration under poor vascular
perfusion would overcome such limitations.

