Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discerning the molecular basis of DNA-PK pro-tumorigenic functions
and translational capacity as a therapeutic target in prostate cancer


Prostatic adenocarcinoma (PCa) is dependent on androgen receptor (AR)
signaling at all stages of disease, as AR activation induces both cell
proliferation and survival. Though organ-confined disease can be treated,
the response is transient and reactivation of AR results in incurable
state of disease (castration resistant prostate cancer, CRPC). Thus,
there is a significant need to discern the mechanisms by which aberrant
AR activity arises, and to develop new means to clinically target
advanced disease. Recently, AR activation was found to promote tumor cell
survival and proliferation through a feed-forward loop involving the
repair factor DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK). Emerging new data
correlates elevated DNA-PK expression with poor prognosis and identifies
DNA-PK as a driver of metastatic signaling. Although the role of DNA-PK
activity in DNA repair is well characterized, the underpinning mechanisms
and consequences of DNA-PK in transcriptional regulation are
understudied. Data to be discussed will build on our new preliminary
DNA-PK interactome data to identify sequence-specific transcription
factors found in complex with DNA-PK. In order to molecularly dissect
DNA-PK transcriptional events, the DNA-PK cistrome and transcriptome will
be defined using clinically relevant models, resulting in a detailed
understanding of DNA-PK mediated transcriptional regulation. The
correlation of high expression of DNA-PK with poor prognosis in advanced
PCa, as well as the known roles of DNA-PK in cancer-relevant pathways
make DNA-PK a viable therapeutic target for PCa. Despite the current
clinical assessment of DNA-PK inhibitors in multiple tumor types, there
are no existing trials targeting PCa. Additional studies that assess the
efficacy of current DNA-PK inhibitors in PCa will be presented and used
to determine the best clinical space for their use.

