Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of ribosomal protein S6 overcomes radioresistance
in prostate cancer


Radiation Therapy (RT) is a definitive treatment for early-localized
prostate cancer (PCA), but is associated with side effects which impair
quality of life in addition to development of radioresistance.
PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling is one of the contributors to therapeutic
resistance, including radioresistance. Ribosomal protein S6 (rpS6), a
downstream effector of PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling, mediates radioresistance
by increasing protein synthesis, cell survival and epithelial mesenchymal
transition. Also, increased activation of rpS6 is correlated with poor
survival in PCA. Therefore, downregulation of rpS6 could decrease RT
induced toxic side effects by sensitizing tumor cells. Based on published
evidence demonstrating tumor growth inhibitory activities, we tested if
Nexrutine (Nx), an inexpensive OTC herbal supplement from Phellodendron
amurense bark extract, could potentiate RT by inhibiting rpS6 activation.
Using clonogenic assays, low dose RT in combination with Nx was found to
have similar inhibition of surviving fraction compared to high dose RT in
androgen independent PC-3 cells. Isobologram analysis of these data
depicted strong synergism. In addition, increased activation of Akt/NFKB
signaling molecules was observed in PC-3 cells exposed to radiation. The
observed radiation-induced increase in these signaling molecules was
either abolished (p-rpS6, p-NFKB and p-p70S6K) or decreased (p-Akt) in
cells pretreated with Nx (8 hours) prior to RT. Additionally, Nx
pretreatment prolonged the G2/M arrest caused by RT in PC-3 cells.
Strikingly, knockdown of rpS6 in PC-3 cells reversed the observed effects
of Nx, indicating the importance of rpS6 in mediating these changes.
Furthermore, administration of Nx in combination with RT inhibited
prostate tumor progression in transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse
prostate (TRAMP) mice with no prominent toxicity. Notably,
immunohistochemical analysis revealed decreased levels of p-mTOR, p70S6K,
NFKB, Ki67 and Cyclin D1 in the prostate in combination group of animals
compared to monotherapy. Taken together, our data suggest that Nx
sensitizes PCA cells by down regulating rpS6 and delays progression to
lethal disease. Remarkably, in a recent phase 0/1 study patients (81%)
receiving Nx showed decreased PSA levels with no signs of grade 3
toxicity. Thus, Nx shows immense potential for use as an adjuvant in
combination with conventional therapy for effective clinical management
of PCA.Supported by NCCAM (R01 AT-007448) and VA-MERIT Award (I01 BX
000766; APK)

