Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel pluronic F127-coated paclitaxel nanoparticles formulation
for pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer (PanCa) is one of the deadliest cancers which accounts
for 46,420 new cancer cases and almost 39,590 deaths in the United States
in 2014. There is no effective treatment modality for PanCa that can
significantly improve the overall survival rate of patients. Paclitaxel
is a mitotic inhibitor widely used in chemotherapy. Recent FDA approved
treatment regimen of Abraxane (paclitaxel nanoformulation) with
gemcitabine has been increased overall survival of PanCa patients from
6.7 months (Gemcitabine) to 8.5 months (Abraxane + Gemcitabine). Targeted
delivery of paclitaxel may lead to significant improvement in treating
pancreatic cancer. For this purpose, we have engineered a unique,
pluronic F127-coated paclitaxel loaded nanoparticles (PPNPs) formulation.
This formulation is composed of a PLGA core that is subsequently coated
with poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), poly(l-lysine) (PLL), and pluronic
polymer (F127) for efficient drug delivery and active tumors targeting.
This formulation has several unique properties: (a) the PLGA core is
capable of loading paclitaxel and its sustained release (b)
pluronic-polymer layer coating provides stability and also reverses
multi-drug resistance in cancer cells (c) the polyethylene glycol chains
of pluronic F127 polymer act as a stealth polymer which diminishes the
nonspecific uptake of formulation, and (d) amine functional groups on NPs
(PLL) are useful for antibody conjugation through a PEG-linker for
specific targeting of tumor/cancer cells. The PPNPs formulation was
characterized for particle size, chemical composition, and thermal
characteristics. The PPNPs exhibited superior dose-dependent inhibition
effects on the proliferation of Colo-357, HPAF-II, BxPC-3, MiaPaca-2,
Panca-1, and AsPC-1 pancreatic cancer cell lines, over free PTX and other
conventional PTX nanoformulation (Abraxane). Similar inhibition effects
were also observed in colony formation assay in BxPC-3 cells. The
improved anti-cancer effects of this formulation was achieved due to its
accumulation in the cytosolic compartment and less presence in early
endosome/late endosome/lysosome indicates their escape from lysosomal
degradation. In addition, our data suggest that F127-stabilized PPNPs
exhibit superior anti-cancer potential and is capable of regulating
proteins associated with sonic hedgehog, multi drug resistance and miR-21
signaling pathways and inducing apoptosis which, eventually lead to the
gemcitabine chemo-sensitization. Interestingly, MUC13-conjugated
nanoformulation exhibited efficient targeting in HPAF-II cells. In
conclusion, our data suggest that the PPNPs nanoformulation can be used
for the efficient, targeted delivery of paclitaxel to tumors and may
useful for treatment of pancreatic cancer alone and/or in combination
with gemcitabine.

