Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: hMENA11a contributes to HER3-mediated resistance to PI3K
inhibitors in HER2 overexpressing breast cancer cells


Human Mena (hMENA), an actin regulatory protein of the ENA/VASP family,
cooperates with ErbB receptor family signaling in breast cancer. It is
overexpressed in high-risk preneoplastic lesions and in primary breast
tumors where it correlates with HER2 overexpression and an activated
status of AKT and MAPK. The concomitant overexpression of hMENA and HER2
identifies breast cancer patients with a worse prognosis. hMENA is
expressed along with alternatively expressed isoforms, hMENA11a and
hMENAv6 with opposite functions.By Reverse Phase Protein Assay, we
identified a novel role for the epithelial associated hMENA11a isoform in
sustaining HER3 activation and pro-survival pathways in HER2
overexpressing breast luminal cancer cells. Since HER3 activation is
crucial in mechanisms of cell resistance to PI3K inhibitors, we explored
whether hMENA11a is involved in these resistance mechanisms. The specific
hMENA11a depletion switched off the HER3-related pathway activated by
PI3K inhibitors and impaired the nuclear accumulation of HER3
transcription factor FOXO3a induced by PI3K inhibitors. On the other
hand, PI3K inhibitors activated hMENA11a phosphorylation and affected its
localization. At the functional level, we found that hMENA11a sustains
cell proliferation and survival in response to PI3K inhibitor treatment
whereas hMENA11a silencing increases molecules involved in cancer cell
apoptosis. As shown in three-dimensional cultured breast cancer cells
hMENA11a contributes to cancer cells resistance to PI3K inhibition since
the depletion of hMENA11a drastically reduced cell viability upon
treatment with PI3K inhibitor BEZ235.Altogether, these results indicate
that hMENA11a in HER2 overexpressing breast cancer cells sustains
HER3/AKT axis activation and contributes to HER3-mediated resistance
mechanisms to PI3K inhibitors. Thus, hMENA11a expression can be proposed
as a marker of HER3 activation and of resistance to PI3K inhibition
therapies, to select patients who can benefit from these combined
targeted treatments. hMENA11a activity may represent a new target for
anti-proliferative therapies in breast cancer.

