Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Xenograft dose-response from intra-mouse dose escalation


IntroductionXenograft response has been shown to hold predictive value
for the clinical efficacy of a drug, but growth sensitivity to a drug
candidate can vary widely between xenografts models. As the ability to
test pre-clinically for broad biological activity across many xenografts
models is often resource-limited, in this work we develop a mathematical
approach based on evolutionary dynamics to derive dose-response
information from a single xenograft tumor.MethodsWe propose to estimate a
dose-response curve of xenograft growth inhibition by treating a single
tumor with a series of different dose strengths. Exponential tumor growth
rate (GR) may be quickly estimated to determine the inhibition effect of
a particular exposure during week-long intervals of constant dose
strength. We next considered the possibility of a dose strength ordering
effect on tumor growth due to cellular heterogeneity in GR and drug
sensitivity within a tumor. To determine to what extent dose history
could influence the observed growth inhibition, we developed an
evolutionary model of tumor growth for a heterogeneous population of
cancer cells with joint-distributed clonal GR and drug sensitivities, and
simulated tumor response to treatment for distributions having variable
degrees of correlation. Finally, we tested the ability to estimate
dose-response curves from single tumors in vivo compared to the typical
method of assessing drug effect based on multiple dose-groups.ResultsFor
the three possible orders of dosing three different treatment strengths,
we found that the simulated study design with escalating dose intervals
lead to the least error compared to assessing each dose in a separate
tumor. Additionally, the discrepancy between the growth inhibition
effects of different dose orders peaks when the correlation between GR
and drug sensitivity decreases to negative. We then show that this study
design allows efficient, accurate estimation of the range of
dose-responses in a broad set of simulated tumor types (e.g.,
fast-growing and sensitive, or slow-growing and insensitive). An in vivo
dose-response study validates the estimation of dose-response curves from
a single xenograft by comparing favorably with the single dose per mouse
method.ConclusionsThe mathematical approach described here allows
efficient estimation of a dose-response curve for a xenograft model using
a single tumor. By reducing the resources required to determine the
response of a single model, a molecule's anticancer effect can be tested
against a larger sample of tumor types pre-clinically. A more accurate
picture of a drug candidate's broad biological activity will allow for
greater confidence in translational projections of clinical efficacy.

