Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of resveratrol-zinc combination on prostate tumor growth in
transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate (TRAMP) model


Prostate cancer (PCa) is a major cancer of males globally and is
associated with significant mortality and morbidity across the globe. The
trace element zinc (Zn) plays a critical role in a variety of prostatic
functions and normal prostate accumulates Zn at up to ten-fold higher
concentration than other soft tissues in the body. However, the cancerous
prostate lose the ability to accumulate Zn and lower levels of prostatic
Zn has been associated with development and progression of PCa. Studies
have suggested that a dysregulation in the transport machinery of Zn,
possibly mediated via ZIP and ZnT families of Zn transporters, may be
associated with this neoplastic transformation of prostate. Thus,
re-tuning of Zn transport machinery via pharmacological means could be
useful in PCa management. We have previously demonstrated that the grape
antioxidant resveratrol (RSV) enhances the anti-proliferative response of
Zn by increasing Zn-transporter protein ZIP1 in prostate cancer cells in
vitro (Cancer Res 2012; 72(8 Suppl): Abstract nr 3729. doi:
1538-7445.AM2012-3729). Here, we extended our study to determine the in
vivo relevance of our in vitro findings. We assessed the effect of RSV
(600 mg/kg in diet) in combination with Zn (15 and 30 ppm ZnSO4.7H2O in
drinking water) against prostate cancer progression in TRAMP mice,
employing two experimental protocols, which represent prevention and
intervention settings, respectively. We found that RSV-Zn combination,
when given prior to tumor initiation (4 weeks of age), showed superior
anti-tumor efficacy than either of the agents alone. However, we did not
find a significant anti-tumor response of RSV and/or Zn in the
intervention protocol. We also determined the effect of RSV and/or
treatments on markers of proliferation and apoptosis in tumor tissues
obtained from TRAMP mice. Interestingly, we found that lower dose of Zn
(15 ppm) was most consistent in imparting anti-proliferative response;
resulting in a significant i) decrease in tumor weight/volume, ii)
decrease in proliferative marker PCNA, iii) increase of pro-apoptotic
Bax, and iv) decrease of the pro-survival Bcl2. In addition, the observed
response of RSV-Zn combination was associated with an increase in ZIP4
protein. Further experiments are ongoing to dissect the mechanism of the
PCa chemoprevention effects of RSV-Zn combination. Outcome of this study
may provide a foundation for the use of RSV-Zn combination for PCa
management.

