Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted sequencing of prostate cancer circulating tumor cells in
comparison with matched cell free DNA and prostate tumors


Introduction: Precision oncology care is predicated upon detecting
actionable genomic aberrations. Obtaining tissue that accurately reflects
the genomic landscape of prostate cancer (PCa) is a challenge, though
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) represent a promising tissue source. We
demonstrate the feasibility of high throughput targeted sequencing of
CTCs across multiple PCa disease states and compare the genomic variation
among different cancer substrates (CTCs, cell free DNA [cfDNA], primary
tumors, metastasis) in matched patient samples.Methods: Under IRB
approval, 7.5ml of peripheral blood was obtained from healthy controls
and patients with PCa. CTCs were enriched using LiquidBiopsy (Cynvenio
Biosystems), a CLIA-certified immunoaffinity-based microfluidic platform.
CTCs were defined as EpCAM+CK+DAPI+CD45. Amplicon libraries covering 50
cancer genes were generated (AmpliSeq 2.0, Life Technology) and sequenced
on an Ion Proton System. Somatic single nucleotide variants (SSNV),
occurring in >1% of DNA in a sample, were identified based on their
presence in CTCs and absence from WBC. When available, matched cfDNA,
primary tumors and metastatic tissue were sequenced in parallel.Results:
Peripheral blood was collected from healthy controls (n = 31) and PCa
patients (n = 26) at various disease states: localized (n = 2),
biochemical recurrence (n = 4), metastatic hormone sensitive (n = 16),
and castration resistant (n = 4). In patients with PCa, the median PSA
was 3.32 ng/dl (range Introduction: Precision oncology care is predicated
upon detecting actionable genomic aberrations. Obtaining tissue that
accurately reflects the genomic landscape of prostate cancer (PCa) is a
challenge, though circulating tumor cells (CTCs) represent a promising
tissue source. We demonstrate the feasibility of high throughput targeted
sequencing of CTCs across multiple PCa disease states and compare the
genomic variation among different cancer substrates (CTCs, cell free DNA
[cfDNA], primary tumors, metastasis) in matched patient samples.Methods:
Under IRB approval, 7.5ml of peripheral blood was obtained from healthy
controls and patients with PCa. CTCs were enriched using LiquidBiopsy
(Cynvenio Biosystems), a CLIA-certified immunoaffinity-based microfluidic
platform. CTCs were defined as EpCAM+CK+DAPI+CD45. Amplicon libraries
covering 50 cancer genes were generated (AmpliSeq 2.0, Life Technology)
and sequenced on an Ion Proton System. Somatic single nucleotide variants
(SSNV), occurring in >1% of DNA in a sample, were identified based on
their presence in CTCs and absence from WBC. When available, matched
cfDNA, primary tumors and metastatic tissue were sequenced in
parallel.Results: Peripheral blood was collected from healthy controls (n
= 31) and PCa patients (n = 26) at various disease states: localized (n =
2), biochemical recurrence (n = 4), metastatic hormone sensitive (n =
16), and castration resistant (n = 4). In patients with PCa, the median
PSA was 3.32 ng/dl (range <0.03-1531) and CTCs were identified in 26 of
26 (100%) patients with a median CTC count of 46 cells/7.5 ml (range
15-518). Six of 26 (23%) CTC samples from PCa patients had SSNV detected
at 18 loci. Matched tissue was available in 17 of the 26 PCa patients:
cfDNA (n = 14), primary tumor (n = 3), primary tumor and metastasis (n =
1). Five of 14 (36%) cfDNA samples had SSNVs detected at 16 loci; 2 of 3
(67%) primary tumors had SSNVs detected at 2 loci; and 1 of 1 (100%)
metastasis had SSNVs detected at 4 loci. Of the 17 patients with matched
tissue samples, SSNV concordance was seen in only one case. No SSNVs were
detected in the control patients.Conclusion: Targeted sequencing of CTCs
was feasible across the spectrum of PCa and SSNVs identified in CTCs were
not concordant with SSNVs in matched cfDNA or tumor DNA, likely
reflecting cellular heterogeneity, clonal evolution, and tissue-specific
extraction methodologies. Expanded matched sample cohorts are needed to
elucidate how these DNA sources - used alone or in combination - can best
inform clinical decisions in prostate cancer.

