Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global correlation analysis of HOXC6 expression in ovarian cancer


Introduction:HOXC6 is a member of the HOX gene family known to be
dysregulated in many cancers. We previously reported gene and protein
down-regulation of HOXC6 in ovarian cancer tissue and serum of high-grade
serous carcinoma patients. This study evaluates the relationship of the
HOXC6 gene expression with other genes from transcriptional microarray
analysis of 92 ovarian tissues.Methods:Transcriptional microarray data
from ovarian tissue was analyzed from 67 whole tissue samples and 25
micro-dissected samples. The 25 samples consisted of 9 malignant tumor
tissues, 9 normal epithelia (NE) tissues and 7 Benign Tumor tissues.
Genes with significant direct or reverse correlations to HOXC6 were
initially identified from the 67-sample set (FDR Introduction:HOXC6 is a
member of the HOX gene family known to be dysregulated in many cancers.
We previously reported gene and protein down-regulation of HOXC6 in
ovarian cancer tissue and serum of high-grade serous carcinoma patients.
This study evaluates the relationship of the HOXC6 gene expression with
other genes from transcriptional microarray analysis of 92 ovarian
tissues.Methods:Transcriptional microarray data from ovarian tissue was
analyzed from 67 whole tissue samples and 25 micro-dissected samples. The
25 samples consisted of 9 malignant tumor tissues, 9 normal epithelia
(NE) tissues and 7 Benign Tumor tissues. Genes with significant direct or
reverse correlations to HOXC6 were initially identified from the
67-sample set (FDR < 0.05). Correlated genes identified in the 67-sample
set were then reanalyzed to reconfirm their significance against the
HOXC6 in 25-sample set (FDR Introduction:HOXC6 is a member of the HOX
gene family known to be dysregulated in many cancers. We previously
reported gene and protein down-regulation of HOXC6 in ovarian cancer
tissue and serum of high-grade serous carcinoma patients. This study
evaluates the relationship of the HOXC6 gene expression with other genes
from transcriptional microarray analysis of 92 ovarian
tissues.Methods:Transcriptional microarray data from ovarian tissue was
analyzed from 67 whole tissue samples and 25 micro-dissected samples. The
25 samples consisted of 9 malignant tumor tissues, 9 normal epithelia
(NE) tissues and 7 Benign Tumor tissues. Genes with significant direct or
reverse correlations to HOXC6 were initially identified from the
67-sample set (FDR < 0.05). Correlated genes identified in the 67-sample
set were then reanalyzed to reconfirm their significance against the
HOXC6 in 25-sample set (FDR < 0.05). To verify validity of correlations
in cancer, expression values of genes in this second group were compared
between NE and malignant samples using ANOVA (FDR 2.0 were used in
unsupervised hierarchical clustering against both NE and malignant
samples.Results:The absolute values of correlation coefficients (|r|) in
116 significant genes ranged from 0.43-0.81; 33 had (|r|) > 0.70, and 65
had |FC| > 2.0. Of note because of their known association to ovarian
cancer, this analysis revealed PBX3, MAL2, TPD52, ZEB2, PTTG1, KLK7, and
KLK8. GO enrichment analysis identified developmental process (36 genes),
cell differentiation (34), anatomical structure development (36), and
regulation of signaling (27) consistent with HOXC6 known functions (FDR
2.0 were used in unsupervised hierarchical clustering against both NE and
malignant samples.Results:The absolute values of correlation coefficients
(|r|) in 116 significant genes ranged from 0.43-0.81; 33 had (|r|) >
0.70, and 65 had |FC| > 2.0. Of note because of their known association
to ovarian cancer, this analysis revealed PBX3, MAL2, TPD52, ZEB2, PTTG1,
KLK7, and KLK8. GO enrichment analysis identified developmental process
(36 genes), cell differentiation (34), anatomical structure development
(36), and regulation of signaling (27) consistent with HOXC6 known
functions (FDR < 0.05). Protein-protein interaction networks revealed
SMAD3 to be the central node with the largest cluster of connectivity
linked to other HOXC6 correlated genes including PAX8, ZEB2 and UCHL5.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis clearly distinguished
between NE obtained from non-tumorous and NE obtained from tumorous
tissues.Discussion:Overall this analysis demonstrates a strong
correlation between HOXC6 expression in ovarian tissue and multiple
developmental genes. The hierarchical clustering results may indicate
that effects of the reported genes are not limited to the tumor tissue
and can be traced back to normal epithelial cells. Therefore, future
study of large sample sets of micro-dissected malignant and nearby normal
epithelia to identify underlying developmental pathways in ovarian cancer
will increase understanding of growth mechanisms of ovarian tumors and
their interaction with normal cells in the microenvironment. Our previous
work along with these new findings could potentially be used for future
study of identifying ovarian cancer specific biomarkers.

