Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of recurrence risk stratification markers after
curative resection of stage II or III gastric cancer and potential
clinical applications


Objective: Standard treatment for stage II or III gastric cancer is
curative resection followed by adjuvant chemotherapy. However, treatment
outcomes are expected to be further improved by individualized therapy
based on biomarker analysis. We extracted mRNA from frozen specimens of
gastric cancer to establish a cDNA bank and have analyzed markers for
recurrence risk stratification of after curative resection of stage II or
III gastric cancer. We report our currently available results.Methods: We
studied 255 patients who underwent curative resection of stage II or III
gastric cancer and were followed up for at least 5 years after surgery.
The patients were divided into 2 cohorts: a training set consisting of
145 patients and a validation set consisting of 110 patients. A total of
104 genes were selected as candidate biomarkers on the basis of
comprehensive screening by DNA microarray, extraction by SAGE library
analysis, and target molecules and their families, including the results
of preclinical research. The relative expression levels of each gene in
gastric cancer tissue were measured by quantitative polymerase chain
reaction. Genes that were found to be independent predictors of poor
outcomes in the training set were verified in the validation set, using
Cox proportional-hazards models.Results: In the training set of stage II
or III gastric cancer, 38 genes were selected as independent predictors
of poor outcomes. On verification analysis using the validation set, the
following 11 genes were selected as candidate markers for recurrence risk
stratification (PObjective: Standard treatment for stage II or III
gastric cancer is curative resection followed by adjuvant chemotherapy.
However, treatment outcomes are expected to be further improved by
individualized therapy based on biomarker analysis. We extracted mRNA
from frozen specimens of gastric cancer to establish a cDNA bank and have
analyzed markers for recurrence risk stratification of after curative
resection of stage II or III gastric cancer. We report our currently
available results.Methods: We studied 255 patients who underwent curative
resection of stage II or III gastric cancer and were followed up for at
least 5 years after surgery. The patients were divided into 2 cohorts: a
training set consisting of 145 patients and a validation set consisting
of 110 patients. A total of 104 genes were selected as candidate
biomarkers on the basis of comprehensive screening by DNA microarray,
extraction by SAGE library analysis, and target molecules and their
families, including the results of preclinical research. The relative
expression levels of each gene in gastric cancer tissue were measured by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Genes that were found to be
independent predictors of poor outcomes in the training set were verified
in the validation set, using Cox proportional-hazards models.Results: In
the training set of stage II or III gastric cancer, 38 genes were
selected as independent predictors of poor outcomes. On verification
analysis using the validation set, the following 11 genes were selected
as candidate markers for recurrence risk stratification (P<0.2): SPARC,
INHBA, HRBB2, VSNL1, CXCR4, EZH2, CCR7, PDGFRB, P53, MMP11, and CEACAM7.
Good reproducibility was obtained for 5 of these genes: SPARC, INHBA,
HRBB2, VSNL1, and CXCR4 (PObjective: Standard treatment for stage II or
III gastric cancer is curative resection followed by adjuvant
chemotherapy. However, treatment outcomes are expected to be further
improved by individualized therapy based on biomarker analysis. We
extracted mRNA from frozen specimens of gastric cancer to establish a
cDNA bank and have analyzed markers for recurrence risk stratification of
after curative resection of stage II or III gastric cancer. We report our
currently available results.Methods: We studied 255 patients who
underwent curative resection of stage II or III gastric cancer and were
followed up for at least 5 years after surgery. The patients were divided
into 2 cohorts: a training set consisting of 145 patients and a
validation set consisting of 110 patients. A total of 104 genes were
selected as candidate biomarkers on the basis of comprehensive screening
by DNA microarray, extraction by SAGE library analysis, and target
molecules and their families, including the results of preclinical
research. The relative expression levels of each gene in gastric cancer
tissue were measured by quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Genes
that were found to be independent predictors of poor outcomes in the
training set were verified in the validation set, using Cox
proportional-hazards models.Results: In the training set of stage II or
III gastric cancer, 38 genes were selected as independent predictors of
poor outcomes. On verification analysis using the validation set, the
following 11 genes were selected as candidate markers for recurrence risk
stratification (P<0.2): SPARC, INHBA, HRBB2, VSNL1, CXCR4, EZH2, CCR7,
PDGFRB, P53, MMP11, and CEACAM7. Good reproducibility was obtained for 5
of these genes: SPARC, INHBA, HRBB2, VSNL1, and CXCR4
(P<0.05).Conclusions: Candidate markers for recurrence risk
stratification were identified in patients who underwent curative
resection of stage II or III gastric cancer. At present, these markers
for recurrence risk stratification are being analyzed at the protein
level by tissue microarray, using specimens from a different cohort of
about 1000 patients. Our ultimate goal is the development of a rapid test
kit for recurrence risk stratification based on combinations of these
markers in patients who have undergone radical resection of stage II or
III gastric cancer

