Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The MEK-inhibitor pimasertib is synergistic with PI3K-delta and
BTK inhibitors in lymphoma models


Pimasertib (AS-703026) is a potent and highly selective ATP
noncompetitive MEK1/2 inhibitor that has shown anti-tumor activity in
different pre-clinical models. We have previously reported pimasertib
activity as single agent in lymphoma models and preliminary combinations
results (Gaudio et al, AACR 2014). Here, we report detailed data on
combinations of pimasertib with the PI3K-delta inhibitor idelalisib and
with the BTK-inhibitor ibrutinib.Methods. Cell lines derived from
activated B-cell like (ABC) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
(OCI-Ly10, TMD8), germinal center B-cell like (GCB) DLBCL (DOHH2, RCK8)
and from mantle cell lymphoma (REC1, JEKO1) were exposed to increasing
doses of pimasertib alone and in combination with idelalisib and
ibrutinib. Synergy was assessed by Chou-Talalay combination index (CI).
ERK phosphorylation level and PARP cleavage were detected by western
blotting in cell treated with single agents or combination of pimasertib
with idelalisib or ibrutinib. NOD-Scid (NOD.CB17-Prkdcscid/NCrHsd) mice
were subcutaneously inoculated with OCI-Ly-10 (10 x106) DLBCL cell line.
Mice developed palpable tumors (100 mm3) and were randomized to receive
pimasertib, orally once per day (30 mg/kg), ibrutinib (5 mg/Kg), the
combination of the two, or control vehicle alone. Tumor size was measured
two times per week using a digital caliper [tumor volume (mm3) = (I x W x
W)/2].Results. Strong synergism was observed with pimasertib combined
with the PI3K inhibitor idelalisib in the ABC-DLBCL OCI-Ly10 (median CI =
0.026) and TMD8 (CI = 0.25), whereas synergistic/additive effects were
detected in GCB-DLBCL (DOHH2, RCK8) and MCL (REC1, JEKO1). Synergism was
observed with the BTK-inhibitor ibrutinib in all the cell lines: OCI-Ly10
(CI = 0.32), TMD8 (CI = 0.63), DOHH2 (CI = 0.66), RCK8 (CI = 0.87), REC1
and JEKO1 (CI = 0.2). Thirty minutes of exposure time with pimasertib
were sufficient to knock-down phospho-ERK1/2 proteins in the mentioned
ABC-DLBCL and MCL cell lines stimulated with anti-IgM (20g/mL) for 20
minutes. Stronger down-regulation of phospho-ERK1/2 was seen in ABC-DLBCL
and MCL cell lines treated with combination of pimasertib with idelalisib
or pimasertib with ibrutinib rather than single agent treatment
conditions. Notably, apoptosis and PARP cleavage was observed in cell
lines treated with pimasertib in combination with ibrutinib or
idelalisib.OCI-Ly10 xenograft tumors that received a combination of
pimasertib (30mg/Kg) and ibrutinib (5mg/Kg) for 14 days, showed a
five-fold reduction of both tumor volume and weight as compared to the
control and single compound groups.Conclusions. Pimasertib-containing
combinations with PI3K-delta and BTK inhibitors show very promising
activity in preclinical models of mature lymphomas.

