Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting HER3 by interfering with its Sec61-mediated
cotranslational insertion into the endoplasmic reticulum


There is increasing evidence implicating HER3 in several types of cancer,
as a resilient copartner for HER2 in HER2-amplified cancers, and as a
driver of resistance in many other types of cancer. However, the
development of targeted therapies to inactivate HER3 function has been a
challenging endeavor. Its tumor-driving functions are only sometimes
driven by ligand-activation, and targeting its extracellular domain with
antibody molecules has only limited effects. Its kinase domain functions
in allostery, not catalysis, and we have previously shown that the
classical ATP-analog class of tyrosine kinase inhibitors fail to
inactivate it. Here we describe a novel approach that eliminates HER3
expression. This involves interfering with mechanisms critical for its
cotranslational translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
resulting in the elimination of HER3 protein expression and loss of HER3
function. The small-molecule cotransin CT8 binds the Sec61 translocon
channel in the ER membrane and prevents the signal peptide of the nascent
HER3 protein from initiating its cotranslational translocation into the
lumen of the ER, resulting in the degradation of HER3. Interestingly, CT8
treatment prevents HER3 translocation while the other HER proteins are
unaffected. In addition, CT8 treatment suppresses the compensatory
induction of HER3 that accompanies lapatinib treatment of HER2-amplified
cancer cells, making for a durable suppression of HER2-HER3 signaling
with the lapatinib-CT8 combination. Consistent with the effective
inactivation of HER2-HER3 signaling, CT8 treatment synergistically
enhances the apoptotic effects of lapatinib in HER2-overexpressing cancer
cells. The target selectivities of cotransins are highly dependent on
their structure and the signal sequence of targeted proteins and can be
narrowed through structure-function studies. Our results thus highlight
Sec61-dependent processing as a novel strategy to eliminate HER3
expression and function with considerable potential for the treatment of
HER2-amplified and other types of cancers.

