Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radioprotection of lung tissue involves modulation of
radiation-induced macrophage activation by soy isoflavones


Radiation therapy for lung cancer is limited by radiation toxicity to
lung tissue that results from a chronic inflammatory response, leading to
pneumonitis and fibrosis. We have reported in preclinical mouse models
that treatment with soy isoflavones mitigates inflammatory cytokines and
fibrosis, but the cellular mediators of radioprotection remain unclear.
Macrophages possess the plasticity to respond to environmental stressors
in tissues that functionally may range from proinflammatory to
immunosuppressive phenotypes. We hypothesize that soy isoflavones mediate
radioprotection of normal lung tissue by modifying macrophage phenotype
and function in irradiated lungs. In this study, we investigate the role
of lung macrophage subsets in radioprotection of lung tissue by soy.
BALB/c mice received a single 10 Gy dose of thoracic irradiation with soy
isoflavones given orally at 1 mg per day, prior-to and continuously after
radiation for up to 18 weeks. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid and
lungs were harvested at early and late time points post-radiation.
Differential cell counts on BAL fluid cytospins were performed and ratios
of enlarged, foamy macrophages and smaller macrophages were calculated.
At 4 weeks, lungs were dissociated into single cell suspensions and cells
were stained with anti-CD45, anti-F4/80, and anti-CD11c fluorescent
antibodies to analyze interstitial (F4/80+CD11c-) and alveolar
(F4/80+CD11c+) lung tissue macrophages by flow cytometry. In situ M1
macrophages were detected by immunohistochemical staining in lung tissue
sections for the pan-macrophage marker F4/80 and the M1 macrophage
activation marker NOS2. At 18 weeks after radiation, there was a
significant increase in the percentage of enlarged, foamy macrophages in
BAL fluid to 79.06.7% compared with 14.65.3% in control (p = 0.0003). Soy
significantly inhibited this radiation-induced increase to 33.18.3%
compared with radiation alone (p = 0.0091). In situ staining of F4/80 and
NOS2 in lung tissue sections revealed an increase of activated M1
macrophages caused by radiation in contrast to relatively low NOS2 levels
in lungs of mice treated with radiation and soy or control. Soy
significantly reduced the percentage of F4/80+CD11c- interstitial
macrophage (p = 0.0313) in lung tissue post-radiation. F4/80+CD11c+
alveolar macrophages in lungs are significantly decreased (p = 0.0074)
after radiation, however soy did not have a significant effect (p =
0.7160). These data indicate that radiation-induced proinflammatory M1
macrophage activation is inhibited by soy. Further studies are ongoing to
clarify the role of interstitial and alveolar macrophages in
radiation-induced lung inflammation and its regulation by soy. These
findings suggest that soy modulation of the macrophage subset functions
in response to radiation may play a critical role in soy-mediated
radioprotective effects in lungs.

