Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of CECR1 by activated M2-type macrophages in glioma


ObjectivesGlial neoplasms harbor macrophages which are mainly of the M2
type and secrete Th2 cytokines. These M2 macrophages are not only
involved in immune suppression but also serve functions in angiogenesis.
Recent studies have shown that the adenosine deaminase CECR1 is involved
in the maintenance of vascular homeostasis and M2-macrophage
differentiation. Here we aim to identify the expressional levels of CECR1
in M1 and M2 macrophage populations in gliomas and investigate the role
of these cells in glioma development.MethodsTo identify the relation
between CECR1 expression and the macrophage subtypes, tissue samples of
human glioma and normal brain controls were used for Real Time PCR and
immunostaining. For in vitro functional studies, we generated M1 and
M2-like macrophages by differentiating CD14+ monocytes isolated from
human peripheral blood in GM-CSF and M-CSF medium. With and without
stimulation of GBM conditioned medium, CECR1 level was measured by RT-PCR
and western blot. CECR1 protein was added to the macrophage culture
medium and the expression level of the M1 marker CD80 and the M2 marker
CD163 were measured by flow cytometry and confocal microscopy.ResultsThe
macrophages were predominantly present in perivascular spaces, but also
in the tumor tissue and neuropil of the normal brain. At the mRNA level
the expression of CECR1 was positively correlated with the M2 markers
CD204 and IL-10. Immunohistochemical investigation revealed that CECR1 is
localized in microglia and macrophages in low-grade gliomas and control
brain and it overlaps and co-localizes with the M2-markers CD204 and
CD163, but not the M1-marker CD80. In vitro experiments showed that CECR1
expression is higher in the M-CSF-induced M2-macrophages than in their
GM-CSF-induced M1 counterparts. Under the stimulation of GBM conditioned
medium, increased CECR1 is detected in both M1 and M2-like macrophages.
In addition, exogenous CECR1 greatly affects both M-CSF and GM-CSF
induced macrophages response by up-regulating CD163 in M1-like
macrophages and increasing CD163 positive cells in M2-like macrophages.
As a result, CECR1 skews macrophage differentiation towards the M2
phenotype.ConclusionThis study is the first to show that the
M2-macrophage, not the M1-macrophage in glioma, is the main source of
CECR1. In addition, CECR1 is shown to be a potent regulator of
M2-macrophages. High levels of CECR1 is able to skew GM-CSF driven M1
macrophage differentiation towards an M2 macrophage phenotype. We propose
that CECR1 expression by macrophages promotes M2-macrophage
differentiation under the influence of an adenosine-rich glioma
microenvironment to support tumor growth and tumor angiogenesis. The
findings may well direct the search for new anti-angiogenic target
molecules for the treatment of glioma.

