Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the mechanisms of radiosensitization by human
papillomavirus (HPV) in head and neck cancer cell lines


Background: Several clinical studies have shown that HPV+ head and neck
squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) present a more favorable outcome and
greater response to radiotherapy. Although there are some data supporting
the hypothesis that HPV-related HNSCC exhibit higher sensitivity to
radiotherapy, it is difficult to conclude that the improved outcome of
HPV-related HNSCC is only attributable to intrinsic radiosensitivity of
the HPV+ cells. We postulate that a complex interaction occurs between
intrinsic mechanisms of radio-response and the tumor micro-environment
including cells of the immune system stimulated by the presence of HPV.
The objectives of this work are to study mechanisms of radio-response in
HPV+ cells and to investigate whether irradiated HPV+ cells exhibit
increased immunogenic cell death signals including membrane exposure of
endoplasmatic reticulum-resident chaperone calreticulin, secretion of
High-Mobility-Group-Box 1 protein (HMGB1) and ATP release.Material and
Methods: We determined radiosensitivity by clonogenic survival of two
HPV+ HNSCC cell lines (UPCI-SCC-154 & UPCI-SCC90) compared to two HPV-
cells (SCC61 & SQD9). Cell cycle distribution and G2/M checkpoint were
assessed by flow cytometry. DNA damage repair was evaluated by gamma-H2Ax
assay, HR and NHEJ reporter gene assay. In addition, cell death
(apoptosis, necrosis and mitotic catastrophe) and senscence were measured
in the four cell lines together with immunogenic cell death signals,
through cytokines, HMGB1, and ATP-release as well as, membrane exposure
of calreticulin.Results: The surviving fraction at 2Gy (SF2) for the two
HPV+ cell lines was 0,13 and 0,15 for UPCI-SCC-90 and UPCI-SCC-154,
respectively while SF2 for SQD9 was 0,49 and 0,16 for SCC-61 a cell line
already described as radiosensitive. Cell cycle distribution indicated an
important block in G2/M 24h after irradiation for the HPV+ cell lines
together with a slower clearance of gamma-H2Ax for HPV+ cells, compared
to HPV- cells. Furthermore, HPV+ cells showed decreased DNA repair
capacity by NHEJ and HR.Apoptosis rate after irradiation (2Gy) was
variable depending on the cell line, but remained overall under 5%.
Senescence was not increased after irradiation (2Gy) whereas mitotic
catastrophe increased in HPV-negative cell lines after 24h. Cytokine
secretion was cell line dependent while HMGB1 and ATP release was
increased in HPV+ cell lines compared to HPV- cell lines. Finally,
calreticulin membrane exposure after irradiation detected by
immunofluorescence was more frequent in HPV+ compared with HPV-
cells.Conclusions: Our results confirm an increased radiosenstitivity of
HPV+ cells after irradiation together with increased signals recognised
as immunogenic cell death (calreticulin exposure, HMGB1 and ATP release)
providing a rationale to investigate immune responses in HPV+ tumors
after radiotherapy.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

