Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Parasympathetic signaling suppresses pancreatic cancer development


Background/Aims: The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important
role in the regulation of epithelial homeostasis and has also been
postulated to play a role in tumorigenesis. However, the exact role of
the vagus nerve in pancreatic carcinogenesis is not well understood. Here
we study the effects of muscarinic signaling on pancreatic tumorigenesis
in a genetically engineered mouse model of pancreatic cancer
(PDx1-Cre/KRasG12D (KC).Methods: Mice were either vagotomized at 8 weeks
or treated with a cholinergic agonist. Pancreatic tissue was collected
and analyzed by immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR at 20 weeks of age; cells
were isolated and assayed for colony and sphere forming assays. Different
human (AsPC-1, BxPC-3, Mia PaCa-2, Panc-1) and murine (K-2548 and K-8282)
pancreatic cancer cell lines were subjected to cholinergic and
anti-cholinergic drugs and assayed by RT-PCR, Western blot and flow
cytometry.Results: In pancreatic organoid cultures derived from pancreata
harboring an oncogenic KRas mutation, cholinergic agonists suppressed
sphere formation significantly. Furthermore, pharmacological inhibition
or genetic knockout of the muscarinic M3 receptor abolished this effect
in vitro. In human and murine pancreatic cancer cells, anchorage
independent growth and tumor sphere forming capacity were reduced by
pretreatment with cholinergic agonists. Further evaluation revealed that
parasympathetic agonists decrease the CD44+CD24+EpCAM+ proved CSC's
population. Vagotomy, when performed in KC mice at 8 weeks resulted in
pancreatic cancer development in 20% of the animals at 20 week of age.
Treatment with the direct muscarinic agonist bethanechol caused a
significant delay of PanIN progression in KC mice.Conclusions: Taken
together, our findings suggest that vagal innervation has a regulatory
role in pancreatic tumorigenesis via M3 receptor-mediated suppression of
CSCs. Since current surgical approaches to resection of PDAC from the
head of the pancreas are necessarily associated with a parasympathetic
denervation of the pancreas, and thereby a loss of its suppressive
effect, this fact may might partly explain the high local recurrence rate
of this dismal disease. Additional treatment with cholinergic agonists
should be considered in future regimen.

