Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The generation of colorectal cancer mouse model based on
microsatellite instability and the identification of transforming growth
factor-beta signal target


Background & Aims:The transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signal
is a tumor-suppressor pathway that is commonly inactivated in about 90%
of microsatellite instability (MSI) colorectal cancer (CRC). However,
there was little evidence what gene is regulated by TGF-beta signal in
the multistep progression sequence of CRC. The first aim of the present
study was to generate a mouse model that is null for Tgfbr2 and Apc in
the colon epithelium and forms tumors in the colon. The second aim was to
analyze the tumors that arose in the mice model for the purpose to
identify the gene regulated by TGF-beta signal.Method & Result:Previously
we have described the generation of the CDX2P-G19Cre;Apcflox/flox mice
(called Apc KO mice) which is randomly null for Apc in the colonic
epithelium. By mating Tgfbr2flox/flox mice with Apcflox/flox and
CDX2P9.5-G19Cre mice, we have finally generated a mouse model
CDX2P-G19Cre;Apcflox/flox;Tgfbr2flox/flox mice (called Apc+Tgfbr2 KO
mice) which is null for Apc and Tgfbr2. In these model, the tumors with
well differentiated adenocarcinoma arose mainly in proximal colon and
most of mice died at 4 weeks age due to tumor bleeding. Therefore the
mice were harvested at 3 weeks age to evaluate the development of colon
tumors. Total RNAs of only cancerous tissue areas were extracted from
frozen samples by the laser capture microdissection method. We compared
gene expression profiles of these mice's tumors (n = 3, respectively)
with Mouse Exon 1.0 ST Array (Affymetrix). Gene X expression of
Apc+Tgfbr2 KO mice tumors was most highly upregurated by 9.25-fold
compared with Apc KO mice (p = 0.045). The array data was validated by
quantitative PCR. For human CRC samples, mutations of repetitive
mononucleotide tracts in the coding regions of TGFBR2 were identified by
direct sequencing. By immunohistochemical analysis, the expression of X
was classified according to the percentage of stained cancer cells. The
expression was considered to be positive if 30% of cancer cells were
stained. An analysis demonstrated that 11 (100%) of 11 mutated TGFBR2
cases were positive for X, whereas 10 (66.7%) of 15 wild type TGFBR2
cases were positive (P = 0.033), indicating that high expression of X was
correlated with TGFBR2 mutation in human CRCs samples. Additionally, the
cell proliferation assay revealed that silencing of X led to a
significant reduction in CRC cell proliferation. Conversely, forced
expression of X enhanced CRC cell proliferation in vitro.Conclusion:We
have generated an in vivo model system that Apc and Tgfbr2 were
inactivated only in the colonic epithelium and tumors with well
differentiated adenocarcinoma arose mainly in proximal colon. The
analysis of this model revealed that Gene X is regulated by a TGF-beta
signal and likely promotes cell proliferation in CRC.

