Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of STAT3 reduces radiation induced changes in cellular
plasticity and sensitizes breast cancer cells to radiation


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is categorized as a lack of
expression of the hormone receptors, estrogen and progesterone, and HER2,
and is a highly aggressive form of breast cancer. Due to the receptor
status, TNBC is unresponsive to conventional targeted treatment resulting
in a poor prognosis and increased risk of recurrence and metastasis. We
have observed that TNBC patients have higher amounts of infiltrating
leukocytes compared to estrogen receptor positive breast cancer patients.
Therefore, inflammation may be a contributing factor in TNBC and
inhibition of key inflammatory pathways may aid in sensitizing TNBC cells
to treatment. Growing evidence suggests that radioresistant breast cancer
stem cells are responsible for the tumor growth, recurrence, and
metastasis following treatment. Previous studies have suggested that
radiation alters non-stem cell populations to become more stem-like,
indicating that radiation may induce changes in cellular plasticity.
Cytokine activation of the signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) has been shown to mediate tumor-promoting
inflammation and expansion of stem cell populations. Thus, we wanted to
determine how inhibition of the STAT3 pathway alters the response of TNBC
to radiation. To determine the effect of STAT3 inhibition on breast
cancer stem populations, TNBC cells were treated with two different small
molecule inhibitors to STAT3, C188-9 or Stattic, to block STAT3 signaling
and the enzymatic activity of the cancer stem cell marker, aldehyde
dehydrogenase (ALDH), was measured by Aldefluor assay. Treatment with 10
M C188-9 decreased the ALDH positive (ALDH+) population from 18.3% to
5.2% and treatment with 1 M Stattic decreased the ALDH+ from 12.2% to
4.9% indicating that inhibition of STAT3 decreases the stem cell
population of TNBC. In order to determine the effect of STAT3 inhibition
on radiation induced plasticity of breast cancer cells, TNBC cells were
isolated into ALDH+ and ALDH negative (ALDH-) populations using flow
cytometry and irradiated with 8 Gy of radiation. Following five days of
treatment, both populations exhibited an increase in the percentage of
ALDH+ cells indicating an increase in stem-like cells following
radiation. Treatment with either 10 M C188-9 or 1 M Stattic significantly
blocked the radiation induced increase in breast cancer stem cells. The
combined effect of radiation and STAT3 inhibition on colony formation was
also assessed. Exposure to 8 Gy of radiation decreased colony formation;
however, inhibition of STAT3 prior to radiation exposure significantly
reduced colony formation and thus sensitized the breast cancer cells to
radiation treatment. These data suggest that targeting STAT3 could
potentially be used to prevent alterations in cellular plasticity induced
by radiation, reduce populations of resistant stem-like cells, and
improve treatment outcomes.

