Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitive detection of somatic mutations in class I HLA genes
reveals enrichment for functional events in cancer


Recent studies have revealed enhanced somatic mutation rate in HLA genes
in several tumor types and has strongly implicated HLA dysfunction as a
possible mediator of immune evasion. Mutation detection in this highly
polymorphic and GC-rich locus, however, is complicated by suboptimal
alignment to the canonical reference genome and lowered capture
efficiency. To address this challenge, we developed the POLYSOLVER
(POLYmorphic loci reSOLVER) algorithm for accurate inference of class I
HLA-A, -B and -C alleles from whole exome sequencing (WES) data, which
can then be used for more sensitive and specific mutation detection.
POLYSOLVER comprises two broad steps: alignment optimization and
subsequent inference of the alleles using a Bayesian classifier. When
applied to 133 HapMap samples of known HLA type, POLYSOLVER outperformed
other publicly available tools with an overall protein-level accuracy of
97% and was particularly more powerful at low sequencing depths with an
overall accuracy of 96%.To accurately detect HLA mutations in tumor
samples, we performed HLA typing by applying POLYSOLVER to the paired
germline sample, re-aligned the HLA reads from both tumor and normal to
the inferred HLA alleles while filtering out likely erroneous alignments,
and then applied standard tools (MuTect and Strelka) to detect somatic
mutations by comparing the re-aligned tumor and normal HLA reads. Based
on orthogonal RNA-Seq validation, we estimate an improvement in
sensitivity from 57.1% to 94.3% and specificity from 43.8% to 81.3% over
standard methods.Pan-cancer analysis of TCGA data from 3,608 tumor/normal
pairs by POLYSOLVER across 12 tumor types revealed 147 non-silent HLA
mutations in 121 patients. We identified colon adenocarcinoma to be
significantly affected by somatic mutation in class I HLA genes, further
supporting HLA mutation as a common oncogenic mechanism. By contrast, HLA
mutations were not detected in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (n = 129).
Alterations likely to have a functional effect, including
loss-of-function, were significantly enriched in HLA mutations compared
to non-HLA mutations (P Recent studies have revealed enhanced somatic
mutation rate in HLA genes in several tumor types and has strongly
implicated HLA dysfunction as a possible mediator of immune evasion.
Mutation detection in this highly polymorphic and GC-rich locus, however,
is complicated by suboptimal alignment to the canonical reference genome
and lowered capture efficiency. To address this challenge, we developed
the POLYSOLVER (POLYmorphic loci reSOLVER) algorithm for accurate
inference of class I HLA-A, -B and -C alleles from whole exome sequencing
(WES) data, which can then be used for more sensitive and specific
mutation detection. POLYSOLVER comprises two broad steps: alignment
optimization and subsequent inference of the alleles using a Bayesian
classifier. When applied to 133 HapMap samples of known HLA type,
POLYSOLVER outperformed other publicly available tools with an overall
protein-level accuracy of 97% and was particularly more powerful at low
sequencing depths with an overall accuracy of 96%.To accurately detect
HLA mutations in tumor samples, we performed HLA typing by applying
POLYSOLVER to the paired germline sample, re-aligned the HLA reads from
both tumor and normal to the inferred HLA alleles while filtering out
likely erroneous alignments, and then applied standard tools (MuTect and
Strelka) to detect somatic mutations by comparing the re-aligned tumor
and normal HLA reads. Based on orthogonal RNA-Seq validation, we estimate
an improvement in sensitivity from 57.1% to 94.3% and specificity from
43.8% to 81.3% over standard methods.Pan-cancer analysis of TCGA data
from 3,608 tumor/normal pairs by POLYSOLVER across 12 tumor types
revealed 147 non-silent HLA mutations in 121 patients. We identified
colon adenocarcinoma to be significantly affected by somatic mutation in
class I HLA genes, further supporting HLA mutation as a common oncogenic
mechanism. By contrast, HLA mutations were not detected in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (n = 129). Alterations likely to have a functional
effect, including loss-of-function, were significantly enriched in HLA
mutations compared to non-HLA mutations (P < 2.210-16). We also observed
that 70 of the 147 total HLA mutations (47.6%) fell in 23 recurrent sites
suggesting positive selection at these positions. Finally, we determined
that the majority of the detected mutations mapped to regions critical
for antigen presentation.In addition to enabling better detection of HLA
mutations, accurate HLA typing by POLYSOLVER can also be used to study
germline associations of HLA alleles in diseases, and in donor screening
for organ transplantation. It may be extended to extracting typing and
mutation information from whole genome or RNA sequencing data and from
other polymorphic regions in the genome such as MHC class II, TAP1 and
TAP2 genes, and MIC-A and MIC-B ligands. POLYSOLVER hence is a generally
applicable analysis framework to address these otherwise challenging loci.

