Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Agonist OX40 ligand fusion proteins induce effector T cell
proliferation, block regulatory T cell function and can combine with
immune checkpoint inhibitors to promote antitumor immunity in preclinical
models


OX40 is a tumor necrosis factor receptor found primarily on activated T
effector (Teff) cells and regulatory T (Treg) cells including lymphocytes
infiltrating mouse and human tumors. Costimulation of OX40 by agonist
molecules is hypothesized to improve antitumor immunity by enhancing Teff
cell activity and inhibiting Treg suppression. We conducted in vitro and
in vivo experiments to characterize the costimulatory activity, assess
single agent and combination antitumor efficacy and measure
pharmacodynamic biomarkers of novel, agonist OX40 ligand (OX40L) fusion
proteins. In vitro costimulation assays, Treg suppression studies, and
human tumor/T cell xenograft mouse models were performed using MEDI6383,
a human OX40L fusion protein. MEDI6383 is comprised of three distinct
domains: (1) human OX40L extracellular receptor binding domains, (2)
isoleucine zipper trimerization domains, and (3) human fragment
crystallizable gamma (Fc) domains. In vivo antitumor activity was
evaluated using a surrogate mouse OX40L fusion protein (mOX40L FP), and
anti-mouse PD-L1, anti-mouse PD-1 or anti-mouse CTLA-4 monoclonal
antibodies in multiple syngeneic mouse tumor models. MEDI6383 activated
the OX40 signaling pathway, as measured by NFB signaling, in human
OX40-expressing Jurkat T reporter cells co-cultured with cells that
express Fc receptors. With concurrent CD3 stimulation, MEDI6383
costimulated primary human Teff cells to proliferate and release
cytokines, and suppressed Treg cell activity in T cell co-cultures.
MEDI6383 demonstrated potent in vivo antitumor activity that was
dependent on the addition of alloreactive human T cells in a mouse model
of human cancer. Administration of mOX40L FP resulted in dose-dependent
antitumor activity that significantly reduced growth of 4 histologically
distinct mouse tumor models. Antitumor activity of mOX40L FP and
increases in T-cell proliferation was dependent on the expression of
activating Fc receptors but not the inhibitory Fc receptor. Checkpoint
inhibitors combined with mOX40L FP resulted in significantly greater
antitumor activity of established tumors than either antibody used as
monotherapy. These results demonstrate that agonist OX40L fusion proteins
induce potent T cell proliferation, block Treg inhibition and promote
antitumor activity in preclinical models as a single agent or in
combination.

