Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The antitumor efficacy of anti-BST2 antibody is significantly
increased in combination with CpG oligodeoxynucleotide in endometrial
cancer


Background:CpG oligodeoxynucleotides (ODN) has been shown to exhibit a
potent immunostimulatory activity. Therefore, CpG ODN has been considered
to be a promising material for enhancing the therapeutic effect of
anticancer monoclonal antibody with antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity (ADCC) activity. We have previously identified bone marrow
stromal antigen 2 (BST2) as a therapeutic target of endometrial cancer
cells and also demonstrated that an anti-BST2 antibody showed a potent
anti-tumor effect by ADCC and complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC)
activities against BST2 positive cells. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the synergistic anti-tumor effect by combination of anti-BST2
antibody and CpG ODN, and to clarify the mechanisms of its anti-tumor
effect, using xenograft model of BST2 positive endometrial cancer
cells.Material and Method:We implanted 7-8 week-old female SCID mice with
5106 HEC-88 nu endometrial cancer cells subcutaneously. Mice with tumor
were treated by intra-peritoneal injection of an anti-BST2 mAb alone
(12.5 and 200 g/mouse, twice a week for four weeks), intra-tumoral
injection of CpG ODN alone (10 g/mouse, twice a week for four weeks) or
combination therapy (12.5 g/mouse of anti-BST2 mAb and 10 g/mouse of CpG
ODN). Anti-tumor effect was evaluated by monitoring the changes of tumor
volume. Finally, population of NK cells and macrophages infiltrated into
the tumor were analyzed by the FACS analysis, how CpG ODN induces
immunopotentiative action.Results:Intraperitoneal treatment by anti-BST2
antibody showed a significant anti-tumor effect, dose dependently. The
combination therapy of anti-BST2 antibody and CpG ODN was more effective
than the single-agent therapy (p = 0.0002). In addition, the combination
therapy also resulted high population of NK cells and macrophages in
tumor significantly (p = 0.00018).Conclusion:We showed that CpG ODN
increases the efficacy of anti-tumor effect of anti-BST2 mAb induced ADCC
activity via potentiating NK cells and macrophages mediated cancer cell
injury. Combination of GpG ODN would be a promising approach for
enhancing the activity of ADCC based monoclonal antibodies, which
targeting anti-tumor antigen.

