Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel fatty-acid synthase inhibitor in combination with
platinum-based therapy provides increased tumor killing efficacy in
luminal breast murine model


While targeted therapies exist for Her2 and Luminal breast cancers there
remains a subset of patients that would benefit from additional
therapeutic options when refractory disease emerges. Independent previous
studies have shown that Fatty acid synthase (FAS) can inhibit Her2
oncogene expression and has been shown to be effective as a therapeutic
target in xenografts. In this abstract we provide evidence for the
anti-tumor activity of a novel FAS inhibitor HS-106 in the Mouse mammary
tumor virus (MMTV) driven transgenic mice expressing the Her2 rat analog
Neu when combined with platinum-based chemotherapeutic agent
Carboplatin.Single parous female MMTV-Neu mice (Jackson Labs Strain
002376) were used to test the efficacy of HS106 (15mpk, IP twice weekly)
alone and in combination with Carboplatin (50mpk IP once weekly). Mice
were monitored for tumor development by palpating them weekly as per UNC
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center's Mouse Phase I Unit (MP1U)
protocol. Once tumors were observed, the mice were placed on treatment.
The tumor-bearing mice were injected weekly with HS106 and/or
Carboplatin. HS106 is dosed at 15 milligrams (mg) per 1 kilogram (kg) of
mouse weight, using a solution of 5mg per 1 milliliter (ml) of solvent.
The solvent for HS106 consists of 50% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)and 50%
saline (0.9% sodium chloride solution). Clinical grade Carboplatin was
purchased from the UNC Hospital pharmacy. Tumor volume was measured at
the time of injection by caliper and width (short diameter) and length
(long diameter) in millimeters (mm) were recorded. The volume was
calculated using the formula: length x width2 0.5. Body composition was
assessed and weight measurements (in grams) were taken weekly at the time
of injection were recorded and used to determine toxicity. After three
weeks, tumor progression was calculated using the formula: (21 day volume
- initial volume)/initial volume x 100. This percent change in tumor
volume, at 21 days, was used to assess the objective response rate of the
therapies.Objective Response Rate (Stable Disease, Partial Responses and
Complete Responses) were noted in 7 of 8 mice treated with the
combination of HS106 and Carboplatin (Mean tumor regression of 4.5%)
compared to 3 of 9 in Carboplatin alone (Mean tumor progression of 103%).
The combination was well tolerated with no deaths associated with
toxicity The FAS inhibitor HS-106 provides a novel means to homogenize
and increase the therapeutic response to Platinum-based therapeutic
agents. Additional analyses are underway however pharmacokinetic data
suggests that a more frequent dosing schedule could provide additional
benefit. Further refinement of the dosing schedule for HS-106 may permit
the reduction of Carboplatin dose, leading to lowering Carboplatin
related toxicity and adverse effects.

