Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genotoxicity of zinc oxid nanoparticles and the activation of
ATM-Chk2 DNA-damage-response pathway are caused by zinc-ions


Zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO-NP) are used in a variety of applications
including cosmetics and pharmaceuticals. The common utilization of
ZnO-NPs results in an increasing environmental release with unknown
health effects. Recent studies have shown that ZnO-NP exposure cause
cellular toxicity including DNA-damages. Discussed mechanisms are
interactions of the ZnO-NP with intracellular structures and molecules
after internalization, extracellular or intracellular dissociation of the
particles, and the generation of ROS. In the present study we evaluated
the genotoxic properties of ZnO-NP as well as the cellular DNA damage
response in dependence of oxidative distress and ZnO-NP dissociation into
Zn2+.For this purpose, we exposed the human epithelial cell line A549 to
defined ZnO-NP (100g/ml). Genotoxic effects of the particles were
evaluated by Comet assay and H2AX-foci, measuring DNA double-strand
breaks (DNA-DSBs). Dissociation of ZnO-NP and the intracellular increase
of Zn2+ were performed with spectrofluorimetric and cLSM measurements by
the use of FluoZin3. Oxidative distress was determined by the compound
dihydrodichlorofluorescein diacetate (H2DCF-DA). The Activation of the
DNA damage response pathway was proven by analyses of H2AX-, ATM-, Chk1-
and Chk2 phosphorylation, and p21, p53 up-regulation after ZnO-NP
exposure by western blot or ELISA. To figure out, if the genotoxic
potential of ZnO-NP is dependent of released Zn2+ or the generation of
ROS we inhibited oxidative distress by the antioxidant
N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) and Zn2+ were extracellular chelated by
diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA).We found a fast extracellular
dissociation of ZnO-NP and a quick intracellular increase of Zn2+.
Furthermore, we ascertained an activation of H2AX induced by ZnO-NP; this
phosphorylation is totally inhibited by DTPA. ZnO-NP activated the
DSB-damage response indicated by ATM-, Chk2-phosphorylation as well as an
up-regulation of p53 and p21. Pretreatment with NAC scavenging ROS leads
to a reduced and Zn2+ complexation to no activation of ATM-Chk2-DNA
damage pathway. The ATR/Chk1 pathway was not activated by ZnO-NP.We
demonstrated ZnO-NP induced DNA-damages and the activation of the
ATM/Chk2 DNA damage response pathway but not the ATR/Chk1 pathway,
indicating that ZnO-NP exposure induces DNA-DSBs. Scavanging of ROS leads
to a slight reduction of DNA-DSBs but extracellular Zn2+ compelxation to
a complete impairment suggesting that the mechanism of ZnO-NP
genotoxicity is not mediated via ROS-generation but rather a direct
interaction of dissociated Zn-ions with the DNA.

