Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-130b targets Arhgap1 increasing Cdc42 activity and metastic
potential in Ewing sarcoma cells


Osteosarcoma (OS) and Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) are the most common bone
tumors in the pediatric population. While significant progress has been
made with towards increasing patient outcomes, our success in eradicating
these two malignances is significantly less than most other pediatric
malignancies. One reason for continued treatment failure is due to high
risk disease states such as the presence of metastatic lesions.
Metastasis is of the utmost clinical relevance as it accounts for more
than 90% of solid tumor deaths. Improvements in treatment regimens have
been stagnant over the past 20-30 years most likely due to our lack of
understanding their molecular pathogenesis. Overall survival rates are
approximately 65-70% for localized disease and less than 20% for
aggressive, disseminated states. Thus, the clinical need to understand
high risk disease, such as metastasis is significant in order to develop
novel therapeutics. miRNAs are highly conserved short 18-22 single
stranded non-coding RNAs that have the ability to repress target
translation and affect key cell signaling pathways often deregulated in
cancer. Recently, miRNAs have been implicated in numerous cancers;
however the functional role of miRNAs in sarcomas is limited. In order to
identify novel alterations in miRNAs, we have utilized our analysis of
microRNA expression from localized and metastatic tumors derived from
novel genetically engineered mouse models of osteosarcoma. Among the
miRNAs most significantly dysregulated, miR-130b was shown to be
significantly upregulated in the metastatic lesions. Furthermore, it has
been shown that miR-130b is overexpressed in OS and EWS patient samples,
and this event is significantly associated with poor patient outcome in
the latter sarcoma. Furthermore, we have verified miR-130b overexpression
in both mouse and human sarcoma cell lines and in metastatic EWS tumor
samples obtained from Texas Children's Hospital. Functional analysis
shows overexpression of miR-130b increases migration and invasion in
vitro. In order to identify novel targets of miR-130b contributing to
metastasis, we performed gene expression analysis. We identified Cdc42GAP
as a novel target of miR-130b. Cdc42GAP is a negative regulator of Cdc42
which hydrolyzes the active GTPase. ELISA analysis of Cdc42 activity
reveals that Cdc42 activity is increased with overexpression of
miR-130b.Further microarray and pathway analysis suggest a mechanism by
which activation of Cdc42 leads to positive regulation of the MAPK
cascade. Subsequent western blot analysis reveals that overexpression of
miR-130b leads to the activation of SAPK/JNK and subsequent
phosphorylation of c-JUN suggesting activation of AP-1 transcription
factor. Taken together, these findings suggest that overexpression of
miR-130b promotes sarcoma cell migration and invasion through targeting
of Cdc42GAP and modulation of the Cdc42 and SAPK pathways.

