Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA sequences differentially associated with Sirt1 and Dnmt3b
during melanoma progression


Melanoma is one of the most worrying tumors due to its high capacity to
cause metastasis. Sirt1, a class III histone deacetylase, was shown to be
attracted to sites of double strand breaks in DNA, favoring, by
recruiting components of the epigenetic machinery, aberrant epigenetic
silencing in that region (OHAGAN et al., 2008). Beyond that, subsequent
studies have attributed important roles of Sirt1 and other components of
the epigenetic machinery, such as DNA methyltransferases (such as
Dnmt3b), in tumor initiation and progression. In this sense, using a
murine model of malignant transformation of melanocytes, associated with
sustained stress conditions, our goal was to identify genomic sequences
differentially associated to Sirt1 and/or Dnmt3B before and after stress
condition, represented in our model by anchorage blockade, and analyze if
these sequences are targeted by aberrant methylation in cell lines
obtained by this process that represent different steps in melanoma
progression. We have showed increased DNA damage after 24 hours of
anchorage impediment followed by increased Sirt1 expression. In addition,
we have showed Sirt1/Dnmt3b association just after this stress condition
that leads to malignant transformation. It was identified several DNA
sequences differentially associated to Sirt1 and also to Dnmt3b after
stress condition which are also associated to genes related to different
metabolic processes. Some of these sequences remain associated to Sirt1
and Dnmt3b during melanoma progression, indicating that Dnmt3b remains
associated to Sirt1 during malignant transformation. Among the sequences,
Tiam1 and Mxd1 are potential targets of Sirt1 and Dnmt3b that have
important roles in tumor progression. We have also identified motifs
where Sirt1 and Dnmt3b are probably bound before and after stress
condition. The main motif related to Sirt1 was coincident with Boris
motif. Subsequent analysis are been developed to elucidate the importance
of these interesting discoveries. Supported by FAPESP and DAAD.

