Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glypican-3 (GPC3) inhibits metastatic dissemination in a
preclinical human breast cancer model


Although GPC3 has been linked to cancer, its role during mammary tumor
progression is barely known. With the aim to develop a pre-clinical
breast cancer model, we genetically modified MCF-7 (poorly-metastatic,
GPC3 +) and MDA-MB231 (metastatic, GPC3 -) cell lines. GPC3 expression
was blocked in MCF-7 by siRNA (generating MCF-7-shGPC3 sublines), while
it was overexpressed in MDA-MB231 by viral infection (producing
MDA-MB231-GPC3 sublines).First, we analyzed the in vivo tumor growth by
s.c. inoculation of MCF-7 and MDA-MB231 engineered cells into nude mice.
Silencing GPC3 stimulated tumorigenicity, while its overexpression
inhibited it. The histological analysis of MCF-7-shGPC3 tumors revealed
extensive invasion of the muscle and the dermis, while control tumors did
not invade. In addition, MDA-MB231-GPC3 tumors were less invasive than
MDA-MB231-vector ones. We also evaluated spontaneous metastasis capacity
by lung histological analysis. While no metastases were found in MCF-7-sh
scramble tumor-bearing mice, lung nodules were detected in mice
inoculated with GPC3 silenced cells. On the other hand, mice bearing
MDA-MB231-GPC3 tumors showed a decrease in the incidence of
metastasis.Next, we did a panel of in vitro tests. Although MCF-7-shGPC3
and control cells were morphologically similar, an increase in the number
of actin stress fibers was found in GPC3 silenced cells. In association
with this mesenchymal characteristic, this subline exhibited a decrease
in E-Cadherin expression. While MDA-MB231-vector cells presented a
fibroblastic appearance, GPC3 overexpression induced a drastic change in
cell morphology turning to an epithelial phenotype. In addition, although
control cells showed large stress fibers, GPC3 overexpressing cells
localized their actin in cortical position. Moreover, GPC3 induced a
reexpression of the epithelial marker E-Cadherin.We tested
anchorage-independent growth, finding that GPC3 silencing disorganized
MCF-7 spheroids. MDA-MB231-GPC3 cells formed larger spheroids than those
generated by controls. Blocking E-cadherin, employing a neutralizing
antibody, reversed the 3-D growth ability of GPC3 overexpressing
cells.The sensitivity to nutrient depletion was evaluated. We found,
through propidium iodide/Hescht staining, a reduction in starved
MCF-7-shGPC3 cell death. While MCF-7-sh scramble cells showed
morphological alterations characteristic of apoptotic death as detected
by orange acridine/ethidium bromide staining, no apoptosis was found in
MCF-7-shGPC3 cells. GPC3 overexpression increased MDA-MB-231 cell
susceptibility to death. Although there was no apoptosis in MDA-MB231
control cells, the overexpression of GPC3 promoted an increase in the
number of cells with nuclear and cytoplasmic manifestations of
apoptosis.We demonstrate a central role of GPC3 in human breast cancer
biology. Our results indicate that it acts a metastasis suppressor in
human mammary cancer.

