Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel expansion method for functional natural killer cells and
its clinical application


Background: Natural killer (NK) cell-based adoptive immunotherapy is a
promising approach for the treatment of cancer. But, it is difficult to
generate the sufficient scale and purity of NK cells, and reliable
methods to produce large number of functional NK cells have not been
established yet. We have developed novel clinical-grade NK cells
expansion method to produce the high purity, large scale and functional
NK cells using a combination of recombinant human fibronectin fragment
(RetroNectin) -induced T-cells (RN-T cells), OK-432 and IL-2. We
subsequently conducted a Phase 1 clinical study to evaluate the safety
and efficacy of this NK cell therapy. In this paper, we address the
characteristics of the NK cells elicited by this method and the results
of immune monitoring in the clinical trial.Methods: To confirm the
significance of RN-T cells as stimulator, we compared the stimulation
effects on NK cells between RN-T cells and aCD3-T cells, which stimulated
by anti-CD3 mAb only. Next, we analyzed expanded NK cells from PBMCs
obtained from 31 cancer patients to verify the efficacy of this method.
In the Phase 1 trial, patients with unresectable digestive cancer were
enrolled. They received weekly intravenous administration of autologous
NK cells elicited by the novel method three times to assess the safety of
the number of adoptive cells at 0.5 109(cohort1), 1 109(cohort 2) and 2
109 cells (cohort 3) per dose. The phenotype and cytotoxicity of expanded
NK cells were analyzed. For immune monitoring, cytotoxicity of PBMCs and
whole blood cytokine levels were examined following NK cell
infusion.Results: The stimulation by RN-T cells could induce preferable
NK cell proliferation rather than the one by aCD3-T. As results of 31
cancer patients, 68876-fold expansion was achieved in this system with
PBMCs, and the NK cell populations were highly purified (84.73.6%) and
highly expressed functional markers such as NKG2D (97.30.6%) and CD16
(96.80.7%). In the Phase 1 clinical trial, no NK cell infusion related
severe or unexpected toxicities were observed. The response rate and the
disease control rate in 10 per protocol patients were 0% and 50.0%,
respectively. Although no clinical responses were observed, the
cytotoxicity of PBMCs against K-562 targets increased in most patients
(80%). The average of cytotoxic activity of PBMCs increased more than two
times after the NK cell infusion.Conclusion:Although no patients
receiving the NK cell therapy alone experienced a clinical response,
adoptive immunotherapy of the NK cells elicited by the novel method is
expected to exert considerable ADCC activity in vivo because of their
high expression of CD16. Now, we are conducting clinical trial in which
we explore the combination of this novel NK therapy with IgG1 antibodies
such as trastuzumab and cetuximab. We also address the ongoing clinical
trial in this paper.

