Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Cathepsin L in breast cancer angiogenesis


Recognition of the dependence of angiogenesis on proteolytic enzymes has
raised significant interest in evaluation of proteases as potential
targets to disrupt tumor angiogenesis. While the role of cysteine
proteases in tumor metastasis is well understood, their contribution to
tumor angiogenesis remains less explored.Cysteine cathepsins, in
particular cathepsin L (CTSL) gets are upregulated in a wide range of
human cancers. In transformed cells extracellular CTSL levels can
increase up to 200-fold and comprise up to 40% of total secreted
proteins. The role of CTSL in promoting tumor metastasis is supported by
recent studies in our laboratory which have shown that treatment with the
small molecule CTSL inhibitor 3-bromophenyl-3-hydroxyphenyl-ketone
thiosemicarbazone (KGP94) significantly impairs the metastatic phenotype
of prostate and breast cancer cells. However, the contribution of CTSL to
tumor angiogenesis remains less well explored. Thus, the goal of the
present studies was to evaluate the role of tumor cell secreted CTSL in
tumor cell induced angiogenesis.Upon activation by pro-angiogenic
stimuli, endothelial cells migrate and invade through the interstitium to
form tubes. The effect of CTSL on the migratory, invasive and tube
formation capacity of endothelial cells was therefore investigated.
Stimulation of human micro-vascular endothelial cells of the lung
(HMVEC-L) with purified human CTSL led to a dose dependent increase in
endothelial cell invasion (1.5-fold at 10ng/ml and 2-fold at 100ng/ml).
Furthermore, CTSL (100ng/ml) increased the tube forming ability of
endothelial cells as demonstrated by an increase in total tube length.
Similarly, incubation of HMVEC-L with conditioned media from MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells, led to a significant increase in their migration,
invasion and tube formation capacity (migration 1.3-fold; invasion
2.5-fold). Compared to parental MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, CTSL
knockdown cells that were inoculated intradermally into ventral skin
flaps of female nude mice showed a significant reduction in their ability
to induce blood vessel formation (3.5-fold).These proangiogenic
endothelial cell functions were accompanied by a significant increase in
endothelial cell proliferation upon stimulation with purified CTSL
(2-fold). Microarray analyses revealed a significant upregulation of cell
cycle related genes by CTSL. Western blot analyses further confirmed
upregulation of members of the cyclin family by CTSL.In conclusion, our
findings suggest that in addition to its pro-metastatic function, CTSL
might further contribute to tumor progression by eliciting various
pro-angiogenic endothelial cell functions.

