Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation and characterization of circulating melanoma cells by
size filtration and fluorescent in situ hybridization


Somatic mutations in BRAF are predictive of the clinical efficacy of BRAF
and/or MEK inhibitors for advanced melanoma. Resistance to treatment is
observed for most patients despite a high response rate to kinase
inhibitors. While repeated tumor biopsy is the gold standard for
evaluating genetic changes following treatment, this is not generally
feasible. The analysis of circulating melanoma cells (CMCs) has the
potential to be a non-invasive means of interrogating the biology
underlying response and resistance.Here we report on the isolation,
detection, and characterization of CMCs from patients using size
filtration followed by immunoflourescence and/or fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) analyses. Blood from a cohort of 20 patients with
advanced melanoma was collected in an initial proof of concept
experiment. CMCs were identified in 14 out of 20 melanoma blood samples
(70%) with a range of 2.5-99 CMCs per 3mL of blood by immunofluorescence
(IF) using a cocktail of 4 melanoma specific antibodies (HMB45, MART-1,
Tyrosinase and MiTF). Cells that appeared tumor like by microscopy, but
that did not stain for CD45 or the cocktail of melanoma specific
antibodies were also detected. To further characterize these cells, FISH
was performed with a set of 4 melanoma-specific probes (RREB1, MYB,
Centromere 6, CCND1). In a cohort of 13 patients with melanoma specimens
that had paired blood specimens, CMCs were detected in all 13 specimens
ranging from 7.2-76 CMCs per 3mL of blood with more identification by
FISH in 10 out 13 samples. Additionally, cells that were double negative
by IF were observed to be positive by FISH.CMCs are detectable in the
majority of patients with advanced melanoma. Use of IF and FISH can help
detect and characterize CMCs. These tools will be useful in
characterizing treatment related changes in CMCs.

