Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of HSP90 inhibition on the gene expression profile of MDM2
transfected LNCaP-MST prostate cancer cells


The heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) is a major molecular chaperone of the
cell that appears to be a master regulator of the stability and activity
of multiple oncoproteins such as HER2, Akt, Bcr-Abl, c-Kit, EGFR and
BRAF. Recent approaches have revealed that most of the target proteins of
HSP90 are protein kinases or transcription factors which play important
roles in the cellular carcinogenesis. The HSP90 also plays an important
role in the regulation of cell cycle, proliferation, vascularization,
invasion and metastasis of cancer cells, as well as in maintaining the
stability and functions of several carcinogenic proteins involved in
altering the signal transduction pathways of apoptosis. The
17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG) is a well known inhibitor
of HSP90 and it was speculated that, this inhibitor may have particular
value in the antitumor and angiostatic therapies. Hence, we were trying
to determine the expression profile of the genes in the angiogenesis
pathway following treatment of MDM2 overexpressing LNCaP-MST prostate
cancer cells with 17-AAG. In the LNCaP-MST cells, the expression of genes
such as TNF-, MMP9 and TGFB1 were found to be significantly up-regulated
compared to the LNCaP cells. Hence, MDM2 overexpression was suspected as
the primary cause of these increases. However, after treating the
LNCaP-MST cells with 10 m 17-AAG for 24 hrs, several of these genes were
significantly altered compared to the untreated LNCaP-MST cells. In
particular, the 17-AAG treatment significantly down-regulated the
expression of TNF-, TGFB1, ID1, IL8 and F3 which are involved in the
regulation of angiogenesis and tumor growth. The heat map and scatterplot
analysis clearly confirmed the alterations in the expression levels of
these genes following 17-AAG treatment. Cluster analysis further
indicated that the gene expression patterns are positively correlated
with the anti-angiogenic effects of 17-AAG treatment in LNCaP-MST cells
compared to untreated cells. Our results offer convincing evidence to
suggest that the inhibition of HSP90 can control both pro-angiogenic and
cell proliferative signals in LNCaP-MST cells. (The financial support
from the Royal Dames of Cancer Research Inc., Ft. Lauderdale, Florida is
gratefully acknowledged).

