Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: qPCR array of 84 cell cycle genes in oral squamous cell carcinoma
reveals differently expressed genes in larger size tumors in relation to
small tumors


The aim of the study is to investigate if larger oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) tumors show a different transcriptional signature of
cell cycle genes in relation to small OSCC tumor samples. To address this
issue, 17 fresh OSCC tumor samples were included in the study, including
T1(n = 5),T2 (n = 9),T3 (n = 2) and T4 (n = 1) samples. All tumors were
either from the tongue or from the floor of the mouth and only two
patients were non-smokers. Two samples were from female patients, while
the other 15 were from men. Samples were categorized according to
clinical tumor size in tumors 2cm (T1 n = 5) or tumors > 2cm (T2, T3 and
T4, n = 12). The median age of both groups was similar (57 and 62,
respectively). The group of tumors 2cm was considered the reference group
in the qRT-PCR results interpretation, while the larger tumors were
considered the test group. The RNA was extracted and the cDNA was
synthesized. A commercially available 84 cell cycle genes PCR array kit
was used (PAHS-020, Cell Cycle PCR Array - Human, Qiagen). The results
were analyzed according to the formula 2^-deltaCT and differential
expressions were considered statistically significant when pThe aim of
the study is to investigate if larger oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)
tumors show a different transcriptional signature of cell cycle genes in
relation to small OSCC tumor samples. To address this issue, 17 fresh
OSCC tumor samples were included in the study, including T1(n = 5),T2 (n
= 9),T3 (n = 2) and T4 (n = 1) samples. All tumors were either from the
tongue or from the floor of the mouth and only two patients were
non-smokers. Two samples were from female patients, while the other 15
were from men. Samples were categorized according to clinical tumor size
in tumors 2cm (T1 n = 5) or tumors > 2cm (T2, T3 and T4, n = 12). The
median age of both groups was similar (57 and 62, respectively). The
group of tumors 2cm was considered the reference group in the qRT-PCR
results interpretation, while the larger tumors were considered the test
group. The RNA was extracted and the cDNA was synthesized. A commercially
available 84 cell cycle genes PCR array kit was used (PAHS-020, Cell
Cycle PCR Array - Human, Qiagen). The results were analyzed according to
the formula 2^-deltaCT and differential expressions were considered
statistically significant when p<0.05. The target genes expressions were
normalized to two housekeeping endogenous genes B2M and HPRT1,
considering both, the geometric and arithmetic CT means (that differed
less than 1 CT between the reference and test groups). The following
genes were downregulated in the test group (larger tumors) compared to
the reference group (smaller tumors), showing a minimum fold change of 4:
ANAPC4, E2F4, CUL1, PCNA, KNTC1, RPL13A, KPNA2, NBN, CCNG2 and SUMO1.
These results need to be further confirmed in a larger cohort of samples.
In conclusion, these findings suggest that the transcriptional activity
of specific cell cycle genes changes according to the size of the OSCC
tumor, which probably reflects tumor molecular evolution.Supported by:
FAPEMIG (Fundao de Amparo Pesquisa de Minas Gerais), CNPq (National
Council for Scientific and Technological Development) and CAPES
(Coordination for Improvement of Higher Education Personnel), BrazilNote:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

