Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of low number circulating tumor cells (CTCs) for
cancer treatment monitoring


For most solid tumors, the clinical use of CTCs is limited by current
instrument restrictions on detection of infrequent CTCs. Based on the
FDA-approved criteria used in current CTC detection instruments, we
developed a microfluidic device capable of capturing, enumerating and
releasing low numbers of CTCs in the peripheral blood of patients with
solid tumors. The device is the size of a microscope slide, consisting of
an inlet, an outlet, and eight parallel channels connecting them.
Micromixers inside the channels enhance interactions between CTCs and
capture agents on the channel surfaces. Epithelial cell-adhesion molecule
(EpCAM) antibodies are immobilized onto the surfaces via avidin-biotin
chemistry. A blood sample from a cancer patient is introduced through the
inlet. Cells captured by anti-EpCAM studded channels are verified as CTCs
using triple-color IHC definitions (EpCAM+, cytokeratin+, CD45-, and
DAPI+). Using pancreatic cancer as a model for a low frequency CTC
condition, device capture efficiency and cell purity was tested under
various flow rates (shear stresses) using L3.6pl cells spiked into blood.
Capture efficiency was defined as the% of target cells isolated relative
to target cells present in a sample, representing device sensitivity.
Cell purity was defined as the% of target cells isolated relative to all
cells captured (both target and non-target cells), representing device
specificity. Capture efficiency (90%) and cell purity (84%) were further
optimized by changing the flow rate. A higher flow rate resulted in
higher cell purity as non-target bound cells are dislodged by shear
forces. This capability of parameter adjustment and performance control
is enabled by the microfluidics platform used as opposed to CTC isolation
using other commercially approved technologies. The device was then
clinically tested in detecting CTCs and monitoring the response to
anti-cancer drug treatment in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer.
We identified CTCs in 113 out of 115 clinical blood samples (98%). CTC
enumeration (CTC number/mL of blood) both correlated with and predated
changes in the radiographic tumor size over the treatment period, ranging
from 10 to 35 cycles (2 weeks per cycle) of therapy. Microfluidic devices
possess the capacity to enumerate infrequent CTCs which also appear to
correlate with treatment response.Note: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

