Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Energetic metabolism and DNA damage response in fibroblasts from
Li-Fraumeni syndrome patients: new insights into the molecular mechanisms
of the disease


Background: Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a cancer predisposition
syndrome associated with TP53 germline mutations and characterized by
increased risk to multiple early-onset cancers. Studies in families from
Southern and Southeastern Brazil have identified a germline founder
mutation in the TP53 gene, the p.R337H, in high population prevalence
(0.3%). Unlike the majority of the mutations in TP53, which are missense
mutations located in the DNA-binding domain (DBD) of the protein, the
TP53 p.R337H is located in the oligomerization domain (OD). Recently, we
identified a new rare germline variant, the rs78378222 (A>C), in the 3
UTR of the gene in 7/130 of the patients who tested negative for coding
germline TP53 mutations. Based on the broad spectrum of p53 functions,
which include metabolism and DNA damage response regulation, in the
present study we aimed to characterize the functional impact of germline
TP53 mutations identified in Brazilian families. Methods: Primary
fibroblasts from p.R337H/WT (n = 2), p.R337H/p.R337H (n = 1), DBD
mutations (n = 2), rs78378222[C] patients and from WT p53 controls (n =
2) were included. The DNA damage induction was performed using UVB
(0.2W/m2) and ionizing irradiation (IR) (1 Gy). Results: First, we
observed that all p53-mutated fibroblasts appeared to have lower p53
levels but higher levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
mitochondrial biomass compared to controls. Fibroblasts homozygous to
p.R337H mutation presented more pronounced ROS production and, notably,
higher expression of two antioxidant proteins, SOD2 and GPX1. On the
other hand, the results of high-resolution respirometry showed higher
oxygen consume in DBD-mutated fibroblasts. Second, using a specific
multiplexed enzymatic DNA repair assay on biochip, we simultaneously
investigated several DNA repair pathways. Overall, we observed a high DNA
repair activation profile in p.R337H/p.R337H and poor DNA repair capacity
in DBD-mutated fibroblasts. Interestingly, all p53-mutated fibroblasts
showed higher repair activity of apurinic/pyrimidinic (AP) sites, a DNA
lesion caused mainly by ROS attacks. Conclusions: Our data indicate
important alterations in both metabolism and DNA damage response in
normal cells (fibroblasts) from LFS patients, suggesting
haploinsufficiency mechanism associated to these mutations. We were also
able to demonstrate distinct phenotypes according to mutational status,
which may explain, at least in part, the clinical variability in LFS.

