Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ligand- and structure-based virtual screening to discover dual
EGFR and BRD4 inhibitors


Combination therapy is the standard-of-care for many cancer patients.
However, for some cancers it is not feasible to identify effective
treatments since drug combinations have not been tested. The standard
treatment for Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) includes surgical resection,
followed by radiotherapy, and temozolomide (TMZ) subministration.
However, resistance to TMZ is nearly universal and tumor recurrence is
inevitable. Thus, it is desirable to identify effective combination
therapies for the treatment of GBM and other aggressive cancers. Kinase
inhibitors have recently gained attention as effective therapies for the
treatment of multiple cancers. However, resistance to kinase inhibitors
is very common due to upregulation of compensatory mechanisms that
overcome the requirement for the particular kinase being inhibited.
Recent discoveries suggest that the onset and or maintenance of cancer
also involve alterations in the epigenome, which may cause extensive
genomic reprogramming in cancer cells in part mediated by changes in DNA
methylation and a variety of histone modifications. The realization that
epigenetic alteration in cancer may be reversible has led to the
identification of novel targets that may result in new strategies for the
treatment of cancer. The principal readers of acetylated lysine residues
on histones are the bromodomains (BRDs), and they have been implicated in
the development of a large variety of diseases. Recently,
bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) is emerging as an interesting
target for drug development for a large number of diseases that are
caused by aberrant acetylation of lysine residues, among these cancers.
We propose to overcome this problem by generating kinase inhibitors,
which also inhibit epigenetic targets.We describe a virtual screening
approach to identify compounds that are likely to inhibit both BRD4 and
epidermal growth factor receptor beta (EGFR) using in silico analysis,
docking, and laplacian based modifier algorithms to predict relative
ligand-receptor dynamics. Key elements of this approach include
algorithmic prediction of EGFR inhibition based on chemical similarity
and quantitative structure activity relationships, protein-ligand docking
from crystal structure analysis and preparation, and substructure queries
to compile a set of commercially available compounds that can be ordered
for in vitro assays. We will confirm inhibitory activity of BRD4 by
selected compounds via an AlphaLisa Bromodomain-Aceylated Histone H4
Interaction Assay.Of 108 hits from the docking study, 24 compounds were
selected for validation. Our results show promising activity of one
compound from our AlphaScreen Assay.With this approach, we can unveil new
properties of compounds that can inhibit both BRD4 and EGFR. We also show
the validation of our chemoinformatic pipeline, which can be used for
additional drug discovery efforts and to further explore the field of
polypharmacology.

