Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ketosis and hyperbaric oxygen elicit potent anti-cancer effects in
vitro and in vivo


The Warburg effect and tumor hypoxia underlie a unique cancer metabolism
characterized by glucose dependency and abnormal mitochondrial function.
We have previously shown that this phenotype can be exploited
therapeutically by glucose restriction with the ketogenic diet, dietary
ketone supplementation, or hyperbaric oxygen (HBOT). We hypothesized that
combining these therapies would be an effective non-toxic treatment
regimen, so we tested this combination therapy in the VM-M3 mouse model
of metastatic cancer. Treated mice exhibited decreased tumor growth rate,
decreased metastatic spread to the lungs, kidneys, spleen, adipose, and
liver, decreased liver tumor vascularization, and lived twice as long as
controls. To further characterize the effects of these therapies, we
measured proliferation, viability, ROS production, and expression of key
signaling molecules in VM-M3 cells exposed to the following conditions:
high glucose (control; 25mM), low glucose (LG; 3mM), ketone
supplementation (HB; 5mM), hyperbaric oxygen (HBOT; 90 min, 2.5 ATA), or
combination therapy (LG+BHB+HBOT). Proliferation of VM-M3 cells was
measured with trypan blue hemocytometry and was significantly decreased
from controls at 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours. Viability of VM-M3 cells was
measured by fluorescence microscopy with calcein and EthD-1 and was
decreased by 19.2% in LG, 12.5% in HB, and 38.2% in LG+HB+HBOT treated
cells compared to control. ROS (superoxide) production was measured by
fluorescent microscopy with DHE and was increased by 46% in HBOT and by
48% in LG+HB+HBOT treated cells. Treatment with HB significantly
decreased expression of HIF-1 and pAkt compared to control as measured
with western blot. HBOT also inhibited HIF-1 expression but increased
pAkt expression in vitro. This study strongly supports further
investigation into mechanisms of action and the use of these metabolic
therapies as a potential cancer treatment.

