Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Checkpoint kinase 1 inhibition suppresses cell growth and enhances
cisplatin sensitivity in medulloblastoma cells


Background: Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor in
children and remains a therapeutic challenge due to its significant
therapy-related morbidity. Checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1) is highly expressed
in many cancers and regulates critical steps in mitotic progression and
DNA-damage response. Activation of CHK1 pathway promotes treatment
resistance in tumor cells. Recent studies suggest that targeting CHK1
with a small molecule inhibitor, to sensitize tumors to a variety of
DNA-damaging agents, is a promising approach to tumor therapy.Methods:
The expression of CHK1 mRNA in medulloblastoma patient samples and cell
lines were examined using microarray analysis and qRT-PCR respectively.
Western blot analysis was conducted on medulloblastoma cell lines to
analyze expression level of CHK1 protein. The effect of AZD7762, a small
molecule inhibitor of CHK1, on colony forming ability of medulloblastoma
cell lines in combination with cisplatin was examined using colony
formation assay and methylcellulose assay. The impact of AZD7762 in
combination with cisplatin on tumor cell proliferation was further
evaluated in real-time using xCELLigence. The effect of AZD7762 on cell
viability was assessed using Guava ViaCount assay. Furthermore, the
effects on key signaling pathways were analyzed using immunofluorescence,
senescence assay, and apoptosis assay.Results: Analysis of gene
expression and western blot experiments revealed that CHK1 mRNA and
protein levels are over expressed in all medulloblastoma patient samples
and in cell lines when compared to normal pediatric cerebellum. High CHK1
expression correlates with adverse outcomes in a large cohort of
medulloblastoma patients. Inhibition of CHK1 by a low nanomolar
concentration of AZD7762 potently inhibited cell growth, suppressed the
colony-forming ability, and increased cellular apoptosis of
medulloblastoma cells. Furthermore, AZD7762 pretreatment sensitized
medulloblastoma cells to cisplatin synergistically.Conclusions: CHK1
expression is a prognostic marker in medulloblastoma and targeting CHK1
with a small molecule inhibitor, in combination with cisplatin, is an
attractive strategy in treatment of medulloblastoma that warrants further
investigation.

