Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual E-selectin and CXCR4 inhibition reduces tumor growth and
increases the sensitivity to docetaxel in experimental bone metastases of
prostate cancer


Prostate cancers preferentially metastasize to the skeleton where the
bone microenvironment can stimulate excessive tumor cell growth and
spread, and promote the emergence of clinically-resistant disease. An
improved understanding of the complex relationship between prostate
carcinoma (PCa) cells and the bone microenvironment has created a
powerful opportunity to develop novel therapies. PCa cells preferentially
roll and adhere on bone marrow vascular endothelial cells, where
constitutive E-selectin expression and abundant stromal cell-derived
factor-1 (SDF-1) are expressed and interact with E-selectin ligands and
CXCR4 present on PCa cells. These molecular interactions initiate a
cascade of activation events that lead to the development of treatment
resistant metastases. This suggests that agents able to antagonize these
molecular interactions may be used as pharmacological treatments of bone
metastatic disease.In the current studies we investigate if a dual
E-selectin/CXCR4 inhibitor (GMI-1359) could impact the intraosseous
growth of the metastatic, androgen-independent PC3M cell line and affect
chemosensitivity to docetaxel. PCa cells, including PC3M, selected for
increased visceral and bone metastatic potential express high levels of
E-selectin ligands and CXCR4 as compared to nonmetastatic PCa cell lines.
We evaluated the ability of GMI-1359 administered alone or in combination
with docetaxel to inhibit the growth and metastasis of intratibially
implanted luciferase-transfected PC-3M cells. Approximately two weeks
post tumor cell implantation, mice were treated by intraperitoneal
injection for 2 weeks with either saline twice daily; 40 mg/kg GMI-1359
twice daily, 5 mg/kg docetaxel once weekly or a combination of GMI-1359
and docetaxel. Thirty-five days after initiation of treatment, the
percentage of tibiae positive by X-ray and the size of osteolytic lesions
was impacted by treatment with GMI-1359 alone or in combination with
docetaxel. Docetaxel alone had only a modest impact on intraosseous
lesions. Lytic units were reduced by 38%, 78% and 88% in mice treated
with docetaxel alone, GMI-1359 alone, or GMI-1359 in combination with
docetaxel, respectively. The significantly reduced intraosseous growth of
PC3M cells correlated with decreased serum levels of both mTRAP and type
I collagen fragments.Our data provides a clear biologic rationale for the
use of a dual E-selectin/CXCR4 inhibitor as an adjuvant to taxane-based
chemotherapy in men with high-risk prostate cancer to prevent bone
metastases. Given its complementary mechanism of action to traditional
chemotherapy, GMI-1359 warrants further development not only in prostate
carcinoma, but also in other malignancies where tumor cells are likely to
spread to bone.

