Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ROR1 targeted delivery of OSU-2S, a non-immunosuppressive FTY720
derivative, exerts potent cytotoxicity in mantle cell lymphoma in-vitro
and in-vivo


Treatment of mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), an uncommon non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma, remains challenging despite numerous therapeutic advances. We
have previously shown the preclinical effect of FTY720 (Fingolimod)
against MCL through down modulation of cyclin D1, the protein almost
uniformly over-expressed in this disease. Herein, we describe the potent
direct cytotoxicity of OSU-2S, a novel non-immunosuppressive FTY720
derivative in MCL cells and evaluate tumor directed lipid based
nanoparticle formulation of OSU-2S designed to selectively deliver to
ROR1+ MCL cells.OSU-2S is a FTY720 derivative that does not traffic T
cells and exhibits potent cytotoxicity in MCL cell lines and in MCL
patient-derived primary cells (p = 0.0049). Exploratory studies aimed to
identify the best combination therapies identified induction of cell
surface CD74 in primary MCL cells treated with OSU-2S. Similarly,
induction of cell surface CD74 was also confirmed in JeKo and Mino cells.
Evaluation of OSU-2S and anti-CD74 antibody, milatuzumab in cell lines
and primary MCL cells revealed enhanced cytotoxicity compared to either
of the agents alone.B-cell malignancy restricted expression of receptor
tyrosine kinase ROR1 in MCL, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and
subset of pediatric acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) has been reported.
Consistent with this, JeKo, Mino and primary MCL cells but not normal B
cells expressed ROR1. As tumor directed delivery of cytotoxic cargo
offers the potential to further enhance the therapeutic index of cancer
therapeutics such as OSU-2S, we developed a lipid-based OSU-2S
nanoparticle (OSU-2S-LP) tethered with an anti-ROR1 mouse monoclonal
antibody (2A2) to form 2A2-OSU-2S-ILP that mediated selective
cytotoxicity of MCL.Testing of immunonanoparticle formulation on JeKo,
Mino cell lines and primary lymphoma cells showed selective cytotoxicity
of 2A2-OSU-2S-ILP in MCL (pTreatment of mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), an
uncommon non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, remains challenging despite numerous
therapeutic advances. We have previously shown the preclinical effect of
FTY720 (Fingolimod) against MCL through down modulation of cyclin D1, the
protein almost uniformly over-expressed in this disease. Herein, we
describe the potent direct cytotoxicity of OSU-2S, a novel
non-immunosuppressive FTY720 derivative in MCL cells and evaluate tumor
directed lipid based nanoparticle formulation of OSU-2S designed to
selectively deliver to ROR1+ MCL cells.OSU-2S is a FTY720 derivative that
does not traffic T cells and exhibits potent cytotoxicity in MCL cell
lines and in MCL patient-derived primary cells (p = 0.0049). Exploratory
studies aimed to identify the best combination therapies identified
induction of cell surface CD74 in primary MCL cells treated with OSU-2S.
Similarly, induction of cell surface CD74 was also confirmed in JeKo and
Mino cells. Evaluation of OSU-2S and anti-CD74 antibody, milatuzumab in
cell lines and primary MCL cells revealed enhanced cytotoxicity compared
to either of the agents alone.B-cell malignancy restricted expression of
receptor tyrosine kinase ROR1 in MCL, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)
and subset of pediatric acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) has been
reported. Consistent with this, JeKo, Mino and primary MCL cells but not
normal B cells expressed ROR1. As tumor directed delivery of cytotoxic
cargo offers the potential to further enhance the therapeutic index of
cancer therapeutics such as OSU-2S, we developed a lipid-based OSU-2S
nanoparticle (OSU-2S-LP) tethered with an anti-ROR1 mouse monoclonal
antibody (2A2) to form 2A2-OSU-2S-ILP that mediated selective
cytotoxicity of MCL.Testing of immunonanoparticle formulation on JeKo,
Mino cell lines and primary lymphoma cells showed selective cytotoxicity
of 2A2-OSU-2S-ILP in MCL (p<0.001) compared to other controls, including
non-targeted formulation (OSU-2S-LP), non-specific antibody
(IgG-OSU-2S-ILP) or empty targeted formulation (2A2-Empty-ILP). In-vivo
treatment with 2A2-OSU-2S-ILP in Mino cell line xenografted
NOD-SCID-Gamma/ mice revealed significantly diminished tumor growth
compared to the control (p = 0.0001). These findings describe the novel
OSU-2S molecule as a successor of FTY720 that is active against MCL.
OSU-2S enhanced CD74 expression can be exploited in combination therapy
with milatuzumab which is in human clinical trials. Importantly, the
tumor antigen ROR1 directed delivery system for increasing the payload
selectively to the cancer cells thus obviating the exposure of
chemotherapeutics and targeted therapeutics to other unintended target
cells has broad implications in diverse ROR1+ malignancies.

