Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted RNA sequencing improves transcript analysis in cancer
samples


RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) is a transcriptome profiling technology that
provides multiple levels of insight into the genome. In addition to
expression levels (transcript abundance), it generates endpoints such as
alternative splicing, somatic mutations and rearrangements, which may
have functional consequences in cancer. Although somatic mutations are
generally identified by DNA sequencing, RNA-seq has the advantage of
detecting allele-specific expression affecting a variant allele, as well
as functional chimeric transcripts that result from structural
rearrangements. Compared to microarray technologies, RNA-seq can provide
additional information about novel transcripts. Due to the complexity of
the human transcriptome and the variability of gene abundance, the cost
of whole transcriptome sequencing to achieve sufficient coverage to
detect these types of alterations remains high. To explore the
feasibility of a more cost-effective method, we compared the performance
of three different RNA-seq methods: whole-transcriptome-, exome-, and
targeted RNA-seq, using RNA derived from cancer cell lines and
Formaldehyde Fixed-Paraffin Embedded (FFPE) samples. For
whole-transcriptome preparation, we used the Illumina TruSeq Stranded
mRNA and total RNA kits for cell line and FFPE samples, respectively.
Exome-RNAseq was performed using the Illumina Access kit. The libraries
from whole-transcriptome RNAseq were subjected to hybridization capture
using OncoPanel-an Agilent SureSelect baitset of 500 cancer-related
genes. Compared to whole-transcriptome, exome- and targeted-RNA-seq
demonstrated (1) higher coding exon coverage and multiplexing capability;
(2) reduced rRNA composition to 1%; (3) comparable gene abundance
information and (4) over 90% of reads aligned to coding exon regions in
FFPE samples, compare to 30% when using whole transcriptome method. In
conclusion, we demonstrated that exome- and targeted RNA-seq provide a
cost-effective way to analyze a subset of the transcriptome. Furthermore,
targeted RNA-seq can be highly multiplexed and is therefore amenable for
large-scale tumor profiling in clinical or research settings.

