Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncostatin M promotes breast cancer metastasis to lung by
affecting initial stages of metastasis


Recent studies suggest that cancer cells destined to establish metastatic
lesions may shed early during tumor development, potentially even from
carcinoma in situ. Furthermore, these cells may disseminate and lay
dormant in a metastatic microenvironment (MME) for years before
macrometastases are detectable. While inflammatory cytokines are known to
be important in promoting breast cancer metastasis, their effect on tumor
cell dissemination needs to be clarified. In this study, we investigate
the effect of the interleukin-6-related, inflammatory cytokine oncostatin
M (OSM) on early stages of breast cancer metastasis. First, we establish
the expression pattern of OSM in human breast tissue using tissue
microarrays. OSM is expressed in epithelial cells at higher levels in
invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) than in adjacent normal breast tissue,
but is expressed at highest levels in ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS).
This suggests that autocrine-produced OSM may be important in breast
tumor invasion and in the promotion of initial steps of metastasis. OSM
increases early stage metastatic potential in vitro in aggressive 4T1.2
triple negative breast cancer cells (TNBCs) by inducing tumor cell
detachment and migration. These findings are corroborated by in vivo
studies using an orthotopic 4T1.2 mouse model of breast cancer. Reduced
OSM expression in 4T1.2 (4T1.2-shOSM) cells is sufficient to inhibit the
progression and the final number and volume of metastases in the lung, as
well as circulating tumor cell (CTC) numbers in Balb/c mice. The number
of CTCs is further reduced in a Balb/c OSM knockout background,
demonstrating the importance of both paracrine- and autocrine-produced
OSM in this process. Furthermore, orthotopic injection of 4T1.2-shOSM
cells increases animal survival post-primary tumor resection, while
bypassing the early stages of metastasis by injecting cells directly into
the systemic circulation does not. As expected, in an orthotopic
xenograft MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer mouse model, peri-tumoral
injection of recombinant OSM increases the number of CTCs as well as
spontaneous metastasis to lung. Taken together, these results suggest
that suppression of OSM levels in the tumor microenvironment could be a
highly effective therapeutic strategy for halting breast cancer
metastasis to lung.

