Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Towards structure-based drug design of 3-phosphoglycerate
dehydrogenase inhibitors


BackgroundThe NAD+-requiring enzyme 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase
(PHGDH) diverts glycolytic flux into serine production and folate
metabolism by catalyzing the oxidization of 3-phosphoglycerate to
phosphohydroxypyruvate. The PHGDH gene is located on chromosome 1(1p12),
a region frequently amplified in melanoma and certain breast cancer
forms. PHGDH knockdown in cells with amplified PHGDH or overexpressing
PHGDH at the protein level resulted in cell growth inhibition. In
addition ectopic overexpression of PHGDH in a non-tumorigenic cell line
induced morphological changes characteristic of transformation.
Therefore, inhibitors of PHGDH may be therapeutically valuable.No PHGDH
inhibitors have been reported to date, our aim is to develop PHGDH
inhibitors targeting the cofactor (and substrate) binding
site.MethodsFull length PHGDH and the catalytic subunit (sPHGDH) were
expressed in, and isolated from E. coli. PHGDH was found to co-purify
with its cofactor, making it necessary to abolish the cofactor-protein
interaction to investigate inhibitor binding at the co-factor site. To
accomplish this, site-directed sPHGDH mutants were constructed and
purified. To characterize the mutants, their enzymatic activity and
ability to bind to NADH (assessed by thermal stability and isothermal
titration calorimetry (ITC)) were measured, and their structures were
characterized by circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy and on-going x-ray
crystallographic studies.Results sPHGDH retained 60% of the enzymatic
activity of the full length protein whereas introduction of single or
double point mutations around the cofactor or substrate binding site
resulted in complete abolition of enzymatic activity. The binding of NADH
(1mM) to PHGDH and sPHGDH resulted in increases in melting temperature
(Tm) of 8.4 0.2 C and 9.3 0.5 C respectively. Mutation of the cofactor
binding site resulted in reduced ability to bind NADH (Tm = 0.8 0.2 C,
2.3 0.1 C) whereas mutation at the substrate binding site, directly
adjacent to the cofactor binding site, had no significant effect on the
ability to bind NADH. Congruent findings were obtained via ITC
determining a binding affinity (Kd) of 0.66 M for wt sPHGDH and a reduced
binding affinity of 3-30 fold for the mutated proteins. CD measurements
showed that the proteins mutated at the co-factor binding site had
undergone minor changes in the secondary structure compared to the wt
sPHGDH whereas mutation at the substrate binding site had no effect on
the secondary structure elements.Conclusion Although the mutations
carried out were single or double point mutations only, cofactor binding
could be reduced substantially, giving rise to markedly lower catalytic
activity. These investigations illustrate a promising way of making
proteins with large, tight binding ligands accessible to structure-based
drug-design.

