Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quinomycin A affects pancreatic cancer stem cells in part through
suppression of notch signaling pathway


Background: Pancreatic cancer (PCa) remains a leading cause of death in
the United States. Cancer stem cells (CSC) are responsible for tumor
behavior, and therapeutic resistance. Quinomycin (Qui) is an orally
administered quinoxaline antibiotic that bifunctionally intercalates with
double stranded DNA. As a first step for repurposing this drug, we
determined whether Qui affects PCa growth, and if so whether this is by
suppressing stem cells.Method: Growth and apoptosis of PCa lines
(MiaPaCa-2, PanC-1, BxPC-3) and normal ductal epithelial cells (HPNE) was
measured by hexosaminidase and clonogenicity, and caspase 3/7 assays,
respectively. Pancosphere formation and FACS sorting were used for
identifying effects on stem cells. For in vivo effects, MiaPaCa-2
xenografts were developed in the flanks of nude mice.
Immunohistochemistry was performed for stem cell markers and Notch
signaling proteins.Results: Qui treatment resulted in a dose- and
time-dependent inhibition of proliferation and colony formation in all
three PCa lines but not HPNE cells. Qui also induced PCa cells to undergo
apoptosis. Qui also significantly reduced the number and size of
pancospheres, suggesting effects on stem cells. In addition, flow
cytometry and western blot analyses showed that Qui suppressed PCa stem
cell marker proteins Doublecortin Calmodulin-like kinase 1 (DCLK1), CD44
and CD24. We next determined whether Qui affects the Notch signaling
pathway, a pathway that is important in maintaining CSC population. Notch
receptor and its ligands are up-regulated in human PCa tissues. Qui
treatment significantly downregulated Notch-1, 2 and 3 expression and
that of its ligand Jagged-1. Notch activation requires cleavage by the
-secretase complex. Qui inhibits the expression of members of the complex
Presenilin 1 and Nicastrin. Moreover, ectopic expression of the Notch
Intracellular domain (NICD) rescued the cells from Qui -mediated growth
suppression. These data demonstrate that Qui mediated effects of PCa stem
cells is in part through downregulating Notch1 activation. To determine
the effect of Qui on tumor growth in vivo, mice carrying MiaPaCa-2 tumor
xenografts were administered the compound intraperitoneally (20 g/kg bw)
every day for 21 days. Qui treatment significantly suppressed tumor
xenograft growth, with notably lower tumor volume and weight. Western
blot and immunohistochemistry analyses demonstrated significant
inhibition of CSC marker proteins DCLK1, CD44 and CD24 and also the Notch
signaling related proteins in the Qui-treated xenograft
tissues.Conclusion: Together, these data suggest that Qui suppresses PCa
growth by inhibiting the Notch signaling pathway. Qui may therefore be a
novel compound to target pancreatic cancers.

