Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methotrexate derivative with intrinsic magnetism


Background: We previously reported the generation of a novel paclitaxel
derivative with intrinsic magnetism. Similarly, we have synthesized a
novel derivative of methotrexate, a conventional drug for cancer and
rheumatic diseases, with intrinsic magnetism (M-MTX). MTX is widely used
in clinical treatments, however various severe side effects such as
renal, hepatic, and pulmonary toxicities or bone marrow suppression have
been reported. This is a single methotrexate compound with intrinsic
magnetism and is not a methotrexate encapsulated in micelle with magnetic
particles. The magnetic property contributes to unique features. 1) It
can be attracted by a magnet, resulting in reduction of the side effects.
2) It can be visualized by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), suggesting
that we can identify the localization of drug and quantify the amount of
this drug. In this study, we have examined whether M-MTX has both the
magnetic and the anti-cancer property with similar efficacy to commercial
available methotrexate.Materials & Methods: The magnetic property of
M-MTX was measured by Electron Spin Resonance (ESR) and Superconducting
Quantum Interference Device (SQUID). MCF7, breast cancer cells were
obtained from RIKEN Bioresource center in this study. Cell proliferation
was assessed by a commercially available kit, XTT Cell Proliferation
Assay Kit (ATCC). Apoptotic cells were stained with APC Annexin V and
7-AAD, and measured by fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS), to
evaluate early and late apoptosis. The intracellular ROS level was then
measured using a fluorescent dye, 2,7-dichlorofluorescein diacetate
(DCFH-DA; Sigma, Japan)Results: M-MTX was easily attracted by a neodium
magnet. Plots of magnetization versus magnetic field revealed that the
magnetized methotrexate exhibits spontaneous magnetization in SQUID. ESR
also showed that M-MTX has an intrinsic magnetism. Furthermore, M-MTX
inhibited cell proliferation and induced cellular apoptosis in MCF7 cell
lines in a dose-dependent manner. M-MTX also increased reactive oxygen
species (ROS) generation, suggesting that M-MTX might retained the
original anti-cancer property.Conclusion: M-MTX may provide us a new
strategy for cancer therapy, i.e., chemotherapy with magnetic drug
delivery with a single agent. These results also suggested that various
conventional anti-cancer drugs might be similarly magnetized, leading to
novel drug developments in future cancer chemotherapy and other
treatments.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

