Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rational design of combination therapies and block of acquired
targeted drug resistance


Recent successes of targeted drugs on end stage cancer patients highlight
the value of mutation-based biomarkers with high positive predictive
value for drug response predictions. However, the impact of these drugs
is often temporary, and the patients progress to acquired resistance. A
common mechanism of drug evasion involves feedback mechanisms that
increase expression or phosphorylation-driven activation of an
alternative oncogenic pathway. The objective of this work was to set up a
streamlined methodology for pre-clinical assessment of the novel drug for
refractory cancer targeting, with specific focus of personalized
medicine, mediated by sequencing, and seek combination therapies that
would block the spontaneous drug evasion. We explored the efficacy of the
combination approach on a panel of cancer patient derived xenografts in
mice, using tumor size, or metabolic imaging as an end point. Each cancer
case was subject to target somatic mutation screening, which resulted in
a targeted drug recommendation, and then, mouse groups were treated
either with sequeincing-based therapy, or with combination of these
therapies with blockers of the suspected evasion mechanisms. As a blocker
of the evasion mechanism and epithelial to mesenchymal transition, we
characterized the utility of a molecule that leads to the destruction of
IRS1/2 of the IGF1R pathway. IRS1/2 are altered during EMT and drug
resistance, thus blocking them could block drug resistance, and found
multiple scenarios, where the combination of this blockage with currently
used targeted drugs, such as Erlotinib, Zelboraf, and Gleevec, all
increase the attenuation of the cancer growth and progression. Addition
of the IRS1/2 destruction to Erlotinib and Zelboraf resistant H&N and
melanoma cancers, respectively, lead to regression of the recurrent tumor
mass. This combination therapy was further characterized by
shRNA-negative screens, and kinome activity profiling, to assess further
drug treatments that could be added, and in search for biomarkers that
would identify patients likely to respond to the therapeutic
combinations, We believe blocking the IGF1R in combination with drugs
that inhibit the MAPK and tyrosine kinase receptor pathways may increase
the progression free survival and expand the responding population within
an array of cancer types, many of which are currently refractory to
chemotherapy.

