Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting lysophosphatidic acid receptor 1 (LPAR1) radiosensitizes
poor prognosis cancers


Therapies for poor prognosis cancers, such as lung cancer and
glioblastoma, are limited due to radio-resistance and tumor recurrence.
Development of molecular targeted therapy can serve as a potential method
to improve the efficacy of radiation therapy in both glioblastoma and
lung cancer. Ionizing radiation (IR) can activate a series of
pro-survival pathways which contributes to the pathogenesis of cancer
cells. Among these pathways, cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) is an
integral component which is activated by IR. Following activation, cPLA2
cleaves arachidonic acid to form phosphatidylcholine (PC) and yields
lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC). Autotaxin (ATX) then converts LPC to
lysophosphatidic acid (LPA). LPA acts through G-protein-coupled receptors
(GPCR) such as LPA1, LPA2, and LPA3, influencing various fundamental
cellular functions. Specifically, these receptors can modulate the
ability of cancer cells to proliferate, differentiate, and survive.
Earlier we have shown that inhibition of ATX decreases invasion and
enhances radiation sensitivity of cancer cells. In the present study we
investigated the role of LPA receptors and its effect on radioresistance
in human A549, murine Lewis Lung Carcinoma (LLC), and rat C6 glioma
cells.We analyzed the expression levels of the three LPA receptors in
various cancer cell lines including lung, brain, breast and pancreatic
cancer cells. We found high expression of LPA1 in LLC, C6 and A549, which
we thus chose for further study. Using inhibitors of LPA1/LPA3, Ki16425
and VPC 12249, we determined the effect of LPA1 inhibition on the AKT and
ERK activation. Inhibition of LPA1 attenuated phosphorylation of both AKT
and ERK in irradiated lung cancer cells. This implicated LPA1 in the
regulation of pro-survival signaling, and we hypothesized that LPA1
regulation could influence radioresistance in lung cancer and glioma
cells. We targeted LPA1 using siRNA in LLC, C6 and A549 cells which led
to an average of 50% reduction in clonogenic survival and cell
proliferation after irradiation. Similar results were obtained when LLC
and A549 cells were treated with 10M Ki16425 or 10M VPC 12249. In
addition, LLC and A549 cells which were treated with combinations of
radiation and LPA1 inhibitors and analyzed using cell invasion assays
showed a 70% reduction in cancer cell invasion. These results indicate
that LPA1 could serve as a novel target for cancer treatment due to its
ability to enhance the efficacy of radiotherapy in multiple cancer cell
lines.

