Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Longitudinal monitoring of cell proliferation and cytotoxicity in
a biomimetic 3D culture model for lung cancer using native extracellular
matrix scaffolds


Introduction: Tissue-engineered 3D cell culture techniques have gained
popularity in cancer research as they recapitulate tissue architecture,
facilitate stroma formation, and promote complex cell-cell and
cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions. Decellularized whole-organ
scaffolds may represent the ultimate ECM analogue for this purpose.
However, methods to assess cell behavior or viability within these tumor
constructs are lacking.Methods: Lungs from Sprague Dawley rats were
subjected to perfusion-decellularization via the pulmonary artery with
0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 1% Triton X-100 to obtain decellularized
whole-lung ECM scaffolds. Decellularized lung scaffolds were placed in a
bioreactor to allow perfusion of cell-specific media through the
pulmonary artery. The human lung cancer cell lines SW1573 (KRAS mutant)
and PC9 (EGFR mutant) were seeded into the scaffolds by means of tracheal
delivery and were cultured for a total of 7 days. A resazurin reduction
perfusion assay was performed on days 1, 3, 5 and 7 of culture to
evaluate cell viability by diluting a resazurin-based reagent with
culture medium and perfusing it via the pulmonary artery. The net
fluorescence increase at the end of the assay was used to estimate the
number of viable cells. Some tumor-ECM constructs were treated with
erlotinib starting on day 3 of culture. At 7 days, tissue was collected
and analyzed by histology and immunostaining for Ki67 and activated
caspase 3.Results: The human lung cancer cell lines PC9 and SW1573 showed
engraftment and macroscopic tumor nodule formation when cultured on
native lung ECM scaffolds under biomimetic 3D conditions. The resazurin
reduction perfusion assay permitted the longitudinal and non-destructive
estimation of cell viability within these 3D tumor constructs, therefore
allowing the generation of proliferation curves using this model.
Doubling times for PC9 and SW1573 cells under 3D biomimetic conditions
were approximately 4.2 days and 4.7 days. Additionally, this method was
able to detect sensitivity and relative resistance to erlotinib. After
introduction of erlotinib on day 3, this assay reliably identified
decreasing viable cell numbers in PC9-seeded scaffolds (23% vs. before
treatment) consistent with the genotypic background of this cell line
(EGFR exon 19 deletion). On the other hand, this method detected ongoing
proliferation of SW1573 cells after erlotinib (148% vs. before
treatment), consistent with known relative resistance of this cell line
to this agent, which correlated with caspase 3 expression.Conclusions:
Decellularized native lung ECM scaffolds can serve as a more realistic 3D
model for the study of processes related to lung cancer progression or
for therapeutic experimentation. The methods presented here will prove
useful to study cancer proliferation and cell viability under these 3D
biomimetic culture conditions.

