Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunosignature technology detects stage I lung cancer from a drop
of serum


Early detection of lung cancer could have a tremendous impact as newly
diagnosed patients suffer an overall 5-year survival rate of 16.8%,
largely due to late detection. The use of computed tomography (CT) for
earlier lung cancer detection in a high risk population was shown to
reduce lung cancer mortality by 20% in a 2011 NLST study report. The US
Preventative Services Task Force has recommended low dose CT be used for
screening high risk populations despite a high false positive rate
(23.5%) and 2-10 mSv of radiation exposure per scan. Our laboratories
have developed a new concept for disease detection based on
immunosignatures. The immunosignature (IS) technology uses arrays of
hundreds of thousands of unique peptides designed to broadly survey an
individual's antibody binding repertoire from a drop of blood. Arrayed
library peptides that bind differentially between case and control
samples are selected as input into classification algorithms. The
technology holds promise for detecting the presence of virtually any
disease that generates a significant B-cell response. For cancer, the
technology has accurately distinguished patient samples representing
several different cancers from each other as well as from non-cancer
controls. To determine the feasibility of using IS technology to detect
early stage lung cancer among high risk and/or symptomatic individuals, a
cohort of samples representing 44 pathology-confirmed stage I lung cancer
cases and 44 age, gender, and smoking-history/status matched controls
were assayed on high density peptide arrays. All control samples were
from individuals with benign lung diseases, such as chronic respiratory
illnesses and/or benign lung nodules (55% of control samples), that could
be interpreted as suspicious of cancer and require differential
diagnosis. Peptides with statistically significant difference in binding
signal between cases and controls were identified by Bonferroni adjusted
t-test and standardized log odds ratios. A support vector machine
classification algorithm was trained using the 100 most significant
features. Feature selection and classifier model performance were
evaluated by applying 100 iterations of a four-fold cross-validation
routine. The cross-validated performance metrics of the 100-feature
immunosignature classifier were sensitivity of 91.9% (95% confidence
interval (CI) 78-3%-97.5), specificity of 94.3% (95%CI 81.3%-98.6%) and
an overall accuracy of 93.1% (95% CI 85.7%-97.5%). These results need
verification in larger cohorts and validation in blinded studies;
however, they are deemed promising for the early detection of lung cancer.

