Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive genomic analysis identifies frequent MET
juxtamembrane domain deletions as an actionable genomic alteration in
pulmonary sacromatoid carcinoma


Background:Pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma (SC) is a rare and highly
aggressive lung tumor, and it is associated with poor prognosis and high
rate of resistance to conventional chemotherapy. We performed whole-exome
next generation sequencing followed by a careful ranking and validation
strategy to understand its unique differentiation pattern and to identify
actionable targets.Methods:Twenty-nine patients with pulmonary SC
diagnosed at our institution between 1998 and 2013 were enrolled and
divided into a discovery set (n = 10) and a validation set (n = 19).
Whole-exome sequencing was performed on genomic DNA samples extracted
from fresh frozen tumor tissue and paired normal tissue in the discovery
set. TruSeq Amplicon-Cancer 48 gene panel and bidirectional Sanger
sequencing was performed to validate mutations. Validated genes were then
screened for mutations using Sanger sequencing on FFPE-DNA of the
patients in the validation set. Total RNA and protein were extracted from
fresh frozen tumor tissues and paired normal tissues when available.
RT-PCR and Western blotting were performed to validate MET juxtamembrane
domain deletion. Ablation of MET signaling by siRNA or pharmacological
inhibitors was conducted in cell line models harboring MET exon 14
skipping, and cell line models harboring wild-type MET. MTS assay and
western blotting were then performed to assess cell proliferation and MET
downstream signaling changes.Results:Previously reported mutations in
TP53 (7/10) KRAS (2/10) and PIK3CA (2/10), as well as novel mutations in
RASA1(2/10), CDH4 (2/10), CDH7 (2/10), LAMB4 (3/10), MET (2/10), SCAF1
(2/10), and LMTK2 (2/10), were detected and validated in the discovery
set. CDH4, CDH7, SCAF1, LMTK2, and MET were screened in the validation
set, and two SCAF1 mutations and five MET mutations were identified. In
total, 24% (7/29) of pulmonary SC harbor somatic mutations in the splice
sites of MET exon 14, including five D1010H point mutations in the 3p
splice acceptor site. RT-PCR and Western blotting confirmed the presence
of exon 14 skipped MET variant. Inactivation of MET using the MET
inhibitor Crizotinib decreased cell proliferation and inhibited
downstream AKT and mitogen-activated protein kinase activation in cell
lines harboring MET exon14 skipping (H596 lung adenocarcinoma and Hs746T
gastric cancer), whereas effects of MET inhibition on cell proliferation
and downstream protein activation were negligible in MET wild-type cell
lines. Further functional studies utilizing specific siRNA and MET exon
14 expression constructs are ongoing.Conclusions:Our study finds an
unprecedently high frequency of exon 14 skipping MET mutations in
pulmonary SC and suggests that MET activation might contribute to the
mesenchymal differentiation and aggressive biology and defines MET
inhibition as a promising novel therapeutic strategy for MET-mutated
pulmonary SC.

