Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of AKT negatively regulates the pro-apoptotic function
of death-associated protein kinase 3 (DAPK3) in prostate cancer


Activation of AKT plays a central role by inducing pro-survival signaling
pathways, promotes cell growth and inhibits apoptosis in human
malignancies including prostate cancer. Higher expression of pAKT is
correlated with aggressiveness of the prostate cancer. Published
evidences suggest that inhibition of survival kinases may utilize the
current therapeutic modalities to sensitize the prostate cancer cells
more significantly. Indeed, numbers of small molecules or peptides are
being developed to inhibit either AKT or its upstream kinase PI3K to
inhibit the growth of human malignances. Death-associated protein kinase
3 (DAPK3), a serine/threonine kinase governs many signaling pathways
including induction of apoptosis.This lead the way to focus our research
on small molecules which can inhibit AKT activation and induce DAPK
mediated apoptosis in CaP cell lines. To begin with, we identified a
small molecule which binds to AKT kinase domain with a predicted affinity
of 11.0 Kcal/mol. The amino acid residues of AKT-1 within 4 of the best
docking site of this small molecule, 6-dimethyl, dihydro pyranone (6ddp),
includes ARG-4, SER-7, LEU-156, GLY-157, LYS-158, GLY-159, PHE-161,
VAL-164, LYS -179, GLU-191, HIS-194, GLU-234, ASP-274, MET-281, ASP-292,
GLY-294,LEU-295, and PHE-438. The hydroxyl group of 6ddp likely forms a
hydrogen bond with the nitrogen on the side chain of HIS-194. 6ddp
inhibited pAKT (ser473) expression which concomitantly induced DAPK1
expression resulting in the growth inhibition of CaP cell lines. Similar
results were obtained when a pharmacological inhibitor of AKT was used
which resulted in DAPK induced apoptosis of CaP cells. Subsequently, we
examined the DAPK3 activation in prostate cancer samples, which
significantly showed a higher expression in normal prostate samples. On
the contrary, reduced expression with low level was observed with the
progression of disease. Currently, our study focuses on the kinase and
phosphatase interaction network by mass spectrometric analysis of protein
complexes. Understanding the mechanism of DAPK3 mediated AKT inhibition,
may strengthen the therapeutic window for prostate cancer without causing
much or any toxicity

