Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor and antimetastatic response of melanoma-bearing normal
and alcoholic mice to Sunitinib and ALT-803 treatment


Chronic alcohol consumption (CAC) is a risk factor for melanoma as well
as other cancers and can result in decreased patient survival. We
previously showed that CAC increases the percentage of IFN--producing
CD8+ T cells exhibiting a memory phenotype (CD44hi) in the early stage of
primary B16BL6 melanoma development; however, these cells rapidly
decrease with continued tumor growth. CAC also results in decreased cells
producing IL-15, a cytokine essential for sustained proliferation and
survival of CD8+ T cells. In addition, myeloid derived suppressor cells
(MDSC), which can inhibit CD8+ T cell proliferation and activation and
thus suppress antitumor immune responses, also increase in the blood of
melanoma-bearing mice during CAC. Herein, we examined the single and
combined effects of ALT-803, a novel IL-15/IL-15 receptor alpha complex
designed to increase CD8+ T cell proliferation and activation and
Sunitinib, known to inhibit MDSC, on primary melanoma growth and
metastasis in female C57BL/6 mice inoculated s.c. with B16BL6 melanoma
and given continuous water or 20% w/v alcohol. Both drugs are being
evaluated separately in human melanoma clinical trials. ALT-803 did not
inhibit primary tumor growth or increase survival when given weekly at a
dose of 0.2 mg/kg but did inhibit tumor growth and increase survival at a
dosage of 1.5-2.0 mg/kg. Sunitinib (40 mg/kg daily) given alone and in
combination with ALT-803 inhibited tumor growth compared to untreated
water and alcohol controls. Sunitinib had a greater effect on tumor
growth and final tumor weight in alcohol drinking mice compared to water
drinking mice. Sunitinib increased survival and in combination with
ALT-803 extended survival further. MDSC, which increased with tumor
growth in untreated mice, were initially suppressed by Sunitinib;
however, continued tumor growth overcame the initial suppressive effect.
ALT-803 increased levels of CD8+ T cells, CD8+CD44hi T cells, and
IFN--producing CD8+ T cells. This effect decreased with continued tumor
growth. ALT-803 inhibited and Sunitinib increased lymph node and lung
metastasis in mice inoculated s.c. with melanoma. The Sunitinib effect on
metastasis was not abrogated in combination with ALT-803. Further studies
to investigate the mechanisms associated with these findings are
warranted. Supported by NIH Grants K05AA017149 and R21AA022098 to GGM and
HZ and NSF pre-doctoral fellowship DGE-1347973 to KAG.

