Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alternatively spliced tissue factor promotes pancreatic cancer
progression via carbonic anhydrase IX


Purpose: Here we study the mechanisms by which alternatively spliced
Tissue Factor (asTF) contributes to pancreatic cancer progression in an
advanced tumor micro-environment.Background: There is a well-established
association of the hemostatic system with cancer. Molecules of the
coagulation pathway predispose patients to cancer-associated thrombosis
and also trigger intracellular signaling pathways that promote cancer
progression. The primary transcript of Tissue Factor, the main trigger of
coagulation, undergoes alternative splicing yielding a secreted variant,
termed asTF (alternatively spliced Tissue Factor). asTF does not have a
physiologic function in hemostasis, but its expression positively
correlates with advanced tumor stages, including pancreatic
adenocarcinoma; asTF acts as a cell agonist by binding beta-1 intregrins.
The hypoxia-inducible enzyme carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) may be
overexpressed by cancer cells as a result of increased glycolysis and
acidic pH. While it increases cancer cell survival by maintaining
intracellular pH, carbonic anhydrase IX decreases the extracellular pH,
making the extracellular space more acidic, which can increase cancer
cell motility.Methods: asTF-overexpressing pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma cell line Pt45P1/asTF+ and the parent cell line Pt45P1
were tested for growth and mobility under normoxic conditions (5% CO2,
ambient O2, 1000 mg/ml glucose) that model early stage tumors, and in the
hypoxic environment of advanced-stage cancers (20% CO2, 1% O2 and 5 mM
lactate).Results: asTF overexpression in Pt45P1 cells conveyed higher
proliferative ability. According to propidium iodide staining and flow
cytometry, the major fraction of Pt45P1/asTF+ cells resides in the
dividing G2/M phase of the cell cycle, while control Pt45P1 cells are
mostly confined to the quiescent G0/G1 phase. asTF overexpression is also
associated with significantly higher cell mobility. These observations
were similar for cells plated under both normoxia and hypoxia. While
normoxic cell culture conditions have been traditionally designed to
maximize cell growth, an aggressive phenotype that may arise in an
advanced-stage micro-environment prompted us to study the mechanisms that
might promote invasive behavior under hypoxic tumor conditions. In a
hypoxic environment, we observed an upregulation of carbonic anhydrase IX
which was more pronounced in Pt45P1/asTF+ cells. Inhibition of carbonic
anhydrase IX by the compound U-104 significantly decreased cell growth
and mobility of Pt45P1/asTF+ cells in hypoxia, but not in
normoxia.Conclusion: Carbonic anhydrase IX is a novel downstream mediator
of the asTF's effects in pancreatic cancer progression under hypoxic
conditions that model advanced stage tumor micro-environment.

