Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nicotine-mediated regulation of Sox2 and its implications in the
biology of non-small cell lung adenocarcinoma stem-like cells


Nicotine, the addictive component of tobacco smoke, is known to promote
proliferation, migration, and invasion of multiple cancer cells,
including those of the lung and the pancreas. In addition, nicotine can
promote the growth and metastasis of such cancers in mouse xenograft
models. More recently, nicotine has also been implicated in promotion of
cancer stem cell properties such as self-renewal. Our lab has shown that
stimulation of lung cancer cells with nicotine results in activation of
Src kinase in a -arrestin-1 dependent manner, resulting in inactivation
of the Rb tumor suppressor protein and subsequently the activation of
E2F-mediated transcription of proliferative and survival genes. In
addition to proliferative and survival genes, the E2F family of
transcription factors has been shown to activate genes like matrix
metalloproteinases that are involved in invasion and migration,
indicating a role for E2F in the growth and metastasis of cancers
downstream of nicotine. Our recent studies have shown that E2F1 can also
induce genes which promote stemness, such as Stem Cell Factor (SCF/c-kit
ligand), promoting nicotine-mediated enhancement of self-renewal of
stem-like cells. In addition to these findings, here we demonstrate the
ability of nicotine to induce the embryonic stem cell factor Sox2, which
is indispensable for self-renewal and maintenance of stem cell
properties, as well as the ability of E2F1 transcription factor to
regulate Sox2 gene expression in non-small cell lung cancer cells.
Western blot analysis revealed an induction of Sox2 protein at 18 and 24
hours post nicotine stimulation, which diminished by 48 hours. Similarly,
quantitative real time PCR analysis showed an increase in Sox2 mRNA
levels at 18 and24, hours post nicotine stimulation. Analysis of a 1500bp
region of the human Sox2 gene promoter revealed multiple predicted E2F
binding sites. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated E2F
transcription factors to associate with the Sox2 promoter at multiple
predicted binding sites. Transient transfection experiments further
demonstrated the ability of E2F1 to induce the expression of a
Sox2-luciferase reporter. These results suggest that nicotine may enhance
lung cancer stem cell properties in part through the induction of Sox2,
and this could potentially be mediated via E2F transcriptional
activation. Further studies are underway to elucidate the impact of
nicotine mediated induction of Sox2 on stemness, the underlying mechanism
of activation, and the implications this has for non-small cell lung
cancer. These studies can be expected to have a direct impact on our
understanding of the molecular mechanism involved in the initiation,
growth and metastasis of non-small cell lung cancer, especially in
smokers.

