Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin affects breast cancer cell growth and disturbs an
IGF1/insulin related gene network that correlates with breast cancer
progression


BackgroundObesity and the insulin resistance syndrome are risk factors
for breast cancer and might also affect breast cancer progression. The
anti-diabetic drug Metformin (METF) reduces the breast cancer risk in
diabetic women. Insulin like growth factor 1 (IGF1) and insulin are
involved in breast cancer tumorigenesis and progression.We tested the
effect of METF on the IGF1/insulin pathway and its involvement in breast
cancer progression.MethodsWe developed a prognostic signature based on
IGF1/insulin pathway genes using the Stockholm breast cancer microarray
dataset of 149 cases for training and primary validation and the Uppsala
dataset of 249 for external validation. The effect of METF on the
prognostic gene set identified was tested in vitro on a panel of breast
cancer cell lines. METF effects on proliferation and glucose metabolism
were analyzed in vitro and in vivo. The insulin receptor substrate 2
(IRS2) was silenced by transfection with shRNA-lentiviral vectors.
Xenograft growth, in the presence and absence of METF, was studied and
18FDG-uptake was measured in vitro and in vivo.ResultsA 15-gene signature
(Insulin sensitivity score, ISS) was developed and predicted breast
cancer metastasis with an accuracy similar to the Recurrence Score. ISS
genes were expressed at variable levels in a breast cancer cell line
panel and showed variable responsiveness to METF. The high expression
correlation among the ISS genes observed in untreated breast cancer cell
lines was lost upon treatment with METF. METF reduced breast cancer cell
growth in vitro with IC50 values ranging from 1mM to 25mM. Growth of
MDA-MB-231 cells and hyper-invasive subpopulations derived therefrom was
reduced in vivo by oral administration of METF to xenografted nude mice.
Response to METF in terms of IC50 values correlated with basal expression
of the 15 ISS genes with the strongest inverse correlation observed for
IRS2. Stable silencing of IRS2 reduced the MDA-231 cell responsiveness to
METF in vitro.DiscussionMETF acts on the insulin/IGF1 axis by disturbing
a network of breast cancer progression related genes and appears to
depend in its action on the expression of IRS2 that inversely correlates
with the sensitivity of cell lines to the drug. The disruption of the ISS
gene network is expected to correlate with an effect on breast cancer
growth and progression and in fact, mouse xenografts show reduced growth
upon treatment with METF. IRS2 appears to be a major mediator of METF
effects.

