Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthetic lethal approaches to aurora inhibition in aggressive
B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma


We explored synthetic lethality in the context of aurora inhibition with
novel combination therapies for aggressive B-NHL. Aurora A and B are
serine/threonine kinases and when amplified dysregulate the mitotic phase
of the cell cycle. Pre-clinical and clinical evidence demonstrate that
aurora inhibition has therapeutic benefit in aggressive B-NHL. Alisertib,
an aurora inhibitor has single agent activity in B-NHL mouse xenograft
tumors and clinical trials. Pre-clinical studies demonstrate Bruton's
tyrosine kinase (BTK) is persistently expressed despite alisertib
therapy. TMAs for DLBCL (S0313, S0515, N = 60) and MCL (S0213, S0601, N =
45) were generated to evaluate aurora A, B and BTK expression by IHC. We
developed B-NHL cell lines resistant to alisertib to evaluate mechanisms
of acute and chronic resistance and knock down of aurora A and B to
evaluate Myc, Bcl2 and BTK expression. Mouse B-NHL xenograft models were
conducted to demonstrate synthetic lethality of aurora plus BTK
inhibition. We demonstrate synergistic inhibition of cell proliferation
associated with apoptosis, particularly in ABC and double hit DLBCL and
mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) cells. Ibrutinib completely inhibited BTK and
AKT activity at 3.0M without affecting BTK or AKT protein level in B-NHL
cells that co-over-express Myc and Bcl-2. Aurora A and B knockdown show
compromised oncogene expression. IHC indicated in DLBCL and MCL aurora B
to be differentially over-expressed versus aurora A and BTK. Alisertib
plus ibrutinib was highly synergistic in inhibiting cell proliferation
and inducing apoptosis in B-NHL cells. Moreover, this effect was
amplified with the addition of rituximab. Acute and chronic resistance to
alisertib was due to ERK1/2 activation. Significantly greater apoptosis
was induced in the triplet combination (alisertib + ibrutinib +
rituximab) compared to doublet combinations (ibrutinib + rituximab or
alisertib + ibrutinib or alisertib + rituximab). Mouse xenograft models
of MCL (Granta-519) and double hit DLBCL (U2932) showed ibrutinib alone
had no anti-B-NHL activity. Ibrutinib + alisertib lead to tumor growth
inhibition (TGI) of 50% in MCL and 30% in DLBCL (p = 0.005).
Interestingly, ibrutinib + rituximab lead to a TGI of 60% (p = 0.005) in
both B-NHL mouse models. In contrast, triplet therapy with alisertib plus
ibrutinib plus rituximab demonstrated a statistically significant tumor
TGI of 70-90% (p = 0.005) in both B-NHL mouse models with an associated
enhanced overall survival (>70 days). Harvested tumors at the end of
treatment(s) demonstrated target inhibition and increased apoptosis with
triple therapy. Inhibition of BTK plus rituximab in the presence of
aurora inhibition is synthetic lethal in B-NHL and warrant clinical trial
evaluation.

