Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KRAS-mutation dependent effect of zoledronic acid in human NSCLC
preclinical models


In non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) KRAS-mutant status is a negative
prognostic and predictive factor of both classic and target based
therapy. In human malignancies bisphosphonate drugs are applied to treat
or prevent formation of bone metastases. Nitrogen-containing
bisphosphonates inhibit the posttranslational modification of small
G-proteins (e.g. Ras, Rac, Rho) and thus may affect proliferation and
migration. In our preclinical work, we investigated the effect of an
aminobisphosphonate compound (zoledronic acid) on mutant and wild type
KRAS-expressing human NSCLC cell lines.In vitro cell viability was
measured by MTT assay in H358, LCLC-103H, H1650 and H1975 cells.
Apoptotic cell death was quantified by flow cytometric detection of
sub-G1-fraction in propidium-iodide stained cultures. Furthermore, we
investigated the in vivo effect of zoledronic acid in a SCID mouse
subcutaneous xenograft model. The extracted tumors were examined by
traditional histological methods and the proportion of proliferating
tumor cells was determined by Ki67 labeling.KRAS-mutant H358 human NSCLC
cell line showed relative resistance to zoledronic acid on proliferation,
while human lung cancer cell lines carried wild type KRAS proved to be
sensitive. Zoledronic acid improved the cytostatic effect of traditional
anti-cancer agent cisplatin. Zoledronic acid did not induce significant
apoptosis in NSCLC cell lines in vitro, rather the blockade of the cell
cycle appeared. In in vivo subcutaneous animal model, zoledronic acid
significantly reduced the weight of LCLC-103H xenograft tumor harboring
wild type KRAS, furthermore, the treatment decreased the number of
Ki67-labeled tumor. Zoledronic acid induced the expression of VEGF in
LCLC-103H cells and stimulated in vivo angiogenesis.We concluded that in
human NSCLC cells the antiproliferative effect of zoledronic acid
dependended on KRAS-status (wild-type or mutant). The inhibitory effect
of zoledronic manifested through the in vitro and in vivo blockade of
cell cycle. The in vivo angiogenic effect of zoledronic acid supported
cytostatic effect of cisplatin. Our preclinical investigation suggests
that patients with wild type KRAS-expressing NSCLC could potentially
benefit from aminobisphosphonate therapy.

