Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MITF regulates proliferative subpopulation tumor architecture and
modifies invasion and characteristics of the epithelial to mesenchymal
transition within melanoma


Melanoma is the leading cause of skin cancer-related death. Survival
rates are high if the disease is diagnosed early, but drop precipitously
at later stages.Small molecule inhibitor therapy has given robust
responses in the clinic, but relapse is almost certain. This relapse may
be due, in part, to tumor heterogeneity. Not only are there multiple cell
types within a tumor, but cancer cells themselves can exhibit various
phenotypes. This can be due to genotype variation or nutrient
availability, and result in populations with different proliferative and
invasive capabilities. As these cells display various behaviors, they
could also respond to therapies uniquely. Understanding the molecular
signature influencing different sub-populations is therefore crucial to
design the most effective therapeutic regimen.The fluorescence
ubiquitination cell cycle indicator (FUCCI) system, which delineates
phases of the cell cycle by visual means, was employed to better
understand melanoma tumor heterogeneity. Using this model, it was found
that tumor xenografts grown in mice produce two cohorts. One that
contained distinct clusters of either arrested or proliferating cells,
and another that displayed a homogenous dispersion of proliferating cells
throughout the breadth of the tumor. These cohorts were subsequently
discovered to display either low or high levels of
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) expression,
respectively. Additionally, loss of MITF by shRNA treatment resulted in
conversion of the ability of melanoma cells to give rise to a homogenous
xenograft, to instead produce a clustered tumor phenotype. Furthermore,
in a 3D in vitro tumor spheroid model, MITF expression was predominantly
found in the periphery of the spheroid, which corresponds with the region
of highly proliferative cells. Forced over-expression of MITF within
these spheroids results in loss of the distinct proliferative ring, and
instead a homogenous growth pattern. Not only do spheroids express MITF
around the perimeter, but also markers of the Epithelial to Mesenchymal
Transition (EMT). These markers, such as Vimentin and Slug, also switch
to become expressed homogenously upon high MITF expression. Surprisingly,
the increased levels of EMT marker expression by MITF do not correlate to
increased migration, and these spheroids in fact show reduced invasion
into collagen. We are currently exploring what other means of cancer cell
migration could trump an enhanced EMT phenotype and slow invasion in our
model. These data outline how tumor heterogeneity, including
proliferative and invasive potential, is tightly intertwined with MITF
expression, making it an important marker for therapy design.

