Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long term monitoring of circulating regulatory T cells (Treg),
myeloid derived suppressor cella (MDSC) and type I effector T cells in
melanoma patients treated with neoadjuvant ipilimumab


Background: Patients with regionally advanced melanoma were treated with
neoadjuvant ipilimumab in a previously reported study (Tarhini. PLOS One
2014) where significant changes in circulating Treg, MDSC and peptide
specific type I CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were observed early on-treatment (6
weeks) that correlated with clinical outcome.Methods: Patients were
treated with ipilimumab (10 mg/kg IV every 3 weeks x 2 doses) bracketing
surgery. Blood (serum / peripheral blood mononuclear cells) specimens
were collected at baseline and during treatment for up to 9 months. We
conducted longer term monitoring in patients with available specimens at
3 (n = 28), 6 (n = 22) and 9 (n = 13) months utilizing multicolor flow
cytometry. We compared the frequencies of circulating suppressive Treg
and MDSC on-study to baseline levels, as well as frequencies of CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells specific to shared tumor-associated antigens (Gp-100,
MART-1, NY-ESO-1) utilizing overlapping peptide libraries (15-mer
peptides overlapping by 4). The prognostic value of cell frequencies in
relation to the probability of the event of progression at 9 months was
tested.Results: Baseline levels of Treg (CD4+/CD25hi+/CD39+) were
significantly associated with 9 months progression free survival (PFS) (p
= 0.04). A significant increase in Treg (CD4+CD25hi+Foxp3+ and
CD4+/CD25hi+/CD39+) frequencies reported previously at 6 weeks after
initiation of ipilimumab appears to have reversed starting 3 months as no
significant changes were seen at this or any of the later time points
compared to baseline. However, in monitoring the time dependent change
over time in circulating Treg there was a trend towards an association
with PFS (p = 0.09). Unlike what we had observed and reported at 6 weeks,
no significant decrease in MDSC levels was seen at 3 months or later time
points compared to baseline. We detected evidence of spontaneous in vivo
cross presentation resulting in type I (interferon- producing), fully
activated (CD69+) CD4+ and CD8+ antigen-specific T-cell immunity against
cancer-testis (NY-ESO-1) as well as melanocytic lineage (MART-1, gp100)
antigens in the absence of therapeutic vaccination. These responses were
significantly potentiated at 6 weeks and persisted at 3, 6 and 9 months
following the initiation of ipilimumab.Conclusions: Neoadjuvant
ipilimumab significantly modulates the levels of cellular mediators of
immune suppression (Treg and MDSC) early on-treatment with less
significant changes seen on long term follow up. Significant potentiation
of the type I effector T cell response is seen early and persists on long
term monitoring. These biomarkers warrant further investigation in
relation to the mechanism of action of ipilimumab and for their potential
prognostic and therapeutic predictive value. (Supported by NIH award
P50CA121973 and BMS)

