Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ACP-196, an orally bioavailable covalent selective inhibitor of
Btk, modulates the innate tumor microenvironment, exhibits antitumor
efficacy and enhances gemcitabine activity in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma exists in a complex desmoplastic
microenvironment that provides stromal support for tumor growth and
conceals the tumor from immune surveillance. Tumor-associated stroma
comprises a mix of fibroblasts, immunosuppressive T regulatory cells
(Tregs), myeloid suppressive monocytes (MDSCs) and tumor-associated
macrophages (TAMs) that promote tumor growth and restrain immune-mediated
tumor cell killing. The targeting of immune infiltrates may impair
stromal support and enhance immune-mediated killing of pancreatic cancer
cells. Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) is a nonreceptor enzyme in the Tec
kinase family expressed among cells of hematopoietic origin including B
cells, myeloid cells, mast cells and platelets, but not T cells, where it
regulates multiple cellular processes. Here we describe an unexpected
finding of ACP-196, a potent, novel, second generation Btk inhibitor with
improved selectivity and target coverage that binds covalently to a
cysteine residue (Cys481) in the front position of the ATP-binding
pocket.In an orthotopic mouse model of pancreatic cancer, KPC derived
pancreatic cancer cells (KrasG12D; Trp53R172H; Pdx1-Cre) were injected
into the pancreases. Vehicle, single agent ACP-196 (15 mg/kg/BID,
gavage), single agent gemcitabine (50 mg/kg, IV) and combination ACP-196
with gemcitabine were evaluated for efficacy. By 4 weeks of treatment,
mice in the vehicle group showed signs of health deterioration and all
mice were euthanized, tumors were collected and measured. Relative to the
vehicle treatment, ACP-196 monotherapy resulted in a >2-fold reduction in
tumor growth compared with less than a 2-fold reduction with gemcitabine
alone. The combination of ACP-196 and gemcitabine resulted in a further
reduction in tumor growth when compared to each single agent.
Interestingly, analysis of tumor tissues showed that single agent ACP-196
inhibited immunosuppressive populations of TAMs and MDSCs. Surprisingly,
Treg populations were also reduced with a robust expansion of CD8+ T
cells in the tumors. None of these effects were observed with gemcitabine
alone. Although Btk is not expressed in T cells, this finding maybe the
result of inhibiting the MDSC and TAM populations within the tumor
microenvironment, a mechanism of action which is currently under
investigation. Taken together, these data identify Btk as a novel target
for modulating tumor immune escape and suggest that pharmacologic
targeting of suppressive myeloid cells by ACP-196 induces therapeutic
benefit. ACP-196 is currently being evaluated in clinical trials
including frontline and salvage pancreatic cancer.

