Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal evolution of a lethal prostate cancer: Integrated whole
genome analysis case study


Prostate cancer (PC) is prevalent in both indolent and lethal forms.
Although many PC patients diagnosed today have organ-confined disease
curable by prostatectomy or radiation therapy, 20-30% of PCs will relapse
to lethal disease within 5-years of treatment. Relatively little
attention has been paid to distinguishing the molecular characteristics
of proven lethal metastatic PC from non-lethal cancers. A better
understanding of the origins and evolution of lethal cancers should allow
screening and treatment to be better tailored to the needs of each
patient. To this end, we performed an integrative molecular profiling of
a lethal PC from one patient (A21). High-coverage whole genome sequence,
transcriptome sequence, and methylation analysis was performed on 9
anatomically separate metastases obtained by autopsy, and targeted
sequencing was performed in multiple cancerous and noncancerous foci
within the radical prostatectomy specimen removed 5 years prior to death.
Molecular results were analyzed in relation to detailed clinical data.
Integrated whole genome sequence analysis revealed convergent evolution
of AR gene amplification events, and inception of p.L702H mutation in the
AR present only in liver metastases. In addition, the analysis showed
parallel increases in AR regulated transcripts in the liver metastases,
suggesting a dominant effect by the mutation. Mutation of PI3/PI4 kinase
member PIK3CG was found in all metastases but in no primary tumor foci
studied. The study demonstrated the power of an integrated approach to
interrogate clonal evolution of cancer suggesting that such studies are
valuable on the individual level and could lead the way towards
personalized treatment. In the individual studied, cessation of
corticosteroid treatment and/or therapeutic manipulation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR
activity theoretically could have provided a personalized benefit. These
findings suggest that similar integrated analysis in large cohorts of
patients with metastatic cancer could accelerate progress in establishing
effective personalized cancer medicine.

