Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amplification and overexpression of EVI1 suppresses growth
inhibition mediated by TGF- in hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of cancer death
worldwide. EVI1 (ecotropic viral integration site 1) is one of the most
aggressive oncogenes associated with myeloid leukemia. The EVI1 gene
codes for a zinc finger transcriptional factor that plays an important
role in normal development and in oncogenesis. In humans, rearrangements
of chromosome 3q26 often activate EVI1 expression in acute myeloid
leukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia, and myelodysplastic syndrome.
Importantly, high EVI1 expression is an independent negative prognostic
indicator of survival in acute myeloid leukemia. The oncoprotein EVI1 has
been reported to influence a number of signaling pathways. Thus, EVI1
activates the PI3K/AKT and RAS/ERK signaling pathways. Moreover, EVI1 has
been reported to suppress TGF- signaling by inhibiting Smad3. TGF- acts
as a tumor suppressor by arresting the growth of cells in the early
stages of cancer. Whereas the majority of investigations have focused on
the contribution of EVI1 to the pathogenesis and clinical characteristics
of hematopoietic malignancies, little is known about its relevance for
HCC.To identify genes potentially involved in HCC, we investigated DNA
copy number aberrations in human HCC cell lines using high-resolution
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays (Affymetrix). We found that a
novel amplification at the chromosomal region 3q26 occurs in a HCC cell
line and that MECOM (MDS1 and EVI1 complex locus), which lies within the
3q26 region, was amplified. Amplification of DNA in certain regions of
chromosomes plays a crucial role in the development and progression of
human malignancies, specifically when proto-oncogenic target genes within
those amplicons are overexpressed. Quantitative PCR analysis of the three
transcripts transcribed from MECOM indicated that only EVI1, but not the
fusion transcript MDS1-EVI1 or MDS1, was overexpressed in HCC cell lines
and was significantly up-regulated in 22 (61%) of 36 primary HCC tumors
when compared with their non-tumorous counterparts. A copy number gain of
EVI1 was observed in 24 (36%) of 66 primary HCC tumors. Knockdown of EVI1
in HCC cells resulted in increased induction of the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor p15INK4B by TGF- and decreased expression of c-Myc,
cyclin D1, and phosphorylated Rb in TGF--treated cells. Consequently,
knockdown of EVI1 led to reduced cell proliferation of HCC.Collectively,
our results suggest that EVI1 is a probable target gene that acts as a
driving force for the amplification at 3q26 in HCC and that the
oncoprotein EVI1 suppresses TGF--mediated growth inhibition of HCC cells.

