Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of genetic polymorphisms on erlotinib pharmacokinetics and
toxicity in Japanese patients with non-small-cell lung cancer


Introduction: Erlotinib is an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
tyrosine-kinase inhibitor, a 150 mg daily dose of which has been shown to
be effective for improving overall survival in non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients who had failed at least 1 prior chemotherapy regimen.
Furthermore, erlotinib demonstrated significant prolongation of
progression-free survival versus standard chemotherapy in EGFR mutation
positive NSCLC patients. However, skin rash and diarrhea often occurs,
and these toxicities lead to discontinuation of therapy or dose reduction
in many patients. Several population pharmacokinetics (PK) analyses have
reported large interindividual variabilities in erlotinib blood exposure
and its toxicities. However, none of those analyses clearly explains the
determinants of these large interindividual variabilities. Here, aiming
to develop a dose regimen that would maintain the clinical benefits of
erlotinib while minimizing its adverse effects, we analyzed single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of PK-related genes and investigated the
relationships between genotypes and interindividual variabilities in the
PK and adverse effects.Methods: We performed a multicenter study of 50
patients treated with 150 mg erlotinib as a second-line or later
treatment. PK and toxicity were assessed. For PK analyses, blood samples
were collected from 28 patients at 5 to 18 time points, and trough blood
samples were collected from 20 patients at 1 time point. SNPs in genes
encoding metabolizing enzymes or efflux transporters (CYP1A1, CYP1A2,
CYP2D6, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, UGT1A1, UGT2B7, GSTM1, GSTT1, ABCB1, and ABCG2)
were analyzed. Population PK analyses were carried out using NONMEM. SNPs
were tested as covariates in a population PK model. The effects of these
SNPs and erlotinib exposure on toxicity were evaluated.Results and
Discussion: A 2-compartment model with first order absorption and linear
elimination described the erlotinib PK. Only the ABCB1 1236C>T
polymorphism was a statically significant covariate for CL/F, showing a
29.4% decrease in CL/F for the TT genotype as compared with the CC and
the CT genotypes. The interindividual variability in CL/F decreased by
10.6% after inclusion of the TT genotype as a covariate in the model.
This result indicates that a dose reduction to 100 mg for the TT genotype
group could equalize the erlotinib exposure between each genotype group.
A higher incidence of adverse effects (mainly diarrhea) was observed in
the TT genotype group.Conclusions: Of the 20 SNPs that are related to
erlotinib PK, only ABCB1 1236C>T influenced the exposure of erlotinib.
This SNP was suggested to be related to the risk of adverse events.
Individual dosing based on ABCB1 genotype might reduce the adverse
effects. Further clinical trials are needed to investigate the toxicity
and the clinical outcome of this dose regimen.

