Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostication of patients with clear cell renal cell carcinomas
based on quantification of DNA methylation levels of CpG island
methylator phenotype marker genes using anion exchange high performance
liquid chromatography


Background: We have identified CpG island methylator phenotype
(CIMP)-positive clear cell renal cell carcinomas (ccRCCs) characterized
by accumulation of DNA hypermethylation of CpG islands, tumor
aggressiveness and poorer patient outcome. Furthermore, the criteria for
prognostication of patients with ccRCCs have been established based on
DNA methylation levels of ccRCC-specific CIMP marker genes. Recently, we
have developed an anion exchange High Performance Liquid Chromatography
(HPLC) column for detection of methylated DNA. To make the
prognostication of patients with ccRCCs clinically applicable, the newly
developed HPLC column has been applied to DNA methylation analysis of
CIMP marker genes.Methods: Genomic DNA extracted from tumorous tissue
samples of nephrectomy specimens of 5 patients with CIMP-positive ccRCCs
and 5 patients with CIMP-negative ccRCCs was amplified by Polymerase
Chain Reaction (PCR) after sodium bisulfite conversion with the EpiTect
Bisulfite Kit (QIAGEN). Three-hundred and eighty-four bp-PCR products
encompassing the promoter region of the FAM150A gene, a CIMP marker gene,
and including 39 CpG sites were subjected to the HPLC column. DNA
methylation levels were quantitatively evaluated using 0% and 100%
methylated DNA controls (QIAGEN).Results: The analysis time for all
samples was within 10 minutes. The retention time difference between 0%
and 100% methylated DNA controls was 0.34 min. CIMP-negative ccRCCs were
detected as a distinct single peak which had similar retention time with
the 0% methylated DNA control, whereas CIMP-positive ccRCCs showed a
bimodal peak pattern. Retention time of the later peak of CIMP-positive
ccRCCs was similar with the 0% methylated DNA control. On the other hand,
an early peak was eluted at various positions depending on its DNA
methylation level. Based on the differences of chromatogram patterns,
CIMP-positive ccRCCs were completely discriminated from CIMP-negative
ccRCCs. DNA methylation levels of the FAM150A gene of each tissue sample
calculated from retention time were consistent with those previously
evaluated using MassARRAY system (Sequenom).Conclusion: Using newly
developed anion exchange HPLC column, tissue specimens of CIMP-positive
ccRCCs were readily, quickly and clearly distinguished from those of
CIMP-negative ccRCCs, indicating that this HPLC method may be suitable
for clinical application of prognostication of patients with ccRCCs based
on CIMP diagnosis.

