Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A therapeutic Her2-Neu cancer vaccine alone or in combination with
anti-Her2 mAb inhibits tumor growth in HLA-A2 transgenic mice


Her2/neu is a validated target in cancer, as various antibodies (Abs)
against this antigen have demonstrated their clinical efficacy in
patients presenting either breast or gastric cancers. Various preclinical
and clinical studies showed that the combination of anti-Her2 Abs and
vaccines aiming to induce anti-Her2-T cells synergized in promoting the
regression of Her2 expressing tumors. The Her2369-377 peptide (E75) has
been shown to be immunogenic in humans and an E75 peptide vaccine is
currently being tested in a phase III clinical trial. We have developed a
vector based on the non-toxic B subunit of Shiga toxin (STxB) which
targets antigens directly to dendritic cells and favours
cross-presentation of exogenous antigens to CD8+T cells. We coupled the
E75 peptide to STxB and showed that immunization of HLA-A2 transgenic
mice with STxB-E75 elicits statistically significant higher levels of
anti-Her2-neu CD8+T cells (> 3%) detected by tetramer analysis, than the
use of the non vectorized E75 peptide (Her2/neu is a validated target in
cancer, as various antibodies (Abs) against this antigen have
demonstrated their clinical efficacy in patients presenting either breast
or gastric cancers. Various preclinical and clinical studies showed that
the combination of anti-Her2 Abs and vaccines aiming to induce
anti-Her2-T cells synergized in promoting the regression of Her2
expressing tumors. The Her2369-377 peptide (E75) has been shown to be
immunogenic in humans and an E75 peptide vaccine is currently being
tested in a phase III clinical trial. We have developed a vector based on
the non-toxic B subunit of Shiga toxin (STxB) which targets antigens
directly to dendritic cells and favours cross-presentation of exogenous
antigens to CD8+T cells. We coupled the E75 peptide to STxB and showed
that immunization of HLA-A2 transgenic mice with STxB-E75 elicits
statistically significant higher levels of anti-Her2-neu CD8+T cells (>
3%) detected by tetramer analysis, than the use of the non vectorized E75
peptide (< 0.1%). The specific CD8+T cells induced by STxB-E75 were
functional, cytotoxic in vivo and of higher avidity, than those elicited
by the E75 peptide. We then proceeded to set up a human (h)
Her2/neu-HLA-A2 expressing tumor model (B16) in HLA-A2 transgenic mice
for vaccination with STxB-E75. We demonstrated than STxB-E75 was more
efficient to inhibit the growth of hHer2-HLA-A2 tumor in humanized HLA-A2
TG mice, than the E75 peptide in both a prophylactic and a therapeutic
setting. As control, STxB-E75 had no influence in the growth of hHer2
negative HLA-A2-B16 tumor. We then observed that the anti-Her2 CD8+T
cells elicited in HLA-A2 transgenic mice recognized human breast tumor
cell lines expressing either high or low levels of hHer2/neu, as well as
the HLA-A2 B16 clones expressing low levels of hHer2. To assess the
relevance of this capacity of STxB-E75 to detect low levels of Her2, we
grafted the HLA-A2 B16 clone expressing low levels of hHer2/neu on HLA-A2
transgenic mice. The combination of STxB-E75 and anti-Her2 mAb (4D5) was
more efficient to inhibit the tumor growth, than the use of the vaccine
or antibody alone. The body of experiments presented in this work clearly
demonstrated that the STxB-E75 vaccine is a potent candidate to be tested
in the clinics for Her2 expressing tumor. In addition, a synergy was
observed for the combination of anti-Her2/neu mAb and STxB-E75 vaccine
for the regression of low expressing Her2/neu tumor.

