Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of EZH2 overcomes resistance to sunitinib in clear cell
renal cell carcinoma models


Background: Alterations in epigenetic mechanisms including histone
modification and hyper-methylation at gene promoter regions have been
implicated as mechanisms of drug resistance in cancer. Alternation of
epigenetic regulators such histone methyltransferase, EZH2, has been
reported in numerous cancer types including advanced renal cell carcinoma
(RCC). Previous studies suggest that sunitinib may have a direct
anti-tumor effect and that acquired sunitinib resistance may be induced
in tumor cells rather than just in endothelial cells. In our study, we
investigated the role of EZH2 in sunitinib resistance in clear cell renal
cell carcinoma. Methods: Human RCC cell lines 786-0 were treated and
exposed to increasing concentrations of sunitinib to develop a resistant
cell line, 786-0R. Parental and resistant cell lines were treat with
either sunitinib, GSK126 (EZH2 inhibitor) or both. In parallel, EZH2 was
knocked down in 786-0 cells and exposed to increasing concentrations of
sunitinib. Cell viability was quantitated by absorbance of crystal violet
stained cells using a spectrometer at 570nm. In a second set of
experiments, control and treated cells were collected for western
analysis. Mice bearing human ccRCC patient derived xenograft (PDXs);
RP-R-01, RP-R-02 and RP-R-02LM (a metastatic ccRCC model established from
RP-R-02) were implanted into SCID mice either subcutaneously or
orthotopic in the kidney (sub-renal). When tumors reached an average
volume of 50mm3, mice were randomly grouped into 2 arms; control and
sunitinib treatment (40mg/kg, 5days/week). Tumors volumes and body weight
were assessed once per week. Tumor tissues and lungs were collected for
immunohistochemistry analysis. All assessments and quantification were
done blindly. Results: Our in vitro and in vivo data showed an increased
expression of EZH2 with resistance to sunitinib. Furthermore, inhibition
of EZH2 in our in vitro studies correlated with a significant decrease in
the anti-tumor effect of sunitinib in both parental and resistant cell
lines. Conclusion: Overall our data suggest the potential role of
epigenetic alterations, specifically EZH2 overexpression and its
association with resistance to sunitinib. We are currently assessing the
effect of EZH2 inhibition with sunitinib resistance in our in vivo system
using metastatic ccRCC PDX models.

