Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the NAD metabolome in Ewing Sarcoma


Ewing Sarcoma (ES) is the second most common bone cancer in children and
adolescents with a high metastatic potential. Tumor development is driven
by the specific t(11;22)(q24;q12) chromosomal translocation resulting in
generation of the chimeric transcription factor EWS-FLI1.Recently, ES has
been reported to be exquisitely sensitive to inhibitors of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1). This enzyme uses NAD as substrate
and was demonstrated to regulate EWS-FLI1 in a feed-back mechanism. NAD
is a key metabolite essential for sustaining cellular energy metabolism.
It plays a central role in cellular redox reactions, DNA repair, and in
the maintenance of genomic stability serving as a donor of ADP-ribose.
The other major mammalian NAD consumer is the deacetylase SIRT1 which we
observed to be specifically highly expressed in ES metastases. PARP1 and
SIRT1 are crucial for coupling cellular metabolism to transcriptional
gene regulation as well as to stress response. Usually, NAD is
regenerated from nicotinamide in the NAMPT-dependent salvage pathway or
from the reduction of pyruvate via LDHA (Warburg effect), but can also be
synthesized de novo from tryptophan. Interestingly, the knockdown of
EWS-FLI1 in ES cells comes along with alterations in the expression of
multiple enzymes involved in NAD biosynthesis and regeneration, including
TDO2, KMO, NMNAT1, NAPRT, NAMPT, and LDHA. We are interrogating the role
of EWS-FLI1 mediated modulation of these enzymes and of specific small
molecule inhibitors on cellular tryptophan consumption, kynurenine
production and intracellular NAD levels of Ewing sarcoma cells.
Additionally, we are investigating the functional consequences thereof on
constitutive and stress-induced protein poly(ADP)-ribosylation and
acetylation.Preliminary results suggest that NAMPT inhibition diminishes
PARP1 activity due to low NAD, implying a pivotal role for the
regenerative salvage pathway in ES cells. TDO2-dependent tryptophan
consumption increases in the absence of the oncogene.These studies aim at
a better understanding of factors influencing Ewing sarcoma sensitivity
to therapies targeting PARP1 and the NAD metabolome.

