Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lysine specific demethylase 1 inhibition attenuates enzalutamide
resistant androgen receptor V7 splice variant activation


Prostate cancer remains one of the leading causes of cancer death in men
worldwide. The majority of prostate cancer is initially hormone dependent
highlighting the central role of the androgen receptor (AR) pathway in
this disease. However, in a significant number of the cases, patients
relapse and develop castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) through a
variety of molecular mechanisms, many of which include AR modifications.
One common resistant mechanism is through an AR-V7 splice variant lacking
the C-terminal ligand-binding domain (LBD) but retaining the
transactivating N-terminal domain. AR-V7 is constitutively active.
Emerging data imply that hormonal therapy with the AR antagonist
enzalutamide, which is highly effective in some CRPC patients, becomes
ineffective in the face of AR-V7 consistent with the loss of its LBD
binding site.Lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) is a co-activator of
the AR pathway which interacts with the AR to promote androgen-dependent
transcription of target genes by ligand-induced demethylation of mono-
and dimethylated histone 3 at Lys 9. In this work we identified LSD1 as
new potential target for treatment of CRPC resistant to enzalutamide
treatment through AR-V7 expression.We used reporter assay experiments in
human embryonic kidney 293 cells, deficient for androgen receptor, to
investigate the transactivation control of the putative androgen receptor
responsive element (ARE) in the presence of the wild type (WT) form and
the constitutively active V7 variant of the AR. Using this approach we
show that enzalutamide effectively inhibits the activation of the ARE by
the AR-WT but not the AR-V7 variant upon stimulation with
dihydrotestosterone (DHT). However, treatment with a LSD1 inhibitor shows
reduced transcription of the ARE promoter with the AR-wt with DHT
stimulation and AR-V7 with and without DHT stimulation.Treatment of an
androgen-sensitive human prostate adenocarcinoma cell line (LNCaP) with
DHT shows an increase in the expression of prostate specific antigen
(PSA) gene, an AR transcriptional target. However when treated with LSD1
inhibitors this activation was impaired or completely blocked as PSA
levels were similar to those in non DHT treated sample. Moreover we show
that treatment of LNCaP cells with LSD1 inhibitors trigger apoptosis as
indicated by PARP cleavage.Together this results show that by targeting
LSD1, a co-activator of the AR, we can inhibit the expression of AR
target genes in a clinically relevant model of enzalutamide resistant
AR-V7 expressing CRPC. LSD1 holds potential as a target for cancer
therapy in castration resistant prostate cancer.This work was supported
by Prostate Cancer UK.

