Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exportin-5 downregulation induces miRNA dysregulation and HDAC6
overexpression in cholangiocarcinoma


Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a malignancy arising from the epithelial
cells lining the biliary tract in the liver, the cholangiocytes. While
cholangiocytes normally express cilia, we showed that they are
significantly reduced in CCA by a mechanism involving overexpression of
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a molecule that deacetylates the ciliary
axoneme and promotes ciliary disassembly. Even though HDAC6 protein is
overexpressed in CCA, we found no differences in its messenger RNA (mRNA)
level, suggesting a post-transcriptional regulation, possibly involving
microRNA (miRNA). Therefore, we hypothesized that decreased levels of
specific miRNAs induce overexpression of HDAC6 in CCA. We compared miRNA
levels between normal and CCA cholangiocyte cell lines and found that
three miRNAs potentially targeting HDAC6 are downregulated (40-55%
decrease) in CCA: miR-433, miR-22, and miR-200a. Experimental
overexpression of miR-433, miR-22, or miR-200a in normal cholangiocytes
decreased HDAC6 expression by 82%, 33%, and 39%, respectively. We
selected miR-433 and miR-22 for further analysis and the downregulation
of both miRNAs were confirmed by qRT-PCR on normal and six different CCA
cell lines, and by in situ hybridization on control and CCA human liver
samples. To further investigate the dysregulation of these miRNAs, we
measured its precursor forms by qRT-PCR and, in contrast to the mature
miR-433 and miR-22, the levels of the precursors were increased in
malignant cells. In situ hybridization on human samples showed that the
miR-433 probe was accumulated in the nucleus of malignant cholangiocytes.
Taken together, these data suggested a potential impairment of nuclear
export; therefore, we assessed the expression of the protein responsible
for transporting microRNA precursors out of the nucleus, exportin-5. By
western blotting, we found that exportin-5 is decreased by 50% in five
different CCA cell lines compared to normal cholangiocyte cell lines. We
confirmed the downregulation of exportin-5 protein by immunofluorescence
of normal and CCA human liver samples. Finally, the experimental
overexpression of exportin-5 in CCA cell lines restores the precursor and
mature forms of these miRNAs to normal levels, inducing a decrease in the
expression of HDAC6, and decreased proliferation and anchorage
independent growth of the malignant cells. In summary, these data suggest
that downregulation of exportin-5, preventing the nuclear export of the
precursor forms of miR-433 and miR-22, may be the underlying mechanism
explaining the decrease of miR-433 and miR-22, and the overexpression of
HDAC6 in CCA. Thus, our work further clarifies the molecular mechanisms
accounting for the absence of cilia in CCA and also identifies multiple
potential molecules for targeted therapies like HDAC6, miR-433, miR-22,
or exportin-5.

