Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inflammasomes: fanning the flames of malignant mesothelioma
initiation


Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is an aggressive and devastating cancer of
the pleural/peritoneal mesothelium related to asbestos exposure. MM has a
low survival rate (average: less than 12 months). Despite the causal
relationship between asbestos and MM development, the exact mechanism by
which asbestos causes MM is still poorly understood. There is an urgent
need for the identification of mechanism(s) that may help in early
detection and finding new treatment targets for prevention and treatment
of MM.We have recently shown that asbestos exposure of human mesothelial
cells (HMCs) leads to the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome and a
concomitant increase in the secretion of the inflammasome products, IL-1
and IL-18. Other studies have shown that IL-1 promotes the stemness of
colon cancer cells and an epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) of
corneal endothelial cells. The activation of the inflammasome by asbestos
is protracted in mesothelial cells and led us to hypothesize that the
inflammasome and its products play a crucial role in the tumorigenesis of
MM by promoting a mesothelial to fibroblastic transition (MFT) of HMCs.
Our studies using EMT PCR array revealed that asbestos exposure results
in the down regulation of E-cadherin and KRT19 among others in HMCs.
Western blot analysis revealed decreases in expression of the epithelial
markers, E-cadherin, Claudin-1 and -catenin in response to asbestos
exposure, while levels of the transcription factors ZEB-1, Snail and Slug
(drivers of EMT) were increased in response to asbestos exposure in
primary human pleural mesothelial cells. The secretion of MFT
cytokines/mediators, IL-1, IL-18, IL-6, IL-8, FGF2 and TFPI2 were also
upregulated after asbestos exposure. Inhibition of NLRP3 by siRNA
attenuated various parameters, suggesting a role for inflammasomes in the
process. In vivo studies using an intra-peritoneal model of asbestos
exposure in wild type and knockout mice (NLRP3-/-, ASC-/- and
caspase-1-/-) also showed that asbestos exposure causes a thickening of
the parietal peritoneal mesothelium over an 8 week period and an early
increase in IL-1 and IL-18 levels in the peritoneal lavage fluid. An
increase in collagen deposition and expression of vimentin and alpha
smooth muscle actin was also observed, indicating a shift towards a
mesenchymal phenotype in the mesothelium. Our results demonstrated that
caspase-1 plays a significant role in asbestos-induced peritoneal wall
thickening. Taken together, our results indicate that asbestos exposure
activates the NLRP3 inflammasome thereby increasing secretion of the
pro-inflammatory cytokines, IL-6 and IL-8 in an IL-1 dependent manner
while compromising the fibrinolytic capacity of the mesothelium through
the increased expression of TFPI2 and other protease inhibitors involved
in fibrin clearance (e.g. SERPINE1). This altogether leads to MFT and may
eventually result in MM development. This work is supported by funding
from NIEHS grant RO1 ES021110

