Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fidelity of subclonal representation in human
neuroblastoma-derived cell line and patient-derived xenograft models: A
report from the NCI-TARGET project


Patient-derived xenografts and cell lines have been the underpinning of
functional characterization and drug discovery efforts in cancer. The use
of these models is often under the assumption that these systems are
renewable, faithful representations of original progenitor tumor cell
populations. To test this assumption, we performed whole exome (92X
median coverage) and genome sequencing (36X median coverage) analysis of
cell line and patient-derived mouse xenografts (PDXs) originating from 7
neuroblastoma patients. Data are from1 primary tumor, 3 PDXs, and 15
neuroblastoma cell lines cultured from tumor, bone marrow, or blood. The
cell lines consisted of 4 pre-/post-therapy pairs and 3 pairs established
and maintained in either hyperoxia (room air i.e. standard cell culture)
or physiologic (bone marrow hypoxia = 5%) oxygen. 7 lymphoblastoid or
fibroblast cell lines were used as matched normals to identify somatic
mutations. Subclonal population structures were inferred from somatic
mutation calls calibrated for copy number state and tumor purity.In all
cell lines and xenografts, we observed 1-2 additional subclonal
populations, primarily supported by deep coverage from exome sequencing.
In nearly every case, we observed shifts in the proportional
representation of genetic subclones and many subclones showed additional
mutations not evident in the progenitor tissue or cancer line derived in
parallel. Comparison of three cell line pairs established in bone marrow
level hypoxia versus room air found only 40% of coding mutations in each
line were shared (average 82 mutations per line), suggesting significant
genetic impact of growing tumor cells in the two different culture
conditions. Matched PDXs from these cases had only 17% of coding
mutations shared across all three models. The greatest genetic similarity
was seen between paired cell lines established from tissue obtained
pre-/post-therapy from the same patient (36 coding mutations shared, 14
private to diagnosis and 13 private to progression). However, a second
pre/post-therapy cell line pair did not share any coding mutations,
although they did have 585 non-coding mutations in common (of 4,033 and
2,480 in each line), assuring that the relapse was derived from a
diagnostic tumor clone. These results highlight a need for comprehensive
subclonal analysis of human cancer laboratory models to better inform
design and interpretation of biological and preclinical therapeutic
studies.

