Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alteration of the protein tyrosine phosphatome in cancer


While the importance of receptor tyrosine kinase pathways in cancer has
and continues to be carefully studied there are more than 100 tyrosine
phosphatases, either receptor or non receptor, that also play an
important role in cancer development. However there has been no
comprehensive study of all PTPs or the protein tyrosine phosphatome
(PTPome), to identify which have a role in cancer. We as a cancer
community are fortunate to have access to a wide array of data types from
a number of data sources such as TCGA, where we can determine if the PTPs
are mis regulated in more than 20 types of cancers, totaling close to
4,000 samples. We utilized TCGA data for all tumor types with mature data
sub setting the data to analyze the PTPome for all data types including
expression, methylation, copy number and sequence data where available.
Our intention was to use the genomic data to identify PTPs that were
important to specific cancers as well as to understand which PTPs play an
important role in multiple tumor types. Presently we have studied copy
number variations, expression and methylation changes in 20 different
tumor types. Thus far, copy number variations, as could be expected were
extremely useful to determine the primary mutations in specific tumor
types as well as PTPs that are found recurrently in multiple tumor types
but not as useful to identify a number of PTPs that are co-altered or
altered in the same individual tumors. We were surprised to find that the
methylation data was not very useful to identify alterations but could
use the methylation data to corroborate other alterations found.
Presently we are also using the methylation data to determine if it can
be used to identify possible clinical correlations. The expression data
has been very useful to identify co-altered PTPs. Interestingly we found
several PTPs that are altered together (for example, PTPN6, PTPN7,
PTPN18, PTPN22, PTPRC, DUSP2 and DUSP22 with an overall pvalue of 0.02
and much lower if measured between any two PTPs in this list). In
addition we have found PTPs that are co-altered in a specific tumor type
but possibly more interesting PTPs that are co-altered in a number of
tumor types. We are now studying if our results can be used to determine
if these PTPs represent multiple specific pathways that are
advantageously altered in carcinogenesis.

