Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of long term NK cell culture and TIMP3 over-expression
with NK cell reduced susceptibility to leukemia and epithelial cancer
cell induced damage


Allogeneic leukemia and cancer epithelial (CE) cells have been recently
shown to induce,in vitro, NK cell abnormalities (NKCA). The latter
include NK cell depletion and apoptosis as well as natural cytotoxic
receptor (NCR) CD16 down-regulation. The potential negative impact of
leukemia and CE cell induced NKCAs on the in vivo anti-tumor activity of
NK cells and the limited information about strategies to protect NK cells
from NKCAs have prompted us to characterize NKCAs and to develop
strategies to counteract them. NKCA induction by leukemia and CE cells is
influenced neither by interleukin-2 (IL-2) treatment nor by HLA class I
antigen expression, but is abrogated by a long term culture of peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) at 37 C. Following a 10 day culture of
PBMCs, NK cells become resistant to cancer cell induced NKCA but maintain
their cytotoxic activity. Actinomycin D restores the susceptibility of
long term NK (LTNK) cells to NKCAs suggesting that the generation of
resistance to NKCAs requires RNA transcription. TAPI-0, a functional
analogue of the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMP) 3, inhibits
cancer cell induced NKCAs indicating a role for a restricted number of
metalloproteinases (MMPs) in the generation of this phenomenon. This
conclusion is supported by the reduced susceptibility to cancer cell
induced NKCAs of LTNK cells in which TIMP3 gene and protein are
over-expressed. Finally, subcutaneous infusion of IL-2 stimulated LTNK
cells inhibited subcutaneous growth of the monoblastic leukemia cells,
ML-2 in CB17scid mice while short term, IL-2 stimulated NK cells did not
suggesting that LTNK cells have significant anti-leukemia capacity in
vivo. This information may contribute to the rational design of targeted
strategies to enhance the efficacy of NK cell-based-immunotherapy for the
treatment of myeloid leukemias with haploidentical or allogeneic NK cells.

