Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 5 mediates low-dose
nicotine-dependent regulation of tumorigenesis in lung adenocarcinoma
cells


The concept that lung adenocarcinoma is less related to smoking behavior
than lung squamous cell carcinoma may be due to the fact that a
considerable number of LAC patients do not have smoking habit. However,
this argument may mislead the effect of tobacco smoke on LAC because it
ignores the potential effects of environmental smoking that cause second
hand smoking in non-smokers. In Taiwan, 70% of female LAC patients would
encounter heavy smokers either at home or in working place, suggesting
that environmental smoke may have substantial effects than we thought.
Transcriptional deregulation at the chromosome 15q25 locus revealed an
association between the gene encoding CHRNA5 with lung adenocarcinoma
risk. It has been showed that overexpression of the genes encoded in this
locus in mice increased the sensitivity to nicotine. In this report, we
found that nAChR 5, but neither nAChR 7 or nAChR 9 that have been
respectively shown to mediate tumorigenic alterations in lung SCC and
breast cancer cells, was differentially expressed between tumor and
non-tumor specimens of LAC patient specimens. Knockdown of nAChR 5 in LAC
cell lines resulted in decreased cell proliferation rate as well as cell
migrating and invasive capabilities. In these nAChR 5-knockdown cells,
low dose (10 nM) nicotine was not able to significantly increase cell
proliferation and motility, while low dose nicotine enhanced both
abilities of cells when nAChR 5 expressed. Colony formation assay
indicated that nAChR 5 maintained cell survival and prevent contact
inhibition in LAC cells when encountering low serum stress condition.
Through molecular analysis, we showed that nAChR 5 positively regulates
epithelial-mesenchymal transition factors such as Snail and Slug, and
negatively regulates E-cadherin. Animal experiment showed a severely
suppressed tumor growth in mice transplanted with LAC cells with nAChR 5
being knocked down, in comparison to mice transplanted with parental
cells. These data demonstrated a crucial role of nAChR 5 in low-dose
nicotine-dependent regulation of tumorigenesis in LAC. It is, for the
first time, a study of mechanism in response to low dose nicotine that
implies the regulatory pathway underlying the effect of environmental
nicotine.

