Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of small molecule activators of protein phosphatase 2A
for the treatment of lung cancer


KRAS is the most common recurrent oncogenomic mutations driving the
growth of NSCLC and accounting for 25% of patients with advanced NSCLC.
Patients with KRAS mutations respond poorly to current therapies. Thus,
novel therapies, are critically needed, to improve the lives of patients
suffering from KRAS driven lung cancers. While oncogenic kinases have
proven to be successful targets for cancer treatment, the therapeutic
targeting of phosphatases, the key negative regulators of these same
pathways, has remained largely unexplored. Through reverse engineering of
tricyclic neuroleptic drugs, we developed a first-in-class series of
small molecule activators of PP2A activators (SMAPs) molecules, as
represented by TRC-794 and TRC-1154, that have favorable pharmaceutical
properties directly bind and activate the serine/threonine phosphatase 2A
(PP2A). PP2A accounts for the majority of cellular serine/threonine
phosphatase activity, and its dominant and best-defined targets are
oncogenic protein kinases including ERK and AKT. In this study, we sought
to determine both the association of PP2A inactivation in lung cancer
with specific molecular genotypes and the biological and functional
consequences of PP2A reactivation in lung cancer. We determined the PP2A
activation status by immunohistochemistry for the Y307 PP2A residue, a
well documented inactivating site on the phosphatase, in a large cohort
of primary lung tumors and identified that KRAS G12C mutant tumors
displayed coordinate overexpression of both pERK and PP2A Y307. Global
phosphoproteomic analysis of TRC-794 treated KRAS lung cancer cell lines
revealed ERK signaling as the only commonly perturbed pathway in drug
treated cell lines which was confirmed by western blotting. Treatment of
lung cancer cell lines with TRC resulted in decreased cell viability,
decreased colony formation, and an increase in apoptosis. Given the
marked dephosphorylation of ERK upon treatment of cell lines with
TRC-1154, we overexpressed a constitutively active form of MEK (MEKDD) to
blunt SMAP mediated ERK dephosphorylation to determine the relevance of
ERK inactivation to the biological effects of SMAPs on cellular
apoptosis. Overexpression of MEKDD resulted in blunting the apoptotic
response to TRC-1154 treatment. Single agent TRC-794 or TRC-1154
treatment of KRAS GEMM and xenograft mouse models of lung cancer resulted
in tumor stasis, induction of tumor cell apoptosis and cell cycle arrest
to comparable levels seen with a combination of AKT and MEK inhibitors.
Western blotting and immunohistochemical analysis of the tumors
demonstrated that SMAP treatment resulted in of ERK, AKT, and PP2A-Y307
dephosphorylation in vivo. Additionally, these compounds demonstrate
favorable pharmacokinetics and show no overt toxicity. Taken together,
these findings point to therapeutic activation of PP2A as a novel
strategy for the treatment of advanced KRAS-mutant NSCLC.

