Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CHFR methylation is an independent prognostic marker of poor
prognosis in gastric cancer


Introduction : Although primary gastric cancer (PGC) is the leading cause
of cancer-related death in Asia, remnant gastric cancer (RGC), a cancer
deloping after a subtotal gastrectomy in the part of the stomach not
excised, is rare but equally lethal. In PGC, aberrant gene methylation
has been reported to be correlated with carcinogenesis and development.
However, few reports describe the process of molecular carcinogenesis in
RGC. CHFR is a mitotic checkpoint- and tumor suppressor gene in a diverse
number of solid malignancies. CHFR is most frequently inactivated by
promoter CpG island methylation and has shown to be a marker of poor
prognosis and increased sensitivity to treatment with taxanes. We
hypothesized that the mathylation status in CHFR could be correlated with
clinicopathological factors and prognosis in RGC. We retrospectively
investigated the methylation status in RGC and the correlation between
the methylation status, clinicopathological factors and prognosis.Methods
: Sixty nine PGC patients and 22 RGC patients who underwent curative
surgery were enrolled in the present study. We investigated the
mathylation status of CHFR using quantitative methylation specific PCR.
Using ROC curve, we defined a methylation rate of 5.5% as high
group.Results : There was no significant difference in CHFR methylation
rate between PGC and RGC lesions (P = 0.72). There were 17 PGC patients
(24.6%) and 5 RGC patients (22.7%) with the CHFR methylation high group
(P = 1.00). There was a trend towards a higher proportion of
undifferentiated histology and higher clinical stage in the CHFR
methylation high group, compared with the low group. On multivariate
analyses, the CHFR methylation high group was found to be a significant
independent prognostic factor (Hazard ratio = 3.39, 95% CI 1.14-10.11, P
= 0.03).Conclusion : CHFR methylation rate was not significantly
different between primary and remnant gastric cancers. But, CHFR
methylation rate may be a significant independent prognostic factor in
patients with gastric cancer.

