Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic impact of enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) in
patients underwent hepatectomy for colorectal liver metastases who
received preoperative oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy


Purpose: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most commonly diagnosed
cancer and the third leading cause of cancer mortality in Japan. Almost
15% and 10% of patients with CRC are diagnosed with synchronous and
metachronous liver metastasis, respectively. In the last decade, the
therapeutic strategies including chemotherapy and molecular targeted
therapy have improved. However, the prognosis of patients with CRC
remains poor because of their acquirement of chemoresistance.Previous
studies have shown that enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) is
associated with proliferation of various cancers. EZH2 is the catalytic
subunit of Polycomb repressive complex2 (PRC2) which catalyzes the
methylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27), leading to repress the
transcription of tumor-suppressor genes. In addition, high EZH2
expression is associated with the resistance to cisplatin in non-small
cell lung carcinoma. However, the association between the resistance to
oxaliplatin and the expression of EZH2 is unrevealed.The aim of this
study is to investigate the correlation between the expression of EZH2
and response to oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy as well as survival of
patients with colorectal liver metastasis (CRLM).Experimental Design:
Sixty-one patients who underwent first-line oxaliplatin-based
chemotherapy before resection of CRLM were enrolled in this study.
Immunohistochemistry of EZH2 was performed, and then the correlation
between response to chemotherapy and survival was evaluated.Results:
Immunohistochemistry revealed 38 patients (62.3%) with high EZH2
expression, and 23 patients (37.7%) with low EZH2 expression. Of the 38
patients with EZH2 high expression, 15 patients (39.5%) responded to
oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy with either complete response or partial
response. Of the 23 patients with low EZH2 expression, 14 patients
(60.9%) exhibited a response to chemotherapy. There was significant
difference in response to oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy between high and
low EZH2 expression patients (p = 0.04). Univariate survival analysis
indicated that patients with high EZH2 expression had a lower overall
survival than those with low EZH2 expression. Moreover, multivariate Cox
regression analysis revealed that high EZH2 expression was an independent
prognostic factor for overall survival. Kaplan-Meier survival curves also
confirmed that high EZH2 expression correlates with poor prognosis in
patients who underwent hepatectomy for CRLM.Conclusions: Our results
indicated that prognosis of patients with high EZH2 expression who
received preoperative oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy and underwent
hepatectomy for CRLM was worse than those with low EZH2 expression. EZH2
may be a predictive factor for oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy response
and overall survival in patients with CRLM.

