Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation and characterization of a mouse model of
CRTC1-MAML2-induced mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC)


Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC) is the most common salivary gland
malignancy and can arise in multiple other organ sites. Currently,
patients with advanced, unresectable MEC have limited therapeutic options
and poor treatment outcomes. Clinical improvement has been hindered by a
lack of understanding of the basic mechanisms underlying MEC development
as well as suitable preclinical models. The majority of MEC tumors
contain a t(11;19)(q21;p13) chromosomal translocation that results in the
generation of a new fusion gene product, CRTC1-MAML2. We previously
showed that the CRTC1-MAML2 fusion had a strong transcriptional
co-activator activity and was capable of transforming epithelial cells in
vitro, in part through co-activating the transcription factor CREB.
Depletion of CRTC1-MAML2 fusion expression reduced the growth and
survival of human malignant MEC cells when assayed in vitro or when
propagated as xenograft tumors in vivo. These findings indicate that
CRTC1-MAML2 is essential in maintaining MEC malignant phenotype and
serves as a promising therapeutic target. However, whether CRTC1-MAML2
fusion has a causal role in MEC induction had not been demonstrated in
vivo.In this study, we determined the oncogenic potential of the
CRTC1-MAML2 fusion in vivo by establishing a Cre-regulated CRTC1-MAML2
transgenic mouse model. Through genetic crossing with MMTV-Cre mice or
direct AAV-Cre transduction to induce expression of CRTC1-MAML2 transgene
in salivary glandular cells, the transgenic mice developed salivary gland
tumors with typical human MEC histological characteristics. Moreover,
isolated tumor cells were capable of forming subcutaneous tumors in
immune-compromised hosts that again recapitulate the MEC histological
feature. Transcriptome analysis revealed that mouse tumors showed
differential expression of genes associated with cell growth, survival,
and metastasis as well as host cell immune modulating pathways in
comparison with tumor-adjacent, macroscopically normal salivary gland
tissues and salivary gland tissues from fusion transgene-negative
littermate controls. Importantly, CRTC1-MAML2-induced tumors showed
enhanced expression of known fusion target genes in human MEC, strongly
supporting that this mouse tumor model molecularly resembles human MEC.
Therefore, our study offered a direct proof for an oncogenic role of
CRTC1-MAML2 fusion in vivo and provided the first genetically engineered
mouse model for human MEC. Using this mouse MEC model, we are currently
dissecting oncogenic transformation of normal salivary gland stem cells
by salisphere assays, identifying cooperative genetic alterations in MEC
through whole exome sequencing, and assessing its utility as a
preclinical MEC model in evaluating therapeutic strategies.

