Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of FXR agonist on colitis and colorectal carcinogenesis in
mice


Background & Aims: Farnesoid X receptor (FXR) is a member of the nuclear
receptor superfamily and bile acids are endogenous ligand of FXR. FXR is
highly expressed in the intestine and liver where FXR is essential for
maintaining bile acid homeostasis. FXR activation has recently reported
to inhibit intestinal inflammation and tumor development. The aim of this
study was to investigate whether FXR agonist prevents colitis and
colorectal carcinogenesis in mice.Methods: We achieved two experiments.
One experiment (Ex.1) used mouse colitis model with short term
administration of FXR agonist, Nelumal A, and the other (Ex.2) employed
mouse carcinogenesis model with long term administration. In Ex.1, male 5
week old A/J mice received drinking water containing 1.5% DSS for one
week and were fed diets containing 100 or 400 ppm Nelumal A for 4 weeks.
In Ex.2, male 5 week old A/J mice were administered once intraperitoneal
injec]]tions of AOM (20 mg/kg body weight) and after one week, mice
received drinking water containing 1.5% DSS for one week and were fed
diets containing 100 or 400 ppm Nelumal A for 15 weeks.Results: In Ex.1,
DSS-treated mice all had colitis and multiple colonic mucosal ulcers.
Both mucosal ulcer and inflammation grade in colon were significantly
reduced in 400 ppm Nelumal A-treated mice, and also tended to be reduced
in 100 ppm Nelumal A-treated mice. Body weight loss and colon length had
no significant difference. The results of Ex.2 showed that the number of
colonic mucosal ulcer, adenoma, and adenocarcinoma and total tumor number
were decreased in 400 ppm Nelumal A-treated mice, but there was no
statistically significant difference. The expression levels of FXR mRNA
in colonic mucosa were increased by Nelumal A treatment. Moreover,
administration of Nelumal A significantly decreased the expression levels
of tumor necrosis factor , monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, and
proliferating cell nuclear antigen, and increased the level of Bax in
colonic epithelium.Conclusion: FXR agonist prevents chemically induced
intestinal inflammation and carcinogenesis by inhibition of
proinflammatory cytokine production and cell proliferation and promotion
of apotosis in colonic mucosa.

