Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CSF-1R inhibition blocks rhabdomyoscarcoma metastasis by
polarizing macrophage differentiation


Colony Stimulating Factor 1 (CSF-1) is overexpressed by many tumors and
predicts poor clinical outcome. CSF-1 expression results in the
recruitment of CSF-1R (Fms)-expressing cells, which have been shown to
suppress tumor immunity, thereby promoting cancer progression. PLX3397 is
a novel, orally active small molecule inhibitor that selectively targets
CSF-1R, KIT, and oncogenic FIT3. CSF-1R and KIT regulate the tumor, tumor
microenvironment, and the pre-metastatic niche. However, it is unknown if
targeting the myeloid CSF-1R expressing component of the tumor
microenvironment regulates metastasis of pediatric tumors, such as
rhabdomyosarcoma. Using the M3-9-M murine syngeneic orthotopic
rhabdomyosarcoma model, we evaluated the effects of PLX3397 on primary
tumor growth and metastatic progression. This highly metastatic
rhabdomyosarcoma model has high infiltration of CSF-1R-expressing bone
marrow-derived cells, which includes inflammatory monocytes, M2
macrophages, and myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Therefore, we
hypothesized PLX3397 would have a direct effect on CSF-1R expressing M2
macrophages and inflammatory monocytes, resulting in decreased
metastasis. Using both in vitro and in vivo models, we found that PLX3397
treatment decreased tumor-infiltrating M2 macrophages and skewed the
differentiation of inflammatory monocytes toward M1 macrophages and
development of immunocompetent mature dendritic cells. This resulted in
impairment of spontaneous M3-9-M metastasis to secondary sites. In
addition, we have found that the polarization of inflammatory monocytes
reversed the T cell suppressive capability of tumor-derived myeloid
cells. In conclusion, CSF-1R blockage with PLX3397 inhibited metastatic
progression by decreasing the infiltration of M2 macrophages in the
primary tumor and pre-metastatic niche. The polarization of inflammatory
monocytes to dendritic cells restored the immune recognition and
decreased metastasis. This data supports our rationale for testing
PLX3397 in patients with high M2 infiltration and suggests value in this
agent as an adjuvant setting for metastasis prevention in high-risk
patients.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

