Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations of coffee drinking with systemic immune and
inflammatory markers


Background: Coffee drinking has been inversely associated with mortality
as well as cancers of the endometrium, colon, skin and liver. Improved
insulin sensitivity and reduced inflammation are among the hypothesized
mechanisms by which coffee drinking may affect cancer risk. The
association between coffee drinking and systemic levels of immune and
inflammatory markers has not been well characterized.Objective: To
explore the associations of coffee drinking with levels of a wide range
of immune and inflammatory markers.Design: Luminex bead-based assays were
used to measure serum levels of 77 immune and inflammatory markers in
1728 older non-Hispanic Whites from three case-control studies nested
within the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening
Trial. Usual coffee intake was self-reported using a semi-quantitative
food frequency questionnaire. We used weighted multivariable logistic
regression models to examine the associations between coffee drinking and
dichotomized marker levels. We conducted statistical trend tests by
assigning each coffee category its median value and modeling as a
continuous variable. We applied a 20% false discovery rate criterion to
the P-values for trend.Results: Ten of the 77 examined markers were
nominally associated (P-valueBackground: Coffee drinking has been
inversely associated with mortality as well as cancers of the
endometrium, colon, skin and liver. Improved insulin sensitivity and
reduced inflammation are among the hypothesized mechanisms by which
coffee drinking may affect cancer risk. The association between coffee
drinking and systemic levels of immune and inflammatory markers has not
been well characterized.Objective: To explore the associations of coffee
drinking with levels of a wide range of immune and inflammatory
markers.Design: Luminex bead-based assays were used to measure serum
levels of 77 immune and inflammatory markers in 1728 older non-Hispanic
Whites from three case-control studies nested within the Prostate, Lung,
Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial. Usual coffee intake was
self-reported using a semi-quantitative food frequency questionnaire. We
used weighted multivariable logistic regression models to examine the
associations between coffee drinking and dichotomized marker levels. We
conducted statistical trend tests by assigning each coffee category its
median value and modeling as a continuous variable. We applied a 20%
false discovery rate criterion to the P-values for trend.Results: Ten of
the 77 examined markers were nominally associated (P-value<0.05) with
coffee drinking. The five markers that withstood correction for multiple
comparisons included various aspects of the host response namely
chemotaxis of monocytes/macrophages (IFN, CX3CL1/fractalkine,
CCL4/MIP-1), pro-inflammatory cytokines (sTNFRII) and regulators of cell
growth (FGF-2). Heavy coffee drinkers had lower circulating levels of IFN
(OR = 0.35; 95% CI 0.16, 0.75; P-trend = 0.0003), CX3CL1/fractalkine (OR
= 0.25; 95% CI 0.10, 0.64; P-trend = 0.0031), CCL4/MIP-1 (OR = 0.48; 95%
CI 0.24, 0.99; P-trend = 0.0050), FGF-2 (OR = 0.62; 95% CI 0.28, 1.38;
P-trend = 0.0080) and sTNFRII (OR = 0.34; 95% CI 0.15, 0.79; P-trend =
0.0112) than non-coffee drinkers.Conclusions: Coffee drinking was
associated with lower circulating levels of inflammatory markers, which
may partially mediate previously observed associations of coffee drinking
with lower mortality and morbidity. Validation studies, ideally
controlled feeding trials, and prospective studies, such as nested
case-control studies, are needed to confirm these associations.

