Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Persistent STAT3 signaling contributes to the resistance of anti
cancer drugs doxorubicin and cisplatin, and MEK inhibitor AZD6244 in
human sarcoma cells


Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling
pathway is activated in response to cytokines and growth factors.
Persistently activated STAT3 are frequently detected in many types of
human cancers and are believed to play an important role in their
oncogenesis. Stat3 has been classified as a proto-oncogene because
activated STAT3 can mediate oncogenic transformation in cultured cells
and tumor formation in nude mice. We previously demonstrated that
persistently activated STAT3 is frequently detected in human sarcoma such
as rhabdomyosarcoma. To further examine the role of persistent TAT3
signaling plays in rhabdomyosarcoma, we used genetic approaches to either
knock-down the expression of STAT3 using short hairpin RNA (ShRNA) or
expressed constitutive active STAT3 protein. Knock-down the expression of
STAT3 in rhabdomyosarcoma cells that express persistent STAT3 signaling,
reduced the cell viability and sensitized cells to anti-cancer drugs
doxorubicin and cisplatin. On the other hand, expression of constitutive
active STAT3 protein in rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines lacking persistent
STAT3 signaling decreased the sensitivity of those cells to doxorubicin
and cisplatin. Furthermore, a MEK inhibitor, AZD6244 that is being tested
in human cancer clinical trials unexpectedly induced STAT3
phosphorylation suggesting inducing of STAT3 may induce intrinsic
resistance to MEK inhibitor. Accordingly, knock down of STAT3 sensitize
sarcoma cells to MEK inhibitor treatments. To further translate our
finding to potential cancer therapy, we tested a small molecular
STAT3-selective inhibitor LY5 in sarcoma cells expressing persistent
STAT3 signaling. Our data demonstrated that LY5 inhibited STAT3
phosphorylation, STAT3 DNA binding activity, and the migration of sarcoma
cells. In addition, the combination of LY5 with anti-cancer drugs
doxorubicin and cisplatin and the MEK inhibitor, AZD6244 also shown
stronger inhibitory effects than single agent alone. In summary, our
results using both genetic and small molecule approaches demonstrated
that persistent STAT3 signaling contributes to the resistance of
anti-cancer drugs doxorubicin and cisplatin, and MEK inhibitor in human
sarcoma cells. They also implicated a potential cancer therapy strategy
with the combination of STAT3 inhibitor with doxorubicin, cisplatin, and
MEK inhibitor in sarcoma cells expressing persistent STAT3 signaling.

