Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Label-free imaging identification of white blood cells using
quantitative phase microscopy for negative selection of circulating tumor
cells


Background: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are cancer cells which are
shed from primary tumors and circulating in the bloodstream, and thought
to play a key role in metastasis. Existing CTC capture methods are
largely based on surface markers such as cytokeratins. However, invasive
tumor cells tend to lose their epithelial markers and change into
mesenchymal phenotype by the epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT). It
seems that conventional CTC capture methods miss the mesenchymal CTCs
which are supposed to have highly malignant potentials. Because the
features of CTCs are not fully understood, it is difficult to retrieve
all CTCs by positive selection using CTC-surface markers. Considering the
fact that vast majority of nucleated cells circulating in the blood
stream are WBCs, eliminating WBCs from circulation is an efficient way to
purify CTCs. In this study, we attempted to develop a novel method for
the identification of WBCs in the blood using Quantitative Phase Imaging
Microscopy (QPM).Methods: We analyzed WBCs and cancer cell lines using
QPM that can image optical path-length of living cells with a high
resolution of 1nm without staining in non-cytotoxic way. Obtained images,
quantitative phase images (QPIs), were analyzed by a computer vision
application which automatically identifies an object in digital images
based on features extracted from the dataset we had developed by machine
learning.Results: We imaged 325 WBCs obtained from healthy donors and 325
cell-line cells (including 5 different cell lines) with QPM. Then, we
extracted certain features from the QPIs and used them as training images
for machine learning. We employed 5-fold cross validation to create an
algorithm to detect WBCs circulating in the blood. The algorithm
successfully recognized WBCs among QPIs mixed in with WBCs and cancer
cell lines. The ROC AUC value was 0.98, indicating that the algorithm was
not random selection.Conclusions: We successfully differentiated WBCs
from cancer cell lines based on the features of QPIs. The object
recognition method applying to QPIs of the cell is expected as a useful,
non-cytotoxic, marker free isolation of CTCs.

