Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule mediated transcriptional derepression of E-cadherin
and inhibition of epithelial to mesenchymal transition


BACKGROUND: Transcriptional repression of E-Cadherin is a hallmark of
Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) and is associated with
metastasis in cancer. Understanding mechanisms behind E-cadherin
repression may provide important insights into the regulation of EMT and
novel therapeutic strategies for cancer. In this report, we applied a
medicinal chemistry approach to generate a novel EMT-reversing compound,
ML327. We tested the hypothesis that ML327 activity impinges directly on
the mechanism of EMT in cancer and represents a potential therapeutic
agent to block or reverse EMT in vivo.METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We
used cell based biochemical approaches to show that ML327 increases
E-cadherin expression in 5 cancer cell lines and 2 non-transformed cell
lines. ML327 was shown to induce global changes in histone modifications,
but through a distinct mechanism than similar chemical agents such as
Histone De-Acetylase (HDAC) inhibitors. Cell based assays were used to
show that ML327 inhibits cell invasion, partially reverses EMT, and
inhibits metastasis in vivo. We examined gene expression changes induced
by ML327 within 3 hrs in the presence of cycloheximide by RNA-seq and
determined a mechanistic requirement for Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4
(HNF4) in ML327 activity on E-cadherin gene expression. Through direct
testing, we have determined the ML327 is not a promiscuous chemical probe
and that it lacks direct HDAC inhibitory and kinase inhibitory activity,
however, our study is limited by the lack of identification of the direct
cellular target. Significant ongoing studies are designed to address this
limitation.CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: ML327 increases E-cadherin in cells
and translate to an important biological behavior in vivo that may be
exploited for therapeutic potential in cancer. Furthermore, ML327
represents a novel chemical structure for continued pharmacological
optimization toward the development of novel therapeutics.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: This work was supported by NIH through the Molecular
Library Probe Center Network (MPLCN) under grant U54MH084659 to
CWL.DISCLOSURE of POTENTIAL CONFLICT of INTEREST: No potential conflicts
of interest were disclosed.DISCLOSURE of CHEMICAL STRUCTURES: Chemical
compounds were used in this scientific work to generate the data, and the
structures of the compounds will be disclosed at the time of presentation
at the meeting.

