Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma (POLG) as a novel
therapeutic strategy for acute myeloid leukemia (AML)


Mitochondria contain their own 16.6kb genome (mtDNA) which encodes 13
protein-coding genes essential for electron transport chain activity. In
mammalian cells, it is replicated solely by the nuclear-encoded
mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma (POLG), which exists as a heterotrimer
with POLG2 to perform replication and repair of mtDNA. Through
bioinformatic analyses, we observed increased POLG expression in a subset
of AML cell lines compared to other cancer cell lines. As a subset of AML
patients also have unique mitochondrial characteristics, including
increased mitochondrial mass and mtDNA content compared to normal
hematopoietic stem cells (Skrtic et. al., Cancer Cell, 20:674, 2011), we
addressed the effects of targeting POLG as a novel therapeutic strategy
for AML.OCI-AML2 and TEX leukemia cells were treated with the
anti-retroviral drug 2,3-dideoxycytidine(ddC) that exhibits off-target
inhibition of POLG catalytic activity. At concentrations as low as 200nM,
ddC depleted mtDNA, decreased mRNA expression of mtDNA transcripts,
reduced the expression of mitochondrial encoded proteins COX 1 and 2
subunits that form the catalytic core of respiratory chain complex IV,
decreased basal oxygen consumption rate (OCR), and reduced the
proliferation and viability of AML cells. However, AML cells had large
reserves in their mtDNA; as significant changes in mitochondrial
proteins, metabolism, proliferation and viability were only observed with
a threshold of >95% depletion of mtDNA. In contrast, lesser reductions in
mtDNA content with ddC did not significantly affect levels of
mitochondrial transcripts, metabolism, or cell viability.Next, we used a
genetic approach and explored the impact of knocking down POLG with
multiple independent shRNA in AML cells. POLG knockdown in OCI-AML2 cells
depleted mtDNA content by 60% compared to controls. Consistent with the
findings with ddC, mtDNA depletion to this extent produced only
quantitatively minor changes in the protein expression of the
mtDNA-encoded COX 1 and 2 and basal OCR. Despite the minimal effect on
mitochondrial metabolism, POLG knockdown decreased the growth and
viability of OCI-AML2 cells, and increased apoptosis, as measured by
Annexin V staining. Results of electron microscopy analyses indicate that
POLG knockdown disrupted mitochondrial cristae structure compared to
controls.In summary, these results indicate that POLG plays a role in
maintaining AML cell viability and mitochondrial structure and this
function is independent of mtDNA replication and oxidative metabolism.

