Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging of tissue factor expression in an orthotopic pancreatic
tumor mouse model using small animal PET/CT and MRI


Objectives: Tissue factor (TF) is up regulated in many solid tumors and
its expression is linked to tumor angiogenesis, invasion, metastasis and
prognosis. We have previously reported the use active site inhibited
factor VII (FVIIai) labeled with 18F for specific in vivo imaging of TF
expression. The aim of this study was to investigate the feasibility of
non-invasive imaging of tumor TF expression in an orthotopic pancreatic
tumor mouse model using 18F-FVIIai and small animal PET/CT and MR
imaging.Methods: Female NMRI nude mice (N = 24) were inoculated
orthotopically with 5105 human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells
(BxPC-3.luc2). Tumor development was monitored by bioluminescence
imaging. Non-invasive TF imaging was performed 13 days after tumor
inoculation. Each mouse (N = 18) underwent small animal PET/CT imaging 4
hours after intravenous administration of 2.9-8.3 MBq 18F-FVIIai.
Anatomical T2-weighted MR imaging was performed the day after followed by
surgical removal of the primary tumors. Bioluminescence imaging was
applied to monitor tumor regrowth and metastatic development. The primary
endpoint was overall survival using humane endpoints.Results: The PET
images showed high uptake of 18F-FVIIai in the orthotopic pancreatic
tumors. A high tumor to normal tissue ratio clearly visualized the tumor
margins on the combined PET/CT images. The pancreatic tumors had intense
uptake in their outer margins and a low central uptake. This corresponded
well with the findings on the T2-weigted MR images that showed central
necrosis of the pancreatic tumors. Surgical removal of the primary
orthotopic tumors reduced the bioluminescence signal more than 30-fold
fold from 1.2109 1.7108 photons/s (mean SEM) to 3.4107 1.7107 photons/s.
In comparison, the bioluminescence signal was 1.5108 3.5107 photons/s two
days after inoculation of the BxPC-3.luc2 cells. All but one mouse had
tumor re-growth and at autopsy, 5 animals had local disease, 5 animals
had regional disease, and 7 animals had distant metastatic disease.
Interestingly, 3 animals showed hematological spread with multiple
metastatic foci found in the liver. The median overall survival was 30
days post surgery.Conclusion: PET/CT imaging with 18F-FVIIai is able to
clearly visualize TF positive orthotopic pancreatic tumors. High
intensity uptake of 18F-FVIIai in tumor margins corresponded to viable
tumor visualized by MRI. Further quantitative image analysis of
18F-FVIIai uptake in tumor regions will reveal if TF expression measured
by non-invasive PET imaging is able to predict prognosis and metastatic
disease.Research Support: This work was supported by at grant from the
Danish National Advanced Technology Foundation.

