Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profilin-1 is a key determinant for tumorigenic potential of
breast cancer cells


A hallmark of oncogenic transformation is disruption of the actin
cytoskeleton, which is partly attributed to altered expression and/or
activity of proteins that bind to and regulate the state of
polymerization of actin in cells. Profilin-1 (Pfn1) is a key regulator of
actin polymerization that is downregulated in human breast cancer, and
reduced Pfn1 levels were shown to facilitate dissemination-promoting
activities of certain types of breast cancer cells. The objective of the
present study was to investigate whether Pfn1 modulation affects tumor
initiating capacity of breast cancer cells. Using a MMTV-PyMT transgenic
mouse model, we demonstrated that mice engineered for conditional
Cre-mediated homozygous deletion of Pfn1 (Pfn1/) in the mammary gland
develop fewer spontaneous mammary tumors and exhibit longer survival than
either wild-type or heterozygous Pfn1-knockout littermates.
Haplo-insufficiency of Pfn1 (Pfn1+/) causes the expected 50%
downregulation of Pfn1 expression in tumors; however, mammary tumors
isolated from Pfn1/ mice exhibit residual Pfn1 expression that is at
least comparable to the level found in tumors derived from Pfn1+/ mice.
This scenario is consistent with a competitive disadvantage of Pfn1-null
tumor cells for autonomous growth and/or survival, allowing selective
outgrowth of tumor cell populations that have incomplete Cre-mediated
gene excision of Pfn1, likely resulting from mosaic activation of
Cre-driving MMTV-promoter in mammary gland. Acute deletion of floxed-Pfn1
alleles in normal mouse mammary epithelial cells by Cre-adenovirus
transduction dramatically impairs their ability to outgrow when seeded
sparsely on 3D matrigel. Likewise, human breast cancer cells exhibit
retarded outgrowth on 3D matrigel upon stable silencing of Pfn1
expression even though their proliferation on 2D tissue-culture substrate
was not affected. Correlated with these phenotypic changes, Pfn1
knockdown suppresses stem-cell-like behavior of breast cancer cells as
marked by a significant reduction in both aldehyde dehydrogenase activity
and mammosphere forming ability. Collectively, these findings suggest
that a minimum level of Pfn1 is essential for tumor initiation of breast
cancer cells. Interestingly, the outgrowth-deficient phenotype of
Pfn1-depleted breast cancer cells on 3D-matrigel can be fully rescued by
addition of collagen-I which suggests that alteration in cell-matrix
adhesion and downstream signaling underlies the growth-related phenotypic
changes induced by loss of Pfn1. Finally, the outgrowth-deficient
phenotype of breast cancer cells can also be elicited in vitro and in
vivo by Pfn1 overexpression, further suggesting that an optimum range of
Pfn1 expression is conducive for tumor-initiating capacity of breast
cancer cells. Based on these results, we conclude that Pfn1 expression
level is a major determinant for tumorigenic potential of breast cancer
cells.

