Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of fluorescent probes for detection of DNA base
excision repair in human cancer cells


Many cancer chemotherapeutics target DNA, which makes them vulnerable to
repair by innate mechanisms the cell has evolved to ward off endogenous
and exogenous DNA damage. In the course of chemotherapy, these repair
pathways lead to drug resistance and reduced efficacy of cancer
treatment. To address these issues, our goal was to develop imaging
agents to visualize and quantify DNA repair in cancer. Thus, we have
developed small molecule, fluorescent probes that bind to the abasic (or
AP for apurinic/apyrimidinic) site in DNA, a key intermediate in the base
excision repair (BER) pathway.Taking advantage of the biochemistry of
BER, we have developed an assay based on a fluorescently tagged DNA
oligomer to evaluate the ability of these probes to bind to AP sites and
stall further repair. This assay relies on blocking the DNA single strand
breaking activity of the enzyme, AP endonuclease (APE), when its natural
substrate, the AP site, is obstructed by probe binding. Using this assay,
we have screened our novel probes for their AP site binding potential.
Our cyanine-(Cy7) based probe outperformed other, commercially available
AP site binding probes including methoxyamine (MX) and aldehyde reactive
probe (ARP).In addition, we have developed a method for analyzing a
genomic DNA sample that demonstrates the potential to evaluate
physiologically relevant quantities of AP sites. 5-Fluoro-2-deoxyuridine
(FUDR) is indicated for treatment of many types of cancer; however,
uracil DNA glycosylase (UDG) can repair the lesions in DNA introduced by
FUDR. Therefore, we prepared a UDG knockdown of the DLD1 colon cancer
cell line and treated both wild type and knockdown cells with FUDR for
24, 48, and 72 h. Following extraction of the DNA and in vitro treatment
with purified UDG, we observed a nearly 9-fold increase in fluorescence
in treated versus untreated cells. This confirmed that our probe could
report of AP site quantity in cancer cells in vitro.Our cyanine-based
probes have several benefits over existing probes including red and NIR
fluorescence for application in animal imaging. Our studies indicate that
these probes bind to AP sites more efficiently than existing probes.
Further, these fluorescent AP site-binding agents could have application
in drug development and discovery or be used in assays to monitor patient
response to therapy.

