Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of long-noncoding RNA interaction at chromatin by
chromatin isolation by RNA purification (ChIRP)


Gene regulation plays a critical role during development and progression
of Cancer. While the regulation of gene expression by transcription
factors and epigenetic influences has been well studied over time,
pervasive genomic transcription and the role of non-coding RNAs in this
process is a rapidly evolving field that remains to be thoroughly
explored.Chromatin Isolation by RNA Purification (ChIRP) is one of the
methods, which allows discovery of the sites of interaction of
chromatin-associated RNAs (e.g. lncRNAs) with genomic DNA sequences by
using probe-based hybridization to target RNA molecules in chromatin. To
perform ChIRP multiple biotinylated oligonucleotide probes complementary
to the RNA of interest are used. To help eliminate non-specific signals
two different pools of probes are used (even and odd probe sets). These
probe sets are combined with chromatin and hybridized to the
chromatin-associated RNA. Complexes containing biotinylated-probes bound
to the chromatin-associated RNA are then isolated using streptavidin
magnetic beads. DNA can then be recovered and analyzed by quantitative
PCR or next generation sequencing (ChIRP-seq). Alternatively, RNA may
also be isolated from an aliquot of the recovered chromatin to detect
other RNA molecules that may be associated with the RNA of interest.To
enable the exploration of these RNA interactions in chromatin regulation,
we have optimized the methods and developed ChIRP reagents. Using these
reagents ChIRP experiments can be performed with reliable recovery of
chromatin using lncRNA or other chromatin associated RNA as targets.
Additionally, negative and positive control probe sets, and detection
primers were developed to ensure first time success. We have performed
ChIRP experiments with a HeLa cell lysate and capture oligos for the
NEAT1 lncRNA. Isolated DNA was subjected to NGS library construction and
sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq instrument. Sequences were aligned to the
reference genome (hg19). The peaks were called separately for odd and
even reactions, and only common peaks were selected. We successfully
identified several NEAT1 binding sites in the genomic DNA sequence.In
summary the methods developed allow unbiased discovery of RNA-associated
genomic DNA sequences, RNA sequences, and potentially proteins.

