Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intracellular ATP reduction by an artificial protein as a novel
approach to cancer therapy


Introduction: The use of chemotherapeutic agents that target key
metabolic processes in cancer cells is an important therapeutic strategy.
As a result of reduced mitochondrial activity, adenine triphosphate (ATP)
is produced mainly by aerobic glycolysis and lactic acid fermentation in
the cytosol of cancer cells (Warburg effect). Since ATP is a vital energy
carrier that is crucial for various biochemical reactions in cancerous
cells, interfering with the production/availability of ATP offers a new
approach to cancer therapy. To assess this idea, a man-made synthetic
ATP-binding protein, DX, was tested as a novel cancer therapy.
Hypothesis: Reduced ATP availability, due to the expression of DX in HeLa
cells, will negatively affect cellular metabolism and viability. Methods:
For controlled expression, DX was cloned into the pcDNA5/TO expression
vector (with an N-terminal FLAG tag), whose expression is driven by a
tetracycline-regulated cytomegalovirus promoter. Cultured T-REx HeLa
cells (which stably express the tetracycline repressor protein) were
transfected with pcDNA5/TO::DX. As a control for transfection and DX
expression, T-REx HeLa cells were transfected with pcDNA5/TO/lacZ and
cultured under identical conditions. The impact of DX expression on cell
viability and morphology was assessed using a tetrazolium-based
colorimetric cell viability assay and by light and fluorescent
microscopy. To assess the impact of ATP depletion in combination with
currently used anti-cancer agents on HeLa cell viability, toxicity assays
were performed comparing Doxorubicin, Paclitaxel, or Gemcitabine
treatment alone or in combination with DX. Results: HeLa cells expressing
DX experienced reduced viability and altered morphology compared to cells
expressing lacZ alone. These results suggest that ATP depletion
potentiate cell death in HeLa cells. HeLa cells treated singly with DX do
not possess the same level of toxicity as compared with the tested
chemotherapy agents. Of the chemotherapy agents assayed, DX displayed a
synergistic effect with Doxorubicin to reduce cell viability. Conclusion:
Reduced intracellular ATP levels, mediated by a synthetic ATP-binding
protein, negatively affects the viability of cervical cancer cells. The
reduction in ATP, and the consequence of this on biochemical pathways and
cell viability requires further investigation. We suggest that artificial
proteins, such as DX, could be used to control and regulate specific
targets in metabolic pathways and represents a new approach for cancer
chemotherapy.

