Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human endogenous retrovirus K expression as a possible adjunct to
PSA in the diagnosis of prostate cancer


Embedded in the genomes of nearly all vertebrates, are sequences of
retroviral origin. These endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) are the result of
ancient retroviral infections of the germline. 8% of the human genome
consists of such sequences (HERVs).To date, no active, infectious HERV
has been observed in humans, but high levels of retroviral mRNA and
protein from a group known as HERV-K (HML-2) have been observed in some
human cancers. Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a non-malignant
enlargement of the prostate commonly diagnosed in older men. Its
prevalence negatively impacts on the sensitivity of PSA scores. We
previously reported an association between high levels of HERV-K (HML-2)
gag mRNA expression and a prostate cancer diagnosis (Wallace et al.,
2014). The strength of this association increased with age. We
hypothesised that measuring HERV-K (HML-2) expression could improve the
discriminatory ability of PSA in the diagnosis of prostate cancer versus
BPH. We set out to analyse differences in HERV-K (HML-2) protein
expression between prostate adenocarcinoma and BPH.To this end, we
conducted immunohistochemistry on prostate tissue microarrays
(LS-SPRCA26, LS-SCA19; LifeSpan Biosciences) containing cores from
prostate adenocarcinoma and BPH cases. TMAs were stained with an
anti-HERV-K gag antibody (LS-C65287, LifeSpan Biosciences) and scored by
an independent pathologist.We observed significantly greater epithelial
HERV-K gag protein expression in BPH cores versus prostate adenocarcinoma
cores (Fisher exact test, p = 0.001). Similar differences were also
observed in stromal tissue (Fisher exact text, p = 0.02). Significant
differences were also seen after positive expression levels were
dichotomized into high versus low subgroups for both epithelial tissue
(Fisher exact test, p = 0.001) and for stromal tissue (Fisher exact test,
p = 0.034). Finally, we considered an association between HERV-K gag
protein expression levels and tumor stage, but we did not observe any
significant differences.Our data indicate that measuring HERV-K (HML-2)
expression may improve the discriminatory ability of PSA in the diagnosis
of prostate cancer versus BPH and that its potential utility as an
adjunct biomarker warrants further investigation. Furthermore, increased
sample size in relation to tumor stage will enable its prognostic
potential to be evaluated.

