Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exercise, alone and in combination with a whole tumor cell vaccine
reduces mammary tumor cell growth and enhances anti-tumor immunity


Regular, moderate exercise (EX) can reduce both the incidence and
recurrence of breast cancer (BC), and improve survival. Numerous
biological mechanism(s) have been proposed to explain these beneficial
clinical effects of EX. However, little work has been done to examine the
effect of EX on immunomodulation, i.e. the balance between anti-tumor
immunity and the emergence of immunosuppressive cells, in particular
myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC). We have previously demonstrated
that moderate EX significantly enhances antigen-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T
cell responses and reduces regulatory T cell function in tumor free-mice.
Thus, the goal of the current study was to determine if EX could enhance
effector function and reduce immunosuppression in tumor bearing mice, and
determine if there were any synergistic effects of EX and the
administration of a whole tumor cell vaccine on the aforementioned
outcomes. Female Balb/c mice were randomized into EX or sedentary control
(SED) groups (n = 14-16/group) and had access to running wheel or
standard cages, respectively, for 12 weeks prior to the injection of
510^4 lucerifase-transfected 4T1.2 tumor cells into the 4th mammary fat
pad. Mice were further randomized into vaccination (n = 6-8/group) or
vehicle control (n = 4/group) and administered 110^6 irradiated 4T1.2
cells (VAC) or HBSS (VEH) at day 7, 14, 21, and 28 post tumor injection.
All mice were fed the AIN-76A diet; however, the EX mice (n = 14) were
fed 90% of caloric intake of SED animals to remain in energy balance
(prevent weight gain) over the course of the study. Primary tumor growth
was quantified, and at sacrifice (day 35) organs were collected to assess
the following endpoints: splenic antigen-specific CD8+ effector function
and myeloid derived suppressor cell (MDSC) accumulation, and metastatic
burden in femurs. EX mice, with or without vaccine, weighed significantly
less than SED mice (pRegular, moderate exercise (EX) can reduce both the
incidence and recurrence of breast cancer (BC), and improve survival.
Numerous biological mechanism(s) have been proposed to explain these
beneficial clinical effects of EX. However, little work has been done to
examine the effect of EX on immunomodulation, i.e. the balance between
anti-tumor immunity and the emergence of immunosuppressive cells, in
particular myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC). We have previously
demonstrated that moderate EX significantly enhances antigen-specific
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses and reduces regulatory T cell function in
tumor free-mice. Thus, the goal of the current study was to determine if
EX could enhance effector function and reduce immunosuppression in tumor
bearing mice, and determine if there were any synergistic effects of EX
and the administration of a whole tumor cell vaccine on the
aforementioned outcomes. Female Balb/c mice were randomized into EX or
sedentary control (SED) groups (n = 14-16/group) and had access to
running wheel or standard cages, respectively, for 12 weeks prior to the
injection of 510^4 lucerifase-transfected 4T1.2 tumor cells into the 4th
mammary fat pad. Mice were further randomized into vaccination (n =
6-8/group) or vehicle control (n = 4/group) and administered 110^6
irradiated 4T1.2 cells (VAC) or HBSS (VEH) at day 7, 14, 21, and 28 post
tumor injection. All mice were fed the AIN-76A diet; however, the EX mice
(n = 14) were fed 90% of caloric intake of SED animals to remain in
energy balance (prevent weight gain) over the course of the study.
Primary tumor growth was quantified, and at sacrifice (day 35) organs
were collected to assess the following endpoints: splenic
antigen-specific CD8+ effector function and myeloid derived suppressor
cell (MDSC) accumulation, and metastatic burden in femurs. EX mice, with
or without vaccine, weighed significantly less than SED mice (p<0.001).
There was a significant effect of both vaccination and EX on primary
tumor growth (F(24,200) = 7.386, pRegular, moderate exercise (EX) can
reduce both the incidence and recurrence of breast cancer (BC), and
improve survival. Numerous biological mechanism(s) have been proposed to
explain these beneficial clinical effects of EX. However, little work has
been done to examine the effect of EX on immunomodulation, i.e. the
balance between anti-tumor immunity and the emergence of
immunosuppressive cells, in particular myeloid derived suppressor cells
(MDSC). We have previously demonstrated that moderate EX significantly
enhances antigen-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses and reduces
regulatory T cell function in tumor free-mice. Thus, the goal of the
current study was to determine if EX could enhance effector function and
reduce immunosuppression in tumor bearing mice, and determine if there
were any synergistic effects of EX and the administration of a whole
tumor cell vaccine on the aforementioned outcomes. Female Balb/c mice
were randomized into EX or sedentary control (SED) groups (n =
14-16/group) and had access to running wheel or standard cages,
respectively, for 12 weeks prior to the injection of 510^4
lucerifase-transfected 4T1.2 tumor cells into the 4th mammary fat pad.
Mice were further randomized into vaccination (n = 6-8/group) or vehicle
control (n = 4/group) and administered 110^6 irradiated 4T1.2 cells (VAC)
or HBSS (VEH) at day 7, 14, 21, and 28 post tumor injection. All mice
were fed the AIN-76A diet; however, the EX mice (n = 14) were fed 90% of
caloric intake of SED animals to remain in energy balance (prevent weight
gain) over the course of the study. Primary tumor growth was quantified,
and at sacrifice (day 35) organs were collected to assess the following
endpoints: splenic antigen-specific CD8+ effector function and myeloid
derived suppressor cell (MDSC) accumulation, and metastatic burden in
femurs. EX mice, with or without vaccine, weighed significantly less than
SED mice (p<0.001). There was a significant effect of both vaccination
and EX on primary tumor growth (F(24,200) = 7.386, p<0.001), splenic IFN-
production (KW = 11.43, p = 0.010); and the accumulation of MDSC (F(3,28)
= 6.486, p = 0.021). However, there was only an EX effect on metastatic
burden (p = 0.027). There was a synergistic effect of the combination of
vaccine+EX on tumor growth, but no other endpoint. These results
demonstrate that exercise alone (i.e. in a prevention model, 12 weeks
prior to tumor implantation) is highly effective in reducing primary
tumor growth and metastases in an aggressive tumor, and significantly
shifted the balance of effector and immunosuppressive factors in the
direction of anti-tumor immunity. Furthermore, these results demonstrate
that exercise is a viable intervention that may yield significant
clinical benefit when used in combination with therapeutic cancer
vaccines. This work is supported by internal PSU pilot funds for CJR;
T32AI074551-03 for WJT.

