Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the tumor microenvironment of pancreatic cancer to
predict treatment outcome


Introduction: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) ranks 4th on the
list of cancer-related deaths which is mostly due to therapy resistance.
The tumor microenvironment is one of the main hallmarks to contribute to
therapy resistance in which tumors are characterized by large amounts of
stroma deposition, and hypovascularization. In this study we assess the
use of non-invasive functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for
characterization of these tumor microenvironment characteristics and its
prognostic and predictive role. Diffusion weighted (DWI) MRI and dynamic
contrast enhanced (DCE)-MRI provide insight in stromal content and tumor
vascularization. Subsequent correlation of imaging with
immunohistochemical (IHC) stainings can validate the biological basis of
these imaging modalities. Here, we propose a method to correlate
functional MRI to corresponding histology derived tissue
characteristics.Methods: Patients suffering from (borderline) resectable
PDAC underwent DWI and DCE-MRI on a 3T Philips scanner prior to resection
and/or neoadjuvant chemoradiation. DWI data were fitted with the intra
voxel incoherent motion model to obtain, among others, the diffusion
coefficient D, while DCE-MRI data were fitted according to the extended
Tofts model to retrieve the volume transfer constant Ktrans. After
resection, the tissue was sectioned in the axial plane and slices where
photographed. One slice with evident tumor was selected for whole mount
embedding. Whole mount sections were stained for stromal content (SMA)
and vascular density (CD31) The pancreas contour of the photographed
tissue slices was manually outlined. Slices were aligned and stacked to
form a 3D volume of the pancreas specimen, which was projected onto the
MR images. Stained whole mount sections were aligned with the
corresponding tissue photograph and transposed to the MRI accordingly to
correlate pathology sections to imaging sections and validate parameters
using IHC.Results: Sixteen patients were included in the study of which
four patients have currently been analyzed. Tissue specimens after
resection showed good visual agreement with MRI and could be matched
using corresponding anatomical landmarks. In addition, Lower D-values,
suggesting higher cell density, indeed corresponded with higher stromal
content, while higher values on the Ktrans map, suggesting a higher tumor
vascularity, corresponded with higher vessel density.Conclusion: With
these preliminary data we demonstrated the feasibility of matching
post-operative tissue slices to in vivo MRI of the pancreas. Matching
stained whole mount sections to MRI images provides direct information on
localization and local tumor heterogeneity for validation of functional
MRI parameters. Expanding this work in a larger patient group will
provide valuable insights on the underlying biology of functional MRI
parameters in pancreatic cancer.

