Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined inhibition of MEK and PI3K elicits anti-tumor activity in
human cholangiocarcinoma


Cholangiocarcinoma (CC) responds poorly to chemo- and immunotherapy and
is nearly always fatal within one year. In recent years we have gained
important insight into the signaling pathways that drive this cancer.
These cancers are characterized by deregulated mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK), PI3 kinase/Akt and a dependence on the IL-6 axis of signal
transduction. Importantly, we previously reported clinical responses for
CC patients receiving single agent MEK inhibitors, indicating these
agents have activity in this disease. We hypothesized that dual targeting
of these pathways in CC using MEK162 and buparlisib would lead to potent
antitumor and immunomodulatory activity, possibly circumventing
resistance to single agent MEK162. In a panel of n = 7 human CC cell
lines with diverse genetic profiles, constitutive phosphorylation of ERK
(7/7) and Akt (2/7) was observed. Human CC cell lines displayed variable
sensitivity to the growth inhibitory and pro-apoptotic effects of single
agent MEK162 or buparlisib. CC cell lines with basal AKT phosphorylation
(WITT, Mz-Cha-1) showed greater sensitivity to growth inhibition by
buparlisib (IC50 10-20 M), as compared to CC lines lacking pAKT (HuCCT1,
HuH28, IC50 > 20M). Immunoblot analysis confirmed decreased
phosphorylated ERK (pERK) in the HuCCT1 and SNU-478 CC cell lines
following treatment with MEK162. Culture supernatants from four separate
human CC cell lines displayed significant reductions in IL-6, VEGF, and
GM CSF in a concentration-dependent manner after treatment with MEK162.
Immunomodulatory effects of MEK162 were also evident, independent of its
tumor-intrinsic effects upon CC cell lines. Namely, it significantly
reduced IL 6/GM-CSF driven MDSC differentiation (HLA-DRlo CD11b+ CD33+)
from healthy normal donor PBMC in vitro. These observations were not due
to cytotoxic activity as treatment with MEK162 for 72 hours did not
reduce viability of bulk human PBMCs. Finally, to evaluate the effect of
this treatment combination, in vivo studies were conducted in athymic
mice bearing Mz-Cha1 or SNU-478 xenografts. Tumor bearing mice received
daily oral administration of MEK162 (30 mg/kg), buparlisib (25 mg/kg), or
both agents combined. Vehicle treated animals served as negative
controls. Inhibition of tumor growth was observed following
administration of single agent MEK162 or buparlisib as compared to
control animals. This effect was further enhanced in the combination
treated animals. Body weight of animals indicated this regimen was
well-tolerated. Together, these data suggest that dual PI3K and MEK
inhibition can target CC with varying genotypes and represents a
promising therapeutic regimen with potential for direct antitumor
activity and immunomodulation in CC.

