Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ironing out breast cancer: investigation of a novel iron chelator


Introduction: Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related
death in women. Current breast cancer therapy is hindered by
dose-limiting toxicities, demonstrating the need for less toxic
alternatives. As cancer cells have an increased requirement for iron, we
hypothesized that iron withdrawal using a highly selective iron chelator
(DIBI) developed by Chelation Partners Incorporated (CPI) would enhance
breast cancer cell killing by chemotherapeutic drugs and ionizing
radiation.Results: DIBI inhibited the growth of a panel of breast cancer
cell lines while similar doses had limited effects on the growth of
normal fibroblasts. In breast cancer cells, DIBI-mediated iron chelation
increased transferrin receptor 1 mRNA expression and decreased the
expression of ferroportin1 mRNA, which is indicative of decreased
intracellular iron stores. Iron citrate reversed the inhibitory effect of
DIBI, confirming the iron-specific activity of the compound. On the basis
of iron-binding capacity, a comparison between DIBI and two conventional
iron chelators demonstrated that DIBI was more effective at inhibiting
breast cancer cell proliferation. DIBI-treated breast cancer cells showed
a dose-dependent reduction in rounds of cell division, as well as arrest
in the S-phase of the cell cycle. Higher doses of DIBI also induced
apoptosis in breast cancer cells. In addition, DIBI treatment of breast
cancer cells induced double-stranded DNA breaks, which are likely
important for its anticancer activity. Pretreatment of breast cancer
cells with DIBI enhanced the grow-inhibitory effects of ionizing
radiation and conventional chemotherapeutic agents, suggesting that DIBI
may increase the effectiveness of current breast cancer therapies.
Combination treatment with cisplatin and DIBI demonstrated that DIBI
enhanced both the cytotoxic and cytostatic anticancer effects of
cisplatin.Conclusion: These findings suggest that selective sequestration
of iron from the tumor microenvironment may prevent or diminish tumor
progression. In the future, treating patients with this novel iron
chelator in combination with conventional therapies may increase the
effectiveness of current breast cancer treatments.

