Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRAIL and IAP inhibitor AZD5582 combination treatment induces
profound tumor cell death, which is differentially dependent on the
mitochondrial apoptotic pathway


BackgroundIt has been suggested that activation of the death receptors
may induce selective tumour cell lethality and therefore represent a safe
and effective therapeutic approach. However, several recent clinical
trials evaluating either recombinant TRAIL or TRAIL receptor agonistic
antibodies have shown very limited responses despite favourable safety
profiles. This lack of efficacy suggests that combination with other
agents will be required to unleash the therapeutic potential of the death
receptor pathway.Through a high-throughput combination screen, we
identified the combination of TRAIL and an IAP (Inhibitor of Apoptosis
Proteins) inhibitor AZD5582 to be highly synergistic in inducing tumour
cell death across a number of tumour cell line panels. Since the
molecular mechanisms underlying the synergistic activity of combined IAP
inhibition and TRAIL remain unclear, we investigated the modes of the
death signal transduction and its execution in a panel of breast cancer
cell lines.MethodsCell number and viability were assessed using the
nuclear staining dye Sytox green. BID, BAX and BAK gene expression was
modulated using siRNA, protein expression was evaluated by western
blotting. Total caspase activity was inhibited with Q-VD-OPh.ResultsWe
observed a diverse sensitivity profile in response to the AZD5582/TRAIL
combination in it's ability to enhance cell killing over the single agent
across the breast cancer cell line panel. A smaller panel was selected to
contain members either resistant or exquisitely sensitive to
AZD5582/TRAIL. Analysis of cell death confirmed early induction of
apoptosis following treatment in sensitive cell lines. Combination
treatment induced both caspase-8 activation and a concomitant apoptotic
cell death in sensitive cell lines but we observed neither event in
resistant cell lines. Importantly, knockdown of BID demonstrated the
requirement of this BH3-only protein in two out of four IAPi/TRAIL
sensitive cell lines.ConclusionsIn this study we investigated the
exceptionally synergistic effect of combining TRAIL and the IAP inhibitor
AZD5582 in mediating enhanced tumour cell lethality. We have shown that
the combination induces both caspase-8 activation and a concomitant
apoptotic cell death in sensitive cell lines but not in resistant cell
lines upon combination treatment. We also demonstrated that the
BID-initiated mitochondrial apoptotic pathway plays an essential role in
some cell lines but is dispensable in others. Thus our study provides new
insights into the molecular events responsible for the death signal
transduction and execution in response to the IAPi/TRAIL combination
treatment.

