Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anoikis evasion in inflammatory breast cancer cells is mediated by
Bim-EL sequestration


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is a rare and highly invasive type of
breast cancer, and patients diagnosed with IBC often face a very poor
prognosis. IBC is characterized by the lack of primary tumor formation
and the rapid accumulation of cancerous epithelial cells in the dermal
lymphatic vessels. Given that normal epithelial cells require attachment
to the extracellular matrix (ECM) for survival, a comprehensive
examination of the molecular mechanisms underlying IBC cell survival in
the lymphatic vessels is of paramount importance to our understanding of
IBC pathogenesis. Due to the inherent invasive nature of IBC cells, we
hypothesized that IBC cells could evade detachment-induced apoptosis
(anoikis), and rely on tightly regulated intracellular signaling pathways
to do so. Here we demonstrate that in contrast to normal mammary
epithelial cells, IBC cells robustly survive in ECM-detached conditions.
ErbB2 and EGFR knockdown in KPL-4 and SUM149 cells, respectively, causes
decreased colony growth in soft agar and increased caspase activation
following ECM detachment, suggesting overexpression/hyperactivation of
these oncogenes is vital for IBC evasion of anoikis. Downstream of ErbB2
and EGFR, ERK/MAPK signaling was found to protect cells from anoikis by
phosphorylating Bim-EL at serine 59. This phosphorylation of Bim-EL
results in a physical interaction between Bim-EL, LC8, and Beclin-1 and
prevents Bim-EL from localizing to the mitochondria and promoting cell
death. Mutation of the serine 59 site results in increased cell death and
a diminished capacity to form a protein complex with LC8 and Beclin-1.
Bim-EL knockdown also rescued ECM-detachment-induced death in IBC cells,
suggesting Bim-EL is necessary for the induction of anoikis in IBC cells.
Interestingly, Bim-EL levels were found to be elevated in ECM-detached
IBC cells and present in a significant percentage of IBC patient samples,
despite their evasion of anoikis. Therefore, the sequestration of Bim-EL
away the mitochondria provides a compelling rationale for how IBC cells
survive in the presence of high Bim-EL levels. Furthermore, this
mechanism provides a unique and novel opportunity for chemotherapeutic
approaches aimed at freeing the already elevated Bim-EL levels from
sequestration to specifically induce cell death in IBC cells.

