Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A model-based approach toward clinical pipeline optimization


IntroductionWhat is the optimal shape for a drug pipeline: A flute? A
megaphone? A trumpet? In other words, what set of stringencies for
passage of candidates to the next stage in development maximizes the
value of the pipeline as a whole, and how do assays predicting drug
quality influence this optimum?MethodsA linear programming formulation
was developed for four phases of a drug pipeline: Preclinical, Phase I,
Phase II, and Phase III, with variables including: the total budget for
the entire pipeline (B), and the number (Ni), cost (ci), and net present
value (vi) of drugs in each phase (i). The model is subject to two
constraints: (1) the pipeline must reduce in size with each subsequent
phase (i.e. Npre N1 N2 N3), and (2) the sum total of the cost times the
number of drugs in each phase must be less than or equal to the total
budget (i.e. cpreNpre + c1N1 + c2N2 + c3N3 B). The overall goal is to
maximize the total value of drugs progressing through the pipeline (i.e.
maximize vtot = vpreNpre + v1N1 + v2N2 + v3N3).Additionally, pipeline
evolution was modeled to evaluate the implications of a predictive drug
quality assay. Hypothetical drug quality scores were drawn from normal
distributions which reflect industry probabilities of success between
phases. Drugs that are above a cutoff stringency advance forward, with
the process repeated for all phases. The cost of each phase and value for
successful drugs are recorded for each simulation. The process is
repeated many times, with the expected value calculated at each
iteration.ResultsBeginning with a pool of drug candidates, the optimal
pipeline structure should approach equal sized pipeline widths as rapidly
as possible.Monte Carlo simulations demonstrated that increasing the
stringency of a quality assay in Phase I results in a linear increase in
expected value. Additionally, if the quality test is improved, e.g. by
reducing the variability of the assay, the improvement in expected value
will increase in an exponential manner.ConclusionsThe simulations predict
that to maximize pipeline value, drug companies should: (a) pick the
winners as early as possible (i.e. Preclinical or Phase I), (b) set
stringent go/no-go criteria in Preclinical and Phase I development, and
(c) perform prospective clinical trial simulations (Preclinical to Phase
I, Phase I to Phase II, Phase II to Phase III) to improve the ability to
predict winners.

