Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of ALDH1A1 gene expression with survival of
triple-negative breast cancer


Aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDH) are a family of enzymes that catalyze
aldehyde into carboxylic acids via the NAD(P)+-dependent oxidation.
Several ALDH family members have been identified in humans, including
ALDH1A1, ALDH1A3, ALDH2, ALDH3A1, and ALDH4A1.ALDH1A1 is a crucial
element in the retinoic acid signaling pathway regulating the
self-renewal and differentiation of normal stem cells. It ALDH1A1 has
been suggested as one of breast cancer stem cell markers and may play an
important role in breast cancer prognosis. However, previous research on
ALDH1A1 and breast cancer prognosis has yielded conflicting results. We
analyzed the association between mRNA expression of ALDH1A1 in tumor
tissues and survival of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC:
ER-/PR-/HER2-) using data and samples from three cohorts of breast cancer
patients, including 469 cases from the Shanghai Breast Cancer Survival
Study (SBCSS), 86 cases from the Nashville Breast Health Study (NBHS),
and 47 cases from the Southern Community Cohort Study (SCCS).Gene
expression levels were measured in total RNA isolated from microdissected
archival formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded breast cancer tissues using
Nanostring nCounter assays. The associations between ALDH1A1 mRNA
expression levels and recurrence/breast cancer mortality and overall
mortality were evaluated by multivariate survival analysis using the Cox
regression model. Data from the SCCS and NBHS were combined in the
analysis because both studies were conducted among US women and had a
small sample size.The levels of ALDH1A1 mRNA expression were consistently
and positively associated with disease free and overall survival
independent of age at diagnosis and TNM stage in both Chinese and US
women with TNBC. Compared to those with ALDH1A1 mRNA expression below the
median, TNBC patients with ALDH1A1 mRNA expression above the median had a
reduced risk of recurrence/breast cancer mortality (HR = 0.60, 95% CI:
0.39-0.92) and overall mortality (HR = 0.70, 95% CI: 0.47-1.05) in the
SBCSS and reduced overall mortality in the SCCS/NBHS (HR = 0.27,95% CI:
0.10-0.74). Additional analyses of the SBCSS cohort stratified by
basal-like breast cancer subtype showed that ALDH1A1 mRNA expression was
similarly associated with reduced risk of recurrence/breast cancer
mortality and total mortality in both basal-like and non-basal like TNBC
patients, although the point estimates were not significant due to the
smaller sample size. In addition, we found that patients with a higher
tumor grade had a lower level of ALDH1A1 mRNA expression but did not
observe an association with TNM stage. Our study suggests that the mRNA
expression of ALDH1A1 in tumor tissue may be associated with favorable
clinical outcomes in patients with TNBC. Further investigations are
needed to understand the biological mechanism(s) underlying the observed
association.

