Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bclxl is a key regulator of mitochondria-induced apoptosis in
ovarian cancer stem cells


Background:Resistance to mitochondria-initiated apoptosis is a hallmark
of chemoresistant cancer stem cells. As such, in epithelial ovarian
cancer (EOC), EOC stem cells exhibit cross- resistance to a broad range
of chemotherapy agents irrespective of their upstream targets. Members of
the Bcl2 family of proteins function as rheostats of mitochondrial
stability. Pro-apoptotic members Bak and Bax can form high molecular
weight oligomers that allow the release of cytochrome c to the cytoplasm
and consequently activating the caspases. In turn, pro-survival members
such Bclxl and Bcl2 bind Bak and Bax thus preventing their
oligomerization and maintaining mitochondrial integrity. We hypothesize
that a distinct and targetable subset of Bcl2 proteins may be regulating
the chemoresistant EOC stem cells.Methods:Whole cell lysates and
cytoplasmic/mitochondrial fractions were collected from pure clones of
chemoresistant CD44+/MyD88+ and chemosensitive CD44-/MyD88- EOC cells.
Expression of proteins in the Bcl2 family was determined by western blot
and net intensity of regions of interest (ROI) was determined to provide
quantitative measure. Mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) was measured
using Mitotracker Red, caspase activity was quantified by Celltiter
GloTM, and Bclxl expression was knocked-down in the EOC stem cells using
siRNA.Results:We observed a differential expression profile of Bcl2
family members between the chemoresistant CD44+/MyD88+ and chemosensitive
CD44-/MyD88- EOC cells. Using whole cell lysates, chemoresistant
CD44+/MyD88+ EOC stem cells surprisingly express 3-fold and 5-fold more
of the pro-death proteins Bak and Bax, respectively compared to the
chemosensitive CD44-/MyD88- EOC cells. In addition, the EOC stem cells
express 6 -fold more Bclxl but 5-fold less Bcl2 than CD44-/MyD88- EOC
cells. At the level of the mitochondria, the significantly higher levels
of Bak, Bax, and Bclxl are maintained in the EOC stem cells.
Interestingly, as little as 14% knock-down of Bclxl in the EOC stem cells
was able to induce loss of MMP, 3-fold increase in caspase-9 and 17-fold
increase in caspase 3/7.Conclusion:Ovarian cancer stem cells have a
unique mitochondrial phenotype and Bclxl is a key regulator of its
stability and may play a role in resistance to chemotherapy-induced
apoptosis. Targeting Bclxl may be an approach to complement current
standard of care in ovarian cancer. The demonstration that apoptosis can
be fully induced with minimal loss of Bclxl suggests an acceptable
therapeutic window for Bclxl inhibitors.

