Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioactive tanshinones and tea polyphenols inhibit prostate cancer
stem cells by targeting bmi1


Prostate cancer (CaP) is the most common invasive malignancy and the
second leading cause of cancer-related death in U.S. men.
Androgen-independent/hormone-refractory CaP remains the primary cause of
CaP death. The search for effective therapeutic and preventive
strategies, particularly the ways to intervene in the progression of
androgen-independent tumors remains the top priority of CaP research.
Prostate cancer stem cells (CSCs) are suggested to be responsible for
initiation, progression, drug resistance, recurrence and metastasis of
CaP. Strategies that target prostate CSCs may significantly prevent
and/or delay cancer progression and metastasis. The objective of this
study was to identify the potent natural bioactive compounds for
targeting prostate CSCs. The sphere-forming efficiencies in LNCaP, DUCaP,
PC3 and DU145 prostate cancer cell lines were 2.8%, 15.7%, 1%, and 5.6%,
respectively. The expression of several CSC related biomarkers, such as
c-met, c-kit, bmi1 and CD44 were increased, whereas the expression of
androgen receptor was decreased in prostate spheres. Natural compounds,
especially tanshinones (tanshinone I (T1), tanshinone IIA (T2A),
cryptotanshinone) and tea compounds (epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) and
theaflavines), inhibited the sphere-forming efficiency of CaP cells with
T1 and T2A the most potent. Furthermore, T1 and EGCG significantly
downregulated Bmi1 gene expression and protein level. Since Bmi1 has been
reported to be a crucial regulator of stem cell self-renewal and
malignant transformation, we further studied the functional role of bmi1
in self-renewal of prostate CSCs. Silencing of bmi1 dramatically
inhibited the growth and decreased the sphere-forming ability of CaP
cells. Animal studies showed that T1 and EGCG inhibited the growth and
metastasis of prostate tumors associated with downregulation of bmi1
expression. The results derived from our preliminary studies suggest that
bmi1 may play an important role in self-renewal ability of prostate CSCs,
and that some natural bioactive agents, such as T1 and EGCG, may inhibit
self-renewal of prostate CSCs in part via downregulation of bmi1 gene
expression and function. Supported in part by NCI/NIH R21 CA153355.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

