Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR and KRAS activation generate discrete inflammatory responses
within the lung tumor microenvironment


Despite decades of research, non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC)
remains one of the world's deadliest cancers. Approximately half of NSCLC
cases are classified as lung adenocarcinomas (ADCA), in which KRAS, EGFR,
and TP53 mutations are the predominant genetic drivers. Although patients
with EGFR mutations are initially responsive to targeted therapies, drug
resistance uniformly occurs within one year. KRAS mutant ADCA have proven
even more intractable, as scant progress has been made in the development
of therapeutics for this patient population. Recent breakthroughs in the
field of immunotherapy have offered new hope for the management of NSCLC,
but the clinical success of immunomodulatory agents will depend on a
strong foundational knowledge of the immune cells that comprise the ADCA
microenvironment.Activating mutations in KRAS and EGFR induce the
aberrant function of numerous signaling pathways that may influence the
host immune response in different ways. However, the discrete impact of
KRAS and EGFR mutations on the immune composition of ADCA remains largely
undefined. To address this question, we profiled the tumor
microenvironments (TME) of four mouse models of ADCA: adenoviral
Cre-infected KrasLSL-G12D and KrasLSL-G12D;Trp53Fl/Fl mice, as well as
TetO-EgfrL858R;Ccsp-rtTA and TetO-EgfrL858R;T790M;Ccsp-rtTA mice. Lung
specimens from tumor-bearing and control animals (n 5 per cohort) were
harvested at multiple time points and subjected to histological
assessment, gene expression analysis by qRT-PCR, and flow cytometric
immunophenotyping, in which 23 markers were used to identify 12 unique
cell types. The Kras subtype exhibited robust inflammation and expansion
of both the lymphoid and myeloid cell compartments. In particular,
significant increases were observed in the number of CD8+ T cells
(3-fold), B cells (2.5-fold), and macrophages (16-fold). Although loss of
Trp53 promoted tumor growth and malignancy, it had little effect on
cytokine expression or immune cell recruitment into the Kras TME. In
contrast, while EgfrL858R mutations produced similar total levels of
inflammation, leukocyte recruitment into the Egfr TME was largely
restricted to macrophage expansion (increased 8-fold). Introduction of
the T790M resistance mutation to Egfr-mutant animals further amplified
the macrophage dominant signal (14-fold). Expression of the cytokine IL-6
was correspondingly elevated in the Egfr but not Kras subtypes, a finding
replicated in EGFR-transfected primary human endobronchial cells. Most
notably, CD8+ cytotoxic T cell numbers were unaltered at all time points
examined in the Egfr animals, a finding which raises concerns about the
efficacy of most currently developed immune checkpoint blockers in EGFR
patients. In summary, KRAS and EGFR mutations give rise to distinct
immune responses that may require oncogene-specific immunotherapy
regimens.

