Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell-free DNA derived from ascites: Detection of copy number and
somatic mutations using OncoScan FFPE Assay


Background: There is increased interest in molecular analysis of
cell-free DNA isolated from body fluids for the evaluation of tumor
progression. These liquid biopsies are usually obtained from blood. Their
advantages include the fact that they can be repeatedly accessed, are
less invasive, and may be sensitive to changes in tumor profile from
multiple metastatic sites.Materials and Methods: Eleven ascites samples
from patients with metastatic epithelial neoplasms (gastric, N = 3;
pancreas, N = 3; ovarian, N = 2; breast, N = 2; and lung cancer, N = 1)
were investigated. Cell-free DNA was isolated from supernatant of ascites
fluid (50 ml) after centrifugation using commercially available DNA
purification kits (Norgen Bioteck Corp and Qiagen), and analyzed using
the OncoScan FFPE Assay kit.Results: Cell-free DNA yields ranged from 1.7
ng to 230 ng per mL of ascites fluid, indicating wide variability in DNA
content. Of the 11 patients, all had detectable aberrations, including
copy number alterations affecting from Background: There is increased
interest in molecular analysis of cell-free DNA isolated from body fluids
for the evaluation of tumor progression. These liquid biopsies are
usually obtained from blood. Their advantages include the fact that they
can be repeatedly accessed, are less invasive, and may be sensitive to
changes in tumor profile from multiple metastatic sites.Materials and
Methods: Eleven ascites samples from patients with metastatic epithelial
neoplasms (gastric, N = 3; pancreas, N = 3; ovarian, N = 2; breast, N =
2; and lung cancer, N = 1) were investigated. Cell-free DNA was isolated
from supernatant of ascites fluid (50 ml) after centrifugation using
commercially available DNA purification kits (Norgen Bioteck Corp and
Qiagen), and analyzed using the OncoScan FFPE Assay kit.Results:
Cell-free DNA yields ranged from 1.7 ng to 230 ng per mL of ascites
fluid, indicating wide variability in DNA content. Of the 11 patients,
all had detectable aberrations, including copy number alterations
affecting from <1%- 37% of the genome. A sample from a patient with
metastatic breast cancer had apparent chromosome 12 chromothripsis
(chromosome breakage with numerous clustered chromosomal rearrangements).
Another sample (metastatic lung cancer) had high overall genomic
stability (T); the lung tumor tissue did not show these alterations
though the patient has never smoked. Other aberrations were seen in genes
including: p53 (N = 4 patients), EGFR (N = 3), ERBB2 (N = 2), PI3KCA (n =
2).Conclusions. Combined copy number and somatic analysis of ascites
cell-free DNA revealed clinically relevant aberrations, including ones
not found in primary tumor tissue. Comparison to circulating cells in
ascites, cell-free DNA in blood, as well as tumor molecular profile is
ongoing.

