Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal selective targeting by uPAR retargeted oncolytic measles
virus inhibits breast cancer progression


Stromal cells in the tumor microenvironment play an important role in
breast cancer progression. Strategies directed against stromal cell
components have been investigated in the preclinical and clinical
setting. However, few studies have focused on stromal targeting by
oncolytic viruses. The urokinase receptor (uPAR) is overexpressed in
tumor and stromal cells, and plays a critical role in tumor progression.
The aim of this study is to evaluate the antitumor effects of stromal
retargeted oncolytic measles virus via urokinase receptor.We rescued and
characterized fully retargeted oncolytic measles viruses against human
(MV-h-uPA) and murine (MV-m-uPA) urokinase receptor (uPAR). In vitro,
MV-m-uPA and MV-h-uPA infected and induced cytotoxicity to human
(MDA-MB231, T47D and MCF-7) and murine (4T1) mammary cancer cells in a
species specific manner. Efficient MV-m-uPA infection and replication
were demonstrated in murine NIH-3T3 mouse fibroblast cells and MS1 murine
endothelial cells. Selective infection of murine fibroblasts by the
murine uPAR specific MV-m-uPA led to significant inhibition of human
breast cancer proliferation in an in vitro 3-D collagen co-culture model
of tumor-stromal interactions. To further validate the potential of
stromal uPAR targeting as a therapeutic strategy, the effects of MV-uPA
were assessed in a human breast cancer xenograft model (MDA-MD231), where
tumor cells express human uPAR (target of MV-h-uPA) and the host stroma
expresses murine uPAR (target of MV-m-uPA). Tumor bearing mice were
treated with MV-h-uPA, MV-m-uPA or combination (MV-h-uPA and MV-m-uPA) by
IV administration (3 doses). Surprisingly, MV-m-uPA (selectively
targeting mouse uPAR) was associated with a measurable delay in tumor
progression while on treatment, as well as prolongation in survival.
Combination therapy (MV-m-uPA and MV-h-uPA) was associated with the best
antitumor effects in vivo. To further characterize the in vivo effects of
stromal uPAR targeting, repeat experiments were performed where tumor
bearing mice received prolonged treatment with MV-m-uPA (12 treatments).
This approach was shown to be safe and resulted in a significant delay in
tumor progression and marked prolongation of survival. These effects were
associated with the identification of viable viral particles and viral
RNA from MDA-MB231 tumor xenograft treated with MV-m-uPA.In conclusion,
our results demonstrate for the first time that oncolytic viral targeting
of tumor stroma is feasible and associated with in vivo antitumor
effects. These findings further validate the critical role of stromal
uPAR in cancer progression.

