Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of an aspirin-derived small molecule as a potential
therapeutic for colorectal cancer


In the US, colorectal cancer (CRC) remains the second leading cause of
cancer-related death. The 5-year survival rate for patients with CRC is
64%, although for patients who present with distant metastases at
diagnosis the 5 year survival is only 12%. Currently used standard care
for CRC can only marginally extend the survival of patients and is
associated with numerous adverse events. Hence, there remains an urgent
need for more effective and less toxic treatments, which can increase CRC
patient survival with better quality of life. Non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (e.g. Aspirin, Ibuprofen, Naproxen),
which are widely used for their anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects,
have also been shown to be effective in reducing colon cancer incidences
and are proposed to be effective chemopreventive agents. However, these
NSAIDs are not potent enough to be used as cancer therapeutics and also
carry a liability of gastrointestinal bleeding mainly associated with COX
inhibition. Through extensive structure activity relationship (SAR)
studies based on newly synthesized NSAID-analogs, we have identified a
novel aspirin analog, ASD-49, as the most effective small molecule that
showed efficacy in different cancer cell lines, including CRC cells with
an EC50 ranging between 1 to 2.5 M at 48 h treatment in culture. This
unique compound selectively killed cancer cells and is >50-times more
potent than the current therapy for CRC and >100-times more potent than
the parent compound, aspirin. Our preliminary results show that ASD-49
induces G1 and G2 cell cycle arrest in HT29 cells. In addition, ASD-49
induced apoptosis as indicated by PARP cleavage in HCT116 and RKO cells.
Furthermore, we observed down-regulation of anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2
in a dose-dependent manner in both HCT116 and RKO cell lines. Unlike
aspirin, the novel analog did not alter COX-2 protein expression,
suggesting that ASD-49 may not possess adverse effects related to COX-2
inhibition. In addition, >100-times lower dose requirement as compared to
aspirin is expected to further minimize side effects associated with
aspirin structure. Taken together, our results suggest that ASD-49 may be
a promising agent for CRC treatment. Detailed results regarding the
efficacy and mechanism of action of ASD-49 will be presented.

