Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deguelin selectively inhibits proliferation of luminal androgen
receptor (LAR) triple-negative breast cancer cells


Triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) lack expression of the estrogen
and progesterone receptors (ER/PR) and HER2 amplification. These
aggressive malignancies have higher mortality rates than other breast
cancer subtypes. While targeted therapies for ER+/PR+ and HER2-amplified
breast cancers have greatly improved survival for these patients, there
are no approved targeted therapies for TNBCs. Development of targeted
therapies for TNBC will likely provide a similar survival benefit over
traditional cytotoxic therapy. The identification of molecular targets
for TNBC has been limited without a better understanding of the subtypes
of these heterogeneous diseases. Gene expression profiling recently
identified 6 defined subtypes of TNBC and representative cell lines,
providing the first opportunity to identify subtype-specific leads for
TNBC. In this study, we used high-content phenotypic screening to
evaluate novel libraries of plant and fungal extracts for
antiproliferative and cytotoxic activity in a panel of cell lines
modeling the different TNBC subtypes. The aim was to identify extracts
with selective activity in a single cell line with the hypothesis that
the selectivity resulted from a target relevant specifically to that
subtype. A plant extract selectively inhibited proliferation of
MDA-MB-453 cells, which represent the luminal androgen receptor (LAR)
subtype. Bioassay-guided fractionation identified deguelin, which showed
potent and highly selective activity in MDA-MB-453 cells compared to all
the other TNBC cell lines, with 240 to 1000-fold higher potency. Further
studies investigated the molecular mechanisms of action of degeulin in
MDA-MB-453 cells. Based on the sensitivity of LAR TNBCs to both
antiandrogens and Hsp90 inhibitors, as well as prior studies
demonstrating Hsp90 inhibition by deguelin, we hypothesized that
deguelin's mechanism in MDA-MB-453 cells involves Hsp90 inhibition,
resulting in AR destabilization and reduced proliferation. Immunoblotting
of deguelin-treated MDA-MB-453 whole-cell lysates indicated that deguelin
reduced cellular levels of AR, which are noticeable 8 h after treatment.
Immunofluorescence microscopy studies also suggested reduced nuclear
localization of AR 18 h after treatment. Previous studies showed that LAR
TNBC cells are highly sensitive to PI3K inhibitors compared to other TNBC
subtypes, and thus the effects of deguelin on PI3K-Akt signaling were
evaluated in MDA-MB-453 cells. Immunoblotting indicated that deguelin
reduced the relative phosphorylation of Akt at T308, but had no effect on
phosphorylation of S473, suggesting inhibition of PI3K but not mTORC2.
Ongoing studies are aimed at better characterizing the mechanisms of
deguelin in MDA-MB-453 cells with the goal of identifying targets to
develop better therapies for LAR TNBC patients.

