Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigations on the role of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
and cancer stem cells in the response to therapy in patient-derived
ovarian carcinoma xenografts


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) has the highest mortality rate in the
western world among gynaecological malignancies. Approximately 70% of
patients achieve complete remission after first-line platinum-based
therapy, but unfortunately, almost all patients relapse with the
development of a resistant disease. Progress has been made in identifying
hallmarks of cancer, and the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
the presence of cancer stem cells (CSCs) have been associated with
aggressiveness and chemoresistant properties.These studies were designed
to better understand the role of CSCs and EMT in the resistance to a
platinum-based therapy in a panel of patient-derived ovarian carcinoma
xenografts recently characterized (Ricci F et al, Cancer Res 2014). These
xenografts reproduce the complexity and the heterogeneity of ovarian
cancer both at a biological (i.e. histotypes, pattern of spread) and
molecular levels (i.e. gene mutations and transcriptomic).In order to
investigate the role of EMT and CSC in ovarian cancer, 10 different
ovarian carcinoma xenografts (4 serous, 3 endometrioid, 2 mucinous, and 1
mllerian-mixed tumor) were treated with cisplatinum (CDDP) once a week
for 3 weeks at the dose of 5 mg/kg. Then, a second CDDP cycle was given
to the regrowing tumors, mimicking clinical conditions. Ovarian
xenografts showed different sensitivity to the first CDDP cycle, but
almost all were less sensitive to the second CDDP cycle. Xenografts were
classified as Very Responsive (VR), Responsive (R), and Non-Responsive
(NR) on the basis of their therapy response. By RT-PCR (Qiagen, RT2
ProfilerTM PCR Array System) the expression of EMT and CSCs genes (n = 86
for each array) was evaluated in untreated and CDDP-treated xenografts.
Statistical analysis were performed by using the Significance of
Microarrays (SAM) method.The expression of EMT genes supported the
recently put forward idea that the different ovarian histotypes are to be
considered as different diseases. Indeed, xenografts belonging to the
same hystotype clustered in the same group. We then focus on the role of
EMT genes in prediciting CDDP sensitivity in serous and endometroid
carcinomas subtype. We found that transcription factor 3 (TCF3 gene) was
more expressed in NR than in the VR and R xenografst, with a gradual
increase among the 3 different groups starting from VR to NR xenografts.
In addition, the upregulation of 3 genes (DSP, MITF, and WNT5B) was
induced after CDDP treatment. Preliminary analysis on the same group of
xenografts showed that CDDP treatment causes a modulation of CSC
genes.These new xenograft models will be instrumental in clarifying the
role, if any, of EMT and CSCs in both predicting response to CDDP and in
testing novel therapeutic strategies in ovarian carcinomas.

