Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic characterization of MM-131, a bispecific antibody that
blocks c-Met signaling through concurrent targeting of EpCAM


Purpose: MM-131 is a purely antagonistic, bispecific antibody that
potently inhibits HGF/c-Met signaling by co-targeting the widely
expressed tumor antigen EpCAM. The purpose of these studies is to uncover
the mechanism by which MM-131 exhibits potent inhibition of both
HGF-dependent and HGF-independent c-Met signaling in EpCAM positive tumor
cells.Methods: To assess the role of EpCAM in mediating avid binding of
MM-131 to c-Met, we quantified the cell surface levels of c-Met and EpCAM
in a panel of cancer cell lines using flow cytometry and determined how
potently MM-131 inhibits HGF-dependent c-Met signaling in each cell line.
Using these data, we built a computational model to explain and quantify
the effect of EpCAM targeting. We then tested this model by (1)
predicting the activity of MM-131 in other cell lines, based on their
EpCAM:c-Met ratios; (2) knocking down EpCAM in cell lines by RNA
interference; and (3) comparing MM-131 to a variant of MM-131 in which
its EpCAM-targeting arm was mutated to impair binding. To uncover the
mechanism by which MM-131 inhibits HGF-independent c-Met signaling, we
monitored the effect of MM-131 on c-Met levels, using quantitative
imaging and immunoblotting.Results: Consistent with its design, we found
that MM-131 is more potent at inhibiting HGF-dependent c-Met signaling,
cell viability, and cell migration in EpCAM-high cells than in EpCAM-low
cells. In addition, MM-131 potency is reduced when EpCAM levels are
knocked down by RNA interference. By mutating the EpCAM-targeting arm of
MM-131, the observed potency in EpCAM-high cells is noticeably reduced.
Further cell biological characterization of MM-131 revealed two distinct
mechanisms of action: (1) MM-131 blocks ligand binding to c-Met; and (2)
MM-131 induces downregulation of c-Met. In side-by-side comparison
studies, MM-131 was found to be more potent at inhibiting HGF-dependent
signaling, cell migration, and cell viability than one-armed-5D5
(MetMab), and uniquely effective at inhibiting HGF-independent signaling
through downregulation of c-Met. Consistent with the design criteria,
MM-131 did not exhibit any discernable agonistic activity characteristic
of bivalent c-Met antibodies such as LY2875358. The molecular effects of
MM-131 observed in vitro were also observed in vivo: MM-131 inhibited
tumor growth in models of ligand-dependent and ligand-independent c-Met
signaling and induced downregulation of c-Met.Conclusions: MM-131 is a
bispecific antibody designed to overcome HGF-dependent and
HGF-independent c-Met pathway activation by concurrently targeting EpCAM.
MM-131 shows no agonistic activity in preclinical models and exhibits two
principal mechanisms of action: it antagonizes HGF binding and it induces
downregulation of c-Met. These findings support the clinical development
of MM-131 in c-Met-driven epithelial tumors that also express EpCAM.

