Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dianhydrogalactitol inhibits the growth of glioma stem and
non-stem cultures, including temozolomide-resistant cell lines, in vitro
and in vivo


The standard of care for glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) patients is
surgical resection followed by temozolomide (TMZ) and irradiation (XRT).
However, TMZ-resistance has emerged as a significant unmet medical need,
as DNA repair enzyme 0-6-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT)
removes the methyl-group adducts caused by TMZ. Dianhydrogalactitol
(VAL-083) is a structurally unique alkylating agent causing DNA
crosslinks at N7 position of guanine. Because VAL-083's N7 adducts are
not subject to MGMT mediated repair, it may be an effective
chemotherapeutic in the treatment of TMZ-resistant GBM. VAL-083 crosses
the blood brain barrier and accumulates in brain tumor tissue. We have
recently shown that TMZ activity is similar in cancer stem cells (CSC)
and their paired non-CSC from primary GBM tissues, and that the activity
is MGMT-dependent. We thus sought to investigate how our CSC and non-CSC
panel would respond to VAL-083 alone or in combination with XRT. We
further investigated the activity of VAL-083 in in vivo models of
drug-resistant GBM in comparison to TMZ. Rag2 mice bearing intracranial
human GBM xenograft tumors of either MGMT-positive and TMZ-resistant
origin (BT74), or MGMT-negative and TMZ-sensitive origin (U251) were
treated. VAL-083 was given i.p. 3 times/week x 3 weeks, and the efficacy
of VAL-083 in controlling tumor growth compared to TMZ (30 mg/kg).
Disease progression was evaluated by overall survival, clinical
observations and body weight measurements. Our in vitro results show that
VAL-083 is a potent inhibitor of all tested primary GBM cultures,
irrespective of MGMT status. VAL-083 causes cell cycle arrest and loss of
cell viability in TMZ-resistant cells, and at lower concentrations than
TMZ in TMZ-sensitive cells. Furthermore, VAL-083 is not affected by cell
culture condition (Stem vs. Non-Stem). Low dose VAL-083 combined with XRT
exhibited an additive effect in all cultures tested, suggesting that
VAL-083 might act as a radiosensitizer. In the in vivo U251 model, the
median survival time for mice treated with 4 mg/kg VAL-083 was
significantly increased to 72 days compared to 48 days for controls (pThe
standard of care for glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) patients is surgical
resection followed by temozolomide (TMZ) and irradiation (XRT). However,
TMZ-resistance has emerged as a significant unmet medical need, as DNA
repair enzyme 0-6-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) removes the
methyl-group adducts caused by TMZ. Dianhydrogalactitol (VAL-083) is a
structurally unique alkylating agent causing DNA crosslinks at N7
position of guanine. Because VAL-083's N7 adducts are not subject to MGMT
mediated repair, it may be an effective chemotherapeutic in the treatment
of TMZ-resistant GBM. VAL-083 crosses the blood brain barrier and
accumulates in brain tumor tissue. We have recently shown that TMZ
activity is similar in cancer stem cells (CSC) and their paired non-CSC
from primary GBM tissues, and that the activity is MGMT-dependent. We
thus sought to investigate how our CSC and non-CSC panel would respond to
VAL-083 alone or in combination with XRT. We further investigated the
activity of VAL-083 in in vivo models of drug-resistant GBM in comparison
to TMZ. Rag2 mice bearing intracranial human GBM xenograft tumors of
either MGMT-positive and TMZ-resistant origin (BT74), or MGMT-negative
and TMZ-sensitive origin (U251) were treated. VAL-083 was given i.p. 3
times/week x 3 weeks, and the efficacy of VAL-083 in controlling tumor
growth compared to TMZ (30 mg/kg). Disease progression was evaluated by
overall survival, clinical observations and body weight measurements. Our
in vitro results show that VAL-083 is a potent inhibitor of all tested
primary GBM cultures, irrespective of MGMT status. VAL-083 causes cell
cycle arrest and loss of cell viability in TMZ-resistant cells, and at
lower concentrations than TMZ in TMZ-sensitive cells. Furthermore,
VAL-083 is not affected by cell culture condition (Stem vs. Non-Stem).
Low dose VAL-083 combined with XRT exhibited an additive effect in all
cultures tested, suggesting that VAL-083 might act as a radiosensitizer.
In the in vivo U251 model, the median survival time for mice treated with
4 mg/kg VAL-083 was significantly increased to 72 days compared to 48
days for controls (p<0.0001). Median survival time for 3 mg/kg VAL-083
was 54 days. Body weight loss was observed in mice treated with 5 mg/kg
and treatment was stopped after 4 doses after which the animals recovered
and their median survival was 57 days. Animals treated with TMZ were
terminated at day 102 at the end of the study. BT74: study is ongoing,
data will be presented at the meeting.In conclusion, VAL-083 is highly
efficacious against both stem and non-stem GBM cell cultures in vitro,
the activity is independent of MGMT and VAL-083 appears to act as a
radiosensitizer in GBM. In vivo xenograft GBM models further validate the
benefits of VAL-083 in the treatment of GBM and support ongoing clinical
research with VAL-083, which is currently in a clinical trial for GBM
patients with recurrent disease.

