Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Demographics of colorectal cancer patients vary by aspirin use


Purpose: Regular NSAID (Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drug) use results
in an overall reduction in colorectal cancer (CRC) risk; however, this
reduction may vary among molecularly defined subsets of CRC.
Characterization of patients by regular NSAID use and molecular subtype
will provide unique insight into the biology of NSAID-based CRC
prevention.Methods: A sample of patients was selected from the Assessment
of Targeted Therapies Against Colorectal Cancer (ATTACC) protocol, which
is designed to molecularly profile tumors of patients with refractory
metastatic CRC. Demographic data and NSAID use were collected from a
risk-factor survey. Demographic characteristics were compared between 106
non-NSAID users, 75 regular aspirin users and 78 regular non-aspirin
NSAID users. Chi-square analysis was used to compare categorical
variables and ANOVA was used for continuous variables. Logistic
regression was used to assess predictors of aspirin or non-aspirin NSAID
use compared to non-use.Results: Preliminary results indicate that
aspirin users tend to be older, male and more frequently engage in
vigorous physical activity compared to non-users and users of non-aspirin
NSAIDs (Table I). In univariate analyses, patients who are older or
engage in more frequent vigorous physical activity are at increased odds
of using aspirin. When controlling for other variables, only age at
diagnosis predicts aspirin use.Description and AssociationsConclusions:
These preliminary data indicate that we will be able to distinguish
aspirin users from non-NSAID users in a sample of late-stage CRC
patients. Going forward, we will combine these demographic data with
tumor molecular classification to determine the subtypes of CRC that are
more or less prevalent in aspirin/NSAID users. Use of NSAIDs and overall
survival will also be evaluated among different molecular subtypes of
CRC. This data, combined with analysis of risk factors for each molecular
subtype will provide unique insight into the biology of NSAID-based CRC
prevention.

