Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of EGF receptor in macrophages inhibits M2 polarization
and suppresses proliferation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in
gastric epithelial cells


Background & Aims. Tumor-associated macrophages, predominantly polarized
to M2 phenotype, produce mediators, such as EGF and HB-EGF, to promote
tumor invasion, angiogenesis, and immunosuppression. It is clear that
activation of EGF receptor (EGFR) in tumor cells accelerates
tumorigenesis. However, therapy to inhibit EGFR activity is not
universally efficacious, suggesting possible resistance of EGFR
inhibition in tumor cells or different functions of EGFR in other cell
types for tumor cell growth. We have demonstrated that activation of EGFR
in macrophages down-regulates IL-10 and up-regulates TNF production in
response to inflammatory stimuli. This study was designed to determine
the roles of EGFR activation in M2 polarization of macrophages and
proliferation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in gastric
epithelial cells. Methods. Mouse RAW 264.7 macrophages and peritoneal
macrophages isolated from wt and kinase-defective Egfrwa5 mice were
treated with IL-4 (10 g/ml), to induce M2 polarization, for 15 min to 24
h in the presence or absence of an EGFR kinase inhibitor, AG1478. EGFR
activation and expression of M2 markers, Arg1 and YM1 were detected by
Western blot and real time PCR, respectively. Conditioned media from IL-4
treated macrophages was used to treat mouse conditionally immortalized
stomach epithelial cells (ImSt) and ImSt with EGFR knock out (EGFR/ImSt).
Cell proliferation was examined by MTT assay and EdU labeling and EMT by
real time PCR analysis of Snail and vimentin expression. Results. IL-4
transactivated EGFR in RAW 264.7 and peritoneal macrophages from wt mice.
Inhibition of EGFR kinase activity by AG1478 enhanced IL-4-stimulated
Arg1 and YM1 expression in RAW 264.7 cells. IL-4-stimulated Arg1 and YM1
expression in peritoneal macrophages from Egfrwa5 mice was significantly
higher than those from wt mice, which suggests that EGFR activation
suppresses M2 polarization. Conditioned-media from IL-4-reated RAW 264.7
cells stimulated EGFR activation, cell proliferation, and Snail and
vimentin expression in ImSt, but not in ImSt EGFR/ cells, which suggests
that EGFR in gastric epithelial cells is required for M2
macrophahe-producted factors to promote growth and EMT. IL-4 treatment of
ImSt did not show any of these effects, Furthermore, proliferation in
ImSt by conditioned media from IL-4-treated peritoneal macrophages from
Egfrwa5 mice was significantly higher than that by macrophages from wt
mice, indicating that activation of EGFR in macrophages suppresses
production of factors for promoting gastric epithelial cell growth.
Conclusion. EGFR activation in macrophages inhibits M2 polarization and
production of growth factors for gastric epithelial cell growth and EMT.
These results provide novel information to understand cell-type specific
(epithelial vs macrophage) EGFR activation in regulation of tumorigenesis.

