Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolically activated macrophages in obesity associated TNBC


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for about 20% of all breast
cancers. TNBC patients have an extremely poor prognosis due to their high
metastatic potential and lack of targeted drug therapies. Emerging
epidemiological data suggest that obesity is strongly linked to the
incidence and severity of TNBC; obese women have a 35% higher risk of
developing TNBC and 46% higher risk of developing distant metastases.
Thus, understanding the biological processes that link obesity and TNBC
has important clinical applications for prognosis and
treatment.Mechanisms by which obesity worsens TNBC prognosis are
incompletely understood. One clue to its action is that obesity causes
chronic inflammation, and macrophage infiltration into adipose tissue is
a key mediator of this inflammation. Recent studies demonstrated that
macrophages are enriched in breast adipose tissue of obese humans and
mice. Moreover, depletion of macrophages in mice diminished the effects
of obesity on TNBC growth and metastasis. Although anti-inflammatory
M2-like TAMs are key effector cells that promote tumorigenesis, it is
well accepted that obesity stimulates macrophages to adopt a
pro-inflammatory M1-like state. However, M1 macrophages exhibit potent
anti-tumor functions. From these discordant observations an important
paradox emerges: How can obesity promote breast cancer if it elicits an
M1, anti-tumor macrophage phenotype? Using a combination of proteomics,
immunology, and cell biology, we recently identified a novel
metabolically activated (MMe) macrophage phenotype produced by exposure
to high levels of insulin, glucose, and palmitate, conditions
characteristic of obese and diabetic patients. Here we show that gene
expression patterns in MMe (but not M1) macrophages are strongly
associated with pathways involved in breast cancer. Moreover,
pre-treating BM1 cells with conditioned media derived from MMe
macrophages promotes TNBC cell invasion by 2.3 fold, suggesting that MMe
macrophages potentiate metastasis. We further show that breast adipose
tissue macrophages isolated from obese women express cell surface markers
of MMe (CD36, ABCA1), but not M1 (CD38, CD319, CD274), macrophages.
Furthermore, treating nave macrophages with media conditioned by human
mammary adipose tissue from an obese subject (BMI = 37), but not a lean
subject (BMI = 19), induced genes diagnostic of the MMe phenotype. Thus,
mammary adipose tissue from obese women supports metabolic activation of
macrophages.Together, these observations suggest that obesity-induced
changes to adipose tissue reprogram macrophages to an MMe phenotype that
potentiates TNBC. A comprehensive understanding of signaling mechanisms
involved in metabolic activation would enable development of directed
therapies towards this specific pro-tumorigenic macrophage phenotype,
thereby leaving the immune system of cancer patients intact.

