Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutrophil Elastase plays a key role in epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and metastasis in triple-negative breast cancers


Background: Triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) account for about 15%
of breast cancer diagnosis in the USA, and occur at a higher percentage
among African-American women (about 34%). Although they constitute a
small percentage, the lack of targeted therapy of these hormone
receptor-negative cancers has led to poor prognosis and overall survival.
The main cause of TNBC-associated death is tumor metastasis from the
primary site to distant sites. Characterization of drivers of EMT, one of
the major drivers of metastasis could potentially identify therapeutic
targets to prevent and potentially block metastasis. Interactions between
tumor cells and inflammatory cells, including tumor-infiltrating
neutrophils (TILs) play an important role in initiating and driving the
process of metastasis. Our group previously reported that Neutrophil
Elastase (NE), a secreted elastin from neutrophils as a mitogen that
promotes tumor growth and activation of EGFR and TLR4 signaling pathways.
We have also shown that molecular and pharmacological inhibition of NE
leads to 90% reduction in metastatic foci in the lung. In this study, we
interrogated the role of NE in EMT and its ability to affect key cellular
functions involved in tumor metastasis, using TNBC cell lines as our
model system.Methods: Using a genetic knockdown model of NE in murine and
several human breast cancer cell lines we performed cellular
proliferation, migration and invasion assays to evaluate its role in
essential EMT-associated functions. We also interrogated the specific
roles of the epithelial junction protein E-cadherin and mesenchymal
transcription factor Snail in the ability of NE to drive a mesenchymal
phenotype in the breast cancer cells.Results: Silencing of NE in all
cells examined to date led to a significant increase in E-cadherin, a
junction protein associated with an epithelial phenotype. We also
observed a significant decrease at the mRNA level of Snail, a major
transcription factor associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition
and Axl, a receptor tyrosine kinase that is highly associated with
mesenchymal cells. Performing functional assays, we showed that NE
silencing had a significant effect on cellular invasion through Matrigel.
Studies are on going to validate the effects on cellular invasion and EMT
mediated by exogenous NE uptake by the breast cancer cells.Conclusions:
In summary, we identified NE as a potential driver of EMT and a
mesenchymal phenotype in breast cancer cell lines. NE promotes cellular
invasion and causes upregulation of factors associated with EMT. Studies
are on going to characterize the major pathways downstream of NE that
mediate the effects and to determine the function of exogenous NE that
tumor cells are exposed to in their microenvironment. This study will
lead to identification of mechanisms of NE-mediated effects on EMT and
potential therapeutic targets of tumor metastasis.

