Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of non small-cell lung cancer by stress reduction


Non small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading type of lung cancer
with a poor prognosis. Smoking is a risk factor but NSCLC develops in a
significant number of nonsmokers. We have reported that social stress
significantly promoted the growth of NSCLC xenografts, a response
mediated by multiple cAMP-driven signaling cascades downstream of
Gi-coupled beta-adrenergic receptors activated by the stress
neurotransmitters norepinephrine and epinephrine and reversed by
-aminobutyric acid (GABA) via Gi-coupled GABA-B-receptor signaling. In
addition, improved clinical outcomes in NSCLC patients with incidental
beta-blocker therapy have been reported. These findings suggest that
psychological stress with the associated increase in systemic stress
neurotransmitter levels and suppression of physiological agonists for
Gi-coupled receptors may significantly contribute to the high incidence
and poor therapeutic response of NSCLC. On the other hand, these findings
suggest that stress reduction may have significant inhibitory effects on
NSCLC. To test this hypothesis, we achieved stress reduction in athymic
nude mice by maintaining the animals in larger cages and by providing
them with several enrichment items, resulting in reduced systemic levels
of corticosterone, norepinephrine and epinephrine while the levels of
GABA and the physiological agonists for Gi-coupled opioid receptors,
dynorphin A and B and met-enkephalin increased. We found that stress
reduction significantly inhibited the establishment of xenografts and
significantly reduced xenograft sizes. Xenografts in the stress reduction
group expressed lower levels of cAMP, VEGF and sonic hedgehog (SHH)
accompanied by reduced protein expression of p-ERK, p-AKT, p-CREB, p-SRc
and Gli1 while cleaved caspase-3 and p53 proteins were induced. Based on
the observed reduction of the cancer stem cell markers SHH and Gli1 in
xenograft tissues, we conducted additional mechanistic experiments with
cancer stem cells enriched from three NSCLC cell lines under selective
sphere formation conditions over 21 days with subcultures every seven
days. We found that epinephrine significantly increased stem cell self
renewal associated with increased intracellular cAMP, increased levels of
the stem cell markers SHH and aldehyde dehydrogenase-1 and increased
expression of Gli1. Simultaneous treatment of the enriched cancer stem
cells with GABA or dynorphin B completely reversed all of these effects.
We conclude that stress reduction can act as a powerful inhibitor of
NSCLC by restoring cAMP homeostasis and should be incorporated as
important component into existing NSCLC prevention and therapy protocols
to improve clinical outcomes.Supported in part by 5RC1CA144640 and State
of Tennessee Center of Excellence for Human and Livestock Disease

