Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of KEAP1 genetic and epigenetic silencing in SCLC cell
lines


Introduction. Nuclear factor erythroid-2 related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a
redox-sensitive transcription factor that positively regulates the
expression of genes encoding antioxidants, xenobiotic detoxification
enzymes, and drug efflux pumps, and confers cytoprotection against
oxidative stress and xenobiotics in normal cells. Kelch-like
ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1) negatively regulates Nrf2 activity by
targeting it to proteasomal degradation. We have just described a
Keap1/Nrf2 axis full genetic and epigenetic characterization of SCLC cell
lines that revealed unreported molecular alterations of the Keap1/Nrf2
axis.Materials and methods. The downstream effects of the genetic and
epigenetic alterations of the KEAP1 gene were investigated in 12 cell
lines derived from human small cell lung carcinoma in terms of modulation
of the KEAP1 transcript and protein levels, nuclear accumulation of Nrf2
and enhancing transcriptional induction of xenobiotic metabolism enzymes.
Additional functional analysis of short interfering RNA (siRNA)
inhibition of the KEAP1 and treatment 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (DAC) were
conducted.Results. Our analysis revealed that the Keap1 mRNA and protein
level decreased significantly in genetic and epigenetic alterated SCLC
cell lines compared with those without any alterations. Con-versely Nrf2
levels and protein nuclear localization were increased and these
modifications were associated with a parallel increase in the expression
of AKR1C1, TXN1 and NQO1 at the cellular lev-el. Silencing RNA
experiments in vitro in H1184, H69V and were performed to confirm the
cause-effect relation between the gain of Nrf2 and the increase in
AKR1C1, TXN1 and NQO1 expression. Treatments with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine
restored the expression of KEAP1 in SCLC cells and replace the functional
Keap1/Nrf2 equilibrium.Conclusions. Our data provide new insights into
the potential downstream effects of genetic and epigenetic Keap1/Nrf2
molecular deregulation in SCLCs, suggesting that the impairment of Keap1
activity actually induces the expression of cytoprotective enzymes also
in small cell lung cancer cells. Validations on tissues from SCLC
affected patients combined with in vitro pharmacological studies are
demanded to establish new combined therapeutic strategies in targeted
cancer treat-ments of this aggressive lung tumour histotype.

