Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell analysis of AR N terminal, AR C terminal and the ARv7
splice variant in the CTCs of metastatic castration resistant prostate
cancer (mCRPC) patients


Background: Androgen signaling directed therapies, including Abiraterone
(A) and Enzalutamide (E), prolong survival in patient (pts) with mCRPC
and are FDA approved. Resistance to A and E is associated with the
presence of the ARv7 splice variant which, along with other AR ligand
binding domain (LBD) alterations, may constitutively activate AR.
Previous work showed marked heterogeneity in cell types and protein
expression in CTCs of mCRPC pts mandating single cell analysis to assess
the AR LBD to understand passenger vs. driving clonal subtypes. We have
developed and begun clinical validation for AR N terminal (AR N), AR C
terminal (AR C), ARv7 protein and ARv7 mRNA enabling single CTC
analysis.Methods: Cell lines (VCaP, LnCaP, LnCaP-95, 22RV1, & PC3)
expressing varying levels of AR LBD alterations were spiked into healthy
donor blood. 47 pt samples were collected for CTC analysis utilizing the
Epic Sciences platform which 24 pts (6 treatment nave, 10 post A or E,
and 8 post taxane) were selected for AR N/C/v7 analysis due to CTC
prevalence across clinical decision point where change in therapy was
needed. Epic analysis included ID of traditional CTCs, CK- CTCs, small
CTCs, and CTC clusters. Cell lines & pts were analyzed for AR N, AR C and
ARv7 IF, and a subset of patients CTC for ARv7 mRNA by RNA FISH.Results:
Immunofluorescent protein expression of AR N, AR C and ARv7 in cell lines
were consistent with published profiles. AR C & ARv7 were detected only
in AR N+ CTCs indicating assay specificity for both targets. ARv7
expression was observed in traditional, CK-, small CTCs and CTC clusters,
but no association was seen between ARv7+ and any CTC subtype. AR v7 RNA
FISH was specific to AR v7 IF+ pts.Conclusions: AR C loss is more
sensitive in detecting AR LBD alterations than ARv7. Variable ARv7/AR N
ratios in different cell types suggest intrapatient AR heterogeneity. The
low prevalence of ARv7+ CTCs of total and AR N+ CTCs suggests many pts
may have other driving resistance mechanisms.

