Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Second malignant neoplasms after non-CNS embryonal tumors in North
America


Background: Childhood cancer survivors are known to face an increased
risk of adverse medical conditions related to the initial disease or
cancer treatment; however, few studies have quantified the risk of second
malignant neoplasms (SMNs) among survivors of childhood non-CNS embryonal
cancer due to its rarity. In this study, we combined data from the U.S.
and Canada to investigate the risk of SMNs.Methods: Data from 13,107
survivors of childhood non-CNS embryonal tumors reported to the
Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program in the U.S. and
8 population-based cancer registries in Canada (between 1973 to 2010)
were analyzed. We calculated standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) for all
types of second primaries by type of first primary, age at first cancer
diagnosis, and follow-up duration. Expected numbers of SMNs were obtained
by applying age-, sex-, calendar year-, and registry-specific cancer
incidence rates to person-years contributed by these cancer
survivors.Results: One hundred and ninety SMNs were reported over 134,548
person-years of follow-up, with bone and joint cancer and leukemia being
the most common SMNs (19% and 16% respectively). The SIR for all SMNs
combined was 6.4 (95% CI: 5.53-7.35). Most site-specific SIRs were
significantly increased, ranging from 36.4 (95% CI: 25.5-49.2) for bone
and joint cancer, to 3.1 (95% CI: 1.54-5.2) for brain tumor. Among all
the survivors, those who survived rhabdomyosarcoma carried the greatest
risk of SMN development with SIR of 11.5 (95% CI: 8.7-14.6). Bone and
joint tumors were mostly seen among retinoblastoma survivors, reflecting
a markedly risk of 139.3 (95% CI: 85-207). When stratified by follow-up
period, we observed that the risk patterns varied by SMN site. For
example, the risk for a second malignancy in the thyroid remained
significantly increased even after 20 years of follow-up, whereas the
elevated risk of secondary leukemia persisted for 10 years but decreased
rapidly afterwards. Details of stratified analyses by first primary tumor
site, age at first diagnosis, and follow-up duration will be
presented.Conclusion: Survivors of childhood non-CNS embryonal tumors
have increased risks of developing SMNs compared to the general
population. Increased surveillance may explain the elevated risks within
the first few years of the initial diagnosis, but treatment effects and
shared etiology most likely account for the excess risk later in life.

