Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EpCAM+ and EpCAM- circulating tumor cells in metastatic lung cancer


Purpose: The presence of Circulating Tumor Cells (CTC) in metastatic
carcinomas detected by CellSearch is associated with poor outcome.
CellSearch uses an enrichment step based on the EpCAM antibody and
enumerates CTC using antibodies targeting specific cytokeratins. Here we
investigate the presence and role of CTC not detected by CellSearch in
lung cancer patients.Methods: Blood discarded by CellSearch after EpCAM
based enrichment was collected and enriched for CTC by filtration through
microsieves and enumerated after fluorescent labeling. Additional
anti-cytokeratin antibodies were added to the CellSearch test to increase
the cytokeratin coverage. This approach was validated using different
cell lines spiked into blood and tested on blood samples of 28 metastatic
lung cancer patients.Results: The majority of spiked EpCAM+ cells could
be detected with CellSearch whereas few cells were detected with low or
no EpCAM expression (EpCAM-). Recovery of cells on microsieves depended
strongly on cell size. One or more CTC were detected in 39% of the
patient samples, this increased to 75% when adding the CTC detected in
the discarded blood and to 82% with the use of additional cytokeratin
antibodies. Presence of CTC was significantly associated with poor
Overall Survival (OS) when detected by CellSearch without (p = 0.004) and
with additional cytokeratins (p = 0.007), but not with EpCAM-CTC in the
blood discarded by CellSearch (p = 0.271) or all CTC detected (p =
0.354)Conclusions: Expanding the cytokeratin coverage and including
EpCAM-CTC, double the number of patients with CTC and the number of CTC
detected with CellSearch. In contrast with EpCAM+ CTC, the presence of
EpCAM-CTC in this group of patients was not associated with poor OS. The
metastatic lung cancer patients included in this study were very diverse
with respect to cancer type, line of therapy and quite small in numbers
to make any definitive conclusions. Still, this pilot study warrants a
larger study to confirm the findings. In addition an in-depth
characterization of the EpCAM+ and EpCAM-CTC is needed to confirm that
the EpCAM-, panCK+ CTC are indeed tumor cells and unravel the genetic
difference with the EpCAM+, panCK+ CTC.

