Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determination of individual isothiocyanates/indoles occurring as a
result of glucosinolate degradation and their relation to biological
potential of different Brassica plants


Glucosinolates (GLs), and particularly two classes of their degradation
products - isothiocyanates (ITC) and indoles - released upon myrosinase
catalyzed hydrolysis, belong to the most promising chemopreventive
dietary components. Despite their wide use in research on chemopreventive
mechanisms and industrial utilization in the production of e.g. dietary
supplements, the methods of reliable characterization of myrosinase-GLs
system have been underdeveloped. The biological potential ascribed to ITC
and indoles, in the case of actual Brassica plant samples, is still
assessed based on GL content, though it is well known that these two
types of derivatives are not the only ones that are formed following
myrosinase action. This means that the relationship between content and
composition of bioactive Brassica ingredients and biological effect can
not be properly assessed or predicted.The aim of our research was to
optimize known or to develop novel methods that will ensure precise
description of GLs-myrosinase system in any source, natural or processed,
and to relate the rate of formation of ITC/indoles to biological effects
observed. The methods optimized include: determinations of GLs by
HPLC-ESI-MS [1], myrosinase activity by pH-static method [2], indoles by
HPLC with fluorescent detection [3], as well as novel derivatization of
ITC enabling their identification and quantitation by HPLC-DAD-MS. The
developed methods were applied to characterize an array of Brassica
samples and the results of chemical analyses were compared with
determined cytotoxicity (MTT test), genotoxicity (comet assay) and
capability of covalent DNA modification (restriction analysis [5]).GL
conversion rate to ITC and indoles was found to differ significantly not
only between Brassica species but also between individual plant parts and
was independent of myrosinase activity. The yield of conversion of
individual GLs to ITC was also not identical. The biological activity in
tests used turned out to be mostly related to indoles, some of which were
particularly toxic. The developed set of methods should ensure better and
safer exploitation of chemopreventive potential of Brassica plants.1.
Kusznierewicz et al., J. Chromatography A, 1278: 108, 20132. Piekarska et
al., Ind. Crops Prod., 50: 58, 20133. Pilipczuk et al., Food Anal. Meth.,
submitted4. Pilipczuk et al., Quantitative and qualitative determination
of isothiocyanates in plant extracts by HPLC after chemical
derivatisation, manuscript in the final stage of preparation5.
Kolodziejski et al., Food Chem. Toxicol., 75: 118, 2015

