Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of BET bromodomain proteins as a therapeutic approach
in small cell lung cancer


BET (bromodomain and extra-terminal) family proteins are epigenetic
readers that regulate expression of genes involved in cell growth and
oncogenesis. Selective small molecule BET inhibitors, such as the GSK
I-BETs (I-BET762, I-BET151), abrogate binding of BET proteins to
acetylated histones and inhibit transcriptional activation of BET target
genes. BET inhibitors attenuate proliferation and survival in a number of
hematologic cancer models, partially through down-regulation of the
critical oncogene, MYC. We and others have previously shown activity for
BET inhibitors in solid tumor models such as neuroblastoma and prostate
cancer, with concomitant down-regulation of MYC family gene expression.
However, MYC or MYCN silencing only partially accounts for the activity
of BET inhibitors in these models, suggesting that transcriptional
regulation of multiple pathways promotes I-BET induced phenotypes. Here
we describe the activity of the selective BET inhibitor, I-BET762, in
small cell lung cancer (SCLC), a highly aggressive malignancy with few
treatment options. We observe potent growth inhibition and apoptosis in a
subset of cell lines and patient-derived SCLC models in vitro, as well as
significant tumor growth inhibition in cell line and primary mouse
xenografts. These anti-proliferative effects are likely mediated by
inhibition of BRD2, BRD3, and BRD4, as siRNAs individually targeting all
three proteins result in partial inhibition of SCLC cell line growth.
Similar to our observations in neuroblastoma and prostate cancer,
I-BET762 treatment in SCLC cell lines results in transcriptional changes
affecting MYC and other pathways. We explore the contribution of these
changes to the anti-proliferative effects observed in SCLC models, and
identify potential combination strategies to enhance the activity of
I-BET762. Taken together, our data highlight the potential of BET
inhibitors as novel therapeutic agents to treat small cell lung cancer
driven by various oncogenic pathways.All studies were conducted in
accordance with the GSK Policy on the Care, Welfare and Treatment of
Laboratory Animals and were reviewed by the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee either at GSK or by the ethical review process at the
institution where the work was performed.

