Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high-throughput chemical screen identifies synergistic activity
between crizotinib and transcriptional CDK inhibitors in ALK-mutated
neuroblastoma


Activating mutations in the anaplastic lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase
(ALK) represent important therapeutic targets in neuroblastoma (NB). One
of the more common mutations, ALKF1174L, is sensitive to the FDA-approved
ALK inhibitor, crizotinib, only at high doses and mediates acquired
resistance to crizotinib in ALK-rearranged cancers. To identify compounds
that would potentiate the effect of crizotinib, we performed a
high-throughput compound screen using ALKF1174L-dependent human NB
SH-SY5Y cells and compared viability between cells treated with the
screen compound alone and in combination with crizotinib. The strongest
hits among the 8,000 compounds screened were inhibitors of cyclin
dependent kinases (CDKs). The combination of crizotinib and two candidate
pan-selective CDK inhibitors, AT7519 and SNS-032 resulted in synergistic
activity with significantly increased apoptosis over that of either
single agent alone. This effect was observed in NB cells expressing not
only ALKF1174L, but also in those expressing ALKR1275Q, the most common
NB-associated ALK mutation. Synergy was also seen with ceritinib
(LDK378), a structurally unrelated ALK inhibitor, in combination with
both AT7519 and SNS-032. We determined that the synergistic effect was
mediated preferentially through the transcriptional, rather than the cell
cycle activity of these CDK inhibitors, denoted by absence of cell cycle
arrest, stalling of RNA polymerase II at representative gene promoters,
and loss of Pol II phosphorylation at the transcription elongation marker
serine 2 in treated cells. These findings were comparable with results
obtained using agents that were highly selective for CDK9 or CDK7, CDKs
with roles in transcription regulation. Finally, in murine xenogaft
models of ALK-mutated NB, the combination resulted in inhibition of tumor
growth and prolongation of survival compared to single agents alone.
Together, these data support further pre-clinical and clinical efforts to
explore the therapeutic potential of combining ALK inhibitors with
transcriptional CDK inhibitors in ALK-mutated NB.

