Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profiling for oncogenic Kras mutation in mice and
human colorectal cancer


Purpose: Oncogenic KRAS mutations are found in 40-50% of human colorectal
cancers. However, specific therapeutics has not been yet available. We
aimed to search new therapeutic molecular targets or biomarkers in KRAS
mutated colorectal cancers.Experimental design: We generated
Apcflox/flox; CDX2P9.5-G22Cre and LSL-KrasG12D; Apcflox/flox;
CDX2P9.5-G22Cre mice, that had been considered as sporadic colon cancer
mouse model with Kras wild and mutant, respectively. We observed the
carcinogenesis at the age of 3-4 weeks by necropsy, and harvested the
tumors for gene expression profiling. We compared the gene expression by
Microarray (GeneChip, Affymetrix) between each 3 tumors from these mice
strains. Genes with >5 fold changes between the two groups were selected
as candidate genes, and subsequently narrow these down by bibliographic
search for further analyses in human colorectal cancers.Result: In
macroscopic findings, extensive polyps were generated in cecum and
proximal colon, but not in other site of gastrointestinal tract. Tumors
occurred in the both strains were considered as well differentiated
adenocarcinomas in hematoxylin-eosin staining. It was confirmed that
tumors generated in Apcflox/flox; CDX2P9.5-G22Cre mice had Cre-targeted
Apc 580D alleles and wild-type Kras, and that tumors generated in
LSL-KrasG12D; Apcflox/flox; CDX2P9.5-G22Cre mice had both Cre-targeted
Apc 580D alleles and activated oncogenic KrasG12D. In the subsequent gene
expression profiling, we identified 31 genes with >5 fold change in
Microarray analyses. Of these, we focused on some genes that showed lower
expression in Kras mutant tumor than in Kras wild type tumor. We
confirmed the lower expressions of these genes in murine tumors by
quantitative RT-PCR, and the lower expression in early-staged human
colorectal cancers with oncogenic KRAS mutant by immunohistochemistry
staining. To analyze the functions, the retroviral vectors that lead
overexpression of these genes were constructed and infected to SW480 and
RKO CRC cell lines. Proliferation and migration is being analyzed using
these cell lines.Conclusion: We identified novel genes associated with
oncogenic KRAS mutation, using the analyses of gene expression in colon
cancer mouse model.

