Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of hedgehog signaling by Mixed Lineage Kinase 3
(MAP3K11) in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDA) remains a most deadly malignancy, with
less than 5% survival over 5-year. The treatment of PDA is limited due to
lack of multiple drug options, however, Gemcitabine which is widely used
for PDA, finally develops resistance. Therefore, there is an urgent need
to identify new pathways that can alternatively be targeted in PDA. Here
we report a novel pathway that promotes oncogenic potential of Gli1, an
effector of hedgehog pathway (Hh). We recently reported that MLK3
phosphorylates Pin1 on Ser138 site and increases its catalytic activity
and nuclear translocation. In order to identify targets of nuclear
p-Pin1, we performed cancer specific gene expression profiling and found
13-fold up-regulation of Gli1 transcript, suggesting MLK3-Pin1-Gli1 axis
could activate Hh pathway. Indeed we observed that all three proteins
were overexpressed in pancreatic cancer cell lines (Panc-1, MiaPaca2,
AsPC-I) compared to epithelial (HPDE) cells. Most importantly, MLK3,
pMLK3, Pin1 and Gli1 were overexpressed in human pancreatic cancer
tissues, compared to normal adjacent tissues. Expression of Pin1 and Gli1
was also higher in tumors from PDA mouse model (KPC mouse).
Interestingly, MLK3 was able to directly phosphorylate Gli1 on specific
residues and the transcriptional activity of Gli1 was synergistically
regulated by Pin1 and MLK3 together, which was partially blocked by MLK3
pan-inhibitor, CEP-1347. CEP-1347 also down-regulated the expression of
sonic hedgehog (Shh) in Panc-1 cells suggesting that MLK3 regulates Gli1
signaling at transcriptional and post-translational levels. These results
prompted us to identify the ligand(s) that could activate this axis in
PDA. Quite interestingly, while doing cytokine/chemokine profiling,
specifically regulated by MLK3, we observed about 7-8 folds up regulation
of CXCL5 in the liver of WT mice compared to MLK3 KO mice. CXCL5 up
regulation was also found in the pancreas of the WT mice. Furthermore,
the MLK3 was activated by CXCL5 in pancreatic cancer cell line and MLK3
kinase activities also directly correlated with the reported expression
of CXCL5 in different pancreatic cell lines. In conclusion, our findings
suggest that pathological activation of MLK3-Pin1 axis by CXCL5, could
promote survival of pancreatic cancer cells via Hh pathway activation.
Thus targeting CXCL5-MLK3-Pin1-Gli1 axis might abrogate pancreatic cancer
cell growth.This work is supported by VA Grant #: BX000312 (AR) and
BX000571 (BR).

