Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) facilitates
metastasis of uterine cervical cancer by recruiting myeloid-derived
suppressor cells (MDSCs) via CXCL12-CXCR4 axis


Objectives: Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) is known to
induce the myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) to stimulate the
progression of uterine cervical cancer. The aim of this study was to
investigate the role of G-CSF and the MDSCs in the invasion and the
metastasis of uterine cervical cancer.Methods: We first established
cervical cancer cell lines stably transfected with G-CSF expression
vector (ME180-GCSF) or control vector (ME180-control). Then, using mice
subcutaneously inoculated with ME180-control or ME180-GCSF cells, the
effect of G-CSF on the induction of MDSCs (CD11b+Gr1+ cells) and the
metastatic activity of cervical cancer cells. The association of MDSCs
infiltration and the clinical outcome was also assessed
immunohistochemically using tumor samples obtained from cervical cancer
patients. Finally, using MDSCs isolated from the spleen of the
ME180-GCSF-bearing mice, we investigated whether the MDSCs facilitate the
invasive or metastatic activities of uterine cervical cancer in vitro and
in vivo.Results: 1) ME180-GCSF-derived tumors contain greater number of
MDSC, more frequently develop lymphovascular space invasion, and
developed greater number of metastatic tumors than ME180-control-tumors.
2) Immunohistochemical analyses using human samples revealed that
increased MDSC counts were significantly associated with deep stromal
invasion and lymphovascular space invasion. 3) MDSCs were recruited into
cervical cancer via CXCL12-CXCR4 axis. 4) Coincubation of MDSCs with
ME180 cells increased the invasive activity of ME180 cells. 5) The
depletion of MDSCs significantly decreased the invasive and metastatic
activities of ME180 cells.Conclusions: Granulocyte-colony stimulating
factor (G-CSF) facilitates metastasis by recruiting MDSCs. MDSCs and
CXCL12-CXCR4 axis might be promising therapeutic targets in patients with
uterine cervical cancer.

