Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An anti-Ephrin-A4 calicheamicin conjugate effectively targets
triple-negative breast and ovarian tumor-initiating cells to result in
sustained tumor regression


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) and ovarian cancer comprise
heterogeneous tumors, and neither targeted therapies nor traditional
chemotherapies have provided consistent clinical benefit. Novel therapies
that target and actively eradicate the subpopulation of tumor cells that
mediate drug resistance and tumor relapse could significantly improve
patient survival. Tumor-initiating cells (TIC) are functionally defined
as the subpopulation of cells that drive long-term tumor growth,
resistance to therapy and disease relapse. We herein identified CD324 as
a surface antigen able to reproducibly enrich for TIC in well annotated,
low passage TNBC and ovarian cancer patient-derived xenografts (PDXs).
Gene expression analysis of TIC led to the identification of Ephrin-A4 as
a prospective therapeutic TIC target. Humanized Ephrin-A4-specific
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) were generated and demonstrated to
internalize to mediate the delivery of potent cytotoxins. An
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) comprising a humanized anti-Ephrin-A4 mAb
conjugated to the DNA damaging agent calicheamicin achieved sustained
tumor regressions in vivo in both TNBC and ovarian cancer PDX.
Anti-Ephrin-A4-ADC (PF-06647263) actively reduced TIC frequency as
evidenced by limiting dilution analysis in serial transplantation assays.
Unexpectedly, TNBC tumors of the non-Claudin low molecular subtype
exhibited higher Ephrin-A4 expression and more robust responses to the
ADC than other breast cancer subtypes, which suggests a specific
translational application for breast tumor subtype classification.
Together these findings demonstrate the potential of the
Ephrin-A4-targeted calicheamicin conjugate as a first-in-class compound
designed to eradicate TIC and improve long-term survival of cancer
patients. PF-06647263 is currently being evaluated in a Phase I clinical
trial.

