Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting glucose and glutamine regulated BCL2 family members for
multiple myeloma therapy


Multiple myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell malignancy accounting for
approximately 11000 deaths annually in the US. Despite use of
immunomodulatory drugs and proteasome inhibitors, MM is largely incurable
with a median survival of 5 years due to the development of intrinsic and
acquired resistance to these drugs. Targeting metabolic dependencies in a
cancer cell may provide an effective strategy to target the molecular
heterogeneity and chemo resistance characteristic of MM.Resistance is in
part mediated by ineffective regulation of Bcl-2 family members. Myeloid
cell leukemia factor 1 (MCL-1) is a key resistance promoting
anti-apoptotic protein expressed in MM cells. We and others have
previously established that glucose regulates expression of MCL-1. MM
cells are heavily reliant upon glucose and glutamine and withdrawal of
either nutrient is associated with varying levels of apoptosis. While
glucose withdrawal was found to suppress MCL-1 expression uniformly, this
did not always correlate with the extent of apoptosis induced. One
potential mechanism for continued survival despite suppression of MCL-1
could be due to a shift in binding of pro-apoptotic BCL2 proteins to
alternate pro-survival BCL2 members. Our investigation through
co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that glucose or glutamine
withdrawal enhances a shift in binding of pro-apoptotic BIM from MCL-1 to
BCL2/ BCLxL. This shift in the association of BIM to BCL2 and BCLxL
increased sensitivity to BH3 mimetics ABT-199/737. Induction of NOXA,
that has a greater affinity for MCL-1 than BIM, is known to promote the
redistribution of BIM to BCL2 and BCLxL. Indeed, glucose and glutamine
withdrawal were found to increase NOXA expression associated with
activation of the upstream GCN2/PERK/eIF2/ATF4 axis in a cell type
specific manner. Knock down of NOXA in MM cells successfully increased
cell survival and reduced sensitivity towards ABT-199 in glucose or
glutamine deprived cells. We have extended these observations to a panel
of 7 myeloma cell lines and primary myeloma patient samples.Our study
broadly divides MM cells into two subtypes on the basis of glucose or
glutamine dependency and provides effective ways to their survival by
targeting their specific metabolic dependencies in combination with the
BH3 mimetic ABT-199. We also demonstrate that glucose transport and
metabolism in MM can be targeted with the FDA approved GLUT4 inhibitor
ritonavir and glutamine utilization can be inhibited by glutamine
antagonist DON (6-Diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine). Both ritonavir and DON
treatments sensitized MM cell lines and primary patient samples to
ABT-199, bolstering the utility of repurposing FDA-approved ritonavir and
ABT-199 (in clinical trial) for MM therapy.

