Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new promising drug through abating endoplasmic reticulum stress
response in treating endometrial cancer


Background: In order to survive under ER stress conditions, cells have a
self-protective mechanism against ER stress, which has been termed the ER
stress response. BIP/HSPA5 is a well-known marker of ER stress. In
multiple tumors, BIP expressed highly, which even confers resistance to
of chemotherapeutic agents. Some methods targeting to BIP have been
studied to enhance chemotherapy efficacy. CBIO showed the most relative
proteins with BIP is YAP-pS127. Objects: try to understand what roles YAP
plays in ER stress and to explore a new drug for endometrial cancer
taking advantage of ER stress. Methods: to analyze the YAP and YAP-pS127
level as well as HSPA5 mRNA level of EC patients. Then, overexpression of
YAP, proteasome inhibitors and YAP inhibitor were employed to explore the
relationship between YAP and BIP by immunoprecipitate (IP), western blot
(WB) and SRB techniques and to investigate the most effective combination
of drugs cell. Results: 1. 322 EC patients with G3 had higher HSPA5 level
and lower YAP-pS127 level compared with G1-2, patients with higher HSPA5
level had lower YAP-pS127 level. 12 EC patients had higher HSPA5 level
than 12 normal women. 2. MG132 and Bortezomib induced ER stress
successfully with the increase of BIP, CHOP,PERK, IRE-1a. 3.
Overexpression YAP also increased the BIP, CHOP and IRE-1a level.
However, Verteporfin(VP) as a YAP inhibitor decreased IRE-1a level,
moreover offset the effect of MG132 on increasing IRE-1a. 4. VP induced
the death of EC cells in a dose and time course manner. The sequential
method of VP- Carboplatin or VP-Taxol is most effective than the
simultaneous method of VP+ Carboplatin or VP+ Taxol. Conclusion: BIP
impacted the grade of EC and correlated with YAP-pS127 negatively in EC.
The YAP could contribute to the occurrence of ER stress. VP destroyed the
capacity of ER stress response of EC cell so that it induced cell to die
effectively. Making failure of ER stress response before chemotherapy
will enhance the effectiveness of chemotherapeutic drugs.

