Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial haplotype effects on tumor formation and metastasis
are both cell autonomous and non-cell autonomous


Increasing data support roles for mitochondrial genomes in complex
diseases, including cancer. We hypothesize that primary tumor formation
and metastasis can arise from inherited mitochondrial differences. To
test directly the role of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in mammary cancer
tumorigenicity and metastasis, we generated Mitochondrial Nuclear
Exchange (MNX) mice. This unique animal model is created by moving the
nucleus from an oocyte of one strain into an enucleated oocyte of a
different strain. By exchanging the nucleus of mouse strains promoting or
inhibiting metastatic efficiency, mtDNA effects can be distinguished from
phenotypes which would occur due to nuclear admixing. To determine if a
change in the mtDNA background impacts metastasis in a cell autonomous
manner, two FVB transgenic mouse strains encoding either Her2 or PyMT
oncogenes were crossed with MNX mice with FVB nuclear DNA and mtDNA from
either BALB/cJ or C57BL6J strains. The mtDNA were chosen because of
higher or lower metastatic efficiency, respectively (PMID9679770,
PMID16491073). Latency of mammary tumor formation in MNX mice with
C57BL/6 mtDNA is longer for both Her2 and PyMT. Lung metastases are
smaller in C57BL6 but larger in BALB/c MNX crosses with the PyMT. Studies
measuring metastasis efficiency in the MNX crosses with Her2 are still in
progress. To determine whether the mitochondrial haplotype alters
tumorigenicity or metastasis in a non-cell autonomous manner, syngeneic
tumor cells were injected orthotopically and ectopically (i.v.). Tumor
formation and metastasis differ in a tumor and mtDNA-dependent manner.
For example, E0771 forms significantly more lung metastases in
C57BL/6n:C3H/HeNmt mice compared to controls. To explore underlying
mechanisms, metabolic differences were observed in MNX and matched wild
type mouse embryonic fibroblasts using the Seahorse bioanalyzer.
Conclusion: mtDNA affects mammary cancer development and progression via
both genetic and non-cell autonomous mechanisms in the tumor
microenvironment. Support: Susan G. Komen for the Cure (SAC11037), Natl
Fndn Cancer Res, Steiner Family Fund for Metastasis Research, Kansas
Bioscience Authority, CA134981, P30-CA168524

