Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smoking Carcinogen (BaP) enhances tumorigenic phenotypes of
cervical cancer cells by modulation of HPV oncogenes and microRNA profiles


Cervical cancer (CxCa), one of the most common and deadly cancers among
women worldwide, is associated with persistent Human Papillomavirus (HPV)
infection. An importunate oncogenic HPV infection itself is not enough to
immortalize and transform the epithelial host cell. Additional factors
are needed to acquire an immortal, malignant and invasive phenotype. In
addition to HPV infection, cigarette smoking is a known risk factor.
Benzo[a]pyrene (BaP), a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon, is among the
numerous carcinogens associated with cigarette smoking. BaP levels have
been found to be elevated in the cervical mucus of women who smoke. BaP
has been shown to stimulate high levels of the viral oncoproteins E6 and
E7 besides enhancing virion synthesis in cell lines prolifically infected
with HPV. Furthermore, mixtures containing BaP, such as cigarette smoke
condensate, have been shown to induce dramatic microRNA (miR) alterations
in rodent lungs and in vitro human bronchial models. MiRs, small
non-coding RNAs, regulate gene expression and their aberrant
regulation/function has been reported in a large majority of cancers.
Additionally, previous studies have shown the role of BaP in modulating
miR profiles in different cancers. In this study we examine the effects
of the carcinogen BaP on miRs and their related pathways in CxCa. In
vitro treatment of CxCa cells with BaP resulted in an increase of
expression of oncogenic miR-21 and decrease in tumor suppressor miR-214.
MiR-21 has been shown to enhance chemoresistance to established regimens
of chemotherapy and radiation therapy. In addition BaP also modulates the
downstream pathways that these miRs regulate. BaP treatment increased the
expression of oncogenic transcription factors such as NFkB-65, pSTAT-3,
pSTAT-5 (transcription factors promoting miR-21 expression) and oncogenic
cytokine IL-6, besides decreasing tumor suppressor PTEN (a target of
miR-21). IL-6 is known to increase miR-21 expression through pSTAT-3 and
pSTAT-5. Moreover, BaP in combination with IL-6 enhanced the migratory
properties of CxCa cells. BaP also increased the nuclear translocation of
-catenin as observed through confocal microscopy. -catenin is a direct
target of miR-214. Natural or synthetic compounds that can mitigate BaP
induced tumorigenic effects can have tremendous clinical significance.
Herein, we report that curcumin (C) or its PLGA (poly [lactic-co-glycolic
acid]) based nanoformulation (NC) effectively suppresses BaP induced
tumorigenicity, regulates the expression of miRs and nuclear
translocation of -catenin associated with BaP in Caski/SiHa CxCa cells.
In vivo experiments show that C/NC efficaciously reduced the tumor burden
in xenograft mouse model. These data suggest a potential role of smoking
in CxCa progression via regulating miR profiles and C/NC may effectively
attenuate smoking induced CxCa progression.

