Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tirapazamine as a strategy to prevent cell dissemination and
overcome drug resistance


Introduction: Multiple myeloma (MM) and Waldenstrm's macroglobulinemia
(WM) are lymphoplasmacytic malignancies which are characterized by
continuous spread through cell trafficking in and out of the BM. We have
recently shown that the spread process in these diseases is mediated by
hypoxia. Moreover, despite the introduction of novel therapies, cancer
patients relapse due to the development of a drug-resistant stem
cell-like subpopulation, which we recently found to be, at least in part,
promoted by hypoxia. Therefore, in this study we aimed to overcome spread
and drug resistance in MM and WM by inhibition of the hypoxic responses
in these cells. Tirapazamine (TPZ) is a hypoxia-activated pro-drug
causing cell apoptosis, which has been shown to improve cancer patient
outcome when combined with radiotherapy. We use TPZ for the first time in
hematologic malignancies to target the drug-resistant cancer cells and
sensitize them to therapy.Procedures: Cell survival was tested on MM
(MM1.s, H929, OPM1, RPMI8226) and WM (BCWM.1, MWCL.1) cell lines exposed
to normoxia (21% O2) or hypoxia (1% O2) for 24hrs in the presence of
bortezomib and carfilzomib, different concentrations of TPZ (in order to
obtain an IC50), or combination of those drugs using MTT assay. For
adhesion assay, cancer cells were pre-labeled with calcein-AM, treated
with TPZ, applied to unlabeled endothelial cells, non-adherent cells were
washed after 1hr, and adherent cells were analyzed by a fluorescent
reader. Chemotactic properties of cells were tested using a transwell
chamber and the migrated cells were counted by flow cytometry. For in
vivo study, 5 106 MM1s-Luc-GFP cells were injected i.v. into 6 SCID mice
and tumor progression was monitored for 3 weeks by bioluminescent
imaging. All mice were treated with (1) high-dose bortezomib (1.5mg/kg)
only (n = 3), or (2) bortezomib and TPZ (40mg/kg; n = 3), all
administered i.p. sequentially twice a week. Bone marrow and peripheral
blood were collected and analyzed for the presence of GFP+ cells by flow
cytometry.Summary of data: We found that hypoxia induced drug resistance
to bortezomib and carfilzomib of MM and WM cells, and that TPZ was active
in a dose-dependent manner only in hypoxic conditions. Combination of TPZ
with bortezomib and carfilzomib, resensitized cancer cells to death in
hypoxia. Addition of TPZ increased adhesion of cancer cells to
endothelial cells, and decreased chemotactic properties of cancer cells
in hypoxia in vitro. Moreover, post-treatment residual cancer cells were
further decreased using TPZ, preventing recurrence of MM in
vivo.Conclusion: We report that TPZ prevents hypoxia-induced metastasis
and overcomes hypoxia-induced drug resistance in MM and WM. This is the
first study to show the efficacy of TPZ in hematologic malignancies in
general and in MM and WM in particular. This data provide a preclinical
basis for future clinical trials testing efficacy of TPZ in MM and WM.

