Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galectin-3 modulates glioblastomas (GBM) tumor microenvironment,
and is linked to glioblastoma invasion


Malignant glioblastomas (GBM) are lethal form of brain tumors, and are
difficult to treat due to their invasion into the brain parenchyma.
Aggressive and invasive nature of GBM is at least partly attributable to
GBM associated stem cells (GSC). Soluble factors released by GBM and GSC
can recruit inflammatory cells, including brain resident microglia to
tumor micro-environment (TME) that support angiogenesis and invasion. We
have previously shown that exogenous Galectin-3 (Gal-3), a carbohydrate
binding lectin increases the migratory potential of BV2 microglial cells,
and promotes the formation of pro-angiogenic structures in an in vitro
HUVEC culture and 3D matrigel model. Furthermore, Gal-3 supports the
survival of microglial cells under hypoxic environment. In this study, we
investigated the role of Gal-3 in GBM by utilizing the biochemical and
molecular approaches. Using well characterized GBM tumor cell lines, and
GSC lines that exhibit various degrees of invasive potential, we have
identified that the expression of the Gal-3 is significantly up-regulated
in GSCs that are highly invasive as compared to those that form only
focal tumors in a mouse xenotransplantation model. Gal-3 is also highly
expressed in microglia that accumulated in and around the GSC tumors in
mouse brain, as indicated by co-localization of Gal-3 and Iba1, the maker
for activated microglia. Furthermore, Gal-3 expression is significantly
increased in GBM tumor cells when exposed to in vitro hypoxic conditions.
Importantly, Gal-3 increased the migratory potential of GBM tumor cells
in vitro, indicating its role as a chemo-attractant. Taken together,
these results suggest that Gal-3 plays a critical role in promoting GBM
invasion through modulating the interaction of microglia in TME and GBM.
Thus Gal-3 may be a potential therapeutic target for GBM.

