Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A drug-screening model to identify compounds active in cells under
metabolic stress


Background and aim: Promising anticancer compounds often fail in vivo due
to lack of efficacy. Drug screenings to identify anticancer agents are
usually performed in culture conditions that very poorly represent the
complex metabolic tumor environment. Tumor tissues are characterised by
low oxygen (hypoxia) and acidic extracellular pH (acidosis). A screen of
a drug-library for compounds able to induce cell death in acidic/hypoxic
conditions may lead to discover effective drugs targeting
quiescent/hypoxic cells, normally considered responsible for tumor
relapses after therapy. Methods: The colon carcinoma cell line HCT-116
has been adapted to grow in low pH conditions (pH 6.8). The Prestwick
compound library (1200 FDA-approved compounds) was used to validate the
assay. Cell viability was measured using the acid phosphatase assay after
48 hours exposure to test compounds. The assay was validated in HCT-116
cells cultured in normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Multicellular
spheroids (MCS) were used to evaluate the sensitivity to hit compounds
confirmed at least three times in 2D culture conditions. Results: The
assay was optimized to perform the screening at pH 6.8 in normoxic and
hypoxic conditions. Experiments have demonstrated the ability of cells to
survive and grow in hypoxic conditions (1% oxygen) for at least 4 days.
The test was optimized in terms of number of plated cells and serum
concentration. Hit compounds were identified based on the mean values for
quality control plus 3 standard deviations of untreated samples. The
screen led to identify 20 hits for both conditions and 11 hits were
further confirmed for hypoxic/acidic conditions. Auranofin and
Verteporfin showed to better induce cell death in cells adapted or
acutely exposed to low pH compared to parental cells and immortalized
epithelial cells (RPE1). Both drugs showed cytotoxic effects on cells
grown as MCS, suggesting a potential good efficacy of the therapeutic
agent in vivo. In addition, the screening of about 10000 compounds of the
LCBKI library is ongoing and about 100 hits have been identified.
Conclusions: The screening validation on the Prestwick library will
hopefully lead to identify potential off-label effects of already
approved drugs. The screening of larger drug-libraries will hopefully
lead to find and characterize more compounds able to target slow
proliferating and therapy resistant cells.

