Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting super-enhancer induced gene expression with the novel
BRD4 inhibitor OTX015 in preclinical models of MYCN-amplified
neuroblastoma


Bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) functions as an epigenetic reader
and binds to promoter super-enhancer regions driving oncogenes such as
MYC. Neuroblastomas (NB) harboring MYCN amplifications are highly lethal
tumors often resistant to standard chemotherapy. OTX015 is a novel
BRD2/3/4 inhibitor currently in clinical Phase Ib studies in hematologic
malignancies and solid tumors. We have previously reported that OTX015
displayed in vitro and in vivo antitumor effects, together with MYCN
transcription attenuation in NB models (Henssen et al; AACR 2014). Here,
we investigated OTX015 targeting of super-enhancer regulated genes in
MYCN-amplified NB in vitro and in vivo models. Protein-DNA interactions
were analyzed using ChipSeq in IMR 5 cells. We identified super-enhancers
associated with a variety of genes of known importance in NB, including
MYCN, as well as some previously undescribed genes. OTX015 inhibited cell
proliferation in Chp-212, Chp-134, Gimen, IMR-32, NB69, SK-N-AS, SK-N-BE,
and SK-N-BE2 NB cell lines after 72 h exposure. OTX015 reduced tumor
burden in IMR 5 xenograft mice and in a genetically engineered model of
MYCN-amplified NB LSL MYCN;Dbh-iCre, when administered by oral gavage at
a dose of 25 mg/kg daily for 3 weeks. Antitumoral effects of OTX015 were
coupled with decreased binding of BRD4 to chromatin and subsequent global
transcriptional changes. Moreover, OTX015 exposure led to significant
transcriptional downregulation of genes associated with super-enhancers,
supporting the notion that BRD4 preferentially acts at these chromatin
sites. Interestingly, BRD inhibition not only attenuated MYCN
transcription but most significantly affected MYCN-regulated
transcriptional programs. Ectopic expression of MYCN was not able to
abrogate the antitumoral effects of BRD4 inhibition, indicating direct
involvement of MYCN in super-enhancer regulated gene expression and
possibly explaining the increased susceptibility of MYCN-amplified NB to
OTX015 inhibition. We describe here for the first time that BRD
inhibition by OTX015 selectively and preferentially targets global
super-enhancer induced transcription in MYCN-driven NB. These new
insights will serve as a rationale for a clinical trial in pediatric
MYCN-amplified NB patients with OTX015.

