Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microglia differentiated from induced pluripotent stem cells treat
glioma tumors in mice


Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM), a grade IV astrocytoma is the most
aggressive primary brain tumor. GBM patients have the worst prognoses
with median overall survival of less than 15 months from the time of
diagnosis. The standard of care consists of maximal surgical resection
followed by chemotherapy, given concomitantly with and following
radiotherapy. Despite these measures, disease progression or recurrence
is virtually inevitable and occurs at a median time of approximately 7
months. Among the more promising experimental treatments for recurrent
GBM is the vaccination of patients with dendritic cells to elicit
anti-tumor immune responses. The safety of this approach has been well
demonstrated, but the clinical response rate of patients has ranged from
8%-30%. To improve upon these responses, we investigated the ability of
microglia; the resident immune cells of the CNS, to better activate
cytotoxic T lymphocytes within the tumor microenvironment. Using a murine
syngeneic intracranial tumor model, we found that combined vaccination
with dendritic cells and microglia is more effective than either alone.
Combination treated mice had sustained regression of tumors over a
four-week imaging period and the median survival of the animals was
greater than one year. In contrast, the median survivals of the various
control groups were 52 days. Translation of our findings to the clinical
setting requires a source of patient-specific microglia. Here, we report
the sequential differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells
(hiPSC) into hematopoietic progenitor-like cells, and then into cells
with a phenotype and gene expression profile resembling that of primary
brain-isolated microglia. Similarly, human iPSC-derived microglia
(hiPS-MG) exhibit phagocytic activity; produce inflammatory cytokines and
reactive oxygen species. We have also differentiated mouse induced
pluripotent stem cells into microglia (miPS-MG) with gene expression
profile and phenotype similar to primary neonatal microglia. Mice treated
with a combination therapy of tumor lysate-pulsed miPS-MG and dendritic
cells show median survival greater than one year, whereas the survival
for the control group was less than 50 days. For direct clinical
translation of our findings, the ability to readily differentiate hiPSC
into microglia in vitro will allow for the generation of patient-specific
cells for use in a GBM immunotherapy protocol. hiPSC-derived microglia
may also be useful as modulatory cells for a variety of CNS diseases and
serve as gene and protein delivery vehicles to the CNS.Acknowledgement:
This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH
[NINDS].

