Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting oncoproteins via disruption of proteostasis:
Identification of oncoprotein destabilizing agents using luciferase
tagged oncoproteins


Since many oncoproteins are considered undruggable targets, we have
developed and validated a new screening strategy to identify small
molecules that inhibit oncoprotein activity by causing their degradation.
Recently, the mechanism of action for the class of drugs known as
immunomodulators (IMiDs; e.g. thalidomide, lenalidomide and pomalidomide)
has uncovered a novel oncogene targeting strategy. IMiDs commandeer an E3
ligase complex that contains the E3 recognition subunit cereblon and
divert its activity toward two transcription factors IKZF1 and IKZF3,
which play critical roles in hematopoietic cells. This mechanism explains
the efficacy of IMiDs in multiple myeloma and may translate into a
general approach to target traditionally undruggable oncoproteins. We
generated cell lines stably expressing IKZF1as a firefly luciferase
fusion protein with coexpression of Renilla luciferase. A pilot HTS
campaign was run to uncover novel drugs that can mimic the effects of
IMiDs. A cell line expressing the MYC-firefly fusion protein was used for
counter-screening. We used pomalidomide as our positive control and it
reduced firefly luciferase signal 75% with no change in the renilla
luciferase signals. This control resulted in a Z prime value typically
>0.5. The pilot screen of 3,850 compounds resulted in 39 hits that
reduced firefly luciferase >35%. More importantly, both thalidomide and
lenalidomide were found to be active in the screen. Confirmation testing
revealed that 75% of hits repeated, but also had activity in the
MYC-firefly cell line. Actives were tested in western blots for their
ability to decrease fusion protein abundance. Many active compounds did
not reduce protein levels in western blots and represent nonspecific hits
(e.g. luciferase inhibitor). In conclusion, we present a screening
paradigm with the potential to uncover novel proteostasis disruptors by
expressing luciferase tagged oncoproteins.

