Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ribosomal protein-p53-MDM2 signaling by nucleolar stress response
and drug discovery


Ribosomal biogenesis is a major energy consuming cellular step, and
tightly regulated by the demand of protein synthesis associated with cell
growth and proliferation. Thus, defects that impair ribosomal biogenesis
cause nucleolar stress response. This response initiates a cascade
mediated by ribosomal proteins (RPs), particularly RPL5, RPL11, RPL23,
and RPS7. These RPs are usually located in the nucleolus but are rapidly
released into the nucleoplasm upon nucleolar stress, activating the tumor
suppressor MDM2-p53 pathway. Thus, nucleolar stress response is
considered as a quality control surveillance mechanism that regulates
balance between proper protein synthesis and cell cycle progression for
tumor suppression. However, it is unknown whether there are direct
connections between p53-activating RP genes and cancer development in
vivo, and whether this stress response might be target for cancer
therapy.We identified nucleolar protein PICT1 as a novel key regulator of
nucleolar stress response. To clarify PICT1 function, we generated
PICT1-deficient mice and ES cells and carried out extensive analyses. Our
results show that even without DNA damage, PICT1 loss results in
p53-dependent growth arrest in vitro and in vivo. We further show that
PICT1 binds to RPL11, and that RPL11 is released from nucleoli in the
absence of PICT1. In PICT1-deficient cells, increased binding of RPL11 to
MDM2 blocks MDM2-mediated ubiquitination of p53, leading to p53
accumulation and repression of cell proliferation. Human colon and
esophageal cancer patients with low PICT1 expression have better
prognoses. Similarly, when shRNA is used to deplete PICT1 in various
tumor cell lines with intact p53 signaling, the cells slow in growth and
accumulate p53. These data suggest that PICT1 is a novel key regulator of
the MDM2-p53 pathway on nucleolar stress response and promotes tumor
progression by retaining RPL11 in the nucleolus. Thus, the nucleolar
stress response PICT1 regulates could play a definitive role in tumor
suppression and, chemicals which induce nucleolar stress response might
be lead to new cancer therapeutics.Therefore, we next constructed a
reporter system to visualize and quantitate nucleolar stress response. We
found that this reporter system allowed quantitative measurement depend
on strength and duration of this stress. As this reporter system showed
excellent accuracy, we next screened 400 inhibitors, 1,300 approved drug,
and hundreds of natural products from marine species. We found hit
compounds including RNA synthesis inhibitor Doxorubicin and Aclarubicin,
and also positive control compound, ActinomycinD. In addition, inhibitors
of CDK and HDAC were included here. Thus, the nucleolar stress reporter
system may reveal unexpected physiological functions of the nucleolar
stress response, such as mitotic progression and epigenetics regulation,
and identify novel cancer therapeutics, especially for individuals with
intact-p53 signaling.

