Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel GD2-specific chimeric antigen receptor-modified T cells
targeting osteosarcoma


Despite intensive multi-modality therapies employed in the treatment of
osteosarcoma (OS) the prognosis for children with high-risk disease
remains suboptimal. Since standard systemic therapy for OS has remained
unchanged in the past thirty years, with no new agents identified to
complement conventional regimens, there has been a significant plateau in
the survival of OS patients thus necessitating the development of more
targeted and efficacious therapeutics. Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)
modified T cells can meet this need by utilizing the immune system's
surveillance capacity and potent cytotoxic mechanisms against tumor
specific antigen targets with exquisite specificity. Since OS highly
expresses the GD2 antigen, a viable immunotherapeutic target, we sought
to assess if a novel 4th generation CAR modified T cell could target GD2
and induce cytotoxicity against OS.We have engineered a newer generation
of CAR T cells that harness the vital co-stimulatory domains imperative
for T cell activation while embedding the safety features of suicide
induction. The latter, an advanced safety design iCasp9, is based on
AP1903-induced caspase 9 dimer formation to trigger apoptosis, which has
been incorporated in our CAR design. The 4th generation lentiviral CAR
(4S-CAR) encodes a combination of CD28/CD137/CD27 T cell co-stimulatory
domains and CD3zeta domain fused with a mutated FKBP12 (F36V) and caspase
9. To illustrate the self-destructive function, 4S-CAR T cells were
treated with AP1903 to induce iCasp9 dimerization. High efficiency of
apoptosis was observed within 30 min, and in 2 hours, more than 80% CAR T
cells died. After demonstrated the ability to screen patient OS samples
for GD2 expression, we found that OS cells expressing high levels of GD2
were effectively targeted and killed by 4S-GD2-CAR-T cells. 4S-GD2 CAR
modified T cells were shown to overexpress the exhaustion marker PD-1
when in contact with target tumor cells, and multiple OS expressing cell
lines were shown to overexpress PD-L1, and the PD-L1 level increased
after cocultured with 4S-GD2 CAR modified T cells. The combination
effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors such as anti-PD-L1 and anti-PD-1
antibodies with CAR T cells will be further investigated.Anti-GD2
expressing CAR T cells provide a novel targeted approach to eliminate
residual disease with consummate specificity. As cellular therapeutics
using CAR T cells become further entrenched in the forefront against
refractory malignancies, OS provides a new and compulsory niche to
further test the feasibility, safety and potential efficacy of this
promising new technology.

