Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paracrine effect of NRG1 and HGF drives resistance to MEK
inhibitors in metastatic uveal melanoma


Metastatic uveal melanoma (UM) patients usually die within one year,
emphasizing an urgent need to develop new treatment strategies.
Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) small molecule inhibitors
improve survival in cutaneous melanoma patients but show only modest
efficacy in UM patients. In this study, we identified compensatory
mechanisms that provide resistance to MEK inhibition in metastatic UM. We
screened for growth factors that were able to induce resistance in three
newly characterized metastatic UM cell lines to MEK inhibitors,
trametinib and selumetinib, with colony formation assay and viability
assay. Cellular signaling pathway analysis was carried out to determine
the molecular mechanisms of resistance to MEK inhibition in metastatic UM
cells. Clinical-grade antibody and inhibitors targeting these pathways
were used to determine their capability to overcome the resistance
mediated by these growth factors. Conditioned medium collected from
fibroblasts were used to evaluate whether stromal effect from fibroblasts
could drive resistance to metastatic UM cells. We demonstrate that
Neuregulin 1 (NRG1) and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) provide resistance
to MEK inhibition. Mechanistically, trametinib enhances the
responsiveness to NRG1, whereas HGF induces sustained activation of AKT
in the presence of trametinib. Individually targeting ERBB3 and cMET, the
receptors for NRG1 and HGF, overcomes resistance to trametinib provided
by these growth factors and by conditioned medium from fibroblasts, which
produce NRG1 and HGF. Analysis of metastatic liver biopsies showed that
ERBB2, which is the co-receptor for NRG1, and cMET were phosphorylated in
some of these clinical specimens. Our data suggest that combination of
MEK inhibitors with ERBB3 and cMET targeting agents may provide novel and
effective treatment strategies in metastatic UM.

