Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AZD1152HQPA Accurin nanoparticles inhibit growth of diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas and small cell lung cancer


Inhibitors of the Aurora Kinases have been developed to treat both liquid
and solid tumours. The prodrug AZD1152 is an inhibitor of Aurora kinase B
that is clinically active in acute myeloid leukaemia. Despite this
clinical proof-of-concept, the broader clinical utility of AZD1152 is
limited bythe requirement for continuous IV infusion, and the
mechanism-related dose-limiting toxicities seen with this class of
inhibitors, in particular bone marrow toxicity. To address these
challenges and maximise the clinical utility, an Accurin nanoparticle
containing AZD1152HQPA, the active metabolite of AZD1152, has been
developed. In preclinical models, the AZD1152HQPA Accurin shows increased
efficacy without the bone marrow toxicity seen with the prodrug
formulation. In preclinical studies, models of Diffuse Large B Cell
Lymphoma (DLBCL) and Small Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC) show sensitivity to
monotherapy Aurora B kinase inhibitors. Consistent with this, AZD1152
inhibits the growth of subsets of DLBCL and SCLC cells lines in vitro,
while in vivo, AZD1152HQPA Accurin consistently reduces the growth of
DLBCL and SCLC models. When given at 25mg/kg on days 1 and 3, AZD1152HQPA
Accurin gave either equivalent or superior activity to AZD1152 delivered
at 25mg/kg on days 1, 2, 3 and 4. When the dose-schedule was explored,
increasing the dose intensity increases the anti-tumour effect, while
modifying the timing and dose intensity of each dose cycle also
influenced the anti-tumour activity. In a DLBCL model, low dose
AZD1152HQPA Accurin (25mg/kg delivered as a fractionated dose on day 1
and 3) gave tumour stasis or partial regression, while a higher dose
(50mg/kg delivered weekly) gave increased tumour response, which was
durable on repeated dosing. The timing of AZD1152HQPA Accurin doses had
significant impact on the shape of the tumour response, indicating that
optimal scheduling is important to maximize the benefits of sustained
release and enhanced tumour accumulation of Accurin nanoparticles.
Collectively the preclinical data indicate that the AZD1152HQPA Accurin
has the potential for activity in SCLC and DLBCL; is able to be used
flexibly; and has an improved therapeutic index.

