Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Over-expression of NPM-ALK drives resistance to TKIs in ALK+ ALCL
but is toxic upon drug withdrawal, permitting prolonged tumour control
through discontinuous dosing


Activated Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) is seen in several cancers,
including 2-7% of non-small cell lung cancer and 70% of Anaplastic Large
Cell Lymphoma (ALCL). The most common ALK fusion in ALCL is a
translocation, t(2;5)(p23;35), placing the kinase domain of ALK before
the constitutively active promoter of nucleophosmin (NPM). Activated ALK
drives oncogenesis by turning on multiple proliferative pathways. The
success of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in ALK+ lung cancer has
prompted evaluation of their use in ALK+ ALCL as a therapeutic strategy
for patients who fail combination chemotherapy. Clinical studies in lung
cancer show resistance to these drugs limits progression-free survival.
We aim to identify resistance mechanisms against approved TKIs,
crizotinib and ceritinib, in ALK+ ALCL.We selected for resistance in 3
patient-derived cell lines through propagation in gradually increasing
drug concentrations. We assessed resistant subclones with long-insert
whole-genome sequencing, viability and proliferation assays, qPCR and
western blots. Similar profiling was carried out upon drug withdrawal. We
validated our findings in cytokine-dependent murine pro-B cells
transformed with NPM-ALK during ceritinib incubation. We xenografted
resistant clones to SCID mice and assessed tumour burden over
time.Resistant clones showed viability stimulation by TKIs and when
washed out of drug, these clones underwent apoptosis due to
hyper-stimulation of ALK signalling. Genomic amplification of NPM-ALK was
seen leading to an increased expression at the mRNA and protein levels.
TKI-dependence therefore was co-selected with resistance, showing for the
first time toxicity to cancer cells due to an overdose of ALK signalling.
We validated our findings in IL3-dependent FL/5.12 cells, which also
showed co-selection for drug resistance and dependence due to ALK
over-expression. Resistant ALCL lines selected for ability to grow
without TKI behaved similarly to parent lines, showing no stimulation of
viability in presence of drug. ALK mRNA and protein also return to
baseline in these cells. SCID mice injected with resistant cells required
TKI treatment for tumour engraftment and tumour burden decreased when
drug dosing was stopped. When tumours re-grew, drug treatment was
reinitiated, generating a second response demonstrating in vivo that
NPM-ALK up-regulation results in both resistance and dependence on the
TKI and resistant cells die from an overdose of ALK signalling in the
absence of drug.Our results reveal that up-regulation of the fusion-ALK
drug target is a resistance mechanism, previously un-reported in any ALK+
cancers. Up-regulation of NPM-ALK provides cells means to acquire
resistance but also results in ALK overdose when drug is withdrawn,
revealing intermittent dosing as a potential therapeutic strategy to
prolong tumour control in ALK + patients.

