Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of aryl substitution and intramolecular ligand H-bonding
in selective inhibitors of the MEK5/ERK5 cascade


Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) pathways initiate with external
signaling, proceed through a sequence of protein kinases, and alter cell
proliferation, growth, and survival. MAPK pathways proceed through a
well-ordered sequence but are interconnected and modified by the cell's
internal needs. The MEK-catalyzed phosphorylation of its target ERK
represents the most selective interaction of MAPK signaling cascades. The
type III MEK1/2 inhibitor, Mekinist, was recently approved by the FDA for
the treatment of unresectable or metastatic melanoma with BRAF V600E or
V600K mutations. This success suggests inhibitors of other MEK/ERK
cascades may be reasonable strategies for anti-cancer therapeutic
strategies. Despite the likely involvement of MEK5 phosphorylation of
ERK5 in early and triple negative breast cancers, prostate cancer, and
renal cancer, little work has been focused on developing selective MEK5
inhibitors. We have previously described an initial series of anthranilic
acid derivatives structurally derived from the known non-selective MEK
inhibitor PD0325901. To explore structural requirements for selective
inhibition of MEK5 versus MEK1/2, aryl substitution and the role of
proposed internal hydrogen bonding of the ligand were examined with novel
compounds. These were tested at 10 M in MDB-MB-213 cells subsequently
treated with EGF to induce MEK1/2 and MEK5 phosphorylation. Western blot
analysis following electrophoresis using IR-tagged antibodies raised
against pERK1/2, pERK5, ERK1/2, or ERK5 permitted determination of total
and relative inhibition of MEK-mediated generation of pERK. Incubation
with PD0325901 resulted in full suppression of both pERK1/2 and pERK5.
For the aryl substitutions examined, omission of the halogens on the
pendant phenyl group (SC-1-181) abolished MEK1/2 inhibition(0% decrease
in pERK1/2) yet retained good MEK5 inhibition (82% decrease in pERK5).
Disruption of an internal nitrogen-acyl hydrogen bond preferentially
decreased MEK5 inhibition (SC-2-32: 40% and 16% decrease in pERK5 and
pERK1/2 respectively). This establishes early evidence of significant
variation in specificity of MEK type III binding sites that may be
exploited as pharmacological tools and possibly as therapeutic agents for
cancers overexpressing MEK5.

