Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The BET inhibitor INCB054329 is synergistic with JAK1 inhibition
in models of multiple myeloma


Bromodomain and Extra Terminal (BET) protein inhibitors have emerged as a
potentially effective therapeutic option for multiple tumor types,
through their ability to regulate expression of genes necessary for
proliferation and survival. For example, multiple myeloma (MM) cells have
been shown to be highly sensitive to BET inhibition due in large part to
the ability of BET proteins to control transcription of c-myc, an
oncogene known to be dysregulated in MM. Likewise, some inflammatory
response and cytokine signaling pathways associated with MM (eg.
IL-6/JAK/STAT pathway) have also been shown to be reliant on BET
proteins. Therefore, inhibition of both BET proteins and the JAK/STAT
signaling pathway may be beneficial to MM patients. Here we assess the in
vitro and in vivo effects of combining clinical compounds that target BET
proteins and JAK in multiple myeloma cell lines. Studies were performed
using the potent pan-BET inhibitor INCB054329 and selective JAK1
inhibitors. When tested in cell proliferation assays, the combination of
BET and JAK1 inhibitors displayed strong synergistic effects in the IL-6
dependent INA-6 MM cell line in vitro. Western blots also revealed that
several pharmacodynamic (PD) markers including c-MYC, PIM-2 and
phospho-STAT3 were further repressed with the combination than with
single agents alone. Likewise, the c-MYC and p-STAT3 PD markers could
also be increasingly repressed in vivo by combined administration of BET
and JAK1 inhibitors in the INA-6 mouse xenograft model. In vivo efficacy
experiments in the INA-6 model resulted in enhanced, synergistic tumor
growth inhibition in the BET/JAK inhibitor cohort as compared with the
single drug cohorts. Interestingly, the cytokine independent MM1.S cell
line was also sensitive to the BET/JAK inhibitor combination in vivo,
while being far less sensitive to JAK1 inhibition as a monotherapy. In
the MM1.S model, the c-MYC and p-STAT3 PD markers also behaved as seen in
the INA-6 model. Our data indicate that the pharmacological inhibition of
BET proteins and JAK1 yields strong combinatorial effects in MM cell
lines both in vitro and in vivo. Therefore, dual inhibition of BET
proteins and the JAK/STAT signaling pathway may offer a novel therapeutic
approach and suggest a potential clinical utility for this drug
combination in MM.

