Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of the IL-6/JAK/STAT3 signaling pathway inhibits
pancreatic tumor cell growth in 3D spheroid cultures and in xenograft
models


Emerging evidence has demonstrated the importance of tumor-associated
inflammation in the development and progression of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. Specifically, constitutive activation of the
inflammation-related IL-6/JAK/STAT3 signaling pathway has been reported
in pancreatic tumors and has been suggested to be a poor prognostic
factor for overall survival in patients with advanced disease. The aim of
this study was to assess the effects of inhibition of IL-6/JAK/STAT3
signaling on pancreatic cell growth in vitro and tumor growth in vivo.
INCB039110, a JAK1 selective inhibitor currently in multiple Phase 2
clinical trials, was used to block the IL-6/JAK/STAT3 signaling pathway
in cells. We show that while inhibition of IL-6/JAK/STAT3 signaling by
INCB039110 showed no effects on the proliferation of pancreatic cell
lines grown under conventional 2D monolayer cell culture conditions, this
inhibitor demonstrated growth inhibitory activity against the pancreatic
tumor cell lines, Hs700T and BxPC-3, in a 3D-spheroid culture system.
Importantly, addition of cytokines that stimulated JAK/STAT3 signaling in
these cells significantly promoted the growth of the spheroids, and this
could be completely reversed by INCB039110. Furthermore, JAK1 inhibition
enhanced the cytotoxicity induced by gemcitabine in both Hs700T and
BxPC-3 spheroids in a combination study. The results were confirmed with
another novel Jak1 selective inhibitor, INCB052793 which is currently in
a Phase 1 clinical trial in patients with advanced malignancies. Since
elevated serum IL-6 and its correlation with cachexia has been observed
in pancreatic cancer, we tested and found that INCB039110 prevented
weight loss in an IL-6 induced cachexia model in mice. Finally, we show
that INCB039110 blocked tumor growth in human pancreatic xenograft models
in mice at clinically relevant doses, both as monotherapy and in
combination with cytotoxic agents such as gemcitabine. Thus, we
demonstrate that pharmacological blockade of the IL-6/JAK/STAT3 signaling
pathway with a JAK1 selective inhibitor can have both tumor intrinsic and
extrinsic effects resulting in the inhibition of pancreatic tumor cell
growth and the modulation of inflammation-associated cachexia. These data
suggest that pancreatic cancer patients may potentially benefit from JAK1
inhibitors in the clinic.

