Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nestin expression in tumor cells is associated with BRCA1 positive
genotype and a basal-like phenotype in breast cancer


Background:The basal-like subtype of breast cancer is one of at least
five molecular categories. These poor prognosis tumors are most often
triple negative, i.e. negative for hormone receptors and HER2, and
therefore lack targeted treatment options. There is at present no
consensus on how to best define this subtype, and different surrogate
immunohistochemistry based markers have been suggested. We here present
data supporting nestin as a marker of the basal-like subtype. Originally
reported in neuronal progenitor cells, nestin was later observed in the
stem cell/progenitor compartment in a variety of tissues as well as in
different cancer types, and suggested to be a cancer stem cell marker. In
breast cancer, nestin has been reported in the basal-like and triple
negative phenotypes. Here, we examined nestin expression in different
breast cancer cohorts, including BRCA familial cancer, and breast cancer
metastasis.Materials and methods:Immunohistochemical staining of nestin
was done in four series of breast cancer, and a semi-quantitative measure
of nestin positivity (staining index) was used for evaluation of
expression. Series I include 190 breast cancer patients diagnosed during
1996-2001 in Hordaland, Norway. Series II comprise 192 breast cancer
cases identified in Kampala, Uganda in 1990-2002. Series III includes 151
patients with breast cancer, 53 BRCA1 and 45 BRCA2 mutation carriers,
identified during 1980-1995 in Montreal, Canada, and 51 BRCA negative
patients from Norway. Series IV consists of 35 patients with tissue from
the primary breast cancer and matched metastasis collected in 1996-2007.
Finally, level 3 mRNA microarray data from TCGA (n = 520) and four open
access breast cancer gene expression data sets (n = 1148) with
information on molecular subtype were included.Results:The proportion of
nestin positive breast tumors was 11%, 24% and 28% in Series I-III.
Nestin expression was significantly associated with basal cell markers
Cytokeratin 5/6 and P-cadherin (p-values Background:The basal-like
subtype of breast cancer is one of at least five molecular categories.
These poor prognosis tumors are most often triple negative, i.e. negative
for hormone receptors and HER2, and therefore lack targeted treatment
options. There is at present no consensus on how to best define this
subtype, and different surrogate immunohistochemistry based markers have
been suggested. We here present data supporting nestin as a marker of the
basal-like subtype. Originally reported in neuronal progenitor cells,
nestin was later observed in the stem cell/progenitor compartment in a
variety of tissues as well as in different cancer types, and suggested to
be a cancer stem cell marker. In breast cancer, nestin has been reported
in the basal-like and triple negative phenotypes. Here, we examined
nestin expression in different breast cancer cohorts, including BRCA
familial cancer, and breast cancer metastasis.Materials and
methods:Immunohistochemical staining of nestin was done in four series of
breast cancer, and a semi-quantitative measure of nestin positivity
(staining index) was used for evaluation of expression. Series I include
190 breast cancer patients diagnosed during 1996-2001 in Hordaland,
Norway. Series II comprise 192 breast cancer cases identified in Kampala,
Uganda in 1990-2002. Series III includes 151 patients with breast cancer,
53 BRCA1 and 45 BRCA2 mutation carriers, identified during 1980-1995 in
Montreal, Canada, and 51 BRCA negative patients from Norway. Series IV
consists of 35 patients with tissue from the primary breast cancer and
matched metastasis collected in 1996-2007. Finally, level 3 mRNA
microarray data from TCGA (n = 520) and four open access breast cancer
gene expression data sets (n = 1148) with information on molecular
subtype were included.Results:The proportion of nestin positive breast
tumors was 11%, 24% and 28% in Series I-III. Nestin expression was
significantly associated with basal cell markers Cytokeratin 5/6 and
P-cadherin (p-values <0.0005), five immunohistochemical profiles for the
basal-like phenotype (Odds ratio, OR, range 10.9-27.5) and the triple
negative phenotype (OR range 11.8-28.2). Further, patients with BRCA1
mutation more often had nestin positive tumors (OR 8.7, Series III).
Higher nestin mRNA levels were seen in basal-like tumors, compared with
the luminal-like and HER2-enriched subtypes.In Series IV, nestin
expression in the primary tumor correlated with expression in the
corresponding metastasis, with no statistically significant difference
between the two groups (McNemar test, p = 1.0).Conclusion:We found nestin
positivity in breast cancer cells to be significantly and strongly
associated with the BRCA1 genotype, individual basal cell markers, and
the basal-like and triple negative phenotypes.

