Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unraveling the genetic basis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma using
next-generation sequencing approaches


Background: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an epithelial malignancy
that originates in the nasopharynx. This cancer is highly prevalent in
Asia, especially southern China. Familiar genetic predisposition is
observed in 5-10% of NPC patients. It is well-accepted that host
genetics, EBV infection, and environmental factors together contribute to
NPC development.Purpose: The genetic basis of NPC has not been fully
elucidated. Therefore, we aim to use next-generation sequencing
approaches to identify genes or pathways associated with NPC risk and to
understand the genetic basis of NPC.Methods: In the discovery cohort, 67
family history-positive (FH+) NPC cases from 56 families, 39 early-age
onset cases, and 51 sporadic cases were subjected to whole-exome
sequencing (WES). WES data of additional 415 non-cancer controls were
obtained from non-cancer studies. Two strategies, mixed model association
analysis and systematic filtering methods, were used for the analysis.
The LightSNiP assay, which detects variants by melting curve analysis,
and targeted sequencing approach were applied in an independent
validation cohort.Results: Association analysis identified a 3 UTR
variant in G protein-coupled receptor 114 (GPR114) with genome-wide
significance (p-value 1.110-8). The risk allele was observed in 10 cases
from 5 FH+ families and 1 sporadic case, but was not found in controls
and public databases. In the validation study, LightSNiP assay identified
the variant in 4 out of 210 FH+ cases, 25 out of 1725 sporadic cases, and
11 out of 1849 controls. The odds ratios are 3.1 and 2.35 for FH+ and
sporadic cases, respectively. All the variants identified were validated
by Sanger sequencing. GPR114 is expressed in both NPC and normal
nasopharyngeal tissues. Further functional studies are now underway for
GPR114.Using the systematic filtering analysis strategy, we identified
the genes with rare damaging variants (minor allele frequency0.01) in at
least four FH+ families and excluded the genes which are likely to be
false positive signals in WES or not expressed in NPC or normal
nasopharyngeal tissues. In total 455 genes were identified. Gene ontology
analysis identified enriched terms including chromatin modification (FDR
= 0.02) and extracellular matrix (FDR = 0.006). Targeted sequencing of
candidate genes in about 300 additional FH+ cases and 300 age- and
gender-matched controls is underway.Conclusions: In our study, a GPR114 3
UTR variant was found to be associated with increased risk of NPC in both
familiar and sporadic cases. We also identified rare damaging variants
enriched in chromatin modification and extracellular matrix. Our study
provides an enhanced road map for comprehensive understanding of the
genetic basis of NPC.Acknowledgements: NPC AoE funding provided by the
Hong Kong Research Grants Council (AoE/M-06/08 to MLL).

