Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delivery of checkpoint inhibitor antibodies and other therapeutics
directly to tumors by encoding them within the oncolytic adenovirus
enadenotucirev


We are developing armed versions of the oncolytic adenovirus,
enadenotucirev (EnAd), that will selectively infect and deliver
immunotherapeutics to tumours following systemic dosing. EnAd is a
potent, chimeric Ad11p/Ad3 adenovirus active against a range of
epithelial cancer cells. In normal cells, EnAd is attenuated and shows
little or no activity by either cytotoxicity assay or qPCR. In vivo, EnAd
shows efficacy in a range of xenograft human tumor models following
intra-tumoural, intravenous and intra-peritoneal injection and is
currently being evaluated clinically for treatment of several different
epithelial cancers. Data from ongoing clinical studies have shown that
i.v. dosed EnAd infects and selectively replicates in tumor cells,
producing significant amounts of viral protein (hexon). This is
associated with CD8 cell accumulation and also indicates that transgene
encoded proteins will be made in significant amounts by tumors following
i.v. delivery of an armed EnAd virus.To develop armed EnAd variants we
have developed a novel, efficient cloning system for rapid generation of
viruses that can produce antibodies and other payloads under the control
of the virus replication cycle or exogenous promoters. As an initial
exemplification of the platform we have successfully produced EnAd
variants encoding full-length (NG-135) and ScFv (NG-76) forms of
anti-human VEGF antibodies. These have similar virus activity profiles to
EnAd in cancer cell lines in vitro (virus replication, gene expression
and oncolytic action), but also express and release the respective
anti-VEGF antibody forms into the culture supernatant of tumor cells but
not non-transformed cells. Using HCT-116 or DLD human colon carcinoma
xenograft models we have shown that the virus infection profile following
intra-tumoral injection is also similar to the parental EnAd virus (virus
replication and hexon gene expression). Anti-VEGF antibody expression
could be detected in the tumor tissue as both mRNA and functional
antibody. Antibodies were detectable early (within 3 days of infection)
and sustained over several weeks. Using an orthotopic A549 lung tumor
model, NG-135 virus dosed i.v. following the development of tumors was
able to decrease tumor burden by >90%. Viruses similarly expressing IgG1
or ScFv versions of anti-PDL1 and anti-CTLA4 checkpoint inhibitor
antibodies have also been made and shown to produce functional antibodies
that inhibit the respective receptor-ligand interactions in a range of in
vitro assays, including upregulation of T-cell responses.In conclusion,
our data show that EnAd can be modified to produce different antibody
payloads following infection of human tumor cells in vitro and in vivo.
Evaluation of the in vivo impact of these armed oncolytic viruses on the
growth and microenvironment of tumors is now in progress.

