Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smoking is associated with mosaic loss of chromosome Y


Smoking of tobacco is a major preventable environmental risk factor
related to human health. Smoking killed about 100 million people during
the 20th century and is projected to kill one billion people during this
century, assuming that the current frequency of smoking is maintained.
Lung cancer is the prime cause of cancer-associated death in relation to
smoking. However, it is less well appreciated that smoking also causes
tumors outside the respiratory tract, which are predominant in men, and
cumulatively roughly as common as lung cancer. Moreover, it is known that
males have a higher incidence and mortality from most sex-unspecific
cancers, regardless of smoking status, and this fact is largely
unexplained by known risk factors. We have recently shown that a male
specific risk factor, acquired mosaic loss of chromosome Y (LOY) in
non-cancerous blood cells, is associated with an increased risk of
non-hematological tumors among aging males. Median survival among men
with LOY was 5.5 years shorter [1]. We demonstrate here that smoking is
associated with LOY in blood cells in three independent cohorts
(TwinGene: odds ratio [OR] = 4.3, 95% CI = 2.8-6.7; ULSAM: OR = 2.4, 95%
CI = 1.6-3.6; and PIVUS: OR = 3.5, 95% CI = 1.4-8.4) encompassing in
total 6014 men. Our data also support a transient and dose-dependent
mutagenic effect from smoking on LOY-status [2]. Thus, smoking may induce
LOY, linking the most common acquired human mutation with a severe
preventable risk factor. Our results could explain the observed sex
differences and why smoking seems a greater risk factor for cancer in men
than women. The molecular mechanisms behind these observations are not
well understood, but LOY appears a strong and male-specific risk factor.
Follow up studies are required to understand how cellular Y chromosome
deficiency in normal blood cells might cause risk for cancer. We
hypothesize that the Y-chromosome loss may be skewed towards, and exert
negative effect on, a specific population of immune cells that are
responsible for immunosurveillance.Selected references:1. Forsberg LA,
Rasi C, Malmqvist N, Davies H, Pasupulati S, Pakalapati G, Sandgren J, de
Stahl TD, Zaghlool A, Giedraitis V, Lannfelt L, Score J, Cross NC, Absher
D, Janson ET, Lindgren CM, Morris AP, Ingelsson E, Lind L, Dumanski JP:
Mosaic loss of chromosome Y in peripheral blood is associated with
shorter survival and higher risk of cancer, Nature Genetics 2014,
46:624-628.2. Dumanski J, Rasi C, Lnn M, Davies H, Ingelsson M,
Giedraitis V, Lannfelt L, Magnusson P, Lindgren C, Morris A, Cesarini D,
Johannesson M, Tiensuu Janson E, Lind L, Pedersen N, Ingelsson E,
Forsberg L: Smoking is associated with mosaic loss of chromosome Y,
Science 2014, in press.

