Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-1 secreted into the bone metastatic niche by androgen
receptor-negative prostate cancer cells enables skeletal metastasis


Advanced prostate cancer (PCa) frequently leads to bone metastasis, a
major cause of morbidity and mortality. Limited knowledge of the
molecular interactions underpinning the behavior of cancer cells in the
bone microenvironment has stymied the development of curative therapies.
Signaling between cancer cells and stroma likely plays a crucial role in
dictating the fate of disseminated tumor cells (DTCs), and its disruption
could interfere with the supportive role of the metastatic niche and thus
hamper tumor growth.We previously identified interleukin-1 (IL-1) as a
major mediator of the bone-metastatic behavior of human prostate cancer
cells inoculated into the left cardiac ventricle of SCID mice. Here, we
show not only that pharmacologic disruption of IL-1 signaling using the
IL-1 receptor (IL-1R) antagonist anakinra diminishes the metastatic
potential of PCa cells in vivo, but also that IL-1 secreted by PCa cells
can prompt bone stromal cells to acquire a carcinoma-associated
fibroblast (CAF) phenotype. Emphasizing the role of the stroma, we
demonstrate that SCID mice null for IL-1R display diminished formation of
bone metastases relative to wild-type when inoculated with highly
metastatic IL-1-expressing PCa cells. In this same model we find that
IL-1 supports early survival of DTCs in the bone.Interestingly, while the
aggressively-metastatic androgen receptor (AR)-negative PC3-ML cell line
expresss high levels of IL-1, the numerous AR(+) PCa cell lines we
examined each lack IL-1 expression. This was recapitulated in human
tissue specimens of PCa bone metastases examined by a combination of
Laser Capture Microdissection and qPCR. In these lesions, a relevant
fraction of PCa cells lack AR transcript and express IL-1, whereas AR(+)
cells were uniformly negative for this cytokine. As AR(+) PCa cells are
consistently non-metastatic in our pre-clinical model, we speculated that
IL-1-mediated induction of CAFs in the bone may enable growth of AR(+)
PCa cells that would otherwise be unable to initiate a metastatic niche.
To test this hypothesis, we co-inoculated PC3-ML and AR(+) PCa cells and
evaluated their metastatic abilities using two-color labeling in both
multispectral microscopy and bioluminescence imaging. We found that the
presence of AR(-), IL-1-expressing cells allowed AR(+) PCa cells both to
colonize the bone and persist in macroscopic mixed tumors in the long
term.Our study thus conclusively confirms the existence of AR(-) PCa
cells in skeletal metastases, describes a negative correlation between AR
and IL-1 expression, and implicates this cytokine in a form of metastatic
cooperation between phenotypically distinct cancer cells. These
discoveries may be exploited therapeutically to alter the
microenvironment of the metastatic niche, with the aim to impair
establishment and progression of bone metastatic disease in PCa patients.

