Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lung metastasis of ovarian cancer in a transplantable MUC1.Tg
mouse model is accompanied by upregulation of MUC1 expression and
epithelial to mesenchymal transition


Introduction: Patients with ovarian cancer are usually diagnosed late,
when tumors have already spread to the surrounding tissues. Hematogenous
dissemination of ovarian cancer cells can also occur and lung metastasis
can be found in 12% of ovarian cancer patients. Human mucin1 (MUC1) is a
large transmembrane glycoprotein with roles in cell adhesion and
migration. More than 80% of ovarian cancer overexpress MUC1, regardless
of histology. MUC1 is a widely used vaccine target for numerous
adenocarcinomas, including ovarian tumors.Approach and results: We have
recently described the triple transgenic (Tg) mice with conditional
(cre-loxP) mutations in Kras and Pten pathways that progress to human
MUC1-expressing endometrioid ovarian tumors. Using orthotopic tumors from
these mice we generated here several new murine cell lines. The MKP-L
cell line was derived from an ovarian tumor implant attached to the liver
surface. Intraperitoneal (IP) injection of MKP-L cells into syngeneic
mice triggers IP tumors and multiple lung metastatic masses. Cells
isolated from lung metastases (MKP-Lung cell line) triggered peritoneal
tumors as well as lung metastases, suggesting that they retain the
original homing capacity. Compared to the parental, endometrioid-looking
and low-MUC1 expressing MKP-L cells, the metastatic MKP-Lung cells showed
morphological changes consistent to epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) and are homogeneously high in MUC1. Mouse WG6 microarray analysis
of MKP-L and MKP-Lung cells revealed expression changes of several
EMT-associated transcription factors as well as their downstream
proteins. Western blot confirmed upregulation of ZEB1, vimentin and
downregulation of cytokeratins. To dissect the mechanistic roles of Kras
and Pten pathways in EMT and MUC1 regulation, we also generated a series
of ovarian surface epithelial (OSE)-derived cell lines with conditional
(Cre-loxP) oncogenic mutations in Kras (MKOSE), deletion in Pten (MPOSE)
or both (MKPOSE). Using these cell lines we recapitulated in vitro the
EMT phenotype and MUC1 upregulation acquired by MKP-Lung cells in vivo.
Furthermore, small molecule inhibitors of oncogenic Kras (AZD6244) and
Pi3K/Pten pathway (BEZ235) demonstrated that MUC1 expression is
significantly upregulated in response to Pten deletion and that Pi3K
inhibitor (BEZ235) downregulated MUC1. In contrast, Kras activation
slightly lowered MUC1 expression while cell exposure to AZD6244
upregulated MUC1.Conclusions: We report here the first transgenic mouse
metastatic ovarian cancer model that expresses human MUC1.Usig this model
we identified a gene signature consistent with lung metastasis and EMT
and identified mechanisms of MUC1 upregulation during these processes.
These findings have important consequences for MUC1 immunobiology in
metastatic ovarian tumors with mutations in Kras, Pten/Pi3K or both.

