Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetics of BIND-014 (docetaxel nanoparticles for
injectable suspension) in preclinical species and patients with advanced
solid tumors


Background: BIND-014 is a novel, prostate-specific membrane antigen
(PSMA)targeted, polymeric nanoparticle-containing docetaxel (DTXL). PSMA
is expressed on prostate cancer cells and on vasculature of non-prostate
solid tumors. The PK profile of BIND-014 is characterized by reduced CL
and V(D). These characteristics together with PSMA targeting, potentially
lead to greater tumor uptake and improved activity of BIND-014 compared
to conventional solvent-based DTXL (sb-DTXL). In a Phase 1 clinical
trial, BIND-014 was well tolerated and displayed multiple clinical
response.Methods: Preclinical PK studies were performed in tumor-bearing
mice and cynomolgus monkeys. Clinical PK was measured in patients with
solid tumors. BIND-014 was administered intravenously and blood samples
were collected up to 96 hours post-dose. Plasma was analyzed for total
and encapsulated DTXL using LC/MS-MS. PK parameters were determined by
non-compartmental analysis.Results: BIND-014 preclinical and clinical PK
demonstrated monophasic plasma concentration-time profiles were well
differentiated from sb-DTXL. BIND-014 displayed higher Cmax and AUC with
reduced CL and V(D) compared to sb-DTXL. In all species, the V(D) of
BIND-014 was close to the blood volume. Evaluation of encapsulated DTXL
plasma concentrations in patients and cynomolgus monkeys demonstrated
means of 91% and 92% of total DTXL, respectively, indicating that most
circulating DTXL was encapsulated in nanoparticles.Conclusion: BIND-014
displays a PK profile well differentiated from sb-DTXL and consistent
with retention of BIND-014 nanoparticles in the blood compartment and
controlled release of DTXL. In contrast, sb-DTXL displays rapid CL and a
high V(D). The PK characteristics of BIND-014 are associated with
increased intratumoral DTXL concentrations and tumor growth suppression
in preclinical models, and may lead to greater efficacy in patients.

