Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TNF and TGF1 secreted by macrophages enhance breast cancer cell
migration dynamics via the induction of NF-B dependent MMP-1 expression


Metastasis, which is a major cause of cancer death, depends on cancer
cell's ability to migrate through the dense extracellular matrix (ECM)
within the solid tumor. Recent studies have revealed that macrophages
within the breast tumor microenvironment could promote tumor metastasis.
However, it is still unclear how macrophages affect the migration
dynamics (e.g. total speed and directedness) of cancer cells in 3D ECM
that mimics the in vivo environment. To address this question, we
co-cultured MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells with Raw 264.7 macrophages
inside a collagen I ECM embedded in a microfluidic device. Time-lapse
microscopy was used to quantify the effects of macrophages on the total
speed and directedness of cancer cell 3D migration. Various biochemical
assays were also performed to investigate the mechanisms underlying the
observed effects. We found that macrophages enhanced both cancer cell
migration total speed and directedness, allowing cancer cells to migrate
faster and more persistently. Since macrophages are the major producers
of TNF and TGF1, we used blocking antibodies against these two factors to
investigate their contribution to macrophage-assisted cancer cell
migration. We found that inhibiting macrophage-secreted TNF or TGF1 alone
only slightly diminished cancer cell migration directedness. In contrast,
simultaneous inhibition of both TNF and TGF1 completely abolished
macrophage-enhanced cancer cell migration directedness. To investigate
this result further, we quantified the migration directedness of cancer
cells treated with TNF and/or TGF1. We found that the treatment of cancer
cells with TNF or TGF1 alone did not significantly increase their
migration directedness. However, treatment of cancer cells with both TNF
and TGF1 synergistically enhanced the migration directedness of cancer
cells to the level when cancer cells were co-cultured with macrophages.
This result suggests that macrophage-released TNF and TGF1 are the main
contributors to the increase in cancer cell migration directedness.
Furthermore, using a MMP inhibitor, we found that the inhibition of
cancer cells ability to breakdown ECM led to reduced migration
directedness. Therefore, we showed, using western blotting, that
macrophage-released TNF and TGF1 synergistically induced the nuclear
localization of NF-B in cancer cells, leading to a synergistically
enhanced expression of MMP-1. Taken together, our results indicate that
macrophage-secreted TNF and TGF1 could enhance cancer cell migration
directedness via the induction of NF-B nuclear localization and MMP-1
expression within cancer cells. Our results further suggest that both
macrophage-released TNF and TGF1 need to be simultaneously inhibited in
order to effectively neutralize macrophage-enhanced cancer cell migration
and metastasis.

