Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The SxxSS motif of T-cell Factor-4 isoforms regulates Wnt5a
expression and EMT in human liver cancer cells


Background: The T-cell factor (TCF)-4 is a key transcriptional protein
activated by Wnt/-catenin signaling. Previously we identified 14 TCF-4
isoforms derived from human HCC cell lines (Exp Cell Res 2011). The
TCF-4J and K pair have been characterized based on the presence (K) or
absence (J) of a SxxSS motif. TCF-4J-overexpressing HCC cells (J cells)
exhibited high tumorigenic potential in contrast to TCF-4K-overexpressing
cells (K cells) (PLoS ONE 2012). However, K cells often showed
morphological alteration, reminiscent of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), which is involved in non-canonical Wnt signaling (BMC
Cancer 2013). The finding suggested that the SxxSS motif had potential to
regulate EMT through the non-canonical Wnt signaling pathway. Thus, the
AIM of this study was to investigate whether the SxxSS motif modulated
expression levels of EMT regulators and Wnt5a, a representative
non-canonical Wnt ligand. Methods: The human HCC cell line HAK-1A
(Hepatology 1993) was used. TCF-4K mutants (269A, 272A, and 273A) were
prepared with conversion of serine (S) in the SxxSS motif to alanine (A)
by site-directed mutagenesis. HAK-1A-derived stable clones overexpressing
TCF-4J, K, and K-mutants (269A, 272A, and 273A cells, respectively) were
established. Western blot analysis and real-time RT-PCR were employed to
evaluate protein and mRNA expression levels, respectively. Sh-RNA was
used to knockdown wnt5a gene expression. Results: The 269A-mutant cells
robustly expressed Wnt5a in both protein and mRNA levels, while empty
vector-transfected cells (control), J cells, or K cells did not. Of note,
Wnt5a expression was coupled with SLUG expression and EMT-like cellular
morphological change. Snail was hardly expressed in the cells examined in
this study. When the Wnt5a expression was specifically silenced by using
sh-RNA, the expression level of SLUG was clearly decreased. Conclusion:
The findings in this study suggest that serine 269 (the first serine) of
the SxxSS motif of TCF-4 is a major switch to control Wnt5a
transcription, thereby modulating the expression level of the
EMT-regulator SLUG in a human HCC cell line.

