Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Large oncosomes derived from the aggressive prostate cancer
sub-line, DU145R80, can modify the biological behavior of the parental
DU145 cells


We have recently established a zoledronic acid-resistant prostate cancer
cell line, DU145R80,which exhibits higher invasive capability compared to
parental DU145 cells, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)[Milone MR, Cell Death Dis. 2013]. To investigate the mechanism by
which the cells become invasive, we compared DU145R80 and DU145 cells by
a proteomic approach, unveiling a signaling network that links the
interior of the nucleus to changes in cytoskeleton dynamics and to the
extracellular matrix, dictating prostate cancer aggressiveness [Milone MR
Oncotarget 2014].Cytoskeletal modifications allow cells to gain a more
migratory/invasive behavior and to interact with the surrounding
microenvironment triggering different kind of biological phenomena,
including the formation of large oncosomes (LO), a bioactive class of
extracellular vesicles (EVs) [Di Vizio D, Cancer Res. 2009]. In this
study, we found a higher amount of spontaneously shed LO along with an
increased gelatinase activity from DU145R80 cells compared to the
parental counterpart. By applying low speed and discontinuous gradient
ultracentrifugation to both DU145 and DU145R80 cell media, we obtained a
pure preparation of LO, floating at a 1.15 g/mL density fraction and
positive for LO markers such as as Cav-1, Ck18, GAPDH. Moreover, we
treated DU145 parental cells with pure preparations of LO from either
DU145 or DU145R80 cells and performed an invasion assay, showing that LO
from the resistant, aggressive DU145R80 cell line increase the invading
ability of DU145. Treatment of DU145 cells with LO originating from the
parental cell line itself did not result in increased invasinevess,
suggesting a specific role for EVs from aggressive cells. In addition, in
order to investigate LO content, we focused our attention on a cell
surface glycoprotein, CUB domain-containing protein 1 (CDCP-1),
putatively linked to the network of proteins identified in DU145R80 cells
and whose role in cancer is still under debate. Our results demonstrate
that CDCP-1 expression is significantly reduced in DU145R80 compared to
DU145 cells, suggesting a tumor-protective role for the protein in
prostate cancer. We also observed, for the first time, that the CDCP-1
expression pattern displayed by both cell lines was reflected in their
derived LO. These data intriguingly suggest that CDCP-1 may change its
expression pattern upon modifications in tumor cells properties, playing
a different role in different stages of cancer development. Overall,
these findings highlight LO as a new biological component in the
development of aggressive features by prostate cancer cells, connecting
molecular alterations to changes in the ability to interact with the
surrounding environment, and suggested new prognostic markers and/or
therapeutical targets.

