Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic landscape of human cancer reveals dysregulated TGF-
signaling with prognostic significance


Objective: Genome-wide analysis enables predictive modeling of genetic
pathways driving many cancers. While somatic mutations and patterns
reflecting key pathways have been identified for many cancers, an
integrated analysis of driver mutations identified through mouse/human
genetics have yet to be comprehensively defined for hepatocellular cancer
(HCC). Previously our group and others have identified that loss of TGF-
signaling leads to spontaneous HCC development, through mouse models and
human genetics. Patients with hepatocellular cancer have a poor survival
of 9-11 months. Recent clinical studies show that targeting TGF- improves
survival up to 21 months, yet prognostic significances are undefined. The
relationships between patterns of mutations and transcriptomic phenotypes
for the TGF- pathway are unclear.Methods: (1) We analyzed the
transcriptome of 488 hepatocellular cancers and screened for mutations in
the TGF- pathway in 202 HCCs from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). (2)
Increased levels of TGF--related genes were designated as an activated
signature that is associated with hepatic fibrosis. Conversely, decreased
levels of TGF--related genes were defined as an inactivated signature,
which was associated with the loss of TGF- tumor suppressor function. (3)
We further performed high-fidelity (80x) whole-genome sequence analysis
and transcriptome sequencing analysis of eight additional HCCs to define
the role of TGF- in their development and characterize a potential novel
driver mutations in HCV- and alcohol-associated hepatocellular cancer.
(4) We validated the clinical relevance of 2SP alterations in 22 human
liver specimens.Results: (1) Transcriptomic analyses revealed aberrant
TGF- superfamily profiles in 72% of hepatocellular cancers, with
mutations in 38% of patients. (2) HCCs characterized by the inactivated
TGF- signature were associated with a significantly poorer survival
particularly in early stage HCCs, compared to HCCs with the activated
TGF- signature (p = 0.0027). (3) We observed the greatest number of
functional mutations in the SPTBN1 gene (6%), which encodes a tumor
suppressor TGF-/Smad3 adaptor protein. (4) Furthermore, we found a strong
association between DNA damage response genes and the TGF- pathway at
both transcriptomic and genomic levels.Conclusions: The TGF- pathway
plays a pivotal role in liver tumorigenesis and the molecular signatures
we characterize here appear to have prognostic significance. The
additional association with the DNA repair pathway supports new
approaches to developing biomarkers. Targeting of TGF-, has the potential
for improving survival of liver cancer.

