Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High throughput drug screening with engineered tumor spheroids


Physiologically relevant, in vitro cell-based models are important tools
to identify effective anticancer drugs. Three-dimensional (3D) clusters
of cancer cells, called tumor spheroids, mimic key characteristics of
avascular tumors such as diffusion limitations and hypoxia, and hence
serve as a relevant model for compound screening. Nevertheless, current
spheroid formation techniques face difficulties to generate large number
of uniform sized spheroids, conveniently maintain them in culture and
biochemically analyze them using commercially available tools. To address
this need, we developed a robotic, high throughput technology for
three-dimensional culture of cancer cells that is simple to implement,
produces consistent size spheroids in standard microwell plates, and
allows convenient robotic media exchange and drug addition, and analysis
of cellular responses using microplate readers. The technology is based
on the use of an aqueous two-phase system. Cancer cells confined in a
drop of the denser aqueous phase are robotically dispensed into a
microwell containing the immersion aqueous phase. Cells remain within the
drop at the bottom of the microwell and form a viable spheroid.We
demonstrate the robust performance of this technology by evaluating the
effect of two clinically used drugs against biologically aggressive skin
cancer and triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells. Skin cancer
spheroids treated with paclitaxel and cisplatin show dose-dependent
decrease in cell viability, but with a greater resistance compared to the
monolayer culture (2D) of cells (paclitaxel: LD50,3D = 178.5 nM, LD50,2D
= 22.1 nM and cisplatin: LD50,3D = 131.7 M and LD50,2D = 29.2 M. TNBC
cell monolayer and spheroids treated with cisplatin displayed a similar
LD50 value of 13.1 M. However, unlike the monolayer culture of TNBC cells
that showed a dose-response to paclitaxel with LD50,2D = 8.0 nM, TNBC
spheroids showed resistance to this drug, even at micromolar-scale
concentrations, and maintained a high viability.In conclusion, our tumor
spheroid technology enables quick and efficient generation of relevant
tumor models in standard microplates to conveniently treat with chemical
compounds and analyze. This technology allows investigating the efficacy
of drug compounds against cancer cells and reveals cellular responses not
captured with widely-used monolayer cultures. The ease of conducting and
analyzing high throughput experiments will substantially reduce labor and
cost, and expedite discovery of effective anti-cancer compounds with a
physiologic tumor model.

