Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cells in tobacco-induced carcinogenesis and subsequent
effect of ATRA-based chemoprevention


Introduction Chemoprevention is potentially the most effective method to
lower the prevalence of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC),
the sixth most common type of malignancy worldwide. The chemopreventive
effects of retinoids against HNSCC have been previously reported.
Retinoids however; relapse following cessation of medication is a
critical problem that prevents its clinical use. The objective of this
study was to determine the possible mechanism of retinoid resistance by
exploring cancer stem cell mediated pathways.Experimental Procedures.In
vitro cell line models of normal (NOK) and dysplastic oral keratinocytes
(DOK) are being exposed to tobacco to assess the process of carcinogenic
progression. The progression in the DOK and HOK cell lines will be
assessed by proliferation, migration and invasion assays. The expression
of stem cell markers/pathways (CD44/Hyaluronan, Wnt, Notch1, ALDH1A1)
during the process of progression will be evaluated using QPCR and FACS.
These cell lines will then be treated with ATRA and the subsequent
effects on transformation and CSC-specific pathways further
evaluated.Summary To this end, immunostaining of normal oral mucosa,
potentially malignant lesions (n = 93) and malignant lesions (n = 48) for
the stem cell marker CD44 was performed. CD44+ cells were found at a
density of 58.57/hpf in normal mucosa, 61.56/hpf in mild dysplasia,
119.44/hpf in moderate dysplasia, and 107.6/hpf in severe dysplasia. The
density of CD44+ cells in WDSCC, MDSCC and PDSCC were 183.4, 105 and
160/hpf respectively, indicates CSC cells may represent a marker of
malignant progression The cell lines are currently under exposure to
tobacco and the transformational changes being documented. Apart from the
studies on the changes specific to CSCs, high throughput secretome and
proteomic studies are also being planned to evaluate the global changes
effected due to tobacco as well as due to subsequent treatment with
ATRA.Conclusion This study hence attempts to provide novel insight into
tobacco-induced carcinogenesis and mechanism of resistance to
retinoid-based chemoprevention.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

