Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel treatment strategy for pancreatic cancer


Background: Solid association exists between high expression level of
glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK-3) and pancreatic cancer (PaCa)
progression in humans. GSK-3 inhibition in a mouse orthotopic model of
PaCa induced tumor shrinkage. However, GSK-3 inhibition stimulates
pro-metastasis epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). HDAC1/2 is
involved in regulation of EMT in PaCa cells. We developed a novel
strategy based on the combination of GSK-3 inhibition with inhibition of
HDAC1 to prevent cancer cell survival, EMT and metastasis in vitro and in
vivo. We designed, synthesized and tested a novel dual-inhibitor CSME-357
which inhibits both the proteins.Methods: Pdx-Cre;LSL-Kras (KC) mice were
ip injected with GSK-3 inhibitor TDZD-8 and/or HDAC1/2 inhibitor Saha.
Pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) lesions, fibrosis, and
inflammation were measured by IHC. Pancreatic cancer cell lines MIA
PaCa-2, BxPC3, AsPC1 were cultured in the presence of HDAC and/or GSK-3
inhibitors or with the novel compound CSME-357 which inhibits both
proteins. Cell survival and apoptosis were measured by MTT assay and DNA
fragmentation, respectively. EMT and cancer stemness markers, histone
acetylation and GSK-3 level were measured by IHC and Western in tissue
and cells. Invasion of the cells was measured by invasion assay. Ability
of the cells to form metastatic niches in nude mice was measured by
injecting PaCa cells in mice tails in the presence or absence of CSME-357
and live mice were analyzed by MRI and by tissue analysis after
necropsy.Results: Treatment of KC mice with Saha decreased the level of
PanIN lesions, fibrosis, inflammation, and EMT. TDZD-8 potentiated the
effect of Saha on PanIN prevention. Saha and TDZD-8 decreased EMT in KC
mice. Pharmacological and molecular inhibitions of GSK-3 significantly,
dose dependently, and synergistically decreased proliferation and at a
lesser extent stimulated apoptosis in PaCa cell lines. GSK-3 inhibition
stimulated EMT in PaCa cells; whereas, Saha reversed this effect.
CSME-357 significantly and more potently (compared to the combination of
two inhibitors) decreased proliferation, invasion and EMT and stimulated
apoptosis in PaCa cells. Significance was achieved at 300nM. Toxicity
assays showed no to very little toxicity of the novel compound. CSME-357
decreased the ability of cancer cells to form metastatic niches in nude
mice.Conclusion: Combination of HDAC1 and GSK-3 inhibitions induced a
triple beneficial effect by decreasing proliferation, stimulating
apoptosis and inhibiting EMT/metastasis. CSME-357 is a novel compound
with promising anti-cancer properties. CSME-357 is a very potent
inhibitor for both GSK-3 and HDAC1/2; in addition, CSME-357 prevents
cancer cell growth, resistance to apoptosis, EMT, invasion and
metastasis.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

