Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Full-length isoform sequencing of the human MCF-7 cell line using
PacBio long reads


While advances in RNA sequencing methods have accelerated our
understanding of the human transcriptome, isoform discovery remains a
challenge because short read lengths require complicated assembly
algorithms to infer the contiguity of full-length transcripts.This
inability to resolve full-length isoforms hinders researchers ability to
identify key isoform changes and fusion transcripts associated with human
diseases. With the PacBio long-read technology, one can now sequence
full-length transcript isoforms up to 10 kb. The PacBio Iso-Seq protocol
produces reads that originate from independent observations of single
molecules, and no assembly is needed if a read spans the entire length of
the transcript.In this study, we sequenced the human MCF7 cell-line using
the Clontech SMARTer cDNA preparation kit. Using the PacBio Iso-Seq
bioinformatics software, we obtained 55,770 unique, full-length,
high-quality transcript sequences that were subsequently mapped back to
the human genome with 99% accuracy. The full-length transcripts ranged
from 300 bp to 9.5 kb with a mean length of 2.1 kb. Out of 16,868
expressed loci, 149 had more than 20 isoforms, with a total average of 3
isoforms per loci. Additionally, we identified more than 100 candidate
fusion transcripts, many of which were confirmed through previously
published experimental validations or computation predictions. For the
BCAS3-BRCA4 fusion, we detected 3 different fusion transcripts, two of
which were entirely novel.To validate the full-length isoforms, we
compared the predicted peptides from the MCF-7 data against a previously
published mass spectrometry dataset from the same cell line. 41,699
peptides mapped to 23,729 PacBio-predicted open reading frames (i.e.
protein sequences), confirming the translation of a majority of sequenced
transcripts. Notably, 251 peptides were novel and not annotated in the
UniProt protein database. These peptides confirm abundant cases of single
amino acid polymorphisms, cassette exon splicing, and potential
alternative protein coding frames encoded in the MCF-7 proteome.To
conclude, the Iso-Seq protocol provides a new opportunity for researchers
to study the complex splicing events that occur in cancer cells.

