Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of childhood immunizations and infections on the risk of
pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma


Background: Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a rare, highly malignant childhood
cancer with an annual incidence of four cases per million and
approximately 350 new cases are diagnosed in the U.S. annually. Due to
its rarity, relatively little is known about the etiology of this
childhood malignancy. Early immunologic challenges such as immunizations
and infections have been hypothesized to be protective in certain
malignancies. To our knowledge, these associations have not been studied
in relation to childhood RMS risk. The purpose of our study was to better
characterize the association between childhood immunizations and
infections and RMS risk using data from the largest case-control study of
RMS to date.Materials and Methods: Cases (n = 322) were previously
enrolled in the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study, which became a part of
the Children's Oncology Group in 2000. Controls (n = 322) were selected
by random-digit telephone dialing and pair-matched to cases on race, sex,
and age. We evaluated RMS risk based on whether parents reported that
their child was up-to-date on immunizations and had completed their DPT
(diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus), oral polio, and MMR (measles, mumps
and rubella) series. In addition, we evaluated whether the child ever had
previous infections including mumps, pneumonia, rubella, rubeola,
pertussis, tuberculosis, meningitis, scarlet fever, and chickenpox.
Conditional logistic regression models were used to calculate an adjusted
odds ratio (aOR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) for each exposure,
adjusted for age, race, and sex.Results: Having up-to-date immunizations
had a protective effect on childhood RMS (aOR = 0.22, 95% CI: 0.11-0.44).
More specifically, children who did not receive the complete vaccination
series of DPT (aOR = 1.70 95% CI: 1.18-2.50) or did not receive the MMR
vaccine (aOR = 1.59, 95% CI: 1.04-2.44) had an increased risk of being
diagnosed with childhood RMS. Most infectious conditions examined were
negatively associated with childhood RMS; however, these findings were
not statistically significant (p>0.05).Conclusions: This is the first
study of its kind to provide evidence that receiving childhood
immunizations may be protective against RMS risk. Although the effect
estimates suggested a possible protective role of childhood infections
against RMS risk, these findings were not statistically significant.
Future studies will be needed to further evaluate the role of
immunizations and childhood infections in the development of this tumor.

