Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic mechanisms control switching between metastatic and
proliferative subtypes in the SW13 adrenal adenocarcinoma cell line


The human adrenal carcinoma SW13 cell line can switch between a subtype
which expresses the tumor-suppressor gene Brahma (BRM), SW13+, and one
that does not, SW13-. Unlike many tumor supressor genes, which are often
mutated, loss of BRM expression occurs post-transcriptionally and BRM
expression can be restored via histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition.
However, many of the previously characterized BRM inducing HDAC
inhibitors are toxic, broad-spectrum inhibitors which have limited
downstream use, and provide little insight into the specificity of BRM
epigenetic suppression. In this work we sought to further characterize
the oncogenic potential of the two SW13 subtypes, and to investigate the
potential epigenetic regulators that contribute to the subtype switching.
SW13 subtype morphology and growth rates were assessed by
immunofluorescence and standard growth assays. Metastatic potential was
characterized by measuring anchorage-independent growth with soft agar
assays, collagenase activity with fluorescein-conjugated gelatin, and
invasiveness into a 3D extracellular matrix. Differences in gene
expression were measured by standard qRT-PCR and pathway-specific qRT-PCR
profiling arrays. The capacity of specific HDAC inhibitors for their
ability to induce switching between the SW13 subtypes was assessed by
immunofluorescence and gene expression analyses. BRM deficient SW13-
cells have both a faster doubling time and an increased rate of
anchorage-independent growth, while SW13+ cells exhibit higher
collagenase activity and invasive capacity. Significant differences in
the expression of multiple genes involved in epigenetic chromatin
remodeling as well as epigenetic chromatin modification were observed,
indicating that these two subtypes also have unique gene expression
profiles that could contribute to BRM regulation. Of those tested,
inhibition of HDAC1 most efficiently increased the rate of conversion
between SW13- and SW13+ cells, and did so in a dose dependent manner.
After conversion to SW13+ subtype there is also increased acetylation on
histone H3 but not histone H4 when compared to levels in SW13-,
suggesting that the role of acetylation on the H3 tail may play an
essential role in the subtype switch. These studies provide new insight
into the functional consequences of BRM loss in the SW13 cell type and
reveal potential targets for the reversal of BRM epigenetic silencing.

