Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDK1 regulates cell migration and 3D invasion of breast tumor
cells by a kinase independent mechanism


3-Phosphoinositide Dependent Kinase 1 (PDK1) is the kinase that
phosphorylates the activation loop of several protein kinases such as
Akt, PKC, RSK or SGK. In melanoma, breast and prostate carcinomas PDK1
was found amplified and overexpressed and this event correlates with a
more aggressive phenotype.The purpose of our study is to unveil the
mechanism by which PDK1 regulates cell migration and invasion with the
aim to rationally target it in order to prevent tumor cell
dissemination.Combining PDK1 stable silencing and PDK1 stable
overexpression, we studied PDK1 role in different assays of breast tumor
cells migration and invasion.Our data showed that PDK1 silencing in T47D,
MDAMB231, MCF10A and MCF10DCIS breast tumor cells determined a potent
reduction of chemotactic ability towards different chemoattractants,
including serum, Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) and Hepatocyte Growth
Factor (HGF). Complementary, PDK1 exogenous overexpression, a condition
that mimics PDK1 amplification and overexpression in tumors,
significantly increased directional migration of MCF10A and MCF10DCIS
cells. Surprisingly, the overexpression of a kinase dead mutant of PDK1
was equally able to increase cell migration, suggesting a kinase
independent mechanism. We further confirmed this result by treating cells
with an ATP competitive small molecule which inhibits PDK1 kinase
activity but failed to impair cell migration. Moreover, we found that the
kinase dead PDK1 overexpression was able to potently increase the ability
of MCF10DCIS cells to invade through a basement membrane layer and to
induce the formation of 3D invasive spheroids when cultured embedded in
basement membrane matrix. We found that the molecular mechanism
underlying the PDK1-mediated regulation of cell migration and invasion is
the activation of Myotonic dystrophy kinase-related CDC42-binding kinase
alpha (MRCK). This kinase protein is an important regulator of myosin
contraction and cytoskeletal dynamics. According to our data, PDK1 is
able to increase the kinase activity of MRCK. Moreover, we confirmed the
MRCK role by silencing it, resulting in a complete abolition of the
effects of PDK1 overexpression.The widespread role of PDK1 in the
regulation of tumor cells migration and invasion together with its
overexpression status in different tumors, makes it an appealing target
for precision medicine. However the simple inhibition of PDK1 kinase
activity by ATP competitors couldn't be effective on invasive properties
of tumor cells. Future strategies to target PDK1 should take in account
these findings by developing allosteric PDK1 inhibitors able to block its
kinase independent functions.

