Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Standardized measures of lobular involution and subsequent breast
cancer risk among women with benign breast disease


Purpose: Breast biopsies with benign findings (benign breast disease
[BBD]) outnumber biopsies revealing in-situ or invasive cancer 4:1,
providing an opportunity to identify histopathological features that
predict breast cancer risk. Greater degrees of involution of terminal
duct lobular units (TDLUs), the structures within the breast that produce
milk and the primary source of breast cancer precursors, have been
inversely associated with breast cancer risk among women with BBD. We
recently developed measures to quantitate levels of TDLU involution,
which demonstrate high inter/intra pathologist reproducibility. Here we
assessed whether TDLU counts/100mm2 and median TDLU span (microns), two
measures inversely related to degree of TDLU involution, are associated
with subsequent breast cancer risk among women with BBD.Methods: From the
Mayo BBD cohort (n = 9,376), we evaluated benign biopsies from 99 women
who later developed breast cancer (cases) and 145 age-matched controls
who did not develop breast cancer. Digitized images of biopsy sections
were reviewed to enumerate TDLUs/mm2 and measure median TDLU span
(microns) for up to ten normal TDLUs. Breast cancer risk factors were
available from questionnaires or medical records. To assess associations
with breast cancer risk, subjects were categorized into quartile levels
of TDLU counts and median TDLU spans, based on data from controls. Odds
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were estimated using
multivariable conditional logistic regression models, adjusted for
histologic type of BBD, family history of breast cancer and menopausal
hormone use.Results: Compared to controls, women who developed breast
cancer had higher median number of TDLU counts/100mm2 (28 vs 20, p =
0.03) and larger TDLU spans (300 vs 267 microns, p = 0.14). In
multivariable models higher TDLU counts (quartile4 vs. quartile1, OR =
2.44, 95%CI = 0.96-6.19, ptrend = 0.02) and larger TDLU span measures
(quartile4 vs. quartile1, OR = 2.83, 95%CI = 1.13-7.06, ptrend = 0.03)
were associated with subsequent diagnosis of breast cancer. Combinatorial
metrics of TDLU counts with median TDLU span measures identified women at
higher risk; specifically, women above the median for both TDLU span and
TDLU counts had an OR = 3.75 (95%CI = 1.40-10.00, ptrend = 0.008),
compared with women below the median for TDLU span and TDLU
counts.Conclusion: These data show that lack of TDLU involution, as
measured by increased persistence of TDLU counts, larger median TDLU
spans and cross-classification using these measures was associated with
increased breast cancer risk among women with BBD, extending prior work
in this cohort based on other TDLU involution metrics. Future studies to
identify determinants of TDLU involution, its association with breast
cancer risk and its potential as an intermediate endpoint in prevention
studies warrant consideration.

