Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of serum progesterone levels of the immunomodulatory
protein, the progesterone induced blocking factor, in people with BRCA-2
mutations associated with and not associated with a high risk of cancer


The BRCA genes normally provide proteins important in degradating the
progesterone (P) receptor. BRCA1 and 2 mutations may make mutated
protein, leading to prolongation of P receptor activity which may be
involved in the mechanism of how these mutations increase the risk of
breast and ovarian cancer. The progesterone induced blocking factor
(PIBF) is a protein which suppresses natural killer (NK) cell
cytotoxicity, and exposure to P increases both serum levels of PIBF and
intracytoplasmic levels in rapidly growing cells (both fetus and cancer
cells). The objective of this study was to compare serum PIBF levels in a
person with a wild type BRCA2 mutation not known to be associated with
malignancy versus the familial type of BRCA2 mutation associated with
malignancy. Serum levels of PIBF were obtained in the follicular phase x5
in a woman with a benign wild type heterozygote mutation of BRCA2
(NM000059.3 C.1964 (>(P655R) and in two anovulatory women and a man with
familial BRCA2 mutations associated with increased risk of malignancy.
The PIBF assay was a research ELISA method using a monoclonal antibody to
PIBF. All 5 serum samples of the 21 year old woman with the benign BRCA2
mutation were over 700 ng/mL (levels seen only with high levels of serum
P) vs. an average of 55.5 in 2 women with breast cancer at an early age
and 1 man positive for the familial BRCA2 mutation. The high levels of
serum PIBF seen with the wild type heterozygote mutation show that
certain types of BRCA mutations can be associated with increased PIBF
levels. Perhaps this BRCA2 wild type mutation is more associated with
interfering with degradation of the P receptor found in gamma delta T
cells, thus increasing serum PIBF levels. Increased virulence of certain
cancers, e.g., breast cancer, has been found with increasing P receptor
longevity by either phosphorylation or decreased ubiquitination or
sumoylation. Blocking P receptor activity by certain P receptor
antagonists, e.g., mifepristone, has been shown to decrease tumor
virulence irrespective of the presence or not of P receptors in the
tumor. The parent compound for PIBF is a 90 kDa nuclear protein found in
the centrosome, but it can be converted to 34-36 kDa immunoprotective
intracytoplasmic protein which is similar or identical to the circulating
PIBF. Conditions associated with consistent high levels of serum PIBF,
e.g., grand multiparous women, are not associated with increased risk of
malignancy. Thus an attractive hypothesis (that needs to be proven) is
that the BRCA2 mutation (and maybe BRCA1 also) leads to prolongation of
the nuclear P receptor leading to increased nuclear PIBF, resulting in
increased intracellular PIBF, which, in turn, helps protect the cancer
cells especially from NK cell immunosurveillance but potentially other
immune factors also.

