Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FFPE preanalytical variables: Investigating the effect of delayed
times to fixation on the proteome and phosphoproteome for FFPE kidney
tumor samples and a comparison of tumor versus normal for matching FFPE
and OCT frozen tissue


Variations in how human biospecimens are collected, processed and stored
have been shown to significantly affect downstream molecular analyses.
FFPE (formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded) specimens are valuable resources
for biospecimen based research, since many such samples are routinely
collected and stored in biobanks. With an aim to evaluate the impact of
delay to fixation on total protein and phosphoprotein profiles, we used a
label free mass spectrometry based proteomic and phosphoproteomic
analysis on FFPE renal cell carcinoma (RCC) tumor tissues from 20
patients at four delay to fixation time points (1h, 2h, 3h and 12h delay
to fixation), collected under the National Cancer Institute's (NCI)
Biospecimen Pre-analytical Variables (BPV) program. In addition, we
compared tumor and adjacent normal kidney tissue at the four delay to
fixation time points. This comparison was performed using both FFPE and
frozen (OCT) tissue from case-matched tumor specimens to assess the
relative impact of the two biospecimen preservation methods. We employed
a label-free intensity based quantitation for the proteome profiling
using high resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometry. A total of 3475
proteins and 1690 phosphoproteins were quantitated in the FFPE specimens
and 3728 proteins and 1817 phosphoproteins in the OCT (frozen) tumor
specimens. Very few significant changes were observed at the proteome
level with different delay to fixation times. However, at the
phosphoprotein level, significant numbers of phosphopeptides were
observed to change and these changes were observed across the majority of
patients. Approximately 8% of the phosphopeptides were significantly
changed after a 12 h delay in time to fixation (vs. 1 h) compared to just
0.5% of the nonphosphopeptides. The observed changes to the
phosphoproteome do not appear to be completely random. The
phosphopeptides that are differentially expressed are enriched in
proteins associated with renal cell death.In the tumor versus normal
tissue comparison, large numbers of changes were observed at both the
proteome and phosphoproteome level. These changes were consistent between
the FFPE and OCTtumor specimens. In general, however, greater magnitude
fold changes were observed in OCT versus the FFPE tumor specimens. Many
of the differentially expressed proteins observed in this study have
previously been identified in urine. These findings could potentially
lead to the development of a urine-based biomarker assays for renal cell
carcinoma that could aid in the early detection of this cancer. This work
is funded by NCI Contract No. HHSN261200800001E.

