Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hybrid clustering methodologies to distinguish CNAs and/or SNVs
that drive subclonal differentiation in samples from a breast cancer
patient primary tumor and metastatic lymph nodes


Background: Next generation sequencing (NGS) has revealed that the
genetic profiles of individual tumors are highly heterogeneous due to
their subclonal composition. Tumor heterogeneity has profound clinical
implications affecting differences in treatment response and therapeutic
resistance.Methods: An estrogen receptor positive, Her2 normal breast
cancer patient underwent definitive surgical treatment with modified
radical mastectomy. Multiple samples were obtained from the primary
cancer and metastatic lymph nodes. Flow cytometry based methods were used
to isolate and classify distinct cell subpopulations according to their
ploidy, and samples were processed for whole exome sequencing (WES).
Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) methods were used to identify
somatic unique copy-number alterations (CNAs). WES-Single Nucleotide
Variations (SNVs) were used to infer subclonal phylogenetic relationships
using Maximum Parsimony methods and annotated with
variation-cluster-barcodes (vc-barcodes) generated using a variation
Bayesian mixture model (VBMM) approach that focuses on copy-number
neutral sequence variations for subclone identification (SciClone). Our
comparative phylogenetic-VBMM clustering method was used to identify CNA
and/or SNV drivers that are key in differentiating subclonal populations
at multiple tumor sites.Results: CNA-neutral WES-SNVs from 25 subclonal
populations (isolated from 4 distinct sites) clustered into 6 major
groups and were used to generate vc-barcodes. A phylogenetic
reconstruction of subclonal architecture annotated with vc-barcode
information expedited identification of key variations underlying the
differentiation of subclones at distinct tumor sites. For example, we
identified an amplification event involving the Anaplastic Lymphoma
Kinase (ALK) gene that was more frequent in primary biopsy subclones
(12/17, 71%) in comparison to metastatic subclones (2/6, 34%). As the ALK
amplification is lost, we find that most of the metastatic subclones also
acquire a predicted damaging mutation in this oncogene (4/6, 67%). In
addition, we identified a potential driver metastatic cell lineage that
carries the ALK amplification in the absence of the nonsynonymous
mutation.Conclusions: We developed a hybrid clustering methodology and
used it to reconstruct the subclonal architecture in primary and
metastatic tumors from a single breast cancer patient. Our methods have
identified several CNAs and/or SNVs underlying subclonal differentiation,
as well as potential biomarkers of disease progression and indicators of
emerging resistance. Application of these methods to larger cohorts and
types of tumors should be conducted to ascertain more precise estimates
of the predictive accuracy of our processes.

