Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-unique mutation detection in cell-free DNA to monitor
colorectal tumor burden using a cancer-associated gene sequencing panel


Background: Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) carries information on tumor burden.
However, the mutation spectrum is different among tumors. This study was
designed to examine the utility of cfDNA to quantitatively monitor tumor
burden based on individual mutation profiles.Materials and Methods: DNA
was extracted from a total of 236 samples from pre- and post-operational
plasma, primary tumors, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells of 72
individuals who underwent curative resection of colorectal tumors and
from healthy individuals. With the use of a sequencing panel comprising
50 cancer-associated genes in an Ion PGM sequencer, mutations with a
frequency higher than 0.1% in the tumor were designated as tumor-unique
mutations and were used to trace the tumor burden by cfDNA. These
experiments aimed to identify: (a) tumor-unique mutations and (b) the
potential utility of tumor-unique mutations detected in cfDNA.Results:
The mean cfDNA levels of healthy individuals, endoscopically resectable
tumors, and advanced cancers were 5.1, 15.9, and 27.4 ng/mL per plasma,
respectively. The group average appeared to have decreased after both
endoscopic and laparoscopic procedures, suggesting that the cfDNA level
may have diagnostic utility. From the panel of 50 cancer-associated
genes, an average of 6.7 tumor-unique mutations were found per tumor, in
which TP53 and CDKN2A were mutated in more than 60% of tumors. All tumors
showed mutation in either one of these genes, whereas 15 genes were not
mutated in any of the tumors. Quantitative monitoring of the mutated
fragments in cfDNA with Ion PGM or droplet digital PCR demonstrated that
16 out of 49 (32.7%) mutated fragments decreased the mutation frequency
corresponding to the tumor burden in individual patients after operation.
These results suggest that selective tumor-unique mutations in cfDNA
precisely represent tumor burden in individual patients in a quantitative
manner. Although the tumor-unique mutation in genes that are frequently
altered may seem to have played a dominant role in diagnostics, mutations
with a minor frequency in the population, such as FBXW7, also contributed
to reflect tumor-unique mutational properties.Conclusions: The 50
cancer-associated gene panel appeared sufficient in identifying
individual tumor-unique mutated cfDNA makers for cancer patients. The
validation process to detect tumor-unique mutations in cfDNA has yet to
be well established. However, the potential clinical utility of tumor
unique-mutations as a biomarker has been demonstrated, particularly for
applications, such as post-operative follow-up.

