Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of novel alternative splicing events in human
papillomavirus-related oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma


Although the overall incidence of head and neck squamous cell cancers
have decreased in the past 30 years, the incidence oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinoma (OPSCC) related to human papillomavirus (HPV) has actually
been rising. Clinically, HPV-related tumors show improved response to
treatment and longer overall survival. Recent genomic sequencing data
also suggests that HPV-related tumors represent a biologically distinct
entity, harboring significantly fewer mutations than non-HPV-related head
and neck tumors. The paucity of genetic alterations in HPV-related OPSCC
has limited our understanding of its underlying biology and our ability
to identify targetable pathways for therapy. Thus, we sought to use RNA
sequencing to study post-transcriptional changes in HPV-related OPSCC,
primarily alternative splicing events (ASEs). ASEs have been shown to
play an important role in carcinogenesis in other cancer types leading to
protein expression changes in the absences of genetic alterations at the
DNA level.RNA sequencing data was obtained using an Illumina platform in
a cohort of 47 HPV-related OPSCC primary tumors and 25 normal mucosa
tissue samples from uvulopalatopharyngoplasty surgical specimens. We
developed a novel algorithm for the identification of ASEs which utilized
outlier analysis to identify differential expression of these splicing
events in tumors compared to normal tissues. Our analysis identified 3522
putative alternative splicing events occurring in tumor samples. These
ASEs were ranked based on presence of outlier over-expression and
under-expression in tumors. The top 200 candidates for over-expression
and under-expression were selected for further validation. Differential
expression of these candidate ASEs was confirmed using integrated genome
viewer (IGV). Additional validation was performed using RT-PCR in the
original tumor and normal tissue cohort. These were further validated in
publically available TCGA RNA sequencing data. An independent cohort of
normal and tissue samples was collected, and differential ASE expression
was confirmed using RT-PCR. These methods identified several ASEs that
offer insight into the molecular biology of HPV-related OPSCC. This
pipeline represents a robust and validated algorithm for identification
and prioritizing biologically significant ASEs using RNA sequencing data
that may be adapted for analysis in other tumor types.

