Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomics analysis of the effect of fluorouracil (5FU) and
5FU/leucovorin (LV) on colorectal cancer (CRC) in patients


Background:5FU is widely used and inhibits thymidylate synthase (TS); LV
given in combination with 5FU enhances TS inhibition. TS levels and
inhibition are associated with survival in advanced disease. The large
variation in response between patients indicates that more mechanisms may
be important. To make better treatment decisions, several additional
biomarkers, next to TS, such as 5FU activation, breakdown and
incorporation into RNA have been investigated. Several studies on global
molecular profiling for 5FU activity have been performed on model systems
and patients, showing that loss of 18p11-32, which harbors the TS gene,
was associated with better survival.Aim:Identification of new potential
mechanisms of action and potential biomarkers of 5FU with or without LV
treatment using in-depth proteomics analysis of patient CRC
tissues.Methods:Patients received approximately 48 hours before
resection, a test dose of 5FU (500 mg/m2) (n = 5), 5FU with LV (500
mg/m2) (n = 7) or no test dose (n = 7). For proteomics analysis, samples
of CRC resection material were lysed in SDS sample buffer, fractionated
by 1D gel electrophoresis, followed by in-gel digestion and nano-liquid
chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (QExactive). The
MaxQuant tool was used for protein identification and quantification by
spectral counting.Results:Our CRC proteome analysis identified a total of
6880 proteins and 874 with altered abundance (pBackground:5FU is widely
used and inhibits thymidylate synthase (TS); LV given in combination with
5FU enhances TS inhibition. TS levels and inhibition are associated with
survival in advanced disease. The large variation in response between
patients indicates that more mechanisms may be important. To make better
treatment decisions, several additional biomarkers, next to TS, such as
5FU activation, breakdown and incorporation into RNA have been
investigated. Several studies on global molecular profiling for 5FU
activity have been performed on model systems and patients, showing that
loss of 18p11-32, which harbors the TS gene, was associated with better
survival.Aim:Identification of new potential mechanisms of action and
potential biomarkers of 5FU with or without LV treatment using in-depth
proteomics analysis of patient CRC tissues.Methods:Patients received
approximately 48 hours before resection, a test dose of 5FU (500 mg/m2)
(n = 5), 5FU with LV (500 mg/m2) (n = 7) or no test dose (n = 7). For
proteomics analysis, samples of CRC resection material were lysed in SDS
sample buffer, fractionated by 1D gel electrophoresis, followed by in-gel
digestion and nano-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass
spectrometry (QExactive). The MaxQuant tool was used for protein
identification and quantification by spectral counting.Results:Our CRC
proteome analysis identified a total of 6880 proteins and 874 with
altered abundance (p< 0.05) upon treatments. Our results indicate that
5FU induces upregulation of proteins associated with the extracellular
matrix, membrane vesicles, stress and immune responses and downregulates
mitochondrial proteins, peroxisomes and (most profoundly) ribosomal
proteins. Patients who received 5FU-LV also displayed upregulation of
extracellular matrix and vesicle/granule proteins in addition to cell
adhesion proteins, an extensive downregulation of ribosomal proteins and
downregulation of mitochondrial and ubiquitin proteins. In addition,
there is an upregulation of the GO-term Extracellular region part in both
5FU and 5FU/LV treated patients, compared to controls. Top upregulated
proteins were isoform NELF-D of negative elongation factor C (NELFCD),
AMP deaminase 3 (AMPD) and myeloblastin (PRTN3), while top downregulated
were neudesin (NENF), antigen KI-67 (MKI67) and
HERC4.Conclusions:Proteome analysis revealed strong changes in the CRC
proteome upon 48 hrs of 5FU +/- LV treatment, with regulated proteins
involved in stress and immune responses, vesicular transport, protein
synthesis and metabolism. A number of proteins were not yet associated to
5FU actions. These proteins when correlated in a larger cohort to
clinical outcome may function as biomarkers for future treatment decision.

