Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo and in vitro efficacy of birinapant in preclinical models
of Ph-like pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia


Despite the success of current therapies for pediatric acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) more effective treatments are required for
the management of high-risk subtypes. Ph-like ALL is a high-risk subtype
defined by a gene expression signature similar to that of
BCR-ABL1-positive ALL despite the absence of the BCR-ABL1 translocation.
Approximately 50% of Ph-like pediatric ALLs harbor mutations in Janus
kinases (JAKs). Birinapant is a small molecule SMAC (second
mitochondria-derived activator of caspase) mimetic that potently and
specifically antagonizes inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs),
resulting in IAP degradation, inactivation of NF-B survival signaling and
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-dependent apoptosis. The combination of
birinapant plus azacitidine is being evaluated in a Phase 2 clinical
trial for the treatment of high-risk myeloid dysplastic syndrome. The aim
of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of birinapant against
patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) of pediatric ALL subtypes. Birinapant
(30 mg/kg IP Q3 days 5) significantly delayed the progression of 17/19
PDXs derived from Ph-like ALL (n = 7), B-cell precursor ALL (BCP-ALL, n =
8), and infant MLL-rearranged ALL (MLL-ALL, n = 4) by between 2 and 80
days compared with vehicle-treated controls. Using stringent objective
response criteria modeled after the clinical setting, birinapant induced
objective responses in 12/19 PDXs, including 7/7 Ph-like ALL (5 complete
responses, CRs; 2 maintained CRs, MCRs), which was significantly better
than BCP-ALL (4/8; 2 partial responses, PRs; 1 CR; 1 MCR) or infant
MLL-ALL (1/4; 1 CR) PDXs (P98% clearance of human leukemia cells from the
bone marrow, spleen and peripheral blood of mice treated with birinapant
doses that achieve drug levels attainable in humans. In vitro apoptosis
assays confirmed the greater sensitivity of the Ph-like ALL PDX panel.
Moreover, the cIAP1 protein was rapidly degraded in PDXs upon birinapant
treatment both in vitro and in vivo, regardless of their relative
sensitivity. Microarray analysis of gene expression revealed a
significant correlation between baseline TNF expression and in vivo
birinapant sensitivity across 19 PDXs (P = 0.002; R2 = 0.46). While
exogenously-added TNF did not potentiate apoptosis induced by birinapant,
a TNF blocking antibody partially reversed apoptosis in 3/4 Ph-like PDXs.
These results show that birinapant exerts profound single-agent in vivo
efficacy against Ph-like pediatric ALL PDXs, indicate a role for
endogenous TNF in the birinapant mechanism of action against this
high-risk pediatric ALL subtype, and support further evaluation of
birinapant in the treatment of Ph-like ALL. Supported by NCI NO1CM42216.

