Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel insights into the genetic and epigenetic regulation of the
MLH1 CpG island and shore in colorectal cancer


Gene silencing via CpG island hypermethylation contributes to colorectal
cancer (CRC). We previously demonstrated that genetic variants (single
nucleotide polymorphisms, or SNPs) in the MLH1 gene promoter region are
associated with MLH1 CpG island hypermethylation, MLH1 protein loss, and
DNA mismatch repair deficiency in tumors. Recently, CpG-rich shore
regions were identified flanking many CpG islands which exhibiting
distinct methylation profiles among different tissues and in normal
versus tumor states. To explore the role of MLH1 CpG island shore
methylation, we performed global methylation profiling (Illumina 450K
microarrays) to investigate DNA methylation in peripheral blood cell
(PBC) DNA of over 800 CRC cases and 800 controls (Savio et al., 2012). We
found that MLH1 CpG island shore hypomethylation occurred in PBC DNA of
both cases and controls. Intriguingly, individuals carrying variant
alleles of the MLH1 promoter SNP rs1800734 incur significant
hypomethylation at the MLH1 CpG island shore, located 1.5 kb upstream
irrespective of disease status. Based on these observations we sought to
determine whether these SNP-associated epigenetic changes were apparent
in other tissues, including CRC and normal colonic tissue. To address
this, we investigated MLH1 CpG island shore methylation in matched PBC,
normal colon, and tumor DNA of 349 CRC cases using the real-time
PCR-based technique, MethyLight. Methylation was significantly lower in
PBC DNA of CRC cases with variant SNP genotypes (both heterozygous and
homozygous variant carriers) and this association was also observed in
normal colonic DNA. The association between genotype and epigenotype was
lost in tumor DNA, as no differences in methylation were seen among
different genotypes. Hypermethylation in tumor DNA compared to normal
tissues (PBC and colon) was also observed. This hypermethylation and lack
of association between SNP genotype and shore methylation in tumors may
indicate an epigenetic switch occurring. Bisulfite sequencing of DNA from
fresh frozen tumors and paired normal colonic mucosa have recapitulated
these results, with hypomethylation incurred in variant SNP carriers.
Hypermethylation in tumor compared to normal DNA was also observed.
Bisulfite sequencing of four CRC cell lines has also revealed
SNP-dependent hypermethylation at the MLH1 CpG island shore. Taken
together, we have integrated methylation data from a microarray platform,
sensitive real-time PCR, and bisulfite sequencing for a comprehensive and
systematic analysis of DNA methylation at the CpG island shore of MLH1 in
multiple tissues of CRC cases, controls, and cell lines. These results
indicate that static genetic variants can modulate dynamic epigenetic
regulation at the MLH1 gene region, and may play a role in colorectal
tumorigenesis.

