Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrin 64 promotes autocrine EGFR signaling to stimulate
migration and invasion toward HGF


Integrin 64 is upregulated in pancreatic adenocarcinomas where it
contributes to carcinoma cell invasion, in part, through its coordinated
modulation of the transcriptome. Here, we find that integrin 64 signaling
dramatically upregulates the expression of several genes involved in the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway, including amphiregulin
(Areg), epiregulin (Ereg), and ectodomain cleavage protease MMP1.
Notably, these genes correlate well with integrin 64 expression in
publicly available pancreatic cancer databases. We previously reported
that integrin 64 promotes HGF-stimulated migration and invasion;
therefore, we tested the role of autocrine EGFR signaling in these
processes. We discovered that blocking EGFR signaling with EGFR-specific
blocking antibodies or an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor hindered
HGF-stimulated pancreatic carcinoma cell chemotaxis and invasive growth
in three-dimensional culture. Furthermore, we found that both Areg and
Ereg are required for these autocrine effects, as knocking down either
ligand prevented migration and invasion. Notably, AsPC1 cells, isolated
from abdominal metastases, are not dependent on EGFR signaling for
migration or invasion; thus suggesting a mechanism exists for
circumventing EGFR dependency. We also demonstrated that HGF stimulates
the secretion of Areg, which is dependent on integrin signaling pathways
including MAPK, PI3K and PKC and that Areg was transported to the leading
edge of cells treated with HGF. Moreover, MMP activity and integrin 64
signaling are required for Areg secretion. Finally, we found that EGFR is
phosphorylated in response to HGF stimulation which was dependent on EGFR
protein kinase activity; however, Met phosphorylation in response to HGF
was unaffected by EGFR signaling. Taken together, we show that integrin
64 stimulates invasion by promoting autocrine EGFR signaling through the
upregulation of key genes and facilitating HGF-stimulated EGFR ligand
secretion.

