Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole genome bisulfite sequencing from plasma of patients with
metastatic breast cancer identifies putative biomarkers


Although several improvements in the management of breast cancer(BC) have
been made, an estimated 90% of BC related deaths are due to the
development of distant metastasis to organs such as lung, bone, liver,
and brain. Numerous studies suggest that cell-free (cf)DNA methylation
could serve as a useful biomarker for improving clinical management. The
objective of our study was to identify novel blood-based biomarkers that
can be used to predict BC patients at high risk of distant metastasis.
For the first time we performed paired-end whole genome bisulfite
sequencing (WGBS) using 15 ng of cf plasma DNA from three pools of
samples which included metastatic BC to various organs (M, n = 40),
breast cancer free survivors (BCF n = 40) and healthy individuals (H, n =
40). Sequences were aligned using the bismark tool and data analysis was
conducted using the R package methylKit to identify base-pair resolution
DNA methylation differences between groups. A minimum of 5 reads in each
group, delta beta values 0.2 and p valuesAlthough several improvements in
the management of breast cancer(BC) have been made, an estimated 90% of
BC related deaths are due to the development of distant metastasis to
organs such as lung, bone, liver, and brain. Numerous studies suggest
that cell-free (cf)DNA methylation could serve as a useful biomarker for
improving clinical management. The objective of our study was to identify
novel blood-based biomarkers that can be used to predict BC patients at
high risk of distant metastasis. For the first time we performed
paired-end whole genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) using 15 ng of cf
plasma DNA from three pools of samples which included metastatic BC to
various organs (M, n = 40), breast cancer free survivors (BCF n = 40) and
healthy individuals (H, n = 40). Sequences were aligned using the bismark
tool and data analysis was conducted using the R package methylKit to
identify base-pair resolution DNA methylation differences between groups.
A minimum of 5 reads in each group, delta beta values 0.2 and p
values<0.001 were considered differentially methylated loci (DML).
Overall, the data revealed that H and BCF had very similar plasma
methylomes with approximately 1792 DML, compared with 0.8 million and 1.1
million DML between HvsM and BFSvsM, respectively. The M pool had greater
overall hypomethylation across the genome, particularly in gene bodies
compared with H and BFS. However, M had greater CpG island and promoter
hypermethylation compared with H and BFS. The average coverage of CpG
loci across the genome was 18, 11 and 9 for M, BFS, and H, respectively
indicating that plasma of M samples has greater genomic representation.
Among the genes differentially methylated in plasma of M was RUNX3, which
was hypomethylated overall in M compared to H and BFS except for one CpG
island hotspot, where methylation and number of reads significantly
exceeded that of H and BFS. Other genes with similar hotspots were also
identified. We validated these data using bisulfite amplicon sequencing
(Ion Torrent) in each pool and individual plasma samples. Using the
HumanMethylation27K bead array, we analyzed 32 breast brain metastasis
(BBM) tumor tissues compared to a series of 50 unmatched early stage BC
samples and identified RUNX3 hypermethylation in the same hotspot region
as WGBS. Lastly, comparing 25 early stage BC samples with known outcomes
of BBM had RUNX3 hotspot hypermethylation compared with samples from
patients who were BM-free for greater than 5 years. This suggested that
prediction of metastasis may occur at the time of early stage of disease.
Together these data identified DNA-methylation hotspots in circulation
and tissue that are unique to distant MBC and which could be translated
into predictive biomarkers of metastasis. Biomarkers indicating a
high-risk population can shift current paradigms by allowing increased
surveillance and/or prophylactic therapies aimed at preventing metastasis
and improving outcomes.

