Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RasGRP3 mediates MAPK pathway activation in GNAQ mutant uveal
melanoma


Uveal melanoma (UM) is the most common intraocular malignancy in adults
and no effective treatment options are available for metastatic disease.
Over 80% of UM show mutations in the Gq family members GNAQ and GNA11.
MAP-kinase pathway activation in part mediated by protein kinase C (PKC)
has been shown as one critical contributing factor to GNAQ-mediated
oncogenesis. However PKC inhibition alone does not completely suppress
MAPK signaling. A more refined understanding of the signaling cascade
linking MAPK signaling to mutant GNAQ or GNA11 is required to develop
more effective strategies for targeted therapy. Among more than 10
different PKC isoforms, we identified both PKC and PKC to be required and
sufficient to activate MAPK pathway in GNAQ mutant melanomas by using
siRNA mediated knock-down and co-transfection of GNAQQ209L and specific
PKC isoform cDNAs. Overexpression of GNAQQ209L in 293FT cells increased
Ras-GTP level and knock down of three Ras isoforms in GNAQ mutant uveal
melanoma cell lines decreased MAPK signaling. Microarray analysis of 5
different GNAQ/11 mutant and 5 NRAS/BRAF-mutant melanoma cells revealed
RasGRP3, a Ras-guanyl nucleotide exchange factor (RasGEF), ranks at the
top of 487 differentially expressed genes between (cut off : p2 or 100
fold) elevated RasGRP3 levels in GNAQ/11 mutant melanoma cells, while
other RasGEFs were not significantly altered. Knock down of RasGRP3
decreased MAPK signaling and proliferation in GNAQ mutant melanoma cells,
while it no effect on BRAF mutant cells. Mutating the PKC phosphorylation
site of RasGRP3 (T133) partially attenuated RasGRP3-mediated MAPK
signaling. Overexpression of PKC and PKC increased RasGRP3 T133
phosphorylation but not PKC and PKC . While PKC inhibition completely
abrogated RasGRP3 T133 phosphorylation, it did not fully suppress
RasGRP3-mediated MAPK signaling, indicating that its activating effect
only partly requires PKC. We found that RasGRP3 activation mediated by
its diacylglycerol(DAG) binding C1 domain provides an independent conduit
of activation, which is augmented by PKC-mediated phosphorylation at
T133. DAG is a second messenger that is released by phospholipase C, a
direct effector of activated GNAQ/11. Finally, we found that the markedly
elevated RasGRP3 expression in GNAQ mutant melanoma cell lines is a
direct consequence of the oncogenic signaling and is mediated by PKC and
. Hence, our data identify RasGRP3 as a critical signaling node linking
oncogenic signaling downstream of GNAQ/11 to the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway
through three mechanisms: phosphorylation by PKC and , binding of the
second messenger DAG, and by upregulation of its protein level as a
consequence of oncogenic GNAQ-mediated activation of PKC and PKC . The
findings nominate RasGRP3 as a possible therapeutic target for cancers
driven by oncogenic GNAQ/11.

