Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic predisposition to DNA double strand break repair defect
defines a new class of familial colon cancer


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most common fatal cancer in the
U.S., with 30% cases familial (FCRC). Genetic predispositions have only
been defined for 25% of FCRC (including Lynch syndrome, Familial
Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP), and MutYH polyposis). For the genetically
undefined group (uFCRC), understanding of disease pathogenesis is
limited, and the absence of defined defects in relevant pathways that
could support molecular diagnosis results in under- and over-screening.
We hypothesized that uFCRC would arise distinctly from moderately
penetrant germline defects in repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs).
Such defects in DSB repair would lead to a moderate level of
constitutional genomic instability (CGI) that could be assayed from
patient peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs). We further hypothesized that
such DNA lesions would often be heterozygous, associated with
haploinsufficiency or dominant-negative effects, and would impair protein
interactions important for DNA repair.We combined exome sequencing with
biological assays to screen a rich resource of uFCRC clinical samples
from the Fox Chase Cancer Center Risk Assessment Program. Exome
sequencing of PBLs from patients (N = 25) identified a mean of 1.4 rare
variants/patient that were 1) strongly predicted to damage protein
function using multiple functional predictors (SIFT, Polyphen-2, Provean,
and MutationAssessor), 2) involved in pathways that suppress DSBs, and 3)
have not been previously implicated in CRC. Further, many of the variant
genes were commonly mutated in CRCs and other cancers in TCGA database.
Comparison of PBLs from patients and age- and sex- matched controls
revealed increased DSB levels (basal and with DNA damaging agents) in
18/25 patients vs. 1/25 normal controls (P = 0.001, AUC = 0.85). Next,
knockdown of variant genes in HCT116 CRC cells increased DSB formation
with or without damaging agents.As a proof-of-concept, we studied one
patient in detail who had candidate disease-causing variants in 2 DNA
repair genes, ERCC6 and WRN. Both variants were dysfunctional in
biochemical tests. We established patient-derived EBV-lines and observed,
at baseline and with several DNA damaging agents, elevated levels of H2AX
foci and larger nuclear comets, indicative of DSBs. This phenotype could
be rescued by expression of wild type WRN or ERCC6 and conversely induced
by knockdown in CRC cells. Further, the patient derived lines exhibited
reduced expression of WRN and ERCC6, implicating haploinsufficiency of
these genes in the phenotype observed.Our data support the hypothesis
that defects in DSB repair genes cause moderate-level CGI that commonly
presents as uFCRC. Our studies identify novel genetic subsets of FCRC,
and could potentially predict familial risk and improve screening and
diagnosis.

