Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the enhanced potency of PI3K inhibitor
taselisib (GDC-0032) in PI3K mutant cell lines and models


Alterations of the phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling pathway
occur broadly in cancer via multiple mechanisms including mutation of the
PIK3CA gene or loss of the tumor suppressor PTEN. The dysregulation of
this pathway has been implicated in tumor initiation, cell growth and
survival, invasion and angiogenesis; thus PI3K is a promising therapeutic
target with multiple inhibitors in clinical trials. The current study
investigates preclinical mechanism of action of taselisib (GDC-0032), a
novel, oral, selective inhibitor of PI3K alpha sparing inhibition of PI3K
beta. In preclinical studies, taselisib demonstrates greater potency in
cancer cell lines harboring activating PI3K alpha mutations vs wild-type
lines. Taselisib induces tumor growth arrest and regressions at tolerated
doses in xenograft and patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumor models
bearing PI3K alpha mutations. Notably, taselisib is distinguished from
other PI3K inhibitors by enhanced potency in PI3K alpha mutant isogenic
cells compared to parental cells. Pathway inhibition and apoptosis are
associated with the enhanced activity of taselisib in PI3K alpha mutant
cells. Other PI3K inhibitors, including PI3K alpha selective and pan-PI3K
inhibitors, do not achieve the same level of activity in PI3K alpha
mutant cell lines. Taselisib is more effective at maintaining suppression
of the signaling pathway upon activation of Receptor Tyrosine Kinases
(RTKs), such as after alleviation of negative feedback within the
pathway. Additionally, a screen to evaluate secreted factors contributing
to pan-PI3K inhibitor resistance was carried out in SW48 parental and
PI3K H1047R isogenic cells. Growth factor ligands for the EGFR family
were found to reduce the activity of PI3K inhibitors. Taken together,
taselisib offers greater preclinical activity in PI3K alpha mutant cells
when compared to other PI3K inhibitors, which may indicate a wider
therapeutic index.

