Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Repositioning HIV-based small molecule inhibitors of the stress
survival oncoprotein LEDGF/p75 to overcome taxane resistance in prostate
cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most commonly diagnosed cancer in men
and the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in elderly males. Although
early stage PCa is treatable, many patients eventually develop
castration-resistant disease (mCRPC), characterized by metastasis and
resistance to therapy. Furthermore, PCa also presents a major health
disparity problem as evidenced by its disproportionately high incidence
and mortality in African American men compared to other racial/ethnic
groups. Reducing or eliminating these disparities in PCa mortality will
require innovative therapeutic approaches to circumvent chemoresistance
and increase patient survival. We have previously demonstrated that lens
epithelium-derived growth factor of 75 kD (LEDGF/p75) is a stress
survival protein that is overexpressed in PCa cells and clinical tumors,
and promotes resistance to Docetaxel (DTX), the gold standard for mCRPC
chemotherapy. LEDGF/p75 has also been extensively studied as a target to
inhibit HIV-1 integration into host chromatin because of its role as a
key cellular cofactor of HIV integrase (IN). A series of novel and potent
small molecule inhibitors (SMI) of LEDGF/p75 were previously evaluated
for their potential to disrupt its interaction with HIV-IN. We
hypothesized that repositioning these SMI to target LEDGF/p75 in the
context of PCa could be a promising strategy for overcoming taxane
resistance. We observed that PC3 and DU145 mCRPC cells selected for DTX
resistance expressed high levels of LEDGF/p75, and were also resistant to
the taxanes Cabazitaxel (CTX) and Paclitaxel (PTX). This chemoresistance
was selective since LEDGF/p75 did not protect cells against the classical
apoptotic inducer TRAIL, which triggers caspase-mediated cleavage and
inactivation of LEDGF/p75. RNAi-mediated knockdown of LEDGF/p75 in these
cell lines sensitized them to taxane therapy. We then evaluated 130
LEDGF/p75 SMI for their cytotoxicity in DTX-resistant and sensitive PC3
and DU145 cells, in the presence and absence of DTX. These experiments
yielded a number of inhibitors that induced cell death directly or
re-sensitized resistant cells to taxanes only when combined with these
drugs. Our results suggest that LEDGF/p75 is a druggable oncoprotein that
could be targeted with repositioned HIV-based SMI to overcome PCa
chemoresistance.

