Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PQR309: A potent, brain-penetrant, dual pan-PI3K/mTOR inhibitor
with excellent oral bioavailability and tolerability


The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway is frequently
activated in tumors and promotes oncogenic cell transformation,
proliferation and tumor growth. PQR309, a novel dual inhibitor of PI3K
and mTOR, is currently in Phase I clinical development in cancer
patients. PQR309 binds potently and specifically to the ATP binding
pocket of all PI3K class I isoforms and mTORC1/2, attenuates PI3K
signaling and inhibits tumor cell growth. The preclinical pharmacological
and toxicological characterization of PQR309 is presented here.Methods:
PQR309 pharmacokinetics/-dynamics (PK/PD) were investigated in rats and
mice. Tissue samples from plasma, brain and liver were analyzed by LC/MS
detecting PQR309 distribution as well as blood insulin and glucose.
Toxicological studies were performed in rats and dogs. Effects on
neurological, hematopoietic, respiratory, lymphoid, reproductive and
cardiovascular system as well as general health were monitored. The
metabolic fate of PQR309 was analyzed in rat, dog and human
hepatocytes.Results: PQR309 PK studies in rats, mice and dogs revealed
dose-proportional PK, both PO and IV, with a half-life of 5-8 hours in
plasma, brain and liver, allowing for once a day oral application. As
on-target effect, increase of blood insulin and glucose could be observed
within hours after oral dosage in rats, which makes both molecules
suitable as PD markers. In in vivo PC-3 rat tumor xenograft models,
PQR309 effectively inhibited PI3K signaling in tumors and reduced tumor
growth at 10 mg/kg oral dosing.Preclinical toxicity testing showed no
signs of cardiotoxicity (including lack of hERG binding), phototoxicity
(3T3 NRU test) or mutagenicity (AMES test) for PQR309. No marked effect
on CYP450 activity was observed making PQR309 a good combination partner
in cancer therapy. As for other PI3K inhibitors, PQR309 leads at elevated
doses to a fully reversible loss of body weight and appetite in rats and
dogs. No further significant adverse events were observed when testing
PQR309 for 28 days in these species.Conclusions: PQR309 potently inhibits
class I PI3K isoforms and mTORC1/2 and shows anti-tumor effects in vitro
and in vivo. The physico-chemical properties of PQR309 result in good
oral bioavailability and equal distribution between plasma and brain.
Pre-clinical data led to initiation of a Phase I clinical study of PQR309
in solid tumors.

