Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arsenic trioxide downregulates NPM-ALK and inhibits the
proliferation of ALK-positive anaplastic large cell lymphoma


INTRODUCTIONAnaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma (ALCL) is a mature T-cell
lymphoma. Depending on the presence or absence of chromosomal
translocations involving the anaplastic lymphoma kinase ALK gene and
hence the expression of ALK, ALCL is further subdivided into ALK positive
(ALK+) or ALK negative (ALK-) types. NPM-ALK chimeric fusion oncogenic
protein is found in around 80% of ALK+ ALCL, as a result of the
chromosomal translocation t(2;5)(p23;q35). The current standard of
treatment for ALK+ ALCL is combination chemotherapy. Crizotinib, an ALK
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, is the only agent available to target NPM-ALK
in ALCL. The identification of other targeting agents would potentially
improve the treatment outcome of ALK+ ALCL especially for relapsed and/or
refractory cases. In this study, we investigated the effect of arsenic
trioxide (As2O3) on NPM-ALK in ALCL.MethodsWe treated ALK+ ALCL cell
lines with various clinically achievable concentrations of As2O3 (0, 0.5,
1 and 2M) for 24 hours and examined its effects on NPM-ALK mRNA
expression by semi-quantitative RT-PCR and protein expression by Western
immunoblotting. The downstream signaling pathway of NPM-ALK,
phosphorylation of STAT3 on Tyr705, was also examined. Next, we analyzed
apoptotic cell death and growth arrest induced by As2O3 in ALK+ and ALK-
ALCL cell lines using Annexin V-7AAD staining and cell cycle analysis.
The effect of As2O3 on cell viability was also measured with WST-1
assay.RESULTSOur data showed that As2O3 downregulated NPM-ALK at the
protein level without affecting the transcription. It also inhibited the
phosphorylation of STAT3 in all ALK+ ALCL cell lines. We also found that
blocking protein degradation through proteasome with MG132 abrogated the
effect of As2O3 on NPM-ALK. Furthermore, As2O3 induced apoptotic cell
death, cell cycle arrest at G2/M phase and growth inhibition in ALK+ but
not in ALK- ALCL cell lines, with a GI50 of less than 1M, which was a
level achievable with clinical use of As2O3.CONCLUSIONS.Our data
demonstrated that As2O3 downregulated NPM-ALK by facilitating protein
degradation through the proteasomal pathway, thereby inhibited cell
proliferation and induced cell death in ALK+ ALCL. As2O3 may therefore
represent a potential therapeutic agent for the treatment of ALK+ ALCL.

