Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitophagy imparts enzalutamide resistance in prostate cancer


Purpose: Anti-androgens are widely used in androgen deprivation therapy
(ADT), a standard-of-care for patients with recurrent prostate cancer
(PCa). Unfortunately, most patients ultimately develop resistance to ADT
and progress to castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Recently, two
agents that block androgen receptor activation [abiraterone acetate
(Zytiga, J&J) and enzalutamide (Xtandi, Medivation/Astellas)] have been
approved for CRPC therapy. While some patients respond to these
therapies, many fail. We investigated if sequestration of metabolically
aberrant mitochondria in the autophagosomes (mitophagy) imparts
anti-androgen resistance.Method: We studied the effects of anti-androgen
enzalutamide on the autophagy of androgen-dependent LNCaP and
-independent C4-2 cells. Autophagy was monitored by cellular fluorescence
in cells treated with monodansylcadavarine (MDC). Cellular fluorescence
due to Mitosox dye oxidation was used to identify mitochondria producing
high superoxide (O2-). Mitophagy of O2- producing mitochondria was
monitored using fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) between MDC
and Mitosox in a 96-well plate based high throughput (HTS) assay and by
visualization of FRET images and quantitation of FRET image intensities
using a Nikon A1 fluorescence confocal microscope and associated
software.Results: Our data show that in low androgen media, the degree of
autophagy is less in C4-2 cells than in LNCaP cells. Enzalutamide
treatment induces autophagy in both cell lines, but the increase in
autophagy is more pronounced in the androgen-independent C4-2 than in the
-dependent LNCaP cells. FRET data from both HTS and fluorescence
microscopy show that while enzalutamide increases mitophagy of O2-
producing mitochondria in C4-2 cells in a dose dependent manner, it
decreases after an initial increase in LNCaP cells. Mitophagy of such
mitochondria has also been observed by FRET based fluorescence microscopy
in live circulating tumor cells (CTCs) isolated from blood sample of a
patient undergoing enzalutamide therapy.Conclusion: Our data demonstrate
that PCa cells resistant to enzalutamide show high degree of mitophagy of
O2- mitochondria in autophagosomes. If this effect correlates with CTCs
from blood collected from CRPC patients undergoing enzalutamide therapy,
it can become a clinically useful method of identifying patients who are
most likely to benefit from enzalutamide treatment.

