Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A positive feedback loop between TGF- and SCF mediates TGF-1
ligand overexpression in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma


Background: The Tumor Growth Factor- (TGF-) pathway is a potent tumor
suppressor pathway. Its inactivation has been implicated in
hepatocarcinogenesis. However, in patients with advanced stage
Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC), TGF-1 serum concentrations are elevated
and correlated to tumor size, recurrence and shortened survival. The
mechanisms mediating TGF-1 ligand overexpression in HCC are
unknown.Material and Methods: Immunohistochemical analysis of human HCC
samples was performed using Tissue Micro Array. Established human HCC
cell lines were used for in vitro studies. Gene expression was assessed
by qRT-PCR, ELISA and immunoblot analysis. shRNA was used for gene
silencing. Transcription factor DNA binding was evaluated by chromatin
immunoprecipitation. For promoter analysis, transcription factor binding
site containing DNA fragments were cloned into the enhancer or promoter
position of luciferase expression vectors and subsequent
transfected.Results: In up to 68% of advanced stage HCC tumors Stem Cell
Factor (SCF) is overexpressed, and SMAD2 and STAT3 are constitutively
activated. SCF expression in human HCC tumors is intratumorally and
intracellularly correlated to expression of pSer465/467SMAD2 and
pTyr705STAT3. In HCC cell lines, SCF stimulation induces TGF-1
transcription, expression and secretion, all of which are abrogated by
genetic silencing of STAT3. TGF-1 stimulation of human HCC cells induces
TGF-1 transcription, and genetic silencing of SCF prevents TGF-1
autoregulation. We identified two STAT3 recognition sites within the
TGF-1 gene. In human HCC cells, TGF-1 stimulation results in STAT3
binding to one of the identified recognition sites. TGF-1 activates
luciferase expression vectors under control of the corresponding STAT3
binding site but not in its absence. TGF-1-induced STAT3 binding and
expression vector activation is abrogated in HCC cells with genetically
silenced SCF. TGF-1 induces SCF expression but SMAD2 knockdown inhibits
TGF-1-induced SCF transcription and expression. We identified 7 putative
SMAD2-binding elements (SBE) within the SCF promoter. TGF-1 stimulation
results in SMAD2 binding to the SCF promoter and activation of luciferase
expression vectors regulated by the SCF promoter; conversely, genetic
silencing of SMAD2 abrogates TGF-1-induced SCF promoter activation.
Importantly, knockdown of SCF restored the antiproliferative functions of
TGF-, and prevented TGF--induced tumor cell migration and
invasion.Conclusion: In advanced stage HCC, SCF drives TGF-1
autoregulation through STAT3-mediated regulation of the TGF-1 promoter.
Thereby, SCF and TGF-1 form a positive feedback loop that functionally
switches the TGF- pathway from a tumor suppressor to a tumor promoter in
advanced stage HCC.

