Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: WEE1 kinase inhibition enhances PI3K inhibitor response in p53
deficient gliomas


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive brain tumor that is
resistant to chemotherapy and radiation, and is almost always fatal.
Oncogenic activation of the PI3K signaling pathway plays a pivotal role
in the development of GBM and is a major molecular target for therapeutic
development. However, clinical results of single-agent PI3K inhibitors
have been modest to date. PI3K inhibitors have led to tumor stabilization
and some disease responses; however, dramatic tumor regressions are not
typical. Multiple recent reports have described mechanisms of resistance
to PI3K inhibitors. The goal of the present study was to identify ways to
improve the efficacy of PI3K inhibitor-based therapy by overcoming
adaptive resistance. In this study we show that PI3K inhibitor BKM
induces G2/M cell cycle arrest and inhibits GBM cell proliferation. We
identified WEE1 as a putative treatment target of resistance to PI3K
inhibition based on its potential function as a mitotic gatekeeper and
its specific overexpression in GBM. WEE1 kinase is a key molecule in
maintaining G2-cell-cycle checkpoint arrest for premitotic DNA repair. We
show that that BKM treatment activates WEE1, which in turn phosphorylates
CDC2 at Tyr15, inactivates CDC2 and inhibits CDC2 activity, leading to
G2/M arrest in glioma initiating cells (GICs). We show that treatment
with WEE1 inhibitor MK1775 inhibited BKM-induced Cdc2 Tyr15
phosphorylation, and forced GICs to enter into the mitotic phase of the
cell cycle. Using a panel of GICs, we show that MK1775 synergizes with
BKM to inhibit GBM cell proliferation. Further, MK1775 and BKM as a
single agent alone partially blocks proliferation, however, combination
of MK1775 and BKM induces apoptosis as evaluated by Annexin V positive
cells, cleaved PARP and caspase 3, and TUNEL staining. This effect was
observed specifically in p53 mutant cells. Finally we show that depletion
of WEE1 by shRNAs synergizes with BKM to inhibit GBM cell proliferation
and induce apoptosis. These results indicate that WEE1 inhibition
potentiated the effectiveness of PI3K targeted inhibition in GBM, and
suggest a combinational inhibition of WEE1 and PI3K might allow
successful targeted therapy in p53 mutant GBM.

