Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: APOBEC3 enzymes induce damage to the cellular genome during DNA
replication


The APOBEC3/AID family of cytidine deaminase enzymes are powerful DNA
editors that convert cytidine to uracil. APOBEC3 (A3) enzymes provide
immune defense by mutating and inactivating viral genomes. We have
previously shown that A3 enzymes are also capable of causing cellular DNA
damage. Recent bioinformatics analyses of breast cancer and other solid
tumor genomes identify a mutational pattern consistent with A3 activity.
The mutational signature of A3 enzymes includes a predominance of C-to-T
transitions, mutated cytidines within a TC context, and clustered
hypermutation. We identified the mutational hallmarks of A3 activity in a
subset of pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) genomes. To
understand the circumstances under which A3 enzymes cause damage to
cellular DNA, we examined the effect of A3 overexpression using a
doxycycline-inducible system in human cancer cell lines. A3 enzymes edit
single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), thus we hypothesize that A3 enzymes act on
the cellular genome when ssDNA is exposed during DNA replication.
APOBEC3A (A3A) is the most potent of the seven A3 enzymes and induces
phosphorylation of histone-variant H2AX (H2AX), indicating
double-stranded DNA breaks (DSBs). We examined the DNA damage response
pathways activated by A3A expression and found that both
Ataxia-Telangiectasia Mutated (ATM) kinase and ATM-Related (ATR) kinase
signaling occurs when A3A is expressed. As expected from these findings,
we show that cycling cells induced to express A3A arrest in S phase. ATR
signaling is activated in response to DNA damage such as ssDNA breaks,
and replication fork stress. To assess whether A3A acts on the cellular
genome during DNA replication, we induced replication stress by treating
cells with hydroxyurea (HU). We found that A3A expression increases DNA
damage signaling in HU-treated cells. Additionally, we examined H2AX and
quantified genomic uracil throughout the cell cycle in cells induced to
express A3A. Cells that expressed A3A and were arrested in G1 phase by
isoleucine depletion had decreased cellular DNA damage and less genomic
uracil as compared to those in S phase. These observations suggest that
cells undergoing DNA replication are particularly vulnerable to
deamination by A3A. Overall, these data support the hypothesis that A3
enzymes contribute to genomic instability and may contribute to malignant
transformation. A3 enzymes may be responsible for the clustered cytidine
mutations identified in pediatric leukemia genomes. This research is the
first investigation into the association between A3 enzymes and pediatric
cancer, and provides insight into the impact of A3A on replicating DNA.

