Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enrichment and isolation of uncontaminated breast cancer cells
from human blood samples


Cancer cells in peripheral blood, known as circulating tumor cells
(CTCs), play an important role in tumor dissemination. CTCs are shed from
either the primary tumor or its metastases and circulate in the
peripheral blood of patients; thus they can be regarded as liquid
biopsies of metastasizing cells. Although the exact origin and physiology
of CTCs is unknown, a fraction of these cells are thought to be viable
metastatic precursors capable of initiating a clonal metastatic lesion.
The molecular characterization of CTCs is important because it may
provide insights into the molecular biology of metastasis, the
association of their molecular profiles with treatment outcomes, and
reveal the presence of potential therapeutic targets. The process of CTC
enrichment represents a significant step toward the isolation of CTCs
from whole blood. Given that there are approximately 5109 erythrocytes
and 107 leukocytes per ml of whole blood, purification must represent a
reduction of many orders of magnitude. In this study, we show a method to
isolate CTCs which combines a microfluidic cell separation device
(Parsortix system) as an enrichment method followed by the DEPArray
selection system. The Parsortix system is versatile in its ability to
separate, capture and harvest CTCs in an enriched form compatible with
the needs of downstream processes such as DEPArray. Here we demonstrate
enrichment of CTCs via the Parsortix system using both breast cancer cell
spiked healthy blood donor samples and blood from metastatic breast
cancer patients. For these experiments, two milliliters of blood were
processed. The cells were harvested and stained to identify CTCs in the
enriched harvest product. Cells were stained with fluorescently labeled
monoclonal antibodies specific for pan cytokeratin (CK-8/18/19-PE),
leukocyte common antigen (CD45-APC), and nuclear stained with
[4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)]. With spiked samples, tumor cells
were isolated by DEPArray selection, which yielded a pure population of
tumor cells for molecular characterization. Tumor cells were defined by
presence of a clear DAPI-stained nucleus, CK-PE-positive cytoplasm and
CD-45-APC negative. We demonstrated that by using a combination of
enrichment and isolation/selection methods, we are able to isolate
single, uncontaminated tumor cells to achieve single cell molecular
analysis. The use of single cells is emerging as a powerful approach to
molecular analysis in oncology, and this study demonstrates its potential
application with circulating tumor cells.

