Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of the role of CADM1 in suppression of lung cancer using
Cadm1-deficient mice


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths, and non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most prevalent form of lung cancer. The tumor
suppressor gene CADM1/TSLC1 was originally identified in NSCLC. CADM1
encodes an immunoglobulin superfamily cell adhesion molecule. CADM1 is
inactivated by deletion and/or promoter methylation of the gene in 40-60%
of NSCLC, especially in their advanced stages. Previously we generated
conventional Cadm1-deficient mice and found that around 40% of
Cadm1-deficient mice spontaneously developed lung adenoma and
adenocarcinoma by 15 months of age. To assess the precise role of CADM1
in suppression of lung tumorigenesis, we crossed Cadm1-deficient mice to
conditional K-ras-mutant mice, well-established mouse models of lung
cancer. The K-ras-mutant mice are shown to develop multiple lung
adenocarcinomas by 25 weeks after administration of adenovirus expressing
Cre recombinase followed by the activation of oncogenic K-ras. We then
analyzed the development of lung tumors in K-ras-mutant (K) mice and
K-ras-mutant Cadm1-deficient (KC) mice. Loss of Cadm1 results in
enlargement of the size of alveolar tumors (adenomas or adenocarcinomas)
as well as higher tumor grades. The most malignant histology of vascular
or pleural invasion was only detected in tumors from KC mice. On the
other hand, the size of the bronchial tumors was larger in K mice than in
KC mice. Immunohistochemical analysis of bronchial marker SOX2 showed
that adenomas or adenocarcinomas expressing SOX2 were larger in KC mice,
indicating that loss of Cadm1 enhanced the rapid growth of alveolar
tumors and thereby impaired the growth of bronchial tumors originated
from the common stem cells, bronchio-alveolar stem cells (BASCs).
Furthermore, tumors from K mice showed frequent loss of CADM1 expression
and the tumors with low expression of CADM1 exhibited more malignant
histological features. These results suggest that loss of Cadm1 promotes
the malignant progression of alveolar tumor.

