Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of novel PKD1 related biomarker panel in
African American men with prostate cancer


Background: Prostate Cancer (PCa) exhibits striking racial disparity and
is presented more aggressively in African Americans (AAs) than Caucasians
(CAs). We have previously reported that the dysregulation of
PKD1-centered signaling in primary AA prostate cancer cell line E006AA is
akin to more aggressive Caucasian cell line C4-2. As PKD1 plays a central
role in several cellular mechanisms that contribute in aggressive
malignant phenotype, we defined a PKD1 related biomarker panel consisting
of 11 biomarkers and explored whether PKD1 centered signaling would be
differentially regulated in AA compared to CA PCa. Methods: PKD1 related
biomarker panel consisted of PKD1, AR, HSP27, N-Cadherin, Snail,
Vimentin, MMP-2, MMP-9, MT-1, E-cadherin, beta-Catenin. The validity of
the PKD1 related biomarker panel in PCa was evaluated on available
microarray databases (cbioportal.org). The differential expression of the
biomarker panel was quantified on PCa tissue samples from15 AA and 15 CA
men with matching Gleason score obtained from tumor tissue bank of
Comprehensive Cancer Center of Wake Forest University. Results: The
cbioportal consisted of six different PCa databases with approximately
662 human PCa samples in total. In average, PKD1 related biomarker panel
was altered 47.7% in available cases. Quantification of the PKD1 related
biomarker panel regarding gene expression demonstrated a trend toward
higher expression of majority of biomarkers in AA samples in compare to
CAs. However, only variances in expression of MMP2 (PBackground: Prostate
Cancer (PCa) exhibits striking racial disparity and is presented more
aggressively in African Americans (AAs) than Caucasians (CAs). We have
previously reported that the dysregulation of PKD1-centered signaling in
primary AA prostate cancer cell line E006AA is akin to more aggressive
Caucasian cell line C4-2. As PKD1 plays a central role in several
cellular mechanisms that contribute in aggressive malignant phenotype, we
defined a PKD1 related biomarker panel consisting of 11 biomarkers and
explored whether PKD1 centered signaling would be differentially
regulated in AA compared to CA PCa. Methods: PKD1 related biomarker panel
consisted of PKD1, AR, HSP27, N-Cadherin, Snail, Vimentin, MMP-2, MMP-9,
MT-1, E-cadherin, beta-Catenin. The validity of the PKD1 related
biomarker panel in PCa was evaluated on available microarray databases
(cbioportal.org). The differential expression of the biomarker panel was
quantified on PCa tissue samples from15 AA and 15 CA men with matching
Gleason score obtained from tumor tissue bank of Comprehensive Cancer
Center of Wake Forest University. Results: The cbioportal consisted of
six different PCa databases with approximately 662 human PCa samples in
total. In average, PKD1 related biomarker panel was altered 47.7% in
available cases. Quantification of the PKD1 related biomarker panel
regarding gene expression demonstrated a trend toward higher expression
of majority of biomarkers in AA samples in compare to CAs. However, only
variances in expression of MMP2 (P<0.0001) and MT1A (P = 0.03) were
significantly different between AAs and CAs. The results obtained from
human PCa samples showed a moderate correlation with previously reported
cell line data which showed significantly higher expression of EMT
markers N-Cadherin, Vimentin and Snail in AA cell line in compare to CA
cell lines. Conclusion: The differential expression of PKD1 related
biomarker panel in AAs in compare to CAs suggests a biological basis for
disparity in PCa. Besides, relatively high altered PKD1 related biomarker
panel in available microarray databases suggests the potential of the
panel as a tool in diagnosis of aggressive phenotype in PCa.

