Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A reversible DNA methylation signature precedes sporadic mutations
in the colorectal adenoma-dysplasia-cancer development


Background and aims: New generation sequencing and array technologies now
allow the systematic investigation and comparison of genetic or
epigenetic alterations in AD-CRC. The colorectal adenoma-dysplasia-cancer
(AD-CRC) development is characterised by sporadic (95%) in early stages
of cancers already.Aims: Evaluation of the role of epigenetic and genetic
alterations in the AD-CRC development using new generation sequencing and
DNA methylation arrays.Materials and methods: DNA was isolated from fresh
frozen biopsy specimens (20 normal; 33 adenomas; 17 CRCs). First, a
multiplex PCR panel was designed to amplify mutation hot spots of 12
selected genes (APC, BRAF, CTNNB1, EGFR, FBXW7, KRAS, MSH6, NRAS, PIK3CA,
SMAD2, SMAD4, TP53). Further DNA methylation analysis of 94 genes was
performed on Human Colon Cancer EpiTect Methyl II Signature PCR Array
(Qiagen) from the same DNA specimen. After RNA isolation whole genome
expression analysis was performed with HGU133plus2 microarrays
(Affymetrix) from 49 normal, 49 adenoma and 49 CRC specimens and on HT-29
cells with and without 5-aza-deoxycytidin treatment. Immunohistochemistry
confirmation of expression changes on protein level was performed using
tissue microarrays.Results: Mutations were found in 76% of adenomas and
78% of the cancer cases. The average number of mutations found in mutated
samples was 1; 1,8; 1,9 and 2,3 in low grade adenomas, high grade
adenomas, carcinomas and serrated adenomas, respectively. The APC
suppressor gene was mutated in adenomas more frequently than in
carcinomas (36% vs. 24%). The most frequently mutated genes were APC,
TP53 and KRAS with 36%, 18% and 26% frequencies in adenomas and 24%, 47%
and 45% frequencies in carcinomas.DNA methylation was found in 100% of
the investigated colorectal adenoma and cancer specimens. Eight genes
were found to be methylated in all of the cases. This gen set included
SFRP1, MAL, SLIT2, SST, VIM; another set of genes (DKK1, SLI3, TMEFF2)
was found to be hypermethylated in adenomas and cancers in >75% of the
cases. In adenomas 56 genes, in dysplasias 40 in cancer 37 genes were
methylated (>50% of the cases). The effect of methylation could be
confirmed by decreased mRNA and protein expression. Demethylation
treatment successfully restored the expression profile of the top
methylated genes.Conclusion: Methylation of gene sets occurred in early
premalignant stages followed by somatic mutations in increasing number
through the AD-CRC development. Demethylation treatment could reverse the
systematic, robust methylation alterations. Epigenetic alterations
precede the somatic mutations of the AD-CRC and show higher significance
in CRC development than genetic.

