Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation-induced downregulation of GLT-1 glutamate transporter
mRNA expression is reversed by renin-angiotensin system inhibitors


Fractionated partial or whole brain irradiation (fWBI) is often required
to treat metastatic brain cancer. Unfortunately, fWBI can lead to the
development of a progressive, irreversible cognitive impairment in
patients who survive longer than six months following treatment. Prior
studies suggest that neuroinflammation and alterations in neuronal
plasticity may play a role in this treatment-related side effect. In the
current study we determined that radiation-induced inflammatory
activation of primary rat cortical astrocytes results in downregulation
of mRNA and protein for the GLT-1 glutamate transporter, which functions
to regulate glutamate signaling at excitatory synapses. Furthermore, we
show that delivery of clinically-relevant fWBI (40Gy, 5Gy/fraction,
2x/week) to young adult male rats results in 51% decrease in Glt-1 mRNA
in the cortex at 48 hours. Two months after completion of fWBI, cortical
GLT-1 mRNA is further decreased to 25% the levels observed in sham
controls, while at six months following fWBI GLT-1 levels remain 43%
decreased compared to controls. We have previously identified two classes
of compounds, the renin-angiotensin system inhibitors and PPAR agonists,
which ameliorate the fWBI-induced cognitive impairment in this rodent
model, although the full mechanisms by which these compounds protect
cognition remain unknown. We found that dietary administration of the
angiotensin receptor blocker L-158-809, but not the ACE inhibitor
Ramipril, prevents fWBI-induced loss of cortical GLT-1 mRNA at 48 hours,
while both cognition-sparing compounds restored GLT-1 expression at 2
months post-fWBI. Similarly, administration of the PPAR agonist GW0742
prevented the fWBI-induced decrease of GLT-1 mRNA observed 6 months
post-fWBI. Together these data suggest that radiation-induced
downregulation of GLT-1 is a potential mechanism contributing to the
development of radiation-induced brain injury, including cognitive
impairment, and that GLT-1 may represent a druggable target to prevent
this treatment-related cognitive decline. (Supported by NIH CA112593)

