Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of pertuzumab in combination with trastuzumab plus
docetaxel therapy in a breast cancer xenograft model


Background: Pertuzumab is a first-in-class humanized monoclonal antibody
that prevents HER2-dimerization with ligand-activated HER family
receptors. In a Phase III trial for HER2-positive breast cancer
(CLEOPATRA), the triple-drug combination arm of trastuzumab (Tras),
docetaxel (DTX), and pertuzumab (Per) showed significantly longer
progression-free survival and overall survival compared to the Tras + DTX
arm. In this study, we investigated the mechanism of action for the
triple-drug combination therapy in vivo.Methods: A mouse model
xenografted with KPL-4, a human breast cancer cell line that
over-expresses HER2, was used for examining the efficacy. Tras (10 mg/kg)
and Per (20 mg/kg) were intraperitoneally administered once a week for 3
weeks, and DTX (10 mg/kg) was intravenously injected once every 3 weeks.
The tumor tissues excised 4 days after the initial treatment were
analyzed in the following ways: counting the number of cells in the
mitotic phase on Hematoxylin-Eosin stained specimens; assessing the
apoptosis and growth phase of the tumor cells by TUNEL assay and Ki-67
immunohistochemistry, respectively; and examining the signal transduction
of HER2 by Western blotting.Results: Tumor volume 21 days after treatment
started was 560 206 mm3 (Control group), 574 262 mm3 (Per group), 133 102
mm3 (Tras + DTX group) and 11 27 mm3 (Tras + DTX + Per group). Tumor
growth inhibition by Per + DTX (106 95 mm3) was similar to Tras + DTX.
Furthermore, the triple-drug combination showed significantly stronger
antitumor activity than the combination of 30 mg/kg of Tras (equal amount
with the triple-drug combination as an anti-HER2 antibody) and DTX. Thus,
our preclinical model accurately reflects the results shown by the two
different anti-HER2 antibodies in clinical treatment. Using this model,
we examined how Per enhanced the antitumor activity of Tras + DTX
treatment. The number of cells in the mitotic phase in tumors treated
with Tras + DTX and Tras + DTX + Per was equivalent to DTX alone,
indicating that Per and Tras did not enhance the mitotic arrest induced
by DTX. On the other hand, in the Tras + DTX + Per group compared to the
Tras + DTX group, Ki-67 staining was significantly less and apoptotic
tumor cells significantly enhanced, even though neither Tras nor Per
increased apoptosis as a single agent. These results were supported by
Western blot analysis showing that Tras + DTX + Per decreased
phosphorylation of HER2, HER3, and Akt more strongly than Tras + DTX.
These results suggest that Per in combination with Tras + DTX accelerated
apoptosis by DTX after enhancing Tras-mediated HER2-HER3-AKT signal
inhibition.Conclusion: The mechanism of the synergistic efficacy of Per
in combination with Tras + DTX is at least in part attributed to the
acceleration of DTX-mediated apoptosis after mitotic arrest.

