Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GR activation modifies ER transcriptional activity and results in
decreased estrogen-mediated breast cancer cell proliferation


Approximately 75% of breast cancers (BC) express estrogen receptor-alpha
(ER). The proliferative and anti-apoptotic actions of estrogen signaling
in ER+ BC are well-established. Our laboratory recently reported that
approximately 40% of ER+ breast cancers express significant
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) mRNA; a meta-analysis of early-stage ER+ BC
gene expression unexpectedly found that patients with tumors expressing
high GR had significantly improved relapse-free survival (p-value
7.8E-8). Consistent with the improved outcome observed in ER+/GR+ BC
patients, our laboratory and others have reported that GR activation can
alter ER-mediated transcription and also antagonize estradiol
(E2)-mediated cell proliferation. We therefore hypothesized that GR
activation directly antagonizes the expression of ER-mediated
pro-proliferative genes.Recapitulating observations reported by others,
we first performed cell cycle analysis and found that the synthetic
glucocorticoid dexamethasone (Dex) decreased E2-mediated proliferation of
MCF-7 BC cells. To understand how GR activation inhibits ER-mediated
pro-proliferative activity in ER+ BC cells, we performed chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) to
examine global GR chromatin occupancy in MCF-7 cells in the presence or
absence of ER activation (+/- E2 at 10 nM). Surprisingly, in GR ChIP
experiments we observed that in the presence of Dex, E2 treatment
resulted in significantly increased GR association with ER response
elements (EREs). Likewise, ER ChIP experiments showed that in the
presence of E2, Dex treatment significantly increased the association of
ER with GR response elements (GREs). Using genome-wide gene expression
array analyses of MCF-7 cells, the gene expression signatures resulting
from Dex and E2 co-treatment compared to E2 treatment alone are being
examined. In analyses done to date, we found that in the presence of E2,
Dex treatment inhibits the induction of ER-mediated pro-proliferative
genes related to the cell cycle such as CCND1 (Cyclin D1) and CDC6.
Furthermore, microarray analysis suggested that E2-mediated ER activation
represses pro-apoptotic CASP7 and BIK gene expression, while co-treatment
with Dex inhibits this repression. Additionally, anti-GR ChIP-seq
analysis showed GR enrichment at CASP7 regulatory regions upon
co-treatment with Dex and E2. Together, these data suggest that GR
expression and subsequent GR activation may inhibit ER-mediated
pro-proliferative gene expression as well as inhibit ER-mediated
repression of anti-apoptotic genes through direct GR-chromatin
interaction. These experiments suggest that GR activation can be an
important component modulating ER activity in ER+/GR+ BC.

