Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-Frequency of TMPRSS2-ERG fusion gene identifies a non-random
androgen-driven event of chromosomal instability in BRCA mutated prostate
cancer


INTRODUCTION:Germline BRCA mutations are an independent prognostic factor
for PrCa prognosis and treatment outcomes. BRCA tumours are associated
with chromosomal instability due to underlying DNA repair deficiency;
however, recurrent patterns of genomic aberrations in this context have
not been explored.METHODS:We collected PrCa formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded samples from diagnostic biopsies and/or prostatectomies
from 5 BRCA1 and 24 BRCA2 germline mutation carriers, which were matched
with at least 1 sporadic PrCa (ie PrCa with no germline mutation) by
stage and treatment. All samples were reviewed by an expert pathologist,
and the tumour relevant areas were selected for further analyses.
Recurrent chromosomal abnormalities in PrCa were also analyzed using
previously described fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
break-apart and/or fusion assays, including a novel FISH combined
break-fusion assay for TMPRSS2-ERG designed with probes flanking 3and 5of
ERG and 5of TMPRSS2. Genomic abnormalities were confirmed by a second
method (qPCR or IHC) whenever possible.RESULTS:No differences in Gleason
score between mutation carriers and non-carriers were seen (p = 0.134).
Neuroendocrine phenotype was not identified in any sample. The
break-apart assay identified interstitial deletion of genomic sequences
between TMPRSS2 and ERG in all BRCA mutated tumours in at least one focus
(100%), compared with 45% of non-carriers (PINTRODUCTION:Germline BRCA
mutations are an independent prognostic factor for PrCa prognosis and
treatment outcomes. BRCA tumours are associated with chromosomal
instability due to underlying DNA repair deficiency; however, recurrent
patterns of genomic aberrations in this context have not been
explored.METHODS:We collected PrCa formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
samples from diagnostic biopsies and/or prostatectomies from 5 BRCA1 and
24 BRCA2 germline mutation carriers, which were matched with at least 1
sporadic PrCa (ie PrCa with no germline mutation) by stage and treatment.
All samples were reviewed by an expert pathologist, and the tumour
relevant areas were selected for further analyses. Recurrent chromosomal
abnormalities in PrCa were also analyzed using previously described
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) break-apart and/or fusion
assays, including a novel FISH combined break-fusion assay for
TMPRSS2-ERG designed with probes flanking 3and 5of ERG and 5of TMPRSS2.
Genomic abnormalities were confirmed by a second method (qPCR or IHC)
whenever possible.RESULTS:No differences in Gleason score between
mutation carriers and non-carriers were seen (p = 0.134). Neuroendocrine
phenotype was not identified in any sample. The break-apart assay
identified interstitial deletion of genomic sequences between TMPRSS2 and
ERG in all BRCA mutated tumours in at least one focus (100%), compared
with 45% of non-carriers (P<0.001). The novel break-fusion assay allowed
us to identify TMPRSS2 as the fusion partner in all cases, excluding
other potential partners previously described. ETV1 rearrangements were
identified in 3.5% of carriers and in 4% of non-carriers (P =
0.662).CONCLUSIONS:The presence of TMPRRSS2-ERG fusion gene in all BRCA
mutated tumours in our series identifies a non-random androgen-driven
event on the background of high chromosomal instability. Our findings
suggests that BRCA mutated PrCa is androgen-dependent which may have
important implications for the management of these patients.

