Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nelfinavir inhibits the growth of small cell lung cancer cells and
patient-derived xenograft tumors


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive lung cancer with a poor
prognosis that is characterized by frequent metastasis at the time of
diagnosis. Although SCLC is more responsive to chemotherapy and radiation
therapy compared to other types of lung cancer, cure is difficult because
of frequent recurrence. Molecular alterations in SCLC include
inactivation of TP53 and RB1, high copy number of Myc family, and
amplifications of FGFR1 and SOX2. Additionally, achaete-scute homolog 1
(ASCL1), a transcription factor for development of pulmonary
neuroendocrine cells, is a lineage-dependent oncogene for SCLC. New drugs
and molecular targets need to be identified. Previously, we reported
nelfinavir (NFV), a HIV protease inhibitor, inhibited proliferation of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells in vitro and human NSCLC
xenograft tumors through induction of the unfolded protein response
(UPR). Here we demonstrate that the effect of NFV in SCLC cells and
preclinical treatment studies using SCLC patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
mouse models. NFV inhibited SCLC cell proliferation and induced cell
death in vitro. Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a marker of the
UPR, was rapidly increased, whereas Myc was decreased after 4 hr
treatment with NFV. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), which plays a
role in cellular energy homeostasis, was activated in the early phase of
NFV treatment, whereas the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) that is a
serine/threonine kinase that regulates cell growth, was inactivated. NFV
inhibited the expression of SOX2, ASCL1 and Aurora B in a cell line- and
time-dependent manner. Taken together, NFV had pleiotropic effects
against multiple targets during the inhibition of SCLC cell
proliferation. In vivo, NFV inhibited growth of SCLC PDX tumors, which
correlated with induction of the UPR and decreased expression of ASCL1
and Aurora B. Collectively, these findings show that NFV is highly
effective in SCLC in vitro and in vivo, suggesting possible value of
incorporating NFV into clinical trials for patients with SCLC.

