Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic networks and promoter-associated long noncoding RNAs
(paRNAs) in prostate cancer


Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are emerging as important players in
epigenetic mechanisms and human diseases, including cancer. paRNAs
represent a class of lncRNAs transcribed in promoter-proximal regions of
genes. However, their function is still unknown. In this study we
examined the functional relationship between paRNAs and expression of
neighboring genes. By analyzing Global Run On sequencing (GRO-Seq) data
from different cell lines and experimental conditions we identified large
numbers of nascent transcripts with both sense (S) and antisense (AS)
orientation in the 2 kb upstream region of many genes. Interestingly,
many paRNAs were found to be shared across different cell lines, denoting
a conserved function. Furthermore, many paRNAs were dynamically linked to
their neighboring gene expression, exhibiting concomitant changes in
transcription in different experimental conditions. Although the overall
mechanisms and network of co-acting elements may be highly complex, we
defined subgroups of genes whose paRNAs behaved consistently in similar
ways. This genome-wide analysis suggested that specific patterns of S and
AS paRNAs might be associated with either transcriptional activation or
repression of neighboring genes. To provide support to this hypothesis,
we focused on CDH1, the gene encoding E-cadherin, an important tumor
suppressor silenced in many epithelial cancers. We uncovered a complex
paRNA-based epigenetic network controlling CDH1 transcription in normal
and cancer cells. In addition to S and AS paRNAs, the network included
the RNA interference protein Argonaute 1 (AGO1) and the epigenetic
effector SUV39H1. Silencing of CDH1 in prostate cancer cells relied on
binding of AGO1 to the S paRNA, which in turn recruited SUV39H1 and
induced repressive histone modifications (H3K9me) at the CDH1 promoter.
Notably, this mechanism was shared by other genes that were similarly
silenced by AGO1 and SUV39H1 and reactivated by AGO1 and SUV39H1
knockdown in prostate cancer cells. Integrating GRO-seq data and ChIP-seq
data we found that many AGO1 and SUV39H1 co-regulated genes showed
evidence of bidirectional paRNAs and AGO1 binding in their promoters.
Furthermore, many co-regulated genes had putative tumor suppressor
function, were downregulated in human tumors and were associated with
metastasis and poor clinical outcome. This study reveals the presence of
complex RNA-based epigenetic networks that rely on transcription of
bidirectional paRNAs and interaction with AGO1 and epigenetic effectors.
paRNA-based networks can coordinate epigenetic silencing of critical
tumor suppressors, like CDH1, and promote tumor development and
progression. These findings give also new perspectives and insights on
epigenetic mechanisms and identify paRNAs as novel targetable elements in
the epigenetic machinery.

