Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extensive morphological heterogeneity of circulating and selected
high metastatic variants and differential chemosensitivity of human
prostate cancer in mouse models


Circulating PC-3-GFP human prostate cancer cells were collected from the
blood from nude mice orthotopically implanted with PC-3-GFP. In parallel
experiments, a highly metastatic PC-3-GFP cell line was developed by
injecting parental PC-3-GFP to the footpad of nude mice which
metastasized to inguinal lymph nodes from which the cancer cells were
collected and were re-injected to the footpad. After 6 cycles, the
PC-3-GFP cells collected from inguinal lymph nodes (PC-3-GFP-LN) and were
injected to the footpad. PC-3-GFP-LN showed 100% metastasis to major
lymph nodes (popliteal, inguinal, axillary, and cervical), and 100%
metastasis to bone and lung. PC-3-GFP-CTC and PC-3-GFP-LN were cultured
in vitro, and their morphology and chemo-sensitivity were comparing to
the parental PC-3-GFP cells. Highly pleomorphic subpopulations of
prostate cancer cells were identified in PC-3-GFP-CTC and PC-3-GFP-LN.
The different cell subtypes included characteristic high malignancy
features such as high nucleus to cytoplasmic (N/C) ratios and giant cell
formation as a result of abnormal mitoses. Variations in growth rate,
plating efficiency, size, shape, and number of the nuclei and nucleoli
were observed. The results suggest extensive tumor heterogeneity in both
sublines. The giant cells, contain multiple nuclei, cannot survive by
themselves and need small cells around them in order to proliferate.
However, giant cells also can produce smaller cells, which divide
further. The ratio of giant cells/total cells were significantly higher
in PC-3-GFP-LN compared to parental cells. However, the morphology of
cells from lung metastasis and bone metastasis showed lung and bone
epithelial features such as squamous on shape and tightly packed
together. PC-3-GFP-CTC had similar sensitivity to both cisplatinum and
docetaxel when compared to PC-3-parental cells. PC-3-GFP-LN was
resistant. In contrast, PC-3-GFP-LN was sensitive to the traditional
Chinese medicine (TCM) herbal mixture LQ similar to the parental cells.
These results demonstrate that circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and
selected high metastatic variants can be extensively heterogeneous and
have different chemosensitivity profiles, suggesting new approaches to
treatment such as with TCM.

