Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IHC assessment of PBRM1 loss in colon and lung carcinomas


PBRM1 (also known as BAF 180) is a chromatin remodeling polybromodomain
protein recently identified as the second most frequently mutated gene in
renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Loss of PBRM1 protein expression is most
frequently observed in clear cell RCC and correlated with tumor
progression. Approximately 40-50% of patients with RCC have mutations in
PBRM1, and loss of PBRM1 was also reported in 28% of melanocytic
neoplasms. However, loss of PBRM1 has not been studied in other tumors
using patient tissues. The purpose of this study was to assess the
protein expression of PBRM1 in a wide-ranging collection of normal and
tumor tissues. Here we report our findings of PBRM1 loss in colon and
lung carcinomas using a newly developed rabbit monoclonal antibody
(RabMAb), Clone EP342. The antibody was generated by immunization of
rabbits with PBRM1 recombinant protein. Sera collected from immunized
rabbits were screened by ELISA, WB and IHC. After fusion, antibody from
final hybridoma cell line was characterized using ELISA and Western blot
(WB). A 180 KDa PBRM1 protein was detected by WB in A431 and MCF7 cell
lysates. The antibody was further characterized by extensive IHC testing
using formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) human normal and tumor
tissue microarray (TMA). IHC analysis on human tissue microarray (TMA)
comprising seventeen types of normal tissues showed that PBRM1 antibody
stained positively in the nuclei of all normal cells except cardiac
muscle cells. In tumor TMAs comprising of fifteen types of tumors (2-4
cases for each type), negative staining was observed in carcinomas of the
lung and colon, as well as clear cell RCC. Further analysis of specific
types of tumor TMAs showed that PBRM1 was lost in 5 out of 30 colon
carcinomas (17%), 8 out of 35 (14%) lung carcinomas, and 8 out of 1844%)
clear cell RCC. In summary, the RabMAb PBRM1 antibody, clone EP342
specifically labels normal cells and most tumor cells. It is a useful
tool in identifying cancers with loss of PBRM1 expression on FFPE
tissues. The rate of PBRM1 loss in clear cell RCC (44%) detected by this
clone is consistent with literature reported. Our study showed that PBRM1
protein was lost in colon and lung carcinomas, but less frequent than
that of clear cell RCC. Further studies on colon and lung carcinomas are
needed to clarify the role of PBRM1 in tumor progression in these tumors.

