Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular targeted photoimmunotherapy as a treatment for bladder
cancer


Introduction: Bladder cancer (BCa) is a common cancer and is the most
expensive malignancy to treat from diagnosis to death. Although no new
therapies have been introduced in the past two decades, data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) confirms that Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
(EGFR) family and its downstream signaling molecules are altered in
almost 72% of muscle invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) cases. However,
anti-EGFRs to date have failed to demonstrate any benefit over standard
of care chemotherapy. We have applied a technique of employing monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) conjugated with photo-activatable compounds (IRDye
700Dx, a phthalocyanine dye) that are activated by near-infrared light
(NIR). When incubated with the conjugate, exposure to NIR destroys only
targeted cells. We explored photoimmunotherapy (PIT) in a panel of BCa
cell lines. The purpose of this study was to study the efficacy and
mechanism of action of PIT using the anti-EGFR panitumumab (Pan)-IR700
immunoconjugate as a selective therapeutic strategy for bladder
cancer.Methods: Using flow cytometry, the surface expression of EGFR was
profiled in several BCa cell lines. The cytotoxicity of Pan-IR700 was
analyzed using LIVE/DEAD and IC50 was measured using the MTS assay. The
type of cell death was examined by fluorometric caspase assay, Annexin
V-PI staining, and TEM. The mechanism of cell death was elucidated using
fluorometric measurement of reactive and singlet oxygen species.Results:
Using flow cytometry, the surface expression of EGFR was profiled in
several BCa cell lines and cell lines with increasing amounts of surface
EGFR (RT4, TCCSUP, 5637 and UMUC-5) were selected for further studies.
Pan-IR700 rapidly killed UMUC-5 cells (high EGFR expressions) with an
IC50 of 4 nM at 4 J/cm2 NIR. In TCCSUP cells (low surface EGFR), the same
IC50 of Pan-IR700 could be achieved at 64 J/cm2 of NIR. No significant
cytotoxicity was observed in the presence of IR700 or NIR alone, or in
cell lines without any EGFR expression. Absence of any caspases and
presence of most cells in the late apoptosis/necrosis quadrant of Annexin
V-PI staining suggested that PIT kills cells by necrosis. In TEM, these
cells showed classic features of necrotic cell death such as swollen
organelles, disintegrated plasma membrane and depleted cytoplasm and
nucleoplasm. Cells undergoing PIT showed production of ROS and singlet
oxygen species in large amounts immediately after exposure to NIR.
However, only the singlet oxygen quencher (NaN3) and not the ROS quencher
(Trolox) was able to protect the cells from PIT induced cell death
indicating partial involvement of singlet oxygen in PIT-induced necrosis
of cells.Conclusions: PIT is a new targeted treatment for bladder cancer.
Our data demonstrate that Pan-IR700-induced PIT selectively and
efficiently kills EGFR-expressing bladder cancer cells in vitro and
therefore warrants further preclinical therapeutic studies in in vivo
bladder cancer models.

