Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of FOXM1 driven gene network as a prognostic marker
in breast cancer


A transcription factor FOXM1 is known to play a key role in cell cycle
progression where endogenous FOXM1 expression peaks at S and G2/M phases.
It was previously reported that expression level of FOXM1 in breast
cancer was strongly correlated with patient survival, since FOXM1
influenced endocrine therapy and chemo-response effect. The aim of this
study is to estimate prognostic value of FOXM1 gene and to identify novel
markers interconnected with FOXM1 to predict heterogeneous breast cancer
behaviors.Microarray gene expression profiling was performed using gene
expression data obtained from 317 Korean patients with breast cancer to
identify a signature associated with FOXM1. Various statistical methods,
including the leave-one-out cross validation, were applied to identify a
gene expression signature able to predict breast cancer outcome. The
predictive value of the signature was verified in the two larger
independent cohorts obtained from a public database. Unsupervised cluster
analysis of gene expression data from the Korean cohort showed highly
concordant subtypes of Caucasian cohort. Significant differences in
overall and disease specific survival between the subgroups divided by
the expression signature of FOXM1-associated genes were observed
(log-rank test, each P A transcription factor FOXM1 is known to play a
key role in cell cycle progression where endogenous FOXM1 expression
peaks at S and G2/M phases. It was previously reported that expression
level of FOXM1 in breast cancer was strongly correlated with patient
survival, since FOXM1 influenced endocrine therapy and chemo-response
effect. The aim of this study is to estimate prognostic value of FOXM1
gene and to identify novel markers interconnected with FOXM1 to predict
heterogeneous breast cancer behaviors.Microarray gene expression
profiling was performed using gene expression data obtained from 317
Korean patients with breast cancer to identify a signature associated
with FOXM1. Various statistical methods, including the leave-one-out
cross validation, were applied to identify a gene expression signature
able to predict breast cancer outcome. The predictive value of the
signature was verified in the two larger independent cohorts obtained
from a public database. Unsupervised cluster analysis of gene expression
data from the Korean cohort showed highly concordant subtypes of
Caucasian cohort. Significant differences in overall and disease specific
survival between the subgroups divided by the expression signature of
FOXM1-associated genes were observed (log-rank test, each P <0.001,
respectively). Multivariate Cox regression analysis revealed that the
expression signature of FOXM1-associated genes was a strong predictor of
breast cancer outcomes. Our findings were verified in the two independent
patient cohorts and confirmed that the signature produced consistent
prediction patterns. Finally, gene network analyses in the signature
revealed that, FOXO1, CCNK, MYC, BRD4 and EIF4G1 could be important
mediators interconnected with FOXM1 in the breast cancer behavior.The
expression signature of FOXM1 and its associated genes represents a
promising diagnostic tool for the identification of breast cancer
patients that have a high risk of poor clinical behavior.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

