Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of different highly sensitive miRNA array platforms for
the investigation of circulating cell-free microRNAs in blood


Introduction: Circulating free (cf) microRNAs hold great promises in
early detection and prognosis of human diseases such as cancer. However
due to the very low amount of cf miRNA in plasma and serum, highly
informative miRNAs are lost. Thus, there is an urgent need for highly
efficient, sensitive, cost efficient technologies to measure low abundant
miRNA in a quantitative manner. Previously, we have successfully measured
and validated miRNA profiles of early onset breast cancer cases, healthy
controls and breast cancer patients who had developed breast cancer
metastasis during follow-up by applying TaqMan Low density arrays. We
established and validated miRNA signatures for the early detection of
early stage breast cancer, and prognosis and early detection of breast
cancer metastasis.However more sensitive microarray platforms with highly
dynamic ranges could even improve identified diagnostic signatures
especially in respect of early detection of diseases and relapse.Here, we
compared the sensitivity of the previously applied array platform TaqMan
Low density array (TLDA) with Toray innovative 3D-Gene microarray
technology by measuring plasma cf miRNA profiles of 40 individuals (10
healthy controls, 10 early stage breast cancer, 20 metastatic breast
cancer patients).Experimental Procedures: Plasma samples were processed
within 2 h after blood collection. EDTA blood was centrifuged for 15 min
at 1200 g and the supernatant centrifuged again at 12.000 g for 10 min in
order to remove any cell debris. Cf RNA was isolated from plasma. Cf
miRNA profiles of plasma samples of 40 individuals (10 healthy controls,
10 early stage breast cancer, 20 metastatic breast cancer patients) were
investigated A: via TaqMan low density arrays (TLDA) and B: via 3D-Gene
microarray technology.Expression profiles between both array types and
between cases, early stage breast cancer and metastatic breast cancer
patients were compared. In addition selected miRNAs were measured with
single TaqMan assays. These results were compared with the array based
results.Conclusion: The result will be of importance for all scientists
who intend to develop and improve diagnostic miRNA panels. Based on our
results recommendations for a microarray platform for the investigation
of cf miRNA will be given.

