Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the arginine-nitric oxide pathway to arrest development
and progression of invasive bladder cancer


Background: In United States there will be an estimated 74,690 new
diagnoses and 15,580 deaths in 2014 due to bladder cancer. Lack of
reliable markers of early disease and limited chemotherapy options have
resulted in poor patient outcomes. A better approach is to treat patients
with early intervention using targeted therapy. Arginine metabolic
pathway has been identified to be deregulated in bladder cancer. Arginine
is either derived from the microenvironment or synthesized by cells
containing arginosuccinate synthase I (ASS1). Arginine undergoes
subsequent conversion to nitric oxide (NO), which which can activate
numerous intracellular signaling mediators, including guanylate cyclase
(GC). We evaluated dual targeting of this metabolic pathway by arginine
deprivation (ADI-PEG 20, Polaris Pharmaceuticals, San Diego, CA) and NO
chelation (Cobinamide) as a therapy for bladder cancer.Experimental
Design: Expression of arginine-NO pathway components in FFPE tissue
sections was assessed by IHC and correlated with histopathology, outcomes
and progression to identify pathway activation during early and late
disease and stratified based on moderate to strong expression (2+, 3+)
compared to absent to weak expression (0, 1+). In addition, a panel of
bladder cell lines was screened for arginine-NO pathway components by
immunoblotting and representative ASS1 negative and positive cells were
used to evaluate the effects of arginine deprivation and/or NO chelation
in vitro on colony formation and cell viability by clonogenic and MTT
assays. Effects of NO production on bladder cancer survival and motility
was assessed utilizing siRNA gene silencing and small molecule
inhibitors. Effects of arginine deprivation by ADI-PEG 20 treatment in
vivo was assessed by a mouse xenograft model.Results: Analysis of human
tumors showed that ASS1 loss and increase in NOS occurred early in the
course of bladder neoplastic progression. We identified loss of the ASS1
enzyme in bladder cancer cells and compensatory dependence on
extracellular arginine, which can be successfully targeted using arginine
removal to induce bladder cancer cell death, both in vitro and in vivo.
We also identified increased nitric oxide synthase (NOS; the enzyme that
catalyzes NO production) and GC activation in invasive bladder cancer
cell lines. We characterized the effects of NO production on bladder
cancer cell survival, growth and motility. Disruption of the NO pathway
through gene silencing and small molecule inhibitors resulted in
decreased cell survival, migration and invasion.Conclusions: Thus, dual
targeting of this metabolic pathway using arginine chelation by the
arginine degrading enzyme ADI-PEG20 and NO scavenging by a novel compound
Cobinamide can be a potential mechanism to prevent development and/or
progression of early bladder neoplasia.

