Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting focal adhesion kinase is a novel approach to therapy of
high-risk, Ikaros-mutant acute B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia


Deletions and dominant-negative mutations in IKZF1, the gene encoding
Ikaros transcription factor, are found in 85% of Ph+ B-ALL and in some
cases of Ph B-ALL, and are associated with poor prognosis. Genomic
studies of high-risk Ph or Ph-like B-ALLs have revealed frequent mutation
and activation of TK genes and signaling pathways. While ABL1 tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as dasatinib and ponatinib have been
incorporated into chemotherapy regimens for Ph+ B-ALL, the majority of
patients still relapse, which correlates with residual bone marrow
disease following induction therapy. New therapeutic strategies are
needed for patients with Ikaros-mutant, high-risk Ph+ and Ph B-ALL.Using
mice with a conditional Ikzf1 mutation (Ike5fl) that mimics the
dominant-negative Ik6 mutant found in human B-ALL, we demonstrated that
loss of Ikaros DNA-binding function arrests B-lymphoid development at a
large pre-B cell stage that can give rise to B-ALL. Survival and
proliferation of Ikaros mutant pre-B cells is dependent on increased
integrin-mediated stromal adhesion and activation of focal adhesion
kinase (FAK). FAK is a non-receptor TK downstream of integrins and growth
factor receptors that plays important roles in cancer stem cell biology
and the tumor microenvironment.Here, we show that dysregulated tyrosine
kinases, including BCR-ABL1, cooperate with Ikaros mutation to accelerate
the development of B-lymphoblastic leukemia in mice, correlated with a
striking (30-fold) increase in the frequency of engrafting
leukemia-initiating or leukemic stem cells (LSCs). Ikzf1-mutant BCR-ABL1+
lymphoblasts exhibit relative resistance to ABL1 TKIs including dasatinib
that is dependent on the presence of stroma. VS-4718 is a potent, orally
bioavailable FAK inhibitor that inhibits tumor growth and metastasis in
preclinical models, and is currently under evaluation in clinical trials
in patients with various solid tumors. VS-4718 treatment abolished
stromal adhesion and induced apoptosis of Ikzf1-mutant B-ALL and
synergized with dasatinib, but had little effect on Ikzf1 WT B-ALL cells.
Primary human Ph+ B-ALL samples showed a correlation between IKZF1
mutation status, stromal adherence, and sensitivity to FAK and ABL
inhibitors in vitro, and BM tropism in vivo in xenografted NSG mice.
Results from ongoing in vivo therapy experiments will be
presented.Together, these results suggest a new model for the
pathogenesis of high-risk B-ALL and its resistance to conventional
therapy. B-ALLs with IKZF1 mutations may be resistant to TKIs and to
chemotherapy by virtue of their stromal adhesion phenotype, resulting in
failure to eliminate BM leukemic stem cells. Inhibition of FAK signaling
in Ph+ or Ph IKZF1-mutant B-ALL may reverse the stromal-mediated
resistance to ABL1 TKIs and/or chemotherapy. FAK inhibitors represent a
promising new approach for the treatment of high-risk IKZF1-mutant B-ALL
patients.

