Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of microRNAs in resveratrol induced breast cancer cell death


Purpose: Breast cancer is the second most common type of cancer in women
and several drugs are currently being used against this disease. In spite
of the availability of promising chemotherapeutic drugs, it is often
observed that tumor cells develop resistance to these drugs rendering
them ineffective after prolonged use. Identifying alternative and
effective treatment options is thus crucial to improve the life
expectancy of breast cancer patients. Resveratrol, a dietary agent is
being considered as a potential drug candidate due to its pro-apoptotic
properties against cancer cells. Additionally, recently microRNAs
(miRNAs), which are small non-coding single stranded RNA molecules, are
gaining ground as novel cancer therapeutics due to their capability to
alter cell functions including apoptosis. The current study aims to
elucidate resveratrol-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells and to
investigate if the effects are mediated via tumor-suppressor miRNAs that
negatively regulates anti-apoptotic proteins responsible for development
and progression of breast cancer.Objective: The overall objective of this
study is to elucidate whether resveratrol-induced apoptosis in breast
cancer cells (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231) is mediated via tumor-suppressor
miRNAs.Experimental setup: Cell viability was tested using the cell titer
glo assay followed by evaluation of apoptosis induction by Hoechst
staining. Western blotting was employed to confirm caspase activation.
miRNA expression changes in cells treated with resveratrol was confirmed
using a miScript miRNA profiling kit. The role of selected miRNAs was
further investigated by transfection experiments using miRNA mimic and
inhibitor and Western blotting.Results: Resveratrol induced a dose
dependent effect on cell viability and induced apoptosis in treated
breast cancer cells. MiRNA data analysis revealed several miRNAs to be
regulated in breast cancer cells. MiRNAs hsa-miR-542-3p and
hsa-miR-122-5p were the most down-regulated and up-regulated in MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 cells respectively. Transfection experiments confirmed that
the observed effects of resveratrol might be mediated by tumor
suppressive miRNAs identified.Conclusion: Resveratrol induces apoptosis
in breast cancer cells and this effect is mediated through regulation of
key tumor suppressive miRNAs. The conclusions drawn from the study
highlights the importance of resveratrol in conjunction with miRNAs as a
good therapeutic alternative to induce tumor suppression.

