Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and therapeutic targeting of signaling pathways in
Ruxolitinib resistant cells


Ruxolitinib/Jakafi is a current front line therapy for JAK2-mediated
myelofibrosis. Like other chemotherapy agents, prolonged use of the drug
confers resistance. However, the mechanisms that allow for the
development of Ruxolitinib resistance are poorly understood. Moreover,
there is a paucity of alternative treatment options for these drug
resistant patients. To address these timely issues, we first took
BaF3/JAK2-V617F cells and selected for a Ruxolitinib resistant variant.
After selection through increasing concentrations of Ruxolitinib, the
cells grow quite rapidly in 500 nM of the drug; normal IC50 is 125 nM.
Both the parental and drug resistant cell lines were then subjected to
NGS of the whole exome. In the parental cells, JAK2-V617F is the driver
mutation. Pathways downstream of JAK2-V617F include the activation of
STAT3, STAT5, PI3K/AKT/NFkB and to some extent the SHC1/ERK pathway.
Analysis of the variant strain revealed that the cells acquired
Ruxolitinib resistance by tuning down all the key pathways downstream of
the driver JAK2 mutation. There was low copy number and a consequent
knockdown of key genes downstream of JAK2 including STAT3, STAT5, PI3K,
SOS1, ELK1, FOS, and MCL1. Additionally there were other newly acquired
genomic aberrations including knockdown of dephosphatases DUSP1, PTPRJ,
PTPRR; low copy number of epigenetics regulating genes such as TET2 and
KAT5; a knockdown of regulators of beta catenin pathway; and also an
increase in the copy number of EGFR. Thus, in this model of JAK2 driven
tumorigenesis, the cell is dynamically reacting to Ruxolitinib by
decreasing flux through the JAK2 signaling pathway and tuning up other
pathways that support growth and survival. The signaling network maps for
both cell lines were then overlaid onto a list of FDA approved
therapeutics that are used for other indications. Predictive simulation
modeling of the dys-regulated signaling networks suggested that
Roflumilast, a PDE4 inhibitor, and Chloroquine, an autophagy inhibitor,
would be highly efficacious in reducing cell viability. When the parental
cells were treated individually with Chloroquine (0-40 uM) or Roflumilast
(0-40 uM), cell viability was reduced dose-dependently; Chloroquine IC50
= 15 uM and Roflumilast IC50 = 25 uM. Furthermore, when used in
combination, the effect of the two agents was synergistic. These drugs
also showed efficacy in the Ruxolitinib resistant cell line, but at
higher doses. Specifically, the IC50 for Chloroquine doubled to 30 uM in
the drug resistant strain while 20 uM Roflumilast only reduced cell
viability by 25%. Overall, we have created a cell model for Ruxolitinib
resistance and identified signaling networks that are dys-regulated in
both the drug sensitive and drug resistant cells. Furthermore, using
predictive simulation technology, we have begun to identify alternative
drug therapies that effectively reduce the viability of both Ruxolitinib
sensitive and Ruxolitinib resistant cells.

