Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel carborane based inhibitors of carbonic anhydrase IX


Carborane-based compounds have emerged as promising lead structures for
the development of carbonic anhydrase (CA) inhibitors. The aim of this
study is to evaluate the effect of new carboranes with functional
sulfonamide residues on CAIX function. CAIX is a transmembrane isoform of
carbonic anhydrase with an extracellular-facing catalytic site and
therefore is well positioned to act in the control of tumor pH, and is
overexpressed in various solid tumors. The function of CAIX can be
inhibited by CAIX selective sulphonamides, and the inhibition perturbs
the in vitro survival, under hypoxia conditions.To investigate the
potency of carboranes to inhibit CAIX, at cellular level, carboranes were
chosen based on their enzymatic activity against CAIX and CAII, in vitro
from a library of 28 new carboranes with sulphonamide residues (IOCB,
ASCR, v.v.i., Czech Republic). 3 carboranes, viz., CB-30, CB-31, and
CB-33, showed high binding constant (10, 16, and 64 nM, respectively) and
high selectivity for CAIX, and were studied further. Extracellular pH in
cell cultures was measured, in parallel with measurements of cellular
cytotoxicity, in both 2D and 3D culture systems. At cellular level, the
activity of CB-30 and CB-31 was significantly lower than CB-33, due to
increased binding of CB-30 (99.7%) and CB-31 (99.3%) to the plasma
proteins, compared with 93.3% binding for CB-33. This indicated that the
activity at cellular level was preserved by the free fraction of CB-33.
Moreover, CB-33 comparatively showed the highest change of extracellular
pH under hypoxia conditions, and decreased migration of cells in
anti-metastatic assay.Further, we developed a new method of Raman
spectroscopy, to locate the distribution of carboranes in cells, and
determined the distribution pattern of CB-30 and CB-31 in HT-29 cells,
under hypoxia conditions. The highest Raman signal was detected on the
cell membrane. Furthermore, we investigated the pharmacodynamics and
pharmacokinetics profiles of carboranes. All tested carboranes were
distributed using ADME methods, according to their plasma and microsomal
stability, plasma protein binding, and presence of passive and active
transport in cells. The rapidity of drug metabolism, suitability of
carboranes for per-oral administration, and the ability of carboranes to
penetrate through the blood brain barrier were then evaluated.
Pharmacokinetic analysis is currently ongoing process, based on which
anti-tumor studies will be performed, followed by the measurement of pH
for intra-tumoral alteration.Our results show the ability of herein
tested carboranes to inhibit CAIX at enzymatic and cellular level. In
future, novel carboranes with functional sulfonamide residues may serve
as selective inhibitors of CAIX, and potential drugs in anticancer
treatment.Acknowledgement: This work was supported by ProMedChem
(CZ.1.07/2.3.00/30.0060), and BIOMEDREG (CZ.1.05/2.1.00/01.0030).

