Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of receptor-interacting serine/threonine protein
kinase-2 (RIP2K) via EGFR-mediated CRAF transactivation induces the
acquired resistance to Dabrafenib in BRAF V600E mutant non-small cell
lung cancer


Background: A BRAF V600E mutation found in approximately 1.3% of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) leads to constitutive activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. Therapeutic targeting of
BRAF V600E mutation in NSCLC with Dabrafenib have shown encouraging
response rate. The majority of patients, however, will eventually develop
resistance.Methods: To identify acquired resistance mechanism to
Dabrafenib, resistant cells were established by exposure of MV522 NSCLC
cells harboring BRAF V600E mutations to stepwise increasing Dabrafenib
concentrations. To understand the biological relevance of these clones,
we performed Western blot analysis, receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) array,
cell viability assays, Real time-PCR, sanger-sequencing, siRNA
transfection and immunoprecipitation in vitro. MV 522 cells and resistant
cells were inoculated to nude mouse to assess the combination effect of
BRAF and EGFR inhibitor and evaluate the expression of biomarker from in
vitro assay using immunohistochemistry in vivo.Results:The resistant
clones displayed activation of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR)-RAS-CRAF signaling and achieved sustained activation of ERK1/2,
but not MEK1/2, despite high concentration of Dabrafenib. Heparin-binding
epidermal growth factor (HB-EGF) selectively enhanced cell viability in
the presence of Dabrafenib in MV 522 cells, even though EGFR ligands
(TGF-alpha, Epiregulin, and Amphiregulin, and HB-EGF) increased in GSR
clones. Combination of Dabrafenib with EGFR inhibitors (gefitinib or
cetuximab) effectively blocked transactivation of CRAF from BRAF via
inhibition of EGFR-RAS signaling in resistant cells, but knockdown of
CRAF by short interfering RNA (siRNA) did not affect ERK activation.
Interestingly, inhibition of receptor interaction protein kinase 2
(RIPK2) by siRNA in combination with Dabrafenib abrogated tumor cell
survival via inhibition of ERK1/2 in the resistant clones. Furthermore,
combination of Dabrafenib with gefitinib or cetuximab effectively
inhibited activation of RIPK2 and ERK1/2 in resistant clones. The
enhancement of Dabrafenib sensitivity by combination of gefitinib was
confirmed in vivo.Discussion: Taken together, these findings suggest that
the acquired resistance to Dabrafenib in BRAF V600E mutant NSCLC is
uniquely mediated by EGFR-RAS-RIPK2-ERK signaling, bypassing MEK1/2,
which may necessitate therapeutic strategies different from those of
melanoma.

