Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bivalent adenylate cyclase (CYA)-based therapeutic vaccines:
eradication of tumor cells expressing different antigens over time


Introduction: ProCervix is a clinical stage HPV16 E7/HPV18 E7 bivalent
adenylate cyclase (CyaA)-based therapeutic vaccine targeting HPV16/18
infection in women prior to cervical high grade lesion development. We
report here on the ability of ProCervix to induce E7-specific CD8+ T
lymphocytes which can be both functional effector and memory cytotoxic
CD8+ T lymphocytes with (CTL) and we bring the proof of concept that
co-delivery of HPV16 E7 protein with non-viral Ag including OVA or
MAGE-A3 result in an effective therapeutic effect while providing broad
prophylaxis. Methods: Three vaccines bearing oncogenes or model Ag were
prepared, ProCervix (CyaA-HPV16 E7 and CyaA-HPV18 E7), CyaA-HPV16
E7/CyaA-MAGEA3 and CyaA-HPV16 E7/CyaA-OVA. ProCervix was adjuvanted with
imiquimod 5% cream applied on the skin dermis at the injection site, or
admixed with Poly-ICLC (Oncovir, USA). The two other vaccines were
adjuvanted with Poly-ICLC. All vaccines were injected intradermally in
C57BL/6 mice. Induction of E7-specific CD8+ T cells was evaluated by IFN-
ELISpot and E7-specific memory CTL by in vivo killing. Therapeutic
efficacy was performed in TC-1 tumor bearing mice (expressing HPV16 E7).
The evaluation of memory to HPV18 was subsequently performed in TC-1
tumor-free mice rechallenged with a newly engineered LL2 cell line
expressing HPV18 E7. Dual vaccination effects were further evaluated with
2 vaccine combinations in TC-1-tumor bearing mice, CyaA-HPV16 E7/CyaA-OVA
(EG7 rechallenge) or CyaA-HPV16 E7/CyaA-MAGEA3 (B16-MAGEA3 rechallenge).
Results: ProCervix adjuvanted by Imiquimod 5% cream or Poly-ICLC produced
similar therapeutic efficacy. ProCervix-vaccinated mice developed a
long-lasting HPV16 E7-specific CD8+ T cell response leading to HPV16
E7-expressing tumor eradication. Functional HPV18 E7-specific memory CTL
were also identified in these mice leading to the Ag-specific protection
against a challenge with HPV18 E7-expressing tumor cells. Similar results
were observed with eradication of TC-1 tumors followed by Ag-specific
tumor no takes of either EG7 or B16-MAGEA3, with CyaA-HPV16E7/CyaA-OVA
and CyaA-HPV16 E7/CyaA-MAGEA3 vaccinations, respectively. Conclusion:
CyaA technology is amenable to multivalent/multi-Ag therapeutic
vaccination approaches as shown by the sequential successful T-cell based
therapy, and the protective memory achieved in an Ag-specific fashion. We
could anticipate that ProCervix-treated patients could clear their HPV16
infection while being protected against a later infection with HPV18.
This dual mechanism opens the possibility to protect/treat patients with
several different Ag for a given cancer with appropriately designed
CyaA-based therapeutic vaccine.

