Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-associated fibroblast-derived HGF regulates cancer stem
cell-like properties in hepatocellular carcinoma through c-Met/FRA1/HEY1
signaling pathway


Liver cancer (HCC) remains one of the most deadliest malignancies in the
world. Increasing evidence showed the existence of a subset of cancer
cells called tumor-initiating cells (T-ICs) within the tumor bulk which
are resistant to conventional treatments. Similar to normal stem cells,
T-ICs are also regulated extrinsically within tumor microenvironment.
Since HCC is mostly developed with cirrhotic background with the
enrichment of activated fibroblasts, we hypothesized that
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) would regulate liver T-ICs. For this
purpose, we first isolated CAFs from fresh HCC clinical specimens,
cultured and propagated them in vitro. After confirming the fibroblastic
identity of CAFs, we subcutaneously injected CAFs, conditioned medium
(CM) of CAFs, together with HCC tumor cells into NOD/SCID mice to assess
their role in regulating tumorigenicity. Both CAFs and CM of CAFs were
shown to have a similar ability in promoting the tumorigenicity of HCC
cells, suggesting that CAFs regulate HCC probably by paracrine
regulation. Therefore, we collected the CM of CAFs and examined its
effect on the properties of liver T-ICs. We found that CM of CAFs
enhanced liver T-IC properties, and HCC cells could stimulate CAFs to
further aggravate its potential.By cytokine profiling, we identified
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) to be the most potent cytokine in CM of
CAFs critical for promotion of T-IC properties, and this effect was
further confirmed by the administration of recombinant HGF at a level
comparable to that secreted by CAFs. Upon cDNA microarray analysis, we
identified FRA1, to be mediator for the effect of HGF-induced T-IC
properties. Further characterization showed that activation of both
Erk1/2 and Akt pathways are important for HGF-mediated FRA1 activation
and induction. By IHC staining, we demonstrated that overexpression of
FRA1 is significantly correlated with poorer cellular differentiation, as
well as poor disease-free and overall survival in HCC patients. In view
of the functional significance of FRA1 in regulating liver T-ICs, and the
upregulation of FRA1 by CAF-derived HGF, we next investigated whether
FRA1 activation is associated with fibrosis-dependent
hepatocarcinogenesis. Using STAM non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) HCC
mouse model, in which HCC is developed from liver fibrosis, we found that
the activation of HGF/c-Met/FRA1 signaling pathway might be associated
with the regulation of T-ICs during liver carcinogenesis. Lastly, we
identified HEY1 to be the direct transcriptional target of FRA1. Rescue
experiments by overexpression of HEY1 in FRA1 knockdown HCC cells,
suggest that FRA1 promotes liver T-IC properties, at least in part,
through HEY1 regulation. In conclusion, our study suggests the role of
CAFs in regulating liver T-IC properties through the secretion of HGF,
which is mediated through a novel c-Met/FRA1/HEY1 pathway.

