Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mdm2 antagonist RG7388 does not interfere with tumor angiogenesis
in vitro and in vivo


MDM2 interacts with the transcription factor p53 via its N-terminal
domain and is the most prominent and best described natural inhibitor of
the p53 tumor suppressor pathway. Apart from this very well investigated
function, MDM2 has been reported to be involved in angiogenesis via
various mechanisms. Published data indicate that MDM2 interacts directly
with and activates HIF1a but can also display HIF1a independent effects
such as VEGF mRNA stabilization or regulation of ERK1/2 signaling. Taken
together, these reports suggest that MDM2 antagonists might have the
potential to inhibit tumor-angiogenesis or age-related macular
degeneration.In order to test the potential anti-angiogenic activity of
interfering with MDM2-p53 binding, we utilized the highly selective,
clinical stage MDM2 antagonist RG7388. First, it was tested if RG7388
influences the induction of response to hypoxic conditions using a
HRE-reporter cell line, followed by analyzing the interference of RG7388
with human endothelial cell tubule formation. The in-vitro results showed
no statistically significant inhibition of HIF1a facilitated GFP reporter
activation nor any effect on HUVEC tubule formation, viability or
proliferation. In a mouse cornea pocket assay in-vivo, systemic
administration of a MDM2 antagonist did not prevent VEGF-A or FGF-2
induced vessel formation. Finally, RG7388 and vehicle treated SJSA
xenograft tumors were explanted and analyzed in detail for changes in
vessel architecture. No effects on microvascular density or vessel
structure were observed. Taken together, these data indicate that RG7388,
a highly selective MDM2 antagonist that binds to the p53-binding pocket
of MDM2 and prevents interaction of MDM2 with p53, is not suitable for
anti-angiogenic treatment. One possible explanation for the lack of
anti-angiogenic activity is the increased potency/specificity of RG7388
resulting in higher selectivity and fewer off target effects compared to
Nutlin-3a.

