Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Allergic pulmonary inflammation accelerates breast cancer
metastasis via increase of MDSCs in the lung microenvironment


Disseminated metastasis accounts for majority of cancer-related deaths.
Lungs are one of the common sites for breast cancer metastasis.
Inflammation is known to contribute to tumor initiation and metastasis.
Since it is not known the effect of pre-existing inflammation on
metastasis, we combined a well-established model of allergic pulmonary
inflammation with breast cancer model. Using this model, we found that
allergen sensitized mice implanted with 4T1 mammary tumors had a
five-fold increase in metastatic foci formation compared to the 4T1
controls. Further, tumor cell infiltration in the lungs was three-times
faster in allergic 4T1 tumor bearing mice. More importantly, allergic 4T1
tumor bearers showed accelerated primary tumor growth and shorter
survival rate. It is known that one of the contributing factors in
metastasis is an increase in myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC).
Myeloid derived subpopulations are also known to be present in the lungs
of mice and humans with allergic pulmonary inflammation. Since MDSCs play
a key role in the immunosuppressive process associated with both
inflammation and metastasis, we hypothesized that allergic pulmonary
inflammatory microenvironment attracts myeloid subpopulations that
support incoming mammary tumors cells and accelerate metastasis. To test
this hypothesis, we assessed the alterations in MDSC subpopulations in
the lungs of mice with pre-existing pulmonary inflammation (ragweed
mice). We found an increase in the monocytic (CD11b+Ly6ChighLy6G-),
granulocytic (CD11b+Ly6ClowLy6G+) and macrophages (CD11b+F4/80+CD11c+)
subpopulations in mice with allergic pulmonary inflammation prior to
tumor inoculation. These populations were further increased after 4T1
tumor cell inoculation (ragweed 4T1 mice). To determine the role of MDSCs
in contributing to accelerated metastasis, we assessed the
pro-inflammatory mediators secreted by these cells known to play a role
in tumor growth and metastasis. Chemokines such as CCL2/MCP-1, CXCL2/IL-8
and their receptors, CCR2 and CXCR2 were increased in ragweed mice and
these levels were further enhanced in ragweed 4T1 tumor bearers.
Depletion of MDSCs prior to tumor cell inoculation in ragweed mice
decreased pulmonary inflammatory mediators resulting in decreased tumor
growth and metastasis in ragweed 4T1 tumor bearing mice. Targeting
specific immune populations could lead to a safer and more efficient
strategies against breast cancer metastasis.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

