Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of cell-free tumor DNA in cerebrospinal fluid to
characterize and monitor the genetic alterations of brain tumors


Background: Genetic characterization and monitoring of brain tumors is
challenging given the restricted sampling of tumors and the limited
abundance of brain tumor-derived circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in the
plasma. Here, we sought to define whether cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) could
serve as a liquid biopsy for the genetic characterization of tumor DNA
originated from the central nervous system (CNS) of patients (pts) with
brain tumors.Methods: CSF, plasma and tumor tissue were obtained from pts
with glioblastoma (GBM), brain metastases from breast (BMBC) and lung
cancers (BMLC) and leptomeningeal carcinomatosis (LC). Whole exome
sequencing was done in CSF and tumor (n = 3) and was coupled with digital
PCR for monitoring CSF and plasma ctDNA (n = 6). Targeted capture
massively parallel sequencing of 39 samples from 4 BMBC pts, including
samples from CSF, plasma and matched metastatic sites obtained at autopsy
was performed using two independent platforms (MSK-IMPACT (341 genes) and
BC panel (254 genes most frequently mutated in BC)) comprising 488 unique
genes. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina HiSeq2000. Single
nucleotide variants were defined using MuTect, and indels using Varscan.
Copy number alterations were assessed using Varscan2 and GISTIC.Results:
Whole exome sequencing of tumor and CSF DNA revealed a high proportion of
tumor-derived cell-free DNA in the CSF of 3 pts (1 GBM, 2 BMBC). We
identified actionable somatic mutations (EGFR L858R, IDH1 R132H) and also
IDH1 mutations associated with molecular diagnosis of proneural GBM. In
CSF and plasma ctDNA of 6 pts with GBM, BMBC, BMLC, we observed that the
mutations present in the CSF ctDNA, but not plasma ctDNA, and their
mutant allele fractions (MAFs) correlated with brain tumor burden. In 3
pts with suspected LC, we compared the results of cytopathologic analysis
and CSF ctDNA obtained from samples used for cytopathologic diagnosis,
and observed that CSF ctDNA was more robust and sensitive for the
diagnosis of LC. The analysis of synchronous CSF ctDNA, plasma ctDNA and
intra- and extra-cranial metastases from 4 autopsied BMBC pts showed that
CSF ctDNA recapitulated the somatic genetic alterations present in the
intra-cranial lesions. We detected similar MAFs for the truncal mutations
(RB1, KMT2D, AHNAK2) in both CSF and plasma DNA of BMBC3, a pt with
Li-Fraumeni syndrome and a diagnosis of concurrent BMBC and
esthesioneuroblastoma; however, mutations in PIK3CB, PAK7, MSH5 found
only in the CNS implant of each disease were only detected in the CSF but
not in the plasma DNA.Conclusions: Brain tumor-derived ctDNA is
abundantly present in the CSF of brain cancer pts and compared to plasma
ctDNA, CSF ctDNA is more representative of the brain lesions. Our results
demonstrate that massively parallel sequencing can be performed using CSF
DNA, allowing for the non-invasive genomic characterization and
monitoring of brain lesions.

