Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tripterygium induces apoptosis in NSCLC via mitochondria
dysfunction


Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer deaths globally. Patients
with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) account for 80% of all lung
cancer cases. Active mutation of EGFR was identified as one of the key
anti-cancer target for NSCLC patients. Recently, tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, like gefitinib which can specifically inhibit the activation
of EGFR, emerges as a new potential anticancer drug. However, drug
resistance remains an unsolved problem. Most of patient acquired
resistance to this inhibitor within 12 months. Therefore, it is necessary
and urgent to discover more effective potential agents as candidate drugs
for treating gefitinib resistant NSCLC. Tripterygium, a triterpene
extracted from the Chinese herb Thunder of God Vine, has been shown to
have multiple bioactivities. Its anti-cancer effect has been proved in
many kinds of cancers. However, the effect of Tripterygium on
gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells is still unknown. In this study, we
examined the potency of Tripterygium in induction of apoptosis in a
gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cell line and explored its underlying
anti-cancer mechanism. Our results demonstrated that Tripterygium induced
its apoptotic effect on NSCLC cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner.
Moreover, the function of mitochondria was disrupted by the treatment of
Tripterygium. The mitochondria membrane potential was gradually loss, and
the ratio of Bax/Bcl-2 which is the indicator of mitochondria membrane
integrity, was significantly up-regulated after the treatment of
Tripterygium. Although the caspases were activated, the treatment of
pan-caspase inhibitor could only partially inhibit the level of
apoptosis. Moreover, the level of Hsp90 client proteins, EGFR and its
downstream target AKT, were measured. Interestingly, both of them were
remarkably decreased after Tripterygium treatment. Taken together, our
data suggest that Tripterygium, which may be developed as a promising
agent for gefitinib-resistant NSCLC patient, induced apoptosis through
mitochondria dysfunction and EGFR degradation in gefitinib-resistant
NSCLC cells.

