Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial targeting of EGFR-VIII in temozolomide resistant
glioblastoma models


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) over-expression is the most
frequent genetic alteration associated with glioblastoma and has emerged
as a highly attractive therapeutic target based on its high frequency of
gene amplification and mutation as well as its deregulated cell signaling
cascades that drive GBM pathophysiology. The genetic aberration of wtEGFR
is often accompanied by the overexpression of a mutant EGFR known as EGFR
variant III (EGFRvIII), which is expressed in 30% of GBM tumors. Despite
recent innovations, may it be neurosurgical techniques, chemotherapeutics
or molecular targeted therapies only few treatments showed promise.
Temozolomide (TMZ) is one such and has shown improved survival in GBM
when administered with concomitant radiotherapy. However, acquired TMZ
chemoresistance occurs in more than 90% of recurrent GBMs. To delineate
the mechanisms in the context of TMZ resistance, we generated an
aggressive TMZ resistant model by continual exposure of U373 cells
constitutively expressing EGFRvIII (U373vIII) to 150uM TMZ for 6 months
(U373vIIIR). Our preliminary data showed that dichloroacetic acid (DCA)
induced apoptosis and demonstrated reduced cell survival in the context
of TMZ resistance. DCA treatment also demonstrated reduced EGFRvIII
mitochondrial translocation in U373vIIIR cells. Micro array studies
conducted on U373vIII or U373vIIR and their subsequent treatment with DCA
revealed that PDK1 is the sole target in TMZ resistant tumors expressing
EGFRvIII. Since EGFRvIII expression displays an aggressive phenotype yet
remains tumor specific, we propose studying DCA alone or in combination
with dasatinib, an inhibitor of EGFR subcellular translocation, in
U373vIII and U373vIII-TMZ-R cell lines. By more accurately depicting the
status of GBM at the time of recurrence after standard of care
chemotherapy treatment, the investigation of DCA will augment and
possibly redefine our current understanding of resistance mechanisms and
establish novel methods of circumventing this pervasive phenomena.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

