Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel and selective histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 & 2 inhibitors
enhance differentiation of neuroblastoma cells in combination with
retinoic acid


Neuroblastoma is an extra-cranial solid cancer arising from the neural
crest and is among the most common cancers in infants less than 1 year of
age (Park, JR et al., 2008). Approximately one child per 100,000 is
diagnosed with neuroblastoma, resulting in 650 new cases each year in the
United States. Half of the children with neuroblastoma have high risk
disease and 20% - 50% of those children will fail to respond adequately
to current therapies, illustrating a clear unmet medical need. Current
treatment for high-risk disease is aggressive, including chemotherapy,
surgery, radiation with stem cell transplant, anti-GD2/cytokine
immunotherapy and retinoic acid (Yang, RK et. al., 2010; Cheung, NK et.
al., 2012). Retinoic acid is a pro-differentiation agent that acts on
neuroblastoma cells to slow growth and promote cell death. A gene
expression pattern associated with retinoic acid induced neuroblastoma
differentiation was recently identified (Hahn, CK et. al., 2008; Frumm,
SM et. al., 2013), and it was further shown that inhibition of HDAC1/2
was able to induce a similar expression pattern.In this work, we
demonstrate that next generation selective and orally bioavailable
HDAC1/2 inhibitors can induce gene expression changes in neuroblastoma
cells consistent with differentiation. The action of HDAC1/2 inhibitors
potently enhances the retinoic acid differentiation effect at sub-optimal
concentrations of retinoic acid or HDAC inhibitor, as well as with
intermittent (pulse) HDAC1/2 inhibition. Retinoic acid alone and in
combination with HDAC1/2 inhibitors is able to slow cell proliferation in
long term growth assays and alter morphology in a manner consistent with
differentiation. The observed enhancement of differentiation by selective
HDAC1/2 inhibitors occurs at concentrations below that required for cell
death as evidenced by viability assays and caspase 3/7 activation. Acute
toxicity is induced by elevated concentrations of HDAC1/2 inhibitors, and
synergy is observed in combination with retinoic acid. Ongoing studies
exploring global gene expression changes, ChIP-seq examining retinoic
acid receptor and HDAC1/2 chromatin binding, and activity of the
selective HDAC1/2 inhibitor in combination with retinoic acid in animal
models of neuroblastoma will be discussed. Taken together, these findings
support a role for selective HDAC1/2 inhibitors in combination with
retinoic acid for the treatment of patients with high risk neuroblastoma.

