Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increases in the numbers of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in
Egyptian children with acute lymphoid leukemia


Background: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) or acute lymphoid leukemia
is an acute form of leukemia. Although the mechanism behind the relapse
in ALL is not clearly known, one possible mechanism could be the
accumulation of immune regulatory cells, in particular myeloid-derived
suppressor cells (MDSCs). We and others have reported that MDSCs cause
suppression of host immune responses through several mechanisms. Aim: The
main goal of this study was to determine whether these cells accumulate
in ALL patients and whether they are affected by chemotherapy. Materials
and Methods: Upon informed consent, patients with B-Linage Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukemia B-ALL (n = 20) were recruited in this study along
with healthy volunteers (n = 20). Patients included in this study were
risk stratified according to risk classification system and treated
according to treatment protocols including high risk pre B-ALL protocol,
standard risk pre B-ALL. MDSCs were characterized as
HLA-DR-Lin-CD33+CD11b+ cells. Results: Our preliminary results showed
significant increases in the numbers of myeloid population with MDSC-like
phenotype in B-ALL patients at different stages of chemotherapy treatment
when compared with healthy control volunteers (Mean = 1.01%). The
increases in the numbers of these cells were higher after treatment of
the patients with induction chemotherapy. Further, the increased numbers
of MDSCs associated with high numbers of circulating leukemic stem cells
(LSCs). Conclusion: Our preliminary data suggest that cells with MDSCs
like-phenotype emerge in ALL patients and possibly play a critical role
in establishing an immune suppressive environment in children with ALL.
Further research is needed to determine if circulating MDSCs
like-phenotype populations are a immunosuppressive and whether they can
be modulated.Acknowledgment:This work has been supported by a grant (ID#
5245) funded from the Science and Technology Development Fund (STDF),
Ministry of Scientific Research and Technology, Egypt to Mohamed L.
Salem, the Principal investigator of this project.Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

