Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cisplatin resistant non small cell lung cancer is sensitive to
arginine deprivation therapy


Drug resistance is a major obstacle to cancer chemotherapy. Despite early
positive response to platinum-based chemotherapy, the majority of non
small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) develops resistance. We have previously
shown that all cisplatin resistant (CR) cell lines exhibit high levels of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) production which leads to alteration in
tumor metabolism. We and others have shown that CR cells have low or no
expression of argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS) when compared to their
parental cells. Since ASS is a key enzyme to synthesize arginine from
citrulline, lack of ASS expression will make arginine an essential amino
acid for these CR tumors. Certain NSCLC cell lines/tumor samples also
express very low levels of ASS; however, it is unclear how this
expression will be affected by cisplatin treatment. In this report, we
investigate the underlying mechanism using 6 pairs of NSCLC cell lines
and their CR variants: H460/H460CR, F/FCR, S/SCR, A549/A549CR,
H1299/H1299CR, and H23/H23CR. Note that H460, F, S are ASS(+) and A549,
H1299, H23 are ASS(-). No ASS expression due to hypermethylation was
found in H1299, while in A549 and H23, it is most likely due to
transcription regulation which governs ASS expression, as we have been
previously reported in melanoma. All these CR cells possess at least 7
fold resistances to cisplatin and express 3-5 fold increase in ROS levels
when compared to parental cell counterparts. CR cells, derived from
parental cells that possess high ASS expression, exhibited significantly
lower levels of ASS once they became resistant to cisplatin. These CR
cells were also hypersensitive to arginine deprivation using ADI-PEG20
(provided by Polaris Inc) which degrades arginine to citrulline.
Importantly, the addition of 50ng/ml of ADI-PEG20 restored cisplatin
sensitivity to CR cells. With the combination of cisplatin and ADI-PEG20,
the ID50 dosage of cisplatin decreased (5-7 fold) to the original levels
as their parental counterparts. When compared with cisplatin alone
treatment, the percentage of cells with caspase activation increased from
5% (2ug/ml of cisplatin) to 70% (combination with ADI-PEG20). However, in
three pairs of CR cells derived from ASS(-) cells, the ASS remains
negative in H1299CR while in A549CR and H23CR the ASS expression showed
1-1.5 fold increase both at mRNA and protein levels. Nevertheless, the
addition of ADI-PEG20 still can sensitize these CR cells to cisplatin
treatment. To further verify the role of ASS in cisplatin resistance, we
have overexpressed ASS into SCR cell line and determine the sensitivity
to cisplatin. This transfectant became resistant to ADI-PEG20, but
maintains similar levels of cisplatin resistance. These data suggest that
silencing ASS in these CR cells is most likely a consequence of other
biochemical changes occurring in CR cells. These metabolic alterations
can be used to target CR lung cancer. Supported by Department of Veterans
Affairs, CDA2 award (1K2BX001289).

