Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The correlation between the change of future remnant liver volume
and functional capacity in ALPPS (associating liver partition and portal
vein ligation for staged hepatectomy), and establishment of ALPPS model
in rats


Associating liver partition with portal vein ligation for staged
hepatectomy (ALPPS) has been recently introduced, and has demonstrated
that it produces rapid future remnant liver (FRL) volumes compared with
conventional staged hepatectomy using portal vein embolization (PVE). The
correlation between the change of volume and functional capacity in ALPPS
is not clear. Furthermore, exact mechanisms of the spectacular
regenerative response in ALPPS have not been elucidated. The aim of this
study is to evaluate whether FRL volume increases with its change of
functional capacity in ALPPS compared with PVE and to elucidate the
mechanism of the regenerative response in ALPPS. A retrospective review
of all patients with liver metastases undergoing ALPPS or conventional
staged hepatectomies using PVE was performed. ALPPS consisted of 2 steps;
parenchymal transection between the FRL and the diseased part of the
liver with concomitant selective PVL was performed. After that, the
diseased deportalized part of the liver was removed 7 - 10 days later. In
contrast, the diseased deportalized part of the liver was removed 4 - 6
weeks after PVE for the conventional staged hepatectomy. The fusion data
of multi-detector raw CT and 99mTc-GSA dynamic SPECT using the software,
SYNAPSE VINCENT (Fujifilm, Japan) was analyzed. FRL volume was measured
by CT volumetry at 1 week after 1st step of ALPPS and 4 weeks after PVE.
Seven patients with ALPPS were compared with 6 patients with conventional
staged hepatectomies. The increasing rate of FRL volume was higher in
ALPPS than in PVE (13.7% and 4.6%, respectively), whereas the increasing
rate of the functional capacity of FRL was higher in PVE than in ALPPS
(18.5% and 10.7%, respectively). This result suggests that the increasing
rate of the functional capacity of FRL might be lower compared with the
volume, resulting in an overestimation of the functional capacity of FRL
for ALPPS. To elucidate the mechanism of the regenerative response and
figure out which day is the best time for the diseased liver resection
after 1st step of ALPPS, rats were randomly assigned to three
experimental groups: selective PVL and ALPPS, sham operation. The hepatic
regeneration rate, histopathology, liver biochemical determinations were
assessed at 24, 48 and 72h after surgery. The hepatic regeneration rate
of ALPPS was much higher than that of the PVL at 72h after surgery. And
we successfully established the ALPPS model using rats and demonstrated
the accelerated hepatic regeneration in ALPPS compared with PVL. Our
model provides a basis for further studies of ALPPS.

