Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of A20 and activated-Src result in TRAIL resistance
in oral cancer cells


The 5-year survival rate for oral cancer patients is around 50%, and has
remained unchanged for the last several decades. This poor survival rate
is due to the delay in diagnosis, the high incidence of recurrence, and
the difficulty of controlling metastases. It is considered that the
acquisition of resistance to anoikis and apoptosis is an essential event
to successfully metastasize. We have to withdraw these resistance of
cancer cells to improve the survival ratio.In this study, we have used
oral squamous cell carcinoma cell lines with and without distinct
metastatic ability, and revealed the relationship between their anoikis
and apoptosis sensitivity and the metastatic ability. At first we
examined their sensitivity to anoikis by using the low attachment culture
condition. There was no apparent relation between their metastatic
potential and the sensitivity to anoikis. SAS cells which have no
metastatic potency showed modest sensitivity to tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), whereas SAS-T5 cells
and SAS-L1 cells, a clone with high metastatic potential showed robust
resistance. Fas ligand (Anti-Fas/CD95 monoclonal antibody) showed the
similar effects for apoptosis induction as well as TRAIL, but TNF- had no
effect in these cells. We confirmed that the expression levels and the
localization of TRAIL receptors were not correlated with TRAIL
sensitivity. We found that the mechanisms underlying the differences in
these resistance to TRAIL was an activity of Src kinase and the basal
levels of A20. Phosphorylated Src (Tyr 416), the active form, was
upregulated in SAS-T5 and SAS-L1 cells compared to parental SAS cells.
Src inhibitor PP2 suppressed cell proliferation in response to dependence
on Src signaling. Downregulation of Src or A20 with siRNA made metastatic
cells dissolve the resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. These results
suggest that combination therapy with TRAIL and some drug inhibiting Src
kinase and /or A20 expression may be a treatment strategy for oral
squamous cell carcinoma.

