Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel molecular markers of bladder cancer progression identified
by global chromatin profiling


Bladder cancer (BCa) is the 5th most prevalent cancer in the US, and the
metastatic disease has very poor prognosis with 150,000 deaths per year
worldwide. The use of molecular markers to predict disease progression
has been largely unsuccessful, with only few therapeutically approachable
mutations. Over 2,300 alterations in the coding sequences have been
described in high-grade bladder cancer, encompassing frequent alterations
in genes involving chromatin modifiers. Thus, chromatin organization may
play a critical role in this tumor type. The development of tumor
progression models from transitional carcinoma samples that are poorly
tumorigenic and non-metastatic to highly metastatic to the lung or liver
by serial in vivo passaging allows analysis of the mechanisms associated
with tumor progression. We examined whole exome sequencing to identify
mutations, gene expression, and DNase I hypersensitivity followed by deep
sequencing to identify sites of chromatin modification during tumor
progression. Bioinformatic analysis of was performed using algorithms
developed at LRBGE. Comparative analysis combining multiple data sets was
performed using Ingenuity Pathways. Mutations in several previously
identified genes associated with bladder cancer: TP53, RAS and TERT, and
mutations/deletions in several chromatin modifiers KDM6A and MLL2/3 were
found in parental cells. Only few additional mutations, none identifiable
as cancer driver mutations marked the progression to metastatic
phenotype. Changes in gene expression were already evident in progression
to tumorigenic state, with high score in cells in cell-to-cell
interaction pathway marked by a decrease in cell adhesion, increase in
genes associated with EMT and genes associated with cancer. Changes in
global chromatin landscape occurred at many known genes correlated with
pathways detected by expression analysis, but many were in novel sites
distant to promoters, suggestive of novel distant enhancer and confirm
massive reprogramming of regulatory networks. Many of these sites were
unique for each stage of tumor progression and have potential clinical
application. Specific chromatin modifications were found in NFkB and
inflammatory pathways. Thus, in the tumorigenic stage, these cells
acquired not only the capacity for tumor formation, but also some of the
characteristics associated with metastasis. Combination of exome
sequencing with the gene expression and unbiased analysis of global
chromatin landscape provided valuable new information on bladder cancer
biology and tumor progression.

