Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple alternative promoters and a long non-coding RNA
constitute the complex regulatory region of the cancer and drug
resistance associated gene B4GALT1


Background: The B4GALT1 (-1,4-galactosyltransferase) gene, overexpressed
in human cancers is highly implicated in tumor progression and
metastasis. Used as a prototype in genomic analyses, it shows significant
variations in the transcript origination sites in normal and cancer
tissues. Little is known on the regulation of B4GALT1 transcription and
regulatory regions involved. Objectives: To characterize the alternative
promoters and the regulatory elements of B4GALT1 and gain further insight
into its cancer and tissue-specific transcription. Methods: The genomic
criteria of the bidirectional loci, B4GALT1 and B4GALT1-AS1 (encoding a
long non-coding antisense RNA; lncRNA) and their promoters were searched
in the NCBI-GenBank, UCSC Genome Bioinformatics, Ensembl, TRED, EDP, PEDB
and MPromDb databases to specify the map locations and identify the
transcription factor binding sites (TSS), namely the TATA-8 (TATAWAWR)
and TATA-532 (HWHWWWWR, excluding: HTYTTTWR, CAYTTTWR, MAMAAAAR,
CTYAAAAR) elements, INR (YYANWYY), CCAAT and its inverted sequence, BRE
(SSRCGCC) and DPE (RGWCGTG) sequences. Several bioinformatic tools were
used to retrieve the promoter sequences, identify and flip the forward or
reverse strands in search for specific sequences and quantitate the
dinucleotide base-stacking energy values (Kcal/mol/dimer) indicative of
the helix stability and strength of protein binding. Results: 13
alternative promoters were identified in the databases B4GALT1. Six of
these resided within 1.454 kb forming a complex transcriptional
regulatory unit we refer to as the TR1-PE1; this unit had all
characteristics known for bidirectional transcription of divergent genes,
B4GALT1 and B4GALT1-AS1. The TR1-PE1 sequence harbored CpG Island and
several types of TFBSs, INR, BRE, ERE, TCCAA and TATA-532. The
dinucleotide base-stacking energy along TR1-PE1 showed variable values,
indicating a differential stability along the sequence. The INR sequences
were found mainly along sequences with lower dinucleotide base-stacking
energy values, whereas BRE sequences were observed in regions with higher
values. Two highly conserved (TG)18 repeats were identified in
non-overlapping B4ALT1 promoter located 9.744 kb from 3 TR1-PE1 side,
which enhance transcription especially when they are located closer to
the promoter. The transcripts of B4GALT1 and B4GALT1-AS1 are of different
lengths, one of B4GALT1-AS1 transcripts showed a 66% complementarity with
the primary B4GALT1 transcript. Conclusions: The unique expression of the
B4GALT1 in malignant and non-malignant tissues is controlled by a
differential usage of alternative and bidirectional promoters along with
post-transcriptional regulation by the antisense lncRNA and possible
involvement of (TG)18 repeats, which in turn govern the cell-matrix
interactions, malignant progression and anticancer sensitivity.

