Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF- signaling inhibition as a potential approach to target
suboptimally debulked ovarian tumors


The current standard of care for all patients with high-grade,
advanced-stage serous ovarian cancer is surgery followed by adjuvant
chemotherapy. Resection of all visible residual disease to less than 1 cm
is associated with a favorable prognosis, but this optimal debulking can
only be achieved in 70% of patients. Patients with suboptimal
cytoreduction are presumed to have lower response rates to subsequent
chemotherapy and are known to have a poor prognosis.Recently, we
performed a meta-analysis of 1,525 publicly available expression
profiling assays and identified a 200-gene expression signature of
primary ovarian tumors to predict the outcome of debulking surgery. The
signature was validated using two independent sets of tumors. This
debulking signature consists of transcripts positively regulated by TGF-,
indicating that hyperactivation of TGF- signaling may be responsible of
the aggressive biological and clinical behavior of suboptimally debulked
tumors.In this study, we evaluated the potential anti-tumor effect of
TGF- signaling blockade in ovarian cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.
Integrated TGF- signaling was observed in 8 of 10 ovarian cancer cell
lines tested by a SMAD-binding element based luciferase assay. The
potential anti-tumor effect of a small molecular TGFBR1 kinase inhibitor
LY2157299 was further investigated in SKOV3 cell line, which presents
both endogenous and inducible TGF- signaling and is highly disseminative
when inoculated into immunodeficient mice. Although imposing minimum
effect on in vitro cellular proliferation, LY2157299 significantly
inhibited tumor-dissemination related biological processes in SKOV3 cells
including migration, invasion and mesothelial cell adhesion. In an
interperitoneal SKOV3 xenograft model, administration of LY2157299
significantly increased cisplatin related cytotoxicity and tumor burden
reduction. Taken together, our study has provided evidence for the
potential clinical use of LY2157299 to improve the treatment and survival
of women with suboptimal surgery.

