Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of occupational exposure to carbon black on peripheral
white blood cell counts


Carbon black (CB) is a material produced by the combustion of hydrocarbon
gases or liquids and widely used in various industrial settings. The
International Agency for Research on Cancer has classified CB as possibly
carcinogenic to humans. Previous studies suggest that CB might induce
lung inflammation and injury and it is well known that inflammation can
play an important role in tumor development. However, the relationship
between CB exposure and peripheral white blood cell counts is still not
clear. To address this issue, we conducted a cross-sectional molecular
epidemiology study of 106 CB-exposed male workers responsible for packing
CB in a CB manufacturing facility that produced very high purity CB and
112 unexposed male control workers from the same geographic region who
were frequency-matched to the exposed workers by age. The average number
of years worked in the factory for the exposed workers was 12.5 years.
Peripheral blood samples were collected and a complete blood cell count
(CBC) and lymphocyte subset analysis were conducted. There was a
borderline significant increase in eosinophil count, and a significant
decrease in total lymphocyte and NK cell counts, among the exposed vs.
control workers. Among non-smokers (35 exposed and 29 controls), CB
exposure was associated with a borderline significant increase in total
white blood cell and neutrophil counts, a significant increase in
eosinophil counts, and a significant decrease in total lymphocyte, CD3+ T
cell, CD8+ T cell and NK cell counts. There were no significant
differences between exposed and control workers for any white blood cell
measure among smokers. Also, there was some evidence of an interaction
between carbon black exposure and smoking status for neutrophil, total
lymphocyte, CD3+ T cell, and CD8+ T cell counts. Our results suggest that
CB exposure may be associated with altered levels of cells that play an
important role in the inflammatory process among non-smokers. Also, there
was evidence for an interaction between CB exposure and tobacco use.
These findings may provide new insights into particulate-associated
disease.

