Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of WNT/-catenin signaling-related glutamine metabolism
but not the Warburg effect in denervation-induced suppression of gastric
tumorigenesis


Background/aim: Cholinergic nerves have been shown to regulate gastric
WNT/-catenin signaling in leucine-rich repeat-containing G
protein-coupled receptor 5 (Lgr5)-positive stem cells and have recently
been implicated in gastric tumorigenesis. Denervation by local vagotomy
or botulinum neurotoxin type A injection or the muscarinic acetylcholine
receptor 3 antagonist limit gastric cancer growth. The aim of this study
was to further unravel the metabolic pathways underlying the
vagotomy-induced suppression of gastric tumorigenesis.Methods: Unilateral
subdiaphragmatic truncal vagotomy (VT) was performed in wild-type (WT)
and the INS-GAS mice, a genetic mouse model of spontaneous gastric
cancer. Metabolic profiling and gene expression profiling in gastric
tissues at 6 months post-surgery were performed using liquid
chromatography/mass spectrometry, gas chromatography/mass spectrometry,
high resolution magic angle spinning NMR spectroscopy, and microarray
gene expression (Illumina).Results: VT-induced suppression of
tumorigenesis was manifested by reduced proliferation rate and increased
apoptotic and autophagic signaling pathways, leading to reduced tumor
size and prolonged survival. Principal component analysis showed four
distinct clusters among 343 metabolic compounds: WT without VT, INS-GAS
without VT, WT with VT and INS-GAS with VT. In the gastric tumor, the
metabolic pathways that regulate stem cell homeostasis were downregulated
after VT. Glutaminolytic pathway, including glutamine, glutamate, glycine
and glutathione-S-S-glutathione, was down-regulated. The tricarboxylic
acid cycle (TCA), including citrate, cis-aconitate, acetyle-CoA,
threonine and glycine, was also down-regulated. However, glycolytic
pathway, including glucose, glucose 6-phosphate, fructose 6-phosphate and
lactate, was not significantly down-regulated. Signaling pathways that
regulate glutamine metabolism, such as WNT/-catenin signaling, WNT target
genes Cyclin D1, Axin2, Myc, Lgr5 and Cd44, p53 signaling, and mTOR
signaling were down-regulated. The central carbon metabolism in cancer
(The Warburg effect signaling) and lactate production were unchanged
after VT. In addition, the choline metabolism, the lipid-derived
eicosanoids and prostaglandins were reduced after VT.Conclusions: The
denervation-induced suppression of gastric tumorigenesis was associated
with the inhibition of WNT/-catenin signaling-related glutamine
metabolism but not the Warburg effect. We suggest that glutamine and
choline phospholipid metabolisms can be used for metabolism-based tumor
detection with MRS and/or positron emission tomography (PET) for gastric
cancer diagnosis and that blocking these metabolic functions can be a
therapeutic approach for gastric cancer treatment.

