Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of uracil DNA glycosylase (UDG) sensitizes cancer cells
to thymidylate synthase inhibitors


Thymidylate synthase (TS) is responsible for the de novo synthesis of
thymine nucleotides that are used as building blocks for DNA synthesis.
Two classes of therapeutic agents inhibit TS including fluropyrimidines
(eg, 5-FU, 5-FdU) and antifolates (eg, pemetrexed), which lead to
depletion of deoxythymidine triphosphate (dTTP) and expansion of
deoxyuridine triphosphate (dUTP). Fluropyrimidines are also metabolized
to 5-fluorouridine triphosphate (5FdUTP). As a result, both elevated dUTP
and 5FdUTP are incorporated into DNA. Uracil DNA N-glycosylase (UDG or
UNG) is the primary DNA repair enzyme to remove uracil and 5-FU bases
from DNA and creates abasic (AP) sites, thus initiating base excision
repair (BER) pathway. However, whether the cytotoxic effects of TS
inhibitors are dependent on UDG activity still remains controversial.
Previously, our lab has shown that in DLD1 colon cancer cells, knockout
of UDG hypersensitized cells to pemetrexed treatment and the cell death
was accompanied by remarkable S phase arrest and stalled replication
fork. In this study, we examined the cytotoxicity of both pemetrexed and
5-FdU in SW480, HCT116, DLD1, and HEC1A cancer cell lines after
performing stable UDG knockdown (KD) by shRNA. We hypothesized that loss
of UDG would sensitize cancer cells to TS inhibitors treatment with
accumulation of a large amount of uracil and 5-FU bases in DNA and
ultimately lead to replication folk collapse. Results showed that reduced
UDG protein and activity levels enhanced the cell killing effect,
increased the sub-G1 populations, and delayed cell cycle recovery
following TS inhibitors treatment. In response to 5-FdU treatment, cells
with UDG shRNA were mainly arrested at late G1 and early S phase by 24
hours of treatment. After releasing cells in drug free medium, loss of
UDG displayed delayed recovery from cell cycle arrest in comparison to
shRNA scramble control cells. We have also detected a significant
induction of the amount of AP sites after incubation of extracted DNA
from UDG shRNA KD cells with purified UDG protein following 5-FdU
treatment, indicating the accumulation of uracil and 5-FU in DNA as a
consequence of 5-FdU treatment. Now, further studies are undergoing to
determine the actual levels of uracil and 5-FU incorporation into DNA and
the replication status after TS inhibitors treatment. These studies
confirm that uracil and 5-FU incorporation due to loss of UDG accelerates
stall of replication, collapse of the replication fork, and increased
cytotoxicity of TS inhibitors.

