Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: (R,R)-4-Methoxy-1-naphthylfenoterol decreases glycolytic activity
in the PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cell line


We have recently demonstrated that (R,R)-4-methoxy-1-naphthylfenoterol
(MNF) significantly reduces proliferation in pancreatic cancer (PancCA)
cell lines, including PANC-1. MNF is a potent competitive inhibitor of
the G-protein coupled receptor GPR55 and the anti-proliferative effects
in PANC-1 cells was associated with down-stream events including
attenuation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) expression and
reduced phosphorylation of extracellular signal-related kinases [1]. In
the current study, a previously described untargeted metabolomics
approach using one-dimensional proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1D 1H
NMR) [2] was used to examine the effect of MNF incubation (1 M, 1h) on
the intracellular metabolome of PANC-1 cells. Principal component
analysis showed that MNF incubation produced a significantly different
metabolome as compared to untreated cells. MNF treatment significantly
reduced the signal associated with lactate indicating impaired
glycolysis. Enhanced aerobic glycolysis in tumor cells, known as the
Warburg effect, is a major metabolic contributor to cancer cell
proliferation including PancCA [3]. Treatment of PANC-1 cells with the
glycolysis inhibitor 3-bromopyruvate lowers cellular survival [4] and
co-incubation of 3-bromopyruvate with the HSP90 inhibitor geldanamycin
has a positive synergistic anticancer effect in vitro and in vivo [5].
Here, we showed metabolomics data that indicated also an increase in the
relative expression of 3-hydroxybutyrate in response to MNF.
Supplementation with ketone bodies such as 3-hydroxybutyrate has been
associated with decreased proliferation and viability of PancCA cells in
vitro and in vivo as well as tumor-related cachexia [1]. The signals
associated with leucine, lysine, glycine and carnitine were also
significantly upregulated with MNF treatment, indicating a possible role
of fatty acid metabolism in MNF signaling. The data suggest that in
addition to attenuating EGFR expression and reducing phosphorylation of
extracellular signal-related kinases, MNF may affect PANC-1 cell
proliferation and survival by disrupting glycolysis.Ref:1. Paul RK,
et.al. (R,R)-4-methoxy-1-naphthylfenoterol targets GPR55-mediated ligand
internalization and impairs cancer cell motility. Biochem Pharmacol.
2014;87(4):547-61.2. Shukla SK, et.al. Metabolic Reprogramming Induced by
Ketone Bodies Diminishes Pancreatic Cancer Cachexia. Cancer Metab.
2014;2:18.3. Warburg, O. On the origin of cancer cells. Science.
1956;123:309-14.4. Bhardwaj V, et.al. Glycolytic enzyme inhibitors affect
pancreatic cancer survival by modulating its signaling and energetics.
Anticancer Res. 2010;30:743-9.5. Cao X, et.al. 2008. Synergistic
antipancreatic tumor effect by simultaneously targeting hypoxic cancer
cells with HSP90 inhibitor and glycolysis inhibitor. Clin Cancer
Res.14:1831-9.

