Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of c-Myc facilitates hepatocarcinogenesis with
altering lipid metabolism in tumors induced by activated Akt and mutant
Hras


Activation of c-Myc plays an important role in many biological processes,
including cell growth, proliferation, apoptosis and energy metabolism.
Overexpression of c-Myc has been observed in human hepatocellular
carcinoma, with an inverse correlation between its expression levels and
prognosis of the patients. It has been reported in a mouse model that
liver-specific overexpression of c-Myc induces hepatocellular carcinoma,
while its subsequent inactivation leads to tumor regression, suggesting
that c-Myc expression might be important in hepatocarcinogenesis, as well
as maintenance of the liver tumors. In this study, we explored the role
of c-Myc in mouse liver tumor models using the Sleeping Beauty
transposon-mediated gene integration. The activated Akt (myrAkt), mutant
Hras (HrasV12), and c-Myc genes were introduced in various combinations
into mouse hepatocytes in vivo through hydrodynamic tail vein injection.
When myrAkt and HrasV12 were injected simultaneously, multiple tumors
developed after 6 to 8 weeks. During the rapid hepatocarcinogeneis,
preneoplastic cells with abundant cytoplasmic lipid transformed into less
fatty and more proliferative tumor cells. c-Myc immunohistochemistry
revealed that fatty preneplastic hepatocytes were negative, while some of
the highly proliferative tumor cells were positive, indicating that
secondary activation of c-Myc and altered lipid metabolism might be
involved in the neoplastic transformation in this model. We then
investigated the effects of introduction of c-Myc into hepatocytes.
Although the injection of c-Myc alone was insufficient to induce tumor
formation, the combination of c-Myc and myrAkt induced multinodular
tumors within 8 weeks. In the early preneoplastic lesions (4 weeks),
cells contained various amounts of cytoplasmic lipid, with a tendency
that less fatty cells were more proliferative. Fully developed tumors
after 8 weeks were composed of thick trabecular arrangements of highly
proliferative hepatocyte-like tumor cells with plump nuclei containing
prominent nucleoli, characteristically devoid of cytoplasmic lipid,
compatible with moderately hepatocellular carcinoma. When c-Myc was
introduced with myrAkt and HrasV12, multiple liver tumors developed quite
rapidly as early as 2 weeks. The tumors showed the histology of poorly
differentiated HCC without lipid accumulation. The cells in the earliest
preneoplastic lesions found after 1 week contained only a small amount of
cytoplasmic lipid. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that c-Myc
facilitates hepatocarcinogenesis and suggest that there might be a link
between altered lipid metabolism and proliferation of hepatocytic tumor
cells.

