Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive failure of intracellular protein homeostasis kills
myeloma and solid cancer cells following VCP/p97 inhibition


Introduction: Intracellular protein homeostasis requires a
well-controlled protein degradation machinery to clear damaged and old
proteins and to replenish intracellular amino acid pools. Cancer cells
may be particularly susceptible to agents that disrupt protein
degradation because of unbalanced protein levels related to gain or loss
of genetic material, high protein turnover, or high-level production of
specific proteins such as Ig in multiple myeloma (MM). The AAA ATPase VCP
(p97) is a master regulator of protein degradation that has been
implicated in oncogenesis. Small molecule VCP inhibition (VCP-i) rapidly
activates caspases in cancer cells, induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress, and has anti-tumor activity in murine xenograft models. A phase 1
trial of VCP-i in relapsed MM has recently opened. Methods: We
investigated the cellular mechanisms that govern VCP-i mediated cancer
cell death in MM cell lines including bortezomib-adapted AMO1 cells, MM
cells from patients with bortezomib-resistant MM, as well as lung cancer
(A549) and osteosarcoma (Saos2) cells. Results: The ATP-competitive
inhibitor DBeQ and the allosteric inhibitor NMS873 induced cell line as
well as primary MM cell death at similar low micromolar concentrations
independently of bortezomib sensitivity. DBeQ and NMS873 caused
phosphorylation of eIF2alpha in a time- and dose-dependent manner and
resulted in strong transcriptional and translational up-regulation of
ATF4, CHOP and GADD34. VCP-i also increased expression of ER chaperones
BiP and p58IPK. Inhibition of eIF2alpha de-phosphorylation with guanabenz
reduced S6 phosphorylation, a marker of protein translation, and
increased A549 and OPM2 cell survival early (8h) after VCP-i. Direct
inhibition of protein translation with cycloheximide also decreased early
VCP-i mediated cell death. Using MEFs deficient in eIF2alpha kinases we
show that eIF2alpha phosphorylation following VCP-i depends on both the
unfolded protein response mediator PERK and the nutrient sensor GCN2. We
found that DBeQ induces GCN2 phosphorylation in parallel with loss of
mTORC1 signalling, induction of the key autophagy factor p62, and
accumulation of LC3-II. DBeQ also induced a rapid decrease in free
intracellular L-amino acids. Depletion of selected amino acids in the
cell culture medium increased cell death and mRNA levels of CHOP and
GADD34 following VCP-i with DBeQ or NMS873, but not following induction
of ER stress with tunicamycin. Conclusion: Collectively, these data show
that both ATP-competitive and allosteric VCP-i effectively kills cancer
cells independently of bortezomib sensitivity. Disrupting VCP function
induces early cell death via inappropriate eIF2alpha-regulated protein
translation downstream of GADD34. VCP-i also depletes the intracellular
free amino acid pool, resulting in cell death despite compensatory
catabolic processes.

