Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high-throughput conjugation strategy for the selection of
THIOMAB antibodies with desired properties for antibody-drug conjugation


THIOMAB antibody technology utilizes antibody engineering to replace
endogenous amino acids of an antibody with cysteine to allow for
site-selective conjugation. The technology enables the exploration of
different drug attachment sites on the antibody thereby offering the
potential to select antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) with unique
properties. Having a large number of antibody sites from which to choose
may be desired for some applications. Many antibody sites are not
suitable due to limited solvent accessibility or because drug attachment
alters the native antibody properties. To identify those antibody sites
most amenable to drug conjugation, we prepared 648 THIOMAB antibody
variants of the anti-HER 2 antibody 4D5 by sequentially mutating every
amino acid in the light and heavy chains to cysteine (excluding the
endogenous cysteines). Each THIOMAB antibody variant was then conjugated
to maleimido caproyl valine citrulline PABA MMAE and pyridyl disulfide
MMAE in separate reactions. A high throughput on-bead Protein A
conjugation and purification method was developed using a 96 well plate
format. Complete reduction of the engineered cysteines and reoxidation of
the endogenous cysteines, and drug to antibody ratios (DAR) were all
determined by LC/MS. The concentration and aggregation status of each ADC
were determined using automated liquid chromatography methods. Nearly 40%
of the THIOMAB antibodies were found to be suitable for conjugation with
DAR >1 and low aggregation levels. The other 60% failed due to a variety
of factors including low drug incorporation, high aggregation levels, and
incomplete re-oxidation of the endogenous cysteines. We found similar
results with the maleimide and pyridyl disulfide derivatives suggesting
our findings may be applicable to other auristatin derivatives with
different sulfhydryl reactive chemistries. In summary, we have developed
a high throughput conjugation strategy for THIOMAB antibodies and used it
to identify the antibody sites most suitable for conjugation to
auristatin derivatives.

