Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DLGAP5, MAT1A, SKA3, and ZMYM5 are novel susceptibility genes for
aggressive prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is a common disease with approximately 233,000 men
estimated to be diagnosed in the United States alone in 2014. Yet, it is
usually an indolent disease with only 13% of patients succumbing to
prostate cancer, and the molecular determinants of aggressive prostate
cancer remain unclear. Previously, we reported that germline variation
influences disease aggressiveness in the C57BL/6-Tg(TRAMP)8247Ng/J
(TRAMP) mouse model. These mice develop neuroendocrine prostate tumors
similar to a subset of human prostate tumors associated with poor
outcomes. Here, we used a multifaceted approach to identify candidate
genes for susceptibility to aggressive prostate tumorigenesis and
metastasis using the TRAMP mouse model. Candidate prostate cancer
metastasis susceptibility genes were identified through quantitative
trait locus (QTL) mapping in 201 (TRAMP x PWK/PhJ) F2 males. Two
aggressive disease QTLs were identified; one for lymph node metastasis
burden on chromosome 12 (LOD = 5.86) and one for distant metastasis-free
survival on chromosome 14 (LOD = 4.41). Correlation analysis using
microarray data derived from 27 (TRAMP x PWK/PhJ) F2 prostate tumors
identified 35 metastasis-associated transcripts within the two loci. The
role of these genes in susceptibility to aggressive human prostate cancer
was analyzed in two different datasets. First, logistic regression and
survival analyses in human prostate cancer gene expression datasets
demonstrated that the expression levels of 5 of the 35 candidate genes
was associated with both an increased risk of aggressive disease and a
poorer disease-free survival. Second, four of these genes - DLGAP5,
MAT1A, SKA3, and ZMYM5 - harbored SNPs associated with aggressive
tumorigenesis in the PLCO/CGEMS GWAS cohort of 1,172 prostate cancer
patients. This approach, novel to the prostate cancer field, demonstrates
how mouse models can be used to identify aggressive disease
susceptibility genes, and gives new insight into the molecular mechanisms
of aggressive disease.

