Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Sin3-Pf1 complex: Novel site-specific epigenetic therapy
for triple negative breast cancer


Introduction: Dearth of clinically validated drug targets is a major
challenge in Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) that limits the
treatment options to chemotherapy with intense cytotoxic consequences. We
previously identified PAH2 domain of Sin3 protein as potential
therapeutic target in TNBC and shown that protein-protein interactions of
Sin3 via its PAH-2 domain can be disrupted by decoys (Mad1-SID
peptide/small molecule inhibitors) designed based on the Sin3 interaction
domain (SID) of transcription factor Mad1. Chromatin regulator Pf1 shown
to be overexpressed in breast cancer and interacting with PAH2 domain of
Sin3 can also be dissociated from Sin3 complex by Mad1-SID. In this study
we identify Pf1 to be a significant contributor to the oncogenic
phenotype associated with TNBC.Methods: Pf1 knockdown lines were
generated by stably transfecting MDA-MB-231 cells with Pf1-shRNA or
scr-shRNA. Cells were cultured in 2D and assayed for cancer stem cell
(CSC) markers and ALDH activity by flow cytometry. For colony
morphogenesis cells were cultured in 3D Matrigel. qRT-PCR were performed
to assay expression of Nanog, Sox2 and Oct4. Fluorescence anisotropy and
co-immunoprecipitation assays were used to test Sin3-Mad1 and Sin3-Pf1
interaction in the presence or absence of Mad1-SID and/or
Pf1-SID.Results: MDA-MB-231 cells transfected with Pf1-shRNA had over two
fold reduced ability to form colonies in 3D Matrigel cultures, with 95%
of colonies non-invasive in contrast to the invasive star-like colonies
formed by cells transfected with Scr-shRNA. Additionally reduction in Pf1
level was accompanied by a 1.5-fold reduction (pIntroduction: Dearth of
clinically validated drug targets is a major challenge in Triple Negative
Breast Cancer (TNBC) that limits the treatment options to chemotherapy
with intense cytotoxic consequences. We previously identified PAH2 domain
of Sin3 protein as potential therapeutic target in TNBC and shown that
protein-protein interactions of Sin3 via its PAH-2 domain can be
disrupted by decoys (Mad1-SID peptide/small molecule inhibitors) designed
based on the Sin3 interaction domain (SID) of transcription factor Mad1.
Chromatin regulator Pf1 shown to be overexpressed in breast cancer and
interacting with PAH2 domain of Sin3 can also be dissociated from Sin3
complex by Mad1-SID. In this study we identify Pf1 to be a significant
contributor to the oncogenic phenotype associated with TNBC.Methods: Pf1
knockdown lines were generated by stably transfecting MDA-MB-231 cells
with Pf1-shRNA or scr-shRNA. Cells were cultured in 2D and assayed for
cancer stem cell (CSC) markers and ALDH activity by flow cytometry. For
colony morphogenesis cells were cultured in 3D Matrigel. qRT-PCR were
performed to assay expression of Nanog, Sox2 and Oct4. Fluorescence
anisotropy and co-immunoprecipitation assays were used to test Sin3-Mad1
and Sin3-Pf1 interaction in the presence or absence of Mad1-SID and/or
Pf1-SID.Results: MDA-MB-231 cells transfected with Pf1-shRNA had over two
fold reduced ability to form colonies in 3D Matrigel cultures, with 95%
of colonies non-invasive in contrast to the invasive star-like colonies
formed by cells transfected with Scr-shRNA. Additionally reduction in Pf1
level was accompanied by a 1.5-fold reduction (p<0.05) in the tumorsphere
forming ability of MDA-MB-231 cells. Pf1 depletion also significantly
reduced RNA and protein of Nanog, Oct4 and Sox2. Confocal imaging
revealed reduced levels and nuclear accumulation of Nanog, Sox2 and Oct4
in cells transfected with Pf1-shRNA compared to Scr-shRNA. Pf1 knockdown
resulted in a 2.5-fold decrease in ALDH1 positive cells (6.55% in
Scr-shRNA vs 2.59% in Pf1-shRNA). The CD44low/CD24low/neg population was
enriched 3 fold over cells transfected with Scr-shRNA. From a therapeutic
perspective we have designed a linear peptide corresponding to the Sin3
interaction domain of Pf1 (Pf1-SID). By fluorescence anisotropy we show
that in comparison to Mad1-SID (IC50 = 1.40.3 M), several hundred times
higher concentration of Pf1-peptide (IC50 = 826162 M) is required to
dissociate Sin3-Mad1 interaction. Co-immunoprecipitation assays show that
Pf1-SID can specifically dissociate Pf1 from Sin3 without affecting the
binding of Mad1 with PAH2 domain of Sin3. Pf1-SID treated MDA-MB-231
cells also have reduced invasive capacity and CSC traits.Conclusion: PAH2
domain of Sin3 and its interaction with Pf1 is potential drug target and
Pf-1SID-mediated disruption of Sin3-Pf1 complex as translation relevance
for first site-specific epigenetic therapy for TNBC.

