Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 18F-misonidazole PET (FMISO-PET) monitors vascular normalization
(VN) and predicts benefit from antiangiogenic treatment plus chemotherapy
in pancreas cancer


Antiangiogenic agents effects are elicited by VN, a process that improves
tumor oxygenation and chemotherapy delivery, factors implicated in
chemo-sensitivity. A biomarker that allowed monitoring this process
non-invasively could help guiding individual therapeutic decisions. As
hypoxia can be tracked with FMISO-PET, and hypoxia is influenced by
vessel abnormality, we reasoned that a dynamic FMISO-PET monitoring of
tumors treated with antiangiogenics at early timepoints could be
informative of VN.Three pancreas cancer PDXs, (Panc215, Panc 286 and
Panc219) were studied. Animals (athymic nude mice) were randomized to a
window-of-opportunity (WOP) short course (4 days) of the multikinase
inhibitor antiangiogenic agent dovitinib (DOV, a VEGFR1-3, PDGFRA/B and
FGFR inhibitor) or vehicle. The WOP was preceded and followed by
FMISO-PET and FDG-PET, as well as tumor sampling in order to assess
vessel architecture and density (CD31 and confocal acquisition),
10Kda-dextran extravasation (vessel abnormality), tumor necrosis (H&E),
and hypoxia staining (pimomidazole immunohistochemistry, in order to
study the correspondence between FMISO-PET and tissue hypoxia evolution).
After the WOP, animals were randomized to the addition of GEM or vehicle
to their treatment. Tumor growth inhibition (TGI) was the parameter under
study, comparing for each PDX the TGI of GEM, DOV or the combination
versus vehicle.DOV did not exert significant TGI in any of the three
models. FMISO-PET SUV levels evolved during the WOP: the SUV increased
53% and 72% for Panc286 and Panc219 when treated with vehicle, but
remained unchanged during WOP for Panc215. The SUV changes were modulated
by DOV: administered during the WOP, FMISO-PET SUV in Panc215 remained
stable, but abrogated the increase in Panc219, and induced a 10% decrease
in Panc285. FDG-PET showed that the areas that turned FMISO-PET-negative
with DOV were still viable in the three models, confirmed by histologic
examination (no significant change in the percentage of necrotic area
surface). DOV did not add TGI effect to GEM in Panc215 but it improved
TGI an additional >80% and 75% compared to GEM alone in Panc286 and
Panc219 (p = 0.02 and 0.001). Dovitinib reduced vessel tortuosity and
dextran extravasation in Panc286 and Panc219, whereas did not change
these parameters in Panc215 during the WOP. FMISO-PET mirrored
pimomidazole staining evolution during the WOP. Intratumor gemcitabine
concentration increased >2fold after DOV vs. vehicle during the WOP in
Panc286 and Panc219, whereas did not change in Panc215.In conclusion,
FMISO-PET accurately monitors the changes following VN induced by DOV:
hypoxia and vessel leakage reversal, and increased interstitial
concentration of GEM. FMISO-PET monitoring during the WOP detect in which
tumors antiangiogenic treatment exerts positive effects added to
chemotherapy.

