Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutation signature and intratumor heterogeneity of esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma in a Chinese cohort


Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is one of the most common and
most aggressive cancers. The epidemiological features of ESCC are
extremely complex, with remarkable geographic differentiation among
world's populations. While rural Anyang in the Henan Province of China is
a well-known high-incidence area, the causal factors in this population
remain elusive. We performed exome sequencing of 81 tumor-normal pairs,
identified TP53, PIK3CA and NOTCH1 as significantly mutated genes, and
observed highly recurrent aberrations in several other genes previously
reported for ESCC (ZNF750, MLL2, FAT1, FAT2, and FAT3). Our catalog of
7,000 single-nucleotide mutations revealed two main signatures: C>T
transitions due to spontaneous deamination of 5-methyl-cytosine, and C>T
and C>G mutations at TpCpN attributed to the APOBEC family of cytidine
deaminases. Per-sample loadings of these two signatures are uncorrelated
with the patient's smoking and drinking status. Since APOBEC activities
are associated with exogenous viruses, the prominence of this signature
suggests a role of HPV in ESCC etiology, consistent with our previous
studies that detected HPV DNA in tumor samples and anti-HPV-E7 antibody
in patient's blood. To characterize intratumoral heterogeneity we applied
our newly developed method, CHAT, to summarize the clonal frequencies of
copy number alternations and single nucleotide mutations in each tumor.
Many tumors show a multi-modal distribution of the clonal frequencies,
suggesting extensive within-tumor diversity. To better understand the
patterns of growth, migration and metastatic potential among different
cells within a tumor we performing exome sequencing to compare multiple
samples in 10 ESCC patients. For each, we analyzed 4-6 sectors of the
tumor, 2-4 samples of adjacent normal tissue, and 1-2 nearby lymph nodes.
The spatial heterogeneity of molecular lesions within each tumor is
expected to uncover major genes and pathways affected in each patient, as
well as the temporal progression of tumorigenic events that may have
driven the initiation and outgrowth of ESCC. By integrating the mutation
signatures, introtumoral clonal heterogeneity, and clinical outcomes, we
aim to gain a better understanding of the molecular bases and
evolutionary path of this lethal disease.

