Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphorylation of Id2 at the N-terminus modulates Id2 degradation
and mediates cell cycle regulation in neural progenitor cells


Glioblastoma is the most common and aggressive type of primary brain
tumor in adults with more than 14,000 new cases diagnosed each year in
the US. Although surgical resection, radiation, and cytotoxic therapies
are available these current treatment methods are not curative and the
median survival of patients remains at 12-15 months. Inhibitor of DNA
binding proteins (Id1-Id4) are a family of genetically encoded dominant
negative regulators of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factors. Id proteins are widely reported to inhibit differentiation and
promote cell cycle transit in neural progenitor cells (NPCs) and have
been implicated in the development of glioma. Our laboratory has observed
a poor correlation between Id2 mRNA levels and Id2 protein levels in
multiple cell types which led us to seek post-translational modifications
that effected steady state Id2 protein levels and key Id2 mediated
cellular functions. Using mass spectrometry we have identified three
phosphorylation sites within the N-terminus of Id2 in proliferating NPCs.
To interrogate the importance of Id2 N-terminal phosphorylation, Id2-/-
NPCs were modified to express WT Id2 or various Id2 mutants expressing
proteins that could not be phosphorylated at the N-terminus. We observed
that NPCs expressing these mutants had higher steady state levels of Id2
than NPCs expressing WT Id2. It is known that WT Id2 is rapidly degraded
by the proteasome. However, when proliferating NPCs were treated with
cyclohexamide, phospho-ablated Id2 molecules exhibited a longer half-life
than WT Id2 molecules indicating that loss of N-terminal phosphorylation
results in resistance to proteasome-mediated degradation. Moreover, NPCs
expressing this degradation-resistant, phospho-ablated Id2 protein
proliferate more rapidly than NPCs expressing WT Id2, a finding
consistent with the well-characterized function of Id2 in driving
proliferation. Seeking to identify molecules whose inhibition might
enhance Id2 phosphorylation, we evaluated the activity of multiple
phosphatase inhibitors and identified phosphatases that could potentially
function to stabilize pro-proliferative Id2 in NPCs. Calyculin A
treatment caused a significant loss of Id2 protein suggesting that the
PP1, PP2A, PP4 and/or PP6 phosphatases were likely regulators of Id2. To
complement these pharmacologic studies we used a genetic approach to
decrease PP2A expression and found that Id2 protein levels were
decreased. Our findings indicate that inhibition of this phosphatase may
provide a novel mechanism to decrease Id2 protein levels by causing rapid
degradation of Id2.

