Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Euphorbia tirucalli terpenes cocktail extracts in the
regulation of molecular cell death: implications in gynecological cancer
progression


Gynaecological cancers are increasingly becoming the cause of death in
females in developing countries. This type of cancers, especially
cervical cancer is in the increase due to co-infection with HIV. Many of
these people are solely dependent on traditional remedies, as
conventional treatment might be expensive or inaccessible to them. In
this study we characterised butanolic, hexane and methanolic extracts of
Euphorbia tirucalli using both TLC and LC-MS spectroscopy. Following
extract analysis, we looked at the effects of the extracts in regulating
cell death in breast (MDA-MB 231), ovarian (RMG-1) and cervical (SiHa)
cancer cell lines. The cells were treated with varying concentrations of
the cocktailed extracts for up to 48 hours. A real time cell analyzer
(xCELLigence) was used to monitor cell growth and to determine IC50. MTT
assay was used to assess cell viability 24 hours post treatment with
extracts. To determine if the extracts had an effect on cell cycle
arrest, cell cycle distribution was determined by staining treated cancer
cells with propidium iodide and the percentages of G0/G1, S, G2/M cell
populations were analysed using flow cytometry. To determine the type of
cell death induced, flow cytometry using annexin V was employed. At IC50,
molecular analysis was performed to evaluate the effect cocktailed
extracts had on apoptotic and cell cycle genes. Cocktailed extracts were
found to inhibit cell proliferation in a concentration and cell type
dependent manner. Cells were also found to have been arrested at G0/G1
and in some cases apoptosis induced. In general most pro-apoptotic genes
like Bax and caspase-8 were upregulated this included the cell cycle gene
p21 which was found to be significantly up-regulated in cells treated
with extracts. These results suggest that the 3 cocktailed extracts might
induce apoptosis or arrest cells at G0/G1 with the molecular mechanism
that suggest activation of caspase-8 and Bax.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

