Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PARK2 is a negative regulator of Wnt and EGFR pathways in glioma


PARK2 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase whose dysfunction has been associated
with the progression of autosomal recessive juvenile Parkinson's disease
and human malignancies. However, its role in cancer remains to be
explored. In this study, we report that PARK2 is frequently deleted and
underexpressed in human glioma, and low PARK2 expression is associated
with poor survival in cohorts of both low-grade glioma and glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM). Functional studies revealed a tumor-suppressive role of
PARK2 in GBM cells. Restoration of PARK2 significantly inhibited glioma
cell growth both in vitro and in vivo, while depletion of endogenous
PARK2 promoted cell proliferation. cDNA microarray analysis showed that
PARK2 expression strongly altered the activity of both the Wnt and EGFR
pathways. Immunoblot analysis confirmed that ectopic expression of PARK2
suppressed the intracellular levels of -catenin, EGFR, as well as their
down-stream targets including Cyclin D1, TCF4, c-Myc, p-AKT and p-S6K,
etc. Notably, PARK2 physically interacted with both -catenin and EGFR,
and promoted their ubiquitination in an E3-ligase dependent manner.
Similar to the ligase-dead PARK2 mutant (C431S), three PARK2 mutants
harboring cancer-derived somatic mutations (T173A, T240M and P294S)
showed decreased ability to ubiquitinate either -catenin or EGFR
proteins. We further found that PARK2 attenuated the cellular response to
both Wnt3a and EGF stimulation, suggesting PARK2 is a negative regulator
of both the Wnt and EGFR pathways. Lastly, inspired by these newly
identified functions of PARK2, we tested and proved that the combination
of small-molecule inhibitors targeting both Wnt--catenin and EGFR-AKT
pathways synergistically impaired glioma cell viability. In aggregate,
our findings uncover novel, cancer-associated functions of PARK2 and
provide a potential therapeutic approach to treat glioma.

