Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profiling after radiation in human breast cancer
specimens and breast cancer cell lines


Background: Breast radiotherapy is currently one size fits all regardless
of breast cancer subtype (eg. luminal, basal). Emerging clinical data
suggests that these distinct subtypes of breast cancer have unique
patterns of response to radiation. There is a clinical need to identify
radiation response biomarkers in order to provide individualized and
optimal radiotherapy. Here we report on gene expression profiles
associated with radiation response from: i) a rare clinico-genomic data
in women treated with preoperative breast radiation and, ii) data from a
pilot study of 16 biologically diverse breast tumor cell lines. Methods:
Microarray analysis was done using the Affymetrix GeneChip Human
Transcriptome Array 2.0 (HTA 2.0) and the Affymetrix HU133A2.0 arrays.
RNA was harvested from paired pre- and post-radiation formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded breast cancer tissue in 26 patients treated with
radiation prior to surgical resection. In addition, RNA was obtained from
16 biologically diverse breast cancer cell lines exposed to radiation
treatment (5Gy and 0Gy). The genes with the highest coefficient of
variation were selected and a paired sample t-test was used to evaluate
the significance of these changes. We compared the top 100 significantly
induced human genes with genes identified as differentially expressed in
the 16 breast cancer cell lines. Findings of interest were validated
using qPCR, IHC and wWestern blotting assays. Results: Fourteen genes had
significant adjusted p-values for differential expression in the human
data and were differentially expressed among the radiation responsive
versus non-responsive cell lines. Differential expression of genes
involved in: apoptosis, cell cycle and MAPK signaling pathways were
observed in both the luminal human tumors and the largely luminal
radiation responsive cell lines. Differential expression of FAS, a
critical modulator of programmed cell death, was highly significant.
Conclusion: The known function of FAS suggests a biologically plausible
role in breast subtype specific radiation response. Induction of FAS is
seen in human tissue, and preferentially in luminal breast cancer cell
lines.

