Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary oleuropein (OL) improves high-fat diet-induced metabolic
stress and suppresses solid tumor growth and lymph node (LN) metastasis
in the B16F10 melanoma allograft model


Epidemiological studies indicate that obesity-associated metabolic stress
increases the risk of developing several cancers. We previously reported
that a high-fat diet (HFD)-induced obesity stimulates tumor growth and
metastasis of B16F10 melanoma cancer cells in C57BL/6 mice. OL, the most
abundant phenolic compound in olives, was reported to exert several
physiological activities, including antioxidative, anticancer, and
antimicrobial activities. In the present study, we examined whether OL
inhibits HFD-induced melanoma progression in the B16F10 allograft model.
Four-week old, male C57BL/6N mice were fed a diet [control diet (10 kcal%
fat), HFD (60 kcal% fat), HFD + 0.02% OL, or HFD + 0.04% OL]. Twelve
weeks after the initiation of feeding, fasting blood glucose, plasma
insulin, and HOMA-IR were increased in HFD-fed mice, which was suppressed
by dietary OL. Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry results revealed that the
proportion of lean body mass was decreased, whereas that of fat mass was
increased in HFD-fed mice, and these changes were suppressed by dietary
OL. After 16 weeks of feeding, B16F10-luc cells were subcutaneously
injected into the animals left flank; bioluminescence imaging was
conducted; and the primary tumor was resected 3 weeks later. OL
suppressed HFD-induced solid tumor growth; HFD-induced increases in the
expression of Ki67, cyclin D1, VEGF-A, VEGF-C, VEGF-D, CD31 (platelet
endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1) and LYVE (lymphatic vessel
endothelial receptor)-1; and HFD-induced decreases in TUNEL-positive
apoptotic cells and cleaved PARP levels in the tumor tissues. OL also
suppressed HFD-induced changes in the levels of many cytokines/chemokines
in tumor tissues. All animals were killed 3 weeks after the tumor
resection. OL suppressed HFD-induced increases in the size of LN; LN
metastasis; and expression of VEGF-A and VEGF-C in the LN. OL suppresses
HFD-induced increases in the size of adipocytes and accumulation of
F4/80+ macrophages in adipose tissues surrounding the LN. In vitro
culture results revealed that OL inhibited lipid accumulation in 3T3-L1
preadipocytes and the migration and viability of B16F10 cells. The
present results demonstrated that dietary OL suppresses tumor growth and
LN metastasis in HFD-fed mice. These effects are probably mediated, at
least in part, via the inhibition of lipid accumulation, thereby reducing
obesity-associated metabolic stress. Additionally, in vitro results
indicate that OL may directly inhibit melanoma cell growth and migration,
which may be one of the mechanisms by which dietary OL suppress melanoma
progression in these mice.

