Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of 2D- and 3D-culture models as drug-testing platforms
in breast cancer


While it is becoming recognized that screening of oncology drugs on a
platform using two-dimensionally (2D)-cultured cell lines is unable to
precisely select clinically active drugs, three-dimensional (3D)-culture
systems are emerging and show potential for better simulating the in vivo
tumor microenvironment. The aim of this study was to reveal differential
effects of chemotherapeutic drugs between 2D- and 3D-cultures and to
explore their underlying mechanisms. We first evaluated differences
between 2D- and 3D-cultured breast cancer cell lines by assessing drug
sensitivity, oxygen status, and expression of Ki-67 and caspases. Three
cell lines (BT-549, BT-474, and T-47D) developed dense multi-cellular
spheroids (MCSs) in 3D-culture, and tended to show greater resistance to
paclitaxel and doxorubicin than in 2D-culture. An additional three cell
lines (MCF-7, HCC-1954, and MDA-MB-231) developed only loose MCSs in
3D-culture, and showed drug sensitivities similar to those in 2D-culture.
Treatment with paclitaxel resulted in greater increases in cleaved PARP
expression in 2D- than in 3D-culture, but only in cell lines forming
dense 3D-MCSs, suggesting that MCS formation protected cells from
paclitaxel-induced apoptosis. Hypoxia, as measured with phosphorescent
LOX-1, was observed only in dense 3D-MCSs. BT-549 had considerably fewer
cells positive for Ki-67 in 3D- than in 2D-culture, suggesting that the
greater G0 dormant sub-population may be responsible for its drug
resistance in 3D-culture. In addition, BT-474 had a lower level of
caspase-3 in 3D- than in 2D-culture, suggesting that the 3D-environment
was anti-apoptotic. We next examined whether these findings were
reproduced in primary cells utilizing a breast cancer patient-derived
xenograft (PDX). The fresh disaggregated PDX tissue developed dense MCSs
in 3D-culture. We compared staining for Ki-67, and caspase-3 and -8 in
2D- and 3D-cultured primary cells obtained from the PDX, and the original
patient tumor (Ki-67 only): 2D-cultured cells showed much greater
proportions of Ki-67-positive and caspase-3-positive cells than the
others. 3D-cultured cells tended to show greater resistance to paclitaxel
and doxorubicin compared to the others. Residual spheroids after exposure
to paclitaxel did not grow after removal of the drug but majority of
cells in the spheroids appeared alive based on their excluding trypan
blue dye. In the residual spheroids, greater population of cells showed
phosphorylated histone H2AX expression than those in the spheroids
unexposed to paclitaxel, suggesting that chemotherapy-induced senescence
associated with drug resistance. In conclusion, 3D-cultured cells forming
dense MCSs may be better than 2D-cultured cells in simulating important
characteristics of tumor grown in vivo, namely hypoxia, dormancy,
anti-apoptotic features, and their resulting drug resistance. 3D primary
culture will be a model for the study of chemotherapy-induced senescence.

