Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endogenous increase of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids through
expression of of 3-desaturase gene inhibits tumorigenicity and metastasis
of prostate cancer cells in vitro and in vivo


The 3-desaturase (Fat-1) catalyzes the conversion 6-polyunsaturated fatty
acids (6-PUFAs) to 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (3-PUFAs) and increases
the amount of 3-PUFAs. It is known that 3-PUFAs have anti-tumorigenic
properties, while 6-PUFAs accelerate tumorigenesis. Here, we report that
endogenous increase of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids through
expression of fat-1 gene may inhibit tumorigenicity and metastasis of
prostate cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. When mouse prostate cancer
RM1 cells were implanted into mice, tumor size and volume were
significantly reduced in Fat-1 transgenic mice (Fat-1 transgenic mice
express a Caenorhabditis elegans 3-desaturase converting 6- to 3-PUFAs
endogenously.) compared with wild mice. In immunohistochemical analysis
of tumors tissue of Fat-1 mice, apoptotic cells were markedly increased
and angiogenesis significantly was reduced, compared with wild mice
tumor. When RM1 cells were injected through tail vein, lung metastasis of
RM1 cells was significantly inhibited in Fat-1 transgenic mice. On the
other hand, the fat-1 stable RM1 cells (fRM1sc) were significantly
inhibited the proliferation compared to the cells expressing the control
vector (fRM1cc) and fRM1sc showed an increase in the proportion of cells
in G2/M phase comparing with fRM1cc. Tumor growth of fRM1sc implanted
into C57BL6 control mice was significantly decreased, and tumor tissues
from fRM1sc implanted-animals showed an increase in the apoptotic index
compared to fRM1cc. Moreover, the proliferation index and microvessel
density were significantly decreased. Furthermore, transwell chamber
assay for invasion indicated a reduction of cell invasion in the human
prostate fPC3sc when compared with the fRM1cc. In Zymography, MMP-9 and
MMP-2 activties were decrease in fPC3sc. These results suggest that
expression of the fat-1 gene, thereby enhancing endogenous levels of
3-PUFAs may prevent tumorigenicity and metastasis of prostate cancer
cells. Additionally, transgenic mouse and a stable cell line of fat-1
gene are useful to study the anti-cancer effects of 3-PUFAs. [This
research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF)
grant funded by the Korea government(MSIP) (No. 2007-0054932)]

