Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ciclopirox prodrug for the prevention and therapy of non-muscle
invasive bladder cancer


Objective: Ciclopirox prodrug for the prevention of Non-Muscle Invasive
Bladder Cancer (NMIBC) represents a potential breakthrough in the
management of high-grade, NMIBC. If successful, this represents the first
systemic approach to manage NMIBC. Ciclopirox olamine, the active
pharmaceutical ingredient in several topical antifungal drug products,
has demonstrated anticancer activity in blood and solid tumors. We
developed a phosphoryloxymethyl prodrug of ciclopirox (CPX) for efficient
intravenous delivery, thereby avoiding dose-limiting gastrointestinal
toxicities and first-pass effect associated with oral
administration.Methods: In vitro anticancer activity of CPX was performed
in both NMIBC (T24) and MIBC (253-JBV) cell lines. Cell proliferation was
determined by hexoseaminidase assay. Stemness was determined by the
Spheroid assay. Flow cytometric analyses was performed for cell cycle
analysis. RT-PCR array analysis was performed to identify signaling
pathways. Real Time PCR, western blot and immunofluorescent studies were
performed for determining gene expression.Results: Pharmacokinetic
studies conducted in mice, rats and dogs demonstrated that the drug is
rapidly and completely metabolized and eliminated via the urine. In
vitro, CPX inhibited growth of T24 and 253-JBV cells at 4 and 2 M,
respectively coupled with S-phase cell cycle arrest. FITC conjugated
Annexin V-coupled flow cytometry studies showed that CPX induces
apoptotic cell death. CPX also suppressed bladdosphere formation,
suggesting that stem cells are affected. Notch signaling pathway plays a
significant role in stem cell behavior, and previous studies have
suggested that the pathway may be a therapeutic target for bladder
cancer. Notch receptor activation, which occurs following ligand binding,
involves specific intracellular cleavage by the -secretase complex.
First, RT-PCR array analyses suggested that CPX inhibits the Notch
signaling pathway. Furthermore, CPX significantly inhibited the
expression of the -secretase complex proteins Presenilin1, Nicastrin,
APH-1 and PEN-2. In addition, there was a reduction in the expression of
downstream targets of the pathway including Hes1 and Cyclin-D1. These
data suggest that CPX significantly inhibits Notch intracellular
signaling pathway proteins. Ectopic expression of the activated/cleaved
Notch protein reversed CPX mediated inhibition of cell
proliferation.Conclusion: CPX is a novel chemotherapeutic and preventive
agent for bladder cancers, and this occurs by suppressing the stem cells.
We are confident that there will be no failure of the compound as a
result of unacceptable toxicity because drug safety profile of CPX has
been previously characterized in animals and humans. These studies
provide insight into understanding the role of CPX as a potent
chemotherapeutic and preventive agent.

