Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective modulation of IRES-mediated translation in malignant
cells


There are two distinct modes of protein synthesis in the cell. The
conventional mechanism of cap-dependent ribosomal scanning is utilized
for general protein synthesis, whereas internal ribosome entry site
(IRES)-mediated translation appears to be reserved for synthesis of those
gene products most critical for cell proliferation and survival,
providing a fail-safe or emergency system to ensure that such essential
polypeptides can be manufactured when needed, particularly under
conditions of stress when general protein synthesis is compromised. To
date, there has been no means, experimental or therapeutic, by which to
selectively modulate IRES function; rather, IRES-mediated translation has
typically been studied by inhibiting general protein synthesis and
attributing the remaining translational activity to the IRES. To address
this problem, a cell-based high-throughput screen of 135,000 compounds
was performed to identify small molecules capable of selectively
inhibiting translation mediated through the IGF1R IRES. The
identification of these compounds allows us, for the first time, to
selectively perturb IRES-mediated translation in its native context, and
assess the consequences.Data obtained using the bicistronic reporter
system demonstrate that the lead compounds and their structural analogs
selectively inhibit second cistron translation (mediated through the
IRES). Western analyses show that, at sufficient concentration ( 5 g/ml),
the IRES inhibitors completely block de novo IGF1R protein synthesis in
genetically-unmodified breast tumor cells, confirming activity against
the endogenous IRES. The IRES inhibitors function in a manner which is
essentially reciprocal to rapamycin, and can be clearly distinguished
from cycloheximide.Spectrum of activity of the small molecule IRES
inhibitors extends beyond IGF1R to a subset of potential IRES targets,
including c-myc. The IRES inhibitors differentially modulate synthesis of
the two c-Myc protein isoforms, bringing about a dramatic decrease in
p64, the dominant (oncogenic) isoform, while transiently stimulating
synthesis of p67, the minor (growth-inhibitory) isoform. RNase protection
analyses show no discernible changes in c-myc mRNA, confirming that the
effects of the IRES inhibitor are exerted at the translational
level.Sustained IRES inhibition has profound, detrimental effects on
human tumor cells, inducing massive (>99%) cell death and complete loss
of clonogenic survival in tumor models as disparate as triple negative
breast carcinoma, glioblastoma, and acute myeloid leukemia. Beyond a
critical threshold of dose and duration of exposure, there is no evidence
of recovery, even with prolonged incubation in absence of the compound.
Together, these findings support the conclusion that IRES-mediated
translation is of fundamental importance to the survival of malignant
cells, and may represent a critical point of vulnerability which could be
exploited therapeutically.

