Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The difference of drug sensitivity between HPV-positive and
HPV-negative head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines


Objectives: Infection with the human papillomavirus (HPV) is an important
risk factor for development of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC). Strikingly, HPV-positive HNSCCs carry a more favorable prognosis
and are a biologically distinct subgroup when compared with their
HPV-negative counterparts. We aimed to discover novel therapeutic targets
by conducting a high-throughput drug screening platform in vitro with
both FDA approved and investigational drugs. Based on our prior proteomic
analysis we tested inhibitors of pathways activated in HPV+ HNSCC
tumors.Methods: Cell viability assays were performed by the Cell Titer
Glo method in a panel of 66 fingerprinted HNSCC cell lines using 13 drugs
at concentrations of 0.011 to 9.613 M. This panel includes 9 HPV+ lines
and 57 HPV- lines (5 oropharynx, 15 oral cavity, and 37 others). The IC50
values were calculated. Western Blot assay was used to confirm that the
drugs inhibited their targets.Results: We observed a wide range of
sensitivities to all 13 drugs with the exception of BKM120 which was
effective in all tested lines (Table 1). In contrast, nearly all cell
lines were resistant to BMN673, ruxolitinib, LEE011, and selicilib. The
HPV+ cell lines were more sensitive to MEK162 (pObjectives: Infection
with the human papillomavirus (HPV) is an important risk factor for
development of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Strikingly,
HPV-positive HNSCCs carry a more favorable prognosis and are a
biologically distinct subgroup when compared with their HPV-negative
counterparts. We aimed to discover novel therapeutic targets by
conducting a high-throughput drug screening platform in vitro with both
FDA approved and investigational drugs. Based on our prior proteomic
analysis we tested inhibitors of pathways activated in HPV+ HNSCC
tumors.Methods: Cell viability assays were performed by the Cell Titer
Glo method in a panel of 66 fingerprinted HNSCC cell lines using 13 drugs
at concentrations of 0.011 to 9.613 M. This panel includes 9 HPV+ lines
and 57 HPV- lines (5 oropharynx, 15 oral cavity, and 37 others). The IC50
values were calculated. Western Blot assay was used to confirm that the
drugs inhibited their targets.Results: We observed a wide range of
sensitivities to all 13 drugs with the exception of BKM120 which was
effective in all tested lines (Table 1). In contrast, nearly all cell
lines were resistant to BMN673, ruxolitinib, LEE011, and selicilib. The
HPV+ cell lines were more sensitive to MEK162 (p<0.05) and resistant to
Bosutinib (pObjectives: Infection with the human papillomavirus (HPV) is
an important risk factor for development of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC). Strikingly, HPV-positive HNSCCs carry a more favorable
prognosis and are a biologically distinct subgroup when compared with
their HPV-negative counterparts. We aimed to discover novel therapeutic
targets by conducting a high-throughput drug screening platform in vitro
with both FDA approved and investigational drugs. Based on our prior
proteomic analysis we tested inhibitors of pathways activated in HPV+
HNSCC tumors.Methods: Cell viability assays were performed by the Cell
Titer Glo method in a panel of 66 fingerprinted HNSCC cell lines using 13
drugs at concentrations of 0.011 to 9.613 M. This panel includes 9 HPV+
lines and 57 HPV- lines (5 oropharynx, 15 oral cavity, and 37 others).
The IC50 values were calculated. Western Blot assay was used to confirm
that the drugs inhibited their targets.Results: We observed a wide range
of sensitivities to all 13 drugs with the exception of BKM120 which was
effective in all tested lines (Table 1). In contrast, nearly all cell
lines were resistant to BMN673, ruxolitinib, LEE011, and selicilib. The
HPV+ cell lines were more sensitive to MEK162 (p<0.05) and resistant to
Bosutinib (p<0.01) when compared to the HPV- HNSCC cell lines or
oropharynx and oral cavity cell lines (Table 2). Western blotting
confirmed target inhibition for the targeted therapies.Conclusions: For
most agents tested, HNSCC cell lines displayed similar drug sensitivity
regardless of the tumor site. However, HPV+ lines were more sensitive to
MEK162 and more resistant to Bosutinib. Future analysis will include
comparing drug sensitivity to mutation, gene and protein expression in
these lines. Taken together, the results may provide a rationale for the
clinical evaluation of MEK inhibitors as a molecular targeted approach
for the treatment of HPV+ HNSCC.Table 1. IC50 values in 66 HNSCC cell
lines

