Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: G0-like cells support an oral cancer stem cell pool by
transitioning to a JARID1B-high state


Oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCCs) likely contain a subset of tumor
cells whose stem cell-like molecular and functional properties help
sustain tumor growth. There is growing evidence that this cancer stem
cell (CSC) pool exists in dynamic equilibrium with other subpopulations
with tumorigenic potential. To characterize this plasticity in OSCC, we
examined the developmental potential of tumor cells in a G0-like cell
state previously shown to have high growth capacity and innate drug
resistance in other tumor types. G0-like cells in OSCC exhibited hallmark
molecular traits of low reactive oxygen species (ROS), high Hes1, and low
total Akt levels. However, despite lacking high levels of CD44 and other
stem cell markers, they prominently displayed stem cell-like functional
properties of in vitro sphere formation and in vivo tumorigenicity. To
evaluate the contribution of G0-like cells to the oral CSC pool, a GFP
reporter system was used to isolate CSCs based on high expression of
JARID1B, an H3K4me3 demethylase associated with multiple normal and
malignant stem cell phenotypes. JARID1B-high OSCC cells were distinct
from the G0-like subset, highly expressed CD44 and ALDH1, and possessed
both molecular and functional CSC traits. Silencing JARID1B expanded the
G0-like subset but abrogated its functional CSC properties, suggesting
these cells mediate such functions by returning to a JARID1B-high CSC
state. The G0-like and JARID1B-high subsets were further distinguished by
widely disparate levels of PI3-kinase pathway activation, which
corresponded to distinct responses to cytotoxic and targeted therapies.
These findings reveal a JARID1B-mediated mechanism underlying a
contribution of G0-like cells to a CSC pool. Further they may provide a
novel basis for OSCC therapy by simultaneously targeting the CSCs and a
subset G0-like cells that appear uniquely primed to return to a CSC state.

