Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mapping SUMOylation sites of PTEN tumor suppressor


PTEN tumor suppressor plays crucial function in multiple cellular
processes, including proliferation, migration, DNA repair, cell cycle and
survival signaling. Its function is tightly controlled by a series of
regulatory processes at transcriptional and post-translational levels.
Small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) is an essential
post-transcriptional modifier which involves in many important biological
functions. Previous studies showed that PTEN can be modified by
SUMOylation on K254 and K266. SUMOylation on K254 controls the nuclear
localization and retention of PTEN and plays essential role in DNA damage
repair. On the contrary, SUMOylation on K266 is responsible for its
membrane binding, which is required for the down-regulation of PI3K/AKT
pathway.However, most studies mainly focus on SUMO1 modification,
function of SUMO2/3 involved PTEN regulation is still unclear. In
addition, the dynamic regulation and biological activities of different
isoforms of SUMOylated PTEN in different subcellular compartments are not
well-defined. Also, how PTEN phosphorylation impacted on PTEN SUMOylated
have not been addressed fully.To address these questions, a series of
PTEN SUMOylation defective-mutants targeted to different subcellular
compartments were generated. In addition, a panel of phosphorylation
sites mutants (T366A, S370A, S380A, T382A, T383A, and S385A) were
included. These mutants were cotransfected with His-tagged SUMO1, SUMO2,
and SUMO3 in 293T cells. SUMOylated PTEN protein species are affinity
absorbed onto nickel columns. The characterization of these mutants will
be discussed.To further delineate the dynamic regulation of SUMOylated
PTEN, we are developing a BRET-based live cell imaging system by the
ectopic co-expression of a HALO-tagged SUMO and NanoLuc-tagged PTEN
expression constructs to monitor the subcellular localization of
SUMO-conjugated PTEN in vivo.This work was supported by Hong Kong
Research Grant Council (460713) and Hong Kong PhD Fellowship Scheme
(PF-12-13876).

