Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of c-Myc inhibitor effectiveness in various cancer cell
lines


In order to identify the patient population who will benefit the most
from treatment with c-Myc inhibitors, we have examined and compared the
effects that our construct (Bac-ELP-H1) has on different breast cancer
cell lines.This construct is a genetically engineered polypeptide
composed of the c-Myc inhibitory peptide H1, our macromolecular drug
carrier Elastin-like polypeptide (ELP), and the cell penetrating peptide
(CPP) Bac. ELP is a thermally responsive macromolecule. Below its
transition temperature (Tt), ELP is soluble in aqueous solution; but,
when the temperature is raised above the Tt, ELP forms aggregates. Due to
its thermal responsiveness, ELPs may be used as a thermally targeted drug
delivery carrier. To penetrate tissues and cell plasma membrane, its
coding sequence is modified by the addition of a CPP such as Bac, a
peptide derived from bovine antimicrobial bactenecin peptide Bac7. When
fused to the N-terminus of ELP, Bac facilitates uptake of the CPP-ELP
conjugate and its localization to the cytoplasm and the nucleus. Since
ELP is genetically encoded and has an easily modified sequence, it can be
successfully used for therapeutic peptide (TP) delivery. In this study,
we modified the Bac-ELP sequence with the H1 peptide that is derived from
helix 1 of the basic helix-loop-helix-zipper domain of c-Myc, a
transcriptional regulator that has been shown to be dysregulated in many
cancers. H1 inhibits c-Myc and Max dimerization, a crucial step in the
c-Myc pathway, thus inhibiting cancer cell proliferation.We tested the
antiproliferative activity of Bac-ELP-H1 by MTT in four breast cancer
cell lines: MDA-MB-231 (triple negative), MCF-7 (estrogen receptor
positive), SK-BR-3 (overexpresses the Her2 gene product) and MCF-7/VP
(multidrug resistant). Based on the data obtained from proliferation
assays, MCF-7 was the most sensitive to the Bac-ELP-H1 treatment. At 30
M, the highest concentration used, Bac-E1-H1 resulted in more than 75%
inhibition of cell proliferation in MCF-7 cells, while the inhibition of
cell proliferation in the other three cell lines, MDA-MB-231, SK-BR-3 and
MCF-7/VP, was approximately 50, 60 and 50%, respectively. In order to
examine whether inhibition of cell proliferation is a result of cells
undergoing apoptosis, an assay using propidium iodide (PI) and
Annexin-V-Alexa 488 staining was done. There was no increase in apoptotic
cells due to the treatment, indicating that apoptosis is not the
mechanism of Bac-ELP-H1 antiproliferative activity. We have also compared
c-Myc mRNA levels in these cell lines after the treatment with Bac-ELP-H1
using qPCR. Bac-ELP-H1 treatment lowered the endogenous c-Myc levels in
examined cell lines. Further studies are planned to correlate levels of
c-Myc mRNA with antiproliferative activity of Bac-ELP-H1.

