Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Abcc3 up-regulation confers protection from chemotherapy to NK
cells in a murine model of malignant glioma


Growing evidence suggests that chemotherapy can influence the immune
response by inducing lymphopenia or enhancing immunogenicity of dying
tumor cells. In a clinical trial currently active in our Institution,
patients with first diagnosis of glioblastoma are treated with dendritic
cells (DC) loaded with autologous tumor lysate together with standard
radio and chemotherapy with temozolomide. Peripheral blood lymphocytes
from 22 patients were analyzed by flow cytometry to identify immune cell
activation before and after DC vaccines. The ratio of vaccine/baseline
frequencies (V/B ratio) was correlated with the survival of each patient.
Increased V/B ratio for NK cells was significantly associated with
prolonged PFS and OS (median 15.0 vs 8.0 mo, p = 0.003; 22.0 vs 12.0 mo,
p = 0.02, respectively). Using the murine malignant glioma GL261, we
investigated the molecular mechanisms induced by TMZ on NK and CD8 T
cells. We treated mice 9 days after intracranial implantation of GL261
cells with intraperitoneal injections of TMZ (5 mg/kg) or vehicle
(control mice) for 5 days. Mice were sacrificed at different time points
and tumor and peripheral blood harvested and analyzed by flow cytometry.
Gene expression profiling on peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed an
up-regulation of multidrug resistance genes in NK cells, but not in CD8 T
lymphocytes, in TMZ-treated mice compared to controls. The increased
expression of the ATP transporter gene Abcc3 was confirmed by real time
PCR (4.2-fold higher than controls, P = 0.006). Using eFluxx-ID multidrug
resistance (MDR) assay based on specific inhibitors, we also demonstrated
that Abcc3 was functionally active during TMZ treatment. NK cell
resistance to chemotherapy was accompanied by an increase in migration
and homing ability into the brain at early time point and in cytotoxicity
at later phases (beyond the end of TMZ treatment).Our data show that
murine NK cells are resistant to and activated by TMZ chemotherapy.
Further investigations in patients treated by radio-chemotherapy with or
without DC immunotherapy are warranted.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

