Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional profiling reveals uterine leiomyoma subtypes with
distinct pathways and biomarkers of tumorigenesis


Uterine leiomyomas, also known as fibroids, are benign smooth muscle
tumors with an estimated prevalence of 77% among women of reproductive
age. Although benign, they frequently cause a variety of health
complications and are the leading cause of hysterectomy worldwide. Recent
studies utilizing high-throughput sequencing have revealed recurrent and
mutually exclusive mutations in a variety of genes, suggesting that
distinct molecular pathways are involved in the initiation of leiomyoma
tumorigenesis. The consequences of these mutations are poorly understood
and expression signatures associated with these driver mutations may
provide further insights. The aim of this study was to explore
transcriptional differences between genetic subgroups of leiomyomas
utilizing Affymetrix exon arrays and RNA-sequencing. We performed
transcriptional profiling of 100 leiomyomas harboring different genetic
drivers; these included leiomyomas harboring MED12 mutations, HMGA2/HMGA1
rearrangements, biallelic inactivation of FH and COL4A5-COL4A6 deletions.
We identified a long non-coding transcript of RAD51B to be specifically
upregulated in MED12 mutant leiomyomas. Genes involved in key metabolic
pathways, including pentose phosphate pathway and glutathione
biosynthesis, were specifically upregulated in FH-deficient leiomyomas.
AKR1B10 was the most significantly upregulated gene in leiomyomas of the
FH type. This gene was not expressed in other leiomyomas and may serve as
a robust biomarker for FH-deficient leiomyomas. Overexpression of the
proto-oncogene PLAG1 was specifically seen in leiomyomas harboring HMGA2
or HMGA1 aberrations, suggesting that these tumors exert their
tumorigenic effect through dysregulation of PLAG1. This was supported by
identification of one uterine leiomyoma harboring a translocation of
PLAG1 resulting in a similar overexpression. While this study highlights
the importance of stratifying each leiomyoma into a specific subgroup, it
also shows that several genes are commonly dysregulated among all
leiomyomas. Targeting these genes would be ideal in developing treatments
for this disease.

