Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ferric oxide nanoparticles (nFe2O3) induce neoplastic
transformation of primary human small airway epithelial cells


Nano-scaled metal oxides including nFe2O3have been widely used for
various applications but with unknown healthconsequences, especially
after long-term exposures. Previous studies have shown that ferric oxides
have the potential to be toxic, such as induction of lunginflammation,
cell death, and reactive oxygen species formation from acute in vivo and
in vitro observations. However, the underlying mechanisms of disease
pathogenesis are unclear. The present study was undertaken to investigate
the effect of long-term/low dose exposure of small airway epithelial
cells (SAECs), a major cellular target of inhaled toxicants, to nFe2O3 on
cell transformation and cancer-like properties. Primary human SAECs were
exposed to a sub-lethal concentration (0.625 g/cm2) of nFe2O3 (size dXRD
= 20 nm, SSA = 50 m2/g) for up to 10 weeks in culture and its effects on
cell proliferation, colony formation, and cell invasion were examined.As
controls, cells were similarly exposed to multi-walled carbon nanotubes
(MWCNT), a known inducer of neoplastic transformation in vitro and a
tumor promoter in vivo, and to nano cerium oxide (nCeO2), a similar sized
metal oxide known to induce lung toxicity. Unexposed SAECs served as
passage-matched controls. At 6 weeks post-exposure, nCeO2 induced cell
proliferation, whereas nFe2O3 caused decreased cell viability, as
determined by the metabolism-based WST-1 assay. However, at 10 weeks
post-exposure, nFe2O3 stimulated cell growth and induced neoplastic
transformation as determined by soft-agar colony formation and
Transwellcell invasion assays. The effect of nFe2O3 on neoplastic
transformation is more pronounced than that of MWCNT, suggesting the
potential carcinogenicity of nFe2O3 after prolonged exposure. nCeO2
induced cell proliferation without having the same effect on colony
formation or cell invasion, even at 10 weeks post-exposure. These results
indicate the differentialeffects of nano-metal oxides on human lung
cells, with nFe2O3 being pro-neoplastic and nCeO2 being pro-growth.
Knowledge gained from this study could aid in the design of further
animal and cellular studies aimed at assessing the cancer risk of
nano-metal oxides and unveiling the underlying mechanisms of
action.Keywords: metal oxides, nanoparticle, lung, epithelial cell,
transformation, carcinogenesis

