Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of novel patient derived melanoma xenografts and
cell lines in response to targeted therapies


The success of clinical trials for patients with malignant melanoma (MM)
designed from the promising results using pre-clinical models is minimal.
With its increase in incidence, there is a dire need to develop both
pre-clinical models comparable to clinical practice that have the
capability to translate from bench-to-bedside and novel therapeutic
agents for this life-threatening form of skin cancer. To address this
concern, we have developed a panel of pre-clinical MM models including
patient matched cell lines, patient cell-line derived xenograft models
and patient tumor tissue-derived xenograft models. Patient derived
xenograft (PDX) models are purported to most closely replicate a
patient's response to therapy. Since the development of patient-derived
cell lines and tumors grown in mice were more efficacious, their genetic,
phenotypic, and therapeutic responses were compared to those of their
corresponding patient-matched PDX model. Each model was molecularly
characterized to confirm a match to that of the originating patient tumor
tissue via protein immunohistochemistry (IHC), mRNA quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), DNA short tandem repeat (STR) analysis,
and Sanger sequencing. Each pre-clinical model provided a genetic match
to their respective patient tumor sample. All pre-clinical models were
positive for the melanoma-specific markers (S-100 beta, HMB-45, and
Melan-A) confirming a melanoma phenotype. Soft agar studies and tumor
growth of our PDX and patient cell-line derived xenograft models
confirmed tumorigenicity within our models providing the foundation to
perform therapeutic studies. Mutation status data (i.e. BRAF, RAS),
patient therapeutic clinical history and oncogene overexpression analysis
(pERK, pAKT, PI3K, pmTOR, etc.) provide the platform and rationale behind
the use of specific therapeutic agents per model. BRAF, NRAS and KRAS
mutations were identified along with elevated pERK, pAKT and pmTOR in the
models. Targeted therapies (trametinib/MEK inhibitor; vemurafenib/BRAF
inhibitor; MK-2206/pAKT inhibitor; and everolimus/mTOR inhibitor)
demonstrated dose dependent inhibition of cell proliferation in each of
the models based upon oncogenic expression or mutations. In vivo
experiments are in progress, which will allow comparison of the three
models. The next steps include combination therapy to identify antitumor
synergy targeting oncogenic signaling pathways.

