Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-diagnostic aspirin use, lymph node involvement and mortality
in women with stage I-III breast cancer: A study in the Prostate Lung
Colorectal and Ovarian cancer screening trial


BackgroundInhibition of the cyclooxygenase (COX) / prostaglandin pathway
has been shown to suppress the development of lymphatic metastases in
animal models of breast cancer. A recent population based study reported
that women with pre-diagnostic aspirin use (COX1/COX2 inhibitor) were
significantly less likely to present with a lymph node metastasis at
diagnosis than non-users. Pre-diagnostic aspirin use was also associated
with lower 5-year breast cancer-specific mortality among women with lymph
node-negative tumors. This study aims to confirm these results in a US
population.ObjectiveTo examine the association between pre-diagnostic
aspirin use, lymph node metastasis at breast cancer diagnosis, and breast
cancer mortality, among women in the Prostate Lung Colorectal and Ovarian
(PLCO) screening trial.MethodsWomen with stage I-III breast cancer were
identified in PLCO. Pre-diagnostic aspirin use was ascertained from a
self-reported questionnaire completed at trial entry. Adjusted risk
ratios (RR) were calculated for associations between pre-diagnostic
aspirin use and lymph node-positive status at diagnosis. Adjusted hazard
ratios (HR) were estimated for associations between pre-diagnostic
aspirin use at baseline and mortality, stratified by lymph node status.
Ever vs never use of aspirin was examined and analyses incorporating
updated measures of aspirin exposure are ongoing.ResultsThere were 2925
women with stage I-III breast cancer, 716 of whom had lymph node
metastases at diagnosis. Median time between assessment of pre-diagnostic
aspirin exposure and diagnosis was 70 months. Aspirin users (n = 1274)
were more likely than non-users (n = 1651) to have a greater number of
comorbidities (p = 0.005) and were also more likely to be current or
former smokers (p = 0.008). No association was observed between
pre-diagnostic aspirin use and lymph node involvement at diagnosis RR
1.06 (95% CI 0.93-1.19). Pre-diagnostic aspirin use was not associated
with lower breast cancer specific mortality HR 0.86 (0.60-1.23). However,
in analyses stratified by lymph node status at diagnosis aspirin use was
associated with lower breast cancer-specific mortality among women with
lymph node-negative tumors (HR = 0.48, 95%CIs 0.27- 0.88), but not lymph
node-positive tumors (HR 1.30 95%CIs 0.81- 2.09). Tests for
effect-modification were statistically significant (P-interaction =
0.0001).Conclusion These data suggest that in women using aspirin prior
to a breast cancer diagnosis, negative nodal status predicts a subsequent
survival benefit from aspirin use.They partly reflect the findings in the
previous study and may contribute to the understanding of aspirin's
potential mechanism of action in breast cancer progression. However
further etiologic research to understand this association is warranted.

