Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral silibinin inhibits tumorigenic potential of colon cancer stem
cells


Recent studies by our group have demonstrated that silibinin, a
non-toxic, chemopreventive agent, has an inhibitory effect on the
self-renewal capacity and differentiation potential of the cancer stem
cell (CSC) population of CRC cell lines. However, these observations were
under in vitro conditions. To overcome the limitations of these findings,
in the present study, we assessed oral silibinin effect on tumorigenic
potential of colon CSC. For this, we employed phenotypic cell isolation
strategy to separate CD44+EpCAMhigh (stem cells enriched) HT-29 CRC cells
by flow cytometry/magnetic activated sorting. These sorted and unsorted
cells were used to generate ectopic xenograft tumors in NOD/SCID mice and
silibinin effect on initiation, growth, and metabolism of these tumors
was assessed. Briefly, unsorted and sorted population (CD44+EpCAMhigh)
from CRC HT29 cells purified using FACS as per defined protocols were
injected sub-cutaneously into NOD/SCID mice (6-8 weeks old), and animals
were orally fed with vehicle or silibinin (200 mg/ kg body weight),
starting 24 h post-injection (n = 14 per group). Unsorted cells were
similarly injected as 2 x106 cells/ mouse. Once xenograft started
growing, tumor sizes and volumes were calculated. Tumor latency (time
from injection to detection of palpable tumor) were also noted. In
general, experiment was terminated by 40 days post cell injections or
terminated earlier if tumors reach a maximum diameter of 15 mm. To
support tumor latency and tumor size results obtained visibly, anatomical
proton-density magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans (day 2, 7 and 14)
were acquired. Functional imaging (performed for 60-80 mm3 tumor and by
end of study) was performed to report on tumor cellularity by
diffusion-weighted (DW-), vascularity by dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE-)
MRI and glycolytic activity by 18Fluorine-2-Deoxy-Glucose (FDG) positron
emission tomography (PET). Tumors harvested at the end of above study
were subjected to live cell sorting analysis to determine the percentage
of CSC population (CD44+EpCAMhigh cells) in xenografts. To determine oral
silibinin effect on CSC self-renewal in serial transplantation studies,
these CSC enriched fractions and the unsorted population of tumor cells
were transplanted back into NOD/SCID mice and followed for initiation,
growth, and tumor phenotype with or without silibinin treatment. Sorted
CSC and unsorted tumor cells from both control and silibinin-treated mice
were also subjected to in vitro experiments to determine their
self-renewal and differentiation capacity. Results show that indeed
silibinin feeding has an inhibitory effect on tumorigenic potential of
colon CSC; a decrease in latency as well as size/ volume of tumor was
observed. This effect was associated with a reduced number of CSC's in
silibinin-fed tumors, a decrease in tumor metabolic activity and an
inhibition of angiogenic feed to the tumors.

