Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mechanistic study on the effect of platinum-based chemotherapy
efficacy imposed by EGFR-TKI regulated ERCC1 in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC)


Platinum-based chemotherapy is conventionally the first line treatment
for EGFR wild type patients while EGFR-TKI is the standard for patients
with mutation. Subgroup biomarker studies conducted in FASTACT-2 (Wu et
al Lancet Oncology 2013) indicated that patients with positive ERCC1
attained longer overall survival and progression free survival under
intercalated chemotherapy and EGFR-TKI, in comparison with solely
chemotherapy. EGFR-TKI is postulated to down-regulate ERCC1 expression in
EGFR wild type NSCLC cells, hence enhancing the Chemo efficacy. The study
aims to investigate the missing link between EGFR and ERCC1 in the
perspective of mechanistic means.In vitro and in vivo studies were
devised to examine the impact imposed on ERCC1 by EGFR-TKI. H1993 cells
underwent a 72-hour EGFR-TKI treatment and transient siRNA transfection
for ERCC1 suppression. Cell viability assay was employed for detecting
the cisplatin sensitivity of the transfected cells. Xenograft tumor
models were established with a 2-week treatment of oral erlotinib on
animals, using western blot and IHC to study the ERCC1 expression. Human
EGFR Phosphorylation Membrane Array was used to study the EGFR
phosphorylation pattern involved in ERCC1 level alterations and its
downstream pathways were further analyzed with western blot.ERCC1
expression level is not correlated with EGFR-TKI sensitivity.
Nonetheless, ERCC1 level gradually decreased along the 72-hour exposure
of EGFR-TKI. The cells sensitivity towards cisplatin was raised upon
ERCC1 knock-down with its IC50 reduced from 14.67M to 0.16M. Furthermore,
TKI showed a significant reduction in ERCC1 level with IHC staining after
treatment yet no sequel on the tumor volume of the xenografts. On the
mechanistic side, 6 out of 17 EGFR phosphorylation sites were found
compelling in respond to variations on ERCC1 level. We discovered that
the MAPK/ERK and JNK pathways were the potential candidates that
regulated EGFR associated ERCC1 expression.In summary, the data
manifested that EGFR-TKI may reduce ERCC1 expression and latently enhance
sensitivity towards cisplatin. MAPK/ERK and JNK pathways may contribute
in ERCC1 regulation. With the preliminary screening results, it warrants
further investigation to validate the underlying mechanism for the
regulation of ERCC1 expression level.

