Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of LASEP1 as a new serological and prognostic
biomarker and a therapeutic target for lung cancer


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in the world and the
overall prognosis remains poor. The poor prognosis of lung cancer
patients is largely a result of the occult metastatic dissemination.
Thus, the development of early cancer detection biomarker and new
treatment is required. This study aims to identify novel biomarkers or
therapeutic targets for lung cancers. We used cDNA microarrays for
screening genes encoding transmembrane/secretory proteins that are
up-regulated in lung cancers. As a result of this process, we identified
a secreted protein, LASEP1 (lung cancer-associated serum protein 1) as a
candidate. Immunohistochemical staining of LASEP1 showed that LASEP1
expression was observed in 210 (56.1%) of 374 NSCLC (non-small cell lung
cancer) that had undergone curative surgery. High level of LASEP1
expression was associated with poor prognosis for NSCLC patients (PLung
cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in the world and the overall
prognosis remains poor. The poor prognosis of lung cancer patients is
largely a result of the occult metastatic dissemination. Thus, the
development of early cancer detection biomarker and new treatment is
required. This study aims to identify novel biomarkers or therapeutic
targets for lung cancers. We used cDNA microarrays for screening genes
encoding transmembrane/secretory proteins that are up-regulated in lung
cancers. As a result of this process, we identified a secreted protein,
LASEP1 (lung cancer-associated serum protein 1) as a candidate.
Immunohistochemical staining of LASEP1 showed that LASEP1 expression was
observed in 210 (56.1%) of 374 NSCLC (non-small cell lung cancer) that
had undergone curative surgery. High level of LASEP1 expression was
associated with poor prognosis for NSCLC patients (P<0.0001 by log-rank
test). Serum LASEP1 levels were higher in NSCLC patients than in healthy
volunteers. The proportion of serum LASEP1-positive cases was 127 (38.6%)
of 329 NSCLCs, while 4 (3.9%) of 102 healthy volunteers were falsely
diagnosed. Furthermore, reduction of LASEP1 by siRNA significantly
induced the apoptosis of lung cancer cells. Furthermore, the growth
activity of the LASEP1-positive cells was neutralized by addition of
originally developed anti-LASEP1 monoclonal antibodies into their culture
media, and the systemic administration of the anti-LASEP1 antibody to
tumor-implanted mice significantly suppressed tumor growth without any
adverse events. By gene expression analysis using microarray and mRNAs
from lung cancer cells transfected with siRNA for LASEP1, we identified
WHSC1 gene that encodes an oncogenic histone methyltransferase as one of
LASEP1-target genes. These data suggest that LASEP1 is a possible
diagnostic and prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for lung
cancer.

