Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor, synergizes with DFMO to
inhibit neuroblastoma cell proliferation via the reversal of the
LIN28/Let-7 axis


Background: The most common extracranial solid pediatric tumor,
Neuroblastoma (NB) is responsible for 8-10% of all cancer in children and
15% of pediatric cancer deaths. Due to a high rate of tumor relapse, less
than 40% of patients with high-risk disease achieve long-term survival.
High incidence of metastatic disease and relapse in NB, as well as
cellular heterogeneity of tumor, suggests that high-risk NB is likely due
to inherent drug resistance of cancer stem cells (CSCs) that survive
treatment in order to regenerate differentiated tumor. One pathway
associated with targeting CSCs is the LIN28/Let-7 pathway due to the
inductive role of LIN28 in stem cell growth and metabolism. LIN28 is
characteristically overexpressed in many malignancies, including NB.
Overexpression of LIN28 correlates with poor outcome in NB, therefore
drugs that target LIN28/Let-7 axis could be beneficial in treating NB
patients by targeting CSCs and preventing relapse of disease. This study
proposes the drug combination therapy of Difluoromethylornithine
(DFMO)-an inhibitor of ornithine decarboxylase and polyamine
biosynthesis-coupled with bortezomib-a proteasome inhibitor-as a new
therapeutic upstream target of LIN28/Let-7 pathway and glycolytic
metabolism.Methods: NB cell lines BE(2)-C and SMS-KCNR were used. Cell
viability was measured using Calcein AM fluorescent assay at DFMO doses
0.15 - 40 mM, alone and in combination with bortezomib at doses 0.15 - 80
nM. Isobologram cell viability analyses with DFMO in combination with
bortezomib were generated using Calcein AM fluorescent assay results.
Western blot analysis was used to measure LIN28, MYCN, SOCS3 and NFKB.
ATP level per cell was measured using CyQuant fluorescent DNA assay
combined with Cell Titer GLO luminescent cell viability assay.
Neurosphere assays were used to evaluate sphere formation after DFMO
treatment. Xenograft studies were performed with SMS-KCNR cells implanted
in the flank of mice and treated with vehicle, 2% DFMO in drinking water,
bortezomib 0.5mg/kg IP twice a week, or combination of DFMO and
bortezomib.Results: Cell proliferation assays and isobologram experiments
suggest synergistic cytotoxicity of the drug combination in NB cell lines
BE(2)-C and SMS-KCNR. Further, western blot analysis and ATP per cell
experiments demonstrate the inhibition of overexpressed proteins in the
LIN28/Let-7 pathway and inhibition of ATP/cell activity in NB cells. DFMO
inhibits neurosphere formation in NB. Xenograft studies show decrease in
tumor size with combination treatment.Conclusion: This study indicates
that bortezomib synergizes with DFMO in inhibiting NB cell proliferation
and neurosphere formation both in vitro and in vivo. Given the current
lack of effective treatments and the high incidence of relapse and
metastatic disease for patients, this drug combination offers a potential
new therapeutic treatment for children with NB.

