Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cardiac glycoside digitoxin and its monosaccharide analogue MonoD
inhibit NFB to induce apoptotic cell death in ER+ MCF7 and
triple-negative MDAMB-468 breast cancer cells


Digitoxin, a cardiac glycoside well appreciated in the treatment of
congestive heart failure, has been poorly understood and appreciated as
an anti-cancer therapeutic due to its narrow therapeutic potential. Using
a patented palladium-catalyzed de novo synthesis method, we have
developed a library of digitoxin analogs, which alleviate the toxic side
effects of digitoxin while maintaining its chemical activity. We have
evaluated MonoD, a digitoxin analog with a single sugar moiety, in a
variety of NCI-60 panel of cell lines, with a significant tumoristatic
effect observed in estrogen receptor positive and triple negative breast
cancer cells. Therefore, in order to determine the efficacy of digitoxin
and MonoD, delineate its mode of action and identify molecular targets we
chose to test this novel compound in ER+ MCF7 and TN MDAMB-468 breast
cancer cells.Digitoxin and MonoD showed a dose dependent decrease in cell
viability in MCF7 and MDAMB-468 cell lines. Further characterization of
cell death using the Hoechst assay showed that MonoD induced
significantly higher apoptosis at the same dose as digitoxin. Both drugs
induce oxidative stress in the form of superoxide as assayed using
Dihydroethidium (DHE). In vitro scratch migration assay showed a
five-fold decrease in rate of cell migration in the presence of test
drugs.MCF7 and MDAMB-468 cells were analyzed for cell cycle progression
in the presence of digitoxin and MonoD. We observed that the drugs
induced cell cycle arrest in G0/G1 phase at the expense of S and G2/M
phases. Increased expression of p27Kip1 in the presence of drugs provided
further validation, as increased p27 expression is known to block cell
cycle progression through G1-S transition. In addition to cell cycle
arrest, apoptosis is another widely accepted mechanism by which
anti-cancer drugs inhibit tumor formation. We observed that these drugs
induced apoptosis as indicated by cleaved PARP and cleaved caspase-9, in
addition to down-regulation of pro-survival factor Bcl-2. NFB has been
reported to be constitutively active in many types of cancer by
controlling the expression of several genes involved in cellular
proliferation and apoptosis. We observed that NFB expression was
down-regulated in both cell lines with digitoxin and MonoD treatment.
IKK, a critical kinase involved in regulating NFB pathway showed
significant down-regulation, thereby suggesting that these drugs exert
their anti-cancer therapeutic potential through the inhibition of NFB
pathway.While additional work is required to establish their mode of
action, we have sufficient evidence to hypothesize that down-regulation
of NFB is critical to the mode of action of these drugs. Further, it is
evident from densitometric analyses of western blots, MTT and Hoechst
assays that MonoD shows higher efficacy as compared to digitoxin in
inducing cancer cell death.

