Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adipocyte-derived monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) promotes
prostate cancer progression through matrix metalloproteinase (MMP-2)
mediated extracellular matrix degradation


Background: Obesity is known to be associated with prostate cancer
development and progression, but the detailed mechanism is not clear.
Monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) is secreted from cancer cells,
stromal cells and adipocytes, and it is involved in prostate cancer
progression. Here we investigated the biological role of MCP-1 secreted
from adipocytes for prostate cancer cells.Methods: Human pre-adipocytes
(HPAds) were cultured and differentiated to mature adipocytes.
Conditioned medium (CM) from HPAd cells was obtained using phenol
red-free RPMI1640 medium. We performed a cytokine membrane array analysis
to detect cytokines in the CM. To characterize the physiological function
of MCP-1 in the CM, we performed an MTT-assay, a wound-healing and
invasion assay with anti-MCP-1 antibody using three prostate cancer cell
lines: DU145, LNCaP, and PC-3. Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9
activities were evaluated by gelatin zymography. A qPCR and Western
blotting were used to examine the mRNA and protein expression levels of
MMP-2.Results: The cytokine membrane array of the CM showed a strong
signal of MCP-1compared to the control medium, and we thus focused our
attention on MCP-1 in the CM. The CM up-regulated the cancer cell
proliferation, and the neutralization by anti-MCP-1 antibody inhibited
the proliferative effect of the prostate cancer cell lines. The CM
greatly increased the invasive activity in the prostate cancer cell
lines, and anti-MCP-1 antibody decreased the invasiveness. Gelatin
zymography revealed that the CM markedly enhanced the enzymatic activity
of MMP-2, and anti-MCP-1 antibody down-regulated its effect. MMP-2 mRNA
expression was undetected and the MMP-2 protein level was unchanged
between the control medium and CM in DU145 cells.Conclusions: MCP-1 from
adipocytes enhances the growth and invasion activity of prostate cancer
cells. The inhibition of MCP-1 derived from adipocytes might be an
effective treatment for prostate cancer.

