Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stability and efficacy comparison of site-specific and
lysine-linked maytansinoid antibody-drug conjugates


As with any therapeutic molecule, antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) exhibit
structure-activity relationships, and medicinal chemistry efforts in this
field strive to optimize structure to give the maximum therapeutic index.
Recent interest in ADCs as cancer therapy has led to a number of
different combinations of linker, payload, and conjugation chemistry.In
particular, site-specific methods of payload conjugation have been
suggested to generally improve therapeutic properties as compared with
more established approaches directed toward lysines or endogenous
cysteines.We have investigated the preparation, stability, and activity
of anti-folate receptor alpha (FR) ADCs carrying the microtubule
inhibitor, DM1, and conjugated to engineered cysteine mutants utilizing
different sites, and compared these ADCs with lysine-directed
heterogeneous conjugates. In both embodiments, the DM1 is linked with a
protease-cleavable linker. We show that highly homogeneous DM1 ADCs can
be produced using engineered cysteine chemistry, enabling assessment of
the effects of site-specific conjugation in cells and in animal models.
We find that in vitro potency of both lysine-linked and engineered
cysteine-linked ADCs against FR-positive KB cells scales with the total
DM1 delivered to cells. Buffer stability experiments in the presence of
excess thiol suggest that most engineered cysteine conjugates are
comparable in stability to the lysine-linked ADC. A notable exception
shows about twice as much fractional DM1 loss upon 3 days of incubation
as the other conjugates. Comparison of in vivo activity of two
site-specific DM1 ADCs in a KB xenograft model shows measurable activity
differences between different conjugation sites. However, a lysine-linked
conjugate using almost identical linker chemistry shows approximately
2-fold superior activity to either site-specific construct on a molar DM1
basis. We conclude that, while site-specific conjugation of ADCs may
provide a benefit in certain contexts, in other contexts, it may lead to
decreased activity, such as in the anti-FR/KB model examined here. We
also observe that different conjugation sites may offer significant
differences in activity. It is therefore advisable to evaluate each
unique combination of payload, linker, drug:antibody ratio, conjugation
site(s), and antibody to the maximum extent possible.

