Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Allosteric Hsp70-family inhibitors as targeted anticancer
therapeutics


Background: Hsp70, a molecular chaperone responsible, in part, for the
folding of nascent peptides following translation, has been implicated as
a survival factor and a poor prognostic marker in cancer cells. These
pro-cancer mechanisms originate in the ability of Hsp70 to preserve and
maintain oncogenic and transformative proteins responsible for the cancer
phenotype. Hsp70 is a stress response protein such that expression
increases under proteomic/proteotoxic stress events. This increased
expression is also evident in cancer cells, an environment under
proteomic stress brought on by transformation, and is known to be
protective against programmed cell death.Hypothesis: We predict that by
interrupting the chaperoning capacity of Hsp70 through allosteric
inhibition, we can destabilize oncogenic proteins dependent on Hsp70 for
structure and function. Additionally, as Hsp70 is a survival factor, we
believe that a loss of Hsp70 activity will result in cancer specific cell
death both in vitro and in vivo.Approach: Using chemical tools, primarily
novel allosteric Hsp70 inhibiting small molecules, we will determine the
fate of oncogenic proteins dependent on Hsp70 for stability. We will also
examine the cellular response to the disruption of cancer-specific
networks which require Hsp70. In vivo tumor models will be used to
examine the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of small molecule Hsp70
inhibitors and to evaluate the therapeutic potential of Hsp70
inhibition.Significance: The stress response machinery is responsible for
the stability of proteins, maintenance of signaling pathways, and evasion
from programmed cell death while a cell is under stress; stressors
including oncogenic transformation. These pathways maintained by the
molecular chaperones have been directly linked to deleterious cancer
phenotypes including aggressiveness and the emergence of therapeutic
resistances. Targeted therapeutics, and uniquely those targeting the
molecular chaperone system, can provide therapeutic options capable of
ablating the specific mechanisms involved in proteomic stability and cell
survival unique to each tumor cell; effects which can be delivered with
minimal effect to normal tissue. This work highlights the potential for
therapeutics targeting Hsp70 as anti-cancer agents.

