Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Robust immunohistochemical assay to characterize human cancer
tissues for prevalence of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3
(VEGFR3)


VEGFR3 plays a key role in the regulation of lymphangiogenesis in adults,
and is also important for tumor angiogenesis and metastasis. In order to
characterize human cancer tissues for imunohistochemical (IHC)
localization and prevalence of VEGFR3 protein, we developed a robust IHC
assay in our lab using a mouse monoclonal primary antibody (Millipore).
To optimize the various assay parameters, we utilized high-quality VEGFR3
positive (and internal negative) control tissues (Kaposi's sarcoma,
angiosarcoma, lymph node). Reagent negative controls were satisfactory.
Specificity of the primary anti-VEGFR3-antibody was supported by a
discrete band at the expected molecular weight on western blots using a
VEGFR3 transfected cell lysate and negative control cell lines. We also
demonstrated lack of specific vascular VEGFR3 staining in pre-absorption
experiments with VEGFR3 (but not VEGFR1 or 2) recombinant protein,
supporting selectivity of the primary antibody for VEGFR3. Using the
fully optimized assay, we stained a human multi-tumor screening tissue
microarray (TMA) to demonstrate full range of specific vascular VEGFR3
staining in glioblastoma and carcinomas of the colon, breast, ovary,
pancreas, lung, larynx, kidney, cervix, bladder, extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma and malignant melanoma. Specific, unequivocal VEGFR3
immunoreactivity was interpreted qualitatively (VEGFR3 positive/negative)
in tumor blood and lymphatic vessels. No tumor cell staining was seen.
Some colon cancer tissues in multi-tumor TMA were VEGFR3+, while others
were VEGFR3-. The observed variation in VEGFR3 expression and vascular
distribution on screening TMA were further evaluated in two independent
cohorts of well-characterized human colorectal cancer tissues
(organ-specific TMAs) by a Board-certified, subspecialty GI pathologist
(AN), with overall VEGFR3 prevalence rates of 62% (36 of 58 cases) and
56% (55 of 98 cases). Using CD34 and D2-40 IHC assays from a
CLIA-certified lab, we confirmed IHC localization of VEGFR3 protein both
in the stromal blood vessels and lymphatics within the invasive
colorectal cancer stroma. In conclusion, following well-established IHC
assay development and standardization protocols and efficient workflow
paradigm, we have used a technically robust IHC assay to characterize
routinely processed archival human cancer tissues and have demonstrated
specific VEGFR3 expression patterns, tissue localization and prevalence
in human colorectal cancer tissues. Based on its performance in our
hands, this assay can be used to further evaluate patterns of VEGFR3
expression in areas of tumor angiogenesis in other human cancer tissues.
Data-driven hypotheses generated from such investigations will be
relevant to corroborate VEGF receptor biology and emerging clinical
experience with anti-VEGF/anti-VEGFR therapies.

