Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depletion of Runx1 promotes epithelial to mesenchymal transition
in breast cancer


Runx1 is an essential transcription factor for definitive hematopoiesis
and Runx1 translocations are well established as the causative factor of
various leukemias. Recent studies have identified Runx1 as one of the
most frequently mutated genes in breast cancer patients, and also that
Runx1 expression levels are decreased in high-grade primary breast tumors
compared to low/mid-grade tumors. The recognition of Runx1 expression in
epithelial lining cells of glands suggests that Runx1 functions in
maintaining the integrity of that cell layer. Therefore we examined the
role of Runx1 during cancer progression. We found that Runx1 is highly
expressed in immortalized human mammary epithelial cells (MCF10A)
compared with breast cancer epithelial cells (MCF7) and invasive breast
cancer cells (MDA-MB-231). To test the hypothesis that Runx1 contributes
to the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in breast cancer, the
EMT was induced in MCF10A cells which resulted in a 50% decrease of Runx1
mRNA, but complete loss of Runx1 protein. This finding suggests a role
for Runx1 as an EMT suppressor. To further address the relationship
between Runx1 and EMT, Runx1 depleted stable cell lines were generated in
both MCF10A and MCF7 cells. We observed that Runx1 knockdown (90%) in
MCF10A cells leads to a dramatic change in their morphology towards a
mesenchymal state, with a concomitant decrease in expression of the
epithelial marker E-cadherin. In addition Runx1 depletion in MCF7 cells
directly induced EMT state by repression of E-cadherin, as well as
increased expression of mesenchymal genes, including vimentin, N-cadherin
and fibronectin. Our results highlight a crucial role for Runx1 in
preventing epithelial to mesenchymal transition and tumor progression in
breast cancer. This Runx1 mediated mechanism points to novel intervention
strategies for early stage breast cancer.

