Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Homology-directed repair in mouse mammary tissue


Numerous factors are linked to breast cancer risk including reproductive
history, early exposure to radiation, age and genetic background. Defects
in homology-directed repair (HDR)_considered the most accurate of the
three major pathways for repairing double-strand breaks (DSBs) in DNA in
mammalian cells_can lead to genomic instability and are associated with
tumor predisposition. Mutations in multiple genes involved in HDR are
linked to breast cancer susceptibility including BRCA1 and BRCA2. The
mammary gland is highly influenced by its hormonal environment and
undergoes significant changes during pregnancy, lactation and involution,
but many questions remain about how the DNA damage response in mammary
tissue, and specifically DNA DSB repair, is impacted by these
developmental changes.A widely used reporter for studying DSB repair by
HDR is DR-GFP in which direct repeats of two defective GFP genes are
induced to recombine by I-SceI endonuclease cleavage of one of the
repeats, resulting in a functional GFP gene. We have recently generated
DR-GFP containing mice that express I-SceI under the control of a
tetracycline-inducible promoter. Induction of I-SceI by doxycycline
administration ex vivo results in substantially increased HDR in primary
cultures of mammary epithelial cells compared to transient transfection
experiments.To gain insight into the effects of breast cancer
predisposing mutations on HDR in mammary epithelial cells, the
I-SceI/DR-GFP mice were crossed to mice carrying hypomorphic mutations in
Brca1 (Brca1tr/tr) or Brca2 (Brca2ex27/ex27). An approximately 3-fold
reduction in HDR was observed in primary mammary epithelial cells from
virgin Brca1tr/tr I-SceI DR-GFP mice compared to littermate controls,
while an 8-fold reduction was observed in primary mammary epithelial
cells from virgin Brca2ex27/ex27 mice. Primary ear fibroblasts from these
animals showed similarly reduced HDR levels.In order to understand how
DSB repair processes in the mammary gland are affected by developmental
changes we are assessing HDR at different stages of mammary gland
development in vivo. We observe a significant increase in HDR relative to
overall repair in mammary tissue from mice at mid-pregnancy compared to
virgin littermates. We are now attempting to determine if there is a
relationship between repair proficiency, lineage specificity of mammary
epithelial cells and fate after involution in mammary tissue from normal
and BRCA mutant mice.

