Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDM2 small molecule inhibitors synergize with chemotherapeutics to
attenuate senescence-driven inflammatory secretion


An attractive therapeutic approach for treatment of cancers with
wild-type (wt) p53 is the emergent class of small molecule MDM2
inhibitors, including the imidazoline nutlin-3 and more potent
spiro-oxindole MI-63. Both compounds rapidly increase intracellular wt
p53 levels and induce apoptosis or a senescence growth arrest, depending
on the target cell. A critical question in the clinical development of
MDM2 inhibitors is their potential for normal tissue toxicity owing to
their ability to cause p53-dependent apoptosis or cellular senescence.
Recent work suggest senescent cells exhibit a senescence-associated
secretory phenotype (SASP) that can stimulate cancer progression. We
critically examined the effect of MDM2 small molecule inhibitors
Nutlin-3a and MI-63 on non-senescent and senescent cells. Both compounds
caused normal cells to undergo a transient growth arrest. Continuous
incubation with MDM2 small molecule inhibitors caused normal cells to
exhibit some hallmarks of senescence (arrested growth, SA--Gal expression
and secretion of High Mobility Group Box 1 protein), but the cells
resumed growth upon removal of the MDM2 inhibitors. Senescent cells
cultured with MDM2 inhibitors failed to resume growth upon removal of the
compounds, as expected. However, their SASP was markedly dampened, as
determined by multiplex ELISA assays. Since NF-B and IL-1 are major
drivers of the SASP, we examined their status in senescent cells cultured
with MDMD2 inhibitors. The small molecule MDM2 inhibitors significantly
reduced NF-B activity and IL-1 mRNA expression in senescent cells. Our
data suggest using combinatorial therapy of chemotherapeutics or
irradiation and MDMD2 small molecule inhibitors may provide a potent
therapeutic strategy to promote apoptosis of p53 positive tumor cells
after radio- or chemo-therapy and attenuate the potentially deleterious
effects of the SASP.

