Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decoding phenotypic drug screening targets using a novel
chloroalkane capture tag


Phenotypic screening has become increasingly common to the drug discovery
workflow. Yet, productive outcomes remain hindered by the challenging
task of identifying the underlying cellular targets mediating the desired
phenotype. Current approaches rely on linking the bioactive compound to a
surface or an affinity handle allowing selective capture of interacting
proteins for identification by mass spectrometry. These methods can be
constrained by ineffective capture of low affinity and low abundance
proteins. In addition, for these methods to provide meaningful results,
it is critical that the chemical derivatization of the bioactive compound
would not disrupt the binding interactions with the cellular targets.
Consequently, there is preference for methods compatible with living
cells because they allow verification of the pharmacological activity of
the modified compound. We have developed such a method based on a novel
chloroalkane capture tag that minimally affects compound potency and cell
permeability. Following binding with the tagged compound in live cells,
the cells are lysed and the chloroalkylated compound, together with the
bound targets, is rapidly captured onto immobilized HaloTag protein. The
in-situ target engagement combined with rapid covalent capture allows for
isolation of difficult targets with low affinity and/or low abundance.
The putative targets identified by mass spectrometry are then validated
for direct binding relationship with the bioactive compound by
bioluminescence energy transfer. We tested this target
capture/target-validation workflow using the interaction of histone
deacetylases (HDACs) class I/IIb and the inhibitor SAHA
(Vorinostat).RESULTS: Treatment of K562 cells with SAHA or
SAHA-chloroalkane revealed high cellular potency against HDAC class I/IIb
with minimal impact of the chloroalkane modification on the drug potency.
Using the SAHA-chloroalkane to selectively enrich for SAHA targets from
K-562 cells, we identified and validated all the known targets of SAHA
(i.e., HDAC 1, 2, 3, 6, 8 and 10) regardless of their abundance or
affinity (nM to low M). In addition, we also identified and validated two
previously undescribed targets of SAHA (CPPED1 and ADO), both
metalloenzymes. Because SAHA binds to HDACs by chelating to a bound zinc
ion, it may interact by a similar mechanism with other metalloenzymes.
The discovery of ADO may also provide insight to a potential novel mode
of action for SAHA in neurodegenerative diseases. Other experiments
showed that replacing the chloroalkyl group in the SAHA-chloroalkane with
biotin significantly reduced drug potency and consequently enrichment
efficiency (only HDAC6 was isolated), further demonstrating the
advantages provided by the relatively inert chloroalkane tag. Taken
together these results indicate that our workflow can reveal the direct
binding relationships between bioactive compounds and their cellular
targets.

