Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Copy number alterations identify targeted therapies in preclinical
models of osteosarcoma


Osteosarcoma (OS) is an aggressive pediatric bone malignancy that affects
400 children per year in the United States. It has one of the lowest 5
yr. survival rates of any pediatric cancer. OS is characterized by
genomic instability and numerous copy number alterations (CNA). We
hypothesized that CNA may be drivers of OS and that targeting cancer
genes with CNAs may be a novel approach for treatment of OS. We have
established a robust approach for generation of patient-derived
xenografts (PDX) from patients with OS. To date, 12 PDX have been
established from OS patients. Using whole-genome sequencing (WGS), we
have identified possible target CNAs for individual patients and are
currently testing them in their corresponding PDX. In one patient, an
amplification in c-myc suggested possible susceptibility to the
bromodomain inhibitor JQ1. In a second patient sample, amplification of
Cyclin D1 in the setting of p16 loss and wild-type Rb suggested
responsiveness to a CDK4/6 specific inhibitor. This patient sample also
has an Aurora kinase B amplification, suggesting susceptibility to
inhibition of this kinase as a therapeutic approach. We treated the
corresponding PDX with the drug predicted to target the patient sample
based on CNA. In one case, JQ1 treatment inhibited tumor growth in the
PDX generated from the patient sample with c-myc amplification. In the
second case, Aurora kinase B inhibition arrested tumor growth in the PDX
harboring the Aurora kinase B amplification. We are currently testing
whether CDK4/6 inhibition is sufficient to inhibit tumor growth as
predicted by WGS. As a follow up we are currently submitting several more
patient samples and paired PDX for WGS as well as RNAseq to determine
other potential targeted therapeutics based on CNA. In summary, our work
suggests that WGS can be used to identify potential novel therapies for
patients with OS. Further work will be needed to determine whether
response in PDX models correlates with clinical response in patients.

