Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of CDK5 in colorectal cancer


Purpose: To investigate the role of CDK5 in Colorectal Cancer.Background:
Colorectal Cancer (CRC) is the fourth most commonly diagnosed form of
cancer and is the second leading cause of cancer related deaths in the
United States. Most CRC deaths are due to metastatic disease, making the
identification of metastatic targets important for the development of
therapeutics.Materials and Methods: Gene expression analysis was
performed comparing expression in primary and metastatic tumors from the
orthotopic model. Primary colon and corresponding liver metastatic tumors
from an orthotopic model and human CRC tissue were analyzed using
immunohistochemistry (IHC) to determine the expression of CDK5. Primary
antibodies were from Abcam were used at a dilution of 1:300. The negative
control contained no primary antibody. Tissue samples were imaged at 40x
magnification. Changes in CDK5 expression and activity were analyzed
using 150nM CDK5 siRNA. A panel of potential inhibitors was screened for
efficacy against CDK5 activity. CDK5 inhibitor studies were further
carried out using a small molecule inhibitor, 20-223 and treated at 100nm
- 1uM. GEO-GFP CRC cells were injected into athymic nude mice and
xenografts were grown to 100mm3. Injections of either DMSO or 8mg/kg of
20-223 were then given S.C daily for the first 7 days then every other
day for the remaining two weeks.Results: Gene expression analysis showed
CDK5 expression is upregulated in metastatic tumor compared to primary
tumor from the orthotopic model. Additionally, IHC analysis revealed
higher expression of CDK5 in metastatic tumors compared to primary tumors
in both orthotopic model and human tissues. Knockdown or inhibiting CDK5
decreased CDK5 activity as determined by a decrease in phosphorylation at
S732 of FAK, a site specific to CDK5 phosphorylation. Knockdown or
inhibition of CDK5 using 20-223 also led to a decrease in expression of
anti-apoptotic mediators. Furthermore, treatment with 20-223 reduced cell
proliferation and migration, increased cell death, and arrested cells in
the G2M transition in vitro. 20-223 halted tumor progression and tumor
weight in vivo.Conclusions: CRC is the second leading cause of cancer
related deaths mainly due to the metastatic disease. There are currently
no effective pharmacologic treatments for CRC metastases. We have shown
that CDK5 is upregulated and overexpressed in metastatic tumors when
compared to primary colon tumors. Inhibition of CDK5 either by knockdown
or through the use of small molecule inhibitors decreased downstream
phosphorylation of specific targets and reduced expression of
anti-apoptotic mediators. Together, these data suggest that CDK5 might
play a role in metastatic CRC and weve identified a potential inhibitor,
20-223 which targets CDK5 in CRC. Future work will include the
establishment of a CDK5 knockdown inducible system to verify
pharmacological findings and to study the role of CDK5 in establishment
and maintenance of metastasis.

