Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of neoantigens recognized by autoantibodies in
chemotherapy-treated pancreatic cancer patients


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is one of the most difficult
cancer to treat, both for lack of effective screening method and for
resistance phenomenon. At present surgical resection is the only
potentially curative option, but the absence of early symptoms or
clinical-pathological markers results in diagnosis at a late, inoperable
stage in mostly of cases. Once diagnosed, a number of chemotherapy,
radiation and combination therapy regimens are usually used to treat
patients, but responses remain poor. However, chemotherapy is able to
enhance tumor immunogenicity. Thus more immunogenic neo-antigens can be
induced by chemotherapy and targeted by passive or active immunotherapy.
We have previously identified a number of Tumor Associated Antigens (TAA)
that are recognized by autoantibodies in PDAC patients. One of these,
alpha-enolase, was found to have good antigen capability and immunization
with DNA coding for alpha-enolase effectively enhanced the survival of
genetically engineered mice that develop spontaneously PDAC. To discover
neo-antigens that might be selected for immunotherapy, we have analysed
antibody response in PDAC patients sera before and after chemotherapy.
The reactivity of PDAC patients sera obtained before and after two rounds
of chemotherapy was analysed on 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis
proteome map of CF-PAC pancreatic cancer cell line and the antigens
recognized by autoantibodies were identified by mass spectrometry. A
number of antigens, mainly metabolic enzymes, proteins involved in
transcription and structural proteins, were recognized by autoantibody
only after one or two rounds of chemotherapy. The identification of
common and individual antigens from chemotherapy treated-patients formed
the platform for ongoing immunological studies aimed to assess the
ability of these neo-antigens, compared to that identified before
chemotherapy treatment, to induce specific helper and cytotoxic response
to PDAC. A stronger and sustained immune response correlated to survival
is expected to be induced by neo-antigens. Validation of these
neo-antigens will allow to develop specific immunotherapy combined with
chemotherapy.

