Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TG3003, an immunomodulatory anti-CD115 mAb targeting M2-macrophage
polarization in the tumor microenvironment


Cancer progression has been associated with the presence of
tumor-associated M2-type macrophages (M2-TAMs) able to inhibit anti-tumor
immune responses, stimulate neo-angiogenesis and facilitate metastasis.
Colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1, M-CSF) is a cytokine required for the
survival and differentiation of myeloid cell lineages, and CSF-1
signaling is known to polarize macrophages towards the M2-type. M2-TAMs
can represent the most abundant immunosuppressive cell population in the
tumor microenvironment, notably recruited by CSF-1 and
MCP-1/CCL2.Transgene has developed a monoclonal antibody (mAb), TG3003,
directed against the CSF-1 cell-surface receptor, CD115 (CSF-1R, M-CSFR).
This mAb does not block the binding of CSF-1 to its receptor, but
down-modulates CD115 signaling. In contrast to other anti-CD115 mAbs
currently in development, whose modes of action rely on the blockade of
ligand binding, TG3003 is not cytotoxic to normal myeloid cells that
require CD115-mediated signaling for their survival. In vitro, TG3003
skews monocyte differentiation from M2-type macrophages towards dendritic
cells, most potent antigen-presenting cells capable of stimulating
efficacious T cell responses. It inhibits the secretion of MCP-1/CCL2 by
differentiating macrophages and decreases their IL-6 production. Through
this inhibition of M2-TAMs, TG3003 may potentiate immune responses in
patients and impact on tumor progression. Moreover, due to its unique
non-competitive mode of action, TG3003 does not block the physiological
pathway for CSF-1 clearing from the circulation, thus avoiding the issue
of toxic or rebound effects in treated patients.To investigate the
properties of TG3003 in vivo, we have generated a transgenic mouse strain
where the mAb epitope has been inserted into murine CD115 without
affecting murine CSF-1 binding nor signaling. We will present the results
of preclinical proof-of-concept experiments validating the mechanism of
action and the immunomodulatory properties of mAb TG3003.

