Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of retinoic acids as low affinity inhibitors of the
leukemia stem cell target NR2F6


Many human cancers are composed of heterogeneous populations of cells.
While most cancer cells have a limited ability to divide, growth of the
tumor is carried out by a small population of cancer stem cells, and
hence represent the true target of effective anti-cancer therapy.To
identify potential therapeutic targets, we previously studied the
molecular signature of leukemia stem cells. Our work has led to the
discovery of the orphan nuclear receptor NR2F6 (EAR-2) as a potential
leukemia stem cell therapeutic target. We have previously shown that
NR2F6 is over expressed in patients with acute leukemia and related bone
marrow cancers, and that exogenous expression of NR2F6 in mouse bone
marrow cells causes acute leukemia in vivo. Furthermore, silencing of
NR2F6 expression in human and mouse-leukemia cell lines causes terminal
differentiation and death by apoptosis. The discovery of the role of
NR2F6 in leukemogenesis and the effects of silencing NR2F6 expression on
leukemia cells suggests that this protein is a logical candidate as a
therapeutic target in acute leukemia and related disorders for
differentiation therapy. This forms the basis of the therapeutic concept
that we wished to develop further, by identifying small molecule
modulators of NR2F6 function.We hence developed a screening tool that was
used to survey the ability of known nuclear receptor ligands to modulate
NR2F6 activity. We constructed a hybrid receptor, comprising the NR2F6
ligand binding domain fused to the Gal4 DNA-binding domain. The hybrid
receptor was co-transfected into HeLa cells along with a reporter plasmid
in which a Gal4 regulatory sequence was placed upstream of a luciferase
gene running off a constitutive promoter. The transfected cells were
treated with candidate ligands and assayed for luciferase activity by
luminometer. Of the 20 nuclear receptor ligands assessed none showed a
significant effect at low concentrations (up to 1M). However, we
identifying 9-cis retinoic acid and, to a lesser extent, all-trans
retinoic as low affinity ligands for NR2F6 since they were able to show a
dose-dependent effect that we began to observe at 20M.Retinoic acid and
its analogues have long been studied in the context of chemoprevention
and differentiation therapy based on their anti-proliferative,
pro-apoptotic, and ability to induce differentiation. We have now
commenced the search for a high affinity small molecular inhibitor of
NR2F6 activity by screening commercially available libraries that contain
compounds with similar chemical structure to retinoic acid using the
luciferase-based assay developed here.

