Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dual role of fibronectin in lung cancer progression


Tumor cells chronically progress, involving a series of aberrant
activities within distinct organs, to accomplish final metastasis. The
role of fibronectin (FN) in tumor progression has been controversial,
being either tumor-suppressive or metastatic-promoting. Nevertheless,
little effort has been made to reconcile these discrepancies in a
systemic manner. Here, we deprived metastatic tumor cells of pericellular
FN (periFN) in the spontaneous metastasis assay and demonstrated a dual
role of FN. We found that, while knocking down FN expression of Lewis
lung carcinoma cells (FNKD-LLC) increased the tumor sizes and migratory
activities, it significantly decreased the tumor metastasis in the lungs.
Histological examination revealed that subcutaneous tumors of mice
bearing FNKD LLC invaded the surrounding tissues to a higher extent than
those of mice bearing control scramble-LLC. Immunohistochemical staining
with antibodies against CD31, FN, and casepase 3, revealed that FNKD-LLC
rendered more angiogenesis, tumor intravasation, and fibrous FN deposited
in the surrounding inflammatory tissues, without altering the tumor
apoptosis, suggesting that the FN expression in tumor cells indeed plays
a role in suppressing the tumor progression in the primary tumor tissues.
Conversely, the metastatic tumor nodule numbers in the lungs were
significantly reduced for the FNKD-LLC cells, clearly indicative of a
metastatic-promoting role of periFN. We reasoned these seemingly
conflicting phenomena by hypothesizing that the FN expression of
neoplastic lung carcinoma cells is initially downregulated to trigger
fibrotic microenvironments (FN deposition in extracellular matrices) to
which pro-inflammatory leukocytes are recruited, leading to the enhanced
angiogenesis and tumor intravasation. However, the early circulating lung
cancer cells fail to colonize distant organs (including lungs) until
periFN is re-assembled in the later progression stages, thus facilitating
the tumor cell adhesion to CD26 on endothelial cells and consequently
extravasation and metastasis. This hypothesis of temporal-spatial
regulations was clinically supported by comparing and statistically
analyzing the FN expression levels in lung cancer tissues collected from
patients hospitalized by the NCKU hospital for surgery within 2003
through 2006 with low and high survivals. This study was supported by
Grant # MOST 102-2320-B-006 -031- and MOST 103-2325-B-006 -009 -.

