Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CRM1 is overexpressed in lung tumorigenesis and represents an
adjuvant target for lung cancer treatment


In spite of extensive investigations, the molecular mechanisms of lung
tumorigenesis have not been completely understood, and the effective
therapy for lung cancer is in great demand. Studies have shown that
chromosome region maintenance 1 (CRM1), a nuclear export receptor for
various cancer-associated cargo proteins, overexpressed in several human
cancers. The objectives of the present study are to evaluate the
involvement of CRM1 in lung carcinogenesis and lung cancer treatment.
First, we have analyzed the importance of CRM1 overexpression in lung
cancer development. We showed that CRM1 was overexpressed in lung tumor
tissues from lung cancer patients and lung adenocarcinoma in mice induced
by a tobacco carcinogen, as well as lung cancer cell lines. The increased
CRM1 expression levels in these lung cancer tissues and cells were
associated with an increased phosphorylation level at threonine residue
55 of the p53 protein. Furthermore, CRM1 overexpression in lung cancer
cells seemed to be p53-dependent. Stable overexpression of CRM1 in
BEAS-2B cells led to malignant cellular transformation and p53
cytoplasmic localization. Moreover, as compared to A549 cells,
cancer-related genes significantly altered in A549 cells with stable CRM1
knockdown. Second, we have evaluated targeting CRM1 as an adjuvant
therapy for lung cancer treatment using both in vitro and in vivo models.
We found that CRM1-siRNA could inhibit A549 cell growth and A549 cells
with stable CRM1 knockdown showed more pronounced cytotoxic effects to
cisplatin than A549 cells. In addition, A549 cells treated with cisplatin
and a low non-toxic dose of leptomycin B (a CRM1 inhibitor) had a
remarkably enhanced cytotoxicity compared to cisplatin. This increased
therapeutic effect from leptomycin B and cisplatin was further validated
using an in vivo xenograft mouse model. The findings of this study reveal
the significance of CRM1 in lung carcinogenesis and lung cancer adjuvant
therapy.

