Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting IL-6 as a preventive and therapeutic strategy for K-ras
mutant lung cancer


Worldwide, lung cancer (LC) leads in cancer mortality and cigarette
smoking (CS) is its principal cause. Activating mutations of K-ras are
one of the most common alterations in LC and are associated with CS
exposure. However, several studies have shown that smokers with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), an inflammatory disease of the
lung, have a higher risk of developing LC when compared to smokers
without COPD. These facts suggest a strong link between COPD-type
inflammatory lung microenvironment and K-ras mutant lung cancer.
Unfortunately, attempts to directly target K-ras have thus far failed,
clearly stating the need for new approaches to bring clinical benefits to
patients with this undrugabble profile. Using a conditional K-ras induced
lung cancer mouse model (CC-LR) we showed that K-ras mutant lung tumors
have intrinsic inflammatory characteristics, and a bacterial
lysate-induced COPD-like airway inflammation promotes lung cancer in this
model. This was associated with release of the cytokine IL-6 and
activation of the IL-6-responsive transcription factor STAT3. We showed
that genetic ablation of IL-6 in this model results in a significant
tumor reduction indicating an essential role for IL-6/STAT3 pathway in
lung cancer promotion and introducing IL-6 as a druggable target for
K-ras mutant lung tumor. Therefore, we blocked IL-6 using a monoclonal
anti-IL-6 immunotherapy in our K-ras mutant model. Six week old CC-LR
mice were injected intraperitoneally with 20 mg/kg dose of an anti-IL-6
monoclonal IgG1 antibody twice a week for eight weeks, while been exposed
to the aerosolized bacterial lysate once weekly for 8 weeks. Anti-IL-6
therapy not only inhibited intrinsic lung cancer development by 78%, but
also inhibited the tumor promoting effect of the COPD-like airway
inflammation. It also decreased the expression of P-STAT3, proliferation
marker, Ki67, and pro-angiogenic factors: VEGF, MMP-9 and CD31 in lung
tissue. qPCR analysis of lung tissues from anti-IL-6 treated mice showed
a decrease in Arginase1, FIZZ1, FOXP3, and IL-17 expression, with
increased expression of Th1 markers, IFN and TBx21. Flow cytometry
analysis of total lung inflammatory cells in CC-LR mouse showed a
significant increase in the population of tumor associated macrophages
(TAMs) during tumor progression from age 6 to 14 weeks, and COPD-like
inflammation induced an increase in myeloid derived suppressor cell
(MDSCs) population. Interestingly, we found a significant decrease in
TAMs and MDSCs population after anti-IL-6 treatment. Taken together, we
conclude that IL-6 blockade not only has cell intrinsic effect in K-ras
mutant tumors but also edit the lung microenvironment toward an
anti-tumor phenotype. Therefore, we propose pharmacological targeting of
IL-6 alone or in combination with conventional cytotoxic therapy, or
other targeted therapies for prevention and treatment of lung cancer
patients with K-ras mutation.

