Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of family history of cancer in first-degree relatives
and increased cancer risk: A multinational study


Family history of cancer is a known risk factor for several of the more
prevalent cancer types. However, familial aggregation of cancer may not
follow the genetic linkage pattern seen with most inherited cancer
syndromes. In these instances, clustering may be due to unknown
hereditary genetic mutations or to an aggregation of environmental risk
factors and such clustering may still confer a significant risk. We
assessed the association between family history of cancer in first-degree
relatives and cancer risk among 9,122 cancer cases and 76,537 controls in
a multinational study. Analyses also included evaluation of breast, colon
and prostate cancer risk associated with family history of these
respective cancer types. Cases were verified by physician diagnosis and
all study participants were administered an in-depth survey to ascertain
various demographic and lifestyle factors as well as a complete family
history of cancer among first-degree relatives. Multivariable logistic
regression was used to assess the association between family history of
cancer and cancer risk. Among all subjects, the odds ratio (OR) for
individuals with a family history of cancer was 1.79 [95% confidence
interval = 1.7-1.9] after adjusting for age, gender, BMI, smoking pack
years and ethnicity. Additionally, a greater cancer risk was associated
with increasing number of first-degree relatives with a history of
cancer. Ethnic groups studied included Caucasian-Americans,
African-Americans, Hispanic/Latinas and Caucasian-Polish. All ethnic
groups showed a significant association between family history of cancer
and cancer risk with the highest adjusted OR of 2.65 [95% confidence
interval = 2.0-3.6] among the Hispanic/Latina group. Further analyses
indicated that family history of colon, breast and prostate cancer was
significantly associated with an increased risk of these respective
cancer types across studied ethnic groups. In particular, the adjusted
ORs for breast, colon and prostate cancer risk in the Caucasian-Polish
group were at least double the overall adjusted ORs for each cancer type.
Our study shows that family history of cancer is a significant predictor
of cancer risk especially among certain ethnic groups. In addition,
family history of cancer can represent both a genetic predisposition
and/or environmental exposure and risk associated with familial
clustering of cancer.

