Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of epigenetic based inter-tumoral heterogeneity
identifies novel ZMIZ1 gene as a biomarker of cancer patient survival in
multiple tumor types


Glioblastoma is the most malignant primary brain tumor and is universally
fatal despite the use of the best treatment available. However a small
percentage of these patients live considerably longer. Extensive genetic
and epigenetic analysis has identified IDH1 mutation, G-CIMP (Glioma-CpG
Island Methylator Phenotype) phenotype and MGMT as markers of better
survival in glioblastoma. These markers though can only be associated
with a small fraction of long term survivors (defined as glioblastoma
patients surviving >3 years), underlying the need for better biomarkers
of improved survival. Epigenetic analysis of inter-tumoral heterogeneity
in the TCGA glioblastoma cohort identified a truncated form of the novel
ZMZI1 gene to be associated with improved survival in patients
hypermethylated in the alternative promoter of the truncated ZMIZ1 form,
in an independent manner from IDH1, G-CIMP or MGMT methylation status.A
validation cohort of 31 glioblastoma long term survivors with low
prevalence of the known markers IDH1, G-CIMP and MGMT showed that ZMIZ1
methylation was positive in 42% of the patients, more sensitive and
specific than IDH1, G-CIMP or MGMT. Extending our analysis to lower grade
gliomas as well as other central nervous system tumors showed that higher
methylation of the truncated ZMIZ1 was predicting a more favorable
outcome in astrocytomas but not in oligodendrogliomas. Furthermore, in
non-CNS tumors including breast cancer, colorectal cancer, bladder cancer
and renal cell carcinoma, lower expression of the truncated ZMIZ1 form
predicted a favorable survival, statistically significant in univariate
and multivariate analysis adjusting for tumor stage and grade. In vitro
loss of function and gain of function studies showed that ZMIZ1 is
significantly affecting migration of glioblastoma cell lines, leaving
unaffected the proliferation capacity of these cells. Loss of function
studies showed that decreased ZMIZ1 expression in glioblastoma is
resulting in higher sensitivity of glioblastoma cells to
temozolamide.These results identify a novel pan-cancer biomarker of
prognosis as well as a new gene that could potentially play a key role in
cancer pathogenesis and resistance to treatment. Interestingly, unlike
many other key cancer genes ZMIZ1 expression is regulated via epigenetic
rather than genetic alterations in the entirety of human cancers.

