Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel anti-a proliferation-inducing ligand hAPRIL.01A monoclonal
antibody targets multiple myeloma cells in the bone marrow
microenvironment


A proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL), a close member of
B-cell-activating factor (BAFF) belonging to the TNF superfamily, is
mainly produced by bone marrow (BM) accessory cells to stimulates growth
and survival of multiple myeloma (MM) cells. We here characterize
molecular mechanisms regulating APRIL activation in the BM
microenvironment and further determine whether a novel anti-APRIL
monoclonal antibody hAPRIL.01A inhibits its functional sequelae in MM.
First, in vitro culture showed that osteoclasts (OC) and macrophages
secret significantly higher levels of APRIL than unstimulated CD14+
monocytes and BM stromal cells. All MM cell lines express cell surface
BCMA in significantly higher level than TACI (p A proliferation-inducing
ligand (APRIL), a close member of B-cell-activating factor (BAFF)
belonging to the TNF superfamily, is mainly produced by bone marrow (BM)
accessory cells to stimulates growth and survival of multiple myeloma
(MM) cells. We here characterize molecular mechanisms regulating APRIL
activation in the BM microenvironment and further determine whether a
novel anti-APRIL monoclonal antibody hAPRIL.01A inhibits its functional
sequelae in MM. First, in vitro culture showed that osteoclasts (OC) and
macrophages secret significantly higher levels of APRIL than unstimulated
CD14+ monocytes and BM stromal cells. All MM cell lines express cell
surface BCMA in significantly higher level than TACI (p < 9.06e-15). H929
MM cells (expressing only BCMA, but not TACI), and other MM cell lines
were next stimulated with APRIL, in the presence or absence of hAPRIL.01
Ab followed by immunoblotting and TaqMan Array assays on harvested
protein lysates and mRNA. APRIL stimulation activated NF-B, PI3K/AKT, and
ERK1/2 signaling in MM cells. NF-B-DNA binding activities of p65 and p50
(p52, to a less extent), were significantly upregulated as early as 15
minute after stimulation. Conversely, hAPRIL.01 Ab completely blocked
these signaling cascades, consistent with decreased NF-B-DNA binding
activities in BCMA-knock-downed MM cells by shBCMA lentivirus
transfection. APRIL further induced pro-survival proteins (Mcl1, Bcl2,
BIRC3, XIAP) and MM cell growth-stimulating regulators (CCDN2, CDK4,
CDK6, c-myc), which were completely inhibited by hAPRIL.01 Ab. These
results correlated with blockade of hAPRIL.01 Ab in APRIL-promoted
proliferation and survival of MM cells, in the presence of OCs or
macrophages. APRIL also induces adhesion of MM cells to BMSC, which was
blocked by hAPRIL.01 Ab. This concurred with hAPRIL.01 Ab-reduced
adhesion molecules (CD44, ICAM-1) induced by APRIL. APRIL-increased
VEGF-A and PECAM-1 in MM cells was also significantly reduced by this
mAb. APRIL-upregulated chemotactic/osteoclast-activating factors (MIP-1,
MIP1, SDF-1) were also inhibited by this Ab. Other angiogenesis and
adhesion/chemoattractant factors were changed in a similar fashion,
indicating specific blocking of hAPRIL.01 Ab to APRIL-induced downstream
target genes. This mAb further inhibited APRIL-increased viability of
plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) and diminished MM cell viability
protected by pDC in 3-d cocultures. Finally, hAPRIL.01 specifically
overcame APRIL-, but not IL-6, induced protection in lenalidomide- or
dexamethasone-treated MM1S and H929 MM cells. This Ab also blocks
OC-induced MM cell growth and survival in ongoing SCID-hu model of MM.
These studies confirm a constitutive APRIL activation via BCMA and TACI
in promoting malignancies of myeloma cells, supporting a novel
therapeutics of hAPRIL.01 Ab to target MM in the BM
microenvironment.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

