Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential roles of palmitoylation on oncogenic potential of
NRAS and KRAS4A


The RAS family includes three RAS genes, which encode four highly
homologous proteins: H-, N-, and KRAS4A and 4B, the latter two being
alternatively spliced forms differing only at the carboxyl terminus.
Hyperactivation of RAS is common in human cancer, including hematological
malignancies. Since RAS proteins are difficult to target, identification
of alternative means to block RAS oncogenic signaling is critical for
developing therapies against RAS-driven cancers. The biological activity
of RAS proteins relies upon post-translational modifications (PTMs) that
anchor RAS to cellular membranes. Among RAS PTMs, palmitoylation is
required for the high affinity plasma membrane binding of NRAS, HRAS and
KRAS4A. We have previously shown that palmitoylation is essential for
NRAS leukemogenesis, suggesting that targeting RAS palmitoylation may be
an effective therapy for NRAS related cancers. In addition, it has been
shown that KRAS4A plays an essential role in the development of
KRAS-driven lung cancer, suggesting that targeting palmitoylation may
impact on cancers with KRAS mutations as well. However, the exact role of
palmitoylation in KRAS4A oncogenic activity is not known. In this study
we compared the effect of palmitoylation on leukemogenic potential of
oncogenic NRAS and KRAS4A whose high expression level is detected in some
KRAS mutated leukemia cell lines. We found that palmitoylation of
oncogenic NRAS and KRAS4A is both critical for their plasma membrane
attachment and their activity to activate the MEK-ERK signaling pathway.
Mutation at the palmitoylation site of the oncogenic KRAS4A significantly
abrogates its leukemogenic potential. However, unlike NRAS,
palmitoylation defective KRAS4A still induces leukemia in mice, albeit
with a long latency. Using NRAS/KRAS4A chimeric constructs, we found that
the KIKK (Lys-Ile-Lys-Lys) motif between amino acids 181 and 189 in the
hypervariable region of KRAS4A effects on the oncogenic activity of
KRAS4A, though its contribution is less than that of palmitoylation.
After replacing the three lysine residues in the KIKK motif with
glutamine residues, the leukemogenic potential of oncogenic KRAS4A is
partially inhibited, while inactivating mutations of both palmitoylation
site and KIKK motif completely suppress the ability of oncogenic KRAS4A
to induce leukemia in mice. On the other hand, replacement of lysine
residues in KIKK motif with arginine residues does not change the
oncogenic activity of KRAS4A, indicating that the KIKK motif functions by
providing positive charged residues. These studies demonstrate that
KRAS4A contains an additional membrane association motif comparing to
NRAS and suggest that though therapies targeting RAS palmitoylation would
inhibit KRAS4A tumorigenesis, interfering the KIKK motif of KRAS4A would
enhance the therapeutic effectiveness.

