Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional signatures associated with lack of response to
anti-PD-1 therapy in patients with renal cell carcinoma


Background: The PD-1/PD-L1 immune checkpoint pathway limits host immune
responses to cancer in the local tumor microenvironment. Monoclonal
antibodies blocking PD-1 or PD-L1 have shown promising clinical results
in a variety of advanced human cancers including renal cell carcinoma
(RCC). We previously reported that response to anti-PD-1 therapy
correlates with PD-L1 expression by tumor cells in pre-treatment
biopsies. Although 20-30% of patients with metastatic RCC respond to
anti-PD-1 therapy, many patients with PD-L1+ tumors still do not respond.
The current study was undertaken to understand mechanisms underlying the
failure of anti-PD-1 targeted therapies in patients with PD-L1+
RCC.Methods: The specimen cohort included formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) pre-treatment tumor biopsies expressing PD-L1,
derived from 13 RCC patients treated with nivolumab (anti-PD-1) at a
single institution [4 responders (R), 9 non-responders (NR); RECIST].
PD-L1+ specimens were defined as those having 5% of tumor cells with cell
surface PD-L1 expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC). RNA was isolated
from PD-L1+ regions on FFPE slides. Whole genome microarray profiling
with cDNA-mediated Annealing, Selection, extension and Ligation (DASL)
was performed. Global gene expression analysis was profiled using
BRBArrayTools. Multiplex quantitative (q)RT-PCR was used to validate
differential expression of genes of interest, and IHC was used to
validate protein expression from select genes, in R vs. NR.Results: Whole
genome analysis revealed 234 transcripts that were differentially
expressed in R vs. NR (p value 0.01, fold change 1.5). Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis (IPA) of these transcripts showed the involvement of metabolic
and immune pathways as well as genes encoding oxidation stress response
molecules. Multiplex qRT-PCR for a subset of 60 differentially expressed
genes validated significant over-expression of genes with metabolic
functions, such as drug glucuronidation (UGT1A6/A1/A3), glucose transport
(SLC23A1), and mitochondrial oxidation (AKR1C3) in NR vs. R. Conversely,
R were found to overexpress immune markers such as BMP1, which has been
shown to positively regulate PD-L1 expression, and CCL3 involved in
leukocyte migration.Conclusions: Although tumor PD-L1 expression is
associated with an increased likelihood of response to anti-PD-1/PD-L1
therapy, tumor cell-intrinsic metabolism may contribute to treatment
resistance in PD-L1+ patients. Our data suggest that overexpression of
certain metabolic factors may contribute to the failure of PD-L1+ RCC to
respond to PD-1 pathway blockade, while immune factors in the tumor
immune microenvironment may contribute to success. Treatment strategies
that co-target these factors may be needed to enhance responses to
anti-PD-1 immunotherapy in RCC.Supported by grants from Bristol-Myers
Squibb and Stand Up to Cancer

