Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GNASR201H and KrasG12D cooperate to promote murine pancreatic
tumorigenesis recapitulating human intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm


Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) is the most common
pancreatic cystic neoplasm, which is a precursor of the invasive ductal
adenocarcinoma. IPMNs recurrently harbor activating somatic mutations in
GNAS and KRAS, mostly GNASR201H and KRASG12D. GNAS encodes the
stimulatory G-protein subunit (Gs) that mediates a stimulatory signal to
adenylyl cyclase to produce cyclic AMP (cAMP), a second messenger
activating cAMP dependent protein kinase (PKA). The GNASR201H mutation is
known to result in constitutive activation of Gs and its downstream
signaling molecules, which induces expression of various genes including
mucin genes. To study a role of GNAS in pancreatic tumourigenesis in
vivo, we generated transgenic mice lines of which transgene is consisted
of Lox-STOP-Lox (LSL)- GNASR201H under the control of the CAG promoter
(Tg(CAG-LSL-GNAS)). The transgene contains genetic elements that inhibit
transcription and translation of GNASR201H flanked by functional LoxP
sites. These mice lines were crossed to pancreatic transcription factor 1
a (Ptf1a)-cre mice, and generated Tg(CAG-LSL-GNAS);Ptf1a-cre mice. This
mouse line showed elevated cAMP levels and a compensatory upregulation of
PKA in the pancreas. GNASR201H alone was not sufficient to induce
tumourigenesis by 2 months of age, but small dilated tubular complex
formation, loss of acinar cells, and fibrosis, which could be a very
early phenotype of IPMN. To know a cooperative effect of GNASR201H and
KRASG12D in pancreatic tumorigenesis, we crossed
Tg(CAG-LSL-GNAS);Ptf1a-cre mice with LSL-KrasG12D mice.
Tg(CAG-LSL-GNAS);LSL-KrasG12D;Ptf1a-cre mice developed multiple cysts
consisting of marked dilated ducts lined with papillary dysplastic
epithelia in the pancreas within 5 weeks, which recapitulated human
IPMNs. Our data strongly suggest that mutated GNAS cooperating with
mutated KRAS may sufficiently cause to develop IPMN.

