Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improvement of response to chemotherapy in breast cancer cells by
the use of the non-oncologic drug minocycline


IntroductionThe majority of breast cancer patients receive (neo-)
adjuvant chemotherapy. Although a high percentage of patients show good
response - as shown by pathologic complete response - another high number
of patients does not profit from chemotherapeutic treatments. Therefore,
there is a high demand for improvement of chemotherapeutic treatments.It
has been proposed that non-oncologic drugs, which are used in treatment
of other diseases, might represent a valid novel therapeutic approach, as
these drugs have already been tested for side effects, etc. Nonetheless,
a dramatic breakthrough by using non-oncologic drugs as single treatment
agents has not been published so far.However, we hypothesized that a
combinatorial treatment using oncologic drugs as well as non-oncologic
drugs might improve the response to classical cancer treating agents,
e.g. chemotherapeutic agents.Recently, we could show a sensitization of
triple negative breast cancer cells to chemotherapy by using the
anti-androgenic drug dutasteride in combination with either cisplatinum
as well as paclitaxel (von Wahlde et al., 2014).Currently, we deeply
analyze the effect of another non-oncologic drug - minocycline - in the
treatment of breast cancer cells. Minocycline has been described as a
broad-spectrum tetracycline antibiotic. It has already been proposed that
it might also improve chemotherapeutic treatments as well as radiation
treatments (Sotomayor et al. 1992). However, an improvement of
chemotherapy in breast cancer patients has not been described so
far.MethodsBreast cancer cells were treated with increasing
concentrations of minocycline. Subsequently, cells were treated with
minocycline in combination with different cytotoxic agents. Cell
viability was measured using MTT assays. Molecular biological analyses
were performed in order to dissect the mechanisms resulting in altered
chemotherapeutic responses.ResultsWhen treated in the presence of
minocycline alone, some breast cancer cells showed reduced viability only
at high concentrations. The combinatorial treatment using minocycline
plus cytotoxic agents however, greatly improved the response to the
cytotoxic agents, as viabilitiy drastically decreased.ConclusionWe
conclude that the use of non-oncologic drugs might greatly improve the
response to standard chemotherapeutic agents in the treatment of breast
cancer. Thus, patients suffering from breast cancer might profit from a
combinatorial application of both minocycline as well as standard
chemotherapeutic agents.As minocycline targets several distinct cellular
components, a deeply analysis is needed in order to evaluate the
mechanisms underlying the improved response to cytotoxic agents.

