Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a novel BRCA1-EGR1 interaction


The tumor suppressor protein BRCA1 orchestrates DNA repair and cell cycle
arrest following DNA damage, with transcriptional regulation integral to
these processes. We have identified a novel, DNA-damage responsive,
interaction between BRCA1 and the zinc-finger transcription factor EGR1.
EGR1 is rapidly and transiently expressed in response to a wide variety
of stress stimuli and growth factors, and like BRCA1, decreased
expression of EGR1 correlates with tumor formation in mammary cell lines
and tissues.The stress response gene, NDRG1, was identified as a
transcriptional target of BRCA1 by microarray analysis and subsequent
RQ-PCR validation. NDRG1 is a known suppressor of breast cancer
metastasis and we have observed a significant reduction of NDRG1
expression in breast cancer cell lines (relative to normal cell lines).
Promoter analyses identified EGR1 binding motifs within the NDRG1
proximal promoter region, and EGR1 was confirmed as the transcription
factor of interest by promoter assays. Downregulation of either BRCA1 or
EGR1 (using a siRNA approach) resulted in a reduction in both basal and
DNA-damage induced NDRG1 promoter activity, suggesting a co-regulatory
mechanism. Indeed, recruitment of BRCA1 and EGR1 to the NDRG1 promoter
was confirmed by ChIP assays.GST-fused BRCA1 deletion constructs showed
that EGR1 specifically interacts with a C-terminal region of BRCA1 (which
contains both BRCT domains). However, following DNA damage, we observed
EGR1 interaction along the entire length of the BRCA1 protein, suggesting
that both BRCA1 and EGR1 reside within a larger transcriptional complex
upon DNA damage. In agreement with this, siRNA knockdown of either BRCA1
or EGR1 in breast cell lines (i) induced endogenous DNA damage
signalling, (ii) increased intracellular ROS generation and (iii)
upregulated numerous stress-response genes.To investigate transcriptional
regulation downstream of this interaction we performed analyses of
publically available ChIP-Seq data for both BRCA1 and EGR1, and
identified a list of genomic locations (corresponding to gene promoters)
at which both proteins localise. We will use these findings, in
combination with our own ChIP-Seq experiments performed in the
non-tumorigenic mammary cell line, 184A1, to investigate the roles of
this novel complex in the maintenance of genomic stability and within
normal breast biology.

