Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Secretory ANXA3 endows liver cancer cells with tumorigenic and
self-renewal abilities and promotes HCC development


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of mortality in
Southeast Asia and in Hong Kong. Despite advances in treatment, the
prognosis of advanced HCC patients remains dismal. Contemporary challenge
in treating HCC has been the common chemotherapy resistance and
recurrence after therapy.Therefore, the identification of valid targets
and the development of new therapies are urgently needed for more
effective clinical management of this deadly disease. We found secretory
annexin A3 (ANXA3) to be up-regulated in HCC cell lines, compared with
immortalized normal liver cell line MIHA. Clinically, secretory ANXA3
levels in the serum were found to be progressively elevated from non-HCC
individuals to early and advanced HCC patients, with up-regulation of
serum ANXA3 to be tightly associated with gender, number of tumor
nodules, tumor sizes and tumor stages. More importantly, the diagnostic
value of secretory ANXA3, as evident by ROC analysis, was found to be
more superior to the commonly used biomarker alpha-fetoprotein (AFP).
Subsequent functional studies found secretory ANXA3 to promote cancer and
stem cell-like properties of HCC cells. Co-culture of conditioned medium
from ANXA3-overexpressing cells with ANXA3-absent HCC cells potentiated
the abilities of HCC cells to migrate, invade, self-renew, induce tube
formation in endothelial cells, and resist apoptosis induced by
staurosporine and chemotherapy. The in vivo tumor-initiating capacity was
also significantly enhanced in HCC cells when co-cultured with
ANXA3-containing conditioned medium compared with conditioned medium from
cells transfected with empty vector control. Similar functional
properties were also observed when MIHA cells were treated with
recombinant ANXA3 proteins. In an effort to characterize the molecular
mechanism by which ANXA3 drives cancer and stem cell-like properties in
HCC, cDNA microarray profiling was performed to compare the gene
expression between ANXA3-depleted and control cells. Pathway enrichment
analysis found many of the deregulated genes to be closely associated
with the JNK/AP-1 signaling cascade. Activation of JNK pathway was
detected when cells were treated with recombinant ANXA3 proteins or
ANXA3-containing conditioned medium. Collectively, our findings suggest
that secretory ANXA3 plays pivotal roles in promoting tumor initiation,
growth and chemoresistance through the activation of JNK signaling
pathway in HCC.

