Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disulfiram a dual mgmt and aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitor
sensitizes pancreatic cancer to gemcitabine and abraxane


Background: O6 methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) is
overexpressed in a majority of cancers, including pancreatic cancer. MGMT
has been the focus of significant research for its role in the repair of
DNA damage caused by chemotherapeutic agents. Aldehyde Dehydrogenase as a
progenitor/stem cell marker has been linked to chemotherapy and radiation
resistance.Methods: We tested the administration of Antabuse (disulfiram,
DSF) at nontoxic doses in combination with gemcitabine (GEM) and Abraxane
(ABX) on pancreatic cancer cells.Results: DSF at very low doses
(achievable in human serum with standard DSF clinical dosing) decreases
pancreatic cancer cell growth in a dose-dependent manner. DSF further
sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to GEM and ABX and significantly
inhibits pancreatic cancer growth without causing unwanted side effects
to the normal pancreatic cells. Dose effect and isobologram studies
confirm synergistic activity of DSF and ABX combination and moderate
synergism for DSF and GEM combination. DSF, either alone or in
combination with GEM (DSF GEM) and/or ABX (DSF ABX), significantly
inhibits expression of MGMT, aldehyde dehydrogenase, antigen Ki-67 and
BIRC5 gene (survivin) - all involved in pancreatic cancer tumorigenesis.
DSF+/-GEM+/-ABX induces the expression of p21Cip1, a cell cycle
inhibitor. We show an inverse correlation between aldehyde dehydrogenase
activity and MGMT expression, where MGMT expression is high, aldehyde
dehydrogenase activity is low and where aldehyde dehydrogenase activity
is high, MGMT levels were low. The ALDH3A1 expression is significantly
higher in highly metastatic cancer cells (L3.6pl) compared to other
metastatic cancer cells (PANC1, Mia PaCa2, ASPC1). We further report that
in our model DSF at very low doses (achievable in human serum with
standard DSF clinical dosing) effectively inhibits both aldehyde
dehydrogenase and MGMT in pancreatic cancer cells. DSF also induces
caspase activation indicative of mitochondrial induced apoptosis in these
cells.Conclusions: Our findings suggest that DSF as dual inhibitor of
MGMT and aldehyde dehydrogenase potentially provides a novel therapeutic
approach to inhibiting pancreatic cancer growth/metastasis and
synergistically enhances GEM and ABX activity.

