Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epidermal growth factor receptor and anaplastic lymphoma kinase
bypass signaling in oral squamous cell carcinoma in vivo


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is an insidious disease with poor
prognosis. This is due to invasive disease that is refractive to
conventional therapies. We reported a gene-set of hypomethylated loci in
metastatic OSCC involved in Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR)
signaling. EGFR over-expression is an early event in OSCC however
therapies targeting EGFR have had dismal results. Our studies showed
hypomethylation of Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) correlates with
metastatic OSCC. ALK and EGFR signaling drive glioblastoma and non-small
cell lung cancers (NSCLC). Furthermore, NSCLC that develop resistance to
ALK inhibition demonstrate activation of EGFR bypass signaling. Based
upon these findings, we hypothesize that simultaneous targeting of both
ALK and EGFR in OSCC will yield greater anti-tumor activity than single
drug therapies. Our objective was to assess expression and activation of
EGFR and ALK signaling pathways in response to therapies targeting EGFR
and/or ALK in vitro and in mouse OSCC xenograft models. Expression of
total and activated EGFR and ALK was analyzed in HSC3 cells (invasive)
and SCC4 cells (non-invasive) using western blot analysis. Effects on
downstream signaling molecules (AKT, STAT3, and RAS) were also evaluated
following treatments with TAE684 (ALK inhibitor) and/or Gefitinib (EGFR
inhibitor). Anti-tumor effects of TAE684 and/or Gefitinib were evaluated
in mouse OSCC xenograft models using HSC3 and SCC4 cell lines. This study
revealed that HSC3 and SCC4 cell lines have unique growth, invasion, and
signaling profiles resulting in varying responses to treatments targeting
ALK and/or EGFR. HSC3 cells express ALK and have active EGFR whereas SCC4
cells have low ALK expression and low EGFR activity. Subsequently, HSC3
xenografts were sensitive to Gefitinib and co-targeting ALK resulted in
an additive effect. Targeting ALK alone had no effect on tumor growth.
Similar to NSCLC, western blot analysis revealed that ALK inhibition
alone induces increased activation of EGFR bypass signaling in both HSC3
and SCC4 cells. In contrast SCC4 xenografts failed to respond to TAE684
and/or Gefitinib treatments. Co-treatment with TAE684 and Gefitinib down
regulated the already low EGFR activity. Downstream effector molecules
AKT and STAT3 had reduced activity in response to co-treatments in both
HSC3 and SCC4 cell lines. Conversely, MAPK activity increased with all
treatments in both cell lines. Therefore, we conclude that OSCC with
active EGFR and ALK signaling are responsive to combination treatments
targeting ALK and EGFR resulting in more efficacious anti-tumor effects
than single drug therapies. Furthermore, single anti-ALK therapy induces
compensatory EGFR activation and has no effect on tumor growth.
Additional parallel pathways may account for elevated MAPK activity in
response to all treatments and warrants further investigation.

