Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevention of peritonitis carcinomatosa after adjuvant
chemotherapy by the inhibition of RNA polymerase in drug-tolerant
subpopulations


Peritonitis carcinomatosa (PC) is one of the most devastating states of
digestive tract cancers and occurs at a substantial frequency even after
curative removal of the primary lesions followed by adjuvant
chemotherapy. Tumor cells involved in PC after the adjuvant therapy are
considered to have the ability to survive in the presence of anticancer
drugs. To clarify the mechanism(s) of cancer relapse after adjuvant
chemotherapy, we studied drug-tolerant colonies (DTCs), which are
subpopulations of cancer cells that survive in the presence of anticancer
drugs. In a dose-dependent fashion, DTC formation was observed in the
presence of various drugs, including cisplatin, docetaxel, gefitinib, and
sorafenib, in five cell lines: HCT116, HeLa, HT29, MKN45, and MCF7. To
characterize DTCs at the protein level, we collected more than 2000 DTCs
and drug-free colonies for analysis by means of reverse-phase protein
arrays (RPPAs). Profiling of 44 proteins by quantitative RPPA analysis
identified two major clusters that were defined by the expression of
stem-like (e.g., CD44, Oct-4, and c-Myc) or epithelial proteins
(E-cadherin and keratins). However, no distinct DTC subpopulations with
defined proteins were found associated with drug type, drug
concentration, or cell type. In contrast, the transcriptional product
level of some cellular reprograming genes, such as Nanog, seemed to be
up-regulated in DTCs. Subsequent functional-level screening of inhibitors
for colony suppression indicated that the up-regulation of mRNA synthesis
played an important role in emergence of DTCs. In fact, we identified an
RNA polymerase inhibitor that effectively inhibits the emergence of DTCs.
Intriguingly, DTC inhibition is partially attributed to a gene that
encodes for an RNA-binding protein (RBP) that forms a transcriptional
complex along with the RNA polymerase. The RNA polymerase inhibitor
reduced the gene expression level of the RBP gene. Moreover, knockdown of
the RBP gene also reduced the degree of DTC formation comparable to the
RNA polymerase inhibitor, suggesting that one of the targets of the RNA
polymerase inhibitor is the RBP gene. To validate efficacy of the RNA
polymerase inhibitor in terms of DTC suppression in vivo, we established
a mouse PC model using the MKN45 gastric cancer cell line. The mouse PC
model forms nodules in the mesentery or peritoneum a few weeks after
inoculation. Concurrent peritoneal injection of the RNA polymerase
inhibitor and cisplatin significantly suppressed the number of nodules.
Moreover, overall survival of the mouse PC model was extended in the
group treated with the RNA polymerase inhibitor and cisplatin. These
results suggest that cancer relapse may occur from rather non-distinct
subpopulations that could be suppressed by the RNA polymerase inhibitor
via disruption of the transcriptional machinery.

