Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mPGES1 deletion and the mechanisms of tumor growth suppression


The pro-tumor contributions of prostaglandin (PG) E2 are established, as
is the clinical efficacy of pharmacological inhibition of COX-2, the
rate-limiting enzyme in PGE2 synthesis. In addition to the desired
suppression of tumor PGE2, collateral loss of endothelial COX-2-derived
PGI2 imposes a cardiovascular hazard that limits clinical use of COX-2
inhibitors. mPGES1, the terminal enzyme in the PGE2 synthesis pathway, is
an alternative target to interrupt COX-2-driven events in tumors without
elevating cardiovascular risk. We engineered mice transgenic for an
activated HER2/neu oncogene to lack mPGES1 globally (mPGES1 KOgl) or only
in mammary epithelial cells (mPGES1 KOepi). Abdominal mammary glands from
wild type (WT), heterozygous (het), mPGES1 KOgl, and mPGES1 KOepi mice
were harvested at 22 weeks of age, paraffin embedded, H&E stained and
scanned for whole slide imaging (WSI). Tumor multiplicity was calculated
based on the number of lesions on WSI. Adjacent sections were
immunostained for Ki67, caspase 3, Factor VIII, CD3, and F4/80, to assess
proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and tumor lymphocyte and
macrophage infiltration. Tumor multiplicity was significantly higher in
WT compared to either mPGES1 KOgl or mPGES1 KOepi mice. Concordantly,
shRNA knock down (KD) of mPGES1 in mammary tumor cells dramatically
suppressed their growth as orthotopic tumors in syngeneic immune
competent WT hosts: 4 weeks after the injections, 6 out of 6 non-target
shRNA control tumors grew successfully while 6 out of 10 mPGES1 KD cells
failed to grow. In separate experiments, 14 of 14 non-target shRNA cells
formed tumors after 2 weeks while 12 out of 18 mPGES1 KD tumors failed.
By immunohistochemistry, no difference was observed in proliferation and
apoptosis markers, as well as in the number of tumor infiltrating
macrophages and lymphocytes, between WT, mPGES1 KOgl, and mPGES1 KOepi
tumors. In contrast to our previous study in mice lacking epithelial
COX-2 (COX-2 KOepi), vascularization was not different between mPEGS-1
KOepi and WT tumors suggesting divergence in the anti-tumorigenic
mechanisms in mPEGS-1 KOepi and COX-2 KOepi tumors. By flow cytometry
there was no difference in infiltrating macrophage and lymphocyte density
or functional phenotypes, between WT, mPGES1 KOepi, and mPGES1 KD
orthotopic tumors. Similarly, no difference was observed in the number of
macrophages and myeloid derived suppressor cells in spleens from mPGES1
sufficient and mPGES1 KD orthotopic tumor bearing mice. In contrast,
decreased co-inhibitory molecule PD-1 expressing CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocyte
numbers were evident in draining lymph nodes in mice injected with mPGES1
KD cells compared to WT. This finding indicates that the absence of
mPGES1-derived PGE2 renders tumor cells less efficient in creating and
maintaining an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment and that
targeting mPGES1 may enhance anti-tumor immune mechanisms.

