Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and evaluation of cell membrane lipid-extracted
nanoliposomes (CLENs) for the treatment of cancer using cellular models
of human pancreatic cancer


In 2014, an estimated 46,420 people will be diagnosed with pancreatic
cancer in the United States, and approximately 39,590 will die from the
disease. Gemcitabine has been established as the first-line treatment for
advanced pancreatic cancer. However, this type of cancer has responded
poorly to many therapeutic agents including gemcitabine, mainly due to
inadequate drug accumulation at the desired tumor location and drug
resistance. Liposomes represent a convenient method to deliver drugs to
solid tumors. The drug carrier enhances the accumulation of the drug at
the tumor site and has been shown to overcome drug resistance. Liposomes
can direct the drug away from normal tissue and minimize unwanted drug
side effects. However, more selective tumor targeting of cytotoxic
drug-loaded liposomes to pancreatic tumors will further improve efficacy
and will likely reduce toxicity.The present study investigated whether
the inclusion of extracted lipids derived from pancreatic cancer cells
would improve the selective uptake of liposomes by pancreatic cancer
cells and formulation effects. We hypothesized that the inclusion of cell
membrane lipid-extracted materials in the preparation of nanoliposomes
will promote selective cellular uptake and improved cytotoxic drug
effects. To test the hypothesis, two different pancreatic cancer cell
lines were employed for the study (PANC-1 and Capan-2), and hTERT (a
human immortalized normal pancreatic duct cell line) used as a healthy
cell control. The human prostate (LNCap) and colorectal cancer (COLO-205)
cell lines were used as negative controls. Various nanoliposome
preparations were prepared and evaluated in terms of particle size, zeta
potential and relative affinity of CLENs for target cells and
fluorescence microscopy.The particle size of these nanoliposomes ranged
between 92-176 nm and the zeta potential was negatively-charged (-14.07
and -34.95 mV). The Sulforhodamine B cell viability assay showed that
CLENs was non-toxic to cells over the full concentration range evaluated
when compared to conventional liposomes. The cellular uptake of the five
different nanoliposome preparations was highest for the cell line from
which the lipid material used to prepare CLENs was extracted (P0.05).
Fluorescence microscopic analyses supported the cellular uptake
studies.The incorporation of gemcitabine in CLENs may represent a
promising approach for the treatment of pancreatic cancer. Cytotoxic drug
studies with gemcitabine are currently underway.

