Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-genome microRNA profiling identifies prognostic serum
biomarkers of esophageal adenocarcinoma


Background: Cell free circulating microRNAs (cfmiRNAs) have been
recognized as robust and stable biomarkers of cancers. However, little is
known about the prognostic significance of cfmiRNAs in esophageal
adenocarcinoma (EA). In this study, we explored whether specific cfmiRNA
profiles could predict EA prognosis and whether H. pylori (HP) infection
status could influence the association between cfmiRNAs and EA survival
outcomes.Methods: At discovery stage, we profiled 1075 cfmiRNAs in 6
pooled serum samples from 30 EA patients and 30 cancer-free control
subjects. After filtration, a total of 589 cfmiRNAs were stably
detectable in the serum samples. The most significantly differential
expressed cfmiRNAs were then validated the association with overall
survival (OS) in an independent cohort of 82 patients, using Log-Rank
test and multivariate Cox regression models in overall samples or
stratified by HP infection status. qRT-PCR was used for cfmiRNA profiling
in validation. HP infection status was determined by immunoblotting
assay.Results: We identified a 21-cfmiRNA panel that could distinguish EA
patients from cancer-free subjects (multiple response analysis by
Hotelling T test, P = 3.0E-12). In validation, the OS analysis among
HP-positive subtype patients showed that no cfmiRNA was significantly
associated with EA prognosis. In HP-negative patients, however, 9
cfmiRNAs were significantly associated with OS (minimal P = 1.9E-4, all
FDR adjusted q-value Background: Cell free circulating microRNAs
(cfmiRNAs) have been recognized as robust and stable biomarkers of
cancers. However, little is known about the prognostic significance of
cfmiRNAs in esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA). In this study, we explored
whether specific cfmiRNA profiles could predict EA prognosis and whether
H. pylori (HP) infection status could influence the association between
cfmiRNAs and EA survival outcomes.Methods: At discovery stage, we
profiled 1075 cfmiRNAs in 6 pooled serum samples from 30 EA patients and
30 cancer-free control subjects. After filtration, a total of 589
cfmiRNAs were stably detectable in the serum samples. The most
significantly differential expressed cfmiRNAs were then validated the
association with overall survival (OS) in an independent cohort of 82
patients, using Log-Rank test and multivariate Cox regression models in
overall samples or stratified by HP infection status. qRT-PCR was used
for cfmiRNA profiling in validation. HP infection status was determined
by immunoblotting assay.Results: We identified a 21-cfmiRNA panel that
could distinguish EA patients from cancer-free subjects (multiple
response analysis by Hotelling T test, P = 3.0E-12). In validation, the
OS analysis among HP-positive subtype patients showed that no cfmiRNA was
significantly associated with EA prognosis. In HP-negative patients,
however, 9 cfmiRNAs were significantly associated with OS (minimal P =
1.9E-4, all FDR adjusted q-value < 0.05). A risk-score analysis by
combining the 9 cfmiRNA biomarkers showed a worse outcome in high-risk
group (HR = 12.82, P = 0.0075) that showed better prediction of prognosis
than individual cfmiRNA alone.Conclusions: Our findings suggest that
deregulated cfmiRNAs may contribute to EA prognosis and HP infection
status may modify the association between cfmiRNAs and EA survival.

