Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LAMP2 overexpression in the plasma membrane of breast cancer cells
in response of chronic acidosis as a new imaging and therapeutic target


A combination of poor vasculature perfusion, hypoxia, and increased flux
of carbons through fermentative glycolysis lead to extracellular acidosis
in solid tumors; with extracellular pH values as low as 6.5. The proton
concentration increases within the lumen due to diffusion limitations and
increased production of acid from hypoxic-glycolytic cells, causing the
interior of the lumen to become highly acidic. The glycolytic phenotype
can become hardwired as Warburg proposed, leading to the continued
generation of metabolic acids even in well-oxygenated conditions. This
acidified habitat is constant and imparts a Darwinian selection pressure
that favors cells that have adapted mechanisms to be resistant to acid
mediated apoptosis, and this likely increases with increasing cancer
stage. In order to understand tumor acidity, we investigated protein
profiles of acid-adapted and non-adapted breast cancer cells (MCF-7)
using SILAC-proteomics followed by LC-MRM confirmation. A large number of
lysosomal proteins were observed to be upregulated in acid-adapted cells
and, among these was the lysosome associated membrane protein 2 (LAMP2)
confirmed by MRM. This protein is of particular interest because it is
heavily glycosylated and functions to protect lysosomal membrane from
acid proteolysis. Using independent in vitro as well as in vivo
approaches such as intravital fluorescent microscopy of dorsal window
chamber mouse xenografts, we observed that LAMP2 was associated with
acid-adaptation. In vivo, treatment of animals with bicarbonate to reduce
tumor acidity led to reductions in LAMP2. Further, mRNA-expression
profiling (microarray) of patient tumor samples and IHC of Tissue
Microarray (TMA) of breast cancer patient tissue samples, revealed a high
correlation of LAMP2 expression with progression and metastasis of breast
tumors. We also applied LAMP2 staining on the whole breast tumor samples
of different stages and observed that LAMP2 was associated with the
peri-luminal regions of DCIS, as well as regions of local invasion, which
are expected to be acidic. Finally, we observed both in tumors by IHC and
subsequently in acid adapted cells by ICC that, while LAMP2 was localized
in lysosomes and late endosomes under normal pH conditions, it was
redistributed to the plasma membrane under acidic pH conditions. To
further investigate this cell membrane localization we carried out
western blot on membrane extract of acid adapted cells. Based on these
observations, we propose a novel cell defense mechanism wherein cells
chronically exposed to an acidic environment translocate LAMP2 to their
surface, which protects the plasmalemma via an unstirred layer effect. To
prove the role of LAMP2 on acid adaptation we did shRNA and siRNA
knockdown followed by in vitro and in vivo acid exposure of the cells. We
further propose that this pathway may provide a novel therapeutic target
against breast cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

