Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic change in residual triple-negative breast cancers after
neoadjuvant chemotherapy


Background: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by its
aggressive phenotype and its genomic instability. TNBC patients who do
not respond to neoadjuvant chemotherapy have a very poor prognosis.
Currently, little is known about the mechanisms of drug resistance and
how to overcome it in TNBC. Our study aims at identifying molecular
factors enriched for in residual TNBC tumors after standard neoadjuvant
chemotherapy.Methods: We obtained specimens from 60 TNBC patients
participating in a clinical trial (Q-CROC-03). Biopsies were collected
prior to and after standard neoadjuvant chemotherapy and residual cancer
was collected at the time of surgery. Matched tumor specimens (pre and
post) from 9 patients were analyzed by array comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH), gene expression microarrays and whole exome
sequencing. All samples contained >50% tumor cellularity.Results: Gene
expression data was used to identify the different TNBC subtypes
(TNBCtype). Six of the 7 subtypes were represented in at least one sample
from our cohort. In the post-chemo samples, we observed a change in TNBC
subtype compared to the pre-chemo samples in 6 pairs. The most common
switch was to the Immuno Modulatory subtype (IM). aCGH analysis showed
relatively few differences in copy number variants (CNV) following
chemotherapy in 3 out of 8 patients. Whole exome sequencing revealed
increased allele frequency or appearance of de novo mutations in TP53
gene in the residual cancers of 2 of the 3 patients presenting
differences in CNVs post treatment. Interestingly, pathway analyses
revealed that genes involved in DNA binding, chromosomal organization and
nucleosome organization were differentially expressed (>2fold) in 2 of
the patients with CNV changes. Our results suggest that increased levels
of TP53 mutations and altered transcriptional expression of genes
involved in chromosomal functions could be associated with the presence
of CNV changes in drug resistant tumors.Conclusion: In summary, the
genome of TNBCs does not undergo major changes during neoadjuvant
chemotherapy; however, enrichment for or de novo TP53 mutations is
associated with the appearance of novel CNVs in drug resistant residual
tumors.

