Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Akt kinase-interacting protein1 as a potential therapeutics target
in CREB1 signaling in malignant pleural mesothelioma


Background:Diffuse malignant mesothelioma (DMM) is an aggressive tumor
arising from the mesothelial cells of serosal membranes. As conventional
treatment regimens are commonly unsuccessful in changing its outcome,
novel effective therapeutic strategies based on the molecular mechanisms
of disease are needed to improve the prognosis of DMM. Akt
kinase-interacting protein1 (Aki1), known as a scaffold protein of
PI3K/PDK1/Akt that determines receptor signal selectivity for EGFR, has
been suggested as a therapeutic target in lung cancer. The aim of this
study was to evaluate Aki1 as a potential therapeutic target for
treatment of DMM.Methods:DMM cell lines (211H, H290, H2052, H2373, H2452,
Y-meso8A, and Y-meso14) and immortalized human mesothelial cells (Met-5A)
were employed for evaluation of effects of treatment with Aki1 or CREB1
siRNAs on cell viability by MTT assay, cell cycle by FACS analysis, cell
signaling by WB, and CREB transcriptional activity. The efficacy of Aki1
siRNA against growth of 211H cells was investigated in an orthotropic
implantation model using SCID mice. We further examined Aki1 and p-CREB1
expression in DMM tumors from 35 patients utilizing tissue microarray and
resection specimens.Results:Cell based assay showed that silencing of
Aki1 inhibited cell viability and caused cell arrest of mesothelioma cell
lines but not immortalized mesothelial cells (Met-5A). Importantly, we
identified that the efficacy of Aki1 is regulated by CREB1 signaling
which is involved in cell viability, cell cycle, and transcriptional
activity. Application of Aki1 siRNA significantly inhibited growth of
211H cell line within pleural cavity compared with that of control siRNA
in an orthotropic implantation model (p = 0.006). Aki1 and phosphorylated
CREB1 were frequently expressed in DMM patients (65/68 and 30/35 cases,
respectively). Furthermore, the expression of Aki1 correlated with
phosphorylation of CREB1 (Spearman rank correlations = 0.521; p =
0.002).Conclusions:Our data suggest that Aki1/CREB axis may regulate the
survival signaling, and may therefore be a potent target for DMM patients.

