Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent curcumin analog FLLL12 induces apoptosis in lung cancer
cells through death receptor-5-dependent pathway


Background: Drug-associated toxicity is one of the major challenges in
the management of cancer patients. Unlike chemotherapy drugs, the safety
of natural compounds such as curcumin has been well established. However,
the potential use of curcumin in cancer treatment has been compromised by
its low bioavailability, limited tissue distribution, and rapid
biotransformation leading to low efficacy. To circumvent these problems,
more potent and bioavailable analogs have been synthesized. In the
current study, we investigated the mechanism of anti-tumor effect of one
such analog, FLLL12, in lung cancer cells.Methods: A panel of
premalignant and malignant lung cancer cell lines was used for the study.
SRB assay was used to measure cell growth inhibition and IC50. Annexin-V
staining was conducted for apoptosis assay. Expression of mRNAs and
proteins were measured by RT-PCR and Western blotting, respectively.
Small molecule chemical inhibitors and siRNA-mediated knockdown
strategies were used to inactivate and shut down the expression of the
relevant proteins, respectively.Results: IC50 values (0.63-1.67 M for
FLLL12 as compared to 6.06-12.4 M for curcumin, depending on the cell
lines) and apoptosis results (annexin V staining and cleavage of PARP and
caspase 3) suggest that FLLL12 is 5-10-fold more potent than curcumin
against lung cancer cells. Moreover, FLLL12 induced the expression of
death receptor-5 (DR5). Ablation of the expression of the components of
the extrinsic apoptotic pathway (DR5, caspase 8 and BID) significantly
protected cells from FLLL12-induced apoptosis as evidenced by reduced
annexin V staining (p = 0.0008, p = 0.0001 and p = 0.0007 for DR5,
caspase 8 and BID, respectively) and cleavage of PARP and caspase 3.
Analysis of mRNA expression by RT-PCR revealed that FLLL-12 had no
significant effect on the expression of DR5 mRNA. Interestingly,
inhibition of global phosphatase activity by phosphatase inhibitor
cocktail (PIC) completely abolished DR5 expression and significantly
inhibited apoptosis (p = 0.0007 and p = 0.001, respectively) and the
cleavage of casepase-3 and PARP. Similarly, inhibition of protein
tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) by sodium orthovanadate, but not by the
alkaline phosphatase inhibitor imidazole, inhibited DR5 expression,
apoptosis (p = 0.006) and cleavage of caspase-3 and PARP, suggesting the
involvement of PTPs in the regulation of DR5 expression. FLLL12 also
induced the expression of p53 and p73. However, inactivation of these
proteins with their dominant negative construct or siRNA had no
significant effects on apoptosis induction.Conclusions: Our results
strongly suggest that FLLL12 induces apoptosis of lung cancer cell lines
by posttranscriptional regulation of DR5 through activation of protein
tyrosine phosphatase(s). This study was supported by NCI R03 CA171663,
NCI P50 CA128613 and Robbins Scholar Award of Winship Cancer Institute of
Emory University.

