Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of VEGF-C for cell viability, tumor growth and
bevacizumab resistance in glioblastoma multiforme


Although treatment with the VEGF-A targeting antibody Bevacizumab has
resulted in substantial response rates in patients with the brain tumor
Glioblastoma Multiforme, patients invariable progress. The VEGF-A
receptor VEGFR2, has in addition to be expressed on endothelial cells,
recently been shown also to be expressed by GBM tumor cells. Autocrine
VEGF-A/VEGFR2 signaling has been identified in GBM cells, but
contradicting results exist for the effects of inhibiting VEGF-A and
VEGFR2 respectively; indicating that VEGFR2 in GBM at least partly is
activated by other factors than VEGF-A. Study aim was to search for other
factors responsible for VEGFR2 activation in GBM cells and to examine
their role for GBM growth and response to Bevacizumab.To study VEGFR2
regulation we examined a VEGFR2-positive and a VEGFR2-negative GBM cell
culture, which both expressed VEGF-A. In line with others, we found that
VEGFR2 phosphorylation could be stimulated by recombinant VEGF-A, and
found that inhibition of receptor phosphorylation by SU1498 resulted in
significantly reduced proliferation of the VEGFR2-positive cells, while
inhibition of the VEGF-A expressed by the cells using Bevacizumab only
had minimal effect on proliferation. Examinations revealed that the
VEGFR2-positive cells also were positive for the VEGF variant VEGF-C.
Addition of recombinant VEGF-C protein to the VEGFR2-positive cells could
stimulate VEGFR2 phosphorylation, while inhibition of VEGF-C using siRNA
constructs resulted in reduced in vitro growth of VEGFR2-positive cells.
Further, when injected into the brains of mice, VEGF-C-siRNA transfected
cells resulted in reduced tumor growth and increased survival compared to
control cells. Moreover, measurement of the VEGF-C mRNA level in 19 GBM
patient tumors showed that all tumors were positive for VEGF-C
expression, although the level was varying. To examine if VEGF-C
expression represents a possible mechanism behind insensitivity towards
Bevacizumab therapy, we are currently investigating the expression of
VEGF-C in paired samples from GBM patients taken before and after
Bevacizumab therapy and in xenograft tumors from mice receiving this
treatment.In conclusion, our current results show that VEGF-C is of
importance for GBM cell viability and tumor growth presumable due to its
ability to stimulate autocrine activation of VEGFR2. VEGF-C expression
therefore could respresent a possible mechanism behind Bevacizumab
resistance. An update on this will be presented.

