Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastasis-associated oncogene RhoC as a regulator of glutamine
metabolism in the inflammatory breast cancer cell line SUM149


Metabolic reprogramming is increasingly recognized as a fundamental
hallmark of cancer. While the Warburg effect and normal proliferative
metabolism are similar, they are not equivalent. We hypothesize that
there are key drivers of malignant metabolism that can be modulated to
impede cancer proliferation without substantial effects on normal tissue
growth. Using 13C-labeled glucose and glutamine tracers in combination
with mass spectrometry and measurements of extracellular glucose,
lactate, and glutamine flux, we have characterized system level
differences in a series of breast cancer cell lines as well as
normal-like breast epithelial cells. We observed an increase in the
reductive carboxylation of glutamine-derived citrate and
alpha-ketoglutarate in the triple-negative inflammatory breast cancer
cell line SUM149. We also observed that the SUM149 exhibit high levels of
HIF-1 and low levels of oxygen consumption under normoxia, suggesting
that the cell line is highly adapted to hypoxia. Surprisingly, the stable
depletion of HIF-1 via shRNA had no significant effect on the metabolic
profile of these cells. Previous work by our lab and others has
demonstrated that the GTPase RhoC is a driver of the metastatic phenotype
exhibited by inflammatory breast cancer. Activation of RhoC is known to
induce cytoskeletal rearrangements and increase invasive potential. The
Rho GTPase family of proteins has also recently been linked to
metabolism, specifically regulation of glutaminase activity. Here we show
that stable knockdown of RhoC in SUM149 cells results in a marked
decrease in the rate of both glutamine uptake and intracellular reductive
carboxylation. This work reinforces the role of RhoC as an important
driver of inflammatory breast cancer metastatic potential. We conclude
that RhoC remains an important clinical target with the potential to
alter patient outcomes.

