Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA) as a potential
therapeutic target for prostate cancer radiotherapy


Introduction: Radiation therapy (RT) is an important treatment option for
prostate cancer (CaP) patients at both early and advanced-stage disease.
Many CaP patients suffer from relapse and metastasis due to
radio-resistance. In this study, we aimed to develop a radio-resistant
CaP (CaP-RR) xenograft model, to identify potential protein markers
associated with radio-resistance using proteomic approach, and to
validate the identified biomarkers in CaP cell lines and animal
xenografts.Methods: Subcutaneous (s.c) CaP animal model was established
using PC3-RR and PC3-control CaP cells in NODSCID mice. Tumor xenografts
were harvested 5 weeks post cell inoculation and the proteins were
extracted. Using LC-MS/MS expression protein profiles from the two groups
were created. Statistical analysis was performed using one-way ANOVA for
all features. Mascot was employed for peptide identification.
Differential protein expressions were identified by re-importing the
Mascot data to Progenesis software. The protein pathways and the top KEGG
terms were searched against KEGG database using ingenuity software.
Selected pathway markers or modulators were validated in CaP-RR cell
lines and xenograft tumors using western blotting and
immunohistochemistry, respectively. Lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA) was
selected for functional studies including radio-sensitivity, apoptosis
and autophagy assays.Results: We found for the first time that higher
levels of vascularity, proliferation, and proteins from the glycolysis
pathway are associated with CaP-RR xenograft tumors and that more than
two hundred proteins were differentially expressed between CaP-RR and CaP
nave tumor xenografts. In addition, we demonstrated that the increased
expressions of glycolysis markers, including LDHA, were certified in both
CaP- CaP-RR cell lines and xenograft tumors. Knock-down or inhibition of
LDHA combined with RT increase the radiosensitivity in PC3-RR cells,
induce more apoptosis and autophagy compared to each single treatment
alone.Conclusions: We have successfully identified protein signatures
using a CaP-RR xenograft animal model. The glycolysis pathway protein
LDHA is a promising candidate to develop combination therapy to overcome
CaP radioresistance.

