Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Somatic genetic profiling in pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas


Approximately one quarter of pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas
(PCC/PGLs) are malignant, defined as having distant metastases, which can
be present at initial diagnosis or develop even 20 years later. Patients
with malignant PCC/PGL only have a 50% five year survival rate. This poor
prognosis and potential long latency period emphasizes the need for
biomarkers of aggressive disease and novel targets for therapeutic
intervention. More than eleven known susceptibility genes have been
identified. Nevertheless, very little is known about the activated
cellular pathways or the somatic genetic and genomic changes leading to
tumor development and progression to malignancy. We aimed to characterize
the somatic genetic profile in clinically benign and clinically
aggressive PCC/PGLs in order to identify alterations leading to
tumorigenesis and malignant potential. We performed exome sequencing on
matched germline and tumor DNA from 21 PCC/PGLs including five
VHL-associated PCCs representing clinically benign disease, seven
SDHB-associated PCC/PGLs representing clinically aggressive disease, and
two SDHD-associated and seven sporadic PCC/PGLs representing a mix of
clinical behavior. Three hundred and twenty-one protein altering variants
were identified. There were seven truncating mutations (nonsense variants
and frameshifts) and twelve variants affecting splice sites. The vast
majority of variants were non-synonymous variants of undetermined
significance. Three of the seven sporadic tumors had somatic NF1
mutations, but no somatic mutations in any of the other known
susceptibility genes were observed. In addition to somatic ATRX mutations
which we have previously reported, there were a number of cancer
associated genes with somatic variants including SHH, FANCD2, CTNND1,
MACC1, FGFR1, GADD45A, and RBBP6. Pathway analysis identified a broad
range of disrupted pathways including the WNT and cadherin signaling
pathways. For tumors with a known inherited mutations in VHL or SDHx,
copy number variation analysis identified loss of heterozygosity as the
second hit. In summary, we performed a comprehensive somatic exome
sequencing analysis of a large set of PCC/PGLs, and we identified several
cancer associated genes not previously reported to be altered in
PCC/PGLs. These data not only expand upon the limited prior knowledge of
somatic alterations in PCC/PGLs but may also serve to identify potential
targets for therapeutic intervention.

