Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mifepristone causes endoplasmic reticulum stress, triggers the
unfolded protein response, and increases autophagic flux in ovarian
cancer cells


Mifepristone (MF) is a synthetic steroid that blocks the growth of
ovarian cancer cells causing cytostasis or lethality depending on its
concentration. Unbiased genomic and proteomic screenings using ovarian
cancer cell lines of different genetic backgrounds and sensitivities to
platinum led to the identification of two key genes up-regulated by MF
and that are involved in the unfolded protein response (UPR): the master
chaperone of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), glucose regulated protein
(GRP) 78, and the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous transcription
factor (CHOP); both proteins are known for balancing ER stress in a yin
(CHOP; pro-cell death factor) yang (GRP78; pro-survival factor) manner.
GRP78 and CHOP were up-regulated in ovarian cancer cells regardless of
p53 status and platinum sensitivity. Further studies revealed that MF
caused expansion of the ER and triggered the UPR. The three UPR
associated signaling pathways, PERK, IRE1, and ATF6, were activated by
MF. While low-dose MF caused cytostasis with compensatory UPR activation,
high-dose MF induced lethality with concurrent UPR activation,
up-regulation of pro-apoptotic factor Bim, down-regulation of
anti-apoptotic factor Bcl-2, and cleavage of PARP, a downstream target
for executer caspases. MF-induced lethality but not cytostasis was
abrogated by the ER stress inhibitor salubrinal, indicating that ER
stress is required when MF causes cell death but not when its action is
limited to cell cycle arrest. Because ER stress involves the accumulation
of misfolded/unfolded proteins that alter ER homeostasis, the UPR engages
compensatory mechanisms including short-term attenuation of the rate of
protein translation, and degradation of surplus proteins by the ubiquitin
proteasome system (UPS) and/or autophagy. Contrary to our expectation,
MF-induced UPR associated with short-term increase rather than decrease,
in protein translation rate. Moreover, the accumulation of
poly-ubiquitinated proteins-a surrogate marker of the activity of the
UPS-was slightly decreased by MF, suggesting that ER-associated protein
degradation (ERAD) may be operating at a faster pace. Finally, MF
increased the accumulation of LC3-II, which results from the fusion of
LC3-I and phosphatidylethanolamine along the process of autophagosome
formation. MF-induced LC3-II accumulation also augmented in the presence
of the lysosomal degradation inhibitor bafilomycin A1, indicating that MF
increases autophagic flux. In MF-treated cells, the induction of
autophagy may counterbalance and alleviate ER expansion induced by ER
stress. The stimulation by MF of ER stress, UPR, and autophagy offers a
therapeutic opportunity for utilizing this compound to sensitize ovarian
cancer cells to aggravators of the ER and/or inhibitors of autophagy.

