Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical development of a novel hypoxia-activated EGFR
inhibitor using a cobalt(III)-based prodrug design


Chemotherapy and therapy with small targeted molecules are two major
strategies for therapy of human cancer at the disseminated stage. During
the last decades, thousands of compounds have been developed and,
consequently, have improved therapy effectiveness. Especially the
development of receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as erlotinib or
imatinib were major step forwards in cancer treatment. However, despite
its success EGFR inhibitor therapy is still limited by strong side
effects, resistance development and insufficient tumor accumulation. Aim
of the here presented study was the development of novel EGFR inhibitors,
which are specifically activated in the malignant tissue. To this end a
cobalt(III)-based prodrug strategy was used, which allows targeted
release of the active EGFR inhibitor triggered by hypoxic conditions of
the solid tumor. As a first step, new inhibitors with bis-chelating
moieties were prepared and tested for their efficacy against several cell
models with differing EGFR status. The most promising lead candidate was
selected based on potent kinase inhibition (confirmed by in vitro kinase
assays as well as Western blotting) resulting in activity against
EGFR-driven cells in the nM range (MTT assay). Subsequently, the
respective cobalt complex was prepared and its activity tested in hypoxia
vs. normoxia revealing that the new complex was distinctly more active
under hypoxic conditions. Finally, the anticancer activity of the new
complex was tested in two xenografts indicationg potent and
hypoxia-dependent anticancer activity also in vivo. Summarizing,
cobalt(III)-based tumor-targeting represents a promising strategy to
reduce the side effects of tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as
erlotinib.Acknowledgements. This work was performed in course of the
research platform Translational Cancer Therapy Research Vienna, Austria
and the COST action CM1105 and supported by Fonds der Stadt Wien fr
innovative interdisziplinre Krebsforschung.

