Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NKG2D receptor stimulation of effector CD8+ T cells alters the
transcriptome and activation of mTOR to enhance anti-tumor immunity


To induce strong immune responses, nave CD8+ T cells require concurrent
stimulation through the TCR and costimulatory receptors. Each
costimulatory molecule can have a unique effect on the function of T
cells due to differential activation of downstream signaling pathways and
gene expression. However, the effect of stimulating costimulatory
receptors on effector T cells is still unclear. One costimulation
receptor that is likely to be engaged in the tumor microenvironment is
NKG2D since the ligands for this receptor are expressed on over 80% of
tumors. To determine how activation of costimulatory receptors in the
tumor microenvironment alters CD8+ T cell functions, this study
investigated the differential activation of signaling pathways by two
costimulatory receptors, CD28 and NKG2D. To obtain an in-depth view of
how stimulation through the NKG2D receptor alters T cell function, the
transcriptome of NKG2D- and CD28- costimulated murine CD8+ T cells was
analyzed using RNA-sequencing. These analyses showed that NKG2D
costimulation of effector CD8+ T cells altered expression of over 5200
genes compared to CD3 stimulation alone. Some genes that were increased
in NKG2D-stimulated cells include IFN, and granzymes A and C, suggesting
the NKG2D stimulation enhances the anti-tumor functions of CD8+ T cells.
When comparing NKG2D and CD28 costimulation, many genes were
differentially regulated, including genes in the mTOR pathway. To
determine if the differential activation of mTORc1 and mTORc2 signaling
pathways altered T function, murine effector CD8+ T cells were activated
through CD3 in combination with CD28 or NKG2D and treated with no, low,
or high amounts of rapamycin to deactivate either mTORc1 or both mTORc1
and mTORc2. NKG2D-stimulated T cells increased expression of Eomes, a
transcription factor that is involved in the differentiation of central
memory T cells, while CD28 stimulated cells increased expression of TCF1.
Rapamycin inhibition studies showed that stronger activation of mTORc1 in
CD28 stimulated T cells inhibited Eomes expression and also increased
TCF1 expression compared to NKG2D-stimulated T cells. In addition, NKG2D
stimulation lead to differential expression of memory markers including
CD127, CCR7, CD62L, and KLRG1, with NKG2D stimulation inducing a central
memory phenotype compared to CD28 stimulation which caused an effector
memory phenotype. Together, these data suggest that differential
activation of mTORc1 by the NKG2D receptor alters CD8+ T cell
differentiation to become central memory T cells. Thus, NKG2D stimulation
likely enhances CD8+ T cell anti-tumor effector functions.

