Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carfilzomib transcriptionally regulates CIP2A/PP2A/p-Akt signaling
and induces apoptosis in leukemia cells


Background: Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) has been shown to be an
important tumor suppressor protein and loss of PP2A function has been
identified in several solid cancers and in leukemias. Recent studies have
suggested strategies for enhancing PP2A activity as an anti-leukemic
approach. Among the potential key players regulating PP2A, a new
oncoprotein, called cancerous inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A
(CIP2A), is recently identified as a key factor in the development of
malignancies in various human cells. Previously we studied novel drug
mechanisms of bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor, on acute leukemia
cells. We discovered that CIP2A plays an indispensable role in mediating
bortezomib-induced apoptosis in acute leukemia cells (Hematologica 2013),
hepatocellular carcinoma cells (Oncogene 2010) and in breast cancer cells
(Breast Cancer Research 2012). Importantly, this mechanism by bortezomib
is independent to its proteasome inhibition. Carfilzomib, a more
selective proteasome inhibitor than bortezomib, has shown efficacy in
multiple myeloma and is being investigated in phase III clinical trials.
In this study, we examined the effect of carfilzomib on CIP2A in leukemia
cells.Methods: Leukemia cell lines (HL-60, KG-1, THP-1, and K562) were
used for in vitro studies. Apoptosis was examined by both flow cytometry
and Western blot. Signal transduction pathways in cells were assessed by
Western Blot. Quantitative RT-PCR was used for assessing gene
transcription. In vivo efficacy of carfilzomib was tested in nude mice
with subcutaneous leukemia xenografts.Results: We found carfilzomib
induced differential antiproliferative effects and apoptosis. HL-60, KG-1
and THP-1, but not K562 cells, were sensitive to carfilzomib-induced
apoptosis. Similarly, carfilzomib-induced apoptosis may be dissociated
with its proteasome inhibition. We found CIP2A mediated this apoptotic
effect of carfilzomib in leukemia cells. Carfilzomib down-regulated CIP2A
in association with p-Akt downregulation. Furthermore, carfilzomib
increased PP2A activity and over-expression of CIP2A up-regulated p-Akt
and suppressed carfilzomib-induced apoptosis. In addition, carfilzomib
downregulated CIP2A mRNA but did not affect the degradation of CIP2A
protein. Further dissecting the regulatory mechanism showed that
carfilzomib may affect CIP2A transcription though transcriptional
factors. Importantly, carfilzomib demonstrated anti-tumor activity in
xenografted mice models.Conclusions: CIP2A is a major determinant
mediating carfilzomib-induced apoptosis in leukemia cells and may be a
therapeutic target in leukemia. This study disclosed a novel drug
mechanism of carfilzomib in leukemia cells. (Supported by Taiwan Clinical
Oncology Research Foundation, MOST 103-2325-B-075-002, V103C-141; and
TVGH-NTUH Joint Research Program VN103-08)

