Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cigarette smoke and therapeutic response to chemotherapy and
radiotherapy in cancer cells


Background: The 2014 Surgeon General's Report concludes that cigarette
smoke (CS) causes increased cancer specific mortality. Clinical data
support that the effects of CS are reversible, but there are no extant
biologic models that have shown therapeutic response profiles for cancer
cells exposed to CS.Methods: An acute, subacute, and chronic dose
escalated CS exposure model was developed to test the hypothesis that CS
decreases therapeutic response to chemotherapy (CT, cisplatin) and
radiotherapy (RT, 0, 2, 4, and 6 Gy) in a reversible manner in cancer
cells.Results: H460, A549, and FaDu cancer cells were treated with single
and multiple exposure CS for up to 12 weeks. Subacute and prolonged
exposure to CS significantly decreased response to CT and RT. CS
increased survival fraction following CT or RT between 30-157% across all
cell lines. Exposure of cancer cells to CS for 6 or 9 weeks followed by
removal of CS for 3 and 6 weeks resulted in a partial to complete
restoration of baseline therapeutic response in a cell specific manner;
however, all cell lines required several weeks to achieve a partial or
full restoration of therapeutic response. Dose response curves for CS
exposure demonstrate that H460 and A549 cells had a decreased therapeutic
response profile at higher CS concentrations while FaDu cells were more
sensitive to lower concentrations to CS. Dose response curves further
demonstrated that high dose CS exposure was cytotoxic in all cell lines.
Results were verified in all cell lines using 2 additional repeated
experiments with freshly thawed cancer cells purchased from ATCC over 10
months.Conclusions: CS exposure reproducibly decreases therapeutic
response to CT and RT in a dose dependent and reversible manner,
reflective of clinical observations. Dose specific effects may vary
between cancer cells. Data suggest that the biologic effects of CS
removal, such as with acute smoking cessation in cancer patients, may not
manifest in an immediate restoration of cancer cell response to CT or RT.

