Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNA-10a* enhances invasiveness via suppression of HDAC5 in lung
cancer


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer death
worldwide. Metastasis, the spread process of cancer cells from a primary
tumor to seed secondary tumors in distant sites, is one of the big
challenges in cancer treatment today. For most patients, when the cancer
is detected, metastasis has already occurred. The growing evidences
implied that miRNAs play an important role in developmental lineage and
different states of cancers as well as cancer invasion. In this study, we
would like to establish a metastasis-based prognostic miRNA signature.
First, 16 lung adenocarcinoma cells were divided into the high or
low-invasive group. The miRNAs whose expression correlated with invasion
were identified. Next, we investigated whether the expressions of
identified miRNAs are correlated to patients survival. Quantitative
RT-PCR results showed that the expression of miR-10a* is significantly
correlated to the five-year survival in 98 lung adenocarcinoma patients.
The inhibition of miR-10a* attenuated the invasion abilities of the
highly invasive lung cancer cells. Moreover, we investigated the
underlying regulation of miR-10a*. We found that miR-10a* negatively
regulated Histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5) was assayed by Western Blot,
RT-PCR and luciferase reporter assay. These evidences suggested that
HDAC5 is a direct target of miR-10a*. Besides, inhibition of HDAC5
promoted invasive ability. RNAs derived from two paired groups
(pre-miR-10a* and pre-NC; sh-HDAC5 and sh-LacZ) were assayed by
microarray and pathway analysis. The analysis result of MetaCore implied
that miR-10a* trigger TGF-beta signalings. RT-PCR and Western Blot were
utilized to validate the differentially altered expression of certain
genes in miR-10a*-mediated pathways. The rescue effect of HDAC5
expression on miR-10a*-mediated phenotypic changes is also evaluated to
elucidate the importance of HDAC5 in miR-10a*-mediated invasive ability.
Our findings indicated that miR-10a* may play an oncogenic miRNA role in
lung cancer.

