Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression analysis of STEAP1 in breast cancer patients as
therapeutic target


Objective: The six transmembrane epithelial antigen of the prostate
(STEAP1) is predominantly overexpressed in human prostate cancer. STEAP1
was first identified as a prostate-specific cell-surface antigen and
found to be up-regulated in multiple cancer cell lines and in various
cancers, including lung, bladder, colon and ovarian cancers. However no
significant expression in normal tissue has been reported suggesting its
potential use as a target for anti-STEAP1 immunotherapy. An anti-STEAP1
monoclonal antibody linked to an antimitotic agent is in Phase I clinical
trials for prostate cancer patients. Microarray data from our lab
suggested that STEAP1 is also highly expressed in human breast cancers.
In this study we evaluate expression STEAP1 in primary tumors and the
bone marrow from breast cancer patients as a therapeutic target for
minimal residual disease.Experimental procedures: RNA was isolated from
primary tumor and non-malignant breast tissue. RNA was also isolated from
bone marrow of state II and III breast cancer patients, healthy
volunteers and breast cancer cell lines. STEAP1 expression was analyzed
by nanostring nCounter and real time qRT-PCR using human specific probes.
STEAP1 immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of human tissue was performed
using standard IHC Protocol.Results: STEAP1 mRNA was up-regulated in 77%
of tumors (28/36) compared to the corresponding normal tissue. STEAP1
protein was expressed in 100% of tumors (8/8) and was absent in
non-malignant breast tissue (7/7) by IHC staining. STEAP1 mRNA was not
expressed normal BM, but was detected in 8% (6/74) of BM from patients
with early stage breast cancer. Of patients with STEAP1 positive BM, 50%
(3/6) had triple negative disease and 66% (4/6) developed recurrent
disease (p = .028).Conclusion: STEAP1 is expressed in human breast tumors
and the BM of breast cancer patients. Expression of STEAP1 in the BM is
significantly associated with the development of metastatic disease. Our
data indicate that STEAP1 could serve as a therapeutic target for the
treatment of minimal residual disease in breast cancer.

