Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The RET receptor Y791F variant activates the kinase but diminishes
ligand responsiveness


The RET receptor tyrosine kinase is essential for normal development of
the kidneys and enteric nervous system, and is also implicated in several
human pathologies. Gain-of-function mutations in RET are associated with
the familial cancer syndrome multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2),
where single amino acid substitutions lead to constitutive RET activation
in the absence of its ligands of the glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor (GDNF) family. Conversely, loss-of-function RET mutations are
associated with Hirschsprung disease, a congenital abnormality of the
enteric nervous system. Previous studies have identified a specific
substitution variant of a phenylalanine for tyrosine at amino acid 791 in
the RET kinase domain in both cancer and Hirschsprung disease patients.
Thus, the functional implications of this variant and its contributions
to these diverse phenotypes are not clear. Here, we have explored the
role of MEN 2-associated RET mutations in RET-mediated cell invasion and
migration. We showed that GDNF-stimulation promotes RET-mediated cell
migration and that a GDNF-chemotactic gradient significantly increased
invasion of cells expressing wild type RET or a MEN2B (M918T) mutant RET
form. However, we found that a GDNF gradient did not enhance invasion of
cells expressing RET-Y791F. Consistent with this, we showed that MEN
2-associated RET mutants M918T and Y791F were phosphorylated in the
absence of GDNF and stimulated downstream signaling pathways. GDNF
treatment further increased phosphorylation of the RET-M918T but not
RET-Y791F proteins, suggesting that RET-Y791F has reduced responsiveness
to GDNF ligand. Our results suggest that despite constitutive activation
of RET signaling, cells expressing the Y791F variant may possess a
diminished capacity to recognize and respond to GDNF in the cell
microenvironment. This may be linked to a disturbance in the directional
migration of cells expressing the mutant receptor thus contributing to
the phenotypic variability observed.

