Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A vascular endothelial growth factor gene polymorphism predicts
malignant potential in intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm


BackgroundIntraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) are well known
to be premalignant lesions that sequentially progress from adenoma to
carcinoma. Radiological type, size of cystic mass, and the presence of
mural nodules are widely accepted as predictive malignant factors;
however, its underlying mechanism is still unclear. Angiogenesis plays an
important role in the progression and metastasis of various tumor types,
and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a critical component. In
previous studies, at least 30 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of
the VEGF gene have been reported. VEGF +405G/C SNP (rs2010963) is located
within the 5-untranslated region and may affect transcription factor
binding affinity. In contrast, VEGF -460C/T SNP (rs833061) is located in
the promoter region and may influence promoter activity. Recent studies
reported that serum VEGF levels were significantly higher in pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) patients compared with control subjects, and
VEGF +405G/C SNP was strongly associated with the carcinogenesis of PDAC
patients.ObjectiveThe aim of this study was to investigate the
distribution of VEGF SNPs with regard to malignant transformation in IPMN
patients. Furthermore, correlations between VEGF SNPs and
clinicopathological parameters including the morphological subtypes were
statistically analyzed.MethodsA total of 169 IPMN and 108 PDAC patients
who underwent curative resection were enrolled. Low grade and moderate
dysplasia were defined as benign IPMNs, on the other hand, high grade
dysplasia and invasive carcinoma were defined as malignant IPMNs. The
intraductal components were classified into four distinct epithelial
subtypes, gastric, intestinal, pancreatobiliary, and oncocytic, based on
their epithelial morphology on hematoxylin and eosin staining. VEGF
+405G/C and -460C/T polymorphisms were examined by TaqMan Allele
Discrimination.ResultsVEGF +405C/C was found more frequently in malignant
IPMNs compared with +405G/G (odds ratio: 2.7, P = 0.04), and +405C allele
was associated with malignant IPMNs compared with +405G (P = 0.055). In
branch duct IPMNs, VEGF +405C/C was significantly associated with
malignant transformation (CC vs GG; odds ratio: 4.0, P = 0.03, CC vs
CG+GG; odds ratio: 3.3, P = 0.04), and there was a trend of VEGF +405C/C
associated with malignant transformation of gastric type IPMNs (CC vs GG;
odds ratio: 3.0, P = 0.07). When the survival outcomes were analyzed
based on VEGF +405G/C SNPs, however, there was no relationship between
VEGF SNPs and overall survival in patients with both IPMNs and
PDAC.ConclusionVEGF +405G/C SNP was significantly associated with
malignant transformation in IPMNs, especially branch duct and gastric
type IPMNs. VEGF +405G/C SNP might be helpful in predicting clinical
course in pancreatic disease with potential for malignant transformation.

