Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA analysis of aromatase inhibitor-resistant breast cancer
cells reveals upregulation of a unique miRNA cluster on chromosome 14


Estrogen signaling has been shown to play a large role in the development
and progression of breast tumors that express the estrogen receptor (ER).
Thus, endocrine therapies that either inhibit ER action (tamoxifen or
fulvestrant) or inhibit estrogen synthesis (aromatase inhibitors) have
been increasingly valuable for the management of ER+ breast cancer. A
frequent obstacle, however, is acquired resistance to endocrine
therapies, often characterized by aberrant ER expression and heightened
growth factor signaling. Another aspect of acquired endocrine resistance
that is now being examined is the role of microRNA (miRNA). miRNAs are
18-22 base pair RNA molecules whose primary role is to inhibit expression
of mRNA targets by inhibition of translation or by degradation of the
mRNA. Here, we have conducted next generation sequencing of the miRNA
from three breast cancer cell lines - one ER+ line that is
estrogen-dependent and AI-sensitive (MCF-7), and two ER+ long-term
estrogen deprived (LTED) models of AI resistance (MCF-7:5C and MCF-7:2A).
We found that in LTED/AI-resistant MCF-7:5C and MCF-7:2A cells there were
over 330 and 240 miRNAs differentially expressed, respectively, compared
to AI-sensitive MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Initially, we used qPCR to
validate the expression of miRNAs that that were differentially expressed
in both LTED cell lines vs. MCF-7. Notably, LTED cell lines had
upregulated miR-181a (> 4 to 8-fold) and downregulated miR-221/222
expression compared to MCF-7. Elevated miR-181a has been shown to be
associated with more aggressive breast cancers whereas miR-221/222 play a
role in tamoxifen resistance through targeting ER. Further bioinformatic
analysis also revealed that the LTED cells had very unique expression
profiles compared to one another, indicating that they have adapted to an
estrogen-depleted environment through potentially different mechanisms.
In MCF-7:5C cells, which have lost expression of the progesterone
receptor (PR), a miRNA cluster on chromosome 14 is upregulated. This
upregulated cluster, which encodes miR-127, miR-654, miR-889 and others,
has been shown to be associated with Luminal B (ER+/PR-) breast cancer,
consistent with the hormone receptor status of the MCF-7:5C cells. The
oncogenic, estrogen-responsive miR-17/92 cluster on chromosome 13 is
upregulated in the MCF-7:2A cells and these miRNAs target proteins
including PTEN, p21, and Bim. Overall, these findings reveal altered
expression of miRNAs in AI-resistant breast cancer cells and they suggest
that targeting these miRNAs might be an effective strategy to reverse AI
resistance in breast cancer patients.

