Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms contributing to the
evolution of paclitaxel resistance in breast cancer model cell line, SKBR3


Introduction: Breast Cancer (BCa) treatments often include taxanes in the
treatment regimens and resistance to these drugs is common in a clinical
setting. Several mechanisms were put forth to explain the resistance.
These include induction of multidrug (MDR) resistance family of
transporters, differential regulation of tubulin isotypes, microRNA (miR)
mediated post-transcriptional regulation and autophagy. Aims: (i) to
create a panel of breast cancer cell lines from SKBR3 (Her2+ and ER-ve)
with varying levels of drug resistance to paclitaxel; (ii) to profile
differentially expressed miRs in these panels of cell lines to understand
the evolution of drug resistance with common and unique signatures
associated with each of the cell lines in the panel and (iii) to assess
-tubulin (TUBB3) expression and its regulation by miRs. Methods: Drug
resistant SKBR-3 cells were generated by a stepwise increase in drug
concentration to the parental cells until a maximum tolerable dose was
reached. Control cells were those without any treatment (wild type, WT)
and serial passage of SKBR3 cells for the same numbers of generations as
in each of the drug resistant lines. Total RNA extracted from the cell
lines was subjected to small RNAome profiling (with focus on miRs) using
Next Generation Sequencing (Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx). Partek
Genomics Suite 6.6 was used for analyzing sequencing files. Data
normalized (RPKM) from triplicate experiments (three independent cell
growth experiments) were adjusted for potential batch effects. We report
miRs showing statistically significant differences in expression levels
(>2-fold and FDR adjusted pIntroduction: Breast Cancer (BCa) treatments
often include taxanes in the treatment regimens and resistance to these
drugs is common in a clinical setting. Several mechanisms were put forth
to explain the resistance. These include induction of multidrug (MDR)
resistance family of transporters, differential regulation of tubulin
isotypes, microRNA (miR) mediated post-transcriptional regulation and
autophagy. Aims: (i) to create a panel of breast cancer cell lines from
SKBR3 (Her2+ and ER-ve) with varying levels of drug resistance to
paclitaxel; (ii) to profile differentially expressed miRs in these panels
of cell lines to understand the evolution of drug resistance with common
and unique signatures associated with each of the cell lines in the panel
and (iii) to assess -tubulin (TUBB3) expression and its regulation by
miRs. Methods: Drug resistant SKBR-3 cells were generated by a stepwise
increase in drug concentration to the parental cells until a maximum
tolerable dose was reached. Control cells were those without any
treatment (wild type, WT) and serial passage of SKBR3 cells for the same
numbers of generations as in each of the drug resistant lines. Total RNA
extracted from the cell lines was subjected to small RNAome profiling
(with focus on miRs) using Next Generation Sequencing (Illumina Genome
Analyzer IIx). Partek Genomics Suite 6.6 was used for analyzing
sequencing files. Data normalized (RPKM) from triplicate experiments
(three independent cell growth experiments) were adjusted for potential
batch effects. We report miRs showing statistically significant
differences in expression levels (>2-fold and FDR adjusted p<0.05)
between WT SKBR3 and drug resistant cell line(s) with concordant profiles
from triplicate sequencing experiments. Protein expression levels of
-tubulin (TUBB3) were assessed using Western blots. Results and
conclusions: The resistant cell lines expressed TUBB3 (graded
up-regulation with the level of resistance) as expected as well as
down-regulation of hsa-miR-200c, a known miR directly regulating the
expression of TUBB3. The resistant cell lines also showed up-regulation
of miRs 221-3p and 99a known to modulate ER and its mediated gene
regulatory pathways, consistent with the ER-ve phenotype of SKBR3 cells.
Overall, 27 miRs are differentially expressed when all resistant cells
are considered (irrespective of the level of resistance conferred). As
expected, some of the identified miRs were reported to have a role in
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition vis--vis acquisition of cancer stem
cell properties. We also observed unique miRs in cells expressing graded
levels of resistance and the data is subject to further analysis for
potential hierarchy of programmed expression of miRs facilitating
transitioning of cells from sensitive to highly drug resistant phenotype.

