Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of ultrasensitive Singulex immunoassays for CCL3 and
CCL4, important biomarkers for the BTK inhibitor studies


Disregulation of B-Cell Receptor (BCR) leading to activation has been
associated with a number of B-cell malignancies including Chronic
Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) [1]. In response to BCR activation, B-cells
secrete chemokines CCL3 and CCL4 that foster interactions between CLL
cells and the leukemia microenvironment and to recruit T-cells. High
levels of CCL3 have also been correlated with poor prognosis in CLL [2].
Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) has long been known to be a key component of
B cell receptor (BCR) signaling that regulates B cell proliferation and
survival. BTK inhibitors such as lbrutinib have been shown to disrupt
secretion of BCR-dependent chemokines (CCL3/CCL4) and thereby reduce
plasma concentrations in patients [3]. Consequently, these chemokines
have been measured as pharmacodynamic biomarkers in a number of studies
of molecules that inhibit BCR signaling [3]. However, baseline CCL3/CCL4
levels in CLL patients vary widely and are less than 10 pg/ml in a large
proportion of patient samples, making detection of these cytokines in
clinical samples challenging using existing immunoassays. In an effort to
improve sensitivity of CCL3/CCL4 measurements in plasma samples, we
developed ultrasensitive assays for CCL3 and CCL4 using the Singulex
immunoassay platform. A direct comparison of multiple, commercially
available immunoassays technologies and our optimized CCL3/CCL4 Singulex
assay were performed using plasma samples from both healthy donors and
CLL patients. Singulex proprietary Single Molecule Counting (SMCTM)
technology combining digital counting enables the quantification of CCL3
and CCL4 with sensitivity of 0.37pg/ml and 0.15pg/ml respectively in
plasma. This ultrasensitive assay has the potential to enable more robust
and quantifiable measurements of CCL3 and CCL4 in the context of clinical
studies testing BTK inhibitors.

