Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New technique generates cell cultures from rare adenoid cystic
carcinomas of the salivary gland


Introduction: Historically it has been difficult to generate and maintain
cell cultures derived directly from a patient's tumor and virtually
impossible to generate continuous cultures of normal cells. Preclinical
models provide an essential tool to study both basic biology as well as
aid in translational research, including drug target identification and
drug discovery efforts. Even today, one of the greatest challenges in
cancer research has been the generation of stable cancer cell lines that
can genocopy and phenocopy the respective primary tumors. Recently, a new
cell culture method was developed by our research group (Liu et al, AJP
2012) called conditionally reprogrammed cells (CRCs). Cells derived from
primary tumors and corresponding normal tissues can be grown indefinitely
under defined conditions without using any extrinsic genetic
immortalization technique. No authentic cell culture line currently
exists for the rare and aggressive adenocystic carcinoma (ACC) of the
salivary gland and the few cell lines described have proven to be
contaminated with conventional cell lines such as HeLa. Here we show that
our CRC technology can be successfully applied to generate cell cultures
from this rare subtype of salivary gland tumor.Method: The CRC technique
utilizes irradiated mouse J2 feeder cells and a ROCK inhibitor to rapidly
grow and expand each patient's epithelial cells. All PDx tissue samples
were provided by the Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma Research Foundation (ACCRF)
and processed in our laboratory for generating CRC lines. STR analysis
indicated that these cultures are unique and show no similarity to cell
lines in the ATCC data base.Results: We have successfully established CRC
cultures from three different PDx tumor biopsies. Preliminary analysis on
one CRC culture, ACC11, shows that the Myb-NF1B translocation is
maintained, similar to the primary tumor and PDx. The sequencing of
RT-PCR products using primers for Myb and NF1B revealed the exact break
point for both genes. The cell cultlure maintains the overexpression of
the Myb protein as assessed by Western blot when compared with a non-ACC
salivery gland culture. Next generation sequencing of 48 TruSeq cancer
panel identified mutations in key genes including ATM and FGFR2 that were
further confirmed by RT-PCR followed by sequencing.Conclusion: The CRC
technology represents a new approach to culturing cells from tumors and
normal cells, including tumors that have been historically challenging to
grow such as ACC of salivary gland. The resulting cells maintained the
key genetic translocation and corresponding overexpression of the Myb
protein. Newly identified mutations were also discovered in this tumor.
Future studies will explore the genetic alterations in the two additional
ACC tumor cell cultures and to generate a biobank of ACC tumor cultures
for basic biological studies and to identify the key drivers of
malignancy.

