Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor associated targeting with Manocept: HIV associated Kaposi's
sarcoma as a model system


IntroductionInflammation appears to play a critical role in tumor
development of HIV-associated Kaposi's sarcoma (KS). Specifically,
emerging data show that KS tumor cells that co-express various macrophage
(MO) antigens become resistant to current anti-viral therapies used to
treat KS and AIDS. MOs also are a known source of KS tumor cell growth
factors and substantial evidence suggests that tumor associated
macrophages (TAMs) may represent a reservoir for HIV and its evolved
retroviral variants. The MO pool driving these two pathological pathways
share a common element rooted in the MOs, the CD206 human macrophage
mannose receptor. Manocept, a molecular targeting agent, binds and enters
MOs via pinocytosis of holo-CD206, providing a cell portal for the
evaluation of Manocept as a MO and KS targeting agent.MethodsManocept was
prepared as a synthetic molecule with a dextran backbone, and 12-20
mannose moieties. The reporter molecule (Cy3) was included as a
fluorescent tracer for locating Manocept on and in MOs and KS tumor
cells.Binding and localization Cy3-Manocept was assessed through
intracellular visualization and flow cytometric quantitation of
Cy3-Manocept binding and uptake using in vitro generation of
monocyte-derived CD206+ MOs. The fresh HIV+ KS tumor tissue culture
followed by immunofluorescence staining and confocal imaging was
performed to confirm Cy3-Manocept uptake in KS tumor cells and
TAMs.ResultsIn vitro culture showed that Cy3-Manocept binds avidly to
CD206 expressing MOs. Time course studies of increasing Cy3-Manocept
concentrations confirmed continuous and ongoing uptake of Manocept into
CD206+ MOs at 37C. Fresh HIV+ KS tissue culture studies showed both
Manocept uptake and CD206 staining of TAMs as well as KS tumor spindle
cells (HHV8+ cells). Cy3-Manocept co-localized with CD206 in nearly all
KS-associated cells expressing HHV8 and/or CD68 (Tissue MO marker),
confirming that CD206 acts both as a target and Manocept concentrating
receptor for TAMs and KS tumor cells.ConclusionsOur results support the
potential use of CD206 macrophage mannose receptor-targeted Manocept for
imaging KS tumor cells, TAMs, and more importantly, for delivery of
therapeutic/diagnostic agents capable of targeting all KS-associated
cells including a potential MO reservoir for HIV.

