Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent in situ cancer immunotherapy with synthetic human
STING-activating cyclic dinucleotides


Spontaneous tumor-initiated T cell priming is dependent on IFN-
production by tumor-resident dendritic cells. Based on recent
observations indicating that IFN- expression was dependent upon
activation of the host STING (Stimulator of Interferon Genes) pathway, we
hypothesized that direct engagement of STING through intratumoral
administration of specific agonists would result in effective anti-tumor
therapy. To this end, we generated novel synthetic cyclic dinucleotide
(CDN) derivatives with superior STING-activating and anti-tumor
properties. The most potent molecule contains a 2-5 and 3-5 phosphate
bridge that increases its affinity for STING at least 10-fold.
Additionally, sulfur atoms at the non-bridging oxygens of the
internucleotide phosphate bridge enable both superior STING binding
affinity, as well as resistance to host cell phosphodiesterases.
Importantly, the lead molecule activates PBMCs from a panel of human
donors representing all known STING alleles, including homozygotes for
the most refractory allele. Intratumoral injection of the lead CDN
molecule induced profound regression of established B16 melanoma tumors,
generated substantial systemic immune responses capable of rejecting
distant metastases and provided long-lived immunologic memory. Cures in
entire cohorts of mice bearing well-established 4T1 mammary and CT26
colon carcinoma models correlated with induction of cytokine-mediated
innate and adaptive antigen-specific T cell immunity, both systemically
and in the tumor microenvironment. Immune activation and anti-tumor
efficacy was lost in mice encoding non-functional STING. In vivo
activation of STING with the lead CDN administered by multiple routes
demonstrated a high safety and tolerability margin in preclinical
toxicology studies. In addition, pharmacokinetic analysis indicates that
the lead CDN compound was rapidly cleared from systemic circulation,
consistent with pulsatile STING activation and transient systemic
cytokine and hematological changes. These results demonstrate that CDNs
have high translation potential for treatment strategies to induce
activation of the tumor microenvironment, leading to effective
tumor-initiated T cell priming and anti-tumor immunity.

