Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy as a drug target to prevent tumor progression in head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma: Validation using a physiologically
relevant mouse model


Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN), the sixth leading
cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide, is frequently detected in its
late stages, when treatment options are limited; thus, novel insight into
the mechanisms underlying the development of squamous cell carcinoma and
how this disease responds to drug therapies is needed to more effectively
manage disease progression. Mutations in the PI3K signaling pathway are
more common in SCCHN than in most other cancers. Because autophagy is a
major cellular process regulated by PI3K signaling that affects response
to PI3K/AKT/mTOR inhibitors, we are interested in assessing the extent to
which autophagy contributes to tumor progression and drug resistance in
SCCHN. With this objective in mind, we developed the first mouse model
exploring the role of autophagy in the context of SCCHN using keratin 14
(K14)-driven Cre to direct deletion of Atg5-flox or Atg7-flox alleles in
the oral epithelium. Unlike previous mouse models examining the role of
autophagy in cancer, our physiologically relevant model does not rely on
the use of strong oncogene drivers, notably KrasG12D and BrafV600E, or
p53 loss; instead, the drinking water of 6- to 8-week-old mice is
supplemented with 4-nitroquinoline 1-oxide (4NQO) to induce DNA damage
that mimics the mutational spectrum induced by chronic tobacco and
alcohol use, the most prevalent risk factors for SCCHN. Wildtype mice
exposed to 4NQO develop pre-malignant lesions as well as oral squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC) of the tongue within 4 to 24 weeks following 4NQO
treatment that resemble human SCCHN histologically as well as
molecularly. Interestingly, in wildtype mice, lesion grade is inversely
correlated with expression levels of autophagic markers; for example,
SCCs exhibit increased levels of p62 and loss of Atg7 and LC3.
Furthermore, in normal tongue epithelium, autophagy is largely confined
to the basal cell layer, and SCCs from 4NQO-treated mice continue to
express the basal cell markers, K14 and p63. At 24 weeks post-cessation
of 4NQO treatment, autophagy-competent mice universally exhibit dysplasia
or SCC. However, autophagy-deficient K14-Cre+/-;Atg5fl/fl and
K14-Cre+/-;Atg7fl/fl mice exhibit histologically normal tongues or mild
hyperkeratosis, with many fewer instances of dysplasia or SCC, suggesting
that early loss of autophagy prevents tumor progression to SCC. Thus, we
conclude that autophagy promotes the progression of early lesions to
cancers in a physiologically relevant model of SCCHN and that autophagy
represents a valid target in our continuing efforts to block malignant
progression of head and neck cancer.

