Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparison of NVP-AUY-922 (AUY) and Geldenamycin (G) in human
tumor primary culture microspheroids


Introduction: Molecular chaperone heat shock protein 90 (HSP 90)
maintains the stability and function of client proteins essential for
malignant transformation. The ansamycin Geldenamycin (G) and its
derivative 17-AAG are potent HSP90 inhibitors with activity observed in
human tumors. The resorcinol-based HSP90 inhibitor AUY offers advantages
with regard to solubility & DT-diaphorase independence. To evaluate and
compare the activity of AUY & G we conducted ex vivo analysis of
programmed cell death (EVA/PCD) on microspheroids isolated from fresh
human tumor specimens. Methods: The EVA/PCD method as previously reported
(Nagourney, RA Anticancer Res. 2012) isolates microspheroids of desired
size by mechanical & enzymatic disaggregation followed by precise density
centrifugation. Drug activity is measured by delayed loss of membrane
integrity & ATP content (luciferase). Lethal concentration (LC50) values
are interpolated from 5-point dose response curves and compared by
modified Z-Score. Concentrations ranges for AUY were 6.25-100 uM and for
G 1.25-20 uM. Results: AUY and G activity compared in 22 parallel
analyses by Pearson Moment revealed a correlation coefficient R = 0.59 (p
Sarcoma >Melanoma >Ovary>NSCLC>Breast. ERBB2 (+) breast appeared more
sensitive as did several EGFr mutation (+) NSCLC specimens. Metachronous
assays conducted in 3 EGFr (+) NSCLC pts revealed activity for G
following Erlotinib failure. Additional studies with AUY alone and in
combination are underway. Conclusions: i) HSP-90 inhibitors are active in
human tumor primary cultures ii) AUY and G activity correlate iii) HSP90
inhibitor activities reveal disease & patient-specific profiles iv)
EVA/PCD analyses could facilitate the development of clinical strategies
for the use of HSP90 inhibitors. Supported by The Vanguard Cancer
Foundation & The Nagourney Institute. NVP-AUY-922 was the kind gift of
Novartis AG.

