Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tracking transplanted cells with paramagnetic fluorinated
nanoemulsions


Visualization of distinct cell populations in vivo is one of the most
formidable challenges in biomedical sciences. Clinical translation of
cutting-edge therapies that involve administration of live
immunotherapeutic or stem cells can benefit from understanding the fate
of injected cells in vivo. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is emerging
as a prime method for non-invasive, longitudinal cell tracking.
Fluorine-19 MRI (19F MRI) involves the use of non-radioactive 19F label
in the form of biologically inert, cytocompatible perfluorocarbons (PFC).
Immediately prior to injection, cells of interest are labeled ex vivo
with water-based PFC nanoemulsions. 19F MRI yields background-free images
of labeled cells in an anatomical context provided by conventional 1H
MRI. Both datasets are acquired on the same scanner in one imaging
session. This technology has recently been used to detect
immunotherapeutic dendritic cells delivered to colorectal adenocarcinoma
patients.We sought to enhance sensitivity and versatility of 19F MRI by
using paramagnetic relaxation agents. Covalent modification of clinically
relevant PFCs with metal-binding ligands enabled stable and uniform
incorporation of gadolinium and iron in the fluorous phase of
nanoemulsions. Paramagnetic relaxation enhancement resulted in up to
50-fold reduction in 19F longitudinal relaxation time (T1) compared to
state-of-the-art commercial tracers. The ultralow 19F T1 of our
paramagnetic tracers enabled in vivo cell tracking with rapid,
three-dimensional, zero time-to-echo (ZTE) 19F MRI pulse sequences in
mice bearing subcutaneous allografts of 19F-labeled GL261 cells.
Moreover, the high local concentration of paramagnetic metals imparted
negative contrast in T2*-weighted 1H images.Combination of the new agents
with conventional 19F tracers comprises a previously unavailable toolbox
of 19F contrast agents, selectively detectable by appropriate acquisition
methods. This enables multicolor 19F MRI tracking of multiple cell
populations, e.g., for monitoring the interaction of host immune cells
with injected therapeutic cells or cancer xenografts. Overall, the design
of biocompatible, fast-relaxing 19F tracers addresses the issue of modest
sensitivity of 19F MRI and reduces the barriers to widespread adoption of
this powerful imaging technique.

