Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression analysis of SMYD5 in breast cancer and normal tissues


Lysine methyltransferases are a group of enzymes that carry a SET domain,
which catalyzes the addition of methyl groups to specific lysine
residues. Several lysine methyltransferases have been described to be
involved in human carcinogenesis. The SMYD family of methyltransferases
constitutes a group of five genes that encodes proteins bearing a SET and
a MYND domain, whose activity have not yet been completely characterized.
Although deregulation of SMYD family members has been reported to
contribute to cancer progression through several different mechanisms, to
date a clear relationship of SMYD5 with breast cancer, the second most
frequent cancer worldwide and the most common among women, was not
determined. In the present study we investigated the expression profile
of SMYD5 in breast tumors and adjacent non-tumor samples, in breast
cancer cell lines and in several normal tissues. qPCR revealed SMYD5 mRNA
expression level was downregulated in 7 breast cancer cell lines when
compared to normal breast tissues. Relative expression of SMYD5 in breast
tumors and normal breast samples revealed a significant (pLysine
methyltransferases are a group of enzymes that carry a SET domain, which
catalyzes the addition of methyl groups to specific lysine residues.
Several lysine methyltransferases have been described to be involved in
human carcinogenesis. The SMYD family of methyltransferases constitutes a
group of five genes that encodes proteins bearing a SET and a MYND
domain, whose activity have not yet been completely characterized.
Although deregulation of SMYD family members has been reported to
contribute to cancer progression through several different mechanisms, to
date a clear relationship of SMYD5 with breast cancer, the second most
frequent cancer worldwide and the most common among women, was not
determined. In the present study we investigated the expression profile
of SMYD5 in breast tumors and adjacent non-tumor samples, in breast
cancer cell lines and in several normal tissues. qPCR revealed SMYD5 mRNA
expression level was downregulated in 7 breast cancer cell lines when
compared to normal breast tissues. Relative expression of SMYD5 in breast
tumors and normal breast samples revealed a significant (p<0.001)
reduction of SMYD5 expression in tumors comparing to the non-cancerous
breast samples. These findings led us to investigate the role of SMYD5 in
cell proliferation. We observed that reduction of SMYD5 expression by
shRNA in HEK293 cells induced acceleration in culture growth. Moreover,
the generation of MDA-MB-231 tumor sublines expressing varying levels of
SMYD5 revealed different proliferative profiles. SMYD5 expression
inversely correlated with growth rate in highly proliferative cultures.
However, slow proliferating cells (i.e. long doubling time) do not seem
to be affected by SMYD5 levels. This observation indicates that specific
subgroup of highly proliferative cells may depend on SMYD5 downregulation
to exhibit this phenotype. In addition, we found that SMYD5 has a
sub-cellular distribution similar to other SMYD family proteins
suggesting it may exert enzymatic activity in both cytosolic and nuclear
substrates. Taken together, our data indicates a possible role for SMYD5
in modulating breast carcinogenesis through epigenetic alterations,
probably acting as tumor suppressor.Note: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

