Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatic hypoxia-activated intra-arterial therapy: effect of
selective targeting of hypoxia in a rabbit liver tumor model


Purpose:Tumor hypoxia is considered a challenge of anticancer therapy.
The use of hypoxia-activated prodrugs (HAPs) in the setting of
transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) is particularly appealing by
allowing the locoregional delivery of high-doses of chemotherapy which
has the potential to reach distal hypoxic tumor regions. Moreover, the
embolic effect provided by TACE constitutes an attractive setting for the
selective activation of HAPs. We aimed to evaluate the safety and
characterize the anticancer efficacy of hepatic hypoxia-activated
intraarterial therapy (HAIAT) in a rabbit liver tumor model.Experimental
Design:Twenty-eight animals bearing VX2-tumors were randomly assigned to
4 intraarterial therapy (IAT) groups: (1) saline (control); (2) TH-302;
(3) doxorubicin-Lipiodol emulsion followed by bland embolization with
100-300m beads (conventional TACE - cTACE); or (4) cTACE in combination
with TH-302 (cTACE+TH-302). Blood samples were collected at baseline and
24 hours, 48 hours, 7 days, and 14 days post-IAT to evaluate
treatment-related toxicity. A semi-quantitative pathologic scoring system
was used to assess hepatocellular damage. Tumor volumes were segmented on
multidetector computed tomography (baseline, 7 days, and 14 days
post-IAT). Tumor necrosis was quantified in the whole tumor using a
slide-by-slide histosegmentation. Hypoxic fraction (HF) and hypoxic
compartment (HC) was determined by pimonidazole staining. Tumor DNA
damage, apoptosis, cell proliferation, endogenous hypoxia and metabolism
were quantified using color deconvolution analysis (including -H2AX,
annexin V, caspase-3, Ki-67, HIF1, VEGF, MCT4 and
LDH).Results:cTACE+TH-302 showed similar profile in liver enzyme
elevation and pathologic scores compared to cTACE. Neither hematologic
nor renal toxicity was observed. Animals treated with cTACE+TH-302
demonstrated smaller tumor volumes, lower tumor growth rate and higher
necrotic fraction compared to cTACE. cTACE+TH-302 resulted in a
pronounced reduction in the HF and HC. Negative correlation was found
between tumor necrosis and the magnitude of HF or HC. cTACE+TH-302
treatment increased the expression of -H2A.X, apoptotic biomarkers and
decreased the proliferative potential of VX-2 tumor cells. Increased
expression level of HIF1/VEGF and tumor glycolysis biomarkers supports
the HAIAT mechanism of action. TH-302 demonstrated a bystander effect
with antitumor activity observed beyond hypoxic tumor
regions.Conclusion:HAIAT achieved a promising step towards the
locoregional targeting of tumor hypoxia. The favorable toxicity profile
and strong anticancer effects of TH-302 in combination with cTACE support
further investigation in clinical trials in patients with liver cancer.

