Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer-associated a2 isoform vacuolar ATPase regulates
neutrophils: potential association for tumor invasion


Breast cancer is the most common cancer worldwide and it is a prominent
cause of cancer death in developing countries and the second leading
cause of cancer death in American women. Breast cancer infiltrating
immune cells like macrophages and neutrophils, TAM and TAN respectively
are highly influencing tumor progression. Factors modulating TAN to
produce pro-tumorigenic factors are not well understood. Vacuolar ATPases
are overexpressed on many tumors and their expression highly correlates
to the tumors metastatic potential. In tumor cells a cleaved peptide from
the N-terminal domain of the a2-Isoform vacuolar ATPase (a2NTD) is
secreted in the microvesicles and promotes pro-tumorigenic properties of
macrophages as in TAM. In the current study we show by immunofluorescent
staining that human breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7
overexpress a2V in comparison to the non-tumorigenic cell line MCF-10A.
Also, immunohistochemical analysis showed that a2NTD is highly expressed
on infiltrative ductal carcinoma (IDC, represents 80% of all breast
cancers) sections as compared to normal breast tissue. In order to
investigate the regulatory effect of a2NTD on neutrophils we stimulated
freshly isolated neutrophils from healthy volunteers with recombinant
a2NTD. a2NTD treatment up-regulates the gene expression of
anti-inflammatory mediators as IL-10 and interleukin 1 receptor
antagonist (IL-1RA) and pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines like
TNF, IL-1, IL-1, IL-6, CCL-2, CXCL-1 and CXCL-2 in neutrophils. The
multiplex luminex assay was done confirming the up-regulation of these
mediators at the protein level. Moreover, a2NTD stimulated neutrophils
enhanced the secretion of angiogenic and metastatic factors such as IL-8,
VEGF, MMP-9 and elevated the gelatinase activity of MMP-9, which was
detected by zymography. To evaluate the influence of a2NTD treated
neutrophils on tumor progression we did an in vitro angiogenesis assay
using Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells (HUVECs). a2NTD treated
neutrophils supernatant caused a 4 fold increase in the number of the
capillary tubes formed by HUVECs and increased the branching of these
tubes as well as the formation of closed structures. Furthermore, we
tested the potential of a2NTD treated neutrophils on the invasiveness of
the MDA-MB231 and MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines using in vitro
trans-well invasion assay. Interestingly, a2NTD treated neutrophils
supernatant promoted the MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 invasion by 20 and 8
percent respectively as compared with untreated neutrophil supernatant.
These data demonstrate the potential effect of tumor associated a2V and
its soluble peptide a2NTD in regulating the sterile inflammation present
in tumor microenvironment by modulating neutrophils, which promotes
angiogenesis and tumor invasion.

