Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of methylation of Wnt target genes in tumorigenesis and
effect of re-expression with demethylating agent decitabine in colon
cancer


Colon cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. Extensive studies of the Wnt signal cascade have determined
its role in colon cancer development and progress. Several targets of the
Wnt-cascade like APCDD1, ASCL2, AXIN2 or DKK1 are thought to reduce Wnt
activity by negative feedback. As a result, expression of these genes
prevents pathway activation and silencing of these targets can cause
proliferation of the tumor. Recently, we have shown that silencing of Wnt
target genes by DNA-methylation predicts poor prognosis in colon cancer
patients. Moreover, demethylation of those genes results in reexpression
and is associated with reduced tumor growth in mice. Hence, treatment
with demethylating agents can be beneficial for a subgroup of colon
cancer patients with high methylation of Wnt target genes. The aim of
this study is to clarify whether Wnt target gene methylation is an
important driver in development of colon cancer and can be an effective
target in colon cancer.To determine the role of Wnt target genes in colon
cancer more extensively, we study the effect of selective expression of
these genes via an inducible vector system in established colorectal cell
lines and in patient derived cultures that display CpG island methylation
on these genes. In that way, we can monitor the effect of induced
overexpression on tumor growth, tumor invasion and sensitivity towards
chemotherapeutic agents. As a control, baseline expression in the same
cell population, but in an uninduced state will be used.Furthermore, we
are also studying the effect of the demethylating agent decitabine on Wnt
target gene methylation in a clinical trial in stage II/III colon cancer
patients. Patients are pre-operatively treated with decitabine. Tumor
material prior to decitabine treatment obtained during endoscopy is
compared to resection material after treatment. Differences in
methylation and expression of Wnt target genes are determined by
respectively pyrosequencing and q-PCR.We hypothesize that reexpression of
Wnt target genes via an inducible vector results in lower Wnt pathway
activity through negative feedback. As a result, tumor growth and
invasion will be reduced and might be more sensitive towards
chemotherapeutics.To translate this into the clinic, demethylation of Wnt
target genes by decitabine will hopefully give a similar effect in
patients.

