Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Restoration of miR-100 sensitizes luminal A breast cancer to
paclitaxel treatment by targeting mTOR


Based on molecular profiling, immunohistochemical detection of ER, PR and
Her2, and morphological evaluation, breast cancer is classified into five
subtypes: Luminal A, Luminal B, Her2, Basal-like, and Normal-like. Each
subtype has distinct prognosis and treatment response. The luminal A
subtype nicely responds to endocrine therapy with a good prognosis, but
is less responsive to chemotherapies including paclitaxel. According to a
previous study, patients with luminal A breast cancer do not benefit from
the addition of paclitaxel to their chemotherapies, but the underlying
mechanisms are still not clear. We found that the expression of miRNA
miR-100 is dramatically lower in luminal breast cancer cell lines
compared to the basal-like subtype. In human breast cancer specimens,
while miR-100 expression was downregulated when compared to the matched
normal breast tissues, the downregulation in luminal A subtype tumors was
more dramatic when compared to other subtypes. We therefore propose that
lower levels of miR-100 expression could be responsible for decreased
sensitivity of luminal A breast cancer to paclitaxel. To test this
hypothesis, we expressed miR-100 in the MCF-7 luminal A breast cancer
cell line, and found that expression of miR-100 sensitized MCF-7 cells to
paclitaxel treatment by promoting paclitaxel-induced apoptosis and cell
cycle arrest. We also suppressed miR-100 expression in the MDA-MB-231
basal-like cell line, and found that miR-100 downregulation desensitized
MDA-MB-231 cells to paclitaxel. Tumorigenesis experiments in nude mice
further support a role of miR-100 in luminal breast cancer's response to
paclitaxel treatment. mTOR, an important player in the PI3K/mTOR
signaling pathway, has been identified as a downstream target of miR-100,
and combination of rapamycin, a mTOR inhibitor, with paclitaxel enhances
the effect of chemotherapy in breast cancer. We found that miR-100
expression inhibited mTOR expression in MCF-7 cells, while suppression of
miR-100 increased mTOR expression in MDA-MB-231 cells. These results
suggest that miR-100 sensitizes luminal A breast cancer cells to
paclitaxel via targeting mTOR. They also provide an explanation for the
resistance of luminal A breast cancer to paclitaxel treatment.

