Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Melanoma phenotype switching to adapt to BRAF inhibition


Melanoma can adapt to several stress factors, such as TNF treatment, by
changing its phenotype from a highly differentiated (MITF and MART-1
positive) to undifferentiated (neural crest markers) states. We studied
this phenomenon as a mechanism of adaptive resistance to BRAF inhibition
since melanomas with both MITF high and low have been reported to result
in BRAF inhibitor resistance. We treated 17 BRAFV600E mutant melanoma
cell lines with the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib for short term (3 days) or
long term (17 days), and compared them to no treatment or TNF treated
conditions. We profiled them phenotypically for MART1 antigen
(differentiated phenotype) and nerve growth factor receptor (NGFR, neural
crest phenotype) expression by flow cytometry. Results comparing median
fluorescence intensity (MFI) showed a wide spectrum of adaptive responses
to short term BRAF inhibition, followed by solidification or further
evolution of these changes upon long term exposure and development of
drug tolerance. According to each cell line distribution, we calculated a
(x,y) value that organized the cell lines and conditions in four
quadrants according to MART1 (x axis) or NGFR (y axis) expression. Two
double negative (MART1-/NGFR-) cell lines that were unaffected by
treatment and stayed in the same quadrant. Seven MART1-/NGFR+ and four
MART1+/NGFR- cell lines slightly changed phenotype with vemurafenib
exposure but stayed in the same quadrant. Four cell lines with
MART1+/NGFR+ phenotype were greatly influenced by treatment, showing wide
plasticity with cells shifting towards NGFR+/MART1- and others towards
NGFR-/MART1+. Changes in position between baseline and tolerance to
vemurafenib after 17days treatment were numerically quantified as an
inferred number from plasticity. Cell lines with double positive
(MART1+/NGFR+) phenotype had a significant change in plasticity compared
to the rest of cell lines in other quadrants (p = 0.0004). This arranges
cells in a four-quadrant pattern that could be likened to a U-turn toward
de-differentiation. Cells that de-differentiated with BRAF inhibition
mimicked the effect induced by TNF. This effect was driven by a decrease
in MITF activity confirmed with a tyrosinase promoter-luciferase assay.
In conclusion, baseline melanoma differentiation phenotypes guide the
phenotype switch response, with those double positive for differentiation
and neural crest markers being at a semi-stable state that can be prone
to different plastic changes upon BRAF inhibition.

