Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEF2 plays a significant role in the tumor inhibitory effects of
agarose encapsulated RENCA cells through the EGF receptor


Identification of the molecular targets involved in the tumor growth
inhibition induced by agarose encapsulated mouse renal adenocarcinoma
(RENCA) cells will aid in an understanding of the mechanism of action and
may allow for the discovery of key targets for therapeutic intervention.
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR/ERBB1/HER1) and related family
members have been shown to transduce extracellular signals through the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway to regulate
post-translational regulation of myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2)
proteins. We have previously reported that suppression of MEF2 isoforms
in target tumor cells reduced the growth inhibitory effect of RENCA
macrobeads. In this study, we evaluated signaling through EGFR in
response to RENCA macrobead conditioned media and examined
post-translational activation of MEF2D, using the human prostate cancer,
DU145 and the human breast adenocarcinoma, MCF7 cell lines. DU145 and
MCF7 cells exposed to nave or conditioned media were evaluated using
In-Cell Western analysis for the expression of phospho-EGFR Y1068 in
parallel with total EGFR. Phospho-MEF2D and total MEF2D were assessed in
nuclear extracts using western blotting. In the DU145 cells, exposure to
RENCA macrobead conditioned media activates EGFR as evidenced by
phosphorylation of the receptor at tyrosine 1068 in parallel with the
increasing age and inhibitory capacity of macrobeads. Further, the growth
inhibition of DU145 cells exposed to RENCA macrobead conditioned media is
accompanied by dephosphorylation of MEF2D at Serine 444 supporting a role
for increased MEF2D transcriptional activity in the inhibitory effect.
MCF7 cells are less sensitive to RENCA macrobead-induced growth
inhibition, EGFR is not phosphorylated by 2 hours following exposure to
macrobead conditioned media and MEF2D remains phosphorylated at Serine
444. These findings support the hypothesis that RENCA macrobeads signal,
at least in part, through the EGF receptor to differentially regulate
MEF2D, which is significant for macrobead-induced tumor growth inhibition.

