Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The use of kinome profiling to determine potential resistance
pathways in pancreatic cancer cells treated with PIM kinase inhibitors


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the most prevalent cancer of
the pancreas with a 5-year survival rate of 6%, making it the 4th most
common cause of cancer deaths in the United States. One of the challenges
related to this cancer is the issue of chemoresistance. Chemoresistance
renders most drugs ineffective in the treatment of PDAC, including kinase
inhibitors and the chemotherapeutic drug gemcitabine. PIM (Proviral
Integration site for the Moloney murine leukemia virus) kinases are a
family of proteins shown to play an important role in the chemoresistance
of many cancers, including pancreatic cancer. PIMs act downstream of the
JAK-STAT cytokine signaling pathway and phosphorylate substrates involved
in numerous cell functions including cell cycle progression and
apoptosis. One objective of our research was to determine the role of PIM
kinases on transformed phenotypes of PDAC cells. We were able to
demonstrate that the PIM kinase inhibitor SGI-1776 and TP-3654, a second
generation PIM kinase inhibitor, were able to inhibit growth in cell
viability assay. Also, the PIM inhibitors were able to decrease various
phenotypes such as anchorage-dependent and anchorage-independent growth
in MIA PaCa-2 and PANC-1 cells. A second objective was to determine if
PIM kinase inhibitors could reduce chemoresistance in PDAC cells. PIM
inhibitors in combination with gemcitabine decreased cell viability in
PDAC cells significantly more than when administered separately. To
investigate resistance pathways activated in PDAC cells after treatment
with PIM kinase inhibitors, we applied multiplexed inhibitor beads (MIBs)
mass spectrometry (MS) to profile the kinome. We observed numerous
kinases that were downregulated or upregulated after treatment. One of
the kinases upregulated was IKK, a key kinase in the anti-apoptotic NF-B
signaling pathway. Our results suggest that PIM kinases are an important
target for cell growth and chemoresistance in pancreatic cancer. Also,
these results suggest that treating PDAC cells with a PIM inhibitor
simultaneously with an IKK inhibitor might prevent the effects of
resistance pathways. Overall, our studies demonstrate that kinome
profiling is an effective strategy to identify cellular responses to PIM
kinase inhibitors as well as other drugs for treating pancreatic and
other cancers.

