Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary chemopreventive agent (curcumin), hypomethylates 5
promoter of DCLK1 gene in human colon cancer cells and restores
expression of long isoform of DCLK1


Curcumin, a dietary chemopreventive agent, inhibits proliferation of
colon cancer cells by inhibiting multiple oncogenic pathways. Curcumin
has also emerged as a non-toxic epigenetic modulator in recent years.
Direct interaction of curcumin with DNA methyl transferases (DMTs),
inhibits their enzymatic activity, resulting in hypomethylation of
specific genes. DCLK1 is a cancer stem cell (CSC) marker, critically
required for colon tumorgenesis and for maintaining
tumoregenic/metastatic potential of colon cancers. The 5 promoter of
DCLK1 gene in human colorectal cancers (hCRCs) is epigenetically silenced
due to DNA methylation, resulting in loss of expression of long isoform
of DCLK1 (DCLK1-L). However, a short isoform (DCLK1-S) is expressed from
an alternate promoter within IntronV, in response to several oncogenic
pathways, including activation of NF-B pathway, and is required for
maintaining tumorigenic/metastatic potential of hCRC cells. Since a
subset of DCLK1+CSCs survive inhibitory effects of curcumin, resulting in
relapse of the disease (Can Res, 2014), we hypothesized that curcumin
will likely inhibit DCLK1-S expression, by inhibiting NF-B pathway, but
cause re-expression of DCLK1-L by hypomethylating the 5promoter. A
representative hCRC cell line, devoid of DCLK1-L expression due to
hypermethylation of 5promoter (HCT116), was used. Dose and time dependent
effects of curcumin were examined on 2D/3D growths of HCT116 cells. As
expected, proliferation of curcumin treated cells was significantly
decreased in a time and dose dependent manner. DCLK1-L was re-expressed,
corresponding to de-methylation of 5 promoter; curcumin (5-10M) was
optimally effective as an epigenetic modifier at 72h. Higher doses were
required for inhibiting DCLK1-S expression and corresponded with loss of
binding of NF-Bp65 to the NF-B cis element in IntronV promoter of DCLK1
gene. The loss in DCLK1-S expression, likely explains significant
inhibitory effects of curcumin on the growth of colon cancers and CSCs,
as reported by many investigators. Re-expression of DCLK1-L, marker of
quiescent stem cells in normal colons, may allow curcumin-treated cancer
cells to survive and become dormant/quiescent. It is speculated that
CSCs, re-expressing DCLK1-L, are initially induced into dormancy, but
revert back to expressing DCLK1-S after a period of dormancy, resulting
in relapse of the disease, as previously reported; this intriguing
possibility will be examined in future studies.

