Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high level of circulating CXCL10 at initial diagnosis is
associated with poor prognosis of osteosarcoma patients


Background: Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common malignant bone tumor in
children and adolescents. Although survival rates have reached 70% over
the past few decades, the prognosis of patients with metastatic disease
remains very dismal. Identification of prognostic biomarkers besides
clinically detectable metastasis will facilitate risk-stratification, and
identify the most appropriate treatment option to improve their outcomes.
Our group has previously devised a systems biology approach and
identified that chemokines pathway are associated with metastasis in OS
cell line models. Additionally, we reported that the plasma levels of a
group of CXC chemokines were associated with a poorer patient outcome.
CXC chemokines has been identified as source of potential therapeutic
targets such as the CXCL12/CXCR4 and the CXCL10/CXCR3 ligand/receptor
axes, which have been targeted successfully to inhibit lung metastasis in
OS mouse models. Therefore, we decided to expand our findings by
employing a Luminex platform to characterize circulating levels of
cytokines/chemokines in OS patients, as these represent potential
prognostic biomarkers and novel therapeutic targets. Materials and
Methods: In this study, we employed a Luminex platform to analyze 39
chemokines/cytokines in two cohorts comprised of totally 290 OS patients.
A regressive partitioning method was used to binarize the variables in
the training cohort (40 samples) and the cutoff points were examined in
the validation cohort (250 samples) for significance.Results: Twenty-two
of the candidate biomarkers were significant with respect to overall
survival and were tested in the validation cohort (250 samples). After
Benjamini-Hochberg correction, CXCL10 significantly correlated with
overall survival (p = 0.047) and remained significant after correcting
for initial metastasis (CXCL10: p = 0.0037, Metastasis: p = 0.00012),
indicating that CXCL10 is an independent prognostic factor. Therefore, we
combined both prognostic factors to stratify the patients. Using this
approach we identified three risk groups and the 5-year overall survival
rate for the high-risk (high CXCL10 with initial metastasis),
intermediate-risk (high CXCL10 with localized disease, or low CXCL10 with
initial metastasis), and low-risk (low CXCL10 with localized disease)
groups were 31%, 54%, and 71% respectively. Further, in patients with
localized disease at diagnosis, which is conventionally considered to be
low risk, a higher level of CXCL10 predicted a poorer outcome (p =
0.019).Additionally, we found that the receptor for the CXCL10 ligand,
CXCR3, is expressed in OS tumors and is potentially targetable. In
summary, our results suggest that circulating CXCL10 can be used as
non-invasive biomarker to better prognosticate osteosarcoma patients
before the treatment initiation and may lead to CXCR3-targeted therapy in
selected patients in future clinical trials.

