Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cisplatin in combination with a potential antiestrogen
wedelolactone applied to different gynaecological tumor models


Introduction: Estrogens are found to influence aetiology and progression
of endocrine/hormone responsive cancers in patient specific manner. The
concept of hormonal manipulations dates back to the last half of
twentieth century when tamoxifen was approved by FDA as the first
selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM). A significant decline in
mortality rate in breast cancer is attributed partly to advancements in
chemotherapy and adjuvant hormone therapy. However, toxicities from mild
to life threatening including the risk of endometrial cancer, remain a
major problem. Hence the need of new and more effective SERMs remains.
Phytoestrogens being structurally similar to human estrogens can mimic
their effects in vitro and in vivo. Wedelolactone, a naturally occurring
coumestan, has recently emerged as a compound of high interest due to its
inhibitory effects on various types of cancer cells. Several studies have
demonstrated its potential as antiestrogen in MCF-7, Ishikawa and SKOV-3
cancer cells.Toxic side effects and intrinsic and acquired drug
resistance remains a major hurdle in chemotherapy with cisplatin in
ovarian cancer. Another place where non/low cytotoxic options would be
desired relate to patients with elevated CA-125 (false positive
elevations not uncommon in ovarian cancer patients) but without other
clinical symptoms, in order to minimize the negative impact on quality of
life.The aim of this study was to evaluate wedelolactone in different
gynaecological models alone and also in combination with platinum drug
cisplatin to determine its suitability in adjuvant or palliative
settings.Methods: Cytotoxicity of compounds alone and in binary
combination against six cancer cell lines (A2780, A2780cisR,
A2780ZD0473R, SKOV-3, MCF-7 and HELA-3) was evaluated using MTT reduction
assay and combination index (CI) as a measure of combined drug action was
calculated using equations of Chou and Talalay (1984).Results: Cisplatin
and wedelolactone showed varied but dose dependent apoptotic effects. CI
values were found out to vary showing antagonistic to additive to
synergistic effects in different tumor models.Discussion: Wedelolactone
considered as a natural apoptotic agent was found to inhibit cell growth
irrespective of receptor status. Variations in combined drug action
indicate that further studies would be needed to get more insights on
signal transduction pathways.Conclusion: Wedelolactone can be further
tested in different in vitro and in vivo models in the hope of being
useful for patients with recurrent gynaecological cancers (especially
ovarian).

