Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A multifaceted role of the Hedgehog pathway in modulating
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma biology


The Hedgehog (Hh) developmental pathway is reactivated in pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) and forms a paracrine axis from the tumor
cells to the supporting stromal cells. Previous work from this laboratory
found that, in established tumors, inhibition of the Hedgehog (Hh)
pathway caused a loss of tumor stroma implicating this axis in the
development of the profuse desmoplastic stroma observed in PDA. However,
the mechanisms by which Hh signaling modulates the stroma in PDA remain
unknown.In this study we have attempted to identify the target genes of
the Hh pathway in the stroma of pancreatic tumors. Using a novel tumor
biopsy procedure coupled with RNA-SEQ analysis we have identified genes
acutely sensitive to Hh pathway inhibition in the KPC mouse model of PDA.
The gene signature of down-regulated genes following Hh inhibition
implicated the Hh pathway in the proliferation of its target stromal
cells as well as a possible indirect effect on the proliferation of tumor
cells. Interestingly, a significant number of genes were also
up-regulated following inhibition of the Hh pathway. This gene signature
was consistent with the migration and infiltration of leukocytes. Taken
together these data suggest that the Hh pathway can drive proliferation
of both the stromal and epithelial compartments as well as actively
suppress leukocyte infiltration into pancreatic tumors.In addition we
have utilized a Gli1-GFP reporter mouse to study the Hh target cells in
the stroma of KPC mice. Previous work has suggested that Hh target cells
in pancreatic tumors are myofibroblasts and thus -Smooth muscle actin
(-SMA) positive. However, we observed that while some Gli1 positive
stromal cells are -SMA positive a significant proportion are -SMA
negative. In addition, costaining KPC-Gli1-GFP tumors for other stromal
markers, including Fibroblast specific protein-1 (FSP-1), Glial
Fibrillary Acidic Protein (GFAP), Desmin, Vimentin and Platelet-derived
growth factor receptor (PDGFR) reveals subsets of Hh target cells in the
tumor stroma. These data suggest the Hh pathway targets a complex set of
stromal fibroblasts to mediate its effects.Taken together, these data
suggest that the Hh pathway regulates multiple facets of pancreatic tumor
biology both in negative and positive manner and does so through
targeting a complex array of stromal cells.

