Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MK-1775 (WEE1 inhibition) lacks efficacy against DNA repair
deficient pancreatic cancer cells


Introduction: In this study, we explored the possibility of developing a
personalized approach of using MK-1775, a potent WEE1 inhibitor, as mono-
or combination therapy to treat pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA)
cells with DNA repair deficiency.Experimental Methods: We treated PDA
cells harboring diverse genetic backgrounds with IC50 doses of
clinically-relevant DNA damaging agents: mitomycin C (MMC) and the WEE1
inhibitor MK-1775. Drug sensitivity assays were performed in isogenic PDA
cells that are either proficient or deficient in Fanconi Anemia
(FA)/BRCA2 pathway. In addition, proficient cell lines were treated with
siRNA oligos targeted against FANCD2 and BRCA2 genes. Mechanistic studies
such as Annexin V staining were performed to measure apoptotic cells upon
MMC and MK-1775 treatments. The degree of DNA damage was measured by
immunofluorescence (IF) assay using H2AX antibody. Mitotic entry was
analyzed by both IF and flow cytometry analyses using pH3
antibody.Results: Drug sensitivity assays demonstrated that
FA/BRCA2-pathway proficient PDA cell lines (MiaPaCa2 and Panc1) are
sensitive to the cytotoxic effect of MK-1775 compared to DNA
repair-deficient cell lines (Capan1:BRCA2 deficient and Hs766T:FANCG
deficient) which showed acute resistance to MK-1775. Immunoblotting
showed that MK-1775 efficiently reduces the expression of WEE1 and
accordingly phosphorylation of CDK1 in all cell lines. Annexin V staining
showed a higher percentage of cell death in the FA/BRCA2-pathway
proficient cell lines compared to deficient cell lines when exposed to
MK-1775. Furthermore, IF experiments demonstrated that MMC treatment
induces H2AX foci in all cell lines, however, the FA/BRCA2 proficient
cell lines showed a higher degree of nuclear abnormality and
multi-nucleation after MK-1775 treatment compared to deficient cell
lines. In addition, the FA/BRCA2 proficient cell lines showed
significantly higher phospho histone 3 (pH3) staining, a marker of
mitotic cells. FACS analyses validated that proficient cell lines showed
a higher percentage of cells in the mitotic phase when exposed to
MK-1775. In addition, we evaluated the cytotoxic effect of MK-1775 in
combination with MMC and showed that FA/BRCA2 proficient cells are more
sensitive to dual treatment than deficient cells. In addition,
immnobloting detected cleaved caspase 3, a marker of apoptosis, after
MK-1775 treatment alone or in combination with MMC, demonstrating cells
undergoing mitotic catastrophe. We validated the results in the
FA/BRCA2-pathway proficient cell lines pre-treated with siFANCD2 or
siBRCA2 oligos as compared to the proficient control lines.Conclusions:
These results support a paradigm in which identified high risk
FA/BRCA2-mutated patients would not benefit from WEE1 inhibitor
monotherapy; and thus, would most likely respond better to conventional
DNA damaging agent-based therapies (e.g., oxaliplatin or MMC).

