Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The transcriptional co-regulator and emerging cancer drug target
C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) is a transforming oncogene


The paralogous C-terminal binding proteins (collectively CtBP) 1 and 2
are evolutionarily conserved transcriptional co-regulators which
demonstrate oncogene-like properties such as allowing for the progression
of EMT and cellular invasion/migration, and supporting cellular survival
through suppression of tumor suppressors (PTEN, p16, E-cadherin, BRCA-1)
and pro-apoptotic genes (Bik, Puma, Noxa). Overexpression of CtBP is
found in colon, ovarian, breast, and prostate cancers, and often
correlates with loss of the tumor suppressors ARF and APC and with poorer
prognosis for the patient. CtBP is also an emerging cancer drug target,
encoding a dehydrogenase domain that can be targeted with small molecule
inhibitors to kill cancer cells. CtBP appears to fit the criteria for a
driver oncogene, though has never been fully characterized as such. To
investigate the hypothesis that CtBP is a transforming oncogene, we
subjected CtBP2 to multiple assays for cellular oncogenic activity
including loss of contact inhibition, invasion, and anchorage independent
growth. Previously immortalized NIH 3T3 mouse fibroblasts expressing
CtBP2 or mutant H-Ras as a positive control were analyzed for focus
formation, Matrigel-invasion, and soft agar colony formation. Consistent
with the hypothesis that CtBP exhibits properties of an oncogene, CtBP2
potently induced focus formation, Matrigel-invasion, and soft agar colony
formation with similar potency to oncogenic mutant H-Ras. Moreover, CtBP2
cooperated with the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein but not H-Ras to transform
primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). Taken together, the 3T3 and
MEF transformation data suggest CtBP2 acts as a Ras-like oncogene in
rodent cell transformation assays. Previous research from our lab has
shown that CtBP's ability to induce migration in HCT116 cells depends in
part on its activation of T-cell lymphoma invasion and metastasis 1
(Tiam1). Work is ongoing to characterize critical downstream targets for
CtBP's transforming activity. Targeting CtBP and its dehydrogenase domain
in cancers where the protein is found to be overexpressed, or where its
regulators, ARF and APC are found to be inactive, could lead to a
therapeutic approach specific for an emerging driver oncogene.

