Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A translational platform to design antibodies targeting triple
negative breast cancer-specific antigens for cancer immunotherapy


Triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) are characterised by the lack of
estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2 (HER2) rendering them insensitive to current endocrine
and anti-HER2 therapies, therefore novel treatment options are required.
Breast cancers have been shown to be immunogenic and patient tumors
feature infiltrating immune cells. Since monoclonal antibodies are an
important therapeutic modality in the clinical management of many
cancers, engineering antibodies against triple negative breast cancer
specific antigens that may activate immune effector cells within tumors
and in the circulation may lead to tumour clearance and may provide new
treatment strategies for this patient group. Here we describe a platform
for selection of TNBC-associated antigens, engineering of novel
antibodies against these antigens and functional studies to elucidate
antibody mechanisms of action and therapeutic potential in vitro and
vivo. Our approach involves identification of tumour-associated antigens
from patient tumor specimens using a transcriptomics approach and
validation and evaluation of biological functions in breast cancer cells
using cell culture models. Antibody heavy (VH) and light (VL) sequences
are cloned in a dual expression vector system for recombinant expression
in HEK293 cells to rapidly produce antibodies with reactivity to specific
tumor antigens. The system is optimised for the seamless expression of V
genes of any species including human sequences, along with human constant
(C) genes of different antibody classes and subclasses. The latter
permits the study of different class/subclass antibodies in order to
identify those most effective in triggering immune cell activation and
tumor clearance. Engineered monoclonal antibodies are subsequently tested
for their antigen binding properties and capacity to activate immune
effector cells against cancer cells in vitro. The therapeutic potential
of selected candidates is evaluated in vivo using xenograft TNBC mouse
models engrafted with components of the human immune system using
adoptive transfer of healthy volunteer and patient derived peripheral
blood cells. Xenograft models featuring human immune components serve to
evaluate the therapeutic potential of monoclonal antibodies in the
context of their capacity to redirect immune effector functions against
cancer cells. Our findings demonstrate a translational pathway designed
to facilitate the discovery and evaluation of novel antibody therapeutic
options for triple negative breast cancer immunotherapy.

