Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COPD and risk of lung cancer in post-menopausal women: findings
from the Women's Health Initiative


Background: Lung cancer and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
are leading causes of morbidity and mortality in the United States.
Cigarette smoking is associated with both lung cancer and COPD, but
whether COPD independently predicts lung cancer risk is debated. To
examine this question in a large, prospective study, we constructed risk
models using data from the observational study arm of the Women's Health
Initiative.Methods: Initial analyses included 89,384 women (n = 1,479
lung cancers) with complete baseline information on cigarette smoking and
COPD status. We created a second, time-varying model to account for
incident smoking that occurred during the eight year follow up period, in
addition to the number of pack years reported at baseline. Estimates from
Cox proportional hazard models were used to assess the association
between COPD and lung cancer. The baseline hazard was stratified by age
at study entry in all models. COPD status was self-reported, and
diagnoses within one year of lung cancer diagnoses were not included.
Reported lung cancers were adjudicated via medical record.Results: There
was an interaction between number of pack years (continuous) of smoking
at baseline and COPD status (pBackground: Lung cancer and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are leading causes of morbidity and
mortality in the United States. Cigarette smoking is associated with both
lung cancer and COPD, but whether COPD independently predicts lung cancer
risk is debated. To examine this question in a large, prospective study,
we constructed risk models using data from the observational study arm of
the Women's Health Initiative.Methods: Initial analyses included 89,384
women (n = 1,479 lung cancers) with complete baseline information on
cigarette smoking and COPD status. We created a second, time-varying
model to account for incident smoking that occurred during the eight year
follow up period, in addition to the number of pack years reported at
baseline. Estimates from Cox proportional hazard models were used to
assess the association between COPD and lung cancer. The baseline hazard
was stratified by age at study entry in all models. COPD status was
self-reported, and diagnoses within one year of lung cancer diagnoses
were not included. Reported lung cancers were adjudicated via medical
record.Results: There was an interaction between number of pack years
(continuous) of smoking at baseline and COPD status (p<0.001). Never
smokers with COPD were 2.7 times more likely to develop lung cancer
compared to never smokers without COPD, after adjusting for race,
education, income and body mass index (HR = 2.70, 95% CI: 2.12, 3.45).
Similar risk of lung cancer associated with COPD was seen among smokers
with 20 pack years of smoking (HR = 2.37, 95% CI: 1.96, 2.87) and at 40
pack years of smoking (HR = 2.08, 95% CI: 1.77, 2.45) after adjustment.
From the time-varying models, women with COPD had approximately 2 times
the risk of developing lung cancer compared to those who did not, after
adjusting for smoking, race, education, income and body mass index (HR =
1.90, 95% CI: 1.54, 2.34). COPD was associated with all subtypes of lung
cancer after adjustment for smoking, with hazard ratios ranging from
1.59-2.15 for different histological subtypes of non-small cell lung
cancers. Smokers with COPD were 4.6 times more likely to develop small
cell lung cancers compared to those without COPD (HR = 4.68, 95% CI:
2.67, 8.20).Conclusion: These data suggest that COPD is an independent
risk factor for the development of lung cancer, and should be considered
when constructing risk models.

