Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance
(MGUS) in a 3-dimensional co-culture in vitro model


Introduction: Multiple Myeloma (MM) is an incurable cancer with a
pre-malignant clonal phase of disease called monoclonal gammopathy of
undetermined significance (MGUS). Most patients with MGUS do not develop
MM and the biology underlying this potential transformation is unclear.
Investigations to prevent the development of MM from MGUS is limited by
infrequent MGUS progression. MGUS cells have historically proven
difficult to grow in vitro because of slow rates of proliferation and
difficulty in sustaining cell cultures. An in vitro model of MGUS that
circumvents these challenges by recreating a supportive bone marrow
microenvironment will allow further investigation into the pathogenesis
of disease progression. Herein, we examine a novel stroma-based in vitro
model of MGUS and MM using bone marrow stromal cells to support and
maintain a bi-directional relationship within the clonal plasma cell
population.Aim: To grow MGUS derived plasma cells by recreating a
supportive bone marrow microenvironment using a 3-dimensional in vitro
model.Methods: We collected a CD38+ cell fraction and a bone marrow
stromal fraction from patients with plasma cell dyscrasias using a
Miltenyl Biotec column Separator. We seeded stromal cells from a female,
kappa expressing MGUS patient or a healthy donor onto a polyglycolic
acid/ poly L-lactic acid 90/10 (PLGA) copolymer scaffold. Then, a CD38+
cell fraction from a male patient with lambda secreting PCL or MM cell
line U266 or MM1.s (both male, lambda expressing cell lines) were added
to create 3D co-culture conditions. For comparison, a 2 dimensional
co-culture condition was created by growing MM patient cells or cell
lines over a bone marrow stromal cell layer without scaffold.. After one
week, samples were formalin fixed and sectioned for immunohistochemistry
(IHC) and stained with CD138, kappa, lambda, and ki-67. Fluorescent in
situ hybridization (FISH) was used to label X and Y chromosomes.Results:
IHC demonstrated proliferation of CD138+ cells evident by Ki-67
expression in in 3-D co-culture systems. There was no growth of the
patient derived CD38+ cells in 2-D co-culture and the proliferation of of
cell lines was diminished in 2-D versus 3-D. When seeded on healthy donor
stroma in 3-D, the CD38+ cells from all sources were lambda restricted.
When seeded on the MGUS stroma, the MM1.s cells were lambda restricted
while PCL cells showed both kappa and lambda expression with a dominance
of kappa expression, and U266 cells showed kappa restriction. FISH
demonstrated a female chromosomal pattern with X,Y in the plasma cells
from the 3D co-cultures in the case of U266 or PCL cell 3-D co-culture
with MGUS stroma.Conclusion: This is the first demonstration of in vitro
growth of plasma cells from a patient with MGUS. We speculate the
aggressive plasma cells from the U266 cell line and the PCL sample
induced the growth of a CD38- cell fraction and caused differentiation to
plasma cells.

