Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of Src inhibitors and soy isoflavones on human prostate
cancer cells


Background: Src family kinases are often over-expressed and highly active
in solid tumors, including prostate cancer. This phenotype is associated
with a poor prognosis partly because Src is a key factor in important
signaling pathways involved in cell proliferation, angiogenesis, and
initiation of metastasis. As a result, several promising small molecule
targeting agents have been developed to prevent phosphorylation of key
tyrosine residues that produce Src activation. However, these agents are
not without side effects. The purpose of this study was to determine if
adding a cytostatic soy isoflavone extract (ISF) to the treatment would
produce optimal results at lower doses of the Src inhibitor. The ISF used
in these studies has been shown to inhibit tumor growth in mice carrying
human prostate cancer cell xenografts without causing toxicity to the
host.Methods: Aggressive PC-3ML cells (a gift from A. Fatatis, Drexel
University), and weakly tumorigenic LNCaP cells were treated for 24 hr
with various concentrations of Src inhibitors (dasatinib, saracatinib),
ISF (200 ug/ml, NovaSoy), or a combination. To evaluate effects on the
metastatic potential of the cells, functional assays of cell growth and
motility were performed, including those that assess clonogenic cell
survival, cell cycle progression, and transwell migration and invasion
activity.Results: Src inhibitors and ISF alone produced very little
reduction in cell viability, but significant cytostatic effects, as
determined by a reduction in clonogenicity, the number of cells able to
form 50-cell colonies. This was likely due, in part, to changes in cell
cycle progression. Both dasatinib and saracatinib caused an accumulation
of cells in the G1 phase. As expected, ISF treatment resulted in higher
numbers of cells in the G2/M phase. When the treatments were combined,
cells exposed to dasatinib were observed to accumulate in both phases,
with a significant decrease in S-phase cells. The results were not
significant for saracatinib-treated cells. Exposure to either a Src
inhibitor or ISF significantly reduced the migration of cells in a
transwell chamber and their ability to invade through a Matrigel-coated 8
micron-pore membrane towards a chemoattractant (media containing 10%
FBS). Dasatinib produced much greater effects, and at lower
concentrations, than saracatinib. When combined with ISF, the effects
were enhanced, particularly with dasatinib.Conclusions: In vitro studies
suggested that combining a Src inhibitor and ISF resulted in greater
inhibition of metastatic potential than either alone. This may indicate
that including ISF in treatment regimens may allow a lower dose of the
targeting agent to be used to achieve optimal response and also decrease
toxicity.

