Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Standardizing the analysis of Ki-67 immunohistochemical assays


IntroImmunohistochemical assays of the proliferation marker, Ki-67, have
been associated with poorer clinical prognosis in breast cancer. However,
a high degree of inconsistency in scores has been demonstrated in
inter-laboratory and intra-laboratory Ki-67 positivity scorings, this has
limited its potential in clinical practice. In this study, we aim to find
a more consistent method for scoring Ki-67 positivity among malignant
breast tumours.MethodsSix Tissue Microarray (TMA) blocks were sectioned
and immunohistochemistry was performed with Anti-Ki-67 antibody. Slides
were then evaluated and Ki-67 positive cells in invasive breast carcinoma
were scored as a percent positivity manually by a trained analyst with
random sample quality assurance (QA) by trained pathologists. This was
used as the standard benchmark for the experiment as it has been
correlated successfully with clinical outcome. Successively, the same six
slides were then annotated on Aperio ePathology software by two observers
with different levels of pathology training and experience. The annotated
regions were analyzed for Ki-67 positivity with Aperio ePathology
software on UHN BioBank servers. The computer analyzed scores were
compared to the manual benchmark scores.ResultsThe difference between
computer-analyzed and manual-scores were relatively large,
Observer-A-annotated-computer-analyzed vs. analyst-manual-scores had a
difference of 4.23% to 16.96%, while
Observer-B-annotated-computer-analyzed vs. analyst-manual-scores had a
difference of 7.13% to 15.03%. Interestingly,
Observer-A-annotated-computer-analyzed vs.
Observer-B-annotated-computer-analyzed scores only had a difference of
0.49% to 2.91%. Pearson Correlation was calculated for all samples on a
case-by-case basis and we found there to be a linear correlation of
0.564, with a P-value of 3.608210-8, between the computer scores and the
manual scores; suggesting significant correlation between the computer
scores and the manual score.ConclusionA significant linear correlation
has been observed between the computer score and the manual score.
However, while the data does not seem to support the idea that a
semi-automatic method of computer scoring will replace analyst manual
scoring, most of the large contributing variables have been identified.
We plan in the next steps of the project to continue to decrease the
effects of such variables. It is interesting that the inter-observer
computer score displayed a minimal amount of difference, again with the
variables identified. This could signify a more consistent method of
Ki-67 scoring. Further experiments will be conducted to continue to
reduce the variables and optimize the system to gain similar performance
as manual scoring. Hopefully in the near future, computerized
immunohistochemical analysis can replace the tedious task of manual
scoring.

