Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anticancer effect of Vernonia amygdalina in the MMTV-PyVT
transgenic mouse model


One of the most frightening events that women will ever face is being
diagnosed with breast cancer. One in eight women in the United States
will be diagnosed with this life-threatening disease during her lifetime.
Even with all the advances in pharmaceutical technology, mortality rates
for breast cancer have remained stagnant for the past few decades. The
development of new drugs from natural products is considered important.
Previous studies from our laboratory show that a novel natural product,
Vernonia amygdalina (V. amygdalina) leaf extract, exerts DNA-damaging
anticancer activities against breast cancer. Therefore, the specific aim
of the present study was to use transgenic mouse mammary tumors as a test
model to explore the therapeutic mechanisms of V. amygdalina as
anti-cancer agent in the treatment of breast cancer. To achieve our
specific aim, we performed both in vitro and in vivo studies. Acridine
orange and propidium iodide (AO/PI) staining were used to visualize live
and dead cells with the means of Cellometer Vision. Tumor volume and
weight were measured. Tumor histology was assessed by
immunohistochemistry, and enzymatic activities were determined by
spectrophotometry. The extent of DNA damage was evaluated by the Comet
assay. Cell/tissue apoptosis was measured by the flow cytometry. Data
obtained from the AO/PI dye assessment indicated that V. amygdalina
significantly reduced the number of live cells in a dose-dependent
manner, showing a gradual increase in the loss of viability in V.
amygdalina-treated cells. We observed tumor growth inhibition after 4
weeks of daily intraperitoneal administration of V. amygdalina to
trangenic mice. There was a significant increase in DNA damage in V.
amygdalina-treated mice compared to the control mice. Flow cytometry data
showed a strong dose-response relationship between V. amygdalina
treatment and annexin V/PI positive cells. Similarly, a statistically
significant and dose-dependent increase (pOne of the most frightening
events that women will ever face is being diagnosed with breast cancer.
One in eight women in the United States will be diagnosed with this
life-threatening disease during her lifetime. Even with all the advances
in pharmaceutical technology, mortality rates for breast cancer have
remained stagnant for the past few decades. The development of new drugs
from natural products is considered important. Previous studies from our
laboratory show that a novel natural product, Vernonia amygdalina (V.
amygdalina) leaf extract, exerts DNA-damaging anticancer activities
against breast cancer. Therefore, the specific aim of the present study
was to use transgenic mouse mammary tumors as a test model to explore the
therapeutic mechanisms of V. amygdalina as anti-cancer agent in the
treatment of breast cancer. To achieve our specific aim, we performed
both in vitro and in vivo studies. Acridine orange and propidium iodide
(AO/PI) staining were used to visualize live and dead cells with the
means of Cellometer Vision. Tumor volume and weight were measured. Tumor
histology was assessed by immunohistochemistry, and enzymatic activities
were determined by spectrophotometry. The extent of DNA damage was
evaluated by the Comet assay. Cell/tissue apoptosis was measured by the
flow cytometry. Data obtained from the AO/PI dye assessment indicated
that V. amygdalina significantly reduced the number of live cells in a
dose-dependent manner, showing a gradual increase in the loss of
viability in V. amygdalina-treated cells. We observed tumor growth
inhibition after 4 weeks of daily intraperitoneal administration of V.
amygdalina to trangenic mice. There was a significant increase in DNA
damage in V. amygdalina-treated mice compared to the control mice. Flow
cytometry data showed a strong dose-response relationship between V.
amygdalina treatment and annexin V/PI positive cells. Similarly, a
statistically significant and dose-dependent increase (p< 0.05) was
recorded with regard to caspase 3 activity. Data from enzyme analysis
(alaninine transaminase, aspartate transaminase, and creatinine) revealed
that V. amygdalina administration is not toxic to treated mice. These
results suggest that induction of cell death, DNA damage, and cell/tissue
apoptosis may be involved in the therapeutic mechanisms of V. amygdalina
in breast cancer. Collectively, the findings from this study provide
convincing evidence that V. amygdalina may represent a potential
anticancer candidate against breast cancer.

