Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differentiated gastric cancer cells have a potential to induce
cancer-associated fibroblasts


Gastric cancer is one of the most common causes of cancer death. Stromal
fibroblasts in the tumor microenvironment have recently been implicated
in tumor growth, invasion and metastasis. Cancer-associated fibroblasts
(CAFs) have been suggested to be responsible for progression of
undifferentiated scirrhous gastric cancers with vast fibrous stroma.
However, the relationship between differentiated gastric cancer cells and
CAFs in tumor progression remains unclear. In this study, we investigated
whether differentiated and/or undifferentiated human gastric cancer cells
induce CAFs. We used two differentiated human gastric cancer cells
(MKN-7, MKN-74) and two undifferentiated human scirrhous gastric cancer
cells (KATO-III, NUGC-4). Two types of human normal fibroblasts (WI-38,
FEF-3) were used for induction of CAFs. The conditioned media (CM) from
all cancer cells were obtained 48 hours after serum starvation. The
morphological change and expression of CAF-specific markers (-smooth
muscle actin (-SMA), fibroblast activation protein- (FAP)) were analyzed
by microscopy and Western blot analysis, respectively, in fibroblasts
treated with CM for 120 hours. Moreover, the effect of CM from CAFs in
the migration ability of cancer cells was evaluated using in vitro
Migration assay. The CM from differentiated MKN-7 and MKN-74 cells
induced the morphological change like CAFs in normal human fibroblasts,
whereas CM from undifferentiated KATO-III and NUGU-4 cells did not
induce. In fact, morphologically changed fibroblasts like CAFs showed
increased -SMA expression, whereas FAP expression was not increased. The
CM from morphologically changed fibroblasts, but not normal fibroblasts,
significantly enhanced the migration ability of MKN-7 cells. These
results suggest that differentiated gastric cancer cells have a potential
to induce CAFs in the invasion process of gastric cancers. CAF-targeting
therapy may be a promising antitumor strategy in differentiated gastric
cancers as well as undifferentiated scirrhous gastric cancers with vast
fibrous stroma.

