Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The NCI exceptional responders initiatives: Initial feasibility
result


Introduction: Preliminary data show that up to 10% of patients on early
clinical trials have complete (CR) or partial (PR) responses. Exceptional
responses (ER) are also observed in certain clinical cases using standard
chemotherapy. The ERI Pilot study is evaluating the molecular alterations
found in tumors from cancer patients who respond to a systemic treatment
(standard or investigational) that is ineffective in at least 90% of
patients. The study is available through the Cancer Trials Support Unit
(www.ctsu.org). Experimental Procedures Cases of patients who achieve a
CR or PR > 6 months are proposed by email at
NCIExceptionalResponders@mail.nih.gov. Once provisionally approved, the
proposer sends tissue to a central repository, where the tissue is
evaluated for percent tumor &necrosis; nucleic acids are isolated & sent
for whole exome, mRNA & deep targeted sequencing. Tissue may be frozen or
formalin fixed paraffin embedded but must be at least an entire core
biopsy. Data will be correlated with mechanism of action of the treatment
given. The ERI pilot study will characterize > 100 ERs. If sufficient
tissue is available, whole genome sequencing &other molecular analysis
may be done. We anticipate that some specimens will not be of sufficient
quality/quantity; thus many more tumors will need to be submitted to
obtain these results. Six months after the genomic data are generated
they will be released to a publicly available, controlled access database
to facilitate research by qualified investigators. The ERI study accepts
all types of malignant disease in adults or children if adequate tissue
obtained prior to the ER exists. The ER could have been to an approved or
investigational, targeted, or non-targeted systemic treatment. The
feasibility of retrospectively collecting tumor tissue & clinical data
for genomic analysis is a goal of the ERI study. Results: The ER study
was activated on September 24, 2014. As of December 2, > 80 cases have
been proposed, 46 are provisionally approved & 26 cases were not ERs or
were withdrawn. Accepted Cases: solid & hematologic tumors (2 brain, 4
breast, 2 colon, 6 gastric, 1 hepatocellular, 7 head/neck, 2 renal, 2
lung cancer, 1 melanoma, 2 ovarian, 6 pancreatic, 2 prostate and 4
sarcomas; 2 acute leukemia, 2 lymphoma, 1 myeloma). Approximately 75%
involved standard & 25% involved targeted drugs or combinations. Tissue
analysis is ongoing & results will be presented. Conclusions: Collection
of archived tissue from ERs for genomic evaluation is feasible. Efficient
ER case identification occurs through expert review and consensus-based
case selection.

