Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: uPAR mediated endothelial targeting by oncolytic measles virus


Background: The urokinase receptor (uPAR) is over-expressed in tumor
cells as well as in tumor endothelium and plays a critical role in tumor
neovascularization. We have recently rescued an oncolytic measles virus
fully retargeted against human uPAR (MV-h-uPA). The aim of this study was
to further characterize the endothelial targeting capabilities of
MV-h-uPA over MV-GFP.Methods: In vitro cytotoxicity assays were performed
in unstimulated and stimulated HUVEC, and the effects of both viruses
were analyzed. The effects of MV-GFP and MV-h-uPA on actively forming vs.
established capillaries was investigated using the matrigel tube
formation assay. Endothelial to tumor transfer of MV-uPA or MV-GFP was
investigated in breast, colon cnd kidney cancer cell lines expressing RFP
by overlaying infected HUVEC on tumor cell monolayers. The
mechanisms/kinetics of viral transfer from HUVEC to tumor cells was
characterized. Microvessel density of tumors treated with MV-h-uPA was
quantitated by immunohistochemistry using an antibody against
CD31.Results: MV-h-uPA and MV-GFP induced cytotoxicity at 24, 48 and 72
hours in stimulated HUVECs. MV-h-uPA replicated more efficiently in
growth factor stimulated, compared to resting HUVECs. Interestingly,
MV-h-uPA, but not MV-GFP successfully infected actively forming
(angiogenic) HUVEC capillaries, as assessed by mean fluorescence
quantification of GFP expression of infected capillaries. On the other
hand, the non-targeted MV-GFP predominantly infected already established
HUVEC capillaries (infected 24 hours after tubes were formed), an effect
not observed with MV-h-uPA. Importantly, MV-h-uPA did not induce vascular
disrupting effects in HUVEC capillaries. MV-h-uPA was successfully
transferred from infected endothelial cells to tumor cells. This effect
was mediated by heterofusion, as chemical inhibition of virus induced
fusion at different time points during co-culture completely blocked EC
to TC transfer. Heterofusion occurred as early as 4 hours after
endothelial cell overlay into tumor cell cultures. EC to TC viral
transfer resulted in significant tumor cell cytotoxicity.Conclusion: The
above results demonstrate the improved ability of uPAR retargeted
oncolytic measles virus to infect, replicate and successfully infect
angiogenic endothelial cells, as well as successful EC to TC transfer in
vitro, resulting in tumor cell cytotoxicity. Vascular targeting by
oncolytic MVs may result in improved tumor cell delivery in vivo, and
enhanced antitumor effects.

