Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of PRKD2 in HSP90- and hypoxia-mediated
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition


The protein kinase D (PRKD) family of serine/threonine kinases belongs to
the calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase superfamily and comprises
three isoforms, PRKD1, PRKD2 and PRKD3. We have recently identified PRKD2
as a novel client of HSP90 chaperone in several cancer cell lines.
Depletion of PRKD2 protein following pharmacologic inhibition of HSP90
was associated with tumor cell death in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore,
abrogation of PRKD2 in cancer cells prevented hypoxia-induced
accumulation and promoter activity of HIF-1a, an oxygen sensor also shown
to be regulated by HSP90. Since, both HSP90 and hypoxia/HIF-1a regulate
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), we sought to investigate the
role played by PRKD2 in this process.Here we report that ectopic
expression of PRKD2 was associated with a change in morphology, from
epithelial polarized to a spindle-like phenotype, in lung and pancreatic
cancer cells. This observation was associated with impaired E-cadherin
and augmented vimentin protein levels. Pharmacologic inhibition of HSP90
was associated not only with PRKD2 degradation but also with decreased
vimentin expression. However, the higher remaining PRKD2 levels after
HSP90 inhibition of tumor cells expressing ectopic PRKD2 partially
restored the vimentin expression suggesting a contribution of kinase to
the chaperone-supported EMT. Incubation of cancer cells under low oxygen
atmosphere showed decreased epithelial marker proteins and elevated
vimentin levels, which was further enhanced by overexpressing PRKD2
suggesting that PRKD2 is involved in hypoxia-triggered EMT process. The
fact that PRKD2 is able to interact with hypoxia-stabilized HIF-1a, which
regulates EMT by controlling expression of Twist, a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor reported to repress E-cadherin,
suggests that PRKD2 may influence crucial EMT molecules via HIF-1a.
Altogether, these findings 1) suggest PRKD2 as a crucial modulator of
HSP90- and hypoxia-mediated EMT process, 2) suggest PRKD2 ablation
through HSP90 inhibition as a potential therapeutic strategy in cancer
with immediate implementation since several chaperone inhibitors are in
clinical trials and 3) promote the intensification of designing specific
PRKD2 inhibitors and their implementation in targeted therapy in human
cancer.

