Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The gain-of-function truncated GLI1 (TGLI1) promotes glioblastoma
angiogenesis by direct upregulation of VEGF-C and TEM7 expression


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most frequent and deadliest brain malignancy in
adults. GBM is associated with poor patient outcomes with less than five
percent of patients surviving five years after diagnosis. High tumor
vascularity is a hallmark of GBM and is associated with poor patient
prognosis. Glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1) is a transcription
factor that is the terminal effector of the Sonic Hedgehog (Shh)
signaling pathway. Our laboratory discovered an alternatively spliced
variant of GLI1, termed truncated GLI1 (TGLI1), which has an in-frame
deletion of 123 nucleotides corresponding to 41 amino acids. We have
demonstrated that: 1) TGLI1 is highly expressed in GBM cell lines,
patient tumors, and primary culture from the Wake Forest University Brain
Tumor Center of Excellence, but not in normal brain tissues; 2) TGLI1 is
a gain-of-function GLI1 with a higher propensity than GLI1 to induce
tumor cell migration and invasiveness; 3) TGLI1-expressing GBM xenografts
have greater vascularity compared to those expressing GLI1. However, to
date, the mechanisms underlying TGLI1-mediated angiogenesis in GBM are
still not well understood. To address this knowledge gap, we compared
TGLI1- with GLI1-expressing GBM xenografts for the expression profile
using an angiogenesis PCR array consisting of 84 angiogenesis-associated
genes. Our results showed that seven genes, including vascular
endothelial growth factor-C (VEGF-C) and tumor endothelial marker 7
(TEM7), were expressed at higher levels in TGLI1-expressing tumors
compared to those with GLI1. VEGF-C is a member of the VEGF family and
binds VEGFR2/3 to promote angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. TEM7 is a
transmembrane protein identified in the tumor endothelium with a
currently unidentified function, but it may play a role in capillary
morphogenesis. Results of the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
revealed that TGLI1, but not GLI1, directly bound the promoters of both
VEGF-C and TEM7 genes. Conditioned medium from TGLI1-expressing GBM cells
strongly induced tubule formation of brain microvascular endothelial
cells and the induction was prevented when VEGF-C or TEM7 expression in
the GBM cells were knocked down. Consistent with these results, we found
that TGLI1 expression was positively correlated with VEGF-C, TEM7, and
microvessel density in122 patient gliomas across all grades. The levels
of VEGF-C and TEM7 in patient specimens were also correlated with
microvessel density. Taken together, these findings further support an
important role for TGLI1 in promoting GBM angiogenesis, identify VEGF-C
and TEM7 as novel TGLI1 target genes and their involvement in
TGLI1-mediated vascularity, and provide a new insight into the molecular
underpinning of the excessive angiogenesis that is characteristic of GBM
(T32CA079448 to RC; 7R01NS087169-02 to HWL).

