Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting STAT3 as a novel therapy for ovarian clear cell carcinoma


Objective: Advanced ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC) carries a very
poor prognosis in large part secondary to the high rate of resistance to
standard platinum and taxane chemotherapy. STAT3 expression and
activation has been shown to regulate tumor progression in various human
cancers though has not been well studied in OCCC. Preliminary work in our
lab has demonstrated constitutive activation of STAT3 (pSTAT3Tyr705 or
pSTAT3727) in OCCC cell lines as well as human OCCC tumor tissue samples.
Significantly, pSTAT3 is expressed in the absence of other forms of
activated STAT (pSTAT1,2,6). Based on our preliminary data, we
hypothesized that use of a novel STAT3 inhibitor, HO-3867, would be an
effective agent against OCCC cell lines in vitro and in vivo using a
novel orthotopic mouse model.Methods: Five OCCC cell lines (JHOC, OVISE,
OVTOKO, RMGV, and ES2) were treated with HO-3867, cisplatin, or
paclitaxel alone and/or in combination. Protein expression in tumor
tissue and cell lines was determined by western blot (WB) and RT PCR was
used to analyze RNA expression levels. MTT assay, BrdU assay, ANNEXIN V
kit and flow cytometry were used to analyze cell viability,
proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. We use a novel orthotopic
murine model using an ovarian bursal injection which was developed in our
laboratory and has demonstrated primary ovarian tumor development and
peritoneal carcinomatosis.Results: Treatment with HO-3867 decreased
expression of pSTAT3 while total STAT3 remained constant. Treatment with
cisplatin or paclitaxel resulted in a relative increase in pSTAT3. The
inhibitory effect of HO-3867 on cell proliferation is associated with
G2/M phase cell cycle arrest and apoptosis (>45%) within 24 hours of
treatment. Treatment with HO-3867 resulted in a decrease in BCL2 and
cleavage of caspase 3, caspase 7, and PARP confirming induction of
apoptosis after treatment with HO-3867. Treatment with cisplatin or
paclitaxel was less effective at decreasing cell viability, reducing
proliferation, and inducing apoptosis. In vivo experiments using the
orthotopic murine model are ongoing.Conclusion: HO-3867, a novel STAT3
inhibitor, appears to be efficacious against OCCC in vitro as compared to
standard chemotherapeutics. Further investigation into this novel therapy
is warranted given the generally poor response of OCCC to our standard
chemotherapy regimens. Experiments to investigate the efficacy of HO-3867
in OCCC in vivo are underway.

