Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GLI2 inhibition suppresses metastasis of HER2+ breast cancer


Metastasis of breast cancer is a significant problem majorly in HER2
positive cancer, as there are no therapeutic targets known. Due to
inherent complexity of the process, underlying mechanisms of metastasis
are largely unknown. We have shown previously that HER2 overexpression
enhances the metastatic potential of breast cancer cells. The results
from our previous studies showed that a 22 fold increase in HER2
expression in MDA-MB-231 cells lead to several orders of magnitude
increase in the metastasis of the MDA-MB-231 cells. However, HER2
inhibition alone did not significantly suppress metastasis. Hence we
investigated the molecular changes induced by HER2 expression that may
promote metastasis of breast cancer cells. Interestingly, we observed an
increased expression of GLI2 in the metastatic tumors formed by HER2+
cells in the mice lungs. GLI2 is a transcription factor of sonic hedgehog
pathway and aberrant signaling of this pathway has been implicated in
several cancers. In addition, GLI2 is overexpressed in breast tumors and
associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer patients. GLI2 was
therefore silenced using shRNA to study its role in metastasis of
MDA-MB-231 high HER2 (HH) breast cancer cells. We achieved about 66%
knock down of GLI2 expression using GLI2 shRNA. Our results showed that
silencing of GLI2 inhibited the migration of HH cells by more than 60%.
Our results also demonstrated over 80% inhibition of the invasion of (HH)
cells with silenced GLI2. Furthermore, HH luciferase expressing cells
were transfected with GLI2 shRNA or scrambled shRNA and equal numbers of
live cells were injected intravenously in athymic nude mice. The
trajectory and growth of control and GLI2 silenced MDA-MB-231 HH cells
were monitored by non-invasive IVIS imaging system. A drastic reduction
of luminescence was observed in the lungs of mice injected with GLI2
silenced HH cells as compared to mice injected with control HH cells,
indicating inhibition of metastasis. Taken together our results establish
GLI2 as an important target for therapy in HER2+ metastatic breast
cancer. Further mechanistic studies are in progress. [Supported in part
by R01 grant CA129038 awarded to S.K.S. by the National Cancer Institute]

