Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of the NAD+- binding site affects GAPDH interactions in
the nuclei of cancer cells outside glucose metabolism


Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) is a pivotal enzyme of
the glycolytic pathway in cancer cells (the Warburg effect) which also
performs signaling/regulatory functions in several cellular pathways
including apoptosis and accelerated senescence. Multiple
post-translational modifications, e.g., phosphorylation, acetylation, and
nitrosylation, modulate functions and protein interactions of GAPDH in
the cell. To assess the potential role of GAPDH as a molecular target
within the cancer energy metabolism network, we (1) characterized
structural elements of human GAPDH polypeptide pertinent to its
intranuclear functions, and (2) evaluated mobility of nuclear GAPDH in
cancer cells treated with chemotherapeutic agents. Using MALDI-TOF
analysis, we identified novel phosphorylation sites within the
NAD+-binding center of GAPDH at Y94, Ser98, and Thr99. We generated
polyclonal antibody specific to phosphoThr99-containing peptide within
GAPDH, and demonstrated accumulation of T99-phosphoGAPDH in the nuclear
fractions of A549 cancer cells following the cytotoxic stress using
2D-Western blot analysis. Analysis of the extant crystal structures for
human GAPDH and molecular modeling experiments indicated that T99 is
adjacent to the NAD+-binding site. Molecular mechanics and dynamics
experiments suggested that mutation of Thr99 may adversely affect the
local geometry of the NAD+-binding cleft, and is likely to decrease
affinity for NAD+. We performed site-mutagenesis of the functional
domains in GAPDH, and estimated the enzymatic properties, intranuclear
distribution, and intranuclear mobility of GAPDH mutated variants.
Site-mutagenesis at positions S98 and T99 in the NAD+-binding center
abrogated enzymatic activity of GAPDH due to decreased affinity to NAD+
(Km = 0.410.17 mM in T99I vs. 0.040.01 mM in wild type GAPDH). FRAP
analysis showed that mutation in NAD+-binding center of GAPDH didn't
disrupt its nuclear translocation after chemotherapeutic agents, but
prevented intranuclear interactions. Molecular dynamics parameters of
nuclear EGFP_GAPDH_WT before vs. after araC treatment were: t(1/2) = 0.12
vs. 1.09 sec, and diffusion coefficient D = 28.88 vs. 3.2 m2/s. The same
parameters for EGFP-GAPDH_T99I were: t(1/2) 0.39 vs. 0.68 sec, and D =
9.1 vs. 5.1 m2/s. The studies on the functional consequences and a
mechanism of Thr99 phosphorylation will open avenues to the rational
design of modulators of GAPDH activity, an important target in anticancer
therapy.

