Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The proteomic characterization of HNSCC patient-derived xenografts


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the fifth most common
cancer in the US and a leading cancer worldwide. There has been little
change in the prognosis for these patients despite extensive research and
FDA approval of the targeted therapy cetuximab. Cetuximab has been
effective in immortalized HNSCC cell lines but demonstrates only a modest
benefit for a subset of patients. This gap between pre-clinical discovery
and testing and final clinical efficacy can be narrowed improving the
translational relevance of preclinical model systems. Patient derived
xenografts (PDXs) have emerged as a promising approach in several
cancers. We sought to define and compare the protein expression patterns
between primary HNSCC and PDXs derived from 13 patient tumors and test
predictive biomarkers to cetuximab therapy.We compared 13 PDXs propagated
at the University of Pittsburgh and analyzed for the expression levels of
190 proteins by reverse-phase protein array (RPPA) to 212 HNSCC specimens
and 4566 cancer specimens from TCGA also analyzed by RPPA. We found that
12/13 PDXs were more like HNSCC than any of 14 other cancer types
analyzed. Unsupervised clustering of the primary HNSCC and the PDXs
demonstrated that PDXs clustered together, indicating some differences in
protein expression between HNSCC and PDXs. Further analysis demonstrated
that a subset of the proteins were different between the mouse derived
PDXs and the primary HNSCC while a second subset were similar between
mouse derived PDXs and primary HNSCC. Proteins that were different
between these two groups may be poor candidates for translational models,
but proteins that were similar may prove useful. We tested the different
responses to cetuximab using the PDXs. We found that a PDX with high
EGFR/pEGFR expression was more sensitive to cetuximab treatment than a
PDX with low EGFR/pEGFR expression.These results suggest that improved
model systems used for translational may predict clinical responses. RPPA
measurement of protein expression in PDXs and primary cancers
demonstrates that PDXs do represent HNSCC overall. Comparison of the PDXs
specifically with primary HNSCC reveals that PDXs are not an appropriate
model system for all targeted therapies/studies but provide an effective
model for many studies of interest in the field.

