Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of CpG island methylation with clinical and pathologic
characteristics in metastatic colorectal cancer patients


Background: Colorectal cancer morbidity and mortality rates vary by race
and ethnicity. The combined contribution of genetics and environment to
response to chemotherapy, progression-free and overall survival in
colorectal cancer patients is unclear, but CpG island hypermethylation
(CIMP), a discrete molecular subtype of colorectal cancer, is associated
with inflammation and environmental exposures. Hence our main objective
is to assess correlation between various modifiable risk factors and CIMP
status among metastatic colorectal cancer patients.Methods: We
characterized CIMP methylation (MINT1, MINT2, MINT31, p14, p16, and MLH1)
in 229 metastatic colorectal cancer patients using PCR amplification of
bisulfite treated DNA followed by pyrosequencing. The number of
methylated probes were averaged to obtain the% methylation with CIMP-High
(CIMP-H) being defined as 40% of probes methylated. Associations of
demographic and clinical characteristics, including BMI, diabetes,
obesity, physical activity, smoking and drinking status, as well as
presence or absence of other molecular alterations (BRAF, KRAS, NRAS,
PIK3CA and PTEN loss) with overall survival were assessed in
multivariable-adjusted Cox proportional hazards models.Results:When
treating methylation as a continuous variable, patients with BRAF
mutation had higher methylation as compared to participants with BRAF
wildtype (40.6% vs 20.5%, p = 0.001). White, non-Hispanic (WNH) patients
had greater degree of tumor methylation (24.8%) as compared to other
racial categories (p = 0.02). When classified as a categorical variable,
moderate to vigorous physical activity was associated with higher rate of
having any methylated probes, as compared to sedentary patients (p =
0.02). CIMP status was not associated with OS in these patients in
multivariable-adjusted Cox models. However when stratified by CIMP
status. When stratified by CIMP status; among patients with 0-40%
methylation, KRAS mutation was associated with poor OS(HR = 3.19, p =
0.006) and diabetes was protective (HR = .14, p = 0.025). Among patients
with high methylation(41-100%) methylation, obesity was associated with
poor OS (HR = 5.20, p = 0.038) and former smoking was associated with
poor OS(HR = 2.92, p = 0.05). When stratified by KRAS mutation status,
among patients with KRAS wildtype, obesity was associated with poor OS(HR
= 2.86, p = 0.019) and among patients with KRAS mutation, diabetes was
protective (HR = 0.18, p = 0.033)Conclusion and Impact:CpG island
methylator phenotype was associated with unique clinicopathologic
characteristics. Methylation, as assessed by the 6-gene CIMP panel, was
not associated with worse outcomes after correcting for the KRAS
mutations, a well-established genetic marker of poor prognosis.
Hypermethylation did appear to modulate outcomes in obese patients with
hypermethylated tumors.

