Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid conversion to resistance, of a colon PDX with ret-fusion, by
ponatinib treatment could potentially be attributed to the introduction
of the gate keeper mutation V804M


RET encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) involved in cellular
mechanisms of proliferation, migration and differentiation. RET fusions
with different genes at 10q11.2 result in constitutively activation and
drive tumor development in various cancers: 10-20% of sporadic papillary
thyroid cancer1, spitzoid neoplasms, CMML and 1% of lung
adenocarcinomas2,3. RET fusions have been suggested to be important
therapeutic targets. Ponatinib, a multi-kinase inhibitor, was approved
for the treatment of Ph+ chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and acute
lymphoblast leukemia (ALL), including CML with T315I/imatinib-resistance.
Ponatinib has recently been found to potently inhibit the common NSCLC
fusion variant, KIF5B-RET at clinically-achievable concentrations.We have
established large collection of colorectal patient derived xenografts
(PDXs)4,5. Two of the poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, CR1520 and
CR2518, contain two different chromosome 10 in-frame RET-fusions,
CCDC6-RET (CR2518) and NCOA4-RET (CR1520), as revealed by RNAseq and
Sanger Sequencing6. Both models have also demonstrated over-expressing
ret gene at mRNA levels. More importantly, they both responded Ponatinib
significantly along with dephosphorylation of RET and downstream AKT,
confirming these two types of Ret fusions as oncogenic drivers in these
two models6. In addition, we also observed that Ponatinib treatment also
rapidly drives CR2518 into its resistance (The resistant derivative is
called CR2545). To investigate the underlying mechanism of the
resistance, we performed RNAseq analysis of CR2545, which revealed
retaining of the ret-fusion, but also the introduction of a previously
described gate-keeper mutation, V804M, at ret kinase domain. V804M, a
mutation frequently found in familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC),
introduces bulky amino acid at position 804 and found to resistant to
vandetanib. This may contribute to the resistance. However, this notion
apparently contradicts to the previous observation/claim that V804M is
sensitive to Ponatinib7, and ponatinib should be used to treat
RET-V804M/L cancers. It is possible that the described V804M containing
vandetanib resistant cells are sensitive to ponatinib, but via a non-RET
mechanism for the multi-kinase inhibition nature of ponatinib; or in our
case, there are other non-RET Ponatinib resistant mechanisms been
introduced in CR2545 where RET is no longer the key oncogenic driver. We
are currently testing other RET inhibitors and also assessing
pharmacodanamic (PD) parameters to further investigate RET resistant
mechanism. The further findings from the ongoing studies will be
presented at the meeting.

