Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune-inhibitory HLA-G is expressed in the tumor microenvironment
of Ewing Sarcomas


Ewing Sarcoma (EwS) is an aggressive malignancy of bone and soft tissue
which still lacks efficient treatment in case of metastases and relapse.
Cellular immunotherapies for EwS are under development, but inhibitory
molecules in the tumor microenvironment may counteract antitumor immune
responses by preexisting or therapeutic immune effector cells. Here we
hypothesized that the non-classical HLA-molecule HLA-G may contribute to
immune escape of EwS. HLA-G is a potent inhibitor of both T cells and NK
cells. It is naturally expressed on trophoblast cells during pregnancy as
well as on mesenchymal stem cells from which EwS cells are thought to
originate. We analyzed expression of membrane-bound HLA-G1 by flow
cytometry and expression of shedded HLA-G1 and soluble HLA-G5 by ELISA in
14 EwS cell lines with and without stimulation with interferon- (IFN-).
Whereas all cell lines failed to express HLA-G1 both before and after
IFN- stimulation, and none secreted HLA-G without stimulation, 1 of 14
cell lines (TC-32) responded to IFN- stimulation by significant
upregulation of soluble HLA-G (p = 0.004). To study HLA-G expression in
EwS within their tumor microenvironment, we analyzed paraffin-embedded
pretherapeutic tumor biopsies from 35 patients by IHC using the HLA-G
specific antibody clone 4H84 and detected HLA-G expression in 12 cases
(34%), either on the tumor cells (10/35) and/or on infiltrating
lymphocytes (7/35). We further studied the presence of soluble HLA-G and
HLA-G+ T cells in the peripheral blood of 19 EwS patients and 15 healthy
donors. Serum HLA-G was not increased in the EwS patients compared to
healthy controls. Moreover, no significant difference in the proportions
of naturally occurring HLA-G+CD4+ (Mean 0.90.8% vs. 0.90.6%, p = 0.627)
or HLA-G+CD8+ (Mean 1.21.2% vs. 1.71.0%, p = 0.134) suppressor T cells
among peripheral blood lymphocytes was found between EwS patients and
healthy donors by flow cytometry. Thus, systemic HLA-G secretion and
expression is unlikely to have a major role in EwS, but the presence of
HLA-G+ cells found in EwS biopsies in a substantial proportion of
patients deserves further exploration. To address the potential
functional relevance of HLA-G+ cells in the tumor microenvironment, we
expressed HLA-G1 in 2 EwS cell lines by retroviral gene transfer.
Coincubation of HLA-G-expressing EwS cells with freshly isolated
allogeneic NK-cells resulted in suppression of EwS cell lysis by NK cells
in 3 of 6 NK cell donors in a flow cytometry based cytotoxicity assay. In
detail, HLA-G+ EwS cells suppressed NK-cell cytotoxicity up to 47.014.8%,
(VH-64, p = 0.001) and up to 87.016.0% (WE-68, p = 0.002) compared to
mock transduced control.We conclude that local expression of HLA-G within
the tumor microenvironment in EwS is a candidate mediator of immune
escape and a potential barrier to cellular immunotherapeutics. Strategies
that modulate HLA-G expression may be effective to overcome local immune
suppression in this cancer.

