Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of ARv567es expression profile in the prostate
cancer clinical samples with a newly developed antibody


Background: Androgen receptor splice variants (AR-Vs) have emerged as an
important diagnostic biomarker and potential therapeutic oncotarget in
castration-resistant prostate cancer. Extensive RNA sequencing of a large
cohort of metastases from men treated with androgen deprivation therapy
(ADT) including abiraterone and enzalutamide, revealed a marked increase
in the amount and variety of AR-Vs when compared to primary tumor
samples. These and other data suggest that the AR-Vs should have a
selective growth advantage over the full-length AR (AR-FL). However, this
growth advantage only occurs after ADT even though AR-FL and AR-V RNA
expression are both present in the tumor. Methods: In order to determine
how this progression to AR-V predominance occurs, we used the LuCaP 86.2
xenograft, which has a genomic rearrangement of the AR gene so that tumor
cells either express AR-FL or ARv567es. Xenografts were implanted sc into
the flanks of SCID mice. When tumors reached a volume of 200 mm3 cohorts
of mice were castrated and followed then euthanized at 0, 1 day, 1 week,
or 3 weeks post-castration. Intact control mice bearing LuCaP 86.2
xenografts were euthanized at similar time points. Tumors were analyzed
for AR-FL and ARv567es mRNA and protein. In addition canonical and AR-V
regulated gene expression was analyzed by quantitative PCR. We then used
an ARv567es antibody to examine the presence of ARv567es in 155
metastases. Results: The ARv567es antibody is a rabbit monoclonal
antibody against the unique exon-9 amino acid sequence expressed by
ARv567es (CERAASVHF). This antibody does not react with AR-FL. As
previously described, there is no difference in growth rates for
castration-resistant LuCaP 86.2 xenografts grown in intact and castrate
mice. Following castration there was a marked increase in ARv567es
nuclear staining (p Background: Androgen receptor splice variants (AR-Vs)
have emerged as an important diagnostic biomarker and potential
therapeutic oncotarget in castration-resistant prostate cancer. Extensive
RNA sequencing of a large cohort of metastases from men treated with
androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) including abiraterone and
enzalutamide, revealed a marked increase in the amount and variety of
AR-Vs when compared to primary tumor samples. These and other data
suggest that the AR-Vs should have a selective growth advantage over the
full-length AR (AR-FL). However, this growth advantage only occurs after
ADT even though AR-FL and AR-V RNA expression are both present in the
tumor. Methods: In order to determine how this progression to AR-V
predominance occurs, we used the LuCaP 86.2 xenograft, which has a
genomic rearrangement of the AR gene so that tumor cells either express
AR-FL or ARv567es. Xenografts were implanted sc into the flanks of SCID
mice. When tumors reached a volume of 200 mm3 cohorts of mice were
castrated and followed then euthanized at 0, 1 day, 1 week, or 3 weeks
post-castration. Intact control mice bearing LuCaP 86.2 xenografts were
euthanized at similar time points. Tumors were analyzed for AR-FL and
ARv567es mRNA and protein. In addition canonical and AR-V regulated gene
expression was analyzed by quantitative PCR. We then used an ARv567es
antibody to examine the presence of ARv567es in 155 metastases. Results:
The ARv567es antibody is a rabbit monoclonal antibody against the unique
exon-9 amino acid sequence expressed by ARv567es (CERAASVHF). This
antibody does not react with AR-FL. As previously described, there is no
difference in growth rates for castration-resistant LuCaP 86.2 xenografts
grown in intact and castrate mice. Following castration there was a
marked increase in ARv567es nuclear staining (p < 0.01), with no
significant change in ARv567es mRNA. AR-amino terminal staining was
unchanged following castration; however, consistent with the loss of
expression of AR-FL protein and increase in ARv567es protein, there was
no detectable carboxy-terminal AR protein staining. PSA gene expression
did not change following castration but a marked increase in TMPRSS2,
UGT2B17, and UBE2C gene expression was seen, consistent with a shift from
ligand-mediated AR-FL activity to AR-V activity. Finally,
immunohistochemistry on a tissue microarray (TMA) of 155 metastases from
55 patients in the University of Washington rapid autopsy program
demonstrated a significant increase in AR-V staining compared to a
primary tumor TMA. Summary: This study demonstrates that expression of
ARv567es in development of a castrate resistant xenograft may be
regulated at the level of protein translation and that the presence of an
AR gene rearrangement for ARv567es prior to castration may be a marker
that the tumor can become resistant to castration by an AR-V mechanism.

