Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The molecular profiles of disseminated tumor cells in a Patient
Derived Xenograft model recapitulate those found in patient bone marrow


ObjectiveDisseminated tumor cells (DTCs) found in the bone marrow (BM) of
breast cancer patients portends a poor prognosis. BM DTCs are thought to
be intermediaries in the metastatic process and may exhibit molecular
features different from the primary tumor. Using Patient Derived
Xenograft system, we report the presence of transcript associated with
DTCs and their correlation to distant disease development.Experimental
proceduresAfter informed consent, human breast adenocarcinomas were
prospectively collected from 5 patients with estrogen receptor
negative/Her2 negative tumors and implanted into NOD/SCID mouse mammary
fat pad as previous described. BM was collected from the femur and tibia
from mice at varying passages of the tumors and analyzed for
human-specific transcripts by qRT-PCR. Human gene expression array
analysis (Affymetrix Human gene 1.0ST) was performed on the BMs from all
WHIM17 mice, control non-tumor bearing mice, breast cancer patients and
that of healthy volunteers.ResultsBM was screened from 18 tumor bearing
mice for the presence of DTCs of which 10 mice developed metastatic
tumors. All mice developed from one patient line (WHIM17) developed
metastatic tumors. Further microanalysis of WHIM 17 BM showed 300 genes
upregulated over 10 fold in their BM compared to non-tumor bearing mice.
7 of these genes were detected in the BM of breast cancer patients but
completely absent in BM of healthy volunteers. They are TNFRSF17, CD226,
HIST1H4E, MDM2, TFAM, DDT, and RPS20. The presence of these transcripts
was confirmed by qRT-PCR and was detected in the BM of mice which
developed metastatic tumors. Of the 32 genes which we found significantly
upregulated in the BM of stage II/III breast cancer patients prior to
treatment who subsequently developed metastatic tumors compared to
similar patients who did not develop metastatic disease, DCSR3 and STAM2
were upregulated in all WHIM17 mice.ConclusionThe presence of DTCs in the
BM and its association with metastatic outcome was observed in the PDX
model system. Our results provide an experimental support for the
clinical association of DTCs in the BM of early stage breast cancer
patients with recurrent disease development. We believe the PDX mice
recreate a more clinically relevant model compared to other xenograft
models. Moreover, using this system, we have identified new targetable
genes associated with DTCS.

