Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diagnosis of lung tumor types based on metabolomic profiles in
lymph node aspirates


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the US and
worldwide. The majority of lung cancer patients are diagnosed with an
advanced stage, precluding curable surgical resection, and therapy is
limited to thoracic radiation and chemotherapy. The efficacies have
improved in recent years due to patient pre-selection based on the
cytology of fine needle aspirates of lymph nodes, which harbor
circulating tumor cells. We report herein the evaluation of lymph node
aspirates for the presence of metabolite features that are suitable to
distinguish patients with lung cancer from patients without malignancies
and to separate patients with adenocarcinoma from patients with squamous
cell carcinoma. The results provide evidence that patient groups can be
separated based on their metabolite profiles. Multivariate statistical
analyses (PLS and OPLS) produce a set of consensus features that can be
further developed into clinical biomarkers. Two of the features were
identified as kynurenine and oxidized glutathione, and their identities
were confirmed in a second larger sample set. In addition, the
accompanying metabolites glutamate, glutamine and tryptophan were
included in the validation experiment to utilize relative metabolite
ratios as indicators for corresponding enzyme activities. The validation
results demonstrate significant differences in metabolites and metabolite
ratios between lymph node aspirates harboring a circulating tumor cell
and aspirates negative for malignancy. Subsequently, a second set of
lymph node samples were analyzed for an extended panel of metabolites and
of these 42 were suitable biomarker to be statistically significant to
distinguish between at least one of the pair wise comparisons. Together
the results demonstrate that metabolite profiles in lymph node aspirates
are suitable to differentiate patients with adenocarcinoma from patients
with squamous cell carcinoma.

