Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic deletion of TNF in mice inhibits UVR-induced development
of cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas via suppression of its own
receptors and associated signals to epidermal cell survival


Skin cancer is the second most common malignancy encountered in the U.S.
with an expected diagnosis of 1.3 million new cases of non-melanoma skin
cancer each year. Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and basal cell
carcinoma (BCC) are the most common non-melanoma forms of human skin
cancer. BCC is rarely life threatening because it is slow growing and is
mostly localized. SCC, unlike BCC, invades the nearby tissue. Chronic
exposure to ultraviolet radiation (UVR) is the most common etiologic
factor linked to the development of cutaneous SCC. PKC transgenic mice
provide a unique model to investigate the molecular basis of the
development of SCC. PKC is a major intracellular receptor for the mouse
skin tumor promoter 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). PKC is
among six isoforms (, , , , , ) expressed in the mouse skin. To determine
the in vivo functional specificity of PKC in mouse skin carcinogenesis,
we generated FVB/N PKC transgenic mouse lines 224 and 215 that
overexpress approximately 8- and 18-fold respectively PKC protein over
endogenous levels in basal epidermal cells. We observed that epidermal
PKC level dictates the susceptibility of transgenic mice to the
development of SCC elicited by either the repeated exposure to UVR or
using the DMBA-TPA tumor promotion protocol. Our earlier studies to
elucidate mechanisms of PKC-mediated development of SCC indicated an
elevated release of cytokine TNF. To conclusively determine whether TNF
is essential for the development of SCC in PKC transgenic mice, we
generated TNF-knockout//PKC transgenic mice by crossbreeding TNF knockout
mice with PKC transgenic mice. We now present that deletion of both TNF
alleles in PKC transgenic mice significantly (p = 0.0023) inhibited the
development of cutaneous SCC by repeated UVR exposures. PKC
overexpressing mice deficient in TNF elicited both increase in SCC
latency (21 weeks) and decrease in SCC incidence (55%). Inhibition of SCC
development in TNF-knockout//PKC transgenic mice accompanied by: 1)
suppression of the expression levels of TNF receptors TNFRI and TNFRII,
2) inhibition of the activation of transcription factors Stat3 and NF-B,
and 3) decreased expression levels of cell proliferation marker ornithine
decarboxylase and metastatic markers MMP9 and MMP7. In summary, our
results indicate that deletion of TNF in mice inhibits UVR-induced
development of cutaneous SCC probably via suppression of its own
receptors and associated signals to epidermal cell survival pathways.
(Support: NIH Grant CA102431)

