Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of the functional relevance of novel alternative splicing
events in non-small cell lung cancer


Lung cancer is the most common cause of death by cancer worldwide.
Deregulation of alternative splicing (AS) is becoming increasingly
relevant for the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of lung tumor
progression. Genome-wide microarrays containing probes in exons and
junctions can be used to identify differential AS events. We developed an
algorithm, called ExonPointer, which was optimized to detect AS events
using this kind of platforms. Using this technique, we successfully
detected splicing events regulated by the oncogene serine/arginine-rich
splicing factor 1 (SRSF1) in lung cancer cell lines. Moreover, four of
these genes, ATP11C, IQCB1, TUBD1 and PRRC2C, showed a significantly
different pattern of AS in primary non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
compared with normal lung tissue. In the case of PRRC2C, we also
demonstrated that the deregulation of the splicing event was important
for tumor progression. We next applied the same technique to target
differential AS events in NSCLC primary tissues (13 lung squamous cell
carcinomas and 9 lung adenocarcinomas). Their paired normal lung tissues
were used as reference. The validation rate for the top 20 events
identified by ExonPointer was 70%. Gene cluster analyses showed an
enrichment of clusters implicated in cancer development such as Cellular
Growth and Proliferation, or Cell Death and Survival. Among others, we
observed accumulation of a tumor-specific splice variant in
Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase 9 (MAPK9 or JNK2). The tumor-specific
variant for this gene contains an alternative exon 2 which causes a frame
shift introducing a premature stop codon. Functional analyses using
isoform-specific siRNAs showed that this variant did not affect tumor
growth or progression. However, its expression significantly correlated
with the expression of Regulator of Nonsense Transcripts 3A and B (UPF3A
and UPF3B) in 42 lung cancer cell lines. These proteins belong to the
Nonsense Mediated Decay (NMD) pathway, which eliminates aberrant mRNA
transcripts, suggesting that the presence of some aberrant AS variants in
lung cancer are caused by a malfunction of NMD. In conclusion, we have
developed a reliable tool for the high throughput analysis of AS, and
have identified new splicing events in lung cancer that can be studied as
potential diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets.

