Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Excision DNA repair: a biomarker of colorectal cancer onset and
its chemotherapy


Introduction: DNA repair maintains universal genomic stability and
preserves cellular functions. Defective DNA repair predisposes
individuals to cancer by accumulating DNA damage and mutations.
Measurement of DNA repair capacity (DRC) through functional assays
integrates effects of epigenetic factors, genetic polymorphisms, gene
expression, stability of gene product, effect of inhibitors/stimulators,
environmental and lifestyle factors.Methods: We recently developed
functional assays to measure nucleotide (NER) and base excision (BER)
repair capacities in human tissues (1). MiRNA, lncRNA and DNA repair
transcript levels were analysed by RT PCR, protein expressions by western
blotting and immunohistochemistry, activities of SMUG1 and UNG1,2 by
fluorimetric assay. SNPs were determined by KASP genotyping, their
functional relevance by a luciferase reporter assay.Results: Healthy
subjects exposed to chemical carcinogens exhibited decreased DNA damage
and increased BER capacity. On the contrary, DRC were significantly lower
and DNA damage higher in incident colorectal cancer (CRC) patients than
in matched control subjects. In CRC patients the DRC, significantly lower
at the time of diagnosis, increased to the levels observed in healthy
controls following the completion of chemotherapy(2). We measured DRC in
blood cells, healthy mucosa and tumor tissues from 70 patients with
sporadic CRC. Lymphocytes in contrast to tumor tissues exhibited lowest
DRC(1). SNPs in miRNA binding sites of SMUG1 affected significantly
survival in 5-fluorouracil(5FU)-treated CRC patients(3). Further
mechanistic investigation comprises transcript levels, protein
expressions as well as uracil glycosylase activities in cell
lysate.Discussion/Evaluation: Our data indicate clearly alterations in
excision DNA repair kinetics in CRC patients. However, the DRC should be
determined in particular histo-pathological subtypes separately as well
as in precancerous adenomas. Mechanistic investigations are undertaken on
BER, SMUG1 and UNG1,2 gylcosylases in particular, in relation to
5FU-treated CRC. The data are being evaluated regarding
post-transcriptional regulation of DNA repair by miRNA and lncRNA, as
suggested by our recent report(3).Conclusion: Our data on DRC in
modulating the chemotherapy outcome are quite promissing. However, the
analysis of sequential steps from subjects in risk to cancer patients may
further elucidate the prognostic value of DNA excision
repair.References:1. Slyskova et al.
Clin.CancerRes.2012;18:5878-58872.Slyskova et al.
Molec.Carcinogenesis2014,Epub ahead of print3.Pardini et al.
Clin.CancerRes.2013;19:6044-60564.Yang et al.
MolCellProbes.2011;25:219-221Support: CZ:GACR:P310/12/1585, CZ:IGA MZCR
NT 13424 and 14329

