Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative analysis of RNA sequencing methods for
characterization of cancer transcriptomics


RNA sequencing (RNASeq) provides the ability to comprehensively assay the
transcriptome in a high-throughput manner. Current there are a variety of
library preparation methodologies for measuring and sequencing the
transcriptome depending on (a) the sample source and (b) outcomes of
interest. Beyond protocol selection, the requisite computational tools
and resources are significant considerations in processing, analyzing and
reporting the experimental results. While there are many resources
readily available to effectively perform RNA-seq experiments, optimal
protocols and analysis tools for the cancer domain remain to be
developed.We have developed and characterized a set of protocols and
analysis procedures that comprise an RNA-seq pipeline that can
effectively be used in a cancer research setting. The analysis pipeline
consists of a sequence of functions and tools to process and clean the
raw data, generate quality control and summary metrics, and perform
secondary analyses that include expression quantification, fusion
detection and somatic mutation calling. We applied this pipeline to three
different RNAseq strategies (whole-transcriptome, exome, and targeted
RNA-seq) and performed an in-depth comparative analysis to investigate
the implications of the choice of strategy on the downstream analysis and
results. More specifically, we investigated the impact of library
preparation methods on the dynamic range and expression profiles, variant
calling and fusion detection. While the data indicated that capture-based
protocols provided efficient methods for sampling transcripts as compared
to whole-transcriptome RNA-seq, there are considerations in its use,
particularly for duplicate reads and uncaptured transcripts. We
illustrate the implications of these issues on downstream analysis, such
as somatic mutation and fusion calling and differential expression.In
summary, we have described a RNA-seq analysis platform that provides a
varied set of library preparations and analytical components for
large-scale clinical or research transcriptomics. Our analysis has
characterized the technical features of the different library
preparations, providing a necessary understanding of the costs and
benefits of each method and the potential effects on the downstream
analyses.

