Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-Myc is critical for apoptosis in 4-hyroxynonenal-treated
colorectal cancer cells


The transcription factor c-myc has an important role in the control of
cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. The dysregulation of
c-myc activity is a feature of many cancers. Although it enhances
proliferation, the overexpression of c-myc also sensitizes cells to a
variety of pro-apoptotic stimuli. 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE) is a reactive
lipid that is generated as a consequence of oxidative stress, and is
found to be elevated in many solid lesions. HNE is known to promote
apoptosis in various cancer cell types, including colorectal cancer
cells. We therefore decided to investigate whether c-myc has a role in
HNE-induced apoptosis in this setting.We began by investigating the
effect of HNE on c-myc expression and function. Treatment of colorectal
cancer cell lines RKO and HCT-116 with HNE caused a time- and
concentration-dependent nuclear accumulation of c-myc protein. The
increase in nuclear c-myc levels was not accompanied by an increase in
either c-myc mRNA or total cellular levels, leading us to speculate that
enhanced nuclear import or sequestration are involved. To evaluate
whether c-myc activity was also increased in response to HNE, we used a
luciferase reporter construct bearing a conserved c-myc binding element.
These data reveal that in addition to causing its nuclear accumulation,
HNE also enhances c-myc transcriptional activity.To examine the
consequence of c-myc activation and explore its role in HNE-induced
apoptosis, we silenced c-myc expression using 3 different siRNA sequences
in both the RKO and HCT-116 cell lines. Silencing c-myc expression caused
a significant attenuation of apoptosis in HNE-treated cells, as evidenced
by a reduction in caspase 3 cleavage, PARP cleavage, and caspase 3
activity assays. To investigate the reason behind this effect, we
examined known pathways for HNE-induced apoptosis. In accordance with
published data, we find that HNE promotes apoptosis through the ASK1-JNK
pathway, and that apoptosis can be blocked with an ASK1-specific
inhibitor. Furthermore, our data show for the first time that silencing
c-myc expression leads to a profound reduction in the phosphorylation and
activity of JNK, which we propose explains the reduction in apoptosis in
c-myc deficient cells.Since c-myc is a protein of interest and potential
target for colorectal therapy, the consequence of its inhibition on
cancer cell viability and cell death pathways is critical to understand.
Together, our work reveals a novel pathway for c-myc mediated apoptosis
and highlights its importance in HNE-treated cancer cells.

