Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mass balance study of 14C- belinostat in patients with recurrent
or progressive malignancy


Background: Belinostat is a hydroxamic acid based pan-histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitor that inhibits Class I, II, and IV HDAC enzymes at
micromolar concentrations; it (Beleodaq) was recently approved in the US
for the treatment of relapsed/refractory PTCL. The excretion of
belinostat and its metabolites has been studied using radiolabeled
belinostat in dogs and rats (70% and 50% excreted fecally and 30% and 50%
excreted renally, respectively). The renal excretion of parent belinostat
was Background: Belinostat is a hydroxamic acid based pan-histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that inhibits Class I, II, and IV HDAC
enzymes at micromolar concentrations; it (Beleodaq) was recently approved
in the US for the treatment of relapsed/refractory PTCL. The excretion of
belinostat and its metabolites has been studied using radiolabeled
belinostat in dogs and rats (70% and 50% excreted fecally and 30% and 50%
excreted renally, respectively). The renal excretion of parent belinostat
was <1% in both species.Objective: To determine the excretion route of
radiolabeled belinostat and its metabolites following single IV
administration of 14C-labeled belinostat in patients with advanced
cancers. Secondary objectives included an assessment of safety.Methods:
Patients with progressive or recurrent malignancies who failed standard
therapies were eligible for the study. Patients with severe constipation,
urinary incontinence, primary hepatic or renal carcinomas were excluded.
Six eligible patients received a single dose of 14 C-labeled belinostat
(approximately 90 to 105 Ci, 1500 mg) as a 30-minute IV infusion. Blood,
urine, and fecal samples were collected at pre-determined time points (up
to 168 hours) for measurement of total radioactivity.Results: Six
patients with a median age of 66 yrs (range: 55 to 75) were enrolled.
Total recoveries of radiolabeled material ranged from 87.6% to 97.9%
(mean 94.5% 4.0%). The majority of the excreted belinostat dose in urine
was recovered within 48 hours (83.8%) with only 9.3% in the feces within
96 hours. Renal elimination was the principal route of excretion of
radioactivity in all patients, representing a mean of 84.8% 9.8% of the
administered dose. Fecal excretion accounted for only 9.7% 6.5% of the
administered dose.Belinostat was shown to be extensively metabolized. The
parent compound accounted for only 10% of the total drug exposure and was
below the level of detection in plasma samples taken 4.5 hours post-dose.
Belinostat glucuronide was the major circulating plasma metabolite
accounting for 65% of the total drug exposure with urinary excretion as
the major route of elimination. Belinostat glucuronide was the
predominant urinary metabolite accounting for 36% of the total
administered dose. Belinostat amide was the most abundant metabolite in
feces, accounting for 6% of the total administered radioactivity.The most
commonly treatment-related adverse events were Grade 1-2 nausea (50%),
infusion site pain (50%) and fatigue (33%).Conclusion: In this study,
mass balance was achieved with a mean recovery of 94% radiolabeled
belinostat. Belinostat was shown to be extensively metabolized with
parent compound accounting for only about 10% of the excreted
radiolabeled material and radiolabeled material was primarily excreted by
the renal route. Belinostat glucuronide is the primary circulating
metabolite and the primary metabolite excreted in the urine.

