Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein Kinase D1 induces autophagic cell death through activation
of endoplasmic reticulum stress in prostate cancer cells


Background: Advanced stage of prostate cancer is difficult to treat and
manage. Autophagy facilitates both disease progression and therapeutic
resistance in prostate cancer. In fact, different forms of therapies such
as androgen-deprivation, taxane-based chemotherapy, targeted kinase
inhibition, and nutrient restriction, all induce significant cellular
distress, and subsequently autophagy, which plays cyto-protective role in
prostate cancer. The differential role of autophagy in prostate cancer
cells is mainly dependent on the type of tumors, stage, and genetic
context of cancer cells. Protein Kinase D1 is a serine-threonine kinase,
a tumor-suppressor, which is down-regulated in advanced stage of prostate
tumors. PKD1 is involved in many cellular functions, such as cell
proliferation, apoptosis, cell adhesion and invasion. In this study we
try to determine whether PKD1 causes autophagic cell death by activation
of ER stress in prostate cancer cells.Methods: Prostate cancer cells
expressing PKD1 (LNCaP and C4-2; C4-2-GFP; C4-2-GFP-PKD1) and null PKD1
(DU-145/PC-3) were used for the experiments. Cell viability assay was
performed by MTS assay. CCL2 expression levels were quantified by ELISA.
Cell migration assays were performed with cells pre-incubated with
3-Methyladenine (3-MA; autophagy inhibitor), or Salubrinal (SAL; ER
stress inhibitor) or exogenously added CCL2 (100ng/mL). Immmunoblot
experiments were performed using specific antibodies.Results: Our results
suggest that PKD1 inhibits cell proliferation, migration and
colonization, and arrest cells at G2/M phase. Our data strongly suggests
that PKD1overexpressing cell activates Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER)
stress-mediated autophagic cell death in prostate cancer cells compared
to PKD1-null cells. Immunoblotting experiment suggested that
C4-2-PKD1-GFP cells have suppressed ATG5/ATG7 and free ATG12 expression
as compared to PKD1-null DU-145/PC-3 cells. These proteins are involved
in the cyto-protective role of autophagy in prostate cancer cells. PKD1
also interacts and activates PERK expression, which is an initiator of
Endoplasmic Reticulum stress (ER stress). PKD1-overexpressing
C4-2-PKD-1-GFP and C4-2-GFP (vector control) cells inhibited nuclear
translocation of oncogenic proteins such as c-Myc, ATG-5, p-NFKB-65 and
-catenin, and enhanced PERK and GSK-3 expression. Interestingly, PKD1
also suppressed the expression of p-AKT and mTOR and decreased glucose
uptake in prostate cancer cells. Thus, PKD1 regulates glucose uptake with
the involvement of AKT-mTOR-GSK-3 axis and decreases the nuclear
translocation of c-Myc, ATG-5, p-NFKB-65 and -catenin in prostate cancer
cells.Conclusions: Our results strongly suggest that the PKD1 mediated
modulation of autophagy and ER stress induced cell death can be useful
for the augmentation of current chemotherapies used for prostate cancer
treatment.

