Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Joint structural variant analysis of colorectal cancer whole
genome sequencing data


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers, with over
million cases and over 600,000 deaths each year in the world. It is
estimated that a significant part of CRCs may have a hereditary
compo-nent, but majority of this heritability remains unexplained.
Structural variants (SVs) comprise an important type of variation that,
until the availability of deep-coverage whole-genome sequencing (WGS),
has been hard to study in genome-wide scale. It has been suggested that a
significant portion of unexplained, or missing, heritability could be
explained by structural variants. Somatic structural aberrations are
known to play a role in tumorigenesis and tumor progression. However,
structural variation discovery is often complicated by low sequencing
coverage, sequencing artifacts, repeat regions and errors of the
reference genome.To study the role of structural variation in CRC, we
analyzed deep-coverage WGS data of matched tumor-normal sample pairs of
213 Finnish CRC patients and additional in-house WGS data. In these data,
we identified both germline and somatic structural variants using a
recent structural variant caller DELLY.A novel algorithm was used to
combine DELLY paired-end structural variant calls across normal and tumor
samples to improve both sensitivity and specificity of variant detection.
A total of 4,854,576 unfiltered structural events were identified,
consisting of 2,912,552 deletions, 1,304,636 tandem duplications, 71,724
inversions and 565,664 interchromosomal translocations. To call
high-confidence somatic events, we identified 475,902 structural events
in tumors that were not present in any normal sample. Calling accuracy
was further improved by annotating events by mappability and proximity to
repeat regions. Our results demonstrate the applicability of integrating
structural variant data across a large number of samples to obtain
high-quality structural variant calls.

