Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput mutation sequencing of the full exon regions in
BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes using nanofluidic-PCR prepared libraries


Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers and also the principal
cause of cancer-related death among women in the world. BRCA1 and BRCA2
genes contribute to DNA repair and transcriptional regulation in response
to DNA damage. Mutations of BRCA1/2 genes greatly increase lifetime risk
to develop breast cancer and these mutations are frequently observed in
hereditary breast cancer. In addition, recent studies suggested that
breast cancer patients who carry a BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline mutation
benefit from poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors. Therefore,
it would be of great interest to develop a high-throughput approach for
mutation screening of the full exon regions in BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene.We
have developed a targeted gene exon-sequencing approach using a
nanofluidic PCR platform, the Access Array system, which enables
simultaneous amplification of 48 genetic regions (amplicons) from 48
samples in parallel. We have applied this system to generate the
libraries of BRCA1 and BRCA2 coding regions. Total 120 target-specific
primer pairs were designed covering all 22 exons of BRCA1 and 26 exons of
BRCA2. A primer design strategy was applied to incorporate
sample-specific barcodes and Illumina sequencing adaptors into each
amplicon, allowing direct sequencing without further library preparation.
The exon regions of these 2 genes have been amplified on Access Arrays
using 48 multiplex mixes of the 120 primer sets in paired tumor/normal
tissues from 144 breast cancer patients. We will present the
next-generation sequencing data of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation screening
collected from amplicon libraries generated using the Access Array
system. Our results indicate the excellent utilization of this approach
in the mutation screening of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in clinical samples.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

