Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer-associated macrophages undergo proliferation at
different rates across ethnicities: results of a pilot study


The tumor microenvironment is a complex biosystem composed of diverse
cells, including tumor, immune and non-immune stromal cells. It has
become increasingly clear that stromal cells have critical roles in tumor
progression. Among the immune stromal cells, tumor-associated macrophages
(TAM) are found in abundance, playing critical roles in tumor progression
and are signs of poor prognosis. Whereas in chronic inflammation of a
tissue M1 pro-inflammatory macrophages may play a role in tumor
initiation, in advanced tumors, TAMs promote anti-inflammatory functions
including suppression of immunity, tumor invasion, angiogenesis,
metastasis, and resemble the behavior of M2 anti-inflammatory
macrophages. CD163 is considered a human pan macrophage marker and has
been extensively used in TAMs recognition in human tumors. Until
recently, macrophages were considered end-differentiated cells without
mitotic activity. However, more recently proliferative activity of
macrophages has been identified in several settings, but not in tumors.
In a recent study, we demonstrated that breast cancers from different
ethnicities exhibit diverse degree of TAMs colonization. African American
(AA) and Latina (LA) patients present with more aggressive tumors and
lower survival rates than Caucasian (CA) women. We recently demonstrated
that AA breast cancer patients exhibit tumors with very high numbers of
macrophages, followed by LA, with CA showing the lowest numbers of TAMs.
Consequently, in the present study we sought to examine whether the high
numbers of TAMs detected in these cancer health disparity groups were
associated with macrophage capacity to proliferate. To assess TAM mitotic
potential, the Ki-67 nuclear marker was used. To examine this question,
we carried out a pilot study with a small number of cases where the
co-expression levels of Ki-67 and CD163 were determined by
immunofluorescence (IF) in sections of human breast cancers from a
retrospective breast cancer tumor bank encompassing these three
ethnicities. Our results reveal that tumors from AA patients contain the
highest numbers of CD163+/Ki-67+ cells among the three ethnic groups,
followed by LA, with CA exhibiting the lowest numbers, thus paralleling
our results with TAM numbers in these same ethnicities. As far as we
know, this is the first report of macrophage proliferation in a tumor
microenvironment, and particularly in association with ethnicity cancer
disparity groups.

