Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitive, specific and highly multiplexed mutation detection for
cancer management


Mutations in RAS, RAF, EGFR and PIK3CA genes are present in a number of
cancers including colon, lung and breast cancers. Importantly, many of
these mutations are predictive biomarkers of clinical outcomes for
targeted therapies. This has led to a growing demand for detection of
multiple mutations simultaneously. Multiplex formats allow a greater
amount of information to be obtained from each sample.PASS primer
technology can sensitively and specifically identify the presence of SNPs
and somatic DNA changes (point mutations, deletions and insertions) with
sensitivity up to 1 in 1,000 (0.1%). PASS primers selectively amplify
nucleic acid variants and create amplicons that are markedly different
from the parent sequence. The method is superior to ARMS PCR for
multiplexing, particularly when mutations are present at the same,
adjacent or nearby loci.PASS primers consist of two target specific
regions separated by an insert sequence (IS) which is not complementary
to the target. A long 5 target-specific region anchors the primer and a
short 3 region targets the variant base/s thus directing highly specific
binding and extension. During amplification, the IS sequences are
incorporated into amplicons, introducing 10 base difference between the
starting single base variant and the resulting amplicon. This reduces
competition between primers during amplification and facilitates robust
discrimination between amplicons during detection.MNAzyme qPCR is a
robust alternative to other probe based real-time qPCR protocols such as
TaqMan and Beacons. MNAzymes are bi-specific, catalytic oligonucleotide
complexes which form in the present of target and cleave universal
reporter probes. The bi-specificity, and the use of well-characterised
universal probes sets (suitable for use with any group of targets), makes
MNAzyme qPCR more amenable to multiplexing. When combined with PASS,
MNAzyme qPCR easily discriminates between amplicons since MNAzymes are
tailored to specifically detect both the distinct IS and the original
mutation.PASS MNAzyme qPCR has been used to facilitate multiplex
detection of RAS, RAF, EGFR and PIK3CA mutations. As many as eight
mutations located at codons 12 and 13 of RAS have been successfully
detected in a single well using three channels on a standard PCR machine.
The technology is even more powerful when combined with newer instruments
with higher multiplex capabilities such as Biocartis Idylla automated
platform. A multiplexed KRAS/BRAF assay, which detects 18 mutations, was
evaluated using colon cancer and melanoma FFPE samples. The results
showed >96% concordance with sequencing and significantly specificity
compared to the singleplex Therascreen KRAS test.Since PASS MNAzyme qPCR
affords greater multiplex capacity, along with high specificity and
sensitivity, it provides a superior tool for ascertaining mutations from
tumour tissues and is particularly well suited for use with liquid
biopsies.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

