Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a molecular imaging system based on the
transcriptional activity of the DD3/PCA3 non-coding RNA for imaging
specifically the prostate cancer cells


Development of a molecular imaging system based on the transcriptional
activity of the DD3/PCA3 non-coding RNA for imaging specifically the
prostate cancer cellsOBJECTIVE: Molecular imaging plays an important role
in oncology for staging of tumors. Unfortunately, the specificity and
sensitivity of current techniques remains low. This study aims to improve
the existing imaging system based on transcriptional activation, named as
Two -Step- Transcriptional Amplification (TSTA) system, with the goal to
precisely image in vivo prostate cancer cells (PCa) by Positron Emission
Tomography (PET). We have studied the potential of DD3/PCA3 promoter, a
gene specifically expressed in PCa, to achieve this goal.METHODS: Various
adenovirus constructs incorporating the DD3 promoter, the TSTA system and
the Firefly luciferase reporter gene were generated and their specificity
for PCa cells was tested in transient infection. By molecular
engineering, we have improved the TSTA system and generated the 3STA. The
luciferase activities of DD3-TSTA, DD3-3STA and PSA-TSTA (Prostate
Specific Antigen) were compared in vivo by bioluminescence in xenograft
mouse models. Ex vivo prostate biopsy from RP (radical prostatectomy)
specimen were exposed to DD3-3STA and luciferase expression was evaluated
using bioluminescence and Immunohistochemistry.RESULTS: The DD3 promoter
activity is both specific to prostate and cancer cells. When DD3 promoter
is incorporated in the amplification systems TSTA and 3STA, it is
specific to PCa cells and its activity is amplified 32 and 95 times,
respectively, when compared to the activity of the DD3 promoter alone.
Moreover, activity of DD3-TSTA and DD3-3STA is androgen-independent. In
vivo, DD3-3STA activity is comparable to that obtained with the PSA-TSTA
whose activity can be imaged by PET. DD3-3STA could detect primary
prostate cancer cells ex vivo in prostate biopsy obtained from RP
specimen (Figure 1).CONCLUSIONS: The new system DD3-3STA allows specific
and sensitive imaging of PCa cells. The new amplification system 3STA
allows the DD3 promoter to produce reporter signal high enough to be
detected by PET, a technology available in the clinic.

