Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The FACT histone chaperone complex is highly expressed in
aggressive drug refractory childhood cancers and the anti-FACT compound
CBL0137 represents a highly promising therapeutic approach in this setting


Background: Despite the success of chemotherapy in improving the overall
survival rate of childhood cancer, a number of types of children's
cancers still have dismal outcomes. Included here are high risk
neuroblastomas, Diffuse Intrinsic Pontine Gliomas (DIPG), and infant
leukemias with MLL translocations. New treatments for these aggressive
childhood cancers are urgently needed. Evidence is emerging of the
importance of alterations in chromatin modifier genes in pediatric
cancers. In this regard, CBL0137 is a carbazole-based anti-cancer agent
with a unique mechanism of action. It is an indirect inhibitor of the
chromatin remodeling complex FACT (Facilitates Chromatin Transcription).
Inhibition of FACT by CBL0137 modulates the activity of several
transcription factors involved in cancer: NF-kB and HSF1 are suppressed,
while p53 is activated (Science Transl Med, 2011). We have examined FACT
expression in neuroblastoma, DIPG and MLL leukemia, as well as the
efficacy of CBL0137 in preclinical models of these diseases.Methods:
Expression of the FACT subunits, SSRP1 and SPT16, was examined in
neuroblastoma, DIPG and MLL leukemia cells using RT-PCR and Western
analysis. The clinical significance of SSRP1 and SPT16 was also analysed
using expression array data on 650 primary untreated neuroblastomas.
Colony-forming assays were used to study the effect of CBL0137, either
alone or combined with chemotherapeutic drugs. Cohorts of neuroblastoma,
DIPG and MLL leukemia xenografted mice, as well as neuroblastoma-prone
TH-MYCN mice, were treated with CBL0137, alone or combined with
chemotherapeutic drugs.Results: High levels of SSRP1 and SPT16 expression
were observed in all three types of child cancer. In addition, in
neuroblastoma, the two FACT subunits were associated with MYCN
amplification, and were strongly predictive of poor outcome (pBackground:
Despite the success of chemotherapy in improving the overall survival
rate of childhood cancer, a number of types of children's cancers still
have dismal outcomes. Included here are high risk neuroblastomas, Diffuse
Intrinsic Pontine Gliomas (DIPG), and infant leukemias with MLL
translocations. New treatments for these aggressive childhood cancers are
urgently needed. Evidence is emerging of the importance of alterations in
chromatin modifier genes in pediatric cancers. In this regard, CBL0137 is
a carbazole-based anti-cancer agent with a unique mechanism of action. It
is an indirect inhibitor of the chromatin remodeling complex FACT
(Facilitates Chromatin Transcription). Inhibition of FACT by CBL0137
modulates the activity of several transcription factors involved in
cancer: NF-kB and HSF1 are suppressed, while p53 is activated (Science
Transl Med, 2011). We have examined FACT expression in neuroblastoma,
DIPG and MLL leukemia, as well as the efficacy of CBL0137 in preclinical
models of these diseases.Methods: Expression of the FACT subunits, SSRP1
and SPT16, was examined in neuroblastoma, DIPG and MLL leukemia cells
using RT-PCR and Western analysis. The clinical significance of SSRP1 and
SPT16 was also analysed using expression array data on 650 primary
untreated neuroblastomas. Colony-forming assays were used to study the
effect of CBL0137, either alone or combined with chemotherapeutic drugs.
Cohorts of neuroblastoma, DIPG and MLL leukemia xenografted mice, as well
as neuroblastoma-prone TH-MYCN mice, were treated with CBL0137, alone or
combined with chemotherapeutic drugs.Results: High levels of SSRP1 and
SPT16 expression were observed in all three types of child cancer. In
addition, in neuroblastoma, the two FACT subunits were associated with
MYCN amplification, and were strongly predictive of poor outcome
(p<0.0001). As a single agent, CBL0137 administered iv had remarkable in
vivo anti-tumor activity against neuroblastoma, DIPG and MLL leukemia
xenografted mice. CBL0137 also synergized strongly with a variety of
chemotherapeutic agents, including cyclophosphamide. Most dramatic
results were observed when CBL0137 was combined with
cyclophosphamide/topotecan, a highly active therapy for relapsed
neuroblastoma that is currently in clinical trial.
Cylophosphamide/topotecan plus CBL0137 resulted in cure of 90% of
tumor-bearing MYCN-transgenic mice.Conclusions: Targeting FACT offers a
highly promising novel therapeutic approach for aggressive childhood
cancers. The results for CBL0137 are as good or better than any
chemotherapy regimens we have tested in our preclinical models, and a
Phase I COG trial of this nongenotoxic agent in refractory pediatric
cancer patients is currently being planned.

