Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Attenuation of pancreatic cancer stemness and growth by a novel
magnetic nanoparticle formulation


Background: Pancreatic cancer (PanCa) is one of the deadliest cancers
accounting for high mortality rates due to high desmoplasia and the
development of chemo-resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs, such as
gemcitabine (GEM). Curcumin (CUR) has showed potent anticancer,
chemopreventive, chemo-sensitization properties and has entered phase II
clinical trials in pancreatic adenocarcinoma patients. However, the
clinical translation of CUR has been significantly hampered due to its
low solubility, high rate of metabolism, poor bioavailability and
pharmacokinetics. To address these clinically relevant issues, we have
successfully engineered a magnetic nanoparticle formulation of curcumin
(MNP-CUR) using a multi-layer approach, for its efficient and tumor
targeted delivery.Methods: Western blotting and qPCR were used to
investigate the effects of MNP-CUR, GEM and their combination on Hh
signaling pathway and related proteins involved in PanCa. The antitumor
effects were studied using PanCa xenograft mice. Tumor tissue sections
were stained for SHH (sonic hedgehog) and its effector (Gli-1), cygb/STAP
(stellate cell selective markers) -SMA (PSC activation), F4/80
(macrophage) for imunohistochemistry/immunofluorescence and microRNAs
through in situ hybridization.Results: MNP-CUR alone or in combination
with GEM inhibits pluripotency maintaining factors (Nanog, Sox-2, c-Myc
and Oct-4) in human pancreatic cancer stem cells thereby, restricts the
formation of secondary mamospheres. Further investigations reveal that
MNP-CUR inhibits Panca proliferation, migration, invasion and tumor
growth in xenograft mouse model by suppression of the sonic hedgehog
(SHH) signaling pathway and CXCR4/CXCL12 signaling axis that inhibit
bidirectional tumor-stromal cells interaction. MNP-CUR treatment alone or
in combination with CXCR4 antagonist (amd3100) inhibits CXCL12 induced up
regulation of CXCR4, SHH and NFB-65 in cells. Further, qRT-PCR results
showed that MNP-CUR treatment increases GEM sensitivity by up regulating
the human nucleoside transporter genes (hENT, hCNT) and blocking
ribonucletide reductase subunits (RRM1/RRM2) which further supports the
use of MNP-CUR for suppression of PanCa growth. Immunostaining of tumor
sections from treated pancreatic xenograft mice revealed that MNP-CUR
treatment efficiently inhibits key proteins of SHH signaling such as SHH
and Gli-1. MNP-CUR also disrupts the stroma of fibrotic pancreatic tumors
by inhibiting proliferating stellate and myeloid cells. This was
indicated by the decreased staining of SMA, macrophages and cygb/STAP in
tumor tissues. Additionally, the tumor tissues from MNP-CUR treated mice
showed extensive downregulation of oncogenic miR-21 expression which has
been associated with cancer progression and drug resistance.Conclusion:
These data suggest that MNP-CUR possesses great promise as a treatment of
choice for PanCa.

