Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a novel TIMP-2 deficient mouse model of
experimental lung metastasis


It is well known that the balance between matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) and their endogenous inhibitors, the tissue inhibitors of
metalloproteases (TIMPs) impacts tumor progression, thereby providing a
novel avenue for cancer therapies. We have previously shown that forced
TIMP-2 expression inhibits lung tumor growth independent of MMP
inhibition via direct effects on tumor cells and modulation of the tumor
microenvironment.The current study was undertaken to examine how reduced
TIMP-2 expression impacts lung tumor growth using a novel TIMP-2
deficient (T2D) mouse model in a clean C57BL6 background. This is first
time we fully developed and characterized TIMP2 deficient mice, validated
by genotyping, histologic staining, protein and mRNA expression. The
deletion of TIMP2 gene down regulated the expression TIMP2 mRNA and
protein as demonstrated by quantitative RT-PCR and immunoblot
experiments, respectively. Further, we investigated the impact of TIMP2
deletion on Lewis lung carcinoma model of metastasis. Lewis lung
carcinoma cells transfected with luciferase (LL/2-Luc-M38, Caliper) were
intratracheally instilled in the lungs into group's have heterozygous
(T2D+/), homozygous (T2D/), and wild type (WT) littermates. Tumor
progression was monitored by IVIS imaging after 2nd week of intratracheal
instillation and continued till 4th week, mice were sacrificed and lungs
were perfused and harvested for further analysis. The IVIS analysis
showed higher tumor burden in TIMP2 deficient and heterozygous mice as
compared to wild type littermate, suggested that TIMP2 deficiency
aggravates tumor development in deficient mice. The effects of
recombinant TIMP2 on tumor microenvironment and microarray experiments
are currently in progress. The molecular mechanism underlying the
observed activities will be investigated. Collectively, these preliminary
findings suggest that TIMP2 may be a novel target for lung cancer therapy.

