Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CYC065, a novel CDK2/5/9 inhibitor: detailed mechanistic studies,
determinants of sensitivity and synergistic combinations


Background: CYC065 is a novel, second generation aminopurine inhibitor
highly selective for CDK2, CDK5 and CDK9 over other CDKs and non-CDK
enzymes. CYC065 has completed IND-directed drug development and is ready
for FIH studies. The unique target profile of CYC065 can be exploited in
cyclin E-overexpressing tumors, including a trastuzumab-resistant Her2+
breast cancer model (Scaltriti et al, PNAS 2011; 9:3761).The aim of this
study was to gather key dosing information for this compound in advance
of FIH studies, and provide understanding of the compound mechanism of
action in additional key target indications.CDK9 is a key regulator of
mixed lineage leukemia (MLL)-driven leukemogenesis and Mcl-1-dependent
survival and therefore represents a potential therapeutic target for AML
and MLL leukaemia.Methods: A panel of acute leukemia cell lines with
different MLL status (WT, MLL translocations and MLL PTD) was used in
this study. Resazurin and flow cytometry-based annexin V assays were used
to determine cell viability and apoptosis induction. PI staining was used
to examine cell cycle distribution. Protein levels were quantified by
Western blotting and quantitative imaging. Combinations were studied
using the Chou and Talalay method. The in vivo activity of CYC065 was
studied in murine xenograft models.Results: CYC065 rapidly decreased
phosphorylation of Ser2 -RNAP II and expression of proteins involved in
cell cycle control, survival and leukemogenesis (such as Mcl-1, Cyclin E,
PNUTS, Hoxa9 and Meis 1), leading to robust and early induction of
apoptosis (within 4 h). Time- and dose-dependent studies indicated that 6
h pulse treatment at 0.5-1 M CYC065 was sufficient to cause 90% cell
death in sensitive cell lines. Cell lines with MLL rearrangements were
highly sensitive to CYC065, whilst sensitivity of AML cell lines with WT
MLL correlated with the level of Bcl-2 family proteins. Cell lines with
reduced sensitivity to CYC065 could be effectively targeted by exposure
to longer, 10 h pulse treatments with CYC065, or in combination with
short pulses of Bcl-2 inhibitors. In vivo, CYC065 achieved >90% TGI at
well tolerated dose levels in HL60 (WT MLL) and EOL-1 (MLL PTD) xenograft
models.Conclusion: CYC065 has therapeutic potential for AML and MLL
leukemia. MLL status and the levels of Bcl-2 family proteins might be
useful patient stratification markers for predicting
sensitivity/resistance.

