Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mammary gland-specific deletion of Sirt1 delays mammary tumor
growth and progression


SIRT1, a type III HDAC, is involved in regulation of several cellular
processes including longevity, inflammatory response, energy metabolism
and stem cell maintenance. SIRT1 first emerged as a potential anti-aging
factor but now it is implicated in a number of age-related diseases
including carcinogenesis and also in cancer stem cell maintenance. SIRT1
is over-expressed and/or catalytically activated in a variety of human
cancers, including breast cancer. Several lines of evidence suggest that
SIRT1 plays an important role in the activation of oncogenic signalling
in mammary epithelial cells and that inhibition of SIRT1 has a direct
effect on tumor cell growth and apoptosis. Despite the fact that SIRT1 is
mainly involved in the promotion of oncogenic signaling, it can also
function as a tumor suppressor via deacetylation and subsequent
destabilization of various oncoproteins such as c-Myc, -catenin, NF-B,
and HIF1. Further, SIRT1 activation by resveratrol protects BRCA1
mutation-associated breast cancer. Thus, the precise role of SIRT1 in
cancer is still unclear and remains debatable; it is likely that SIRT1
function in cancer is tissue/context-dependent. Therefore, understanding
the precise role of SIRT1 in mammary tumorigenesis is essential for the
rational design of SIRT1-based novel therapeutic drugs to combat breast
cancer.To understand the functional implications of SIRT1 in breast
cancer, we generated mammary gland-specific Sirt1-conditional knockout
mice. Sirt1 deletion is associated with reduced mammary gland outgrowth
and terminal end bud development, leading to significant reduction in
mammary stem and progenitor cell formation. This perturbed mammary gland
outgrowth and reduced mammary stem and progenitor cell formation recovers
either by puberty or by exogenous administration of estrogen, suggesting
that Sirt1 plays a key role in mediating estrogen signalling in mammary
gland. To assess the functional role of SIRT1 in mammary tumor growth and
progression, we crossed Sirt1-knockout mice with MMTV-PyMT-Tg mice and
C3(1)-SV40-Tg mice, two spontaneous murine mammary tumor models. Sirt1
deletion significantly reduces the development and growth of spontaneous
mammary tumors in both mouse models. This phenomenon is associated with
significant reduction in cancer stem cell (CSC) formation with dramatic
reduction in CSC markers Slug and Sox2 expression. We also found that
Sirt1 deletion reactivates tumor suppressor proteins p53 and Foxo3a.In
conclusion, our study provides direct evidence that SIRT1 plays a key
role in breast cancer growth and progression by maintaining cancer stem
cells via stabilization of CSC drivers and inactivation of tumor
suppressors in mammary gland. Thus, pharmacological agents targeted to
disrupt SIRT1 function and signalling might have potential in breast
cancer treatment.

