Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The HSP90 inhibitor, onalespib (AT13387), delays the emergence of
resistance to erlotinib in an EGFR-driven xenograft model


Background: Kinase inhibitors have been used successfully in the clinic,
but relapse is common due to the emergence of resistance. Inhibition of
HSP90 leads to the depletion of oncogenic client proteins and the
simultaneous inhibition of many signalling pathways. As such, the use of
HSP90 inhibitors to overcome resistance has been widely investigated.
Onalespib (AT13387) is a potent, second generation HSP90 inhibitor, which
has been studied in many preclinical models of kinase inhibitor
resistance. Recent findings indicate that an upfront combination of
onalespib and either vemurafenib or crizotinib, in models of mutant BRAF
melanoma or ALK-translocated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), can
delay the emergence of resistance to these therapies. Here we have
extended this work to a combination of onalespib and erlotinib in an
EGFR-driven NSCLC model.Methods: Mice bearing HCC827 tumor xenografts
were dosed with either 12.5 mg/kg erlotinib po qd, or a combination of
12.5 mg/kg erlotinib and 55 mg/kg onalespib ip qw for 52 weeks.Results:
Initially both the erlotinib single-agent and onalespib/erlotinib
combination treatments significantly inhibited tumor growth of the
EGFR-driven NSCLC HCC827 xenograft model; all tumors in the monotherapy
and combination groups regressed rapidly and achieved complete response
(CR) (median times to CR were 79 and 56 days for monotherapy and
combination treatments respectively). However, after 20 weeks of
continuous treatment, tumor relapse was observed in one of the xenografts
dosed with erlotinib only and this was followed by regrowth of a further
2 tumors in this group over the 52-week study period, with these tumors
reaching 50% of the original tumor volumes by 26 and 46 weeks. Of the
remaining tumors, 5 out of 6 were detectable at the end of the study. In
comparison, tumor growth remained inhibited in the group treated with the
erlotinib/onalespib combination; no tumors were observed to regrow over
the course of the study and none (of 9) were palpable when treatments
were terminated. This suggests that while treatment with monotherapy
erlotinib in this model leads to relapse, as seen in the clinic,
combination treatment with onalespib can delay the emergence of
resistance.Conclusions: These data demonstrate that an upfront
combination of onalespib and erlotinib can delay the emergence of
resistance in an EGFR-driven xenograft model, suggesting there is
therapeutic potential for an upfront erlotinib/onalespib combination in
the clinic. Onalespib is currently being tested in a Phase 2 clinical
trial in combination with crizotinib in ALK-positive NSCLC. The
preclinical data presented here, alongside our previous data on
combinations of onalespib with vemurafenib or crizotinib, suggest that
the concept of using an HSP90 inhibitor combination upfront in the clinic
to delay resistance could be extended to further targeted therapies.

