Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role and mechanisms of miR-223 in the invasion and metastasis of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Purpose: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is one of the most
common malignancies with a low survival rate for its ability of
metastasis. Therefore, finding the potential biomarkers for the
diagnostic, as well as therapy and prognostic of HNSCC metastasis is
extremely urgent. Previous studies have demonstrated that microRNAs, a
21-23 nucleotide strands of endogenous single-stranded RNAs, which could
regulate the expression of numerous genes post-transcriptionally, played
a key role in the invasion and metastasis of human cancer. In this study,
we attempted to explore the function and mechanism of microRNAs in
invasion and migration of HNSCC, and hoped to provide a novel diagnostic
and therapeutic strategy for HNSCC patient with metastasis.Materials and
Methods: In order to identify a new microRNA/gene pathway that regulates
the invasion and metastasis in HNSCC, we performed a microarray assay to
explore the microRNAs expression profiling in HNSCC cells with varying
invasiveness. Quantitative RT (qRT)-PCR and functional analysis were used
to confirm the role of microRNA, which we focused on, in HNSCC invasion.
Then we predicted the targeted gene of microRNA through a bioinformatics
approach and defined it by luciferase assay and western blot. At last, we
utilized the buccal mucosa-lymph node metastasis model to detect the
effect of microRNA in HNSCC metastasis in vivo.Results: Here, we
established the role and mechanisms of miR-223 in metastasis of HNSCC.
First, we profiled microRNA expression in four HNSCC cells with varying
invasive capacity. MiR-223 was highly down regulated in cells with highly
invasive capacity. The negative correlation between miR-223 expression
and invasiveness was confirmed in another validation cohort of seven
HNSCC cells. Functional analysis showed that ectopic expression of
miR-223 repressed HNSCC cell invasiveness; on the other hand, miR-223
inhibition resulted in increased HNSCC cell invasiveness. Furthermore,
the expression level of TCF7L2, an important transcription factor in Wnt
pathway, was repressed when overexpressing the miR-223 expression in
HNSCC cells, whereas miR-223 silencing increased its expression. Next, we
showed that miR-223 could bind to the 3-untranslated region of TCF7L2 by
luciferase assay. Moreover, we demonstrated that TCF7L2 enhanced the
invasion of HNSCC cells, and the silencing of TCF7L2 inhibited invasion.
Most importantly, increased miR-223 expression level in HNSCC cell
repressed the metastasis of lymph node in vivo, and decreased the miR-223
expression enhanced the metastasis.Conclusions: Taken together, these
data indicated that miR-223 played a key role in HNSCC invasion and
metastasis by targeting to the 3UTR of TCF7L2. And our results presented
evidences for a potential anti-metastasis therapeutic value of miR-223 in
HNSCC patients.

