Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of an assay to detect transcription misincorporation
errors in Escherichia coli


In contrast to errors in DNA replication which can product heritable
mutations, errors in transcription cause only transient alterations. The
temporary nature of these transcription mistakes has made them difficult
to detect and genetic screens to identify mutations that lower the
fidelity of transcription have been problematic. We addressed this
problem by developing methods to turn transient transcription errors into
permanent genetic changes. The principle is based on suppression of a
mutation in the active site of the cre recombinase. This assay is based
on two parts: a source of Cre, which is actually the transcription
misincorporation substrate, and a genetic reporter with a phenotypic
change created by Cre-mediated recombination between lox sites. To
develop a substrate for E. coli we chose the galactokinase gene (galK) as
our reporter. From an alignment of the galK protein from E.coli, H.
sapiens and L. lactis we identified sites that might be able to accept a
12aa insertion encoded by the LoxP sequence without disrupting its
function. We selected four different sites that were away from the GalK
active site and on the surface of the protein. We started our project
using the strain MG1655, which is galK (+), able to grow in galactose as
a carbon source and red on a MacConkey galactose plate (MAcGal). Using
oligo recombineering, we first inserted a 7 base sequence, which caused a
frame-shift mutation, the cells became galK (-) and, therefore white on
MacGal. To put it back in frame, we next replaced the 7 bases with a 36
base loxP site, which, if it does not disrupt the function of galK will
make the cells galK (+) again. To our surprise, the insertion of this
LoxP site was completely successful, putting the gene back in frame and
making the cells galK (+) and, therefore, red at each of the four sites
we chose. A derivative of this reporter was made with the a portion of
the galK gene inverted at one of the loxP sites. Active Cre recombinase
can be detected by flipping the inversion to restore galK function. The
active site mutant cre-Y324C exhibits a very low inversion rate.
Mutations that reduce the accuracy of transcription, such as cells
defective in greA, exhibit an elevated frequency of galK (+) inversions.
This system will be used to identify additional mutations that reduce the
fidelity of transcription in E. coli.

