Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Grape seed extract decreases visceral adiposity and impairs the
pro-tumorigenic adipose tissue secretions affecting colorectal cancer
growth and progression


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most frequently diagnosed malignancy
in the United States. Given the global obesity epidemic, and the fact
that obesity is associated with increased CRC risk, incidence and
mortality, it is imperative that we discover and develop agents with
efficacy against CRC under obese conditions. Thus, an agent with both
anti-obesogenic and anti-CRC activities would be ideal to impair
different facets of CRC interactions with adipose tissue secretions
resulting in CRC chemoprevention under obese conditions. Our extensive in
vitro and in vivo studies investigating the benefits of grape seed
extract (GSE) consumption against CRC have shown that it exerts strong
inhibitory activity in different CRC pre-clinical models. Recently, we
also explored GSE potential to modulate the growth promoting tumorigenic
secretions of adipocytes on CRC and colon cancer stem cells (CSCs).
Results indicated that GSE significantly reduces the growth and invasion
promoting effects of both mouse and human adipocytes on these cells which
was associated with a decrease in CSC-associated markers and
transcription factors. Notably, GSE effects on adipocytes were not due to
changes in lipid content, but mechanistic studies showed that GSE causes
differential modulation of adipogenesis-related proteins during different
stages of adipocyte differentiation and induces the browning of
adipocytes as evidenced by an increase in UCP1 mRNA level and
mitochondriogenesis. To further establish that indeed GSE has the
potential to modify adipose tissue secretions, we fed GSE to obese mice
and evaluated its anti-obesogenic effect. Briefly, short-term GSE feeding
(200mg/ Kg body weight) for two weeks by oral gavage to diet-induced
obese mice suppressed body weight, decreased the weight of fat pads, and
improved associated metabolic abnormalities. During the high-fat-diet
induced hyperlipidemia, GSE normalized total cholesterol in serum with a
concomitant increase in high density cholesterol. Furthermore, our
findings showed that GSE feeding significantly modulated the serum levels
of adipokines/cytokines; specifically, GSE lowered the circulating
leptin, resistin, pentraxin-2, lipocalin-2, and IGF-1 serum levels, while
increasing IGFBP-1 levels. These results are significant as presence of
meta-inflammation in obese people suggests that reversal of white adipose
tissue dysfunction and modulation of visceral obese adipose tissue-driven
pro-inflammatory adipokines/cytokines signaling provide unique
opportunities for the preventive intervention of CRC in obese conditions.
Based on these notable biological effects, GSE is a strong candidate
agent to be studied further for its potential use against CRC growth and
progression under obese conditions.

