Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biopsy-free comprehensive tumor profiling of 1,000+ consecutive
cancer patients using CLIA-certified commercial test and its clinical
utility


Background: Genomic alterations of metastatic cancers may be discordant
with alterations in primary tumors due to continuous evolution of disease
and tumor heterogeneity. Current NGS approaches based on tissue biopsies
can fail to capture a complete picture of the real-time cancer profile.
Biopsy-free genomic profiling of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) can
provide deep insights into the disease when biopsies are not an
option.Methods: We developed Guardant360 for comprehensive profiling of
ctDNA with high sensitivity (detection in 90%+ of advanced cancer pts)
and ultra-high specificity (>99.9999%). Guardant360 has been validated to
analyze a 69-oncogene panel covering over 120,000 bases and detects SNVs,
gene amplifications, indels and genomic rearrangements, including all
NCCN-guidelines recommended biomarkers. We previously reported high
concordance of ctDNA profiles with concurrent matched biopsies.Results:
In our first 1,000 clinical tests (77% across breast, colorectal and lung
and 23% distributed over many other indications), we successfully
processed 99.8% of samples. In 3 cases, we canceled the test as we
detected secondary genome carry-over (confirmed to be pregnancy or liver
transplant cases). Despite the wider range of clinical stages in
commercial samples, we detected ctDNA in 78%. Additionally, we identified
actionable mutations with associated treatments in 74% of those cases.
Clinical benefit of the test was shown in many patients. Examples: A
refractory IBC patient with Her2 status change, showed strong response to
Her2 TKI. Patients with quantity-not-sufficient biopsy sequencing, showed
strong actionable alterations (ERBB2 amplification, BRAF mutation, EGFR
activating and resistance mutations, etc)Conclusion: Comprehensive
sequencing of a patient's cancer in real -time through a simple blood
test can empower oncologists to make better informed treatment decisions,
especially when repeat tissue biopsy is not a desirable or viable option.

