Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical assessment of combination therapy with selumetinib and
CTLA-4 for cancer


Immune mediated therapies for Cancer (IMT-C), such as anti-CTLA-4 and
anti-PD-1/PD-L1 monoclonal antibodies (mAb), are showing promise in the
treatment of solid tumors. However, although these treatments demonstrate
clinical activity in a range of tumors, the durable benefit of these
agents appears to be limited to a subset of patients. One hypothesis is
that activity in these patients is limited by a lack of immune priming or
by additional immunosuppressive pathways. Combination with molecular
targeted therapies offers the potential to explore additional treatment
strategies for patients. However, in order to select the best combination
partners, a greater understanding is needed as to how each therapy
affects the immune system both directly, through effects onleukocytes,
and indirectly, through effects on tumor immunogenicity and the
microenvironment. Selumetinib is a potent inhibitor of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase 1/2 (MEK1/2), involved in
the activation of signaling pathways which regulates cellular growth,
proliferation and survival. Given that these pathways are often found
aberrantly activated in human tumors, and also play key roles in the
regulation of immunological processes, it is difficult to predict the
combinatorial effect of MEK1/2 inhibition and IMT in cancer treatment. To
assess the effect of selumetinib in a tumor model with an intact immune
system, we have characterized the impact of dosing selumetinib with or
without anti-CTLA-4 mAb on the immune system in the CT26 syngeneic tumor
model. Flow cytometric analysis showed that this combination reduced
T-cell proliferation and memory T-cell generation, but increased the
frequency of splenic T cells. Selumetinib treatment decreased PD-L1
expression and increased MHC class II expression on the tumor cells,
whilst decreasing myeloid-derived suppressor cell (MDSC)-like cells in
the tumor. Despite the apparent ability of selumetinib to have both
positive and negative effects on immune responses in vivo, the
combination of selumetinib and anti-CTLA4 mAb was found to show
anti-tumor activity in the CT26 colorectal tumor mouse model. These
studies highlight the potential for enhancing anti-tumor immune response
through combinations of molecular targeted therapies and IMT-Cs.

