Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structurally guided development of meditope-based antibody-drug
conjugates


Meditopes are cyclic peptides that bind the Fab fragment noncovalently,
in a novel and unique site, outside the paratope. This property can be
utilized to harness cytotoxic payloads to an antibody in a site-specific
and consistent manner. One of the originally described peptides, named
cQFD, presents a moderate affinity for the humanized antibody cetuximab
(KD = 0.43 uM). The binding site involves residues from the heavy as well
as the light chain of the antibody, and from both sides of the
variable-to-constant hinge of the Fab domain, with a predominance for
residues of the variable region. A similar affinity of cQFD to
trastuzumab was achieved by mutating thirteen specific residues of the
antibody, all located in the variable (Fv) region of the Fab domain; Nine
of which are located in the light chain (LC: V9, I10, R39, T40, N41, G42,
S43, R45, I83, D85, A100), two in the heavy chain (HC: S40 and I89). We
refer to those mutations as to the meditope enabling. Via a combined
approach, we (i) looked into peptide modifications to increase meditope's
affinity for the antibody, and (ii) evaluated the transferability of this
approach onto a panel of human antibodies of therapeutic relevance. Based
on X-ray crystallography analysis, antibody modelingin the case of
antibodies for which no structure is availableand guided docking, we
suggested a number of modifications (point mutations and/or peptide
extension) that were subsequently tested via surface plasmon resonance.
The top meditope leads were conjugated to MMAE and DM1 and their binding
was reassessed to a number of humanized/IgG1 antibodies-confirming that
payload conjugation does not interfere with meditope binding and also
that meditope enabling and binding does not interfere with antigen
binding. Finally, the complexes between antibodies and meditope-drug
conjugates were tested in vitro in a panel of tumor cell lines, to
measure and rank the efficacy of those leads in our ADC pipeline for
further development as novel oncology therapeutics.

