Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical sequencing in the National Institute of Health's Clinical
Sequencing Exploratory Research (CSER) Program


To evaluate best uses of and support the integration of genomic
sequencing into the clinical workflow, the National Human Genome Research
Institute and National Cancer Institute co-fund the Clinical Sequencing
Exploratory Research (CSER) project. This initiative aims to 1) leverage
NHGRI's experience in genomic sequencing and analysis to facilitate
adoption of these methods into patient care, 2) develop and disseminate
best practices for the integration of genomic sequencing into clinical
care, and 3) research the ethical, legal, and psychosocial (ELSI)
implications of bringing broad genomic data into the clinic. The CSER
Consortium includes nine multi-disciplinary projects, nine ELSI-specific
projects, a Coordinating Center and NHGRI's Intramural ClinSeq program.
Four of the multi-disciplinary projects and one ELSI project have a
specific focus on cancer settings and outcomes: CanSeq (Dana-Farber
Cancer Inst.), BASIC3 (Baylor College of Med.), ONCOSEQ (Univ. of
Michigan), and NEXT Medicine (Univ. of Washington) are developing robust
frameworks for the integration of whole exome sequencing (WXS) in tumor
and germline samples. By measuring the effectiveness of novel platforms
for returning results, analyzing the costs and benefits of using
sequencing technology to identify rare variants, and evaluating patient
experiences, these projects will help define best practices for
incorporating WXS into cancer management. As of August 2014, these
projects had collected WXS data from 415 patients (269 adults and 146
children). The CSER consortium also has nine working groups that strive
to advance best practices and communicate lessons learned to the
community regarding the use of genomic sequence data in the clinical
workflow. The Tumor Working Group explores the unique technical,
interpretive, and ethical challenges involved in clinical sequencing of
both somatic and germline cancer genomes. This presentation will
highlight progress to date, anticipated products and results, and the
relationship between these cancer sequencing projects and broader CSER
consortium efforts.

