Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying a lead compound for mitigation of drug-induced PQTS


In addition to 170 approved therapeutic drugs whose adverse effects
include QT prolongation, a prevalence of 1:2500 subjects in the US are
genetically susceptible, or have a diabetic syndrome with increased risk
of QT prolongation, torsade de pointes, and sudden death. To address this
risk we determined the mitigating effect of a liposome and its components
administered intravenously and orally on clinically approved
QT-prolonging anticancer drugs, crizotinib and nilotinib, and an
antibiotic moxifloxacin (MF) in vitro and in vivo in rats and guinea
pigs. Intravenous MF at 20 mg/kg caused a statistically significant QTc
prolongation of 35ms in guinea pigs. This observation is in line with
peer-reviewed literature in which an oral dose of 400 mg (or
approximately 6.1 mg/kg) in humans caused the FDA to black-label MF for
causing QT interval prolongation in patients.The mitigating effect of a
liposome consisting of dimyristoyl phosphatidylcholine (DMPC) and
dimyristoyl phosphatidylglycerol (DMPG) on curcumin, a compound that
inhibits the IKr (hERG) current, was initially discovered during
preclinical testing with Lipocurc. Additional patch-clamp studies with
DMPC, DMPG, their metabolites myristoyl lysophosphatidylcholine (14:0
LPC) and myristoyl lysophosphatidylglycerol (14:0 LPG), and a synthetic
compound, myristoyl ethyleneglycolphosphatidylglycerol (EGPG), revealed
mitigation of crizotinib- and nilotinib-induced inhibition of the IKr
current. Formulation of 14:0 LPG in a eutectic mixture with a
monoglyceride and myristic acid (EU8120) given orally to both normal and
diabetic rats prior to challenge with intravenous nilotinib resulted in
significantly reduced QT prolongation.We quantified and compared the
conduction delays on QT intervals in guinea pigs induced by MF alone with
those of MF preceded by oral administration of EU8120, 14:0 LPG, 16:0
LPG, EGPG and DMPG. Three ratios of phospholipids:MF were tested for
mitigation of conduction delays: 3:1, 1:1 and 0.3:1. At the 3:1 ratio,
all the compounds tested mitigated MF-induced prolongation of QT
intervals. While EGPG induced the most protection it caused bradycardia
which limited its beneficial effects at that dose level. DMPG was the
least potent. At lower ratios of 1:1 and 0.3:1 the mitigating effects of
EU8120, EGPG and DMPG were maintained with equal potency. Lipid:MF ratios
of 0.1:1 and 0.03:1 are currently being tested and will identify a lead
compound for drug development, and offer insight into its mechanism of
action.

