Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glioma stem cells internalize perivascular bevacizumab via a
non-canonical pathway and target it for recycling or degradation


Antiangiogenic therapy shows great promise for treatment of cancer.
Bevacizumab is a humanized mAb that blocks VEGF-A, thereby inhibiting
angiogenesis. It has received FDA approval for patients with recurrent
glioblastoma (GBM); however, approximately 30% of patients are
non-responsive and the underlying mechanism for the lack of response is
not known. It has been assumed that Bevacizumab solely targets
circulating VEGF-A; however, VEGF-A found in the perivascular space of
GBM tumors could also be an important target. We hypothesized that
Bevacizumab is transcytosed across brain endothelial cells (ECs), gains
access to the perivascular niche containing glioma stem cells (GSCs), and
that differences in GSC endocytosis and trafficking of Bevacizumab to
either a recycling or degradation compartment determines a patients
response. We found that Bevacizumab is internalized by normal and
tumor-isolated brain ECs in a time-dependent manner. ECs transcytose 20%
of Bevacizumab after 30 minutes, and 40% after 120 minutes. Importantly,
we found that 95% of GSCs internalize Bevacizumab within 30 minutes.
Internalized Bevacizumab in GSCs can be recycled to the extracellular
space via a Rab4+ fast recycling compartment, or degraded via trafficking
to the LAMP1+ compartment (late endosome/lysosome). Furthermore,
Bevacizumab internalization in GSCs was partially inhibited by a
macropinocytosis inhibitor (EIPA) suggesting macropinocytosis is one
mechanism of internalization. GSCs do not internalize Bevacizumab via the
canonical IgG internalization pathway since they do not express the
neonatal Fc Receptor (FcRn). Supporting our in vitro data, we found a
gradient of Bevacizumab extending from the vessel into the tumor in an
orthotopic xenograft mouse model of GBM administered Bevacizumab, and
Bevacizumab was readily detected within perivascular tumor cells. Our
data suggest that the transcytosis of Bevacizumab by brain and
tumor-associated ECs, and the endocytosis and trafficking of Bevacizumab
by perivascular GSCs influences Bevacizumab effectiveness in patients
with GBM.

