Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SETDB1 accelerates non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
tumorigenesis through WNT signalling pathway


Histone methylation deregulation leads to disruption of chromatin
structure and gene expression pattern in many human cancers. Histone H3
lysine K9 methyltransferase, SETDB1 (SET domain, bifurcated 1) is
initially reported to control heterochromatin structure, repress gene
expression and be essential in early embryogenesis. Studies have recently
shown its involvement in boosting tumorigenesis in different kinds of
human cancers, including lung cancer. However, the mechanism underlying
its ability to promote tumorigenesis remains largely unknown. In our
study, we sought to investigate the oncogenic role of SETDB1 in NSCLC.
Our immunohistochemistry found that 72% out of 387-lung cancer cases
stained positively for SETDB1, compared to 46% samples of normal
bronchial epithelium (pHistone methylation deregulation leads to
disruption of chromatin structure and gene expression pattern in many
human cancers. Histone H3 lysine K9 methyltransferase, SETDB1 (SET
domain, bifurcated 1) is initially reported to control heterochromatin
structure, repress gene expression and be essential in early
embryogenesis. Studies have recently shown its involvement in boosting
tumorigenesis in different kinds of human cancers, including lung cancer.
However, the mechanism underlying its ability to promote tumorigenesis
remains largely unknown. In our study, we sought to investigate the
oncogenic role of SETDB1 in NSCLC. Our immunohistochemistry found that
72% out of 387-lung cancer cases stained positively for SETDB1, compared
to 46% samples of normal bronchial epithelium (p<0.0001). Moreover, the
percent positive cells and their intensity of positivity correlated with
cancer grades.Ectopic expression of SETDB1 in NSCLC cell lines enhanced
clonogenic growth in vitro and significantly enlarges tumor size in vivo;
while depleting endogenous SETDB1 expression with shRNAs suppressed NSCLC
cells proliferation and tumor formation. Analyzing the expression pattern
of cells with forced expression of SETDB1 combined with TOP/FOP
luciferase assay and western blotting showed that WNT/-catenin signaling
was activated upon overexpression of SETDB1, as well as upregulation of
its downstream targets, c-Myc and Cyclin D1. ChIP assay showed that
SETDB1 binds to WNT relevant genes, such as APOE, IGFBP4, FZD1 and LRP8
and upregulates their transcription, which is very distinct from its
canonical suppressing function of H3K9 trimethylation. Interestingly, we
also noted that SETDB1 was able to repress P53 expression, while
diminishing P53 expression reciprocally enhanced SETDB1 expression.In
summary, our study demonstrates that SETDB1 enhances NSCLC tumorigenesis
through activating WNT/-catenin signaling and repressing tumor suppressor
P53. Our novel findings provide new insight into a non-canonical function
of SETDB1 in activating gene expression, and suggest therapeutic benefit
of targeting SETDB1 in NSCLC having high expression level of this protein.

