Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fetal alcohol exposure increases susceptibility to carcinogenesis
in the pituitary


The idea that exposure to adverse environmental conditions and lifestyle
choices during pregnancy can result in fetal programming that underlies
disease susceptibility in adulthood is now widely accepted. Fetal alcohol
exposed offspring display many behavioral and physiological abnormalities
including neuroendocrine-immune functions, which often carry over into
their adult life. Since neuroendocrine-immune system is critically
involved in the regulation of tumor surveillance, we determined whether
fetal alcohol exposure increases the susceptibility to estrogen-induced
pituitary prolactin-secreting tumors (prolactinomas), commonly occurring
pituitary tumors in humans. Pregnant Fischer 344 rats were fed between
gestational days 7 and 21 with a liquid diet containing alcohol (AF),
pair-fed with isocaloric liquid diet (PF), or fed ad libitum with rat
chow (AD). At 90 days of age, female offspring rats were ovariectomized
and received a subcutaneous estradiol implant. These rats were sacrificed
between 4 and 5 months after the estradiol implants. At the time of
sacrifice, pituitaries of these animals were inspected for tumor and
whole body were inspected for any tumor metastasis. Estradiol treatment
increased pituitary weight about 5-folds in AD and PF treated groups and
increased 20-30-folds in the AF treated group. Most tumors in the AF
group were hemorrhagic. About 30% AF rats had some tumors in the
non-pituitary sites. AD and PF rats did not show any non-pituitary site
tumor. When AF rat pituitaries were grown in cultures, cells rapidly grew
and formed colonies. Colony formation and rapid growth rate were not
observed in cells of the pituitary from PF and AD rats. Histopathological
evaluation revealed that tumors in AF group were more densely packed
cells as compare to the PF and AD groups who showed uniform cells with
abundant cytoplasm. Pituitary tumor from alcohol exposed animals showed
strong nuclear p53 and monoclonal Ki67 immunoreactivity in almost all
tumor cells. Significantly higher mRNA levels of hemorrhage-associated
genes (VEGF and MMP-9) were also observed in pituitary tumor tissues from
AF group as compare with PF and AD groups. Tumor cells showed positivity
to prolactin staining but showed negativity to other pituitary hormones
staining. Histological evaluation of the pituitary tissues revealed that
tumors were prolactin producing in all groups, and tumors in AF
pituitaries were highly proliferative. These data provide evidence for
aggressive, possible neoplastic, prolactinoma development in the
pituitary after estrogen treatment in fetal alcohol exposed female rats.
(This work is supported by a National Institute of Health grant R01
AA11591).

