Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of factors that recruit tumor-associated
neutrophils to head and neck squamous cell cancer


Recent immunohistological studies have shown that abundant
tumour-associated neutrophils (TAN) are present within malignant tumours.
TAN can have a significant impact on the tumour microenvironment via
release of potent growth factots, chemokines and proteinases that
influence tumour progression. The presence of TAN has been associated
with poor prognosis in patients with head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC). The aims of this study were to identify which factors
are responsible for neutrophil recruitment into HNSCC.The number of TAN
within human HNSCC tissue was evaluated by immunohistochemical staining
for the neutrophil marker, myeloperoxidase (MPO). The factors secreted by
FaDu HNSCC multi-cellular tumour spheroids (MCTS) were analysed by
cytokine array and ELISA. Neutrophils isolated from the peripheral blood
of healthy volunteers were used to measure neutrophil migration to
factors identified from the array. Then the recruitment of neutrophils to
MCTS was assessed overtime by flow cytometry in the absence and presence
of small molecule inhibitors. FaDu xenograft mouse models were used to
confirm the effect of these inhibitors on neutrophil recruitment
in-vivo.MPO staining confirmed the presence of marked numbers of TAN in
HNSCC compared to normal oral epithelium. HNSCC MCTS resemble in-vivo
tumours, displaying areas of hypoxia, necrosis and cell proliferation.
Neutrophils migrated to recombinant CXCL8, CXCL1 and MIF and these
chemoattractants were found in the conditioned medium of FaDu MCTS. The
recruitment of neutrophils to FaDu MCTS was significantly inhibited when
neutrophils were pre-treated with antagonists for CXCR2 and CXCR4, the
receptors for CXCL8, CXCL1 and MIF respectively. Moreover, use of the MIF
inhibitor, ISO-1caused a dramatic reduction in the number of neutrophils
recruited into FaDu MCTS. In-vivo, ISO-1 significantly reduced the number
of TAN in xenograft FaDu tumours. Collectively, these data suggest that
CXCL8, CXCL1 and MIF in particular are important in the recruitment of
TAN into HNSCC.

