Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The castrate resistant PC-3 cell line with neuroendocrine features
is enriched in tumor initiating cells and is resistant to enzalutamide
and abiraterone but sensitive to antimetabolites


BACKGROUND. Prostatic small cell carcinoma is increasing in frequency in
patients resistant to all forms of androgen ablation. It is a high-grade
malignant neoplasm with neuroendocrine features. There are no suitable
cellular models to study this particular type of carcinoma. A recent
study showed that the PC-3 cell line has neuroendocrine characteristics
(1). This report prompted us to determine if this cell line is enriched
in tumor initiating cells, and to use this cell line as a model to
determine sensitivity to second generation anti androgen treatments and
chemotherapeutic agents.METHODS. To determine the percentage of tumor
initiating cells (TICs) marker expression comparing LNCaP with PC-3
cells, flow cytometry analysis was used. Functional assays such as
migration, invasion, colony formation and sphere formation were used to
determine metastatic potential. Secondary and tertiary spheroid assays
were used to determine the self-renewal ability. The CellTiter 96 AQueous
non-radioactive cell proliferation assay was used to identify response to
hormone deprivation and chemotherapeutic drugs.RESULTS. The growth rate
of PC-3 was similar to LNCaP cells while the TIC marker CD44 was only
expressed on PC-3 cells. Both LNCaP and PC-3 cells expressed 21 with the
highest expression detected in PC-3 cells. No expression of CD133 was
detected in either of the cell lines. PC-3, as compared to LNCaP cells,
displayed an increase in 5-minute collagen-I attachment, cell migration,
invasion, colony formation and sphere formation in an
anchorage-independent environment. PC-3 cells were capable of
self-renewal in the secondary and tertiary spheroid assays and expressed
neuroendocrine markers such as chromogranin A and EMT marker, Twist. PC-3
cells were able to also grow in androgen-deprived media, and as compared
to LNCaP cells, demonstrated resistance to anti-androgen drugs that
included enzalutamide and abiraterone and chemotherapy drugs such as
doxorubicin and taxotere. Surprisingly, PC-3 cells were more sensitive to
methotrexate than LNCaP or DU145 cells. PC3 cells had lower levels of
MTAP (methylthioadenosine phosphorylase) and hence may be the reason for
their sensitivity to denovo purine synthesis inhibitors such as
methotrexate.CONCLUSIONS. The novel findings presented here provide
evidence that castrate resistant PC-3 cells are CD44+/ 21+/CD24low/CD133_
and possess stem cell properties and may serve as a useful model to study
the role of new treatments for prostate cancer with neuroendocrine
features.Reference:1) Prostate. 2011 Nov; 71(15): 1668-79; PC3 is a cell
line characteristic of prostatic small cell carcinoma; Tai S, Sun Y,
Squires JM, Zhang H, Oh WK, Liang CZ, Huang J

