Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The genomic landscape of nasopharyngeal carcinoma


Background Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) arises from the epithelial
tissue of the nasopharynx. This cancer has remarkable ethnic and
geographic distributions, with a particularly high prevalence in Southern
China and Southeast Asia. Genetic susceptibility and Epstein-Barr virus
infections have been implicated in the pathogenesis of NPC. However,
genomic abnormalities of this neoplasm remain largely obscure, and no
effective targeted therapy has been established. Therefore, a strong need
exists to characterize the genetic alterations of this type of tumour for
guiding the development of more effective and innovative therapeutic
regimens.Methods Whole exomes sequencing (WES) was performed on 56 NPC
germline/tumor pairs and 5 NPC cell lines. Transcriptome sequencing
(RNA-seq) was conducted on 4 tumors from this cohort. An additional 61
NPC germline/tumor pairs and 5 non-paired primary tumors were further
subjected to targeted regional deep-sequencing (TS). The somatic copy
number variations (SCNV) of 52 primary tumors were profiled by SNP-array
hybridization (50 of them also had WES data). Finally, both in vitro and
in vivo biological and biochemical experiments were performed to evaluate
the newly-identified mutations in NPC cell lines.Results We identified a
total of 1,577 non-silent somatic mutations affecting 1,413 genes from
WES, revealing a relatively low mutational rate and wide mutational
diversity. Integration of the results from WES, TS and RNA-seq revealed a
distinct mutational signature and a number of significantly mutated genes
(such as TP53, ARID1A, MLL2, BAP1, PIK3CA, etc.) in NPC. Pathway
enrichment analysis of genetic lesions identified several important
cellular processes and pathways in NPC including chromatin modification,
ERBB-PI3K signaling and autophagy machinery. We further characterized the
biological functions of both ARID1A and BAP1 proteins in NPC cell lines.
Depletion of wild-type endogenous ARID1A expression with shRNAs resulted
in increased anchorage-independent colony formation, cell migration and
xenograft growth in vivo, whereas ectopically expressed ARID1A suppressed
both cell proliferation and migration. Similarly, ectopic expression of
wild-type BAP1 suppressed anchorage-independent colony formation of NPC
cells.Conclusion We characterized the genomic landscape of 128 NPC cases,
and identified a number of novel driver genes with statistical and
biological evidence. Integrated analysis showed enrichment of genetic
lesions affecting chromatin modification, ERBB-PI3K signaling and
autophagy machinery, offering opportunities for developing novel
treatments. These results in aggregate provide an important genetic
foundation for further study of the molecular pathology and etiology of
this fatal disease.

