Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lysosome disruption rapidly and effectively induces necrosis in
aggressive thyroid carcinomas


Poorly differentiated thyroid cancer (PDTC) and anaplastic thyroid cancer
(ATC) are very aggressive and lethal neoplasms for which there is
currently no effective therapy. By activating Kras and deleting p53 in
the mouse thyroid we have generated a mouse model of PDTC progressing to
ATC. These tumors are characterized by elevated levels of anti-apoptotic
members of the Bcl2 family. Tumor cell lines established from this model
as well as similarly aggressive human thyroid cancer cell lines undergo
cell death upon treatment with Obatoclax, an inhibitor of the
anti-apoptotic Bcl2 family members. Even though several studies have
suggested that Obatoclax induces apoptosis or necroptosis by binding to
its designated targets in a number of different cancer models, our
studies show that Obatoclax induces necrosis in both human and mouse
thyroid cancer cell lines. By exploiting its autofluorescence, we show
that Obatoclax is found in association with lysosomes, but not with
mitochondria as it would be expected given the location of its known
Bcl2-family targets, and that it causes rapid lysosome disruption.
Obatoclax was also able to induce a block in the later stages of
autophagy, as shown by an accumulation of autophagosomes upon treatment,
likely as a result of lysosome impairment. Furthermore, Bafilomycin A1,
an inhibitor of lysosomal acidification, counteracts the effect of
Obatoclax and allows for cell survival. These findings suggest a novel
mechanism of action for Obatoclax, in which direct lysosome disruption
leads to necrosis. Strikingly, human and mouse thyroid cancer cell lines
are also sensitive to other lysosome-destabilizing agents.Importantly,
transformed human thyroid cell lines are much more sensitive to Obatoclax
than non-transformed thyroid cells, suggesting the existence of a useful
therapeutic window. Even though Obatoclax has been removed from clinical
trials due to low anti-tumor activity and toxic side effects, its
efficacy in killing thyroid cancer cells otherwise refractory to
treatment, and the alternative mechanism of action involved in this
process support a new approach for targeting aggressive thyroid
neoplasms. In conclusion, our data show that aggressive thyroid cancer
cells are intrinsically sensitive to lysosome destabilization, and this
characteristic can be exploited for the development of novel therapeutic
approaches.

