Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantification of the cobalamin (vitamin B12) TCN2 transport
protein, cobalamin CD320 cell surface receptor and Ki-67 in naturally
occurring canine and feline tumors and comparison to expression in
adjacent normal tissues


Introduction: Cobalamin-dependent enzymes such as methionine synthase are
critical to DNA synthesis. While all living cells require cobalamin for
this purpose, rapidly proliferating cancer cells have an especially high
demand. Cancer cells ensure sufficient cobalamin supply through increased
production of the serum cobalamin transport protein (transcobalamin II;
TCII; TCN2) and through up-regulation of the cobalamin cell surface
receptor (transcobalamin II-R; TCII-R; CD320). Previously, we developed a
standardized immunohistochemical method to quantify expression of TCII,
TCII-R, and Ki-67 in 34 human tumor xenografts. Specific Aim: The purpose
of this study was to quantify the expression of TCII, TCII-R, and Ki-67
in naturally occurring tumors, and to compare these results to expression
in corresponding adjacent normal tissues. Methods: 30 canine and 36
feline patient-derived, archived tissue samples were utilized.
Immunohistochemical staining was performed using rabbit polyclonal
antibodies to the cobalamin transport protein (anti-TCN2) and cell
surface receptor (anti-CD320), and using a mouse monoclonal antibody to
Ki-67 (clone MIB-1). Representative areas of solid tumor were digitally
photographed. An Image J color deconvolution plugin was used to quantify
TCII and TCII-R positively stained cells, and an Immunoratio plugin was
used to calculate percentage of Ki-67 positively stained cells. Results:
All canine and feline tumor tissues stained positively for TCII, TCII-R
and Ki-67. Expression of these proteins was noted to vary both within and
between tumor types. Expression of TCII, TCII-R and Ki-67 was
significantly higher in tumor tissues than in corresponding adjacent
normal tissues in both canine and feline samples. There was a strong
correlation between TCII and TCII-R expression in both canine and feline
tissues. A modest correlation was identified between TCII and Ki-67
expression in canine tissues, and between TCII-R and Ki-67 expression in
both canine and feline tissues. Conclusion: For the first time since the
discovery of cobalamin in 1948, we have quantified on a molecular level
the tumor-specific expression of TCII and TCII-R compared to adjacent,
histologically normal tissues. These results demonstrate a quantifiable,
synchronous up-regulation of TCII and TCII-R expression by proliferating
tumors. Results from this study also indicate that cobalamin homology is
highly conserved between human, canine and feline species. The potential
to utilize these proteins as biomarkers to identify tumor tissues, assess
eligibility for cobalamin-based anti-tumor regimes, evaluate response to
therapy and monitor for recurrent and metastatic disease has important
implications in the management of both human and companion animal cancer
patients.

