Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of FKTN gene in gastric cancer related to radiation
exposure: research on atomic bomb survivors


While radiation use increases, the Life Span Study (LSS) atomic bomb
survivor cohort of Radiation Effects Reserach Foundation (RERF) from
1951-2003 shows a significant cancer risk for most major organs in the
body, including stomach. To identify genes associated with gastric
cancer, we utilize Escherichia coli ampicillin secretion trap (CAST)
method, which is a powerful tool for novel cancer biomarkers. By this
method, we found that FKTN (fukutin) was overexpressed in gastric cancer.
Fukutin localizes to the Golgi apparatus and normally has low expression,
but overexpresses in some cell lines. It is thought to forms a complex
with protein POMGnT1, a glycosyltransferase involved in the synthesis of
O-mannosyl glycan attached to mucin-like domain of alpha-dystroglycan.
The POMGnT1 activity was also downregulated by fukutin mutation and
resulted in Fukuyama congenital muscular dystrophy: brain malformation,
one of the most common autosomal-recessive disorders in Japan. To
elucidate the molecular mechanisms of radiation carcinogenesis, we
analyzed FKTN expression from sporadic gastric cancer cohort and LSS
cohort by immunohistochemistry. In the sporadic cohort of 695 gastric
cancer samples, there was a significant correlation of FKTN expression in
differentiated type gastric cancer. For mucin markers, a significant
relationship was detected between FKTN and CD10 (pWhile radiation use
increases, the Life Span Study (LSS) atomic bomb survivor cohort of
Radiation Effects Reserach Foundation (RERF) from 1951-2003 shows a
significant cancer risk for most major organs in the body, including
stomach. To identify genes associated with gastric cancer, we utilize
Escherichia coli ampicillin secretion trap (CAST) method, which is a
powerful tool for novel cancer biomarkers. By this method, we found that
FKTN (fukutin) was overexpressed in gastric cancer. Fukutin localizes to
the Golgi apparatus and normally has low expression, but overexpresses in
some cell lines. It is thought to forms a complex with protein POMGnT1, a
glycosyltransferase involved in the synthesis of O-mannosyl glycan
attached to mucin-like domain of alpha-dystroglycan. The POMGnT1 activity
was also downregulated by fukutin mutation and resulted in Fukuyama
congenital muscular dystrophy: brain malformation, one of the most common
autosomal-recessive disorders in Japan. To elucidate the molecular
mechanisms of radiation carcinogenesis, we analyzed FKTN expression from
sporadic gastric cancer cohort and LSS cohort by immunohistochemistry. In
the sporadic cohort of 695 gastric cancer samples, there was a
significant correlation of FKTN expression in differentiated type gastric
cancer. For mucin markers, a significant relationship was detected
between FKTN and CD10 (p<0.0001). The LSS cohort of 86 gastric cancer
samples showed FTKN expression downregulated in high-dose than in
low-dose exposed patients (pWhile radiation use increases, the Life Span
Study (LSS) atomic bomb survivor cohort of Radiation Effects Reserach
Foundation (RERF) from 1951-2003 shows a significant cancer risk for most
major organs in the body, including stomach. To identify genes associated
with gastric cancer, we utilize Escherichia coli ampicillin secretion
trap (CAST) method, which is a powerful tool for novel cancer biomarkers.
By this method, we found that FKTN (fukutin) was overexpressed in gastric
cancer. Fukutin localizes to the Golgi apparatus and normally has low
expression, but overexpresses in some cell lines. It is thought to forms
a complex with protein POMGnT1, a glycosyltransferase involved in the
synthesis of O-mannosyl glycan attached to mucin-like domain of
alpha-dystroglycan. The POMGnT1 activity was also downregulated by
fukutin mutation and resulted in Fukuyama congenital muscular dystrophy:
brain malformation, one of the most common autosomal-recessive disorders
in Japan. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms of radiation
carcinogenesis, we analyzed FKTN expression from sporadic gastric cancer
cohort and LSS cohort by immunohistochemistry. In the sporadic cohort of
695 gastric cancer samples, there was a significant correlation of FKTN
expression in differentiated type gastric cancer. For mucin markers, a
significant relationship was detected between FKTN and CD10 (p<0.0001).
The LSS cohort of 86 gastric cancer samples showed FTKN expression
downregulated in high-dose than in low-dose exposed patients (p<0.0001),
but with no correlation between FKTN and mucin phenotype expression. This
is the first analysis on the expression of fukutin protein in gastric
cancers among atomic-bomb survivors and the radiation dose response,
using immunohistochemistry. These results suggest that FTKN has a
possible relationship with radiation exposure and gastric cancer among
atomic bomb survivors.

