Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional genomic screening reveals asparagine dependence as a
metabolic vulnerability in sarcoma


Background. Currently available therapies for sarcomas are often
inadequate. This study sought to identify actionable gene targets in
sarcomas by selective targeting of the molecular networks that support
sarcoma cell proliferation. Experimental approach. Mouse sarcomas driven
by expression of oncogenic Kras(G12v) and disruption of CDKN2A (p16p19)
were induced by ex-vivo transduction and intramuscular injection of mouse
satellite cells. Kras; p16p19null sarcomas identified a cluster of genes
upregulated in mouse sarcomas and human rhabdomyosarcoma compared to
normal skeletal muscle. A customized shRNA proliferation screen was used
to identify transcripts within this cluster that reduced sarcoma cell
proliferation. Target gene effects on sarcoma growth were evaluated in
mouse and human sarcoma cell lines and xenografts.Results. Silencing of
asparagine synthetase (ASNS), an amidotransferase that converts aspartate
into asparagine, produced the strongest inhibitory effect on sarcoma
growth in a functional genomic screen of mouse sarcomas generated by
oncogenic Kras and Cdkn2a. ASNS silencing in mouse and human sarcoma cell
lines reduced the percentage of S phase cells and impeded new polypeptide
synthesis. These effects of ASNS silencing were reversed by exogenous
supplementation with asparagine. Also, asparagine depletion via the ASNS
inhibitor amino sulfoximine 5 (AS5) or asparaginase inhibited mouse and
human sarcoma growth in vitro, and genetic silencing of ASNS in mouse
sarcoma cells combined with depletion of plasma asparagine inhibited
tumor growth in vivo. Conclusions. The generation of new protein mass by
rapidly proliferating sarcoma cells requires adequate Asparagine
availability. Asparagine reliance of sarcoma cells may represent an
actionable, metabolic vulnerability with potential anti-rhabdomyosarcoma
therapeutic value.

