Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altiratinib is a potent inhibitor of TRK kinases and is
efficacious in TRK-fusion driven cancer models


Introduction:TRK kinases have been implicated in a variety of cancers,
wherein TRK gene fusions, amplifications and mutations have been shown to
drive tumor growth. TRK kinases have also been shown to play key roles in
metastasis. Recently, large-scale sequencing efforts have identified TRK
fusions at a low but significant frequency across all major cancers.
Altiratinib is a potent single-digit nanomolar inhibitor of TRK, MET,
TIE2, and VEGFR2 kinases. Altiratinib inhibits TRKA, TRKB, and TRKC
phosphorylation in both WT TRK and TRK-fusion cell lines and inhibits
cell proliferation in these cell lines. In vivo, altiratinib suppressed
TRK phosphorylation for >18 hr after a single oral dose and showed
significant inhibition of tumor growth in TRKA and TRKC-fusion xenograft
efficacy studies. Altiratinib is currently in a Phase 1 clinical trial
for patients with advanced solid tumors.Experimental
procedures:Altiratinib was tested for inhibition of various recombinant
kinases using a standard PK/LDH coupled spectrophotometric continuous
assay. In cell assays, cells were treated with a dose response of
compound. Levels of phosphorylated TRK in cell lysates were determined
Western blot. Cell proliferation was measured using the fluorescent dye
resazurin. Experiments were performed in triplicate. In vivo xenograft
models were performed at Molecular Imaging, Inc. (Ann Arbor, MI).Summary
of results:Altiratinib potently inhibited TRK kinase activity in
biochemical assays (IC50 values of 0.9 nM, 4.6 nM, and 0.8 nM for TRKA,
B, and C, respectively). Altiratinib inhibited phosphorylation of TRKA in
the TPM3-TRKA fusion cell line KM-12 (IC50 = 1.4 nM) and of TRKC in
ETV6-TRKC transformed NIH-3T3 cells (IC50 = 0.5 nM). Altiratinib
inhibited NGF-stimulated phosphorylation of wild-type TRKA in K562 (IC50
= 0.7 nM) and SK-N-SH cells (IC50 = 1.2 nM) and BDNF-stimulated
phosphorylation of TRKB in ATRA-transformed SK-N-SH cells (IC50 = 0.24
nM). In compound washout experiments, altiratinib inhibited TRKA
phosphorylation in KM-12 cells for > 24 hr after compound washout, due to
its durable Type II switch pocket binding mode to the kinase. In cell
lines driven by TRK fusions, altiratinib also inhibited cell
proliferation (KM-12 IC50 = 3.8 nM; NIH-3T3 ETV6/TRKC IC50 = 0.5 nM). In
vivo, altiratinib inhibited phosphorylation of TRK and downstream targets
in the signaling pathway for >12 hr after a single oral dose. Altiratinib
treatment led to tumor regression in TRK-fusion xenograft efficacy
studies.Conclusions:Altiratinib exhibits potent inhibition of oncogenic
TRK fusions in vitro and in vivo. Combined with its inhibition of the
tumor and microenvironment targets MET, TIE2, and VEGFR2 kinases,
altiratinib provides the potential to treat cancers driven by TRK
fusions. Altiratinib is currently in a Phase 1 clinical trial in patients
with solid tumors.

