Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance to TGF-beta-induced apoptosis is not associated with
the de-differentiation in hepatocellular carcinoma


Aim: Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta is a cytokine which induces
apoptosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells. However, some HCC
cells show resistance to the induction of apoptosis by TGF-beta. The
analyses of the molecular mechanism underlying these phenomena may be
related with the mechanisms of acquirement of drug-resistance. Thus, we
examined molecularly the apoptosis-resistant HCC cells which we
previously established, especially emphasizing on the analyses of the
stem-cell marker expression in this study.Methods: Previously established
HuH7R cells, which acquired a resistance to TGF-beta-induced apoptosis
after a long-term culture under small amount of TGF-beta, and control
parental HuH7 cells, were used. Apoptosis rate and cell cycle state of
these cells after TGF-beta treatment were determined by a flow-cytometry.
The expression levels of stem-cell surface markers, such as epithelial
cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) and CD133, and those of transcriptional
factors: Oct4, HNF3alfa, HNF4beta, and C/EBPbeta, were analyzed by
fluorescent labeling using specific antibodies, at 24hrs and 48hrs after
TGF-beta treatment.Results: 1) HuH7 cells showed apoptosis after 48hrs of
TGF-beta treatment, whereas HuH7R did not show apoptosis but entered
cell-cycle arrest. 2) The expression levels of CD133 were not affected at
both 24hrs and 48hrs after TGF-beta treatment, while EpCAM expression
levels increased from 24hrs, in both HuH7 and HuH7R cells. 3) The
expression levels of Oct4, HNF3alfa, HNF4beta, and C/EBPbeta were also
increased in HCC cells. However, those expression profiles were almost
comparable in between HuH7 and HuH7R cells.Conclusions: The acquisition
of the resistance to TGF-beta-induced apoptosis in HCCs were not related
with the expression changes of stem-cell markers. The acquisition of
drug-resistance in HCC cells was considered through mechanisms other than
the changes of the cellular differentiation status of HCC cells.

