Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome analysis of MCF7 breast cancer cells with different
expression profile of PAR-4 (prostate apoptosis response-4) in the
presence and absence of docetaxel


The ability of cancer cells to evade apoptosis is one of the essential
alterations in cell physiology that dictate tumor growth and impact
chemo- and radio-resistance. Experimental evidence indicates that protein
kinase C apoptosis WT1 regulator (PAWR) gene, also known as prostate
apoptosis response-4 (PAR-4), plays an important role in tumor cell
survival, and may be considered a candidate for tumor cell selective
therapy. This selective ability of Par-4 to directly cause apoptosis in
most cancer cells is associated with its nuclear translocation and its
phosphorylation state. PAR-4 acts in both intrinsic and extrinsic
apoptotic pathways. In the present study, we sought to evaluate the
effects of PAR-4 on the expression profile of MCF7 breast cancer cells in
the presence and absence of docetaxel. MCF7 breast cancer cells were
transfected with the expression vector pCMV6-PAR-4 or pCMV6-Neo. Real
time PCR, western blot and immunofluorescence were used to characterize
the clones over-expressing PAR-4. Using cDNA microarray analysis, we
evaluated the transcriptome changes in the comparison between MCF7 cells
with increased expression of PAR-4 and the control cells before and after
docetaxel treatment. Several differentially expressed genes were
identified as potentially involved in PAR-4-mediated chemosensitivity to
docetaxel. Using the Ingenuity program, several gene networks were
generated from the differentially expressed genes, including many genes
direct and indirectly involved in the canonical WNT (Wingless-Type MMTV
Integration 1) signaling pathway. The Wnt Signaling Pathway Human RT2
Profiler PCR Array was used to validate the differentially expressed
genes involved in the Wnt pathway identified in MCF-7 cells with
differences of Par-4 expression before and after exposure to docetaxel.
The validation results confirm the data observed by cDNA microarray
showing that the increase in PAR-4 expression modulates the expression of
many genes involved in the Wnt signaling pathway in MCF7 breast cells.
The results generated could be of particular interest for the
understanding the action of PAR-4 in chemosensitivity, especially to
increase the specificity and effectiveness of drug treatment and
overcoming resistance to chemotherapy.Supported by FAPESP and CNPq.

