Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary scores and cancer incidence, mortality and survival:
Epidemiologic evidence and meta-analysis


Diet scores or indices assess the degree to which an individual's
reported diet conforms to dietary recommendations or culturally-defined
healthful diets. Characterizing diet exposures in this way provides a
more complete picture of individual dietary behavior, and potentially
captures additive and/or interactive effects on disease risk. Such
metrics, where higher points reflect better diets, and lower scores
reflect worse diets, have been examined in relation to cancer incidence,
mortality and survival. To date, the literature on the association
between diet scores and cancer risk is inconsistent across and within
scores. We conducted a literature search for prospective cohort studies
of a priori dietary scores or indices in relation to cancer incidence,
mortality or survival using PubMed. Meta-analyses were performed when at
least five separate studies published results on a cancer outcome, using
the same diet score. When studies on both incident and fatal outcomes
were available from the same cohort for the same cancer/s, estimates from
incident outcomes were used. If more than one version of the same score
in the same cohort was evaluated, we used the most recent score.
Estimates in men and women were included separately. Meta-analyses of
four out of six diet scores and the outcome total cancer incidence or
mortality showed significant inverse associations comparing top vs bottom
quantiles, often with significant study heterogeneity: the Alternate
Healthy Eating Index (AHEI) Relative Risk (RR) = 0.88, 95% confidence
interval (CI) 0.84-0.93, p heterogeneity = 0.02; Healthy Eating Index
(HEI) RR = 0.84, 95% CI 0.77-0.92, p heterogeneityDiet scores or indices
assess the degree to which an individual's reported diet conforms to
dietary recommendations or culturally-defined healthful diets.
Characterizing diet exposures in this way provides a more complete
picture of individual dietary behavior, and potentially captures additive
and/or interactive effects on disease risk. Such metrics, where higher
points reflect better diets, and lower scores reflect worse diets, have
been examined in relation to cancer incidence, mortality and survival. To
date, the literature on the association between diet scores and cancer
risk is inconsistent across and within scores. We conducted a literature
search for prospective cohort studies of a priori dietary scores or
indices in relation to cancer incidence, mortality or survival using
PubMed. Meta-analyses were performed when at least five separate studies
published results on a cancer outcome, using the same diet score. When
studies on both incident and fatal outcomes were available from the same
cohort for the same cancer/s, estimates from incident outcomes were used.
If more than one version of the same score in the same cohort was
evaluated, we used the most recent score. Estimates in men and women were
included separately. Meta-analyses of four out of six diet scores and the
outcome total cancer incidence or mortality showed significant inverse
associations comparing top vs bottom quantiles, often with significant
study heterogeneity: the Alternate Healthy Eating Index (AHEI) Relative
Risk (RR) = 0.88, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.84-0.93, p heterogeneity
= 0.02; Healthy Eating Index (HEI) RR = 0.84, 95% CI 0.77-0.92, p
heterogeneity<0.001; Mediterranean Diet Score (MDS) RR = 0.81, 95% CI
0.78-0.85, p heterogeneity = 0.35; and WCRF/AICR RR = 0.77, 95% CI
0.68-0.86, p heterogeneity = 0.046. The associations with the Recommended
Food Score (RFS) and Diet Quality Index (DQI) were not statistically
significant. The MDS was associated with significantly lower colorectal
cancer risk (RR = 0.82, 95% CI 0.73-0.91, p heterogeneity = 0.034). In
studies of cancer survivors, less than three studies were available for
each diet score/outcome combination; thus no meta-analyses of cancer
survival were conducted. These results suggest that following recommended
dietary guidelines or the Mediterranean healthy diet pattern may
significantly reduce overall cancer risk. The limited number of studies
in cancer survivors indicates a need for further research.

