Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediction of prostate cancer progression with biomarkers and
tissue morphometry changes


Introduction:The progression of prostate cancer (PCa) involves both
tissue morphometric changes and critical molecular alterations (such as
cancer-associated markers). We have studied 80 men that underwent radical
prostatectomy (RP) to evaluate this dual approach to discriminate Gleason
score and progression. Next, we applied our approach at the diagnostic
biopsy of men that chose active surveillance (AS) as an option for the
management of their PCa, to predict the likelihood for re-classification
of their disease to immediate treatment.Materials & Methods:Two tissue
microarrays (TMAs) with 80 RP PCa cases, stratified by Gleason scores
were used first. Next, a total of 27 favorable and 24 unfavorable AS
biopsy PCa cases were evaluated. In both series we applied multiplex
tissue immunoblotting (MTI) & quantitative nuclear morphometry studies.
Data were first analyzed alone and then in combination using multivariate
logistic regression (MLR) to predict the aggressive RP cases or AS biopsy
reclassification status of the cancer. MTI was used to simultaneously
detect 56 biomarkers ((-5,-7)ProPSA, PCNA, RBM3, Her2/neu, & CACNA1D,
etc) on a single 5 micron section. Proteins on the slide were transferred
onto a series of 56 P-film membranes and each membrane was probed with
different primary antibody. The quantified FITC fluorescence signal of
the biomarker were normalized to CY5 labelled total protein. For the
nuclear morphometry analysis, quantification of the nuclear features were
achieved either using ImagePro Premier 9.1 Software for the TMAs or the
adaptive active contour scheme (AdACM) that uses nuclear shape,
architectural and textural features extracted from AS
biopsies.RESULTS:Using MLR, to differentiate aggressive PCa (Gleason
score 4+3 & > = 8) from less aggressive PCa (Gleason score 3+3 & 3+4) on
the TMAs of RP cases, our biomarkers model generated an ROC-AUC of 0.8
with accuracy of 71.43%, while morphometry model generate an ROC-AUC of
0.92 with accuracy of 82.50%. When combined, it improved to an ROC-AUC of
0.96 and accuracy of 87.01%. Additionally, MLR was used for
differentiation unfavorable biopsy cases that requires reclassification
due to upgraded Gleason score, increased tumor volume, and/or PSA/PSAD
during monitoring and need definitive treatment. On the contrary,
favorable cases are very low risk (VLR) PCa biopsies that are not
reclassified and can continue monitoring. The biomarkers model produced
an ROC-AUC of 0.71 with an accuracy of 73.91% while morphometry model
produces an ROC-AUC of 0.84 and accuracy of 74.51%. When combined, the
new model produces an ROC-AUC of 0.88 and accuracy of
80.43%.CONCLUSIONS:Our method combining tissue morphometry with
biomarkers demonstrated its translational clinical relevance since it can
predict PCa aggressiveness in men that have undergone RP. Also, this
approach predicts AS PCa cases requiring reclassification and immediate
treatment at biopsy.

