Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary modifications of rectal cancer survivors to improve bowel
function symptoms


Purpose: Rectal cancer (RC) survivors with and without permanent ostomy
have similar bowel function challenges, and seek improvement of symptoms
through dietary modifications. Identifying patient-reported dietary
modifications among survivors with different surgical reconstructions can
guide postoperative supportive care and improve health-related quality of
life (HRQOL).Methods: We mailed a survey to long-term (5 years
post-diagnosis) RC survivors enrolled in Kaiser Permanente (Northern
California and Northwest). It included a question eliciting foods that
were helpful with bowel function and the bowel symptoms that were
impacted. Food types were recoded into broader categories based on food
families developed around nutrition and common usage patterns and
frequencies of food types and symptoms addressed were compared by sex and
surgery type (ostomy vs. anastomosis).Results: Of the 577 RC survivors
who responded to the survey, 201 (35%) responded to the question related
to foods that helped bowel function. Food groups that most commonly were
used were fruits other than prunes (16.3%) and vegetables (15.5%). Water
was often used (9.2%). The only specific food that was commonly used was
prunes (7.6%). Most foods cited were credited with helping prevent the
constellation of symptoms and signs of constipation or bloating, followed
by predictability. A few foods (e.g., bananas, bread, rice) were more
likely to help with diarrhea. Helpful foods addressing
constipation/bloating were more likely cited by women than men (55% vs.
44%, p = .007). Vegetables were more likely cited by anastomosis than
ostomy subjects (18% vs. 11%, p = .03).Conclusions: Multiple dietary
alterations are attempted by RC survivors. It appears very
individualized, although multiple strategies can be suggested to improve
bowel function. Through this exploratory analysis, strategies can be
developed and tested for RC survivors.

