Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical and immunopathological effects following Image-guided
intratumoral injection of activated, autologous dendritic cells in
patients with advanced solid cancers


Introduction: Preclinical models have shown that activated DC's can
effectively clear both injected (local) and non-injected (distal)
inoperable tumor lesions. Based on this strong rationale a Phase I trial
was designed to exploit this finding in late stage solid tumors.Methods:
We designed a phase I study to determine the safety of intratumoral
injection of activated DC by administering the product repeatedly until
disease progression or unacceptable toxicity, in advanced cancers.
Endpoints included maximum tolerated (MTD), dose limiting toxicities
(DLT), safety, and immune response criteria (iRC) and RECIST. The
treatment consisted of image-guided intratumoral (IT) injections of
autologous, activated dendritic cells (DCVax-Direct,). Injections were
given on days 0, 7 and 14, followed by booster immunizations at weeks 4,
8 and 16. Three dose levels, at 2 million, 6 million or 15 million DC per
injection, were tested. Concomitant, serial biopsies were performed at
the time of the vaccination in the absence of toxicity /progression.
Systemic immune responses were tracked through evaluation of T cell
subsets and cytokines in circulation, and through T cell receptor (TCR)
sequencing in the tumor tissue and in the periphery.Results: To date, 40
patients (men, n = 18; women, n = 22), median age 53.7 (range 30 - 73)
years, median of 3.1 (1 - 6) prior therapies (including 1 patient with
prior immune therapy) were enrolled. Seventeen patients were treated at
the 2 million dose level, 19 at the 6 million dose level, and 3 at 15
million. The MTD has not been reached and there were no dose limiting
toxicities. Two patients experienced Grade 3/4 drug related toxicities :
one case of fever and dehydration and one case of systemic inflammatory
response syndrome. Patterns of immunological reactivity were assessed by
pathological scoring on tumor biopsies for 29 patients, and included
increasing necrosis in 62% of patients and emergence or amplification of
infiltrating T cells in 55%. In-depth study was carried out in a patient
with therapy-refractory, de-differentiated liposarcoma whose imaging at
12 weeks post initial injection revealed necrosis in the primary tumor
and stable lung metastases. Biopsies demonstrated an intra-tumoral
inflammatory response consisting of lymphocytes, macrophages and TIA-1
expressing cells, suggesting cytolytic activity. TCR sequencing revealed
the presence of shared TCR sequences in the tumor as well as in
circulation, demonstrating a systemic anti-tumor response. Analysis of T
cell subsets in circulation demonstrated normalization of the
CD4/CD8ratio.Conclusion:Immunotherapy with partially activated DC's
injected IT demonstrate early signals of immune reactivity even in late
stage patients with cancer. Preliminary data support the generation of
anti-tumor effects following IT injection of the partially activated,
autologous DCs.

