Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blocking activity of a novel anti-MET humanized monoclonal
antibody, KTN0216, is enhanced by IgG2 isotype in HGF-dependent and
Met-amplified tumors


Aberrant activation of MET kinase can be mediated by ligand-dependent
mechanisms through paracrine or autocrine stimulation by its ligand, HGF,
or by ligand-independent mechanisms through gene amplification,
over-expression or mutation. Both mechanisms of activating MET have been
associated with promoting tumor growth and progression. The discovery of
antagonistic MET antibodies has been challenging as many anti-MET
antibodies promote kinase activation that leads to cell proliferation and
migration. We have systematically screened MET antibodies using cell
based functional assays and identified a number of antibodies that
potently block MET-dependent cell proliferation, cell scattering as well
as tumor growth in vivo. One such antibody, KTN-MET-IgG1, binds to the
Sema/PSI domain and prevents HGF-MET interaction; additionally it induces
receptor ubiqutination and degradation. To evaluate if the IgG isotype
influences activity on MET activation and tumor growth we grafted the
binding domains of this antibody onto 2 other IgG backbones: KTN-MET-IgG2
and KTN-MET-IgG4. Surprisingly, grafting the antibody variable regions
onto the IgG2 framework dramatically enhanced the anti-MET activity in
vitro and in vivo. Comparing to KTN-MET-IgG1 and KTN-MET-IgG4 antibodies
with KTN-MET-IgG2 antibody, it demonstrated significantly better
inhibition of receptor phosphorylation and cell proliferation in MET
amplified tumor cell lines (EBC1, SNU5) and comparable activity in
HGF-dependent tumor cell lines (A549, U87MG). KTN-MET-IgG2 treatment of
tumor bearing mice achieved potent and prolonged suppression of tumor
growth using the U87MG glioblastoma xenograft model and tumor growth
regression with tumors remaining below detection for over 90 days post
last dosing using the SNU5 gastric cancer xenograft model. In summary, we
have found a novel IgG2 anti-MET antibody that inhibits tumor growth
driven by HGF-dependent MET activation and MET amplification. A model to
help explain the contribution of IgG2 isotype to enhanced blocking
activity will be presented. The humanized version of KTN-MET-IgG2,
KTN0216, is currently in preclinical development to evaluate tumor types
best suited for KTN0216 treatment.

