Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The sialyl-glycolipid SSEA4 marks a subpopulation of
chemotherapy-resistant breast cancer cells with mesenchymal features


Currently, the main option for systemic therapy of high-risk breast
cancer is chemotherapy, with an overall poor efficacy and severe side
effects. Chemotherapy-resistance and incomplete pathologic response
associate with risk of metastasis and early relapse in breast cancer.In
order to characterize treatment-resistant tumor cells, we performed a
cell surface marker screen in 4 triple-negative breast cancer
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models that respond well to
adriamycin/cyclophosphamide-based chemotherapy but fail to reach complete
pathological response. We used multi-parameter flow cytometry to screen
for the expression of a set of 45 cell surface markers during the course
of chemotherapy. This set of markers represented both proteins involved
in stem cell function and proteins known to be over-expressed in stem
cells or cancer stem cell sub-populations.We identified the
sialyl-glycolipid SSEA4 as a constant marker of chemotherapy-resistant
cancer cells in all four models. In addition, SSEA4 expression was found
higher in 3 out of 4 TNBC PDXs that are de novo resistant to neo-adjuvant
chemotherapy compared to sensitive TNBC PDXs. Two cell populations with
different percentage of SSEA4-positive (SSEA4+) cells and with different
growth characteristics were identified in a PDX model. When treated with
genotoxic compounds, the cell population with higher SSEA4+ expression
showed increased resistance to chemotherapy, indicating this
post-translational modification as potential marker of tumor resistance.
Comparison of SSEA4+ and SSEA4-negative (SSEA4-) tumor cells from TNBC
PDX models by global gene expression profiling showed overexpression of
mesenchymal-associated genes in SSEA4+ tumor cells and a deregulation of
drug resistance pathway-associated genes and miRNAs. In addition, high
expression of ST3 beta-galactoside alpha-2,3-sialyltransferase 2
(ST3GAL2), the enzyme catalyzing the last step of SSEA4 synthesis, was
found associated with poor outcome in breast and ovarian cancer patients
treated with chemotherapy.Thus, we propose SSEA4 as a novel marker of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition associated with chemoresistance, and
ST3GAL2 expression as a predictive marker for tumor chemoresistance
associated with poor outcome in breast and ovarian cancer patients. Both
biomarkers and additionally identified regulatory miRNAs may be used to
further understand chemoresistance and to develop alternative treatment
regimens for breast and ovarian cancer patients.

