Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-cancer activity of a new LIM-Kinases inhibitor: LIM-Pyr1


Breast cancer is the second cause of death in Europe with an incidence of
464.00 new cases in 2012. Chemotherapy is frequently used to treat severe
breast cancer. Current drugs like taxanes and anthracycline used alone or
in combination are efficient. Moreover the use of biomarkers, like HER2
and BRCA status is now helping in the choice of the most adapted
chemotherapy to the patient. De novo or acquired resistance limits,
however, the clinical usefulness of drugs used in current chemotherapy.
The development of new therapeutics effective against drug-resistant
cancers thus still represents an important challenge.Our team has
discovered a new LIM Kinases (LIMK1/2) inhibitor, LIM-Pyr1. LIMK1/2 are
situated at a crossroads of several signaling pathways mainly activated
by tyrosine kinase receptors and regulate both actin and microtubules
dynamics. LIMK1/2 regulate actin dynamics through cofilin
phosphorylation. Cofilin is an actin-depolymerizing factor and its
phosphorylation inactivates its actin severing activity. LIMK1/2 also
regulate microtubule dynamics through a mechanism unknown yet. LIMK1/2
inhibition induce microtubules stabilization (1). Moreover, LIMK1/2 are
overexpressed in many invasive cancers and appear to be a relevant target
for anticancer therapy (2, 3).We have shown that LIM-Pyr1 is toxic on
cell lines resistant to conventional chemotherapy (4) and tested LIM-Pyr1
therapeutic activity on different breast cancer models (xenografts in
mice). We found that LIM-Pyr1 shows a potent antitumor activity both on
primary and secondary tumors, with no detectable undesirable side
effects. The antitumor effect is effective on paclitaxel resistant
xenografts. Finally, intravital microscopy analysis indicates that a
LIM-Pyr1 treatment induces a strong morphological change of tumor cells
inside the tumors and reduces their migration.LIM-Pyr1 and its
derivatives could thus represent a pharmacological alternative to
overcome resistances often observed when tumors are treated with
microtubule targeting agents.(1) O. Bernard, LIM Kinases, regulators of
actin dynamics, Int. Journals of Biochemistry and cell biology (2007)
1071-1076(2) F. Manetti, Recent finding confirm LIM Domain Kinases as
emerging target candidates for cancer therapy, Curr. Cancer Drug Targets
(2012) 12,543-560(3) W. Wang, R. Eddy, J. Condeelis, The cofilin pathway
in breast cancer invasion and metastasis, Nat. Cancer Reviews (2007)(4)
R. Prudent, E. Vassal-Stermann, C-H Nguyen et al., Pharmacological
inhibition of LIM Kinases stabilizes microtubules, Cancer Research (2012)

