Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiparameter flow cytometry analysis of breast cancer cell lines
MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 to simultaneously assess cell proliferation,
apoptosis, and DNA damage in response to treatment with camptothecin


In cell analysis, separate functional assays are often utilized to
monitor multiple functional states. To simultaneously interrogate
multiple functional states, we have optimized simple flow cytometric
panels that use up to four parameters. As a result, more detailed
biological correlations between distinct cellular functions can be
obtained from a single sample. In this study, multiparameter panels were
used to analyze breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 for
differences in proliferation, apoptosis, and DNA damage in response to
drug treatment. Cells were treated in culture with 20 M camptothecin, and
then analyzed on a two-laser BD Accuri C6 flow cytometer. In the first
panel, we analyzed mitochondrial membrane potential (TMRE),
phosphatidylserine exposure (Annexin V), and viability (7-AAD) to
quantify early or late apoptotic and necrotic cells. In the second panel,
we assessed double-stranded DNA breaks (phosphorylated H2AX), caspase
activity (cleaved PARP), DNA synthesis (BrdU incorporation), and DNA
content (7-AAD) to quantify DNA damage, apoptosis, and cell cycle status.
In the third panel, we performed a more detailed cell cycle analysis by
detection of DNA synthesis (BrdU incorporation), DNA content (7-AAD),
M-phase associated histone expression (phosphorylated histone H3), and
cyclin content (cyclin A or B). In response to camptothecin treatment,
both cell lines showed decreased proliferation, increased DNA damage
responses, increased apoptosis, and decreased viability. The presence of
mitochondrial depolarization, caspase activity, and phosphatidylserine
exposure suggests an apoptotic death mechanism for both cell types.
Compared to MDA-MB-231 cells, MDA-MB-468 cells showed higher levels of
mitochondrial depolarization, phosphatidylserine exposure, caspase
activity, and loss of viability indicating increased drug susceptibility.
Additionally, while both MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells showed decreased
proliferation and an increased DNA damage response, the cell lines showed
different cyclin expression across cell cycle compartments, potentially
suggesting different cellular responses to drug treatment. Multiparameter
flow cytometry enables the simultaneous analysis of cell proliferation,
viability status, and other cellular states at the single cell level and
serves as an invaluable and tool to understand the response of
heterogeneous cancer cells to drug treatment. When combined with an
automated platform for sample acquisition, this method can provide an
effective tool for high throughput drug screening applications.

