Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Are the genomic gene expression profiles maintained between the
original donor and patient-derived xenograft tumors


INTRODUCTION: Patient-derived xenograft model (PDX) that transplant
patient tumors into nude mice are now an accepted model to be used for
drug development, and even for guiding therapy. It has been reported that
PDX tumors retain the histologic characteristics, tumor heterogeneity,
and maintain the metastatic potential of the original donor tumor.
Therefore, PDX has been expected to be a potential tool for predicting
responses to specific therapies, and large amounts of funding and labor
are invested in generating PDX from tumors obtained from patient samples.
Recently, however, there have been disagreements in the literature
whether PDX tumors maintain the transcriptomics gene expression profile
of the original donor tumor.METHODS: 2 datasets (Uronis (PLoS One.
2012;7(6):e38422), and Julien (Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Oct
1;18(19):5314-28)) were identified from the GEO database that contained
gene expression data from colorectal cancer tumor samples and from
xenografts of the same tumors transplanted into nude mice or rats. A
series of quality control tests were performed to ensure only high
quality arrays were included in downstream analyses. Differentially
expressed genes (FDR INTRODUCTION: Patient-derived xenograft model (PDX)
that transplant patient tumors into nude mice are now an accepted model
to be used for drug development, and even for guiding therapy. It has
been reported that PDX tumors retain the histologic characteristics,
tumor heterogeneity, and maintain the metastatic potential of the
original donor tumor. Therefore, PDX has been expected to be a potential
tool for predicting responses to specific therapies, and large amounts of
funding and labor are invested in generating PDX from tumors obtained
from patient samples. Recently, however, there have been disagreements in
the literature whether PDX tumors maintain the transcriptomics gene
expression profile of the original donor tumor.METHODS: 2 datasets
(Uronis (PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38422), and Julien (Clin Cancer Res. 2012
Oct 1;18(19):5314-28)) were identified from the GEO database that
contained gene expression data from colorectal cancer tumor samples and
from xenografts of the same tumors transplanted into nude mice or rats. A
series of quality control tests were performed to ensure only high
quality arrays were included in downstream analyses. Differentially
expressed genes (FDR < 0.01) in each dataset were identified comparing
patient donor tumor and PDX tumor.RESULTS: There were 19 original tumors
and 27 PDX in the Uronis dataset and 40 original tumors and 75 PDX in the
Julien dataset. In both datasets, there was a general under-expression of
genes in PDX tumors compared with original donor tumors. Hierarchical
clustering of the Uronis dataset showed two main clusters - the donor
tumors clustered together and the PDX tumors clustered separately, except
for one original tumor sample that clustered together with the PDX. There
were a total of 5234 genes differentially expressed between the donor and
PDX tumors. In the Julien dataset, the PDX tumors also clustered
separately from the original tumors. There were also 2 main clusters seen
in hierarchical cluster analysis, with most of the original tumors
clustering together except for eight, and all the PDX clustering together
including the former eight original tumors. There were a total of 1661
differentially expressed genes, with 913 genes differentially expressed
in both datasets (p = 7.4e-151).CONCLUSIONS: Original donor tumors and
matched PDX tumors cluster separately in hierarchical cluster analysis.
These results suggest that PDX transcriptomic gene expression profiles
are more similar among PDX tumors that originated from different tumors
than from the original tumor used to create the corresponding PDX. Thus
we recommend using the PDX model with caution due to the significant
dissimilarity of gene expression profiles between PDX and matched donor
tumors.

