Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unique metabolic profile of Vemurafenib-resistant melanoma cells:
a quantitative proteomics approach


Malignant melanoma is noted for its aggressive clinical behavior and
propensity for lethal metastasis. Despite the remarkable success of BRAF
inhibitor Vemurafenib in clinics, emergence of resistance remains a
limiting factor in increasing overall survival. Thus, comprehensive
studies are needed to increase the biological understanding of
BRAF-resistant tumors in order to develop effective therapeutic regimens.
To study the molecular mechanism(s) involved in acquired resistance, we
generated a Vemurafenib-resistant cell line in the BRAFV600E mutated
SK-Mel28 melanoma cell background. Incubation of SK-Mel28 cells with
Vemurafenib (0.1 M) resulted in an initial loss of cell viability after
which majority of cells resumed proliferation. Thereafter, cells were
exposed to gradually increasing Vemurafenib concentrations and allowed to
proliferate in the presence of 5 M Vemurafenib, to generate the A2-1b
resistant cell line. Viability assays established the IC50 of parental
SK-Mel28 cells as 0.2 M, while IC50 > than 12 M was noted for the
Vemurafenib-resistant A2-1b population. We utilized a quantitative
proteomics strategy, employing label-free nano-LC-MS/MS technology on a
Q-exactive, to compare the proteome of A2-1b with SK-Mel28 cells. The
data searched against the human proteome using the Sequest search engine
and further analyzed with SIEVE software resulted in the positive
identification of 1720 proteins (1% FDR). This data set containing
proteins with only uniquely identified peptides with a high level of
confidence (pMalignant melanoma is noted for its aggressive clinical
behavior and propensity for lethal metastasis. Despite the remarkable
success of BRAF inhibitor Vemurafenib in clinics, emergence of resistance
remains a limiting factor in increasing overall survival. Thus,
comprehensive studies are needed to increase the biological understanding
of BRAF-resistant tumors in order to develop effective therapeutic
regimens. To study the molecular mechanism(s) involved in acquired
resistance, we generated a Vemurafenib-resistant cell line in the
BRAFV600E mutated SK-Mel28 melanoma cell background. Incubation of
SK-Mel28 cells with Vemurafenib (0.1 M) resulted in an initial loss of
cell viability after which majority of cells resumed proliferation.
Thereafter, cells were exposed to gradually increasing Vemurafenib
concentrations and allowed to proliferate in the presence of 5 M
Vemurafenib, to generate the A2-1b resistant cell line. Viability assays
established the IC50 of parental SK-Mel28 cells as 0.2 M, while IC50 >
than 12 M was noted for the Vemurafenib-resistant A2-1b population. We
utilized a quantitative proteomics strategy, employing label-free
nano-LC-MS/MS technology on a Q-exactive, to compare the proteome of
A2-1b with SK-Mel28 cells. The data searched against the human proteome
using the Sequest search engine and further analyzed with SIEVE software
resulted in the positive identification of 1720 proteins (1% FDR). This
data set containing proteins with only uniquely identified peptides with
a high level of confidence (p<0.05) was uploaded into Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis and Panther softwares, with number of peptides and corresponding
ratio between the two groups, set as observational parameters. Notably,
the largest fraction (49%) of identified proteins belonged to cellular
metabolic processes. Glycolysis, gluconeogenesis and NADH repair were the
major pathways modulated in Vemurafenib-resistant A2-1b cells. In
addition, TCA cycle and unfolded protein response was significantly
affected. A subset of 13 proteins, linked to these pathways and not
previously associated with acquired resistance was identified. The
upregulated proteins included CALD1, OR4A15, PTPRK, CALU, IDH3A, RNH1,
CLIC4, SPAG17, SND1 and VCP while ENO2, TPI1 and GAPDH were significantly
downregulated. In summary, the proteomic approach applied for the first
time to study acquired resistance to BRAF inhibition identified novel
targets which upon further validation in appropriate models has the
potential to provide valuable therapeutic strategies against
Vemurafenib-resistant melanomas.

