Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A small-molecule antagonist of CX3CR1 impairs homing and
colonization of breast cancer cells in the skeleton


Therapeutic approaches aimed to prevent breast cancer cells from
spreading to distant sites are commonly neglected, based on the
indication that dissemination from primary tumors can occur early.
However, mounting evidence indicates that cancer cells recirculating from
established bone lesions could further seed and colonize both skeleton
and soft-tissue organs, thus precipitating metastatic dissemination and
accelerating disease progression. We have previously shown that breast
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) rely on the chemokine receptor CX3CR1 for
lodging to the skeleton. Here, we show that this receptor is
overexpressed by all four main subtypes of breast adenocarcinoma and also
abundantly detected in bone metastatic lesions from breast cancer
patients. We have recently synthesized JMS-17-2, a novel small molecule
inhibitor of CX3CR1. We tested this compound in pre-clinical animal
models of metastases in which human breast cancer cells, labeled with
fluorescent and bioluminescent markers, are converted into CTCs by direct
grafting in the arterial blood circulation. Pre-incubating cancer cells
with JMS-17-2 or treating animals with this compound (10 mg/Kg, i.p.)
were equally effective in dramatically decreasing the number of breast
CTCs that lodged to the skeleton. These disseminated tumor cells (DTCs)
were detected 24 hours after grafting and enumerated by multispectral
fluorescence microscopy of sequential bone tissue sections spanning the
entire width of tibiae and femora. Notably, when animals were examined at
two weeks after grafting, JMS-17-2 completely prevented metastases,
indicating that the reduction in number of DTCs directly translates to an
impaired tumor growth in the long term. Finally, JMS-17-2 was
administered to animals harboring a limited number of small metastases in
bone and soft-tissues and monitored by bioluminescence imaging for three
weeks before sacrifice. Animals treated with the CX3CR1 antagonist
remained at an oligometastatic stage whereas control animals showed a
sharp increase in the number of metastatic lesions and overall tumor
burden.The work presented here should generate a conceptual shift in the
treatment strategies for breast cancer patients, paving the way to
approaches aimed to counteract the seeding of additional lesions from
existing metastases. We also introduce JMS-17-2 as the first CX3CR1
antagonist and lead compound of a class of potentially new drugs with a
novel mechanism of action that could be added to the arsenal of therapies
currently used to treat advanced breast adenocarcinoma.

