Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of molecular signature associated with the
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) development by
next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based transcriptomic profiling


Backgrounds:Castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is an advanced
form of prostate cancer produced by disease progression following
surgical or pharmaceutical castration. The development process of CRPC
becoming castrate resistant is unclear. The objective of this study is to
identify a gene set and putative signaling pathway for mediating the
development of CRPC.Methods:RNA-seq data was generated using 54 prostate
samples [primary prostate cancer (PCa), CRPC, and benign prostatic
hyperplasia (BPH)], among which 8 were paired samples of PCa and CRPC
obtained from 4 patients. Diverse statistical methods, including a
generalized linear model likelihood ratio test, were applied to identify
the signature associated with CRPC development. The interconnectivity
between genes in the signature was verified by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
TM. We also confirmed a relevance of the signature with experimental
assays using prostate cancer cell lines.Results:Unsupervised hierarchical
cluster analysis of RNA-seq data revealed a clear gene expression pattern
of tumorigenesis in PCa with heterogeneous molecular characteristics of
CRPC. Comparing paired cancer samples, 309 genes were differentially
expressed between PCa and CRPC samples. We also tested unpaired sample
groups (PCa vs. CRPC) and found that 182 genes had significantly
differences of expression (a generalized linear model likelihood ratio
test, P Backgrounds:Castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is an
advanced form of prostate cancer produced by disease progression
following surgical or pharmaceutical castration. The development process
of CRPC becoming castrate resistant is unclear. The objective of this
study is to identify a gene set and putative signaling pathway for
mediating the development of CRPC.Methods:RNA-seq data was generated
using 54 prostate samples [primary prostate cancer (PCa), CRPC, and
benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)], among which 8 were paired samples of
PCa and CRPC obtained from 4 patients. Diverse statistical methods,
including a generalized linear model likelihood ratio test, were applied
to identify the signature associated with CRPC development. The
interconnectivity between genes in the signature was verified by
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis TM. We also confirmed a relevance of the
signature with experimental assays using prostate cancer cell
lines.Results:Unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis of RNA-seq data
revealed a clear gene expression pattern of tumorigenesis in PCa with
heterogeneous molecular characteristics of CRPC. Comparing paired cancer
samples, 309 genes were differentially expressed between PCa and CRPC
samples. We also tested unpaired sample groups (PCa vs. CRPC) and found
that 182 genes had significantly differences of expression (a generalized
linear model likelihood ratio test, P < 0.001, a 2-fold or greater
relative difference). When comparing two gene sets, a total of 15 genes
was common in both paired and unpaired CRPC groups. Among them, AR and
SPINK1 were significantly increased in the CRPC than in the PCa groups.
Gene network analyses and experimental assays of AR and SPINK1 revealed
that CRPC development could be mediated by SPINK1-AR
pathway.Conclusion:The molecular signature defined by activation of
SPINK1-AR may be a genetic determinant of progression from PCa to
CRPC.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

