Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Linking suppressive activity and ER-Stress in Myeloid Derived
Suppressor Cells


In recent years, immunotherapies have shown great promise for the
treatment of cancer patients. However, the presence of a very potent
immunosuppressive microenvironment in the tumor site remains one of the
major obstacles in fully harnessing the potential of immunotherapeutic
strategies. Myeloid Derived Suppressor cells (MDSC) represent one of the
main suppressive populations inside the tumor. These cells can be divided
in two sub-populations: PMN-MDSC and Monocytic-MDSC. They suppress immune
response using various well-known mechanisms and accumulate to a large
extent in tumor-bearing hosts. Despite the increasing body of literature
on MDSC, which mechanisms drives their suppressive capacity remains
unclear. Our group recently reported that the ER-Stress response is
activated in MDSC isolated from tumor bearing mice and cancer patients.
In this study, we investigated the possibility that the ER-stress
response could be responsible for the immune suppressive capacities of
MDSC. To test this hypothesis, we induce ER-Stress using well-known
chemical inducer into non suppressive myeloid cells (PMN and monocyte)
and assess their ability to suppress T cells function. Our results show
that, following ER-Stress induction, normal myeloid cells were able to
suppress T cells response (in murine and human system). To better
understand how the ER-Stress response can induce suppressive capacities,
we performed microarray analysis following treatment with ER-Stress
inducer. Interestingly, we found that arginase-1, one the major enzyme
implicated in MDSC suppressive capacities, was induced by more than 5
fold. Altogether, our results suggest that activation of the ER-Stress
response in MDSC could be responsible for the up-regulation of arginase-1
and the suppressive phenotype of MDSC. These results suggest that
targeting the ER-Stress response in cancer patients could inhibit the
suppressive activity of MDSC and improve the efficacy of current
immunotherapies.

