Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A model incorporating spirometry to predict absolute risk of lung
cancer: The UK Biobank prospective cohort study


BackgroundScreening with computed tomography has been shown to reduce the
rate of death from lung cancer, but at substantial cost in terms of
morbidity associated with overdiagnosis. The performance of screening
programs can be improved by restricting screening to those people who are
at sufficiently high risk of lung cancer. We sought to develop a lung
cancer risk prediction model incorporating a measure of lung function
(forced expiratory volume in one second: FEV1) as well as other
information that is routinely available to general
practitioners.MethodsWe built the model using participants and data from
the UK Biobank prospective cohort study, which recruited 500000 people
aged 37 to 73 years between 2006-2010. Follow-up for cancer incidence and
death was conducted via linkage to registries. Each participant was
followed up for an average of 3 years and a maximum of 6 years.We
investigated factors that are routinely available or can be easily
ascertained by general practitioners: sex, variables related to smoking
history and addiction to nicotine, personal medical history, and family
history of lung cancer. We additionally investigated lung function, which
was assessed via sprirometry as the forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV1, litres). Conditional on these predictors, we separately modeled
the hazard of lung cancer and the hazard of death using flexible
parametric survival models with age as the timescale, and combined the
estimated hazards to predict the 2-year absolute risk of lung cancer.
Internal validation of model discrimination was assessed by calculating
the bootstrap optimism-corrected c-statistic.ResultsThere were 738
incident lung cancer diagnoses and 3956 deaths from all causes among the
UK Biobank population in the follow-up period. FEV1 at baseline was
strongly and inversely associated with subsequent lung cancer risk:
hazard ratios [95% confidence intervals] of 0.57 [0.43,0.77] per
additional liter of FEV for never, 0.50 [0.40,0.63] for former, and 0.62
[0.48,0.80] for current smoking participants. Model discrimination was
high (c-statistic 0.85) and the model is likely to discriminate well when
applied to new data (bootstrap optimism-corrected c-statistic 0.83).
Applying the current National Lung Screening Trial(NLST) inclusion
criteria to the UK Biobank data yielded a specificity of 0.95 and
sensitivity of 0.37. By applying a risk prediction model-based inclusion
criteria where additional factors such as FEV1 were taken into account,
we could improve the sensitivity to 0.47 for the same
specificity.ConclusionsComprehensive risk prediction models based on
standard risk factor information, along with FEV1, can clearly outperform
currently used screening criteria in terms of specificity and
sennsitivity in predicting future lung cancer diagnoses, and applying a
model-based screening strategy has the potential to improve the
performance of lung cancer screening programs.

