Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial DNA phylogenetic analysis for local recurrences and
second primary tumors from patients with oral cavity squamous cell
carcinoma


Local recurrences (LRs) and second primary tumors (SPTs) are commonly
observed in patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). A lower
survival rate has been demonstrated in patients with LRs with respect to
patients with SPTs. Therefore, the criteria for differentiating LRs and
SPTs are indispensable for determining appropriate treatment. Currently,
criteria based on histology, the distance and relapse time between new
lesions and index primary tumor are generally used in clinical
classification. In the genomic era, molecular classification based on the
clonal relationship between the first and the second lesions may be more
reliable than traditional clinical classification. The aim of the present
study tried to establish a feasible molecular classification based on
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) phylogenetic analysis. The study population
consisted of 44 OSCC patients with multiple lesions for a total of 47 (19
LRs and 28 SPTs) paired lesions. The mtDNA analysis was performed by
direct sequencing. The phylogenetic and molecular evolutionary analyses
were conducted by using MEGA software version 6 and three common
phylogenetic evolutionary methods (Maximun Likelihood (ML),
Neighbor-Joining (NJ) and Unweighted Pair Group Method with Arithmetic
Mean (UPGMA) method) were applied. Preliminary analysis indicated that
the prevalence of clonality for LRs and SPTs was 26.3% and 3.6%,
respectively. A discrepancy between the clinical classification and mtDNA
analysis was found in 15 paired tumors (31.9%) in which 14 paired lesions
were classified as LRs based on clinical criteria, while mtDNA analysis
suggested that they were nonclonal-related SPTs. Survival analysis
indicated that there was no difference between patients with LRs and
patients with SPTs based on clinical classification. On the other hand,
patients with clonal second lesions had poorer overall survival than
patients with nonclonal second lesions based on mtDNA analysis. In
conclusion, our preliminary findings suggested that molecular clonality
analysis could improve the accuracy in differentiating LRs from SPTs.

