Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune, keratinocyte, and fibroblast expression signatures
distinguish HNSCC samples by HPV status


IntroductionHead and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth
leading cancer in the world. HPV-positive HNSCC is considered a distinct
molecular entity with a better prognosis than HPV-negative. To better
understand the mechanisms underlying the clinical and molecular behavior
between HPV-positive and HPV-negative HNSCC we applied bioinformatics
approaches to transcriptomic data to identify signature patterns
associated with 25 different cell types, and characterize cell type
heterogeneity by HPV-status.Materials and methodsWe analyzed 18 HPV (+)
and 18 HPV (-) samples collected at University of Michigan hospital from
36 individuals with HNSCC; all were determined to be >70% cellularity by
a pathologist. Gene expression was evaluated using Illumina HiSeq
RNA-seq. Differentially expressed genes were identified using TopHat,
HTSeq, and then edgeR, resulting in 559 and 873 up in HPV(+) or HPV(-),
respectively, with FDR 3. Cell type-specific expression patterns were
identified using > 700 microarray samples from 25 relevant cell types.
Using this database and the list of genes differentially expressed by HPV
status we identified which cell type(s) contributed the strongest
expression pattern by calculating cell type-specific enrichment scores as
a weighted Kolmogorov-Smirnov-like statistics against the top ranked 250
genes.ResultsSignificantly higher estimates of cell type composition in
HPV(+) samples were observed for T lymphocytes (CD3+ T-cells, CD4+
T-cells, CD8+ T-cells, CD34+ T-cells, T-cells, regulatory T-cells),
NK-cells, B cells, and monocytes (p-value 3. Cell type-specific
expression patterns were identified using > 700 microarray samples from
25 relevant cell types. Using this database and the list of genes
differentially expressed by HPV status we identified which cell type(s)
contributed the strongest expression pattern by calculating cell
type-specific enrichment scores as a weighted Kolmogorov-Smirnov-like
statistics against the top ranked 250 genes.ResultsSignificantly higher
estimates of cell type composition in HPV(+) samples were observed for T
lymphocytes (CD3+ T-cells, CD4+ T-cells, CD8+ T-cells, CD34+ T-cells,
T-cells, regulatory T-cells), NK-cells, B cells, and monocytes (p-value <
0.0004). Conversely, endothelial cells, epidermis, dermis, keratinocyte,
and fibroblast all had significantly higher estimates of cell type
proportion in HPV(-) samples (p-value 3. Cell type-specific expression
patterns were identified using > 700 microarray samples from 25 relevant
cell types. Using this database and the list of genes differentially
expressed by HPV status we identified which cell type(s) contributed the
strongest expression pattern by calculating cell type-specific enrichment
scores as a weighted Kolmogorov-Smirnov-like statistics against the top
ranked 250 genes.ResultsSignificantly higher estimates of cell type
composition in HPV(+) samples were observed for T lymphocytes (CD3+
T-cells, CD4+ T-cells, CD8+ T-cells, CD34+ T-cells, T-cells, regulatory
T-cells), NK-cells, B cells, and monocytes (p-value < 0.0004).
Conversely, endothelial cells, epidermis, dermis, keratinocyte, and
fibroblast all had significantly higher estimates of cell type proportion
in HPV(-) samples (p-value < 0.0004). For validation, we compared these
results to results calculated in an identical way using TCGA HNSC RNA-seq
data (39 HPV(+) vs 277 HPV(-) samples) and found that the largest
differences in cell types higher in HPV(+) were shown also in T
lymphocytes, NK-cells & B cells, and that dermis, fibroblast, epidermis &
keratinocyte cell types were again estimated to be higher in HPV(-)
samples (p-value 3. Cell type-specific expression patterns were
identified using > 700 microarray samples from 25 relevant cell types.
Using this database and the list of genes differentially expressed by HPV
status we identified which cell type(s) contributed the strongest
expression pattern by calculating cell type-specific enrichment scores as
a weighted Kolmogorov-Smirnov-like statistics against the top ranked 250
genes.ResultsSignificantly higher estimates of cell type composition in
HPV(+) samples were observed for T lymphocytes (CD3+ T-cells, CD4+
T-cells, CD8+ T-cells, CD34+ T-cells, T-cells, regulatory T-cells),
NK-cells, B cells, and monocytes (p-value < 0.0004). Conversely,
endothelial cells, epidermis, dermis, keratinocyte, and fibroblast all
had significantly higher estimates of cell type proportion in HPV(-)
samples (p-value < 0.0004). For validation, we compared these results to
results calculated in an identical way using TCGA HNSC RNA-seq data (39
HPV(+) vs 277 HPV(-) samples) and found that the largest differences in
cell types higher in HPV(+) were shown also in T lymphocytes, NK-cells &
B cells, and that dermis, fibroblast, epidermis & keratinocyte cell types
were again estimated to be higher in HPV(-) samples (p-value <
0.0004).ConclusionDifferential expression in HNSCC by HPV status can
partly be explained by differences in the tumor cellular composition, and
this in turn will help to focus on differential expression within the
tumor cells themselves. Our results predict that T lymphocytes and other
cell types responsible for the adaptive immune response contribute a
larger portion of the cellular composition in HPV(+) tumors compared to
HPV(-). Conversely, keratinocytes and fibroblasts are predicted to make
up a larger portion of cells in HPV(-) tumors. Surprisingly, the stem
cell expression signature was not significantly different by HPV-status,
even though HPV(+) tumors tend to be less differentiated than HPV(-)
tumors.

