Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a noninvasive assay to determine drug concentration
in tumor during hsp90 inhibitor therapy


As molecularly targeted agents assume a more prominent role in anticancer
therapy there is a growing need to determine in a noninvasive manner
whether the target is being engaged and to what extent such drug-target
binding results in desirable effects. We address this need in the context
of Hsp90, a target of significant value and one in critical need for such
assessment tools, by combining a novel chemical tool selective for tumor
Hsp90 with PET imaging and mathematical modeling. The chemical tool is
[124I]-PU-H71, the iodine-124 radiolabeled analog of the potent Hsp90
inhibitor PU-H71, which can be administered in tracer quantities for PET
imaging. The resulting diagnostic, PU-PET, has been optimized and
validated preclinically in mouse models of cancer and then translated to
the clinic. The exquisite design of this assay is based on three
essential concepts as it relates to the target (Hsp90) as well as to the
PET tracer (124I-PU-H71). First, the target is oncogenic Hsp90 and has
been shown by numerous biochemical and pharmacokinetic studies to have a
strong affinity for inhibitors and a very low koff resulting in selective
and prolonged retention in tumor. Secondly, the tracer incorporates a
124I in place of the naturally occurring 127I in the structure of PU-H71
and therefore there is no change in the chemical structure. This feature
in a PET tracer intended as a companion diagnostic is unprecedented and
ensures that the PK properties are identical to the therapeutic agent
(PU-H71). Finally, the radionuclide 124I has a four-day half-life and
thus is well-suited to monitor the extended tumor retention profile
observed for Hsp90 inhibitors. We here demonstrate that this PET assay
informs on Hsp90 targeting in individual tumors in real time and provides
accurate tumor drug concentrations for at least four chemically distinct
Hsp90 drugs. In contrast, we find that plasma pharmacokinetics is not
predictive of intratumor parameters and therefore provides limited value
in estimating target engagement. Using PU-PET we demonstrate that at
least one Hsp90 inhibitor exhibits tumor targeting and retention in
humans, delivering and retaining therapeutic, micromolar, concentrations
at safe doses. PU-PET is currently being evaluated in Phase 0/1
(NCT01269593) clinical trials as a noninvasive companion diagnostic to
determine intratumoral concentration as well as to identify those
patients who would best benefit from Hsp90 inhibitor therapy. This
diagnostic assay is intended to be incorporated into future Phase 2
clinical trials in order to preselect those patients who would most
likely benefit from Hsp90 inhibitor treatment.

