Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A bioinformatics approach to evaluate the involvement of
CDH1/E-cadherin in solid tumors and to identify breast cancer biomarkers


Cancer is a complex disease characterized by abnormal proliferation of
different cell types among which solid tumors (ST) stand out due to their
high incidence and mortality rates. Of many ST, breast cancer (BC) is the
2nd most common cancer worldwide and the most frequent among women (1.67
million new cases in 2012). Ductal breast cancer (DBC) and lobular breast
cancer (LBC) are the most frequent BC types. The human gene CDH1 encodes
Epithelial Cadherin (ECad), a calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion
molecule defined as tumor suppressor since its absence prevents adherens
junctions and associates to tumor progression and poor patient outcome.
In cancer research, a great deal of data is available in the literature,
providing an abundant source of knowledge for biomedical research,
although the information is disaggregated. The use of bioinformatics
tools (BT) dedicated to text mining (TM) and network biology has become
very useful to study cancer pathology from a global perspective since
integrate the vast amount of data available. In this study, we have
implemented BT (DisGeNET, Cytoscape, COSMIC, Hippie, PANTHER, String) to
systematically assess the relationship between CDH1/ECad and ST and to
identify potential biomarkers for DBC and LBC.To identify CDH1 related
diseases, a gene-disease network analysis was performed using
DisGeNET/Cytoscape. In a query restricted to curated databases, CDH1 was
associated (biomarker/genetic variation/ therapeutic target) to 29
diseases among which 20 were ST. When all databases (curated, predicted
and literature) were included, the terms related to CDH1 expanded to 173
diseases (98 ST). A manual term-curation related to CDH1 (80 ST) was
performed, with a total of 286 publications reviewed. In 199/286 (70%)
reports, the association between CDH1 and ST was confirmed (67/286 (23%)
inconclusive, 20/286 (7%) unconfirmed). As a result, 75/80 ST terms were
validated as related to CDH1. An analysis done with the COSMIC BT led to
the identification of 376 somatic mutations on the CDH1 gene in 11/20 ST
terms from the DisGeNET output (curated databases). For BC, 3045 genes
were found using TM tools as related to this term (CDH1:
biomarker/genetic variation). For DBC, 42 genes were related with proven
evidence (high score: BAG1, CDH1, ATF4, CLDN4, PTGER1, SERPINB5). To
analyze protein-protein interaction (PPI), the HIPPIE BT was used. A
selected DBC biomarkers were identified from a PPI network of 448 nodes,
among which HDAC1, SKP2, CFTR, HSPA8, SMAD7, TGM2, ATF2, MDM2 were listed
as putative biomarkers based on the Linkage method. For LBC, 28 genes
were found as associated (3 with proven evidence) and generate a PPI
network of 216 nodes; ERBB2IP, SRC, EGFR, EP300 y HDAC1 were listed as
potential biomarkers. Altogether, BT allowed a systematic assessment of
current knowledge of CDH1/ECad and led to the identification of novel
putative biomarkers for DBC and LBC.

