Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RASSF1C modulation of Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) in lung cancer


Introduction: RASSF1C is emerging as an important oncoprotein in lung
cancer cell growth. We have shown that RASSF1C promotes lung cancer cell
proliferation and migration; and RASSF1C up-regulates important genes in
lung cancer cell growth that include a stem cell self-renewal gene, piwi1
(hiwi). PIWI-like proteins are a subfamily of Argonaute proteins that
interact with small PIWI-interacting RNA molecules (known as piRNAs that
are 24-32 nucleotides long) to form complexes that regulate
transcriptional and translational repression. This leads to inhibition of
apoptosis, stimulation of cell division and proliferation, and
down-regulation of cyclin inhibitors and tumor suppressors. Therefore,
modulation of Piwil1-piRNA gene expression by RASSF1C suggests a
potential role for RASSF1C in lung cancer stem cell development and
progression. To further investigate our hypothesis, we carried out a
global piRNA microarray screen to identify piRNAs that are modulated by
RASSF1C in lung cancer cells.Method: A piRNA microarray screen was
performed using the lung cancer cell line H1299 stably over-expressing
RASSF1C (and controls). Total RNA was extracted from experimental and
control cells and was submitted to Arraystar (Rockville, MD) for the
piRNA microarray screen and data analysis.Results: The piRNA microarray
screen identified several piRNAs that are regulated by RASSF1C and we
have confirmed the expression of some of them in cell lines. The function
of the piRNAs identified is yet to be determined. We have initiated
studies to determine the function of some of the most up-regulated and
down-regulated piRNA genes in lung cancer cells. We are also profiling
the expression of these piRNAs in normal and lung tumor
tissues.Conclusion: Several piRNAs are target genes of RASSF1C.
Characterization of the function of these piRNAs may enhance our
understanding of the role of RASSF1C in promoting lung cancer stem cell
growth and progression. Linking a Rassf1c-Piwil1/piRNAs axis to lung
cancer stem cell development and progression could possibly lead to
discovery of new diagnostic and therapeutic targets for lung cancer.

