Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt pathway antagonist ipafricept (FZD8-Fc, OMP-54F28) inhibits
tumor growth and reduces tumor-initiating cell frequency in ovarian
patient-derived xenograft models


Ovarian cancer is the deadliest gynecologic malignancy and the fifth
leading cause of death from cancer in women in the U.S. The
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, which signals through the Frizzled (FZD)
receptor family and several co-receptors, has long been implicated in
cancer. We have developed ipafricept (FZD8-Fc, OMP-54F28), a recombinant
fusion protein consisting of the ligand-binding domain of FZD8 and a
human IgG1 Fc fragment. This fusion protein blocks Wnt signaling induced
by multiple Wnt family members by binding and sequestering WNT.Using
minimally passaged ovarian patient-derived xenograft tumors (PDX), we
demonstrate that ipafricept is efficacious in combination with
chemotherapy in four of eight ovarian cancer PDX tumors examined.
Utilizing an in vivo serial transplantation assay, we quantified a
reduction of the tumor initiating cell frequency by ipafricept in
combination with paclitaxel. Additionally, we have discovered that
pre-treatment with ipafricept several days prior to paclitaxel therapy
enhances the activity of both agents when compared to delivering the
drugs simultaneously.The anti-tumor effect observed is directly
associated with a modulation of Wnt pathway gene sets. In responsive
tumors, we discovered that a large number of WNT target genes were
significantly down-regulated by ipafricept (e.g, AXIN2, LRP5/6, and
FZD8). Conversely, in non-responsive tumors, these genes were either
unchanged or up-regulated by the combination therapy. Histologic analysis
revealed that total beta-catenin protein levels were reduced by
ipafricept alone and in combination with paclitaxel in responsive tumors
but were unchanged in non-responsive tumors. We are using these tumors to
develop biomarkers that can be used clinically.Our data demonstrates the
potential therapeutic benefit of targeting Wnt signaling in ovarian
cancer. A Phase 1b clinical trial is currently examining ipafricept in
combination with paclitaxel and carboplatin in patients with recurrent
platinum-sensitive ovarian cancer.

