Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of lovastatin on the PRL-3 cascade of events in prostate
cancer


Phosphatase of Regenerating Liver 3 (PRL-3) has recently been
demonstrated to play a role in the cellular processes associated with
cancer metastasis and has been suggested as a potential new target for
cancer therapies. Several pre-clinical evaluations targeting PRL-3 have
shown great promise for cancer treatment. Statins are a class of drugs
that inhibit 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA reductase (HMGCR) and have
been shown to have anti-cancer properties in a variety of cancer types
including prostate cancer (PC); previous work has shown that one of the
anti-cancer effects of statins is the inhibition of protein prenylation,
a post translational modification that allows proteins to associate with
the plasma membrane. Prenylation of PRL-3 plays a critical role in cell
membrane localization and metastatic process; therefore, targeting PLR-3
prenlyation may be an attractive strategy. In our recent work, we have
identified that PRL-3 is highly expressed in aggressive prostate cancer
cells and is critical for the motility behavior. Our hypothesis is that
lovastatin treatment will reduce the metastatic properties of PC cells by
inhibiting prenylation of PRL-3 and therefore reduce the oncogenic
effects of the PRL-3 cascade of events required for PC
metastasis.Advanced PC cell line, DU145 was used in this study to
characterize PRL-3 function. Cell viability assays showed that lovastatin
has dose dependent effects on DU145. Western Blot analysis was then used
to analyze expression levels of PRL-3 and its downstream proteins in
DU145 cells treated with lovastatin. Cellular localization of PRL-3
following lovastatin treatments was also conducted using Western blot
analysis. Following this, migration assays were performed using Boyden
chamber to determine whether lovastatin has anti-migration effects in PC
cells. Immunoprecipitation (IP) analyses were also performed to determine
whether PRL-3 and Translationally Controlled Tumor Protein (TCTP) [a
mediator of PRL-3 function] are binding partners using respective
antibodies.Our studies have shown lovastatin decreases the expression of
PRL-3 resulting in the inhibition of DU145 cell proliferation;
furthermore, a reduction in TCTP expression has also been observed in
treated cells versus control cells. Specifically, lovastatin decreases
the membrane localization of both PRL-3 and TCTP in DU145 cells.
Moreover, IP results show that PRL-3 and TCTP are potential binding
partners and this interaction may be critical for PC metastasis. Finally
our results show that lovastatin has the ability to decrease the motility
of DU145 PC cells in vitro. Taken together, our results for the first
time show that lovastatin can target PRL-3 by interfering with
prenylation and preventing the membrane location of PRL-3 and its
downstream effector, TCTP in advanced prostate cancer cells. Targeting
PRL-3 warrants further studies to develop PRL-3 as a therapeutic target
for PC.

