Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A rapid 3D tumor spheroid analysis method using the Celigo imaging
cytometry


The current 2D methods for cancer drug discovery have had some difficulty
in identifying potential drug candidates that can be used for clinical
testing. To overcome this challenge, there has been an increase in
research of 3D tissue culture that facilitated the development of new
in-vitro tumor model assays. Traditional 2D and 3D analysis method relied
heavily on visual observation using microscopy. However, the method is
time-consuming and has high variations. Automated plate-based imaging
cytometer can be employed to rapidly analyze and characterize 3D tumor
spheroids, which can be used to generate both quantitative and
qualitative results. In this work, we demonstrate a novel 3D tumor
spheroid analysis method using the Celigo imaging cytometer for spheroid
counting, size analysis, tumor migration and invasion, tumor viability,
and dose response of drug induced/inhibited tumor growth. The plate-based
imaging cytometer utilizes bright-field and three fluorescence channels
(Blue, Green, and Red) for multi-channel analysis. By utilizing the F
theta lens technology, uniform bright-field image is captured for more
accurate counting of the entire well. In addition, Celigo analysis
software is used to report numerous parameters allowing detailed spheroid
characterization. In addition to direct spheroid counting in the well,
the use of specific fluorescent dyes and probes allow the user to define
viable and hypoxic areas within spheroids and monitor migration and
invasion on or into supporting cells and/or tissues. The results showed
that Celigo imaging cytometer can accurately count and measure spheroid
sizes in response to drug induction. Furthermore, tumor migration and
invasion were clearly observed and quantified in the captured images. By
utilizing the 3D spheroid imaging cytometry method, researchers can
quickly characterize and quantify tumor spheroids, which can improve the
efficiency of identification of potential cancer drug candidates.

