Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical characterization of LV305, a lentiviral vector
targeting tumors expressing NY-ESO-1


The cancer-testis antigen, NY-ESO-1, is an attractive tumor antigen
target for cancer immunotherapy, because it is expressed in numerous
cancer types (e.g., melanoma, breast cancer, sarcoma, lung cancer) but
not in normal adult tissues except the testis or placenta. Although
recent studies using various NY-ESO-1 formulations show promising
results, an optimal immunotherapeutic strategy to generate T cell
responses for controlling tumor growth is still lacking. Lentiviral
vectors (LVs) are proven tools for delivering nucleic acid payloads into
cells due to their ability to transduce not only dividing cells but also
quiescent cells, such as dendritic cells (DCs). Because DCs are essential
for the initiation of T cell responses, we have engineered LV305 (a
product candidate from ZVex, our LV-based discovery platform) to
selectively deliver the antigen-encoding NY-ESO-1 gene to human DCs in
vivo. To develop tools to evaluate LV305 in a preclinical setting, we 1)
generated a cell line, CIN.23, which is a CT26 murine colon cancer cell
line that stably expresses human NY-ESO-1 protein; and 2) mapped and
confirmed NY-ESO-1 CD8 and CD4 T cell epitopes recognized by H2d. Mice
immunized with LV305 developed strong, dose-dependent, poly-functional,
and cytotoxic NY-ESO-1-specific CD8 T cells within 14 days
post-immunization and could be boosted with LV305 at least three times to
recall peak-level CD8 T cell responses. Immunization with LV305 protected
mice against CIN.23 tumor challenge, which was abrogated upon depletion
of CD8 T cells. Adoptive transfer of CD8 T cells, together with CD4 T
cells or NK cells, from LV305-immunized donor mice to tumor-bearing mice
conferred significant protection against metastatic tumor growth. This
protection was not observed when CD8 T cells alone were adoptively
transferred. Taken together, these findings suggest that CD8 T cells are
required but not sufficient for mediating LV305-induced anti-tumor
efficacy. We have demonstrated the anti-tumor therapeutic potential of
LV305-mediated in vivo DC immunization in murine models and are currently
investigating LV305 in a phase I clinical trial in cancer patients with
tumors expressing NY-ESO-1.

