Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the molecular pathways underlying
radio-sensitization of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) by vitamin D
(EB1089)


Ionization radiation (IR) is an integral component of lung cancer
treatment. However, disease recurrence represents a significant barrier
to effective therapy. One explanation for the difficulties associated
with treatment of NSCLC could be the promotion of autophagy, a
cytoprotective signaling pathway that controls the degradation and
recycling of cellular components. Cytoprotective autophagy may be one of
the primary causes for the development of resistance to standard
therapies.In recently published studies (Sharma et al, Autophagy), we
showed that the vitamin D analog, EB 1089, leads to conversion of the
cytoprotective autophagy induced by radiation alone to a novel cytostatic
form of autophagy. While pharmacological and genetic inhibition of
autophagy increased sensitivity to radiation, interference with autophagy
reversed the radio-sensitization by EB 1089 (or Vitamin D3) in H460 and
A549 NSCLC cells. These studies demonstrated a switch between the
cytoprotective and cytostatic roles of autophagy in response to radiation
alone and the combination of EB 1089 (or Vitamin D3) and radiation.AMPK,
an energy sensor, has been shown to be involved in regulating autophagy
via the AMPK-mTOR pathway. We observed an increase in phosphorylated AMPK
(and ULK-1, which is downstream of AMPK) with the combination treatment
of IR and EB 1089. Both pharmacological and genetic inhibition of AMPK,
reverted the radio-sensitization effects of EB 1089, implicating AMPK in
radio-sensitization. Studies conducted with NSCLC cell lines both wt and
mutant or null in p53 indicated that functional p53 was required to
radio-sensitize tumor cells with the combination treatment. p53 appears
to promote AMPK upregulation via sestrin. Finally, studies to determine
the potential involvement of NF-kB in radiation sensitization showed
degradation of IKB- in response to IR alone that was suppressed by EB
1089, indicating NF-kB's involvement in the initiation of cytoprotective
autophagy by radiation Overall, these studies suggest that the use of
vitamin D or a vitamin D analogue could increase sensitization to
radiation treatment for lung cancer.

