Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation between modulation of RNA expression and the
preventive and therapeutic efficacy of Tamoxifen in an ER+ model of
breast cancer


The SERMs, primarily Tamoxifen, have been employed in both the therapy
and prevention of ER+ breast cancer for many decades. In the present
study we examined the effects of the SERM tamoxifen as a preventive and
therapeutic agent in an ER+ Methylnitrosourea (MNU) -induced model of
mammary cancer in rats. Fifty day old female Sprague Dawley rats were
administered MNU i.v. and tamoxifen was administered continually in diet
beginning either 5 days post MNU (prevention) or when an animal developed
its first palpable tumor (150mm2) [therapy]. The approximate ED50 (dose
required to reduce tumor multiplicity 50%) and ED90 in the preventive
assays were 0.66 and 3.3 ppm (mg of tamoxifen per g of diet) for
Tamoxifen. Interestingly the 3.3 ppm dose was ineffective as a therapy at
these doses although it slowed growth of palpable lesions. Rather one had
to administer a dose of roughly 100 ppm achieve a strong therapeutic
response. We also examined the short term effects (5 days of treatment)
of 3.3 and 100 ppm on gene expression in palpable lesions. We compared
each treatment group with the control to find the up or down regulated
genes. The number of differentially expressed (DE) genes selected at FDR
= 0.2 increased from 584 to 2267 when the dose increased from 3.3ppm to
100ppm. The 3.3ppm treatment yielded fewer DE genes compared to the
100ppm treatment, but the majority (60%) of the genes identified in the
3.3 ppm group were identified in the high dose group. The higher dose
profoundly decreased a variety of specific genes in the proliferative
pathways, particularly in APC (Anaphase Prometaphase Condensation
Complex), which includes Ccnb1 and Top2A. In contrast, the low dose
failed to significantly change expression of these specific genes. The
effects of the higher dose of tamoxifen were confirmed by the use of
RT-PCR. Using the human Tamoxifen treatment dataset GSE6532 in GEO, we
found 633 DE genes by comparing the treated (n = 277) and untreated (n =
237) patients. We found 68 genes shared between human and rat derived
from 100ppm treatment and 11 genes from 3.3ppm treatment. 9 of the 11
genes regulated by the low dose were also regulated by the high dose.
These genes included RAB5B, a member of the RAS oncogene family, and
GDF9, the growth differentiation factor 9. By gene enrichment analysis
(GSEA), we found several pathways, including RAS, TGF beta signaling, DNA
damage signaling, and cell cycle pathways, which were affected by the
tamoxifen treatment. Our study suggests that the rat gene expression was
regulated by tamoxifen even at low dose, and the DE genes at the low dose
are a subset of these DE genes altered at the high dose. These data
provide a rationale for testing low dose tamoxifen as a chemo preventive
agent for women at high risk of developing breast cancer and offer
potential genomic biomarkers associated with efficacy at these lower
doses.

