Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFL6, a potential novel ligand of EGFR, play roles in
Nasopharyngeal cacinoma metastasis through establishing invasive and
long-distant metastatic niche by paracrine and autocrine


Distant metastasis is the leading cause of treatment failure in
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Our study focused on the searching of
potential targets for NPC metastasis treatment. cDNA microarray was
applied in this screening. We compared gene expression level in
metastatic NPC, non-metastatic NPC and inflammatory cases with different
bioinformatic methods. EGFL6 was chosen for further study. The
over-expression of EGFL6 was confirmed in NPC cell lines and 63% of the
metastatic cases(n = 7/11, 3 years follow-up) by Q-PCR. EGFL6 was
identified as an independent prognostic index for NPC distant metastasis
survival prognostic, P = 0.023 (n = 96, QPCR). As a follicle stem cell
specifically expressed secretion protein, EGFL6 showed its powerful
strength in promoting cell migration and especially the formation of
aggressive morphology in the matrix-gel based three-dimensional culture.
With the overexpression of secreting EGFL6, CNE2 cells formed the
follicle-like structure but with more aggressive leading edge, which
invaded deep into the matrix-gel instead of forming single layer
epithelial structure. EGFL6 overexpressed SUNE1 cells breakthrough the
restriction of its regular sphere structure, and migrated for more
spaces. In vivo study also showed that EGFL6 dramatically increased the
tumorigenisis in subcutaneous injection assay and the growth of
metastatic tumor in the mice tail vein injection experiment. Mechanism
study showed that EGFL6 was a potential novel ligand of EGFR. Our
resulted demonstrated that EGFL6 could bind to EGFR and caused its
phosphorylation, which activated EGFR and leaded to its internalization.
c-Src was subsequently phosphorylated, and the MAPK/ERK signalling
cascade was activated. The EGFL6 bound cells down-regulated their
expression of E-cadherin and loosed the connection with the adjacent
cells, strength their F-actin and vimentin towards the direction they
migrated, which indicated a transition from epithelial to mesenchymal
characteristic. Further study is on going to investigate the potential of
EGFL6 as a therapeutic target for NPC metastatic treatment. In
conclusion, we found that EGFL6 was a potential novel ligand of EGFR,
which played roles in NPC metastasis through establishing invasive and
long-distant metastatic cancer niche by paracrine and autocrine.

