Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The pattern of extracellular vesicles secretion and their role in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC) is a keratinocytic neoplasm
that is considered to be one of the six most common malignancies
worldwide. It represents more than 90% of all cancers that occur
throughout the upper aerodigestive tract. Unfortunately, HNSCC is still
related to a high rate of morbidity and mortality. The poor prognosis of
HNSCC shows remarkable association with local invasion and subsequent
metastasis. Recent evidences have shown that the tumor development and
the metastatic process are supported by extracellular vesicles (EVs),
which are released from the tumor cells to the blood or lymphatic system.
The molecular mechanisms involved in EVs biogenesis and secretion are,
however, poorly understood. Herein, we sought to evaluate the pathways
that govern EVs formation and the crucial mechanism that regulates EVs
release by HNSCC cells. In addition, we tried to recognize the role of
HNSCC EVs upon dysplastic keratinocytes and microenvironment cells such
as endothelial cells. EVs derived from three HNSCC cell lines (SCC-9,
Cal27 and FaDu) were isolated by ultracentrifugation and quantified using
Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA - NanoSight). A screen targeting for
the components of EVs biogenesis in the HNSCC cell lines through western
blotting was also performed and lysosomal compartment was followed by
immunofluorescence in live cells. Finally, the invasion and angiogenic
potential of dysplastic keratinocytes (DOK cell line) and endothelial
cells (HUVEC cell line) were evaluated, respectively, after treatment
with EVs secreted by HNSCC cell lines. Comparing the three cell lines,
FaDu cells presented higher expression of proteins responsible for EVs
formation (pHead and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC) is a
keratinocytic neoplasm that is considered to be one of the six most
common malignancies worldwide. It represents more than 90% of all cancers
that occur throughout the upper aerodigestive tract. Unfortunately, HNSCC
is still related to a high rate of morbidity and mortality. The poor
prognosis of HNSCC shows remarkable association with local invasion and
subsequent metastasis. Recent evidences have shown that the tumor
development and the metastatic process are supported by extracellular
vesicles (EVs), which are released from the tumor cells to the blood or
lymphatic system. The molecular mechanisms involved in EVs biogenesis and
secretion are, however, poorly understood. Herein, we sought to evaluate
the pathways that govern EVs formation and the crucial mechanism that
regulates EVs release by HNSCC cells. In addition, we tried to recognize
the role of HNSCC EVs upon dysplastic keratinocytes and microenvironment
cells such as endothelial cells. EVs derived from three HNSCC cell lines
(SCC-9, Cal27 and FaDu) were isolated by ultracentrifugation and
quantified using Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA - NanoSight). A
screen targeting for the components of EVs biogenesis in the HNSCC cell
lines through western blotting was also performed and lysosomal
compartment was followed by immunofluorescence in live cells. Finally,
the invasion and angiogenic potential of dysplastic keratinocytes (DOK
cell line) and endothelial cells (HUVEC cell line) were evaluated,
respectively, after treatment with EVs secreted by HNSCC cell lines.
Comparing the three cell lines, FaDu cells presented higher expression of
proteins responsible for EVs formation (p<0.05), such as Flotilin-1,
Tsg101, VPS36 and also Rab7, a small GTPase that directs vesicles to
lysosomes. However, FaDu cells secreted less EVs than SCC-9 and Cal27, as
well as it showed lower levels of Vps4, required for formation of
multivesicular bodies. Immunofluorescence experiments showed the presence
of numerous perinuclear clusters positive for LAMP-1 (lysosome marker) in
FaDu and Cal27 cells, while SCC-9 showed LAMP1-positive organelles
dispersed throughout its cytoplasm. These findings indicate that the
majority of EVs formed by FaDu cells can be driven to lysosome
compartment instead of being released to the extracellular milieu.
Interestingly, when DOK and HUVEC cells were treated with the same number
of EVs derived from HNSCC cell lines, SCC-9 EVs enhanced the invasion and
angiogenic potential of keratinocytes and endothelial cells,
respectively. Taken together, our data highlights a possible role for
Rab7 protein in the negative regulation of EVs secretion by HNSCC cell
lines. Moreover, the results provided by the in vitro functional assays
suggest the clinical importance of regulating EVs secretion for the
controlling of HNSCC tumor aggressivenes.

