Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel strategy for accuurate and unambiguous mutation detection
of the highly homologous PMS2 gene


Background: Heterozygous mutations in the DNA mismatch repair gene, PMS2
contribute to Lynch syndrome. Carrier individuals are at increased risk
of developing cancers, including colorectal and endometrial cancers.
Biallelic mutations in PMS2 can cause constitutional
mismatch-repair-deficiency syndrome, which is characterized by childhood
onset malignancy, including brain cancers, hematologic malignancies,
colorectal cancers, and multiple intestinal polyposis. Molecular analysis
of the PMS2 gene is complicated by the presence of a large family of
highly homologous sequences in other genomic regions and frequent gene
conversion between the active gene and pseudogenes. Although the
combination of multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA)
assay and Sanger sequencing can largely overcome this problem, copy
number variations (CNVs) at the 3 end cannot be unambiguously
differentiated when gene conversion is involved. Here we described a
novel approach that combines long range PCR (LR-PCR), next generation
sequencing (NGS), and MLPA to identify sequence and copy number changes
of the PMS2 gene.Method: A comprehensive workflow incorporating MLPA,
LR-PCR, and NGS was carefully designed for sequence and CNV analyses of
the PMS2 gene. MLPA was used to detect CNVs in PMS2 and PMS2CL. In order
to distinguish mutations in the active gene from changes in the
pseudogene, the active gene was specifically enriched by LR-PCR, followed
by whole gene NGS analysis to detect point mutations and CNVs. CNVs can
be further confirmed by MLPA. Allele dropout is overcome by capture-based
NGS.Results: Using the comprehensive workflow described above, we have
identified CNVs in all coding exons of the PMS2 gene: exonic deletions
(E2-E9, E5-E9, E8, E10, E14), exonic duplications (E11-E12), whole gene
deletion (E1-E15), and a nonsense mutation, S22X. We identified an exon
14 deletion (c.2276-113_c.2445+1596del) in the active gene that could not
be differentiated originally by the combination of MLPA and Sanger
sequencing due to a gene conversion event in the 3 region between PMS2
and PMS2CL, however, with LR-PCR followed by NGS, the deletion was
unequivocally identified. Breakpoint analysis of multiple samples with
exon 14 deletions revealed that frequent exon 14 deletions were mediated
by homologous Alu sequences. We also identified a potential LINE1
sequence mediated intragenic duplication flanking exons 11 and
12.Conclusion: The combined strategies of long range PCR, MLPA, and deep
coverage NGS ensure accurate and unambiguous identification of a wide
spectrum of mutations, including point mutations, small indels, and copy
number changes, in addition to the determination of breakpoints. The
novel strategy of comprehensive workflow provides a reliable tool for NGS
based accurate molecular analysis of genes containing multiple copies of
highly homologous sequences such as PMS2.

