Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of CAS scaffolds: A novel mechanism for microtubule
targeting agents


Microtubule targeting agents (MTAs) are an important class of anticancer
drugs. While their anticancer mechanisms were considered exclusively as
antimitotic for decades, evidence now suggests that the ability of MTAs
to inhibit functions of interphase microtubules likely plays an essential
role in their clinical anticancer actions. Interphase microtubules are
responsible for intracellular trafficking of many constituents including
proteins involved in signal transduction. Efficient signal transduction
requires precise coordination of signaling partners through their
appropriate localization. Scaffold proteins regulate signal transduction
pathways by assembling signaling components into complexes both
temporally and spatially. Assembly of scaffold complexes can be dependent
on a functional microtubule network. Several scaffold proteins have been
identified with importance in breast cancer, including BCAR1, a member of
the crk associated substrate (CAS) family of scaffolds. BCAR1 expression
in breast cancer is associated with resistance to anti-estrogens. We
hypothesized that the ability of diverse MTAs to interrupt the function
of these signaling scaffolds could contribute to their activities in
breast cancer cells. The effects of eribulin, vinorelbine, paclitaxel,
docetaxel, and ixabepilone on the localization and associated signaling
of BCAR1 was evaluated. The MTAs disrupted the localization of BCAR1 and
differential effects were noted among the MTAs. There were also distinct
effects of the agents on BCAR1 associated signaling. To determine whether
BCAR1 expression was related to sensitivity of breast cancer cell lines
to specific MTAs we separated the breast cancer cell lines based on their
ability to initiate cytotoxic or only antiproliferative effects and
evaluated them for BCAR1 expression. Two cell lines with the highest
BCAR1 expression were resistant to the cytotoxic effects of each MTA of
this panel. Thus, high levels of BCAR1 in breast cancer cells can
overcome the ability of diverse MTAs to disrupt scaffold function and
lead to resistance. Our results suggest that the ability of MTAs to
interrupt BCAR1 scaffolds represents a new mechanism of action for these
drugs. However, MTA disruption of the BCAR1 CAS scaffold complexes can be
overcome by high BCAR1 expression. Funding for the work was provided by
Eisai Inc.

