Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sequencing approaches define the mutation and fusion landscape of
choroid plexus carcinomas


Background & Purpose: Choroid plexus carcinomas (CPCs) are aggressive
intraventricular tumors accounting for 20% of brain tumors in children
under 2 years of age. The clinical outcome of CPC patients is variable
having an average 5-year overall survival of 50%. A recent study from our
group has characterized copy number, DNA methylation and gene expression
aberrations in these tumors and identified that a greater number of
mutated copies of TP53 is significantly associated with reduced survival.
The mutational landscape of these tumors is largely unknown, although
this information is crucial to refine the understanding of CPC
tumorigenesis and identify novel therapeutic targets. The purpose of this
study is to complement the in-depth analysis of the molecular
abnormalities driving CPC development by investigating single nucleotide
alterations (SNAs), and structural variations (SVs) in CPC DNA and
RNA.Methods: A cohort of 29 high quality samples from 25 pediatric CPC
patients was used for this study. DNA from 4 blood-tumor pairs and RNA
from 27 CPCs were used for whole genome sequencing (WGS) and RNA
sequencing (RNA seq), respectively, as part of the Pediatric Cancer
Genome Project (PCGP) at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, using the
Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx or HiSeq platform with 100bp read length.
Eighty-two percent of samples were primary tumors, while 17.2% were
recurrences. Only one sample had sufficient high quality nucleic acid
material to conduct both DNA and RNA sequencing.Results: CPCs exhibited
very low levels of SNAs ranging from 1 to 11 SNAs per genome. Copy number
analysis using WGS confirmed the high levels of copy number alterations
in CPCs. RNAseq analysis revealed that primary and recurrent CPC samples
exhibited 100% similarity in fusion breakpoints, suggesting very little
clonal divergence in these pediatric brain tumors. A recurrent fusion in
chromosome 3 was observed in two independent CPCs (7%). Other fusion
events generated in-frame alterations in genes involved in the MAP kinase
pathway, such as PPP2R1A, and in apoptosis and cell proliferation
pathways. The sample for which WGS and RNAseq was generated exhibited
chromothripsis with numerous SVs affecting chromosomes 1 and 19. No other
SV events were found in our CPC cohort.Conclusions: CPCs exhibit very few
SNAs and SVs, but are characterized by recurrent chromosome-wide copy
number aberrations. Various RNA fusion events altering the MAP kinase
pathway have been identified, suggesting a key role for kinase pathways
in the development and growth of these devastating brain tumors.

