Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-modal treatment with peptide vaccine, metronomic
cyclophosphamide and anti-PD1 monoclonal antibody provides effective
control of tumors in multiple models


Future cancer immunotherapies will combine multiple treatments to improve
immune responses to cancer through synergistic, multi-modal mechanisms.
In a phase I clinical trial, we found that metronomic cyclophosphamide
(mCPA; 50 mg BID) enhanced the immunogenicity of a DepoVaxTM (DPX) based
cancer vaccine (DPX-Survivac) in ovarian cancer patients. We emulated
these results in preclinical transplantable tumor models which allowed us
to study the underlying mechanisms of cyclophosphamide induced immune
modulation and explore additional combinations to enhance the therapeutic
effect. In syngeneic murine models for ovarian cancer (MOSE), melanoma
(B16-F10) and HPV-induced cancer (C3), metronomic low dose
cyclophosphamide (mCPA) on alternating weeks (20 mg/kg/day PO) in
combination with a DPX peptide vaccine provided long-term control of
established tumors. The addition of mCPA caused selective enrichment of
antigen-specific CD8+ T cells resulting in increased immune responses
detected by IFN- ELISPOT and in vivo cytotoxicity assay, as well as
improved protection from tumors. Efficacy of the vaccine and mCPA
combination was limited in mice bearing advanced tumors, yet
antigen-specific CD8+ T cells could be detected infiltrating the tumor by
flow cytometry along with increased expression of PD-1 by qPCR,
suggesting that the combination therapy was able to generate strong
cytotoxic T cell response but was still subject to tumor induced
suppression within the tumor microenvironment. A triple combination
therapy of mCPA, vaccine and anti-PD1 enabled the control and/or
regression of established later-treated tumors which could not be
achieved with a combination of mCPA and anti-PD1. To better understand
the mechanism of the enhanced protection observed with the tri-therapy,
mice were implanted with a mixture of C3 and B16 tumor cells and then
treated with a vaccine against the C3 tumors alone, in combination with
mCPA and anti-PD1. Splenocytes of mice treated with the tri-therapy
produced IFN- ELISPOT responses towards both cell lines, suggesting
epitope spreading. This effect could not be detected in tumor bearing
mice treated with mCPA anti-PD1 without vaccine. We conclude that
enhanced tumor control mediated by the tri-therapy is mediated by highly
active, tumor-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes produced by a strongly
immunogenic vaccine, resulting in epitope spreading that can further
facilitate tumor rejection or control. These results provide a rationale
for clinical testing of checkpoint blockade therapy in combination with
our highly immunogenic combination of mCPA and DPX-Survivac targeting the
tumor associated antigen survivin.

