Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic value of high c-Met expression in patients with poor
prognosis pancreatic adenocarcinoma following surgical resection:
comparison of three c-Met scoring methods and exploration of underlying
mechanisms of c-Met overexpression


Context: The HGF/c-Met pathway is an hypoxia-inducible pathway involved
in tumor-stroma interactions and invasion in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Assessment of c-Met expression is a critical issue
as c-Met inhibitors are under clinical development and are suggested to
display antitumor activity only in high c-Met tumors. We aimed to assess
the prognostic value of c-Met overexpression in PDAC and explore
underlying mechanisms (hypoxia, gene amplification, post transcriptional
deregulation).Patients and methods: Patients (Pts) with resected PDAC who
had received no perioperative chemo/radiotherapy were retrospectively
selected. c-Met immunostaining was graded using a simplified score (high
c-Met: 20% of cancer cells with 3+ staining) and compared to a standard
scale combining staining surface and intensity (SI score) and to the
MetMab score. Concordance between entire section and tissue microarray
(TMA) was assessed and a computer-assisted quantification algorithm was
developed (Aperio software). Hypoxia was assessed by visual grading of
HIF-1/CA9 immunostaining, necrosis, and automated microvascular density
(Aperio). c-Met gene copy number was assessed by fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) and Taqman based copy number variation (CNV) assay.
c-Met mRNA levels were quantified using reverse transcription PCR
(RT-PCR). c-Met pathway activation was assessed by immunostaining of
phospho-c-Met, phospho-GAB1 and downstream signaling (pAKT, pERK, and
pSTAT3) and graded visually. Clinical, pathological, and molecular
biomarkers were correlated with disease-free (DFS) and overall (OS)
survivals.Results: Thirty-seven Pts were analyzed. The simplified c-Met
score displayed the best prognostic value and reproducibility vs both the
SI score and the MetMab score; using this score: (a) high c-Met (7/37)
was associated with shorter DFS (6.3 vs 33.0 months, HR: 3.456, p =
0.0035) and OS (10.8 vs 39.0 months, HR: 4.257, p = 0.0006); and (b) the
kappa index was 0.7730.122. In multivariate analysis, high c-Met was
independently associated with both DFS and OS. c-Met expression was
concordant on entire section and TMA in 87.9% of cases, and quantifiable
using a specific computer-assisted algorithm. There was no correlation
between hypoxia-related markers and c-Met expression. FISH and CNV
analysis did not show c-Met gene amplification. mRNA quantification and
downstream pathway activation data will be presented.Conclusion: c-Met is
an independent prognostic marker in resected PDAC that may help
identifying Pts at high risk of recurrence and poor survival. High c-Met
expression was not associated with hypoxia or gene amplification in this
study. The simplified c-Met scale is a robust and reproducible scoring
method that could be used for ongoing larger studies on TMA.

