Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting M2-tumor associated macrophages (M2-TAMs) in prostate
cancer


Prostate cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related deaths of men in the
U.S., and in the past year, over 30,000 men died from this disease. While
localized prostate cancer is highly treatable by surgical resection and
radiation, cancer that has metastasized remains incurable. Alternatively
activated macrophages, also known as M2-macrophages, primarily scavenge
debris and in the process, promote angiogenesis and wound repair.
M2-macrophages are phenotypically similar to M2-tumor associated
macrophages (M2-TAMs) have been reported to associate with solid tumors
such as prostate cancer to facilitate epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT), tumor invasiveness, metastasis, and resistance to
therapy. As an invasive species within the tumor microenvironment, this
makes M2-TAMs an ideal therapeutic target in prostate cancer. The purpose
of this project is to develop novel therapeutics that will directly
target M2-TAMs for destruction and subsequently attenuate prostate tumor
growth and progression. The central hypothesis of this study is to
determine if targeting of M2-TAMs using specific surface antigens will be
an effective therapy for lethal prostate cancer and potentially, other
cancers. Our study will first elucidate M2-TAM biology, including both a
study of known M2-TAM cell surface antigen markers expressed in human
prostate cancers as well as rigorous tests to target these markers for
anti-tumor cell efficacy using relevant model systems. Functional
experiments will then be done in vitro using primary antibodies that are
bound by a saporin-conjugated secondary antibody and also, in vivo by
utilizing human xenograft mouse models. We will also assess
internalization of armed antibodies, M2-TAM cell death, M2-TAM
functionality, and EMT status of PCa tumors after targeting. This will be
followed by target validation using tissues from rapid autopsies and
surgical specimens supplied by the Department of Urology at Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine. By targeting specific markers on M2-TAMs,
we predict that this targeting will provide a better prognosis for
patients who have been diagnosed with lethal prostate cancer.
Modification of targeted ligands and drug combinations will produce a
flexible platform for cancer therapy. The studies described here
represent an underdeveloped frontier in cancer therapeutics and outline a
method of altering the tumor immune microenvironment. If successful,
antibodies used against specific M2-TAM surface markers will be
constructed into antibody drug conjugates (ADCs).

