Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantification and functional characterization of the shared
heritability across multiple cancer sites: results from the GAME-ON
Consortium


It is estimated that more than 1.6 million cancer diagnoses will occur in
the US during 2014 and five common cancers_breast, colorectal, lung,
ovarian and prostate cancer_together constitute more than 50% of new
cancer diagnoses. Many cancers cluster within families and in some cases
multiple tumor types affect one family. Quantifying the extent to which
distinct cancer types share genetic predisposition will inform design for
future genetic association studies and give insights to shared biological
mechanisms underlying disease.The GAME-ON consortium set out to conduct
post-GWAS research for breast, colorectal, lung, ovarian and prostate
cancer. Across the five cancer sites, a total of 51,725 cases and 62,155
controls were included as part of cancer-specific GWAS and summary
statistics were shared between the cancer sites to conduct cross-cancer
analysis. Using the recently developed LD score regression method, we
leveraged these data to quantify the genetic correlation between these
five cancers. In addition, we also estimated the genetic correlation
between these cancers and 59 non-cancer traits using publically available
GWAS summary statistics. Finally, we also functionally characterized the
heritability across the five GAME-ON cancers.We found a nominally
significant positive genetic correlation between breast and lung cancer
(rg = 0.26, p = 0.045), however this correlation did not remain
significantly different from zero after adjusting for multiple testing.
We found positive genetic correlations (all pIt is estimated that more
than 1.6 million cancer diagnoses will occur in the US during 2014 and
five common cancers_breast, colorectal, lung, ovarian and prostate
cancer_together constitute more than 50% of new cancer diagnoses. Many
cancers cluster within families and in some cases multiple tumor types
affect one family. Quantifying the extent to which distinct cancer types
share genetic predisposition will inform design for future genetic
association studies and give insights to shared biological mechanisms
underlying disease.The GAME-ON consortium set out to conduct post-GWAS
research for breast, colorectal, lung, ovarian and prostate cancer.
Across the five cancer sites, a total of 51,725 cases and 62,155 controls
were included as part of cancer-specific GWAS and summary statistics were
shared between the cancer sites to conduct cross-cancer analysis. Using
the recently developed LD score regression method, we leveraged these
data to quantify the genetic correlation between these five cancers. In
addition, we also estimated the genetic correlation between these cancers
and 59 non-cancer traits using publically available GWAS summary
statistics. Finally, we also functionally characterized the heritability
across the five GAME-ON cancers.We found a nominally significant positive
genetic correlation between breast and lung cancer (rg = 0.26, p =
0.045), however this correlation did not remain significantly different
from zero after adjusting for multiple testing. We found positive genetic
correlations (all p<0.003) between lung cancer and traits related to
smoking (rg = 0.53-0.64) and adiposity (rg = 0.31-0.42). We also
identified a positive genetic correlation between schizophrenia and
breast cancer (rg = 0.16, p = 0.003) as well as a negative genetic
correlation between adiposity and breast cancer (rg = -0.25, p = 0.01).
However, these genetic correlations were not statistically significant
after adjustment for number of tests performed.In functional enrichment
analysis across all cancers, we observed a 17-fold (se: 2.9) enrichment
of heritability located within conserved regions. In addition,
transcription factor binding sites (TFBS), super-enhancers and histone
marks showed 6.6- (se: 1.2), 2.5- (se: 0.2) and 2.0-fold enrichments,
respectively.This is the first study to estimate the genetic correlation
between these five common cancers in a population of unrelated
individuals. Although we observe only modest evidence of a shared
heritability of these cancers, the standard errors were large; larger
samples will be needed to find modest, true genetic correlations. In
addition, we found that conserved genetic regions are enriched for cancer
heritability and future studies seeking to discover genetic variants
associated with these cancers should focus on these regions.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

