Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanocarrier for monoclonal antibody delivery


Antibodies represent a large class of drugs that have a number of
different therapeutic uses. The use of monoclonal antibodies against
potential intracellular protein-protein interactions in cancer cells has
remained largely unexplored. This lack of consideration is due largely to
a number of factors that include poor intracellular uptake and rapid
lysosomal degradation of monoclonal antibodies within cells.
Encapsulating monoclonal antibodies within biodegradable nanoparticles is
one strategy that can improve antibody cellular uptake and protect from
lysosomal degradation so that the antibody can be released inside the
cell and remain functional against the therapeutic target.Purpose: The
purpose of this study is to characterize a human monoclonal antibody
encapsulated within poly(lactic-co-glycolytic) acid (PLGA) nanoparticles.
We hypothesized that encapsulation of an antibody within PLGA
nanoparticles is feasible and will release in a favorable manner.Method:
Anti-AnnexinA2 (AnxA2) monoclonal antibody was encapsulated within PLGA
nanoparticles utilizing a water/oil/water double emulsion solvent
evaporation method. Nanoparticles and released antibodies were
characterized through a number of different modalities.Results: Our
results show encapsulation efficiency ranging from 16-22% with a mean of
18.725% (SEM 1.289) depending on initial concentration of antibody used
in the nanoparticle formulation. Nanoparticles were formed in a favorable
mono disperse manner as evidenced through dynamic light scattering. All
of the formulations created maintained a hydrodynamic size below 250nm.
Release kinetics revealed that at day 12 the cumulative release of the
antibody is approximately 35%. In addition after release the antibody
maintained functionality as evidenced through Western Blot analysis and
immunocytochemistry.Conclusions: Encapsulation of a monoclonal antibody
within polymeric PLGA nanoparticles is feasible, exhibits sustained
release kinetics, and maintains functionality upon release. This
encapsulation technique may be used as a method to load antibodies in
targeted nanoparticles and release the antibodies inside cancer cells to
interfere with aberrantly expressed proteins. Future experiments will
focus on utilizing this monoclonal antibody encapsulation approach to
screen intracellular protein-protein interactions as potential new
therapeutic cancer targets.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

