Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk loci for a breast-colon cancer phenotype: results from a
genome-wide association study


Purpose: Clustering of breast and colorectal cancer has been observed
within families in population-based studies giving rise to speculation
that there are breast-colon cancer susceptibility genes. We performed a
genome-wide association study (GWAS) to identify genetic markers
associated with a potential breast-colon cancer phenotype.Methods: Cases
and controls were ascertained from the Breast and Colon Cancer Family
Registries (CFR) GWAS subjects. Breast-colon phenotype definition was
based on 2 or more breast and colon cancer cases diagnosed in first- or
second-degree relatives within a family. Cases (n = 985) were women with
a history of breast cancer and a family history of colorectal cancer, or
persons with colorectal cancer with a family history of breast cancer.
Unrelated controls (n = 1769) were frequency matched to cases for age and
gender. Following standard quality control measures, 6,220,060 directly
measured and imputed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were included
in the discovery set. SNPs associated at p0.05 for testing for
heterogeneity between the overall discovery set and the replication
set).ROBO1 (roundabout, axon guidance receptor, homolog 1) is a
transmembrane receptor of the immunoglobulin family and is differentially
expressed in human cancers, with a possible role as a tumor suppressor
gene. Low ROBO1 expression has been shown to be an adverse prognostic
factor for invasive ductal breast cancer and may also play a role in
pathogenesis of colorectal cancer. BAALC (brain and acute leukemia,
cytoplasmic) is predominantly expressed by neural and blood cells and is
largely implicated in acute leukemia.Conclusion: In this exploratory
analysis, to elucidate genes/regions associated with pleiotropic effect
for breast and colorectal cancer risk we identified germline variation in
the region of ROBO1 and BAALC. Validation in a larger dataset and
functional characterization of the loci is warranted to elucidate
mechanisms by which these genes/SNPs may contribute to the development of
breast and colorectal cancer.

