Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation induced multinucleated giant cells: A novel therapeutic
target to prevent survival and relapse of glioblastoma


In this study, we address the fundamental issue of radiation resistance
in Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) a highly malignant form of brain tumor.
However, because of the unavailability of multiple biopsies of GBM
patients after treatment, we are limited in our understanding of
resistance mechanisms. To circumvent this problem we recapitulated
clinical scenario of GBM resistance in a cellular model developed from
fresh naive primary GBM patient samples and cell lines.Using our model we
show that upon lethal dose of radiation, small percentage of GBM cells
survive, are non-apoptotic and transiently become non- proliferative.
They are arrested in G2/M phase of cell cycle mediated by inhibitory
phosphorylation of Cdk1(Y15) and p21. Surprisingly, we find although non
-proliferative, these cells are highly motile and undergo homotypic
cell-cell fusions at high frequency to form multinucleated and giant
cells (MNGCs). Cell fusion leads to the induction of senescence as seen
by -galactosidase staining and accordingly high expression of SASPs
(senescence associated secretory proteins like GM-CSF, SCF, IL-6 and
IL-8) is also observed. SASPs provide survival and proliferation signals
to the cells in an autocrine manner. Accordingly, we find enhanced
expression of anti-apoptotic genes BIRC3 and Bcl-xL and unaltered levels
of Bax (pro-apoptotic protein) mRNA in the resistant cells. MNGCs also
activate AKT, which is a survival signal and a central convergence node
of signals downstream to SASPs. AKT activation along with Bcl-xL is
reported to regulate apoptosis synergistically. Additionally, resistant
cells also undergo active DNA damage repair mediated by sensory kinases
ATM and ATR. Interestingly, irrespective of the phase of cell cycle, they
adopt Non Homologous End Joining (NHEJ) as their pathway of choice to
repair their double strand breaks in DNA. Since we find increased
presence of H3K36me2 marks known to modulate NHEJ, a possible link
between NHEJ and this modification in GBM is worth exploring. Finally,
unlike previous reports we demonstrate that MNGCs do not die of mitotic
catastrophe instead escape senescence, undergo normal cell division and
proliferation giving rise to mono-nucleated relapse cells with unaltered
ploidy compared to parent cells. Importantly, we also show the potential
ability to prevent the relapse in Glioma by disrupting the
non-proliferative state of radiation resistant cells using mitotic
inducer (MK1775) and selectively ablating growth of MNGCs by cytokinesis
inhibitor.In summary, our data provides a mechanistic explanation for
clinical observations and novel insights into an unexplored multi-step
process of radiation survival and relapse in Glioblastoma We identified
homotypic cell fusions of resistant Glioma cells as a novel non-genetic
mechanism to sustain survival and relapse and generate rationale for
novel combinatorial targeted therapies.

