Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EWS-FLI1 targeted small molecule YK-4-279 synergizes with vinca
alkaloids through double hit to mitotic machinery


A multi-chemotherapeutic regimen remains the benchmark of first- and
second-line therapy for patients with Ewing Sarcoma (ES), yet almost one
third of patients will relapse and die of their disease. The small
molecule YK-4-279 specifically inhibits EWS-FLI1 function both in vivo
and in vitro, and represents the first molecule to directly target
EWS-FLI1, a specific oncogene to be considered a critical ES target.
Given the likelihood of ultimate resistance to any single agent, even a
targeted new agent, combinations of YK-4-279 with established anti-cancer
agents were investigated. Our hypothesis is that currently used
chemotherapy with YK-4-279 would be more potent and have significantly
more durable anti-tumor effects while therapy-limiting adverse drug
effects would be reduced. Methods: The Approved Oncology Drugs Set of 85
different anti-cancer drugs with a spectrum of cellular toxicity
mechanisms was obtained from the Developmental Therapeutics Program at
the NCI/NIH, and tested with YK-4-279 for synergistic activity in ES cell
lines. Successful synergistic combinations were evaluated in xenograft
models. Mechanistic studies were pursued using immunofluorescence and
cell cycle investigations. Results: Combinatorial testing of YK-4-279
revealed synergy in four ES cell lines with vinca alkaloids. Vincristine
(VCR) showed the greatest consistency across all cell lines with a
combination index of 0.7-0.8 in all four cell lines, including COG-E-352,
which is reported to be VCR resistant. This synergy translates as a
10-fold decrease in VCR required for the equivalent cytotoxicity when
combined with YK-4-279. The combination of YK-4-279 (50 mg/kg) and VCR (1
mg/kg) exhibited synergistic effect upon xenograft tumor growth leading
to significantly increased survival in the combination compared to VCR
alone (p = 0.0019). YK-4-279 led to a G2/M-phase cell-cycle arrest as
confirmed by H3 phosphorylation at Thr-11. Treatment with VCR and
YK-4-279 led to an increase in both spindle and chromatin perturbation in
a time and dose-dependent manner. Combination therapy also showed
enhanced reduction of MCL-1 protein. Conclusion: YK-4-279, a promising,
EWS-FLI1 specific small molecule, exhibits synergistic activity with
vinca alkaloids. The mechanism appears to be at the cell cycle level of
mitotic progression with a subsequent decrease in survival protein MCL-1.
These data support future clinical combinatorial studies as YK-4-279
completes preclinical development towards a planned Phase 1 clinical
trial in 2015.

