Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Conversion of the Lung Cancer Risk Test (LCRT) to a next
generation sequencing (NGS) platform


Background: The Lung Cancer Risk Test (LCRT) is a promising,
gene-expression-based test that was developed for use in individuals at
risk for but not yet diagnosed with lung cancer (Blomquist et al. Cancer
Research 2009). A blinded, prospective cohort study is underway in which
normal bronchial epithelial cells (NBEC), blood and demographic
information were collected from 384 subjects aged 50-90 years at
enrollment (between 2010 and 2012) with at least a 20 pack-year smoking
history and no lung cancer. These subjects underwent a chest CT at
enrollment to confirm absence of suspicious lung lesions and follow-up is
ongoing.Purpose: A recently developed next generation sequencing (NGS)
method enables reliable, quantitative measurement of gene expression
using custom amplicon libraries (Blomquist et al. PLoS ONE 2013). Due to
the reduced cost and sample consumption of this method we were motivated
to convert the LCRT from capillary electrophoresis (CE)-based to NGS
method.Methods/Design: NBEC cDNA samples from 12 individuals for which
the LCRT had been previously measured using the CE method were
co-amplified with a newly created mixture of internal standards (MIS)
designed for NGS analysis, using the original LCRT primers. The resultant
PCR products were re-amplified with primers complementary to internal
regions of each target gene to yield two 100 bp amplicons for NGS
analysis. Sample-specific barcodes and platform adaptors were added by
PCR and samples were pooled for sequencing. NGS was conducted using the
Illumina Hiseq 2000 with the 100 cycle paired-read method. PCR
amplification for each sample was conducted in triplicate. Two replicates
were sequenced together in one run and the third replicate was sequenced
in a separate run. Gene expression levels for each gene comprising the
LCRT were compared to levels obtained using the CE method.Results: There
was a small molarity difference between the original and new MIS. A delta
analysis was performed using 6/12 samples and a correction factor was
applied to both the second 6 sample set and all 12 samples. Gene
expression values for the LCRT as measured by CE and NGS were highly
correlated. The slope and R2 values for the second sample set and all 12
samples were m = 0.95, R2 = 0.96 and m = 0.93, R2 = 0.95 respectively.
Comparison of the two replicate PCR measurements detected using NGS in
the same sequencing run demonstrated a high degree of reproducibility (m
= 1.00, R2 = 0.99). The slope was 1.03 and R2 was 0.94 when these
replicates were compared to the third analyzed on a separate sequencing
run.Conclusions: Measurement of the LCRT using NGS of custom amplicon
libraries will yield reliable results that are comparable to those
previously reported (Blomquist et al. 2009). Inter-amplification and
inter-sequencing run variation is low and, thus, it is expected that
results using NGS will be highly reproducible. Conversion of the LCRT
from CE to NGS methods should lead to reduced costs and sample
consumption.

