Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sleeping Beauty uncovers cooperating driver genes in a preclinical
mouse model of myeloid leukemia


Myeloid leukemia is associated with few predominant mutations and
translocations in humans. In order to uncover additional loci that drive
the disease, we developed an aggressive, fully-penetrant mouse model of
myeloid leukemia using Sleeping Beauty insertional mutagenesis. Animals
developed distinct foci of expanded splenic red pulp as early as 30 days
of age and had a median survival of 70 days. SB insertions sequenced from
168 spleens of mice with end-stage disease revealed more than 470
statistically defined candidate cancer genes (CCGs), 87 of which have
orthologs mutated in human AML. Pathway enrichment analysis using the
CCGs confirmed that MAP kinase and Jak-Stat signaling play an important
role in the disease. Twenty-five CCGs were defined as trunk drivers based
on high sequence read representation in multiple tumors from the
population. Among the trunk drivers was a suite of transcription factors
that act downstream of MAP kinase signaling, including Ets- family member
genes Erg, Ets1 and Fli1.We sequenced SB insertions from single cells
isolated from a single tumor to interrogate cooperating relationships
among trunk drivers. Hierarchical clustering of SB insertions revealed
intra-tumor heterogeneity and identified three distinct subclonal
populations. Importantly, Erg and Ghr anchored one subpopulation that was
distinct from a second subpopulation anchored by Ets1 and Notch1. These
gene relationships observed in single cells confirmed the
population-based statistical analysis of cooperativity between Erg and
Ghr and Ets1 and Notch1 from the cohort of 168 tumors. Mutual-exclusivity
for Erg and Ets1 in driving myeloid leukemia was supported by microarray
expression analysis in a subset of the tumors. RNA-seq analysis confirmed
that SB insertions drive expression of many CCGs including trunk divers
Erg, Ghr, Ets1 and Notch1. Chimeric transcripts for the four driver genes
contained the SB splice donor and downstream wild type exons encoding the
functional domains of the translated proteins, suggesting that SB drives
the mis-expression of these proteins to induce myeloid leukemia.We have
identified new CCGs that contribute to myeloid disease progression and
gained insight into both inter- and intra- tumor heterogeneity of this
tumor type. Importantly, SB-driven myeloid leukemia is a robust,
transplantable genetic model that offers a unique platform for
preclinical testing. Transposon insertion profiles provide a powerful
means to stratify tumors for targeted therapies. Finally, SB can be
harnessed to uncover loci that confer therapy response or resistance.

