Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing drug discovery and development throughput without
sacrificing predictivity: ex vivo 3D drug response profiling (DRP) using
patient-derived xenografts (PDX)


Background: PDX have become critical elements of preclinical drug
development as they better reflect the heterogeneity, molecular and
histopathologic signatures of the original tumor than cell lines or
genetically engineered mouse models, and their drug response profiles
correlate with clinical response. While PDX models have become a powerful
tool in drug discovery and development, limitations include low
throughput for broad drug screening, lack of dose-response curves, high
cost and progressive loss of human-derived stromal elements over serial
passages, restricting utility for certain therapeutic classes. A
potential mechanism to overcome the low throughput and high cost of PDX
models is the incorporation of ex vivo 3D (EV3D) DRP on cells isolated
from early passage PDX models. Thus, we correlated DRP results using PDX
with genetic mutations and drug response of PDX tested in vivo. Materials
& Methods: Cells were isolated from low-passage triple negative breast,
invasive bladder, and non-small cell lung PDX tumors propagated in NSG
mice and cultured as 3D spheroids. 3D spheroid cultures were exposed to
15 clinically-relevant chemotherapy and targeted agents and assayed for
cell viability over a range of concentrations. Non-linear regression
curves were generated and relative IC50s estimated. In vivo response with
limited numbers of agents at clinically relevant concentrations (3
including controls) was assessed. Results: 3D cultures and testing were
successfully established across all PDX and IC50s were successfully
generated in 98% of drugs tested. EV3D DRP of PDX tumors differentiated
activity of cytotoxic and targeted agents across tumors of similar
histologic site of origin. Gemcitabine (IC50 = .007 versus 27 uM) and
docetaxel (0.2 versus 40uM) activity was highly correlated with in vivo
response in bladder and breast cancers, respectively, whereas cisplatin
was equally active across all tumor types (IC50 = 3-8uM). hENT1 mRNA
expression was not predictive of gemcitabine activity. EV3D DRP data
correlated with PDX and clinical outcome. It identified Erlotinib as
being relatively inactive (3 uM) against lung cancer PDX with an EGFR
e19del, T790M mutation which correlated with the outcome seen in the PDX
mouse and the clinical patient outcome in which the patient became
nonresponsive to erlotinib. Trametinib was highly active against lung
cancer PDX with a KRAS G12C mutation (IC50 6.7 10-6 versus 1.1 10-3) and
will be used to perform efficacy studies in the KRAS mutant lung PDX
model Conclusions: EV3D DRP predicts in vivo response and correlates with
pathway activating mutations. EV3D DRP using PDX may represent a novel
high throughput and predictive drug response platform that enables
compound ranking for preclinical and clinical applications.

