Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A multi-orthogonal strategy for targeting EGFRvIII expressing
glioblastomas


Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor variant III (EGFRvIII) is a recurrent
oncogenic EGFR isoform found in 25-64% of glioblastomas, the most common
form of primary brain cancer. While EGFRvIII expressing glioblastomas are
initially sensitive to EGFR inhibition, emergence of resistance clones is
universal. We previously demonstrated that EGFRvIII expressing
glioblastoma can be ablated through inhibition of compensatory mechanisms
that allow cancer cells to adapt to EGFRvIII induced oncogenic stress.
Here we propose that this strategy can be combined with direct inhibition
of EGFR signaling.A synthetic lethal RNAi screen revealed synthetic
lethality between Polo-Like Kinase 1 (PLK1) inhibition and EGFRvIII
expression in glioblastoma cells. PLK1 mediated glioblastoma adaptation
to excessive DNA damage associated with EGFRvIII expression through
activation of Rad51, a protein essential for homologous recombination
(HR). PLK1 inhibition (by BI2536) enhanced the cytotoxic effects of the
DNA damaging agent, temozolomide (TMZ), a DNA alkylating agent and the
standard-of-care chemotherapy for glioblastoma. This TMZ-sensitizing
effect is 3-5 fold more pronounced in a formed Ink4a/Arf(-/-) EGFRvIII
GEMM (genetically engineerd murine model)-derived glioblastoma model
relative to an Ink4a/Arf(-/-) PDGF- GEMM-derived glioblastoma model and
correlated to the endogenous level of DNA damage accumulation in these
models.Importantly, the tumoricidal and TMZ-sensitizing effects of BI2536
were uniformly observed across Ink4a/Arf(-/-) EGFRvIII glioblastoma
clones that acquired independent resistance mechanisms to EGFR
inhibitors, Gefitinib and Erlotinib, suggesting these resistant clones
retain oncogenic stress that required PLK1 compensation. Although BI2536
significantly augmented the anti-neoplastic effect of EGFR inhibitors in
the Ink4a/Arf(-/-) EGFRvIII model, complete ablation was not achieved
until TMZ was added. Such synergistic effect was not observed in the
Ink4a/Arf(-/-) PDGF- model.Our study revealed a novel synthetic lethal
interaction between PLK1 inhibition and EGFRvIII expression. Our results
suggest that optimal therapeutic effect against EGFRvIII expressing
glioblastomas requires multi-orthogonal integration of oncogenic
inhibition, oncogenic stress, and conventional chemotherapy, tailored to
the molecular physiology associated with the target cancer genome.

