Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mammary tumor aggressiveness is exacerbated by endothelial HoxA5
expression


Despite evidence showing a positive correlation between angiogenesis and
solid tumor progression, anti-angiogenic therapies have yielded limited,
and often, tissue-specific responses. Whereas colorectal and renal
cancers show improved responses, anti-angiogenic therapy has not proven
effective at clinically managing breast tumor progression or prolonging
patient survival. Moreover, anti-angiogenic treatment may promote the
emergence of tumors with increased aggression and resistance to standard
chemotherapies. Our laboratory has shown that sustained endothelial
expression of the anti-angiogenic HoxA5 homeodomain transcription factor
reduces angiogenesis and delays progression of squamous cell carcinoma in
the KRT14-HPV16 mouse model of skin cancer. We subsequently investigated,
whether constitutive endothelial expression of HoxA5 could also impede
mammary tumor growth and metastasis. Surprisingly, we observed that
endothelial HoxA5 expression increased both primary tumor growth and lung
metastasis in the MMTV-PyMT mouse model of breast cancer. Primary tumors
from PyMT/HoxA5+ mice exhibited an increased number of large vessels but
were significantly more hypoxic, as compared to tumors from control mice.
Orthotopic injection of isolated mammary tumor cells from PyMT/HoxA5+
mice into wild-type animals also resulted in larger tumors, as compared
to tumor cells isolated from PyMT mice of the same age. Interestingly,
although metastasis was increased in the PyMT/HoxA5+ transgenic mice, we
did not detect differences in circulating tumor cells, suggesting that
tumor cells from PyMT/HoxA5+ mice have increased tumor initiating
potential. Thus, while anti-angiogenic HoxA5 expression in the
endothelium delays skin tumor progression, more aggressive tumors arise
in the mammary gland. We are currently evaluating the response of breast
tumors in PyMT/HoxA5+ mice to standard cancer chemotherapeutics, as well
as evaluating novel approaches to potentially target more aggressive
tumors emerging from chronic hypoxic conditions.

