Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterisation of novel chalcone derivatives, CTR compounds as
tubulin polymerisation inhibitors


Agents targeting colchicine-binding site are recognized as valuable lead
compounds in the development of new anticancer drugs. Although colchicine
can effectively inhibit cell proliferation, its use as an anticancer
agent has not been approved by FDA due to its inherent toxicity. To
develop colchicine-binding site targeting agents with low or no toxicity,
we have created and examined several chalcone derivatives, from which we
have identified CTR-17 and CTR-20 as promising leads. We have examined
their anti-proliferative activities using three human breast cancer cell
lines (MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7) and two matching non-cancer
breast cell lines (184B5 and MCF10A). In addition, we also examined their
efficacy using one leukemic cell line (K-562) and one cervical cell line
(HeLa). Data from this study showed that CTR-17 and CTR-20 preferentially
kill cancer cells 10-100 times over non-cancer cells. Data obtained from
flow cytometry, confocal microscopy and Western blotting showed that
CTR-17 and CTR-20 induced prolonged mitotic arrest prior to killing
cancer cells by apoptosis. We also found that both CTR-17 and CTR-20
inhibit tubulin polymerisation and bind to purified tubulin fibers with a
dissociation constant of 3.41.7 M and 5.91.9 M, respectively. CTR-17
competitively inhibits the binding of colchicine to tubulin with an
inhibitory concentration of 8.67 M, suggesting that CTR-17 binds to
tubulin at a site close to the colchicine binding site. Molecular docking
studies confirmed this binding which occurs via three hydrogen bonds and
Van der Waals interactions. In our xenograft model of the human breast
cancer cells, the treatment of mice with CTR-17 or CTR-20 (30 mg/kg)
twice per week for 30 days effectively inhibits tumor growth. The
combination of CTR compounds (15 mg/kg/week) and paclitaxel (5
mg/kg/week) increases paclitaxel's anti-tumor activity by 40-60%. Most
importantly, both CTR-17 and CTR-20, when used alone or in combination
with paclitaxel, showed no notable toxicity to vital organs (spleen,
liver, kidney and lung). Therefore, the novel CTR-17 and CTR-20 chalcone
derivatives possess substantial potential as safe and effective
anticancer drugs.This project was supported in part from the funds by the
Northern Ontario Heritage Funds Corporation, Northern Cancer Foundation,
and The City of Greater Sudbury Development Corporation. IKL is a
recipient of the Ontario Trillium Scholarship.

