Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Iron control is a novel therapeutic target of cancer stem cells


Background: Iron overload is known to cause cancer in animal models.
Several studies have shown that iron deprivation treatment has a strong
anti-cancer effect. However, it is unclear whether iron deprivation
treatment suppresses cancer stem cells or not. A cancer stem cell model,
miPS-LLCcm, was recently epigenetically established from murine induced
pluripotent stem cells (miPS cells) in Okayama University. In this model,
the green fluorescent protein (GFP) and the puromycin resistant gene were
inserted into the 59-bp untranslated region of the Nanog gene of miPS
cells. By this procedure, undifferentiated cancer progenitor cells are
recognized as GFP positive cells. We then examined the iron dependency of
these cancer stem cells both in in vitro and in vivo studies and we used
this model to examine the possibility of cancer stem cells by iron
deprivation.Materials and Methods: In in vitro studies, the miPS-LLCcm
cells were used as cancer stem cells and colon26 and 4T1 cells were used
as differentiated murine cancer cells. Puromycin was used to purify the
cancer stem cells before seeding of the miPS-LLCcm cells. The dependency
on iron for cell proliferation was examined following transferrin
addition. Transferrin (Holo) was used to simulate an iron rich condition.
Iron free medium and the iron chelators, Deferasirox and Deferoxamine,
plus 1% fetal bovine serum (FBS) were used to simulate iron depletion
conditions. Cell proliferation assays and flow cytometric analyses were
performed 48 hours after adjustment of the iron concentration level. In
in vivo studies, an iron depleted diet was used to simulate iron depleted
conditions. Nude mice were divided into normal diet and iron depleted
diet groups. The mice were fed with these diets for three weeks and then
a suspension of miPS-LLCcm cells was injected into the backs of the nude
mice. Tumor size was measured and the tumors were immunohistologically
examined.Results: In the in vitro studies, transferrin strongly promoted
the proliferation of cancer stem cells under iron depletion conditions
compared to no transferrin(pBackground: Iron overload is known to cause
cancer in animal models. Several studies have shown that iron deprivation
treatment has a strong anti-cancer effect. However, it is unclear whether
iron deprivation treatment suppresses cancer stem cells or not. A cancer
stem cell model, miPS-LLCcm, was recently epigenetically established from
murine induced pluripotent stem cells (miPS cells) in Okayama University.
In this model, the green fluorescent protein (GFP) and the puromycin
resistant gene were inserted into the 59-bp untranslated region of the
Nanog gene of miPS cells. By this procedure, undifferentiated cancer
progenitor cells are recognized as GFP positive cells. We then examined
the iron dependency of these cancer stem cells both in in vitro and in
vivo studies and we used this model to examine the possibility of cancer
stem cells by iron deprivation.Materials and Methods: In in vitro
studies, the miPS-LLCcm cells were used as cancer stem cells and colon26
and 4T1 cells were used as differentiated murine cancer cells. Puromycin
was used to purify the cancer stem cells before seeding of the miPS-LLCcm
cells. The dependency on iron for cell proliferation was examined
following transferrin addition. Transferrin (Holo) was used to simulate
an iron rich condition. Iron free medium and the iron chelators,
Deferasirox and Deferoxamine, plus 1% fetal bovine serum (FBS) were used
to simulate iron depletion conditions. Cell proliferation assays and flow
cytometric analyses were performed 48 hours after adjustment of the iron
concentration level. In in vivo studies, an iron depleted diet was used
to simulate iron depleted conditions. Nude mice were divided into normal
diet and iron depleted diet groups. The mice were fed with these diets
for three weeks and then a suspension of miPS-LLCcm cells was injected
into the backs of the nude mice. Tumor size was measured and the tumors
were immunohistologically examined.Results: In the in vitro studies,
transferrin strongly promoted the proliferation of cancer stem cells
under iron depletion conditions compared to no transferrin(p<0.001).
However, transferrin did not promote the proliferation of the
differentiated 4T1 and colon26 cancer cells. The number of GFP-expressing
cancer stem cells decreased as the iron concentration was decreased. In
the vivo studies, iron depletion significantly suppressed the tumor
growth of the cancer stem cells (pBackground: Iron overload is known to
cause cancer in animal models. Several studies have shown that iron
deprivation treatment has a strong anti-cancer effect. However, it is
unclear whether iron deprivation treatment suppresses cancer stem cells
or not. A cancer stem cell model, miPS-LLCcm, was recently epigenetically
established from murine induced pluripotent stem cells (miPS cells) in
Okayama University. In this model, the green fluorescent protein (GFP)
and the puromycin resistant gene were inserted into the 59-bp
untranslated region of the Nanog gene of miPS cells. By this procedure,
undifferentiated cancer progenitor cells are recognized as GFP positive
cells. We then examined the iron dependency of these cancer stem cells
both in in vitro and in vivo studies and we used this model to examine
the possibility of cancer stem cells by iron deprivation.Materials and
Methods: In in vitro studies, the miPS-LLCcm cells were used as cancer
stem cells and colon26 and 4T1 cells were used as differentiated murine
cancer cells. Puromycin was used to purify the cancer stem cells before
seeding of the miPS-LLCcm cells. The dependency on iron for cell
proliferation was examined following transferrin addition. Transferrin
(Holo) was used to simulate an iron rich condition. Iron free medium and
the iron chelators, Deferasirox and Deferoxamine, plus 1% fetal bovine
serum (FBS) were used to simulate iron depletion conditions. Cell
proliferation assays and flow cytometric analyses were performed 48 hours
after adjustment of the iron concentration level. In in vivo studies, an
iron depleted diet was used to simulate iron depleted conditions. Nude
mice were divided into normal diet and iron depleted diet groups. The
mice were fed with these diets for three weeks and then a suspension of
miPS-LLCcm cells was injected into the backs of the nude mice. Tumor size
was measured and the tumors were immunohistologically examined.Results:
In the in vitro studies, transferrin strongly promoted the proliferation
of cancer stem cells under iron depletion conditions compared to no
transferrin(p<0.001). However, transferrin did not promote the
proliferation of the differentiated 4T1 and colon26 cancer cells. The
number of GFP-expressing cancer stem cells decreased as the iron
concentration was decreased. In the vivo studies, iron depletion
significantly suppressed the tumor growth of the cancer stem cells
(p<0.05). Immunohistological analysis indicated that Nanog expression was
also decreased in the tumors of the iron depletion diet
group.Conclusions: Iron is a key element for the proliferation and
differentiation of cancer stem cells. Iron controlling therapy including
iron chelators is a novel therapeutic target of cancer stem cells.

