Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HnRNP Q1 contributes to tumorigenesis through the translational
regulation of Aurora-A in colorectal cancer


HnRNP Q1 is a RNA-binding protein which belongs to hnRNP Q family and
involves in pre-mRNA splicing, mRNA transport, translation and turnover.
Data from Oncomine, which is a cancer microarray database, indicates that
hnRNP Q1 is overexpressed in colorectal cancer. According the
literatures, hnRNP Q1 can increase the translational efficiency through
binding to the 5-untranslated region (5-UTR) of target genes. From RNA-IP
assay following the next generation sequencing (NGS), we found that hnRNP
Q1 regulates a group of cell cycle-related genes. Among them, Aurora-A is
one of the targets of hnRNP Q1. Aurora-A is a cell-cycle dependent kinase
involved in regulating centrosome duplication, maturation, and spindle
assembly during mitosis. Abnormally elevated Aurora-A will cause mitotic
defect and aneuploidy, which might lead to genomic instability and
tumorigenesis. In addition, overexpression of hnRNP Q1 is positively
correlated with overexpressed Aurora-A in clinical colorectal cancer
tissues. Our previous report demonstrated that Aurora-A can be
translational up-regulated in colorectal cancer. In this study, we
demonstrated that hnRNP Q1 can bind to Aurora-A 5-UTRs and also mapped
the interacting domain between Aurora-A 5UTR and hnRNP Q1 has been mapped
by Biacore analysis, RNA-IP and biotin pull-down assay. Overexpressed
hnRNP Q1 enhances the Aurora-A protein expression but doesn't alter its
mRNA level. In contrast, repressed expression of hnRNP Q1 decreases the
translation of Aurora-A. Importantly, we found that Aurora-A 5UTR has
IRES-dependent translational activity in a cell cycle regulated manner.
Overexpression of hnRNP Q1 can up-regulate the IRES-dependent translation
of Aurora-A during cell cycle progression, and promotes the cells
proliferation. Taken together, our data indicate hnRNP Q1 is a novel
trans-acting factor that binds on the Aurora-A 5-UTRs and regulates it's
translation, which may increase the cell proliferation and contribute to
the tumorigenesis of colorectal cancer.

