Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamic analysis of eribulin mesylate
and paclitaxel in mouse


Neuropathy arising from chemotherapy (CIPN) is a major clinical problem
representing the dose-limiting side effect of many antineoplastic drugs.
At their respective MTDs, we previously reported paclitaxel and
ixabepilone produced more severe deficits in nerve conduction velocity,
amplitude and degenerative changes in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and
sciatic nerve (SN) versus eribulin mesylate (Wozniak et al 2011). Similar
trends for eribulin to cause less neuropathy have also been reported in
the clinic (Cigler and Vadhat 2010, Jain and Cigler 2012, Vadhat et al
2013). The underlying reason for this differential effect remains
elusive. Differences in tubulin binding may, in part, explain the
differential effect (Perez et al 2009, Jordan et al 2005). Another
potential explanation could reside in different pharmacokinetic (PK) and
nervous tissue distribution of these agents. Toward this latter point, we
conducted tissue distribution and pharmacokinetic studies following acute
dosing of eribulin mesylate, paclitaxel and ixabepilone. We reported that
while all three drugs rapidly cleared from plasma, they distributed into
and cleared slowly (>3 days) from peripheral nervous system tissues
(Wozniak et al 2014). We have now extended these studies to look out to
42 days following both acute and 2 week MTD-dosing paradigms evaluating
drug pharmacokinetics in plasma, DRG and SN as well as pharmacodynamic
measurements of nerve conduction and amplitude. We found plasma levels of
eribulin mesylate and paclitaxel rapidly declined over 24h after
infusion. In contrast, the levels of eribulin mesylate and paclitaxel
persisted at above quantification levels (ranging from 5-10 ng/g) for 7
to 14 days post cessation of 2 week MTD dosing. Eribulin mesylate
consistently showed greater distribution into DRG and SN over paclitaxel.
When comparing the induced nerve conduction deficits, we found paclitaxel
and eribulin mesylate caused reduction of nerve conduction parameters
similar to our previous studies, most notably in caudal nerve amplitude
(by 80.5% and 54.9% respectively). However these deficits, which were
sustained for up to several weeks after cessation of dosing, were more
severe with paclitaxel. The findings demonstrate that despite eribulin
mesylate showing higher nervous tissue distribution than paclitaxel,
eribulin mesylate caused less neurotoxicity as evidenced by milder
reductions in nerve conduction and amplitude.This work was financially
supported by Eisai.

