Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Parallel microfiltration (PMF): A novel method to screen cell
mechanotype


The mechanical phenotype of cells (mechanotype) is emerging as a valuable
label-free biomarker. Cells are visco-elastic materials whose mechanotype
is altered in diseases from malaria to cancer. For example, marked
changes in the viscoelastic characteristics of cells occur during
malignant transformation and in response to chemotherapy treatment.
Malignant cells across different types of cancers are consistently softer
than benign cells, exhibiting a Young's modulus that is 60-70% lower both
in vitro and in situ. Cell mechanotype also grades metastatic potential:
highly invasive human ovarian carcinoma cells are five-fold more
deformable (softer) than less invasive cells. Further, chemotherapeutic
drugs can alter mechanotype: human leukemia cells exhibit a nearly two
orders of magnitude increase in cell elastic modulus after being treated
with dexamethasone and daunorubicin. These published studies suggest the
potential of cell mechanotype as a biomarker in cancer prognosis and for
identifying effective drug treatments. However, in order to exploit cell
mechanical properties for fundamental research and clinical applications
a simple and scalable method to measure cell mechanotype is required.Here
we describe a parallel microfiltration (PMF) assay, which enables the
mechanotype of multiple samples to be simultaneously measured by driving
cell suspensions through porous membranes using uniform air pressure. The
relative deformability of a cell sample is quantified by the fraction of
sample retained above the porous membrane. Based on experimental results
and theoretical considerations, we have developed a model that provides a
physical explanation of PMF and allows us to relate our experimental data
to cell deformability.We employed PMF to study changes in mechanotype in
ovarian carcinoma cells. We show that epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), a process associated with cancer progression and drug
resistance, yields softer cells: OVCA433 cells engineered to overexpress
key EMT inducers (Snail, Slug, or Zeb) had much lower retention rates
than their epithelial precursors. Similarly, cisplatin-resistant ovarian
cancer cell lines (OVCAR5-cisR, SKOV3-cisR) exhibiting features of EMT,
such as loss of E-cadherin expression and induction of vimentin, were
more deformable than cisplatin-sensitive controls. We also compared
normal p53-/- murine ovarian surface epithelial (MOSE) cells with
HRasV12-transformed MOSE cells, which lose E-cadherin. PMF confirmed
dramatically lower retention rates for the transformed cells relative to
normal precursors. We conclude that EMT results in increased cell
deformability and that PMF is a robust tool to identify changes in
deformability.In summary, we have developed a novel method to assess cell
mechanotype that is compatible with high-throughput screening approaches
and can complement and enhance existing technology for evaluating cancer
cell phenotype and response to drugs.

