Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of CD137 signaling in immune evasion of Hodgkin and
Reed-Sternberg cells


Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), a lymphoid malignancy, is a frequently occurring
cancer among adolescents and young adults. HL is marked by the presence
of malignant Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells, which constitute
only a small fraction of the tumor mass. HRS cells are present in a
complex stroma of inflammatory leukocytes, but are often able to evade
the host immune system. These cells express various receptors to recruit
leukocytes and hijack them for supporting the tumor growth. Our group has
reported the overexpression of CD137, a member of the tumor necrosis
factor receptor (TNFR) superfamily, on the HRS cells of HL tumor samples.
CD137 is a co-stimulatory molecule expressed by T cells, only upon
activation. We speculated that the expression of CD137 on the HRS cells
may be associated with its malignancy, as HRS cells are clonally derived
from B cells which are not expressing CD137. Our study aims to analyse
the functional role of CD137 expression behind the survival, progression,
and cytokine release of the malignant HRS cells. We found that the
induction of CD137 signaling in HRS cell lines enhanced the secretion of
cytokines such as IL-6, TNF- and IL-13. In order to investigate the
effect of these cytokines on the immune microenvironment, we cultured
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in the supernatants derived
from CD137-induced HRS cells. PBMCs, when cultured in the above mentioned
conditioned supernatants, secreted lesser levels of IFN- (a Th1 cytokine
essential for T cell and NK cell cytotoxicity), implying a suppressed
state of immune cells. Further, neutralisation of IL-13 (a Th2 cytokine)
in the conditioned supernatants reversed the reduction of IFN- observed
in PBMCs. This shows that IL-13 secreted by the HRS cells upon CD137
signaling is responsible for the inhibition of IFN- secretion by PBMCs.
To summarize, CD137 signaling in HRS cells leads to the secretion of
cytokines, which drive the polarization of helper T cells towards Th2
type, thus reducing Th1 immune responses against cancers. Taken together,
our findings reveal the role of CD137 signaling as a novel mechanism of
immune escape in HRS cells. Hence, targeting CD137 can be a potential
therapeutic option for HL patients.

