Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGF1R signaling connects DNp73-mediated EMT with the acquisition
of cancer stem cell properties


Metastatic spread is the major cause of cancer-associated mortality and
induced in primary tumor cells by the acquisition of mesenchymal
features. Emerging evidence suggests that metastasis-initiating cancer
cells undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) possess stem
cell-like traits. In this study, we demonstrate that oncogenic DNp73, an
inhibitor of p53 tumor suppressor family members, has a fundamental role
in driving both, transition into a mesenchymal state and providing cancer
cells with stem cell-like properties through constitutive activation of
IGF1R signaling. In patient melanoma tissues, DNp73 expression correlates
with increased Breslow depth and is enriched in skin cancer metastases.
Knockdown of endogenous DNp73 in highly metastatic cell lines abolishes
the aggressive phenotype, whereas tumor xenografts overexpressing DNp73
possess significantly greater capacity to invade the surrounding tissue
and form metastatic lesions. Transition from an epithelial to a motile
mesenchymal phenotype is accompanied by a drastic reorganization of the
cytoskeleton and modulation of cell-cell adhesion molecules. Importantly,
regulation of EMT by DNp73 is induced through activation of IGF1R-AKT
signaling followed by an increase of Slug and loss of E-cadherin.
Additionally, we identified a novel interplay between DNp73 and IGF1R in
the development of cancer stemness. Tumor spheres derived from metastatic
melanoma cells with endogenously high DNp73 display a strong capacity for
self-renewal and tumor growth after subcutaneous injection in mice
compared to DNp73-depleted cancer stem cells. Our results clearly
demonstrate that DNp73-driven stemness involves IGF1R activation.
Selective inhibition of IGF1R blocks DNp73-mediated upregulation of
Nanog, Oct4 and CD133, which is accompanied by a decrease in spheroid
formation and tumor invasiveness. Taken together, our findings show for
the first time that DNp73 is crucial to endow cancer cells with
mesenchymal properties and the ability to self-renew, which is
responsible for malignant progression and tumor dissemination. Moreover,
we establish IGF1R as driving force for a DNp73-induced aggressive cancer
phenotype, highlighting the DNp73-IGF1R cascade as promising therapeutic
target to selectively prevent metastasis initiation.

