Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S-nitrosylation of Bcl-2 negatively affects autophagy in
malignantly transformed lung epithelial cells


PurposeThe purpose of this study is to identify the key autophagic
biomarkers involved in Cr(VI)-induced malignant transformation of
non-tumorigenic Beas-2B cells and to investigate the underlying
mechanisms.Experimental MethodsThe non-tumorigenic (Beas-2B) and
malignantly transformed (B-Cr) lung epithelial cell lines were used in
all experiments. Cells were exposed to hexavalent chromium (Cr (VI))
doses of 20 and 50M for 6h time points. Separate experiments were
conducted using inhibitors for the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2
(ABT-737), nitric oxide (AG (Aminoguanidine)), and p38 (SB203580) for 1hr
before Cr treatment as detailed above. Cells were transfected with
myc-tagged wild-type (WT) Bcl-2 (WT Bcl-2), double-mutant (C158A/C229A)
Bcl-2 (DM Bcl-2), or control (pcDNA3) plasmid DNA (5 g) using
Lipofectamine 2000 transfecting agent. S-nitrosylation of Bcl-2 was
measured using the S-Nitrosylation Western Blot kit. For autophagy and
apoptosis analysis, cell vacuoles and nuclei were stained using the
Cyto-ID dye kit and Hoechst dye respectively, and scored by fluorescence
microscopy.ResultsHere we show that Cr(VI)-induced carcinogenesis
triggers autophagy in non-tumorigenic human lung epithelial cells, while
malignantly-transformed lung cells are resistant to autophagy. We
previously reported that chronic exposure of human lung epithelial cells
to the carcinogenic hexavalent chromium Cr(VI) caused malignant
transformation and Bcl-2 upregulation. In this study we report that
nitric oxide (NO), a potent cellular messenger, has a negative effect on
autophagy initiation by nitrosylating and stabilizing the Bcl-2 protein,
thereby preserving the anti-autophagic Bcl-2-Beclin-1 interaction. We
demonstrate that p38 MAPK is also critical in the autophagic response
along with LC3 and Beclin-1. Further results also link apoptosis,
analyzed by cell staining and measuring caspase-9 protein levels, with
the autophagic proteins, suggesting a possible autophagy-apoptosis
pathway crosstalk. The effect of Bcl-2 nitrosylation on autophagy was
corroborated using a Bcl-2 inhibitor (ABT-737) and by transfecting cells
with non-nitrosylable Bcl-2 double mutant (DM) plasmid, in which the two
cysteine residues (Cys158 and Cys229) critical for nitrosylation are
mutated. Both ABT-737 and transfection with Bcl-2 DM plasmid resulted in
decreased S-nitro-cysteine expression and increased autophagy in lung
cells.ConclusionsWe report a novel mechanism involving nitric oxide
(NO)-mediated post-translational modification of Bcl-2 protein as being
responsible for this resistance to autophagy induction. This Bcl-2
S-nitrosylation was observed to affect the Bcl-2-Beclin-1 interaction
which is key for autophagy initiation. This novel regulation of autophagy
may be important in cancer development and progression, as well as in
carcinogenesis and its prevention.

