Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of orthotopic mouse models for
human uveal melanoma hepatic metastases


Uveal melanoma (UM) is a rare type of melanoma although it is the most
common primary ocular malignant tumor in adults. Nearly half of patients
with primary UM subsequently develop systemic metastasis, preferentially
to the liver. Currently, there is no effective treatment for UM hepatic
metastasis and the prognosis is universally poor. The major challenge in
designing a treatment strategy for UM hepatic metastasis is the lack of
suitable animal models. We have developed two orthotopic mouse models for
human UM hepatic metastases: (1) Direct hepatic implantation model
(intra-hepatic dissemination model), and (2) Splenic-implantation model
(hematogenous dissemination model) and investigated the tumor genesis in
the liver. A human UM cell line, established from a hepatic metastasis
and NSG mice were used for development of in vivo tumor models.In direct
hepatic implantation model, a localized tumor developed in the liver in
all cases and intrahepatic dissemination was subsequently seen in about
half of cases. On the other hand, in splenic implantation model, multiple
hepatic metastases were observed after splenic implantation. Hepatic
tumors subsequently developed intra-abdominal metastasis; however, lung
metastases were not seen. These findings are consistent with those
observed in human UM hepatic metastases. In addition, there are broad
extracellular matrix connecting the blood vessels lined with endothelium
in the hepatic tumors. These structures are assumed to be so called
vasculogenic mimicry (VM) formed by the the tumor cells themselves.
Notably, we found tumor cells in the liver begin to form VM, despite a
small number of them and eventually develop a broad network of VM in the
tumor. Thus, VM might contribute to the microcirculation in the tumor
preceding development of vessels lined with endothelium. Moreover, we
have generated orange-red fluorescence protein (td-Tomato fluorescent
protein) expressing cell line using the same UM cell line and developed
the same mouse models. This allowed us to monitor the growth of hepatic
metastasis over time by in vivo live-imaging system.These orthotopic
mouse models offer useful tools to investigate the biological behavior of
human UM cells in the liver.

