Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual-color immunohistochemistry assays for measuring Aiolos and
Ikaros proteins in multiple myeloma patient samples


IMiDs immunomodulatory drugs Lenalidomide (LEN) and Pomalidomide (POM)
are antineoplastic agents that have a significant clinical impact in the
treatment of patients with multiple myeloma (MM). Recent studies indicate
that the anti-proliferative activity of LEN and POM in MM cells is
associated with ubiquitination and degradation of the Ikaros family zinc
finger protein transcription factors, Aiolos (IKZF3) and Ikaros (IKZF1),
the substrates of the Cereblon (CRBN)-dependent Cullin 4 E3-ligase
complex. Measurement of Aiolos and Ikaros protein levels in MM patient
samples is critical for future correlative studies. Here we describe the
development and validation of dual IHC Aiolos/CD138 and Ikaros/CD138
assays using the highly specific Aiolos rabbit monoclonal antibody
CGN-9-9-7, and a commercial Ikaros rabbit polyclonal antibody H-100 in
combination with a commercial CD138 antibody. Aiolos and Ikaros
immunoreactivity in CD138+ MM cells is scored using the semi-quantitative
H-score method. H-scores range from 0 to 300 and are the sum of the
products of the percentage of tumor cells (0-100%) and the intensity of
staining (0-3). The assays were specific and detected high Aiolos and
Ikaros expression in the positive control OCI-Ly10 lymphoma cell line,
and low Aiolos and Ikaros levels in POM treated OCI-Ly10 cells. These
results were confirmed via Western Blot analysis of Aiolos and Ikaros
expression data in these cells lines. Assay precision was examined via
staining serial sections of the same MM tumor across three different days
and deemed acceptable. The dual IHC assays were used to evaluate bone
marrow core biopsies or aspirate clots from 22 MM patients and H-scores
were determined by a board-certified pathologist. The dual IHC assays
detected a wide range of Aiolos or Ikaros immunoreactivity in the 22 MM
cases, with nuclear H-scores ranging from 10 to 260 for Aiolos and 40 to
240 for Ikaros. In conclusion, the dual Aiolos/CD138 and Ikaros/CD138 IHC
assays were developed to provide a specific and reliable
semi-quantitative method to evaluate Aiolos and Ikaros protein levels in
both bone marrow core biopsies and clots from MM patients. These assays
are currently being used in clinical trials to assess the importance of
Aiolos and Ikaros as biomarkers in MM patients treated with IMiDs
immunomodulatory drugs.

