Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proportion of breast cancer stem cells in fine needle aspirates
co-relates with the marker of metastatic outcome TMEM


Cell surface biomarkers CD44, CD24 and CD133 and intracellular marker
ALDH1 have recently been used to identify breast cancer stem cells. A
very small number of these cancer stem cells can initiate a tumor growth
and cause it to metastasize. The micro-anatomical sites of hematogenous
dissemination of breast cancer cells called Tumor MicroEnvironment of
Metastasis (TMEM) have been described in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
invasive ductal carcinomas from patients. These sites are defined as the
direct apposition of tumor cells and perivascular macrophages and are
visualized using triple immunohistochemistry for CD68, CD31 and Mena to
identify the macrophages, endothelial cells and invasive tumor cells
respectively. The identification of TMEM sites is clinically important
because TMEM density is a predictor of metastatic outcome. Migratory
subpopulation of tumor cells has been shown to be enriched for cancer
stem cells.We have performed flow cytometry to identify CD44high/CD24low
cells, mRNA fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and qRT-PCR to
identify CD133 and ALDH1 expression in breast cancer cells in 50 samples
of invasive ductal carcinoma obtained from patients cancer excisions by
fine needle aspiration (FNA) before formalin fixation. FNA is a minimally
invasive method that uses 26 gauge needles to collect discohesive cancer
cells primarily by capillary action. The stem cell marker expression was
then compared to TMEM scores obtained from the very same cancer excisions
after formalin fixation and paraffin embedding.Our results show very
strong correlation between the percentage of CD44high/CD24low cells with
TMEM scores (r = 0.91), as well as the percentage of CD133 and ALDH1
expressing cells with TMEM scores (r = 0.88 and 0.86 respectively). We
validated the results obtained by FISH with the direct qRT-PCR for CD133
and ALDH1 in the FNA samples. The correlation of CD133 and ALDH1
expression obtained by qRT-PCR with TMEM score was again very strong (r =
0.76 and 0.73 respectively).Our findings here and those previously
reported for migratory tumor cells demonstrate that TMEM rich
microenvironments are enriched for cancer stem cells and partially
explain positive correlation of TMEM scores with metastasis in patients.
They also suggest that the assessment of stem cell proportion in breast
cancers can be assessed in FNA samples. The clinical value of stem cell
assessment using this approach for prognostic and predictive is under
investigation.

