Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An EWS-FLI1/MRTF gene regulatory network in Ewing sarcoma


The pediatric bone cancer Ewing sarcoma (ES) is characterized by the
expression of the chimeric transcription factor EWS-FLI1, derived from a
chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12). The early onset of
metastasis in ES leads to poor overall survival and limited treatment
options. Remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton is a prerequisite of a
tumor cell in order to become metastatic. Previous studies suggest that
EWS-FLI1 alters cell morphology and deregulates various cytoskeletal
genes. The major point of convergence of extracellular signals
influencing cytoskeletal regulation is the Rho pathway. Activation of Rho
GTPases promotes polymerization of monomeric G-actin into stress fibers
(F-actin) thereby releasing the myocardin-related transcription factor
family (MRTF-A, MRTF-B) of transcriptional coactivators. MRTFs
translocate to the nucleus and interact with the transcription factor
serum response factor (SRF) bound on CArG promoter elements of genes.
However, the ternary complex factor (TCF) family, a class of
transcriptional coactivators activated downstream of Ras signaling,
competes with MRTFs for SRF binding in presence of ets binding sites
adjacent to the CArG consensus sequence. The ets-transcription factor
EWS-FLI1 has been shown to substitute for TCFs and interact with SRF. We
hypothesized that EWS-FLI1 competes with MRTFs for SRF binding and
uncouples target gene expression from Rho signaling. In combinatorial
knockdown experiments of MRTFA/B and EWS-FLI1 we demonstrate that global
changes in gene expression elicited by EWS-FLI1 silencing largely depend
on the presence of MRTFs, suggesting that the fusion oncogene prohibits
MRTF activity. Using gene expression analysis we identified six different
patterns of MRTF/EWS-FLI1 interaction, with predominance of EWS-FLI1
inversely regulating MRTF target genes. Furthermore, we found MRTF
transcriptional effects are already present in the absence of serum in
A673 ES cells. MRTFB, however, is cytoplasmic under serum starved
conditions and translocates to the nucleus only upon serum stimulation
unless latrunculin B (LatB), an actin polymerization inhibitor, is added.
In contrast, MRTFA is constitutively nuclear even under serum starved
conditions or upon LatB treatment indicating that MRTFA might be
uncoupled from actin regulation. These findings reveal a previously
unknown role of MRTFs and the CArGome in EWS-FLI1 driven transcriptional
dysregulation. Supported by the Liddy Shriver Sarcoma Initiative.

