Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of the MEK inhibitor Binimetinib (MEK162) in combination
with paclitaxel in patient-derived xenograft models of high-grade serous
ovarian carcinoma


High-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC) has the poorest prognosis
amongst all gynecological cancers with a median survival of approximately
5 years. While most patients (pts) initially respond to therapy, few
achieve long-term remission or cure; thus, new treatment strategies are
needed. Paclitaxel (Pac), an agent commonly used in the treatment of
HGSOC, induces the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway and resistance may be
partially mediated through activation of MEK/ERK, suggesting a rationale
for combining a MEK inhibitor with Pac. Binimetinib (MEK162) is an oral,
potent, selective, allosteric small-molecule MEK1/2 inhibitor. The
combination of binimetinib and Pac was studied in a panel of in vivo
ovarian carcinoma xenograft models derived from either cell lines (A2780,
SK-OV-3) or primary patient tumor resections pathologically confirmed to
be HGSOC (OVC38B1, OVC604, OVC629, OVC104) and propagated solely in mice
(pt-derived xenograft [PDX]). Three of these PDX models were from newly
diagnosed pts, while 1 (OVC38B1) was from a pt who had relapsed following
a prior response to a platinum/taxane regimen. All models were sequenced
for cancer-specific genes by next-generation sequencing; no mutations
were found in Ras, Raf, MEK or ERK. To evaluate single-agent and
combination activity, tumor-bearing mice received 25 mg/kg Pac IP (days
1,5,9) and/or 30 mg/kg binimetinib PO (days 2-15). Single-agent
binimetinib was modestly effective in 3/6 models (tumor growth inhibition
[TGI] 50%), which is consistent with the lack of MAPK pathway mutations
in these models. Single-agent Pac was highly effective in 3/6 models (TGI
90%) including OVC38B1 and 2 PDX models from newly diagnosed pts; the
remaining models were taxane-resistant. This is consistent with expected
high rates of response in the setting of newly diagnosed pts and/or prior
responders. Binimetinib plus Pac had superior efficacy to either agent
alone in 4/6 models including all taxane-resistant models. In 2 PDX
models from newly diagnosed pts, combination activity was not improved,
but Pac was highly effective as a single agent (72-82% regression)
leaving little room for enhancement. Encouragingly, the combination
induced tumor regressions in 2 taxane-resistant models in which no
single-agent regressions were observed. In conclusion, in vivo drug
sensitivity studies with binimetinib and Pac recapitulate the response
expected in HGSOC based on stage, genetic background and clinical
history. In models of taxane-resistant disease, combination with
binimetinib had improved activity over taxane alone warranting further
study of this approach in HGSOC.

