Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen-mediated genomic and non-genomic regulation of TRPM8 in
prostate cancer


Transient receptor potential melastatin 8 (TRPM8) is a cold-sensing and
Ca2+ permeable channel protein. The TRPM8 mRNA is overexpressed in early
prostate tumors with high androgen levels, while anti-androgen therapy
greatly reduces its expression. Thus, androgens, which are at the
crossroads of several signaling pathways, appear to be associated with
TRPM8-mediated Ca2+ -dependent signaling. Genomic regulation; From the
chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis, we observed that an
androgen response element (ARE) mediates androgen regulation of trpm8.
Although TRPM8 mRNA is expressed at high levels in prostate cancer (PC)
cells, we found that the TRPM8 protein undergoes UBA1-mediated
ubiquitination and degradation. PYR-41, a potent inhibitor of initial
enzyme in the ubiquitination cascade, UBA1 increased TRPM8 activity on
the plasma membrane of LNCaP cells. Further, PYR-41-mediated PMTRPM8
activity was accompanied by enhanced activation of p53 and Caspase-9. In
addition, we found that the promoter region of trpm8 possesses putative
binding sites for p53 and that the overexpression of p53 increased the
TRPM8 mRNA levels. Our findings support previous studies that suggest the
fine balance between androgen receptor (AR) and p53 expression that
regulates androgen-dependent growth of PC. Non-genomic regulation;
Furthermore, using immunofluorescence, calcium-imaging and planar lipid
bilayers, we identified that TRPM8 channel is functionally associated
with androgens in the prostate. Most importantly, we report that
testosterone can directly activate TRPM8 channel at low picomolar
concentrations and resulted in full openings of the purified TRPM8
channel in planar lipid bilayers. Our data demonstrated that testosterone
is an endogenous and highly potent agonist of TRPM8 channel. In light of
these observations our data of non-genomic effect of testosterone on
PMTRPM8 may support a strategy for targeting the androgen-TRPM8-AR
interaction or rescuing PMTRPM8 expression as a new therapeutic
application for PC.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

