Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of NADPH oxidase 5 (Nox5) modulates cellular
morphology, proliferation and invasiveness of human melanoma UACC-257
cells


NADPH oxidase 5 (Nox5), one of the seven members of the NADPH oxidase
gene family that generate reactive oxygen species (ROS), has been
implicated in physiological and pathophysiological processes. Recently,
we have reported substantial overexpression of Nox5 in several human
cancers including those of prostate, ovary and melanomas; expression in
most non-malignant tissues was weak to modest. Despite being upregulated
in many human cancers and implicated in promoting cell proliferation, the
molecular mechanisms regulated by Nox5 are poorly understood. In this
study, the functional significance of Nox5 was assessed in human UACC-257
melanoma cells by generating stable Nox5-overexpressing clones and
knockdown clones. Overexpression of Nox5 in UACC-257 cells resulted in
enhanced cell growth, increased BrdU positive cells and decreased
phosphatase activity. Additionally, these cells had increased normoxic
Hif-1 expression and decreased p27Kip1 expression. Conversely, knockdown
of endogenous Nox5 in UACC-257 cells resulted in decreased cell growth,
decreased BrdU positive cells, decreased Hif-1 expression and increased
p27Kip1 expression. Cadherin switch, loss of E-cadherin expression and
upregulation of N-cadherin was observed in Nox5 overexpressing cells
indicative of an invasive phenotype; conversely, an upregulation of
E-cadherin expression in Nox5 knockdown cells was noted. Cell invasion
assay through matrigel-coated membranes also demonstrated enhanced
invasion by Nox5 overexpressing cells. Additionally, 3D cultures of Nox5
overexpressing cells exhibit an amoeboid morphology compared to that of
the Nox5 knockdown cells that were mesenchymal, suggestive of an amoeboid
- mesenchymal (AMT) transition. Strikingly, cells that overexpress Nox5
were able to proliferate in serum-free conditions for over a month. In
summary, our findings suggest that Nox5 expression in human melanoma
UACC-257 cells could contribute to cell proliferation, invasion, amoeboid
morphology, and the ability to grow in the absence of serum or growth
factors in part due to the generation of high local concentrations of
extracellular ROS that modulate multiple signaling networks that regulate
Hif-1, p27Kip1, and the cadherin switch.

