Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the redox-protective protein MTH1 for cancer therapy: A
novel way to exploit the unique redox status of cancer cells


Cancer cells are characterized by an increase in the rate of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) production and an altered redox environment compared
to normal cells. The role of ROS in tumorigenesis is two-fold. On the one
hand, ROS play a causal role in tumor development and progression by
inducing genomic instability and aberrant, pro-tumorigenic signalling. On
the other hand, high levels of ROS can also be toxic to cancer cells,
oxidizing and damaging both DNA and free nucleotides (dNTPs), which can
lead to cell death. MutT Homolog 1 (MTH1) is a redox-protective
phosphatase that converts ROS-oxidized nucleotides (8-oxo-dGTP) into
their corresponding monophosphates, thus preventing their incorporation
into genomic DNA and the resultant DNA damage and cell death. Recent
studies have shown that MTH1 is up-regulated in various cancers and its
activity is required for cancer cell survival and proliferation. Genetic
knockdown of MTH1 and MTH1 small molecule inhibition led to DNA damage
and cancer-specific cell death in vitro and in vivo, while having little
effect on normal cells with a lower rate of ROS production. Hence, the
unique redox status of cancer cells makes them reliant on
redox-protective proteins like MTH1, which opens a novel therapeutic
window to selectively induce cancer cell death via oxidative stress,
while sparing normal cells.In order to validate MTH1 as a potential
cancer therapeutic target, a wide range of cancer cells (lung, bone,
colon, skin, and breast) were treated with a selective MTH1 inhibitor
(TH588) or MTH1 shRNAs, and analysed for proliferation, cell survival,
ROS levels and DNA damage. We found that MTH1 inhibition impaired cancer
cell proliferation as well as anchorage-independent growth. Furthermore,
TH588 induced cancer cell damage, as assessed by DNA damage markers and
cancer cell death. Various normal, non-transformed cells (normal
bronchial epithelial cells, normal lung fibroblasts and normal human
epidermal melanocytes) were not affected by MTH1 inhibition.
Antioxidants, which eliminate ROS, reversed the effects on cancer cells,
indicating that ROS is the driver of cancer cell death and growth
impairment upon MTH1 inhibition. Consequently, combination approaches
using the MTH1 inhibitor together with pro-oxidants, further increased
cancer cell susceptibility to oxidative stress. Based on our data, a MTH1
inhibitor may have clinical potential as a single agent or in combination
with ROS inducers for the treatment of patients with various forms of
cancer.

