Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel FRET assay for the intracellular activation of ADC linkers


Evaluating the intracellular activation of ADC by a novel FRET
assay.Despite the recent success of ADCs as cancer therapeutics, their
mechanisms of action are not fully understood. In this study, we
developed ADCs using a novel fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) linker in order to facilitate monitoring the details of
intracellular uptake, vesicular trafficking and payload release. In the
FRET linker, the cathepsin-cleavable dipeptide of val-cit was inserted
between a fluorescence donor Alexa Fluor 488 (or later, fluorescein) and
an acceptor tetramethylrhodamine (TAMRA). Upon cleavage of the val-cit
linker, a fluorescence signal from Alexa Fluor 488 or fluorescein is
expected to appear as a probe for monitoring intracellular activation of
ADC.We used two in-vitro human cancer cell lines, SKBR3 and PC3. SKBR3 is
a Her2-positive breast cancer cell line and PC3 is a prostate cancer cell
line that has been engineered to express a prostate cancer-specific
growth factor receptor, tomoregulin-2 (TenB2). We assessed the
intracellular processing of the FRET conjugates using flow cytometry. We
found that 74% and 41% of the linker was cleaved in PC3 and SKBR3 cells
after 20 hours of treatment, respectively.In the live-celling imaging of
the FRET probe in SKBR3 and PC3 cells, Anti-Her2 and TenB2 FRET ADCs
showed a remarkable difference of internalization pathways and cleavage
following receptor-mediated endocytosis. In PC3 cells, FRET ADCs were
internalized and congregated into a certain localized area during the
early stage of uptake in 2 to 3 hours. The ADC-containing vesicles were
spread over the cytosol and near the plasma membrane in a subset of
cells. A similar directed localization at the early stage of uptake was
not observed for the SKBR3 cells. The endosomal vesicles in SKBR3s were
spread over the cytosol during the course of ADC internalization. The
amount of the release payload in the cytosol of SKBR3s was 3-fold greater
than that of PC3 cells, suggesting that the endosomal/lysosomal membrane
of SKBR3 may be more permeable than that of PC3.In summary, our ADC FRET
probes allowed for the facile, robust and non-invasive evaluation of
intracellular processing for ADC linkers. Quantitative measurements for
the rate of antigen-mediated intracellular cleavage of the FRET linker as
well as cytosolic release could be evaluated by our FRET probes.

