Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of pantoprazole to enhance activity of docetaxel against
human tumor xenografts by inhibiting autophagy


Background: Autophagy allows recycling of cellular components and may
facilitate cell survival after chemotherapy. Pantoprazole inhibits proton
pumps, including that maintaining low pH in endosomes, and is reported to
inhibit autophagy (1). Here we evaluate effects of pantoprazole to modify
cytotoxicity of the anticancer drug docetaxel, and underlying
mechanisms.Methods: Effects of docetaxel+/-pantoprazole were studied
against wild-type and autophagy-deficient cultured PC3 cells derived by
shRNA, and against four human xenografts. Effects of pantoprazole on
autophagy in cultured cells were evaluated by quantifying LC3-I, LC3-II
and p62 proteins in Western blots, and by fluorescent microscopy of cells
transfected with the tandem sensor RFP-GFP-LC3. Since autophagy is known
to be up-regulated in poorly-nourished tumor regions (2), the
distribution of drug effects and of autophagy was quantified in tumor
sections in relation to blood vessels and hypoxia by immunohistochemistry
(IHC) using H2AX, a marker of DNA damage, cleaved caspase-3, a marker of
apoptosis, Ki67, a marker of proliferation and LC3 and p62 to quantify
autophagy.Results: Pantoprazole increased toxicity of docetaxel for
cultured cells, increased docetaxel-induced expression of H2AX and
cleaved caspase-3 and decreased Ki67 in tumor sections. Pantoprazole
increased growth-delay of four human xenografts of low, moderate and high
sensitivity to docetaxel, with minimal increase in toxicity. Docetaxel
led to increased autophagy throughout tumor sections. Pantoprazole
inhibited autophagy, and effects of pantoprazole were reduced against
genetically-modified cells with decreased ability to undergo
autophagy.Conclusions: Autophagy is a mechanism of resistance to
docetaxel chemotherapy that may be modified by pantoprazole to improve
therapeutic index. High-dose pantoprazole increases the therapeutic
effectiveness of docetaxel in vitro and in vivo, and its main mechanism
of action is via inhibition of autophagy. With this rationale, we are
undertaking a phase II study of pantoprazole + docetaxel in men with
castrate-resistant prostate cancer.References:1. Udelnow A, Kreyes A,
Ellinger S, Landfester K, Walther P, Klapperstueck T, et al. Omeprazole
inhibits proliferation and modulates autophagy in pancreatic cancer
cells. PLoS One;6(5):e20143.2. Yang ZJ, Chee CE, Huang S, Sinicrope FA.
The role of autophagy in cancer: therapeutic implications. Mol Cancer
Ther;10(9):1533-41.

