Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of cancer stem cell properties and identification
of invasion as well as metastatic process in head and neck cancer


Cancer stem cells (CSC) are thought to be a sub-population of cancer
cells, which are the main tumorigenic cells in the tumors. Although
chemoradiotherapy may kill the majority of rapidly dividing cells,
CSC-like cell populations may be left behind due to their low turnover
and infrequent cell cycling. In 2007, Prince et al. reported the presence
of head and neck cancer stem cells for the first time.In the current
study, UTTSCC74A and UTTSCC74B head and neck cancer cell lines as
material derived from the primary tumor and their lymph node metastasis,
respectively, were used. FACS was used for isolation of cancer stem cells
using antibodies against CD44 and ALDH1. However we could not get
specific response from CD44 antigen ie can not isolate cancer stem cell.
However ALDH1 antibody selection gave us isolation of cancer stem cells
from both of UTTSCC74A and B cell lines though much less cancer stem
cells existed in UTTSCC74B cell line. The cells were first cultured in
normal DMEM with 10% FBS under the condition of 5% CO2. Then the cells
were changed into stem cell medium and cultured. Cancer stem cells were
isolated using antibody against ALDH1 and these cells were cultured in
stem cell medium and its characteristics were confirmed through sphere
formation as well as immunofluorescence staining with antibody against
ALDH1 and control antibody against DAPI. Expressions of sox-2, oct-4 and
klf-4 were confirmed. After characterization of cancer stem cell from
head and neck cancer cell line was confirmed, microarray analysis were
performed using Gene Chip PrimeView Human expression Array (U133-HG133/
47,000 transcript). Each group of ALDH1+ (cancer stem) and - cells
isolated from each of UTTSCC74A and UTTSCC74B cell lines were exposed to
microarray analysis. RNA extraction and cDNA construction from each sub
group were prepared for microarray analysis. Comparison of UTTSCC74A
ALDH1+ and - provided increased expression of 2037 and decreased
expression in 2263 genes in various ratios. Similarly comparison of
UTTSCC74B ALDH1+ and - provided increased expression of 6349 and
decreased expression in 5322 genes in various ratios. 26 genes with most
up and down regulation were selected and confirmation was done through
real-time RT-PCR designing custom primers. Similar results were taken as
in microarray analysis. From these 26 genes with confirmation of their
expressions, 5 up regulated and 5 downregulated genes were selected for
further analysis. We currently prepare expression plasmids of these genes
and continue their in vitro functional analysis.Thus, the identification
of the cancer-stem cell related signalling pathways in head and neck
cancer stem cell would provide valuable information for a better
understanding of cancer stem cell properties, molecular mechanisms of
carcinogenesis, invasion and metastasis in this cancer type. By this way,
effective therapeutic options targeting CSCs may be developed.

