Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-L1: the hand brake of immune responses in cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia and cancer


Background: Prospective cohort studies have reported spontaneous
regression rates of high-grade cervical intraepithelial Neoplasia
(CIN2/3) close to 35%, over a period of 4-6 months. These regressions are
presumably immunologically mediated. It is now well recognized that PD-L1
is an immune checkpoint used by neoplastic cells to evade the immune
system, particularly T cells that are specific for tumor antigens. PD-L1
and several other immune checkpoints consist of inhibitory pathways that
tightly regulate the immune system to control the duration and amplitude
of immune responses in peripheral tissues in order to minimize collateral
tissue damage.Design: Immunohistochemistry with anti-TBX21 and anti-PD-L1
antibodies was performed in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue
sections from a tissue microarray consisting of invasive cervical
carcinomas (ICCs) (n = 22), CIN2/3 (n = 4) and benign cervical tissues (n
= 4). Expression of TBX21 and PD-L1 was reviewed and scored by a trained
pathologist blinded to the clinical outcome of each case. Statistical
correlations between these markers score and available demographic and
clinicopathologic data from each case were performed, as well as
disease-free survival curves. Moreover, PD-L1 staining was performed in
three patients with CIN2/3 that received peripheral (IM) therapeutic HPV
vaccination. PD-L1 expression differences in pre and post-vaccination
tissues were compared.Results: Increased expression of TBX21+ T-cells and
PD-L1 was observed from benign to CIN2/3 to ICCs. Association analysis
(fisher exact test) showed a significant correlation between increased
intraepithelial and stromal infiltration of TBX21+ T-cells (score 2,3)
and higher PD-L1 membrane expression (p = 0.04 and p = 0.005,
respectively). No significant associations were found between PD-L1
expression and demographic and clinicopathologic information, likely due
to small number of samples. In our vaccine cohort, we observed a stronger
membrane PD-L1 expression in the epithelium and stroma of the
post-vaccination tissue compared to the pre-vaccination
biopsy.Conclusion: Increased membrane expression of PD-L1 is tightly
correlated with an increased epithelial and stromal infiltration of
TBX21+ T cells in CIN2/3 and ICCs. This correlation was also observed in
our vaccination cohort when compared to our previous published findings
of immune activation after HPV therapeutic vaccination. This association
could represent an immune response control mechanism induced presumably
by interferons released by TBX21+ T cells. We are currently evaluating
the expression of PD-L1 and B7-H4, a recently discovered inhibitory
ligand, in a larger cohort of benign, CIN2/3 and ICCs. Finally, we will
further explore, quantitate and compare the expression changes of these
immune checkpoints in the remaining CIN2/3 cases of our vaccination
cohort (n = 12) in pre and post-vaccination tissues.

