Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MIEN1 drives breast cancer invasion by regulating cytoskeletal
dynamics


Introduction: The emergence of metastases remains the primary cause of
cancer mortality and morbidity. Active migration of tumour cells is a
prerequisite for tumor-cell invasion and metastasis. We identified
Migration and Invasion Enhancer 1(MIEN1) as a novel promoter of cell
migration/invasion.Previously known as C35, C17orf37, RDX12 and MGC14832,
MIEN1 is a novel gene located in the chromosomal region 17q12-21. While
absent or low in normal tissues, MIEN1 is abundantly expressed in
multiple cancers including breast carcinomas. A membrane-bound signaling
adaptor, MIEN1 localizes to the leading edge of migrating cells and
promotes migration and invasion by increasing filopodium formation. While
MIEN1 is shown to promote motility through filopodia formation, little is
known on the mechanisms by which MIEN1 influence the actin cytoskeleton.
Exploring underlying mechanisms, we show that MIEN1 associates with the
actin cytokeleton during motility and directly influence actin
polymerization.Methods: We performed immunofluorescence, migration and
invasion assays using breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB 231 and MCF10CA1a
to investigate the mechanisms by which MIEN1 potentiates cell
motility.Results: Ablation of MIEN1 inhibited cell migration, cell
adhesion and altered the phosphorylation status of motility markers.
Immunofluorescence staining with FITC- conjugated-phalladoin confirmed
that alteration of MIEN1 expression leads to reconfiguration of the actin
cytoskeleton in breast cancer cells. Furthermore we found that MIEN1
associates with cytoskeletal proteins involved in motility
processes.Conclusion: Our results show that MIEN1 is a critical regulator
of cell migration and invasion. The importance of MIEN1 in tumor cell
dissemination is well established; understanding the molecular mechanisms
aiding the processes involved will enable the design of novel and
effective treatments for metastatic tumors.

