Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of co-occurring genetic events on RAS signaling
diversification in NF1-mutant lung adenocarcinoma (LUAC)


IntroductionInactivating somatic mutations in the NF1 tumor suppressor
gene, encoding a prototypical RASGAP, drive the development of 11% of
LUACs. Extensive genetic and biochemical evidence supports a central role
of aberrant RAS signaling in the pathogenesis of NF1-deficient tumors.
However, variable dependence on different RAS effector pathways and
inconsistent responses to MEK and PI3K/MTOR inhibitors have been reported
in experimental models of Nf1-related carcinogenesis. We hypothesized
that significantly co-occurring genetic alterations may underpin
signaling diversification downstream of mutant NF1.MethodsOur dataset
includes 519 LUACs from TCGA and a cohort reported by Imielinski et al.
Assessment of co-occurring genetic events was based on Fisher's exact
test with a statistical cutoff of p0.05 (0.1 for the validation
datasets). Supervised analysis of RNASeq and reverse phase protein array
(RPPA) data and computation of MAPK and PI3K proteomic scores was
conducted for each co-mutated gene as previously described. Signature
enrichment was assessed using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
(GSEA).ResultsWe mapped dominant expression signatures in NF1-mutant LUAC
using GSEA. Signatures relating to poor prognosis, EMT, E2F3-mediated
gene expression and immune engagement were enriched in NF1-mutant tumors.
RPPA confirmed lower expression of E-cadherin (P = 0.015) and higher
expression of fibronectin (P = 0.018) in NF1-mutant compared to
KRAS-mutant LUAC. NF1-mutant tumors showed significant heterogeneity in
MAPK and PI3K/AKT/MTOR pathway activation. Compared to KRAS-mutant LUAC,
NF1-mutant tumors had significantly lower MAPK score (P = 0.005) but
comparable PI3K score (P = 0.407).Analysis of co-occurring genetic events
identified 1201 genes as significantly differentially mutated between
NF1-mutant and NF1-wild-type LUACs in the TCGA cohort. LANCL2 (P =
6.71006) and TP53 (1.631005) were the top hits in this dataset. 135 genes
validated in a second LUAC dataset. Strikingly, a core set of genes were
significantly co-mutated with NF1 across a range of human tumors.Somatic
mutations in KIAA1549L were associated with highly significant increase
in PI3K score (PIntroductionInactivating somatic mutations in the NF1
tumor suppressor gene, encoding a prototypical RASGAP, drive the
development of 11% of LUACs. Extensive genetic and biochemical evidence
supports a central role of aberrant RAS signaling in the pathogenesis of
NF1-deficient tumors. However, variable dependence on different RAS
effector pathways and inconsistent responses to MEK and PI3K/MTOR
inhibitors have been reported in experimental models of Nf1-related
carcinogenesis. We hypothesized that significantly co-occurring genetic
alterations may underpin signaling diversification downstream of mutant
NF1.MethodsOur dataset includes 519 LUACs from TCGA and a cohort reported
by Imielinski et al. Assessment of co-occurring genetic events was based
on Fisher's exact test with a statistical cutoff of p0.05 (0.1 for the
validation datasets). Supervised analysis of RNASeq and reverse phase
protein array (RPPA) data and computation of MAPK and PI3K proteomic
scores was conducted for each co-mutated gene as previously described.
Signature enrichment was assessed using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
(GSEA).ResultsWe mapped dominant expression signatures in NF1-mutant LUAC
using GSEA. Signatures relating to poor prognosis, EMT, E2F3-mediated
gene expression and immune engagement were enriched in NF1-mutant tumors.
RPPA confirmed lower expression of E-cadherin (P = 0.015) and higher
expression of fibronectin (P = 0.018) in NF1-mutant compared to
KRAS-mutant LUAC. NF1-mutant tumors showed significant heterogeneity in
MAPK and PI3K/AKT/MTOR pathway activation. Compared to KRAS-mutant LUAC,
NF1-mutant tumors had significantly lower MAPK score (P = 0.005) but
comparable PI3K score (P = 0.407).Analysis of co-occurring genetic events
identified 1201 genes as significantly differentially mutated between
NF1-mutant and NF1-wild-type LUACs in the TCGA cohort. LANCL2 (P =
6.71006) and TP53 (1.631005) were the top hits in this dataset. 135 genes
validated in a second LUAC dataset. Strikingly, a core set of genes were
significantly co-mutated with NF1 across a range of human tumors.Somatic
mutations in KIAA1549L were associated with highly significant increase
in PI3K score (P<0.001). Higher PI3K score was also noted in tumors
bearing co-mutations in SORCS3 (P = 0.049), and PAPP-A2 (P = 0.027), a
matrix metalloproteinase with a reported role in proteolytic cleavage of
IGFBP5. Functional assays to confirm the impact of these and other
selected co-mutations and their effect on responsiveness to MEK and
PI3K/MTOR inhibitors are underway.ConclusionsCo-occurring genetic
alterations impact both the amplitude and directionality of signaling
downstream of NF1 inactivation in LUAC and may therefore account for
heterogeneity in both biological behavior and clinical response to
targeted therapies.

