Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel cell-penetrating peptide targeting ATF5 (CP-d/n-ATF5)
exerts anti-cancer activity in vitro and in vivo against a broad spectrum
of human cancers


BackgroundThe purpose of this study was to validate the anti-neoplastic
activity of a novel ATF5-targeted therapeutic approach against various
recalcitrant human malignancies. Activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5)
is a member of the cAMP response element binding (CREB)/ATF subfamily of
basic leucine zipper transcription factors and has been shown to be
overexpressed in many human cancers. CP-d/n-ATF5 is a novel peptide
specifically designed to contain a cell-penetrating domain and a domain
inhibiting the function of ATF5 in a unique and novel targeted
therapeutic approach. This therapeutic strategy was tested among a large
panel of different therapy refractory human cancers including
glioblastoma, melanoma, breast, prostate-, lung- and pancreatic
cancer.MethodsCellular viability was assessed by MTT-assays. The
induction of apoptosis was examined by staining for annexin V/propidium
iodide or JC-1 (loss of mitochondrial membrane potential) prior to flow
cytometric analysis. Western blotting was performed for further molecular
analysis detecting caspase cleavage and expression of Bcl-2 family
members. Subcutaneous xenograft models were used to examine the
anti-neoplastic effects of CP-d/n-ATF5 in vivo.ResultsOur data show that
CP-d/n-ATF5 yields a significant increase in apoptosis across a panel of
10 different cancer cell lines when compared to treatment with a
mock-mutated control peptide or penetratin. On the molecular level,
treatment with CP-d/n-ATF5 resulted in a marked down-regulation of the
anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members Mcl-1 and Bcl-2. This effect was
amplified in a synergistic manner by adding either ABT-263 or TRAIL to a
combined targeted therapeutic approach. In vivo, treatment with
CP-d/n-ATF5 resulted in a significant reduction of tumor growth in a
heterotopic glioblastoma- and an orthotopic melanoma model.ConclusionsThe
novel ATF5-targeting compound CP-d/n-ATF5 provides a broad and pronounced
anti-neoplastic activity against human cancers in vitro and in vivo. On
the molecular level, this effect is at least in part due to a shift of
the cellular homeostasis towards a pro-apoptotic cellular phenotype by
inhibiting anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins. Overall, CP-d/n-ATF5 may
represent a promising novel anti-cancer agent.

