Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MM-302 is more effective than PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin
(PLD) at reducing pulmonary metastatic burden in breast cancer models
expressing intermediate levels of HER2


Introduction: Despite improvements in treatment with newly approved
HER2-targeted therapies, safe and effective treatments are still needed,
not only for HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer (MBC), but also for
MBC expressing intermediate levels of HER2 that are still considered
HER2-negative (e.g. IHC 2+, FISH-negative). MM-302 is a liposomal
antibody drug conjugate (ADC) designed to target doxorubicin to
HER2-overexpressing cancer cells. MM-302 is currently being evaluated in
HER2-positive locally advanced breast cancer (LABC)/MBC patients in the
registration-directed HERMIONE trial. The objective of this study was to
compare the relative efficacy of MM-302 and PLD in treating
HER2-intermediate MBC (corresponding to 1+/2+ by IHC) using models that
closely mimic how HER2-overexpressing metastatic tumors are established
in humans.Methods: To establish metastatic disease, the murine 4T1-HER2
cell line engineered to express intermediate levels of Her2 (median of
1105 HER2 receptors/cell), and the human MDA-MB-453 cells that
endogenously express intermediate levels of Her2 (2+ by IHC and median of
3105 HER2 receptors/cell), were inoculated orthotopically into the right
and left mammary fat pads of immunocompromised mice. Primary tumors then
spontaneously seed cancer cells in distant visceral organs such as the
lung. When primary tumor volumes reached 150 mm3 (4T1-Her2) or 270 mm3
(MDA-MB-453), mice were randomized and treated with vehicle control, PLD
or MM-302. At the end of the study, primary tumors and lungs were
harvested to assess liposome delivery and quantify pulmonary metastatic
burden.Results: MM-302 was more effective than PLD at reducing total
pulmonary metastatic burden in both HER2-intermediate models as evidenced
by the lower number of surface metastases in the 4T1-Her2 model and the
lower number of human cytokeratin positive cells per lung in the
MDA-MB-453 model. MM-302 and PLD were equally effective at slowing
(4T1-Her2) and inhibiting (MDA-MB-453) primary tumor growth. Mechanisms
responsible for differences in efficacy are being explored. To date,
better distribution of liposomes in metastatic lesions than in primary
tumors has been observed where liposome delivery appears to be restricted
to the tumor periphery in the 4T1-Her2 model.Conclusion: MM-302 was more
effective than PLD at reducing pulmonary metastatic tumor burden in both
HER2-expressing models. The superiority of MM-302 over PLD was unique to
metastatic lesions where there was better distribution of liposomes than
in the primary tumor. These results support the rationale for evaluating
MM-302 in patients with HER2-intermediate MBC.

