Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of tolfenamic acid on the therapeutic efficacy of
chemotherapeutic drugs used in the treatment of Ewing sarcoma


Ewing sarcoma (ES) is the second most common pediatric primary bone
tumor, and affects children between the ages of 1 to 20 years. With the
advancement in therapeutic options the 5-year event free survival rate of
patients with localized tumor has gone up to 70%. However, in patients
with metastases at diagnosis, this rate is less than 20%. One of the
distinguishing hallmarks of ES is the presence of oncogenic fusion
transcription factor formed by the translocation between EWS and ETS
family transcription factor. The EWS-FLI1 translocation is most commonly
found in ES patients. Therefore targeting EWS-FLI1 transcription factor
or its downstream targets presents a novel therapeutic approach to treat
ES. Research from our group demonstrated the anti-cancer activity of a
small molecule, Tolfenamic acid (TA) in pediatric cancers, leukemia,
neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma. TA has been shown to target
transcription factor Sp1, which regulates the expression of several genes
associated with cancer including survivin, a member of inhibitor of
apoptosis protein (IAP) family and involved in chemoresistance. It is
currently in phase I clinical trials for treating upper gastro-intestinal
cancer patients along with radiation. In this study, we evaluated the
therapeutic efficacy of TA alone and in combination with chemotherapeutic
drugs, and its effect on the EWS-FLI1 downstream targets. ES cell lines
CHLA9, CHLA10 and TC71 were treated with TA, Etoposide, Doxorubicin and
Vincristine and cell viability was measured at 24 and 48h post-treatment.
TA and chemotherapeutic drugs caused a dose and time dependent inhibition
of cell proliferation. We then assessed the effects of TA in combination
with these chemotherapeutic drugs. Results indicate that the combination
treatment causes increased (2-3 fold) inhibition of cell viability
compared to individual agents. To access the mode of action of
combination therapy, cells were treated with TA and Vincristine and
apoptosis was monitored at 48h post-treatment via western blot analysis
(c-PARP), flow cytometry (Annexin V staining), and caspase 3/7 activity
(Caspase3/7-Glo assay). We were able to demonstrate that the inhibition
of cell viability in the combination treatment was the result of
apoptotic mechanism as determined by increased cleavage of PARP and
up-regulation of caspase 3/7activity. In addition we also studied the
effects of TA on the regulation of EWS-FLI1 downstream targets NROB1,
ID2, ROCO1 and LDB2 by real-time PCR. Results demonstrate that TA
treatment leads to the downregulation of EWS-FLI1 genes. Taken together
our results indicate that the combination of TA and chemotherapy drugs
inhibits the proliferation of sarcoma cells. This investigation also
suggests that the proposed combination therapy involving small molecule
TA and standard chemotherapeutic agents could be a viable strategy for
the treatment of Ewing sarcoma.

