Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of miR-146a and novel Rhenium compounds on prostate
cancer cell lines derived from African Americans and European American
patients


African American (AA) men have disproportionately high incidence and
mortality rates of prostate cancer (PCa) compared to other ethnic groups
in the United States. The identification of molecular factors that
contribute to this disparity could improve diagnosis and may predict
therapeutic efficacy. MicroRNA-146a (miR-146a) suppresses PCa
transformation from androgen-dependent to -independent state, and
suppresses a kinase coding gene which reduces cell proliferation,
invasion and metastasis. It is anticipated that miR-146a and other miRNAs
may one day become biomarkers for clinical diagnosis and prognosis of
several types of cancer including PCa. Novel rhenium compounds have shown
anti-cancer properties especially in PCa. Therefore, the purpose of this
study was to determine the expression of miR-146a in PCa cell lines
derived from AA and European American (EA) patients. We also investigated
the anti-cancer properties of two novel organorhenium pentylcarbonate
(RPC) compounds. Relative levels of miRNA expression was determined by
qRT-PCR, miRNA plate assay and smart flare technology after isolating
total RNA from the cells and the exosomes from the tumor
microenvironment. Cytotoxicity studies of the RPC compounds were done by
using MTT and Trypan Blue assay. Our data showed a several fold increase
in the expression of miR-146a in PCa cells derived from AA patient in
comparison to cells derived from EA patients and a benign cell line. The
RPC compounds showed bioactivity in all the PCa lines. To date, we are
unaware of any studies that compared the miR-146a expression in PCa cells
derived from the two racial groups. Our study suggests that miR-146a is
up-regulated in PCa cells derived from AA patient compared to EA patient,
which could possibly contribute to the aggressiveness associated in AA
patients. We also found that the novel organorhenium compounds are
bioactive with anti-cancer properties. Our results warrant further
studies which are being done by our laboratory for assessing the
mechanistic role of miR-146a associated with the anti-cancer activity of
rhenium compounds and the role of miR-146a to define the racial disparity
in PCa patients.Acknowledgment: This research was supported by a grant
from the Borroughs Wellcome Fund, NSF-LSAMP, NIH-MARC and a Disability
Supplement grant from NIH.

