Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of SLC7A11 transporter in lung and pancreatic
cancer tissues at different stages of development


Purpose: The purpose is to investigate the expression of the SLC7A11
transporter in human biopsy samples from patients with lung or pancreatic
cancer at different stages of development. The SLC7A11 is a membrane
antiporter highly specific for cystine. It is a major transporter for the
uptake of cystine in exchange of intracellular glutamate. It plays a role
in the growth and progression of cancers because they need extracellular
cystine for growth. The expression of SLC7A11 was compared between normal
and malignant tissues.Methods: Lung and pancreatic tissue array slides
were purchased from US Biomax, Inc. Pancreatic samples were categorized
into adenocarcinoma, normal and adjacent to cancer tissues. Lung cancer
samples were categorized into: adenocarcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma,
and normal tissue. The slides were hydrated with a series of washes using
xylene and graded alcohols. The tissue arrays underwent blocking of
endogenous peroxidase and albumin. The tissue arrays were processed with
a primary antibody (1:500) dilution of a rabbit polyclonal antibody
against SLC7A11, and a secondary antibody (1:3000) dilution of goat
anti-rabbit conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (HRP). The slides were
counterstained with hematoxylin and images were taken with the EVOS FL
Cell Imaging System. The software ImageJ was used to determine proportion
of stained cells. The staining intensity was determined by comparing the
samples to their negative control supplied on the tissue arrays. The
immune-reactive score (IRS) was calculated as SI x PP and it ranged from
0 to 12. An IRS within 0-3 indicated no, or low expression, 4-7 medium
expression and 8-12 high expression. The distribution of the IRS score
frequency in the different stages was compared to that of the normal
tissues and compared using the chi square test for trend.Results: The
SLC7A11 is significantly overexpressed on all cancer tissues compared to
normal tissues or adjacent to cancer tissues. Pancreatic and lung
adenocarcinomas as well as lung squamous cells carcinomas have
significantly different distributions of IRS score staining for SLC7A11
compared to normal tissues. However, there is no significant difference
between the different cancer stages and the distributions of the IRS
staining for SLC7A11.Conclusion: The results indicate that expression of
the SLC7A11 transporter is significantly overexpressed in cancer compared
to the normal tissues, but there is no significant difference between the
expression levels of SLC7A11 at different stages of lung or pancreatic
cancer.

