Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined inhibition of IL-1, CXCR1/2, and TGF signaling pathways
modulates in vivo acquired resistance to anti-VEGF treatment


Introduction: Resistance of tumors to antiangiogenic therapies is
becoming increasingly relevant. We recently identified interleukin
(IL)-1, CXC receptors (CXCR)1/2 ligands, and Transforming Growth Factor
(TGF) among the proinflammatory factors that were expressed at higher
levels in murine models resistant to the anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab.
Here, we hypothesized that the combined inhibition of these
proinflammatory signaling pathways might reverse the resistance to
anti-VEGF treatment.Methods: Bevacizumab-resistant FGBR orthotopic tumor
bearing mice received bevacizumab alone or in combination with a
recombinant human IL-1 receptor antagonist, a monoclonal antibody against
TGF Receptor type II, and a recombinant antibody binding CXCR1/2 ligands.
Western blot analysis was performed to assess the activity of p65 NFB,
Smad2 and on the expression of IL-6 in FGBR cells in culture.
Immunohistochemical analysis of FFPE sections from FGBR tumors was
performed to assess Smad2 phosphorylation and IL-6 expression. Wound
healing assay was performed to assess cell motility in FGBR cells in
culture. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed to assess the
expression of E-Cadherin and Vimentin in FGBR tumors. Immunohistochemical
analysis was performed to estimate the presence of Cd11b+ cells.Results:
The combination of these agents with bevacizumab reduced the tumor burden
and significantly prolonged mice survival if compared with single agent
bevacizumab. Tumors from mice receiving the combination treatment
demonstrated significantly lower expression of IL-6 and phosphorylation
of p65 and Smad2 when compared with control. FGBR cells treated in vitro
with the three agents plus bevacizumab had significantly higher levels of
E-cadherin and lower levels of Vimentin, and exhibited significantly
lower migration rates than did their bevacizumab- treated controls.
Consistently, tumors from mice receiving the combination treatment
demonstrated significantly higher expression of E-cadherin, lower levels
of Vimentin, and a significantly lower infiltration by CD11b+ cells when
compared with bevacizumab -treated controls.Conclusion: This study
suggests that inhibition of IL-1, CXCR1/2, and TGF signaling pathways is
a potential therapeutic approach to modulate the acquired resistance to
anti-VEGF treatment by reversing EMT and inhibiting CD11b+ proangiogenic
myeloid cells tumor infiltration.

