Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3K inhibition induces homologous repair defects in endometrioid
endometrial cancer patient derived xenografts leading to synergistic
anti-tumor activity with PARP inhibitors


Inhibition of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway has been
shown to induce defective homologous repair in breast carcinoma leading
to heightened sensitivity to poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP)
inhibitors. Our objective was to assess the effects on DNA repair
pathways following single agent and combined PI3K and PARP inhibition
utilizing endometrial cancer (EnCa) patient derived xenografts (PDX) with
and without identified PIK3CA mutations. Under an institutional protocol,
tumors from consenting patients with endometrioid carcinoma were
collected at the time of primary surgery and genotyped for common
oncogenic mutations utilizing the SNaPshot platform. NOD/SCID mice
bearing xenografts derived from two primary human endometrioid
endometrial tumors with and without PIK3CA gene mutations (ENCA1 & ENCA2
respectively) were divided into four arm cohorts with equivalent tumor
volumes. Vehicle or NVP BKM-120 (30 mg/kg) was administered alone and in
combination with veliparib (25 mg/kg) and endometrial xenograft tumor
volumes were assessed. Immunoblotting was used to assess downstream PI3K
pathway and DNA repair pathway alterations in post treatment samples at
specific time points. While NVP BKM120 as a single agent failed to induce
significant anti-tumor activity compared to vehicle in either model,
decreased pAKT, RAD51 and increased -H2AX levels were observed in
response to NVP BKM120 alone. PIK3CA mutation status did not affect these
molecular alterations. Dual NVP BKM-120 and veliparib therapy
significantly impeded tumor growth (p Inhibition of the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway has been shown to induce
defective homologous repair in breast carcinoma leading to heightened
sensitivity to poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitors. Our
objective was to assess the effects on DNA repair pathways following
single agent and combined PI3K and PARP inhibition utilizing endometrial
cancer (EnCa) patient derived xenografts (PDX) with and without
identified PIK3CA mutations. Under an institutional protocol, tumors from
consenting patients with endometrioid carcinoma were collected at the
time of primary surgery and genotyped for common oncogenic mutations
utilizing the SNaPshot platform. NOD/SCID mice bearing xenografts derived
from two primary human endometrioid endometrial tumors with and without
PIK3CA gene mutations (ENCA1 & ENCA2 respectively) were divided into four
arm cohorts with equivalent tumor volumes. Vehicle or NVP BKM-120 (30
mg/kg) was administered alone and in combination with veliparib (25
mg/kg) and endometrial xenograft tumor volumes were assessed.
Immunoblotting was used to assess downstream PI3K pathway and DNA repair
pathway alterations in post treatment samples at specific time points.
While NVP BKM120 as a single agent failed to induce significant
anti-tumor activity compared to vehicle in either model, decreased pAKT,
RAD51 and increased -H2AX levels were observed in response to NVP BKM120
alone. PIK3CA mutation status did not affect these molecular alterations.
Dual NVP BKM-120 and veliparib therapy significantly impeded tumor growth
(p < 0.01) in the ENCA1 model, while in ENCA2, significant tumor
regression was observed (p Inhibition of the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K) pathway has been shown to induce defective homologous
repair in breast carcinoma leading to heightened sensitivity to poly-ADP
ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitors. Our objective was to assess the
effects on DNA repair pathways following single agent and combined PI3K
and PARP inhibition utilizing endometrial cancer (EnCa) patient derived
xenografts (PDX) with and without identified PIK3CA mutations. Under an
institutional protocol, tumors from consenting patients with endometrioid
carcinoma were collected at the time of primary surgery and genotyped for
common oncogenic mutations utilizing the SNaPshot platform. NOD/SCID mice
bearing xenografts derived from two primary human endometrioid
endometrial tumors with and without PIK3CA gene mutations (ENCA1 & ENCA2
respectively) were divided into four arm cohorts with equivalent tumor
volumes. Vehicle or NVP BKM-120 (30 mg/kg) was administered alone and in
combination with veliparib (25 mg/kg) and endometrial xenograft tumor
volumes were assessed. Immunoblotting was used to assess downstream PI3K
pathway and DNA repair pathway alterations in post treatment samples at
specific time points. While NVP BKM120 as a single agent failed to induce
significant anti-tumor activity compared to vehicle in either model,
decreased pAKT, RAD51 and increased -H2AX levels were observed in
response to NVP BKM120 alone. PIK3CA mutation status did not affect these
molecular alterations. Dual NVP BKM-120 and veliparib therapy
significantly impeded tumor growth (p < 0.01) in the ENCA1 model, while
in ENCA2, significant tumor regression was observed (p < 0.001). No
changes in mouse weight or premature death were observed in the various
treatment arms. Combination therapy was associated with reconstitution of
baseline RAD51 and increased -H2AX levels. In conclusion, these results
suggest that PI3K inhibition induces defects in homologous repair
mediated by RAD51 and increases reliance on PARP mediated DNA repair
mechanisms. Our in vivo data suggest that PI3K inhibition sensitizes
endometrial tumors with and without PIK3CA mutations to a PARP inhibitor.

