Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanically tuned 3 dimensional gelatin hydrogels support mammary
fibroblast viability and growth


Matrix stiffness is associated with breast tumor progression. This in
part is due to changes in extracellular matrix composition, abundance and
modification, a phenomenon which is largely accomplished by
myofibroblasts, or carcinoma associated fibroblasts. While it has been
shown that fibroblasts acquire a myofibroblast phenotype following
culture atop mechanically stiff 2 and 3 dimensional (3D) matrices, such a
phenomenon has yet to be tested for cells encapsulated in 3D matrices. In
this study, we generated gelatin hydrogels cross-linked with different
concentrations of microbial transglutaminase (mTg) to yield compliant and
stiff hydrogels. These hydrogels were utilized for encapsulation of human
mammary fibroblasts (HMFs) to investigate their effects on HMF viability
and proliferation over a 7 day culture period. To ensure that mTg was
non-toxic to HMFs, HMFs were first cultured in 2D with various
concentrations of mTg (range from 6.3 to 500g/ml). Viability results
indicated that mTg was relatively non-toxic to HMFs at the tested
concentrations. To investigate thermal stability, hydrogels were
cross-linked with low (6.3 g/ml) and high (500 g/ml) concentrations of
mTg and were cultured in PBS for up to 5 hours at 37C. Results
demonstrated minimal loss of gel weight in 500 g/ml mTg hydrogels and
increased weight (e.g. swelling) from 6.3 g/ml mTg hydrogels, suggesting
that hydrogels cross-linked with the lowest and highest possible
concentrations of mTg exhibit thermal stability. Next, rheology was used
to assess the bulk mechanical stiffness of mTg cross-linked hydrogels.
mTg at 20 g/ml resulted in gels with a stiffness of 300 Pascals (Pa)
while mTg at 30 g/ml resulted in gels with a stiffness of 1200 Pa.
Although hydrogels with a mechanical stiffness of 1800 Pa were evaluated,
it was found that these conditions did not support cell viability or
proliferation. As such, mTg concentrations yielding 300 and 1200 Pa were
elected to represent compliant and stiff hydrogels, respectively. HMFs
were encapsulated in compliant and stiff hydrogels and their viability
and proliferation were monitored over the 7 day culture period. Results
demonstrated that both compliant and stiff hydrogels supported HMF cell
viability throughout the culture period, evaluated using the Live/Dead
assay. Moreover, compliant and stiff hydrogels facilitated cell
proliferation, assessed using the WST assay. Not only did proliferation
significantly increase for HMFs in both compliant and stiff gels during
the 7 day culture period, but was significantly greater for HMFs in stiff
gels in comparison to HMFs in compliant gels at days 1, 3 and 5. Overall,
these results indicate that different concentrations of mTg generate
gelatin hydrogels with unique stiffnesses, which support HMF viability
and proliferation over the culture period. These results will serve as a
platform from which to investigate matrix stiffness effects on a
myofibroblast phenotype.

