Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantification of tumor blood perfusion of an orthotopic mouse
model of neuroblastoma using nonlinear contrast-enhanced ultrasound
imaging


This study quantifies tumor perfusion in individual tumors to estimate
blood flow and blood volume parameters of an individualized tumor
compartment of a comprehensive physiologically-based pharmacokinetic
model of topotecan using an orthotopic xenograft model of pediatric
neuroblastoma. We non-invasively imaged perfusion in orthotopic
neuroblastoma (NB5) xenograft tumors (n = 3 CD1 nude mice/time point)
using nonlinear contrast enhanced ultrasound technique (CEUS). Tumor
tissue and organs from the mice were harvested at predefined time-points.
We used a programmable syringe pump to inject MicroMarker microbubbles
via tail vein catheter and acquired images using VisualSonics VEVO 2100
imaging system. We used the burst-replenishment technique to image tumor
perfusion, which requires a constant concentration of microbubbles in
blood during acquisition. To maintain a steady concentration of
microbubbles, we programmed the pump to inject a small bolus followed by
constant infusion. Our preliminary analysis showed that healthy kidneys
rapidly reach a steady state in less than 1 min, significantly shorter
than the commonly used constant infusion without an initial bolus. The
nonlinear CEUS signal intensities of kidney cortex showed less than 20%
variation between mice. We used a custom program to acquire the CEUS
perfusion images over a 3D volume that included the tumor and a kidney.
We used the kidney as a reference organ to normalize whole tumor
perfusion data. We fitted the log-normal perfusion model to estimate
perfusion parameters for individual tumors. Our perfusion quantification
over the entire tumor volume represents tumor perfusion more accurately
than the commonly used methods based on a single 2D plane without a
reference organ. Our approach provides population estimates of blood
perfusion based on properly normalized estimates of individual blood
perfusion parameters.

