Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coding and noncoding gene targets in pediatric soft tissue sarcomas


BACKGROUND: Genomic studies on pediatric soft tissue sarcomas (STS) such
as rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) and Ewing family of tumors (EFT) have shown
that the overall burden of somatic mutations in these tumors is
relatively low when compared to most adult tumors. This observation along
with recent studies suggest that other features such as chromosomal
translocations that appear predominantly in these tumors may play an
important role in their biology. Genes resulting from these
translocations are known to regulate protein-coding genes that are
required for tumor formation. Our studies on these tumors show that these
chimeric fusion genes can hijack the cellular machinery that comprises
both protein-coding and non-coding networks for tumorigenesis. RESULTS:
Gene expression signature of the more aggressive RMS subset that
comprises of PAX-FKHR-positive alveolar RMS suggested that the
protein-coding NOS1 is most strongly associated and prognostically
significant gene in this group. Functional assays confirmed that PAX-FKHR
directly regulated its expression. Decreasing NOS1 expression using
lentiviral vectors resulted in a decrease in cell survival and reduced
tumor growth in vivo. Similar expression analyses comparing EFT, which
express the fusion gene EWS-FLI1, with other tumors and normal tissues
showed that the non-coding features were more strongly associated with
EFT than the coding genes. EWS-FLI1 directly regulates a long intergenic
non-coding RNA (lincRNA), FEZF1-AS1. Matrigel assays and tail vein
injection models suggested that the lincRNA promotes cell invasion and
migration. Chromatin-RNA immunoprecipitation assays revealed interaction
of the lincRNA with DNA regions, both coding and non-coding, which are
involved in invasion and metastasis. CONCLUSIONS: Fusion genes in
pediatric STS activate genomic regions that facilitate tumor pathogenesis
by regulating the interactive network between coding and non-coding
genes. While fusion-positive RMS are dependent on NOS1 for survival, EFT
need lincRNA FEZF1-AS1 for cell migration and tumor propagation. EFT are
known to be highly metastatic tumors and our results underscore the
complex regulatory networks that are required for cellular migration in
these tumors. Understanding the importance of these gene interactions
will help development of effective tumor-specific drug therapies that
improve treatment while decreasing unwanted side-effects.

