Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Continuous real-time measurement of live and dead cells in culture
over multiple days


Recently developed assay technologies have made it possible to use a
multi-well plate reader to estimate the number of live or dead cells in
culture in real time over a period of days to monitor the effects of long
term exposure to test substances. An advantage of the real time assay
chemistries is that the cells remain viable and available for other
measurements. The purpose of this study was to determine if the real time
assay methods could be multiplexed with other assay endpoints and applied
to three dimensional (3D) culture models. The measurement of the number
of live cells in real time is accomplished by providing a pro-substrate
that viable cells (but not dead cells) can convert into a substrate for a
luciferase derived from a marine shrimp. The pro-substrate and luciferase
can be added with a single reagent addition step and because they are not
toxic, they can be incubated with cells in culture for up to three days.
Live cell conversion of the pro-substrate into a substrate for luciferase
results in a luminescent signal that is proportional to the number of
live cells. The signal diminishes immediately upon cell death. Detection
of dead cells in real time is accomplished by using a fluorogenic DNA
binding dye that is non-permeant and thus non-toxic to live cells. The
dye enters dead cells that have a compromised membrane, binds to DNA, and
becomes fluorescent. We have demonstrated that the real time assays can
be multiplexed to measure both live and dead cells in the same sample. We
further demonstrate the use of these assays to measure viability of cells
in 3D spheroids formed using the hanging drop culture technique. We also
demonstrate multiplexing of real time assays with subsequent measurement
of apoptosis or extraction of RNA for expression studies. Utilization of
real time assay chemistries that are non-toxic enabled repeated recording
of data in a kinetic mode from the same sample of cells which eliminated
the need for duplicate cultures and provided flexibility during assay
protocol development. The ability to multiplex real time assays improved
overall lab efficiency by eliminating the need for duplicate cultures for
each experiment.

