Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of potential salivary response biomarkers in
subjects practicing yogic breathing


Yogic Breathing (YB; Pranayama) is a form of Yoga technique practiced
since ancient times for healthy living. In the United States, the
practice of Yoga has markedly increased in recent years. Recent data
suggest that adjunctive Yoga in cancer patients may help patients with
symptom management. Whereas there are data on Asana (Postures) that
involve physical movements in cancer patients, there are limited data on
YB. Considering the ease of practice when compared to Asana, YB might
benefit patients who are already physically overwhelmed with symptom
burden. Current data measure the outcomes of Yoga using subjective
measures, but biomarkers in an easily accessible biospecimen might
provide key information as to the effects of YB among practitioners. We
hypothesized that YB stimulates alterations in the salivary biomarker
expression. We conducted an Institutional Review Board approved pilot
randomized controlled trial in 20 subjects (n = 10 in each group) to
compare the salivary expression of biomarkers between a 20 min YB group
vs. Attention Control (AC) group. The YB group performed two exercises
(Pranava Pranayama, and Thirumoolar Pranayama) each for 10 min, and the
AC group read a scientific article for the same amount of time. Tandem
Mass Spectrometric (LC-LC-MS-MS), Multiplex, and Western blot analysis
showed the differential expression of 22 salivary proteins associated
with immune response, stress and cancer. As compared with the AC group,
YB increased Deleted in Malignant Brain Tumor 1 (DMBT1) as early as 5 min
and maintained significantly high levels in all time points tested. In
contrast, YB reduced IL-1beta (at 10, 15 and 20 min) and IL-8 levels (at
5, 10, 15 and 20 min) in participants when compared to AC controls.
Further analysis of salivary lipidomic profiles demonstrated marginal
reductions in sphingosine and sphingosine-1-phosphate levels in YB group.
Collectively, our data provide the first evidence that YB could alter
salivary biomarkers associated with cancer, inflammation, and stress.
These markers may be useful to evaluate symptom management via stress
reduction and immune regulation.

