Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilizing Vortex Chip for enumeration and determination of
single-cell heterogeneity of circulating tumor cells in prostate cancer


Background: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are cells that break away from
either the primary tumor or metastatic sites and circulate in the
peripheral blood. CTCs are increasingly used as an accessible source of
tumor cells (i.e. liquid biopsy). We are using a CTC capture technology
known as the Vortex Chip, which allows for rapid isolation of highly
purified CTCs in less than 1 hour. Moreover, because the Vortex Chip
isolates CTCs based on their size, this platform does not require
antibody based capture that can potentially bias the isolation of CTC
subpopulations to cells that express a specific surface marker, like
EpCAM. A new version of the Vortex Chip, Vortex HT, has been used for an
increased capture of prostate CTCs.Methods: The Vortex HT Chip was
fabricated using standard lithographic techniques with
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) polymer. Samples were run using a syringe
pump setup to deliver blood to the chip at a constant flow rate, with
large cells (including CTCs) trapped in the vortices present within each
chamber. Trapped cells were released using PBS rinse buffer and available
for immunofluorescence staining (CK, PSA, CD45, DAPI) or other downstream
analysis. Individual cells could also be isolated for total RNA
amplification and RNA sequencing.Results: With the new HT chip design, we
achieved greater than 10,000-fold enrichment of the cells and an overall
purity of greater than 50%. Individual CTCs from patients with advanced
metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) were isolated,
immunostained and enumerated: among 13 patients, 100% had more than 1.5
CTCs/mL, while among 9 healthy donors, all had less than 1.5 CTCs/mL; we
thus set 1.5 CTC/mL as the cutoff. Proof-of-principle single-cell RNA seq
transcriptome analysis was performed on cells isolated from the chip. We
isolated three CTCs from two distinct patients and performed RNA
sequencing and compared the results to single cell RNA sequencing of
three VCaP cell-line cells.Conclusions: The Vortex Chip HT design has
been successfully applied to prostate cancer with an increased
throughput. CTCs have been collected from patient samples within less
than 1 hour. The individual cells have sufficient RNA for individual
single cell RNA seq analysis. Further optimization of these techniques
will be necessary to validate these methods and to gain additional
insight into heterogeneity of prostate cancer as reflected in CTCs.

