Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Two-sided story of DNA repair proteins MRE11 and RAD51 in breast
cancer


BackgroundDNA repair proteins are required for the maintenance of genome
integrity in normal cells. However previous studies also showed that
altered expression of MRE11 and RAD51, proteins crucial for DNA
double-strand break repair, DNA replication, and telomere maintenance,
are associated with cancer outcomes. In this study, we investigated the
role of MRE11 and RAD51 in breast cancer in both clinical and in vitro
settings.MethodsThe expression of MRE11 and RAD51 in breast tumor tissues
were determined by immunohistochemistry, and associations with
clinicopathological characteristics and overall survival were assessed
using Cox proportional hazards regression models and Kaplan-Meier
survival curves. The effect of altered expression of MRE11 and RAD51 on
cell proliferation, invasion, and treatment resistance was assessed in
vitro using breast cancer cell lines, with the underlying mechanisms
explored. The effect of MRE11 and RAD51 overexpression on tumor growth
was assessed in an orthotopic xenograft model. All statistical tests were
two-sided.ResultsHigh MRE11 expression was statistically significantly
associated with malignant cancer behaviors including increased tumor size
and lymph node metastasis as well as resistance to radiotherapy and
chemotherapy. MRE11 overexpression in breast cancer cell lines promoted
cell proliferation through STAT3, cell cycle entry, invasion and
migration, and radioresistance via enhanced DNA repair activity, and also
inhibited apoptosis; knockdown of MRE11 had the opposite effect. In
xenograft tumor-bearing mice, tumor growth was increased in
MRE11-overexpressing group.RAD51 was expressed both in the cytoplasm and
nucleus of all the breast cancer and non-cancerous cell lines. Expression
levels of cytoplasmic RAD51 were positively correlated with cancer stage,
tumor size, lymph node metastasis in breast cancer patients. High
expression of cytoplasmic RAD51 predicted a poor patient survival as well
as resistance to radiotherapy and chemotherapy.ConclusionHigh MRE11 and
RAD51 expression was associated with a more malignant behavior in breast
cancer. MRE11 and RAD51 may serve as potential targets for therapeutic
intervention against breast cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

