Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibiting endothelium directed tumor cell streaming by targeting
the HGF/C-Met and EGF/CSF-1 signaling pathways


In vivo, tumor cells need to migrate towards blood vessels in order to
metastasize. Streaming, a specialized mode of migration involving
chemotactic signaling between macrophages and tumor cells, allows linear
streams of tumor cells to migrate directionally towards blood vessels on
collagen I-containing ECM fibers in vivo. We have successfully
reconstructed tumor cell streaming in vitro by co-plating tumors cells,
macrophages, and endothelial cells on 2.5 um micro-patterned substrates.
We found that tumor cells and macrophages do not demonstrate directional
migration in only one direction but random walk. Directional streaming
migration of tumor cells in only one direction was established when beads
coated with human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were placed at
one end of the micro-patterned collagen fibers within the assay. Using
this in vitro reconstituted streaming system, we found that directional
streaming can be blocked by inhibiting multiple signaling pathways -
notably the HGF/C-Met signaling pathway between endothelial cells and
tumor cells and the EGF/CSF-1 paracrine loop between macrophages and
tumor cells. These pathways were blocked using gefitinib (EGFRi),
DCC-3014 (CSFRi), and altiratinib (DCC-2701)(c-Meti), which led to a
marked decrease in endothelium directed streaming of the tumor cells. The
inhibitors showed different efficacies of inhibition of streaming at
different distances from the endothelium indicating that HGF from the
endothelium organized the random walk of paired macrophages and tumor
cells into a directional migration. Key observations made with the in
vitro reconstituted system were reproduced in mammary tumors using the in
vivo invasion assay. These results highlight a promising role for
combinations of these inhibitors in blocking tumor cell streaming and
metastasis in vivo and for use in human trials.

