Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) for anti-metastatic
therapy: Blocking active MMP9 abrogates metastatic niche formation and
prevents metastatic seeding in a breast cancer model


Currently there is no cure for a metastatic disease and it is therefore
critical to target the early events that foster metastasis. It is now
also recognized that a favorable microenvironment in the metastatic site,
primed by the tumor, is crucial for metastasis. Our study is geared
towards deciphering cellular and molecular mechanisms governing the
metastatic niche that may lead to novel targeted anti-metastatic
therapeutics.We utilize the multi-stage MMTV-PyMT breast cancer mouse
model, which shares significant similarities with human breast cancer. By
injecting a reporter metastatic cell line into hyperplasia-bearing mice,
we were able to probe the susceptibility of the lung microenvironment to
metastatic seeding. We demonstrate that early during mammary
tumorigenesis, before metastasis has occurred, a metastatic niche is
formed in the lung microenvironment. This niche is initiated in part by
tumor-induced systemic pro-inflammatory factors and local extracellular
matrix remodelers, as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). We show that the
metastatic niche is associated with MMP9-expressing CD11b+Gr1+ and other
lung stromal cells. MMP9, which is also expressed by tumor cells, appears
as a pivotal player in the process and is therefore considered as a
desirable therapeutic target.To examine the role of MMP9 activity in lung
metastatic colonization, we utilized novel endogenous-like,
function-specific antibodies (SDS3) that block the transiently-activated
enzyme conformation of MMP9, which presumably contributes to disease
progression. The therapeutic potential of SDS3 has been demonstrated in
models of inflammatory bowel disease. We show that metastatic seeding
within the lung microenvironment can be inhibited by SDS3, not only in
experimental metastasis models but also when the lung microenvironment is
primed by hyperplastic mammary tumors. Primary tumor burden was not
changed with SDS3, suggesting that blocking active MMP9 is effective in
preventing early metastasis rather than established tumors.To study the
biodistribution and pharmacokinetics of SDS3, we utilized whole-body
bioluminescence, intravital and ex-vivo live microscopy as well as flow
cytometry. We show that SDS3 is retained in myeloid cells within the
microenvironment of mammary tumors and lung metastatic foci. In situ
zymography shows high MMP activity in premetastaic MMTV-PyMT lungs, which
is reduced after SDS3. SDS3 also inhibits colony formation of cultured
metastatic cells.Our results suggest that a metastatic niche is present
in the lungs of hyperplastic mammary tumor-bearing mice and that it can
be targeted by blocking MMP9 activity. Our study offers new insights into
effectively blocking the in vivo activity of dysregulated MMPs as early
anti-metastatic therapy of various cancers.

