Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel small molecule AG311 induces tumor cell death through
inhibition of mitochondrial electron transport


Mitochondria are emerging as an attractive target for new anticancer
therapy. The inhibition of the mitochondrial electron transport chain
(ETC) provides an alternate and selective mechanism for killing cancer
cells, bypassing upstream apoptosis-inducing pathways. The mechanism is
based on the fact that cancer cells have higher mitochondrial membrane
potential rendering them inherently susceptible to increased reactive
oxygen species (ROS) generation such as superoxide through the
respiratory chain. In addition pharmacological inhibition of complex I
and III at the ubiquinone-binding site could further increase superoxide
production. Taken together, this mitochondrial sensitivity represents a
promising approach to selectively kill cancer cells. The purpose of this
study was to investigate the mitochondria-associated cell death of AG311,
a novel anticancer compound. AG311
(5-[(4-Methylphenyl)thio]-9H-pyrimido[4,5-b]indole-2,4-diamine) is a
small molecular weight compound designed by our group. AG311 has been
shown to induce rapid mitochondrial depolarization resulting in necrotic
cell death in a cancer cell-selective manner. In two mouse orthotopic
breast cancer models (MDA-MB-435 and 4T1), AG311 significantly reduced
tumor volume by 85% and 81%, respectively (n = 4 - 6), with no apparent
systemic toxicity.In this study, we aimed to identify the mitochondrial
protein target(s) of AG311 in cancer cells. First, upregulation of the
mitochondrial ETC by culturing MDA-MB-435 cells in galactose media
sensitized cells to AG311-induced cell death. Mitochondrial oxygen
consumption (XFe96 extracellular flux analyzer) drastically decreased by
62.9% ( 12.9, n = 8) in response to AG311 (7.5 M). The effect of AG311 on
mitochondrial ETC complexes was determined by spectrophotometrically
measuring NADH oxidation in the presence of antimycin A (complex I),
ubiquinol reduction (complex III-IV) or cytochrome c oxidation (complex
IV). It was found that AG311 inhibited complex I and III activity, but
not complex IV. Further kinetic assays suggested that AG311 competitively
inhibited ubiquinone binding and significantly induced generation of
mitochondrial superoxide (estimated with MitoSOX Red). Finally, treatment
with antioxidants (e.g. lipoic acid) partially prevented AG311-induced
cell death. In summary, the present results indicate mitochondrial
ubiquinone as a likely target for AG311-induced selective cancer cell
death through generation of mitochondrial superoxide. This together with
the previously demonstrated efficacy further substantiates the use of
AG311 as an anticancer agent.

