Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of trastuzumab, paclitaxel, and carboplatin on
HER2-positive cancer stem cells that are isolated from primary breast
cancer cultures: a preliminary report


Introduction:It is generally accepted that trastuzumab has only effective
in HER2+ breast cancer patients who have HER2 gene amplification or HER2
over expression. On the other hand, trastuzumab resistance is a problem
in HER2+ patients. Our aim is to investigate the effects of trastuzumab,
paclitaxel and carboplatin on cancer stem cells which is isolated from
primary breast cancer cultures.Methods:Tumor tissue was obtained in the
routine surgery of a breast cancer patient who was HER2+ by
immunohistochemistry. Primary breast cancer culture were established.
CD44+CD24- and ALDH+ breast cancer stem cells were sorted by
flowcytometry from these culture. HER2 receptor status of the sorted
cells was also determined by flowcytometry. HER2+ and HER2- breast cancer
stem cells were treated with trastuzumab, paclitaxel and carboplatin, and
combination of these drugs by checker board microplate method for 96 h.
For all of these breast cancer stem cell subgroups, the responses to the
drugs were determined.Results:Breast cancer stem cells were isolated from
a HER2+ breast cancer patient. The cell sorting analysis results
demonstrates that 43% of the population is CD44+CD24- and 22% of the
population is ALDH+. CD44+CD24- breast cancer stem cell subpopulation
contains 84% HER2+ and 16% HER2- cells. Carboplatin has the highest
antiproliferative effect on cancer stem cells among the three drugs which
means carboplatin application resulted in the lowest IC50 values in all
subgroups (IC50: 0.26 M- 0.41 M). HER2- cancer stem cells are more
resistant to the drugs (1.5- 2 fold resistance) than HER2+ subcultures.
Although combination of drugs exerted synergistic effect on the
subcultures, breast cancer stem cells were found to be more resistant to
the combination therapy by exhibiting higher proliferation in drug
combinations.Conclusions:HER2- cancer stem cells may be one of reason for
trastuzumab resistance in HER2+ breast cancer patients. The result of
this experimental study may be used to suggest new treatment strategies
in HER2+ breast cancer patients.

