Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogene signatures identify novel therapeutic targets and
combinatorial strategies in breast cancer


During the course of tumorigenesis, cancer cells acquire a large number
of genetic and epigenetic alterations. A subset of these alterations
results in the generation of driver oncogenes that play critical roles in
initiating and maintaining the transformed phenotype. We hypothesize that
most solid tumors are simultaneously driven by multiple driver oncogenes
that together form an oncogene network and that durable therapies for
solid tumors will need to target multiple oncogenes. Identifying multiple
driver oncogenes from among the large number of mutated/amplified genes
present in most solid tumors is a nontrivial task that will require novel
approaches. In this work, we have combined genome-wide, RNAi-based
dropout screens with copy number, expression and exome sequencing
analysis to identify the full complement of driver oncogenes that
function in a panel of breast cancer cell lines. The panel of cell lines
used for this study is the SUM panel of breast cancer cells which
contains 10 cell lines and includes representatives of HER2 positive, ER
positive, and triple negative breast cancer subtypes. For each line we
have identified multiple activated driver oncogenes that when combined
define a complete oncogene signature for the cell line. All of the
oncogene signatures contain both well-characterized oncogenes that are
known to play a role in breast cancer as well as novel driver genes that
do not have a well-characterized role in breast cancer. Subsequent work
has confirmed the role of several of the novel driver oncogenes including
the epigenetic modifier KAT6A and the apoptotic regulator BCL2L1.
Additionally, we show that the cell line oncogene signatures can be used
to successfully predict sensitivity of individual cell lines to small
molecule inhibitors. Predictions of sensitivity to inhibitors were
confirmed through the integration of oncogene signatures with published
data from large-scale drug screens across numerous cancer cell lines.
Finally, we demonstrate the utility of oncogene signatures through their
use in the design of novel therapeutic strategies that effectively reduce
cancer cell viability.

