Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacodynamic stratification of metastatic colorectal cancer
patients using genomic datasets


Previously, the mutation status of KRAS was the only validated predictive
biomarker for metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC). While KRAS mutated
tumors demonstrated resistance to epidermal growth factor (EGFR)
inhibitors like cetuximab, KRAS WT and EGFR-expressing tumors were
predicted to be responsive. However, KRAS WT metastatic colorectal cancer
(CRC) patients have a poor prognosis even with EGFR inhibitor therapy as
not all KRAS WT CRCs are responsive to such targeted agents. A gene
expression based RAS signature score was developed based on multiple
tumor tissue samples to identify RAS activated tumors independent of
mutations in the KRAS gene [1, 2]. To further refine this score and
define technologies that can be used on FFPE samples isolated in a
clinical setting, we analyzed DNA and RNA derived from fifty-five (55)
FFPE preserved colorectal cancer tumor biopsies using multiple
sequencing, digital and array-based technologies. These samples were
selected from a CRC cohort in which the initial gene expression-based RAS
signature score was calculated utilizing data compiled from fresh frozen
(FF) tumor samples from the same 55 patients. The 55 samples were
selected for this study as they had representative samples with high,
medium and low RAS signature scores. Transcriptomic analyses (RNA-Seq,
Affymetrix microarrays, Nanostring and Targeted RNA-Seq) were performed
on all 55 FFPE samples and three new RAS scores were calculated from the
gene expression datasets. These RAS scores were based on different gene
signatures (1) an 18 gene signature (2) a 13 gene signature, and (3) a
147 gene signature. A significant correlation was identified between RAS
scores calculated from the 18 and 13 gene signatures (Correlation
coefficient 0.88 and 0.76 respectively, p-value Previously, the mutation
status of KRAS was the only validated predictive biomarker for metastatic
colorectal cancer (CRC). While KRAS mutated tumors demonstrated
resistance to epidermal growth factor (EGFR) inhibitors like cetuximab,
KRAS WT and EGFR-expressing tumors were predicted to be responsive.
However, KRAS WT metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) patients have a poor
prognosis even with EGFR inhibitor therapy as not all KRAS WT CRCs are
responsive to such targeted agents. A gene expression based RAS signature
score was developed based on multiple tumor tissue samples to identify
RAS activated tumors independent of mutations in the KRAS gene [1, 2]. To
further refine this score and define technologies that can be used on
FFPE samples isolated in a clinical setting, we analyzed DNA and RNA
derived from fifty-five (55) FFPE preserved colorectal cancer tumor
biopsies using multiple sequencing, digital and array-based technologies.
These samples were selected from a CRC cohort in which the initial gene
expression-based RAS signature score was calculated utilizing data
compiled from fresh frozen (FF) tumor samples from the same 55 patients.
The 55 samples were selected for this study as they had representative
samples with high, medium and low RAS signature scores. Transcriptomic
analyses (RNA-Seq, Affymetrix microarrays, Nanostring and Targeted
RNA-Seq) were performed on all 55 FFPE samples and three new RAS scores
were calculated from the gene expression datasets. These RAS scores were
based on different gene signatures (1) an 18 gene signature (2) a 13 gene
signature, and (3) a 147 gene signature. A significant correlation was
identified between RAS scores calculated from the 18 and 13 gene
signatures (Correlation coefficient 0.88 and 0.76 respectively, p-value <
0.0001). To further refine gene expression signatures, samples were
grouped based upon their mutation status obtained by whole exome
sequencing (WES) and targeted DNA sequencing data (Illumina TruSight and
LifeTech Cancer Panels). In our sample set, the 18 gene RAS score was
found to be dependent on the mutation status of KRAS. Further analysis is
being carried out to better understand the relationship between the
calculated RAS signature scores and the mutation status of other genes.
This analysis will lead to the development of a novel genomic signature
for better pharmacodynamic stratification of colorectal carcinoma
patients.1. Loboda A et al. A gene expression signature of RAS pathway
dependence predicts response to PI3K and RAS pathway inhibitors and
expands the population of RAS pathway activated tumors.2. BMC Medical
Genomics 2010, 3:26Dry JR et al. Transcriptional Pathway Signatures
Predict MEK Addiction and Response to Selumetinib (AZD6244). Cancer Res.
2010 Mar 15;70(6):2264-73.

