Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo efficacy of intraperitoneal anti-PD-L1 therapy in ovarian
cancer


Objectives: Programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune
checkpoint cell surface molecule expressed on many types of cancers
including ovarian cancer. Its interaction with the programmed death
(PD-1) receptor on T cells essentially halts the immune response and
allows tumor escape. Monoclonal antibodies to either PD-L1 or PD-1 block
this interaction and show efficacy in a variety of cancers, though to a
lesser degree in ovarian cancer. We have evaluated the efficacy of
intraperitoneal anti-PD-L1 therapy in two ovarian cancer mouse
models.Methods: Murine 2F8 tumor cells derived from an orthotopic tumor
isolated from a triple transgenic MUC1+/KrasG12D/+PtenloxP/loxP (MKP)
mouse as we recently described. MUC1 transgenic (MUC1.Tg) mice received
an intraperitoneal inoculation of 8105 syngeneic 2F8 cells. Untreated
mice develop extensive tumor burden and expire around 29 days. Mice were
treated with 200 g anti-PD-L1 antibody (or rat IgG as control) every two
weeks for three doses starting at 21 days post-inoculation, thus
corresponding with late tumor stage. C57BL/6 mice were inoculated via
intraperitoneal (IP) injection with 1106 IG10 (spontaneously transformed
mouse ovarian surface epithelial) tumor cells. Treatment with anti-PD-L1
(or rat IgG as control) started 22 days following inoculation when the
mice began showing ascites. Immunohistochemistry for perforin was
performed on tumor tissue sections. Immune gene profiling of spleen cells
collected at necropsy was performed via Nanostring, using 561 mouse
immunology-related genes.Results: The 2F8 tumors are aggressive with
little T cell infiltration. The anti-PD-L1 treated MUC1.Tg mice showed
substantial infiltration of perforin positive cells within the tumor and
significantly increased survival (p = 0.001) compared to isotype control-
treated mice. Splenocyte profiling of 561 immune genes via Nanostring
revealed a treatment-induced immune gene signature that points to T cell
functions and cytotoxic anti-tumor immune responses. A similar gene
signature favoring cytotoxic anti-tumor activity was also revealed in
IG10 tumor bearing C57Bl/6 mice treated with anti-PD-L1.Conclusion: These
preclinical results from two different ovarian cancer tumor models
demonstrate that targeting PD-L1 is a viable therapeutic strategy in
ovarian cancer and increases survival despite (1) non-immunogenic tumors,
(2) late treatment initiation, (3) low dose and administration frequency.
The tumors respond well to anti-PD-L1 blockade, due to increased systemic
T cell responses and intratumoral T cell accumulation, without changing
tumor-specific antibody levels. Our studies have high translational
potential and support IP administration of PD-L1 blockers in ovarian
cancer patients.

