Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor microenvironment regulates the fate of myeloid cells by
controlling STAT3 activity


The abnormal differentiation of myeloid cells is one of the key features
of altered immune response in cancer. Myeloid derived suppressor cells
(MDSC) are a major component of immune suppressive network. MDSC
accumulate in large numbers in peripheral lymphoid organs and inside
tumors. Previous data indicated that the fate of MDSC depends on the
localization of these cells. In contrast to peripheral lymphoid organs
such as spleen, inside tumors, MDSC rapidly differentiate to tumor
associated macrophages with potent immune suppressive activity. We have
demonstrated that this phenomenon is mediated by dramatic down-regulation
of STAT3 activity in MDSC at tumor site. In cancer patients, MDSC at
tumor site also had substantially lower level of pSTAT3 than MDSC in
peripheral blood. These results were unexpected, since high level of
STAT3 activity is a hallmark of MDSC present in blood and lymphoid
organs. The mice with constitutively active STAT3 had shown the dramatic
expansion of MDSC and down-regulation of macrophage population in tumor
microenvironment, emphasizing the crucial role of STAT3 in myeloid cell
differentiation. Hypoxia is an intricate part of tumor microenvironment.
We have found that hypoxia caused the down-regulation of STAT3 activity
in MDSC. However, the effect of hypoxia on STAT3 activity was not
observed in tumor cells. We further demonstrate that the up-regulation of
CD45 tyrosine phosphatase activity in MDSC exposed to hypoxia in tumor
site was responsible for down-regulation of STAT3 activity. Using KO
model we have shown that MDSC devoid of CD45 failed to experience the
effect of hypoxia on pSTAT3 down-regulation as well as their
differentiation to macrophage at tumor site. Furthermore, the positive
regulation of CD45 activity in hypoxia was mediated by the disruption of
CD45 protein dimerization via sialylation. The treatment of sialidase
abrogated the effect of hypoxia on STAT3 activity in MDSC and
differentiation of MDSC to macrophages. This novel mechanism of
regulation of myeloid cell differentiation by STAT3 may provide rationale
for re-evaluation of therapeutic strategies in cancer.

