Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tivantinib (ARQ 197) exhibits antitumor activity by directly
interacting with tubulin and overcomes ABC transporter-mediated drug
resistance


The receptor tyrosine kinase c-MET is recognized as a promising
therapeutic target because c-MET-addicted cancers have been shown to be
highly sensitive to c-MET kinase inhibitors. Tivantinib (ARQ197) was
first reported as a highly selective c-MET inhibitor and is currently
being investigated in a phase 3 clinical trial. However, as recently
reported by us and other groups, tivantinib showed cytotoxic activity
independent of cellular c-MET status and also disrupted microtubule
dynamics. To investigate if tivantinib exerts its cytotoxic activity by
disrupting microtubules, we quantified polymerized tubulin in cells and
xenograft tumors after tivantinib treatment. Tivantinib could reduce
tubulin polymerization independent of c-MET inhibition in cells and in
mouse xenograft tumors. It is well known that microtubule destabilizing
agents, such as vinblastine and colchicine, directly bind to tubulins at
different binding sites. To determine if tivantinib directly binds to
tubulin or not, we performed an in vitro competition assay using
radiolabeled agents. Tivantinib competitively inhibited colchicine
binding, but not vincristine or vinblastine binding, to purified tubulin,
suggesting that tivantinib directly binds to the colchicine binding site
of tubulin. To predict the binding mode of tivantinib with tubulin, we
performed computer simulation of the docking pose of tivantinib with
tubulin using GOLD docking program. Computer simulation predicts
tivantinib fit into the colchicine binding pocket of tubulin without
steric hindrance.Currently, the microtubule inhibitors are widely used
for the treatment of various cancers. However the development of acquired
resistance is a major obstacle for the therapy. Overexpression of the
drug efflux pump (ABC transporter) is one of the major mechanisms of drug
resistance. We thus tested the cytotoxic activity of tivantinib against
tubulin binding agent-resistant cells that we had established by
incubating cells in sublethal concentrations of drug. Tivantinib showed
similar IC50 values against parental and multidrug resistant cells. In
contrast, other microtubule-targeting drugs, such as vincristine,
paclitaxel, and colchicine, could not suppress the growth of resistant
cells. Moreover, tivantinib equally suppressed growth and survival of
ABCB1-, ABCC1-, or ABCG2- transfected cells.Our findings that tivantinib
shows cytotoxic activity by disrupting tubulin polymerization, directly
interacts with tubulin and overcomes ABC transporter-mediated drug
resistance, suggest the possibility that tivantinib might be useful for
treatment of wide variety of cancers.

