Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate cancer cell-derived cathelicidin-related antimicrobial
peptide regulates MCP-1 and CXCL1/2 through autocrine signaling


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most commonly diagnosed cancer and the
second leading cause of cancer deaths among males in the United States.
Even with conventional therapies PCa metastasizes to advanced stage in
many patients, suggesting a need for alternate therapeutic targets to
increase patient survival. We have recently shown that elevated levels of
the human antimicrobial peptides, leucin leucin-37 (LL-37) and its murine
orthologue, cathelicidin-related antimicrobial peptide (CRAMP), were
positively associated with PCa progression. In addition, we have observed
that PCa-derived CRAMP chemoattracts protumorigenic immune cells,
including macrophages, neutrophils, and myeloid-derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs) to the tumor microenvironment. To further understand possible
protumorigenic immune mechanisms of CRAMP during PCa growth, we studied a
relationship between CRAMP and formyl peptide receptor 2 (FPR2) in mouse
PCa cell lines. Interestingly, we observed that TRAMP-C1 cells, which
express high-level of CRAMP, also express high levels of its receptor,
FPR2, whereas its cloned derivative, TRAMP-C1shRNA cells with targeted
down-regulation of CRAMP, display decreased level of FPR2 both in mRNA
and protein levels. We further characterized downstream target genes of
CRAMP-FPR2 signaling pathway. Quantitative real-time PCR results
indicated that TRAMP-C1 cells have increased expression of both monocyte
chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), known to chemoattract
monotyes/macrophages, and CXCL1/2, known to chemoattract neutrophils and
MDSCs, whereas TRAMP-C1shRNA cells exhibited low levels of MCP-1 and
CXCL1/2 mRNA. Moreover, results indicated elevated gene expression of
FPR2, MCP-1, and CXCL1/2 in TRAMP-C1shRNA cells following stimulation
with exogenous CRAMP peptide in culture. In a separate experiment, we
also observed down-regulation of MCP-1 and CXCL1/2 in TRAMP-C1 cells
after the blockade of FPR2 by FPR2 inhibitor, suggesting a possible
association between CRAMP and FPR2 in TRAMP-C1 cells, influencing the
levels of MCP-1 and CXCL1/2 during PCa progression. Chemokines including
MCP-1 and CXCL1/2 play a significant role in PCa development by
recruiting protumorigenic immune effectors, such as MDSCs,
tumor-associated macrophages and neutrophils to the tumor
microenvironment. Thus, understanding the role of CRAMP in stimulating
PCa cells to produce protumorigenic chemokines will define the
immunomodulatory role of CRAMP during PCa progression.Altogether, the
data suggest that PCa-derived CRAMP triggers pro-tumorigenic stimuli by
influencing levels of protumorigenic chemokines through autocrine and
paracrine FPR2 signaling. Ongoing studies to identify transcriptional
regulators influenced by CRAMP-FPR2 signaling will further define the
precise mechanisms of action of CRAMP, to possibly extend the findings in
PCa patients as a potential therapeutic target.

