Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Feasibility of 2-hydroxyglutarate 1H-MR spectroscopy for routine
clinical glioma imaging


The metabolic genes isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) or IDH2 are mutated
in 70-80% of WHO grade II and III glioma. The mutant IDH enzyme gains a
new function producing D-2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG). 2-HG is a small
molecule that accumulates in IDH mutant gliomas as high as 5 to 35 mM and
is considered the principal effector of IDH mutation in cancers. Proton
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) is an approved method in brain
tumors to identify and quantify metabolites within brain lesions by using
signals emitted by proton nuclei (1H). The 2-HG molecule has five
nonexchangeable scalar-coupled protons that give rise to multiplet
resonances in MR spectra. First attempts to measure 2-HG in IDH mutant
glioma have been promising but were limited to scanners dedicated to
research MRIs, long scanning times, and large tumors. The goal of this
study was to explore the feasibility of performing 2HG-MRS as part of
standard glioma imaging.We developed single and multivoxel spectroscopy
techniques using unique alterations of pulse sequence parameters and
software routines on clinical 3Tesla MRI scanners. We added those
sequences to our clinical MRI protocol. All metabolites, including 2-HG,
were estimated by linear combination of model (LC Model). 107 consecutive
glioma patients were evaluated, including 48 (45%) WHO grade II glioma,
40 (37%) grade III glioma and 19(18%) grade IV glioma. 80/107 (75%)
patients had IDH mutant gliomas. At the time of MRS, 42(39%) patients
were on active treatment with radiation or chemotherapy, 19(18%) had
received such treatment in the past, and 46(43%) had never received
radiation or chemotherapy. MRI tumor volume was The metabolic genes
isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) or IDH2 are mutated in 70-80% of WHO
grade II and III glioma. The mutant IDH enzyme gains a new function
producing D-2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG). 2-HG is a small molecule that
accumulates in IDH mutant gliomas as high as 5 to 35 mM and is considered
the principal effector of IDH mutation in cancers. Proton magnetic
resonance spectroscopy (MRS) is an approved method in brain tumors to
identify and quantify metabolites within brain lesions by using signals
emitted by proton nuclei (1H). The 2-HG molecule has five nonexchangeable
scalar-coupled protons that give rise to multiplet resonances in MR
spectra. First attempts to measure 2-HG in IDH mutant glioma have been
promising but were limited to scanners dedicated to research MRIs, long
scanning times, and large tumors. The goal of this study was to explore
the feasibility of performing 2HG-MRS as part of standard glioma
imaging.We developed single and multivoxel spectroscopy techniques using
unique alterations of pulse sequence parameters and software routines on
clinical 3Tesla MRI scanners. We added those sequences to our clinical
MRI protocol. All metabolites, including 2-HG, were estimated by linear
combination of model (LC Model). 107 consecutive glioma patients were
evaluated, including 48 (45%) WHO grade II glioma, 40 (37%) grade III
glioma and 19(18%) grade IV glioma. 80/107 (75%) patients had IDH mutant
gliomas. At the time of MRS, 42(39%) patients were on active treatment
with radiation or chemotherapy, 19(18%) had received such treatment in
the past, and 46(43%) had never received radiation or chemotherapy. MRI
tumor volume was <8cc in 38 (36%) patients and 8cc in 69 (64%) patients.
2-HG MRS was negative in all patients with IDH-wild type tumors and in
all IDH-mutant gliomas with a tumor volume The metabolic genes isocitrate
dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) or IDH2 are mutated in 70-80% of WHO grade II and
III glioma. The mutant IDH enzyme gains a new function producing
D-2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG). 2-HG is a small molecule that accumulates in
IDH mutant gliomas as high as 5 to 35 mM and is considered the principal
effector of IDH mutation in cancers. Proton magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (MRS) is an approved method in brain tumors to identify and
quantify metabolites within brain lesions by using signals emitted by
proton nuclei (1H). The 2-HG molecule has five nonexchangeable
scalar-coupled protons that give rise to multiplet resonances in MR
spectra. First attempts to measure 2-HG in IDH mutant glioma have been
promising but were limited to scanners dedicated to research MRIs, long
scanning times, and large tumors. The goal of this study was to explore
the feasibility of performing 2HG-MRS as part of standard glioma
imaging.We developed single and multivoxel spectroscopy techniques using
unique alterations of pulse sequence parameters and software routines on
clinical 3Tesla MRI scanners. We added those sequences to our clinical
MRI protocol. All metabolites, including 2-HG, were estimated by linear
combination of model (LC Model). 107 consecutive glioma patients were
evaluated, including 48 (45%) WHO grade II glioma, 40 (37%) grade III
glioma and 19(18%) grade IV glioma. 80/107 (75%) patients had IDH mutant
gliomas. At the time of MRS, 42(39%) patients were on active treatment
with radiation or chemotherapy, 19(18%) had received such treatment in
the past, and 46(43%) had never received radiation or chemotherapy. MRI
tumor volume was <8cc in 38 (36%) patients and 8cc in 69 (64%) patients.
2-HG MRS was negative in all patients with IDH-wild type tumors and in
all IDH-mutant gliomas with a tumor volume <8cc. In the group of
IDH-mutant tumors with a tumor volume 8cc, 2-HG MRS was positive in
approximately 35% of the untreated patients and in approximately 30% of
the treated patients. For a subset of patients we measured dynamic
changes in 2-HG over time (multiple times MRS). A drop in 2HG-MRS signal
was associated with treatment response.2-HG MRS in the clinical setting
is feasible. Specificity was 100%. Sensitivity appears, at least in part,
dependent on tumor volume with higher sensitivity in larger tumors. In
patients with a detectable 2-HG peak, 2HG-MRS represents a promising
non-invasive biomarker to monitor tumor growth and treatment response.
Final results for the entire cohort will be presented at the meeting.

