Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exome sequencing analysis of 41 patients with Familial Colorectal
Cancer Type X (FCCTX)


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most common cancer. About 10% of
CRC are hereditary including familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP),
hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), and rare syndromes.
While genetics of FAP and rare syndromes is well studied (APC, STK11,
AXIN2), only 40-50% of HNPCC have identifiable DNA mismatch-repair gene
defects. CRC cases fulfilling Amsterdam Criteria I for HNPCC with normal
DNA mismatch repair and elevated risk of microsatellite-stable CRC are
called Familial Colorectal Cancer Type X (FCCTX). Compared to HNPCC,
FCCTX patients are older, with left-sided CRC, and frequent polyps. We
hypothesize that FCCTX is a dominant Mendelian cancer syndrome with
incomplete penetrance caused by rare, family-specific mutations in
oncogenes and tumor suppressors.To identify novel mutations and genes
involved in FCCTX, we performed germline exome sequencing of
microsatellite-stable familial CRC from Molecular Epidemiology of
Colorectal Cancer (MECC) study, a population-based, case-control CRC
study in Northern Israel. We selected 41 patients from 38 FCCTX families
with extensive family history of microsatellite stable (MSS) or
microsatellite instable low (MSI-Low) CRC. Patients were Ashkenazi
Jewish, Sephardi Jewish, Europeans, Druze, and Arabs. Similar to previous
studies, stomach cancer was second most common in the families, and
left-sided CRC was more prevalent.Exome sequencing of all patients
generated 52,722 variants. Stepwise filtering analysis was applied to
identify candidate variants and genes. We selected all novel and rare
(minor allele frequency Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most common
cancer. About 10% of CRC are hereditary including familial adenomatous
polyposis (FAP), hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), and
rare syndromes. While genetics of FAP and rare syndromes is well studied
(APC, STK11, AXIN2), only 40-50% of HNPCC have identifiable DNA
mismatch-repair gene defects. CRC cases fulfilling Amsterdam Criteria I
for HNPCC with normal DNA mismatch repair and elevated risk of
microsatellite-stable CRC are called Familial Colorectal Cancer Type X
(FCCTX). Compared to HNPCC, FCCTX patients are older, with left-sided
CRC, and frequent polyps. We hypothesize that FCCTX is a dominant
Mendelian cancer syndrome with incomplete penetrance caused by rare,
family-specific mutations in oncogenes and tumor suppressors.To identify
novel mutations and genes involved in FCCTX, we performed germline exome
sequencing of microsatellite-stable familial CRC from Molecular
Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer (MECC) study, a population-based,
case-control CRC study in Northern Israel. We selected 41 patients from
38 FCCTX families with extensive family history of microsatellite stable
(MSS) or microsatellite instable low (MSI-Low) CRC. Patients were
Ashkenazi Jewish, Sephardi Jewish, Europeans, Druze, and Arabs. Similar
to previous studies, stomach cancer was second most common in the
families, and left-sided CRC was more prevalent.Exome sequencing of all
patients generated 52,722 variants. Stepwise filtering analysis was
applied to identify candidate variants and genes. We selected all novel
and rare (minor allele frequency <0.001) functional variants in
cancer-related genes from literature and cancer databases (COSMIC and
TCGA). In line with dominant inheritance, only heterozygous variants
predicted to be deleterious by multiple bioinformatic tools were
selected. We identified 627 variants in 387 genes. Gene enrichment
analysis showed regulation of apoptosis and cell cycle, DNA repair, cell
adhesion, and cell surface receptor linked signal transduction.As
expected, we found APC*I1307K founder mutation in three Ashkenazi Jewish
patients, one novel APC mutation (p.1289_1291del) in a non-Jewish
European patient, and found a mutation in MSH6. We identified three
promising candidate genes and performed segregation analysis in families.
Our preliminary data suggest several novel candidate genes for FCCTX,
although older age at onset and incomplete penetrance complicate the
interpretation of the results. Further population-based and family-based
studies are being conducted to confirm our findings.

