Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation profile analysis of gliomas revealed a change in
methylation status during malignant progression


Low-grade glioma, especially astrocytomas often undergo malignant
progression, and these transformations are a leading cause of death in
patients with low-grade gliomas. However, the mechanisms underlying
malignant tumor transformation are still not well understood. Recent
evidence indicates that epigenetic deregulation is an important cause of
gliomagenesis; therefore, we examined the epigenetic changes during
malignant progression of gliomas. We used the Illumina Infinium Human
Methylation 450K BeadChip to perform genome-wide DNA methylation analysis
of 124 gliomas and four normal brains. These tumors comprised 37 grade IV
gliomas, 32 grade III gliomas, and 55 grade II gliomas. This study sample
included 26 matched-pairs of initial lower grade gliomas and recurrent
tumors and 21 of the 26 recurring tumors recurred as malignant
progressions.Analyses of methylation profiles demonstrated that most
low-grade gliomas in our sample (84%) had a CpG island methylator
phenotype (G-CIMP). Remarkably, approximately 25% of recurrent malignant
gliomas that had progressed from low-grade tumors with the G-CIMP status
exhibited a characteristic partial demethylation of genomic DNA during
malignant progression, but other recurrent gliomas showed no apparent
change in DNA methylation pattern. Interestingly, we found that most loci
that were demethylated during malignant progression were located outside
of CpG islands. The information of histone modifications patterns in
normal human astrocytes and embryonal stem cells also showed that the
ratio of active marks at the site corresponding to DNA demethylated loci
in G-CIMP-demethylated tumors was significantly lower; this finding
indicated that most demethylated loci in G-CIMP-demethylated tumors were
likely transcriptionally inactive. A small number of the genes that were
upregulated and had demethylated CpG islands were associated with cell
cycle-related pathway. Here, we demonstrated that partial DNA
demethylation occurred during malignant transfomrmation of a subset of
lower grade gliomas.

