Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The identity of all nucleated cells enriched by CellSearch


Purpose: The FDA cleared CellSearch assay for enumeration of Circulating
Tumor Cells (CTC) detects CTC by fluorescence microscopy after
immunomagnetic enrichment targeting Epithelial Cell Adhesion Molecule
(EpCAM). The system generated thumbnail images of DNA+, Cytokeratin+
(CK+) events and presents these to a reviewer for scoring events as CTC.
An event is a CTC when it is negative for CD45, positive for DNA and CK
and is larger than a 4 4 m2 with a cell-like morphology. The presence of
CTC defined in such manner is strongly associated with poor outcome. The
question arises whether and how many other tumor cells are present in the
blood that do not have the phenotype defined by the CellSearch system. In
this study we investigated the number of cells that are obtained after
EpCAM enrichment and immunofluorescent labeling by CellSearch that could
not be assigned to a cell lineage and explored the addition of other
markers to increase the number of cells that could be assigned to a cell
lineage.Methods: Automated image analysis was used to reanalyze archived
CellSearch images of 12572 patient samples with benign breast and
colorectal disease, non-metastatic breast and colorectal cancer,
metastatic colorectal and prostate cancer. For the evaluation of
additional markers blood from healthy volunteers aged 20-55 were used.
For the evaluation of CD16-PerCP as an additional leukocyte marker, blood
from 30 patients with metastatic lung cancer was used.Results: The median
number of DNA+CK cells found was 450 of which only 155 (34%) were
identified as leukocytes (CD45-APC+). The number of DNA+CK was higher in
patients with metastatic disease as compared to those with non-metastatic
or benign disease (median 2028 vs 293). The proportion of identified
leukocytes (DNA+CKCD45+) was however only slightly lower (median 35% vs
43%). The number of DNA+CKCD45 cells was larger in patients with more CTC
(0 CTC: 495, 1-10 CTC: 2024, 11-100 CTC: 8140, >100 CTC: 8983). The
number of DNA+CK cells also increased with aging of the blood samples,
but did not account for the observed differences. The use of both CD16
and CD45 decreased the number of DNA+CK cells and increased the fraction
of cells identified as leukocytes to 90% in healthy donors and 78% in
lung cancer patients.Conclusion: A large proportion of nucleated cells
obtained after EpCAM enrichment is not accounted for. The majority of
these cells are leukocytes not detected with the current reagents and
microscope of the CellSearch system. The correlation between DNA+CKCD45
cells and increasing number of CTC suggests an association with cancer
and warrants further investigation.

