Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of resveratrol and curcumin on the expression of immune
modulatory molecules on colorectal cancer cells


Modulation of antitumor immunity in patients by targeting different
regulatory molecules on immune cells and tumor cells has been
demonstrated in recent clinical studies. To date, the most successful
strategy relies on antibodies directed against ligands or receptors that
regulate either the development or expression of antitumor immunity.
Prominent targets include CTLA4 on Treg cells; programmed cell death
ligands 1 and 2 (PDL1/PDL2) on tumor cells; and the programmed death
receptor (PD1) on T cells. But chronic infusion of antibodies to modulate
these targets in patients is not without concerns related to tolerance,
morbidity, and development of resistance. Thus, more tolerable approaches
in cancer patients to supplement the efficacy of current modalities
should be developed. In the present study, natural products Resveratrol
(RV) and Curcumin (C) were tested for effects on expression of
co-stimulatory molecule, CD80; regulatory ligands PDL1 and PDL2; and
programmed death receptor, PD1 on human colorectal cancer (CRC) cells.
CRC cells were obtained from surgical specimens of patients with
metastatic disease involving stomach (CRC1), ovary (CRC2), and a primary
neoplasm (CRC3). Tissues were disaggregated with collagenase/DNAse to
obtain single cell suspensions and cultured to obtain short term cell
lines. Each line was treated with RV (5ug/ml) or C (50M) for 72h,
following by RNA extraction and gene expression profiling using
customized T-cell and B-cell activation quantitative RT-PCR arrays. The
most consistent effect was on expression of CD80 which was increased
significantly by both RV and C on all 3 CRC lines. Expression of CD80 was
increased 9, 58 and 6-folds by RV and 6, 123 and 27-folds by C in CRC1,
CRC2 and CRC3 respectively. There was a differential effect of RV and C
on PDL1 and PDL2 in these 3 lines. In CRC1, PDL1 was suppressed 2 and
3-folds and PDL2 was suppressed 7 and 3-folds by RV and C respectively.
In CRC2, PDL1 and PDL2 expression was increased 3 and 17-folds by RV
whereas C had no significant effect on either ligand. And in CRC3, PDL1
and PDL2 expression was not significantly affected by RV while the only
effect of C was a 3 folds increase in PDL2 expression. Expression of PD1
was also not affected consistently by either RV or C. Expression of PD1
was not affected in CRC1 by either RV or C; was increased 7 and 9 folds
in CRC2; and was increased 3 and 21-folds by RV and C in CRC3
respectively. These results demonstrate that human colorectal cancer
cells express different immunoregulatory molecules that are sensitive to
modulation by the natural products, RV and C. The consistent upregulation
of CD80 suggests that chronic administration of these well tolerated
agents might enhance the immunogenicity of CRC cells in patients.
Furthermore, for specific tumors, favorable modulation of both programmed
death ligands and receptor is possible.

