Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amino acid-based prodrugs of gemcitabine - a therapeutic option to
overcome chemoresistance in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer is the deadliest of all cancers. Currently, gemcitabine
is the only drug of choice to treat this cancer but the results are
modest as the disease itself is diagnosed at an advanced stage and often
times develops resistance to gemcitabine via silencing of the influx
transporters for the drug. We hypothesized that the delivery of
gemcitabine into pancreatic cancer cells in a different form via some
other transporters would provide a logical alternative approach. It would
even be better if we can exploit for this purpose the transporters that
are selectively upregulated in pancreatic cancer. Several nucleoside
drugs are transportable substrates for the amino acid transporter SLC6A14
if used in the form of amino acid-based prodrugs. Such strategy would
work for gemcitabine if SLC6A14 is upregulated in pancreatic cancer. With
this in mind, we analyzed publically available microarray datasets for
the amino acid transporters that are upregulated in pancreatic cancer. We
found four transporters (SLC1A5, SLC7A5, SLC7A11, and SLC6A14)
overexpressed in tumors compared to normal tissue. The fold-increase in
expression is the highest for SLC6A14 in all datasets (range, 1.3 -
163.3; p, 0.05 - 21014). The fold-increase for the other three
transporters is 2 at the maximum. We confirmed these findings using
primary pancreatic cancer tissues and cancer cell lines. First, we used
pancreatic cancer tissues and compared with the normal tissues. SLC6A14
mRNA is increased at least by 7-fold in tumors versus normal tissue. We
then evaluated the expression of SLC6A14 mRNA and protein in normal and
pancreatic cancer cell lines. The expression is higher in all cancer cell
lines than in a normal cell line. This was further confirmed with a
tissue microarray containing pancreatic tumor tissues from 52 patients.
The delivery of gemcitabine in the form of amino acid-based prodrugs via
SLC6A14, an exceptionally energy-coupled transporter, as a means to
overcome gemcitabine resistance is a novel idea that has never been
tested. As a proof of principle, we have shown that SLC6A14 can transport
several nucleoside drugs (acyclovir, ganciclovir, and cytarabine) in the
form of amino acid-based prodrugs. The parent nucleosides are not
substrates for the transporter. To specifically assess the interaction of
amino acid-based prodrugs of gemcitabine with SLC6A14, we synthesized the
valyl ester of gemcitabine and investigated its transport via SLC6A14
using two different heterologous expression systems: a mammalian cell
expression system and the Xenopus oocyte expression system. In both
experimental approaches, we found that the valyl ester of gemcitabine,
but not the parent drug, is a transportable substrate for SLC6A14. The
transport process is Na/Cl-coupled and electrogenic. We conclude that
amino acid-based prodrugs of gemcitabine represent a viable alternative
to overcome resistance to gemcitabine in the treatment of pancreatic
cancer.

