Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-associated or cirrhosis fibroblasts recovered from
hepatocellular carcinoma promote macrophages and cancer cells to
progressive phenotype


Background/Aim: Tumor microenvironment plays supportive roles for cancer
cells of proliferating, invading and spreading systemically.
Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and tumor-associated macrophages
(TAMs) are deemed to be essential constituents forming cancer-surrounding
niche. However, the cross-talks between CAFs and TAMs in the settings of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has yet to be deciphered. The lack of a
reliable system simulating in vivo-microenvironment has been one of the
obstacles hampering investigation of CAFs and TAMs. By using the
newly-established model consisting of fibroblasts directly recovered from
the disease liver, we aimed to clarify the mechanisms of CAFs modulating
the macrophage differentiation and malignant potential of cancer cells in
order to search for therapeutic targets.Methods: We enrolled three
patients who underwent the resection of HCC and two who did living donor
liver transplantation. From the resected or the explanted livers,
fibroblasts from cancer and its adjacent tissues were separated by tissue
digestion. We examined their ontogeny by the expression of
fibroblast-specific markers. For the functional analyses, we examined
invasiveness of HuH7 cells on matrigel and migratory response of
monocytes in the presence of conditioned media (CM) from the fibroblasts.
We assessed the phenotypes/function of macrophages after the
differentiation from monocytes in the presence of M-CSF and the CM. We
comprehensively assayed cytokine/chemokine in the CM to identify
functionally-relevant factors.Results): After the culture, we established
three types of fibroblasts, CAFs, cirrhotic liver fibroblasts (LCFs) and
non-cancerous fibroblasts (NFs). All of these were positive for vimentin,
SMA, PDGFRa and FAP (>99%), confirming that they are ontologically
fibroblasts instead of being HCC, hepatocytes or biliary cells. The
invasiveness of HuH7 were higher in the presence of the CAF- or LCF-CM
compared to those with NF-CM. Similar superiority was observed with the
CAF- or LCF-CM in the migratory ability of monocytes. In the process of
macrophage differentiation, the CAF- or LCF-CM were capable of polarizing
macrophages into TAM/M2 subtypes, as evidenced by their higher production
of IL-10 but lesser IL-12. In the CAF- or LCM-CM, the levels of IL6,
IL-8, CCL2 and GRO were higher than those in the NF-CM.Conclusion: The
CAFs as well as LCFs directly recovered from the cirrhotic liver are
functionally competent of driving TAM/M2 differentiation and providing
malignant potential to cancer cells, thereby tuning the microenvironment
favoring HCC development.

