Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Matrix manipulation affects attachment and growth of breast cancer
cells in a bone-like microenvironment in vitro


Breast cancer notoriously metastasizes to the bone, but it is unknown why
breast cancer cells colonize there. Breast cancer cells may become
dormant in the skeleton until a stimulated to grow. The aim of this
project is to better understand the role of the bone matrix in
determining dormancy or growth. Breast cancer cells were co-cultured with
MC3T3-E1 mouse osteoblasts that formed a collagenous matrix. The matrix
was manipulated by fixation, decellularization, and by varying the medium
estrogen levels as the osteoblasts grew. MDA-MB-231-BRMS1GFP (BRMS), a
metastatic suppressed variant of the human MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell
line, was used because these cells do not grow in the bone, allowing for
observation of growth or dormancy. BRMS were added to a matrix produced
by differentiated MC3T3-E1 cells.BRMS proliferated more on a culture of
osteoblasts and their matrix when fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde than on
a live osteoblasts matrix. Why do the cells proliferate more on the fixed
matrix? We ruled out the possibility that live osteoblasts and cancer
cells competed for growth medium. Another possibility was that BRMS
attach differently to the matrices with live or fixed osteoblasts. We
compared attachment of BRMS to live, fixed, and decellularized matrices
and to tissue culture plastic, and after 60 minutes it was seen that more
BRMS cells attached to a fixed matrix compared to the other conditions.
Fluorescent microscopy revealed that BRMS had many attachment points on a
fixed matrix. On the live osteoblasts matrix, the cancer cells remained
attached to one another instead of attaching to the matrix. Experiments
will determine if the attachment explains the effect on proliferation by
testing for attachment factors such as -actin and focal adhesion
kinase.Breast cancer is more prevalent in post-menopausal women. Estrogen
production decreases with menopause, leading to the hypothesis that the
effects of estrogen deprivation on bone cause metastasis. Osteoblasts
were grown in the presence of ICI, an estrogen inhibitor preventing
estrogen from binding. Osteoblasts grown with and without ICI were
assayed for alkaline phosphatase (AP), stained with von Kossa
(mineralization), and with ChondrexTM (collagenous and noncollagenous
proteins). While AP and mineralization levels were unaffected by the
estrogen inhibition, collagenous proteins production decreased. We will
study breast cancer cell attachment to matrices grown without estrogen.
It is hypothesized that proliferation will increase on a matrix with less
collagen, similar to the increased proliferation seen on a fixed
matrix.Work was supported by the U.S. Army Medical Research & Materiel
Command under W81XWH-12-1-0127, the Metavivor Research Foundation,
Undergraduate Research Funds from the Eberly College of Science & the
Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Summer Undergraduate Research Program.

