Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic alterations of KDM4 subfamily and therapeutic effect of
novel demethylase inhibitor in breast cancer


The histone lysine demethylase KDM4 subfamily, comprised of four members
(A, B, C, and D), play critical roles in controlling transcription,
chromatin architecture and cellular differentiation. Although KDM4 family
members have a high degree of homology, they may play different roles in
various types of breast cancer. The goal of this study is to analyze the
genomic and transcriptomic alterations of the KDM4 subfamily in different
subtypes of breast cancer, and explore the therapeutic potential of a
novel KDM4 inhibitor in aggressive basal breast cancer.We conducted a
large-scale meta-analysis of KDM4A, B, C, and D in breast cancer and
identified associations among recurrent copy number alterations, gene
expression and breast cancer subtypes. We examined KDM4 expression in a
panel of non-tumorigenic and cancerous breast epithelial cell lines using
quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot assays, and assessed global histone
3 methylation levels by Western blot in a panel of breast cancer cell
lines. Next, we tested a novel inhibitor of the KDM4 demethylases, small
molecule NCDM-32B, for its ability to attenuate basal breast cancer cell
growth and impair metastatic potential. Finally, to examine gene
expression changes induced by NCDM-32B, we conducted expression profiling
and pathway analyses.We found that the KDM4 members show different
expression patterns in subtypes of breast cancer. Our findings suggest
that H3 global methylation levels vary among different breast cancer cell
lines. We demonstrated that NCDM-32B significantly impaired viability,
cellular growth and transforming phenotypes of basal breast cancer in
vitro. Furthermore, NCDM-32B impaired several critical pathways and
classical oncogenes, including MET, CDC26, and CDK6, that drive cellular
proliferation and transformation in breast cancer.In summary, our
findings add layers of information to the genomic and transcriptomic
profiles of the KDM4 subfamily in different subtypes of breast cancer. We
provide the first evidence that a novel KDM4 demethylase inhibitor, the
small molecule NCDM-32B, led to significant inhibition of cellular growth
of basal breast cancer in vitro. These findings lay the foundation for
evaluating KDM4 inhibitors as therapeutic approaches against aggressive
breast cancer.

