Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ROR agonists as a novel immunotherapy approach for cancer


Agents that enhance activation or release suppression of the immune
system could form the basis of new treatments for cancer. RORt is the key
transcription factor controlling the development and function of CD4+
Th17, CD8+ Tc17 and IL-17+ innate immune cells. RORmodulates expression
of genes involved in multiple anti-tumor mechanisms and in some cancers
Th17/Tc17 cells are reported to mediate potent and durable anti-cancer
efficacy. To further enhance these responses, we designed small molecule
ROR agonists and characterized their activities on immune cells and
utility in murine tumor models.Synthetic agonists activate an
ROR-dependent reporter construct and when present during activation of
murine or human T cells in vitro, increase production of IL-17A, IL-17F,
IL-22 and GM-CSF without negatively impacting IFN production. Th17 and
Tc17 cells differentiated in the presence of ROR agonists exhibit
decreased expression of inhibitory molecules such as PD-1, TIGIT, CD160,
CD73 and increased expression of costimulatory molecules including CD137
(4-1BB) and CD226 (DNAM-1). Stimulation of CD4+ T cells with cytokine
cocktails including TGF in vitro can generate Th17 and Treg cells;
addition of ROR agonists improves the Teff/Treg ratio via decreased FOXP3
and increased IL-17 expression. Functionally, ROR agonist treatment
reprograms cells to resist PD-1:PD-L1 mediated inhibition of
proliferation and cytokine production. In vitro activation of OT-1 Tc17
cells with ROR agonists generates potent effector cells that control the
growth of large EG7 tumors when transferred into non-irradiated mice. The
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes from this model have enhanced survival,
increased IL-17 production and decreased PD-1 expression. Oral
administration of ROR agonists to C57BL/6 mice significantly inhibits the
growth of established, subcutaneous MC38 colon carcinoma tumors. The
anti-tumor activity of ROR agonists is dependent on T cells, as growth of
MC38 cells implanted into scid mice is not affected by agonist treatment.
ROR agonists also inhibit growth of established, subcutaneous 4T1 mammary
carcinoma tumors in Balb/c mice. In the tumors from agonist-treated
animals there is significantly elevated expression of ROR and IL-17 as
well as decreased CD73 expression with evidence of decreased
metastases.As a transcription modulator, ROR agonists increase immune
activation and decrease immune suppression. These activities translate
into robust anti-tumor effects in syngeneic tumor models and represent a
promising approach for the treatment of cancer.

