Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paired box 2 (PAX2) is involved in carcinogenesis and regulated by
DNA methylation in endometrial cancer


Objective: PAX2 is recognized as a significant factor in the development
of urogenital system. It is expressed in multiple tumors and is essential
in tumor cell survival. This study aimed to investigate the effect,
expression, methylation of PAX2 in endometrial cancer, and the possible
regulative mechanism of DNA methylation related PAX2 expression.Methods:
PAX2 expression in endometrial cancer, hyperplasia and normal tissues was
detected by immunohistochemistry, and its expression in cell lines was
measured by real-time PCR, western blot and immunocytochemistry. The role
of PAX2 on cell viability and mobility was measured by CCK-8, invasion
and migration assays. Bisulfite sequencing and MassARRAY were used to
quantify the DNA methylation level of PAX2 promoter in endometrial cells
and tissues. Deletion analysis of PAX2 promoter was performed by
luciferase reporter gene to analyze its promoter activity. Transcription
factors (TFs) combined with PAX2 promoter were forecasted by TF search
database and the regulatory function of these TFs were measured by
detecting the expression of PAX2 mRNA and protein following the knock
down of these TFs.Results: PAX2 was over-expressed in endometrial cancer
tissues compared to hyperplasia and normal endometrium. Compare to normal
endometrial epithelial cells, endometrial cancer cell lines exhibited
moderate to high PAX2 expression. Knocking down PAX2 by siRNA reduced
cell viability, invasion and migration, while PAX2 over-expression
exhibited opposite role. The methylation level of PAX2 promoter was
higher than normal counterparts in both cancer tissues and cells, which
was positively related to PAX2 expression. After 5-Aza-CdR treatment, the
PAX2 mRNA and protein was down-regulated along with the methylation level
of PAX2 promoter. Deletion analysis confirmed that a repressive
transcriptional regulatory region of PAX2 promoter coincided with the
hypermethylated region found in MassARRAY analysis. The binding sites of
myeloid zinc finger 1 (MZF1) and the early growth responsive gene
1(EGR-1) were found in the repressive transcriptional regulatory region
of PAX2 promoter. Knocking down MZF1 or EGR-1 upregulated both the mRNA
and protein level of PAX2 after 5-Aza-CdR treatment, which indicated that
MZF1 and EGR-1 may act as repressive transcription factors in the DNA
methylation related PAX2 transcription.Conclusion: PAX2 is involved in
carcinogenesis of endometrial cancer by stimulating cell growth and
promoting cell motility. Overexpression of PAX2 in endometrial cancer may
be regulated by promoter hypermethylation via repressive transcription
factors such as MZF1 or EGR-1.

