Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of the transferrin receptor 1 dysregulation in
hepatocarcinogenesis


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most prevalent
life-threatening human cancers, with a rapidly increasing incidence
worldwide. The pathogenesis of HCC is complex and consists of multiple
interconnected molecular alterations. Current evidence indicates that
altered iron metabolism plays an important role in the development and
progression of HCC; however, there is a lack of conclusive information
regarding the mechanisms of this dysregulation. In previous studies using
different models of rodent carcinogenesis, we demonstrated prominent
alterations of intracellular iron metabolism in preneoplastic livers,
including changes in gene expression and the level of related proteins
involved in the regulation of intracellular hepatic iron metabolism,
primarily up-regulation of transferrin receptor 1 (TFRC). In the present
study, we investigated the role and underlying mechanisms of the aberrant
expression of TFRC, the main receptor controlling cellular iron uptake,
in liver carcinogenesis. In both preneoplastic liver tissue from a
relevant rat model of human HCC and in human HCC cells, there was a
significant increase in the levels of TFRC mRNA and protein. This
resulted in a substantial increase in TFRC/ferroportin (FPN) ratio,
favoring an accumulation of iron in the HCC cells. The increase in levels
of TFRC was attributed to a post-transcriptional microRNA-mediated
mechanism. This was demonstrated by a computational analysis and
confirmed experimentally by in vitro transfection experiments showing
that transfection of human HCC cell lines with has-miR-152 effectively
suppressed the expression of TFRC. Additionally, there was a strong
inverse correlation between the level of TRFC and the expression of
miR-152 in human HCC cells (r = -0.99, p = 4.710-9). Finally, the
expression of TFRC and miR-152 in human HCC tissues was evaluated using
the TCGA database. We observed an over-expression of TFRC in human HCC
tissue samples and a markedly decreased level of miR-152 when compared to
non-tumor liver tissue. These results demonstrate that dysregulation of
cellular iron metabolism in liver carcinogenesis is driven by an
up-regulation of TFRC, and indicate that miR-152-specific targeting of
TFRC to decrease its levels may provide a selective anticancer
therapeutic approach for the treatment of HCC.

