Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A rational approach for discovery of inhibitors of YAP-TEAD
interaction


The Hippo signalling pathway plays a major role in organ growth
regulation and tumorigenesis. By sensing contact inhibition, the central
kinase network of the hippo pathway controls nuclear translocation and
activity of the YAP transcription factor. Once translocated in the
nucleus, YAP interacts with the TEAD family of transcription factors and
drives expression of gene involved in cell survival and proliferation.
Deregulation of the hippo pathway frequently occurs in cancers and high
nuclear expression of YAP has been documented in many tumors including
lung, colorectal, ovarian and skin cancers. These data suggest that
targeting the hippo pathway is a new therapeutic option for the treatment
of a large number of cancers. Several approaches are currently proposed
to target the hippo pathway such as inhibition of kinases and GPCRs that
are upstream regulators of YAP nuclear translocation. However, because
YAP and TEAD are the downstream effectors of the Hippo pathway, we
believe that targeting YAP-TEAD interaction is the most promising
approach to selectively counteract abnormal activity of the Hippo
pathway. We have started a drug discovery program aimed at identifying
potent inhibitors of YAP-TEAD interaction, based on a combined FBLD/HTS
strategy. Druggability of the TEAD protein was assessed by a fragment
screen using NMR and SPR technologies. This approach, conforted by
assigned HSQC protein NMR information, provided fragment hits which are
used as starting points for the identification of more potent binders. We
have also designed a dedicated AlphaScreen assay to validate the ability
of our compounds to disrupt the YAP-TEAD interaction. Fifty thousand
compounds of the Inventiva's library were screened using the AlphaScreen.
Several hits in the micromolar range were identified and further
confirmed using SPR. Hits are currently tested for their ability to
disrupt YAP-TEAD interaction in a cellular context with a transactivation
assay and for their ability to block tumoral cell proliferation.

