Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERK5 inhibitor XMD8-92 for malignant mesothelioma treatment: A
preclinical study


Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is an aggressive cancer in dire need of
successful treatment. We are first to demonstrate that Extracellular
signal regulated kinase 5 (ERK5) plays an important role in MM
pathogenesis (Clinical Cancer Research, 19, 2013). In this study we used
genetically manipulated (ERK5 inhibited) MM cell lines to show that MM
tumorigenesis is influenced by ERK5. In the present study we used
recently discovered specific ERK5 inhibitor (XMD8-92) to show that it
regulates MM tumor growth both in vitro and in vivo. First, we show that
XMD8-92 inhibits ERK5 phosphorylation in 3 out of 4 MM cell lines showing
constitutive activation of ERK5. Next, time and dose dependent study
demonstrated significant cytotoxicity of XMD8-92 on 3 different MM cell
lines. We also showed that soft agar colony forming efficiency of H2373
MM cells was significantly reduced in response to XMD8-92 treatment.
Furthermore, in vivo studies using syngeneic mouse model of
intraperitoneal mesothelioma showed that XMD8-92 treatment (50 mg/kg, ip,
1x daily for 3 weeks) resulted in significant decreases in tumor weights
as compared to vehicle treated mice. Total and differential cell counts
in peritoneal lavage fluid (PLF) were also inhibited by XMD8-92
suggesting the role of inflammation in MM tumor growth and their
inhibition by ERK5 inhibitor. Cytokine profile assessment in PLF
demonstrated the reduced levels of VEGF and IL-6 in XMD8-92 treated
animals as compared to control animals receiving saline. FGF2, MCP-1,
G-CSF, KC and RAGE levels were, however, not significantly impacted by
the ERK5 inhibition. Taken together these data suggest that ERK5
inhibitor/ERK5 inhibition could be used for inhibiting the growth of MM
tumors. Currently we are exploring the role of XMD8-92 alone as well as
in combination with chemotherapeutic drugs for the treatment of MM using
various mouse models. We are also exploring the role(s) of ERK5 inhibitor
in inflammasome regulation by chemotherapeutics. This work is supported
by NIEHS RO1 ES021110 and VCC/LCCRO grants.

