Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 16S rRNA saliva analysis unveils differences in the head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma microbiome before and after surgical resection


Systemic inflammatory events and localized disease, mediated by the
microbiome, may be measured in saliva as head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) diagnostic and prognostic biomonitors. We compared the
saliva microbiome in DNA isolated from 38 patients and 25 normal oral
cavity epithelium controls to characterize the HNSCC microbiota before
and after surgical resection.PCR amplification of the 16S rRNA V3-V5 gene
region was performed using the 357F/926R primer set prior to multiplexing
on the Roche/454 GS Junior sequencing platform. Data were screened for
chimeric sequences and contaminant chloroplast DNA after pre-processing.
Passing sequences were characterized for diversity and taxonomic
composition using QIIME and R before cross-tabulation analyses were
performed.After preprocessing 142,887 reads were obtained with an average
length of 491 bp. The number of sequences per sample was rarefied at
3,487 to guarantee equal depth. Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and
Proteobacteria dominated the microbiome in our sample set with less
frequent presence of Actinobacteria and Fusobacteria members. At lower
taxonomic levels, the most abundant genera observed were Streptococcus,
Prevotella, Haemophilus and Veillonella with lower numbers of Citrobacter
and Neisseraceae genus Kingella.We found that 46 OTUs changed
significantly in HNSCC patients (pSystemic inflammatory events and
localized disease, mediated by the microbiome, may be measured in saliva
as head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) diagnostic and
prognostic biomonitors. We compared the saliva microbiome in DNA isolated
from 38 patients and 25 normal oral cavity epithelium controls to
characterize the HNSCC microbiota before and after surgical resection.PCR
amplification of the 16S rRNA V3-V5 gene region was performed using the
357F/926R primer set prior to multiplexing on the Roche/454 GS Junior
sequencing platform. Data were screened for chimeric sequences and
contaminant chloroplast DNA after pre-processing. Passing sequences were
characterized for diversity and taxonomic composition using QIIME and R
before cross-tabulation analyses were performed.After preprocessing
142,887 reads were obtained with an average length of 491 bp. The number
of sequences per sample was rarefied at 3,487 to guarantee equal depth.
Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria dominated the microbiome in
our sample set with less frequent presence of Actinobacteria and
Fusobacteria members. At lower taxonomic levels, the most abundant genera
observed were Streptococcus, Prevotella, Haemophilus and Veillonella with
lower numbers of Citrobacter and Neisseraceae genus Kingella.We found
that 46 OTUs changed significantly in HNSCC patients (p<0.05) when
compared to the controls mainly due to the loss of Neisseria and
Aggregatibacter (Proteobacteria), Leptotrichia (Fusobacteria) and
Veilonella (Firmicutes) with an increase in some Lactobacillus
(Firmicutes). Within bacteroidetes, Prevotella OTUs were found more
abundant in control samples. HNSCC patients had a significant loss in
richness and diversity (pSystemic inflammatory events and localized
disease, mediated by the microbiome, may be measured in saliva as head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) diagnostic and prognostic
biomonitors. We compared the saliva microbiome in DNA isolated from 38
patients and 25 normal oral cavity epithelium controls to characterize
the HNSCC microbiota before and after surgical resection.PCR
amplification of the 16S rRNA V3-V5 gene region was performed using the
357F/926R primer set prior to multiplexing on the Roche/454 GS Junior
sequencing platform. Data were screened for chimeric sequences and
contaminant chloroplast DNA after pre-processing. Passing sequences were
characterized for diversity and taxonomic composition using QIIME and R
before cross-tabulation analyses were performed.After preprocessing
142,887 reads were obtained with an average length of 491 bp. The number
of sequences per sample was rarefied at 3,487 to guarantee equal depth.
Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria dominated the microbiome in
our sample set with less frequent presence of Actinobacteria and
Fusobacteria members. At lower taxonomic levels, the most abundant genera
observed were Streptococcus, Prevotella, Haemophilus and Veillonella with
lower numbers of Citrobacter and Neisseraceae genus Kingella.We found
that 46 OTUs changed significantly in HNSCC patients (p<0.05) when
compared to the controls mainly due to the loss of Neisseria and
Aggregatibacter (Proteobacteria), Leptotrichia (Fusobacteria) and
Veilonella (Firmicutes) with an increase in some Lactobacillus
(Firmicutes). Within bacteroidetes, Prevotella OTUs were found more
abundant in control samples. HNSCC patients had a significant loss in
richness and diversity (p<0.05) compared to the controls. HPV positive
samples were more diverse (higher Shannon values and richness) than HPV
negative samples.Longitudinal analyses (3 time periods) of samples taken
before and after surgery revealed a reduction in the alpha diversity
measure after surgery, together with an increase of this measure in
patients that recurred. We also observed statistically significant
differences (pSystemic inflammatory events and localized disease,
mediated by the microbiome, may be measured in saliva as head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) diagnostic and prognostic biomonitors. We
compared the saliva microbiome in DNA isolated from 38 patients and 25
normal oral cavity epithelium controls to characterize the HNSCC
microbiota before and after surgical resection.PCR amplification of the
16S rRNA V3-V5 gene region was performed using the 357F/926R primer set
prior to multiplexing on the Roche/454 GS Junior sequencing platform.
Data were screened for chimeric sequences and contaminant chloroplast DNA
after pre-processing. Passing sequences were characterized for diversity
and taxonomic composition using QIIME and R before cross-tabulation
analyses were performed.After preprocessing 142,887 reads were obtained
with an average length of 491 bp. The number of sequences per sample was
rarefied at 3,487 to guarantee equal depth. Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes,
and Proteobacteria dominated the microbiome in our sample set with less
frequent presence of Actinobacteria and Fusobacteria members. At lower
taxonomic levels, the most abundant genera observed were Streptococcus,
Prevotella, Haemophilus and Veillonella with lower numbers of Citrobacter
and Neisseraceae genus Kingella.We found that 46 OTUs changed
significantly in HNSCC patients (p<0.05) when compared to the controls
mainly due to the loss of Neisseria and Aggregatibacter (Proteobacteria),
Leptotrichia (Fusobacteria) and Veilonella (Firmicutes) with an increase
in some Lactobacillus (Firmicutes). Within bacteroidetes, Prevotella OTUs
were found more abundant in control samples. HNSCC patients had a
significant loss in richness and diversity (p<0.05) compared to the
controls. HPV positive samples were more diverse (higher Shannon values
and richness) than HPV negative samples.Longitudinal analyses (3 time
periods) of samples taken before and after surgery revealed a reduction
in the alpha diversity measure after surgery, together with an increase
of this measure in patients that recurred. We also observed statistically
significant differences (p<0.05) at the phyla (Actinobacteria and
Fusobacteria), and genus (Veillonella and Prevotella) levels.
Interestingly, in one patient whose HPV status shifted from HPV positive
to HPV negative after surgery, the abundance of Lactobacillus OTUs
decreased, and Streptococcus (OTU 1009) increased significantly, being
also associated with an HPV negative status in another patient.We are the
first to observe that OTUs and several microbial communities at different
taxonomic levels discriminate HNSCC from control samples; HPV positive
and HPV negative samples; and pre- vs postsurgical treatment samples.
Future work will determine the correlation of microbial communities in
paired tissue and saliva HNSCC samples, as well as their link to
treatment response and survival.

