Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next generation sequencing analysis of genetically engineered
mouse models of human cancers


Genetically engineered mouse models (GEMM) of cancer are invaluable tools
for oncology research. They recapitulate critical aspects of tumor
etiology and allow for unique interrogation of the tumor stroma
interactions during tumorigenesis. In addition, these models are poised
for assessing therapeutic drug efficacy and resistance mechanisms.
Although these models are widely used, the mutational landscape and
transcriptional profile of GEMMs have yet to be thoroughly
characterized.In this study we sought to investigate the precise
mutational landscape of four well-validated GEMMs representing three
types of cancers, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and melanoma. Using next generation sequencing
techniques, we profiled one adenovirally-induced Kras mutant NSCLC model
(KrasLSL.G12D; p53frt/frt), two Kras mutant models of spontaneous PDAC
(KrasLSL.G12D; p16/p19fl/fl; Pdx1.Cre and KrasLSL.G12D; p16/p19fl/wt;
p53LSL.R270H/wt; Pdx1.Cre) and one Braf mutant melanoma model
(BrafV600E/wt; PTENfl/fl; TyrCreER). All four GEMMs incorporate mutations
that are well documented to occur in the human patient population.
Additionally these models have been documented to approximate
histological and phenotypic aspects of their human correlate.We carried
out whole exome sequencing for each model (NSCLC n = 120; PDAC n = 73 and
n = 40, respectively; melanoma n = 17) to comprehensively characterize
the baseline genomes. We also looked for additional recurrent driver
mutations beyond those engineered within each model. Interestingly, both
intra and intertumoral heterogeneity was evident. Furthermore, we
performed RNA sequencing and identified significantly affected genes and
gene sets. Finally, we compared our GEMMs to human tumors from TCGA
(LUAD, LUSC, PAAD and SKCM) at the genomic and transcriptomic level.
Taken together, the results we will present provide a clearer
understanding of the genomic and transcriptional landscape of these GEMMs
and their relationship with human patients. More importantly, these
analyses will allow us to better interpret results from previous and
future experiments using these GEMMs of cancer.

