Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic model of lower grade gliomas


BackgroundLower grade gliomas (LGGs WHO grade II/III glioma) account for
one third of all gliomas. Most LGGs generally show a slow progression,
but some show a more aggressive clinical course, where several
clinical/genetic factors, such as tumor size, presence of neurologic
deficit before surgery and 1p19q LOH, have been reported to correlate
patients survival. However, no large-scale studies prevent establishment
of a reliable prognostication system.MethodsStatus of somatic mutations
and copy number variations (CNVs) were investigated for 335 Japanese
patients with LGG using whole exome/targeted sequencing and single
nucleotide polymorphism-array karyotyping, respectively. Corresponding
data were also publically available for 425 patients from the Cancer
Genome Atlas (URL: http://cancergenome.nih.gov/). Correlation of genetic
lesions and other parameters with overall survival (OS) was analyzed for
combined 538 patients, which were divided into two sets, 269 training and
269 validation sets. First, the 269 patients of the training set were
classified into 3 types according to the characteristic mutations and
CNVs: Type 1 (mutated IDH with 1p/19q LOH), Type 2 (mutated IDH without
1p19q LOH), Type 3 (IDH wild type) patients. Using the LASSO Cox
regression model, we built a classifier based on gene mutations, CNVs
(over 5% of cases), sex, age, pathology, WHO grade and operation type
(gross total resection or not). We validated the accuracy of this
classifier in terms of prediction of OS in the independent group of 269
patients.ResultsUsing the LASSO model, the patients in Type 1 and 3 were
grouped into low- and high-risk groups, whereas Type 2 was not because no
significant risk factors were extracted for Type 2 patients. Combining
high-risk Type 1 and Type 2, between which OS was not significantly
different, the entire training set was divided into 4 groups showing
significantly different OS, low- and intermediate-risk groups and high-
and very high-risk groups, respectively. In the training set, 5-year OS
for low-, intermediate-, high-, and very high-risk groups was 100%, 82%,
49%, and 0%, which were 94%, 70%, 43%, and 14%, in the validation set,
respectively. The performance of the new model was evaluated by receiver
operator characteristic (ROC) analysis, which showed significantly higher
accuracy compared to other models based solely on clinical/histological
parameters, including pathology, WHO grade and Karnofsky performance
status (KPS).ConclusionWe established a new classifier based both on
genetic and clinical parameters, which provides a reliable tool for
predicting OS in LGGs patients and should be useful to guide therapy.

