Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of prostate cancer-specific MED12 mutation


Mediator is a highly conserved protein complex regulating RNA polymerase
II-dependent transcription. It also mediates transcriptional signals from
several gene-specific transcription factors. In higher eukaryotes the
core Mediator comprises 26 subunits organized into three distinct
modules; head, middle, and tail. Separate kinase module regulating the
activity of the Mediator is formed by MED12, MED13, Cyclin C, and
CDK8/19. Mediator complex subunit 12 (MED12) gene on Xq13.1 encodes MED12
protein which links the kinase module to the Mediator core and is
required for Cyclin C-dependent CDK8 activity. Somatic mutations in
5-terminus of MED12 are highly frequent in uterine leiomyomas and in
breast fibroadenomas. Similar mutations occur recurrently, although with
lower frequencies, also in uterine leiomyosarcomas and in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. All the observed mutations have been missense
mutations or in-frame insertions and deletions in exons 1 and 2.
Functional analyses have indicated that mutations in both exon 1 and exon
2 lead to dissociation of Cyclin C-CDK8/19 from the core Mediator, loss
of Mediator-associated CDK kinase activity, and similar global gene
expression profiles. Following the initial observation of MED12 mutations
in uterine leiomyomas, exome sequencing study by Barbieri and co-workers
identified a recurrent MED12 mutation in prostate cancer. Seven mutations
were observed in total and strikingly five of these affected the same
codon in exon 26 resulting in substitution of leucine 1224 with
phenylalanine. The same L1224F mutation has been observed in prostate
cancer in sequencing efforts by The Cancer Genome Atlas. The aim of this
study was to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which the mutation
causes tumorigenesis in prostate cancer. To identify the possible effects
on protein-protein interactions, we generated stable and inducible HEK293
Flp-In cell lines expressing MED12 wild type and L1224F mutant protein
and performed affinity purification followed by liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry. Interactions with other subunits of the
Mediator core and the kinase module were further analyzed with
immunoprecipitations accompanied with Western blotting. In addition,
Mediator-associated CDK kinase activity of the kinase modules with
respective protein constructs were measured. Based on these analyzes,
L1224F mutation does not interfere the interaction between MED12 and
Cyclin C-CDK8/19, and thus does not lead to reduced Mediator-associated
CDK kinase activity. Significant decrease was, however, observed in the
binding of L1224F mutant versus wild type protein with several other
Mediator subunits. These results indicate that prostate cancer-specific
MED12 mutation is promoting tumorigenesis through clearly distinct
mechanisms than the ones seen in myomagenesis.

