Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel pro-angiogenic role for IDO1 in inflammatory tumor
promotion


Chronic inflammation is a major contributing factor in cancer, but, due
to the complex multifactorial nature of inflammation, there remains
limited understanding of specific pathogenic determinants that might be
targeted therapeutically. The tryptophan-catabolizing enzyme IDO1
(indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase) has emerged as an intriguing,
pro-tumorigenic regulator of immune function in this regard. Because IDO1
can be elevated in chronic inflammatory states even prior to the
initiation of cancer, it may represent one of the earliest determinants
directing the immune response towards supporting rather than eliminating
tumors. Genetic studies in mice have clearly established the
tumor-promoting role of IDO1, but what this actually entails remains
uncertain. Here we present evidence to support the novel hypothesis that
a principle means by which IDO1 facilitates tumorigenesis is by
mitigating immune-based angiostasis.Tumor angiogenesis is characterized
by excessive and disorganized blood vessel growth much like that induced
by ischemia where immune cells have been shown to be important for
limiting neovascularization. Likewise, an anti-angiogenic response may be
a factor in tumor immunity. In particular, IFN, an inflammatory cytokine,
long recognized as a major inducer of IDO1, has been shown to exert
angiostatic activity against developing tumors, which was implicated in
these studies as the primary mechanism for both CD4 and CD8 T cell
dependent tumor rejection. Our recently reported finding that the loss of
IDO1 resulted in diminished pulmonary vascularization (Smith, Cancer
Discovery 2012) suggested the possibility that IDO1 might be working at
cross purposes to limit IFN-mediated angiostasis. In this same study IDO1
loss was also associated with the attenuated induction of the
pro-angiogenic inflammatory cytokine IL6.To directly investigate the role
of IDO1 in pathologic angiogenesis, we have utilized an oxygen-induced
retinopathy (OIR) model. As predicted, neovascularization in the OIR
model was significantly reduced in Ido1-/- mice. Consistent with the
hypothesis that IDO1 supports neovascularization primarily by
counteracting the angiostatic activity of IFN, neovascularization in
double knockout Ifng-/- Ido1-/- mice reverted back to wild type levels.
Il6-/- mice, on the other hand, exhibited reduced neovascularization
which was likewise reversed by the concurrent elimination of IFN. In
conjunction with these angiogenesis studies, we have also examined
pulmonary metastasis development by 4T1 breast carcinoma isografts. Loss
of either IDO1 or IL6 resulted in resistance to pulmonary metastases
that, in both cases, was abrogated by the concurrent loss of IFN. Taken
together, these findings have led us to propose a conceptually novel
working hypothesis that, in the context of an inflammatory cytokine
milieu, IDO1 plays a key role in supporting tumor angiogenesis.

