Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional interactions between estrogen-related-receptor (ESRRB)
and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-) in the regulation of breast
cancer stem cell dynamics


Breast cancer is a worldwide problem that accounts for almost a quarter
of all cancers in women; however, better therapeutic approaches are
required since it is estimated that one to three deaths from
overtreatment occur for every one death avoided. Our lab is interested in
transforming growth factor beta (TGF-) signaling and its dual role as
tumor suppressor/promoter in breast cancer and its therapeutic
applications. We previously performed genome-wide ChIP/Chip analysis to
identify TGF--activated Smad3 target genes in a model of breast cancer
progression. We discovered that the estrogen-related-receptor (ESRRB)
transcription factor binding motif was significantly enriched in Smad3
binding regions in breast cancer cell lines. The data suggested that
functional interactions between ESRRB and the TGF- pathway may influence
breast cancer progression. ESRRs (, , ) are members of the nuclear orphan
receptor family that share significant homology with the estrogen
receptors but are not activated by natural estrogens. Additionally, ESRRB
maintains pluripotency in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and is activated by
Wnt signaling to promote self-renewal in ESCs. Thus we hypothesized that
mechanistically ESRRB/TGF- may affect breast cancer progression through
effects on cancer stem cell (CSC) dynamics and cancer cell
differentiation. We showed that ESRRB protein is overexpressed in human
breast cancer compared with matched normal breast tissue, and that high
expression of ESRRB colocalizes with the stem cell master regulator OCT4
in human breast cancer xenografts. We performed ESRRB knockdown in the
MCF10Ca1h, MCF10Ca1a and MDAMB231 breast cancer cell lines and our data
demonstrate that ESRRB opposes the inhibitory effects of TGF- on CSCs as
measured by tumorsphere formation assay, while having little or no effect
on proliferation of the bulk tumor cell culture in vitro. More
importantly, knockdown of ESRRB reduced the in vivo tumorigenicity of all
three breast cancer lines and enhanced their histologic differentiation.
Extreme limiting dilution assays in vivo showed that knockdown of ESRRB
in MDAMB231 cells caused a 78-fold decrease in the relative number of
CSCs. In conclusion, our preliminary findings suggest that ESRRB
antagonizes the inhibitory effects of TGF- on CSCs and breast cancer
progression, making ESRRB an attractive therapeutic target whose
inhibition can restore the tumor suppressive effects of TGF- and reduce
the tumorigenic breast CSC population.

