Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dexamethasone variably protects triple negative breast cancer
cells against paclitaxel depending on relative cellular levels of
glucocorticoid receptor alpha


Introduction: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) comprises 15-20% of
all breast cancer cases and is unresponsive to the drugs used to treat
ER+/PR+ or HER2+ breast cancers. The only treatment option for TNBC is
chemotherapy with paclitaxel being a major component. However, many
patients respond poorly and develop side effects that are routinely
treated with dexamethasone. In certain cancers, dexamethasone attenuates
chemotherapy response by inhibiting apoptosis or temporarily arresting
cell growth. Dexamethasone's actions are mediated through glucocorticoid
receptor alpha (GR alpha), which is ubiquitous. Here we examine the
protective effect of dexamethasone in TNBC cells and the relationship of
this effect to variability in cellular GR alpha levels.Methods: GR alpha
expression was measured in TNBC cell lines and related to dexamethasone's
ability to affect their growth and resistance to paclitaxel. Cell lines
analyzed included those expressing low levels of GR alpha and recombinant
cells in which GR alpha expression was ectopically restored.Results: A
positive association was observed between endogenous GR alpha expression
and dexamethasone's ability to protect TNBC cells against paclitaxel.
Overexpression of GR alpha in cells expressing low endogenous GR alpha
conferred protection against paclitaxel in the presence of dexamethasone.
In contrast to reported observations in other cancer cell types,
dexamethasone increased cell proliferation and transcriptional activation
of thymidylate synthase, an S-phase enzyme. These results suggest the use
of dexamethasone may be one factor responsible for the poor response of
TNBC patients to traditional chemotherapy and suggest using GR alpha
expression level as a biomarker for predicting which TNBC patients should
be given traditional chemotherapy.

