Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin mediates reversion to oxaliplatin-acquired resistance in
colorectal cancer cell lines through modulation of nuclear factor B (NFB)
and cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5)


Background: In previous work we have observed hyper-activation of the
transcription factor (TF) NF-B and an up-regulation of the
Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) in human colorectal cancer cell lines
with acquired resistance to oxaliplatin (OXA). Moreover, OXA treatment
induced NF-B activation. Curcumin (diferuloylmethane, CURC), the major
active ingredient of turmeric (Curcuma longa), without discernable
toxicity, has been shown to inhibit the growth of colon tumor cells in
vitro and in vivo partly by suppressing activation of NF-B. The aim of
this study was to demonstrate whether a combined treatment with CURC and
OXA could revert the acquired resistance phenotype to the latter in in
vitro models and to elucidate the molecular mechanisms behind this
effect.Material and Methods: HT29- and LoVo-derived OXA-resistant HTOXAR3
and LoVOXAR3 cells (p53 mutant and WT respectively) as well as HCT116 and
its isogenic derivative with a targeted inactivation of p53 (HCT116 p53
null) cell lines were used in the present study. The IC50s and
combination index for CURC and OXA in the six cell lines was determined
by MTT assay and the data was analysed using the median effect lines and
the Chou and Talalay method, respectively. Survival and clonogenic
expansion of cells after OXA and CURC treatment was assessed by colony
assay. Cell death was measured by flow cytometry and propidium iodide
staining. Dose-response-associated phosphorylation status of P65 (S536),
IB(S32/S36) and expression of Survivin and CDK5 was analysed by Western
Blotting after oxaliplatin and CURC treatments. Nuclear translocation of
p65 was assessed by inmunocytochemistry.Results: CURC had a similar
effect on proliferation in all cell lines (IC50 range 7.5-14.7uM). In
terms of synergism, the best combination of CURC and OXA was the 24h
concomitant treatment. CURC inhibited OXA-induced activation of NF-B,
downregulated the expression of Survivin, an NF-B-regulated gene product,
and it also inhibited CDK5 expression in a dose-dependent manner.
Combination of OXA and CURC resulted in an OXA resistance reversion in
HTOXAR3, LoVOXAR3 and HCT116 p53 null cells but it was only synergistic
in HTOXAR3 and HCT116 p53 null cells, suggesting a possible role of p53
on OXA/CURC synergism. The concomitant treatment also reduced the number
of colonies formed compared with OXA or CURC alone. This was further
supported by preliminary experiments showing that the combination also
increased cell death.Conclusions: These results demonstrate that the
OXA/CURC combination can revert OXA acquired resistance in our resistant
models through the inhibition of the NFB TF and for the first time,
suggest a role of CDK5 in the CURC mechanism of action. Further
experiments are ongoing in order to elucidate a possible link between
CDK5 and NF-B, and their role in acquisition of OXA resistance.

