Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody blockade of semaphorin 4D promotes infiltration of
activated tumor infiltrating leukocytes and reverses tumor growth


Semaphorin 4D (SEMA4D, CD100) and its receptor plexin-B1 are broadly
expressed in cancer and expression correlates with invasive disease in
several human tumors. SEMA4D normally functions to regulate the motility
and differentiation of multiple cell types, including those of the
immune, vascular, and nervous systems. In the setting of cancer, effects
on cellular movement mediated by SEMA4D/PLXNB1 interactions have been
described in relation to vascular stabilization and transactivation of
ERBB2. Herein, we describe a novel function of SEMA4D in regulation of
immune cell infiltration and activity in the tumor microenvironment
(TME).PURPOSE: Characterize immune-related and anti-tumor activity
mediated by antibody neutralization of SEMA4D, as a single agent or in
combination with other immunomodulatory therapies.METHODS: Blockade of
SEMA4D with monoclonal murine antibody was evaluated in subcutaneous
Colon26 and orthotopic ERBB2+ breast carcinoma syngeneic models. Growth
kinetics were assessed following selective in vivo immune cell
depletions. Anti-tumor immune response was characterized by
immunohistochemistry, FACS, and functional assays.RESULTS: Strong
expression of SEMA4D at the invasive margins of actively growing tumors
modulates the infiltration and spatial distribution of leukocytes in the
TME. Antibody neutralization of SEMA4D disrupts this gradient and
enhances recruitment of activated antigen presenting cells and
lymphocytes into the TME, shifting the balance of cytokines toward
increased Th1 and reduced immunosuppressive cytokines. This orchestrated
change in the tumor architecture was associated with durable tumor
rejection and immunologic memory in Colon26 and ERBB2+ mammary carcinoma
models. Efficacy was dependent on both active adaptive and innate immune
cell responses. The immunomodulatory activity of anti-SEMA4D antibody can
be enhanced by combination with other immunotherapies, including immune
checkpoint inhibition and chemotherapy. Strikingly, the combination of
anti-SEMA4D antibody with antibody to CTLA-4 acts synergistically to
promote complete tumor rejection and survival, with significant 58%
increase in tumor regression and >295% increase in survival, as compared
to monotherapy.CONCLUSION: Inhibition of SEMA4D represents a novel
mechanism and therapeutic strategy to promote functional immune
infiltration into the tumor and inhibit tumor progression. Humanized
anti-SEMA4D therapeutic antibody, VX15/2503, has completed a Phase I
prospective multiple ascending dose trial in 42 adult patients with
advanced refractory solid tumors, in which the highest doses were well
tolerated. Patients with the longest duration of treatment, 48-55 weeks,
included colorectal, breast, and a papillary thyroid patient, who had a
partial response by RECIST. A phase 1b/2a trial of combination therapy is
planned.

