Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paclitaxel is necessary for improved survival in epithelial
ovarian cancers with somatic homologous recombination gene mutations


The impact of somatic mutations and genomic alterations in determining
the clinical outcome of sporadic epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) remains
uncertain. Our goal was to identify molecular markers of optimal
cytoreduction, chemotherapeutic response, and survival. We focused on
genes in the homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair pathway, as
germline mutations in these genes confer improved survival, and data
suggest that somatic mutations may similarly predict improved survival
and chemosensitivity. One hundred fifty-eight patients were included with
diagnoses of serous, endometrioid, or clear cell EOC and underwent
primary cytoreduction followed by platinum-based chemotherapy. We
performed targeted massively parallel sequencing of 53 genes in known
genes from pathways such as HR and checkpoint inhibition in primary
surgical samples. Patients were treated with platinum and
cyclophosphamide (n = 24) or platinum and paclitaxel (n = 67). We
detected 226 deleterious variants in 35 distinct genes. TP53 mutations
were found in tumors from 90 subjects (56%) and deleterious mutations in
HR genes in 45 (28%). Twenty-three patient tumors (15%) were found to
have homozygous copy number loss of genes in the HR pathway. We did not
detect an overall survival (OS) benefit in advanced stage patients
treated with platinum whose tumors had HR mutations/loss as compared to
those without HR defects. However, OS was significantly different between
patients (p = 0.0028) whose tumors had HR mutations/loss if they received
cyclophosphamide (median 24.1 months) as compared to paclitaxel (median
50.4 months). Furthermore, in patients with both TP53 and HR gene
mutations or deletions, median OS improved to 76.6 months in the platinum
and paclitaxel treated cohort (p = 0.0001). In this analysis by
chemotherapy regimen and mutation status, the patients with TP53 and HR
mutation/loss demonstrated worse median OS than those without such
defects when treated with platinum and cyclophosphamide (24.1 months vs.
32.7 months respectively), but improved survival over patients without
TP53 and HR defects when treated with platinum and paclitaxel (76.6
months vs. 44.4 months respectively, p = 0.0100). We also found that a
somatic HR mutation was significantly associated with suboptimal
debulking status (p = 0.012). Chances for optimal debulking and early
stage were significantly increased in patients with PTEN mutations (p =
0.042), leading to OS benefit. The survival benefit attributed to
platinum agents in HR deficient ovarian cancers may depend upon the use
of paclitaxel in addition to platinum. This merits elucidation of the
mechanism, and may be due to the mitosis cell cycle specificity of
paclitaxel, and ensuing inhibition of HR deficient genomically unstable
tumor subclones.

