Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of distinct mammary cancer stem cells with
differential requirements for the autophagy regulator FIP200


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) contribute to intratumoral heterogeneity and
have been implicated in disease relapse and drug resistance. Added to
this complexity is the idea that distinct CSC populations can coexist
within a tumor and hence, the understanding of this diversity is
imperative for effective therapeutic targeting. In this study, we show
the co-existence of distinct breast CSC populations which can be
identified by ALDH+ and CD29+CD61+ markers respectively using the
MMTV-PyMT driven mouse model of breast cancer. While both of these
populations exhibit enhanced tumor initiating potential in Nude mice
relative to bulk tumor cells, the CD29+CD61+ population have increased
invasive abilities and display higher expression of epithelial to
mesenchymal (EMT) associated genes. As autophagy has been associated with
the acquisition of breast CSC traits, we went on to address the
requirement for autophagy in ALDH+ and CD29+CD61+ populations through the
deletion of the autophagy regulator, FIP200 in MMTV-PyMT driven tumors.
Interestingly, FIP200 deletion only reduces the percentage of CD29+CD61+
cells but does not affect the percentage of ALDH+ cells. However, the
tumor initiating properties of both ALDH+ and CD29+CD61+ cells were
impaired upon FIP200 deletion. The decrease in the number and CSC
potential of CD29+CD61+ cells correlated with diminished TGF-beta
signalling upon FIP200 deletion as indicated by decreased TGF-b2, TGF-b3
and phospho-SMAD2 levels. FIP200 deletion also reduced STAT3 activation
and it remains to be addressed whether this is responsible for decreased
CSC potential in ALDH+ cells. Altogether, our results demonstrate the
presence of distinct CSCs in MMTV-PyMT tumors with potentially distinct
requirements for divergent signaling pathways. Importantly, we also show
that the autophagy regulator FIP200 plays a crucial role in governing the
CSC properties of these distinct CSC populations and could represent a
potential therapeutic target against breast CSCs.

