Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aggressive breast cancer associated fibroblasts communicate with
cancer cells via microRNAs and promote an aggressive breast cancer
phenotype


Background: Increasing evidence has demonstrated that stromal cells play
a pivotal role to promote breast cancer progression and metastasis.
Breast cancer stroma is comprised mainly of Cancer Associated Fibroblasts
(CAFs). Upon interaction with tumor cells CAFs are known to promote tumor
progression by providing paracrine oncogenic signals mediated by
activation of various pathways including developmental pathways, integrin
signaling, and MAPK pathway in tumor cells. CAFs have also been shown to
promote the survival of CTCs and help them in metastasis at distant
sites. Using breast cancer patient tumor datasets, we have previously
identified a microRNA signature reflective of hyperactive MAPK signaling
and that is significantly associated with reduced recurrence-free and
overall survival, and response to hormone therapy in ER+ patients. Breast
tumors from the TCGA and METABRIC breast cancer datasets classified as
high hMAPK-miRNA exhibit signficant stromal and immune cell infiltrate,
suggesting that these cell types may contribute to the hMAPK-miRNA
signature. We have established primary breast CAF lines, from different
breast cancer subtypes, along with several primary tumor-derived
dissociated tumor (DT) culture models that are tumorigenic in vivo and
vary in metastatic ability, and have found that the CAFs differentially
express several hMAPK-microRNAs compared to the DTs.Results: To
investigate the role of specific expression of hMAPK-miRNAs secreted by
CAFs, CM was isolated from CAFs from aggressive tumors (TNBC), from
indolent tumors (ER+, luminal A), and from normal human mammary
fibroblasts (HMFs) and analyzed for exosome and microRNA secretion. CAFs
from the aggressive tumors showed an overexpression of various secreted
hMAPK-microRNAs into the CM than do HMFs or CAFs from indolent tumors.
Several hMAPK microRNAs were secreted by aggressive CAFs compared to
indolent CAFs or HMFs, including miR221/222. The secreted miR221/222
could down-regulate both ER and TRPS1 (a negative regulator of EMT),
known targets of miR221/222, in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. The
hMAPK-regulated miR155 is also secreted by aggressive CAFs, and regulates
Myeloid derived suppressor cell induction To determine if the secreted
miRNA differences exhibited by the different CAFs could be seen in
patients, serum from breast cancer patients with metastatic breast cancer
and patients without metastases was analyzed for microRNA expression.
Differentially expressed circulating miRNAs were identified in serum from
metastatic breast cancer patients compared with patients without
metastatses.Conclusion: Together, these data suggest that CAFs from
aggressive tumors supports the aggressive breast tumor phenotype by
repressing ER, facilitating EMT and helping tumor cells escape immune
surveillance.

