Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a small molecule inhibitor of aldolase A for the
targeting of hypoxic cancer cells


Cancer cells are critically dependent on glycolysis. Currently, there is
no effective pharmacotherapy that exploits this metabolic vulnerability.
We have uncovered a feed forward cycle of anaerobic glycolysis and
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). Glycolysis under hypoxic conditions
normally maintains high ATP levels, which is driven by transcriptional
activity of HIF-1. Glycolysis inhibition results in a cellular energy
crisis, i.e. an increased AMP:ATP ratio, leading to AMPK-mediated
phosphorylation of the HIF-1 co-activator p300/CBP. This prevents HIF-1
activity, although HIF-1 protein levels are unchanged, abrogating the
feed forward cycle. We identified fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase A
(ALDOA) as a top glycolytic enzyme target for inhibiting hypoxic cancer
cell glycolysis and HIF-1 activity. Our aim was to identify small
molecule inhibitors for ALDOA that may yield compounds for further
preclinical development. To this end, a primary high-throughput screen
(HTS) was performed with 65,936 compounds using a fluorescence-based NADH
oxidation aldolase (cell-free) assay. 640 compounds were further tested
in a cherry-pick confirmation screen, from which 112 hits underwent
concentration-response curve validation in cell-free assays. From these,
4 hits were further tested in cell-based assays by using colorectal,
breast and pancreatic cancer cell lines. A lead compound that showed
micromolar potency in inhibiting ALDOA, induced cell death under hypoxic
conditions with IC50 values ranging between 2 - 8 M in the cancer cell
lines tested. It also inhibited extracellular flux in a real-time
glycolysis assay, inhibited extracellular lactate production under
hypoxic conditions as a measure of glycolysis, and blocked hypoxia
responsive element (HRE) HIF-1 reporter activity but not HIF-1 protein
levels. No effect of the lead compound was observed on mitochondrial
respiration. Thus, this compound provides a valuable chemical probe for
inhibiting glycolysis in cancer cells. Furthermore, the work provides
proof-of-concept that targeting glycolysis with a small molecule
inhibitor exerts potent antitumor effects in vitro and is currently being
tested in preclinical models as a first-in-class oncological agent.

