Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-9-3p plays a tumor-suppressor role by targeting TAZ (WWTR1) in
hepatocellular carcinoma cells


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma is the sixth most prevalent cancer
and the third most frequent cause of cancer-related death. Despite recent
advance in cancer treatment including the development of molecular target
drugs, the prognosis in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
still remains poor.The inactivation of the Hippo-pathway lead to TAZ/YAP
overexpression, and is associated with worse prognostic outcomes in
various cancers including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). While there are
several reports of miR targeting for YAP, miR targeting for TAZ remains
unclear. The aim of this study is to identify the miR targeting TAZ
expression in HCC.Methods: miR expression was analyzed using the Human
miFinder 384HC miScript miR PCR Array and was compared between low and
high TAZ expression cell lines. Then, we extracted miR-9-3p as a
tumor-suppressor miR targeting TAZ using miRBase. We examined the
functional role of miR-9-3p targeting TAZ using miR-9-3p mimic and
inhibitor in HCC cell lines (HLF and HuH1 with high and low TAZ
expressions, respectively).Results: In HCC cell lines and HCC clinical
samples, there was the inverse correlation between miR-9-3p and TAZ
expressions by real-time PCR. By western blotting, TAZ expression was
induced by treatment of miR-9-3p inhibitor and was downregulated by
treatment of miR-9-3p mimic. TAZ nuclear localization was indeed
inhibited with a treatment with miR-9-3p mimics in HLF cells, and was
inversely accelerated with a treatment of miR-9-3p inhibitors in HuH1
cells.Treatment of miR-9-3p mimic inhibited cell proliferative ability by
downregulating the phosphorylation of Erk1/2 and Akt signals in HLF.
Inversely, treatment of miR-9-3p inhibitor accelerated cell growth
compared to control in HuH1. On the other hand, cell invasiveness was not
affected by miR-9-3p.Conclusions: miR-9-3p was identified as the
tumor-suppressor miR targeting TAZ expression in HCC cells. miR-9-3p
played a crucial role in cell proliferation, but not in invasion, via Akt
and Erk1/2 signals in HCC cells.

