Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted inhibition of Hedgehog (HH) signal transduction in
rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) reduces cell survival in vitro and tumor growth in
vivo


RMS is the most common sarcoma of childhood. Approximately 60% of
embryonal RMS (ERMS) and more rarely alveolar RMS (ARMS) express HH
pathway components. However, roles for the HH signal transduction pathway
in RMS biology and as a therapeutic target in RMS have been incompletely
characterized. Therefore, we determined if RMS cells lines have HH
signaling pathways that are responsive to pathway activation or
inhibition in vitro. We demonstrated expression of HH pathway genes
(Indian HH, Desert HH, PTCH1, SMO, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3) by qRT PCR in
ERMS (Rh18, Ruch2, SMS-CTR, and RD) and ARMS (Rh 30 and Rh41) cells. We
showed high GLI1 protein expression, the downstream mediator of HH
signaling, by Western blot in Rh18, Rh30, and Rh41 cells but not in RD or
Rh28 cells. Exposure of Rh41 cells to Sonic HH-containing conditioned
media caused a 12-fold increase in PTCH1 expression and exposure of Rh28
cells to Sonic HH peptide increased GLI1 expression 1.5-fold, suggesting
intact HH signal transduction in some RMS cell lines. Down-regulation of
HH pathway activity with the GLI1 inhibitor GANT61 reduced Rh41 and RD
cell viability by MTT assays in a dose dependent manner. Reduced cell
viability appeared to result at least in part from down-regulation of the
anti-apoptotic GLI1 target gene, BCL2. These results suggest a role for
HH signaling in RMS cell survival. Next, we used subcutaneous xenografts
(with either Rh30 cells, n = 4; Rh41cells, n = 3; or RD cells, n = 3) to
assess whether the HH pathway represents a potentially important
therapeutic target in RMS in vivo. Mice were treated with either
cyclopamine (subcutaneous SMO inhibitor), GANT61 (subcutaneous GLI1
inhibitor), or Vismodegib (oral SMO inhibitor) for 16 days once the tumor
volume was 250 mm3. The study endpoints were HH pathway inhibition (qRT
PCR), tumor volume (mm3), proliferation (BrdU immunostain), and apoptosis
(Caspase immunostain) on day 17 of treatment. Cyclopamine and GANT61
reduced GLI1, PTCH1, and BCL2 expression in 7/10 and 4/10 mice,
respectively. We observed partial responses to cyclopamine and GANT61 in
Rh41 xenograft mice; GANT61 caused significant regression in tumor volume
from baseline (p = 0.03). We did not detect changes in proliferation or
apoptosis post-therapy by immunohistochemistry. Our results suggest that
targeted inhibition of the HH signaling pathway with small-molecule
inhibitors sometimes inhibits RMS xenograft tumor growth in vivo and
support further RMS xenograft studies, assessing HH pathway inhibitors in
combination with chemotherapeutic agents.

