Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apoptosis, autophagy and ATP: The dynamic interaction of cellular
ATP and drug resistance in MET amplified gastric cancer


Background: MET amplification occurs in 20% of gastric tumors, MET
protein overexpression is present in approximately 50% of advanced
gastric cancers and activating MET mutations are exceedingly rare in
gastric cancer. Several ongoing trials have reported responses in gastric
and esophageal patients with MET amplification .Methods: To investigate
the effects, of MET inhibition on proliferation and cell death in gastric
cancer I used two complementary approaches 1) siRNA mediated knockdown of
MET; 2) incubation with crizotinib, a clinically approved small molecule
inhibitor of MET. Both resulted in decreased proliferation and increased
cell death only in the MET amplified gastric cancer cell lines. Results:
The effects on growth arrest were stronger than the effects on cell
death. To look for possible resistance mechanisms we performed whole
genome mRNA expression profiling. Molecular changes related to autophagy
were among the top alterations observed. Consistent with these findings,
autophagy levels increased in a concentration dependent manner when
exposed to crizotinib. In order to investigate the role of autophagy on
cell death, I inhibited autophagy using two approaches 1) siRNA mediated
knockdown of ATG5 and ATG7; 2) exposure to chloroquine, a clinically
approved agent that inhibits autophagy by raising lysosomal pH. I then
measured apoptosis levels with the autophagy inhibitor alone or in
combination with MET knockdown or crizotinib. Autophagy inhibition caused
a dramatic decrease in apoptosis in one of the MET amplified cell lines
(MKN45) but not in the other (SNU-5). Because autophagy provides energy
for cells, we explored the effects of MET or autophagy inhibition on
cellular ATP levels using the Cell Titer-glo assay. The MKN45 cells had
the lowest basal levels of ATP and these levels were further diminished
in combination with autophagy inhibition. Conclusions: Overall, our data
reveal a novel relationship between low ATP levels and resistance to MET
inhibitor-induced cell death. Clinically this is significant because it
may discourage the use of combination therapies with autophagy inhibitors
in gastric cancer patients whose tumors contain MET amplification.

