Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Honokiol inhibits bladder tumor growth by suppressing EZH2/miR-143
axis


EZH2, a histone H3K27 methyltransferase, plays an essential role in
regulation of cell proliferation, survival, invasiveness and cancer stem
cell (CSC) maintenance. The upregulation of the histone methyltransferase
EZH2 is frequently detected in various cancer types, including urinary
bladder cancer (UBC). However, the mechanisms underlying its role in
cancer cell are not yet fully understood. Honokiol, a biologically active
biphenolic compound isolated from the Magnolia spp, has been linked with
anticancer activities; however, its mechanisms is poorly understood. In
this study, we investigated the in vitro and in vivo effects of honokiol
on UBC cells and whether honokiol can modulate EZH2 mediated network. By
employing MTT, colony formation, wound healing, transwell invasion,
Western blot, and Aldofluor stem cell detection assays, honokiol was
shown to inhibit human UBC cell proliferation, survival, CSC maintenance,
migration and invasion. Immunoblotting assay showed that the reduction of
EZH2 expression level by honokiol was correlated with the decreases of
MMP9, CD44, Sox2, Notch1. Forced expression of EZH2 reversed honokiol
induced cell growth arrest and low clonogenicity, indicating that EZH2 is
a major downstream target for honokiol in UBC cells. Since EZH2 is
essential for gene expression repression, we screened 24 cancer related
miRNAs and found that tumor suppressor miR-143 was the most induced miRNA
by honokiol treatment. Further quantitative RT-PCR, chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and functional analysis revealed that EZH2
directly inhibited the expression of miR-143, whereas the inhibition of
miR-143 partially rescued the EZH2 knockdown-induced cell growth arrest
and reduced clonogenicity. Moreover, in vivo investigation using
xenograft analysis in athymic nude mice indicated that honokiol treatment
inhibited tumor progression, which was associated with reduced EZH2,
CD44, Sox2, Notch1 and MMP9, and increased expression of miR-143.
Altogether, our data indicated that honokiol inhibited human UBC tumor
growth and aggressiveness through suppression of EZH2 function and
induction of its target, miR-143, and that honokiol is promising
candidate for chemoprevention and/or therapeutic treatment for bladder
cancer.

