Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sequence and structure-guided approach to identify functional
mutations in G-protein coupled receptors


G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) account for about 4% of all encoded
genes in the human genome with over 800 different types. They activate
signal transduction pathways inside the cell that regulate a wide variety
of cellular responses and physiological processes. GPCRs are known to
play a role in disease progression and are the target of about 40% of
drugs on market. However, the implication of GPCRs in tumor initiation
and/or progression has not been extensively studied and remains unknown.
Due to GPCRs being major drug targets, identifying functional mutations
in GPCRs that may lead to tumorigenesis has large therapeutic
implications. Nearly 20% of human tumors harbor mutations in GPCRs.
However, individual GPCRs may harbor few recurrent mutations making it
hard to detect potential functional mutations. Due to this lack of
statistical power, it is beneficial to analyze the protein family as a
whole and look at recurrent mutations at the same structural site. We can
use sequence conservation, protein structure, and cancer mutation data to
investigate the mutational landscape of GPCRs and identify conserved
mutation hotspots that might be involved in tumorigenesis.We use the
positions of structural domains to guide our protein family alignment.
Entropy scores, which are used to measure conservation, and somatic
mutation densities are computed based on the structure-guided alignment
for each position in each domain. Positions that exhibit high somatic
mutation density and low entropy are prioritized as possible functional
mutations. We analyzed GPCRs from 3,281 tumor samples in over 12 cancer
types and have identified three residues located in highly conserved
motifs: the DRY, NPxxY, and CWxP motifs that may be involved in the
activation of oncogenic pathways. The arginine residue in the DRY motif
serves as an ionic lock, which keeps GPCRs in an inactive state.
Mutations at the arginine could disrupt the inactive conformation leading
to a ligand-independent active form and constitutive activation. The
NPxxY and CWxP motifs are known to control the equilibrium between the
inactive and active states of GPCRs.We plan to further develop our
methodology by integrating specific amino acid changes and mutation
expression levels during the prioritization process. We will generalize
our methodology into a tool called AnaConDAS (Analysis of Conservation in
Domain Alignments and Structure) for major druggable protein families.
Our lab has created a new tool called HotSpot3D, which clusters mutations
and associated drugs based on proximity on a 3D protein structure. We
plan to integrate AnaConDAS and HotSpot3D by focusing on the hotpot
residues identified by AnaConDAS and analyzing mutations that cluster
around them. This approach is novel because it harnesses the statistical
power of studying mutations across a protein family and uses 3D protein
structure/proximity based analyses to uncover functional mutations in
cancer.

