Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The increase of oncogenic miRNA expression in tongue
carcinogenesis of a mouse model


Oral carcinoma is one of the leading causes of cancer death in the world.
To develop biomarkers for early detection may bestow substantial benefits
in diagnosis and the prevention of tumor progression. An animal model
simulating the human pathogenesis will also be useful for developing
therapeutic strategies. miRNAs are short, non-coding RNAs, which play
important roles in neoplastic process. The detection of biomarkers in
body fluid may enable non-invasive diagnostic approaches. This study used
mouse chemical carcinogenesis model to investigate the disruption of
miRNA expression in oral tongue tissues, and to explore the miRNA level
in saliva and blood during pathogenesis. Mice were fed with
4-Nitroquinoline 1-Oxide (4NQO) in drinking water for 12 weeks and were
kept for extended periods for tumor induction. The histological
examination showed the consecutive increase in the severity of epithelial
pathogenesis from hyperkeratosis, hyperplasia to epithelial dysplasia and
squamous tumors following the increase of 4NQO exposure. The increase of
miR-21 and miR-31 staining, as well as p53, pAKT and Ki-67
immunoreactivity parallels the severity of epithelial pathogenesis in
tongue tissues. A progressive increase of multiple oncogenic miRNAs in
both saliva and blood samples was also noted. The increase of miR-21,
miR-31 and miR-372 in the saliva and the increase of miR-146a and miR-184
in the blood sample were particularly eminent during the field
cancerization process of tongue. In addition, the dysregulation of these
oncogenic miRNAs and other molecular events in this model are similar to
the disruption being identified in human counterparts. As these miRNAs
are functionally oncogenic, their increase in the saliva and blood of
mice may be valuable biomarkers to develop diagnosis and prevention
strategies against oral carcinomas.Keywords: chemical, carcinoma, miRNA,
mouse, mouthNote: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

