Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of diarylthiourea analogs on triple negative breast
cancer cell growth


Breast cancer is the most common cancer occurring in women and the second
leading cause of cancer death in women after lung cancer. Breast cancer
is often classified at the molecular level in terms of whether the cancer
expresses the estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and human
epidermal growth factor 2 receptor. Hormone receptor positive breast
cancer accounts for 75-80% of all breast cancer and the remaining 20-25%
accounts for the most aggressive types of cancer which are negative for
all three receptors known as triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). The
current treatment used to manage TNBC is chemotherapy. Although
chemotherapy has been effective in improving patients prognosis, a
significant number of patients either relapse or develop resistance to
these drugs. There is a significant interest in developing new
therapeutic drugs aimed at improving outcomes in TNBC patients. Many
studies have shown that flexible heteroarotinoids (Flex-Het) are a
promising new class of drugs due to their ability to regulate growth,
differentiation and apoptosis in a variety of cancer cells without
activating the nuclear retinoic acid receptors. Previous studies have
shown ShetA2 as the leading Flex-Het anti-cancer drug with the greatest
efficacy in treating various types of cancer cells (Liu et al. 2004,
Benbrook et al. 2005, and Liu et al. 2007). Some of the limitations of
the ShetA2 are its high lipophilicity, toxic side effects and the low
yields associated with the laborious synthesis. Therefore, efforts have
been made to develop 2nd generation diarylthiourea compounds that retain
anti-cancer activity, but with minimal side effects. The objective of
this study was to examine the effects of two 2nd generation drugs SL1-18
and SL1-09 on various TNBC cell lines including MDA-MB-453, MDA-MB-231
and MDA-MB-468. Our preliminary data shows that exposure to micromolar
levels of the diarylthiourea compounds effectively inhibited cancer cell
growth in all three TNBC cell lines; however additional studies are
necessary to understand the molecular mechanism of how SL1-18 and SL1-09
work to block cell growth and whether these anti-cancer drugs are
promising therapeutic leads for the treatment of triple negative breast
cancer.

