Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of AMP kinase in TRAIL and PPAR ligand combination-induced
apoptosis and -catenin cleavage


Tumor necrosis factor related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a
promising anticancer agent that preferentially induces apoptosis in
cancer cells. However, many neoplasms are resistant to TRAIL by
mechanisms that are poorly understood. Previous studies from our lab
indicated that combinatorial treatment with TRAIL and a synthetic ligand
of peroxisome proliferator-activator receptor gamma (PPAR) Troglitazone
(TZD), can induce significant apoptosis in TRAIL-resistant cancer cells.
These studies identified the serine/threonine protein kinase,
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) as a potential target for
TRAIL-TZD-induced apoptosis in androgen independent (DU145) and androgen
dependent (LNCaP) prostate cancer cells. By using prostate cancer cells
overexpressing AMPK1-dominant negative (C42-DN cells) and by
siRNA-mediated knockdown of endogenous AMPK expression in DU145 and LNCaP
cells, we demonstrated that TRAIL-TZD combination-induced apoptosis was
significantly attenuated in the absence of AMPK. Mutations and
overexpression of -catenin are associated with many cancers and it is
known to play important roles in androgen receptor signaling. Our earlier
studies have also shown that TRAIL-TZD-combination-induced apoptosis was
associated with a reduction in the expression of full length -catenin and
appearance of a cleaved -catenin protein downstream of caspase
activation. In this study we found that TRAIL-TZD-induced -catenin
cleavage also involves AMPK. Knockdown of AMPK showed strong reduction of
the cleaved -catenin product in both cell types. Since TZD is an agonist
of PPAR, we also determined its involvement in this apoptosis pathway.
Endogenous expression of PPAR showed significant differences between
DU145 and LNCaP cells, with higher level expression in the DU145 cells.
Knockdown of PPAR in DU145 cells showed a reduction of cleaved caspase 3
levels whereas cleaved caspase 8, 9 and PARP levels were largely
unaffected. Luciferase assays with PPAR-responsive reporter (PPRE-luc)
didn't show significant increase in activity with TZD concentrations that
was optimal for apoptosis induction. These suggested a partial
involvement of PPAR in mediating this apoptosis pathway most likely
through a PPRE-independent manner. A screening with various synthetic and
natural PPAR ligands indicated 15-deoxy-Delta12-14-PGJ2 (15d-PGJ2) and
TRAIL as the most potent apoptotic combination in both DU145 and LNCaP
cells. This was evidenced from a very high induction of apoptotic markers
(caspase cleavage) and dramatic reduction in cell viability by MTT assay
when treated with TRAIL-15d-PGJ2 combination. Our studies indicate AMPK
as a major mediator of TRAIL-PPAR ligand-induced apoptosis and -catenin
cleavage, and suggest that TRAIL-15d-PGJ2 might be a very effective
combination to target androgen dependent and independent prostate cancer
cells.

