Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new quantification method for assessment of plasma
concentrations of pemetrexed and its polyglutamate metabolites


Pemetrexed (PMTX) is a multi-targeted antifolate drug applied in the
treatment of diseases such as malignant pleural mesothelioma and
non-small cell lung cancer. Assessment of therapeutic plasma drug and
drug metabolite concentrations offers a useful tool for monitoring drug
dosage, avoiding drug toxicity and obtaining therapeutic efficacy.Stock
solutions of synthesized PMTX and its (poly)-glutamyl metabolites
(PMTXPG1-3), as well as their corresponding heavy labeled analogues
(13C5, 15N (6 Da mass difference)) were prepared and spiked into plasma
from healthy donors, and 2 M trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added for
protein precipitation. The samples were centrifuged at 5223 g and
subsequently the supernatant was taken for measurement on a UHPLC-QqQ
mass spectrometry set-up. After assessment of analytical factors such as
linear response, stability, reproducibility and recovery, plasma of 4
non-small cell cancer patients undergoing PMTX treatment were measured to
establish the methods ability for measuring clinically relevant
concentrations.The stability of patient samples stored at -80C was
monitored during a six month period, in which no statistically
significant change in recovery between them (all recoveries were between
97-101%, no trend of decrease in time) was observed. The recovery of PMTX
and its metabolites after the sample pretreatment procedure ranged
between 45% and 79%. The relative standard deviations (RSD) in the
biological replicates of the reproducibility analysis were 7.9% for PMTX,
5.9% for PMTXPG1, 7.2% for PMTXPG2 and 37.9% for PMTXPG3. For all
analytes the linear response was determined over three orders of
magnitude in concentration (0.2 to 500 nmol/L). Additionally, the limit
of quantification (lowest quantifiable concentration (RSD Pemetrexed
(PMTX) is a multi-targeted antifolate drug applied in the treatment of
diseases such as malignant pleural mesothelioma and non-small cell lung
cancer. Assessment of therapeutic plasma drug and drug metabolite
concentrations offers a useful tool for monitoring drug dosage, avoiding
drug toxicity and obtaining therapeutic efficacy.Stock solutions of
synthesized PMTX and its (poly)-glutamyl metabolites (PMTXPG1-3), as well
as their corresponding heavy labeled analogues (13C5, 15N (6 Da mass
difference)) were prepared and spiked into plasma from healthy donors,
and 2 M trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added for protein precipitation.
The samples were centrifuged at 5223 g and subsequently the supernatant
was taken for measurement on a UHPLC-QqQ mass spectrometry set-up. After
assessment of analytical factors such as linear response, stability,
reproducibility and recovery, plasma of 4 non-small cell cancer patients
undergoing PMTX treatment were measured to establish the methods ability
for measuring clinically relevant concentrations.The stability of patient
samples stored at -80C was monitored during a six month period, in which
no statistically significant change in recovery between them (all
recoveries were between 97-101%, no trend of decrease in time) was
observed. The recovery of PMTX and its metabolites after the sample
pretreatment procedure ranged between 45% and 79%. The relative standard
deviations (RSD) in the biological replicates of the reproducibility
analysis were 7.9% for PMTX, 5.9% for PMTXPG1, 7.2% for PMTXPG2 and 37.9%
for PMTXPG3. For all analytes the linear response was determined over
three orders of magnitude in concentration (0.2 to 500 nmol/L).
Additionally, the limit of quantification (lowest quantifiable
concentration (RSD < 20%)) was determined for all analytes. For PMTX,
PMTXPG1 and PMTXPG2 subnanomolar limits of quantification were
determined. The linear response for the compounds was determined by
calculation of the correlation coefficient, which was better than 0.99
for all four analytes. In all four PMTX-treated patients the plasma
concentrations of PMTX, PMTXPG1 and PMTXPG2 could be detected and
quantified. PMTXPG3 was not detected in any of the tested clinical
samples of the four patients.In conclusion, a LC-MS/MS-based method to
measure PMTX and its polyglutamate metabolites with minimal sample
pretreatment is described. To our knowledge this is the first time
measurement method for pemetrexed metabolites in human plasma is
reported. The method also has relatively short measurement times and good
performance in being able to quantify the drug and two of its metabolites
at clinically relevant concentrations in plasma of patients with lung
carcinoma.

