Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The landscape of published cancer meta-analyses: a descriptive
look from 2008-2013


Cancer epidemiology has undergone rapid growth in the past two decades.
This rapid expansion of scientific literature in cancer epidemiology has
required scientists to increasingly look towards meta-analyses to help
navigate the sea of literature. Knowledge integration has facilitated the
movement of translation of scientific findings into clinical
applications, evidence-based recommendations and population health
impact. Performing meta-analysis has allowed scientists to filter through
large datasets and translate these scientific or clinical findings
effectively. To our knowledge, there has never been a systematic attempt
to compile meta-analyses in cancer. Here, we describe the landscape of
cancer meta-analyses including publication production stratified by year,
cancer outcome measures, study design, cancer type, journal and country
leaders in the field.To ascertain human cancer meta-analytical studies
published in the scientific literature during the years 2008 through
2013, we searched PubMed using a text query and the Human Genome
Epidemiology (HuGE) Navigator. Two reviewers read through abstracts to
determine whether the articles met inclusion criteria. Articles were
included if there was a meta-analytical analysis of a human cancer
measurement and met one of the following outcome criteria: 1) risk of
disease, 2) diagnostic measure, 3) prognostic measure, 4) treatment of
disease, including long-term survival and/or adverse events and 5)
screening for disease. Coding of articles involved extracting information
from the Medline version of each PubMed article reference (i.e. Journal
title, year of publication, first author location and cancer-site mesh
terms), and by manually reviewing abstracts for classification on the
human cancer outcome measurement and other manually coded information.A
total of 4,007 cancer meta-analyses were captured by PubMed from 2008 to
2013. Our systematic review of cancer meta-analyses publications
indicates a rapid growth of cancer meta-analyses worldwide with 20%
production in the past 6-year time period. Furthermore, PLoS One and
Asian Pacific Journal of Cancer Prevention were recorded as the top two
publishers in the research field. Genomic, clinical and modifiable cancer
risk factors were captured as the top leading cancer meta-analyses
studies. Observational studies were captured as the leading meta-analyses
study design. In the past five years there was an increased wide
distribution of meta-analyses on all cancer types.

