Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Redox imaging biomarkers for breast cancer diagnosis/prognosis: a
pilot study


Metastasis accounts for 90% of cancer death and there are no reliable
clinical biomarkers predicting metastatic risk. Our studies using
preclinical models have shown that tumors with higher propensity for
metastasis have distinct metabolic profiles. We aim to evaluate the
prognostic value of several optical metabolic imaging biomarkers as
previously demonstrated by our group to have diagnostic/prognostic
potential in mouse tumor models. As a pilot study, we have successfully
employed the 3D cryogenic NADH/oxidized flavoproteins (Fp) fluorescence
imager (the Chance redox scanner) to imaging the breast tissue core
biopsies of 16 breast cancer patients. We found that the redox indices
(including Fp, NADH, Fp/(NADH+Fp), NADH/Fp, and their standard
deviations) could readily differentiate cancer from non-cancer and the
cancerous tissues were more oxidized and more heterogeneous. To test the
prognostic power of this technique, we acquired the frozen breast tumor
tissue collected at the time of the patient's primary breast cancer
surgery (n = 29) selected from a fully annotated breast tumor tissue
bank. The clinical breast cancer subtypes in our cohort (65% ER+/PR+
(luminal A), 20% TNBC, 15% Her2+ (including both luminal B and Her2+))
follow the expected distribution. Of the 29 patients, six of them have
developed metastatic disease (MET) while the remaining patients have no
evidence of disease (NED) at the time of study. Three to four tissue
sections (spacing 100-200 m) of each specimen were scanned with the
Chance redox scanner. Comparison of redox indices between MET and NED,
calculated by averaging indices globally, demonstrated no significant
differences. However, as the redox state was heterogeneous within the
tumor tissue, we developed heterogeneity-associated mitochondrial redox
indices (HAMRI) based on the observed intra-specimen redox heterogeneity.
By fitting the histogram of the Fp redox ratio, Fp/(NADH+Fp) for each of
the image sections with 2-4 Gaussian functions, whereby each Gaussian
curve represented a subpopulation of image pixels with a unique averaged
redox ratio, we identified the most reduced (the smallest Fp redox ratio
- br) and the most oxidized (the largest Fp redox ratio - bo) redox
ratios for each patient (brMetastasis accounts for 90% of cancer death
and there are no reliable clinical biomarkers predicting metastatic risk.
Our studies using preclinical models have shown that tumors with higher
propensity for metastasis have distinct metabolic profiles. We aim to
evaluate the prognostic value of several optical metabolic imaging
biomarkers as previously demonstrated by our group to have
diagnostic/prognostic potential in mouse tumor models. As a pilot study,
we have successfully employed the 3D cryogenic NADH/oxidized
flavoproteins (Fp) fluorescence imager (the Chance redox scanner) to
imaging the breast tissue core biopsies of 16 breast cancer patients. We
found that the redox indices (including Fp, NADH, Fp/(NADH+Fp), NADH/Fp,
and their standard deviations) could readily differentiate cancer from
non-cancer and the cancerous tissues were more oxidized and more
heterogeneous. To test the prognostic power of this technique, we
acquired the frozen breast tumor tissue collected at the time of the
patient's primary breast cancer surgery (n = 29) selected from a fully
annotated breast tumor tissue bank. The clinical breast cancer subtypes
in our cohort (65% ER+/PR+ (luminal A), 20% TNBC, 15% Her2+ (including
both luminal B and Her2+)) follow the expected distribution. Of the 29
patients, six of them have developed metastatic disease (MET) while the
remaining patients have no evidence of disease (NED) at the time of
study. Three to four tissue sections (spacing 100-200 m) of each specimen
were scanned with the Chance redox scanner. Comparison of redox indices
between MET and NED, calculated by averaging indices globally,
demonstrated no significant differences. However, as the redox state was
heterogeneous within the tumor tissue, we developed
heterogeneity-associated mitochondrial redox indices (HAMRI) based on the
observed intra-specimen redox heterogeneity. By fitting the histogram of
the Fp redox ratio, Fp/(NADH+Fp) for each of the image sections with 2-4
Gaussian functions, whereby each Gaussian curve represented a
subpopulation of image pixels with a unique averaged redox ratio, we
identified the most reduced (the smallest Fp redox ratio - br) and the
most oxidized (the largest Fp redox ratio - bo) redox ratios for each
patient (br< bo). HAMRI indices were then derived for each patient's
tumor sample and were statistically tested for their prognostic power.
Our results from this pilot study showed that HAMRI is a strong predictor
of MET (sensitivity 83%, specificity 88%, AUC = 0.93, p = 0.01), more
robust than conventional prognostic factors (e.g. tumor grade, size,
molecular types, nodal status). HAMRI indices also predicted the nodal
status in our cohort. Our findings suggest that our quantitative redox
scanning technique has prognostic value and warrants further
investigation.

