Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An orthotopic model of human chordoma in rats


Introduction. Chordoma (CHO) is a relatively rare, slow-growing,
malignant, locally aggressive cancer that constitutes 1% to 4% of all
primary bone tumors. It arises from notochordal remnants along the
neuraxis at developmentally active sites. CHO causes significant damage
through local bone destruction and compromise of surrounding neurologic
and neurovascular structures. CHO in the lumbar spine results in
devastating effects that include pain, paralysis, bowel/bladder
dysfunction, and decreased ambulation. These effects are minimally
responsive to conventional chemotherapy and radiotherapy and as such,
surgical resection is the mainstay of treatment. Pre-clinical models that
better recapitulate the clinical symptoms observed in patients diagnosed
with CHO are needed to increase the understanding of this disease and to
develop strategies to develop new therapeutic strategies. Here we
developed the first orthotopic animal model of human CHO in the lumbar
spine of immunocompromised rats.Methods. 11 immunocompromised rats were
implanted in the lumbar spine with human CHO tumor tissue. A group of 6
sham rats (surgical approach without tumor implantation) and another with
6 intact rats were used as control groups. This tumor was obtained from a
donor rat that was previously injected with UCH1CHO cells in the flank.
Nociceptive response was conducted every week after the first
neurological deficits were present using Randal-Sellito. Locomotion gait
analysis was used to evaluate gait impairment. Rats were clinically
observed for neurological impairment in the lumbar spine and/or hind
limbs. Spines were collected after euthanasia, and inspected for signs of
spinal cord compression followed by H&E staining to evaluate the
histology.Results. In CHO-implanted rats, the threshold for a mechanic
nociceptive response was significantly reduced in time and pressure
applied. Locomotion gait analysis showed a disruption in the normal
pattern of the rats gait. At D25-35 after tumor implantation rats showed
impairment in the flexion and extension of the knees, ankles, and toes.
At the gross morphology level, the spinal cord showed signs of
compression at upper and lower levels related with the implanted CHO
tumor. Histology revealed tumor invasion in the spinal canal that was
related with deficit in the flexion and extension of the toes. The tumor
showed typical CHO morphology: physaliferous cells filled with vacuolated
cytoplasm of mucoid matrix.Conclusions. We have developed a novel
orthotopic human CHO model in rats. This model reproduces cardinal
clinical signs such as locomotor and sensory deficits present in human
patients. To our knowledge, this is the first orthotopic animal model of
human CHO. Its use and further study will be essential for
pathophysiology research and the development of new therapeutic
strategies.

