Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-targeted fusion constructs containing engineered granzyme B
variants with optimized stability and potency


The serine protease Granzyme B (GrB) is highly cytotoxic generating
multiple, intense pro-apoptotic signals when delivered to the cytoplasm
of cells and operates through both caspase-dependent and
caspase-independent mechanisms. Our laboratory has generated fusion
constructs of this payload with VEGF, scFvMEL, BlyS, ML3-9, 4D5 and
scFvIT4 targeting molecules thus far. The inhibitor serpin B9 (PI-9) is a
42 kDa protein found at varying levels in cells and plasma binding
irreversibly to Granzyme B at the latter's catalytic domain serine
(195Serine) resulting in inactive Granzyme B. We undertook modification
studies of the GrB primary sequence to improve protein production, serum
stability and biological activity. Granzyme B variants were engineered
using PCR-based mutagenesis and fused to VEGF121 for direct comparision
to the unmodified GrB/VEGF121 fusion protein. Variants designed to
prevent binding to PI-9 took into account the impact of the mutation on
substrate specificity, and the ability of the mutated GrB to cleave its
various cellular substrates. As expected, mutation of 195serine to
alanine (S195A) resulted in a complete loss of GrB enzymatic activity as
well as in vitro cytotoxicity against VEGFR-1+ and VEGFR-2+ cells. The
enzymatic activity of the K27E, R28A (EA) double mutant was identical to
GrB/VEGF121 when the samples were incubated in PBS. In the presence of
50% human serum, however, the enzymatic activity of GrB/VEGF121 steadily
declined to less than 10% over 24 hours while the enzymatic activity of
EA-GrB/VEGF121 remained over 40% over that time period. The somewhat
similar K27L, R28A (LA) double mutant appeared to behave intermediate to
the wild-type protein and the EA construct. Both EA and LA GrB mutants
retain higher cytotoxic activity after pre-incubation in serum for 4h,
compared to unmodified GrB/VEGF121. Mutation of a putative self-cleaving
domain and a glycosylation site in GrB appeared to improve enzymatic
activity in serum compared to GrB/VEGF121. C210A-GrB/VEGF121, constructed
to remove additional thiol sites which may cause aggregation, resulted in
a vastly improved yield with otherwise similar serum stability and in
vitro cytotoxicity as unmodified GrB/VEGF121. Constructs with
modification of the 82PKN84 loop region alone or in combination with the
EA mutation had either low activity or had no impact on PI-9
inactivation. Finally, a construct with a caspase-3-cleavable amino acid
sequence at the N-terminus showed similar cytotoxic activity to the EA
and LA constructs after pre-incubation in serum for 4h. Our studies
suggest that these novel GrB variants may significantly improve in vivo
half-life. Further studies are underway to determine whether these
modifications impact production of soluble material and in vivo
therapeutic efficacy. Research conducted, in part, by the Clayton
Foundation for Research.

