Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Flow cytometric analysis, sorting and molecular analysis of
dissociated cells from human solid tumors derived from PDX mouse models


Functional and genetic heterogeneity in tumor tissue has been a well
described phenomenon for many decades but only recently emerged as a
potentially crucial contributor to cancer development and progression.
The correlation between cellular heterogeneity and aggressiveness,
metastatic potential and drug susceptibility of a cancerous lesion have
led to models in which the existence of multiple clonal cell lineages is
a central feature enabling a neoplastic lesion to overcome selective
pressures caused by the surrounding tissues defensive capabilities as
well as therapeutic interventions. In addition, the role of the tumor
microenvironment as an integral part of tumorigenesis was recognized and
infiltrating leukocytes or tumor associated fibroblasts are no longer
viewed as mere contaminants of a solid tumor biopsy. The emerging picture
is compared to macroscopic ecosystems and a detailed understanding of the
interactions between numerous cell subgroups seems necessary for the
complete understanding of cancer pathogenesis. Scarcity of appropriate
tools and model systems are an obstacle to the investigation of this
heterogeneity at a molecular level but advances over the last few years
have led to a significant acceleration in this field. More sensitive and
far cheaper methods for collection of genomic and transcriptomic data
have revealed a complex picture of the evolution of individual solid
tumors. To turn this deeper understanding of tumorigenesis into improved
clinical outcomes, routine methods are required to separate complex
tumors into subpopulations. This stratification will provide a more
comprehensive characterization of the tumor and enable more detailed
prediction of disease progression and resistance development.We have
developed an integrated workflow for dissociation and flow cytometric
analysis and sorting for multiple downstream analysis modalities. Using
patient derived xenograft (PDX) mouse models derived from primary human
breast cancer biopsies we have demonstrated the ability to identify
distinct immunophenotypes for each model and use this analysis to isolate
distinct subpopulations. Our successful optimization of a variety of well
characterized surface markers (e.g. CD 24, 44, 133, 184, 326 (EpCAM), and
CD45) provides a basis for effective fingerprinting of cancer cells from
a variety of sources. In an effort to demonstrate the potential of FACS
sorting of solid tumor derived cell populations we have interrogated
sorted fractions by NGS as well as RT-PCR array analysis and show
distinct genotypic as well as gene expression signatures for each
subgroup.The evidence provided by our data suggests that the single cell
focused approach flow cytometry has traditionally enabled in
hematological cancers is accessible for solid tumors as well and may
unlock valuable biological insights.

