Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BET protein inhibition by JQ1 blocks EWS-FLI1 activity in Ewing
sarcoma


Ewing sarcoma is the second most common bone cancer in children, with an
estimated 5-year survival rate of 20% for metastatic cases. These tumors
harbor the characteristic chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12),
which leads to expression of the oncogenic chimeric transcription factor,
EWS-FLI1. EWS-FLI1 drives Ewing sarcoma tumorigenesis, and is an
attractive therapeutic target because it is expressed exclusively in
tumor cells. However, directly targeting EWS-FLI1 has proved difficult.
Thus, despite advances in our understanding of EWS-FLI1 function,
treatment options remain limited, and to date, no targeted therapeutics
have been developed.In this study, we investigated the effects of the
epigenetic modifier drug, JQ1, on Ewing sarcoma pathogenesis. JQ1 is a
small molecule inhibitor of the BET family of bromodomain proteins, which
bind to acetylated histones and transcription factors to regulate gene
expression. JQ1 selectively inhibits these acetylation-dependent BET
protein interactions. Recent studies reveal that JQ1 has potent
anti-neoplastic activity against multiple cancers, with c-MYC
downregulation being a key mechanism by which it induces cell death in
several tumor types. Because Ewing sarcoma cells express high levels of
c-MYC, we predicted that they would be sensitive to the cytotoxic effects
of JQ1.Our results demonstrate that JQ1 indeed inhibits growth of Ewing
sarcoma cells, but unexpectedly, it does not function through inhibition
of c-MYC. Using multiple patient-derived Ewing sarcoma cell lines, we
find that JQ1 induces apoptosis as measured by PARP cleavage. Preliminary
data further indicate that JQ1 suppresses growth of Ewing sarcoma
xenografts in vivo. Mechanistic studies and microarray analysis reveal
that JQ1 inhibits EWS-FLI1 activity, with multiple targets of the
oncogene being rapidly downregulated upon JQ1 treatment. Studies are
currently underway to identify the specific BET family members required
for EWS-FLI1 function, and to determine the mechanism by which they
regulate EWS-FLI1 activity. Given the emergence of numerous
JQ1-derivative compounds targeting specific BET proteins, it is hopeful
that this class of compounds may ultimately be used as targeted therapies
for the treatment of Ewing sarcoma.

