Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prospective study of marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and
risk of colorectal cancer according to microsatellite instability


Background: Chronic inflammation is involved in the development of
colorectal cancer (CRC) and microsatellite instability (MSI), a distinct
phenotype of CRC. Experimental evidence indicates an anti-inflammatory
and antineoplastic effect of marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
(PUFAs). However, epidemiologic data remain inconclusive.Methods: We
investigated whether the association between marine -3 PUFAs and CRC
varies by MSI-defined subtypes of tumors in the Nurses Health Study and
Health Professionals Follow-up Study. We collected updated data on marine
-3 PUFA intake and documented 1,125 CRC cases during 24-26 years of
follow-up. We determined the MSI status of tumors using 10 microsatellite
markers, and classified cases into MSI-high tumors in which 30% of the
microsatellite markers demonstrated instability, and microsatellite
stable (MSS) tumors in which Background: Chronic inflammation is involved
in the development of colorectal cancer (CRC) and microsatellite
instability (MSI), a distinct phenotype of CRC. Experimental evidence
indicates an anti-inflammatory and antineoplastic effect of marine -3
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). However, epidemiologic data remain
inconclusive.Methods: We investigated whether the association between
marine -3 PUFAs and CRC varies by MSI-defined subtypes of tumors in the
Nurses Health Study and Health Professionals Follow-up Study. We
collected updated data on marine -3 PUFA intake and documented 1,125 CRC
cases during 24-26 years of follow-up. We determined the MSI status of
tumors using 10 microsatellite markers, and classified cases into
MSI-high tumors in which 30% of the microsatellite markers demonstrated
instability, and microsatellite stable (MSS) tumors in which <30% of the
markers demonstrated instability. Cox proportional hazards model was used
to estimate the hazard ratio (HR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) of
microsatellite stable (MSS) tumors and MSI-high tumors in relation to
marine -3 PUFA intake.Results: There was no statistically significant
association between marine -3 PUFA intake and overall incidence of CRC.
However, a statistically significant difference was detected by MSI
status (Pheterogeneity = 0.02): high marine -3 PUFA intake was associated
with a lower risk of MSI-high tumors (comparing 0.30g/d to Background:
Chronic inflammation is involved in the development of colorectal cancer
(CRC) and microsatellite instability (MSI), a distinct phenotype of CRC.
Experimental evidence indicates an anti-inflammatory and antineoplastic
effect of marine -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). However,
epidemiologic data remain inconclusive.Methods: We investigated whether
the association between marine -3 PUFAs and CRC varies by MSI-defined
subtypes of tumors in the Nurses Health Study and Health Professionals
Follow-up Study. We collected updated data on marine -3 PUFA intake and
documented 1,125 CRC cases during 24-26 years of follow-up. We determined
the MSI status of tumors using 10 microsatellite markers, and classified
cases into MSI-high tumors in which 30% of the microsatellite markers
demonstrated instability, and microsatellite stable (MSS) tumors in which
<30% of the markers demonstrated instability. Cox proportional hazards
model was used to estimate the hazard ratio (HR) and 95% confidence
interval (CI) of microsatellite stable (MSS) tumors and MSI-high tumors
in relation to marine -3 PUFA intake.Results: There was no statistically
significant association between marine -3 PUFA intake and overall
incidence of CRC. However, a statistically significant difference was
detected by MSI status (Pheterogeneity = 0.02): high marine -3 PUFA
intake was associated with a lower risk of MSI-high tumors (comparing
0.30g/d to <0.10g/d: multivariable HR = 0.54, 95% CI = 0.35 to 0.83, P
for linearity = 0.03) but not MSS tumors (HR = 0.97, 95% CI = 0.78 to
1.20, P for linearity = 0.28). This differential association appeared to
be independent of CpG island methylator phenotype and BRAF mutation
status.Conclusions: High marine -3 PUFA intake is associated with lower
risk of MSI-high CRC but not MSS tumors, suggesting a potential role of
-3 PUFAs in protection against CRC through DNA mismatch repair. Further
research is needed to confirm our findings and elucidate potential
underlying mechanisms.

