Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of multifactor gene-environment interactions and
ovarian cancer risk: SNPs, obesity, and hormone-related risk factors


Background: We investigated the role of multifactor interactions and
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) risk using data collected within the
Collaborative Oncological Gene-environment Study and the Ovarian Cancer
Association Consortium containing 18,000 EOC cases and 26,000 controls.
To date, researchers have identified 18 EOC susceptibility loci. However,
it has been estimated that many more common variant loci exist; we
hypothesized that some of the unexplained variation is due to
gene-environment interactions. Similar to breast and endometrial cancers,
many EOC risk factors relate to estrogen exposure, and increased levels
of estrogen has been associated with obesity in post-menopausal women.
Therefore, we hypothesized that gene-environment interactions dealing
with hormone-related risk factors could differ between obese and
non-obese women.Methods: We considered multifactor interactions between
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and six hormone-related factors:
oral contraceptive use; parity; endometriosis; tubal ligation; hormone
replacement therapy (HRT); and estrogen use; and assessed whether these
GE interactions differed between obese and non-obese women. The SNPs
included in this analysis included the top associated markers within the
18 confirmed risk loci, as well as, 36,811 SNPs that lie within 84
candidate gene regions related to hormone biosynthesis & metabolism and
insulin-like growth factors. For the candidate SNP analyses, we assessed
multifactor interactions across environmental factors using logistic
regression models including age, study site, and population substructure.
For the candidate gene analyses, a two-stage screening and testing
procedure was utilized. All analyses were completed including: (1) all
histologies; and (2) only serous histology.Results: For the 18 known EOC
risk loci, no hormone-related risk factors showed statistically
significant interaction at a threshold of 10-4. In contrast, the
two-stage analysis of the candidate genes found several significant
gene-environment-environment effects, after adjusting for multiple
testing. For analysis of all cases, the SNPs in the following candidate
genes showed a multifactor interaction with a hormone-related risk factor
and obesity: IGFBP5 (HRT, rs729597, p = 1.310-13), CGA (HRT, rs58124219,
p = 1.010-5), and SSTR1 (parity, rs77266093, p = 1.110-5). Similarly, the
serous histology analyses detected a multifactor interaction with HRT,
obesity and IGFBP5 (rs729597, p = 8.810-5). Additionally, serous only
analyses also detected an interaction involving ESR1 (tubal ligation,
Chr6:152246911(indel), p = 8.010-6).Conclusions: In a very large
case-control collection, assessment of multifactor gene-environment
interaction is feasible, and, here, suggest that the relationship between
SNPs in candidate genes and hormone-related risk factors in EOC
susceptibility may vary.

