Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidized lipids contribute to the suppression function of myeloid
derived suppressor cells in cancer


Immune evasion is an emerging hallmark of cancer progression. It is
established that the defects in the function of antigen presenting cells
and the accumulation of myeloid derived suppressive cells (MDSCs) are
critical drivers of tumor mediated immune evasion. MDSCs represent a
heterogeneous population of immature and pathologically activated myeloid
cells that are expanded in many cancers and suppress immune responses by
several defined mechanisms. Our recent findings indicate that the massive
accumulation of oxidized lipids in dendritic cells (DCs) resulted in
profound defects in their ability to mount antitumor responses. In this
study we observed that MDSCs from tumor bearing mice and from cancer
patients have higher amount of lipids than their counterpart in tumor
free mice and healthy donors, respectively. The content of lipids in MDSC
was even much higher in MDSCs infiltrating the tumor, and the
accumulation of lipids in MDSC seems be caused by the uptake of
extracellular lipids. MDSCs with a highest content of lipids showed a
stronger ability to suppress antigen specific CD8 T cell responses than
MDSCs with a normal content of lipids. By using mass-spectrometry we
identified different oxidized species in lipids accumulated in MDSC from
both tumor bearing mice and patients with cancer. Myeloperoxidase (MPO)
and reactive oxygen species (ROS) were responsible for the oxidation of
lipids in MDSCs. Lack of MPO or ROS in MDSC almost completely abrogated
the oxidation of lipids in these cells. Furthermore the reduced amount of
oxidized lipids in MDSC from MPO KO mice or following the pharmacological
inhibition of their oxidative machinery resulted in a profound defect in
MDSC suppressive activity. In line with these findings, unsaturated fatty
acids, highly susceptible to oxidation, favored the expansion of highly
suppressive MDSC from hematopoietic progenitors in vitro, as oppose to
non-oxidizable saturated fatty acids. Together, our data suggest that
MDSCs have increased ability to pick up lipids from the microenvironment
and to oxidize them via their potent oxidative machinery. In turn
oxygenated lipids contribute to the suppressive activity of MDSC. The
regulation of the oxidation of lipids in MDSC could be an attractive
therapeutic strategy in cancer.

