Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel somatic mutations in the DNA-binding and coiled-coil domain
of the STAT3 gene in LGL-leukemia


IntroductionT-cell large granular lymphocyte (T-LGL) leukemia is a rare,
clonal disease characterized by the expansion of CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells.
We recently discovered that 40% of T-LGL leukemia patients have somatic
mutations in the SH2-domain of the STAT3 gene (Koskela et al. NEJM 2012).
As aberrant STAT3 activation can be observed in all patients with
LGL-leukemia, we now aimed to discover whether patients without mutations
in the STAT3 hotspot area harbor mutations in the other parts of the
STAT3 gene.MethodsTargeted STAT3 sequencing covering all 23 coding exons
was done with in-house developed deep amplicon sequencing panel using the
Illumina Miseq platform. The data was analyzed with a bioinformatics
pipeline, which is based on calling of variants with specific
counts/frequencies and filtering out false positives using the estimated
error rate and quality data of amplicon reads. All samples with a
frequency ratio 0.9 were considered to be true mutations after filtering
of SNPs and low coverage variants. 111 LGL-leukemia patients with no
known STAT3-mutations in the SH2 domain were analyzed.To explore the
functional effects of mutations, expression constructs were generated
with the identified variants and wild-type STAT3. The variants were
expressed in HEK-293 cells carrying a STAT3-responsive SIE-reporter
driven luciferase expression sequence to establish increased basal and
IL6-stimulated STAT3 activity.ResultsWith targeted amplicon sequencing, 3
patients were discovered to have STAT3 missense mutations in the
DNA-binding domain. Two patients presented with the same H410R mutation
with a variant allele frequency (VAF) of 49% and 8.8% respectively while
another patient had a S381Y mutation (VAF 7%). The mutation H410R occurs
in the DNA-binding domain in a highly conserved position, and results in
conversion of histidine to arginine, which would predict for a slight
increase in hydrophilicity.In addition to STAT3 DNA-binding domain
mutations, one T-LGL patient had a novel F174S mutation in the
coiled-coil domain of STAT3 (VAF 43%). The coiled-coil domain of STAT3
has previously been shown to be essential in SH2-domain mediated receptor
binding and subsequent activation.Luciferase measurements of SIE-reporter
HEK-293 cells transfected with constructs expressing either wild-type,
variant F174S, H410R or Y640F STAT3 (the most common activating mutation
in LGL leukemia) revealed the F174S and H410R variants to be as
activating as the Y640F mutation in both unstimulated and IL-6 stimulated
conditions.ConclusionsT-LGL leukemia patients without STAT3 SH2-domain
mutations harbor novel activating mutations in the DNA-binding and
coiled-coil domain of STAT3. The frequency of mutations was 3.6% (4 of
111 patients). These findings further highlight the importance of
screening the whole STAT3 gene in the diagnostic workup of LGL-leukemia
and the central role of STAT3 in the pathogenesis of the disease.

