Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lack of CK1 increases DNA damage and genomic instability due to
defects in DNA repair and mitotic checkpoints


Casein kinase 1 delta (CK1) is a conserved serine/threonine protein
kinase that regulates diverse cellular processes including vesicle
trafficking and circadian rhythm. We previously reported that CK1 is a
mediator of Wnt-3a-dependent neurite outgrowth (Greer and Rubin, JCB,
2011) and ciliogenesis (Greer et al. MBoC, 2014). Mice that lack Csnk1d
exhibit a perinatal lethal phenotype and typically weigh 30-50% less than
their wild type littermates, however, the exact causes of death and small
size are unknown. We hypothesized that the absence of CK1 contributes to
cellular stresses that adversely affect cell survival. Mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) were collected from mice homozygous for a Csnk1d
floxed allele, and MEFCsnk1d null cells were generated by infection with
adenovirus (Ad) expressing Cre. As control, MEFCtl. cells were produced
by infection with Ad-GFP. In addition, MEFCtl cells were treated with CK1
siRNA reagents to transiently suppress endogenous expression. Cells were
analyzed by confocal microscopy, western blotting and flow cytometry. At
early passage (P2), many MEFCsnk1d null cells had detached from the
culture dish, raising the possibility of cell death. Subsequent MTS assay
confirmed a significantly lower cell viability of MEFCsnk1d null cells
compared to MEFCtl cells. MEFCsnk1d null cells (P3) exhibited a larger
sub-Go fraction (64%) than MEFCtl cells (34%) in flow cytometric
analysis. -H2AX staining and comet assay confirmed significant DNA damage
in MEFCsnk1d null cells. MEFCsnk1d null cells exhibited micronuclei, a
characteristic of genomic instability. Similarly, abrogation of CK1
expression in MEFCtl cells induced micronuclei formation in response to
DNA damage triggered by doxorubicin, suggesting that the absence of CK1
increases susceptibility to genotoxic exposure. Chk1, a kinase with a
major role in DNA damage response, and its downstream substrate,
Cdc2/CDK1 kinase, were inhibited in MEFCsnk1d null cells as well as in
MEFCtl cells transfected with CK1 siRNA, suggesting that CK1 is required
for the G2/M mitotic checkpoint. Hydroxyurea-induced Chk1 activation was
also impaired in cells lacking CK1, and re-expression of CK1 rescued the
phenotype. Together, the data indicate that CK1 is required for efficient
repair of DNA damage and the proper functioning of mitotic checkpoints.
The mechanism(s) responsible for these activities are currently under
investigation.

