Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparison of bulk versus single-cell whole-exome sequencing to
study cancer genetic heterogeneity


Cancer is a heterogeneous disease consisting of subclonal cell
populations at the genetic level that possess a selective growth
advantage over normal tissue. Furthermore, these subclones have
differential responses to therapeutic interventions, particularly
molecularly targeted approaches to treatment. Traditional cancer genomics
techniques obtain sequence data at a single time point from bulk tumor
tissue. This method provides a snapshot of somatic mutational profiles at
the population level, but is limited in its sensitivity to detect rare
and potentially important subclones by sample quality, sequencing depth,
and subclonal population frequency. Current methods to map the clonal
architecture of tumors use bulk sequencing coupled with bioinformatic
approaches using read depths to determine allele frequencies and groups
subclones based on these frequencies. However, this approach is unable to
separate subclonal populations comprised of variants present at similar
allele frequencies, thus hindering the ability to precisely determine the
cellular distribution of somatic mutations. Recent technological advances
in the field of single cell genomics now allow for the interrogation of
genetic aberrations at a single cell resolution in a high throughput
fashion, providing the means to more fully map the clonal architecture of
a tumor. However, a single cell approach requires large amounts of
amplification, prompting concerns regarding polymerase fidelity, allelic
imbalances and dropout, and incomplete target coverage. By comparing high
depth bulk tumor to single cell exome sequencing results, we can assess
the advantages and disadvantages of bulk sequencing vs. single cell
methods to study genetic heterogeneity. To this end, we have performed
single cell whole-exome sequencing (WES) on the K562 leukemia cell line
and a muscle-invasive bladder cancer patient derived xenograft (PDX)
using the Fluidigm C1 microfluidic system. We have captured over 300
cells from both cancer lines, and obtained an average of >100ng amplified
DNA per cell. We have performed WES of 43 individual K562 cells resulting
in a mean coverage of 11X across covered regions and 90% of passed filter
bases aligned to the targeted regions. Analysis of WES data from 40 PDX
cells is currently underway, and a detailed comparison of the single cell
to high-depth bulk WES in K562 and PDX samples will be carried out to
characterize amplification biases, fidelity, coverage, and sensitivity of
a single cell based approach.

