Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design of phenotype-driven flux analysis approach for personalized
metabolic models of cancer patients


It is well established that departure from healthy and tightly-controlled
metabolism is a hallmark of cancer and hence, studying these metabolic
changes can help us gain useful therapeutic insights. Several
mathematical methodologies have been developed to quantify these changes
to better understand metabolic adaptations in tumor cells. However, they
(i) do not consider different genetic profiles and protein signatures
leading to diversity among cancer patients and (ii) do not mimic
biological interactions between metabolism and cancer phenotypes (such as
chemo-resistance, infinite growth potential and invasive capacities). To
successfully deconstruct metabolic and phenotypic links in tumorigenesis,
we have developed a novel mathematical framework. First, to achieve
patient-specificity we have devised a technique for reconstructing
metabolic models that integrate high-throughput transcriptomic and
proteomic data using a biased random-walk algorithm. The NetWalker
software effectively implements this technique to score interactions
between genes and proteins based on their expression levels and
connectivity with each other and their metabolic targets. These scores
are then used to identify contextually important sub-networks of the
central carbon metabolism. Our reconstruction of the OVCAR-3 metabolic
network independently identifies metabolic features in low-invasive
ovarian cancers as highlighted in previously published literature and
recent discoveries in our lab. These personalized models are then used to
estimate phenotypically-consistent intracellular metabolic fluxes, with
our novel metabolic flux analysis technique. Our approach is designed on
the rationale that cancer cells regulate metabolism to maintain multiple
phenotypic functions by optimally using the limited nutrients available
in their environments. We quantitatively show via correlation studies and
principal component analyses on NCI-60 and CCLE cell-lines
gene-expression data that certain phenotypes are inherently competitive.
This competition is manifested in metabolic functions, which is
effectively modeled using our 13C-Multiobjective Metabolic Flux Analysis
(13C-MOMFA) tool. It utilizes genome-scale metabolic models by
integrating high-throughput omics data, along with measurements from
metabolic assays and 13-Carbon (13C) stable isotope-labeled tracer
studies, to quantify fluxes in cancer cells. Our approach is the first to
connect cancer metabolism to their malignant phenotype - a crucial step
to discover the metabolic underpinnings of cancer pathology. It also
captures the heterogeneity in cancer cells and patients, hence providing
a useful framework for targeted therapy.

