Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anticancer activity of the DUB inhibitor b-AP15 is associated
with accumulation of proteasome bound ubiquitin and oxidative stress


Background: The ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) is the major cellular
degradation system for damaged or short-lived proteins. Tumor cells are
dependent on a functioning UPS, making it an ideal target for the
development of anti-cancer therapies. Bortezomib, an inhibitor of the
proteolytic activities of the proteasome core particle (20SCP), is
approved for treatment of multiple myeloma and mantle cell lymphoma;
however several problems have emerged including dose-limiting toxicity
and tumor relapse. We previously identified b-AP15 as a novel inhibitor
of the proteasome associated deubiquitinases (DUBs) USP14 and
UCH37/UCHL5. Treatment with b-AP15 induced cell death in several in vitro
and in vivo cancer models. The aim of this study was to investigate how
the different modes of UPS inhibition affect the structure of the 26S
proteasome and cellular response as well as the potential for proteasome
DUB inhibitors as a therapeutic option for cancer. Methods: HCT116 colon
carcinoma cells were cultured in McCoy's 5A modified medium/10% fetal
calf serum. For protein expression analysis cell extracts were resolved
by Tris-Acetate gel and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane for
western blotting. Proteasome integrity and cellular distribution of
polyubiquitin chains were assessed in cell extracts subjected to density
gradient centrifugation, conducted in 4-24% linear glycerol gradients,
followed by western blot analysis. Apoptotic response was assessed with
M30-CytoDeath ELISA, measuring level of caspase-cleavage of the
endogenous cellular substrate keratin-18. Results: We found that
inhibitors of proteasome function do not alter proteasome assembly or
structure; however treatment induced the accumulation of
polyubiquitinated proteins associated with the 26S proteasome. Comparison
of 20S CP and 19S DUB inhibition showed that b-AP15 induced more rapid
and sustained apoptotic response in comparison to bortezomib. Proteasome
inhibition has been previously associated with endoplasmic reticulum and
oxidative stress, however our findings show that reactive oxygen species
(ROS) are main mediators of b-AP15 induced apoptosis. b-AP15 strongly
induces several genes associated with oxidative stress response;
hemoxygenase-1 (HMOX1), p38-MAPK, c-JUN and Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK).
Additionally, treatment with a pharmacological inhibitor of JNK and
several ROS scavengers decreased the levels of apoptosis in response to
b-AP15 treatment. Conclusions: Cellular response to b-AP15 mediated
proteasome inhibition is distinct from clinically used bortezomib;
therefore b-AP15 has a potential clinical use, in particular for
treatment of malignancies resistant to other proteasome inhibitors.

