Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting constitutive GLI activation in colon carcinomas and
cancers with oncogenic KRAS signaling


The GLI genes, GLI1 and GLI2, encode transcription factors that regulate
target genes at the distal end of the canonical Hedgehog signaling (HH)
pathway (SHH->PTCH->SMO->GLI), tightly regulated in embryonic
development, tissue patterning and differentiation. In cancers, both GLI1
and GLI2 are oncogenes, aberrantly and constitutively activated.
Oncogene-driven signaling pathways, in particular KRAS/BRAF in colon
cancer, circumvent the HH-GLI axis to further drive GLI activation, which
serves as a nodal channel for oncogenic signals, and provides a pivotal
role for GLI in cell survival. GANT61, a small molecule inhibitor of
GLI-dependent transcription, terminates oncogenic HH-GLI and
KRAS/BRAF-GLI signaling, inducing DNA damage and extensive cell death in
seven human colon carcinoma cell line models examined. The overall goal
is to understand how GANT61 induces cell death by inhibiting
GLI-dependent transcription mechanisms. We have demonstrated that GANT61
is: a) specific for binding to GLI, and does not bind to DNA or to other
transcription factors; b) selective for cancer cells vs normal cells that
lack constitutive GLI activation. Inhibition of GLI1 and GLI2 by GANT61
rapidly reduces GLI binding to consensus sequences in target gene
promoters and inhibits GLI-dependent transcription. Stalling of Pol II
occurs adjacent to GLI binding regions at target gene promoters (FOXM1,
BCL-2), associated with inhibition of GLI binding, enrichment of Pol II,
and modification of promoter-bound pause (DSIF, NELF) or pause-release
(P-TEFb) factors within a 300bp region of the FOXM1 promoter.
Single-stranded DNA and RNA:DNA hybrids determining R-loop formation
(distributed throughout the nucleoplasm) occur at sites of stalled Pol
II, inhibited by RNAseH. Consistent with transcriptional inhibition,
GANT61 induced DNA damage (H2AX foci) in S-phase and non-S-phase cells,
recognized at the initiation of S-phase (G1/S), prior to the onset of
cell death. This may be due to one of two mechanisms: 1) The GLI1 target
gene FOXM1, and its transcriptional target CDC6, downregulated in
GANT61-treated cells, regulate Pre-Replication Complex assembly at G1/S
thereby inhibiting the initiation of DNA replication; this controls
outcome of the GANT61 response, dependent on GLI; 2) Transcriptional
R-loop formation can conflict with DNA replication in GANT61-treated
cells. These events inhibit initiation of DNA replication from unfired
origins at early replicons and inhibit further progression through
S-phase. GLI1 and/or GLI2 are constitutively activated in epithelial
cancers of the GI tract, brain tumors, melanoma, pediatric solid tumors,
liver, lung, breast, pancreatic and prostate cancers. Further, KRAS is
mutated in one third of all human cancers and in 50% of colon carcinomas.
Targeting GLI therefore has the potential for high impact in
therapeutics, and is anticipated to lead to new approaches and
therapeutic strategies for treating cancer.

