Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TFAP4 inhibits differentiation of MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma


Background. Despite the identification of MYCN-amplification as an
adverse prognostic marker in neuroblastoma, no drugs that target MYCN
have yet been developed. An alternative approach is to identify genes
synthetically lethal to MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma. Through a whole
genome shRNA screen, we have previously identified transcription factor
AP4 (TFAP4) as a synthetic lethal gene of MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma.
Silencing of TFAP4, both in vitro and in vivo inhibited the growth of
MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma. TFAP4 has previously reported to repress
neuronal specific genes in non-neuronal cells (Kim et al, 2006). Here, we
investigate the function of TFAP4 in inhibiting differentiation of
MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma.Methods: Master regulators specifically
associated to MYCN amplified patients were identified by MARINA (Master
Regulator Inference algorithm). TFAP4 expression was measured by
real-time PCR, Western blot and immunohistochemistry. GAP43 expression
was detected by Western blot. Gene expression changes after silencing of
TFAP4 or retinoic acid treatment was determined by RNAseq.Results: TFAP4
was identified as a master regulator specifically in MYCN amplified
neuroblastoma patients in both NCI-TARGET dataset and a published GEO
dataset (Kocak et al, 2013). We determined that TFAP4 is a direct target
of MYCN and TFAP4 expression was highly correlated with Stage 4,
MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma in both patient datasets. Neuronal markers
TUBB3 and GAP43 expression were inversely correlated with TFAP4
expression in TARGET (P = 9.77e-03 and P = 7.78e-08). Silencing TFAP4 in
MYCN amplified cells induced a differentiated phenotype, as shown by
markedly increased the number of neurites, and an increase in the
neuronal differentiation marker GAP43. Forty hours after silencing TFAP4,
we observed 415 genes that were significantly up-regulated and 457 genes
down-regulated (PBackground. Despite the identification of
MYCN-amplification as an adverse prognostic marker in neuroblastoma, no
drugs that target MYCN have yet been developed. An alternative approach
is to identify genes synthetically lethal to MYCN-amplified
neuroblastoma. Through a whole genome shRNA screen, we have previously
identified transcription factor AP4 (TFAP4) as a synthetic lethal gene of
MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma. Silencing of TFAP4, both in vitro and in
vivo inhibited the growth of MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma. TFAP4 has
previously reported to repress neuronal specific genes in non-neuronal
cells (Kim et al, 2006). Here, we investigate the function of TFAP4 in
inhibiting differentiation of MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma.Methods:
Master regulators specifically associated to MYCN amplified patients were
identified by MARINA (Master Regulator Inference algorithm). TFAP4
expression was measured by real-time PCR, Western blot and
immunohistochemistry. GAP43 expression was detected by Western blot. Gene
expression changes after silencing of TFAP4 or retinoic acid treatment
was determined by RNAseq.Results: TFAP4 was identified as a master
regulator specifically in MYCN amplified neuroblastoma patients in both
NCI-TARGET dataset and a published GEO dataset (Kocak et al, 2013). We
determined that TFAP4 is a direct target of MYCN and TFAP4 expression was
highly correlated with Stage 4, MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma in both
patient datasets. Neuronal markers TUBB3 and GAP43 expression were
inversely correlated with TFAP4 expression in TARGET (P = 9.77e-03 and P
= 7.78e-08). Silencing TFAP4 in MYCN amplified cells induced a
differentiated phenotype, as shown by markedly increased the number of
neurites, and an increase in the neuronal differentiation marker GAP43.
Forty hours after silencing TFAP4, we observed 415 genes that were
significantly up-regulated and 457 genes down-regulated (P<0.01). Genes
with increased expression were enriched for gene ontology terms
associated with neuronal activity. Gene signature of TFAP4 also showed a
strong correlation with the treatment signature of the differentiation
agent retinoic acid in SKNDZ.Conclusions. We demonstrated that TFAP4 is
an important downstream effector of MYCN, that inhibits the neuronal
differentiatin of MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma. This may provide novel
targets for the treatment of neuroblastoma.

