Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective HDAC inhibition by ricolinostat (ACY-1215) or ACY-241
synergizes with IMiD immunomodulatory drugs in Multiple Myeloma (MM) and
Mantle Cell Lymphoma (MCL) cells


Histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes are attractive therapeutic targets in
oncology, but non-selective HDAC inhibitors have led to dose-limiting
toxicities in patients, particularly in combination with other
therapeutic agents. Ricolinostat (ACY-1215), a first-in-class orally
available HDAC inhibitor that is 11-fold selective for HDAC6, synergizes
in vitro and in vivo with bortezomib in models of MM (Santo, Blood, 2012)
and with carfilzomib in models of lymphoma (Dasmahapatra, Mol Cancer
Ther, 2014). Furthermore, ricolinostat has demonstrated an excellent
safety and tolerability profile in Phase I trials (Raje, Haematologica,
2014, Suppl 1). In addition to ongoing clinical studies with
ricolinostat, we have identified ACY-241 as a next generation, orally
available, selective inhibitor of HDAC6 for clinical evaluation.The IMiD
immunomodulatory class of drugs, including lenalidomide (len) and
pomalidomide (pom), exhibit striking anti-myeloma properties in a variety
of MM models, and have demonstrated significant clinical activity in MM
patients. Beyond MM, len is also approved for the treatment of MCL
patients. In support of our ongoing clinical development programs for
ricolinostat and ACY-241, we show here that combinations with either len
or pom leads to synergistic decreases in the viability of MM and MCL
cells in vitro. Time course studies demonstrated accumulation of cell
cycle arrest in cells after prolonged exposure to len or pom, as well as
progressive induction of apoptosis in these cells. Notably, though, the
addition of ricolinostat or ACY-241 to either len or pom resulted in
synergistic increases in the percentage of MM and MCL cells undergoing
apoptosis. At the molecular level, treatment with IMiD immunomodulatory
compounds reduced expression of the critical transcription factors MYC
and IRF4, which were reduced even further by treatment with ricolinostat
or ACY-241 in combination with either len or pom. The molecular mechanism
underlying this effect is currently being explored, though retention of
low level inhibition of HDAC1, 2, and 3 by these compounds may contribute
to the enhanced effects on gene expression reported here in combination
with len or pom. Finally, prolonged treatment with ACY-241 plus
pomalidomide was well tolerated in vivo with no overt evidence of
toxicity, and combination treatment resulted in a significant extension
of survival in a xenograft model of MM. Given the comparable tolerability
profiles of ricolinostat and ACY-241, and their preclinical activity in
combination with IMiD immunomodulatory drugs, these findings support
clinical evaluation of these agents in MM and MCL patients.

