Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of CDK9/BRCA1 complex in DNA damage response


BRCA1 gene encodes an 1863 amino-acid protein comprising a RING finger
domain in the N-terminus and two tandem BRCT domains (tBRCT) in
C-terminal region. When fused to a heterologous DNA-binding domain, BRCA1
C-terminal region is capable of activating transcription. In addition,
BRCA1 is associated with the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme (RNA pol II), a
number of transcription factors and regulators. As BRCA1
cancer-associated mutations located in the C-terminal region of the
protein lead to an impaired transcriptional activation phenotype, the
ability to trigger transcription seems to be an important feature of
BRCA1 tumor suppression function. BARD1 (BRCA1 associated RING domain 1)
also encloses a N-terminal RING finger and a C-terminal tBRCT domains.
The BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimer was found to ubiquitinate RNA pol II leading
to a reduced transcription initiation. Recently, our group described a
protein interaction network that identified putative interacting partners
of seven different proteins enclosing the tBRCT domain. Among other hits,
Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 9 (CDK9) was identified as a common interaction
partner of BRCA1 and BARD1 tBRCTs. CDK9 is a component of the positive
transcription elongation factor b complex (P-TEFb), which is involved in
co-transcriptional histone modification, mRNA processing, mRNA export and
transcriptional elongation. The interaction between constitutive CDK9 and
BARD1 was confirmed through co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assay using
HEK293FT cells nuclear extracts. We also demonstrated that CDK9 isoforms
were able to interact with both BARD1 N- and C-terminal regions in a GST
pulldown assay. In addition, the BRCA1/CDK9 constitutive interaction was
confirmed by Co-IP assay in HeLa cells. We showed that, differently from
BARD1, BRCA1 tBRCT interacts only with the 42kDa isoform of CDK9. In
order to investigate CDK9 role in BRCA1 mediated transcription, the
kinase expression was downregulated (by shRNA methodology) in HeLa cells,
resulting in a two-fold increase in transcription (observed in a
luciferase reporter assay). On the other hand, the super expression of
CDK9 42kDa isoform leads to the suppression of BRCA1 mediated
transcription. These data suggest that the CDK9 42kDa isoform modulates
BRCA1 mediated transcription through its tBRCT domain. A cisplatin
resistance phenotype was also observed in CDK9 downregulated cells only
in a BRCA1 competent context. Now, we are extending our approach
investigating the role of CDK9/BRCA1 complex in gene expression control
and DNA damage repair. A better understanding of these functions will
help to unravel the BRCA1 mediated transcription and its role as a tumor
suppressor.

