Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined effect of modified citrus pectin and ionizing radiation
on survival and metastatic activity of prostate cancer cells


Radio-resistance is a major cause of decreasing the efficiency of
radiotherapy for prostate cancer. Modified citrus pectin (MCP) has been
previously shown to demonstrate anti-proliferative and anti-metastatic
activity in prostate cancer cells. However, its combination with
radiation has not been evaluated. The aim of the present study was to
investigate whether MCP radiosensitized prostate cancer cell lines and to
unravel its underlying mechanism(s). XTT cell proliferation and
clonogenic assays were used to assess MCP effect alone and in combination
with radiation on viability of prostate cancer cell lines (DU-145, PC-3
and Cl-1). Calcusyn software analysis was used to determine the mode of
interaction between the treatments tested. Flow cytometry analysis with
propidium iodide staining, annexin-V-FITC and 7-aminoactinomycin D
(7-AAD) double staining were used to evaluate effect on cell cycle,
apoptosis and necrosis. Standard Transwell Assay with and without
Matrigel was used to assess effect of MCP on invasiveness of cells. The
effect of MCP and radiation on reactive oxygen species (ROS) production,
and expression of galectin-3, PARP, caspase-3, caspase-9, Bak, Bax, and
Bcl-2 and NF-B pathways in treated cells are currently being
investigated, and will be included in the presentation. Treatment of
DU-145, PC-3 and Cl-1 prostate cancer cells with MCP induced a dose
dependent decrease in cell viability tested by XTT assay (IC50 values
were 1.07, 1.48, 1.29 mg/ml respectively). These cells demonstrated
similar radio-sensitivity. The effect of the combined treatment were
either synergistic (Combined index0.7, DU-145 and Cl-1 cells) at high
dose (2 mg/ml) of MCP or additive (Combined index 1.1-0.9, PC-3 cells).
Flow cytometric analysis showed that neither MCP nor radiation either
alone or combined resulted in significant changes in cell cycle
distribution. Double staining of DU-145 cells with annexin-V-FITC and
7-AAD revealed effect of combined treatment on apoptosis and necrosis.
Treatment of cells with 2 mg/ml MCP reduced 20% of migrating cells and
40% of invasive cells. The effects of MCP and radiation on ROS
production, pro-apoptotic and NF-B pathways in treated cells are
currently being investigated. These results suggest that MCP is a
radiosensitizer in prostate cancer cells. Its mechanism of action is
being investigated, and will be included in this presentation.

