Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of rhBMP-2 on osteosarcoma tumorigenesis


Introduction: Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary bone
malignancy in children and young adults. Complete surgical extirpation of
bulk tumor is essential to successful treatment of OS. While historically
ablative surgery such as amputations were the mainstay of treatment, wide
excision has been shown to provide equivalent survival results,
permitting for limb-salvage surgery in over 90% of cases. Following tumor
resection, structural allograft bone is often employed to reconstruct the
involved extremity. Bone Morphogenetic Protein-2 (BMP-2), a member of the
TGF beta superfamily, possesses tremendous osteoinductive potential and
could theoretically be used to promote bone healing but has been
historically contraindicated due to concern it may stimulate residual
tumor. To date, the role of BMP-2 in OS remains unclear and its effect on
OS remains controversial. The purpose of this investigation is to
evaluate the effect of exogenous recombinant human BMP-2 (rhBMP-2) on
osteosarcoma. We hypothesize that exposure of osteosarcoma to rhBMP-2
will not stimulate tumor growth or development.Methods: Functional assays
were performed using five standard osteosarcoma cell lines (143B, MG-63,
SaOS-2, U20S, and HOS) and three patient derived xenograft cell lines
(OS17, OS31, LM7). The concentration of rhBMP-2 utilized varied between
0.5 to 2 g/ml. Motility (random migration) was measured by wound healing
scratch assay. Migration (both haptotaxis and chemotaxis) was
quantitatively measured using Boyden Chamber assay. Invasion was also
measured using Boyden chamber over which a thin layer of extracellular
matrix is applied. Comparison between different concentrations of rhBMP-2
upon different time points on osteosarcoma cell lines and
characterizations are completed and underway.Results: Preliminary
findings suggest that exogenous rhBMP-2 does not increase the ability of
osteosarcoma cells to migrate and invade in all tested lines (143B,
MG-63, OS17). Quantitative migration decreases with increasing
concentration of rhBMP-2 over a 5-hour time course in all tested lines
(143B, SaOS-2, MG-63, OS17). Invasion did not increase with increasing
rhBMP-2 concentration in any tested line (143B, SaOS-2, OS17).Conclusions
and Future Directions: Preliminary results support the contention that
exposure of osteosarcoma to exogenous rhBMP-2 does not increase in vitro
tumorigenesis. In fact, findings suggest that rhBMP-2 may have a
protective effect in that tumor migration decreases following exposure.
Continued characterization using additional tumor lines is ongoing.

