Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hexokinase II plays a pivotal role in colorectal cancer cell
proliferation and survival


The Warburg Effect describes the widely observed metabolic phenotype of
cancer cells and their heavy reliance on the glycolytic pathway for
energy production regardless of oxygen tension. This is a result of
alterations to metabolic signaling pathways leading to an upregulation in
key glycolytic enzymes. Hexokinase II (HKII) catalyzes the first
irreversible step of glycolysis and is often overexpressed in tumors.
3-bromopyruvate (3BP) has been shown to primarily target HKII, and is a
promising anti-cancer compound capable of targeting critical metabolic
pathways in cancer cells. Here we examine the importance of HKII to cell
proliferation and survival and also whether its inhibition could provide
a therapeutic strategy in human colorectal cancer (CRC). Initially,
established human CRC cell lines (HCT116, Caco2, SW480, DLD-1) were
screened for HKII mRNA and protein expression. Cell proliferation and
survival following HKII inhibition via both siRNA and 3BP treatment was
determined using crystal violet staining, flow cytometry and western
blotting. Sensitivity to 3BP was correlated with HKII expression amongst
the cell lines screened. We next examined the pro-survival AKT signaling
pathway via western blotting and found that AKT phosphorylation was
dependent on 3BP dose and was residue-specific. Immunofluorescence was
then used to examine subcellular HKII localization. Following 3BP
treatment, mitochondrial localization of HKII was lost. As a result of
tumor vascular abnormalities, regions within a tumor are exposed to
transient and/or chronic ischemia, resulting in altered oxygen and
nutrient availablity. To examine the effects of glucose availability on
3BP sensitivity, media glucose was gradually reduced in a step-wise
manner and HKII expression, cell proliferation and cell survival were
evaluated in CRC cell lines. Cells grown under reduced or normal glucose
conditions were less sensitive to 3BP exposure than cells grown under
high glucose conditions, and responses correlated with changes in HKII
expression. Using immunostaining, we examined the expression of HKII in
both normoxic and ischemic regions in FFPE samples of human CRC. These
results were correlated to tumor stage and grade, along with patient
outcome. Results from this study further define the role of HKII in
colorectal cancer progression and show that 3-bromopyruvate could be
useful as an anti-cancer therapy against CRC tumors with high expression
of HKII.

