Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of sunitinib for lung adenocarcinoma with RET
rearrangement


BackgroundOncogenic driver gene rearrangement involving RET
proto-oncogene has been observed in about 1% of non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). However, effective molecular targeted treatment for this
population has not been established yet. In this study, we firstly
identified and characterized a lung adenocarcinoma cell line harboring
KIF5B-RET fusion. We also studied the activity of RET kinase inhibitor
sunitinib in two patients with lung adenocarcinoma harboring RET
rearrangement.Methods and ResultsSNU-2612A, a lung adenocarcinoma cell
line harboring KIF5B-RET rearrangement, was derived from pleural effusion
of a never-smoking male patient with lung adenocarcinoma. In vitro
sensitivity of SNU-2612A and LC-2/ad, another lung adenocarcinoma cell
line harboring CCDC6-RET fusion, to various RET kinase inhibitors was
examined in immunoblotting and cell viability assay. SNU-2612A was
relatively resistant to various RET kinase inhibitors including
sunitinib, compared with LC-2/ad. Notably, gene expression analysis from
transcriptome sequencing of the two cell lines showed higher expression
of mesenchymal lineage-related genes in SNU-2612A, including FN1, VIM,
ZEB1, SNAI1 and AXL. Phospho-receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) array showed
that phosphorylation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) was
higher in SNU-2612A compared with LC-2/ad.We also investigated clinical
activity of sunitinib, a multi-tyrosine kinase inhibitor that has
activity on RET kinase in two heavily pretreated patients with lung
adenocarcinoma harboring RET rearrangement (through an Emergency
Investigational New Drug application, authorized by Ministry of Food and
Drug Safety of Republic of Korea; Sunitinib was provided by Pfizer). They
were all Asian, and never-smokers. RET rearrangement was confirmed by
using fluorescence in situ hybridization. A 64-year-old male patient
received sunitinib for 6th-line treatment. In this patient, sunitinib
treatment resulted in long-term stabilization of disease; the patient was
stable on sunitinib for 23 months. Another 53-year-old female patient
received sunitinib for 5th-line treatment, showed initial mixed tumor
response. However, her general medical condition was rapidly deteriorated
and the treatment was discontinued (treatment duration = 1.7
months).ConclusionsSunitinib showed variable antitumor activity in cell
line models and two pretreated patients with advanced NSCLC harboring RET
rearrangement, which warrants further investigation.

