Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The sonic hedgehog pathway as a therapeutic target in bladder
cancer


Introduction:The sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway regulates
embryonic developmental processes such as pattern formation,
differentiation, proliferation, and organogenesis and has been
hypothesized to play an integral role in the maintenance and progression
of bladder cancer. Blocking this pathway may be an efficacious molecular
target against high-risk bladder cancer.Methods:SHH pathway protein
expression was assessed in an in-house human bladder cancer tissue array
comprising superficial, invasive and lymph node metastasized transitional
cell carcinoma. In addition, a panel of bladder cancer cell lines was
assessed for SHH pathway activation and two lines, UM-UC3 and 253J-BV,
were further evaluated for SHH pathway function and responsiveness.
Messenger RNA and protein expression, proliferation, apoptosis and cell
invasion were measured in response to the addition of SHH ligand, a SHH
overexpressing construct, ligand and receptor blockers, small-molecule
pathway inhibitors, and antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) targeted to the
mRNA sequence of the down-stream transcription factors Gli family zinc
fingers 1 and 2 (Gli1, Gli2). In-vitro ASO results were confirmed in an
in-vivo experiment on UM-UC3 cells intravesically instilled into the
bladder of nude mice.Results:Bladder tissues show a positive and variable
pattern of SHH pathway expression within and between tumors. The bladder
cancer cell lines UM-UC3 and 253J-BV both express the main components of
the SHH pathway, notably the transcription factors GLi1 and Gli2. The
most effective inhibitors of UM-UC3 are an indirect ciliagenesis
inhibitor and direct Gli knock-down through ASO treatment. Both cell
lines show decreased growth and increased apoptosis with the smoothened
protein inhibitor cyclopamine but 253J-BV does not respond in
proliferation or apoptosis to Gli1 ASO suggesting a difference in pathway
function between the lines. UM-UC3 secretes approximately 10 fold higher
amounts of SHH than 253J-BV but does not respond to exogenous SHH
treatment. 253J-BV does respond with an increase in proliferation,
invasion, and SHH and Forkhead Box M1 expression. Robotnikinin and the
SHH antibody 5E1 show a modest decrease in cell viability at high
concentrations in both lines. The addition of SHH through plasmid
transfection has no effect. In-vivo, Gli2 ASO significantly decreases
UM-UC3 tumour growth.Conclusions:Bladder cancer cells are differentially
sensitive to specific regions of SHH pathway modulation, as seen by a
greater reliance on GLi2 in 253J-BV. Direct knock-down of the down-stream
transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2 with ASOs is the most effective
strategy and may be a promising treatment for bladder cancer.

