Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mechanism of action of bendamustine alone or in combination
with nucleoside analogs in chronic lymphocytic leukemia


Bendamustine (BEN) is a promising new treatment for chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) and is believed to function as an alkylating agent (eg,
chlorambucil, CLB) while sharing structural similarities to a nucleoside
analogue (eg, fludarabine, FLU). Enhanced cell death has been observed
with the combination of BEN and FLU in primary CLL cells in vitro, likely
due to the inhibition of repair of BEN DNA cross-linking by FLU. However,
both BEN and FLU are marrow-toxic, limiting the use of this combination
in the clinic. The nucleoside analog, pentostatin (PEN), is an adenosine
deaminase inhibitor that causes the accumulation of deoxyadenosine (dADO)
and is less marrow-suppressive than FLU. However, the cytotoxic
effectiveness of dADO/PEN in combination with BEN is not known.Flow
cytometry analysis using annexin V/7-ADD and the MTT assay were performed
to determine the effectiveness of BEN treatment in primary CLL cells as
compared to or in combination with CLB, FLU, or dADO/PEN at varying drug
concentrations and time points. Using the MTT assay, there was a linear
relationship between cytotoxicity and drug concentration, similar to that
seen with CLB. In vitro treatment of CLL cells with BEN, CLB, FLU, or
dADO/PEN induced apoptosis, the degree being time- and
concentration-dependent. However, the sensitivity of CLL cells to BEN or
CLB varied, suggesting different mechanisms of action. Enhanced cell kill
was seen with the combination of BEN or CLB with FLU or dADO/PEN, with
the extent of increased cytotoxicity being similar for FLU or dADO/PEN.
Cell death mechanisms were analyzed via staining for surface expression
of death receptors (DR4 and DR5) and mitochondrial stress (DICO6 and
DHE). -H2AX staining was used to measure DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs)
and the alkaline comet assay was used to measure both DNA DSBs and
single-strand breaks (SSBs). An increase in DR4 and DR5 surface
expression, loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, and increased
reactive oxygen species production was observed with all agents. There
was an increase in DNA SSB and DSB following FLU, as compared to BEN and
CLB, while a combination of BEN and FLU further increased the number of
breaks (especially SSBs) compared to FLU alone.Thus, BEN has the
properties of an alkylating agent, rather than a nucleoside analog, but
has a different spectrum of antitumor activity to CLB. BEN induces
apoptosis through both the death receptor and mitochondrial pathways.
Increased cell kill is seen on combining BEN with dADO/PEN suggesting
that this might be a useful combination in the clinic.

