Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-12 gene therapy combined with local ablative technique
electrochemotherapy for treatment of canine mastocytoma


Electrochemotherapy is now well established ablative local tumor
treatment for veterinary as well as human cancer. Electrochemotherapy
combines the use of permeabilizing electric pulses applied directly at
the tumor site with the injection of chemotherapeutic drugs, cisplatin or
bleomycin. Increased membrane permeability enables enhanced entry of
chemotherapeutic drug into the cells and resulted in higher tumor cell
kill. Up to 80% complete responses are obtained after single
electrochemotherapy treatment of cutaneous tumors of different histology
(Yarmush et al. Annu Rev Biomed Eng. 2014; 16:295-320). To add a systemic
component to this very effective local treatment, in preclinical studies
it was combined with several different immune therapies, including gene
therapy with plasmid DNA encoding interleukin-12 (IL-12) (Radiol Oncol.
2012;46:302-11).In our on-going clinical research, the effect of IL-12
gene therapy combined with electrochemotherapy was evaluated in 18
client- owned dogs with mastocytomas. Written consent for participation
was obtained from the owners and the study was approved by the competent
authorities (Veterinary administration and Administration for
biotechnology of the Ministry of agriculture and environment; Republic
Ethical Committee for the experiments involving animals).
Electrochemotherapy using intratumoral injection of bleomycin and
application of electric pulses was preformed prior to gene therapy.
Plasmid encoding IL-12 was injected peritumorally into the skin and
immediately thereafter electric pulses were applied. Local response of
tumors was evaluated by measurements of tumors size. Systemic response
was assessed by determination of IL-12 and IFN- in patients sera. Safety
of gene therapy was evaluated by qRT-PCR measurement for the presence of
plasmid DNA at the site of application and possible horizontal gene
transfer by in vitro transformation of plasmid DNA encoding IL-12 into
the bacteria isolated from the dog's (patients) skin.One month after the
therapy, 11 dogs (61%) had a complete response, 4 (22%) partial response,
and 3 (16%) stable disease. At the end of observation period (median 25
months) 16 dogs (89%) had complete response and 2 had to be euthanized
due to the progression of disease. In all dogs, except two, serum IFN- or
IL-12 levels were detected, without systemic toxicity. At the site of DNA
plasmid application, except for one patient, the plasmid was not detected
at 1 week post-treatment. No horizontal gene transfer was detected;
plasmid was not detected in any of the residential bacteria and in vitro
transformation of plasmid into isolated strains was
negative.Collectively, the results of our on-going clinical trial
demonstrate that IL-12 gene therapy combined with electrochemotherapy is
safe, feasible and effective treatment for canine mastocytoma.

