Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-inhibition of ALK and EGFR and/or c-MET on cell growth and
response to radiation in ALK-positive NSCLC cells


ALK (anaplastic lymphoma kinase), EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor)
and c-MET are molecular drivers for a subset of non-small cell lung
cancers (NSCLC). Approximately 4-7% of NSCLCs carry the EML4-ALK
chromosomal rearrangement. We identified overexpression of EGFR and c-MET
in EML4-ALK-positive NSCLC cell lines H3122 and H2228. ALK, EGFR, and
c-MET may function cooperatively to modulate tumor growth, stress
response, and survival in EML4-ALK-positive cells and co-inhibition may
favorably impact tumor control. We therefore investigated the effects of
co-inhibition of ALK and EGFR or c-MET on cell survival and response to
radiation in EML4-ALK-positive NSCLC cells.Compared with ALK-negative
cell lines (H226, A549 and H520), the ALK-positive cell lines (H3122,
H2228) were highly sensitive to the ALK inhibitors crizotinb, ceritinib
and alectinib, although with differing sensitivity to radiation.
Crizotinib, ceritinib and alectinib sensitized H3122 and H2228 to
radiation, as evaluated by clonogenic assay. However, knockdown of ALK by
siRNA in H3122 and H2228, or overexpression of EML4-ALK in NIH-3T3 cells,
had only moderate effects on radiosensitivity. Simultaneous knockdown of
ALK and MET, or ALK and EGFR, increased radiosensitivity as assessed by
clonogenic survival in H3122 and H2228 cells, while also increasing
inhibitory effects on cell growth and proliferation. These results were
confirmed in cells treated with the combination of ceritinib and su11274
(c-MET inhibitor) or with ceritinib and erlotinib (EGFR inhibitor). We
further assessed the impact of drug alone or in combination with
radiation on cell cycle, cell survival and DNA damage repair pathways. To
further evaluate ALK function in the cellular response to radiation in
NSCLC, we are developing EML4-ALK stable expression cell lines.
Evaluation of drug-radiation interactions in xenograft model systems are
also under consideration.These data indicate that co-inhibition of ALK
and EGFR or c-MET can enhance growth inhibitory effects in ALK-positive
cells and augment radiosensitivity in-vitro, suggesting the potential
value for ALK inhibitors combined with EGFR/c-MET-targeting for
therapeutic benefit in ALK-positive NSCLC patients with or without
radiation.

