Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sentinel lymph node detection and in vivo/ex vivo assessment of
melanin distribution by means of multispectral optoacoustic tomography
(MSOT) in patients with malignant melanoma


Melanoma accounts for less than 5% of skin cancer cases, yet it causes
more than 75% of skin cancer death, and its incidence is growing faster
than any other cancer in the world. Because melanoma metastasizes early
into regional/sentinel lymph nodes (SLN), SLN excision (SLNE) is probably
the most important diagnostic procedure for melanoma patients, as
histology provides the most relevant prognostic factor for the survival
of melanoma patients. However, 50% of excised lymph nodes show no
evidence of metastasis; and, current histological protocols involve
sampling only a small portion of the SLN, resulting in a relatively high
false negative rate. Furthermore, SLNE exposes the patients to
complications such as swelling, edema and future risk of infection.
Therefore, a clear need exists to improve the sensitivity and specificity
of SLN analysis. Multispectral optoacoustic tomography (MSOT) ulitizes
the molecular specificity of optical imaging, while capitalizing on the
high temporal and spatial resolution of ultrasound imaging. This method
allows sensitive detection of optical markers such as melanin, which
would identify potentially metastatic lymph nodes, and indocyanine green
(ICG), which can potentially label SLN. In this study, 148 lymph nodes
were excised from 65 melanoma patients (stage I - IV), and the lymph
nodes were examined by MSOT ex vivo to guide the pathologist to
examination of melanin-containing regions of the lymph node, thereby
increasing the detection rate in histological analysis. Compared to
standard histology, MSOT demonstrated a superior 100% sensitivity/47%
specificity. Further, 21 melanoma patients were scanned with a handheld
MSOT device in vivo. MSOT was able to detect sentinel lymph nodes using
ICG specific contrast, with the added ability of non-invasive assessment
of the melanin status prior to excision. In vivo MSOT measurements using
a 2D and a 3D detector were compared with ultrasound, SPECT/CT, planar
fluorescence imaging and ex vivo histology, with a promising concordance
between in vivo MSOT measurements and in vivo and ex vivo gold standard
assessments. MSOT represents a viability modality to improve histological
analysis of excised SLN in melanoma patients, and it offers the ability
to stage lymph nodes noninvasively, potentially reducing the necessity to
excise lymph nodes in some melanoma patients.

