Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel method for isolation and genetic analysis of pure
populations of circulating plasma cells from multiple myeloma patients


Multiple Myeloma is bone marrow tumor that frequently results in the
aberrant release of neoplastic plasma cells into circulation. The
CELLSEARCH system (Janssen Diagnostics, Raritan, NJ) has been used to
capture, enumerate, and perform FISH analysis on circulating multiple
myeloma cells (CMMC) from patients with active multiple myeloma,
smoldering myeloma, and MGUS (Gross, et.al. Poster #1825, ASH 2011). This
method utilizes a blood fixative and subsequently permeabilizes the
cells, which confounds the ability to do mRNA analysis on these samples.
Here we present a novel method to isolate pure circulating myeloma cells
that is compatible with downstream genetic analysis.Blood was obtained
through a commercial vendor (Conversant Bio) from multiple myeloma
patients. Samples were processed in parallel using the existing method
for enumeration and a novel method for genetic profiling. For CMMC
enumeration, blood was collected in CellSave tubes (Janssen Diagnostics)
and CMMC were enriched using paramagnetic ferrofluid recognizing CD138
and CS1 antigens. Cells were permeabilized and stained on the CELLSEARCH
AUTOPREP with CD38 (PE), CD45 (APC), CD19 (APC) and DAPI. CMMC were
enumerated using the CELLTRACKS ANALYZER II scanning platform. CMMC were
defined as DAPI +, CD138+, CD38+, CD45-, CD19-.For genetic profiling, 4
ml EDTA blood was enriched using CD138 and CS1 ferrofluids on the
AUTOPREP with no subsequent permeabilization. CMMC were stained offline
using CD38 (Texas Red), CD45 (FITC), CD19 (FITC), CD3 (FITC) and NucBlue.
Samples were transferred to glass a bottomed petri dish and observed
through an inverted microscope using a Texas Red/FITC dual filter,
individual FITC and Texas red filters, and a DAPI filter. CMMC were
defined as NucBlue+, CD138+, CD38+, CD45-, CD19-, and CD3-. Pools of
individual CMMC were picked from the sample using an Eppendorf
Transferman micromanipulator. For comparison, contaminating leukocytes
were also collected for analysis. RNA from picked cells was amplified
using the SMARTer Ultra Low Input Kit (Clontech) and qPCR was performed
for myeloma and leukocyte specific markers.Detection of CMMC using the
novel method for genetic profiling was found to be concordant with the
existing method for enumeration. We found this approach to provide a deep
and unbiased characterization of gene pathways activated in CMMC by RT
qPCR and RNASeq. This method will have applications in longitudinal
studies of active myeloma patients as a way to gather information about
relapse and minimal residual disease between bone marrow draws.

