Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LncRNA BC200 is induced by estradiol and regulates apoptosis in
MCF-7 breast cancer cells


LncRNA BC200 is a small functional RNA which has been implicated in the
regulation of protein synthesis in neurons. It is dysregulated in
invasive carcinomas of the breast. In this study, we reported that BC200
is upregulated in breast cancer, as detected by RT-PCR analysis of breast
cancer tissue scan, suggesting its possible role as an oncogene. We then
demonstrated that BC200 is transcriptionally induced by estradiol (E2)
treatment in ER positive breast cancer cell lines through multiple
functional estrogen response elements (EREs), including the full ERE
sequence 800bp from transcriptional start site. Luciferase reporter assay
combined with mutation analysis indicated that the full ERE region is
critical to the estradiol-induced promoter activity. Furthermore, BC200
is crucial for cell growth and viability; its knockdown induces apoptosis
in MCF-7 cells. This may explain in part why estrogen can promote cell
proliferation in ER positive breast cancer cells. To better study its
role in breast cancer development and progression, we generated BC200
knockout MCF-7 cell cells using CRISPR/Cas9 technique. BC200 knockout
leads to the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria and promotes the
cleavage of PARP-1, both of which are an indicator of cell apoptosis.
This was further confirmed by TUNEL assay. It has been reported that
hnRNP A2/B1 alters the bcl-X pre-mRNA splicing in favor of anti-apoptotic
bcl-XL. Of great interest, BC200 knockout enhances expression of
pro-apoptotic bcl-XS form at both mRNA and protein level. RNA pulldown
assays using biotin-labeled BC200 probe suggested that BC200 can bind to
hnRNP Q and hnRNP A2/B1. On the other hand, RNA immunoprecipitation using
hnRNP A2/B1 antibody in BC200 knockout MCF-7 cells showed a significant
reduction in enrichment of bcl-X mRNA as compared to control cells. We
propose that the regulation of bcl-X alternative splicing depends upon
endogenous expression of BC200 that would help hnRNP A2/B1 to position
itself on bcl-X mRNA and modulate splicing in favor of bcl-XL. Thus, loss
of BC200 leads to generation of bcl-XS protein synthesis and to
apoptosis. Together, these results suggest that BC200 functions as a
negative regulator of apoptosis in breast cancer and thus, it may serve
as a potential target for cancer therapies.

