Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic transcriptional regulation of ER targets in prostate cancer


Introduction: Prostate cancer is the second most common cause of cancer
death in American men. Prostate cancer is mainly an androgen receptor
regulated disease, however estrogen signaling is also important in
prostate physiology and development particularly in aging men as
decreasing testosterone is accompanied by increasing estrogen levels.
Further, estrogen signaling through estrogen receptor alpha (ER) has been
implicated in prostate cancer progression, and ER expression increases in
high grade tumors, however its precise role remains unclear. Thus far
there have been no systematic approaches to assay ER transcriptional
regulation in prostate cancer, and in this study we aim to determine the
role of ER in prostate cancer by identifying direct ER target
genes.Methods: ER recruitment profile was assayed by ChIP-Seq in both
NCI-H660 and ER overexpressing VCaP cells in response to estrogen
treatment. ER transcriptional regulation of target genes was examined
utilizing RNA-Seq in VCaP cells with and without ER overexpression.
Candidate gene expression was assayed via qPCR in prostate cancer cell
lines, and by RNA-Seq in a 126 sample prostate cancer patient
cohort.Results: In order to delineate the role of ER in prostate cancer
we integrated RNA- and ChIP-Seq datasets from two different cell lines in
response to ER overexpression and estrogen treatment. In doing so we
identified an ER signature comprising multiple genes that were
significantly up or down-regulated (> 5-fold) and had an ER binding site
near the gene promoter. Many of these ER target genes have been
previously identified as oncogenes or tumor suppressors, and they include
members several key pathways including PI3 kinase signaling and
cytoskeleton maintenance. Expression of these target genes was queried in
multiple prostate cancer cell lines, and interestingly ER binding sites
and estrogen regulation were cell line specific in both androgen receptor
positive and negative lines. Further, significant differences in target
gene expression were demonstrated between benign prostate and prostate
adenocarcinoma (PCa), and/or between PCa and castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC) or neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC).
Combinatorial targeting of both ER and PI3K signaling proved beneficial
for prostate cancer.Conclusion: These results demonstrate that estrogen
regulates a distinct set of genes in prostate cancer in a direct genomic
fashion, including several components of the PI3K pathway. They also
support the hypothesis that this ER signature is dynamic and changes
during the course of prostate cancer progression to CRPC and NEPC.
Further validation of the pathways involved is necessary, however these
findings may lead to the discovery of novel co-targeting treatment
strategies and/or prostate cancer biomarkers, and assessment of ER
signaling may help predict a subclass of prostate cancer patients that
are likely to respond to PI3K inhibition.

