Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of metastatic subsets of pancreatic cancer stem
cells possessing metabolic features of pluripotent stem cells


The current cancer chemotherapy can mainly cause pancreatic cancer
remission but often fails to cure cancer due to the existence of cancer
stem cells in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDACs). Therefore,
development of methods targeting pancreatic cancer stem cells could lead
to improvement in PDAC therapeutic. However, the key characteristics of
pancreatic cancer stem cells remain to be determined. Accumulating
evidences revealed the similar features shared by pluripotent stem cells
and cancer stem cells, we therefore hypothesize acquisition of
pluripotent characteristics during the reprogramming process is
superficially reminiscent of the dysplastic transformation proposed in
cancers. In the current work, comparative genome-wide profiling analysis
was conducted on embryonic stem cells (ESCs), induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) and different subpopulation of pancreatic cancer cells. We
initially revealed expression of pluripotent transcriptional factors and
surface markers such as Oct4, Sox2, Lin28, CD133, ABCG2 and CD44 was
significantly higher in ABCG2+ CD44+ pancreatic CSC subpopulation which
was correlated with their drug resistance and high metastatic potentials.
Metabolic pathway analysis was further performed and identified that,
very similar to ESCs/iPSCs, the metastatic ABCG2+CD44+ subpopulations had
evaluated levels of of GLUT5 and KHK and expressed higher levels of
ST6Gal1. Utilizing tumor-engraft mice and spontaneous pancreatic cancer
mice, we actually revealed fructose diet enhanced cancer drug resistance
and CSC-mediated cancer metastasis possibly via up-regulating ST6Gal1 as
knockdown of ST6Gal can affect self-renewal, invasion potential and ABCG2
efflux ability of ABCG2+CD44+ CSC subpopulations. In summary, the current
work elucidated that pancreatic ABCG2+CD44+ CSC subpopulations possess
metabolic features of pluripotent stem cells including the capability to
efficiently to utilize fructose and to perform 2,6 sialylation via
sialyltransferase ST6Gal1 which critically mediated cancer drug
resistance and metastasis. Hopefully, the findings can lead to developing
efficient treatments for patients of PDAC in the near future.

