Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of genetic heterogeneity by whole exome sequencing
using cell free DNA from blood samples


Objectives: Circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) is expected to be useful
for diagnosis of genetic alterations in cancer. However, it has been
still difficult to comprehensively analyze somatic mutations using cfDNA,
because of the low quantity in blood. We examined the feasibility of
whole exome sequencing using cfDNA and assessed the ratio of mutation
reads in cfDNA for somatic mutations comparing with the corresponding
tumor DNA in ovarian cancer specimens. In addition, we assessed whether
cell free DNA might reflect the tumor heterogeneity in ovarian
cancer.Methods: The pair of fresh frozen tumor samples and blood samples
was obtained from two cases of ovarian serous adenocarcinoma under
informed consent and approval of institutional review board. The tumor
DNA and cfDNA were extracted from the specimens and whole-exome
sequencing was performed using 1ug of the tumor DNA or 25ng of cfDNA. The
list of the mutated genes was compared between cell free DNA and the
corresponding tumor DNA. Validation of the mutations and calculation of
the tumor content ratio in cfDNA was assessed using target
sequencing.Result: We successfully detected the somatic mutations from
cfDNA. The somatic mutations detected in cfDNA covered from 21% (49/233)
to 55% (141/258) of the mutations detected in the corresponding tumor
DNA. TP53 was included in the mutated genes, and the base substitution
(chr17:7578257 C>A) was identified in 5 of 121 reads (4%) in cfDNA. We
validated the tumor content ratio of cfDNA is 8% by target sequencing.
One of the two cases showed the correlation between the mutant allele
frequency in the tumor DNA and the detection ratio of the mutations in
cfDNA (p = 0.004, logistic regression analysis). However, the correlation
was not observed in another case (p = 0.3923, logistic regression
analysis). Of note, we detected various types of mutations in cfDNA
alone. One of such genes is RAPGEF2. The base substitution (ch4:160253031
C>T) was detected only in cfDNA (11/53, 21%), but not in tumor DNA
(0/120, 0%).Conclusion: Our data suggest that whole exome sequencing of
cfDNA is feasible. The mutations detected only in cfDNA might reflect the
tumor heterogeneity, and cfDNA might provide us novel biomarkers for
diagnosis of recurrence and/or metastasis. Further study is warranted to
elucidate the method to utilize the genetic information from cfDNA.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

