Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mast cells contribute to T cell tolerance against prostate cancer-
associated antigens favoring tumor growth


Treatments for hormone refractory and metastatic prostate cancer (PC)
still remain palliative. Also tumor specific vaccinations when tested in
the clinical setting showed results lower than expected. A major
limitation to active immunotherapy relies on mechanisms of tolerance
adopted by the tumor. Indeed, an immunosuppressive environment is
established in PC patients, as well as in the TRAMP mouse model of PC, in
which peripheral T cell tolerance to the tumor-associated antigen Tag is
acquired early during neoplastic transformation, with mechanisms that
still need to be fully clarified.Mast cells (MCs) have been described to
mediate immunological tolerance in transplantation and in several disease
models, including cancer. We have demonstrated their involvement in early
stage of PC development. Therefore, we investigated whether
immunosuppression is part of their supporting adenocarcinoma outgrowth in
TRAMP mice.We crossed TRAMP mice with KitWsh mice, genetically lacking
MCs, and followed tumor growth and Tag-specific CD8+ T cells response
after immunization, measured as in vivo lytic activity or ex vivo
cytokine production.MCs depletion restrained adenocarcinoma growth in
about 70% of mice that at 30 weeks of age only showed evidences of
intraepithelial neoplasia or local in situ well-differentiated
adenocarcinoma. These lesions were much different from those raised in
MCs-sufficient age-matched TRAMP counterparts that developed
poor-differentiated multifocal invasive carcinoma. Notably, reduced tumor
onset and aggressiveness correlated with improved immune surveillance.
Indeed, 16 weeks old KitWsh-TRAMP mice matched for the size of prostatic
lesions and for Tag expression, were able to mount a Tag-specific CTL
response, whereas their TRAMP counterparts were tolerant. Reconstitution
of KitWsh-TRAMP with bone marrow-derived MCs restored complete T cell
tolerance. Interestingly, treatment of TRAMP mice with Cromolyn, a
compound that inhibit MCs degranulation, had no effect on Tag-specific
immune response while partially inhibited tumor growth. These results
suggest that independent mechanisms may regulate local immunosuppression
and tumor promotion by MCs. They also hint that surface receptors, rather
than soluble mediators, are involved in MCs-mediated T cell tolerance.MCs
contribute to the maintenance of an immunosuppressive environment,
favoring the growth of well-differentiated prostate adenocarcinoma. This
open the way for the identification of new therapeutic approaches in PC,
aimed at coupling MCs targeting with other immunotherapeutic strategies.

