Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel miRNA-based predictive model for biochemical failure
following post-prostatectomy salvage radiation therapy


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common cancer among men
worldwide. Radical prostatectomy (RP) is a standard treatment for PCa,
yet 30-40% of these men experience biochemical failure (BF) and must
undergo additional treatment such as radiation therapy (RT).
Unfortunately, a subset of these patients develop resistance to RT and
have disease progression. It is important to stratify men based on risk
of recurrence as well as identify the most suitable treatment approach to
take in PCa to reduce non-necessary patient burden. Currently used
methods that include clinical and histopathological factors lack disease
specificity and sensitivity. A more informative classification system is
needed and molecular biomarkers may serve to bridge the gap of the
inadequacies of current prognostic and predictive methods. There were two
major objectives for this study. The first was to identify microRNA
(miRNA) signatures that predict time to BF post-RP. Secondly, and most
novel to the field of RT, we sought to determine miRNAs that could
predict BF following post-RP salvage RT as well as develop a new model
using both miRNAs and clinical factors. Using the NanoString Human v2
array, we profiled 800 miRNAs in forty-three PCa patients that all
experienced BF post-RP and subsequently underwent salvage RT. We
identified an 88-miRNA signature that could predict time to BF post-RP
using multivariate Cox regression analysis. We observed that these 88
miRNAs could classify patients into two groups (early vs late BF) and
that the probabilities to the time to first BF were significantly
different between the groups. To identify miRNAs that could independently
predict BF post-salvage RT, we performed a multivariate Cox regression
analysis with lymph node status and Gleason score which lead to the
discovery of nine miRNAs. We wanted to not only identify miRNAs that
could independently predict BF post-salvage RT, but also develop a model
using these miRNAs in combination with currently used clinical factors to
improve upon existing methods. We performed a Cox regression analysis
including lymph node status, Gleason score, and the 9 independently
identified miRNAs and applied a step-wise model selection strategy to
determine the best predictive miRNAs. Two miRNAs with Gleason score and
lymph node status had the best predictability. Further specificity and
sensitivity analysis indicated that the addition of these miRNAs greatly
improved the predictive ability of lymph node status and Gleason score
alone (AUC = 0.83 vs 0.66). To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first report correlating molecular biomarkers with response to salvage
RT. This research has the potential to greatly impact future treatment
strategies by using molecular biomarker profiles alone or in combination
with other clinical factors to assign the most suitable therapy to
individuals the first time and thus avoid over or under treatment.

