Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYC amplification and overexpression in metastatic anaplastic
thyroid cancer dictates response to therapy


Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is a very aggressive and lethal cancer
with few months of survival from diagnosis. Although less than 2% of all
thyroid carcinomas are ATC, it accounts for up to 40% of thyroid
carcinoma deaths. TRP53 inactivating mutations and PI3K activation
through loss of PTEN, or PIK3CA mutations and amplification are common in
ATC. In fact, targeted deletion of Pten and Trp53 in the mouse thyroid
results in ATC development.Using this mouse model, we found that Myc is
amplified in 38% (11/29) of [Pten,Trp53]thyr-/ ATCs with distant
metastasis, but only in 10% (3/30) non-metastatic ATCs. Conversely Myc
was not amplified in any of 15 metastatic follicular thyroid carcinomas
developed by Ptenthyr-/ mice. Analysis of human ATCs showed Myc
amplification in 17% (3/18) tumors and protein overexpression in 25% of
samples in a tissue microarray.Myc amplification has been shown to be
associated with resistance to PI3K targeted therapies in different tumor
types. We evaluated the role of Myc in ATC growth and response to therapy
using cell lines derived from our [Pten,p53]thyr-/ mouse
model.Myc-amplified cell lines grew faster than cell lines from tumors
without Myc amplification both in full medium and under serum
deprivation. Myc knockdown resulted in a dramatic decrease in growth
rate, especially under serum starvations, suggesting that tumors with Myc
amplification are less dependent on growth factors present in the serum.
Myc knockdown in Myc-amplified cells completely impaired tumor formation
in syngeneic mice.To evaluate the effect of Myc amplification on drug
sensitivity, we screened a panel of drugs on cultured cells. Myc
knockdown sensitized ATC cells to PLK1 inhibition with BI6727, PI3K
inhibition with BKM120, as well as to doxorubicin and etoposide.
Conversely, Myc-amplified cells were more sensitive to carboplatin.Our
results show that Myc amplification is a biomarker for more aggressive
and resistant ATCs and that MYC-targeting strategies could be employed to
sensitize these tumors to conventional and targeted therapy.

