Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Concurrent BRCA2 and PTEN mutations are associated with improved
survival in endometrioid endometrial cancer


Objectives: In patients with high-grade serous ovarian cancer, those with
BRCA mutations and resultant homologous recombination deficiency have
shown improved responses to treatment with PARP inhibitors. PTEN
mutations are frequently observed in endometrioid endometrial cancer,
however, role of BRCA mutations is not known in this disease. We sought
to determine the frequency and clinical significance of BRCA mutations in
patients with endometrioid endometrial cancer.Methods: We assessed PTEN,
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation status for 248 uterine tumor samples using Level
3 data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). We performed mutation
analysis for PTEN, BRCA1 and BRCA2 for an additional 251 samples from
TCGA using ANNOVAR. A total of 499 patients were included in the
analysis. Clinical data including stage, tumor histology, and overall
survival were also extracted. Fisher's exact tests were used to identify
the association between mutation status and histologic subtype.
Kaplan-Meier plots were constructed to demonstrate survival differences
between groups. Next, we characterized a panel of uterine cell lines for
PTEN, BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation status using the Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia. Gene and protein expression levels were determined by qPCR
and Western Blot, respectively. MTT, a colorimetric cell viability assay,
was used to determine viability of uterine cells treated with cisplatin
or olaparib, a PARP-1 inhibitor.Results: Among the samples analyzed, 335
(67%) had endometrioid histology, 76 (15%) had serous histology, 18 (4%)
had mixed histology, and in the remainder of cases, histology was
unknown. Of the patients with endometrioid histology, 260 (78%) had a
PTEN mutation, 23 (7%) had both BRCA1 and 2 mutations, 4 (1%) had
mutations in BRCA1 only, and 25 (8%) had mutations in BRCA2 only. 52/335
patients (16%) had mutations in either BRCA1 or 2; 18/52 (35%) of these
were stage II or above and the remainder were stage I. There was no
survival advantage detected in patients with BRCA1 mutations over
wild-type BRCA1, independent of PTEN mutation status (p = 0.16 and 0.19,
respectively). Patients with both PTEN and BRCA2 mutations had improved
overall survival as compared to those patients with wild-type PTEN and
BRCA2 (p = 0.03, hazard ratio 0.242). A single mutation in BRCA1, BRCA2
or PTEN did not confer a significant survival advantage as compared to
wild-type (p = 0.15). In vitro, Ishikawa (PTEN/BRCA1 double mutant) and
Hec1b (wild-type for all three genes) were found to be the most sensitive
cell lines to cisplatin. RL95-2 (PTEN/BRCA1 double mutant) and Hec1b were
the most sensitive cell lines to olaparib.Conclusions: BRCA 1 and 2
mutations are prevalent in patients with endometrioid endometrial cancer,
and PTEN/BRCA2 double mutations are associated with prolonged patient
survival. These findings may have significant clinical and treatment
implications.

