Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effect of targeted combination therapy in bladder
cancer model using HSP90 inhibitors


BackgroundIn order to survive bladder cancer (BCa) cells deregulate key
pathways - including the inhibition of apoptosis - while developing
oncogene addiction to molecular chaperones such as Heat Shock Protein 90
(HSP90). While successful in vitro, monotherapies targeting such pathways
have failed in clinical trials. We aim to show the superiority of
combination therapy using proteostatic and targeted cytotoxic agents. We
hypothesize that these combinations will synergize to increase
cytotoxicity (CT) in BCa by amplifying the apoptosis via simultaneous
activation of both intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic pathways.MethodsThe
proteostatic agents tested were the HSP90 inhibitor STA9090 (9090) and
the proteasome inhibitor Marizomib (NPI). The cytotoxic agent used was a
synthetic TRAIL ligand. These agents were tested in multiple ATCC BCa
cell lines and the NCI patient tumor-derived BCa cell line UOBL 101
(UOBL). CT was determined via MTT assay. Mechanism of cytotoxic response
was investigated using a series of immunoblots targeting the components
of intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic pathways and nuclear degradation
proteins. All the assays were performed in triplicates for
validation.Results9090 (IC50 7.4-10 nM) was effective in all cell lines,
as was NPI (IC50 10-20 nM). TRAIL caused 100% CT in UOBL (IC50 2.5 ng/mL,
95% CI [1.0, 7.0]) and a maximal 50% CT in T24, however the cytotoxicity
of individual agents was not sustained. Combination effects of 9090 +
TRAIL and NPI + TRAIL demonstrated an increase from 50% CT to 100% CT at
the IC50 of both 9090 and NPI, and this effect was sustained over the
course of the experiment. The increased cytotoxicity of combination
therapy had corresponded to rapid cytoplasmic release of cytochrome c,
additive increase in cleaved caspase 3 and caspase 8, with the
corresponding increase in cleaved PARP and -H2ax.ConclusionsCombination
of a pro-apoptotic agent with a molecular chaperone or proteasome
inhibitor holds promise in BCa therapyby affecting intracellular
anti-apoptotic signaling and compromising efficient proteostasis in
cancer cells lines, and should be investigated further.

