Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bavituximab modulates tumor microenvironment and activates CD8+
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes in a patient-derived 3D ex vivo system of
lung cancer


Bavituximab is a monoclonal antibody directed against the membrane
phospholipid phosphatidylserine exposed on the outer leaflet of tumor and
vascular endothelial cells of the tumor microenvironment. Bavituximab
modulates the tumor microenvironment by blocking PS-mediated immune
suppression and activating cytotoxic T lymphocyte anti-tumor responses.In
this study, we tested the immunomodulatory effect of bavituximab using a
proprietary 3D ex vivo tumor microsphere technology. Upon obtaining
informed consent, fresh tumor tissue from lung cancer patients were
collected at the time of surgical resection. Tissue was processed for
characterization of the tumor microenvironment and potential
immunosuppressive mechanisms such as expression of PD-1, CTLA4, LAG3,
TIM3, BTLA, and Adenosine A2AR. 3D tumor microspheres were prepared and
cells were treated ex vivo with f(ab)2 version of bavituximab,
bavituximab, docetaxel, and a combination of bavituximab and docetaxel
for 36 hours within the 3D tumor microsphere simulating an intact tumor
microenvironment made up of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) and
myeloid cells. At the end of the treatment, TILs were analyzed by flow
cytometry for cell activation and changes in CD4, CD8 and Treg
(CD25+/CD127-) subpopulations. A multiplex human cytokine assay was used
to simultaneously analyze the differential secretion of cytokines,
including human IFN-gamma in culture media as a surrogate of TIL
activation.Preliminary results indicate the combination of bavituximab
and docetaxel can induce TIL activation as demonstrated by a significant
increase in IFN-gamma secretion when compared to tumors treated with
control or either agent alone. Flow cytometry analysis revealed that this
effect was associated with low PD-1 expression on CD8 cells, but did not
correlate with other known immune-modulating receptors.This lung patient
derived ex-vivo approach indicates that bavituximab in combination with
docetaxel can elicit a tumor specific immune response in human
adenocarcinoma of the lung. This effect involves, at least in part,
activation of CD8+ TIL and increased inflammatory cytokine production by
lymphoid and myeloid cells. In addition, we have observed low PD1
expression as a potential prognostic biomarker of positive response to
bavituximab treatment.

