Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A platform to test multiple therapies simultaneously in the intact
tumors of cancer patients: Initial clinical experience


We report the initial clinical findings of a device platform to test
multiple therapeutic options simultaneously in individual living tumors
within a clinical patient population, detailing for the first time
comparative effects of different drugs within individual intact tumors.
Most early cancer drug discovery is performed under in vitro conditions
in cell-based models that poorly represent the disease they are intended
to represent and have a poor track record for predicting success in
subsequent clinical trials. To enable in vivo analysis of anti-cancer
agent efficacy at earlier stages of drug development, and to potentially
enable toxicity-sparing assessment of novel agents in the oncology
clinic, we have developed a technology platform called CIVO. CIVO allows
for simultaneous assessment of up to eight drugs or drug combinations in
a single solid tumor while the tumor is still in the patient. Controlled
microinjection-based delivery of doxorubicin, docetaxel, mafosfamide, and
gemcitabine was tested in twelve patients in the canine sarcoma clinic.
Drugs were co-injected in a columnar array with UV fluorescent beads
resulting in easy-to-identify bands of drug at 95% of the injection
sites, each at a distinct position of the patient's tumor. Tumors were
resected 72h following microinjection and were subjected to multiplexed
analyses for tumor response which included drug-induced ablation of
sarcoma cells, apoptosis, DNA damage, mitotic arrest, immune
infiltration, and feedback activation of oncogenic pathways. The
CIVO-introduced drug microdoses induced spatially-defined graded, and
mechanism-specific cellular changes around sites of drug exposure in a
drug and patient-specific manner. Consistent with the use of doxorubicin
as first line therapy in the soft tissue sarcoma clinic, the frequency
and extent of response of localized tumor kill induced by Doxorubicin
(6/9 patients) exceeded those of all other agents tested, with Docetaxel
being next most effective (2/6 patients), and Gemcitabine being the least
effective (0/9 patients). Interestingly, almost all confirmed sites of
response showed evidence of mTOR pathway upregulation, suggesting that
mTOR pathway activation represents a potential common mechanism of
chemo-resistance across sarcoma patients exists to multiple chemo-toxic
agents. We are currently exploring combinations of 1st line sarcoma drugs
with mTOR inhibitors in the canine sarcoma clinic with CIVO. This data
represents the first time differential effects of multiple drugs have
been captured within individual intact tumors in a clinical population.
Along with early responses observed in the human clinic, this sets the
stage for application of this technology to identify which novel agents
are likely to succeed or fail in subsequent clinical trials.

