Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol-Quercetin combination significantly inhibits prostate
cancer in TRAMP mice


Worldwide, prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most frequently diagnosed
cancer and the sixth leading cause of cancer death in males. The existing
treatments as well as surgical approaches have not been fully effective
in PCa management. Therefore, new mechanism-based approaches are needed
for the prevention as well as therapy of PCa. Resveratrol
(trans-3,5,4-trihydroxystilbene), an antioxidant found in red grapes, has
been shown to afford chemopreventive as well as therapeutic effects
against several cancers. We have advocated the idea that resveratrol may
be better utilized for cancer management, when given in combination with
other agents. A number of in vitro and in vivo studies have suggested
potential usefulness of resveratrol in PCa management. However, an
important issue associated with the potential clinical/human use of
resveratrol is its low in vivo bioavailability, due to its rapid
metabolism (via glucuronidation, sulfation and hydroxylation). Quercetin,
also a flavonoid, has been shown to inhibit in vivo sulfation of
resveratrol. Interestingly, resveratrol and quercetin, both are found in
red grapes and several other plants, indicating their natural
association. Like resveratrol, quercetin has also been shown to inhibit
PCa in animal models. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that
resveratrol-quercetin combination may have better efficacy against PCa as
quercetin, in addition to its own effect, can enhance the bioavailability
of resveratrol via inhibiting its sulfation, thereby imparting superior
anti-proliferative efficacy. We found that resveratrol-quercetin
combination resulted in a superior anti-proliferative response in
multiple human PCa cell lines (22R1, DU145 and PC3), as assessed by MTT
(3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazolyl-2)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay for
cellular metabolic activity, and trypan blue exclusion analysis for cell
growth and viability. Further, clonogenic survival assay, where equal
number of treated cells were allowed to grow for two weeks, showed that
the combination was superior to resveratrol or quercetin alone. To
ascertain the in vivo relevance of in vitro data, we determined the
effects of resveratrol-quercetin combination on PCa development and
progression in TRAMP model, which closely mimics hallmark features of
human PCa. We conducted prevention and intervention trials employing four
experimental groups, 1) control (AIN76A diet), 2) resveratrol (600 mg/kg
in diet), 3) quercetin (60 mg/kg in diet), and 4) resveratrol (600 mg/kg
in diet) + quercetin (60 mg/kg in diet). Our data demonstrated that
resveratrol-quercetin combination was markedly superior to either of the
individual agents, in intervention setting when treatment was started
after the onset of PCa in TRAMP mice. Further studies are ongoing in our
laboratory to determine the mechanism(s) associated with the observed
effect of resveratrol-quercetin combination.

