Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CAMKV as an immunotherapy target in MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma


Background: Neuroblastoma is an embryonal tumor of the developing
sympathetic nervous system that accounts for 10-15% of pediatric
cancer-related deaths. Although an intensive treatment regimen consisting
of chemotherapy, surgery, radiation, immunotherapy and autologous stem
cell transplant is used for patients with high-risk neuroblastoma, about
half of these patients ultimately die. Reliable tumor-specific genomic
biomarkers, such as MYCN amplification, have been identified for
high-risk neuroblastoma and are used to stratify therapy. Recent clinical
studies using immunotherapies to target cell surface molecules such as
GD2 in neuroblastoma and CD19 in leukemia have shown impressive results,
and have highlighted immunotherapy as a critical strategy in combating
childhood cancer.Methods: As part of the Stand Up 2 Cancer/St. Baldrick's
Pediatric Cancer Dream Team's effort to streamline new immunotherapuetics
into the clinic, we developed a computation approach to prioritize new
targets for immunotherapy for high-risk neuroblastoma. Here we used MYCN
as a biomarker for the most aggressive subset of neuroblastoma to define
candidate cell-surface targets that are differentially expressed in
MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma. We used RNAi to manipulate gene expression
levels of MYCN to determine if these cell-surface targets are under the
control of MYCN in neuroblastoma cells.Results: The most significant
differentially expressed cell surface molecule in high-risk neuroblastoma
based on MYCN-amplification status was the calmodulin kinase-like
vesicle-associated gene (CAMKV, p = 110-6), which encodes a protein that
binds calmodulin in the presence of calcium, but lacks the kinase
activity of other calmodulin kinase family members. We have confirmed
that CAMKV protein is selectively expressed in MYCN-amplified
neuroblastoma cell lines. From membrane fractionation and
immunohistochemistry, we have verified that CAMKV is membranous in
MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma cell lines and xeongraft tumors.
Immunohistochemistry also revealed that CAMKV is not highly expressed in
human pediatric normal tissues with the exception of neural tissues.
Depletion of MYCN using RNAi resulted in a significant reduction in CAMKV
RNA and protein expression (p = 2.310-6).Conclusions: These results
provide a template for the discovery and validation of immunotherapeutic
targets in MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma and have the potential to lead to
the development of a new immunotherapy targeting CAMKV.

