Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acute myeloid leukemia cells induce osteogenic differentiation in
mesenchymal stem cells through bone morphogenetic protein- and RUNX-2-
mediated signaling


Mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) are a critical component of the
bone marrow micro-environment (BME), induce cell survival signals in
normal and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells and protect them from
chemotherapy. The mechanisms underlying BME-induced cell growth and
chemo-resistance however have not been fully elucidated. Here, we
hypothesize that AML cells induce functional changes in BME to gain
growth advantage. We have compared age matched (40-60) bone marrow
derived MSCs from AML patients (AML-MSC, n = 10) and normal (N-MSC, n =
10) individuals and analyzed their cell growth, cell surface phenotype
and multi-lineage differentiation. AML-MSCs are phenotypically different
with larger cell surface area and lower cell growth. The average doubling
time of AML-MSCs is 528hrs compared to 346hours for N-MSCs (p95%
reduction (p95% reduction (p<0.001) in the number mature adipocytes in
AML-MSCs compared to N-MSCs suggesting that AML-MSCs lack the ability to
differentiate into adipocytes. To validate these observations, we
co-cultured N-MSCs with OCI-AML3 cells for 3-5 days and FACS sorted the
MSCs for gene expression and differentiation analysis. As expected,
qRT-PCR analysis revealed that osteopontin, osterix and ALP were
up-regulated 3-4 fold in N-MSCs co-cultured with OCI-AML3 cells. In
addition, ALP activity was 2-3 fold higher in N-MSCs co-cultured with
OCI-AMl3 cells compared to mono-cultured cells. Bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMP) are the most essential factors during osteogenic
differentiation and new bone formation in humans. We therefore treated
MSCs with AML cell-derived condition medium, and observed a dramatic 6-8
fold increase in pSmad1/5 levels in N-MSCs in a time dependent manner. In
addition, AML induced pSmad1/5 up-regulation was inhibited when MSCs were
treated with BMP-type1 receptor specific inhibitor LDN-193189, in a dose
dependent manner. Our data suggest that AML cells induce osteogenic
differentiation in BM-MSCs and inhibition of BMP signaling may suppress
AML cell growth in the BM endosteal niche.

