Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Meta-analysis of whole exome sequencing data reveals the
mutational spectrum of testicular germ cell tumors


Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCTs) are the most common cancer in young
men. Although cure rates for TGCT are generally high, due to the
sensitivity of malignant testicular germ cells to platinum-based
chemotherapies, this comes at the cost of an increased risk of metabolic
syndrome, infertility and secondary cancer. Furthermore, there are
limited options for patients who are platinum resistant, a group for whom
the long-term survival rate is less than 15%. Improved targeted therapies
for TGCT are predicated on a greater understanding of mutational profile
of these tumours, including identification of driver mutations and
pathways disrupted. We recently published the first large-scale analysis
of whole exome sequencing of TGCTs (comprising 42 tumors), which revealed
a uniformly low mutation rate; some ten times lower than average rates
observed in other adult solid tumors, consistent with the embryological
origin of TGCT. Aside from mutations in the previously known driver gene
KIT, no additional novel genes with mutation frequency greater than 15%
were associated with tumorigenesis. In parallel The Cancer Genome Atlas
consortium is sequencing an additional series of TGCTs.Given the apparent
absence of high frequency driver genes aside from KIT, several lower
frequency oncogenic pathways may exist, requiring identification through
larger sample size studies and/or pooled analysis. Here we present
meta-analysis across multiple datasets with variant calling re-processed
through a consistent bioinformatic pipeline. We systemically searched for
novel recurrent mutational events at three levels:- (i) driver genes
(combined sample size was empowered to detect recurrent gene mutations of
frequency >5% with 89% power), ii) pathway based associations and iii)
focal copy number alterations. In addition we assessed for
clinicopathological-molecular associations, with particular focus on
mutational events distinguishing treatment responsive and resistant
tumors. Comprehensive cataloguing of the mutational spectra, through
analyses of our data in combination with other initiatives such as TCGA,
is leading to increasing insights into this biology of this cancer.

