Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct and heterogeneous response of Ewing sarcoma cells to
canonical Wnt signaling


Canonical Wnt/-catenin signaling underlies the pathogenesis of many
colorectal carcinomas and other cancer types. However, the role of the
canonical Wnt signaling pathway in Ewing sarcoma (ES) pathogenesis is
unclear. Current data suggest that Wnts may function as morphogens rather
than mitogens in ES. Thus, we hypothesized that the response of ES cells
to Wnt ligands is distinct from other cells and dependent on cellular
context. To investigate the response of ES cells to Wnt signaling, we
transduced ES cell lines with 7xTCF-GFP (7TGP) or 7xTCF-luciferase (7TFP)
reporter vectors, and stimulated cells with control or WNT3a conditioned
media (CM) with or without recombinant R-spondin 2 (RSPO2), a molecule
that strongly potentiates canonical Wnt signaling. We used in situ
hybridization to determine the expression of LGR5, the receptor for
RSPO2. To isolate highly Wnt-responsive cells, we sorted the top 10% of
GFP-positive 7TGP-transduced cells that had been stimulated by Wnt3a CM
+/- RSPO2, and performed RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq). Using edgeR, we
generated lists of differentially expressed genes either up- or
down-regulated by Wnt signaling (pCanonical Wnt/-catenin signaling
underlies the pathogenesis of many colorectal carcinomas and other cancer
types. However, the role of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway in Ewing
sarcoma (ES) pathogenesis is unclear. Current data suggest that Wnts may
function as morphogens rather than mitogens in ES. Thus, we hypothesized
that the response of ES cells to Wnt ligands is distinct from other cells
and dependent on cellular context. To investigate the response of ES
cells to Wnt signaling, we transduced ES cell lines with 7xTCF-GFP (7TGP)
or 7xTCF-luciferase (7TFP) reporter vectors, and stimulated cells with
control or WNT3a conditioned media (CM) with or without recombinant
R-spondin 2 (RSPO2), a molecule that strongly potentiates canonical Wnt
signaling. We used in situ hybridization to determine the expression of
LGR5, the receptor for RSPO2. To isolate highly Wnt-responsive cells, we
sorted the top 10% of GFP-positive 7TGP-transduced cells that had been
stimulated by Wnt3a CM +/- RSPO2, and performed RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq).
Using edgeR, we generated lists of differentially expressed genes either
up- or down-regulated by Wnt signaling (p<0.05). We next interrogated
pathways enriched in these lists using DAVID and gene set enrichment
analysis (GSEA). From these studies, we observed that the activation of
Wnt signaling varied among cell lines and among distinct cells within a
given cell line. We hypothesized that this inter- and intra-cell line
heterogeneity in the response to Wnt pathway activation was due in part
to variations in expression of LGR5, and in situ hybridization confirmed
that there was marked variability of LGR5 expression among individual
cells in both cell lines and primary tumors. RNA-seq analyses revealed
that the most significantly induced or repressed genes in response to Wnt
pathway activation included many genes not previously shown to be
regulated by Wnt signaling, in addition to a limited number of previously
described Wnt targets. Further, DAVID and GSEA revealed that genes in
developmental pathways were enriched in the induced gene set, while genes
associated with cell cycle regulation were enriched in the repressed
genes. Notably, GSEA revealed that numerous genes induced by Wnt
activation are repressed in response to the ES-specific oncogene
EWS/FLI1, and many genes repressed by Wnt are induced by EWS/FLI1. This
led us to hypothesize that Wnt signaling may transcriptionally antagonize
EWS/FLI1 signaling, and phalloidin staining confirmed that Wnt
stimulation induces changes in the cytoskeleton that are reminiscent of
an EWS/FLI1 knockdown phenotype. Together, these data show that canonical
Wnt signaling in LGR5-positive Ewing sarcoma cells results in distinct
transcriptional programs that may depend in part on the relative basal
levels of LGR5 expression. Further, the findings suggest a novel
mechanism by which the functional activity of EWS/FLI1 may be altered by
Wnt signals in the tumor microenvironment.

