Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enrichment and characterization of propagating circulating tumor
cells from late stage prostate and pancreatic cancer patients


Capturing cells shed by a tumor into the bloodstream represents an
opportunity to study the properties of these cells for biomarker
discovery in support of drug development and personalized therapy.
Enrichment and expansion of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in culture
enables molecular characterization not readily available for rare cells.
We report on a primary cell culture platform to enrich and expand rare
circulating cells from the blood of patients with metastatic castration
resistant prostate cancer and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. The
approach relies on tumor cell enrichment via cell-binding substrates
comprised of a collagen-based hydrogel for CTC capture, and hypoxic
culturing conditions to maintain and propagate subset of these cells with
tumor-initiating potential.Here, we demonstrate the successful
identification and expansion of rare circulating tumor cells from
peripheral blood and leukapheresed blood samples from prostate and
pancreatic cancer patients, respectively. Upon successful culture of
samples for a period of 5 to10 days after plating, immunofluorescence
imaging was performed. Morphologically distinct CTC colonies positive for
PSMA, EpCAM and cytokeratin staining were observed, with individual
colonies ranging from approximately 50 to 1000 in cell number.
Interestingly, colonies consistently revealed white blood cell
contaminants (T-cells and dendritic cells) that did not appear to perturb
colony growth.Targeted DNA sequencing was performed on pancreatic CTC
colonies from six patients using a genetic panel covering 237 genes. We
achieved 100-200X coverage for each patient sample and present a
preliminary genetic characterization of their CTCs in culture. Our
results show unique genetic signatures indicative of aggressive forms of
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma based on SNP/INDEL detection, CNV
analysis and gene fusion predictions. In summary, cultured CTCs had
20-30X more variants than corresponding white blood cell controls, with
mutations observed in MLL2, ARID1A, BRAF, KRAS and BRCA2. CNV analysis
and gene fusion predictions revealed previously unreported biomarker
candidates.In conclusion, we show that viable CTCs are amenable to ex
vivo culture, providing both functional and molecular insights into a
sub-population of CTCs with propagating potential. The presence of
T-cells and dendritic cells on CTC colonies warrants further
investigation, and may provide unique insights into immune-tumor
interactions. The culturing platform is currently being evaluated as a
research tool for biomarker discovery and as a clinical tool for disease
monitoring and treatment decision-making.

