Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of MUC1 in NF-kB target gene expression of
pro-inflammatory cytokines in colon cancer


MUC1 is a transmembrane glycoprotein normally expressed at low levels in
a fully glycosylated form on the apical surface of epithelial cells but
it is found overexpressed and hypoglycosylated in human adenocarcinomas
as well as sites of chronic epithelial inflammations. Aberrant
glycosylation of MUC1 in cancer cells alters its normal function and
affects the behavior of cancer cells. The MUC1 extracellular domain also
participates in activation of the NF-kB family members such as
phospho-IkBa and phospho-p65. Our data showed that the tumor form of
MUC1, in association with p65, regulates the transcriptional activity of
pro-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-6 and TNF-alpha, by binding to
their promoter regions in both mouse and human cancer cells. Because
proteomic analysis showed that MUC1 is able to interact directly with
histone proteins, we hypothesized that MUC1 might influence the
transcriptional activity of cytokines by inducing epigenetic
modification.Here, we explored MUC1/p65-regulated transcription of IL-6
and TNF-alpha in colon cancer cells and discovered that MUC1/p65 complex
modulated the expression and interaction of histone methyltransferase
Enhancer of Zeste protein-2 (EZH2) with pro-inflammatory cytokine
promoters. Interestingly, the contribution of EzH2 in controlling the
MUC1/p65-modulated cytokines expression was independent of its histone
H3K27 methyltransferase activity but it shows novel properties in
regulating chromatin remodeling that are currently under detailed
investigation To investigate the in vivo significance of MUC1/p65-induced
cytokines expression in the tumor microenvironment, we used human MUC1
transgenic mice that express MUC1 on the colonic epithelial cells,
treated with azoxymethane to initiate and dextran sulfate sodium
(AOM/DSS) to promote colorectal carcinogenesis. MUC1.Tg mice showed
higher tumor incidence and decreased survival when compared with
wild-type mice. Consistent with the in vitro data, NF-kB family members
and EzH2 expression were higher in MUC1.Tg mice when compared to
wild-type mice. In addition, the number of infiltrating macrophages
strongly increased in AOM/DSS-treated colon tissues of MUC1.Tg mice.
These are important findings that may explain the mechanism by which MUC1
and NF-kB regulate cancer progression.

