Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Surface proteomics of KRASG12V transfected MCF10A cells reveals
molecular phenotype of a model cell line expressing oncogenic KRAS


Oncogenic RAS mutations play a major role in the most aggressive
epithelial cancers in humans (i.e., pancreatic and lung cancer). Mutated
K-Ras protein is found in 95% of pancreatic and 40% of lung and/or colon
carcinomas, characterized by metastasis and a low average survival time
after diagnosis. Plasma membrane proteins are top therapeutic targets due
to their accessibility at the surface of cancer cells. In order to expand
the treatment options of cancers driven by oncogenic RAS, new cell
surface targets need to be identified and characterized. Here, we
describe mass spectrometry based phenotyping of the KRASG12V cell surface
using MCF10A-KRASG12V as a cell line model of constitutively activated
KRAS. Extensive view of the MCF10A-KRASG12V surface proteome was achieved
by applying concurrently targeted hydrazide-based cell surface capturing
(CSC) technology and global shotgun membrane (GSM) proteomics. Our
combined approach revealed 666 plasma membrane proteins unique to the
MCF10A-KRASG12V cell surface. Of these, 104 were cell surface
glycoproteins identified by CSC technology while 562 cell surface
proteins were identified using GSM proteomics. K-Ras was exclusively
identified by GSM proteomics in the membrane fraction of MCF10A-KRASG12V
cells and subsequently cross-validated by Western blot (WB) analysis.
Subtractive proteomics, spectral counting-based based quantitation of
changes in protein abundances, and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis showed that
this investigation reliably revealed expected K-Ras induced changes at
the surface of MCF10A-KRASG12V cells as well as alterations in cell
surface protein expression with very little prior information. This
analysis uncovered a subset of eight proteins identified exclusively at
the cell surface of MCF10A-KRASG12V cells by both CSC and GSM
technologies. Of these, two were further cross-validated using
immunofluorescence and WB analysis. Furthermore, scanning electron
microscopy and functional cell assays showed extensive changes at the
KRASG12V cell surface consistent with widespread epithelial to
mesenchymal transformation (EMT). Taken together, this dataset greatly
extends the known molecular phenotype of the MCF10A-KRASG12V cell surface
and reveals the important role of EMT in the pathophysiology of the
KRASG12V driven malignant transformation in MCF10A- KRASG12V model cell
line.

