Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Id3 generated cancer stem-like cells: A microvascular niche for
the development of glioma


Pro-angiogenic vascular stem cells and angiogenesis are key events in the
process of glioma formation. Vascular lesions that arise from a focal
budding of endothelial cells have been associated with a poor prognosis
in glioblastoma multiforme. Hyper-proliferative endothelial lesions are
common in patients with severe brain tumors, however, little is known
about the relevance of vascular stem cells in the development of these
lesions. We tested the hypothesis that the overexpression of the
inhibitor of DNA binding and differentiation protein 3 (ID3) reprograms
the molecular signature of endothelial cells to stem-like cells; and we
hypothesize that these stem-like cells participate in the development of
vascular lesion formation in glioma. We generated ID3 overexpressing
cells using the human cerebral microvascular endothelial cell line,
hCMEC/D3; and determined the effect of ID3 on molecular stem-like
signature and vascular lesion formation. ID3 overexpressing cells resided
more in the G0/G1 phase and showed a significantly higher level of stem
cell markers CD34, CD133, Oct-4, and Sox-2 than wild-type cells. ID3
overexpressing cells also showed a significant increase in VEGFR3, an
endothelial growth factor receptor that has been previously reported to
correlate with tumor grade of malignant gliomas. In addition, ID3
overexpressing cells showed increased levels of Pyk2, a kinase that has
been shown to control glioma cell migration. In the 3-D culture model, we
observed that ID3 was essential for the growth of endothelial spheroids.
Our findings demonstrate that ID3 generated vascular stem-like cells have
the capacity to participate in vascular lesion formation and that
vascular stem-like molecular signatures are regulated in part by ID3.
Furthermore, the correlation of ID3 overexpression with an increase in
VEGFR3 and Pyk2 suggests the importance of ID3 in malignant glioma
endothelium. Assessing ID3 in malignant gliomas on a functional level may
enable a better understanding for how the microvascular niche contributes
to the development of glioma. A better understanding of how microvascular
lesions depend on ID3 may open new avenues for the prevention and
treatment of glioma.

