Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel web interface to facilitate pathology directed mass
spectrometry


Clinical proteomics studies often involve multiple investigators located
at different physical locations necessitating a centralized platform for
joint access to data and other information pertinent to the study. To
help communicate pathology targets of interests from remote researchers
to the on-site technical team, the Pathology Directed Mass Spectrometry
(PDMS) web application was developed. PDMS was designed to be a secure,
online digital pathology platform specifically configured for down-stream
mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) analysis. Hosting ultra-high resolution
digital microscopy images of stained serial tissue sections, PDMS allows
researchers to zoom into their samples to review and annotate specific
areas for analysis. Once finalized, annotated images are exported from
PDMS for MSI targeting. Built for HTML5 browsers, PDMS was deployed in a
secure LAMP (Linux, Apache, MySQL, PHP) environment, utilizing a
Javascript visualization engine and server-side conversion tools.In a
pathology directed mass spectrometry profiling experiment, two sections
of a tissue specimen are collected, one on a mass spectrometry target and
one that is stained for histological evaluation. A pathologist annotates
a digital microscopy image to indicate areas of interest for mass
spectral analysis. The annotated image is then merged with an image of
the unstained section and after appropriate sample preparation, mass
spectra are collected from the annotated areas. A major advantage to this
type of analysis is that it is high throughput and is conducive to
downstream biostatistical analysis for biomarker discovery.The PDMS
software has been successfully used in the molecular differentiation of
histological patterns in stage I pulmonary carcinomas as part of a joint
collaboration with Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. Image
annotation was carried out remotely prior to mass spectral analysis in
house. Statistical analyses of the mass spectral data resulted in over
85% classification accuracies in differentiating histological tumor
subtypes within individual pulmonary carcinoma patient samples.

