Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Negative regulation of Sox9 by glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta
phosphorylation and SCFFbw7-dependent ubiquitination in cancer


Sox9 is a member of the SOX [Sry-related high-mobility group (HMG) box]
family of transcription factors, with known functions in proliferation,
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), stem cell maintenance and
senescence. Sox9 protein levels are elevated in several different cancer
types, including lung cancer and osteosarcoma. Furthermore, Sox9
overexpression is associated with poor survival in both cancer types. We
recently reported that Sox9 is a direct transcriptional target of the
Notch signaling pathway and mediates Notch1-induced EMT in lung cancer
(Capaccione et al., Oncotarget, 2014). Fbxw7 (F-box and WD repeat
domain-containing 7) is a member of the SCFFbw7E3 ubiquitin ligase
complexthat targets several oncogenic proteins for degradation, including
Notch1. We hypothesized that Sox9 is targeted for degradation by SCFFbw7.
Knocking down or overexpressingFbxw7 significantly increasedor decreased,
respectively, endogenous Sox9 protein levels in lung cancer and
osteosarcoma cell lines. In addition, overexpression of Fbxw7 resulted in
active degradation of ectopic Sox9 protein levels, when assessed in
combination with cycloheximide, and did so in a dose
dependent-manner.Furthermore, both Sox9 and FBXW7 were detected in
immunoblots after the reciprocal protein was immunoprecipitated. Because
substrate degradation by SCFFbw7 is typically phosphorylation-dependent,
frequently by glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)3-beta, we examined whether
modulation of GSK3-beta could affect FBXW7-induced Sox9 degradation.
Treatment of cells with the GSK3-beta inhibitor, CHIR99021, completely
abolished Sox9 degradation by ectopically overexpressed FBXW7, in a
dose-dependent manner. We next identified four putative phosphorylation
sites within potential FBXW7 degron motifs in Sox9.Mass
spectrophotometric analysis confirmed these sites within Sox9 are indeed
phosphorylated.In summary, we found that the E3 ubiquitin ligase complex
(SCFFbw7) targets Sox9 for ubiquitin-mediated degradation in a
GSK3-beta-mediated Sox9 phosphorylation-dependent manner. As a result,
this negative regulation of Sox9 by GSK3-beta/FBXW7 could lead to
inhibition of Sox9-mediated proliferation, EMT and stemness. This new
regulatory mechanism of Sox9 could have diagnostic and therapeutic
implications for lung cancer, osteosarcoma, as well as other cancers.

