Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The HER2 Regulon:Identification of 113 genes that are directly
controlled by HER2 and define four nodes of cancer stem cell networks


We recently developed a combination method using RNA polymerase II
immunoprecipitation together with expression analysis in order to
identify genes regulated by the HER2 oncogene: the HER2 Regulon. We
identified 737 genes which are poised for transcription. 113 of these
genes are differentially expressed (p We recently developed a combination
method using RNA polymerase II immunoprecipitation together with
expression analysis in order to identify genes regulated by the HER2
oncogene: the HER2 Regulon. We identified 737 genes which are poised for
transcription. 113 of these genes are differentially expressed (p < 0.05)
in HER2+/- as determined by analysis of available expression arrays of
812 breast cancer tissues. Thus for these genes, expression may depend
upon features of the in situ organization and/or features of the
microenvironment in addition to the action of high HER2. We further noted
that 58/113 genes are members of pathways related by four nodes: NANOG,
SOX2, OCT3/4, and CREB1.We hypothesize that high HER2 expression and
factors of breast cancer cells in situ, possibly including
microenvironment factors, determine the concerted expression of the four
node proteins and the 58 associated genes. These genes may participate in
the formation of CSC cells or cells with enhanced stemness in high
HER2-expressing breast cancer.MethodsThe HER2+/- breast cancer cell lines
were grown in medium supplied with FBS, the sub-cultures were depleted
from FBS and cultured on ultra-low adherent plate supplemented with
EGF/FGF/B27. The formed spheres were collected and used for expression
analysis of ALDH1, SOX2, NANOG and OCT3/4 and 58 microenvironment
dependent genes employing quantitative real time PCR.Immunofluorescence
staining was used to measure protein expression levels of ALDH1, NANOG,
SOX2 and OCT3/4.ResultsWe used PCR to compare the amount of transcripts
formed in high- and low-HER2 expression cells both as attached cultures
and as mammospheres. We observed all four node transcript levels were
strikingly higher in mammospheres of HER2-expressing cells compared to
attached cultures or compared to HER2-null control cells. We used
immunofluorescence to confirm that the corresponding protein levels were
also increased. Thus, in the context of mammospheres, node genes exhibit
HER2-dependent and greatly increased expression analogous to the
conditions required for the 113 genes. This observation suggests that the
anchorage-independent growth mode of mammospheres growing in
factor-supplemented medium may replicate key features of cancer cells in
situ not observed in attached cultures. If so, mammospheres may provide
an in vitro model for the dissection of the key in situ and
microenvironment features influencing HER2-dependent expression in breast
cancer.ConclusionA poised class of genes in HER2+ cell lines has POLII
binding and low RNA expression and is differentially expressed in primary
tumors in a HER2-dependent manner. These genes include key genes with a
role in stem cell proliferation. These genes become expressed when cell
lines are grown as three dimensional mammospheres. These observations
strongly suggest a role of 3D structure.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

