Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomeric non-coding RNA causes genome-wide alteration of gene
expression in cancer


The end replication problem of linear chromosome DNA causes telomere
shortening and eventual senescence of normal cells. Cancer cells
reactivate telomerase to maintain their telomere length and exhibit an
infinite replicative potential. However, telomerase activation does not
necessarily increase the average telomere length in cancer cells.
Actually, cancer cells often maintain shorter telomeres than the cells in
the surrounding normal tissues. We previously demonstrated that forced
telomere elongation in cancer cells promotes their differentiation in a
xenograft tumor and represses innate immune genes that are upregulated in
various human cancers. This implies that short telomeres of cancer cells
contribute to their malignancy. However, it is completely unknown how
such genetic repression is caused by elongated telomeres. Here, we report
that telomeric repeat-containing RNA (TERRA) induces a genome-wide
alteration of gene expression in telomere-elongated human cancer cells.
Using three different cancer cell lines, including those from prostate,
breast and stomach, we found that telomere elongation by hTERT
overexpression up-regulates TERRA signals, which were detected by
northern blot analysis, and down-regulates innate immune genes such as
STAT1, ISG15, and OAS3 in vivo. These changes were caused by telomere
elongation and not by enhanced telomerase activity or hTERT
overexpression per se. Down-regulation of the innate immune genes was
also observed in the telomere-elongated cells under three-dimensional
(3D) culture conditions, which mimicked the tumor microenvironment in
vivo. Introduction of TERRA oligonucleotides repressed the innate immune
genes even in cells with short telomeres under 3D culture conditions.
Intriguingly, this gene repression appeared to occur from the action of
the non-canonical nucleic acid structure called G-quadruplex (G4) in
TERRA, because non-telomeric (i.e., non-G4-forming) control
oligonucleotides had no effect whereas another non-telomeric but
G4-forming oligonucleotide phenocopied the TERRA oligonucleotides.
Transcriptome analysis revealed that telomere elongation and G4-forming
oligonucleotides showed similar gene expression signatures. Most of the
commonly suppressed genes were involved in the innate immune system and
were up-regulated in various human cancers. Taken together, these
observations suggest that the telomeric non-coding RNA G4 counteracts
cancer malignancy through suppression of innate immune genes, and give a
new insight into our understanding of telomere shortening in human cancer.

