Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel molecular targets for chemoprevention of squamous cell
carcinoma


INTRODUCTION: It is estimated that cancer prevention efforts can reduce
cancer incidence by over 50%. Unlike for advanced disease, effective
molecularly-driven interventions and risk assessment are not available
for clinically normal tissues that may be have been exposed to
carcinogens or for precancerous lesions. Cutaneous squamous cell
carcinoma (cuSCC) comprises 15-20% of all skin cancers and has the most
accessible and clinically well-characterized progression sequence of any
human cancer, from a distinct precancerous lesion, the actinic keratosis
(AK), to invasive carcinoma. Thus, it is an ideal model for establishing
a paradigm of molecularly targeted cancer chemoprevention.METHODS: Here,
we performed next-generation sequencing of total RNA and miRNA (Illumina
HiSeq) on matched isogenic samples of human cuSCC, surrounding normal
(chronically irradiated) skin (NS), and AK. In parallel, we profiled
matched samples from a UV-driven Hairless mouse model of cuSCC for
cross-species analysis, to identify the most important drivers of
progression from NS to AK to cuSCC.RESULTS: Unsupervised clustering of
both mRNA and miRNA expression changes showed that preneoplastic AKs span
a continuum indistinguishable from cuSCC or surrounding NS, whereas cuSCC
and NS were easily distinguished. Through cross-species computational
analysis of mRNA-miRNA functional pairs, we identified miR-21, miR-205,
miR-31, let-7B, and miR-497 and their mRNA targets as core drivers of
cuSCC development through the AK intermediate. We show that several of
these miRNAs are modulated by UV exposure, regulate susceptibility to
apoptosis, and regulate cell motility. Several miRNAs are being inhibited
in our mouse model to validate them as chemoprevention targets. TRANSFAC
analysis identified E2F, SP1, AP1, and TCF3 as key transcriptional
regulators of SCC development. We tested the global mRNA and miRNA
expression similarities to other tumor types profiled by the NIH TCGA
effort, showing that cuSCC is most closely related to head & neck SCC,
lung SCC, and basal subtype of breast cancer. Exome analysis confirmed a
high frequency of TP53, NOTCH1/2, and CDKN2A mutations in cuSCC, with
mutational loads of >30/Mb that are strongly dominated by UVB signature
lesions. Surprisingly, NS contains evidence of numerous mutations
reflecting UV-induced somatic mosaicism.CONCLUSIONS: We report the first
integrated transcriptomic characterization of the development of cuSCC
through the preneoplastic AK. AKs are indistinguishable from cuSCC,
suggesting that chemoprevention efforts should be directed at UV-exposed
skin prior to the emergence of lesions. Key transcriptional responses in
miRNAs and transcription factor networks were identified in our
cross-species analysis, which have been functionally validated. Finally,
SCCs of diverse anatomic sites share deep genomic commonalities
suggesting that there may be common chemoprevention strategies applicable
to multiple SCC types.

