Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear hormone receptor profiling of skin cancer-associated
fibroblasts for targeted pharmacological modulation of skin squamous cell
carcinoma


Background: Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the second-most
frequently diagnosed non-melanoma skin cancer that commonly manifests in
sun-exposed areas of the skin, resulting in permanent disfigurement and
potentially death when untreated. The development and malignant
progression of skin SCC is dependent not only on the properties of the
tumor epithelia but also the effects of the tumor stroma. Cancer
associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are enriched in the stroma of skin SCC
tumors and supply paracrine factors that encourage tumor growth. However,
the transcription regulatory networks enabling this pro-tumor secretory
phenotype of CAFs remain largely unknown. Nuclear receptors, being
ligand-inducible transcription factors, are relevant therapeutic
candidates for modulation of CAF-dependent SCC tumor
advancement.Materials and methods: Laser capture microdissected CAFs from
archived patient SCC biopsies were profiled for their expression of 48
known nuclear receptors. siRNA knockdown and overexpression of specific
nuclear receptors in CAFs was performed, and their impact on the SCC
transcriptome and phenotype was evaluated in a co-culture system.
Co-administration of nuclear receptor ligands and conventional anticancer
chemotherapeutics was also carried out in a 3D-organotypic skin tumor
model to investigate synergistic and sensitizing effects on SCC.Findings
and conclusions: Our study is the first to define a nuclear receptor
profile for SCC CAFs, wherein the expression of 5 nuclear receptors was
unchanged, 18 nuclear receptors were highly expressed and 3 nuclear
receptors were lowly expressed in CAFs relative to normal fibroblasts. We
showed that SCC tumor epithelia are transcriptionally and functionally
sensitive to this nuclear receptor profile of CAFs. Simultaneous and
differential attenuation of multiple aggressive SCC phenotypes was
possible through the manipulation of specific nuclear receptor expression
and activity in CAFs. Our results highlight the utility of CAF nuclear
receptor profiling and a role for nuclear receptor-directed drugs in the
multimodal treatment of skin SCC.

