Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual PI3K and Wnt pathway inhibition is a synergistic combination
against triple-negative breast cancer


Introduction: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 15% of
all breast cancer cases in the United States, and despite its lower
incidence, contributes to a disproportionately higher rate of morbidity
and mortality compared to other breast cancer subtypes. Because these
tumors lack expression of the estrogen, progesterone, or HER-2 receptors
(triple negative), TNBC patients do not respond to targeted therapies
that have been successfully used against tumors that over-express these
proteins. Thus, there exists a critical need to improve the outcomes of
TNBC patients through the implementation of novel targeted
agents.Methods: RNA-seq data from 94 TNBCs (from Indiana University and
TCGA) and 20 microdissected normal breast tissues (Komen Tissue Bank)
were merged and imported into Partek Genomics Suite. The merged
transcript RPKMs were transformed, batch effect corrected, and analyzed
for differential expression. Statistically significant genes were
imported into Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) to identify therapeutic
targets. For cell based studies, we tested a panel of seven TNBC cell
lines using BKM120 and LGK974, a WNT pathway inhibitor, individually. To
further enhance antitumor efficacy, we then tested these TNBC cell lines
using variable dilutions of both drugs in combination with one another.
Cell viability was assessed via Celltiter-Fluor. Synergy between the two
drugs was calculated using the Chou-Talalay method.Results: Using
next-generation RNA sequencing data of TNBCs and microdissected normal
breast tissue, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis identified over-expression and
hyper-activation of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR and Wnt pathways. When anti-tumor
efficacy against these pathways was assessed, a significant reduction in
cell viability in combination was observed across the panel of cell
lines. Using the Chou-Talalay method, we found for MDA-MB-231 and Hs578T,
a 50% reduction in cell viability at 100nM concentration of each drug
that was highly synergistic (Combination Index = 0.33, and 0.36
respectively). For HCC70, this cell line was more resistant to the
combination and we observed 50% reduction at 1uM each that had an
additive, non-synergistic effect.Conclusion: PI3K/mTOR/AKT and Wnt
pathways are a vital target for treatment of TNBC. Using small molecule
inhibitors that are in phase trials (BKM120 and LGK974) we have found
that there is a strong synergy when given at low nanomolar doses. In
vitro studies of inhibitors of these two pathways in a panel of TNBC cell
lines demonstrated significant efficacy in reducing cell viability with
substantial synergy when used in combination. Furthermore, initial mouse
studies display a similar synergy and actual amplification of drug
concentration and half-life in the blood of both drugs when given in
combination when compared to these two drugs alone.

