Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligase RNF4 regulates BLM helicase's
function in dormant origin firing


Regulation of dormant origin firing under conditions of replication
stress is poorly understood. The Bloom syndrome DNA helicase BLM
functions in maintaining replication fork stability, with sumoylation
regulating this function, and BLM deficiency is associated with increased
dormant origin firing. We found here that BLM sumoylation levels increase
in response to replication stalling by hydroxyurea (HU) and to proteasome
inhibition; depletion of the SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligase RNF4 also
causes increased levels of BLM sumoylation. RNF4 directly interacts with
BLM and can ubiquitylate sumoylated BLM in vitro. These data indicate
that sumoylated BLM is an RNF4 substrate. RNF4 is recruited to DNA repair
foci in response to replication stalling. RNF4 depletion causes the
accumulation of increased numbers of HU-induced BLM foci, whereas the
numbers of RPA, RAD51, and gamma-H2AX foci are unaffected by fork
stalling in RNF4-depleted cells. Sister chromatid exchanges are normal in
RNF4-depleted cells. These data indicate that RNF4 can regulate BLM
retention at stalled forks without affecting repair by homologous
recombination. RNF4 depletion reduces cell proliferation and survival of
untreated cells, and it confers hypersensitivity to replication stalling
by HU. Studies of cell-cycle progression using bromodeoxyuridine
incorporation and flow cytometry show that RNF4 depletion causes a delay
of re-entry into S phase in HU-treated cells and the replication delay is
partially rescued by BLM mutation. The delay is not caused by
modification of checkpoint kinase activities. Analysis of replication
dynamics using the DNA fiber assay show that RNF4 depletion causes an
increase of permanently stalled replication forks and a decrease in
activation of dormant origins following recovery from HU-induced
replication stress. Co-depletion of RNF4 and BLM partially rescues these
defects. Replication dynamics is unaffected by RNF4 depletion in
untreated cells. These data indicate that RNF4 regulates BLM's functions
in replication fork stability and dormant origin firing, without
affecting BLM's roles in homologous recombination. We propose that
sumoylation of BLM at stalled replication forks leads to RNF4-mediated
ubiquitylation and subsequent proteasome-dependent degradation of BLM,
which relieves BLM's active inhibition of dormant origin firing.

