Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcription factor Snail mediates EMT by altering vesicular
trafficking protein Rab25


Epithelial cells maintain intercellular communication directly by
cell-cell, cell-ECM interaction and indirectly by paracrine secretion of
extracellular messengers either as free molecules or via exosomes. The
vesicular trafficking machinery is an integral part of such
communication, paralleling digital cables that transmit the information
bytes to the correct hub. During the process of EMT, derailing of the
trafficking machinery leads to a systemic breakdown of intra and
inter-cellular communication pathways. The purpose of the current study
is to elucidate the functional role of Rab25, a key member of the
vesicular trafficking machinery in mediating EMT-MET processes during
breast cancer progression.Aberrant endocytosis is a new hallmark of
cancer. Rab GTPases are the primary regulators of endocytosis. Many
members of this large family are implicated in a wide array of cancers
including breast cancer. Specifically, Rab25, a GTPase associated with
the recycling endosomes, is deregulated in most epithelial cancers. Rab25
appears to function both as a tumor suppressor and an oncogene in a
context dependent manner.We found that Rab25 is lost in Claudin Low
tumors as well as in representative cell lines such as the MDA MB231.
Rab25 is a robust and sufficient marker of breast cancers and cell lines
with an increased EMT signature. Additionally, in immortalized human
mammary epithelial cell lines (HMLE), induction of EMT by overexpression
of Snail1 completely obliterates Rab25 protein. Exogenous re-expression
of Rab25 dramatically rescues these cells from Snail driven invasion
through MatrigelTM. However this Snail dependent regulation is unique
only to TN and Claudin Low tumors and does not hold true for hormone
receptor positive tumors. Further, analysis of RNA Seq data from a MMTV
mouse model showed that tumors with low CDH1/Claudins expression and
enriched in EMT markers also lost Rab25 transcripts.Snail mediated
transcriptional repression targets recycling endosomal proteins such as
Rab25 to decrease delivery of junction proteins that facilitate cell-cell
communication to the appropriate compartment. In parallel, it potentially
enhances paracrine regulation by secreted exosomes. Overall, our study
shows presence and absence of Rab25 markedly alters cell-cell
communication, which is essential for maintenance of epithelial features
of cells. Rab25 could be a prognostic marker and a therapeutic target for
a subset of patients with increased risk of metastatic disease.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

