Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hybrid anticancer drugs: Synthesis of a
combretastatin-piperlongumine analog with mutant p53 reactivation and
antimicrotubule properties


The axiomatic tumor heterogeneity of human cancers and their resistance
to current anticancer drugs has necessitated that we develop innovative
treatment strategies. In this regard, combined drugs that impact two or
more targets simultaneously are likely to offer superior
chemosensitivity. Here, we describe the design and development of a
compound with ROS-generating and microtubule-disrupting properties.
Combretastatins (CA4) are small molecule cytotoxic agents of natural
origin, known to disrupt microtubule dynamics by binding to the
colchicine site and also inhibit angiogenesis. Despite the potent
anticancer activity of CA4, the cis-configured double bond in its
structure is prone for isomerization to the more stable trans form during
storage and metabolism, resulting in loss of activity. In contrast,
piperlongumine (PL), which has structural similarities with CA4, is known
to selectively increase ROS levels and induce apoptosis in cancer cells.
Here, we present the synthesis and biological evaluation of
combretastatin-piperlongumine hybrid derivatives that inhibit tubulin
polymerization, reactivate mutant p53 and induce oxidative stress in
cancer cell lines. These CA4-PL hybrid derivatives were prepared by
introducing the aryl group at the C7-carbon of piperlongumine in such a
way that carbonyl group at C6 position will stabilize the
cis-configuration between two aryl groups which is essential for the
microtubule destabilization. The new compounds exhibited potent
antiproliferative activities against a variety of cancer cell lines,
particularly against cells with the DNA-contact p53 mutations, R175H
(SKBR-3) and R273H (HT29). Cell cycle analysis revealed that CA4-PL
analogs exhibited significant G2/M arrest and in vitro-tubulin
polymerization assays confirmed the microtubule destabilizing actions.
Immunocytochemistry revealed a loss of intact microtubule structure in
cells treated with CA4-PL hybrid compounds, indicating the acquisition of
combretastatin nucleus. Further, the compounds induced high levels of ROS
selectively in cancer cells as determined by flow cytometry assays using
DCF-DA. Most interestingly, the hybrid drugs showed the ability to
reactivate the p53 mutations R273H and R175H- a progressive decline of
mutant forms along with a gradual increase of wt p53 was evident from
immunological assays using specific antibodies (Mabs 240 & 1620
respectively) and EMSAs. p53 reactivation was accompanied by the
induction of the target genes, p21cip1 and Bax. We hypothesize that
redox-perturbation induced by the hybrid drugs triggers the thiolation of
specific redox-sensitive cysteines to cause p53 reactivation. Xenograft
studies to test these observations in vivo are in progress. We believe
such rationally designed compounds with dual actions hold much promise
for drug development (supported by CPRIT grant RP130266 to KSS).

