Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effective targeting of colorectal cancer with a recombinant
antibody mixture against EGFR, HER3 and IGF1R


The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) plays an important role in
the development and maintenance of the malignant phenotype of several
human cancers. Therefore, it is a frequently pursued therapeutic target
and several antibodies targeting EGFR have been clinically approved.
However, the clinical responses to current anti-EGFR agents are often
modest, indicating a need for improved therapeutics. Resistance
mechanisms to anti-EGFR antibodies include ligand up-regulation, receptor
tyrosine kinase plasticity, and mutations in downstream signaling
molecules such as KRAS, BRAF, and PIK3CA.Here, we present data showing
that a mixture of antibodies targeting HER3, EGFR, and IGF1R (HEI
mixture) with high affinity ligand-blocking antibodies induced growth
inhibition in a large panel of cancer cell lines. Synergies of
simultaneous inhibition of the three targets were frequently seen in cell
lines and xenograft tumor models. In particular, colorectal cancer cell
lines were sensitive to the HEI mixture and superiority to cetuximab was
seen in several cell lines. Surprisingly, the HEI mixture was effective
at inhibiting the growth of KRAS and BRAF mutated cell lines, suggesting
that the three receptor tyrosine kinases may still contribute to the
malignant phenotype of tumors with these genomic alterations. Colorectal
cancer is thought to be a ligand driven disease and hence the inhibitory
activity of the HEI mixture was tested in the presence of EGFR, HER3 and
IGF1R ligands and compared with the activity of cetuximab. As expected,
the HEI mixture was able to block growth stimulation induced by all
ligands, whereas heregulin and IGF1/IGF2 caused resistance to cetuximab.A
clinically relevant subpopulation of colorectal cancer harbors
amplification of IGF2, a major ligand for IGF1R, and hence should display
sensitivity to IGF1R targeting. The HEI mixture was tested in three
metastatic colorectal PDX models with IGF2 overexpression and induced
tumor regression in all three models.In conclusion, our data indicate
that simultaneous targeting of EGFR, HER3 and IGFR1 provides a broader
efficacy than targeting a single receptor, and thereby provides a
rationale for simultaneous targeting of the three receptors with a
recombinant antibody mixture.

