Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antigen-induced downmodulation is associated with diminished
efficacy of a novel chimeric antigen receptor targeting anaplastic
lymphoma kinase


CD19 directed Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR) T cell therapies have shown
clinical responses against B cell malignancies. However, CARs targeting
other tumor-associated antigens have been less successful. Factors
limiting CAR efficacy are not well understood. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase
(ALK) is a cell-surface protein overexpressed in a large fraction of
neuroblastomas, the most common extracranial solid tumor of childhood. We
constructed MSGV1.ALK.BBZ retroviral vectors using single-chain variable
fragment (scFv) sequences from murine monoclonal antibodies targeting ALK
and transduced these into human PBMCs. ALK-CAR T cells lysed ALK+ tumor
lines, but produced limited amounts of IFN-g and IL-2 upon co-culture
with ALK+ tumor cells compared to CD19-CARs co-cultured with CD19+
targets. In order to identify potential differences between ALK-CAR and
CD19-CAR induced signaling we employed a reporter system in which GFP
expression was directed by an NFAT-responsive promoter and could be
visualized by flow cytometry. T cells were co-transduced with lentiviral
NFAT-GFP and MSGV1.ALK.BBZ or MSGV1.CD19.BBZ. Transduced T cells were
co-cultured with tumor lines expressing ALK or CD19 antigen. GFP
expression was induced within 4h of antigen exposure in double transduced
T cells and persisted for at least 24h. The magnitude of GFP expression
correlated positively with antigen density on tumor targets.
Additionally, >50% of GFP+ cells retained CD19-CAR surface expression
after antigen encounter. However, we observed drastically reduced surface
ALK-CAR expression on GFP+ T cells after encounter with tumor targets.
Upon further examination, we noticed that ALK-CARs were down-modulated
from the T cell surface within 1h of exposure to antigen, and remained
internalized for at least 24h. The magnitude of NFAT translocation in
ALK-CAR T cells, as measured by GFP intensity, was also markedly lower
than the magnitude of NFAT translocation in CD19-CAR T cells. These
results suggest that limited numbers of CARs remaining on the T cell
surface after initial antigen encounter may contribute to diminished
ALK-CAR T cell efficacy, possibly by preventing temporal summation of
repeated CAR signaling. Work is underway to prevent CAR down-modulation
after antigen encounter, and to evaluate the impact of increased surface
CAR retention on CAR functionality. In summary, optimal design of new CAR
therapeutics requires a better understanding of essential factors
limiting CAR efficacy. Through evaluation of a novel CAR targeting ALK,
we have identified CAR down-modulation as one factor that may influence
CAR-T efficacy, and may be amenable to modulation in order to improve CAR
functionality.

