Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mcl-1-mediated resistance to ABT-263 is combated by mTOR
inhibition in luminal breast cancers


We found that 8.1% of luminal breast cancer cases curated by The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA), harbor gene amplification of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2
family members, warranting further study of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family
proteins (A1, Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, Bcl-w and Mcl-1) in luminal breast cancers.
A complex balance of pro- and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins guides
activation versus repression of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway, with
overexpression of anti-apoptotic factors tipping the balance towards cell
survival. This mechanism is commonly used by cancers to evade
apoptosis.We used the BH3-mimetic ABT-263 to inhibit Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and
Bcl-w in a panel of human luminal breast cancer lines, causing only
modest apoptosis in monolayer and growth inhibition in three-dimensional
(3D) matrix. Expression and activity of Mcl-1, another anti-apoptotic
Bcl-2 family member, was rapidly upregulated in response to ABT-263
through increased cap-dependent MCL1 translation. Mcl-1 knock-down
decreased tumor cell growth and improved ABT-263-mediated tumor cell
killing. Inhibition of cap-dependent translation using the mTOR inhibitor
RAD001/everolimus or the EIF4 complex inhibitor 4E1RCat blocked Mcl-1
induction in ABT-263 treated cells, enhancing apoptosis and growth
inhibition. In vivo, single agent ABT-263 was ineffective at reducing
tumor growth in xenografted human breast cancers and in transgenic
WAP-Myc luminal mammary tumors. However, RAD001 decreased Mcl-1 levels
and decreased WAP-Myc tumor growth by 40%. These results demonstrate that
heightened cap-dependent translation of Mcl-1 prevents therapeutically
induced tumor cell killing in ABT-263 treated luminal tumors,
highlighting the importance of Mcl-1 regulation in therapeutic
resistance, and identifying Mcl-1 as a potential therapeutic target in
luminal breast cancers. These studies suggest that targeted inhibition of
Mcl-1 alone or in combination with other Bcl-2 family inhibitors will
enhance tumor cell killing in luminal breast cancers.

