Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S100P: Cause or effect of vulvar carcinoma prognostic status


Introduction: Vulvar squamous cell carcinoma (VSCC) is a rare disease
accounting for 3 to 5% of female genital-tract malignancy. Conventional
surgical treatment of VSCC can be very aggressive and mutilating,
resulting in relevant psychosexual implications for patients. S100 family
comprises genes involved in several molecular pathways including
proliferation, differentiation and migration. Among them, S100P has a
significant role during the development and progression of different
cancers being able to promote migration. Aims: To evaluate the role of
S100P in VSCC and associate it with clinical outcomes. Methods: 5 samples
of frozen VSCC tissue were microdissected after carefully revision of the
HE slides. Two areas of the same tumor - invasion front (IF) and center
of the tumor (CT)- were selected for different dissections. Each of the
samples had their total RNA extracted, amplified and analyzed using Whole
Human Genome 860K array (Agilent Technologies). Results of RNA expression
were compared between both groups (IF and CT) from the same tumor. The
differential expressed genes were selected by RankProduct methodology,
which pointed out S100P as one of the main ones. Then, 66 VSCC
formalin-fixed paraffin-embbebed samples were used for
immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of S100P. The stained slides were
digitalized and evaluated using Pannoramic250 Flash II and Pannoramic
Viewer, respectively (3DHistechTM). HScore was calculated based on the
percentage and the intensity of stained cells. The statistical analysis
was performed on SPSS Statistics software, version 21.0.0.0, with a
confidence interval of 95%. Results: The gene wide expression analysis
presented a ranked list with 69 genes, one of them, S100P. The IHC
results showed that IF had significant (p = 0,002) higher HScore values
(mean = 132,79) compared to CT (mean = 112,34). Analysis of IF staining
hot spots showed that higher expression of S100P is related with worse
prognosis (p = 0,041). In addition, the greater is the difference in
S100P expression between IF compared to CT of the same tumor, the worse
is the patient prognosis in cancer specific survival analysis (p =
0,035). Conclusion: S100P is a marker of worse prognosis in VSCC. Also,
its heterogeneity of expression between IF and CT seems to be related to
a more aggressive component of the disease, maybe due to its relation
with cell motility and migration. A comprehensive IHC assessment of S100P
can bring important contribution for stablishing prognosis of women with
vulvar cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

