Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosome as biomarkers and diagnostics in bladder cancer


Esosomes are small membrane vesicles secreted by most cell types. They
are first found in reticulocytes and play important roles in cell-to-cell
communication. Recent studies suggest that exosomes secreted by tumor
cells containing tumor specific proteins and miRNAs.Previous study shows
that exosomes purified from high grade bladder cancer promote cancer
progression. This study aims to characterize the genetic contents in
bladder cancer exosomes through mass spectrometry and miRNA array.
Exosomes were purified from bladder cancers, immortalized bladder cells,
and urine of healthy volunteers and muscle invasive bladder cancer
patients. Via proteomics analysis, we have identified several cancer
associated exosomal proteins that were found only in bladder cancer,
including EDIL-3, an anagiogenic protein in our previous report.
Functional characterization of those proteins is currently undertaken
with a focus on periostin an extracellulear matrix protein.In addition to
protein, exosomes also contain miRNAs that regulate cellular behaviors.
Thus, we performed miRNA expression profiling microarray on exosomes from
high grade bladder cancer cells, and immortalized bladder cells (LC
Sciences). The differences in miRNA expression were compared and
differences were determined by a student T test (PEsosomes are small
membrane vesicles secreted by most cell types. They are first found in
reticulocytes and play important roles in cell-to-cell communication.
Recent studies suggest that exosomes secreted by tumor cells containing
tumor specific proteins and miRNAs.Previous study shows that exosomes
purified from high grade bladder cancer promote cancer progression. This
study aims to characterize the genetic contents in bladder cancer
exosomes through mass spectrometry and miRNA array. Exosomes were
purified from bladder cancers, immortalized bladder cells, and urine of
healthy volunteers and muscle invasive bladder cancer patients. Via
proteomics analysis, we have identified several cancer associated
exosomal proteins that were found only in bladder cancer, including
EDIL-3, an anagiogenic protein in our previous report. Functional
characterization of those proteins is currently undertaken with a focus
on periostin an extracellulear matrix protein.In addition to protein,
exosomes also contain miRNAs that regulate cellular behaviors. Thus, we
performed miRNA expression profiling microarray on exosomes from high
grade bladder cancer cells, and immortalized bladder cells (LC Sciences).
The differences in miRNA expression were compared and differences were
determined by a student T test (P<0.05). Results showed significant
difference miRNAs between cancer cells vs normal cells. Some of
cancer-specific miRNAs which have shown to play critical roles in
tumorigenesis and cancer progression will be study priority. Ultimately
our work should contribute to the understanding of how exosomes
contribute to bladder cancer biology and may elucidate novel urine
exosomes markers for bladder cancer diagnosis.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

