Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic eradication of treatment resistant cancer stem cells in
pancreatic tumors: A clonal tracking-based platform for identifying the
best personalized treatment


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) continues to have a poor
prognosis despite new drugs advancing to the clinic.We recently
characterized a population of cells able to survive the genetic and
pharmacologic extinction of oncogenic pathways and demonstrated that the
surviving cells (SC) are tumor stem cells (CSC) able to remain in a
quiescent state for months before relapsing. In-depth transcriptomics and
metabolomics analyses revealed SCs to exhibit different metabolic
features compared to the bulk of tumor cells. Specifically, SC relied on
mitochondrial respiration (OXPHOS) and displayed impaired glycolytic
capacity. In accord with their decreased dependence on glycolysis these
SC were highly sensitive to OXPHOS inhibitors, which prevented tumor
recurrence.Notably, preliminary results in patients suggest that SC
resistant to conventional chemoradiation also have similar features. We
analyzed specimens after neoadjuvant treatment and observed dormant cells
positive for CSC markers and characterized by an increased mitochondrial
mass. Evaluation of TMA of hundreds of treated tumors revealed that high
mitochondrial content is a common feature of SC. Furthermore, functional
metabolic characterization of human cells resistant to gemcitabine
revealed that SC have a severely impaired glycolytic reserve, closely
resembling mouse SC. Based on these findings, we posit that OXPHOS
inhibitors may be an effective adjuvant therapy to eradicate resistant
cells in patients.To validate the efficacy of OXPHOS inhibition, we
developed a new platform to study tumor evolution in response to
treatments based on clonal tracking. Lentivirus-based systems have been
extensively used as a tool to investigate the clonal dynamics, but they
have been limited by lack of sensitivity and the impossibility of
tracking identical clones in different animals. Here, using a new version
of the barcoded technology coupled with deep-sequencing, we track
hundreds of thousands of clones at the single-cell level. We generated
patient-derived xenograft animal cohorts in which tumors were clonal
replicas of each other (each tumor is maintained by the same clones of
all other tumors), representing a unique tool to evaluate responses to
treatments. More importantly, resistant tumor clones generated in vivo
can be isolated and fully characterized and compared to pre-treatment
clones to identify new mechanisms of resistance.Our integrated analysis
paves the way for new therapeutic strategies for patients to eradicate
treatment-resistant CSC by specifically targeting their unique
metabolism. In addition, our clonal tracking-based platform monitoring
the efficacy of different treatments in eradicating resistant clones
represents an unprecedented tool for exploring treatment responses at the
single-cell level, which will help guide the development of personalized
treatments.

