Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDK4/6 inhibition amplifies IMiD killing of myeloma cells by
accelerating CRL4CRBN-dependent degradation of IKZF1 and IKZF3 in
opposition to MEIS2


The immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs) lenalidomide (Len) and pomalidomide
(Pom) are effective therapies for hematologic malignancies, especially
multiple myeloma (MM). Cereblon (CRBN) is required for IMiD's
anti-myeloma activity. Emerging evidence has established that CRBN is a
substrate receptor of the CUL4-ROC1-DDB1-CRBN (CRL4CRBN) E3 ligase
complex and that the homeobox transcription factor MEIS2 is an endogenous
substrate of CRL4CRBN. IMiDs block MEIS2 from binding to CRBN, thereby
facilitating the recruitment of transcription factors IKZF1 and IKZF3 to
CRL4CRBN for ubiquination-proteasome degradation. IKZF1 and IKZF3 appear
to be required for MM survival, in part by transcriptional regulation of
IRF4.These findings, obtained in heterologous systems and MM cell lines,
suggest that modulation of the CRL4CRBN E3 ligase is a critical early
event in IMiD killing of MM cells. We investigated its physiologic
relevance in primary bone marrow myeloma cells (BMMCs) in co-culture with
HS-5 bone marrow stromal cells. We showed that IMiDs preferentially kill
BMMC in G1 arrest and that induction of prolonged early G1 arrest (pG1)
by selective inhibition of CDK4/CDK6 with palbociclib (PD 0332991)
markedly enhanced Len/Pom killing of BMMCs (14/21), unless the BMMCs were
refractory or extremely sensitive to Len (n = 7). Importantly, the IMiD
sensitivity in BMMCs ex vivo correlates with subsequent clinical
responses to IMiD-based therapies in vivo in 7/7 cases characterized.
This novel finding suggests that although IMiDs target multiple cell
types, the intrinsic IMiD sensitivity is a major determinant for the
clinical response to IMiDs in MM.Whole transcriptome sequencing and gene
set enrichment analysis further revealed that Len induces the interferon
response signature genes in BMMCs, and this is enhanced by palbocicib.
While CRBN is ubiquitously expressed, IKZF3 and IRF4 (mRNA and protein)
and the IKZF1 protein were barely detectable in normal bone marrow plasma
cells and prominently increased in BMMCs. Primary myeloma cells thus
appear to be addicted to IKZF1/IKZF3-IRF4 signaling for survival, and
IMIDs induce CRL4CRBN-mediated degradation of IKZF1 and IKZF3 to
antagonize this survival pathway. Accordingly, palbociclib enhancement of
Len killing was associated with rapid acceleration of IKZF1/IKZF3
degradation, within one hour of Len treatment in BMMCs. Palbociclib acts
in opposition of MEIS2, because MEIS2 knockdown mimicked palbociclib
sensitization and MEIS2 reconstitution antagonized palbociclib
sensitization.In summary, we have demonstrated that induction of pG1 by
CDK4/6 inhibition sensitizes primary myeloma cells to IMiD killing
through rapid acceleration of CRL4CRBN -dependent degradation of IKZF1
and IKZF3 in opposition to MEIS2. These findings are being validated in a
clinical trial targeting CDK4/6 with palbociclib in combination with Len
in MM.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

