Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gemcitabine fails to radiosensitize normal intestinal epithelial
CCD841 cells at concentrations that promote excellent radiosensitization
in colorectal tumor cell lines


Gemcitabine (2, 2-difluroro-2-deoxycytidine;dFdCyd) is a potent
radiosensitizer in tumor cells in vitro and commonly used in
chemoradiotherapy regimens to enhance radiation induced cell killing
(radiosensitization), but its use is limited by normal tissue toxicity.
We have studied the mechanism by which dFdCyd promotes radiosensitization
in an effort to optimize its use in such regimens. dFdCyd elicits
cytotoxicity primarily via incorporation of its triphosphate, dFdCTP,
into DNA, whereas inhibition of ribonucleotide reductase (RR) by dFdCDP
produces a profound depletion of dATP, which strongly correlates with
radiosensitization. DNA replication in the presence of imbalanced dNTPs
produces mismatches in DNA, and their persistence underlies the mechanism
of radiosensitization by dFdCyd. Importantly, the presence of dFdCyd
induced DNA mismatches is necessary for radiosensitization to occur but
not for cytotoxicity, and maximal radiosensitization can be elicited at
non-toxic concentrations of drug. However, when dFdCyd is currently used
as part of chemoradiotherapy regimens, it is administered at the standard
and very toxic dose used in monotherapy regimens. The distinction between
radiosensitizing and cytotoxic mechanisms of dFdCyd revealed by our
studies provides a rationale for optimizing chemoradiotherapy while
decreasing normal tissue toxicity. To achieve this, we have evaluated
cytotoxicity of dFdCyd + ionizing radiation (IR) in a normal intestinal
epithelial cell line, CCD841, as a first approach to identify potential
differences in the way tumor versus non-tumor cells respond to dFdCyd IR.
CCD841 cells were exposed to concentrations of dFdCyd that produce
excellent radiosensitization in a variety of colorectal tumor cell lines
(10 nM, 30 nM, 100 nM) and produced a range of survival in CCD841 cells
(78 17.1%, 46.3 5.5%, 26 3.61%, respectively). Analysis of dNTPs during
dFdCyd incubation revealed a profound depletion in dATP. However, all
dFdCyd concentrations failed to radiosensitize CCD841 cells (Radiation
Enhancement Ratios: 10 nM, 0.92 0.03; 30 nM, 0.82 0.04; 100 nM, 0.67
0.10). Marked differences in cell cycle effects were also noted in CCD841
and tumor cells treated with dFdCyd. While tumor cells accumulate in
early S-phase but slowly replicate DNA in the presence of dFdCyd, CCD841
cells arrested right where they were in the cycle at the time of dFdCyd
exposure and displayed a striking decrease in DNA synthesis. We propose
that this prevents CCD841 cells from undergoing the necessary DNA
replication that permits cells to produce the essential DNA mismatches
for radiosensitization to occur. Our studies support the use of
mechanistically-derived doses and administration schedules for dFdCyd
when given with IR to ameliorate normal tissue toxicity while preserving
the effectiveness of the chemoradiotherapy regimen.

