Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Germline mutations in ETV6 confer risk of thrombocytopenia and
acute lymphocytic leukemia


Germline mutations of transcription factors (e.g. PAX5, CEBPA, GATA2,
RUNX1) have been associated with an inherited susceptibility to acute
leukemia. Here we report 2 unrelated kindreds harboring germline
mutations in ETV6, the gene encoding the transcription factor ETS
variants 6. These kindreds were primarily characterized by
thrombocytopenia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). The first
kindred, identified at MSKCC and HMC, includes 9 individuals with
thrombocytopenia, and 3 individuals with pre-B ALL. Sequencing a subset
of common and somatically altered leukemia genes in this family
identified a rare heterozygous non-synonymous missense variation (T>C) in
6 family members with thrombocytopenia and 2 with ALL. Notably, this
variant did not segregate in 9 individuals in the kindred without these
phenotypes. The amino acid alteration is predicted to lead to an L349P
substitution within the DNA binding domain of ETV6 (L349P, NPP_001978).
In silico analyses using SIFT and Polyphen assigned pathogenic variant
classifications to the L349P variant. The proband of the second family
presented to SJCRH with pre-B ALL, a history of thrombocytopenia, and
demonstrated hypersensitivity to methotrexate (grade 3 bone marrow
suppression). His leukemia transformated to myelodsyplastic syndrome and
acute myeloid leukemia, which was treated by unrelated donor
transplantation. The proband's mother, maternal aunt and maternal
grandfather had thrombocytopenia, and the maternal great grandfather was
diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukemia. The proband and his mother were
found to carry a heterozygous 5 bp deletion in ETV6, N385fs
(c.1153-5_1153_1delAACAG), which is predicted to produce a truncated
protein of 389 amino acids with the last 4 residues different from the
canonical ETV6 sequence. This variant has not been described in public
sequencing data repositories. Finally, a review of 1,120 cases from the
SJCRH/Washington University Pediatric Cancer Genome Project, including
588 cases of leukemia (among which 472 were ALL), revealed 3 rare
germline ETV6 variants: L442P (n = 1), R181H (n = 1), and V37M (n = 1),
with 2 of these variants L442P and R181H predicted to be pathogenic based
on prediction and/or genomic location. Notably, these 2 variants each
occurred in patients with ALL.Collectively, these findings suggest that
germline ETV6 mutations are associated with a novel syndrome of
thrombocytopenia with susceptibility to leukemia. Furthermore, these
mutations may account for approximately 0.4% (2/472) of pediatric ALL
cases. Further phenotypic characterization of affected patients and
functional assessment of ETV6 germline variants, in progress, will be
required to reveal the clinical effects of these mutations, their
incidence in patients with ALL and their role in leukemogenesis.

