Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In-situ Kinome wide profiling of Palbociclib treated COLO-205
human tumor xenograft samples


Palbociclib (PD0332991) is a cyclin dependent kinase 4 and 6 inhibitor
being developed for treatment of breast cancer. In order to evaluate the
kinome-wide impacts of Palbociclib in an in-vivo setting, nude mice
inoculated with COLO-205 (human colon carcinoma) cells were administered
Palbociclib at different doses (12.5, 75 and 150mg/kg once daily for 3
days. Tumors were collected at various time points after the final dose
(1, 3, 6, 12, 24 & 48 hours), lysed and subjected to in-situ kinase
profiling using the KinativTM technology. Tumor lysates were probed with
an ATP acylphosphate desthiobiotin probe which covalently modifies lysine
residues in the kinase active site. Samples are then denatured,
trypsinized, and the probe-labeled peptides captured with streptavidin,
eluted, and quantitated by targeted mass spectrometry. The presence of an
inhibitor bound to the active site of a kinase prevents the probe
binding, resulting in the loss of MS signal for peptides from that
kinase. In addition, the upregulation or downregulation of kinase
proteins can also result in changes in the MS signals in palbociclib
versus vehicle-treated samples. A total of 180 kinases were quantified.
As expected, direct targets of palbociclib were observed to be inhibited
in this study (i.e., kinases inhibited by Palbociclib in Colo205 lysate),
including CDK4 &6 as well as ERK5, JNK, CDK16 &17, PIK3C3 and PIP4K2C.
The observed inhibition of these targets was both dose and time
dependent. Significantly, the MS signals for additional kinases not
observed to directly bind Palbociclib in Colo205 lysate were also
strongly downregulated in this study. These include CDC2, AurA, AurB,
PLK1 and MASTL; kinases critical for cell cycle progression. We
hypothesize that the downregulation of these kinases was due to cell
cycle arrest in G1 phase. Consistent with this hypothesis, the
downregulation of these kinases corresponded well with the inhibition of
phosphorylated (Ser780; pRb) as demonstrated by Western Blots of a part
of tumor tissue used for the Kinome profiling. Taken together, these
results highlight the utility of kinome wide profiling in tumor samples
collected from xenograft mice to better understand both pharmacodynamics
of target engagement as well as pathway effects elicited by compound
treatment.

