Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docosahexaenoic acid reduces cancer cell migration may link with
actin binding proteins and miRNA 17-92 cluster expressions changes


Metastasis and progression, reflected by higher migration and longer cell
survival, are major contributing factors in making cancers the leading
cause of death worldwide. Cancer cells exhibit higher migration rates and
greater cell viability facilitated by actin binding protein-mediated
cytoskeletal remodeling and secondary messengers (cAMP and/or cGMP)
signaling. Studies have shown that docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), a poly
unsaturated fatty acid, inhibits cancer cell metastatic phenotype.
Moreover, miRNA-1792 cluster has been reported to be highly expressed in
metastasis. Therefore, we put forward a hypothesis that DHA will induce
changes in actin binding protein dynamics and miRNA-1792 cluster
expression to inhibit cancer cell migration and viability. Non-cance
(MLE12) and cancer (A549) cells were treated with 8-Br-cAMP and/or DHA
for 30 min, 3h, 6h and 24h. Actin binding proteins (profilin, cofilin,
vimentin and gelsolin) and miRNA-1792 cluster expression were analyzed by
western blot and qRT PCR respectively. Cell migration was estimated by
wound assay and transwell apparatus. F-actin content and actin binding
proteins were measured using confocal microscopy at the leading edges of
wound. Proliferation and cell viability were estimated by flow cytometer,
IF using ki-67, and cleaved-caspase-3 antibodies. F-actin content, cell
migration and proliferation were increased while cell viability was
decreased by cAMP. DHA treatment reverses the increase in actin content
and cell migration in cancer cells but not in non-cancer cells. These
findings correlate with changes in actin binding protein content and
miRNA 1792 cluster expression. Thus, DHA specifically inhibits cancer
cell migration, proliferation, and viability and this effect correlates
with decreases in actin binding protein levels and miRNA-1792 cluster
expression. In conclusion, DHA supplementation suppresses cellular
changes related to metastatic potential in cancer cells and could provide
therapeutic potential against cancer cell metastasis. Moreover, actin
binding proteins and miRNA-1792 cluster expression could serve as
innovative therapeutic targets and biomarkers for cancer progression.

