Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tyrosine phosphorylation is essential for OCT2 function and a
target of inhibition by TKIs


Cisplatin and oxaliplatin are among the most widely used anticancer drugs
in both children and adults. The clinical use of these agents is
associated with dose-limiting damage to kidneys (nephrotoxicity) and
peripheral nerves (neurotoxicity). Mechanistic understanding of the
underlying etiology remains incomplete and preventive strategies are
currently unavailable. We previously reported that cisplatin
nephrotoxicity (Filipski et al, CPT 2009) and oxaliplatin neurotoxicity
(Sprowl et al, PNAS 2013) are dependent on organic cation
transporter-mediated uptake mechanisms and can be reduced by genetic or
pharmacological inhibition of OCT2. With a goal to identify small
molecule OCT2 inhibitors, that could be used to prevent these toxicities,
we carried out a high-throughput chemical library screen. Multiple
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), including dasatinib and vandetanib,
were identified as potent OCT2 inhibitors. Further studies showed that
TKIs inhibit OCT2 through a non-competitive mechanism raising the
possibility that tyrosine phosphorylation by an unknown TKI-sensitive
protein kinase(s) may be essential for OCT2 function. Using in vitro cell
culture models and proteomics, site-directed mutagenesis and functional
assays we found that OCT2 is indeed tyrosine phosphorylated and this
phosphorylation is essential for OCT2 function and sensitive to
inhibition by TKIs. A subsequent RNAi kinase library screen identified
the Src-family member YES1 as the OCT2-phosphorylating kinase. This was
further supported by experiments where a TKI-resistant YES1 mutant was
able to rescue OCT2 inhibition by dasatinib. Non-TKI inhibitors of YES1
were also found to suppress OCT2 function. Importantly, tyrosine
phosphorylation of OCT2 was observed in vivo, in murine kidneys and
dorsal root ganglions, major sites of OCT2 expression and toxicities of
platinum-based drugs. siRNA mediated in vivo knockdown of YES1 reduced
OCT2 phosphorylation and suppressed its function in the kidneys.
Treatment with the YES1 targeting TKI, Dasatinib, suppressed OCT2
phosphorylation in dorsal root ganglions, reduced oxaliplatin uptake and
significantly prevented oxaliplatin induced neurotoxicity in mice models.
These findings have not only provided new mechanistic insights into the
regulation of membrane transporters; but have also provided a rationale
for the translational development of new targeted interventions using TKI
pulse-exposure to mitigate the debilitating side effects associated with
platinum-based chemotherapeutics.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

