Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LncRNA RoR enhances the c-Myc mRNA stability in colon cancer


Background: Emerging evidence has implicated long non-coding RNAs
(lncRNAs) as master gene regulators; and they are often aberrantly
expressed in a variety of human diseases including cancer. One of the
mechanisms of lncRNA-mediated gene expression involves modulation of
translation or mRNA stability by interacting with RNA binding proteins.
We have previously demonstrated that lncRNA-RoR is a strong negative
regulator of p53 in response to DNA damage. The present study was to
determine whether and how lncRNA-RoR regulates c-Myc in colon
cancer.Methods: MTT assays were used to determine cell growth. Colon
cancer tissue array was used to determine the level of lncRNA-RoR in
colon cancer tissues by qRT-PCR. Interaction between lncRNA-RoR and RNA
binding proteins was confirmed by RNA co-immunoprecipitation and RNA
precipitation. LncRNA-RoR knockout in colon cancer cells was through
CRISPR/Cas9 system. Dual fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) was
used to determine the relative levels of lncRNA-RoR and c-Myc mRNA, and
their co-localizations in colon cancer specimens. The effect of
lncRNA-RoR on tumor growth was determined by a xenograft mouse
model.Results: Ectopic expression of lncRNA-RoR upregulated, whereas
RoR-siRNA inhibited c-Myc mRNA and protein level, which was further
confirmed by lncRNA-RoR knockout. Mechanistically, we showed that
lncRNA-RoR directly interacted with RNA binding proteins, hnRNP U and
hnRNP D, both of which are implicated in stability of c-Myc mRNA. This
interaction was further confirmed by RNA immunoprecipitation. In
consistent with these findings, ectopic expression of lncRNA-RoR
stimulated cell proliferation but knockout of lncRNA-RoR significantly
decreased cell proliferation. Moreover, ectopic expression of lncRNA-RoR
in HCT-116 cells significantly promoted tumor growth in a xenograft mouse
model. Finally, qPCR array showed the significant upregulation of
lncRNA-RoR in colon cancer tissues. Similarly dual FISH revealed a strong
correlation between lncRNA-RoR and c-Myc mRNA in colon cancer
tissues.Conclusion: It is well known that c-Myc mRNA has a very short
half-life and regulation of c-Myc mRNA stability is complex. Our results
suggest a novel mechanism of regulation of c-Myc mRNA stability involving
lncRNA-RoR, hnRNP U and hnRNP D.

