Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tunneling nanotube formation is significantly upregulated in
invasive cancer cells


Introduction: Intercellular communication is critical for cancer growth
and progression. Research to date has focused on gap junctions,
micro-vesicles/exosomes, and diffusible factors. There is limited
understanding of how efficient cell-to-cell communication occurs between
distant cells in the complex tumor microenvironment. Tunneling nanotubes
(TNTs) are thin, non-adherent actin filament-based, open conduits that
facilitate direct sharing of various cellular cargos between cells. TNTs
can be 50-800 nanometers in diameter and up to several hundred
micrometers in length in vitro. Our lab was the first to provide in vivo
evidence of TNTs in human solid tumors. We hypothesized that TNT
formation is significantly upregulated in human cancers compared to their
non-malignant counterparts. In this study, we examined the rate of TNT
formation in cell lines from multiple human cancers.Methods: Cell lines
from four cancers (colon, mesothelioma, pancreatic, and ovarian cancer)
were plated at similar density in 6-well tissue culture plates. The
number of TNTs and cells in 10 randomly chosen fields of each well were
quantified every 24 hrs for up to 96 hrs and representative images were
taken. Experiments were performed in duplicate for each cell
line.Results: The number of TNTs per cell (TNTs/cell), which we have
titled TNT index, was calculated in order to control for cell
proliferation. The ratio of TNTs formed between malignant colorectal
cells compared benign adenoma ranged from 20:1 to 100:1 by 96 hrs.For
mesothelioma, malignant:mesothelial TNTs/cell ratio ranged from 8:1 to
78:1 over 72 hrs. The mesothelioma cells were too confluent at 96 hrs to
quantify TNTs. The pancreatic malignant:stellate human pancreatic ductal
epithelial TNTs/cell ratio ranged between 2:1 to 63:1. Interestingly, we
found that non-malignant ovarian epithelial (IOSE) cells had a
significantly higher rate of TNT formation than malignant ovarian
cells.Conclusions: We have demonstrated that malignant cells have
significantly higher rates of TNT formation compared to stromal or
premalignant cells of their corresponding tumor. TNTs potentially provide
malignant cells a direct route for transmitting influential messages
across long distances in the complex tumor microenvironment. We believe
that upregulation of TNTs in cancer may amplify cellular cross-talk and
thus increase rates of tumor recurrence and invasion.

