Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting PAK1 activity in breast cancer: Inhibition of cell
growth, survival, motility, and signaling


Breast cancer (BrCa) is one of the most common cancers diagnosed and is
the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths of women in the United
States. BrCa is divided into four major molecular subtypes; these
categories are based upon the expression of hormone receptors (i.e.,
estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR)), HER2/neu
receptor, and proliferation rate. Of these subtypes triple negative (ER-,
PR-, HER2-) BrCa are among the most lethal, are highly aggressive, have
poor prognosis, limited treatment options, and lack effective targeted
therapies. Our lab has shown p-21 activated kinase 1 (PAK1) protein
expression increases with BrCa progression in human tumor samples. PAK1
is highly expressed in invasive tumor tissues in comparison to normal
tissues. The role of PAK1 in BrCa development and progression is through
its activity as a serine/threonine kinase involved in the regulation of
several key oncogenic pathways (i.e., WNT/-catenin and MAPK/ERK/JNK).
Although PAK1 expression is increased in invasive tumor tissues, our
studies have found that in human BrCa cell cultures PAK1 expression is
independent of hormonal receptor status. Our hypothesis for this study is
that triple negative BrCa cell lines are more reliant upon PAK1's
activity for cell growth, survival, and motility. To test our hypothesis
two triple negative BrCa cell lines, MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468, and two
ER+ BrCa cell lines, T47D and ZR75-1, were used. Our results demonstrate
there are significantly higher levels of PAK1 protein in T47D and
MDA-MB-468, compared to ZR75-1 and MDA-MB-231. To determine if the cells
were reliant on the activity of PAK1 for cell viability, a trypan blue
exclusion assay was performed. The PAK1 inhibitor 1,1-Dithiodi-2-napthol
(IPA-3) significantly inhibited all four BrCa cell lines, cell growth and
viability in a dose-dependent manner. IPA-3 further inhibited cell
proliferation of MDA-MB-468 (IC50 = 11.5M), MDA-MB-231 (IC50 = 14.5M),
ZR75-1 (IC50 = 13.3M), and T47D (IC50 = 17.1M). IPA-3 also inhibited the
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of PAK1 in a dose-dependent
manner in MDA-MB-231 cells. The inhibition of PAK1 by IPA-3 also
significantly inhibited the migration of MDA-MB-231 cells in a time- and
dose-dependent manner. The regulation of PAK1 activation by the
WNT/-catenin pathway was further explored in ER+ and triple negative BrCa
cell lines. Additional studies are currently underway investigating the
role of PAK1 activation on the MAPK/ERK/JNK pathway and its effects on
cell migration and invasion. These studies explore the role of PAK-1 in
triple negative BrCa cell growth, survival, motility, and oncogenic
signaling. Further investigation of PAK1's targets within these signaling
pathways will provide opportunities for the development of novel
prevention and/or therapeutic strategies.

