Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling tumors in their environment


Tumour microenvironment plays an important role in tumour growth.
However, the composition and architecture of the tumour stroma varies
dramatically across animal models and the clinic. In these animal models,
not only the tumour formation, but the whole environment (stroma,
mechanical stress) is very different to the clinical tumour context.
Nevertheless, explant models show a conserved stroma-tumour architecture.
Keeping this in mind, we developed a mathematical model that not only
captures tumour growth in animals, but may in the future also translate
to patients.We propose a multiscale model to mimic tumour
microenvironment and tumour cell co-development. The model is an
agent-based model. The agents (epithelial clusters) represent 10 cells
each with 5 transit states (G1, S, G2M, Hypoxic and Necrotic). Also,
stromal cells may be recruited, can migrate and deliver blood to the
tumour. The transitioning probabilities across the cell cycle are
characterised by a pure time delay, followed by an exponential decrease.
Further, profiles of chemokines and oxygen are computed as an
approximation of the Fick Diffusion equations. These profiles trigger
cell recruitment and proliferation. Additionally, cells may undergo
hypoxia and become necrotic. All this computed by the Gillespie algorithm
method in a 3D lattice in matlab 13b.The model successfully predicts
tumour growth for a number of xenografted cell lines and explants of
different cell origin. The patterns of the stromal architecture have been
validated against IHC images from explant tumours at the end of study.
For the validation, we developed an advanced imaging method to score
tumour heterogeneity spatially from different immunostains.By
interrogating the model, we can demonstrate that explant tumours - unlike
xenografts - are not completely out of the clinical context. Our model
being able to mimic the different phenotypes of heterogeneity observed
across explants of diverse tissue origins (or patients), demonstrates
that this method is potentially very broad. In future versions, the model
will include more characteristics of the stroma, which would help us
understand reasons why patterns of the stromal complexity form and affect
tumour development and its treatment; both in animal studies and the
clinic. The model will be contrasted with clinical data.

