Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance to paclitaxel in triple negative breast cancer cells is
associated with ABCB1 gene rearrangement


Breast cancer represents a heterogeneous group of tumors that exhibit a
wide spectrum of clinical, pathologic, and molecular features. Of these
tumors, triple-negative breast cancer (TNBCs), shows one of the most
aggressive clinical behaviors with distinctive metastatic patterns and
very poor prognosis. Due to the triple negative status of receptor
expression, TNBC patients do not benefit from hormonal therapies or
treatments targeted against HER2. Therefore, chemotherapy and, in
particular, taxane-based therapy (e.g. paclitaxel) remains the treatment
of choice for patients with TNBC. Paclitaxel (PTX) is among the most
effective anti-cancer agents developed in the past decades, which is
widely used in the treatment of patients with locally advanced and
metastatic breast cancer. TNBCs are initially highly responsive to PTX
however; the majorities of TNBC patients acquire resistance and develop
progressive disease. Therefore, development of resistance to
chemotherapeutic agents is the major obstacle to the successful treatment
of TNBC patients. In vitro studies on cell lines with acquired resistance
provide models for characterization of the biological mechanisms of
resistance. We have developed five resistant TNBC cell lines by exposure
of cells to increasing concentrations of PTX. We used an integrative
analysis of array CGH and gene expression data to gain insights into the
interplay of functional changes of the genome in TNBC resistant cell
lines. Integrative analysis of aCGH and gene expression revealed
deregulated genes whose expression was correlated with their copy number
alterations. The most highly up-regulated gene in all 5 resistant cell
lines was ABCB1. This up-regulation was accompanied by gene amplification
in three resistant cell lines: BT20R, SUM149R and MDA-468 but not in 2
other lines, MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-436. The overexpression of ABCB1 at
protein level was confirmed only in the three resistant cell lines with
the gene amplification, suggesting that changes in ABCB1 copy number may
result in gene activation and acquisition of PTX resistance. Array CGH
analysis of 7q21.12 in BT20R, SUM149R and MDA-468R revealed similar, but
not identical, breakpoints in ABCB1. Using 5RACE, we identified novel
inter-chromosomal translocations of ABCB1 in 2 drug resistance cell lines
containing ABCB1 breakpoints. These genomic rearrangements occurred in
the 5 un-translated region (UTR) of ABCB1. The deletion of the 5UTR of
ABCB1 in these resistant cell lines may serve to overcome a translation
initiation block, which would then favor the expression of ABCB1. Thus
the detection of ABCB1 genomic rearrangements may be a candidate
biomarker to predict resistance to paclitaxel in triple negative breast
cancers. To our knowledge, we are the first to report ABCB1 amplification
and ABCB1 gene fusions as a potential mechanism of drug resistance in
TNBC cell lines.

