Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A c-Kit targeting antibody-drug conjugate is efficiently
metabolized and activated inside cancer cell lines and xenograft tumors


We have developed an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) targeting the c-Kit
receptor tyrosine kinase, which is selectively expressed on the cell
surface of various tumors including gastrointestinal tumors (GIST), small
cell lung cancer (SCLC) and acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). The ADC
consists of a humanized c-Kit-binding monoclonal antibody (c-Kit-Ab)
covalently attached to a maytansinoid tubulin inhibitor, DM1, via a
non-cleavable linker, SMCC. Like other ADCs, the c-Kit ADC is a pro-drug
that is activated upon metabolism inside cells. Its target-mediated
internalization and lysosomal degradation generates active maytansinoid
metabolites that bind and inhibit microtubule dynamics. To understand the
activation of the ADC, we studied the kinetics and efficiency of its
metabolism in cancer cells and xenograft tumor models. Using radiolabeled
ADC and c-Kit-Ab, we followed the formation of metabolites in SCLC and
AML cells and in SCLC tumors, as well as in engineered cell lines that
express various mutant forms of c-Kit.We found that the ADC and c-Kit-Ab
are efficiently metabolized in c-Kit-positive cancer cells irrespective
of the mutational status or the activation state of c-Kit. The
degradation half-life of c-Kit-Ab is 3-fold lower than that observed for
T-DM1 and SGN35, indicating a faster rate of activation. Moreover, cell
surface repopulation with c-Kit is highly efficient after ADC-mediated
internalization, allowing multiple rounds of ADC recruitment and
activation. Interestingly, cell surface repopulation of c-Kit is more
rapid for cells with a c-Kit mutation than those with wild-type c-Kit,
leading to generation of greater levels of active metabolites in cells
with mutant c-Kit. This may lead to better targeting of the c-Kit-mutated
cancer cells over normal cells with wild-type c-Kit, which may improve
the safety of the c-Kit ADC.Consistent with the in vitro findings, the
ADC was found to undergo efficient metabolism in tumors in vivo. While
tumor localization of the ADC over a non-targeting conjugate is similar
to that observed with T-DM1 and SAR3419, its tumor-specific formation of
active metabolites is 3-fold greater. Thus, the c-Kit-targeting ADC is
particularly efficient at achieving high levels of active metabolites
inside c-Kit-positive tumor cells, consistent with its robust efficacy in
mouse xenograft models.

