Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The modulatory effects of cancer preventive herbal saponins on gut
microbiota and mucosal environment in ApcMin/+ mice


Human gut harbors 100 trillion microbes that is intrinsically linked to
individual's health and diseases, including cancer. Triterpenoid saponins
are present in many plants and are major active components in medicinal
plants. Gynostemma pentaphyllum (Gp) is consumed as herbal tea as well as
herbal medicine and found to possess anti-cancer effects in ApcMin/+ mice
in our study. Here, we would like to address whether Gp saponins (GpS)
can affect the gut microbiota in the ApcMin/+ colorectal cancer mouse
model, and whether the alteration would have cancer preventive
implication.Using ERIC-PCR and 16S pyrosequencing analysis, we revealed
that GpS treatment altered the overall fecal microbiome. Interestingly,
it appeared that GpS treatment enhanced the relatively abundance of the
beneficial microbes while reduced the potential harmful sulfate- and
sulfur-reducing bacteria lineage. The impact of GpS on the gut mucosal
environment was also examined. We found GpS improved the gut barrier
function by increasing the numbers of Paneth cells, goblet cells,
up-regulating the expression of E-cadherin and down-regulating the
expression of N-cadherin in the intestine. In addition, GpS
down-regulated the protein expression of beta-catenin and the p-STAT3.
Furthermore, higher levels of anti-inflammatory and tissue repair-related
cytokines as well as arginase I, but lower level of iNOS expression were
found in GpS-treated ApcMin/+ mice. Altogether, GpS might affect the
host-microbe interactions by regulating the gut microbial ecosystem and
modulating the intestinal mucosal environment, which might contribute to
its cancer preventive effect observed in the ApcMin/+ mice.This study was
supported by Macau Science and Technology Development Fund 015/2014/A1
and Research Grants Council of Hong Kong under GRF260413 to WL Wendy
Hsiao.

