Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the stroma to hit the tumor: MMP11 as a novel target for
cancer immunotherapy


Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are zinc-dependent endopeptidases that
mediate a number of physiological and pathological processes, such as
matrix degradation, tissue remodeling, inflammation and tumor metastasis.
The objective of this study was to develop and characterize a vaccine
targeting stromal antigens expressed by cancer associated fibroblasts
(CAFs). We focused on MMP11 (or stromelysin 3, ST3), that has been
detected primarily in CAFs and its expression correlates with aggressive
clinical behavior and invasiveness of different types of carcinoma. We
demonstrated that intramuscular injection of genetic vectors such as
Adenovirus (Ad) and plasmid DNA encoding MMP11 engineered variants
followed by in vivo electroporation (DNA-EP) resulted in breakage of
immune tolerance and induction of both cell mediated and humoral immune
response. Importantly, MMP11 vaccine was able to confer significant
antitumoral protection in a chemically induced, MMP11 overexpressing
colon cancer model both in prophylactic and therapeutic settings. To
determine the mechanism of action of MMP11 vaccine, we have utilized
IFNgamma- and microMT-knock out mice, devoid of T- and B-cell immune
response, respectively. Our results show that both arms of the immune
response are important to confer the therapeutic effect. Moreover, MMP11
stromal vaccine showed synergic effects when combined with genetic
vaccines targeting classic tumor associated antigens, such as telomerase
reverse transcriptase (TERT) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA). Finally,
to assess the immunogenicity and the safety of MMP11 vaccine in a large
animal model, nonhuman primates have been vaccinated with Ad and DNA-EP.
A strong immune response was measured with no detectable side effects. In
addition, MMP11 detection and spontaneous immune responses in the blood
of breast and prostate cancer patients further corroborate MMP11 as a
valid target for immune intervention.Taken together, these data support
the use of MMP11 as a potential candidate for cancer immunotherapy in
human clinical trials.

