Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel combinatorial therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)


The incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is rising in the US with
parallel increase in mortality rate. Lack of effective therapy for
advanced HCC mandates development of novel targeted therapies to
counteract this fatal malady. Astrocyte elevated gene-1 (AEG-1), also
known as metadherin (MTDH) and LYRIC, plays a pivotal role in
hepatocarcinogenesis and serves as an ideal target for anti-HCC therapy.
AEG-1 interacts with retinoid X receptor (RXR) and inhibits retinoic
acid-induced gene expression and cell death. Retinoic acid has been
evaluated for HCC treatment without promising result. Overexpression of
AEG-1 might underlie the poor performance of retinoic acid in HCC
clinical trials. We documented that combination of a lentivirus
expressing AEG-1 shRNA (lenti.shAEG-1) and all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)
profoundly and synergistically inhibited subcutaneous human HCC
xenografts in nude mice. We now have developed liver-targeted nanoplexes
by conjugating poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimers with polyethylene
glycol (PEG) and lactobionic acid (PAMAM-PEG-Gal) which were complexed
with AEG-1 siRNA (PAMAM-AEG-1si). PAMAM has a net positive charge that
complexes with the net negative charge of the siRNA backbone, PEG
increases stability of the nanoplexes and increases circulation time and
the galactose binds to asialoglycoprotein receptors that are upregulated
on liver cells. The polymer conjugate was characterized by 1H-NMR and
optimal nanoplex formulations were characterized for surface charge and
size using a zetasizer Nano ZS. We established orthotopic xenografts of
human HCC cell QGY-7703 expressing luciferase (QGY-luc) in the livers of
athymic nude mice and monitored tumor development by bioluminescence
imaging (BLI). One week after tumor establishment mice were treated with
PAMAM-siCon, PAMAM-siCon+ATRA, PAMAM-AEG-1si and PAMAM-AEG-1si+ATRA by 8
i.v. injections over 4 weeks, and sacrificed 2 weeks after the last
injection. In the control group the tumor developed aggressively. ATRA
showed little effect due to high AEG-1 levels in QGY-luc cells.
PAMAM-AEG-1si showed significant reduction in tumor growth and the
combination of PAMAM-AEG-1si+ATRA showed profound and synergistic
inhibition so that the tumors were almost undetectable by BLI.
Measurement of liver weight at the end of the experiment corroborated
these findings. Analysis of AEG-1 mRNA in tumor samples showed a marked
decrease in AEG-1 level by PAMAM-AEG-1si indicating efficacy of in vivo
knockdown. The group treated with PAMAM-AEG-1si+ATRA nanoplexes showed
increased necrosis, inhibition of proliferation and increased apoptosis
when compared to other groups. Liver is an ideal organ for RNAi therapy
and ATRA is an approved anti-cancer agent. Our exciting observations
suggest that the combinatorial approach might be an effective way to
combat HCC and need to be evaluated stringently in endogenous mouse
models of HCC for a potential Phase I/II clinical trial.

