Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential response to retinoid treatment in mouse and human
mammary tumor cell lines with alterations in protein kinase C (PKC)
expression


PKC is a serine-threonine kinase family that controls malignant
transformation and metastatic dissemination. ATRA is the main active
metabolite of vitamin A. Some evidences indicate that PKC may regulate
the expression of some retinoid acid (RA) dependent genes, and others
indicate that retinoids could alter PKC intracellular localization; both
processes would lead to cell differentiation.In this work we have
developed human (MDA-MB 231) and murine (LM3) cell models overexpressing
PKC or PKC, in order to determine whether PKC expression alters the
sensitivity to retinoids treatment (ATRA). The effect of ATRA was studied
in vitro, analyzing biological responses related to tumor growth.In LM3
cells, only PKC overexpression was able to reduce in vitro population
doubling time (PDT) as compared to control (PDT: 14,82,3 h vs 21,23,1 h
for LM3-PKC y LM3-Vector respectively). Moreover, these cells also
responded to retinoid treatment with a significant delay in cell
proliferation (PDT: 24,34,2 h vs. 14,82,3 h for LM3-PKC ATRA treated or
not respectively. In MDA-MB 231 derived cell lines, PKC overexpression as
well as ATRA treatment have no effect on proliferative potential. No
differences were observed on migratory and invasive capabilities
either.Interestingly, in LM3, PKC overexpression induced an important
increase in proteolytic enzymes secretion, which correlates with its
major invasiveness, but this increase had no impact on in vivo metastatic
dissemination. Only PKC overexpression increased this parameter (lung
nodes, median (range): 55 (20-75) vs 0 (0-10) for LM3-PKC y LM3-Vector
respectively).Contrary to LM3-PKC in MDA-PKC cells we could detect a
decrease on proteolytic enzymes production and invasive capability.
Moreover, colonies growing in Matrigel as 3D cultures showed a small and
branched structures.Finally we studied whether the overexpression of and
PKC isoforms is able to alter the activity of retinoic acid responsive
elements (RARE) through a reporter gene assay. On LM3 model, the
constitutive expression of PKC highly increased RARE dependent
activity.Surprisingly, in MDA-MB231 derived sublines, we could detect a
significant increase on RARE activity when cells were treated with ATRA,
Altogether, these results suggest that PKC overexpression confers a more
aggressive phenotype in LM3 model, but also makes these cells sensitive
to ATRA effects. We could hypothesize, that the absence of response to
ATRA treatment displayed by MDA-MB 231 sublines can be explained by their
lack of RAR, which is implied in AP-1 transrepression in response to
ATRA. Among others phenomena, AP-1 is involved in cell proliferation and
proteolytic enzymes production.Regarding the differences of response to
PKC overexpression of both models, it has been reported that this PKC
isoform has a differential role, pro or anti tumorigenic, depending on
cellular context.

