Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TAK1-regulated expression of BIRC3 is responsible for
chemoradiotherapy (CRT) resistance in esophagogastric junction (EGJ)
adenocarcinoma


Introduction: Preoperative CRT followed by surgery is the most common
approach for patients with resectable esophageal and EGJ cancers. Based
on the histology, patients with adenocarcinoma consistently demonstrated
significantly lower rate of pathological complete response if compared
with patients with squamous cell carcinoma, thus the need for accurate
biomarkers to select the patients with esophageal and EGJ adenocarcinoma
most likely to benefit from preoperative CRT has become even more
critical. We recently demonstrated that the MAP3K TGF-eta-activated
kinase-1 (TAK1) is responsible for the resistance to the proapoptotic
effect of chemotherapeutic agents by increasing the transcription of the
member of the inhibitor of apoptosis proteins family BIRC3 in preclinical
models of pancreatic cancer. Here, we hypothesized that the
TAK1-regulated expression of BIRC3 might be responsible for the
resistance to CRT in EGJ adenocarcinoma.Materials and methods: TAK1
kinase activity was targeted in FLO-1 and KYAE-1 esophageal cells by
using (5Z)-7oxozeaenol. To test the effect of reducing BIRC3 expression
on the resistance to CRT, FLO-1 and KYAE-1 cells were treated with
increasing doses of cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil, paclitaxel, or
radiotherapy in combination with (5Z)-7oxozeaenol. Drug interactions were
studied for synergism according to Chou and Talalay method. Apoptotic
induction was studied by western blot analysis of PARP and caspase 3
cleavages as well as by AnnexinV staining. BIRC3 expression was measured
in 33 pretreatment biopsies from patients with EGJ adenocarcinoma and 34
from patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma receiving
neoadjuvant CRT by Real-Time PCR. Tumor response was evaluated by Tumour
regression grade (TRG) and by Size-based Pathological Response (SPR)
scores. Correlation between BIRC3 expression and treatment response was
analysed by ROC curve analysis.Results: In vitro, (5Z)-7oxozeaenol
significantly reduced BIRC3 expression in FLO-1 and KYAE-1 esophageal
cells. Exposure to sublethal equitoxic doses of chemotherapeutic agents
plus (5Z)-7oxozeaenol pretreatment resulted in a strong synergistic
anti-proliferative effect. Baseline expression of BIRC3 was significantly
higher in patients with EGJ adenocarcinoma if compared with the more
sensitive squamous-cell carcinoma subtype. Moreover, patients with EGJ
adenocarcinoma expressing higher pretreatment levels of BIRC3 had a
significantly poorer treatment response than did those with lower
expression, indicating that BIRC3 expression significantly correlates
with response to preoperative CRT (AUC-ROC = 0.777 and 0.807 for SPR and
TRG, respectively).Conclusions: TAK1-regulated expression of BIRC3 might
be a valid biomarker to predict resistance to CRT in EGJ adenocarcinoma
patients.

