Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A role of nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase in growth of KRAS
mutant non-small cell lung cancer


Background:KRAS mutations are frequently found in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). The KRAS mutations could be predictive of resistance to
targeted therapy like epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) or a prognostic factor in NSCLC. No successful
targeted therapy currently exists to treat patients with KRAS mutant
NSCLC, and novel therapeutic strategies are needed to prolong survival in
patients with KRAS mutant NSCLC. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase
(nampt) is a rate-limiting enzyme in NAD+ salvage, and we previously
reported that nampt is a potent therapeutic target in NSCLC. Based on the
analysis result of GEO database, we found that expression of nampt is
associated with RAS-MAPK signaling pathway in NSCLC, and we therefore,
conducted an in vitro study to evaluate a role of nampt in growth of KRAS
mutant NSCLC.Methods: We used a panel of KRAS mutant NSCLC cell lines
(A427, A549, H157, H23, H1792, H2009, H358, H441, Calu6, Calu1). The
cells were treated with a nampt inhibitor, FK866, and acid phosphatase
(APH) assay (Thermo SCIENTIFIC) was used to evaluate cell viability of
the KRAS mutant cells. Changes in expression of MAPK signaling pathway
and BCL2 family proteins (antibodies from Cell Signaling and Santa Cruz)
were evaluated by western blot. Apoptosis of the cells treated with FK866
was detected using an Annexin V FITC apoptosis detection kit (BD
Biosciences). FACS analysis was performed using a BD FACSAria II
cytometer (BD Bioscience). Autophagic proteolysis was studied by Cyto-ID
autophagy detection kit (Cosmo Bio), and the expression of the
fluorescent signal was visualized by a FV1000 confocal microscope
(OLYMPUS JAPAN).Results:We found that the sensitivity to FK866 was
different among the KRAS mutant cell lines, and for instance, A427 cells
were sensitive while H157 cells were resistant. FK866 suppressed growth
of KRAS mutant NSCLC and decreased expression of p-ERK expression in the
cell line sensitive to FK866. We will report alteration of apoptosis and
autophagy in the KRAS mutant NSCLC treated with FK866.Conclusion:Nampt
could be a potent therapeutic target in KRAS mutant NSCLC.

