Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53 is differentially regulated in proliferative and invasive
melanoma cells


Melanoma is one of the few cancer types where p53 is not often mutated.
Cancers which have not mutated TP53, often attenuate p53 activity by
affecting upstream regulators or downstream effectors of p53. As melanoma
progresses, it by passes senescence, proliferates, and switches from a
proliferative phenotype to a more invasive phenotype. We have found that
invasive melanomas, characterized by high levels of the pro-invasive Wnt
molecule, Wnt5A, express active p53. Conversely, melanomas with a more
proliferative phenotype, characterized by increased MITF signaling and
low Wnt5A expression, do not express active p53. We show that the
expression of p53 appears to be controlled by Wnt5A, and this may occur
via CAMKII. By Western blot, we have observed that more proliferative
melanoma cells express a high molecular weight p53 (250 kDa). This high
molecular weight p53 does not break down on an SDS-PAGE gel. Knocking
down p53 in proliferative and invasive melanoma cells, using siRNA,
decreases the high molecular weight band in the proliferative cells, and
the 53 kDa band in the more invasive cells. When we over express
HA-tagged p53 in proliferative cells, we see multiple bands for p53 by
Western blot, including the high molecular weight bands, suggesting that
p53 is being post-translationally modified in these cells. We confirmed
that ubiquitination is involved in the formation of the high molecular
weight p53, by treating proliferative cells with SMER3, an E3 ligase
inhibitor. Following two hours of treatment, the high molecular weight
p53 band decreased and this decrease persists for 16 h. Next, we
transfected an E6 ligase into invasive melanoma cells, which express
active p53. Expression of the E6 ligase increased the expression of the
high molecular weight p53 band (250 kDa), but these cells also continued
to express active p53 (53 kDa). To determine if ubiquitination is
targeting p53 for degradation in proliferative cells, we treated invasive
and proliferative cells with MG132, a proteasome inhibitor. Following
treatment with MG132, p53 (53 kDa) increased in invasive cells,
suggesting that p53 is degraded via the proteasome in these cells.
However, when we treated proliferative cells with MG132 we did not see an
increase in the high molecular weight band, suggesting that p53 is not
being degraded via the proteasome in these cells. By immunofluorescence,
we found that p53 is in the cytoplasm of proliferative cells, suggesting
that ubiquitination may be playing a role in sequestration of p53 in
proliferative cells. In invasive cells, p53 remains largely nuclear, and
we demonstrate that this plays critical roles in response to therapy,
counter-intuitively driving resistance, by allowing cells to undergo an
adaptive stress response that we term pseudosenescence

