Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding PARP inhibitor sensitivity: Analyses of the genetic
interactions between specific PARP inhibitor targets and DNA
double-strand repair pathways


Poly (ADP-ribosyl)ation (PARylation) of histones and DNA repair factors
is necessary to maintain genomic integrity in mammalian cells. In
response to DNA damage, PARylation is primarily catalyzed by two Poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerases (PARPs), PARP1 and PARP2. Ablation of PARP1 in
the mouse results in embryonic lethality when combined with deficiencies
for the DNA repair factors that mediate homologous recombination (HR;
such as ATM or H2AX) or Nonhomologous End-joining (NHEJ; such as Ku80).
In contrast, the interaction between PARP2 and DNA double-strand break
(DSB) repair pathways has not been investigated in detail. In this
context, all PARP inhibitors (PARPi) in clinical use block the catalytic
domain of both PARP1 and PARP2. Since the two factors clearly play
unique, non-overlapping roles in DNA repair and other cellular processes,
we sought to further define their specific contribution to the
therapeutic effect of PARPi. We find that combined loss of either PARP1
or PARP2 and histone H2AX results in embryonic lethality in the mouse,
similar to previous observations with mice deficient for PARP1 or PARP2
and the ATM kinase. Because H2AX and ATM promote double-strand break
(DSB) repair throughout the cell cycle, we next investigated whether this
synthetic lethal interaction reflected on their functions in NHEJ and/or
HR. Treatment of H2AX or ATM-deficient fibroblasts or lymphocytes with
PARPi resulted in a marked increase in the frequency of chromatid-type
aberrations relative to wild-type controls, suggesting that PARPi
hypersensitivity in H2AX or ATM-deficient cells results primarily from
defective HR. To further assess an interaction between PARP2 and NHEJ, we
generated mice lacking PARP2 and either Ku80, a core NHEJ factor, or
DNA-PKcs, a kinase required for a subset of NHEJ reactions. We find that,
unlike the early embryonic lethality previously observed in
PARP1/Ku80-deficient mice, loss of PARP2 does not result in additional
phenotypes in growth and development in Ku80-deficient mice. Likewise,
loss of PARP2 has no major effect on growth, development or lymphoma
latency in DNA-PKcs-deficient mice, in marked contrast to the severe
segmental progeroid syndrome and early-onset tumorigenesis observed in
PARP1/DNA-PKcs-deficient mice. Furthermore, PARP1/DNA-PKcs-deficient
lymphomas, but not PARP2/DNA-PKcs-deficient lymphomas, harbor marked
aneuploidy and oncogenic p53 mutations. Altogether, these genetic
analyses suggest that inhibition of both PARP1 and PARP2 contributes to
PARPi-induced killing of HR-deficient human tumor cells. This hypothesis
is currently being tested in our lab using 11q23-deleted neuroblastoma
cells with monoallelic expression of H2AX and breast cancer cells lacking
BRCA1 or BRCA2, and may provide a rationale for the design of
PARP-specific inhibitors in the future.

