Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 is associated with poor
overall survival in clear cell carcinoma of the ovary and may be a novel
therapeutic approach


Objective: Clear cell carcinoma of the ovary (CCC) has a poor prognosis
because of its resistance to conventional platinum- or taxane-based
chemotherapy. We previously found that both gene and protein expression
of fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) 2 are increased in CCC. FGFR
activate intracellular signaling pathways that are known to regulate key
biological processes. Overexpression of FGFR2 has been reported in
several cancers such as lung, pancreatic, breast and colorectal cancers,
and has been associated with a poor prognosis. We therefore investigated
whether FGFR2 could be a biomarker and a therapeutic target for
CCC.Methods: We analyzed the protein expression of FGFR2 by
immunohistochemical staining in paraffin-embedded tumors from 112 CCC
patients, and evaluated the association of this molecular parameter with
clinical outcome. Next, we examined the expression of proteins of the
FGFR2 signaling pathway in 12 ovarian cancer cell lines (11 CCC and one
serous adenocarcinoma) by western blotting. The sensitivity of the cells
to a FGFR inhibitor was determined by WST-8 assay, and cell cycle
distribution was assessed by flow cytometry.Results: One hundred and
eight of 112 (96%) CCC tumors showed positive expression of FGFR2. No
significant associations between the levels of FGFR2 expression and
patient age or disease stage were found. The 5-year survival rate of
patients with moderate or strong tumor expression of FGFR2 was
significantly lower than those with an absent or low tumor expression of
FGFR2 (54% vs. 79%). Multivariable analysis revealed that FGFR2
expression and disease stage were independent prognostic factors. All 11
CCC cell lines expressed substantial amounts of FGFR2 protein compared
with the serous adenocarcinoma cell line. The protein expression level of
8 of 11 CCC cell lines was more than five times that of the serous
adenocarcinoma cell line, and thus we defined these CCC cell lines as
high FGFR2-expressing cells. The FGFR inhibitor effectively suppressed
the growth of high FGFR2-expressing CCC cells compared with low
FGFR2-expressing cells, with induction of G1 cell cycle arrest and
downregulation of phosphorylated (p-) Akt and p-ERK
expression.Conclusions: The FGFR2 protein may be a promising biomarker
that is predictive of patient outcome, and FGFR2 is a potential
therapeutic target for CCC. Further study of FGFR inhibitor in the
treatment of CCC is warranted.

