Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of over-expressed chromosomal regions identifies YBX1
oncogene amplification in basal-like breast tumors


DNA copy number change (CNC) is frequently seen in breast tumors, is
associated with expression in 40% of genes, and has been found to involve
all chromosomal arms in varying frequencies. The addition of CNC to gene
expression information can improve the accuracy of prognostic
predictions, as has been demonstrated by ERBB2 amplification in this
tumor type. We wished to determine the clinical correlates of
over-expressed chromosomal regions, and whether analysis of these regions
can identify driver genes promoting over-expression via CNC.Affymetrix
U133 microarray data were assembled from primary breast tumors of 940
women. Over-expressed chromosomal regions were identified utilising a
modification of the MicroArray Chromosome Analysis Tool (MACAT) and the
DNAcopy program in the R statistical framework. Where regions of elevated
expression were conserved between several tumors, smoothed RNA abundance
was analysed against chromosomal position to identify genes of recurrent
RNA over-expression. By examining several tumors on a whole genome-level
using Nimblegen 4.2M tiling arrayCGH analysis and also by quantitative
PCR, regional over-expression was confirmed as being a result of DNA
CNC.41 distinct over-expressed chromosomal regions were identified, most
frequently observed on chromosomes 1, 8, 11 and 17. Patients with breast
tumors containing any significantly over-expressed chromosome region had
significantly shorter disease-free survival times (Cox proportional
hazard model p = 110-6), and shared common clinical characteristics such
as high grade and HER2 enriched or basal-like molecular
phenotype.Over-expression of region 1p34 containing the YBX1 gene was
observed in twelve breast tumors (1.3% of all tumors, 8-9% of basal-like
breast tumours, and 70.6% of tumors with chromosome 1 regional
over-expression). Disease free survival (DFS) of these twelve patients
was significantly shorter than the DFS of all other patients (log rank
test p = 410-5). In six tumors in which this region was over-expressed at
the RNA level we found the YBX1 gene had estimated DNA copy number 6.YBX1
gene amplification is present across a wide variety of tumor types
collected and analysed by TCGA. Approximately 1.7% of tumours within TCGA
invasive breast cancer cohort contained this amplification, however the
tumor types with highest proportion of YBX1 amplification were ovarian
serous cystadenocarcinoma, bladder urothelial carcinoma, pancreatic
adenocarcinoma, and sarcoma, with 8.4%, 5%, 1.8% and 1.1% of samples in
each tumour group having YBX1 gene amplification respectively.We identify
conserved patterns of over-expression of the RNAs encoded by 41 specific
chromosomal regions in breast tumors. These include over-expressed
regions strongly associated with poor patient prognosis, and the
previously undescribed amplification and over-expression of the YBX1 gene
on chromosome 1.

