Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomic analysis of clear-cell ovarian cancer
identifies PRKCI as a therapeutic target


Clear-cell ovarian cancer (CCOC) is the third most common subtype of
ovarian cancer. CCOC is more resistant to standard chemotherapy and has a
poorer prognosis than serous and endometrioid histotypes. Through a
comprehensive genomic approach, genes that are responsible for the
aggressive behavior of CCOC were identified and their mechanism
explored.Genome-wide DNA copy number alterations were measured in 13 CCOC
cell lines using high-resolution oligonucleotide array comparative
genomic hybridization (Agilent 105k Human Genome CGH Microarray). Genomic
identification of significant targets in cancer (GISTIC) analysis
identified 16 amplicons containing 391 genes. Integrating whole genome
expression data from human CCOC tumor specimens and normal ovarian
surface epithelium specimen revealed 45 amplified genes showed mRNA
overexpression in CCOC tumor specimens. Among the 45 genes, protein
kinase C iota (PRKCI) was amplified in 9/13 CCOC cell lines and was
overexpressed (6.7 fold) in CCOC tumor specimens. Cell proliferation,
migration/invasion and tumorigenicity were suppressed by knockdown of
PRKCI in PRKCI-overexpressing cells (KOC-7c and OVISE) and were enhanced
by overexpression of PRKCI in cells with low endogenous levels of PRKCI
(ES2 and TOV21G). Targeted inhibition of PRKCI with sodium aurothiomalate
(ATM) suppressed cell growth, cell migration/invasion and tumorigenicity
in CCOC cells. Western blot analysis revealed that PRKCI oncogenic
function was mediated through MEK/ERK and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways.
Thus, PKRCI can be considered as a potential novel CCOC-specific target;
not only it inhibits malignant behavior of CCOC cells, but also induces
the two major molecular pathways regulating cisplatin resistance. The
results from the present study indicate that our comprehensive genomic
analysis of CCOC allows identification of therapeutic targets responsible
for the aggressive behavior specific of this ovarian cancer histotype and
thus improve its therapeutic outcome.

