Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Snai1 accelerates Kras driven lung tumorigenesis by overcoming
oncogene-induced senescence


Lung cancer is the deadliest cancer worldwide with the majority of cases
being non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The most common oncogenic
driver in NSCLC patients is mutant KRAS. Mutant KRAS driven proliferation
is abated by the failsafe mechanism of oncogene-induced senescence (OIS)
in primary cell lines. TWIST1, an inducer of epitheilal-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), can overcome OIS, rescuing proliferative capacity of
mutant KRAS in primary cells. SNAI1 is another classical EMT master
regulator critical in development and is aberrantly expressed in breast,
liver, colon, and lung cancers. SNAI1 expression correlates with tumor
recurrence and poor patient prognosis. However, there is no evidence for
the role of SNAI1 in autochthonous lung tumorigenesis in vivo. To study
SNAI1 in lung tumorigenesis, we developed a novel inducible SNAI1
transgenic mouse model. The Club Cell Secretory Protein (CCSP)-rtTA (C)
lung tissue specific driver founder line was crossed with a bidirectional
transgenic founder line, SNAI1-6SA-tetO7-luc (S), to generate CS mice. CS
mice were crossed with inducible oncogenic driver tetO7-KrasG12D (R) mice
to produce the triple transgenic, CRS. Inducible SNAI1 expression was
confirmed by multiple methods in this novel mouse model. Interestingly, a
Kaplan-Meier curve analysis showed that SNAI1 overexpression accelerated
KrasG12D-driven lung tumorigenesis compared to KrasG12D alone in vivo.
SNAI1 reduced median KrasG12D tumor latency from 31 to 15 weeks of
doxycycline (DOX) induction and SNAI1 driven CRS mice developed more
aggressive lung adenocarcinomas than the CR model. Upon DOX removal lung
tumor moribund mice demonstrated complete radiographic tumor regression,
demonstrating tumor maintenance in CRS mice is dependent on KrasG12D
and/or SNAI1. To begin to elucidate how SNAI1 may accelerate lung
tumorigenesis, inducible SNAI1 mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were
generated. These MEFs were used to assess if SNAI1 could suppress OIS and
promote HRASG12V driven proliferation. While uninduced MEFs senesced
within days of HRASG12V infection, DOX induced SNAI1 MEFs had a reduced
number of senescence associated Beta-gal positive cells. Furthermore,
cellular proliferation showed stagnancy in uninduced HRASG12V infected
MEFs, while induced SNAI1 MEFs maintained proliferative capacity. Studies
investigating SNAI1-directed epigenetic and transcriptional regulation of
metabolic gene targets implicated in circumventing OIS in this model are
underway. Overall, these studies demonstrate that SNAI1 may overcome OIS
in mutant RAS driven cells to facilitate cellular proliferation and
tumorigenesis.

