Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: V-set and immunoglobulin domain containing 1 (VSIG1) demonstrates
a tumor suppressive function in gastric cancer and non-small cell lung
cancer


V-set and immunoglobulin domain containing 1 (VSIG1) was recently
identified as a novel member of immunoglobulin-like cell-adhesion
molecules. In human, VSIG1 has 2 transcript variant forms (variant 1 and
variant 2). In normal tissues, VSIG1 was reported to be expressed
predominantly in stomach and testis. In cancerous tissues, the expression
of VSIG1 was shown to be restricted in a part of gastric, esophageal, and
ovarian cancers. However, the role of VSIG1 in cancer progression has not
been elucidated.VSIG1 protein expression in human normal tissues obtained
at autopsy was detected by western blot analysis. We also analyzed VSIG1
protein expression in 8 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines and
8 gastric cancer (GC) cell lines by western blot. Relative mRNA
expression was evaluated by quantitative real-time PCR in patients with
resected NSCLC (n = 69). Protein expression in NSCLC (n = 277) and GC (n
= 362) were analyzed using immunohistochemistry. The effects of VSIG1 in
proliferation, migration, and invasion were assessed in NSCLC and GC cell
lines by ectopic expression of a human full-length VSIG1 variant 2 cDNA
or application of specific VSIG1 siRNA.In normal tissues of 15 organs
(brain, heart, lung, esophagus, stomach, intestine, colon, rectum, liver,
spleen, pancreas, adrenal gland, kidney, testis, and ovary), VSIG1
protein expression was detected in only stomach and testis, and variant 2
mRNA expression level was significantly higher than variant 1 in both
stomach and testis (pV-set and immunoglobulin domain containing 1 (VSIG1)
was recently identified as a novel member of immunoglobulin-like
cell-adhesion molecules. In human, VSIG1 has 2 transcript variant forms
(variant 1 and variant 2). In normal tissues, VSIG1 was reported to be
expressed predominantly in stomach and testis. In cancerous tissues, the
expression of VSIG1 was shown to be restricted in a part of gastric,
esophageal, and ovarian cancers. However, the role of VSIG1 in cancer
progression has not been elucidated.VSIG1 protein expression in human
normal tissues obtained at autopsy was detected by western blot analysis.
We also analyzed VSIG1 protein expression in 8 non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cell lines and 8 gastric cancer (GC) cell lines by western blot.
Relative mRNA expression was evaluated by quantitative real-time PCR in
patients with resected NSCLC (n = 69). Protein expression in NSCLC (n =
277) and GC (n = 362) were analyzed using immunohistochemistry. The
effects of VSIG1 in proliferation, migration, and invasion were assessed
in NSCLC and GC cell lines by ectopic expression of a human full-length
VSIG1 variant 2 cDNA or application of specific VSIG1 siRNA.In normal
tissues of 15 organs (brain, heart, lung, esophagus, stomach, intestine,
colon, rectum, liver, spleen, pancreas, adrenal gland, kidney, testis,
and ovary), VSIG1 protein expression was detected in only stomach and
testis, and variant 2 mRNA expression level was significantly higher than
variant 1 in both stomach and testis (p<0.00001). VSIG1 mRNA was
overexpressed in 21 NSCLC patients (30.4% of patients), in whom variant 2
mRNA expression level was higher than variant 1 in 15 patients (71.4%).
VSIG1 protein expression was detected in 7.2% of NSCLC and 39.5% of GC.
In NSCLC, VSIG1 protein expression was restricted in adenocarcinoma
histology (p = 0.0002) and was negatively correlated with TTF-1 protein
expression (p = 0.002). In GC, patients with VSIG1 decreased expression
tumors had a worse overall rate of survival than those with expressing
tumors (p = 0.014, log-rank test). In NSCLC, however, VSIG1 protein
expression level did not have significant prognostic impact. In 16 NSCLC
and GC cell lines, VSIG1 protein expression was detected in only MKN45
cells. Overexpression of VSIG1 significantly reduced proliferation and
migration in H1299, MKN1, and MKN28 cells, and also inhibited invasion in
MKN1 and MKN28 cells. On the other hand, VSIG1 downregulation enhanced
proliferation in MKN45 cells.From these findings, we conclude that VSIG1
has a tumor suppressive function which contributes to a less
proliferative and invasive phenotype in cancer cells. We are exploring to
identify the binding partners of VSIG1 using LC-MS/MS analysis. The
results will be shown and discussed.

