Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic evaluation of immune checkpoint inhibitors


With the increasing success and subsequent interest in tumor immunology,
we recognized a growing need for well-characterized preclinical models.
While the literature contains many different experimental models, the
available data includes a variety of reagents and the side by side
comparative evaluation of therapeutics in multiple models is relatively
rare. Lechner et al., (J. Immunother. 36:477-489, 2013) addressed this
issue and reported on a comparative analysis of a set of six syngeneic
models. Our effort looked to expand this paradigm towards a comparative
evaluation of the responsiveness of a collection of syngeneic models to
antibody based checkpoint inhibitor therapeutics. Specifically, we
examined the response of the Colon26, MC38, B16F10, Lewis Lung,
Madison109, EMT-6, and 4T1 models to anti-CTLA-4, anti-PD-1 and
anti-PDL-1 monotherapies as well as capturing the response to combination
therapies of anti-CTLA-4 with anti-PD-1 or anti-PDL-1.. Our results
clearly show a differential response across this set of models both in
regard to CTLA-4 targeted therapy as well as PD-1/PDL-1 therapy. In an
attempt to expand the number of checkpoint inhibitor responsive models,
we are performing a second phase of work evaluating the impact of
immuno-modulatory radiation therapy upon these baseline responses.In
initiating these studies and evaluating the literature, it became clear
that there were multiple choices in regard to anti-CTLA-4 preclinical
reagents. We have also performed a series of studies evaluating the
efficacy of multiple anti-CTLA-4 clones as an extension of previously
published work which described the variable ability of anti-CTLA-4 clones
to deplete tumor Treg populations (Simpson et al. J. Exp. Med. 210(9)
1695-1710, 2013). Our anti-tumor data correlates well with these cell
based observations. This differential allows one to match efficacy with
model and expands the reagents available for evaluating combination
therapies.

