Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Visualizing the effect of BIBF1120 in lung cancer cells by
imaging-massspectrometry (MS)


Background: Angiogenesis plays an important role for tumor maintenance,
progression, and metastasis. BIBF1120 is a multiple tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, targeting VEGFR, FGFR and PDGFR, and is known as an
anti-angiogenic agent. The mechanism by which anti-angiogenic agents
suppress the growth of tumors is supposed to be induction of
under-nutrition. However, no study has demonstrated the regional
differences in the nutrition status of tumors treated by anti-angiogenic
agents. Imaging MS is a novel technology that quantitatively visualizes
the distribution of hundreds of metabolites in the selected area of
tissues.Aim: The aim of this study is to evaluate the efficacy of
BIBF1120 in lung cancer cells, and to examine whether BIBF1120 induces
under-nutrition status in association with suppressed angiogenesis in
xenograft models of lung cancer using Imaging MS.Method: We used lung
cancer cell lines driven by several types of histology, PC9, H1975,
H3122, A549, H69, and H520. The efficacy of BIBF1120 was evaluated by MTS
assay and mouse xenograft model. We treated the xenografted mice with
BIBF1120 or vehicle for 4 weeks and harvested xenograft tumors. Micro
vessel density and percentage of apoptosis cells in the tumors was
evaluated by immunohistochemistry using anti-Ki-67 antibody and
anti-cleaved caspase 3 antibody, respectively. The effect of BIBF1120 on
metabolic status in xenograft tumors was evaluated by imaging MS.Result:
BIBF1120 inhibited the growth of all of the xenograft tumors tested,
although it did not directly affect the proliferation rate of those cells
in vitro. BIBF1120-treated tumors exhibited significantly lower micro
vessel density compared to the vehicle-treated tumors (pBackground:
Angiogenesis plays an important role for tumor maintenance, progression,
and metastasis. BIBF1120 is a multiple tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
targeting VEGFR, FGFR and PDGFR, and is known as an anti-angiogenic
agent. The mechanism by which anti-angiogenic agents suppress the growth
of tumors is supposed to be induction of under-nutrition. However, no
study has demonstrated the regional differences in the nutrition status
of tumors treated by anti-angiogenic agents. Imaging MS is a novel
technology that quantitatively visualizes the distribution of hundreds of
metabolites in the selected area of tissues.Aim: The aim of this study is
to evaluate the efficacy of BIBF1120 in lung cancer cells, and to examine
whether BIBF1120 induces under-nutrition status in association with
suppressed angiogenesis in xenograft models of lung cancer using Imaging
MS.Method: We used lung cancer cell lines driven by several types of
histology, PC9, H1975, H3122, A549, H69, and H520. The efficacy of
BIBF1120 was evaluated by MTS assay and mouse xenograft model. We treated
the xenografted mice with BIBF1120 or vehicle for 4 weeks and harvested
xenograft tumors. Micro vessel density and percentage of apoptosis cells
in the tumors was evaluated by immunohistochemistry using anti-Ki-67
antibody and anti-cleaved caspase 3 antibody, respectively. The effect of
BIBF1120 on metabolic status in xenograft tumors was evaluated by imaging
MS.Result: BIBF1120 inhibited the growth of all of the xenograft tumors
tested, although it did not directly affect the proliferation rate of
those cells in vitro. BIBF1120-treated tumors exhibited significantly
lower micro vessel density compared to the vehicle-treated tumors
(p<0.05), but BIBF1120 didn't increased the percentage of apoptosis
cells. Imaging MS revealed that BIBF1120 treatment reduced 2-3 DPG (a
maker of blood flow), glucose intake, and amount of ATP, whereas
activated glycolysis via anaerobic metabolic pathway rather than
oxidative phosphorylation in peripheral area of tumors.Conclusion: To our
knowledge, this is the first report to demonstrate the effect of BIBF1120
on the nutrition status of tumor cells in a site-specific manner.

