Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interplay among E3 ubiquitin ligases regulate timely degradation
of the circadian factor Period 2


Circadian rhythms are mechanisms that measure time on a scale of about 24
h and that adjusts our body to external environmental signals. Core
circadian clock genes are defined as genes whose protein products are
necessary components for the generation and regulation of circadian
rhythms.Oscillatory rhythms are generated as result of the activation of
positive and negative transcriptional feedback loops in which
post-translational modifications, shuttling, and degradation are common
themes. In mammals, the positive feedback loop involves regulation of
bmal1 transcription. BMAL1/CLOCK selectively binds to E-box enhancers and
drives the expression of per, cry and rev-erb genes. REV-ERBa protein
then represses bmal1 transcription through Rev-Erba/ROR response elements
in its promoter. Then, the level of bmal1 RNA falls, as per and cry RNA
levels peak. Period proteins (i.e., PER1, 2, and 3) accumulate in the
cytoplasm, becomes phosphorylated by CK1e/d, ubiquitylated and degraded.
Later in the day, cryptochrome accumulates (i.e., CRY2), associates with
PER2/CK1e/d and this complex translocates to the nucleus where CRY
disrupts the CLOCK/BMAL1-associated transcriptional complex, resulting in
the inhibition of cry, per and rev-erba and de-repression of bmal1
transcription.In addition to the transcriptional loops, ubiquitin E3
ligases-mediated protein degradation is critical to sustain physiological
rhythms. The F-box proteins b-TrCP1/2 target PER1 and PER2 for
degradation via ubiquitination. Whereas knocking down -trcp results in
PER stabilization and period lengthening in synchronized culture cells;
knock-out b-trcp1 mice do not display an abnormal circadian rhythmicity.
Our findings indicate that PER2 ubiquitination engages two different
types of E3 ligases, a process that directly influences the timely
control of PER2 accumulation in the nucleus. Our data show that the mouse
double-minute 2 homolog (Mdm2) RING finger E3 ligase binds to PER2 in
multiple regions including an overlapping site with b-TrCP. We determined
that PER2 is a specific substrate for Mdm2 and that PER2's
polyubiquitination occurs both in vitro and in cells. Accordingly,
overexpression Mdm2 results in the decrease of PER2 half-life, whereas,
down-regulation of Mdm2 by siRNA increases PER2 stability. Furthermore,
we found Mdm2-dependent post-translational modification of PER2 directly
influences the amplitude of the circadian oscillatory response in
synchronized cells and that both, b-TrCP and Mdm2 target PER2 at
different circadian times. Overall, our findings support a model in
which, the rate of nuclear degradation of PER2 leads to slow accumulation
of the protein in the nucleus and, later in the day, to a temporal switch
in which b-TrCP takes control over PER2 degradation. Thus, the
interplaying between these two E3 ligases is indispensible for sustaining
robust circadian oscillation.

