Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triapine-mediated ABCB1 induction via PKC induces widespread
therapy unresponsiveness but is not underlying acquired triapine
resistance


Due to their enhanced proliferation rate, tumor cells are highly
susceptible for ribonucleotide pool disruption. Therefore, several
thiosembicarbazone-based ribonucleotide reductase inhibitors have been
developed, out of which Triapine is the most promising candidate.
Triapine is currently tested in clinical phase I and II studies and shows
promising effects in haematological diseases. Unfortunately, triapine is
rather ineffective in solid cancer types. However, the mechanism
underlying this failure is yet not fully understood. One possible theory
could be development of rapid acquired resistance against the
chemotherapeutic drug. To investigate this issue we generated a
triapine-resistant cell line (SW480/tria) by stepwise selection of human
colon carcinoma SW480 cells. SW480/tria cells displayed a broad
cross-resistance especially against several well-known ABCB1 substrates
(e.g. vincristine). In accordance, strong ABCB1 expression was detected
in SW480 Tria cells. The induction of ABCB1 was not based on gene
amplification but on hypomethylation of the ABCB1 promoter. As a next
step, rhodamine-123 and ATPase assays were performed to investigate if
triapine does interact with the ABCB1 transport function. However, no
ABCB1 inhibitory potential of triapine could be found. Further on,
combined treatment in SW480/tria cells with triapine and the known ABCB1
inhibitors cyclosporine A (CSA) and verapamil did not restore triapine
sensitivity. In addition, the intracellular triapine levels were
comparable between parental and triapine-selected SW480 cell lines.
Moreover, increased ABCB1 expression was found to be a consequence of
triapine stress-induced PKC activation. This suggests that the strong
ABCB1 expression of SW480/tria cells might rather be a consequence of
triapine-induced cell stress than a major driver for specific triapine
resistance.Taken together our data reveal that, although triapine is only
a weak substrate for ABCB1, strong ABCB1 expression is induced by short-
and long-term triapine exposure resulting in distinct cross resistance
against other anticancer drugs. This definitely has to be considered in
the selection of combination schemes and in second line therapy following
triapine failure.

