Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tyrosine phosphatase PRL3 as a novel drug target in T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia


The clinical challenges associated with T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL) are two-fold: 1) the recently improved cure rate for
primary T-ALL is largely attributed to highly toxic chemotherapy regimens
that have both short- and long-term adverse effects in patients, and 2)
chemotherapy is often ineffective against relapsed T-ALL, which has a
dismal 5-year survival rate of The clinical challenges associated with
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) are two-fold: 1) the recently
improved cure rate for primary T-ALL is largely attributed to highly
toxic chemotherapy regimens that have both short- and long-term adverse
effects in patients, and 2) chemotherapy is often ineffective against
relapsed T-ALL, which has a dismal 5-year survival rate of <30% in
children and The clinical challenges associated with T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) are two-fold: 1) the recently improved
cure rate for primary T-ALL is largely attributed to highly toxic
chemotherapy regimens that have both short- and long-term adverse effects
in patients, and 2) chemotherapy is often ineffective against relapsed
T-ALL, which has a dismal 5-year survival rate of <30% in children and
<10% in adults. The development of new and better chemotherapies requires
a detailed understanding of the genes and pathways that drive T-ALL
malignancy. We have completed an unbiased cell transplantation screen
using a zebrafish model of T-ALL and in excess of 6,000 adult recipient
animals to identify molecular targets that promote T-ALL progression and
relapse. Single leukemic cells were grown in syngeneic recipient fish and
animals were assessed for differences in growth, leukemia propagating
cell frequency, and therapy resistance. Serial transplantation
experiments then followed evolution within 48 single-cell clones,
identifying 6 clones that evolved increased LPC frequency and/or elevated
growth potential. Comparative genomic hybridization arrays were used to
identify recurrent amplifications associated with clonal evolution, and
identified Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase 4A3 (PRL3) as being genomically
amplified in 30% of clones with elevated LPC frequency and growth.
Real-time quantitative PCR showed that 90% of clones with high LPC
frequency and growth expressed high levels of PRL3, suggesting additional
genetic pathways likely activate PRL3. PRL-3 was also genomically
amplified in a subset of human T-ALL and highly expressed in 58% of
primary T-ALL patient samples, suggesting that this phosphatase is an
important and previously undefined driver of human T-ALL. PRL3 has not
been previously associated with leukemia progression or survival,
although it is expressed in Multiple Myeloma and Acute Myelogenous
Leukemia. PRL3 knock-down in human T-ALL significantly reduced the
viability of cell lines in vitro and in xenograft models (pThe clinical
challenges associated with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL)
are two-fold: 1) the recently improved cure rate for primary T-ALL is
largely attributed to highly toxic chemotherapy regimens that have both
short- and long-term adverse effects in patients, and 2) chemotherapy is
often ineffective against relapsed T-ALL, which has a dismal 5-year
survival rate of <30% in children and <10% in adults. The development of
new and better chemotherapies requires a detailed understanding of the
genes and pathways that drive T-ALL malignancy. We have completed an
unbiased cell transplantation screen using a zebrafish model of T-ALL and
in excess of 6,000 adult recipient animals to identify molecular targets
that promote T-ALL progression and relapse. Single leukemic cells were
grown in syngeneic recipient fish and animals were assessed for
differences in growth, leukemia propagating cell frequency, and therapy
resistance. Serial transplantation experiments then followed evolution
within 48 single-cell clones, identifying 6 clones that evolved increased
LPC frequency and/or elevated growth potential. Comparative genomic
hybridization arrays were used to identify recurrent amplifications
associated with clonal evolution, and identified Protein Tyrosine
Phosphatase 4A3 (PRL3) as being genomically amplified in 30% of clones
with elevated LPC frequency and growth. Real-time quantitative PCR showed
that 90% of clones with high LPC frequency and growth expressed high
levels of PRL3, suggesting additional genetic pathways likely activate
PRL3. PRL-3 was also genomically amplified in a subset of human T-ALL and
highly expressed in 58% of primary T-ALL patient samples, suggesting that
this phosphatase is an important and previously undefined driver of human
T-ALL. PRL3 has not been previously associated with leukemia progression
or survival, although it is expressed in Multiple Myeloma and Acute
Myelogenous Leukemia. PRL3 knock-down in human T-ALL significantly
reduced the viability of cell lines in vitro and in xenograft models
(p<0.0001). Additionally, a specific PRL3 inhibitor strongly induced
apoptosis of PRL3-expressing T-ALL cells in a dose-dependent manner. PRL3
inhibition also killed T-ALL cell lines that were resistant to
dexamethasone, the standard chemotherapy for T-ALL, suggesting that
therapies that inactivate PRL3 will be useful for the treatment of
refractory and relapse disease. We have also identified several
FDA-approved, general phosphatase inhibitors that have potent anti-PRL3
activity and are capable of killing T-ALL cells in vitro. Current work is
focused on moving these inhibitors into pre-clinical testing using
patient-derived xenografts. Phospho-profiling approaches are also being
used to identify the substrates of PRL3 tyrosine phosphatase activity
that are critical to T-ALL survival and may represent new, tractable drug
targets for the treatment of T-ALL and other types of leukemias.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

