Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-analytical conditions strongly influence molecular pattern in
clinical biospecimen


Research in personalized medicine in oncology and its implementation in
the clinical situation is strongly affected by the quality of collected
biospecimen, which strongly depends on the pre-analytical conditions in
which they were acquired. Therefore, warm and cold ischemia times that
tissues are exposed to during collection are of critical importance.
Insufficient quality of such tissues may lead to spurious results and
data misinterpretation resulting in biased stratification of patients.
The present study was conducted to gain a better understanding of the
effects of warm and cold ischemia on the molecular composition of tissue
specimens and especially on critical clinical biomarkers whose expression
and activity level inform targeted therapy evaluation in cancer.Normal
and cancer tissue from patients undergoing CRC (n = 50) surgery were
analyzed comparing samples taken by endoscopy with postsurgical samples
fixed within 10, 20 and 45 minutes postsurgery. In addition, we collected
normal liver tissue (n = 43) before and after 10 minutes of ischemia and
compared those samples with normal and metastatic cancer tissue fixed at
the same timepoints. Tissue samples were analyzed using a whole genome
gene expression array as well as different technologies for protein
expression and protein phosphorylation with an emphasis on the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR)-pathway.This study showed that surgery,
vascular clamping and subsequent processing had a significant impact on
the expression of genes and the phosphorylation status of proteins. The
gene expression profiling showed a high variability between patients.
Significant changes of expression in individual patients occurred in up
to 690 genes in normal tissue and in up to 4,116 genes in primary cancer
tissue comparing presurgery and ischemia time points postsurgery.
Clinically highly relevant was the finding that the phosphorylation of
EGFR-pathway proteins is affected by surgery and postsurgical tissue
processing. For example, the expression level of EGFR changed more then
2-fold in cancer tissue of 30% of the patients. Furthermore, signaling
protein phosphorylation in the corresponding downstream pathways was also
affected. These observed changes were validated using the NanoPro1000
technology, in order to gain information on the level of distinct isoform
phosphorylation.An understanding of tissue data variability in relation
to processing techniques during and postsurgery is mandatory when testing
surgical specimens in the context of clinical diagnostics, drug
development, or identification of predictive biomarkers. To obtain
reliable expression data, tissue processing for research and diagnostic
purposes needs to be highly standardized. Alterations in molecular
patterns due to ischemia, identified in this study have to be analyzed
with caution in research and development programs.

