Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An effective detection method for the EGFR single mutation T790M
using BNA-NC clamping real-time PCR


Mutations on epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) cause a variety of
cancers including breast and lung cancers. The single mutation T790M on
tyrosine kinase domain of EGFR signifies the response to the popular
cancer drug gefitinib, which leads to the development of resistance to
gefitinib. Detecting the mutation thus guide effective therapeutical
options for patients who are in need of cancer drug treatments. We sought
to develop a rapid, reliable detection method for the T790M mutation
using bridged nucleic acids (BNA), which has been known to enhance the
hybridization affinity of oligonucleotides that contain BNA bases.
Oligonucleotides containing BNA bases designed to block PCR reaction
against wild-type genes, called BNA-clamp, were used to discriminate the
presence of mutant genes mixed with a large number of wild-type genes.
Real-time PCR in conjugation with BNA-clamping allows us to view the
different levels of PCR amplifications in the degree of mixture of
wild-type and mutant genes. In an effort to explore this possibility,
13mer long clamps were prepared with various numbers of BNA bases. The
clamps containing 9 BNA bases appear to be most effective in blocking the
PCR reactions at an optimized concentration to distinguish the mutant
from the wild-type genes. In addition to PCR results, the difference in
the Tm values for the 7 BNA bases in the 13mer was the largest among
differently designed clamps, which is consistent with the results
obtained by real-time PCR. We also examined the degree of sensitivity
using the clamp containing 9 BNA bases, revealing that the clamp has the
ability to determine the level of mutation as low as 1% mixture of the
mutant and wild-type gene. The effectiveness of blocking the PCR reaction
with only 13mers containing BNA bases allowed us to detect a single
mutation, and thus, this BNA-clamping real time PCR technology may offer
a promising, new avenue to detect clinically important mutations in the
future.

