Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trifluridine induces p53-dependent sustained G2 phase arrest with
its massive misincorporation into DNA and few DNA strand breaks


Background: TAS-102 is a combination of an antineoplastic thymidine-based
nucleoside analogue, trifluridine (FTD), and a thymidine phosphorylase
inhibitor, tipiracil (TPI), at a molar ratio of 1:0.5. FTD is the active
antitumor component of TAS-102, and its triphosphate form is incorporated
into the DNA in tumor cells. TPI, a potent inhibitor of the FTD-degrading
enzyme thymidine phosphorylase, maintains adequate plasma concentrations
of orally administered FTD, thereby potentiating its antitumor activity.
In an international multicenter randomized double blind Phase III study
(RECOURSE), TAS-102 administration resulted in a significant improvement
in overall survival and progression-free survival and a favorable safety
profile compared to placebo treatment in patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer refractory to standard chemotherapies. In this study,
we investigated the mechanism of FTD-induced cytotoxicity in colorectal
cancer and other cell lines.Method: The colorectal cancer cell lines RKO
and HCT-116, the subline HCT-116 p53/, and the lung adenocarcinoma cell
line A549 were used. Cells were treated with FTD or FdUrd using the IC50
values for 12 to 72 h. Molecules involved in DNA damage and the cell
cycle were evaluated by western blot and RT-PCR. Cell cycle analysis and
DNA strand-breaks were evaluated by flow cytometry and alkaline- and
neutral-comet assays.Results: FTD and FdUrd activated similar DNA damage
response pathways via transient phosphorylation of Chk1 at Ser345,
followed by accumulation of p53 and p21 in HCT-116 cells. A similar
biochemical response was observed using the IC50 concentration of FdUrd
or FTD in RKO and A549 cells. FTD repressed G2 to M phase progression and
the cells accumulated in G2 phase 72 h after treatment, with a 35% and
29% decrease in the CDK1 and CCNB1 mRNA levels compared to the control.
The G2 phase arrest by FTD was commonly induced in each p53 proficient
cell lines (HCT-116, RKO, and A549). In contrast, FTD-induced G2 phase
arrest was not observed when p53 expression was suppressed. Furthermore,
the p53-dependent G2 phase arrest by FTD was associated with the
downregulation of Cyclin B1, both through its transcriptional repression
and proteasomal degradation. Although FdUrd induced numerous single- and
double-strand DNA breaks, FTD did not induce detectable DNA strand
breaks. FTD was massively incorporated into DNA (41.4 pmol/g DNA),
whereas less FdUrd was incorporated (0.6 pmol/g DNA) 72 h after
treatment.Conclusion: Our analyses revealed that FTD induced sustained G2
phase arrest and few DNA strand breaks, in spite of massive incorporation
into DNA. These results suggest that the mechanism of FTD action is
unique at the cellular level, resulting in the clinical efficacy of
TAS-102.

