Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel targets and monoclonal antibodies for antibody-drug
conjugate therapy


The study focuses on two novel potential therapeutic targets identified
by an immune-histochemistry (IHC) screening with a large collection of
polyclonal antibodies (approximately 1600) raised against marginally
characterized human proteins. Here we describe the molecular
characterization of two surface-exposed proteins (EXN91 and EXN36)
associated to different cancer types. EXN91 is an adhesion molecule and
it acts as a signaling receptor, cell communication and motility.
Prevalence studies showed that the protein is mainly detected in colon
cancer (CRC)with high frequency (approximately 90%), both in early and
advanced colon cancer stages, with a statistical association for early
cancer stages. Moreover, the protein is clearly surface exposed in liver
metastasis from colon. Experiments are ongoing to assess whether EXN91 is
also expressed in precancerous conditions of colon and rectum that have
the potential to develop into cancer.Interestingly, EXN91 is
over-expressed in KRAS and BRAF mutant CRC with high frequency. Moreover,
an expanded IHC analysis revealed that it is also over-expressed and
surface exposed in a number of other cancers, including HCC, RCC, bladder
and endometrium cancer. Preliminary data showed that EXN91 behaves as an
auto-antigen being able to induce specific autoantibodies in CRC
patients.EXN36 is mainly over-expressed in ovary and breast cancers
(frequency of approximately 30-40%), including triple negative breast
cancer. EXN36 prevalence studies in different cancer entities are
ongoing. Moreover, EXN36 is involved in cell proliferation, migration and
invasiveness.Murine monoclonal antibodies (mAb) able to recognize EXN91
and EXN36 on the surface of cancer cells show potential for specific
therapeutic indications. In particular, a murine mAb recognizes EXN91 on
the surface of colon cancer cells, including KRAS and BRAF mutant CRC.
This antibody inhibits growth of colon cancer in xenograft mouse models.
Concerning anti-EXN36 antibodies, they are able to bind the surface of
different breast and ovary cancer cells.EXN36 and EXN91 mAbs show a high
number of binding sites on the cell surface. The mAb specificity has been
confirmed in different immunoassays by gene silencing and peptide
competition assays. Moreover, they show limited IHC reactivity in normal
tissues.The anti-EXN36 and antiEXN91 antibodies are efficiently
internalized by cancer cells, suggesting that they can be exploited for
the development of Antibody-Drug-Conjugate (ADC). Initial results from in
vitro studies show that these antibodies, when tested in drug screening
assays with Protein G conjugated to commercially available drugs show
significant anti-tumor activity with a specific conjugation
chemistry.Overall, the results indicate that EXN36, EXN91 and their mAbs
could be developed for the targeted therapy of different cancer
indications at high medical need.

