Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple drug resistance-associated protein 4 (MRP4) may
contribute to breast cancer metastasis by exporting the COX-2 product PGE2


Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and its enzymatic product, prostaglandin E2
(PGE2), are elevated in breast cancer and are associated with a poor
prognosis and increased metastatic potential. PGE2 initiates various
signaling pathways upon binding to each of four cognate EP receptors. We
have previously shown that PGE2 signaling through the EP4 receptor
increases metastatic potential and supports the survival of breast cancer
stem-like cells. Multiple drug resistance-associated protein 4 (MRP4) is
responsible for the active export of PGE2 from cells, while the
prostaglandin transporter (PGT) imports PGE2 for 15-hydroxyprostaglandin
dehydrogenase (15-PGDH)-mediated degradation. The role of neither MRP4
nor PGT has been investigated in breast cancer progression. The purpose
of this study is to elucidate the role of MRP4 in PGE2 signaling in
breast cancer progression. We hypothesize that elevated expression of
MRP4 would cause increased PGE2 export and receptor-mediated signaling
and, therefore, enhance metastatic potential, tumor progression, and
support breast cancer stem-like cells. We examined MRP4 gene expression
data from multiple breast cancer datasets using Oncomine. We found higher
expression of ABCC4 in breast cancer versus normal breast. MRP4 was
elevated in invasive (IDC) versus localized (DCIS) lesions and elevated
in the majority of basal-type breast cancer. To investigate the role of
MRP4 further, we examined MRP4 mRNA and protein expression in cell lines
representing several molecular subtypes and metastatic capacities. Normal
mammary epithelium (MCF10A), luminal (MCF7, T47D), basal (MDA-MB-231,
MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-436, BT549), and Her2-enriched (SKBR3) cell lines were
evaluated. As in the primary sample data, MRP4 mRNA and protein
expression are elevated in basal and Her2 enriched cell lines (231, 436,
BT549, SKBR3) while expression of PGT mRNA and protein is decreased in
these cells when compared to cells with lower metastatic potential. This
inverse relationship between MRP4 and PGT should lead to higher
concentrations of extracellular PGE2 in the tumor microenvironment. We
evaluated MRP4 activity by measuring PGE2 export from cells via enzyme
immunoassay or resistance to the cytotoxic compound 6-mercaptopurine
(6-MP), two substrates of MRP4. Pharmacologic inhibition of MRP4 with
MK571 (MRP antagonist) results in decreased efflux of PGE2 and increased
sensitivity to 6-MP as expected. Likewise, genetic suppression by RNAi
results in lower levels of PGE2 exported from cells and increased
sensitivity to 6-MP, confirming altered MRP4 activity. Conversely,
ectopic MRP4 overexpression increases PGE2 export. These data support the
hypothesis that MRP4 is a critical member of the PGE2 signaling pathway
that leads to high extracellular PGE2 and increased PGE2 signaling,
implicating MRP4 as a possible therapeutic target in this oncogenic
pathway.

