Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential DNA methylation in peripheral blood DNA as a
biomarker of hepatocellular carcinoma risk


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), one of the most prevalent types of
primary liver cancer, is the sixth most common cancer worldwide and the
third leading cause of cancer death with rising mortality and morbidity
rates. As late onset of HCC accounts for late diagnosis and poor
prognosis and early detection increases cure rate from 5% to 80%,
identifying reliable and quantifiable biomarkers of risk prediction is of
high interest. Aberrations in the DNA methylation patterns, an important
early event in carcinogenesis, have been shown to differentiate HCC
tumors from normal tissues. However, these changes as predictive markers
would have a high application in clinics only if detectable by minimally
invasive tests like blood test.In the present study, we performed a
comprehensive evaluation of DNA methylation profiles in blood DNA
collected before diagnosis with HCC. Aberrant methylation was
investigated in DNA isolated from blood of 21 HCC patients (cases) who
provided samples between 1-4 years prior to diagnosis and 21 controls
enrolled by the Indiana Biobank of Indiana CTSI. Cases were matched with
controls for gender, age, ethnicity, hepatitis C infection, and diabetes.
We used Infinium Human Methylation 450K BeadChip array for genome-wide
DNA methylation analysis and pyrosequencing for validation of DNA
methylation differences.We found 966 probes differentially methylated
between cases and controls with p0.5. Among these significant changes,
732 CpG sites are hypomethylated in HCC cases compared to matched
controls and include 130 CpGs corresponding to 75 genes with delta beta
value (differential methylation) 0.1. Forty six CpG sites out of 234
significantly hypermethylated probes show delta beta value 0.1 and
correspond to 46 genes. Functional analyses using GO, KEGG and DAVID
knowledgebase indicates that hypomethylated genes are associated with Wnt
signaling, cell adhesion, blood coagulation, and regulation of
transcription, whereas hypermethylated genes are enriched with
cytoskeleton organization and small GTPase mediated signal transduction.
One of the genes hypomethylated in blood DNA of HCC cases prior to
diagnosis is TET1 that was found to be 8-fold overexpressed in HCC tumors
in our previous studies and implicated in gene-specific hypomethylation.
Interestingly, 75% of differentially methylated sites in blood DNA of HCC
cases are hypomethylated prior to diagnosis. Validation by pyrosequencing
of four hypomethylated probes including CpGs in the CpG island shore of
BRUNOL5 that was linked to fatty liver disease in earlier reports and
found demethylated and overexpressed in HCC tumors, suggests their
predictive potential.Our results establish the possible predictive value
of aberrant methylation, in particular DNA hypomethylation, in blood DNA
for risk of HCC. This study was supported by Showalter Trust and Purdue
Center for Cancer Research Awards granted to BS.

