Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anti-tumor effect of antimalarial chloroquine on endometrial
cancer cells is dependent on autophagy inhibition


Introduction: Autophagy, which literally means self-eating, is a major
lysosomal degradation system of cytoplasmic materials. Autophagy plays
roles in promoting tumor growth by fueling energy and inducing resistance
to chemotherapy and/or irradiation in various types of human cancer.
However, the roles of autophagy have not been well investigated in
endometrial cancer. Chloroquine (CQ) was originally developed as an
anti-malarial agent, discovered in 1934. It has also been known as an
autophagy inhibitor. In this study, we investigated the anti-tumor effect
and inhibition of autophagy by CQ in endometrial cancer cells.Methods:
Cell proliferation and cell cycle in response to CQ were assessed in
Ishikawa, AN3CA and KLE endometrial cancer cell lines by MTT assay and
flow cytometry, respectively. The autophagic activity and autophagosome
formation were monitored by LC3 expression in Western blotting and
immunofluorescence. The effect of knockdown of either ATG5 or ATG7, both
of which are indispensable for induction of autophagy, was also assessed
by MTT assay. The sensitivity to CQ was compared between parental and
cisplatin-resistant (CP-r) Ishikawa cells.Results: CQ attenuated
proliferation of all the three endometrial cancer cell lines in a dose
dependent manner. The IC50 values were from 1.5 to 12 uM, which were
estimated to be lower than clinical dose of 250 mg daily. CQ induced
apoptosis in these cells. Inhibition of autophagy by knocking down either
ATG5 or ATG7 decreased the sensitivity to CQ in Ishikawa cells,
suggesting that the anti-tumor effect of CQ is dependent on inhibition of
autophagy. Exposure to cisplatin increased the level of basal autophagy,
and the sensitivity to cisplatin was improved by knocking down ATG5 or
ATG7. In addition, CP-r Ishikawa cells acquired higher level of
autophagic activity, and the CP-r cells retained the sensitivity to
cisplatin by autophagy inhibition by CQ.Conclusions: Our data suggest
that autophagy is involved in endometrial tumor growth, and that CQ might
be a promising therapeutic agent as an autophagy inhibitor in endometrial
cancer. In addition, CQ might retain the sensitivity to cisplatin in
cisplatin-resistant endometrial cells, through the suppression of the
increased level of autophagy.

