Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential reactivation of fetal/neonatal genes in mouse liver
tumors induced in cirrhotic and non-cirrhotic conditions


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is usually associated with chronic liver
injury, typically cirrhosis, although it could be developed in apparenty
intact livers. To explore the tumorigenetic mechanisms underlying these
different conditions, we compared mRNA expression profiles in mouse liver
tumors induced by repeated injections of CCl4 (cirrhotic protocol) and a
single diethylnitrosamine (DEN) injection at 2-week-old (non-cirrhotic
protocol) using a cDNA microarray. In the CCl4 model, numerous small
tumors appeared in cirrhotic liver parenchyma, while in the DEN model,
multiple large tumors developed in a non-cirrhotic background. We
identified tumor-specific genes that were differentially expressed in
either CCl4 or DEN model, as well as expressed in both models. The levels
and patterns of mRNA expression of these genes were verified by RT-qPCR
analyses. The mRNA expression of Igf2, H19, Krt20, and Cbr3 were
predominantly increased in CCl4 tumors; that of Gpc3, Tff3, Akr1c18, Afp,
and Abcd2 were predominantly increased in DEN tumors; that of Ly6d, Cpe,
Slpi, and Scd2 was increased at similar levels in CCl4 and DEN tumors.
The mRNA expresion of Igf2bp3, which is known to be functionally
correlated with Igf2, was also increased only in CCl4 tumors. A positive
correlation was found between the expression of Igf2 mRNA and H19 mRNA.
The mRNA expresion of these liver tumor-specific genes was not
significantly correlated with the proliferative activity of tumor cells,
as estimated by Ki-67 immunohistochemistry, either in CCl4 or DEN tumors.
Interestingly, all of these genes, with only exception being Cbr3, were
highly expressed in the mouse livers during the fetal/neonatal periods.
We also examined mRNA expression of these genes in liver tumors induced
by chronic thioacetamide (TAA) treatment, another cirrhotic liver tumor
protocol, and found that TAA-induced tumors shared a similar pattern of
expression profile as that of CCl4 tumors. We further investigated mRNA
expression of the genes in mouse liver tumors induced by the Sleeping
Beauty transposon-mediated somatic integration of active Akt (myrAkt) and
mutant Hras (HrasV12) genes. Hydrodynamic tail vein injection of the
oncogenes rapidly induced multiple liver tumors within 2 months without
developing chronic liver injury or cirrhosis. These tumors overexpressed
most of the above genes, except for Igf2, Igfbp3, H19, and Tff3. Our
results show that mouse liver tumors reactivate numerous fetal/neonatal
genes, some of which are specific to the cirrhotic (e.g., Igf2) and
non-cirrhotic (e.g., Gpc3, Tff3, Akr1c18) modes of pathogenesis.
Furthermore, the IGF2 axis, H19, and Tff3 might be specifically involved
in the processes during the development of liver tumors, not simply
reflecting neoplastic transformation of hepatocytes.

