Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional implications of intragenic DNA methylation in the
estrogen receptor alpha gene in breast cancer cells and tissues


Introduction: DNA methylation variability regions (MVRs) across the
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene have been identified in peripheral
blood cells from breast cancer patients and healthy individuals. In
contrast to promoter methylation, gene body methylation may be important
in maintaining active transcription. This study aimed to assess MVRs in
ESR1 in breast cancer cell lines, tumor biopsies and exfoliated
epithelial cells from expressed breast milk (EBM) to determine their
significance for ESR1 transcription.Methods: DNA methylation levels in
eight MVRs across ESR1 were assessed in pyrosequencing
bisulphite-converted DNA from three oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive and
three ER-negative breast cancer cell lines. DNA methylation and
expression were assessed following treatment with the demethylating
agent, decitabine (DAC, 1 M), or DMSO (controls). ESR1 methylation levels
were also assayed in DNA from 155 invasive ductal carcinoma biopsies
provided by the Breast Cancer Campaign Tissue Bank, and validated with
DNA methylation profiles from the TCGA breast tumors (n = 356 ER-pos, n =
109 ER-neg). DNA methylation was profiled in exfoliated breast epithelial
cells from EBM using the Illumina 450K (n = 36) and pyrosequencing in a
further 53 donor samples. ESR1 mRNA levels were measured by
qRT-PCR.Results: We show that ER-positive cell lines had unmethylated
ESR1 promoter regions and highly methylated intragenic regions (median,
80.45%) while ER-negative cells had methylated promoters and lower
intragenic methylation levels (median, 38.62%). DAC treatment increased
ESR1 expression in ER-negative cells, but significantly reduced
methylation and expression of ESR1 in ER-positive cells. The ESR1
promoter was unmethylated in breast tumor biopsies with high levels of
intragenic methylation, independent of ER status. However, ESR1
methylation in the strongly ER-positive EBM DNA samples were very similar
to ER-positive tumor cell lines.Conclusion: Intragenic methylation levels
correlated with ESR1 expression in vitro, but with markedly different
methylation patterns between homogenous cell populations and
heterogeneous tumour biopsies. DAC treatment inhibited ESR1 transcription
in cells with an unmethylated ESR1 promoter along with reduced levels of
intragenic DNA methylation. These findings emphasize the need for care
when choosing tissue types for epigenetic research and interpreting
results from heterogenous tissue.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

