Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination strategies to target super enhancer transcriptional
activity by CDK9 and BRD4 inhibition in acute myeloid leukemia


The super enhancer complex (SEC) is a group of transcription regulatory
proteins that coordinate the expression of genetic programs which
determine cell identity and drive disease states, such as cancer. In
acute myeloid leukemia (AML), SECs have been shown to turn on
transcriptional programs that drive tumorigenesis and disease
progression. The SEC is replete with potential therapeutic targets that
have been the focus of many drug development efforts; including
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK), bromodomain proteins (BRD), histone
deacetylases (HDAC), and histone methyltransferases (HMT). SEC-regulated
transcription begins as CDK9/cyclin T1 is recruited from an inhibitory
complex by BRD4 and brought to the transcriptional start site of genes.
CDK9 phosphorylates RNA polymerase II, releasing it from the SEC and
leading to transcriptional elongation and gene expression. Considering
the close association of CDK9 and BRD4, we hypothesized that the
combination of CDK9 and BRD4 inhibitors would have synergistic effects,
particularly in AML, a disease largely driven by SEC function. Alvocidib
is a potent CDK9 inhibitor with validated clinical activity in AML from
multiple Phase II studies in over 400 patients. Additionally, BRD4
inhibitors have demonstrated early promise in clinical studies with a
focus on AML. We found that CDK9 inhibitors combined with bromodomain
inhibitors produced a synergistic effect by inhibiting the SEC more
effectively than either of these compounds alone. For example, cell
viability studies with various combinations resulted in an increase in
potency. This was observed with alvocidib combined with JQ-1 (BRD4
inhibitor) in MV4-11 AML cells. Furthermore, the combination of alvocidib
with JQ-1 completely abrogated SEC function, as measured by c-myc
expression through RT-qPCR. Similar results were achieved with other
combinations of CDK9 and BRD4 inhibitors. The alvocidib and JQ-1
combination was also evaluated in an MV4-11 mouse xenograft model. As
single agents, alvocidib (2.5 mg/kg) exhibited a 44% tumor growth
inhibition and JQ-1 (25 mg/kg) a 1% growth inhibition. When these two
doses were combined there was 100% tumor growth inhibition. These data,
primarily focused on alvocidib and JQ-1, suggest a strong rational for
combining CDK9 and BRD4 inhibitors as a treatment strategy for AML.
Furthermore, these findings could be more broadly applied to additional
therapeutic targets in the SEC, such as DOT1L and HDACs. These strategies
yield synergistic effects at inhibiting SEC function and are highly
active in tumor growth studies of AML in vivo. Clinical studies utilizing
these combination strategies are the next steps to further explore this
approach.

