Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule inhibitors of ring1B-Bmi1 E3 ligase target polycomb
repressive complex 1 activity and regulate cell proliferation


Emerging evidence implicates the role of Ring1B and Bmi1 in the
maintenance of embryonic stem cells and regulating adult stem cells
self-renewal. Both Ring1B and Bmi1 are part of Poly-comb Repressive
Complex 1(PRC1) and execute gene silencing through histone H2A lysine119
ubiquitination (UbH2A K119). In addition, Bmi1 is also required for the
self-renewal capacity of leukemic stem cells, suggesting that Poly-comb
Group proteins may contribute to oncogenic transformation by regulating
stem cell self-renewal. Targeting cancer stem cell self-renewal has been
proposed as a therapeutic goal and could be an effective approach to
control tumor growth. In this study, we report the development and
characterization of small molecule inhibitors against Ring1B-Bmi1 complex
which interfere with its E3 ligase function. We developed ligands binding
to Ring1B-Bmi1 employing NMR fragment-based screening. We further
performed extensive medicinal chemistry optimization and synthesized over
80 analogs of the initial fragment hit and improved its binding affinity
to Ring1B-Bmi1 complex by more than 1000-fold. The activity of developed
small molecule inhibitors was analyzed by cellular and biochemical
studies including in vitro ubiquitination assay and quantitative analysis
of p16 expression. Mechanistically, we found that our most potent
compounds inhibit E3 ligase activity of Ring1B-Bmi1 at low micromolar
concentrations. As expected, treatment of HeLa and leukemic cell lines
with these compounds demonstrated reduced UbH2A K119 levels and increased
expression of p16. In addition, presence of the lead compounds also
reduces leukemic cell proliferation as determined by MTT assays.
Furthermore, the comparison between knockdown effects of Ring1B/Bmi1 with
small molecule inhibitors revealed on target effect of the lead
compounds. To our knowledge, these compounds represent the first small
molecule inhibitors that directly bind to Ring1B-Bmi1 and inhibit its E3
ubiquitin ligase activity and have a strong potential for further
development into potent anticancer agents.

