Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design, synthesis, biological evaluation of
cyclopenta[d]pyrimidines as antitubulin agents and discovery of
N-(4-methylthiophenyl) and N-(4-dimethylaminophenyl) substituted
N,2-dimethyl-cyclopenta[d]pyrimidines as long acting and poten


Compounds that bind to the colchicine site of microtubules have promising
antitumor potential. Some of these agents also possess the ability to
overcome multiple drug resistance mechanisms, including those mediated by
the expression of P-glycoprotein (Pgp) or expression of the tubulin -III
isotype. We have reported that compounds 1 and 2 were potent
antiproliferative agents that bind to the colchicine site of tubulin. The
previous structure-activity relationship studies of
cyclopenta[d]pyrimidine based antitubulin agents demonstrated the
importance of the para-methoxyphenyl moiety for antiproliferative
activity. However, the literature suggests that the major metabolism of
the methoxyphenyl moiety was likely O-demethylation. In order to increase
the potency and in vivo stability of 1, we focused our attention on the
variation of the para-methoxy aniline moiety. Compound 3 with a
4-methylthiophenyl substitution was designed to decrease potential
metabolic demethylation. This S-methyl analog was a potent inhibitor of
proliferation with an IC50 of 4.6 0.5 nM in MDA-MB-435 cells. The
possible sulfoxide metabolite, 4 was synthesized and had an IC50 = 7.9
0.5 nM. Each of these depolymerized microtubules. In addition, the
4-dimethylamino moiety compound 5 also demonstrated potent antitubulin
and antiproliferative activity (MDA-MB-435: IC50 = 8.2 0.6 nM). The
possible N-demethylated metabolite of 5, para-methylamino 6 was also a
highly potent antiproliferative agent (MDA-MB-435: IC50 = 20 1.9 nM). The
parent compounds 3 and 5, as well as their probable metabolites 4 and 6,
inhibited the binding of [3H]colchicine to tubulin, which showed that
these compounds bind to the colchicine site. The potent antiproliferative
activities of the parent compounds and the potential metabolites of
compounds 3 and 5 suggest the utility of 3 and 5 as long acting, potent
antimitotic agents. Finally, the in vivo efficacy of the S-methyl analog
2 was demonstrated against MDA-MB-435 triple negative breast cancer
murine xenograft model, indicating the potential utility of these analogs
as antitumor agents.

