Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitigating long-term cardiac adverse effects of radiation
exposure: Emerging opportunities in protein oxidation and autophagy
modulation


Radiation-induced heart disease (RIHD) presents a significant challenge
in the oncology setting. Patients who receive acute doses of irradiation
to the thoracic cavity for Hodgkin's Lymphoma and breast cancer are
subject to an elevated risk of RIHD. The ability to mitigate the
long-term cardiac effects of radiation exposure in these populations by
modulating protein oxidation and the process of autophagy in the heart
has the potential to lead to improved health outcomes. We utilized the
spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR), which has proven a good model for
drug-induced cardiotoxicity, to evaluate radiation-induced heart disease.
SHRs were exposed to low, medium, or high doses of full-body irradiation.
Necropsy was performed to collect serum and tissue samples at various
time points up to one year. Echocardiography and electrocardiography were
performed to evaluate functional changes in cardiac performance. Four
weeks following ionizing radiation, both males and females showed
decreased heart mass and decreased whole body mass in the groups exposed
to medium and high doses of radiation. A marked difference in both heart
and whole body mass was observed in the high dose group after one year.
Anemic conditions were noted by low red blood cell counts observed in
both males and females at all three time points in the animals receiving
the highest dose of irradiation. Cardiac troponin T analysis revealed
cardiotoxicity in both the medium and high dose groups at early time
points. Echocardiography revealed that left ventricular volume at
diastole was increased in males following high dose irradiation, and that
left ventricular mass decreased following high irradiation exposures.
Finally, it should also be noted that after one year, multiple animals
receiving radiation developed spontaneous tumors. We are currently
exploring the oxidative stress-mediated molecular mechanisms behind the
radiation-induced cardiac damage and the subsequent, protective
autophagic response.

