Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Xiap over-expression is a poor prognostic marker in breast cancer
and can be targeted to induce efficient apoptosis


Breast cancer is the most common cancer in females and is ranked only
second to lung cancer in cancer-related deaths all over the world in
women. Despite improvement in diagnosis and management of breast cancer,
the survival rate of this disease for stage 4 disease is still only 22%.
X-linked Inhibitor of Apoptosis (XIAP) is a member of the inhibitor of
apoptosis family of proteins that has been shown to be over-expressed in
a variety of cancers including breast cancer leading to an overall poor
survival. However, the role of XIAP in breast cancer from Middle Eastern
region has not been fully explored. We therefore examined the expression
of XIAP in a cohort of 964 breast cancer cases by immunohistochemistry
and found that XIAP was over-expressed in 29.5% (284/964) of the cases
and was found to be directly associated with clinical parameters such as
tumor size (p = 0.0044), extra nodal extension (p = 0.0041) and poorly
differentiated breast cancer (pBreast cancer is the most common cancer in
females and is ranked only second to lung cancer in cancer-related deaths
all over the world in women. Despite improvement in diagnosis and
management of breast cancer, the survival rate of this disease for stage
4 disease is still only 22%. X-linked Inhibitor of Apoptosis (XIAP) is a
member of the inhibitor of apoptosis family of proteins that has been
shown to be over-expressed in a variety of cancers including breast
cancer leading to an overall poor survival. However, the role of XIAP in
breast cancer from Middle Eastern region has not been fully explored. We
therefore examined the expression of XIAP in a cohort of 964 breast
cancer cases by immunohistochemistry and found that XIAP was
over-expressed in 29.5% (284/964) of the cases and was found to be
directly associated with clinical parameters such as tumor size (p =
0.0044), extra nodal extension (p = 0.0041) and poorly differentiated
breast cancer (p<0.0001). In addition, XIAP over-expression was also
significantly associated with activated AKT (pBreast cancer is the most
common cancer in females and is ranked only second to lung cancer in
cancer-related deaths all over the world in women. Despite improvement in
diagnosis and management of breast cancer, the survival rate of this
disease for stage 4 disease is still only 22%. X-linked Inhibitor of
Apoptosis (XIAP) is a member of the inhibitor of apoptosis family of
proteins that has been shown to be over-expressed in a variety of cancers
including breast cancer leading to an overall poor survival. However, the
role of XIAP in breast cancer from Middle Eastern region has not been
fully explored. We therefore examined the expression of XIAP in a cohort
of 964 breast cancer cases by immunohistochemistry and found that XIAP
was over-expressed in 29.5% (284/964) of the cases and was found to be
directly associated with clinical parameters such as tumor size (p =
0.0044), extra nodal extension (p = 0.0041) and poorly differentiated
breast cancer (p<0.0001). In addition, XIAP over-expression was also
significantly associated with activated AKT (p<0.0001), Ki-67 (pBreast
cancer is the most common cancer in females and is ranked only second to
lung cancer in cancer-related deaths all over the world in women. Despite
improvement in diagnosis and management of breast cancer, the survival
rate of this disease for stage 4 disease is still only 22%. X-linked
Inhibitor of Apoptosis (XIAP) is a member of the inhibitor of apoptosis
family of proteins that has been shown to be over-expressed in a variety
of cancers including breast cancer leading to an overall poor survival.
However, the role of XIAP in breast cancer from Middle Eastern region has
not been fully explored. We therefore examined the expression of XIAP in
a cohort of 964 breast cancer cases by immunohistochemistry and found
that XIAP was over-expressed in 29.5% (284/964) of the cases and was
found to be directly associated with clinical parameters such as tumor
size (p = 0.0044), extra nodal extension (p = 0.0041) and poorly
differentiated breast cancer (p<0.0001). In addition, XIAP
over-expression was also significantly associated with activated AKT
(p<0.0001), Ki-67 (p<0.0001) and PARP (pBreast cancer is the most common
cancer in females and is ranked only second to lung cancer in
cancer-related deaths all over the world in women. Despite improvement in
diagnosis and management of breast cancer, the survival rate of this
disease for stage 4 disease is still only 22%. X-linked Inhibitor of
Apoptosis (XIAP) is a member of the inhibitor of apoptosis family of
proteins that has been shown to be over-expressed in a variety of cancers
including breast cancer leading to an overall poor survival. However, the
role of XIAP in breast cancer from Middle Eastern region has not been
fully explored. We therefore examined the expression of XIAP in a cohort
of 964 breast cancer cases by immunohistochemistry and found that XIAP
was over-expressed in 29.5% (284/964) of the cases and was found to be
directly associated with clinical parameters such as tumor size (p =
0.0044), extra nodal extension (p = 0.0041) and poorly differentiated
breast cancer (p<0.0001). In addition, XIAP over-expression was also
significantly associated with activated AKT (p<0.0001), Ki-67 (p<0.0001)
and PARP (p<0.0001). Finally, XIAP over-expression in our cohort of
breast cancer was an independent poor prognostic marker in multivariate
analysis. Next, we investigated inhibition of XIAP using a specific
inhibitor; Embelin on a panel of breast cancer cell lines and found that
Embelin treatment led to inhibition of cell viability and induction of
apoptosis in breast cancer cells. In order to identify the exact pathway
involved in XIAP inhibition, we treated breast cancer cells with
different doses of Embelin and found that there was down-regulation of
XIAP leading to activation of caspases-9, -3 and PARP. We also found that
Embelin treatment caused cleavage of caspase-8 and truncation of Bid
leading to activation of the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway and
efficient apoptosis. Finally, as our clinical data demonstrated a
significant association between XIAP over-expression and activation of
AKT in breast cancer samples, we synergistically induced apoptosis in
breast cancer cells using sub-optimal doses of Embelin and PI3-kinase
inhibitor; LY294002. These data suggest that XIAP may be playing an
important role in the pathogenesis of breast cancer and XIAP can be
therapeutically targeted either alone or in combination with PI3-kinase
inhibition to induce efficient apoptosis in breast cancer cells.

