Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capture of EpCAM-negative circulating tumor cells (CTCs) with a
Universal CTC-Chip


Background: Circulating tumor cell (CTC) can be a potentially useful
clinical marker in early diagnosis and monitoring therapeutic effects for
patients with malignant tumors. Our previous study showed that CTC
detected by an EpCAM (epithelial cell adhesion molecule) based
immuno-magnetic separation system CellSearch was useful in the diagnosis
of malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM), and also useful in the prognosis
of epithelioid type MPM (Yoneda K, et al. Ann Surg Oncol. 2013). However,
EpCAM-negative tumor cells cannot be principally captured with the
system. Therefore, we have developed EpCAM-independent Universal CTC-Chip
System, and assessed its capture capability.Methods: PC-9 (lung cancer
cell line) was employed as EpCAM-positive cells, ACC-MESO-1 and
ACC-MESO-4 (mesothelioma cell lines) were employed as EpCAM-negative
cells. The expression of cell surface antigen was confirmed by flow
cytometry. A microfluidic devices made of resin was coated in two steps
with bridging antibody and capture antibody. It is possible to use any
antibody to capture. In this study, we use anti-EpCAM antibody,
anti-podoplain antibody, anti-mesothelin antibody, and isotype control.
First, we verified capture capability of this system using samples which
were spiked tumor cells labeled with CFSE in PBS containing 5% BSA. Then,
we measured in the same manner by adding the cells to the blood of
healthy donor, and calculated capture rate.Results: The expression
analysis of cell surface antigens, PC-9 was EpCAM-positive, podoplanin,
mesothelin were negative. On the other hand, MESO-1, 4 was EpCAM
negative, podoplanin, mesothelin were positive. The capture efficiency in
PBS containing 5% BSA with each cell using anti-EpCAM antibody,
anti-podoplanin antibody and anti-mesothelin were PC-9: 101.1% / 2.3% /
2.9%, MESO-1: 3.5% / 52.7% / 4.3%, MESO-4: 3.0% / 78.3% / 5.4%,
respectively. In the study of blood, each of the capture rate using
anti-EpCAM antibody and anti-podoplanin antibody were PC-9: 88.0/ 6.9%,
MESO-1: 4.0%/ 12.7%, MESO-4: 2.2%/ 38.4%, respectively.Conclusions: The
capture efficiency using this device depends on the expression intensity
of cell surface antigens. In experiments with PBS samples, it was
possible to capture targeting specific cell surface antigen. Mesothelioma
cells in the blood ware captured with combination of this CTC-Chip system
and anti-podoplanin antibody.

