Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel lysine demethylase LSD1 inhibitors promote differentiation
and apoptosis of glioma stem cells


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and devastating primary tumor of
the central nervous system with dismal prognosis. GBM development is a
multistep process, involving alterations in genetic and epigenetic
mechanisms. Understanding the mechanisms and enzymes that promote
epigenetic changes in GBM are urgently needed to identify novel
therapeutic targets. Recent studies demonstrated that Glioma Stem Cells
(GSCs) play central roles in GBM development and responsible for tumor
propagation, invasion and chemo/radiation resistance. GSCs elimination is
critical for development of efficient therapeutic strategies for GBM.
Recently, we showed that lysine demethylase LSD1 is overexpressed in GBM
and its inhibition reduces proliferation of GBM cells. In this study, we
tested whether, LSD1 modulates GSCs differentiation and novel LSD1
inhibitors (NCL-1 and NCD-38) promote differentiation and apoptosis of
GSCs. We have isolated GSCs using well established stem markers (CD133
and CD15) from two established and two patient derived GBM cells.
Functionality of GSCs was established using self-renewal assays, and by
profiling stem cell marker expression. Western analysis of purified GSCs
showed that LSD1 is highly expressed in purified GSCs. Differentiation of
GSCs resulted in decreased expression of LSD1. Down regulation of LSD1
expression using lentiviral LSD1-shRNA or by pharmacological inhibition
(NCL-1 and NCD-38) significantly reduced the proliferation, neurosphere
formation and self-renewal ability of GSCs with little or no effect on
normal astrocytes and differentiated cells. Accordingly, treatment of
GSCs with LSD1 inhibitors resulted in a dramatic reduction in the
expression of stemness markers and promoted induction of differentiation
markers. RNA sequencing analysis of GSCs treated with or without LSD1
inhibitors, revealed that LSD1 inhibitors modulate several pathways
related to stem ness, differentiation and apoptosis. The expression of
top five genes and three pathways were validated using q-RT-PCR, and
western blot analysis. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation assays confirmed
significant alternations in epigenetic markers at LSD1 target genes.
Further, LSD1 inhibitors significantly reduced the growth of GSC driven
tumors in vivo. Taken together, these results provided the evidence that
induction of GSCs differentiation and apoptosis following LSD1 inhibition
as a promising approach to eradicate GSCs.

