Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amphiregulin is a key effector of estrogen receptor in breast
cancer


Estrogen is an essential hormone for mammary gland development and is a
key driver of proliferation during the development of estrogen receptor
positive breast tumors. The actions of estrogen are primarily mediated by
its receptor, the ER transcription factor, which regulates several
hundred estrogen-responsive genes in breast cancer cells. However,
despite much investigation, the identity of the key effectors of this
proliferative signal in breast cancer remains unclear. Amphiregulin
(AREG) is a ligand of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor. It is
transcriptionally regulated by estrogen and is required for
estrogen-dependent mouse mammary gland development. In this study, we
have tested whether Amphiregulin is a key effector of estrogen in breast
cancer.shRNA-mediated knockdown of Amphiregulin in MCF7 cells strongly
attenuated ER+ breast cancer cell line growth in vivo. Conversely,
expression of Amphiregulin from an estrogen-insensitive promoter allowed
MCF7 xenografts to escape the therapeutic effects of tamoxifen. Thus,
Amphiregulin expression is both necessary and sufficient for the
proliferative response to estrogen in MCF7 cells in vivo, and
downregulation of Amphiregulin in response to tamoxifen is required for a
therapeutic benefit.After initially responding to endocrine therapy, many
ER+ tumors progress to resistance to these therapies. Our model predicts
that breast tumors which either (1) express AREG in an
estrogen-insensitive manner or (2) have elevated levels of alterative
ERBB family ligands, will be endocrine resistant. We present experimental
and clinical evidence demonstrating that these features contribute to at
least some examples of endocrine resistance. Firstly, in MCF7 cells
selected for resistance to fulvestrant, we show that AREG expression is
no longer regulated by estrogen or its antagonists, but the cells remain
AREG-dependent. Secondly, in a series of 52 ER+ breast cancer patients
treated with neo-adjuvant letrozole, we show that the downregulation of
Amphiregulin in response to endocrine therapy observed in our mouse
studies is recapitulated in human breast cancer patients, and that tumors
in which alternate ERBB ligands (TGFalpha, Epiregulin, and Neuregulins 1
& 2) are expressed at high levels are least likely to respond to
letrozole.In summary, these data underline the importance of ERBB
signaling in estrogen receptor positive breast cancer and implicate
Amphiregulin as the primary ERBB ligand in mediating the effects of
estrogen in these tumors.

