Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic actions of oncolytic vaccinia virus and sunitinib on
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors in RIP-Tag2 mice


Pexa-Vec (JX-594) is an engineered oncolytic vaccinia virus that lacks
thymidine kinase and expresses human granulocyte-macrophage colony
stimulating factor. In addition to having oncolytic effects on tumor
cells and promoting an immune response, Pexa-Vec has been found to cause
rapid reduction of tumor blood flow in preclinical models and in clinical
trials. The angiogenesis inhibitor sunitinib reduces tumor vascularity
and can augment the activity of vesicular stomatitis virus by suppressing
two interferon-induced anti-viral host proteins, RNA-dependent protein
kinase and ribonuclease L.We explored the interaction of mpJX-594, a
mouse-adapted version of Pexa-Vec, and sunitinib. The mouse-adapted
version, mpJX-594, was engineered from Western Reserve strain vaccinia
virus by deletion of thymidine kinase and addition of human GM-CSF,
yellow fluorescent protein, and luciferase genes. The effects of mpJX-594
or sunitinib given individually on pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors in
RIP-Tag2 mice were compared to those of the two agents given together.
Treatment with mpJX-594 alone reduced tumor vascularity and induced
widespread apoptosis in the tumors. After treatment with sunitinib alone,
tumor vascularity was decreased, but apoptosis was much less than after
mpJX-594 alone. When mpJX-594 was given together with sunitinib, the
amount of viral infection in tumors, assessed by vaccinia
immunoreactivity, was much more than after mpJX-594 alone. Vaccinia
staining was detected in most of the tumor blood vessels and in large
patches of tumor cells. The reduction of tumor vascularity and amount of
apoptosis were greater after both agents than after either of them given
alone.To determine whether mpJX-594 increased the efficacy of sunitinib
in tumors or vice versa, we examined the effects of sequential
administration, where mpJX-594 or sunitinib was given first and then
followed 5 days later by the other. In both cases, the reduction in tumor
vascularity after sequential treatment was greater than after either
agent given alone. When sunitinib was given first, tumor vascularity was
less throughout tumors, and the surviving vessels appeared more normal.
By comparison, when mpJX-594 was given before sunitinib, the tumor
vasculature was greatly reduced in some regions and less so in others,
and the remaining blood vessels were abnormal. Apoptotic cells were much
more numerous and widespread when mpJX-594 preceded sunitinib than after
either agent given alone. In contrast, when sunitinib was given first,
tumor apoptosis was greater than after sunitinib alone but not after
mpJX-594 alone.Together these findings indicate that mpJX-594 amplifies
the anti-vascular and anti-tumor effects of sunitinib and vice versa in
RIP-Tag2 pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, regardless of the sequence of
administration, but the magnitude of the changes differs according to the
sequence of administration.

