Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphorylation of BNIP3 is a switch between life and death in
cancer cells


Antibodies vs CD47 (CD47mAbs) that block the CD47-SIRPalpha interaction
promote the phagocytosis of cancer cells and have efficacy in several
tumor models. A select few CD47mAbs also directly kill cancer cells by
lowering cellular cAMP levels leading to mitochondrial damage and cell
death. These CD47mAbs are thus referred to as dual-function mAbs.
Activation of protein kinase A prevents CD47mAb-mediated death suggesting
that phosphorylation of one or more target proteins in the cancer cell
can block the death mechanism. BNIP3, a member of the BH3-only family, is
induced by hypoxia and oncogenes and is necessary for induction of cell
death by dual-function CD47mAbs. BNIP3 can activate autophagy, a
pro-survival function, and can also induce cell death by damaging
mitochondria. The role of BNIP3 in cancer is controversial and
context-dependent with some cancers over-expressing BNIP3 compared to low
levels of expression in normal tissue, while other cancers cannot
tolerate BNIP3 expression and silence the gene, often by methylation of
the BNIP3 promoter. This suggests that cancers that tolerate BNIP3
expression employ an as yet unknown mechanism to protect themselves from
its toxic effects. The C-terminal transmembrane (TM) domain of BNIP3
(residues 164-184) penetrates the outer mitochondrial membrane allowing
the extreme C-terminal ten residue tail of BNIP3 (RRLTTSTSTF, residues
185-194) to extend across the intermembrane space to bind OPA1 on the
inner mitochondrial membrane, a key step in the death mechanism. We used
a phosphosite-specific antibody to detect phosphorylation of BNIP3
immunoprecipitated from Jurkat leukemia cells at residue T188 which
resides in a canonical protein kinase A site (RRLT, amino acids 185-188).
Using mass spectrometry of 6His-tagged BNIP3 isolated from HEK293 cells
treated with 8BrcAMP, we identified as many as 4 additional
phosphorylated sites in the C-terminal tail sequence (residues 189-194,
TSTSTF). We generated phosphomimetic (S/T to D) and unphosphorylated (S/T
to A or N) mutations at these residues and expressed the mutant BNIP3
proteins in 293 cells. All of the BNIP3 mutants associated with
mitochondria but only the phosphomimetic mutants prevented BNIP3-induced
mitochondrial damage and cell death. In contrast, mutation of the
phosphorylated S/T residues to unphosphorylated residues resulted in
rapid and extensive cell death. Importantly, phosphomimetic C-terminal
BNIP3 residues blocked cell death without preventing autophagy, providing
evidence that the two roles of BNIP3 can be regulated independently. We
replicated these results in one lung cancer and three breast cancer cell
lines. These findings suggest that phosphorylation at the C-terminus of
BNIP3 is a switch that determines the pro-survival vs pro-death effects
of BNIP3. Dual-function CD47mAbs may act by dephosphorylating BNIP3
expressed in tumor cells thus unleashing its killing potential.

