Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53 status as a determinant of estrogen receptor beta function in
breast cancer


While the importance of estrogen receptor alpha (ER) in breast cancer is
well documented, role of estrogen receptor beta (ER) still remains
elusive. Whether ER is an oncogenic or a tumor suppressor protein in
breast cancer remains controversial. ER levels are high in ER negative
cancers including triple-negative breast cancer (TNBCs). Recent reports
including the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) show that about 80% of TNBC
express mutant p53 (mut-p53) and it is the most predominant driver mutant
in these cancers. Importantly, in addition to losing tumor suppressor
activity, mut-p53 gains oncogenic functions, and therefore, has a major
role in driving the cancer process. We tested the hypothesis that p53
status in breast cancer will have an important role in determining
function of ER. We report that ER directly binds to p53 in human breast
cancer cells. Using glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-pull down and
co-imunoprecipitation assays, we have delineated the domains of both
proteins that are required for the ER-p53 interaction. The DNA binding
domain (DBD) along with the hinge domain of ER and the C-terminal
regulatory domain of p53 are essential for the interaction. Using the
highly sensitive proximity ligation assay (PLA), we show ER-p53
interaction in situ in breast cancer cells expressing either wt- or
mut-p53. Surprisingly, we found that ER has opposite functions depending
on the wt/mut status of p53. A combination of proliferation and apoptosis
assays, RNAi technology, quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation
(qChIP), and quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) showed that in the
context of the wt-p53, ER is pro-proliferative, whereas in the context of
mut-p53, ER is anti-proliferative. ER binds wt-p53 and inhibits its
transcriptional function. On the other hand, ER binds and sequesters
mut-p53 from mut-p53p73 complex leading to reactivation of tumor
suppressor p73. Consistent with findings in cell culture models,
combination of immunohistochemistry (IHC) and PLA in TNBC patient tissue
microarray (TMA) representing 130 tumors followed by correlative analysis
of linked patient tumor characteristics obtained from RPCI clinical data
network showed that p53 status is an important determinant of ER
function. For example, ER along with mut-p53 has negative effect on tumor
growth, whereas ER in the wt-p53 context has opposite effect. Our finding
that ER elicits opposite functions dependent on p53 status provides an
important insight into the mechanism underlying the context-dependent
function of ER and provides an explanation to the controversial reports
on pro- versus anti-tumorigenic role of ER. These data would have
significant clinical implications in targeting ER and mutant p53
signaling pathways for diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic purposes
especially in ER negative cancers such as triple negative breast
cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

