Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of selective inhibitors of XPO1/CRM1-mediated
nuclear export in diffuse malignant peritoneal mesothelioma: the role of
survivin


Survivin, which is highly expressed and promotes cell survival in diffuse
malignant peritoneal mesothelioma (DMPM), exclusively relies on the
nuclear exportin 1 (XPO1/CRM1) to be released in the cytoplasm and
perform its anti-apoptotic function. Here, we explored the efficacy of
selective inhibitors of nuclear export (SINEs) in patient-derived DMPM
preclinical models. Exposure to individual SINE (KPT-251, KPT-276,
KPT-330) was able to induce a time- and dose-dependent inhibition of the
growth of two DMPM cell lines without affecting normal cell
proliferation. Such a cell growth inhibition was preceded by a decline in
the nuclear XPO1/CRM1 levels and an increase in the nuclear accumulation
of its cargo proteins p53 and p21, which led to a cell cycle arrest at
G1-phase. Our results also indicated that survivin is an essential
component of the downstream signaling pathway of XPO1/CRM1 inhibition in
DMPM cells. In fact, in both cell lines, exposure to SINEs led to a
time-dependent reduction of cytoplasmic survivin levels and, after an
initial survivin nuclear accumulation, also to a progressive decrease in
the nuclear protein abundance, through the ubiquitin-proteasomal
degradation pathway, leading to the complete depletion of total survivin
levels. In both DMPM cell models, according to survivin anti-apoptotic
activity, drug-induced reduction of cytoplasmic survivin levels
correlated with the onset of caspase-dependent apoptosis. We further
observed that SINEs can be combined with other survivin inhibitors, such
as the survivin suppressant YM155 to achieve enhanced growth inhibition
in DMPM cells. Initial in vivo experiments with orally administered
KPT-251, KPT-276 and the orally available, clinical stage KPT-330
(selinexor) indicated that each compound was able to significantly reduce
the growth of early-stage subcutaneous DMPM xenografts. Interestingly,
additional experiments carry out with selinexor demonstrated that the
compound was also able to inhibit the growth of late-stage subcutaneous
DMPM xenografts in nude mice. Most importantly, oral administration of
selinexor to SCID mice reduced the growth of orthotopic DMPM xenografts,
which properly recapitulate the dissemination pattern in the peritoneal
cavity of human DMPM and, for this reason, represent a valuable model for
investigating novel therapeutic approaches for the disease. Consistent
with an important role of survivin as a determinant of anti-cancer
activity of SINE compounds, a reduction of the protein expression was
observed in tumor specimens obtained from selinexor treated mice.
Overall, our results (i) demonstrate a marked efficacy of SINEs in DMPM
preclinical models, which is, at least in part, dependent on the
interference with survivin intracellular distribution and function, and
(ii) suggest SINE-mediated XPO1/CRM1 inhibition as a novel therapeutic
option for the disease.

