Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule Prodigiosin-mediated p53 pathway restoration and
inhibition of self-renewal in colorectal cancer involves c-Jun-mediated
Np73 inhibition and p73 activation


Tumor suppressor p53 is frequently mutated or inactivated in colorectal
cancer while p53 family member p73 is rarely mutated in cancer cells.
Small molecules that activate p73 can elicit a p53-like tumor suppressive
function and represent a novel approach for p53 pathway restoration.
Colorectal tumors contain a small population of cancer stem cells (CSCs)
capable of self-renewal that contributes to tumor maintenance and
resistance to therapy. Targeting CSCs could improve treatment response
and prolong patient survival. We have previously shown that small
molecule Prodigiosin restores the p53 pathway via activation of p73 and
inhibition of the mutant p53-p73 interaction (Hong et al., Cancer
Research 74:1153-1165, 2014). We now demonstrate that prodigiosin targets
5-Fluorouracil-resistant CSCs along with bulk tumor cells. Prodigiosin
prevents colonosphere formation of CRC cell lines independent of p53
status of the cells. Prodigiosin reduces the viability of both CSCs and
non-CSCs while 5-Fluorouracil only targets non-CSCs. Prodigiosin
significantly reduces the growth of xenograft tumors initiated in mice
with CSCs without toxic effects and prevents the passage of these tumors.
In a p53-reponsive luciferase reporter assay, prodigiosin induces
p53-pathway transcription in colonospheres and CSC-initiated xenograft
tumors. Stable shRNA knockdown of p73 revealed that prodigiosin inhibits
the self-renewal of CSCs in a p73-dependent manner. Next, we explored the
mechanisms of prodigiosin-mediated p53-pathway restoration and anti-CSC
effects upstream of p73 activation. The oncogenic N-terminally truncated
isoform Np73 is a dominant negative inhibitor of p73 and p53. Np73 levels
correlate with poor overall survival in colorectal cancer patients.
Western blot analysis revealed that prodigiosin increases protein levels
of p73 and its target genes and reduces levels of the oncogenic isoform
Np73. Prodigiosin has been previously shown to increase the expression of
c-Jun, a member of the AP-1 family of transcription factors. c-Jun is
known to regulate the induction of p73 and degradation of Np73 in
response to cellular stress. We hypothesized that prodigiosin mediated
p53-pathway restoration involves c-Jun upregulation resulting in Np73
inhibition and p73 activation. Western blot analysis revealed that
prodigiosin induces levels of c-Jun and phospho-c-Jun. siRNA knockdown of
c-Jun protein levels reduced prodigiosin-mediated Np73 downregulation.
Thus, we have characterized a previously unrecognized mechanism of
prodigiosin-mediated p73 activation via c-Jun-dependent Np73 inhibition.
Ongoing experiments involve further validation of the mechanism by
studying the effects of c-Jun knockdown and Np73 overexpression on
Prodigiosin-mediated effects on apoptosis, CSC self-renewal and p53
pathway restoration.

