Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The histone acetyltransferase inhibitor CPTH6 selectively targets
lung cancer stem-like cells


Targeting epigenetic regulators is emerging as a promising strategy for
cancer therapy. In this context, we recently identified the thiazole
derivative
3-methylcyclopentylidene-[4-(4-chlorophenyl)thiazol-2-yl]hydrazone
(CPTH6) as a novel pCAF and GCN5 histone acetyltransferase inhibitor.
CPTH6 exerts in vitro anti-tumoral effect in a panel of human tumor cell
lines derived from different histotypes. In this study, we evaluated the
efficacy of CPTH6 as a novel drug that targets Lung Cancer Stem-like
Cells (LCSC) derived from non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. We
found that CPTH6 has a stronger growth-inhibitory effect in
patient-derived LCSC than in established NSCLC lines. Unlike LCSC models,
in which CPTH6 treatment induces cell cycle perturbation and apoptosis
even at low doses, in established NSCLC lines CPTH6 triggers a cell cycle
perturbation associated to DNA damage only at higher concentrations. Of
note, differentiated progeny of LCSC lines are more resistant to CPTH6
cytoxicity when compared to their undifferentiated counterparts.
Interestingly, CPTH6 treatment is also associated with reduced expression
of the CD133 stemness marker in LCSC lines. Analysis of the CD133+
subpopulation in LCSC lines indicates that CD133+ cells not only undergo
apoptosis following CPTH6 treatment but also shift toward a more
differentiated phenotype. Furthermore, the growth inhibitory effect seems
to be tightly related to baseline expression of acetylated alpha-tubulin,
which was particularly prominent in sensitive LCSC lines. In vivo
experiments confirmes the antitumor efficacy of CPTH6, particularly in
LCSC-derived models, where a pronounced apoptosis induction and growth
inhibitory effect is observed after CPTH6 treatment. Overall, our studies
propose histone acetyltransferase inhibition as an attractive target for
cancer therapy of NSCLC.

