Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rhamnetin inhibits prostate cancer progression in an autochthonous
mouse prostate cancer model


Aging increases oxidative stress and cancer risk. Age-regulated genes
viz. FoxO3a and Klotho are stimulated by reactive oxygen species (ROS)
due to increased oxidative stress. Klotho, an antiaging gene, modulates
stress-induced senescence, and decreases with advancing age, whereas
forkhead transcription factor, FoxO3a is known to involve in a paradigm
that engages in antioxidant, anti-proliferative and tumor suppressor
functions. We have previously demonstrated that FoxO3a is deregulated in
human prostate adenocarcinoma and in transgenic adenocarcinoma of the
mouse prostate (TRAMP) model that mimics progressive forms of human
disease. Here we demonstrate the anticancer effects of rhamnetin, a
dietary flavonoid present in fruits and vegetables, in modulating Klotho
and FoxO3a signaling by suppressing ROS. Per-oral feeding of rhamnetin at
10- and 20-g/mouse/day (gavaged in 0.2 ml vehicle containing 0.5% methyl
cellulose and 0.025% Tween 20) to TRAMP mice for six days per week for 16
weeks, starting at 8 weeks of age, exhibited marked reduction in tumor
growth with no signs of metastasis. Rhamnetin feeding to TRAMP resulted
in a significant dose-dependent reduction in FoxO3a, in the dorso-lateral
prostates. FoxO3a protein was redistributed more in nuclear than the
cytosolic compartments after rhamnetin feeding. Simultaneously, decreased
FoxO3a phosphorylation (Ser-253) was observed in the dorso-lateral
prostate, which correlated with decreased cytoplasmic retention of FoxO3a
with no significant changes in 14-3-3 chaperone protein in the cytosol
after rhamnetin feeding. Additionally, decreased IGF-1 protein expression
with subsequent decrease in p-Akt (Ser-473) and p-Erk1/2 (Thr202/Tyr204)
was observed after rhamnetin feeding demonstrating that the decreased
nuclear presence of p-Akt (Ser-473) may restrict FoxO3a phosphorylation
and its retention in the nucleus along with decreased p-Erk1/2 levels in
the dorso-lateral prostate. Furthermore, rhamnetin intake led to
increased levels of SOD2 and significantly enhanced the expression of the
thioredoxin/peroxiredoxin (Trx/Prx) in the dorso-lateral prostate.
Similar findings were recorded in cell culture studies where rhamnetin
treatment to human prostate cancer LNCaP and PC-3 cells resulted in the
restoration of Klotho and FoxO3a in the nucleus. This increase in Klotho
and FoxO3a protein expressions in the nucleus may be a decisive factor
for increase resistance to oxidative stress and cancer progression. Our
finding suggests that rhamnetin has potential to modulate Klotho and FoxO
signaling cascades and could be represented as therapeutic targets in
prostate cancer.

