Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Primate-specific miR-663 suppresses glioblastoma progression and
predicts patient prognosis


Purpose: miRNAs (microRNAs) have recently been recognized as important
regulators of cancer biological behavior. However, the expression
patterns and prognostic significance of miRNAs in GBM remain elusive due
to the lack of large pools of clinical specimens for screening. This
study was performed to identify miR-663 as a potential regulator of
glioblastoma (GBM) malignant behaviors from miRNA profiles. The
prognostic significance of miR-663 in GBM, its effect in tumor
progression and the underlying mechanism were determined.Methods:
Specimens from 256 cases of glioma patients, including 239 patients with
follow-up information, were used to analyze the association between
miR-663 and patients prognosis by Kaplan-Meier and multivariate Cox
regression analyses. The effects of miR-663 on GBM cell proliferation and
invasion were examined both in vitro and in vivo. Bioinformatics
prediction and signal network analysis were applied to identify the
putative targets of miR-663, which were further verified by luciferase
reporter assay, rescue experiments as well as the immunohistochemistry
(IHC) and Western blotting examination of downstream effectors.
Quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR (qRT-PCR) and IHC were applied to
investigate the clinical association between miR-663 and its target in
human GBM specimens.Results: miR-663 was identified from miRNA profiles
and inversely correlated with glioma grades but positively correlated
with patients survival. Furthermore, two distinct subgroups of GBM
patients with different prognoses were identified based on miR-663
expression in our specimens and that from TCGA database. Overexpression
of miR-663 significantly suppressed the proliferation and invasion of GBM
cells in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, we discovered PIK3CD as a
direct target of miR-663 and found that phosphorylated AKT and three key
downstream effectors of PIK3CD, were down-regulated by miR-663
overexpression. Moreover, PIK3CD was inversely correlated with miR-663 in
GBM specimens and predicted poor prognosis of GBM patients.Conclusion:
miR-663 is a novel prognostic biomarker and a potential therapeutic
candidate for GBM.

