Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous activation of C-X-C chemokine receptor 4 and
cannabinoid receptor 2 results in decreased angiogenesis


Tumor angiogenesis is a complex process modulated by numerous signaling
molecules and pathways that influence cell migration, invasion, survival
and tube formation. The expression of the G-protein-coupled receptor
(GPCR) C-X-C Chemokine Receptor 4 (CXCR4) has been correlated with the
increased angiogenic potential of cancer cells. The ligand-specific
binding of CXCL12 to CXCR4 increases tumor angiogenesis by upregulating
the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) at both mRNA
and protein levels. Thus, modulating the CXCR4/CXCL12 signaling axis
provides an attractive target for the inhibition of tumor angiogenesis
and cancer progression. Recent studies have suggested that in addition to
its palliative properties, cannabis may have anti-proliferative and
anti-metastatic effects by acting through the GPCR, cannabinoid receptor
2 (CB2R). GPCR heterodimerization has emerged as a means by which new
signaling entities can be created with respect to agonist binding.
Preliminary co-immunoprecipitation data from our lab indicates that
agonist-bound CXCR4 and agonist-bound CB2R interact at the cell membrane
and that receptor interaction mitigates the effects of CXCL12-mediated
CXCR4 signaling. Here we show that co-stimulation of prostate cancer
cells with CXCR4 and CB2R-specific agonists results in decreased VEGF
expression in vitro. Furthermore, treatment of human endothelial cells
with conditioned medium collected from co-stimulated prostate cancer
cells decreased endothelial cell migration in wound healing and invasion
assays, and decreased endothelial cell tubulogenesis. Taken together,
these results demonstrate that desensitization of CXCR4 signaling through
association with CB2R is a novel anti-angiogenic strategy and reinforces
the clinical relevance of cannabinoids in cancer treatment.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

