Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel role of CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling axis in obesity-induced
prostate cancer progression in HiMyc mice


Obesity has been shown to increase prostate cancer (PCa) progression and
disease severity in men. In previous studies, we showed that diet-induced
obesity (DIO, 60 kcal% fat) increased the incidence and severity of
invasive adenocarcinomas in HiMyc transgenic mice compared to mice on a
control diet (10 kcal% fat) whereas calorie restriction (30% CR)
completely prevented the formation of adenocarcinomas. Increased tumor
progression was associated with changes in expression of a large number
of cytokines, chemokines and growth factors suggesting that altered
growth factor and inflammatory signaling pathways in the tumor
microenvironment may be key targets for preventing and controlling PCa
progression and especially obesity-related PCa progression. Therefore, in
this study we investigated the role of white adipose tissue (WAT)-derived
factors on obesity-driven PCa progression in HiMyc mice. We first
isolated RNA from the stromal vascular fraction (SVF) of the
periprostatic WAT from HiMyc mice maintained on DIO and control diet.
qPCR analyses showed a dramatic increase in expression of various
chemokines, cytokines, growth and angiogenesis factors in the SVF of
obese HiMyc mice. Among them, both CXCL12 and its receptors CXCR4 and
CXCR7, were significantly upregulated in SVF from obese HiMyc mice.
Recently, we developed a PCa cell line from the ventral prostate of HiMyc
mice (HMVP2 cells) and a normal cell line from FVB/N mice (NMVP cells).
Two additional cell lines (HMVP2A1 and HMVP2A2) were isolated from the
original HMVP2 cells after subsequent tumor formation in FVB/N mice and
growth in culture. HMVP2 and the derivative cell lines have
characteristics of cancer stem cells and produce tumors in syngeneic
mice. Western blot analyses showed expression of both CXCR4 and CXCR7 in
the following order HMVP2A2 >HMVP2A1> HMVP2>NMVP cells, which followed
their ability to produce tumors in vivo. Furthermore, CXCL12 treatment
stimulated migration and invasion of HMVP2 cells (but not NMVP cells),
which was inhibited by the CXCR4 antagonist, AMD3100. CXCL12 treatment
also led to rapid activation of Akt, Stat3 and NFB signaling in HMVP2 but
not in NMVP cells. These data suggest that CXCL12 has differential
effects on PCa cells from HiMyc mice compared to normal prostate cells
that may play a role in driving tumor progression. In addition, these
data suggest that targeting the CXCL12/CXCR4/CXCR7 axis could lead to
novel approaches for offset the effects of obesity on PCa progression,
thereby reducing PCa mortality.

