Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effective auger electron radioimmunotherapy using modified
anti-HER2 antibody with nuclear localizing signal


Objective: Radioimmunotherapy has an advantage in treating tumors
scattered in the body. Auger electrons have high cell killing effect
because of its high LET, and the short range can prevent damages to
normal tissue. However, to achieve higher therapeutic effect, it is
desirable to deliver Auger electrons into nucleus and locate close to
DNA. The use of nuclear localizing signal (NLS) has been proposed to
transport Auger electron emitters into nucleus. To evaluate the
cytotoxicity of nuclear localized Auger electron emitter, we performed
in-vitro assay using 111In-labeled anti-HER2 antibody attached with NLS
peptides to human breast cancer cell lines overexpressing HER2.Material
and methods: Trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody to HER2, was conjugated
with CHX-A-DTPA (DTPA) and derivatized with
sulfosuccinimdyl-4-(N-maleimidomethyl) cyclohexane-1carboxylate
(sulfo-SMCC) for reaction with synthetic 13-mer NLS peptides
(CGYGPKKKRKVGG). 111In was labeled with either trastuzumab-DTPA or
NLS-trastuzumab-DTPA, NLS-trastuzumab-DTPA-S carried approximately 4 NLS
peptides per antibody and NLS-trastuzumab-DTPA-L carried 10. The
radiochemical labeling of 111In-NLS-trastuzumab and 111In-trastuzumab was
determined by HPLC. Human mammary epithelial cells HMEpC and two types of
human breast cancer cells with low and high HER2 expression, MCF-7 and
SKBR3, respectively, were employed for in-vitro study. Nuclear
accumulation of 111In was measured in SKBR3 cells by subcellular
fraction. Cell viability was evaluated with dye-based cell viability
assays in all cell lines. DNA damages were examined with -H2AX
immunohistochemistry in SKBR3 cells.Results: Nuclear uptake of 111In was
1.3-1.5-fold higher in SKBR3 cells treated with 111In-NLS-trastuzumab
than 111In-trastuzumab and increased depending on the number of NLS
peptides. Cell viability was significantly reduced with
111In-NLS-trastuzumab comparing 111In-trastuzumab in SKBR3 cells. Both of
111In-NLS-trastuzumab had little or no cytotoxicity on MCF-7 cells and
HMEpC cells. SKBR3 cells treated with 111In-NLS-trastuzumab-L showed more
-H2AX foci than 111In-trastuzumab.Conclusions: The cytotoxicity of
111In-NLS-trastuzumab was higher than that of 111In-trastuzumab by
inducing more DNA damages in HER2-overexpressing human breast cancer
cells. These data demonstrate that delivery of 111In into cell nucleus by
anti-HER2 antibody harboring NLS is an effective strategy for targeted
cell killing of the human cancer cells overexpressing HER2.

