Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new prognostic marker: interferon regulatory factor 6 in renal
cell carcinoma


According to our previous methylated-CpG island recovery assay (MIRA) and
RNA expression array findings, the results indicated methylated status of
Interferon regulatory factor 6 (IRF6) could be observed in most of renal
cell carcinoma (RCC) cases (40.6%), and presented a negative correlation
with gene expression, clear cell type of RCCs especially. As known that
IRF6 is one of members of IRF family. It has been described might play an
important role in epidermal cells, and correlated with cell proliferation
and differentiation. The regulation of feedback loop between IRF6 and
Np63, which is known could control the mechanism of keratinocytes
differentiation and palate closure, has also been noted. In addition, the
tumor suppressor activity of IRF6 had been also demonstrated in squamous
cell carcinoma associated with inhibition of tumor cell invasion and
migration. The aim of this study is to clarify the clinical significance
and role of IRF6 in RCC. We hypothesized low expression of IRF6 via DNA
methylation might lead to irregular differentiation of RCC cells, and
then further trigger cells proliferated out of control. In total, 105
pairs of clinical RCCs patients and eight RCC cell lines (included
chromophobe type RCC98, sacomatoid type RCC52, clear cell type Caki-1,
HH332, HOKN-9, RCC100, papillary type HH050 and adenocarcinoma 786-O), as
well as Human Embryonic Kidney 293 cell used as control have involved in
current study. Firstly, we performed real-time PCR on all cases.
Secondly, 5-aza-2deoxycytidine was treated on all type of RCC cell lines;
it is a way of de-methylated DNA. Western blot detections were then to
confirm whether the expression level of IRF6 restored in RCC cells. The
IRF6 gene expressed levels differ from normal and RCC tissues were
applied by the paired- T test, and shown by -CT. Generally, the variant
and lower level gene expression of the IRF6 could be observed from all
different type of RCC cell lines, except RCC98 and RCC100 cells. After
treated with 5-aza-2deoxycytidine on RCC cell lines, the obvious
expression of IRF6 was restored in all clear cell RCC cell lines. The
mean - CT of normal tissue was -8.0, and RCC tissue was -11.5,
significantly IRF6 expressed levels differ from normal and tumor tissues
could be noted (p = 0.013). The IRF6 gene was usually expressed lower
level in RCC due to methylation. Our findings demonstrated the expression
of IRF6 could be easily resorted by de-methylated in RCC cells, and it
might further inhibit cell proliferation in the tumoral progression, and
might consider as a prognostic marker to predict patients outcomes in
RCC. However, the further cell viability and correlation with the
clinical information should be further analyzed in the future.

