Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic potential of HDAC inhibitors in small cell carcinoma
of the ovary, hypercalcemic type (SCCOHT)


SCCOHT is a rare but deadly type of ovarian cancer. It mainly affects
young women with the median age about 28 years. Although often diagnosed
at an early stage, the prognosis of SCCOHT is nonetheless dismal with a
2-year survival less than 35% due to lack of effective treatments. Unlike
common malignancies, the genome of SCCOHT is minimally disturbed.
Recently, we and others have discovered inactivating mutations of
SMARCA4, the ATPase of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex, in the
majority of SCCOHT along with loss of SMARCA4 protein. Interestingly,
SMARCA2, the alternative ATPase of the SWI/SNF complex is also
inactivated in SCCOHT without apparent mutations. Re-expression of either
SMARCA4 or SMARCA2 robustly inhibited the growth of SCCOHT cells.
Therefore, the dual deficiency of SMARCA4 and SMARCA2 may be the primary
driver in SCCOHT tumorigenesis by creating distinct epigenetic features
that promote oncogenic transformation and can serve as promising
therapeutic targets. In an attempt to identify epigenetic drugable
targets, we performed the drug screening using an epigenetic drug library
(Cayman Chemical) in two SCCOHT cell lines and four other ovarian cancer
cell lines with intact SMARCA4 and SMARCA2. We identified several HDAC
inhibitors that selectively inhibited the viability of SCCOHT cells
(BIN67 and SCCOHT1) compared to that of other ovarian cancer cell lines.
We confirmed that in comparison to other ovarian cancer cell lines,
SCCOHT cells were significantly more sensitive to the treatment of
several pan-HDAC inhibitors including SAHA, an FDA-approved HDAC
inhibitor for treatment of cutaneous T cell lymphoma, and two selective
HDAC6 inhibitors (CAY10603 and Nexturastat A), but not to Romidepsin, a
selective HDAC1/2 inhibitor. Furthermore, the expression of HDAC6 was
significantly higher in SCCOHT cells compared with other ovarian cancer
cell lines and re-expression of SMARCA4 suppressed the expression of
HDAC6. Interestingly, SCCOHT cells were also more sensitive to
Pracinostat, a broad HDAC inhibitor with minimum effect on HDAC6. Using
Agilent gene expression array, we identified a subset of genes whose
expression was upregulated by both SMARCA4 re-expression and SAHA
treatment in BIN67 cells. Taken together, our data suggest that the
SMARCA4/SMARCA2 dual deficiency may promote hypersensitivity to HDAC
inhibitors through both HDAC6-dependent and independent pathways. Ongoing
studies will address the detailed mechanisms and evaluate the efficacy of
using HDAC inhibitors for the treatment of SCCOHT cell line-derived and
patient-derived mouse xenografts to provide requisite evidence for
initiating a clinical trial for defeating this notorious disease.

