Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reprogramming the TGF-beta signaling in cancer-associated
fibroblasts inhibits ovarian cancer progression


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy in the US. While
major research efforts have been dedicated to identify disease related
genes and mutations in cancer cells, the role of the stromal tumor
microenvironment in disease progression is relatively unexplored. We
previously reported that while ovarian cancer cells have minimal response
to TGF-beta, TGF-beta induced secretory proteins from cancer associated
fibroblasts (CAFs) promote ovarian cancer motility and invasion
potential. The present study seeks to further evaluate the involvement of
TGF-beta signaling in CAFs in the progression of ovarian cancer and the
therapeutic potential of targeting such signaling in cancer treatment.By
comparing the gene expression profiles of laser-microdissected ovarian
tumor stromal tissues from high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC)
patients with short and long survival, a differentially expressed gene
signature was identified. Using the IPA platform, signaling pathways and
upstream regulators activated in CAFs from patients with short survival
were identified. TGF-beta signaling was found to be significantly
activated (p = 2.47E-03), while the ligand TGF-beta 1 was identified as
the most significant upstream regulator (Z-score = 5.189, p = 8.85E-29),
suggested the involvement of CAF TGF-beta signaling in poor patient
survival. Further immunohistochemistry and survival analyses revealed the
clinical relevance of multiple TGF-beta regulated stromal genes,
including VCAN, MFAP5 and COMP in poor disease prognosis. Subsequently,
cell culture studies were performed to evaluate the effects of TGF-beta
in ovarian cancer progression. While exogenous TGF-beta did not affect
proliferation, motility and invasion potential of ovarian cancer cells
directly, TGF-beta promoted ovarian cancer cells motility and invasion
potential in a co-culture system of cancer cells and CAFs. Similarly,
treatment of exogenous TGF-beta-induced CAF secretory proteins promoted
ovarian cancer progression, suggested the presence of CAFs is required
for TGF-beta mediated ovarian cancer progression and targeting such
TGF-beta signaling in CAFs could be a novel modality of ovarian cancer
treatment. To reprogram CAFs by targeting its TGF-beta signaling,
multiple approaches were tested in co-culture systems. Using either
siRNAs or small molecule inhibitors, TGF-beta signaling in CAFs was
effectively suppressed and inhibited ovarian cancer progression was
observed. Based on our current findings, animal studies will be performed
to further evaluate the efficacy of targeting the CAF TGF-beta signaling
pathway in ovarian cancer treatment.This study presents the paradigm
which activation of TGF-beta signaling in ovarian CAFs is significantly
associated to the poor clinical outcomes. Targeting such pathway
activation in CAFs could effectively suppress tumor progression and
thereby presented a novel approach in cancer treatment.

