Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic heterogeneity and distinct driver mutations in synchronous
primary and metastatic breast cancers from therapy-nave patients


Background: The metastatic process may constitute a biological bottleneck
and may select for clones with genetic alterations that are distinct from
those found in the dominant clone of the primary tumor. Here we sought to
define whether the repertoires of somatic mutations found in biopsies of
primary tumors would differ from those of their respective metastatic
lesions in patients who did not receive any form of systemic
therapy.Methods: Flash frozen diagnostic biopsies from primary tumors and
their distant metastases were obtained from 9 prospectively accrued
treatment-nave patients with stage IV breast cancer at presentation (3
estrogen receptor (ER)+/HER2+, 2 ER+/HER2-, 2 ER-/HER2+ and 2 ER-/HER2-).
Metastatic lesions from the liver (5), bone (2), skin (1) or
contra-lateral axillary lymph node (1) were biopsied. An additional
formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) biopsy of each primary tumor and
metastasis, as well as plasma from 5 patients, were obtained. DNA from
microdissected frozen samples and peripheral blood, as well as plasma
from one patient, was subjected to high-depth whole exome sequencing and
gene copy number profiling. DNA from all biopsies (frozen/FFPE) and
plasma was subjected to targeted capture massively parallel sequencing
for all single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and insertions and deletions
(indels) found by exome sequencing and all exons of the 100 most
frequently mutated genes in breast cancer. Driver mutations were defined
by state-of-the-art bioinformatic methods and literature
curation.Results: In all cases, we detected founder genetic events in the
modal population of primary tumors and their respective metastatic
lesions (12-146 non-synonymous SNVs and 1-16 indels). Substantial genetic
differences were observed between primary and their metastasis from these
therapy-nave patients, with a median of 9 non-synonymous mutations (range
0-42, median 9.6% of mutations) restricted to the primary tumor and not
found in either biopsies of the metastases, and a median of 19 (range
1-73, median 20.2%) non-synonymous mutations restricted to the metastasis
and not found in either biopsies of the primary tumors. The repertoire of
mutations restricted to the metastatic lesions was unique to each case;
however, we observed an enrichment of genes involved in the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (e.g. TCF7L2, SMAD4, KRIT1 and
L1CAM). Plasma DNA analysis revealed that only 3.2%-38.3% of the
mutations found in the primary tumor or its metastatic deposit could be
detected in plasma.Conclusions: Therapy-nave primary breast cancers and
their metastatic deposits differ in their repertoire of genetic
alterations, even when two biopsies of each primary tumor and metastatic
lesions are analyzed. The assessment of targetable genetic alterations in
single biopsies from primary tumors may not be sufficient for the optimal
selection of precision medicine-based therapies.

