Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical associations between altered bladder cancer genes


Next generation sequencing (NGS) has identified frequently altered cancer
genes in urologic cancers including bladder cancer (BCa). We examined BCa
tumors from 54 U.S. patients using exome NGS and targeted sequencing, and
compared these to 99 extensively characterized Chinese patient tumors
(Guo et al., 2013). We are first to show that telomerase (TERT) is the
gene most frequently altered by somatic sequence changes in 37/54 (69%)
of tumors and that TERT is also altered by rare and common germline
variants in 30/54 (56%) tumors. Most TERT germline variants were novel
(19/20) and three variants were confirmed as both somatic and germline in
distinct tumors, including c. - 245 T>C (rs2853669), the most recurrent
variant. A subset of variants created or altered transcription factor
binding sites and promoter CpGs. Telomere length was significantly
shorter in tumor versus adjacent normal tissue from the same patient (p =
0.004) indicating TERT minimally lengthens telomeres in rapidly
proliferating BCa cells. Somatic TERT alterations were not associated
with stage, grade, or alterations in other BCa genes identified by exome
sequencing. STAG2 is altered by somatic mutations in 20/153 (13%) tumors
and by X chromosome deletions and promoter hypermethylation. STAG2 mutant
tumors had higher levels of aneuploidy (p = 0.01) and Kaplan-Meier
analysis indicated a poor prognosis due to significantly shorter survival
times (p Next generation sequencing (NGS) has identified frequently
altered cancer genes in urologic cancers including bladder cancer (BCa).
We examined BCa tumors from 54 U.S. patients using exome NGS and targeted
sequencing, and compared these to 99 extensively characterized Chinese
patient tumors (Guo et al., 2013). We are first to show that telomerase
(TERT) is the gene most frequently altered by somatic sequence changes in
37/54 (69%) of tumors and that TERT is also altered by rare and common
germline variants in 30/54 (56%) tumors. Most TERT germline variants were
novel (19/20) and three variants were confirmed as both somatic and
germline in distinct tumors, including c. - 245 T>C (rs2853669), the most
recurrent variant. A subset of variants created or altered transcription
factor binding sites and promoter CpGs. Telomere length was significantly
shorter in tumor versus adjacent normal tissue from the same patient (p =
0.004) indicating TERT minimally lengthens telomeres in rapidly
proliferating BCa cells. Somatic TERT alterations were not associated
with stage, grade, or alterations in other BCa genes identified by exome
sequencing. STAG2 is altered by somatic mutations in 20/153 (13%) tumors
and by X chromosome deletions and promoter hypermethylation. STAG2 mutant
tumors had higher levels of aneuploidy (p = 0.01) and Kaplan-Meier
analysis indicated a poor prognosis due to significantly shorter survival
times (p < 0.001). Somatic BAP1 alterations were associated with
papillary histologic features in 15% of Caucasian patient tumors but were
infrequently observed in Asian patients (p = 0.003), which remained
marginally significant after accounting for differences in tumor grade
and stage (p = 0.037). BAP1 mutations co-occurred with histone 3 lysine
27-specific demethylase (KDM6A) mutations (p = 0.017), indicating the
cancer genes might provide complementary survival advantages to cancer
cells. We find that cancer gene alterations are highly predictive of
canonical features of the BCa phenotype and 4-5 tumor suppressors are
altered for each oncogene. X chromosome cancer genes such as STAG2 and
KDM6A have a single copy in men and their lethality (as shown for STAG2)
likely contributes to the gender bias in cancer. We speculate that TERT
alterations are early events in BCa and identification of somatic
alterations in urine may provide a biomarker for early BCa diagnosis.
BAP1 mutations contribute to frequent BRCA pathway alterations in BCa and
indicate treatment with poly(ADP ribose) polymerase inhibitors would be
effective.

