Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of PHLPPs protects against colitis by inhibiting epithelial
apoptosis through upregulating AKT activity


Background & Aims: PHLPP, a novel family of protein phosphatases, plays
an important role in balancing cellular signaling pathways that control
cell death and proliferation. Loss of PHLPP expression promotes
colorectal cancer (CRC) tumorigenesis and progression. Intestine
epithelial cells (IECs) apoptosis contributes to the development of
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and patients with IBD are at increased
risk for CRC. We investigated the functional importance of PHLPP in
intestinal inflammation.Methods: Both Phlpp1 and Phlpp2 genes were
deleted in mice. The effect of PHLPP double knockout (DKO) on the
development of acute colitis was examined in dextran sulfate sodium salt
(DSS)-treated mice. Biochemical and histological analyses were conducted
to determine the extent of tissue inflammation and colon epithelial cell
apoptosis. The expression of PHLPP proteins was examined in DSS-treated
mice and IBD patient samples.Results: In ulcerative colitis and Crohn's
disease patient samples, both PHLPP1 and PHLPP2 protein expression was
markedly decreased in colitis tissues compared to that in uninvolved
tissues. In mice, PHLPP expression was significantly reduced in colonic
epithelial cells following induction of colitis by DSS. Mechanistically,
the inflammation-induced downregulation of PHLPP was mediated through
proteasome-dependent protein degradation. Compared with wild-type mice,
PHLPP DKO mice were protected from colitis induced by the DSS treatment
as demonstrated by lower histopathological scores, and this reduced
susceptibility to colitis was associated with decreased apoptosis and
increased Akt activity in colonic epithelial cells. Furthermore,
epithelial organoids derived from colon and small intestine of PHLPP DKO
mice are more resistant to inflammation-induced apoptosis upon Akt
activation.Conclusion: These results indicated that PHLPP contributes to
the pathogenesis of colitis by controlling epithelial cell apoptosis.
Downregulation of PHLPP at the onset of inflammation plays a role in
protecting intestinal epithelial cell injury by inhibiting apoptosis.
However, prolonged PHLPP-loss may promote colon cancer initiation in IBD
patients.

