Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new mathematical model and software, to enable improved
quantification and interpretation of combinatorial drug effects


Drug combinations are used commonly to treat patients with cancer.
Combination studies are conducted in vitro, to support advancement to in
vivo and/or clinical research. In order to interpret in vitro data,
mathematical models and numerical methods are used to quantify degrees of
drug synergism. Several traditional approaches exist but they have been
questioned with regard to how resulting synergy or antagonism levels
should be interpreted. Our aim was to develop a robust method to analyse
in vitro drug combination data, avoiding the issues related to
traditional models and methods. To facilitate its implementation,
software to enable rigorous and systematic assessment of combinations in
vitro was also developed. We have derived a new mathematical model to
identify synergy distributions based on drug combination dose response
surfaces. Our new model and the classical Bliss, Loewe and HSA models
were incorporated into the newly developed Combenefit software.
Combenefit enables systematic quantification of high-throughput screening
data, incorporating statistical assessment, metrics to describe synergy
distributions and advanced graphical visualisation. Using multiple
simulations of combination data with expected outcomes, our approach
showed that it always provided appropriate evaluation while classical
models failed to do so. We showed how our new model is in principle
better aligned with in vivo requirements of identifying combinations
which provide improvements compared to single agents. We then proceeded
to analyse a large high-throughput combination screen. We first
demonstrated that dataset assessment is strongly model-sensitive. We then
demonstrated that our new model identified the best combinations in terms
of dose response, thus confirming our simulated cases. Therefore, we have
developed a new mathematical model that solves fundamental issues of
model relevance that are encountered with classical models in the context
of drug combinations. The newly developed Combenefit software enables
easily performing rigorous and systematic quantification of in vitro
combinations based on this novel approach. (Combenefit is freely
available on our institutional website
http://www.cruk.cam.ac.uk/combenefit). The resulting procedure is robust
and better aligned with our perception of in vivo requirements.

