Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphoproteomic characterization of selumetinib action in KRAS
mutant lung cancer


In the field of lung cancer therapeutics, KRAS-mutant lung cancer is a
significant problem due to limited therapeutic options and poor
prognosis. Pathway inhibition of the RAS-driven RAF-MEK-ERK pathway using
small-molecule kinase inhibitors has been a key focus for treating
cancers driven by oncogenic RAS; however, significant clinical responses
are lacking. Our initial experiments assessed the efficacy of the
clinical MEK inhibitor AZD6244 (selumetinib) in a panel of non-small cell
lung cancer cell lines harboring oncogenic KRAS mutations. None of the
cell lines showed pronounced apoptosis nor did we observe significant
reduction in cell viability in nano-molar range (In the field of lung
cancer therapeutics, KRAS-mutant lung cancer is a significant problem due
to limited therapeutic options and poor prognosis. Pathway inhibition of
the RAS-driven RAF-MEK-ERK pathway using small-molecule kinase inhibitors
has been a key focus for treating cancers driven by oncogenic RAS;
however, significant clinical responses are lacking. Our initial
experiments assessed the efficacy of the clinical MEK inhibitor AZD6244
(selumetinib) in a panel of non-small cell lung cancer cell lines
harboring oncogenic KRAS mutations. None of the cell lines showed
pronounced apoptosis nor did we observe significant reduction in cell
viability in nano-molar range (<1 M). Given that cancer cells can rapidly
rewire signaling cascades to adapt to loss of survival signaling, we
hypothesized that a phosphoproteomics approach would provide further
insight into adaptive signaling alteration associated with AZD6244. To
this aim, we assessed global phosphoproteome change after AZD6244
treatment (1 M, 24hr) in A427 and A549 lung adenocarcinoma cell lines
harboring oncogenic KRAS mutations. We identified 7,730 unique
phosphopeptides (corresponding to 3,137 unique phosphoproteins) after
removing low-confidence phosphopeptides. We defined phosphopeptide
significantly altered by AZD6244 as one that has had quantity changed by
two-fold, corresponding to one standard deviation of fold change within
the data. This resulted in 882 increased and 831 decreased
phosphopeptides after MEK inhibition. As expected, AZD6244 decreased ERK
phosphorylation and induced feedback increase of MEK and B- and C-RAF
phosphorylation. In addition, we observed that AZD6244 increased tyrosine
phosphorylation (Y1172) and decreased serine phosphorylation (S1045) of
EGFR, which are involved in kinase activation and receptor trafficking,
respectively. We also found reduced inhibitory serine phosphorylation of
MET (S985), suggesting MEK inhibition could lead to MET activation by
relieving inhibitory serine phosphorylation. These observations raise the
possibility that MEK inhibition leads to feedback activation of RTKs, as
well as its downstream activation (e.g., wild-type RAS). Notably, AZD6244
increased phosphorylation of KSR-1, a scaffolding protein required for
assembly of MAPK signaling complex as well as phosphorylation of GEF-H1,
a recently reportedly novel regulator of KSR-1 required for proper
activation of RAS-driven MAPK activation. Collectively, our
phosphoproteomics results indicate altered phosphorylation of a series of
signaling proteins in MAPK signaling cascade, presumably contributing
feedback activation of RAF, MEK and ERK reactivation following MEK
inhibition. We are currently characterizing the importance of GEF-H1 and
KSR-1 in lung cancer cell growth and survival and their role in adaptive
signaling change associated with MEK inhibition. Updated work will be
presented.

