Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel tumor suppressor candidates and
characterizing their potential driver role in familial cholangiocarcinoma


Cholangiocarcinoma (bile duct cancer) is an epithelial malignancy
originating from the bile duct that connects the liver to the small
intestine. This carcinoma, while rare, has an extremely poor prognosis
with a 5-year survival of less than 10%. Initial clinical presentation
and diagnosis is frequently at an advanced stage and while amenable to
specific combination chemotherapy regimens, inevitably progresses towards
distal metastasis. Only recently has the molecular genetic underpinnings
of this cancer been explored with a number of genome sequencing studies
of a limited number of primary tumors.For this study, we used a
multi-faceted approach that integrates the genetic analysis of an
extended familial cholangiocarcinoma pedigree with identification of
somatic genetic aberrations discovered via primary tumor sequencing of
affected family members. Our goal was to identify potential novel tumor
suppressor(s) that have not yet been described and are associated with an
increased familial risk of cholangiocarcinoma. The extended pedigree was
characterized by multiple members with relatively young onset of
cholangiocarcinoma and displayed a segregation pattern consistent with an
autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Several members of the family had
undergone biopsy or resection and as a result, had primary tumor tissue
available for analysis.Relying on a combination of whole genome
sequencing, experimentally-derived haplotype phasing, exome sequencing
and tumor subclonal identification, we performed a combined germline and
somatic analysis on this pedigree. Our analysis included family members
both affected and unaffected by biliary cancers. Somatic variant analysis
of the tumor samples was used to identify driver mutations that may work
in concert with candidate germline mutation to initiate and maintain
tumorigenesis. Remarkably, the cancer genome sequencing analysis
identified a number of common somatic features among primary tumors found
in different family members. Analysis of tumor clonality was derived from
copy number and mutation data and further informed our analysis of
possible contributing drivers. To further inform the analysis of
suspected candidate germline loci, we conducted experimentally-based
haplotype phasing covering Megabase segments to better delineate blocks
that segregated with affected members. We identified several novel
candidate genes with germline mutations with a predicted deleterious
effect that segregated to affected individuals and had not been
previously noted as polymorphisms or rare variants. Thus, we identified
several candidate genes that may be novel tumor suppressor candidates for
cholangiocarcinoma and increase the susceptibility to this lethal tumor.
Overall, our study has significant implications by shedding light on the
genetic basis of cholangiocarcinoma.

