Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEK/ERK inhibitor GDC-0623 dephosphorylates and accumulates BIM
that enables a synergistic apoptosis with the Bcl-xL antagonist, ABT-263,
in mutant KRAS colorectal cancer cells


Background. Oncogenic KRAS mutations occur in nearly one-half of
colorectal cancers (CRC) where they contribute to de novo apoptosis
resistance and treatment failure. Inhibition of MEK/ERK is a promising
strategy to sensitize KRAS mutant tumors to apoptosis that may involve
upregulation of pro-apoptotic BH3-only proteins, including BIM. However,
BH3-only proteins can be neutralized by anti-apoptotic Bcl-xL that we
found was upregulated in isogenic KRAS mutant compared to wild-type
HCT116 and DLD1 CRC cells.Aims. We determined the ability and mechanism
by which a novel MEK/ERK inhibitor, GDC-0623, can induce BIM to promote
apoptotic signaling. A strategy of concurrent induction of BH3-only
proteins and antagonism of Bcl-xL was studied to overcome mutant
KRAS-mediated apoptosis resistance.Results. Using isogenic KRAS HCT116
cells and KRAS mutant SW620 cells, we found that GDC-0623 can potently
induce the BH3-only protein BIM, and to a lesser extent BIK, in both KRAS
wild-type and mutant cells. Only KRAS mutant cells remained resistant to
GDC-0623-induced apoptosis. Knockdown of Bcl-xL or use of a BH3 mimetic
drug, ABT-263, sensitized KRAS mutant cells to GDC-0623-mediated
apoptosis. GDC-0623 and ABT-263 were shown to interact synergistically to
promote apoptosis in KRAS mutant cells. Dependence on BIM or BIK for
synergy between GDC-0623 and ABT-263 was shown by shRNA knockdown that
each attenuated drug-induced apoptosis. Mechanistically, ABT-263
treatment was shown to release BIM from its binding to Bcl-xL using
immunoprecipitation. The ability of GDC-0623 to induce apoptosis occurred
via BIM that was phosphorylated by MEK/ERK activation leading to BIM
degradation. GDC-0623 was shown to dephosphorylate BIM at serine 69 in
cells with wild-type BIM or a phospho-mimic mutation (S69E). However,
GDC-0623's ability to dephosphorylate BIM was lost in cells containing a
phosphorylation-defective BIM mutation (S69G) that showed delayed BIM
degradation.Conclusion. GDC-0623 was shown to dephosphorylate BIM to
enhance its accumulation and to promote apoptosis. Concurrent induction
of BIM/BIK and antagonism of Bcl-xL can overcome mutant KRAS-mediated
apoptosis resistance, suggesting a promising therapeutic strategy against
KRAS mutant CRCs.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

