Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regugulation of osteosarcoma metastatic phenotype via
histone deacetylace inhibition


Introduction:The epigenetic modification of cancer cells regulates tumor
development and metastasis. Epigenetic changes include DNA methylation
and histone modification, both of which regulate gene expression but do
not alter the genetic code. We have demonstrated differential DNA
methylation status of tumor suppressor genes between highly metastatic
K7M2 osteosarcoma (OS) cells and less metastatic K12 OS cells. The
demethylation of tumor suppressor genes repressed the metastatic
phenotype of K7M2 cells. Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDAC inhibitors,
HDIs) have been evaluated for epigenetic regulation of various
malignancies, but the role of HDAC inhibitors in OS is unclear. Wehave
investigated the effect of the HDAC inhibitor, suberoylanilide hydroxamic
acid (SAHA), on highly metastatic K7M2 OS cells.Methods:1. Osteosarcoma
cells: K7M2 and K12 are murineOS cell populations with differing
metastatic potentials. K7M2 is highly metastatic to the lung but K12 is
much less metastatic.2. SAHA treatment: SAHA (25, 50, or 100 M) in
proliferation medium (10% FBS in DMEM) was used to culture the K7M2
cells. Cells were incubated with SAHA for 48 hours prior to fixation for
observation, harvesting for mRNA isolation, or plating for invasion
assays.Results:1. SAHA treatment (25, 50, or 100 M for 48 hours)
significantly decreased cell proliferation compared with untreated
cells.2. SAHA treatment of K7M2 cells modified cell morphology. K7M2
cells were cultured with or without SAHA (25, 50, 100 M) for 48 hours.
Staining of the actin cytoskeleton revealed structural differences in
SAHA-treated cells: treated cells displayed fewer invadopodia and their
shape was more polygonal, resembling less metastatic K12 cells.3. SAHA
treatment of K7M2 cells modified the expression tumorigenesis and
metastasis-related genes.Semi-quantitative polymerase chain reaction
showed that the expressions of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR),
aldehyde dehydrogenase-1 (ALDH-1), and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator 1 (PGC-1) were down-regulated in SAHA-treated
K7M2 cells. The expression of microtubule-associated protein 1A/1B-light
chain (LC3) was up-regulated.4. K7M2 cells were cultured with or without
SAHA (50 M) for 2 days, and their invasion capacity through 2.5% matrigel
was analyzed. SAHA treatment significantly reduced the cells invasion
capacity.Conclusion:These data demonstrate that highly metastatic OS
cells can be epigenetically modified with HDAC inhibition. SAHA treatment
of K7M2 cells reduced both their proliferation and invasiveness,
indicating that HDAC inhibition may potentially reduce tumor development
and metastasis. The effect of SAHA on OS cells could be related to
cytoskeletal changes and/or diminished expression of genes regulating
tumor development and metastasis. In the future we will test the ability
of SAHA to affect OS metastatic potential in vivo.

