Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Familial multiple metastatic small intestine neuroendocrine
tumors: searching for genetic susceptibility


Small intestinal neuroendocrine tumors (SI-NETs) originating from the
enterochromaffin cells of the intestinal mucosa are among the most common
tumors in the small intestine. In the past few decades the incidence of
SI-NETs has increased more than four-fold in the Western countries.
Although SI-NETs are usually well differentiated and indolent with low
mitotic activity, multiple discontinuous tumors are present in up to 1/3
of the patients and metastases are found in the majority of the patients
at diagnosis.Previous studies have described significantly elevated risk
for gastrointestinal NETs in family members of affected individuals. Our
recent nationwide registry-based analyses also showed high familial
enrichment for SI-NETs. MEN1 syndrome (MIM#131100) patients are often
affected by foregut NETs, but no genetic predisposition factor is known
for SI-NETs.We have studied a Finnish family of five affected individuals
with multiple SI-NETs. The affected individuals had also been diagnosed
with numerous adenomas of the colon. The family exhibits autosomal
dominant inheritance of SI-NETs with affected individuals in two
generations. To identify the possible genetic predisposing factor, we
performed genome-wide SNP genotyping and linkage analysis followed by
exome and genome sequencing. In addition, we have studied the somatic
alterations of the tumors by genome-wide copy number analysis and exome
sequencing.We have identified candidate chromosomal regions and genetic
variants in this family. Currently we are functionally validating the
pathogenicity of the variants and screening the variants in additional
familial and sporadic cases with SI-NETs, including a Swedish family of
three affected individuals in three generations and Finnish familial and
sporadic cases identified through Finnish Cancer Registry. Increased
understanding of tumor susceptibility is of great importance in creating
tools for better diagnosis and management of the patients.
Characterization of novel tumor susceptibility conditions and
identification of the associated gene defects also enable studies on
gene's biological function and role in other relevant phenotypes or
associated tumor types.

