Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) of indolino-benzodiazepine
DNA-alkylating agents


There are over thirty ADCs in the clinic today, reflecting the interest
in ADCs for the treatment of cancer. Most of these ADCs utilize a
tubulin-interacting small molecule as their cytotoxic payload. In order
to continue to extend the utility of ADCs to more types of cancers, there
is a strong interest in developing cytotoxic payloads with other
mechanisms of action. Previously we have described the development of a
class of indolino-benzodiazepine dimers (IGNs) with high potency and
specificity. ADCs made with a mono-imine containing IGN, which only
alkylate DNA, were found to display improved tolerability, along with the
absence of delayed toxicity, compared to their DNA-cross-linking di-imine
counterparts.Additional structure-activity relationship studies with
mono-imine containing IGNs have resulted in two promising new leads,
IGN-D1 and IGN-P1, which are conjugated to an antibody via either a
disulfide or peptide linker, respectively. ADCs of IGN-D1 and IGN-P1 were
prepared for evaluation using a folate receptor (FR)-binding antibody,
anti-FR, and EGFR-binding antibody, anti-EGFR.Anti-FR-IGN-D1 and
anti-FR-IGN-P1 were found to be highly potent against the FR-expressing
KB cell line (IC50 values of 8 pM and 4 pM, respectively) and also
demonstrated strong activity against nearby target-negative cancer cells.
The addition of excess unconjugated antibody blocked the cytotoxic effect
of these conjugates, thus demonstrating that their activity is antigen
specific. In addition, both anti-FR-IGN conjugates were found to be
highly potent (IC50 values of 100 pM and 30 pM, respectively) against the
breast ductal carcinoma cell line, T47D, despite only a moderate level of
antigen expression on the target cells. Similarly, anti-EGFR-IGN-D1 and
anti-EGFR-IGN-P1 were found to have IC50 values in the picomolar range
against a panel of EGFR-expressing cell lines. In vivo, anti-FR-IGN-D1
and anti-FR-IGN-P1 were found to be effective against NCI-H2110 non-small
cell lung cancer xenografts, with anti-tumor activity observed at single
doses as low as 3 g/kg (payload dose, equivalent to 0.15 mg/kg Ab
dose).These data support evaluation of new ADC therapies with these two
new IGNs for solid tumor indications as well as tumors with low antigen
expression.

