Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo efficacy of PSMA ADC in combination with enzalutamide in
castration-resistant prostate cancer


Despite multiple new treatment options for patients with
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), the overall survival benefit
still remains relatively short. Therefore, it is possible that combining
these and other new agents can potentially broaden individual therapeutic
windows by achieving greater efficacy and improved safety profiles.
Prostate-specific membrane antigen antibody-drug conjugate (PSMA ADC), a
fully human anti-PSMA antibody linked to monomethylauristatin E (MMAE),
is currently in phase 2 development for the treatment of CRPC. We have
previously demonstrated significant efficacy of PSMA ADC in advanced
prostate cancer patient-derived xenografts and moreover have also shown
synergy between PSMA ADC and enzalutamide (ENZ) in vitro. The objective
of the current studies was to evaluate the efficacy of PSMA ADC in
combination with ENZ to inhibit CRPC patient-derived xenografts (PDX) in
a preclinical setting.First, we performed a pilot study to determine a
sub-optimal dose for PSMA ADC, using LuCaP 96CR, a model of CRPC with
high PSMA expression that previously showed significant regressions in
response to PSMA ADC. Animals bearing subcutaneous LuCaP 96CR were
treated with a single dose of PSMA ADC (1, 2, or 5 mg/kg, IP) or a
non-PSMA targeted ADC (5 mg/kg) and followed for up to 10 weeks. PSMA ADC
demonstrated dose-dependent efficacy, and based on the results, a single
dose of PSMA ADC (2 mg/kg) was selected for combination treatment with
ENZ (50 mg/kg; 5x/week, oral gavage). The effects of the PSMA ADC+ENZ
combination were compared to PSMA ADC alone, ENZ alone, and placebo
control. At six weeks after the beginning of treatment the changes in
tumor volume were: fold increases of enrollment tumor volume in control
(4.9 0.40); ENZ (2.83 0.37); and PSMA ADC (1.6 0.43); and decrease in
tumor volume in the combination group (0.28 0.10). In the control and ENZ
groups all tumors were progressing at 6 weeks, while in the PSMA ADC
group there were 4 tumors that had decreased tumor volume, and all 11
animals in the PSMA ADC + ENZ groups had regressing tumors. The tumor
growth inhibition was also reflected by changes in serum PSA. Most
interestingly, a 12-week follow up and survival analysis show that all
three treatments resulted in significant survival benefits but the
combination therapy effects were the most pronounced resulting in ENZ vs
PSMA ADC+ENZ HR = 0.09 with P = 0.0415 and with no deaths observed in the
combination group. No significant negative side effects were associated
with the combination treatment. Additional post-treatment analyses are
underway.In summary, our results clearly indicate that the combination of
PSMA ADC+ENZ possesses strong antitumor activity in the LuCaP 96CR model
that is much more pronounced than the inhibitory effects of either agent
alone. These results provide a strong rationale for clinical testing of
PSMA ADC in combination with androgen-directed treatment strategies.

