Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of the novel AAV-based vectors with selective tropism
to human cancer cells


Cancer is a leading cause of human death worldwide. Commonly used methods
of treatment such as surgery, radiation and chemotherapy tend to be
largely successful but are extremely invasive and have serious toxic side
effects. The possibility of manipulating viral genomes and the natural
ability of viruses to efficiently infect various cell types has increased
an interest in using a virus-based delivery system to express cytotoxic
products within target cells. Thus, oncolytic viruses represent an
attractive alternative to currently used anti-cancer treatments. Among
different viral methods for gene delivery, vectors based on a human
parvovirus, the adeno-associated virus (AAV) has attracted much attention
mainly because of its non-pathogenic nature, and its ability to mediate
long-term, sustained therapeutic gene expression.In current studies
identified AAV serotype 6 being particularly effective in transduction of
several human prostate (PC3), breast (T47D) and liver (Huh7) cancer cell
in vitro. We also found that transduction efficiency of these vectors can
be significantly, up to 3-5-fold, improved by site-direct mutagenesis of
surface exposed residues involved in intracellular trafficking. Over
thirty single tyrosine (Y), serine (S), threonine (T) and multiple capsid
mutants were developed and AAV6-Y705-731F+T492V was identified the most
efficient.However, the vector promiscuity makes it difficult to use in
vivo. In the more recent studies on AAV crystal structure, combined with
various site-directed and insertion mutagenesis studies of the capsid
gene, have identified specific regions of the capsid proteins that are
surface-exposed and tolerant to insertion of the peptides. In the current
studies, we developed novel AAV-based vectors for targeting of human
cancer cells by incorporating Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) containing peptide to
enable AAV to infect integrin-expressing cells. These AAV6-RGD vectors
improve transduction efficiency for approximately 3-fold compare with
wild-type AAV6 vectors by enhancing viral entry to the cells.Combination
of RGD-peptide and mutations of surface-exposed residues on a single AAV6
capsid further increases transduction efficiency up to approximately
8-10-fold. We also introduced additional mutation at lysine (K531E) since
this was shown to impart a heparan sulfate proteoglycan binding ability
of vectors and, thus, decrease affinity to mice hepatocytes.We are
currently conducting studies on xenograft animal model in
immune-deficient mice to prove specificity and high transduction
efficiency of human cancer cells by AAV6-RGD-Y705-731F+T492V-K531E
vectors in vivo.In summary, this approach potentially can lead to the
development of therapeutic AAV vectors with selective tropism to human
cancer cells.

