Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exome sequencing of refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphomas
highlights candidate genes for targeted resequencing


As the most common lymphoid malignancy, Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma
(DLBCL) has largely benefited from immunochemotherapy combinations
developed in the past decade. However 30% to 40% of patients still do not
respond to treatment, or relapse in a few months. The mechanisms involved
in short term treatment failure are poorly understood, and biomarkers to
predict refractoriness in newly diagnosed patients are still lacking.To
address this issue, 14 normal / tumoral pairs of exomes from patients who
progressed or relapsed within 12 months were sequenced on a HiSeq2500
platform. Somatic events were called using VarScan2, and significantly
mutated pathways were highlighted by PathScan (False Discovery Rate, FDR
As the most common lymphoid malignancy, Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma
(DLBCL) has largely benefited from immunochemotherapy combinations
developed in the past decade. However 30% to 40% of patients still do not
respond to treatment, or relapse in a few months. The mechanisms involved
in short term treatment failure are poorly understood, and biomarkers to
predict refractoriness in newly diagnosed patients are still lacking.To
address this issue, 14 normal / tumoral pairs of exomes from patients who
progressed or relapsed within 12 months were sequenced on a HiSeq2500
platform. Somatic events were called using VarScan2, and significantly
mutated pathways were highlighted by PathScan (False Discovery Rate, FDR
< 0.001). Genes from 175 pathways were found to be more mutated than
expected according to the background mutation rate observed throughout
the exomes (2.68 non synonymous mutations per megabase, ranging from 0.69
to 4.66), including genes encoding histone monomers (HIST1H1/2) and
transcription regulators (CREBBP, EP300, TP53), members and relatives of
the NFKB signaling pathway (MYD88, TNFAIP3, NFKBIA/E), or other signaling
cascades (IRF4, CIITA, SOCS1).To pinpoint genes and pathways unusually
enriched in such refractory patients, a published series of 39 DLBCL
genome pairs was used (Morin et al, Blood 2013). Variant annotation and
filtering was reapplied to enforce target region consistency, and Fisher
tests were conducted independently in the two series. 22 of the 175
pathways selected by PathScan were found to be enriched in refractory
patients (FDR 0.5). One of the most relevant was IL4 mediated signaling
events, which includes genes such as STAT6, IRF4 or SOCS1.These 3 genes,
along with 31 other genes frequently mutated in DLBCL, were sequenced in
a series of 216 DLBCLs with an orthogonal method (PGM sequencer).
Although the survival impact of IL4 related gene mutations could not be
confirmed, their prevalence (17.5%) was far above what was previously
described in DLBCL. Molecular profiling by Affymetrix U133+2 arrays
revealed a strong association with the Primary Mediastinal B-Cell
lymphoma (PMBL) subtype (Fisher p = 5e-10), a molecular subtype observed
in 4/14 and 22/216 patients of the refractory and extended series
respectively.We propose here an exhaustive description of mutations found
in 14 exomes from refractory DLBCL patients, compared to 39 previously
published genomes. The extension to 216 patients enrolled in the LNH03
LYSA (LYmphoma Study Association) clinical trial program using targeted
resequencing and transcriptomic arrays allowed us to refine these
results, and highlight the high prevalence of somatic mutations in IL4
signaling related genes in PMBLs.

