Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal succession in pancreatic cancer progression is not driven
by genetic instability


Our group has recently shown that human pancreatic cancer (PDAC)
progression is driven by a succession of transiently active tumor
initiating cell (TIC) clones during serial xenotransplantation. Genetic
labeling demonstrated that serial PDAC xenograft tumors and even tumors
of parallel mice transplanted with cells from the same donor xenografts
harbored very little to no overlap of active TIC clones, indicating
substantial changes in the proliferative activity of individual TIC
predominantly producing progeny without detectable tumor-initiating
activity. We now asked whether observed clonal activation and
inactivation is caused by acquisition of de novo mutations during
evolution of genetic subclones or by functional plasticity of genetically
stable TIC clones. Therefore, we monitored somatic non-synonymous
mutations in culture and during PDAC progression in genetically marked
serial xenografts of two patients. DNA was isolated from xenografts,
primary TIC cultures and corresponding normal pancreas or primary tumor
tissue. Following paired-end exome sequencing, reads were aligned to a
concatenated hs37d5 human and mm10 mouse genome assembly and human
specific single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and small insertions/deletions
(indels) were identified. We found a total of 45 altered gene coding
genomic loci (P1 = 10; P2 = 35) not present in control tissue.
Strikingly, most SNVs detected were present in all samples, only very few
SNV were acquired during serial transplantation. In P1, 4 novel SNVs not
present in the original patient tumor sample were detected within coding
regions of TTC13, OR4K15, SSPO and TPGS1. Allele frequencies ranged from
2-27% in serial xenografts. In xenografts of P2 we detected 35 SNVs not
present in healthy tissue. Of these, one mutation in the gene C10orf12
aroused after serial transplantation with a maximum altered allele
frequency of 17%. None of these mutations is a known cancer driver or was
found as recurrent in large scale cancer sequencing approaches. To
evaluate whether the clonal TIC dynamics within established tumors are
recapitulated in vitro, we analysed individual TIC clone kinetics in
serially passaged cultures and in cultures derived from transduced
xenografts. Strikingly, the kinetics in vitro were similar to those
observed within serially transplanted xenografts. Every culture passage
was formed by a distinct set of actively proliferating cell clones
without significant overlap between individual serial passages indicating
that clonal succession of TIC activity in PDAC is not dependent on the
cellular context in tumors in vivo. The remarkable genetic stability of
xenografts during serial transplantation strongly indicates that changes
in the functional state of PDAC cells and not genetic instability drive
clonal succession of TIC activity in PDAC.

