Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCL2 recruits inflammatory monocytes to facilitate perineural
invasion


Perineural invasion (PNI) by cancer cells is associated with significant
patient morbidity and poor prognosis. Despite recognition of the clinical
significance of PNI, the mechanisms underlying it remain poorly
understood and no targeted therapies exist to date. Modern theories of
PNI pathogenesis have placed significant focus on the active role of the
nerve microenvironment with PNI resulting from well-orchestrated
interactions between cancer and host. Inflammatory monocytes (IMs) play a
critical role in mediating peripheral nerve repair and facilitating
cancer metastases by differentiating into tumor-associated macrophages.
Here we explore their role in PNI.CCR2 expressed by IMs is a receptor for
ligands CCL2 and CCL7, and mediates IM recruitment in infections and
other cancer models. A murine model of nerve invasion in which pancreatic
cancer (Panc02) is injected into the distal sciatic nerve, was utilized
in mice genetically deficient in CCL2, CCL7, or CCR2. Validated
functional and histopatholgic endpoints were used to quantify PNI.
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and immunohistochemistry (IHC)
were performed on specimens to assess IM and macrophage recruitment.
Adoptive transfer experiments with labeled IMs were performed to
elucidate the signaling pathways involved in homing to the nerve.
Genetically modified green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged reporter mice
were utilized to identify cellular sources of the relevant chemokines.
IHC was performed on human tumors with PNI to assess for macrophage
recruitment.The recruitment of IMs is dependent on CCL2 synthesized
within the nerve. IMs recruited to the nerve differentiate into
macrophages within 24-72 hours upon arrival. Mice deficient in CCL2 or
CCR2 have impaired IM recruitment and reduced macrophage differentiation
in the nerve at the site of PNI, and significantly impaired invasion.
Furthermore, PNI was restored in CCR2 KO mice after multiple adoptive
transfers of wild type IMs with intact CCR2. By contrast, CCL7 KO mice
have only a modest, non-significant decrease in PNI. In the presence of
cancer, CCL2 but not CCL7, is expressed locally in the nerve, likely by
Schwann cells responding to the cancer invasion. IMs recruited to the
nerve serve as an alternate source of CCL2. Human tumors with PNI
demonstrate CD68+ macrophages at the site of nerve invasion.These results
implicate the immune response as a key mediator of PNI and thereby
further our mechanistic understanding of this ominous cancer behavior.
Our data identify potential novel therapeutic targets for treating PNI.

