Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The lung microenvironment influences the metastatic behavior of
breast cancer cells in an innovative 3D ex vivo pulmonary metastasis model


Breast cancer remains a leading cause of mortality among women, with the
majority of deaths attributed to metastatic disease. In particular, the
lung is one of the most common and deadly sites of breast cancer
metastasis, particular in women with more aggressive molecular subtypes
such as Her2+ and triple-negative breast cancer. However, it still
remains unclear whether the propensity of breast cancer cells to
metastasize to the lung reflects properties of cancer cells themselves,
properties of the lung microenvironment, or a combination of both. Both
cancer initiation and progression can in part be attributed to small
subsets of stem cell-like tumor cells, which in breast cancer are
characterized by high aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity and/or
expression of the CD44+CD24- phenotype (ALDHhiCD44+). We have previously
shown that ALDHhiCD44+ breast cancer cells demonstrate preferential
migration and growth in response to lung-derived soluble factors, and an
increased propensity to metastasize to the lung in vivo. The objective of
this study was to use an innovative 3D ex vivo pulmonary metastasis model
(PuMA) that incorporates the native 3D architecture of the lung in order
to test the hypothesis that whole population and stem-like ALDHhiCD44+
breast cancer cell metastatic behavior is influenced by the lung
microenvironment. Red fluorescent protein (RFP)-expressing MDA-MB-231 and
MDA-MD-468 breast cancer cells were seeded (5105 cells) to the lungs of
female nude mice by tail vein injection. Following euthanasia, lungs were
excised, sliced into 1 mm transverse sections, and grown in culture under
serum-free conditions over 21 days. Sections were imaged at 0, 7, 14 and
21 days to observe growth and progression. Using H&E and Masson's
Trichrome staining, we confirmed that lung sections remained healthy with
intact pulmonary architecture over 21 days in culture. Over a 14-day
period, we observed significant growth of MDA-MB-231 whole breast cancer
cell populations in this assay at day 14 relative to day 7 and day 0
(p0.05). Sorted populations of MDA-MB-231 ALDHhiCD44+ cells showed
significant growth at days 14 (p0.001) and 21 (p0.0001) compared to their
ALDHlowCD44- counterparts. ALDHhiCD44+ cells also progressed from the
single cell state (400 m) colonies during 21 days. Conversely,
ALDHlowCD44- cells showed no such progression and remained predominantly
as single cells throughout the assay. Together these results demonstrate
that the PuMA assay sustains healthy lung architecture over 21 days, and
that aggressive breast cancer cells interact with the lung to grow and
progress as metastatic colonies. Ultimately, the results of this study
will provide a greater understanding of the contribution of the lung
microenvironment in mediating breast cancer metastasis.

