Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Nkx3.1 homeobox gene maintains prostatic identity while its
loss leads to prostate cancer initiation


BackgroundMaintenance of epithelial cell identity is tightly coordinated
by tissue-specific gene expression programs, which are often deregulated
during tumorigenesis. The homeodomain-containing transcription factor,
Nkx3.1, is a key regulator of normal prostatic development and is
frequently lost at early stages of prostate cancer initiation. In this
study, we aim to elucidate detailed mechanisms governing Nkx3.1-driven
maintenance of prostate identity and how deregulation of such can lead to
prostate tumorigenesis.Models and MethodsWe evaluated the consequences of
Nkx3.1 loss or gain of function in vivo using genetically-engineered
mouse models and cell-recombination assays. RNA sequencing was performed
to generate gene expression profiles, which were analyzed using Gene Set
Enrichment analysis (GSEA), and validated by quantitative real-time PCR.
In parallel, protein expression was assessed by immunofluorescence and
western blot. Immunoprecipitation (IP) and chromatin-immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assays were performed using RWPE1 prostate epithelial
cells.ResultsHere, we show that loss of function of Nkx3.1 leads to the
progressive down-regulation of a prostate-specific gene expression
program and to aberrant expression of genes that are not typically
expressed in the prostate epithelium. Conversely, gain of function of
Nkx3.1 in non-prostatic epithelium leads to the acquisition of a
prostate-like morphology and expression of prostate-related genes. Our
findings indicate that the underlying mechanism by which Nkx3.1 promotes
prostatic identity is via epigenetic regulation of gene expression. In
particular, we show that Nkx3.1 interacts with the histone
methyl-transferase complex G9a/Glp. Finally, we demonstrate that this
interaction is necessary for maintenance of prostate identity in vivo and
that Nkx3.1 and G9a cooperate to control expression of genes that
coordinate prostatic epithelial integrity.ConclusionsOur results suggest
that Nkx3.1 promotes prostatic identity by interacting with histone
modifying enzymes to coordinate the expression of prostate-specific genes
and that the loss of this function results in a failure to maintain
prostate identity associated with early stages of prostate tumorigenesis.

