Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuroblastoma express a novel EGFR extracellular mutation,
EGFR768, which possesses distinct biological and biochemical properties


Background:Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) is a biologic target
for cancer therapy. Clinical response to EGFR inhibitors is variable.
Recently, EGFR mutations were found to predict response to anti-EGFR
therapy. Since a few children with Neuroblastoma (NB) benefited from EGFR
inhibitors in clinical trials, we screened for EGFR mutations in primary
NB. Interestingly, we identified the expression of both EGFRvIII and a
novel mutation, EGFR768, in these tumors. In this study, we characterized
the EGFR768 mutation by comparing its biological and biochemical effect
with that of wild type (WT)-EGFR and EGFRvIII.Hypothesis:EGFR768
expression confers an aggressive cancer phenotype in NB cellsMaterials
and Methods:We obtained 62 Snap Frozen primary neuroblastic tumors from
the Columbus Bipathology Repository Center and 80 NB RNA from the
Children Oncology Group (COG). Primary NB were prepared for RT-PCR and
sequencing analyses using EGFR exon 1 & 8 primers. Five NB cell lines
were obtained and confirmed by STR profiling. The EGFR768 and EGFRvIII
deletions were subcloned into a WT-EGFR expression vector with a
C-terminal GFP tag. Next, stable 3T3 and NB clones expressing WT and
mutant EGFR were generated. The clones were visualized under fluorescence
microscopy. Invasion and XTT assays were performed with the stable
clones. Responses to Erlotinib from 0.01 - 1 ng/ul and Etoposide from 0.5
- 2 uM were compared among the clones by XTT and western analyses. EGFR
phosphorylation and downstream signaling pathways were examined by
Western Blot and phosphokinase array.Results:We previously reported that
32% (20/62) of the Columbus neuroblastic tumors expressed EGFR
extracellular deletion mutants, EGFR768 (an in-frame deletion from
nucleotides 102 of exon 2 to 869 of exon 7) and EGFRvIII (801). In the 80
COG NB RNA, 7 expressed EGFR768, 7 expressed EGFRvIII and 1 expressed
both. EGFR768 expression was also detected in the NB cell line, BE2M17.
This novel mutant localized to the cell surface and enhanced the invasion
and proliferation of NB cells in vitro when compared to control GFP+
cells. Its expression also confers sensitivity to Erlotinib, but the
biochemical inhibition of Erlotinib on EGFR768 is significantly less
effective than that on activated WT-EGFR from 0.01 - 0.1 ng/ul. EGFR768+
cells were also significantly more resistant to Etoposide than the GFP
and WT-EGFR+ cells. Although both EGFR768 and EGFRvIII autophosphorylated
without ligand, the cellular proliferation rate and baseline
autophosphorylation of EGFR768+ cells were significantly higher than
those of EGFRvIII+ cells. Finally, we found that EGFR768 did not activate
downstream signaling pathways of WT-EGFR such as MAPK or STAT. It has a
different tyrosine phosphorylation profile than
WT-EGFR.Conclusion:EGFR768 confers aggressive cancer cell behaviors and
has distinct biological as well as biochemical properties.

