Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient derived xenograft (PDX) models: improving predictability
of experimental cancer therapies


Clinical development of cancer therapies is associated with attrition
rates as high as 80-95%. This high attrition suggests that standard
preclinical pharmacology models do not accurately reflect clinical
responses. The development of more predictive preclinical models requires
several considerations; the relevance of the in vivo model, the
administration of test agent, and the interpretation of efficacy data.
PDX are cancer models developed from the direct transfer of patient tumor
tissue into immunocompromised mice. A collection of PDX models, by
retaining the genetic and histologic characteristics of the patients from
which they were derived, represents the complexity and heterogeneity of
human cancer. To minimize the clinical attrition rates of oncology
compounds, we are developing hundreds of PDX models in seven major cancer
indications. The collection is being molecularly profiled by RNAseq, WES,
and proteomics. Profiling has identified models with robust expression of
target proteins or mutant oncogenes that are likely to respond in
preclinical efficacy tests. Conversely, the PDX models may provide an
understanding of resistance, for example evaluating models with good
target expression that fail to respond to therapy. Patient and tumor
information, if known, has been collected for each PDX model including
age, sex, cancer stage and grade, diagnosis, primary or metastatic site,
and prior treatments. In addition to the improvements provided by the PDX
models, a preclinical paradigm shift away from treatment with maximally
tolerated dose towards clinically relevant dose (CRD), taking into
consideration such aspects as exposure, formulation, route and schedule,
is critical when attempting to predict clinical outcome from preclinical
data. Also essential is the incorporation of clinically meaningful
endpoints (regression) when assessing preclinical activity. We have
initiated studies on cohorts of non small cell lung and breast PDX models
to predict the likely clinical efficacy of candidate compounds for
clinical development and to determine the CRD for standard of care (SOC)
regimens required to define the most promising Phase II/III combination
therapies. Anti-tumor activities were characterized using RECIST criteria
of progressive disease (PD), stable disease (SD), partial response (PR),
and complete response (CR). Target expression was evaluated by RNA,
proteomics and immunohistochemistry. Preliminary results demonstrate a
spectrum of responses against experimental therapeutics, including Phase
I ADCs and are defining the CRD required for combination treatments with
SOC. Identification of the most critical parameters of PDX models
predicting clinical outcome will help in validating the utility of n of 1
studies with the PDX collection, inform patient enrollment strategies,
guide combination therapies, and provide insight for identifying new
tumor indications.

