Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CODEX: a normalization and copy number variation detection method
for whole-exome sequencing


Background: High throughput sequencing of DNA coding regions has become a
common way of assaying genomic variation in the study of cancer. Copy
number aberration (CNA) is an important type of genomic change, but
detecting and characterizing CNA from whole-exome sequencing (WES) is
challenging due to the high level of biases and artifacts.Methods: We
propose CODEX, a normalization and CNA calling procedure for WES data.
The Poisson latent factor model in CODEX includes terms that specifically
remove biases due to GC content, exon capture and amplification
efficiency, and latent systemic artifacts. CODEX also includes a Poisson
likelihood-based recursive segmentation procedure that explicitly models
the count-based WES data. CODEX can be used to detect both germline and
somatic CNAs in cancer samples with or without matched normal.Results:
Compared to existing approaches, CODEX is shown to be more effective in
removing the biases in WES, and attains better sensitivity and
specificity in detecting copy number aberrations by in silico spike-in
studies. We further evaluate performance on 222 neuroblastoma samples
with matched normal from the Therapeutically Applicable Research to
Generate Effective Treatments (TARGET) Project. We carry out systematic
genome-wide analysis and detailed characterization of both germline and
somatic copy number events. With a focus on a well-studied rare somatic
CNV within the ATRX gene, we show that the cross-sample normalization
procedure of CODEX is more effective in removing noise than the standard
pipeline of normalizing the tumor against the matched normal, and that
the segmentation procedure performs well in detecting CNVs with recurrent
complex nested structures. For detecting germline mutations, CODEX is
compared to existing methods on a population analysis of HapMap samples
from the 1000 Genomes Project, and shown to be perform well on three
microarray-based validation data sets.Conclusions: The cross-sample
normalization procedure of CODEX, when applied to the matrix of tumor and
normal samples, is more effective in reducing noise than normalizing each
tumor to its matched normal. The somatic deletions in the ATRX region
have a nested structure, which CODEX was able to recover. Through
multiple types of validation, CODEX is shown to be applicable to a wide
range of study designs for copy number estimation using WES data.

