Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and synthesis of novel autophagy inhibitors with
anti-proliferative activity in lung and pancreatic cancer cells


Autophagy is an emerging therapeutic target in cancer chemotherapy. It is
a regulated catabolic process that degrades damaged cellular proteins and
organelles, and helps to maintain cellular homeostasis and biosynthesis
during nutrient starvation, metabolic stress, oncogenic transformation,
and in response to chemotherapeutic drugs. Recent studies using mouse
genetic models of lung and pancreatic cancer reported dramatic tumor
regressions when autophagy was ablated, either genetically or
pharmacologically, in either the tumors or systemically in the mouse.
These studies provide pre-clinical proof of principle that strategies to
inhibit autophagy can be therapeutically efficacious in solid tumors. The
autophagy inhibitors chloroquine (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) have
single agent antiproliferative activity against human cancer cell lines,
however low potency may limit their antitumor efficacy clinically. As
part of our ongoing chemistry program to discover novel autophagy
inhibitors, we synthesized a series of chloroquine analogs which retained
the 4-aminoquinoline subunit and incorporated different substituted
triazoles into the target structure. These compounds were tested for
growth inhibition against H460, HCC827, H520 and H1703 human lung cancer
cell lines, and BxPC3 pancreatic cancer cells. The most potent compound,
EAD1, had IC50s ranging from 5.8 M to 11 M in the cells, and was 8-fold
more potent than CQ and HCQ. EAD1 inhibited autophagy, as judged by the
cellular accumulation of the autophagy-related autophagosome proteins
LC3-II and p62, and induced apoptosis. The increases in LC3-II levels by
the analogs were inversely correlated with their growth inhibitory IC50s,
suggesting that autophagy blockade is closely linked to inhibition of
cell proliferation. In contrast to HCQ, the cytotoxic actions of EAD1
were not reversible after a 24 hour treatment. Furthermore, the mechanism
of action of EAD1 appears to partially differ from that of HCQ, including
possible interactions with mTOR/TORC1-mediated pathways. EAD1 is a viable
lead compound for evaluation of the anti-tumor activity of autophagy
inhibitors in vivo.

