Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing the Stupp regimen in glioblastoma cancer cells with a
T-type calcium channels inhibitor


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and lethal primary brain
tumor. Although introduction of the Stupp regimen combining radiation
(IR) with concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide (TMZ) led to increased
patient survival, the cure rate of GBM is disappointing. We postulated
that sensitization of cancer cells to therapy can be achieved by
targeting intracellular pathways and processes. Recently, T-type Ca2+
channels have been proposed as a molecular target for GBM sensitization
to chemo- and radiotherapy (Keir et al., 2013; Sheehan et al., 2013). In
the present studies, we investigated the effects of T-type channel
inhibition on GBM cells responses to the Stupp regimen. GBM cells
differing in their resistance to TMZ and IR were treated with theT-type
channel antagonist, mibefradil, either concomitantly with TMZ or
sequentially (Interlaced TherapyTM). Cell viability and clonogenic
survival were determined, demonstrating significant enhancement of the
Stupp regimen's anticancer effects with co-treatment with T-type channels
inhibitors. Importantly for DNA-targeted therapies, we observed a
decrease in cells ability to repair DNA damage in the presence of
mibefradil. The molecular mechanism of this decrease was investigated by
assessing expression levels, localization and phosphorylation status of
ATM, DNA-PK, H2AX, Chk1/2, Kap1, p53, Rad51. These mechanistic studies
demonstrated that inhibiting T-type Ca2+ channels in GBM affects DNA
damage signaling and repair through reduction of repair protein
activation and changes their cellular localization. The observed effects
are specific for T-type channels inhibition, since L-type channels
inhibitors had no effect. Our study provide a rational molecular
mechanism for sensitization of GBM to the Stupp regimen by T-type Ca2+
channel inhibition, which will facilitate current and future clinical
trials and potentially lead to new treatment options for this deadly
brain tumor.

