Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Goniothalamin, a natural product, modulates the inflammatory
microenvironment on colitis and colitis-associated cancer


Despite anticancer drug discovery advances, the worldwide cancer
incidence is remarkable. Thus, there is continuous necessity on new
therapies development and tumor microenvironment offers multiple targets
for cancer therapy, including inflammation. Nature has been a source of
new therapeutic and preventive agents and the styryl-lactone
goniothalamin (GTN) has shown to be a promising anti-proliferative and
anti-inflammatory agent. In previous studies we showed that GTN has
pro-apoptotic activity, gastroprotective effects and inhibits tumor
development and acute inflammation in mice. Thus, the major goal of this
study was to evaluate the therapeutic and preventive potentials of GTN on
colitis and colitis-associate cancer (CAC) models, focusing on the
elucidation of the relationship between the anti-proliferative and
anti-inflammatory activities.GTN was synthesized and evaluated in vitro
in LPS-stimulated RAW 264.7 murine macrophages. Cells were pre-treated
with GTN (20 M) for 3 hours and then stimulated with LPS (1 g/mL) for 4
hours. Gene expression was analyzed by real-time PCR and cytokines
production by ELISA. Experimental colitis was induced by 3.5% dextran
sulfate sodium (DSS) for 7 days and animals (mice, C57-BL/6) were treated
with GTN daily by oral route (30 and 100 mg/kg). CAC was induced by
Azoxymethane (AOM, 10 mg/kg) followed by 3 cycles of DSS (3.0%) and
treatments with GTN (30 mg/kg) were conducted by oral route, twice week.
Body weight was checked every week and in the end of experiments, colon
tissues were collected and processed for microscopic, biochemical and
gene expression evaluations.GTN significantly reduced IL-1, IL-6, TNF-,
IL-23, CXCL2 and iNOS expression on RAW cells, as well as levels of
secreted IL-6 and TNF-. Treatments with GTN also reduced inflammation
severity on DSS-induced colitis model by reducing cytokines expression,
thus suggesting a modulatory activity of the inflammatory environment.
GTN treatment modulated tumor development in a mouse model of CAC.
Together with previous data, these results highlight that goniothalamin
can be used as a preventive and therapeutic agent to inhibit inflammation
in colitis and cancer.

