Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Standardization and optimization of circulating microRNA serum
profiling in patients with cancer


Background Circulating microRNAs (miRNAs) in blood have recently emerged
as promising non-invasive biomarkers for cancer diagnosis and prognosis.
Standardization of circulating miRNA profiling methodology is lacking.
This may explain contradictory results reported in the same tumor type.We
performed a comparative analysis of different extraction methods for
circulating miRNA profiling in patients with cancer. Furthermore, several
pre-analytical factors that might confound miRNA recovery were assessed
to determine their influence on the serum miRNA profile.Methods
Commercially available RNA isolation kits were compared by performing
targeted miRNA expression profiling in pooled serum from patients with
cancer and healthy donors. MiRNA expression was determined by qRT-PCR
using Taqman microRNA Assays or Exiqon ExiLENT SYBR Green. Normalization
was performed using miR-16-5p and an RNA spike (cel-miR-39) for quality
control. For each RNA isolation kit, the effect of RNA carriers glycogen,
bacteriophage MS2 or their combination was assessed.To establish the
temporal fluctuation of miRNA expression in individual patients we
designed a pilot study in a cohort of 10 head and neck cancer patients.
We compared the circulating miRNA profile of two pretreatment serum
samples which were collected with a minimum interval of 24 hours.The
influence of serum coagulation time and serum indices for: hemolysis,
lipemia and icterus (Roche Modular) on the miRNA profile was
assessed.Results The use of the miRCURY kit (Exiqon), measuring miR-16,
miR-16-5p and miR-20a, resulted in the most reproducible miRNA serum
profile. The addition of glycogen promoted the miRNA extraction yield
(average Ct value decreased from 27.43 to 26.26), but resulted in
decreased reproducibility (standard error of mean (SEM) 0.40 vs 0.92,
respectively). Reproducibility of miRNA detection could be restored after
the addition of MS2. We demonstrate that combining RNA carriers MS2 and
glycogen with the miRCURY isolation kit results in enhanced
reproducibility and RNA yield (avg. raw Ct 25.94SEM 0.30). Targeted
detection of 5 miRNAs in serum from 9 patients with cancer and 10 healthy
donors demonstrated high reproducibility of miRNA levels in both groups
(SEM range: 0.16 to 0.49). Standardization of the method is
ongoing.Conclusion Circulating miRNAs are emerging as potential
prognostic and predictive biomarkers in cancer. We here demonstrate a
non-invasive, optimized method for miRNA profiling from clinical blood
samples. Intra,- and interexperimental miRNA expression levels were
highly reproducible. Developing a standardized, optimized method for
miRNA profiling is pivotal for future clinical applications.

