Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome wide analysis of AR-cell cycle interplay reveals novel
functions in cancer


The androgen receptor (AR) plays a vital role in prostate cancer (PCa)
due in part to its ability to interact with cell cycle components in
order to drive cell cycle transition. Numerous points of cross-talk have
been identified, wherein specific components of the cell cycle machinery
feed back to modulate AR function, and these interactions are thought to
be altered in human malignancies. Despite these observations, the
majority of genome wide analyses for AR have been performed in cells that
have exited cell cycle (G0). Here, the cell cycle dependent AR
transcriptome and cistrome was identified, revealing new and unexpected
functions for AR in cycling tumor cells. In studies to be discussed,
cells were arrested in 5 distinct phases of the cell cycle, stimulated
with androgen, and AR activity assessed through gene expression and
ChIP-Seq analyses. In AR binding analyses, significant overlap was seen
with previously identified sites, but were accompanied by novel binding
events that could be segregated into those that are specific to cycling
cells and occur in all phases (cell cycle common) or show cell cycle
stage specific binding (phase exclusive). Over 50% of the cell cycle
common sites, and up to 95% of the phases exclusive sites were novel AR
occupied sites. Additionally, using a guilty by association approach to
determine potentially AR regulated genes from this novel cistromic data,
it was determined that close to 50% of cell cycle common, and 70% of
phase exclusive binding uncover novel candidates for AR regulation.
Cistrome data was therefore overlaid with microarray data, to prioritize
discovery of meaningful, cell cycle specific AR binding events. Analyses
to be discussed reveal striking new insight into disease relevant AR
function. In sum, these data rigorously demonstrate that AR acts in a
cell cycle dependent manner, and that these functions of AR have a major
impact on tumor cell phenotypes.

