Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of nitric oxide in invasiveness of tumor cells irradiated
with carbon-ion beams


We previously reported that carbon-ion (C-ion) irradiation suppresses the
invasiveness of several pancreatic cancer cell lines such as MIAPaCa-2,
BxPC-3, and AsPC-1; however, we also observed that C-ion irradiation
enhanced PANC-1 invasion. Most invading PANC-1 cells were nitric oxide
(NO)-producing cells; the NOS-NO-PI3K-AKT pathway was activated in these
cells. In addition, the actin-binding AKT substrate, Girdin, which
modulates the actin organization and has important role in AKT-dependent
cell motility, was activated and co-localized with p-AKT at the
lamellipodia. C-ion irradiation increased the NO-producing cell
population, thereby enhancing C-ion irradiation-enhanced PANC-1 invasion.
In contrast to PANC-1 cells, NO levels as well as the number of
NO-producing cells were decreased in C-ion irradiated MIAPaCa-2,
indicated that the NO reduction might cause the suppression of MIAPaCa-2
invasion. The aim of this study is to clarify the role of NO in altered
invasiveness of C-ion irradiated tumor cells. Treatment of PANC-1 with NO
donor, DETA/NO, enhanced PANC-1 invasion. Interestingly, DETA/NO also
increased MIAPaCa-2 invasion, indicated that NO contributes to the
enhancement of MIAPaCa-2 invasiveness. The reduced invasiveness of C-ion
irradiated MIAPaCa-2 was slightly but significantly recovered by the
treatment with DETA/NO, but the recovered levels were still much less
than the invasiveness of non-irradiated MIAPaCa-2. Thus, the reduction of
NO levels involves in the decreased invasiveness of C-ion irradiated
MIAPaCa-2, but there are additional factor regulating the invasiveness of
cells irradiated with C-ion beams. Indeed, C-ion irradiation reduced
GTP-Rac1 and GTP-RhoA expression, the active form of Rac1 and RhoA, which
are known as two master regulators of cell motility. The reduction of
GTP-Rac1 or GTP-RhoA was recovered by the treatment of proteasome
inhibitor, indicated that those proteins were undergo degradation via the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. So far, IAPs, Inhibitors of Apoptosis
Proteins, and HACE1, HECT-domain containing E3 ubiquitin-ligase, were
reported as direct E3 ubiquitin ligase of Rac1. Of those, XIAP was
selectively induced and was co-precipitated with GTP-Rac1 in C-ion
irradiated MIAPaCa-2. In conclusion, NO has a significant role in
enhancing invasive potential of both PANC-1 and MIAPaCa-2 cells. The
alteration of NO levels upon C-ion irradiation modulates the invasiveness
of irradiated cells. Also, reductions of GTP-Rac1 and GTP-RhoA have the
additional effects on the C-ion reduced MIAPaCa-2 invasion. Several
studies have reported that NO modulates ubiquitin-proteasomal degradation
of proteins. The effect of NO on the GTP-Rac1 and GTP-RhoA degradation
remain unknown, and further researches are needed to clarify whether the
NO reduction affects to the GTP-Rac1 or GTP-RhoA degradation observed in
C-ion irradiated MIAPaCa-2.

