Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The iron-overload genetic disease hemochromatosis potentiates
colonic inflammation and colon carcinogenesis


Hemochromatosis is a highly prevalent genetic disease associated with
excessive iron accumulation in a variety of tissues in an age-dependent
manner. In a majority of patients (>85%) with hemochromatosis, mutations
in the iron-regulatory gene HFE are the cause. Iron, when present in
excess, is an inducer of oxidative stress and suppresses mitochondrial
function. Patients with hemochromatosis show evidence of colonic
inflammation. Further, some studies have shown increased risk for colon
cancer associated with genetic mutations known to cause hemochromatosis.
Based on these findings in the literature, we hypothesized that
hemochromatosis is an important determinant of disease progression in
patients with colitis and colon cancer. We tested this hypothesis by
comparing progression of experimentally induced colitis and colon cancer
between wild type mice and Hfe-null mice, a model for hemochromatosis. We
also compared the transcriptome profile between wild type and Hfe-null
colonic epithelial cells. In addition, we analyzed fecal bacteria in wild
type mice and Hfe-null mice because colonic microbiome is an important
determinant of colonic inflammation and colon cancer. With dextran
sulfate sodium-induced colitis, Hfe-null mice suffered more weight loss
and exhibited more severe bleeding and diarrhea scores than wild type
mice. With ApcMin-driven colon and intestinal cancer, Hfe-null mice had
more polyps in the small intestine and colon than wild type mice.
Transcriptome analysis showed that Hfe-null colonic epithelial cells,
compared to wild type cells, had increased expression of the cytokines
Ccl3 and Ccl5 and the interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15 or Usp18),
which are all known to promote inflammation and cancer. Hfe-null colonic
epithelial cells also had decreased expression of Erdr1 (erythroid
differentiation regulator 1), whose expression is known to suppress tumor
cell proliferation, invasion, migration and metastasis. Analysis of fecal
microbiome indicated that the prevalence of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes
decreased while that of Proteobacteria increased in Hfe-null mice
compared to wild type mice, a finding particularly striking in male mice.
These studies demonstrate that hemochromatosis enhances the progression
of colonic inflammation and colon carcinogenesis. This conclusion is
further supported by xenograft studies using the colon cancer cell line
HCT116 with and without shRNA-induced downregulation of HFE. When HFE was
silenced, there was a significant increase in the growth of HCT116 cells
in mouse xenografts, demonstrating that inactivation of HFE promotes
colon cancer progression. Based on these data, we conclude that the
iron-overload disease hemochromatosis is a promoter of disease
progression in colitis and colon cancer, and that use of iron chelators
might have a logical basis for inclusion in therapeutic modalities in the
treatment of colonic inflammation and colon cancer.

