Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor presenting cells: a new strategy for cancer immunotherapy


Solid tumor cells as other non-immunological cells do not present MHC
Class II. The MHC class II is a critical molecule responsible for peptide
presentation to T helper cells. The presence of a not-self peptide on a
MHC II molecule trigger the production of cytokines responsible for
different steps on T cell expansion and maturation. Without the
appropriate cytokine stimulation, cytotoxic T cells that identified a
not-self peptide associate to a MHC class I molecules, may not
proliferate or even be induce to anergy. We hypothesized that lack of
anti-tumor immune responses on the majority of cancer patients (too
little, too late) is due to a not appropriate MHC II peptide
presentation. In our model, solid tumor cells (prostate cancer) are
induce to express MHCII on their surface. In this novel approach of Cell
Based Cancer Immunotherapy, patient's tumor cells were expanded in tissue
culture and treated causing de novo expression of MHC II and activation
of the MHC II peptide presentation pathway. Thus, the modified cancer
cells are bifunctional, being capable of activating both helper T cells
(MHC II) and cytotoxic T cells (MHCI), leading to cytokine production and
a surprisingly robust and cancer-specific immune response. The modified
solid tumor cell by itself will now behave as an antigen-presenting cell
creating a Tumor Presenting Cell (TPC). As previous reported on a Phase
IIb clinical trial done in Brazil (FK-Biotec/UFRGS/PUCRS), a population
of local advance prostate cancer patients were treated with TPC. The
study showed a significant (p = 0,03) increase in number of patients with
undetectable levels of PSA (biochemical cure) after 5 years, 85% versus
48% on the control group. Also shown a trend of lowering mortality by
prostate cancer, 9% in the threated group versus 19% in the control
group. In conclusion, we are describing a novel Cell Based Cancer
Immunotherapy that could be apply to several different tumor types.

