Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silibinin improves radiotherapeutic efficacy in prostate cancer by
reducing IR-induced toxicity and EMT


Radiotherapy of prostate carcinoma is well established and frequently
utilized in a significant proportion of cancer patients. However, two
major concerns with radiotherapy is the effect on normal tissues and
development of more invasive-radioresistant population. We have
previously shown that the use of a plant flavonoid, silibinin can
radiosensitize prostate cancer cells preferentially in vitro, by
inhibiting DNA damage repair. We extended this study further, to validate
the effects of silibinin in improving the radiotherapeutic efficacy in
vivo. Our results showed that, in vivo, silibinin strongly
radiosensitized DU145 tumor xenograft inhibition (84%, PRadiotherapy of
prostate carcinoma is well established and frequently utilized in a
significant proportion of cancer patients. However, two major concerns
with radiotherapy is the effect on normal tissues and development of more
invasive-radioresistant population. We have previously shown that the use
of a plant flavonoid, silibinin can radiosensitize prostate cancer cells
preferentially in vitro, by inhibiting DNA damage repair. We extended
this study further, to validate the effects of silibinin in improving the
radiotherapeutic efficacy in vivo. Our results showed that, in vivo,
silibinin strongly radiosensitized DU145 tumor xenograft inhibition (84%,
P<0.01) with higher apoptotic response (10-fold, PRadiotherapy of
prostate carcinoma is well established and frequently utilized in a
significant proportion of cancer patients. However, two major concerns
with radiotherapy is the effect on normal tissues and development of more
invasive-radioresistant population. We have previously shown that the use
of a plant flavonoid, silibinin can radiosensitize prostate cancer cells
preferentially in vitro, by inhibiting DNA damage repair. We extended
this study further, to validate the effects of silibinin in improving the
radiotherapeutic efficacy in vivo. Our results showed that, in vivo,
silibinin strongly radiosensitized DU145 tumor xenograft inhibition (84%,
P<0.01) with higher apoptotic response (10-fold, P<0.01) and reduced
repair of DNA damage as evidenced by reduced Chk2 activation and enhanced
pH2A.X foci in tumor tissues. Interestingly, we also observed that
silibinin could rescue the mice from IR-caused hematopoietic injury and
normal tissue toxicity. Studies have shown that ionizing radiation (IR)
increases the vascularity and invasiveness of surviving radioresistant
cancer cells. This invasive phenotype of radioresistant cells is an
upshot of radiation induced pro-survival and mitogenic signaling in
cancer as well as endothelial cells. In the current study, we demonstrate
that silibinin can also radiosensitize endothelial cells by inhibiting
expression of pro-angiogenic factors. Combining silibinin with IR not
only down-regulated endothelial cell proliferation, clonogenicity and
tube formation ability rather it significantly reduced migratory and
invasive properties of PCa cells which were otherwise marginally affected
by IR treatment alone. We have found that most of the pro-angiogenic,
migratory and EMT promoting proteins were up regulated in response to IR
in PCa cells. All of these invasive and EMT promoting actions of IR were
markedly decreased by silibinin. Further, we found that potentiated
effect was an end result of attenuation of IR activated mitogenic and
pro-survival signaling, including Akt, Erk1/2 and STAT-3 by silibinin.
Therefore, the study not only underlines the preferential
radiosensitizing ability of silibinin in PCa, but also shows its efficacy
in modulating IR-induced toxicity in normal cells and EMT in PCa cells.

