Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NANOG metabolically reprograms tumor-initiating stem-like cells in
oxidative phosphorylation and fatty acid metabolism


Stem cell markers such as NANOG have been implicated in various cancers;
however, the functional contribution of pluripotency transcription factor
NANOG to cancer pathogenesis has remained unclear. Gene profiling,
proteomics and metabolomics approaches were combined to identify the
pathway(s) altered in tumors. Here, we show that Toll-like receptor 4
(TLR4) signaling phosphorylates E2F1 to transactivate NANOG via
TAK1/TBK1. CD133+/CD49f+ TICs isolated from human HCC have tumorigenic
activities dependent on TLR4 and NANOG. Down-regulation of Nanog
significantly reduces tumor development in obesity-associated HCC mouse
model. In the search for the NANOG-dependent mechanisms underlying growth
of tumor-initiating stem-like cells (TICs), NANOG ChIP-seq identifies the
genes associated with mitochondrial metabolic pathways. The specific
pathways, which were examined: oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and
fatty acid oxidation were identified as novel NANOG-mediated oncogenic
pathways by NANOG ChIP-seq analysis and metabolomics. The causal roles of
NANOG in mitochondrial metabolic reprogramming occurs through the
inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and levels of
mitochondrial ROS and activation of fatty acid oxidation (FAO), which are
required for both the self-renewal of TICs and their drug resistance.
PPAR physically interacts with NANOG. Restoration of OXPHOS and
inhibition of FAO rendered TICs susceptible to drug. Our data showed that
NANOG reprogramming of mitochondrial metabolism was responsible for human
TIC oncogenicity and chemo-resistance. Together, NANOG-mediated metabolic
reprogramming through dysregulation of mitochondrial functions generates
TICs and drives tumorigenesis, providing insight into mechanisms of
NANOG-mediated metabolic reprogramming and its roles in TIC oncogenic
activity and chemo-resistance. NANOG suppresses OXPHOS and activates FAO,
thus inhibiting OCR and ROS production, conferring a tumor chemoresistant
state. These novel pathways are potential drug targets for the highly
malignant TICs found in cancer patients. Reversal of NANOG-dependent
effects on OXPHOS and FAO gene may offer a noteworthy strategy of
countering therapeutic drug resistance associated with NANOG activation.

