Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of autophagy in Wnt5A-mediated melanoma invasion and
metastasis


Melanoma is the most aggressive type of skin cancer and the leading cause
of death from skin disease. With increasing incidence of the disease, it
is crucial to further investigate the cellular mechanisms and molecular
pathways that lead to invasion, metastasis, and drug resistance. Recent
studies have revealed that high autophagy correlates with melanoma tumor
aggressiveness and poor survival in clinical samples, as it is a common
mechanism of resistance to therapy. Autophagy inhibition leads to reduced
levels in Wnt5A in a breast cancer model, suggesting a cross-talk of
Wnt5A and autophagy in cancer. catenin, a mediator of canonical Wnt
signaling, has been shown to act as a negative regulator of both basal
and induced autophagy in a colorectal cancer model. Our laboratory showed
that high levels of Wnt5A correlate with increased invasion and
metastasis in melanoma and that Wnt5A downregulates catenin; therefore,
we hypothesize that autophagy might drive invasion and metastasis in
aggressive melanoma through the regulation of Wnt signaling. To study the
role of autophagy in Wnt5A-mediated melanoma invasion, we inhibited
autophagy in highly invasive melanoma cells using lentivirus-mediated
shATG5 knockdown or hydroxychloroquine and evaluated the effects of
autophagy inhibition on Wnt5A expression, catenin, and invasion using 3D
spheroid models. Analysis of autophagy flux confirms that highly invasive
melanoma cells have high autophagy compared to non-invasive cell lines.
The inhibition of autophagy by hydroxychloroquine or shATG5 both resulted
in significant decrease in invasion. By western blot analysis, we also
observed a decrease in Wnt5A in these cells. These results demonstrate
that autophagy inhibition in highly invasive melanoma leads to decrease
in invasion in a 3D model that mimics the tumor microenvironment of
melanoma. Further dissection of the molecular mechanisms that are
involved in this process will enable the identification of novel
autophagy targets in aggressive melanoma.

