Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel transcript variant of androgen receptor identified in
circulating tumor cells from castration-resistant prostate cancer
patients as a potentially prognostic biomarker


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are rare cancer cells in the bloodstream
thought to have a key role in cancer metastasis. There are enormous
interests in their analysis for castration-resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC) due to their tendency to metastasize to bone. In this study, we
applied a surface marker-independent microfluidic device for CTCs capture
and retrieval that is based on cell size and deformability. Our device
was able to capture 90% and recover 30% of tumor cells in spike
experiments. We also developed and validated assays capable of detecting
the transcript levels of selected molecular markers in single cells
prepared with C1TM Single-Cell AutoPrep System. Blood samples drawn from
34 CRPC patients and 10 primary prostate cancer patients (PPC) were
preceded for CTC isolation and molecular characterization. We found that
73% CRPC patients and 10% PPC patients were positive for EpCAM, and only
about half of the EpCAM-positive CRPC cases were PSA or AR positive. It
is interesting that while there is a strong association between AR and
PSA expression in CTC samples, there is no correlation between AR or PSA
transcripts in CTCs and serum PSA protein levels in CRPC patients. The
positive detection of AR or PSA, but not EpCAM is statistically
associated with poor prognosis of the CRPC patients. Very intriguingly,
we identified a novel androgen receptor (AR) transcript variant -ARv from
four CRPC patients CTCs. This ARv lacks a 554bp sequence region in the
ligand binding domain (LBD), resulting in a loss of the entire LBD.
Clinical data analysis revealed that the ARv is significantly associated
with worse survival of CRPC patients (pCirculating tumor cells (CTCs) are
rare cancer cells in the bloodstream thought to have a key role in cancer
metastasis. There are enormous interests in their analysis for
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) due to their tendency to
metastasize to bone. In this study, we applied a surface
marker-independent microfluidic device for CTCs capture and retrieval
that is based on cell size and deformability. Our device was able to
capture 90% and recover 30% of tumor cells in spike experiments. We also
developed and validated assays capable of detecting the transcript levels
of selected molecular markers in single cells prepared with C1TM
Single-Cell AutoPrep System. Blood samples drawn from 34 CRPC patients
and 10 primary prostate cancer patients (PPC) were preceded for CTC
isolation and molecular characterization. We found that 73% CRPC patients
and 10% PPC patients were positive for EpCAM, and only about half of the
EpCAM-positive CRPC cases were PSA or AR positive. It is interesting that
while there is a strong association between AR and PSA expression in CTC
samples, there is no correlation between AR or PSA transcripts in CTCs
and serum PSA protein levels in CRPC patients. The positive detection of
AR or PSA, but not EpCAM is statistically associated with poor prognosis
of the CRPC patients. Very intriguingly, we identified a novel androgen
receptor (AR) transcript variant -ARv from four CRPC patients CTCs. This
ARv lacks a 554bp sequence region in the ligand binding domain (LBD),
resulting in a loss of the entire LBD. Clinical data analysis revealed
that the ARv is significantly associated with worse survival of CRPC
patients (p<0.0001). In vitro functional studies showed this novel ARv is
constitutively active in the absence of testosterone. Our findings
suggest that this AR variant might contribute to the late stage
progression of the diseases and could be used as a potential indicator
for alternative therapies. In summary, our new fluidic device is capable
of isolating CTC to enable molecular marker analysis, providing value in
prognosis and guidance to therapy.

