Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of longer telomere length with increased risk of
chronic hepatitis B and hepatocelluar carcinoma


Telomere, which consists of small tandem nucleotide repeats (5-TTAGGG-3
in human), plays a critical role in the maintenance of genomic stability
in eukaryotic chromosomes. More and more findings have shown that
alteration in telomere length was involved in some diseases, however
whether the telomere length is associated with the development and/or
progression of disease remains poorly understood. Here a case-control
study was employed to illustrate the correlation of relative telomere
length(RTL) with chronic hepatitis B(CHB) and hepatocellular
carcinoma(HCC). In this study, 115 cases of HCC patients, 212 patients
with chronic hepatitis B and 184 healthy controls well matched with age
and gender were recruited. Genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral
blood leukocytes and fluorescence quantitative polymerase chain
reaction(FQ-PCR) was used to detect the telomere repeated numbers. We
found that the RTL in HCC group was the longest, followed by CHB patients
group and healthy control group was the shortest, showing significant
statistical differences. When compared with age, the RTLs of individuals
who aged more than 50 years old were obvious shorter than those younger
ones in the control group, but not in the HCC and CHB group. Moreover,
individuals who had longer RTLs indicated a significant increased risk of
chronic hepatitis B (OR: 1.83, 95%CI: 1.22-2.73), and the longest RTLs
showed higher incidence of HCC (OR: 3.22, 95%CI: 2.01-5.17) when the
healthy control was used as the reference group. Most importantly, when
the chronic hepatitis B group was used as the reference group,
individuals who had longer RTL also suffered a significant increased risk
of HCC(OR: 1.58, 95%CI: 1.03-2.41). Our results suggest that longer RTL
is associated with the increased risk of chronic hepatitis B and HCC,
which indicates that telomere length might be involved in the development
or progression of HCC, also RTL might be used as a potential predicator
of HBV relative chronic liver disease and HCC.

