Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a safe and effective systemically administered
multiple Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonist for anti-tumor immunotherapy


SummaryWe have developed methods for detoxification and killing of
Gram-negative bacteria, which significantly reduce both
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and non-LPS-mediated endotoxin activity and
pyrogenicity, without compromising stimulation of anti-tumor immune
responses.BackgroundThe field of cancer immunotherapy was founded in the
late 1800s, based on the observation of tumor regression in the setting
of bacterial infection. This was reproduced with intentionally
administered live bacteria, but the approach was not safe due to
infection and septic shock. A mixture of heat killed bacteria (Coley's
toxins) produced long-term responses in advanced cancer patients over 100
years, but was apparently too toxic for safe intravenous (iv)
administration at effective doses. In addition, lack of understanding of
efficacy and toxicity mechanisms prevented optimization. Discovery of the
role of TLRs in immune function has provided a mechanistic rationale for
reconsideration of this approach. Gram-negative bacteria were required
for the anti-tumor activity of Coley's toxins, due to the presence of
multiple TLR agonists, including LPS, which is not produced by
Gram-positive bacteria. However, too much TLR activation can
over-stimulate the immune system, leading to toxicity. Attempts to
produce live, attenuated Gram-negative bacteria for systemic cancer
therapy have not been successful. A Phase 1 trial of one product produced
dose-limiting symptoms of bacterial infection and septic shock, without
evidence of antitumor activity. These historical observations suggest
that a killed and appropriately attenuated Gram-negative product might
produce significant anti-tumor activity if it could be administered
safely iv.Methods and ResultsNon-pathogenic Gram-negative bacteria were
treated with polymyxin B and glutaraldehyde. Endotoxin activity and
pyrogenicity were quantified using Limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL) and
rabbit pyrogenicity assays. Bacterial integrity was assessed by EM.
Antitumor activity was determined using syngeneic tumors in mice.
Treatment was found to kill the bacteria and reduce LPS-mediated
endotoxin activity by 12-fold and non-specific pyrogenicity by 30-fold,
with retention of cell integrity. The first product, DB103, was
approximately 2,500-fold less toxic in mice than a previously described
live, attenuated preparation, and produced significant dose-dependent in
vivo antitumor activity at non-toxic doses. DB103 was also additive or
synergistic in vivo when combined with each of four different established
antitumor immunotherapies, including IL-2, metronomic cyclophosphamide,
and anti-CTLA-4 or anti-GITR antibodies.ConclusionsWe have developed a
multiple TLR agonist that can be safely and effectively administered
systemically alone or in combination with a wide variety of existing
anti-tumor immunotherapies.

