Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel long noncoding RNA as a mediator for
CRTC1-MAML2 fusion oncogenic function and a biomarker for CRTC1-MAML2
fusion-positive tumors


Long non-coding RNAs (LncRNA) are non-protein coding transcripts longer
than 200 nucleotides and represent a novel class of gene regulators.
LncRNA expression is frequently de-regulated in cancer. Specific lncRNAs
have been shown to participate in cancer cell proliferation, survival,
migration, and invasion, and targeting these cancer-associated lncRNAs
inhibits tumor growth and metastasis. Therefore, lncRNAs are implicated
as cancer biomarkers and therapeutic targets. The human genome encodes
>10,000 lncRNAs; however, only a handful lncRNAs have been well
characterized.We revealed through a microarray analysis that a novel
lncRNA, lnc473 is a top target for the CRTC1-MAML2 fusion oncogene.
CRTC1-MAML2 is generated by a t(11;19)(q21;p13) translocation that is
specifically associated with mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC). MEC is a
distinct type of tumors containing three cellular components, squamous
cells, mucus-secreting cells, and intermediate cells. MEC occurs in many
glandular tissues and accounts for the most common salivary gland
malignancies. The CRTC1-MAML2 functions as a transcriptional
co-activator, capable of promoting transcription from CREB and other
factors. CRTC1-MAML2 is a major oncogenic driver for MEC initiation and
maintenance. Currently, knowledge remains limited regarding how
CRTC1-MAML2 mediates its oncogenic activity. In this study, we studied
the regulatory mechanism of lnc473 expression and its function in
mediating CRTC1-MAML2 oncogenic activity. We observed that lnc473
expression was tightly correlated with CRTC1-MAML2 fusion expression
levels in human MEC cell lines and primary tumors using a Nanostring
assay that allowed direct digital quantification of RNA molecules,
strongly suggesting that lnc473 is a surrogate marker for functional
CRTC1-MAML2 fusion. Lentiviral shRNA-mediated depletion of endogenous
CRTCT1-MAML2 and its interacting transcription factor CREB resulted in a
significant reduction of lnc473 expression. Also, lnc473 contained
conserved CREB-binding sites on its proximal promoter, suggesting that
CRTC1-MAML2 interacts with CREB in promoting lnc473 transcription.
Functionally, depletion of lnc473 significantly reduced human MEC cell
proliferation and survival in vitro and blocked the growth of MEC
xenograft tumors. Our combined findings indicate that this lnc473 is a
biomarker for human CRTC1-MAML2-positive MEC and has a novel regulatory
function in mediating CRTC1-MAML2 cancer gene activity. Intriguingly,
lnc473 depletion reduced expression of several known CRTC1-MAML2/CREB
target genes, suggesting that lnc473 exerts a positive feedback
regulation of CRTC1-MAML2-mediated transcription. The molecular
mechanisms underlying lnc473 functions in MEC are currently being
investigated through analyses of lnc473-regulated targeted gene profiling
and lncRNA interacting protein complexes

