Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of lipid-based nanosuspension formulation of
first-in-class PLK2 inhibitor GBO-006 to treat triple-negative breast
cancer


Introduction: The highly selective, ATP competitive PLK2 inhibitor
GBO-006 was previously shown by us to arrest growth of triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC) at 30mg/kg dose (mpk) in MDAMB-231 xenograft model.
However, the maximum formulation strength was 20mg/ml and was not
adequate for toxicology studies. GBO-006 was found to be crystalline and
poorly soluble (Introduction: The highly selective, ATP competitive PLK2
inhibitor GBO-006 was previously shown by us to arrest growth of triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) at 30mg/kg dose (mpk) in MDAMB-231
xenograft model. However, the maximum formulation strength was 20mg/ml
and was not adequate for toxicology studies. GBO-006 was found to be
crystalline and poorly soluble (<1 mg/mL) in organic solvents/co-solvents
and non-aqueous media including lipids & oils, even in the presence of
complexing agents. Degradation at very high temperatures (346 C) limited
the use of amorphous based strategies. Efforts to dissolve GBO-006 using
one solvation strategy (co-solvency, complexation, micellar
solubilization) were unsuccessful. The study described herein focused on
particle engineering efforts to develop a 50mg/ml nanosuspension
formulation of GBO-006 stabilized by ionic, non-ionic, and polymeric and
lipid stabilizers alone or in combination.Experimental procedures:
Nanosizing of GBO-006 by bottom-up and combination of bottom-up and
top-down technologies did not yield particles in the desirable nanosize
range. Nanosizing GBO-006 to less than 400 nm (d0.9) particle sizes was
feasible by top-down technology using bead milling and a high shear
microfluidics processor. During initial trials, lower strength
formulations (5 to 25 mg/mL) were nanosized and stabilized using bead
milling with non-ionic surfactant(s), Tween 80 & poloxamer 188, in
addition to polymers such as PVP K12. Microfluidization was not pursued
further due to clogging of the interaction chamber at higher
concentrations (50 mg/mL).Results: A crystalline, lipid nanoparticle of
GBO-006 was feasible by bead milling and further assessed for
pharmacokinetic evaluation and efficacy studies. Intraperitoneal dose
escalation studies in mice showed a dose-dependent linear increase in
plasma exposure of GBO-006. Fifty percent reduction in MDAMB-231
xenograft tumor volume was observed with 1.5 mpk of GBO-006 after qd
dosing. Significant accumulation of GBO-006 was observed in spleen and
liver upon chronic dosing (21 days). We hypothesized that accumulation
was likely due to reticulo-endothelial system (RES) mediated uptake,
which was further proven by in vitro experiments with differentiated
macrophages.Conclusion: We have successfully developed a nanosuspension
formulation for GBO-006. Notably, this nanosuspension showed similar
efficacy to previous formulations at much lower doses (1.5 mpk), however
particle size of 260 nm accentuated RES uptake. Ongoing studies are
focused on decreasing particle size below 150 nm and incorporating a
negative zeta potential to bypass RES uptake and minimize tissue
distribution.

