Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular dynamics simulations of C7/C7-linked
pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD) dimers


The pyrrolo[2,1-c][1,4]benzodiazepines (PBDs) are a group of naturally
occurring and synthetic DNA minor-groove binding agents (MGBAs)
characterised by their ability to covalently bind to the C2-amino groups
of guanine bases. Although natural PBD monomers have low micromolar
cytotoxicity, synthetic PBD dimers have garnered significant attention
due to their potent cytotoxicity and use in antibody-drug conjugates
(ADCs). The cytotoxic nature of PBD dimers is thought to relate to their
ability to form inter- and intrastrand cross-links in DNA. The first
known PBD dimer had its two PBD units linked through their
C7/C7-positions, and was reported by Suggs and co-workers. This molecule
was shown to reversibly cross-link DNA, a feature that may account for
its poor cytotoxicity relative to C8-linked dimers which are used as ADC
payloads. To investigate this, we have undertaken Molecular Dynamics (MD)
studies on the interaction of C7-dimers with DNA and compared results to
those for C8-linked PBD dimers. This has led us to propose an alternative
mechanism to explain the discrepancy in potencies as described below.MD
simulations were conducted over 10ns in explicit solvent. In this study,
Suggs published C7/C7-linked dimer and an equivalent C8/C8 linked
structure were first compared, and this was followed by comparison of the
known C8-linked PBD dimer SG-2202 and an equivalent C7/C7-linked version.
SG-2202 is known to preferentially bind to the sequence
5-pu-G-A-A/T-A/T-C-py-3. As each of the PBD dimers analysed have an
equivalent central linker (i.e., five methylenes), each of the structures
were simulated in the sequence 5-GCGATTCTCGC-3. The results suggested
that C8-linked dimers interact with DNA to a far greater extent than
C7-linked dimers, a feature attributable to the level of curvature
(isohelicity) of C8-linked dimers, and this was supported by free energy
of binding calculations. Crucially, the simulations showed that the
C7-linked dimer family does not form stabilising non-covalent
interactions with the DNA minor-groove as previously thought.
Furthermore, due to its poor isohelicity, simulations predict that only a
single alkylation event takes place initially, and this is followed by
the second alkylation which is dependent on DNA breathing to align the
second PBD unit with an appropriate guanine. Simulations suggested that
the C7-position of any PBD has two potential orientations: (1) bulky
groups such as a sugar (i.e., as in sibiromycin) point out of the minor
groove, and (2) smaller substituents (e.g., a methylene linker) point
along the minor groove floor. The latter explains why it is possible for
C7-methylene-linked PBD dimers to cross-link DNA albeit with less
efficiency compared to C8-linked dimers. Studies are now underway to
analyse the curvature of PBD-type molecules to develop tools (e.g., QSAR)
for the correlation of shape and cytotoxicity to facilitate the discovery
of MGBAs with more potent cytotoxicity.

