Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel PD-1 blockade bioassay to assess therapeutic antibodies in
PD-1 and PD-L1 immunotherapy programs


Programmed death receptor-1 (PD-1) and its ligand (PD-L1) are among the
few important immunotherapy targets for cancer. Current PD1 assays
measure cell proliferation or cytokine production in primary T cells
which are tedious, have high assay variation and small assay window. To
enable quantitative potency measurement for key anti-PD-1 drugs in the
market or in clinical trials such as pembrolizumab and nivolumab, as well
as anti-PD-L1 drugs in clinical trials such as MPDL3280A and BMS-936559,
here we report the development of a robust bioluminescent cell-based PD1
blockade bioassay. For this, we built a PD-1 effector cells in Jurkat
cells which stably express human PD-1 and a NFAT-RE-luciferase reporter,
and a PD-L1 positive artificial Antigen Presenting Cells (PD-L1+ aAPC) in
CHO-K1 cells which stably express PD-L1 and an engineered TCR activator.
Once these two cell types were co-cultivated, transcriptional activation
of NFAT pathway in PD-1 effector cells, mediated by binding of TCR
complex with TCR activator in PD-L1+ aAPC, is significantly suppressed by
PD-1/PD-L1 engagement. This inhibition can then be specifically reversed
by co-incubation of PD-1 or PD-L1 blocking antibodies in dose-dependent
manner, but not by the antibody for other immune checkpoint receptors
such as anti-CTLA4 ipilimumab. We further developed both PD-1 effector
cells and PD-L1+ aAPC in Thaw-and-Use format so the cells can be plated
for assay without the need of cell culture. The resultant PD-1 assay
using Thaw-and-Use cells brings the benefit of convenience, low
day-to-day variation, and easy lab-to-lab assay transfer. We demonstrate
the assay is able to measure relative potency for antibody biologics, and
also can detect potency changes for stressed antibody samples. In
summary, the reporter-based PD-1 blockade assay provides a valuable tool
for both drug screening and characterization in early drug discovery, and
lot release and stability study in drug manufacture for therapeutic
antibody drug candidates in PD-1 and PD-L1 immunotherapy programs.

