Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor studies of an E2f1 promoter sequence binding peptide -
penetratin conjugate as a molecule targeting E2f in prostate cancer


BACKGROUND: Mutation or inactivation of the retinoblastoma protein is
frequently involved in prostate cancer tumorigenesis resulting in
overexpression/deregulation of E2F activity. E2F1-3a overexpression
induces genes involved in DNA synthesis and leads to abnormal cellular
proliferation, tumor growth, and invasion. Therefore, inhibiting the
overexpression of one or more activating E2Fs is a recognized target in
cancer therapeutics. In our previous studies we showed that a novel
penetratin conjugated 7-mer peptide (PEP) bound tightly to an immobilized
consensus E2F1 promoter sequence, was cytotoxic at low micro molar
concentrations to many malignant cell lines and as the PEP was unstable
in serum, the PEP was encapsulated in PEGylated liposomes and treatment
of tumor xenografts of small cell lung cancer H-69 and DU145 tumors
propagated in mice caused tumor regression. OBJECTIVE: To determine the
antitumor activity and stability of two different modified penetratin
peptides: D-Arg PEP (substituting L-Arginine with D-Arginine in the
peptide sequence) and N-acetylated as well as C-methylated PEP analog.
METHODS: DU145 (prostate cancer) and H196 (small cell lung cancer) cells
were used. To compare the efficacy of the peptides, we tested the IC50s
of peptides at different time points using the MTS assay. Drug
combination experiment results were analyzed using the combination index
(CI) method. Peptide conformational studies were carried out using the
Amber 12 suite of biomolecular simulation programs. RESULTS: Molecular
simulation studies showed that the D-Arg PEP secondary structure is more
stable than the L-Arg peptide structure in water. D-Arg PEP was more
potent compared to L-Arg PEP, and it was also found to be more resistant
to degradation by serum proteases than the L-form. The other modified
form, N-acetylated, C-methylated PEP was marginally more effective than
the unmodified PEP. Drug combination studies showed that the D-Arg PEP in
combination with docetaxel, caused synergistic cytotoxicity against DU
145 cells. Our findings validate D-Arg peptide, an inhibitor of E2F1and
3a transcription, as a drug candidate for targeted molecular therapy of
prostate cancers with elevated levels of activated E2Fs. Studies in
progress are evaluating the combination of the PEGylated liposome
encapsulated D-Arg PEP in combination with docetaxel against DU145
xenografts and against primary prostate cancer cells.Supported in part by
a grant from the Lung Cancer Research Foundation.

