Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor heterogeneity of advanced primary lung cancer evaluated by
multiregion sequencing


Background: Cancers are composed of cells with distinct genetic and
phenotypic characteristics. Tumor heterogeneity in each patient may
influence on personalized medicine strategies that depend on results from
single tumor-biopsy samples. However, tumor heterogeneity in advanced
primary lung cancer has not been well studied. The purpose of this study
was to investigate the tumor heterogeneity in advanced primary lung
cancer.Methods: We sequenced fourteen regions from four patients who were
suspicious for primary lung cancer with multiple lymph node metastasis.
Tumor samples were obtained from primary tumor and metastatic lymph
node(s) or distant metastasis using bronchoscopic forcep biopsy,
endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration, and
percutaneous needle biopsy. The profiles of somatic mutations, copy
number alterations and gene expression were compared among primary tumor
and metastatic sites in each patient. Clonal evolution was evaluated
using the concept of cancer cell fraction by SciClone analysis.Results:
We performed multiregion whole exome sequencing and RNA sequencing on
three non-small cell lung cancers (2 adenocarcinomas [TH1 and TH4] and 1
squamous cell carcinoma [TH2]) and one small cell lung cancer (TH3).
EML4-ALK fusion was noticed in TH1 and TH4. There was profound tumor
heterogeneity in terms of somatic mutation, copy number alteration, or
gene expression in each patient. The frequency of private somatic
mutation from spatially distinct regions were 59% in TH1, 44% in TH2, 13%
in TH3, and 30% in TH4. Known driver mutation was also heterogeneous in
TH1 and TH2. Analysis of the clonal architecture confirmed the presence
of clonal heterogeneity in each patient. Phylogenetic reconstruction
revealed the evidence of branched clonal evolution.Conclusions: Tumor
heterogeneity was noticed from spatially distinct regions from advanced
primary lung cancers. The single biopsy specimens may not represent the
whole landscape of genetic alteration in advanced primary lung cancers.

