Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mathematical modeling predicts exponential growth kinetics for
metastases in the lymphatic vessels in the absence of vascularization


The objective of this study was to examine how the biophysical
characteristics of different metastatic niches influence survival and
growth of metastatic cells using mathematical modeling. In the lung,
metastases can form in the lung parenchyma or in the lymphatic vessels.
The presence of cancer metastases in the lung lymphatics is associated
with rapid disease progression and extremely poor prognosis for patients.
Remarkably, metastases in pulmonary lymphatics are avascular, yet grow
larger than metastases in the lung parenchyma. To explain rapid growth of
metastases in the lymphatics in the absence of angiogenesis, we have
developed a 3D mathematical model of intralymphatic tumor growth. This is
a deterministic continuum model based on partial differential equations
used to describe avascular tumor growth and adapted to reflect the unique
architecture of the lymphatic vasculature. Our model predicts that the
cylindrical shape of the lymphatic vessel, which constrains growth of the
tumor in two dimensions yet allows indefinite growth along the vessel,
enables oxygen levels to remain high throughout the tumor. The greater
diffusion coefficient of oxygen in lymph further improves oxygenation of
intralymphatic metastases, which rarely become hypoxic. Improved tumor
oxygenation leads to decreased tumor cell death and a rapid increase of
metastatic burden in the lymphatics. Importantly, our model predicts that
the kinetics of growth of intralymphatic metastases is exponential. This
contrasts the established view that all tumors follow Gompertzian growth
kinetics, i.e., that tumor growth rate decreases as tumor size increases.
Furthermore, these findings indicate that the lymphatic niche is a
favorable environment for metastatic growth, and that angiogenesis is not
always required for the progressive growth of metastases. Finally, our
predictions of different growth kinetics of primary tumors and their
metastases suggest that the treatment schedules for metastatic disease
could be further optimized to achieve better efficacy.

