Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exomic landscape of uterine leiomyosarcomas


Uterine leiomyosarcomas are rare malignant tumors originating from the
smooth muscle lining of the uterus, the myometrium. They account for 1-2%
of all uterine malignancies with an estimated incidence of
0.3-0.4/100,000 women per year. The symptoms, signs, and
histopathological features of uterine leiomyosarcomas widely overlap with
those of uterine leiomyomas, their benign counterparts, which can cause
diagnostic challenges in daily pathological practice. Because
leiomyosarcomas are clinically aggressive tumors with poor 5-year
survival and a high recurrence rate, early diagnosis is important for
prolonged survival. Currently, the diagnosis of these tumors is often
incidental and postoperative. Most leiomyosarcomas are aneuploid with
complex numerical and structural chromosomal aberrations and show
substantial cytogenetic heterogeneity. Although a few cancer genes have
been implicated in uterine leiomyosarcomas, such as TP53, RB1, and
CDKN2A, these genes represent, however, common cancer genes not specific
for smooth muscle malignancies. The aim of this study is to examine
somatic variation in the coding regions of uterine leiomyosarcomas by
exome sequencing to identify potential new molecular biomarkers.
Altogether 18 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor samples entered
whole-exome sequencing. After the filtering of exome sequencing data, a
list of genes which were mutated in at least two tumors was created. The
list included over 50 genes TP53 being the most frequently mutated gene.
The most prominent candidate variants are validated with Sanger
sequencing and the validations are ongoing. Also a series of 35
additional tumors is available on tissue microarray for possible
immunohistochemical validations. Identification of novel molecular
genetic characteristics in uterine leiomyosarcomas is clinically relevant
to further improve the diagnosis and prognosis of the patients. New
knowledge on the mechanisms underlying the progression to malignancy is
also essential for developing new treatments.

