Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a dietary inflammation score and its association
with incident, sporadic colorectal adenoma


It is now well established that inflammation is linked to colorectal
carcinogenesis and other chronic diseases. The ability to characterize
specific dietary and lifestyle components as having pro- or
anti-inflammatory effects is a promising area of cancer prevention. We
developed a dietary inflammation score based on associations of
independent dietary components with plasma C-reactive protein (CRP) in
the combined Markers of Adenomatous Polyps (MAPs) case-control studies,
and investigated the association of the score with incident, sporadic
colorectal adenoma in the same population. First, we excluded individuals
who regularly took non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and
multivitamins, and among those remaining (n = 369) calculated the
multivariable-adjusted associations of the individual dietary components
with CRP, used the strengths of associations as weights, and summed the
weighted dietary components to create an overall summary dietary
inflammation score. Food components were included in the score based on
biological plausibility and previous literature, and included four
categories of meat, nuts, pepper, coffee, tea, high- and low-fat dairy
products, refined and whole grains, and twelve botanical categories. The
crude odds ratio (OR) for the association of the highest dietary score
tertile with log-transformed CRP was 1.92 (95% confidence interval [CI]:
1.13, 3.27); after adjusting for age, sex, total energy intake, and
lifestyle inflammation score category, the OR was 1.89 (95% CI: 1.06,
3.36). The association tended to be stronger among older individuals,
males, and adenoma cases. The overall score was more strongly associated
with CRP than was any individual dietary component. Next, to assess the
association of the dietary inflammation score with adenomas, we used the
entire MAPs population (n = 188 cases and 325 controls) including the
regular NSAID and multivitamin users. The crude OR for the association of
the highest dietary score tertile with incident adenoma was 1.30 (95% CI:
0.84, 2.02), an association that tended to be stronger among men and
those who regularly took aspirin or other NSAIDs. Multivariable
adjustment did not appreciably change these estimates. The results from
this pilot study suggest that diet may contribute to systemic levels of
inflammation, and support further investigation of a dietary inflammation
score with colorectal neoplasms and other chronic diseases in larger
studies.

