Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glutaminase inhibitors suppress pyrimidine synthesis and promote
DNA replication stress in VHL-deficient human renal cancer cells


Hypoxic and VHL-deficient cells use glutamine to generate citrate and
lipids through reductive carboxylation (RC) of a-ketoglutarate. To gain
insights into the role of HIF and the molecular mechanisms underlying RC,
we took advantage of a panel of disease associated Von Hippel-Lindau
(VHL) mutants and showed that HIF2a expression is necessary and
sufficient for the induction of RC in human renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
cells. Reductive carboxylation can be detected in vivo. HIF2a-mediated
glutamine metabolism is induced by low intracellular citrate levels,
which promote the reductive flux by mass action to maintain
lipogenesis.In addition to being a source of lipogenic acetyl-CoA,
glutamine can be used in the Krebs cycle to generate aspartate - the
carbon source for pyrimidine biosynthesis. We showed that VHL-deficient
RCC cells rely on RC-derived aspartate to maintain de novo pyrimidine
biosynthesis. Pharmacological inhibition of glutaminase (GLS) by the
commercially available glutaminase inhibitor BPTES and a glutaminase
inhibitor which is in Phase I clinical study (CB-839, Calithera
Biosciences Inc) depleted the levels of pyrimidines in VHL-deficient
cells but not in VHL-reconstituted cells, which utilized glucose
oxidation to supply the aspartate pool. Nucleoside depletion activates an
intra-S-phase checkpoint corresponding to DNA replication stress and
suppressed S-phase transition in VHL-deficient RCC cells. DNA replication
stress was rescued by administration of glutamate or
dimethyl-alpha-ketoglutarate. Addition of nucleobases partially rescued
the effect of glutaminase inhibitors on cell growth.Our data suggest that
glutaminase inhibitors suppress de novo pyrimidine synthesis, leading to
DNA replication stress in VHL-deficient RCC cells. We currently test the
hypothesis that this mechanistic insight may allow the development of
novel therapeutic strategies for RCC by combining glutaminase inhibitors
with drugs promoting DNA replication stress.

