Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathogenesis and progression of esophageal adenocarcinoma by prior
diagnosis of Barrett's esophagus


The absolute risk of carcinogenic progression given Barrett's esophagus
(BE) is low and a majority of esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA) cases are
diagnosed at first endoscopy without having had a prior diagnosis of BE.
Therefore the research field has largely utilized case-control study
designs with the implicit assumption that each case-group assessed
(reflux, BE, EA) is representative of that stage in a linear progression
towards cancer. To test the assumption that EA cases are a homogeneous
group and therefore research findings may contribute to evidence-based
prevention programs for diagnosed BE populations, we conducted a
case-case study comparing the clinical presentation, medical history and
survival of EA patients with and without a prior diagnosis of BE in the
SEER-Medicare database. Eligible EA cases were diagnosed at ages > = 68
years during 1994-2009. Exposures were captured for a 2 year period
starting 3 years prior to diagnosis. There were 5,271 EA patients in this
study, 87% (n = 4,609) of which lacked a previous diagnosis of BE (EA-no
prior BE). In univariate case-case comparisons, patient characteristics
(age, sex, race, etc.) were mostly similar with the exceptions that
EA-prior BE cases had lower comorbidity scores and a higher average
number of physician visits. Conversely, tumor and treatment
characteristics were starkly different; EA-prior BE cases were typically
diagnosed with lower stage, lower grade, smaller tumors, and were less
likely to have metastatic disease. EA-prior BE cases were also more
likely to receive surgery and less likely to receive chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. Multivariable case-case comparisons of exposures evidenced
positive associations of GERD, ever-cigarette smoking, hypertension,
dyslipidemia, weight-loss, peptic ulcer, pernicious anemia/celiac
disease, and irritable bowel disease each in relation to EA-prior BE
compared with EA-no prior BE. Obesity, metabolic syndrome, impaired
fasting glucose, diabetes and depression did not differ between the case
groups. EA-prior BE cases had better overall mean survival (2.5 vs. 1.4
years), particularly for localized disease (3.3 vs 2.3 years). Such a
survival advantage persisted after adjustment for age at diagnosis, sex,
race, education and registry (hazard ratio (HR) = 0.53, 95% confidence
interval (CI): 0.48, 0.58). Further adjustment for stage, grade, tumor
size, metastatic disease, surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, & Charlson
comorbidity score attenuated but did not diminish the association (HR =
0.70, 95%CI: 0.64, 0.78). In sum, our study provides evidence that EA
cases occurring among patients previously diagnosed with BE are
dramatically different from those that were not, differing in clinical
presentation, medical history, and survival. These findings underscore
the importance of a prudent approach when attempting to reconstruct the
natural history of this malignancy with utility for cancer prevention.

