Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subtype-specific radiation response in a mouse model of human
breast cancer


Radiation therapy is an important component of multimodal treatment for
women with breast cancer. However, breast radiotherapy is currently
delivered uniformly, regardless of breast cancer subtype. Recent clinical
data have suggested that different subtypes of breast cancer may respond
differently to radiation. Understanding the intrinsic variation of
radiation response in breast cancer subtypes would lay the foundation for
individualized radiotherapy designed to limit toxicity in those with
radiation responsive cancers. Furthermore, identification of molecular
targets can be used to modulate treatment outcomes in patients with
radiation resistant tumors.Our previous in vitro studies have identified
an association between breast cancer subtype and gene expression profiles
in response to radiation in breast tumor cell lines. Cell lines with the
greatest response to radiation were luminal subtype and exhibited
preferential induction of genes involved in programmed cell death, such
as FAS. In this study, we investigated tumor growth and FAS induction in
response to radiation in a mouse model of breast cancer. MCF7 (luminal)
or SUM159 (basal) cells were implanted orthotopically into the dorsal
mammary fat pad of athymic nude mice. These mice were then treated with
different doses of radiation. Our results showed that radiation treatment
inhibited MCF7 tumor growth in a dose-dependent manner, while radiation
treatment had little effect on SUM159 tumor growth. In addition, FAS was
induced in MCF7 tumors 24 hour after radiation, but there was no change
in FAS expression in SUM159 tumors. However, injection of FAS-stimulating
antibody intratumorally led to downstream caspase 8 and PARP activation,
suggesting that the FAS signaling pathway remains intact and can be used
to modulate radiation response in the resistant SUM159 cells.In
conclusion, these results suggest that there is intrinsic variation in
radiation response among breast cancer subtypes and that stimulation of
FAS may have the potential to modulate radiation response.

