Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DART molecules with enhanced DR5 agonistic activity for improved
cancer cell cytotoxicity


Introduction: Death Receptor 5 (DR5) belongs to the tumor necrosis factor
receptor superfamily. The target and its associated signaling pathway are
preferentially active on cancer cells. DR5 elicits pro-apoptotic signal
through receptor oligomerization upon binding of TRAIL or an agonistic
mAb. Chemotherapy and radiation also can synergize with the DR5 pathway.
Various therapeutics targeting DR5 have been generated but clinical
outcomes have been generally disappointing. Here we describe optimization
of the agonistic activity of anti-DR5 mAbs by enabling multivalent target
engagement via engineering into DARTs; covalently-linked Fv-based
diabodies optimized for manufacturability and stability (1) whose modular
nature facilitates tailoring avidity and PK properties to the specific
needs of the application.Methods: Anti-DR5 mAbs were selected from a
panel of mAbs generated from cancer cell immunizations and characterized
for binding properties. DARTs with varying anti-DR5 specificities,
valency and incorporation of either a wild type IgG1 Fc or an Fc mutated
to eliminate FcR binding, were expressed in CHO cells and purified to
homogeneity. DR5 DARTs and mAbs were characterized across a panel of cell
lines including those derived from colorectal, lung, pancreatic, breast
and prostate cancer and by IHC on normal and tumor tissue
specimens.Results: mAbs from whole cancer cell immunizations displaying
differential expression on both normal and cancer tissues were subjected
to antigen identification and identified a subset with reactivity to DR5.
Binding analyses revealed DR5 mAbs recognizing non-overlapping epitopes
that do not block the TRAIL-DR5 interaction. Upon secondary cross-linking
or when combined, the DR5 mAbs induced apoptosis across multiple cancer
cell lines. Further potency enhancement independent of secondary
cross-linking was obtained by the engineered multivalent DR5-targeting
DARTs. Dose-dependent growth inhibition assay demonstrated that the
DR5-targeting DARTs delivered significantly greater potency than TRAIL
(100-fold) across a broad range of cancer cell lines. Furthermore, the
DR5-targeting DARTs maintained the exquisite tumor/normal differential
reactivity displayed by the parental DR5 mAbs from which they were
derived. Combination of an HDAC inhibitor with DR5-targeting DARTs
revealed maintenance of synergistic activity and potential to overcome
pathway resistance.Conclusion: Whole cancer cell immunizations yielded
DR5 mAb candidates with desirable binding and functional properties.
Through incorporation of the anti-DR5 mAb specificities into multivalent
DART molecules, we have generated a new class of therapeutics that may
overcome the limitations of existing DR5-based therapeutics. The data
support the use of DR5-targeting DARTs to target this apoptotic pathway
in multiple cancer cells.Reference: (1) Johnson et al. 2010. J Mol Bio.
399:436-49

