Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell isolation and DNA analysis from circulating tumor
cells using self-sorting nanowell plates


Introduction The heterogeneity of tumor cells dictates the need for
analysis at the single cell level. In addition, gene expression can be
altered during the course of the disease and is accelerated under the
influence of therapy. This imposes the need for a tumor biopsy each time
therapeutic intervention is required.Circulating Tumor Cells (CTC)
represent a unique opportunity for a real time liquid biopsy. Current
available CTC counting technologies are hampered by inefficiency to
isolate individual CTC for further molecular characterization to unveil
the best treatment strategy. Here we introduce a simple solution to
obtain and analyze the genetic make-up of individual CTC from a CTC
enriched cell suspension.Methods Healthy donor blood is drawn into
CellSave tubes and spiked with cells of the prostate cancer cell line
LNCaP. Samples are processed between 24 and 96 hours using the CellSearch
system. The full content of the CellSearch cartridge is transferred to a
self-sorting nanowell plate. After identification on a fluorescence
microscope single and multiple LNCaP's and WBC are punched out of the
plate using a needle and deposited into tubes by using an automated X,Y
stage. The DNA is amplified using the Ampli-1 kit from Silicon Biosystems
(SB).Whole Genome Amplification (WGA) products are labeled with Cy-3 and
Cy-5 and hybridized to an Agilent sureprint microarray slide. Data was
analyzed with the Agilent Genomic workbench software. To show the
compatibility with different WGA kits, Self Sorting Nanowell plates with
mixed and sorted, differentially stained LNCaP, PC-3 and SKBR3 cells were
prepared. Single cells were punched into wells and amplified with three
WGA kits: New England Biolabs (NEB) Single Cell WGA kit, the GE Genomiphi
kit and the SB Ampli-1 Kit. Evagreen was added to follow the reactions in
realtime. Specificity of the system was shown by Sanger sequencing of
each cell line for two specific mutations in the ROBO-1 and Pten
genes.ResultsCells that are captured, stained and quantified by the
CellSearch system have been isolated using self-sorting nanowell Plates.
Array CGH using the Ampli-1 WGA products of these cells shows the
identification of the LNCaP cell line for amplified single cell and multi
cell samples. Whole Genome Amplified DNA was found to be produced in 60%
of the wells for the NEB kit, 77% for the GE kit and 67% for the SB kit.
The punched single cells are correctly identified by Sanger sequencing
and detection of the mutations in the Robo-1 and the PTEN
genes.ConclusionsWe introduced a self-sorting nanowell plate in
combination with an efficient method for the isolation of single cells
from a CTC enriched cell suspension. 68% of the single isolated cells can
be amplified with different WGA kits and cells isolated with CellSearch
can subsequently be used for downstream applications such as sequencing
and arrayCGH

