Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic re-programming of the acute myeloid leukemia cell line
HL-60: Regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, and programmed
cell death


The human acute myeloid leukemia cell line, HL-60, in response to phorbol
esters, undergoes genetic re-programming leading to cell cycle arrest,
macrophage differentiation, and apoptosis. The induced program overrides
the oncogenic mutations driving the leukemia program, illustrating that
changes in gene expression can reverse the cancer phenotype. Whole genome
exon DNA microarray analyses identifies 1260 genes whose RNA expression
levels change significantly during the reprogramming. We define a subset
of 186 genes functionally assigned to the biological processes of
regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, and/or programmed cell
death showing specific temporal expression patterns, and suggest that a
subset of these genes, which are down-regulated during the reversal of
the leukemia phenotype while showing overexpression in AML patient
samples, may represent new therapeutic targets in AML. Among the genes
showing immediate early up-regulation (2-fold or greater by one hour
post-PMA treatment), promoter analysis reveals highly significant
overrepresentation of binding sites for the transcription factors STAT5A,
HIF1A and NF-kB. Delayed early up-regulated genes (2-fold or greater by
three hours post-PMA treatment), have promoters highly enriched in
binding sites for EGR1, SP1:SP3, ZFP206 and E2F4. A phorbol ester
response signature related to reversal of the leukemic phenotype and
initiation of apoptosis has been defined and examined in two additional
AML cell lines (THP-1 and Kasumi-1). Among the significantly up-regulated
genes are MCL1, CDKN1A, NR4A1, and BCL6. Down-regulated genes include
MYC, KIT, LGALS12, and ZBTB16. HL-60 cell lines with CRISPR-mediated
knockouts of several of these genes are currently being evaluated for
their effects on the leukemic phenotype and phorbol ester-induced
apoptosis.

