Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic deletion of cyclooxygenase-2 suppresses K-ras induced lung
tumorigenesis


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide.
Proto-oncogene K-ras is mutated in 30-50% of lung adenocarcinomas, the
most common histological subtype of the non-small cell lung cancer.
Cyclooxygenases are the key enzymes in the conversion of arachidonic acid
to prostaglandins (PGs) which are thought to promote tumor growth,
angiogenesis and metastasis in various tumors including lung cancer.
However, the role of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) in lung tumorigenesis in
mice carrying the K-ras oncogene remains unclear. We evaluated the
contribution of COX-2 in lung tumorigenesis in K-rasLA1(G12D) mice and
its relevant molecular mechanisms. We used a genetic knockout approach by
crossing COX-2 homozygous mice (COX-2-/-) with a mouse strain which
develops lung tumorigenesis driven by mutant K-ras (K-rasLA1) to obtain
COX-2 deficient mice with K-ras expression (K-ras/COX-2-/-) and COX-2
wild type mice with K-ras expression (K-ras). Loss of COX-2 was
associated with a significant reduction in both multiplicity and tumor
volume of lung adenocarcinoma examined by ex-vivo MRI. The average number
of lung nodules in K-ras/COX-2-/- mice was 6.8 per mouse which was
significantly less than that of K-ras mice (19.8) (pLung cancer is the
leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Proto-oncogene K-ras is
mutated in 30-50% of lung adenocarcinomas, the most common histological
subtype of the non-small cell lung cancer. Cyclooxygenases are the key
enzymes in the conversion of arachidonic acid to prostaglandins (PGs)
which are thought to promote tumor growth, angiogenesis and metastasis in
various tumors including lung cancer. However, the role of cyclooxygenase
2 (COX-2) in lung tumorigenesis in mice carrying the K-ras oncogene
remains unclear. We evaluated the contribution of COX-2 in lung
tumorigenesis in K-rasLA1(G12D) mice and its relevant molecular
mechanisms. We used a genetic knockout approach by crossing COX-2
homozygous mice (COX-2-/-) with a mouse strain which develops lung
tumorigenesis driven by mutant K-ras (K-rasLA1) to obtain COX-2 deficient
mice with K-ras expression (K-ras/COX-2-/-) and COX-2 wild type mice with
K-ras expression (K-ras). Loss of COX-2 was associated with a significant
reduction in both multiplicity and tumor volume of lung adenocarcinoma
examined by ex-vivo MRI. The average number of lung nodules in
K-ras/COX-2-/- mice was 6.8 per mouse which was significantly less than
that of K-ras mice (19.8) (p<0.05). Similarly, tumor size in K-ras mice
(65.6 31.1 mm3) was larger than that of K-ras/COX-2-/- mice (25.5 8.7
mm3). Histological examination of mouse lung demonstrated that there was
a significantly higher incidence of bronchioalveolar hyperplasia in lung
tissues of the K-ras group (9.53.2) than in the K-ras/COX-2-/- group
(5.32.5) (pLung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. Proto-oncogene K-ras is mutated in 30-50% of lung
adenocarcinomas, the most common histological subtype of the non-small
cell lung cancer. Cyclooxygenases are the key enzymes in the conversion
of arachidonic acid to prostaglandins (PGs) which are thought to promote
tumor growth, angiogenesis and metastasis in various tumors including
lung cancer. However, the role of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) in lung
tumorigenesis in mice carrying the K-ras oncogene remains unclear. We
evaluated the contribution of COX-2 in lung tumorigenesis in
K-rasLA1(G12D) mice and its relevant molecular mechanisms. We used a
genetic knockout approach by crossing COX-2 homozygous mice (COX-2-/-)
with a mouse strain which develops lung tumorigenesis driven by mutant
K-ras (K-rasLA1) to obtain COX-2 deficient mice with K-ras expression
(K-ras/COX-2-/-) and COX-2 wild type mice with K-ras expression (K-ras).
Loss of COX-2 was associated with a significant reduction in both
multiplicity and tumor volume of lung adenocarcinoma examined by ex-vivo
MRI. The average number of lung nodules in K-ras/COX-2-/- mice was 6.8
per mouse which was significantly less than that of K-ras mice (19.8)
(p<0.05). Similarly, tumor size in K-ras mice (65.6 31.1 mm3) was larger
than that of K-ras/COX-2-/- mice (25.5 8.7 mm3). Histological examination
of mouse lung demonstrated that there was a significantly higher
incidence of bronchioalveolar hyperplasia in lung tissues of the K-ras
group (9.53.2) than in the K-ras/COX-2-/- group (5.32.5) (p<0.05). In
line with this, studying tumor cell proliferation by Ki67 staining
suggested that COX-2 deletion in K-ras mice was associated with less lung
tumor cell proliferative potential evidenced by Ki67 positive cells being
significantly decreased from 6.2% in K-ras mice to 2.9% in K-ras/COX-2-/-
mice. The level of PGE2 was notably lower in lung tumor tissue derived
from K-ras/COX-2-/- mice than that of K-ras mice. Similarly, the urinary
metabolite of PGE2, PGEM, was also significantly reduced by 3-fold in
K-ras/COX-2-/- mice in comparison with K-ras mice. In contrast, level of
13,14-dihydro-15-keto-PGE2, a metabolite of PGE2 in K-ras/COX-2-/- mouse
lung tumor tissue was significantly increased by almost 3-fold.
Furthermore, MEK and p-ErK1/2 expressions significantly decreased in lung
tissues of K-ras/COX-2-/- mice compare to that of K-ras mice. Together,
our data suggest that COX-2 deletion contributes to repression of
K-ras-induced lung tumorigenesis through reducing tumor cell
proliferation rate, decreasing production of PGE2, and increasing
13,14-dihydro-15-keto-PGE2 in the tumors, which potentially involves the
MAPK pathway. These observations suggested the importance of COX-2 in
lung tumorigenesis, especially under K-ras mutation and further
identified COX-2 as a potential target in lung cancer prevention. The
study is supported by NIH Grant R01CA144053.

