Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-cell and local viscoelasticity of stem-like and
non-stem-like breast cancer cells


It has been shown that the mechanical properties of pathological cells
are different from healthy ones. Therefore, mechanical characterization
of cells may be useful for investigating mechanisms and progression of
diseases. In the case of cancer, the finding that cancerous cells are
considerably more deformable than normal ones provides the motivation for
investigating rheological differences between stem-like and non-stem-like
cancer cells. In this study, the viscoelastic properties of six breast
cancer cell lines, three of which have been regarded (based on surface
markers) as stem-like and three considered less stem-like, were measured
using micropipette aspiration and particle tracking microrheology. In
micropipette experiments, cancer cells were aspirated one-by-one at
controlled pressures into small glass micropipettes and the length of the
aspirated section of the cells was tracked as a function of time. The
applied pressure was either increased linearly or increased suddenly to
different levels and then held constant. The homogeneous elastic
half-space model was used to interpret the viscoelastic properties of the
different cell lines. The effect of pressure loading rate on cell
viscoelasticity was examined by applying three different aspiration
pressure rates of 9, 6, and 3 Pa/s. The apparent Young's modulus was
found to depend on pressure loading rate, which suggests a more complex
rheology than a standard viscoelastic solid. Above a threshold force
level, cells were also found to enter the micropipette continuously in a
fashion that is analogous to white blood cells, i.e. as a liquid drop
with constant cortical tension. A comparison between the Young's moduli
showed that at least some of the stem-like breast cancer cell lines were
less stiff than less stem-like cell lines and more likely to exhibit the
liquid drop-like behavior. The reduction in stiffness and change in
rheological regime might be the result of lower actin filament density
which allowed the stem-like cancer cells to be more deformable while
undergoing extravasation and intravasation during the metastatic process.
Regional rheological differences were also found using particle tracking
microrheology. Our hypothesis is that the differences in the rheological
properties might help to distinguish between stem-like cancer cells and
non-stem-like ones, which could eventually lead to a new detection and
diagnostic method in cancer research.

