Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational analysis of MCPH1 C-terminal tandem BRCT domain reveals
residues essential for cell cycle arrest


In this study, the C-terminal tandem BRCT domain of human microcephalin 1
protein (MCPH1) was mutagenized in Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast to
identify residues critical for the cell cycle arrest. Deleterious
variants in MCPH1 causing the loss of the protein function are associated
with primary microcephaly, characterized by decreased cerebral cortex
size and mild mental retardation. The tandem BRCT domain of MCPH1 (amino
acids 640-833) recognizes phospho-serine/threonine motifs, including
-H2AX, necessary for DNA damage response and cell cycle regulation.
Expression of this region of human MCPH1 tethered to DNA in yeast through
the Gal4 DNA binding domain (and not through the interaction with the
Gal4 activation domain), results in growth inhibition and a small colony
phenotype. To detect the essential residues of the MCPH1 tandem BRCT,
mutations were randomly introduced into this region using error-prone
polymerase chain reaction. The mutants were then transformed into yeast
and transformants showing abrogation of the small colony phenotype were
isolated and the specific mutations were assessed by sequencing.
Screening revealed 34 missense, 4 nonsense, and 8 frameshift variants,
and one large deletion of 72 base pairs. The 34 missense variants were
further analyzed in silico by alignment with the BRCA1 tandem BRCT. Out
of 34 missense variants, four (T694A, L755P, F756V, and S819P) were
identified in two or more colonies. One of the mutated residues (T653) is
involved in direct hydrogen bonding with -H2AX, which is likely disrupted
by the amino acid change induced during mutagenesis (T653I).
Interestingly, when aligned with BRCA1, 16 (47%) of MCPH1 missense
variants matched to a corresponding site in BRCA1 previously reported as
a missense variant with a functional impact. MCPH1 residues 653, 756, and
819 all corresponded to amino acids in BRCA1 known for their likely
pathogenicity. Thus, this study identifies functional determinants in
MCPH1 C-terminal domain potentially involved in cell cycle regulation.
Taken together, our results suggest that variants in BRCT domain
containing proteins, can be clinically annotated by making comparative
alignments with the conserved residues of BRCA1 BRCT. Structural
inference using BRCT paralogs might aid in the clinical annotation for
variants lacking genetic data.

