Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphoproteomic profiling of glioblastoma stem cells to uncover
mechanisms of radiation resistance


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and aggressive primary malignant
brain tumor in adults. GBM tumors universally develop resistance to
chemotherapy and radiation therapy; thus, there is an urgent need to
develop novel treatment strategies. In this study, we identify signaling
pathways altered specifically in radioresistant glioblastoma stem cells
(GSCs) following radiation treatment, in order to identify mechanisms of
radiation resistance. Protein phosphorylation is a highly regulated and
dynamic post-translational modification that is the primary mechanism of
signal transduction. We hypothesized that phosphoproteomic profiling of
GSCs can be used to identify novel signaling pathways involved in GBM
radioresistance. Phosphopeptides were isolated from three GSC lines and
one differentiated GBM cell line before and after radiation treatment.
Mass spectrometry-based global phosphoproteomic profiling was then
utilized to quantify radiation-induced changes in protein
phosphorylation. About 6,000 phosphopeptides mapping to about 2,300
phosphoproteins were quantified at two post-radiation timepoints
(relative to untreated) across all four cell lines. Three biological
replicates of each sample were analyzed by mass spectrometry to obtain
statistical significance. Fold changes of phosphoproteins following
radiation treatment were then mapped to canonical signaling pathways, and
pathways altered specifically in radiation-resistant GSCs were
identified. We conclude that different pathways are activated in GSCs
compared to differentiated GBM cells following radiation treatment, and
some of these pathways may mediate radioresistance. Future efforts will
focus on validation of the mass spectrometry results in vivo, and
cell-based assays to identify the role of specific phosphoproteins in
radioresistance pathways. Results of this study will guide future efforts
to develop radiosensitizing agents that, when used in combination with
current treatments, may increase the survival of patients with this
devastating disease. This study was supported by funds from The Ohio
State University Comprehensive Cancer Center (to AC); NIH/NCI
1U10CA180850-01(to AC); NIH/NCI 1RC2CA148190 (to AC); NIH/NCI
2K12CA133250-06 (to AC); NIH/NCI/CTEP 1R01CA169368 (to AC); NIH/NCI
1R01CA11522358 (to AC), RTOG (to AC).

