Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation-induced ER stress contributes to survival in
glioblastoma cell lines


Glioblastoma is the most common primary malignant brain tumor in adults
in the United States. While the standard of care for afflicted patients
has evolved to include surgery, ionizing radiation (IR) and temozolomide
chemotherapy, the prognoses of these patients remain dismal. With the
median survival of glioblastoma patients remaining in the range of 12-15
months, there is an unmet need for approaches that can overcome the
inherent therapeutic resistance of these tumors. In recent years, several
studies have demonstrated that IR can activate pro-survival signaling
that may facilitate adaptation to therapy and the development of
radio-resistance. The endoplasmic reticulum stress response (ERSR) is a
conserved program known to be deregulated in cancer and can mediate
pro-survival signaling in the context of therapy. The ATF6, IRE1 and PERK
pathways of the ERSR are known to be important mediators in the
initiation of this signaling. In this research, we show for the first
time that IR, a key component in glioblastoma therapy, can induce genes
downstream of ATF6, IRE1 and PERK in glioblastoma cell lines.
Furthermore, we identify the ATF6 and PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 pathways as
important contributors to the radiation-response in glioblastoma.Our
study began with the observation of protein and mRNA induction of targets
associated with the ERSR in irradiated glioblastoma cell lines. In
addition to ATF6 target genes, we observed robust induction of PERK
target genes 48h after 6 Gy IR. This induction of PERK target genes was
accompanied with increased phosphorylation of eIF2a in a time and
dose-dependent manner. To evaluate the requirement of PERK for
radiation-induced eIF2a phosphorylation, we used a specific inhibitor of
PERK - GSK2606414, and found that PERK inhibition was sufficient to
prevent radiation-induced eIF2a phosphorylation. We also analyzed
expression of several genes downstream of PERK after treatment with
GSK2606414, and found that PERK inhibition lead to 70-80% reduction in
radiation-induction of downstream genes. Since ATF4 is downstream of
PERK-eIF2a, we examined ATF4 expression in irradiated glioblastoma and
found that it was also induced by radiation. Using RNA-interference, we
found that knockdown of ATF4 reduced proliferation and clonogenic
survival by 50%, and resulted in 38% increase in PARP cleavage in
irradiated glioblastoma. We observed similar trends when we knocked down
ATF6, suggesting that multiple aspects of the ERSR can contribute to the
radiation response in glioblastoma.These results indicate that IR-induced
activation of ER-stress signaling through PERK and ATF6 contributes to
adaptive survival mechanisms in glioblastoma. Further characterization of
the mechanism by which ATF6 and ATF4 mediate cell survival after
irradiation may reveal novel targets for the enhancement of radiotherapy
for glioblastoma.

