Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptomycin B sensitizes ovarian and endometrial cancer cells to
TRAIL-induced apoptosis


One of our most important line of defense against cancer is the use of
chemotherapy. Resistance to these drugs represents, however, a
fundamental limitation in our ability to treat tumors, especially in
ovarian cancer (OC) as well as in endometrial cancer (EC). Both of these
cancers display high mortality rate due to the establishment of
chemoresistance. It is thus of utmost importance that we develop new
approaches to overcome this problem and restore chemosensitivity in
cancer cells. Nuclear transport has been shown to be exceedingly
important in cell fate dynamics. CRM1, also known as XPO1, is a nuclear
export receptor that recognize leucine-rich domain known as Nuclear
Export Signal. Indeed, substantial CRM1 enrichment is indicative of
highly invasive and resistant tumors and is generally suggestive of lower
chance of survival. On the other hand, Par-4, an exceptionally rarely
mutated protein capable of inducing cell death only in transformed cells
while sparing normal cells, is suggested to be activated upon nuclear
localization; it is thus considered a powerful, cancer-specific, inducer
of cell death. Recent findings suggest that reinstating the ability of
Par-4 to accumulate in the nucleus could re-establish its capacity to
induce apoptosis. Our hypothesis was that CRM1 nuclear exclusion of Par-4
could be an acquired resistance mechanism in cancer cells.To explore this
hypothesis, we first treated various OC and EC cell types with Leptomycin
B to observe whether Par-4 would accumulate to the nucleus; to this end,
we performed immunofluorescence as well as subcellular protein
fractionations. The obtained results suggested that Par-4 was enriched in
the nucleus of cells following Leptomycin B treatments. We then treated
multiple OC and EC cell lines with a combination of Leptomycin B,
cisplatin and TRAIL recombinant protein to determine if Par-4 enrichment
through CRM-1 inhibition could sensitizes tumor cells through either
extrinsic or intrinsic death pathways. We then assessed cell death and
Par-4 cleavage, an important event in Par-4 induced cell death, using
western blot and confirmed the results pertaining to cell death by flow
cytometry (Annexin V/PI). The obtained results suggested that the
combination of Leptomycin B and TRAIL largely increased cell death and
apoptosis when compared to their treatment alone.Taken together, these
results suggest that CRM1 control export of various tumor suppressors
including Par-4, and this could be a putative mechanism responsible for
the establishment of chemoresistance in OC as well as EC. The use of CRM1
inhibitors in combination to chemotherapeutic drug treatments could be an
attractive strategy to reverse chemoresistance in the context of
gynecological cancer therapy.

