Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COX2-MMP1 pathway promotes brain metastasis by tampering with
blood-brain barrier and supporting tumor initiating cells in the brain
microenvironment


Brain is one of the major sites of metastasis in breast cancer; however,
the pathological mechanism of brain metastasis is yet poorly understood.
Metastatic tumor cells must first breach the blood-brain barrier (BBB)
which acts as a selective interface between the peripheral circulation
and the central nervous system. We analyzed clinical significance of 23
metalloproteinases on brain metastasis-free survival of breast cancer
patients followed by verification in brain metastatic cell lines and
found that only MMP1 among all metalloproteinses was significantly
correlated with brain metastasis. We then performed the transmigration
assay to study the role of MMP1 in transmigrating ability of breast
cancer cells across the blood-brain barrier. This assay simulates the BBB
structure as we seeded the brain endothelial cells on the luminal side of
a polyester membrane with 3.0m pore size inside a 24-well cell culture
insert and we seeded the astrocytes on the abluminal side. We have shown
that MMP1 was highly expressed in brain metastatic cells and it was
positively correlated to the transmigrating ability of breast cancer
cells. By Western blot and immunocytochemistry analyses, we found that
MMP1 was capable of degrading Occludin and Claudin but not Zo-1 that are
three key components of blood brain barrier. These results indicated that
Occludin and Claudin are the targets of MMP1, and degradation of these
proteins contributes to the increased permeability of BBB. Importantly,
knockdown of MMP1 in brain metastatic cells significantly blocked their
ability of brain metastasis in vitro as well as in our animal model,
while ectopic expression of MMP1 significantly increased the brain
metastatic ability of the cells. We also found that Cox2 was highly
up-regulated in brain metastatic cells and that prostaglandin was
directly able to promote the expression of MMP1 at both transcriptional
and translational levels leading to augmentation of brain metastasis.
Furthermore, we found that Cox2 and prostaglandin were able to activate
astrocytes to release CCL7, which in turn promoted self-renewal of tumor
initiating cells in the brain while knockdown of Cox2 as well as
treatment with Cox2 inhibitor significantly reduced the brain metastatic
ability of tumor cells both in vitro and in vivo. Our results warrant
further investigation on the Cox2-PGE-MMP1 pathway as a novel therapeutic
target for brain metastasis despite the past failure of MMP inhibitors
for the treatment of metastatic disease, possibly by developing more
specific drug to MMP1 and stratifying the target patient population.

