Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new image processing approach for functional context-based
analysis of tryptase positive mast cells in cutaneous T-cell lymphomas


Quantification data on mast cells is scarce in primary cutaneous T-cell
lymphomas (CTCL), a heterogeneous group of non-Hodgkin lymphomas with
initial presentation in the skin. The aim of the study was to develop a
new whole-slide in-silico analysis method for immunohistochemistry
stained skin sections. The design of the analysis method was focused on
results about structural context of the cell location distribution and
cell morphometry linked to mast cell activation
states.Immunohistochemistry staining with a monoclonal anti-mast cell
tryptase antibody was performed on paraffin embedded biopsies from
patients with different CTCL subtypes and controls (normal skin,
inflammatory skin diseases),while hematoxylin was used for counter
staining. Slides were scanned with a TissueFAXS 200 Cytometer
(TissueGnostics GmbH, Vienna). Whole-slide digital images were analyzed
using StrataQuest 5.0 Advanced (TissueGnostics, Vienna).Hematoxylin+ cell
nuclei and tryptase+ cells (TRYP+) objects were automatically detected
using the available analysis modules with adaptive segmentation of
color-deconvoluted images. Mast cells were first selected as
brown-positive cells in a peri-nuclear compartment, then further
stratified depending on the spatial distribution of brown-positive dots
inside the cellular compartment. In an additional analysis layer, an
algorithm pipeline for the identification of the epidermis / dermis area
was assembled. Density-based CTCL areas were segmented in a third
independent pipeline. Inside dermis, two additional CTCL-proximity masks
were defined at 0-30m away from CTCL (P1 mask), as well as in the 30-60m
interval (P2 mask).Typically, there were more mast cells inside CTCL
areas than in P1, which in turn had less than the P2 mask. This
distribution was especially noticed in Mycosis fungoides(MF) IIB, where
CTCL had 2-3 times more mast cells than P1 mask had. However, this trend
was not consistent in all types of lymphoma. Interestingly, MF IIA had a
different distribution showing more mast cells in P1 than in CTCL
areas.The new algorithms provided a rich data insight on functional
context-based characteristics and propose new surrogate markers for
further characterization of CTCL. The analysis time needed for
statistically relevant large whole-slide tissue sections was drastically
reduced when using the computer-aided approach when compared against full
manual annotation and counting. Moreover, distance assessment and
morphometry parameter quantification for each cell are only feasible in
in-silico approaches.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

