Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pooled investigation of circulating adiponectin levels and risk
of multiple myeloma


Background: Excess body weight throughout adult life has been
consistently associated with an increased risk of multiple myeloma (MM).
This association may be due in part to reduced expression of adiponectin,
as circulating levels of this anti-inflammatory hormone are typically
lower in obese individuals compared with those of normal body weight.
Studies conducted in vitro and in animal models have found that
adiponectin induces myeloma cell apoptosis. Furthermore, in a recent
prospective study in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO)
Cancer Screening Trial, we observed a lower risk of MM among those with
higher pre-diagnosis circulating levels of adiponectin. To follow up on
our findings from PLCO and increase our statistical power for analyses
stratified by sex, follow-up time, and other factors, we conducted a
pooled investigation of circulating adiponectin levels and MM risk using
the NCI Cohort Consortium.Methods: Our study included pre-diagnosis
peripheral blood samples from 450 MM cases and 898 individually-matched
controls from the following 6 cohorts: the Alpha-Tocopherol,
Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study; the Cancer Prevention Study II;
the Health Professionals Follow-up Study; the Melbourne Collaborative
Cohort Study; the Nurses Health Study; and the Women's Health Initiative.
We performed additional analyses incorporating data from our original
investigation in PLCO for a total of 624 MM cases and 1,246 controls.
Circulating levels of total adiponectin were measured in duplicate using
standard enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) methods. We used
conditional logistic regression models to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and
95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) for risk of MM in relation to
quartiles of cohort- and sex-adjusted adiponectin levels based on the
distribution among controls.Results: Higher circulating levels of
adiponectin were associated with a reduced risk of MM in the independent
replication set (highest quartile vs. lowest: OR 0.68, 95% CI 0.48-0.96;
P-trend = 0.02) and in the combined set including PLCO (OR 0.64, 95% CI
0.47-0.85; P-trend = 0.001). This association was also present in
analyses restricted to cases diagnosed 6 or more years after blood
collection (OR 0.60, 95% CI 0.40-0.90; P-trend = 0.004). The observed
associations were similar in magnitude for men and women (ORs of 0.59 and
0.66, respectively), and results were unchanged after adjustment for body
mass index.Conclusions: The findings of this pooled investigation provide
the strongest epidemiologic evidence to date that adiponectin may protect
against development of MM. Further research is needed to characterize the
role of this metabolic hormone in progression from the MM precursor
monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance to clinically manifest
disease, and to evaluate the clinical implications of our findings for
risk reduction and therapy for MM and associated bone disease.

