Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kinetic risk assessment with biomarkers of systemic inflammation
in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma


Background: Empiric prognostic scoring systems for metastatic renal cell
carcinoma (mRCC) are routinely employed as baseline risk stratification
tools for clinical trials. However, these systems have limited clinical
utility after therapeutic intervention has begun. The goal of the current
study was to develop clinically useful, hypothesis-driven, kinetic risk
assessment tools based exclusively on biomarkers of systemic
inflammation.Methods: A retrospective chart review was conducted with
authorization from the Emory University Institutional Review Board.
Inclusion criteria included treatment at the Winship Cancer Institute
with a targeted agent for mRCC as well as concomitant serum C-reactive
protein (CRP) and albumin levels on at least three occasions that were at
least 10 days apart. The modified Glasgow Prognostic Score (mGPS) was
used to quantify the intensity of systemic inflammation and to formulate
the Inflammation Intensity Index for kinetic risk assessment.Findings:
Intensity of systemic inflammation was assessed 2465 times in 135
patients with cohorts used for training (n = 55; cutoff date 06/30/2012)
and validation (n = 80; cutoff date 06/30/2014). Kinetic risk was
assigned on the basis of time to onset of refractory systemic
inflammation. The median overall survival (OS) was 44.7, 19.8, 13.0, and
6.7 months for kinetic risk categories A, B, C and D, respectively, with
a median follow up of 29.3 months for the combined cohorts and none lost
to follow up (censored log rank p Background: Empiric prognostic scoring
systems for metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC) are routinely employed
as baseline risk stratification tools for clinical trials. However, these
systems have limited clinical utility after therapeutic intervention has
begun. The goal of the current study was to develop clinically useful,
hypothesis-driven, kinetic risk assessment tools based exclusively on
biomarkers of systemic inflammation.Methods: A retrospective chart review
was conducted with authorization from the Emory University Institutional
Review Board. Inclusion criteria included treatment at the Winship Cancer
Institute with a targeted agent for mRCC as well as concomitant serum
C-reactive protein (CRP) and albumin levels on at least three occasions
that were at least 10 days apart. The modified Glasgow Prognostic Score
(mGPS) was used to quantify the intensity of systemic inflammation and to
formulate the Inflammation Intensity Index for kinetic risk
assessment.Findings: Intensity of systemic inflammation was assessed 2465
times in 135 patients with cohorts used for training (n = 55; cutoff date
06/30/2012) and validation (n = 80; cutoff date 06/30/2014). Kinetic risk
was assigned on the basis of time to onset of refractory systemic
inflammation. The median overall survival (OS) was 44.7, 19.8, 13.0, and
6.7 months for kinetic risk categories A, B, C and D, respectively, with
a median follow up of 29.3 months for the combined cohorts and none lost
to follow up (censored log rank p <.0001). OS was 40.6 months for whites
(n = 99) vs. 9.8 months for blacks (n = 30; p Background: Empiric
prognostic scoring systems for metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC) are
routinely employed as baseline risk stratification tools for clinical
trials. However, these systems have limited clinical utility after
therapeutic intervention has begun. The goal of the current study was to
develop clinically useful, hypothesis-driven, kinetic risk assessment
tools based exclusively on biomarkers of systemic inflammation.Methods: A
retrospective chart review was conducted with authorization from the
Emory University Institutional Review Board. Inclusion criteria included
treatment at the Winship Cancer Institute with a targeted agent for mRCC
as well as concomitant serum C-reactive protein (CRP) and albumin levels
on at least three occasions that were at least 10 days apart. The
modified Glasgow Prognostic Score (mGPS) was used to quantify the
intensity of systemic inflammation and to formulate the Inflammation
Intensity Index for kinetic risk assessment.Findings: Intensity of
systemic inflammation was assessed 2465 times in 135 patients with
cohorts used for training (n = 55; cutoff date 06/30/2012) and validation
(n = 80; cutoff date 06/30/2014). Kinetic risk was assigned on the basis
of time to onset of refractory systemic inflammation. The median overall
survival (OS) was 44.7, 19.8, 13.0, and 6.7 months for kinetic risk
categories A, B, C and D, respectively, with a median follow up of 29.3
months for the combined cohorts and none lost to follow up (censored log
rank p <.0001). OS was 40.6 months for whites (n = 99) vs. 9.8 months for
blacks (n = 30; p <.0001).Conclusions: The correlation of dramatic
differences in OS with the onset of refractory systemic inflammation
provides strong evidence in support of the clinical utility of the
Inflammation Intensity Index and, as a consequence, the underlying
theoretical constructs, including a plausible biological hypothesis for
differences in clinical outcome by race.

