Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coordinated activation of TLR8 and NLRP3 by VTX-2337 (motolimod)
ignites tumoricidal NK cell activity


VTX-2337 (motolimod) is a selective toll-like receptor 8 (TLR8) agonist
in clinical development as an immunotherapy for multiple oncology
indications, including squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck
(SCCHN). Activation of TLR8 has been found to enhance natural killer (NK)
cell activation, increase antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity
(ADCC), and induce Th1 polarizing cytokines. Further characterization of
VTX-2337 reveals the release of mature IL-1 and IL-18 from monocyte cell
populations through coordinated actions on both TLR8 and NLRP3. In vitro,
VTX-2337 primes monocytes to produce pro-IL-1, pro-IL-18 and caspase 1,
while activating the NLRP3 inflammasome, leading to the release of mature
IL-1 family cytokines. Inflammasome activation by VTX-2337 is blocked by
inhibiting caspase 1, with little impact on the production of other TLR8
induced mediators such as TNF. The release of IL-18 stimulates NK cells,
and augments other activation pathways including: FcRIII and NKG2D
receptors, resulting in IFN production and induction of CD107. NLRP3
activation in vivo was confirmed by a dose-related increase in plasma
levels of IL-1 and IL-18 in cynomolgus monkeys administered VTX-2337.
This pathway for NK activation was subsequently assessed in SCCHN
patients treated with VTX-2337 in combination with cetuximab, a
clinically approved epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) specific
monoclonal antibody (mAb). Cetuximab can activate NK cells through an
interaction with FcRIII, and facilitate ADCC of tumor cells. Preliminary
data from a Phase I clinical trial found that prior to treatment, patient
NK cells did not effectively activate in response to ex vivo stimulation
by NKG2D or FcRIII. However, following VTX-2337 treatment, patient NK
cells become more responsive to these activating signals. These results
show that TLR8 stimulation and inflammasome activation by VTX-2337, can
complement FcRIII engagement, and may augment clinical responses in SCCHN
patients treated with cetuximab.

