Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated functional RNAi screening and structural genomics
identify inverse co-modulators of TP53 family and NF-B transitional
activation as potential therapeutic targets in head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the 6th most common
cancer worldwide with a 50-60% mortality rate. Deregulation of p53 family
members in HNSCC occurs in over 90% of cases, preventing transcription of
growth arrest and apoptosis genes. Conversely, members of the NF-B/REL
family are aberrantly activated in about 70% of cases, and drive
expression of pro-proliferation, inflammation, angiogenesis, and
therapeutic resistance genes. The function of different TP53 and NF-B
family members are inversely modulated within two major subsets of HNSCC,
suggesting that common molecules and pathways coordinate this modulation.
To test this hypothesis, we have developed HNSCC stable cell lines that
report transcriptional activation of TP53 or NF-B individually through a
-lactamase reporter. Whole genome siRNA screening in our NF-B reporter
cell line has been performed. Screening was performed by 56-hour
knockdown with siRNAs, followed by stimulation with TNF-. The results
have revealed known and novel targets that maintain oncogenic NF-B
signaling in HNSCC. Validating the assay, most structural components of
the TNF receptor complex and downstream NF-B pathway genes, such as IKKs,
scored highly in the screen. We integrated this functional genomics data
with structural mutation and expression data from TCGA to prioritize
genes that are frequently deregulated in HNSCC specimens from patients.
Several co-receptors that may support NF-B signaling were identified such
as WNT9/FZD6, NOTCH2, and TGFR2. Our primary novel finding was the
identification of genes that regulate mitosis, such as CDC2, CDC7, CHEK1,
WEE1 and CALM2. Several components of the kinetochore were also
identified including NDC80, PLK1,TTK and AURKA. To validate our screening
data, individual assays were performed with two siRNAs for a panel of 27
genes from the pathways mentioned above. >95% of siRNAs tested validated
our screening data. Genes scoring well in our analysis were also assayed
in our p53 reporter cell line using cisplatin and TNF- as stimuli. Genes
that inversely activate p53 were identified. To further investigate the
relationship between kinetochore function and NF-B activation, we treated
cells with various G2/M inhibitors such as docetaxel and showed decreased
NF-B signaling. Future experiments are underway to determine the
signaling mechanism that connects the kinetochore to NF-B regulators.
Experiments are also ongoing to determine if aberrant activation of NF-B
can serve as a biomarker for sensitivity to cell cycle inhibitors.

