Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene-based analysis of the fibroblast growth factor receptor
signaling pathway identifies an association of the FGF1 gene with risk of
estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer: The AMBER consortium


Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) and their receptors (FGFRs) play key
roles in several cellular processes such as differentiation,
proliferation, migration and survival. Deregulation of the FGFR signaling
pathway has been associated with human cancer including breast cancer,
and GWAS-identified polymorphisms in the FGFR2 gene have been associated
with risk of both overall and estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast
cancer. We conducted gene-based analysis in 26 genes in the FGFR
signaling pathway to identify genes carrying genetic variation affecting
risk of breast cancer and the specific ER subtypes. Tagging single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at 10 kb of each gene were selected and
genotyped in a customized Illumina Exome Array. Imputation was carried
out using 1000 Genomes haplotypes. The analysis included 9,264 SNPs in
3,663 breast cancer cases (including 1,983 estrogen receptor-positive
(ER+), and 1,098 estrogen receptor-negative (ER-)) and 4,687 controls
from the African American Breast Cancer Epidemiology and Risk (AMBER)
consortium, a collaborative study of four of the largest studies of
breast cancer in African American women (Carolina Breast Cancer Study,
Black Women's Health Study, Women's Circle of Health Study, and
Multi-Ethnic Cohort). We used the adaptive rank-truncated product (ARTP)
method implemented in R-package PIGE to determine the association of each
gene in the FGFR signaling pathway with overall breast cancer, and ER
subtypes. Analyses were adjusted for principal components of genetic
variation to control for population stratification, age, geographic
region of residence, study, and source of DNA. An alpha level of 0.002 (
= 0.05/26 genes) was used to determine statistical significance at the
gene-wide level. After adjustment for multiple testing the FGF1 gene was
associated with risk of ER-negative breast cancer (p = 0.001). The FGF1
gene codes for the fibroblast growth factor 1. Genetic variation in this
gene has been reported to be associated with risk of ovarian cancer and
with breast cancer survival. As expected, the FGFR2 gene was associated
with risk of overall breast cancer (p = 0.001) and ER-positive breast
cancer (p = 0.002). In summary, we found that the FGF1 gene affects risk
of ER-negative breast cancer in African American women, and we confirmed
the association of the FGFR2 gene with risk of overall and ER-positive
breast cancer. These results highlight the importance of the FGFR
signaling pathway in the pathogenesis of breast cancer, and suggest that
different genes in the same pathway may be associated with different ER
breast cancer subtypes.

