Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wide antiproliferative and proapoptotic activity of the natural
prenyl-flavonoid Xanthohumol and its derivatives on cancer cells,
peripheral blood mononuclear cells, and human primary endothelial cells


Chemo-preventive drugs are molecules able to prevent or retard cancer
development and progression. Recently, diet flavonoids have been
recognized as chemo- and angio-preventive agents. Among these,
Xanthohumol (XN), is the principal prenylated chalcone of the female
inflorescence of the hop plant (Humulus lupulus L.) with
chemo-/angio-preventive properties. The biological effects of the
chalcones mostly depend on their chemical structure, whose variations
influence their anti-tumor effects. In order to identify novel potential
chemo-/angio-preventive agents, we analyzed the effects of seven
synthetic derivatives of XN on tumor and normal cells. We used different
tumor cell lines (lymphoma, colon and prostate cancer cell lines) and
healthy human primary cells (mononuclear cells isolated from peripheral
blood (PBMCs) and umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)). XN
derivatives have a lower IC50 on both cancer and normal cells as compared
to XN. XN10 exerts the highest anti-proliferative activity in cancer and
normal primary cells and we therefore focused our experiments on this
compound in comparison with XN master molecule. Interestingly, the IC50
values for XN10 are two-three fold higher in primary cells than tumor
cells, suggesting an anti-tumor effect of XN10 which spares healthy cells
both from peripheral blood and the microenvironment. The treatment with
XN10 leads to apoptosis as demonstrated in lymphoma cell lines by PARP-1
cleavage and dose-dependent caspase-3 activation. Preliminary data also
show that XN downregulates the enzyme cyclooxygenase-1 while inducing a
DNA damage as demonstrated by the increase of the specific marker -H2AX
in the cell lysates treated with the indicated drugs. We then treated
both PBMCs and HUVECs with XN and XN10 in a range of 1-20M for 48 hr.
XN10 affects PBMCs and HUVEC cells viability starting at lower doses (1
M) than the parental molecule. 20M XN mainly decreases monocyte
population whereas XN10 affects bothCD19+/CD20+ and CD14+/CD33+ cells in
parallel with the increase of apoptosis and caspase activation. Further,
in HUVECs, XN activates AMPK in a time and dose-dependent manner with a
peak of activation after 5 minutes of exposure up to 1h, independently
from LKB1 activation. Activation of AMPK signalling pathway by XN was
confirmed by ACC phosphorylation at Ser-79 at the same timepoints. In
this cellular context, XN modulates AMPK downstream target, mTOR and
eNOS, particularly inhibiting eNOS phosphorylation. Collectively, our
data show that XN and its novel derivative XN10 exert a strong
antiproliferative activity on a variety of tumor cell lines and normal
cells. XN10 features the strongest pro-apoptotic activity yet causing the
most dramatic cytotoxic effect on normal cells. Moreover, XN activity
seems to involve AMPK activation, in HUVEC cells.

