Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating molecular mechanisms linking microRNA-206 loss to
tumor progression and metastasis


Metastasis is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths, and this occurs
when tumor cells invade basement membranes and blood vessels to colonize
other tissues. Metastasis is facilitated by extracellular matrix
(ECM)-degrading structures called invadopodia. Recently, several
microRNAs (miRNAs) have been identified as tumor and metastasis
suppressor genes. Loss of expression of miR-206 has been correlated with
poor prognosis in gastric cancer, breast cancer, rhabdomyosarcoma and
melanoma. A previous study by others has demonstrated that restoring
miR-206 expression in human breast cancer cells was sufficient to block
metastasis in tumor xenograft assays. However, the targets of miR-206
that cause metastasis in these cancer models have not been fully
characterized. Here, we have tested the effects of miR-206 on invadopodia
in metastatic cancer cells, and identified a novel target that may
explain this effect. Transducer of Cdc42-mediated Actin assembly-1
(Toca-1) is an adaptor protein that promotes formation of invadopodia and
metastasis in breast cancer models, and has a predicted miR-206 binding
site within the 3 UTR of Toca-1 transcripts. To test whether the high
levels of Toca-1 expression that we have observed in metastatic cancer
cell lines was due to loss of miR-206, we rescued miR-206 expression
using transient, stable or inducible approaches in MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer, A375 melanoma, and H1299 lung cancer cell lines. In each cell
model, Toca-1 expression was reduced upon miR-206 expression at both the
mRNA and protein levels, thus validating Toca-1 as a new target of
miR-206. Further testing of the phenotypes induced by miR-206 rescue
revealed dramatic defects in ECM degradation and cell invasion in breast
cancer and melanoma cell models. In subcutaneous tumor xenograft assays,
stable rescue of miR-206 in H1299 tumors led to defects in tumor growth
compared to those expressing a scrambled control miRNA. In addition,
miR-206 expression caused a dramatic reduction in the numbers of lung
metastases. We are currently extending this to our melanoma models and
inducible models to define changes in metastasis-related targets of
miR-206 that are aberrantly expressed in metastatic cancers. In
conclusion, our study demonstrates for the first time a link between
miR-206 and suppression of invadopodia formation via Toca-1 silencing,
which likely contributes to the metastasis suppressing activity of
miR-206 in multiple cancer types.

