Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vandetanib as a potential new treatment for ER negative breast
cancers


Introduction: Recent studies have shown that the receptor tyrosine kinase
RET is involved in the biology of ER positive breast cancers and in the
response to endocrine treatment, but its role in ER negative tumors is
unknown. Here we investigated the expression of RET in BC patients tumors
and patient-derived xenografts (PDX) and evaluated the therapeutic
potential of Vandetanib in ER negative BC PDX.Methods: RET mRNA
expression was analyzed in BC of 446 patients and 57 PDX by RT-PCR
analysis. The activity of Vandetanib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor
targeting RET, EGFR and VEGFR2, was tested in three PDX of
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) and one PDX of HER2+ BC with
different levels of RET expression. Protein expression of P-RET, RET,
EGFR, P-EGFR and c-KIT were determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC).
Analyses of PI3K and MAPK pathways and angiogenesis were performed by IHC
and RT-PCR in both untreated and Vandetanib-treated tumors.Results: In
both clinical samples and PDX, elevated levels of RET were found in ER+
and HER2+ tumors, and in a subgroup of TNBC tumors. In the HBCx5 (HER2+)
and HBCx24 (TNBC) PDX, both with RET over-expression, treatment by
Vandetanib resulted in tumor growth inhibition (TGI) of 90% and 98%,
respectively. In both models, tumor regressions were observed in 50% of
xenografts. The effect of Vandetanib was associated to a marked
inhibition of RET phosphorylation. To determine whether the lack of RET
over-expression was associate to Vandetanib resistance, we treated two
additional TNBC PDX with low and no expression of RET: HBCx4B and HBCx14.
In these models, treatment by Vandetanib still inhibited tumor growth
with a TGI of 85%. Tumor regressions were registered in 42% of animals in
the PDX model with low expression of RET (HBCx4B), while no tumor
regression were observed in HBCx14. IHC analyses showed an
over-expression of EGFR in the HBCx4B xenograft and inhibition of EGFR
phosphorylation in treated tumors, suggesting that tumor response to
Vandetanib could depend on EGFR inhibition in this tumor. Further
analyses of treated tumors revealed a decreased expression of phospho-ERK
in the 4 PDX models, indicating inhibition of MAPK pathway, while the
phosphorylation status of the PI3K pathway markers S6 and 4EBP1 was
unchanged. Finally, treatment by Vandetanib decreased expression of
murine Vegf receptors and the endothelial marker Cd31 in the 4 PDX
tested, indicating angiogenesis inhibition.Conclusions: Treatment by
Vandetanib resulted in strong tumor growth inhibition in ER negative PDX
with over-expression of RET. This effect was associated to inhibition of
RET phosphorylation and MAPK pathway and decreased tumor vascularization.
The lack of RET over-expression did not predict Vandetanib resistance,
and over-expression of EGFR was also associated to a marked tumor
response. These preclinical results suggest that Vandetanib treatment
could be useful for patients with ER negative breast cancers expressing
Vandetanib's targets.

