Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A diagnostic gene expression assay for the classification of
pheochromocytoma


Background/Aims:Pheochromocytoma (PCC) is a neoplastic growth of adrenal
or extra-adrenal chromaffin cells. PCC is one of the most heritable
cancers with up to 35% of cases attributed to a germline mutation in one
of 13 or more genes. Previous microarray gene-expression studies have
observed that PCC clusters into two or more subtypes corresponding to the
underlying mutations that cause either dysregulation of hypoxia inducible
factor (HIF) (e.g. VHL, SDHx) or constitutive activation of receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK) signalling (e.g. RET, NF1). The aim of this study
was to conduct an unbiased assessment of the number of gene-expression
subtypes of PCC using a compendium of published gene-expression data.
Furthermore, we aimed to design a gene-expression based diagnostic assay
to accurately classify tumours as an adjunct to clinical mutation
analysis and for research purposes.Methods:Consensus clustering was
applied to a gene-expression compendium of 253 samples to assess the most
stable number of subtypes. Differential gene-expression analysis was
performed to identify genes specific to each class. The expression of
these genes in the microarray data was used to train a cross-platform
k-NN classifier. The classifier was tested on an independent RNA-seq
dataset to assess accuracy. Forty-seven genes (plus five control genes)
were selected for Nanostring gene-expression analysis. The Nanostring
assay was performed on RNA isolated from FFPE blocks corresponding to
samples in the RNA-seq dataset to assess concordance and accuracy of the
cross platform classifier.Results:Consensus clustering identified six
robust PCC subtypes. Based on clinical annotation from the published
data, four classes belong to the RTK signalling group, three of which
(annotated RTK1 to 3) contain a mixture of NF1, RET, RAS, and TMEM127
gene mutations, and a fourth (annotated MAX-like) containing samples with
mutations in the MAX gene.The remaining two classes belong to the HIF
signalling group, one representing samples with a VHL mutation and the
other mutations in one of the SDHx subunits. Applying the classifier we
were able to classify RNA-seq data for samples with RET (6), NF1 (6), RAS
(2), and TMEM127 (1) as belonging to the RTK 1-3 groups. Accurate
classification of nine of eleven VHL samples and two SDHx samples was
achieved. Classification of corresponding Nanostring data provided
concordant classification for eleven of twelve samples.Conclusion:PCC can
be divided into six biological classes indicative of the underlying
driver mutation. The ability to accurately classify samples from FFPE
material would provide a valuable adjunct to current practices in genetic
testing laboratories, providing corroboration for known mutations and
guidance on samples with mutations of unknown significance in PCC genes.
Furthermore, the classifier can be used for research purposes to subtype
tumours with unknown driver mutations for the interpretation of candidate
driver genes.

