Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of prostate cancer biomarkers and therapeutic targets
in FFPE specimens using the NanoString platform


Introduction: Identification of prognostic indicators of disease
progression is one of the highest priorities in prostate cancer (CaP)
research. The majority of CaP tissue specimens available for biomarker
discovery and validation are formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE)
specimens. The RNA quality of these tissues for traditional gene
expression analysis approaches is not adequate, especially of cases with
long term- follow up necessary for prognostic marker studies. We
systematically evaluated and optimized the NanoString platform for CaP
gene expression analysis in FFPE whole mounted prostate specimens with up
to 15 years follow up.Methods: NanoString readouts were compared between
a series of input total RNA prepared through different tissue dissection
methods. We then performed NanoString analysis of 151-CaP probe set on 63
archived CaP samples to evaluate this modified protocol. ERG gene
expression was validated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) assay using CPDR
ERG-MAb (9FY).Results: We have performed NanoString analysis of CPDR
designed 151- CaP gene panel on whole-mounted prostate tissue specimens
using our optimized protocol. The prostate epithelial cell markers KLK3,
MSMB and PAP had the highest signals in all samples reflecting the
prostate epithelial origin of the specimens. Established CaP specific
genes, such as AMACR, PCA3 and PSGR were most highly over-expressed in
tumors compared to matched benign prostate epithelium. ERG positive
tumors had strong expression of both TMPRSS2-ERG fusion probes and probes
for several ERG splice forms (ERG 1,2,3 and 8), with no signals in the
matched benign samples. The ERG gene expression status was consistent
with blinded ERG IHC results.Conclusions: The feasibility of NanoString
profiling in archived whole mounted FFPE prostate specimens was
demonstrated. This approach is well suited for a medium throughput
evaluation and validation of prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target
candidates in CaP.

