Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal-epithelial crosstalk of Mig-6 has an important role for
tumor suppression via progesterone in endometrial cancer


Endometrial cancer is the most common malignancy of the female genital
tract. This disease is commonly caused by an imbalance of progesterone
(P4) and estrogen (E2) action that E2 stimulates proliferation of uterine
epithelial cells while P4 is inhibitory to estrogen-mediated
proliferation of the epithelium. Endometrial hyperplasia is also
associated with endometrial cancer, which is a proliferative process in
epithelium by E2. Responsiveness of progesterone is required to treat
endometrial cancer and preserve the fertility of patients. Furthermore,
PR expression in the uteri of patients with endometrial cancer has been
used as an indicator for a first-rate prognosis. However, more than 30%
of patients do not respond to progesterone treatment as a result of
progesterone resistance and the mechanism of progesterone resistance is
still unknown. Thus, identifying the mechanism of progesterone in
endometrial cancer is essential to improve the therapy of this disease.
Mitogen-inducible gene 6 (Mig-6) is an important mediator of progesterone
receptor (PR) action in the murine uterus. As P4 achieves the inhibition
of proliferation by coordinating stromal-epithelial cross-talk, we
generated a mouse model in which we specifically ablate epithelial
endometrial Mig-6 using Sprr2f-cre mice (Sprr2fcre+ Mig-6f/f) to
understand the role of epithelial Mig-6 in the uterus. Sprr2fcre+
Mig-6f/f mice displayed endometrial hyperplasia upon 10 weeks of age and
develop endometrial cancer by E2 treatment for 3 months. Interestingly,
the hyperplasia exhibited by Sprr2fcre+ Mig-6f/f mice was prevented by P4
treatment for 1 week in morphological and histological analysis.
Proliferation decreased in the glandular epithelium of Sprr2fcre+
Mig-6f/f mice by P4, and apoptotic signal was also reduced. The
expressions of stromal PR and its target genes were induced in Sprr2fcre+
Mig-6f/f mice after P4 treatment, indicating that P4-induced stromal
Mig-6 can prevent the hyperplasia via regulating steroid hormonal
signaling. This study suggested that stromal-epithelial communication of
Mig-6 is critical in tumor suppressor function via regulating steroid
hormonal signaling by progesterone. (This work was supported by American
Cancer Society Research Grant, RSG-12-084-01-TBG to J.W.J.)

