Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between tumor infiltrating immune cells, circulating
tumor cells in blood and disseminated tumor cells in the bone marrow in
patients with primary ovarian cancer


Background: We recently showed that the presence of disseminated tumor
cells (DTCs) in the bone marrow (BM) and circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
in blood of primary ovarian cancer patients significantly correlated with
reduced progression free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). On the
one hand, this negative prognostic impact might be related to different
factors like chemotherapy resistant and stem cell like cells. On the
other hand, the microenvironment of the primary tumor might influence
tumor cell spread and thus, outcome of the disease. Here we analyzed
whether infiltrating leukocytes in the tumor (TILs) and/or stroma (SILs)
are associated with DTCs before and after therapy as well as with CTCs
before therapy in patients with primary ovarian cancer.Patients and
Methods: DTCs before (n = 145) and after therapy (n = 57) were studied
using immunocytochemistry applying the pan cytokeratin (CK) antibody
A45-B/B3. 2 5 ml bloods of 111 patients were analyzed for CTCs with the
AdnaTest OvarianCancer (AdnaGen AG, Langenhagen, Germany) for the
detection of EpCAM, MUC-1, CA-125 and beta-Actin transcripts. Tissue
microarrays of all patients were stamped from paraffin embedded specimens
and 5m thick sections were prepared and subjected to immunohistochemical
analysis using antibodies against human CD4 (Zytomed Systems, Clone IF6,
1:40), CD8 (DakoCytomation, Clone C8/144B, 1:150) and CD68
(DakoCytomation,Clone PG-M1, 1:500), respectively. Each tissue microarray
has been evaluated for TILs and SILs by counting manually, using a 10x
and 20x objective lens. Statistical analysis was conducted with the R
programming language (version 3.02) and ANOVA, Chi-squared test, and when
indicated, Fisher's exact test has been used to check for
independence.Results: Before therapy, DTCs were detected in 51/145
patients (35%) and after therapy in 24/57 patients (42%). CTCs were
detected in 24/111 patients (22%) before therapy. In general, the highest
infiltration of lymphocytes was found in the stroma. Whereas high numbers
of CD8 were detected in the stroma and the tumor, high numbers of CD4 and
CD68 infiltrates were mainly found in the stroma. The expression of CD4
(SIL) and CD8 (SIL) was significantly associated with the presence of
CTCs (p = 0.04) whereas CD4 (SIL) significantly correlated with DTCs
before (p = 0.03) and CD8 (SIL) with DTCs after therapy (p = 0.04). No
association was found between DTCs/CTCs and the expression of
CD68.Conclusion: Here we demonstrate significant associations between
infiltrating lymphocytes and the presence of DTCs and CTCs. Ongoing
studies are now including the expression of CD20 and CD45 and final
statistical analysis, including immune signatures, all clinical
parameters, PFS and OS, will give deeper insights in the interaction of
tumor infiltrating immune cells and tumor cell dissemination.

