Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phytochemicals target epigenetic signaling to block cancer stem
cell-driven colon carcinogenesis


Background: Phytochemicals modulate key cellular signaling pathways and
have proven anticancer effects. Alcea rosea (AR; Hollyhock) is an
ornamental plant in the Malvaceae family with known anti-inflammatory
properties. Its role as an anti-cancer agent however, has not yet been
confirmed. The present investigation is focused on the mechanistic
insight of AR seed extract as an anti-cancer agent for colon cancer.
Methodology: Colon cancer cell lines HCT116 and SW480 and normal colon
epithelial cells were used in the study. Cell proliferation, cell cycle
and stemness were determined by hexoseaminidase, flow cytometry and
spheroid assays, respectively. TOP-Flash reporter and WIF1 promoter
activities were performed in HEK-293T cells. For in vivo effects, we used
the HCT116-tumor xenograft model for colon tumorigenesis. Real Time PCR,
Western blot and immunohistochemistry studies were performed for
determining gene expression. Results: The AR seed extract inhibited
proliferation and colony formation in a dose and time dependent manner in
colon cancer cell lines. The anti-proliferative activity appeared to be
mediated by apoptotic mechanisms, as cleavage of PARP and increased
expression of Bax accompanied decreased levels of BCL-xl protein. In
addition, AR seed extract arrested cells at Go/G1 phase of cell cycle and
exhibited decreases in Cyclin D1. Treatment of cells with AR seed extract
also reduced the number and size of colonospheres in a dose-dependent
manner which coincided with decreases in the expression of ALDH1A1 and
Dclk1, markers of CSCs (Cancer Stem Cells). During analyses of pathways
critical for CSC maintenance and colon cancer progression, AR seed
extract attenuated levels of -catenin, Jagged1, Notch-ICD, Hes1 and EZH2.
TOP-flash reporter activity, a measure of Wnt signaling, decreased
significantly in response to treatment while overexpression of wild type
but not mutant EZH2, reversed the inhibitory effects. Moreover, WIF1 (a
Wnt antagonist) promoter activity increased dramatically following
treatment with AR seed extract which phenocopied increases in WIF1
reporter activity following EZH2 knockdown. To determine the effect of AR
seed extract on tumor growth in vivo, athymic nude mice bearing tumor
xenografts were administered AR seed extract intraperitoneally at 200
mg/Kg daily for 21 days. The AR seed extract significantly inhibited
tumor xenograft growth. In addition, there were reduced levels of EZH2,
-catenin, CyclinD1 and Ki-67 along with attenuated levels of Dclk1 in the
xenograft tissues. Finally, preliminary run through HPLC yielded three
prominent peaks and further identification via NMR spectroscopy is
underway to identify the active ingredient(s). Conclusion: These results
clearly suggest that AR seed extracts can be an effective
preventative/therapeutic agent for colon cancer.

