Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular ATP promotes cancer cell drug resistance to tyrosine
kinase inhibitors by competing for the ATP-binding site of tyrosine kinase


ATP plays important roles in cellular processes in cancer cells, which
are a heterogeneous population in tumors regarding their genetic
background and oxygen and energy supplies. The fact that cancer cells
undergo rapid proliferation suggests that they must possess mechanisms,
which may not be present in normal cells, to meet their high energy
needs. Studies by others revealed that extracellular ATP levels of
various cancer types are 10^3 to 10^4 times higher than those in their
corresponding normal tissues (1). We recently reported that extracellular
ATP can be taken up directly by cancer cells by macropinocytosis (2).
Based on these results, we hypothesized that the internalized
extracellular ATP not only promotes cancer cell growth and survival, but
also drug resistance. In this study, human lung cancer A549 and breast
cancer MCF7 cells were used as cell models to determine the effects of
extracellular ATP on drug resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)
in cancer cells. Cancer cell viability and intracellular ATP measurement
results showed that extracellular ATP substantially increased
intracellular ATP levels and promoted cancer cell drug resistance to
TKIs. Viability of TKI treated cancer cells was significantly increased
in the presence of extracellular ATP, compared to cancer cells with TKI
treatment alone. Administration of macropinocytosis inhibitors
significantly reduced the drug resistance induced by extracellular ATP,
suggesting that extracellular ATP promoted drug resistance by
contributing to the intracellular ATP pool. Protein and protein
phosphorylation analyses results suggested that the increased
intracellular ATP reversed the inhibition of TKIs by competing with the
inhibitor for the ATP-binding site of platelet-derived growth factor
receptor (PDGFR) and enhancing Akt and MAPK signaling pathways. These
findings identify, for the first time, new biological functions of
extracellular ATP in tumors and may lead to novel anti-cancer strategies
combating drug resistance in cancers.1. Pellegatti P, et al. PLoS ONE
2008;3:e2599.2. Qian Y, et al. Cancer Lett 2014;351:242-51.

