Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of FRA-1 as a potential driver of pro-invasive
properties in pancreatic cancer in conjunction with MUC1


The transmembrane mucin, MUC1, contributes to the progression of
pancreatic cancer, in part by conducting signals from the cell surface
that regulate expression of molecules associated with aggressive tumor
behavior. We investigated transcriptional co-regulatory effects mediated
by interactions of the MUC1 cytoplasmic tail with activator protein 1
(AP-1). Previous results suggest that MUC1 regulates the capacity of AP-1
to bind specific promoter elements and regulate genes that contribute to
tumor progression. The DNA binding activity of AP-1 is controlled in
several ways including composition of the protein dimer. The precise
mechanism by which MUC1 alters transcriptional complexes remains unknown.
We sought to determine how MUC1 influences the formation of AP-1
complexes and potential downstream effects.We found MUC1 increased c-Jun
protein levels, the major component of AP-1, in a manner largely
independent of transcriptional upregulation (mRNA upregulation was
observed in only one cell line of several analyzed). Formation of the
AP-1 dimer was assessed by quantitative and semi-quantitative assays.
MUC1 promoted the association of c-Jun with the Fos protein, FRA-1. This
association was promoted by enhanced ERK2 signaling in MUC1 expressing
cell lines. In breast cancer, FRA-1 drives an invasive and metastatic
phenotype. Overexpression of FRA-1 in pancreatic cancer cell lines
promoted migratory and invasive behaviors in vitro. Blocking FRA-1
activity by shRNA knockdown or ERK inhibition decreased migration and
invasion. Analysis of gene expression in pancreatic tumor samples and
normal, uninvolved tissue [mined from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)]
revealed that tumor samples had significantly increased levels of FRA-1
mRNA. A subset of these samples exhibited gene expression patterns
consistent with a FRA-1:EMT phenotype previously observed in colorectal
cancer cells. We evaluated expression of FRA-1 protein in primary
pancreatic tumors, liver metastases, and uninvolved non-malignant
pancreas. Robust nuclear localization of FRA-1 was observed in primary
and metastatic tumor cells whereas uninvolved pancreas showed lower
levels of diffuse cytoplasmic staining.Based on these results, we
hypothesize that FRA-1 plays an important role in a subset of pancreatic
cancers by altering the binding profile of AP-1. Due to a dependence on
ERK activity for FRA-1 function, we propose that cancers with activating
mutations in the RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK cascade are the most likely candidates
for utilization of FRA-1.

