Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulated miR-30a promotes acquisition of chemoresistance by
targeting endothelin A receptor in ovarian carcinoma


Chemotherapy is the preferred therapeutic approach for the therapy of
epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC), but a successful long-term treatment
is prevented by the development of drug resistance. Endothelin-1
(ET-1)/ETA receptor (ETAR) axis is upregulated in chemoresistant EOC and
associated with acquisition of chemoresistance and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) phenotype and poor prognosis. Therefore, interference
with ET-1/ETAR signaling pathway has emerged as a promising strategy for
cancer therapy. Because dysregulation of miRNAs has been associated with
cancer development and drug-resistance, in this study we evaluated
whether altered expression of miRNAs might regulate ETAR expression in
2008 and A2780 sensitive and resistant EOC cell lines. Based on
bioinformatics tools, we selected putative miRNAs able to recognize the
3UTR of ETAR. Among these, only miR-30a resulted downregulated in
chemoresistant EOC cells compared with parental cells. Luciferase
reporter assays using wild-type and mutant ETAR 3 -UTR constructs, and
transfection of miR-30a mimic showed that miR-30a targets the 3 -UTR of
ETAR mRNA. Indeed ectopic expression of miR-30a inhibited ETAR-driven
signaling pathways. Interestingly, miR-30a re-introduction in
chemoresistant EOC cells impaired their capacity to promote the invasive
process and reverted EMT phenotype. Moreover, miR-30a overexpression was
able to restore drug sensitivity by enhancing the susceptibility of
resistant EOC cells to cisplatinum-induced apoptosis, as supported by the
reduced viability and increased cleavage of caspase 7 and PARP.
Similarly, we demonstrated that the treatment with macitentan, a potent
ETAR antagonist with significant affinity for ETBR, counteracted the
effects elicited by ETAR pathway in chemoresistant EOC cells restoring
drug-sensitivity and regulating cell plasticity. In preclinical model of
resistant EOC, macitentan treatment reduced tumor growth,
vascularization, intravasation and metastatic progression. The
combination of macitentan and cisplatinum inhibited tumor growth of
resistant EOC xenografts more effective then chemotherapy alone. In
addition, lower expression of miR-30a and higher expression of ETAR in
platinum-resistant specimens from EOC patients were significantly
associated with poor clinical outcome, representing potential predictive
markers of chemoresistance. This study for the first time demonstrated
miR-30a-dependent regulation of ETAR for chemoresistance of EOC, further
supporting that the regulation of ETAR represents a valid therapeutic
target for circumventing drug resistance.

