Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cooperative interactions between p53 and NFB enhance cell
plasticity


Breast cancer prevention, diagnosis and treatment have improved during
recent years. However, despite these scientific and clinical
improvements, breast cancer survival rate has not substantially
increased, due to cancer recurrence and metastatic spread. It is
therefore important to further investigate the mechanisms and causes
responsible for breast cancer metastasis.The p53 and NFB
sequence-specific transcription factors (TFs) play crucial roles in cell
proliferation and survival with critical, even if typically opposite,
effects on cancer progression. To investigate a possible crosstalk
between p53 and NFB driven by chemotherapy-induced responses in the
context of an inflammatory microenvironment, we performed a proof of
concept study using MCF7 cells. Transcriptome analyses upon single or
combined treatments with doxorubicin (Doxo) and the NFB inducer Tumor
Necrosis Factor-alpha (TNF) were performed. Expression microarrays
experiments identified a common set of synergistically up-regulated genes
upon combined drug treatments in different cellular models of breast and
lung carcinomas. This gene signature was enriched in inflammation,
proliferation and metastasis gene functions, according to gene ontology
and pathway analysis. Interestingly, the migratory phenotypes exhibited
by our cell models significantly differed upon single and combined drug
treatments and exhibited cell-type specificity.For a selected group of
genes synergistically up-regulated upon Doxo+TNF we were able to
demonstrate by ChIP analysis a direct binding of p53 and NFB and we
uncovered LAMP3 and ETV7 as new p53-NFB direct target genes.We also
demonstrated that the combined Doxo+TNF treatment was not only able to
disrupt the 3D architecture of mammary acini observed with MCF10A primary
cells grown within matrigel, but also to stimulate the tube-forming
potential of Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells (HUVEC).Furthermore,
a signature of 29 Doxo+TNF (DT-29) highly synergistic genes exhibited
prognostic value for luminal breast cancer patients, with adverse outcome
correlating with higher relative expression (based on Kaplan-Meier
plotter tool). We further used available experimental data sets (RNA-seq
measurements from Gene Expression Omnibus) both from breast cancer cell
lines (luminal-like vs basal-like breast cancer cells) and breast cancer
patients (ER positive vs Triple Negative Breast Cancer, TNBC and vs
healthy adjacent tissues). The expression of DT-29 gene signature was
analyzed and compared among the different groups of samples. The most
statistically relevant genes differentially expressed among the different
groups were involved in the STAT3-driven pathways and were prevalently
highly expressed in TNBC patients and cell lines.We propose that the
crosstalk between p53 and NFB can lead to the activation of specific gene
expression programs that may impact on cancer phenotypes and potentially
modify the efficacy of cancer therapy.

