Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depleting cysteine: A novel approach to tumor therapy


A cure remains elusive for many types of tumors that initially respond to
chemotherapy but recur with drug-resistant disease. Cysteine, (or its
oxidized form cystine) is an essential amino acid for tumors. Enhanced
uptake of cysteine and/or cystine is required for tumors to maintain
their intracellular glutathione (GSH) levels and redox balance. In
addition, some stem cells within epithelial tumors express CD44v8-10,
which stabilizes the cystine transporter, increasing cystine uptake into
the cell and enhancing resistance to pro-oxidant therapy. Depleting
cysteine during treatment has a profound effect on sensitizing the tumor
to therapy. We have a novel strategy that reduces the cysteine (and
cystine) concentration in serum and extracellular fluid. The strategy
exploits the finding that a severe cysteine deficiency develops in mice
lacking the enzyme gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT). This enzyme
reclaims the cysteine from GSH as the blood is filtered through the
kidney. Inhibiting GGT activity results in excretion of GSH in the urine
and a precipitous drop in the concentration of cysteine and cystine in
serum. The inhibitors of GGT that have been evaluated in the clinic are
glutamate analogs and are too toxic for clinical use. We have discovered
and are developing a new class of GGT inhibitors that are not glutamate
analogs. These inhibitors are orders of magnitude less toxic than the
glutamate analogs. We have determined the crystal structure of human GGT.
In the current study we have co-crystallized human GGT with a series of
inhibitors. We report the identification of residues within the active
site that are critical for inhibitor binding. We have identified changes
in the conformation of the active site upon substrate binding. We have
also delineated movement within the active site during substrate
cleavage. Site-directed mutagenesis and functional assays have confirmed
the role of the key residues identified in the structural studies. These
data provide new insights for continued development of a potent,
specific, non-toxic inhibitor of GGT that can be used clinically in
cancer therapy. Supported by an Institutional Development Award (IDeA)
from the National Institutes of Health under grant P20GM103640.

