Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nitric oxide mediates metabolic coupling of omentum-derived
adipose to ovarian and endometrial cancer cells


Omental adipose stromal cells (O-ASCs) are multipotent population of
mesenchymal stem cells contained in the omentum tissue which promote
endometrial and ovarian tumor proliferation, migration and drug
resistance. The mechanistic underpinnings of O-ASCs role in tumor
progression and growth are unclear. Here, we report a novel nitric oxide
(NO) mediated metabolic coupling between O-ASCs and gynecological cancer
cells in which O-ASCs support NO homeostasis in malignant cells. NO is
synthesized endogenously by the conversion of L-arginine into citrulline
through nitric oxide synthase (NOS). Ovarian cancers have high affinity
for NO which has solubility in lipids. This explains the proximity of
many carcinomas to fatty tissue, and thus the high positive correlation
between obesity and cancer. Through arginine depletion in the media using
L-arginase and NOS inhibition in cancer cells using L-NAME, we
demonstrate that patient derived O-ASCs increase NO levels in ovarian and
endometrial cancer cells and promote proliferation in these cells. O-ASCs
and cancer cell cocultures revealed that cancer cells utilize
O-ASCs-secreted arginine and in turn secrete citrulline in the
microenvironment. Interestingly, citrulline increased adipogenesis
potential of the O-ASCs. Furthermore, we found that O-ASCs increased NO
synthesis in cancer cells which led to decrease in mitochondrial
respiration in these cells. Our findings suggest that O-ASCs upregulate
glycolysis and reduce oxidative stress in cancer cells by increasing NO
levels through paracrine metabolite secretion. Significantly, we found
that O-ASC mediated chemoresistance in cancer cells can be deregulated by
altering NO homeostasis. A combined approach of targeting secreted
arginine through L-arginase, along with targeting microenvironment
secreted factors induced increased NO synthesis in cancer cells using
L-NAME, may be a viable therapeutic approach for targeting ovarian and
endometrial cancers. Interestingly, we found that NO modulates
s-nitrosation of cellular proteins mediating energy metabolism and
cellular differentiation. O-ASCs were found to synthesize higher levels
of NO during their differentiation to fat cells which leads to higher
protein s-nitrosation. Inhibition of s-nitrosation of cellular proteins
showed that NO-mediated protein modifications are strongly associated
with O-ASCs adipogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that modulation
of intrinsic NO substantially affects tumor growth and drug toxicity in
ovarian and endometrial cancer cells. Our study will lead to significant
advances in the understanding of the omentum in altering cancer
metabolism and lead to novel therapeutics.

