Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the mitochondrial binding site on the
amino-terminal end of hexokinase II


Hexokinase II is responsible for the first step in the glycolysis
pathway. Hexokinase II adds a phosphate onto the glucose molecule so it
can proceed down the pathway to give the cancer cell energy for its
continuous growth. Tumor cells overexpress the hexokinase II enzyme. In
fact, it is the overexpression of the hexokinase II enzyme that makes the
diagnosis of cancer possible when imaged by positron emission tomography
(PET). Hexokinase II binds to the voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC)
on the mitochondrial membrane and when it is attached to the
mitochondrial membrane it is blocking a major pathway for cell death.
Thus, hexokinase II is responsible for two characteristics of cancer
cells, rapid tumor growth and difficulty to kill. Therefore the overall
goal of our laboratory is to identify novel compounds with the ability to
displace or translocate hexokinase II from the mitochondrial membrane to
the cytoplasm. To attain our goal, we propose to use the crystal
structure of hexokinase II to create a molecular model of the enzyme.
However the amino acids responsible for binding to VDAC are not known.
Therefore, we made a series of truncations and point mutations to
identify the binding site to VDAC. Truncations of the first 10 and 20
amino acids indicated that important amino acids for binding were located
within the first 10 amino acids. We made a series of single, double and
triple point mutations within the first 10 amino acids.
Immunofluorescence and immunoblot data has confirmed that mutating the
fifth amino acid from histidine to proline completely abolished binding
to the mitochondrial membrane. To prepare hexokinase II for
crystallization, we have cloned the enzyme downstream of a thrombin
cleavage site and His-tag. We were able to purify hexokinase II using a
cobalt column, then eluting hexokinase II using thrombin to cleave at the
thrombin cleavage site. Purified hexokinase II is isolated after removal
of the thrombin using Protein A beads. After the crystal structure of
hexokinase II is obtained, we will use the University of Florida
Structure-based Molecular Docking Core facility to identify compounds
predicted to fit into the VDAC binding site. The compounds will be
characterized to validate a mechanism-of-action of translocating
hexokinase II from the mitochondrial membrane to the cytoplasm, blocking
glycolysis and decreasing ATP synthesis. The positive compounds will be
analyzed to determine the best strategy for moving our studies closer to
clinical application in cancer patients.

