Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo response and molecular characterization of a Caucasian
NSCLC squamous cell carcinoma PDX sensitive to FGFR inhibitors


BACKGROUND:The fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) family are
reported to be involved in key cellular processes such as proliferation,
differentiation, migration & survival with the deregulation of signalling
through genetic modification or amplification being observed in cancer.
FGFR1 has been reported to be amplified in squamous cell non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) as well as other indications (e.g. breast) and there
are several FGFR inhibitors currently in clinical trial. It is therefore
essential to develop relevant in vivo models for the development and
characterisation of new FGFR agents and/or combination strategies which
may prolong benefit and delay the emergence of resistance.METHODS:Patient
derived xenograft (PDX) models were maintained subcutaneously in vivo in
serial passage and their growth monitored by calliper measurements three
times weekly; mice were recruited to treatment groups when the mean
tumour volume was approximately 200mm3. Response to treatment was
evaluated by tumour growth inhibition in response to FGFR inhibitors such
as AZD4547 and chemotherapy. Resistance to both chemotherapy
(Paclitaxel/Carboplatin) and AZD4547 in the squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
PDX model, LU6429, was generated in vivo through repeated dosing and the
resulting models characterised for their treatment response. Molecular
characterisation was carried out by RNA sequencing.RESULTS: A number of
novel PDX models have been developed which harbour FGFR amplification and
mutations including LU6429, a Caucasian NSCLC SCC PDX model which has
modest FGFR1 and FGFR2 amplification and responds to FGFR inhibitors.
LU6429 PDX tumours (SCC confirmed by IHC) exhibited reproducible
sensitivity to AZD4547 (pBACKGROUND:The fibroblast growth factor receptor
(FGFR) family are reported to be involved in key cellular processes such
as proliferation, differentiation, migration & survival with the
deregulation of signalling through genetic modification or amplification
being observed in cancer. FGFR1 has been reported to be amplified in
squamous cell non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) as well as other
indications (e.g. breast) and there are several FGFR inhibitors currently
in clinical trial. It is therefore essential to develop relevant in vivo
models for the development and characterisation of new FGFR agents and/or
combination strategies which may prolong benefit and delay the emergence
of resistance.METHODS:Patient derived xenograft (PDX) models were
maintained subcutaneously in vivo in serial passage and their growth
monitored by calliper measurements three times weekly; mice were
recruited to treatment groups when the mean tumour volume was
approximately 200mm3. Response to treatment was evaluated by tumour
growth inhibition in response to FGFR inhibitors such as AZD4547 and
chemotherapy. Resistance to both chemotherapy (Paclitaxel/Carboplatin)
and AZD4547 in the squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) PDX model, LU6429, was
generated in vivo through repeated dosing and the resulting models
characterised for their treatment response. Molecular characterisation
was carried out by RNA sequencing.RESULTS: A number of novel PDX models
have been developed which harbour FGFR amplification and mutations
including LU6429, a Caucasian NSCLC SCC PDX model which has modest FGFR1
and FGFR2 amplification and responds to FGFR inhibitors. LU6429 PDX
tumours (SCC confirmed by IHC) exhibited reproducible sensitivity to
AZD4547 (p<0.001) which was maintained in continuous serial passage and
following cryogenic storage. FGFR expression and mutational analysis was
assessed in nave tumours, tumours following continuous AZD4547 treatment
and in the acquired chemo-resistance setting. Other models show
differential response to FGFR inhibitors.CONCLUSIONS: Pre-clinical models
such as LU6429, a novel patient-derived NSCLC SCC xenograft model with
moderate FGFR amplification which showed significant sensitivity to the
FGFR inhibitor AZD4547, are invaluable in assessing novel agents
targeting the FGFR pathway and in the development of new combination
strategies which may prevent or overcome resistance.

