Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomimetic carriers modulate tumor vascular barrier function


IntroductionWe showed that nanoporous silicon (NPS) particles coated with
leukocyte cellular membranes -Leukolike Vectors (LLV) - possess cell-like
properties. These biomimetic carriers can escape macrophage uptake, delay
sequestration by the reticulo-endothelial system, target tumor inflamed
vasculature and accumulate within the cancer parenchyma. We characterized
the content and function of the leukocyte's proteins transferred onto the
LLV coating and evaluated their interaction with inflamed cancer
vasculature.Experimental ProceduresThe leukocyte membrane coating was
analyzed with several biochemistry techniques. In vitro experiments were
performed using reconstructed inflamed endothelia. Flow chamber systems
were used to simulate vessel flow dynamics and study LLV docking, firm
adhesion and transcytosis. In vivo experiments were performed with Intra
Vital Microscopy (IVM) to image in real time LLV behavior in BALB/c mice
carrying syngeneic breast cancers.ResultsLLV were studied using dynamic
light scattering and scanning electron microscopy to characterize
particles size (1 m), pore sizes (60 nm) and surface properties (positive
charge and uniform coating). Biochemical analyses revealed that we
successfully transferred on the surface of the LLV critical protein among
which LFA-1, MAC1, and CD45. Upon interaction of the LLV with inflamed
endothelia we found that VE-cadherin expression was substantially
reduced. We also described the differential process of cell
internalization and showed that LLV escaped the endo-lysosomal
compartment during intracellular trafficking.IVM showed delayed
sequestration by spleen and liver macrophages, increased circulation
half-life and increased targeting of tumor associated inflamed
vasculature. To further demonstrate the ability of our biomimetic carrier
to affect the biology of tumor endothelia, we evaluated the extravasation
of an intravascular 70 kDa FITC dextran reporter. We measured the
increase in vessel permeability and tissue diffusion over time and
confirmed that LLV were able to favor the extravasation of the reporter
molecule in the cancer parenchyma.ConclusionOur work showed for the first
time that is possible to transfer biologically active leukocyte membrane
proteins onto synthetic particles. Our biomimetic carriers retain
favorable cell-like functions that can enhance the kinetics of
oncotransport by decreasing endothelial cellular junctions and increasing
diffusion of a therapeutic payload within the tumor tissue. We envision
that biomimetic drug delivery systems derived from the infiltrating
immune cells of a cancer patient could represent the next generation of
personalized treatments.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

