Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Screening of investigational antimalarials for anticancer activity
in high risk N-MYC amplified neuroblastoma (NB)


Introduction: NB is a pediatric tumor of neural crest origin. Patients
who have N-MYC amplified metastatic tumors have poor outcomes. The
importance of autophagy in protecting NB cells from chemotherapy has been
postulated. In the following study we screened bisquinoline (BQ) and
ozonide (OZ) antimalarials (potential autophagy inhibitors) in a highly
N-MYC amplified NB cell line (BE-2) and a moderately amplified N-MYC NB
cell line (IMR-32). A combination of monolayer cell culture and
neurospheres were used to screen activity.Methods: Using a 96 well MMT
based assay and 16 hour treatment with compounds dissolved in DMSO,
cytotoxicity was calculated as a percent decline in absorbance compared
to DMSO controls. 32 BQ and 13 OZ antimalarials were tested. All
compounds were tested at a concentration of 1 mcg/ml; an achievable
concentration in patients. Selected compounds that were cytotoxic in
monolayer culture will be tested in neurosphere culture and then in a
mouse xenograft model alone and combined with chemotherapy.Results: The
bisquinolone antimalarials were consistently active in both BE-2 and IMR
cell culture. Among the bisquinolones, Q1-9, Q2-5, Q2-61, and Q3-75 had
the greatest cytotoxicity. There was no clear
structure-activity-relationship for this small bisquinoline library.
Among the ozonides, OZ465, OZ513, and OZ521 were the most active. From
these data, we could infer that the presence of a weak base functional
group was required, but was insufficient for cytotoxicity. Initial
studies in BE-2 and IMR neurosphere culture using an LDH assay for
cytotoxicity suggests similar activity. Monolayer results are shown in
the Table below:*Percent decline in absorbance compared to DMSO
controlConclusion: The above data indicates that two classes of
antimalarials had moderate cytotoxicity in both 96-well monolayer assays
as well as in a neurosphere assay (data not shown). The results suggest
cytotoxic activity in high and moderately amplified N-MYC NB in both
monolayers and neurospheres.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

