Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of CD4+ T cell epitopes specific for the breast
cancer associated antigen NY-BR-1


Questions: Whether CD4+ T cell epitopes specific for the breast cancer
associated antigen NY-BR-1 can be identified using HLA-transgenic (HLAtg)
mice.Introduction: Adoptive transfer of TCR-transduced autologous tumor
antigen-specific T cells provides an innovative strategy for cancer
immunotherapy. The differentiation antigen NY-BR-1 is over-expressed in
approx. 60% of all invasive mammary carcinomas, thus representing a
potential target for cancer immunotherapy. We thus screened NY-BR-1 for
the presence of CD4+ T cell epitopes.Methods: Splenocytes from DNA
immunized HLA-DRB1*0301 and HLA-DRB1*0401 tg mice were screened ex vivo
by IFN ELISpot assay against a NY-BR-1-derived peptide library. In silico
predicted candidate epitopes present among recognized library peptides
were used to establish CD4+ T cell lines as a read tool to prove
HLA-DR-restriction and natural processing of these epitopes by human
cells. NY-BR-1-specific CD4+ T cell reactivity among PBMC of breast
cancer patients was tested after long term in vitro restimulation with
synthetic 15mers by intracellular cytokine staining.Results: Three
HLA-DRB1*0301-restricted and four HLA-DRB1*0401-restricted
NY-BR-1-specific CD4+ T cell epitopes were identified in HLAtg mice.
HLA-DR-restriction was confirmed upon specific recognition of
peptide-loaded T2/DR3 and T2/DR4 target cells by epitope-specific CD4+ T
cell lines established from HLAtg mice. These T cell lines specifically
recognized human dendritic cells loaded with cell lysates from
Ad5-NY-BR-1 infected melanoma cells, showing natural processing of the
epitopes. Moreover, upon deep sequencing of TCRs from these murine CD4+ T
cell lines two NY-BR-1-specific TCRs were identified which could be
considered for the generation of autologous TCR-transduced T cells lines.
Finally, CD4+ T cells reactive against the NY-BR-1 specific epitopes were
also detected among PBMCs of HLA-DR matched breast cancer
patients.Conclusion: NY-BR-1-specific, HLA-DRB1*0301 and HLA-DRB1*0401
restricted CD4+ T cell epitopes could be identified using HLAtg mice and
CD4+ T cells reactive against these epitopes are present among PBMCs of
breast cancer patients. Finally, murine HLA-restricted CD4+ T cell lines
might serve as source of NY-BR-1-specific TCRs for adoptive immunotherapy
approaches.

