Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIF-1 is responsible for the induction of cancer-associated
fibroblasts in hypoxic tumor microenvironment


In tumor tissues, tumor cells and tumor stromal cells interact with each
other, generating the complex tumor microenvironment (TME). Whereas
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are dominant cells among tumor
stromal cell types, the induction of CAFs in TME still remains unclear.
Given that TME turns to be hypoxic while tumor is growing, we
hypothesized that hypoxia in TME would contribute to induction of CAFs.
In this study, we focused on a role of hypoxia-inducible factor-1
(HIF-1), a key transcription factor in hypoxic responses, and examined
the implication of HIF-1 in the induction of CAFs in TME. The mouse
lymphoma cell line, E.G7 cells, which had been transfected with HIF-1
shRNA (E.G7- HIF-1 shRNA) were cultured under hypoxia with an O2
concentration of 1.0%. As controls, E.G7 cells or those which had been
transfected with control shRNA (E.G7-control shRNA) were also cultured
under the same hypoxic condition as in case of E.G7- HIF-1 shRNA. Three
days later, the culture medium was harvested for following experiments.
To evaluate a role of HIF-1 in migration of CAFs progenitor cells into
TME, mouse bone marrow cells as CAFs progenitor cells were put in the
upper compartment, and hypoxic culture medium was added in the lower
compartment of a transwell chamber. We observed that the number of
-smooth muscle actin (-SMA)-positive cells that had migrated was
decreased when hypoxic culture medium from E.G7- HIF-1 shRNA was added in
the lower compartment. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-) has been
reported to be one of soluble factors which are responsible for induction
of CAFs. Thus, we examined the level of TGF- in hypoxic culture medium by
ELISA, demonstrating that it was decreased in the medium from E.G7- HIF-1
shRNA as compared with E.G7-control shRNA or E.G7 cells. Next, we
examined the association between HIF-1 inhibition and CAFs induction in a
tumor-bearing mouse model. C57BL/6 mice were subcutaneously administered
E.G7-HIF-1 shRNA, E.G7-control shRNA, or E.G7 cells at the flank. Three
weeks later, tumor tissues were harvested from the mice, and
-SMA-positive cells in tumor tissues were examined by
immunohistochemistry. The data showed that -SMA-positive CAFs were
decreased in E.G7-HIF-1 shRNA tumor tissues as compared with E.G7-control
shRNA, or E.G7 tumor tissues. In addition, tumor growth was significantly
suppressed in mice bearing E.G7-HIF-1 shRNA, while inhibition of HIF-1
did not exert a suppressive effect on the proliferation of E.G7 cells in
vitro. These data indicated that HIF-1 would play a critical role in the
induction of CAFs via TGF- in hypoxic TME. Inhibition of HIF-1 could have
contributed to reduction of CAFs in tumor tissues, leading to suppression
of tumor growth. These results provide a novel rationale with
TME-targeted strategy against cancer.

