Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional bioenergetic signature predicts therapeutic responses
to BPM 31510


Unlike personalized strategies to target actionable gene mutations,
predicting patient responses to metabolism-targeted therapies requires a
phenomic - as opposed to genomic - approach to patient stratification.
BPM 31510 is a propriety, ubidecarenone-containing formulation that
alters mitochondrial bioenergetics and is currently in clinical trials
for treatment of solid tumors. Here, we sought to identify a functional
bioenergetic signature which predicts therapeutic responses to BPM 31510
using an in vitro pan-cancer model. BPM 31510 displayed anti-cancer
activity across a range of cancer cell lines including those derived from
breast, prostate, pancreatic, and hepatocellular carcinoma tumors with
IC50 values in the M range (137-922 M) comparable to circulating levels
achieved in clinical trial patients. For each anatomical site, selective
cytotoxicity was observed in cancer cell lines compared to their
respective non-tumorigenic controls. Whether mutational status is
associated with response to BPM 31510 was assessed using hybrid capture
sequencing data from the publically-available Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia; however, a lack of correlation was observed across all 50
driver mutations assessed including TP53 (breast), ETV1 (prostate), and
KRAS (pancreatic). In addition, sensitivity to BPM 31510 was not
correlated with proliferation rate (R2 = 0.0005), in contrast to the
well-established relationship for many standard-of-care chemotherapeutic
agents, suggesting that sensitivity to BPM 31510 is governed by
alternative mechanisms. Using whole-cell integrated energy metabolism
parameters coupled with mitochondrial substrate-level oxidation
measurements, we identified cancer cell types with high glycolytic flux
and low mitochondrial respiration as particularly sensitive to BPM
31510-induced cell death (R2 = 0.6140 and 0.9557, respectively).
Moreover, assessment of substrate-specific oxidation of mitochondrial
substrates (e.g., pyruvate, glutamate, succinate, palmitoyl carnitine,
-hydroxy-butyrate) and subsequent bioinformatics analysis revealed
additional stratification parameters and a predictive functional
bioenergetic signature for therapeutic responses to BPM 31510. Taken
together, these data demonstrate that the anti-cancer effects of BPM
31510 are not governed by mutational status, nor proliferative capacity,
but instead are dictated by the functional bioenergetic status of cancer
cells. Our findings also highlight the importance of phenotypic
stratification approaches to complement those at the level of the genome,
particularly in the setting of anti-metabolic cancer therapies.

