Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic alterations of autophagy genes disrupts autophagic flux in
human lung adenocarcinomas


Targeted therapy using EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) is a standard
therapy for a subset of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with
lung adenocarcinomas (LADs) harboring EGFR kinase domain mutations;
however, EGFR TKI therapy shows limited efficacy due to de novo and
acquired resistance. Consequently, formulating strategies to potentiate
the efficacy of EGFR TKI is of great interest. In EGFR TKI sensitive
cells harboring EGFR mutation, it has been shown that EGFR inhibition
induces autophagy to protect the cells from metabolic stress.
Hydroxychloroquine (HQ), an inhibitor of autophagy, has been shown to
potentiate EGFR TKIs in preclinical models, however, preliminary results
from recent phase II clinical trials shows no added benefits to the
development of resistance to erlotinib in patients with EGFR mutant
NSCLC. The result suggests additional layers of mechanisms in controlling
autophagy in EGFR mutated NSCLC. Furthermore, little is known about
genomic alterations affecting these autophagy genes in lung cancer
samples. The meta-analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database
shows that essential genes for autophagic flux such as ATG5 and ATG7 tend
to reduce their expression levels and/or are deleted in a significant
proportion of LAD patients, suggesting a more complex scenario where the
presence of these genetic alterations may lead to a structurally
deficient autophagy. Besides, the detailed CNV analysis of the Cancer
Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) dataset suggests that a small subset of
NSCLC cell lines may have lost ATG7 locus at chromosome 3. Our validation
study showed that, as expected, EGFR-mutant H1650 cells exhibit an
intragenic deletion at ATG7 and lack of protein expression. Moreover,
functional assays of autophagic flow by western blot and confocal
microscopy demonstrated that ATG7-deficient H1650 cells are not able to
activate autophagy, whereas infection with lentivirus expressing ectopic
ATG7 reconstituted autophagic flux and sensitivity to autophagy
inhibitors including HQ. Taken together, our results suggest that genomic
biomarkers based on autophagy genes could allow stratification of tumors,
and selection of those candidates who could benefit from anti-autophagy
therapy.

