Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analytical and technical validation of a cost-effective diagnostic
test for BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53


BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 encode tumor suppressor proteins in humans that
help repair damaged DNA and play critical roles in ensuring genome
stability. Several inherited mutations in any of the above 3 genes
substantially increase the risk of cancer. Together, BRCA1 and BRCA2
mutations account for about 20 to 25 percent of hereditary breast and
ovarian cancers. Germline mutations in TP53 are the most common cause of
Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a rare disorder that increases the risk of
developing multiple tumors such as breast, soft-tissue and leukemias, in
children and young adults. In India, where the incidence of cancer has
seen a steep rise in the last decade, there is a pressing need to develop
cost-effective screening tests that can identify known and novel
mutations in commonly associated genes.We have developed and offer a
3-Gene panel (Strand - 3 gene) covering all known HGMD/ClinVar mutations
and all coding exons of BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 genes. Current Sanger based
methods query for restricted loci across these genes. Our test is based
on an NGS enrichment protocol using xGen lockdown probes that allows
parallel sequencing of upto 32 - 96 samples. The test would be offered at
a tenth of the cost of current Sanger based tests anywhere in the world.
In this study we present the technical and clinical validation data
obtained from this assay. For technical validation, we included gold
standard HAPMAP characterized as part of 1000 Genome Project, seven cell
lines with known BRCA and TP53 mutations. For clinical validation, we
enrolled thirty seven (37) patients who were consented on an IRB-approved
study at HCG hospital for collecting saliva / blood. These patients were
stratified / selected based on their family history, known risk of
hereditary cancers and availability of previously characterized clinical
samples. The overall sensitivity and specificity of this panel is 99.78%
and 99.74% respectively with a reproducibility of 100%. On an average,
99.75% and 97% of the bases are covered at 0.2x and 0.5x mean coverage
and the average gap (BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 encode tumor suppressor
proteins in humans that help repair damaged DNA and play critical roles
in ensuring genome stability. Several inherited mutations in any of the
above 3 genes substantially increase the risk of cancer. Together, BRCA1
and BRCA2 mutations account for about 20 to 25 percent of hereditary
breast and ovarian cancers. Germline mutations in TP53 are the most
common cause of Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a rare disorder that increases the
risk of developing multiple tumors such as breast, soft-tissue and
leukemias, in children and young adults. In India, where the incidence of
cancer has seen a steep rise in the last decade, there is a pressing need
to develop cost-effective screening tests that can identify known and
novel mutations in commonly associated genes.We have developed and offer
a 3-Gene panel (Strand - 3 gene) covering all known HGMD/ClinVar
mutations and all coding exons of BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 genes. Current
Sanger based methods query for restricted loci across these genes. Our
test is based on an NGS enrichment protocol using xGen lockdown probes
that allows parallel sequencing of upto 32 - 96 samples. The test would
be offered at a tenth of the cost of current Sanger based tests anywhere
in the world. In this study we present the technical and clinical
validation data obtained from this assay. For technical validation, we
included gold standard HAPMAP characterized as part of 1000 Genome
Project, seven cell lines with known BRCA and TP53 mutations. For
clinical validation, we enrolled thirty seven (37) patients who were
consented on an IRB-approved study at HCG hospital for collecting saliva
/ blood. These patients were stratified / selected based on their family
history, known risk of hereditary cancers and availability of previously
characterized clinical samples. The overall sensitivity and specificity
of this panel is 99.78% and 99.74% respectively with a reproducibility of
100%. On an average, 99.75% and 97% of the bases are covered at 0.2x and
0.5x mean coverage and the average gap (<20 reads per base) is 0.0056% in
the validation study. We have identified 3 separate cases of Li-Fraumeni
from the cohort of thirty seven patients. We further present clinical
validation data from these 3 case studies in which we have identified
both known and novel mutations. Further clinical validation of panel is
ongoing.In summary this panel will provide a cost effective screening
method for early detection of pathogenic variants in pre-symptomatic
individuals and in families with known risk of hereditary cancer.

