Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pontin, a new mutant p53 binding protein, promotes
gain-of-function of mutant p53


Tumor suppressor p53 is frequently mutated in human cancers. Many
tumor-associated mutant p53 (mutp53) proteins gain new functions in
promoting tumorigenesis, defined as gain of function (GOF). The
mechanisms for mutp53 GOF are not well-understood. Mutp53 has been
reported to interact with some proteins and it has been suggested that
some interactions of mutp53 with its binding partners are important for
mutp53 GOF through regulating the levels or functions of mutp53 and/or
its binding proteins. To understand the molecular mechanisms for mutp53
GOF, we searched for mutp53 binding proteins in thymic lymphomas of R172H
mutp53 knock-in (p53R172H/R172H) mice with significant mutp53 protein
accumulation by employing an unbiased immunoprecipitation (IP) combined
with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) screening
approach. Normal tissues of p53R172H/R172H mice with low mutp53 levels
and tumors of p53-/- mice were used as controls.Using this approach, we
identified Pontin, a highly conserved AAA+ ATPase important for various
cellular functions, as a new mutp53 binding protein. This Pontin-mutp53
is conserved in both humans and mice. Importantly, this Pontin-mutp53
interaction promotes mutp53 GOF in invasion, migration, and
anchorage-independent growth of tumor cells. Furthermore, we found that
the C-terminus of Pontin is required for Pontin-mutp53 interaction and
mutp53 GOF. The ATPase domain in the C-terminus of Pontin is crucial for
its promoting effect on mutp53 GOF; blocking the ATPase activity of
Pontin by a Pontin specific ATPase inhibitor or an ATPase deficient
dominant-negative Pontin expression vector greatly diminished mutp53 GOF.
We found that Pontin was largely co-localized with mutp53 in the nucleus
and promotes mutp53 GOF through regulation of mutp53 transcriptional
activity; knock-down of Pontin abolished the transcriptional regulation
of mutp53 towards a group of genes involved in many important signaling
pathways, including gap junction signaling, IGF-1 signaling, EGF
signaling etc. Furthermore, overexpression of Pontin is associated with
poor survival in cancer patients, especially those containing mutp53 in
tumors. This work demonstrates that Pontin promotes mutp53 GOF in
tumorigenesis in an ATPase-dependent manner, and raises interesting and
intriguing possibilities to block mutp53 GOF in tumors through targeting
Pontin or its ATPase activity. In summary, our results highlight an
important role and mechanism for Pontin, a new p53 partner, in promoting
mutp53 GOF in tumorigenesis.

