Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantification of metabolic changes by magnetic resonance and
mechanism of cell death in ovarian cancer


Quantification of metabolic changes by magnetic resonance and mechanism
of cell death in ovarian cancer Louiza Belkacemia*, Leila Maurmannb and
Rathindra N BoseaaDepartment of Biology and Biochemistry, University of
Houston, Houston, TX 77204bDepartment of Chemistry, Kansas State
University, Manhattan, KS 6650Ovarian cancer is the most frequent cause
of death from gynecologic malignancy. Presently most ovarian cancers are
diagnosed when the disease has progressed to stage III or IV. Therefore
there is an urgent need for the identification of new biomarkers for
early diagnosis and drug efficacy. Changes in metabolite concentrations
have been associated with tumor regression or progression. Nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) has been used to identify molecular markers
during cell death (apoptosis), especially the onset of membrane
disintegration. Cisplatin is the most commonly used drug in chemotherapy
of ovarian cancer. To date, most research has been focused on the
cisplatin-DNA reaction. Thus it is essential to evaluate the effect of
cisplatin on binding to other biomolecules in the cell. Chinese hamster
ovarian (CHO) cells, which, like resistant ovarian cancer cells, require
high cisplatin concentrations to induce cell death, were treated with 50
M cisplatin at different time intervals. Metabolite concentrations were
determined by one and two dimensional 31P and 1H NMR. Moreover, the A2780
cisplatin-sensitive cell line and its resistant variant were evaluated
for the mechanism of cell death. Analysis revealed that enhanced
apoptosis was associated with significantly increased phosphocholine and
glycerophosphocholine metabolites and marked elevation of cellular
phosphocreatine and nucleoside triphosphate concentrations at 6 hrs and
decreased thereafter. Plasma membrane alterations were paralleled by an
upregulation of expression of Fas and related proapoptotic Bax and PUMA
genes, and Fas and caspase-3 and -9 proteins. These findings suggest that
NMR may be used as a tool to monitor tumors and drug efficacy in humans
using for instance tissue biopsies. Further, NMR measurements of cell
extracts may provide significant insight on pathways to apoptosis.

