Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic biochemical tissue analysis of novel P-selectin ligands
expressed by colon cancer


Selectin/selectin ligand interactions have been implicated in mediating
the adhesion of circulating tumor cells to distant sites during
metastasis. Previous work from our lab has demonstrated the limitations
of static biochemical tissue analysis (SBTA), using both selectins and
antibodies against glycotopes, in detecting functional selectin ligands
expressed on tissue. To address these shortcomings, we developed a novel
tissue interrogation method, termed dynamic biochemical tissue analysis
(DBTA), in which selectin-coated microspheres are perfused over tissues
in a microfluidic device to detect functional selectin ligands in situ.
In this work, DBTA using P-selectin microspheres was performed on cancer
tissue sections in conjunction with SBTA using antibodies against
P-selectin ligands CD24, CD44, and PSGL-1. Using DBTA, calcium-dependent
selectin/selectin ligand adhesive interactions in the form of P-selectin
microsphere rolling was observed on four distinct cases of colorectal
cancer tissue. Examination of serial sections with SBTA in the same
regions of tissue displaying P-selectin microsphere rolling revealed no
detectable levels of CD24, CD44, or PSGL-1 epitopes, while only one case
displayed CD44 expression that was in agreement with DBTA. However, not
all regions displaying specific reactivity with the P-selectin
microspheres used in DBTA were recognized with the CD44 antibody in SBTA.
These results imply the presence of novel P-selectin ligands in the
tissue section. Follow-up CD45 SBTA ruled out the possibility of
microsphere interaction with infiltrated leukocytes, in agreement with
the lack of PSGL-1 detection. Consistent with our DBTA studies using
microspheres coated with E- and L-selectin on other types of cancer
tissue, DBTA reveals unequivocal detection of functional P-selectin
ligands by generating results distinct from SBTA. To further characterize
the adhesion of P-selectin-coated microspheres to functional selectin
ligands that were not identified with SBTA, a more refined method of
interaction analysis that discretizes rolling into a sequence of succinct
pauses (i.e., brief stationary adhesion) was used. In this method,
microsphere rolling recorded at 300 frames per second was assessed using
a cross-correlation tracking algorithm to obtain a robust point estimate
that represents the off-rate bond breakage of the ensemble of
receptor-ligand complexes that mediate microsphere adhesion to the tissue
surface. This adhesion parameter lays the framework for potentially
correlating the density and type of functional ligand(s) expressed with
tumor stage and/or aggressiveness, furthering our understanding of
aberrantly expressed functional selectin ligands as potential cancer
biomarkers.

