Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosome-mediated transfer of alphaV integrins promotes prostate
cancer cell-cell communication


Intercellular communications have been recently shown to be mediated by
exosomes, exocytosed vesicles of endosomal origin, which are thought to
be involved in cancer progression. We have investigated whether
integrins, transmembrane receptors that are known to be deregulated in
cancer progression, are transferred among different subsets of prostate
cancer cells through exosomes and have the ability to support functional
aberrations in the recipient cells. Recent studies have characterized
integrin expression in exosomes but have not investigated whether
integrins are actually shuttled to recipient cells and whether they
modulate the phenotype of these cells. We have focused on the alphaVbeta3
and alphaVbeta6 integrins since they are highly up-regulated in cancer
and metastasis. We show here that these alphaV integrins are present in
exosomes of several prostate cancer cells and are transferred from donor
to recipient cells. The quality of our exosome preparations was tested by
electron microscopy, which confirms the size range (40-100 nm) and the
typical cup shape of these vesicles; by continuous sucrose gradient,
which shows a density range of 1.15-1.17g/ml characteristic of exosomes,
and by biochemical characterization using antibodies to CD63 and CD81.
After exosome internalization was determined by confocal microscopy of
red PKH26-labeled exosomes followed by Z-stack image analysis, these
integrins are shown to be transferred as proteins to recipient cells by
immunoblotting. Furthermore, FACS analysis demonstrated that these
integrins are localized to the cell surface indicating they are
functional. The active state of alphaVbeta6 was confirmed in cell
migration assays which show that the alphaVbeta6 integrin transferred
through exosomes mediates cell migration of recipient cells on an
alphaVbeta6 specific ligand, latency-associated peptide-TGFBeta. To
evaluate the relevance of our findings, we purified exosomes from sera of
TRAMP mice which had developed prostate cancer. The results show that the
alphaVbeta3 integrin is expressed in these exosomes and is a potential
biomarker for prostate cancer diagnostic purposes. Overall, this study
shows that alphaV integrins are transferred through exosomes to recipient
cells and promote cell migration on specific ligands, thus, suggesting
that this novel pathway may lead to increased prostate cancer metastasis
in distinct distant sites.Supported by NIH-CA089720 and P01CA140043 to
LRL; an American-Italian Cancer Foundation Post-Doctoral Research
Fellowship to CF; a JGSBS Alumni Association Graduate Student Travel
Fellowship to AS.

