Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TET inhibits phosphorylation of eIF4E-binding protein, in prostate
cancer cells


Introduction and Objectives: All eukaryotic cellular mRNAs are blocked at
their 5-prime ends with the 7-methyl-guanosine cap structure. EIF4E is a
eukaryotic translation initiation factor involved in directing ribosomes
to the cap structure of mRNAs. The EIF4E polypeptide is the rate-limiting
component of the eukaryotic translation apparatus and is involved in the
mRNA-ribosome binding step of eukaryotic protein synthesis. Tetrandrine
(TET) is a bis-benzylisoquinoline alkaloid, isolated from the root of
Stefenia tatrandra. Previous studies have shown that TET has
anti-inflammatory, immunologic and antiallergenic effects. We have shown
that TET targets AR signaling in PCa cells and induces expression of p21.
However the molecular mechanism by which TET exerts its effects are not
completely understood. In the present study we investigated the effects
of TET in prostate cancer cells in culture (PC-3 and LNCaP
cells).Methods: LNCaP, C-4 and PC3 cells were grown in supplemented RPMI
media and DMEM/F12 Media respectively, and maintained at 37C in a 5%CO2
incubator (as described previously). Protein levels were measured by
Western Blot and by immuno-fluorescence assays. In vitro translation
system from HeLa cell lysates was used to measure protein synthesis in
vitro. Protein Synthesis in vivo was measured by a reduction in the rate
of firefly luciferase production following introduction of luciferase
mRNA into cells by nucleofection. mRNA expression measured in RTPCR
assays. Promoter activities were measured by measuring promoter driven
luciferase expression.Results: TET inhibited protein synthesis in
dose-dependent way with IC50 value of 20 M as measured by a reduction in
the rate of firefly luciferase production following introduction of
luciferase mRNA into cells by nucleofection. The inhibition of protein
synthesis was 88% at 40 M. Interestingly TET did not inhibit protein
synthesis in in vitro translation system from HeLa cell lysates. This
suggested that inhibition by TET occurs in signaling pathways regulating
protein synthesis that are operative in intact cells but not cell-free
lysates. It is well known that un-phosphorylated 4E-BP1 binds with high
affinity to cap-binding protein eIF4E, thus preventing recruitment of 48S
translation initiation complex to capped mRNA and inhibiting protein
synthesis. By western blotting, we demonstrated that tetrandrine
inhibited phosphorylation of translational repressor 4E-BP1 at Ser65, the
substrate of multiple upstream signaling cascades.Conclusions: Our
results suggest that TET is a novel agent to target EIF4E and that Tet
inhibits EIF4. Current research is aimed at determining the involvement
of other upstream signaling pathways that might explain inhibition of
4E-BP1 phosphorylation following TET treatment.Financial support :
(VA-1BX001258; NCI RO1-161880; Carroll W. Feist Endowed Chair Funds (Koul
H), Funds from, FWCC, the Dean School SOM and Chancellor-
LSUHSC-Shreveport.

