Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of transendothelial migration by invasive breast
carcinoma cells from patients


The majority of breast cancer related deaths are not due to the primary
tumor, but rather to the dissemination of metastatic tumor cells from it
to distant sites. Our lab has previously identified the tumor
microenvironment of metastasis (TMEM) in mouse and human mammary tumors,
sites where transendothelial migration, intravasation and dissemination
occur. The constituent cells of TMEM are an endothelial cell, a
perivascular TIE2-expressing macrophage (TEM) and an invasive Mena-over
expressing tumor cell in direct contact. TMEM are present in human
invasive breast tumors and the density of TMEM is positively associated
with the risk of developing metastases.Using invasive ductal carcinoma
cells of the breast obtained from patients by fine needle aspiration
(FNA), we demonstrated that intravasation-directed transendothelial
migration (iTEM) of these cancer cells requires macrophages and,
depending on clinical subtype, involves either paracrine (macrophage
CSF1-R; tumor cell EGFR), or both paracrine and autocrine (tumor cell
EGFR + CSF1-R) signaling. Compared to the total population of primary
breast cancer cells assayed, cells capable of transendothelial migration
expressed relatively high MenaINV and low Mena11a levels, independently
of clinical subtype. MenaINV and Mena11a are functionally distinct
isoforms of Mena, a key regulator of motility and invasion. Depletion of
MenaINV using siRNA showed that MenaINV is required for efficient
macrophage-dependent iTEM of tumor cells. Furthermore, relative MenaINV
expression correlated with the density of TMEM, which were previously
shown to correlate with risk of metastasis in patients. From these
observations we have identified the signaling pathways involved in
macrophage-dependent tumor cell iTEM. Two novel small molecule
inhibitors, Rebastinib (Tie2 inhibitor) and Altiratinib (c-MET
inhibitor), have been identified that show great promise in preventing
key steps in iTEM.Our data reveal targetable signaling events required
for transendothelial migration of human breast cancer cells, and indicate
that relative MenaINV levels and TMEM frequency are correlated prognostic
markers of metastasis and therapeutic targets for most human breast
cancers.

