Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cooperation between adenosinergic and hypoxic signals in shaping
chronic lymphocytic leukemia microenvironment


Extracellular adenosine generated from ATP/ADP through the concerted
action of the ectoenzymes CD39 and CD73 elicits potent cytoprotective and
immunosuppressive effects mediated by type-1 purinergic receptors.Chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) patients expressing the ectoenzymes CD39 and
CD73 can actively produce adenosine. This condition activates an
autocrine adenosinergic axis that supports engraftment of leukemic cells
in a growth-favorable environment. These effects are mediated by the A2A
adenosine receptor, which inhibits chemotaxis and limits spontaneous and
drug-induced apoptosis of CLL cells.Following the reported cross-talk
between hypoxia and adenosine, we tested the hypothesis of a functional
interplay between the adenosinergic axis and hypoxic signals in the CLL
microenvironment.Results confirmed that CLL cells robustly increase HIF-1
expression when cultured under hypoxia. Under these conditions a
significant increase in the mRNA and protein levels of CD73, CD26 and A2A
was observed. An HPLC assay confirmed that hypoxic CLL cell cultures
produce higher extracellular adenosine levels compared to normoxia. The
increase is apparent upon inhibition of adenosine deaminase and
nucleoside transporters, suggesting that under hypoxia scavenging
mechanisms are activated.Attention was then focused on the stromal and T
cell compartments, which are critical to the formation and maintenance of
the leukemic niche. Hypoxia enhanced differentiation of circulating
monocytes into nurse-like cells, macrophages of the M2 type playing an
essential role in nurturing leukemic cells. During hypoxia,
differentiated NLC overexpressed A2A, which was also functional. Indeed,
an increased AKT and ERK1/2 phosphorylation was observed following
pharmacological activation. The enhancement of NLC differentiation under
hypoxic conditions relied, at least in part, on the activation of A2A:
its engagement by the agonist favored NLC generation in normoxia, with
overexpression of IDO, CD163 and CD206. Moreover, activation of A2A
induced secretion of immunomodulatory cytokines, such as IL-6, IL-10 and
CCL18, while pharmacological blockade of A2A under hypoxia prevented NLC
growth.In the T cell compartment, hypoxic cultures were followed by the
sharp up-regulation of the A2A, without significantly affecting the
enzymes that generate adenosine. Co-cultures of T lymphocytes and CLL
cells under hypoxia resulted in a dramatic decrease of T cell
proliferation, partially rescued by antagonists of A2A. Furthermore,
expression of the PD-1 immunoinhibitory receptor was enhanced in hypoxic
T cells, suggesting that there are multiple inhibitory
mechanisms.Together, these results indicate that the adenosinergic and
hypoxic axes synergize in shaping the CLL niche, suggesting that the
pharmacological inhibition of adenosinergic signals may counteract some
of the effects mediated by an hypoxic environment.

