Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of Notch1 signaling-driven melanoma
progression


Objectives. Aberrant Notch signaling promotes melanoma progression, yet
the underlying molecular mechanism remains largely unknown. We
hypothesized a potential involvement of epigenetic mechanism in this
process and sought to identify Notch-regulated miRNAs and their
functional targets.Methods. Notch-regulated miRNAs were identified by
examining miRNA profiles in response to Notch activation/inhibition in
human melanoma cells using RT2-miRNAArray. The role of specific miRNA in
mediating the oncogenic effect of the Notch signaling was studied by
testing whether alteration of miRNA expression could reverse the Notch's
effects on melanoma cell growth, survival and colony-formation in vitro,
and lung metastasis in vivo. The targets of the Notch-regulated miRNA
were identified by searching miRNA target database and validated by
immunoblot. The roles of miRNA targets in mediating the Notch's oncogenic
effects were further assessed by in vitro colony-formation and in vivo
lung metastasis assays.Results. Notch activation down-regulated mi143 in
melanoma cells. Reconstituted expression of mi143 antagonized Notch1's
oncogenic effect. The anti-oncogenic effect of mi143 is mediated by
inhibiting Notch1-induced expression of FGF-1, uPA and uPAR since
expression of these targets was up-regulated by the Notch1 activation
while down-regulated by reconstituted overexpression of mi143.
Supplementation of exogenous FGF-1 or reconstituted expression of
uPA/uPAR, but not uPA alone, reversed the suppressive effect of mir143 on
Notch-enhanced melanoma cells colony formation in soft-agar or lung
metastasis in SCID mice.Conclusions. Notch activation up-regulates
expression of FGF-1, uPA and uPAR through down-regulating mi143
expression in melanoma cells. mi143 is responsible for mediating aberrant
Notch signaling-driven melanoma progression. The effect of down-regulated
mi143 is transmitted through elevated FGF-1 and enhanced uPA-uPAR
signaling activity, but not enzyme activity of uPA. This study unveils
novel Notch1/mi143/FGF-1 and Notch1/mi143/uPA-uPAR cascades and uncovers
an epigenetic mechanism underlying the oncogenic effect of Notch
signaling, and provides potential novel targets for melanoma prognosis
and therapy.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

