Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunotherapeutic strategies targeting CXCR4 axis plus / T cells
in treating ovarian cancer


Ovarian carcinoma is the most crucial and difficult problem for
therapeutic treatment in gynecological malignancies, which requires great
efforts for an effective solution. Molecular studies have shown that
chemokine stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1)/CXCL12 and its receptor
CXCR4 are the key determinants of tumor initiation, progression and
metastasis in ovarian carcinoma. It is also believed that blocking
CXCR4-CXCL12 pathway plays potential roles in treating ovarian cancer
patients. Recent studies also showed that the cytotoxic function of gamma
delta (/) T lymphocytes could efficiently kill ovarian CSCs (cancer stem
cells) and present a promising immunotherapy for ovarian cancer. To
investigate how the CXCL12/CXCR4 pathway is involved in the regulation of
ovarian cancer. We eliminated the expression of CXCR4 in different
ovarian cancer cell lines using CXCR4 antagonist (e.g., AMD3100) and
CXCR4 shRNA silencing to prevent the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis interaction.
Besides, up to 78% of / T cells was expanded in-vitro using
aminobisphosphonates plus low-dose interleukin-2 for the therapeutic
investigating. The therapeutic effects following different treatments
were measured. First, our results showed that blocking of Cxcr4/Cxcl12
axis by AMD3100 reduced around 37% on cell survival rate. Similar results
were also observed in the CXCR4-shRNA silencing ovarian cancer cells.
Additionally, the higher CXCR4-expressed cells were highly proliferation
after CXCL12 stimulating compared to the CXCR4 non-expressed cells. Next,
cancer cells treated with the exogenous activated / T cells showed a
reduction of 35% on cell survival rate. Finally, the combined treatment
strategy using AMD3100 plus /-T cells showed the most significant
therapeutic effects in the high-grade ovarian cancer cells, and the cell
survival rate was reduced almost to 50% after the cell cytotoxic assay.
We therefore conclude that the limitation of CXCL12/CXCR4 activities
combined with the / T cell cytotoxicity is a potent immunotherapy for
treating ovarian cancer and would served as a promising new strategies
for clinical translation.

