Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERp46 (thioredoxin domain-containing protein 5, TXND5) promotes
prostate cancer growth in vitro and in vivo


We have recently demonstrated that endoplasmic reticulum protein ERp46, a
member of the protein disulfide isomerase family of oxidoreductases,
TXND5, is overexpressed in human metastatic renal cell carcinoma. The
expression and function of ERp46 in prostate cancer has not been studied.
Using both in vitro and in vivo approaches, we explore the suitability of
ERp46 as a potential therapeutic target in prostate cancer.Tissue
microarray containing normal prostate epithelium (n = 9) and prostate
cancer specimens from 57 patients was stained for ERp46 and the staining
intensity (H-score) was determined. Human prostate adenocarcinoma 22Rv1
cells were used to generate gain- and loss-of-function models by stable
ERp46 shRNA knockdown and ERp46 overexpression, respectively. In vitro,
the doubling time and PSA production were determined. In vivo, xenografts
of each subclone were established in nude mice (n = 10/group) to
determine the longitudinal tumor growth and serum PSA values. Gene
expression profiling of RNA isolated from 22Rv1 xenografts was performed
using human whole genome HT-12 V4 BeadChip array (Illumina).Our results
demonstrated that human prostate carcinoma samples of Gleason scores 7
showed strong cytoplasmic ERp46 staining which was significantly
increased compared to normal prostatic tissue (p = 0.02). ERp46 staining
in prostate tumors of Gleason scores 6, however, was not different
compared to normal prostate tissue. The stably transfected human prostate
carcinoma 22Rv1 cells expressed 89% knockdown of ERp46 protein expression
(shERp46) or a 4-fold increase in ERp46 protein expression (ERp46+)
compared to the respective control cells. In vitro, shERp46 cells
proliferated slower, whereas ERp46+ cells exhibited accelerated growth
compared to corresponding control cells (pWe have recently demonstrated
that endoplasmic reticulum protein ERp46, a member of the protein
disulfide isomerase family of oxidoreductases, TXND5, is overexpressed in
human metastatic renal cell carcinoma. The expression and function of
ERp46 in prostate cancer has not been studied. Using both in vitro and in
vivo approaches, we explore the suitability of ERp46 as a potential
therapeutic target in prostate cancer.Tissue microarray containing normal
prostate epithelium (n = 9) and prostate cancer specimens from 57
patients was stained for ERp46 and the staining intensity (H-score) was
determined. Human prostate adenocarcinoma 22Rv1 cells were used to
generate gain- and loss-of-function models by stable ERp46 shRNA
knockdown and ERp46 overexpression, respectively. In vitro, the doubling
time and PSA production were determined. In vivo, xenografts of each
subclone were established in nude mice (n = 10/group) to determine the
longitudinal tumor growth and serum PSA values. Gene expression profiling
of RNA isolated from 22Rv1 xenografts was performed using human whole
genome HT-12 V4 BeadChip array (Illumina).Our results demonstrated that
human prostate carcinoma samples of Gleason scores 7 showed strong
cytoplasmic ERp46 staining which was significantly increased compared to
normal prostatic tissue (p = 0.02). ERp46 staining in prostate tumors of
Gleason scores 6, however, was not different compared to normal prostate
tissue. The stably transfected human prostate carcinoma 22Rv1 cells
expressed 89% knockdown of ERp46 protein expression (shERp46) or a 4-fold
increase in ERp46 protein expression (ERp46+) compared to the respective
control cells. In vitro, shERp46 cells proliferated slower, whereas
ERp46+ cells exhibited accelerated growth compared to corresponding
control cells (p<0.05). Similarly, the tumor volume of subcutaneously
growing shERp46 cells in nude mice led to significantly slower tumor
growth (pWe have recently demonstrated that endoplasmic reticulum protein
ERp46, a member of the protein disulfide isomerase family of
oxidoreductases, TXND5, is overexpressed in human metastatic renal cell
carcinoma. The expression and function of ERp46 in prostate cancer has
not been studied. Using both in vitro and in vivo approaches, we explore
the suitability of ERp46 as a potential therapeutic target in prostate
cancer.Tissue microarray containing normal prostate epithelium (n = 9)
and prostate cancer specimens from 57 patients was stained for ERp46 and
the staining intensity (H-score) was determined. Human prostate
adenocarcinoma 22Rv1 cells were used to generate gain- and
loss-of-function models by stable ERp46 shRNA knockdown and ERp46
overexpression, respectively. In vitro, the doubling time and PSA
production were determined. In vivo, xenografts of each subclone were
established in nude mice (n = 10/group) to determine the longitudinal
tumor growth and serum PSA values. Gene expression profiling of RNA
isolated from 22Rv1 xenografts was performed using human whole genome
HT-12 V4 BeadChip array (Illumina).Our results demonstrated that human
prostate carcinoma samples of Gleason scores 7 showed strong cytoplasmic
ERp46 staining which was significantly increased compared to normal
prostatic tissue (p = 0.02). ERp46 staining in prostate tumors of Gleason
scores 6, however, was not different compared to normal prostate tissue.
The stably transfected human prostate carcinoma 22Rv1 cells expressed 89%
knockdown of ERp46 protein expression (shERp46) or a 4-fold increase in
ERp46 protein expression (ERp46+) compared to the respective control
cells. In vitro, shERp46 cells proliferated slower, whereas ERp46+ cells
exhibited accelerated growth compared to corresponding control cells
(p<0.05). Similarly, the tumor volume of subcutaneously growing shERp46
cells in nude mice led to significantly slower tumor growth (p<0.0005,
ANOVA). Vice versa, tumors from ERp46+ cells were significantly larger
than the tumor volume of shControl-cell injected mice (p = 0.02, ANOVA).
Gene expression analysis confirmed the downregulation and upregulation of
ERp46 in the corresponding xenografts and also showed several candidate
genes, including NAAA, SH3BP4 and ID1 that were reciprocally up-and
downregulated. In conclusion, this is the first report to suggest a role
for ERp46 as an oncogenic protein and potential therapeutic target in
prostate cancer given its expression profile in human prostate cancer
samples and its effect on prostate cancer cell growth.Funding was
provided by Prostate Cancer Canada and McMaster Surgical Associates (JHP
and WCMD)

