Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of avidity-driven hyperclustering of DR5 by a new
FAP-DR5 bispecific antibody (RG7386) leads to strong anti-tumor efficacy


Background:Activation of the extrinsic apoptotic pathway by TRAIL is
dependent on clustering of death receptors (DR) on the surface of cells.
However, current TRAIL-based strategies have proven ineffective in
clustering death receptors and failed to demonstrate robust therapeutic
activity in clinical trials. More potent DR agonist therapies could help
to overcome insufficient pathway activation and resistance to TRAIL
activation. RG7386 is a novel bispecific FAP-DR5 antibody, binding with
high affinity to fibroblast activation protein (FAP) and with low
affinity to DR5. FAP is expressed at high prevalence on cancer associated
fibroblasts (CAFs) in various tumor types as well as on tumors of
mesenchymal origin, such as sarcomas. Avidity-driven binding of the
bispecific antibody induces hyperclustering of DR5, which leads to potent
induction of extrinsic apoptosis pathway signaling and tumor cell death.
Biomarkers will be crucial in predicting sensitivity to DR5 activation
and apoptosis induction and for selection of patients most likely to
benefit from treatment with RG7386.Aim:The aim of the study was to
explore the efficacy of RG7386 in vitro and in vivo. CRC and PDAC
xenograft models expressing FAP on tumor stroma as well as sarcoma models
were used to explore in vivo efficacy. Molecular profiling of sensitive
and resistant tumors was also performed to identify response prediction
markers.Results:RG7386 demonstrated additive efficacy in vitro with
clinically relevant combinations (e.g. irinotecan, paclitaxel) in a
variety of CRC and PDAC cell lines. In a xenograft model, where CRC cells
(DLD-1) were co-injected with fibroblasts, RG7386 showed strong
anti-tumor efficacy in combination with irinotecan. Remarkably, in a
patient-derived CRC xenograft model (Co5896), the efficacy of RG7386 in
combination with irinotecan induced complete tumor remission in all mice
(n = 10/10). Furthermore, the combination of RG7386 with doxorubicin
generated complete remissions in FAP+ sarcoma patient and desmoplastic
melanoma cell line derived xenograft models such as Sarc4605 and
LOX-IMVI. Finally, extensive molecular profiling of sensitive and
resistance models in vitro revealed a distinct response prediction
signature of DR5 sensitivity.Conclusion:RG7386 is a novel bispecific
antibody inducing avidity-driven DR5 crosslinking by binding to FAP. This
induces potent apoptosis of tumor cells, making it an attractive
therapeutic approach for treatment of FAP+ solid tumors. Encouraging data
indicate the high potential of RG7386 to treat FAP positive sarcomas. A
comprehensive biomarker program will be employed in the early clinical
development of RG7386 to enable selection of patients likely to benefit
and to corroborate the mode of action, anti-tumor activity and potential
response prediction markers.

