Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the embryonic morphogen Nodal reduces viability of
doxorubicin-treated breast cancer cells in vitro


Triple negative breast cancer represents an aggressive malignancy for
which few targeted therapies exist. The embryonic morphogen Nodal is
re-expressed in highly aggressive breast cancers and reduction of Nodal
signaling decreases tumor cell metastatic characteristics. This
represents a potential avenue for the development of therapeutics aimed
at inhibiting the Nodal pathway. To explore this further, we evaluated
Nodal expression in breast cancer cells following chemotherapy. In vitro
treatment of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 human breast cancer cell lines
with Doxorubicin, a chemotherapy commonly used for the treatment of
malignant breast cancer, resulted in the generation of surviving
subpopulations that retained Nodal expression (>80%) and remained viable.
To validate these findings in vivo, we analyzed Doxorubicin treated
metastatic patient derived breast cancer xenografts (PDX) which displayed
a residual population of Nodal positive cells when analyzed by
immunohistochemistry. Based on these findings, we hypothesize that
targeting Nodal in a combinatorial approach with chemotherapy will lead
to a reduction in remaining viable populations of cancer cells. When we
utilized an anti-Nodal neutralizing antibody to inhibit Nodal signaling,
antibody treatment reduced cell proliferation, attachment and increased
rates of apoptosis in Doxorubicin treated breast cancer cell lines.
Decreases in phosphorylation of Histone 3, a marker of cellular
proliferation, and increases in the cleavage of PARP, correlating to
induction of apoptosis, were noted in response to antibody treatment.
These data suggest that Nodal signaling plays a critical role in the
growth of metastatic breast cancer cells and targeting Nodal may improve
therapeutic outcome in malignancies such as triple negative breast
cancer. The initial results highlight translational potential for the
development of humanized antibodies capable of inhibiting Nodal function.

