Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of miR10b and miR9 expression in breast cancer and
correlations with distant metastases development


We have recently demonstrated that the evaluation of miR10b expression
relative to its normal counterparts (Relative Expression Ratio, RER) is
able to predict patients risk to develop distant metastases. To confirm
these results and evaluate whether other microRNAs could be predictive of
outcome in breast cancer we evaluated the expression of miR10b and miR9
in paired tumors and apparently normal breast tissues 2 cm distant from
tumour (NBT) on an extended cohort (n = 127) with a longer follow up
(median 42 months). As control normal breast tissues from 10 healthy
subjects (HBT) treated by reductive mammoplasty were analyzed. An
increased expression was seen for the miR9 and miR10b in NBT samples as
compared with HBT (PWe have recently demonstrated that the evaluation of
miR10b expression relative to its normal counterparts (Relative
Expression Ratio, RER) is able to predict patients risk to develop
distant metastases. To confirm these results and evaluate whether other
microRNAs could be predictive of outcome in breast cancer we evaluated
the expression of miR10b and miR9 in paired tumors and apparently normal
breast tissues 2 cm distant from tumour (NBT) on an extended cohort (n =
127) with a longer follow up (median 42 months). As control normal breast
tissues from 10 healthy subjects (HBT) treated by reductive mammoplasty
were analyzed. An increased expression was seen for the miR9 and miR10b
in NBT samples as compared with HBT (P<0.01). Whereas the expression of
each of the two miRNAs was significantly lower in tumour samples as
compared to the NBT specimens with RER value of 0.15 for miR10b (P =
0.001) and 0.59 for miR9 (P = 0.05). However only higher miR10b RERs were
associated with distant metastases development in multivariable analysis
(HR = 1.12; P = 0.04). Our results confirm the role of miR10b as
predictive biomarkers of metastases development in breast cancer. In
addition our data suggest a deregulation of miRNAs expression in the
normal tissue surrounding tumor as compared to normal breast of healthy
individuals.

