Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic study of aspirin, folic acid and calcium (AFAC)
combinations delivered using targeted polymeric nanoparticles in colon
cancer prevention


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cause of cancer death in
the US, accounting for 51,000 deaths each year. Although the prognosis of
this disease is improving due to better treatment options, attention has
focused on the chemoprevention of this disease rather than on diagnosis
and treatment. The objective of the present study was to evaluate
themechanisms of action of orally administered, colon targeted
chemopreventive regimens aspirin (ASP), folic acid (FA) and calcium (Ca)
alone and in combination AFAC (ASP+FA+Ca) in in-vitro and in-vivorat
model. We used colon cancer cells, HCT-116 and HT-29 as the in-vitro
model. For colon targeting, ASP and FA was encapsulated in
polylactide-co-glycolide (PLGA 50:50) polymer nanoparticles. Our previous
studies demonstrated that combination of ASP (1mM), FA (1.5mM) and Ca
(1.5mM) showed synergistic effect on inhibition of colon cancer cell
viability. Follow-up study on azoxymethane (AOM) induced colon cancer in
rats showed that the low (40+3.2+65 mg/kg), medium (80+6.4+130 mg/kg) and
high dose (133+11+216 mg/kg) of modified AFAC-PLGA nanoparticle
chemopreventive regimens demonstrated 1.7 to 2.0 fold reduction in the
number of aberrant crypt foci (ACF). In continuation, a mechanistic
approach was evaluated whereby colon cancer cells HCT-116 and HT-29 were
treated with unmodified AFAC for 6h to determine gene expression using
RT-qPCR analysis, and treated for 24h for protein expression study using
western blot. The results obtained from the in-vitro study were further
validated on rat colon tissue treated AFAC-PLGA nanoparticles, using
immunohistochemistry. The RT-qPCR analysis showed that AFAC promoted
reduction in cell viability was associated with down-regulation of
proliferation genes (PCNA, and MKI67), cell cycle genes (CCND1, RB1,
CDK4, E2F1, and JUN), and up-regulation of anti-apoptotic p21 gene. The
protein expression studies revealed that AFAC treatment inhibited
phospho-extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (p-ERK1/2), and
phospho-p38 MAPK protein levels. The AFAC treatment also inhibited
protein expression of PCNA, MKI67 and p-RB1 compared to control and
individual drug treatment. Immunohistochemistry study using rat colon
tissues revealed that the low, medium and high dose of AFAC-PLGA
nanoparticles showed significant reduction in cell proliferation at
10.6%, 26.5%, and 48.5% as evidenced by PCNA protein expression. The AFAC
treatment significantly increased apoptosis as evaluated by Tunnel assay,
as well as decreased p-ERK1/2 and p-RB1 index. Overall, our results
illustrate the mechanisms of action which confirms anti-proliferative
activity of AFAC-PLGA nanoparticles, thus confirming the importance of
novel combination chemoprevention strategies against colon cancer.

