Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRAF V600E mutation in benign and malignant epithelial odontogenic
tumors


The classification of ameloblastoma in multicystic or unicystic variants
is associated with its clinical behaviour. Recently, BRAF and SMO
mutations have been reported in ameloblastomas. However, it is not clear
if such mutations are shared by the multi- and unicystic variants of
ameloblastoma or by odontogenic carcinomas. We assessed BRAFV600E and
SMOF412E in multicystic, unicystic and desmoplastic ameloblastomas. In
addition, we investigated whether the BRAFV600E mutation occurs in
odontogenic carcinomas. A total of 28 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
samples, comprising 17 ameloblastomas and 11 odontogenic carcinomas, were
included. The BRAFV600E mutation was assessed by real-time PCR with a
specific TaqMan probe and confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The SMOF412E
mutation was assessed by Sanger sequencing. Fourteen out of 17 (82%)
ameloblastomas showed the BRAFV600E mutation, specifically, 5/6 (83%)
unicystic, 7/9 (78%) multicystic and 2/2 desmoplastic ameloblastomas.
BRAFV600E mutation was detected in 4/11 (36%) malignant tumours,
specifically, 3/8 (38%) ameloblastic carcinomas and 1/1 clear cell
odontogenic carcinoma, while the two ghost cell odontogenic carcinomas
did not harbour this mutation. The SMOF412E mutation was not detected in
ameloblastoma. The BRAFV600E mutation was less frequent in odontogenic
carcinomas than in ameloblastomas. In ameloblastomas, this mutation
occurred at similar proportions in cases from the mandible and maxilla,
as well as among unicystic, multicystic and desmoplastic variants,
suggesting that there is no difference in their molecular pathogenesis.
Our findings support the possibility for personalised, molecular targeted
therapy for ameloblastomas and ameloblastic carcinomas harbouring the
BRAFV600E mutation. Supported by: FAPEMIG (Fundao de Amparo Pesquisa de
Minas Gerais), CNPq (National Council for Scientific and Technological
Development) and CAPES (Coordination for Improvement of Higher Education
Personnel), Brazil

