Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Successful generation of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes from human
non-small cell lung cancer specimens


Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) are naturally occurring
cancer-fighting T cells found within malignant tumors. After decades of
research, patient-derived TIL populations have been successfully
re-infused into melanoma subjects, and have produced impressive treatment
effects in a subset of cases. To date, the successful generation and
usage of TIL populations for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients
has not been reported. Generating TILs from NSCLC tissue presents several
challenges, as immune cell populations residing within the lungs are
constantly exposed to numerous inhaled antigens and other particulate
matter.Here, we report the successful generation of TILs from three NSCLC
specimens from subjects undergoing surgical resection for curative
intent. Six distinct lung cancer tissue fragments were cultured in the
presence of IL-2 for each of the three cases. Each fragment yielded a TIL
population, although their proliferative rates differed substantially.
Each TIL population was subjected to flow cytometry to identify the
cellular subtypes, and these results were compared to the lymphocyte
subset content measured in the original in vivo tumor specimen.
Preliminary findings suggest that the ability to generate CD8+ enriched
TILs is dependent upon the CD8+ content present in vivo. Low CD8+ content
was associated with an abundance of either Tregs or NK cells. Greater
than 70% of the CD8+ populations generated displayed an effector
phenotype (CCR7-CD45RA+), regardless of the overall cellular composition
of the specimen. However, these cells displayed heterogeneous levels of
exhaustion markers (PD1, Tim3), which inversely correlated with
proliferative rates.Our results show that TIL populations can be
successfully generated from primary human NSCLC specimens. Although the
relative cellular content differed for each tissue fragment, we were able
to generate at least one CD8+ effector population with low levels of
exhaustion for each case. In vitro and in vivo studies to determine the
tumor killing capacity of these TIL populations are currently
underway.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

