Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic rationale for MCL1 inhibition during androgen
deprivation therapy


The cellular consequences of androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), a
first-line therapy for locally advanced and metastatic prostate cancer
(PCa), are induction of apoptosis or G1 cell cycle arrest. Inability of
PCa cells to induce apoptosis is the starting point of development of
castration resistance. Hence, an improved therapy should target the cell
cycle-arrested cells in a combinatorial approach together with currently
applied ADT. Here we set out to analyze whether MCL1, a pro-survival
member of the BCL2 family and known mediator of chemotherapy resistance
regulates the cellular response to androgen withdrawal. Analysis of MCL1
protein and mRNA expression in PCa tissue and primary cell culture
specimens of luminal and basal origin, respectively, reveals higher
expression in cancerous tissue compared to benign origin. Using PCa
cellular models in vitro and in vivo we show that MCL1 expression is
regulated through the action of androgens and upregulated in
androgen-sensitive PCa cells when grown under steroid-deprived
conditions. Analysis of the underlying mechanism suggests that regulation
of MCL1 through the AR signaling axis is indirectly mediated via a cell
cycle-dependent mechanism. Using constructs downregulating or
overexpressing MCL1 we demonstrate that expression of MCL1 prevents
induction of apoptosis when androgen-sensitive PCa cells are grown under
steroid-deprived conditions. The BH3-mimetic Obatoclax induces apoptosis
and decreases MCL1 expression in androgen-sensitive PCa cells, while
castration-resistant PCa cells are less sensitive and react with an
upregulation of MCL1 expression. Synergistic effects of Obatoclax with
androgen receptor inactivation can be observed in androgen-sensitive
cells. In addition, Obatoclax efficiently inhibits clonogenicity of
primary basal PCa cells. Altogether, our results suggest that MCL1 is a
key molecule deciding over the fate of PCa cells upon inactivation of
androgen receptor signaling and provide a mechanistic rationale for a
clinical assessment of a MCL1-targeting therapy adjuvant to ADT.

