Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of chemical tools to study the endogenous Hsp70
interactome in malignant cells


Background: Heat shock protein 70 family members play an important role
in cancer. They are up-regulated in wide variety of tumors and the
increased Hsp70 protein expression correlates with metastases, resistance
to treatment and poor prognosis. Multiple mechanisms explain cancer cells
dependence on Hsp70, such as inhibition of apoptosis by Hsp70, induction
of autophagy and control of stability of onco-proteins. These Hsp70
activities are mediated in cancer by its ability to chaperone and
interact with a large number of proteins in a cell-specific, context
dependent manner.Hypothesis: Reagents that enable the capture of
tumor-specific Hsp70 complexes facilitate the identification of
context-dependent Hsp70 interactomes.Results: Our laboratory recently
reported the identification of a novel allosteric site located in the
nucleotide binding domain of Hsp70 (Chem Biol 2013). It has also reported
the discovery of ligands that bind to the allosteric pocket of Hsp70,
inhibit its function in cancer cells and result in anti-cancer activity
(J Med Chem 2013). Structure-activity relationship studies in this ligand
series gave insights on the attachment of specific linkers for the design
of Hsp70-related chemical tools. Here we present the design of
Hsp70-directed reagents and use biochemical and cell-based methods to
validate Hsp70-directed affinity purification probes. We demonstrate that
these tools lock Hsp70 in complex with onco-client proteins and
effectively isolate Hsp70 complexes for identification through
biochemical techniques. Using these tools we provide proof-of-concept
analyses that glimpse into the complex roles played by Hsp70 in
maintaining a multitude of cell-specific malignancy-driving
proteins.Significance: The knowledge derived from the use of such
reagents will be extremely valuable not only to understand tumor-specific
roles of Hsp70 and associated mechanisms but also to develop rational
strategies for the clinical implementation of these agents to cancer
treatment. They may also provide clues on the altered functional proteome
in individual tumors, a quest yet elusive by today's proteomics methods.

