Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring inflammasome activation with a bioluminescent caspase-1
assay


Inflammatory responses and immune modulation play important and complex
roles in cancer development and therapy, but methods to monitor caspase-1
activity associated with inflammasome activation have been limited.
Inflammasomes are protein complexes induced by diverse inflammatory
stimuli. Caspase-1, an essential component of the inflammasome, is
activated in response to these stimuli, resulting in the processing and
release of cytokines, IL-1 and IL-18, and pyroptosis, an immunogenic form
of cell death. Western blots and ELISA are the primary, but indirect,
methods for monitoring caspase-1 activity currently in use. To simplify
and provide a more direct means of detecting cell-based caspase-1
activity, we developed a sensitive, homogeneous, plate-based assay that
eliminates the need for significant sample processing. The assay employs
a single-step, bioluminescent format combining a caspase-1 substrate,
Z-WEHD-aminoluciferin, with a thermostable luciferase in an optimized
reagent subsequently added to treated cells in an assay well. The
coupled-enzyme system quickly reaches a steady-state between caspase
cleavage of the substrate and luciferase conversion of the
aminoluciferin, with light generated proportional to the amount of
caspase-1 activity present in the sample. In addition to substrate
selection, assay specificity for caspase-1 is conferred by inclusion of a
proteasome inhibitor, MG132, in the reagent and by the subsequent use of
a caspase-1 inhibitor, Ac-YVAD-CHO, to confirm activity. This approach
enables clear determination of caspase-1 activity even in the context of
apoptotic cells. Studies with Casp1/ cells further demonstrate the
effectiveness of this assay system to specifically detect cell-based,
caspase-1 activity. Using this novel assay system, caspase-1 activation
has been quantitatively determined in THP-1 cells following treatment
with -hemolysin, LPS, nigericin, monosodium urate crystals, R-848,
Pam3CSK4, and flagellin. Caspase-1 activation has also been demonstrated
in treated J774A.1 mouse macrophages, bone marrow-derived macrophages
from mice, as well as in human primary monocytes. Of note, caspase-1
activity can be monitored either directly in cells or released into the
culture medium following cell treatment with various inflammatory
stimuli. Monitoring released caspase-1 activity in supernatants is fast,
sensitive, and nondestructive, thereby enabling subsequent multiplexing
of the biological sample with other assays to monitor additional cell
parameters, such as IL-1 release or cell death. Therefore, this assay
system provides a rapid, convenient, and flexible method to specifically
and quantitatively monitor caspase-1 activation in cells in a plate-based
format. This will allow a more efficient and effective assessment of
inflammasome activation as well as enable high-throughput screening for
inflammasome modulators.

