Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urinary miR-1825 and miR-484: An oncogene and a tumor- suppressor
gene among prostate cancer patients


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short, single-stranded RNA molecules with the
ability of acting as post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression.
MiRNAs regulate a number of important pathways, such as: cellular
differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis. MiRNA expression profiling
patterns were demonstrated to have more potential than the common mRNA
expression profiling for the characterization of poorly differentiated
tumours. Studying miRNA expression profiles signatures will help in
understanding the role of these miRNAs in the process of cancer
development. The aim of this study was to profile the urinary miRNA
expression signatures among prostate cancer patients in comparison to
healthy male individuals. To identify the miRNA signatures specific for
PCa, total RNA was isolated from 2.5mL of urine from all prostate cancer
patients and from healthy males. RNA isolated from each group were pooled
together and the differential expression analysis of miRNAs between the
pooled samples was performed using MiRNA Microarray technology.
Differential expression of two individual miRNAs, miR-1825 and miR-484,
was observed between healthy males and prostate cancer patients. The
relative expression of these two miRNAs were assessed among among the
prostate cancer group and the healthy male group using RT-qPCR. MiR-1825
was up-regulated in seven out of eight PCa samples (88%), whereas miR-484
was down-regulated in six out of the eight PCa samples (75%). It has been
found that the putative target for miR-1825 is member-1 of the Discoidin
Domain family of Receptors (DDR1). The over-expression of DDR1 was
reported to be a prognostic marker for the poor survival in several
cancer types and therefore is proposed that miR-1825 might function as a
tumor-suppressor by normally or in response to cancer, inhibiting DDR1's
translation. As for miR-484, E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase (UBR5), which is
thought to be involved with DNA repair, has been found to be the putative
target for miR-484. It has be reported that the over-expression of a
mutated version of UBR5 was found in breast and ovarian cancers where its
deregulation was cited as a possible cause of malignant progression. It
is therefore being proposed that miR-484 might function as a tumor-
suppressor whereby its expression controls progression via the regulation
of genes, such as UBR5, that have already been potentially associated
with cancer progression.

