Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recruitment of effector T cells into the tumor rim and center with
neoadjuvant systemic GM-CSF in patients with localized prostate cancer


Background: Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF,
sargramostim) is a bone marrow growth factor that is often used as an
adjuvant in cancer vaccine clinical trials and has the potential to
enhance antitumor efficacy in combination with immune checkpoint blockade
in preclinical studies and clinical trials. The effect of GM-CSF remains
controversial, however. In this study, we sought to characterize the
systemic and tissue-specific effects of GM-CSF in prostate cancer
patients in the preoperative setting.Methods: Patients with localized
prostate cancer were treated on an open-label phase I/II study of
neoadjuvant GM-CSF prior to planned radical prostatectomy (NCT00305669).
Patients received GM-CSF 250mcg/m2 subcutaneously on days 1-14 (cohort
1), days1-21 (cohort 2), or days 1-28 (cohort 3), and underwent radical
prostatectomy (RP) within 5 days after the last dose of GM-CSF. Blood
collected at baseline, day 14, pre-RP, and 6 weeks post-RP were analyzed
for immune cell subsets by flow cytometry. Immune infiltration in RP
tissue were evaluated by immunohistochemistry and quantified by digital
image analysis with comparison to RP tissue from untreated prostate
cancer patients as controls.Results: 18 patients were evaluated with 6
patients at each dose level. Treatment with GM-CSF was associated with an
increase in the number of myeloid cells including myeloid dendritic
cells. Treatment was also associated with increases in circulating
conventional CD4 and CD8 T cells and NK cells. The number of FoxP3+
regulatory CD4+ T cells was also increased, but to a much lower
magnitude. At the time of radical prostatectomy, treatment was associated
with a recruitment of CD3+ T cells to the tumor rim, and with cohort 3,
at the centers of tumor. These T cells were predominantly CD8+ T cells,
although conventional CD4+ T cells were also increased. No increase in
monocytes or dendritic cells was seen in the tissue.Conclusion: Daily
injection of systemic GM-CSF induces an increase in circulating antigen
presenting cells as well as T and NK cells. While this treatment does not
enhance the frequency of antigen presenting cells in the tumor
microenvironment, this treatment recruits effector CD8+ T cells into the
tumor rims.

