Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular analysis of the pediatric cancer fibrolamellar
hepatocellular carcinoma


Genomic analysis of the pediatric cancer fibrolamellar hepatocellular
carcinomaFibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma (FLHCC) is a rare liver
tumor that usually occurs in adolescents and young adults. Originally
considered a variant of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), FLHCC is
characterized by hepatocytes with deeply eosinophilic, granular cytoplasm
interspersed with fibrous bands, without signs of cirrhosis as in HCC.
Since little is known of its molecular pathogenesis, we performed RNA-seq
and whole genome sequencing of FLHCC paired with normal liver from the
same patient.Our results demonstrated that the majority of the DNA is
unremarkable with few recurrent mutations or structural variants such as
amplifications or inversions The major finding is a heterogeneous
deletion of 400 kB in chromosome 19 which produces a chimeric transcript
and a fully functional protein, a fusion between the heat shock protein
DNAJB1 and the catalytic subunit of protein kinase A (PRKACA). Our
initial observation of this chimera in 15 out of 15 patients has now been
expanded to 116 out of 116 patients. Differential expression analysis of
RNA-seq revealed many changes in the gene expression in FLHCC as compared
to its paired normal liver. These changes were highly consistent from
patient to patient, suggesting a unifying pathogenesis. The RNA-seq from
our FLHCC samples had little in common with HCC samples from the TCGA or
published reports of other cancers. An analysis of protein expression
correlated well with the RNA-seq results. Some observed changes can
directly be linked to increased activity of PRKACA. Other changes involve
pathways known to participate in the initiation and progression of other
cancers, which, along with an increase of PRKACA activity, represent
targets for therapeutic intervention. Several of these targets are now
being explored in cellular models, genetic, and PDX mouse models, as well
as clinical trials.

