Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CARM1 preferentially methylates H3R17 over H3R26 through a random
kinetic mechanism


CARM1 (PRMT4) is a type I arginine methyltransferase involved in the
regulation of transcription, pre-mRNA splicing, cell cycle progression
and the DNA damage response. Overexpression of CARM1 has been implicated
in breast, prostate, and colorectal cancers. Since CARM1 appears to be a
good target for the development of therapies against these cancers, we
studied the substrate specificity and kinetic mechanism of the
full-length human enzyme. CARM1 has been shown to methylate both residues
R17 and R26 of histone H3. Substrate specificity was examined by testing
CARM1 activity with several H3-based peptide substrates using a
radiometric assay. Comparison of kcat/KM values reveal that methylation
of H3R17 is preferred over H3R26. An R17/R26K peptide produced 8-fold
greater kcat/KM value compared to the corresponding R17K/R26 peptide.
These effects are KM-driven as kcat values remain relatively constant for
the peptides tested. Shortening the peptide at the C-terminus by 5 amino
acid residues greatly reduced the specificity (16-24-fold), demonstrating
the contribution of distal residues to substrate binding. In contrast,
adding residues to the N-terminus of the shortened peptide had a negative
effect on activity. CARM1 displays little preference for monomethylated
over unmethylated H3R17 (2-5-fold by kcat/KM) suggesting that it operates
through a distributive mechanism. Previous crystallographic studies with
mouse CARM1 showed that part of the substrate binding groove was formed
by cofactor binding, thereby suggesting an ordered kinetic mechanism (Yue
et al., EMBO J., 2007). Our results from dead-end and product inhibition
studies performed with human CARM1, however, are consistent with a random
kinetic mechanism. SAH and sinefungin demonstrate competitive inhibition
with respect to SAM and produced noncompetitive inhibition patterns with
respect to peptide. Both dimethylated R17 product peptide and dead-end
R17K peptide exhibited noncompetitive inhibition patterns with respect to
SAM. Furthermore, binding of SAM and peptide substrates were shown to be
independent of each other in initial velocity experiments where both
substrates were varied. Together, these results elucidate the kinetic
mechanism of CARM1 and highlight elements important for binding affinity.

