Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic gene signature for intermediate risk prostate cancer


The over treatment of prostate cancer patients is a significant concern,
as recent clinical trials suggest that many patients are over treated
which can lead to significant patient morbidity. Although the Gleason
score is a powerful predictor of lethal or indolent disease, a
significant proportion (40%) of men present with early stage Gleason
score (GS) 7 tumors, for whom prognosis is variable. The goal of this
study is to develop and optimize a robust prognostic gene signature that
can be utilized on formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) core biopsy
tumor material to better classify patients with intermediate risk, GS 7
tumors into good and poor outcome groups.Three gene signatures were
derived from publicly available gene expression profiles of the Swedish
Watchful Waiting cohort. The Genomic Grade Index consisted of the top 25
molecular signatures discriminating between high (8, 9 & 10) and low ( 6)
GS tumors. The Lethal Gene Score consisted of the top 25 molecular
signatures discriminating between lethal and indolent disease within GS 7
tumors only. A network-based gene signature consisted of 88 genes which
accurately stratified GS 7 patients into high risk and low risk groups,
resembling the survival curves of high GS and low GS patients. The
prognostic capacity of the combined gene signature was tested in silico
on the gene expression profiles of the Mayo cohort. Results demonstrated
the gene signature's highly robust capacity for differentiating low risk
and high risk patients within GS 7 patients.The NanoString nCounter
System will be used to quantify mRNA from prostate FFPE blocks to assess
the expression of the 138 prognostic genes. 156 archived prostate tumor
blocks will be collected from intermediate risk, GS 7 patients enrolled
in the 2005 PR5 prostate trial, which also collected 12 years of clinical
follow-up information. Results will be correlated with biochemical (PSA)
failure rates and overall survival.In short, our findings provide
proof-of-principle that through the use of gene signatures it is possible
to separate prostate cancer patients of intermediate risk into good and
poor outcome groups. Furthermore, they also identify multiple gene
candidates whose expression could likely be formulated into a clinically
applicable assay, the implementation of which could serve to stratify
prostate cancer patients with tumors of intermediate risk into more
accurate high and low risk groups.

