Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and evaluation of a small molecule KIFC1 inhibitor for
breast cancer treatment


Historically, drugs used in the treatment of certain cancers may cause
damage to healthy cells while affecting cancer cells. Therefore, finding
compounds that are specific toward cancer cells only is still a high
priority in the search for new therapies. In contrast with normal cells,
most cancer cells contain multiple centrosomes which are associated with
genome instability and tumorigenesis. Cancer cells can avoid multipolar
mitosis which can cause cell death by clustering the extra centrosomes
into two spindle poles, thereby enabling bipolar division. Kinesin-like
protein KIFC1 plays a critical role in centrosome clustering in cancer
cells, but is not essential for normal cell survival. Therefore,
targeting KIFC1 may give some insight into how a novel therapy can
selectively target only cancer cells. Here, we report that KIFC1
up-regulation is a frequent event in human breast cancer and that KIFC1
is highly expressed in all 8 tested human breast cancer cell lines, but
is absent in normal human mammary epithelial cells and weakly expressed
in 2 human lung fibroblast lines. We also found that depletion of KIFC1
in breast cancer cells induced cell death. From a high throughput screen
of 30,000 compounds, we identified a small molecule KIFC1 inhibitor,
SRH06, which has an enzymatic IC50 value of 6.5 M versus KIFC1 and binds
directly to KIFC1 without interacting with the microtubule. Results from
our computer modeling studies suggested that SRH06 binds to a novel
allosteric site on KIFC1 that appears suitable for the development of
selective KIFC1 inhibitors. Importantly, SRH06 prevented bipolar
clustering of extra-centrosomes in breast cancer cells and significantly
reduced colony formation and cell viability, but was less toxic to normal
LL47 fibroblasts. Therefore, SRH06 provides a very valuable tool to study
the biological function of KIFC1 and serves as a potential lead for the
development of a novel therapeutic agent for the treatment of breast
cancer.

