Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: How stochastic single-cell fate decisions drive population
dynamics in oncogene-addicted cancer


Cancer cells within a tumor environment exhibit a complex and adaptive
nature whereby genetically and epigenetically distinct subpopulations
compete for resources. The probabilistic nature of gene expression and
intracellular molecular interactions confer a significant amount of
stochasticity in cell fate decisions. This cellular heterogeneity is
believed to underlie cases of cancer recurrence, acquired drug
resistance, and so-called exceptional responders. From a population
dynamics perspective, clonal heterogeneity and cell-fate stochasticity
are distinct sources of noise, the former arising from genetic mutations
and/or epigenetic transitions, extrinsic to the fate decision signaling
pathways and the latter being intrinsic to biochemical reaction networks.
Here, we present our results and ongoing work of a kinetic modeling study
based on experimental time course data for EGFR-addicted non-small cell
lung cancer (PC9) cells in both parental and isolated sublines. When PC9
cells are treated with erlotinib, an EGFR inhibitor, a complex array of
division and death cell decisions arise within a given population in
response to treatment. Although deterministic (ODE) simulations capture
the ef-fects of clonal heterogeneity and describe the overall trends of
experimentally treated tumor cell popu-lations, these are not capable of
explaining the observed variability of drug response trajectories,
in-cluding response magnitude and time to rebound. Our stochastic
simulations, instead, capture the ef-fects of intrinsically noisy cell
fate decisions that cause significant variability in cell population
trajecto-ries. These findings indicate that stochastic simulations are
necessary to distinguish the contribution of extrinsic (clonal
heterogeneity) and intrinsic (cell fate decisions) noise to understand
the variability of cancer-cell response treatment. Furthermore, they
suggest that, whereas tumors with distinct clon-al structures are
expected to behave differently in response to drug, two clonally
identical tumors may also experience vastly different outcomes, such as
exceptional response vs. rapid relapse, due to the intrinsic noise of
cell fate decisions. The results of this study underscore the need to
improve our un-derstanding of intracellular signaling networks that
govern division vs. death decisions in cancer cells at the single-cell
level. We will present our ongoing work to develop mechanistic models
that link erlo-tinib-driven EGFR inhibition and intrinsic apoptotic
execution. Our preliminary results give insight into what signaling
interactions are required to generate the intrinsic apoptotic response to
EGFR inhibi-tion with erlotinib.

