Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming Lapatinib resistance by the fatty acid synthase
inhibitor HS-106


Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a receptor tyrosine
kinase that is overexpressed in about 20% of breast cancers and most
often in the more aggressive inflammatory breast cancer (IBC). Lapatinib
is one of the most potent small molecule inhibitors of HER2. Although
Lapatinib has shown to be an effective targeted therapy, development of
drug resistance stands as a major problem. Here we show that the
anti-cancer activity of the novel fatty acid synthase inhibitor HS-106
can re-sensitize resistant cell lines to Lapatinib.Lapatinib resistant
SKBR3 and BT474 breast cancer cell lines were treated with increasing
concentrations of HS-106 either alone or in combination with Lapatinib
and their effects on cell proliferation were assessed using the DNA dye
Hoechst 33342. The ability of HS-106 and Lapatinib drug combination to
induce apoptosis were measured in Caspase 3/7 activity assay using the
fluorogenic Caspase substrate (DEVD)2 R110. Their effect on apoptosis was
further confirmed in Lapatinib resistant BT474 cells using flow cytometry
based Annexin V assay. In addition, the effect of HS-106 on the
expression levels and phosphorylation of the kinases involved in Her2
pathway including Her2, AKT and ERK were determined. The fatty acid
synthase inhibitor HS-106 significantly inhibits the proliferation of
Lapatinib resistant cell lines with concentrations. Interestingly, when
combined with Lapatinib, the drugs synergize to dramatically affect cell
growth. This anti-proliferative activity of HS-106 was found to be the
result of induction of apoptosis, Caspase 3/7 activity was found to
increase in a dose dependent manner following HS-106 treatment. Low
concentrations of Lapatinib and HS-106, which does not induce Caspase
activity when administrated separately, were found to significantly
induce Caspase activity when combined together. These results were
confirmed with the Annexin V assay. By examining the expression levels of
HER2 pathway proteins we found a decrease in HER2 levels which was
reflected on the levels of the downstream kinases AKT and ERK when
treating with high concentrations of HS-106.In a previous work, HS-106
showed a good tolerability and anti-cancer activity in the MMTV neu+
mouse model. By showing potent efficacy against Lapatinib resistant
breast cancer cell lines, our data suggest that HS-106 is an excellent
drug candidate to advance into translational studies for the treatment of
Lapatinib resistant breast cancer.

