Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Titanium peroxide nanoparticles enhance antitumor efficacy through
reactive oxygen species in pancreatic cancer radiation therapy


Purpose: Pancreatic cancer is a highly lethal disease and notoriously
resistant to many types of cytotoxic chemotherapy and radiotherapy. A
novel strategy should be explored for these radioresistant tumors. We
originally synthesized a titanium peroxide nanoparticle (TiOxNP) which
had a distinct ability to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) upon
X-ray irradiation (IR). Here, the characterization and efficacy of TiOxNP
as radiosensitizer for pancreatic cancer therapy were
investigated.Methods: TiOxNPs were synthesized from anatase titanium
oxide nanoparticles (TiO2NPs) by H2O2 processing and coated by
polyacrylic acid. The ability of TiOxNPs to enhance ROS generation upon
X-ray irradiation (IR) was tested by using 3-(p-Aminophenyl) fluorescein
and several antioxidants. A xenograft mouse model using the human
pancreatic cancer cell line MIAPaCa-2 was used to evaluate the cytotoxic
effects of a combination of TiOxNPs and IR in vivo. MIAPaCa-2 cells were
injected subcutaneously into the hind legs of immunodeficient BALB/c
mice. Seven days after injection, the tumor was treated with a TiOxNP
suspension injected directly into the tumor and application of 5 Gy of
IR. Tumor size and health of the mice were monitored for 43 days after
the treatment. Induction of apoptosis was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry using terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated
deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end labeling staining. We also
characterized TiOxNPs by ESR and XAFS analyses.Results: ROS generation
was enhanced dramatically by TiOxNPs in a concentration- and radiation
dose- dependent manner compared to enhancement by TiO2NPs. At the highest
concentration of TiOxNPs, ROS generation upon an irradiation dose of 30
Gy was enhanced by a factor of more than 10. Also, ROS generated by
TiOxNPs upon IR were scavenged by vitamin C or glutathione. Growth
inhibition of the tumor in the group receiving both TiOxNP and IR was
significantly greater than single treatment subgroups (P Purpose:
Pancreatic cancer is a highly lethal disease and notoriously resistant to
many types of cytotoxic chemotherapy and radiotherapy. A novel strategy
should be explored for these radioresistant tumors. We originally
synthesized a titanium peroxide nanoparticle (TiOxNP) which had a
distinct ability to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) upon X-ray
irradiation (IR). Here, the characterization and efficacy of TiOxNP as
radiosensitizer for pancreatic cancer therapy were investigated.Methods:
TiOxNPs were synthesized from anatase titanium oxide nanoparticles
(TiO2NPs) by H2O2 processing and coated by polyacrylic acid. The ability
of TiOxNPs to enhance ROS generation upon X-ray irradiation (IR) was
tested by using 3-(p-Aminophenyl) fluorescein and several antioxidants. A
xenograft mouse model using the human pancreatic cancer cell line
MIAPaCa-2 was used to evaluate the cytotoxic effects of a combination of
TiOxNPs and IR in vivo. MIAPaCa-2 cells were injected subcutaneously into
the hind legs of immunodeficient BALB/c mice. Seven days after injection,
the tumor was treated with a TiOxNP suspension injected directly into the
tumor and application of 5 Gy of IR. Tumor size and health of the mice
were monitored for 43 days after the treatment. Induction of apoptosis
was evaluated by immunohistochemistry using terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end labeling
staining. We also characterized TiOxNPs by ESR and XAFS analyses.Results:
ROS generation was enhanced dramatically by TiOxNPs in a concentration-
and radiation dose- dependent manner compared to enhancement by TiO2NPs.
At the highest concentration of TiOxNPs, ROS generation upon an
irradiation dose of 30 Gy was enhanced by a factor of more than 10. Also,
ROS generated by TiOxNPs upon IR were scavenged by vitamin C or
glutathione. Growth inhibition of the tumor in the group receiving both
TiOxNP and IR was significantly greater than single treatment subgroups
(P < 0.05). The number of apoptotic cells was also significantly higher
in the combination group (P Purpose: Pancreatic cancer is a highly lethal
disease and notoriously resistant to many types of cytotoxic chemotherapy
and radiotherapy. A novel strategy should be explored for these
radioresistant tumors. We originally synthesized a titanium peroxide
nanoparticle (TiOxNP) which had a distinct ability to produce reactive
oxygen species (ROS) upon X-ray irradiation (IR). Here, the
characterization and efficacy of TiOxNP as radiosensitizer for pancreatic
cancer therapy were investigated.Methods: TiOxNPs were synthesized from
anatase titanium oxide nanoparticles (TiO2NPs) by H2O2 processing and
coated by polyacrylic acid. The ability of TiOxNPs to enhance ROS
generation upon X-ray irradiation (IR) was tested by using
3-(p-Aminophenyl) fluorescein and several antioxidants. A xenograft mouse
model using the human pancreatic cancer cell line MIAPaCa-2 was used to
evaluate the cytotoxic effects of a combination of TiOxNPs and IR in
vivo. MIAPaCa-2 cells were injected subcutaneously into the hind legs of
immunodeficient BALB/c mice. Seven days after injection, the tumor was
treated with a TiOxNP suspension injected directly into the tumor and
application of 5 Gy of IR. Tumor size and health of the mice were
monitored for 43 days after the treatment. Induction of apoptosis was
evaluated by immunohistochemistry using terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end labeling
staining. We also characterized TiOxNPs by ESR and XAFS analyses.Results:
ROS generation was enhanced dramatically by TiOxNPs in a concentration-
and radiation dose- dependent manner compared to enhancement by TiO2NPs.
At the highest concentration of TiOxNPs, ROS generation upon an
irradiation dose of 30 Gy was enhanced by a factor of more than 10. Also,
ROS generated by TiOxNPs upon IR were scavenged by vitamin C or
glutathione. Growth inhibition of the tumor in the group receiving both
TiOxNP and IR was significantly greater than single treatment subgroups
(P < 0.05). The number of apoptotic cells was also significantly higher
in the combination group (P < 0.05). Histologically, large pools of
TiOxNPs around tumor cells and small amounts inside the tumor cells were
observed. No mice died within a 43-day observation period or showed any
apparent body weight loss. In the ESR spectra, some signals were observed
for TiOxNPs. The spectral shapes of Ti K-edge X-ray absorption near edge
structure, spectra were the same among the mineral anatase, TiO2NPs and
TiOxNPs.Conclusions: TiOxNPs induced remarkable ROS production upon IR.
They were safe and effective in a xenograft mouse model using engrafted
human pancreatic cancer cells. Further studies would be necessary to
elucidate a mechanism of radical generation and long-term toxicity,
however our study shows that TiOxNPs are promising radiosensitizers for
application in pancreatic cancer therapy.

