Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastatic colorectal cancer associated long non-coding RNAs
identified by transcriptome sequencing of matched primary and metastatic
patient tissues


Colorectal Cancer (CRC) is the most common gastrointestinal malignancy in
the U.S.A. Approximately 50% of patients with CRC develops metastatic
disease (mCRC) with a 5-year survival of less than 20%. To date,
colorectal cancer research has primarily focused on the deregulation of
protein-coding genes, however due to recent technological advances we can
now focus on the under-studied and emerging class of long non-coding RNAs
(lncRNAs). Despite advances in our understanding of primary CRC
oncogenesis, the mechanisms driving the progression from primary to
metastatic colorectal cancer remain poorly characterized. To address
this, we performed ab initio transcriptome assembly to detect aberrant
transcripts comparing matched normal, primary, and metastatic colon
cancer tissues from a cohort of patients. This led us to discover 56
novel lncRNAs solely altered in metastasis when compared to normal and
primary tissues, which we refer to as metastatic colorectal cancer
associated long non-coding RNAs (mCCAL). To demonstrate functional
significance, we characterized the most up-regulated novel lncRNA,
mCCAL1. mCCAL1 was highly expressed in multiple colon cancer cell lines
with the highest expression in HCT-116 and Lovo cell lines. Silencing
mCCAL1's expression caused a decrease in cellular migration in HCT-116
cells and invasion in Lovo cells relative to controls. Furthermore, gene
set enrichment analysis of our microarray results and patient cohort data
revealed differentially regulated genes enriched in epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT), chromatin remodeling, methyltransferase
activity, and target genes of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2).
Modulating expression of mCCAL1 also decreased expression of H3K27me3
supporting its role in chromatin remodeling. All together, this is the
first study to compare matched patient tissues to discover metastatic
lncRNAs in colorectal cancer. Our data revealed that mCCAL1 promotes
cellular migration and invasion, EMT, and may function through its
association with PRC2. Moving forward, we intend to further understand
how mCCALs contribute to metastatic progression of colorectal cancer with
the intent of revealing novel cancer diagnostics and therapies.

