Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxic primary tumor stress microenvironments prime DTCs in lungs
for dormancy


The mechanisms behind dormancy of disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) are
unclear. Further, whether primary tumor microenvironments might influence
DTC fate has never been explored in situ. We found that breast tumors
enriched for a specific dormancy signature (DS+) displayed longer
metastasis-free periods than those poor (DS-) for the signature. Key
genes in the DS induce quiescence and are also regulated by hypoxia.
Interestingly, a main response of tumor cells to hypoxia is growth
arrest. We hypothesized that hypoxic primary tumor microenvironments may
spawn a subpopulation of DTCs that, by virtue of becoming dormant, might
escape therapies and eventually fuel incurable metastasis. We used
H2B-EGFP inducible HEp3 HNSCC and photo-switchable (green-to-red
fluorescence) H2B-Dendra2 expressing MDA-MB-231 and ZR-75-1 human breast
cancer cell lines to identify cells from hypoxic microenvironments. To
initiate spatially defined hypoxic microenvironments in primary tumors we
implanted induction NANo IntraVItal Devices (iNANIVIDs) carrying a
hypoxia-mimetic agent (desferrioxamine - DFOM) in T-HEp3 tumors in vivo
(chicken chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) model) or exposed cultured
MDA-MB-231 or ZR-75-1 cells in vitro to either 21% or 1% O2. The regions
influenced by the DFOM-iNANIVID displayed upregulation of p27, NR2F1 and
DEC2 (dormancy genes), as well as induction of hypoxia markers (GLUT1,
HIF1). We found that lung DTCs derived by mouse tail vein injection of
hypoxia induced H2B-EGFP T-HEp3 or H2B-Dendra2 MDA-MB-231 cells were
primed to enter dormancy in lungs > 2 weeks after extravasation, as
measured using H2B-EGFP and H2B-Dendra2-RED label retention. Using human
Vimentin to screen for HEp3 tumor cells in lungs, we found that DTCs
originating from the iNANIVID induced hypoxic regions showed a dormant
profile as evidenced by significant upregulation of p27, NR2F1 and DEC2
compared to DTCs originating from a normoxic milieu. Further, analysis in
3D culture models revealed that ER+/DS+ breast cancer cells (ZR-75-1) are
more prone to enter a prolonged quiescent state after a brief exposure to
hypoxia (1% O2) while this response is not observed in triple
negative/DS- breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231). We propose that hypoxic
primary tumor stress microenvironments induce a subpopulation of tumor
cells to express the DS. Upon spreading, these DTCs may be more prone to
enter dormancy, evade anti-proliferative therapies and eventually fuel
metastasis.

