Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiparameter ploidy profiling: a powerful tool to investigate
the genomics of diploid tumor populations


BackgroundGenomic intratumor heterogeneity is an increasingly recognized
phenomenon in various solid tumors and is now extensively being
investigated by next-generation sequencing (NGS) approaches. However,
most methods are not designed to resolve the complexity of mixed cell
populations. Therefore important information may be lost, eventually
leading to assumptions that may not reflect the true nature of the
disease. We have therefore developed the method of Multiparameter Ploidy
Profiling (MPP). We applied this technology on tumor specimens from
malignant melanoma and from non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).MethodsMPP
involves isolation of nuclei from tissues, multiparameter flow-sorting of
tumor populations by DNA content and specific tumor markers, and
profiling genomes using high resolution array comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH) and NGS. As some tumors are diploid by flow
cytometry, specific lineage markers, e.g. SOX10 (melanoma) and TTF1
(NSCLC) were used to separate these from normal cells.
Fluorescence-in-situ hybridization (FISH) and immunohistochemistry (IHC)
were performed on sorted nuclei and on whole tissue sections to validate
results.ResultsMPP allowed us to sort different tumor populations within
a single tumor specimen, while excluding non-neoplastic contamination in
downstream analysis with aCGH and NGS. We separated three different tumor
populations from a single primary NSCLC with a TTF1 multiparameter sort.
We detected significant differences in copy numbers, e.g. a CDKN2A
homozygous deletion only present in the diploid tumor population as well
as differences in allelic frequencies of gene mutations (e.g. EGFR exon
20). Further sequencing of the diploid TTF1 negative population proved to
be concordant to genomic DNA obtained from a tumor free lymph node.
Finally, we used the population-specific genomic data in order to infer
the clonal relationship of all tumor populations and to postulate the
evolution of these tumor populations within single tumor
specimens.ConclusionsThe power of MPP consists of sorting pure tumor
populations and of deciphering the level of intratumor heterogeneity
based on ploidy. Most importantly MPP enables the separation of diploid
tumor populations from diploid, benign stromal cells that can serve as
reference for genomic profiling studies, where germline DNA is otherwise
not available. To our knowledge, diploid tumor populations were for first
time purifyed from normal cells in a multiparameter sort and genomically
characterized. We also demonstrated that the analysis of diploid tumor
populations within a single biopsy is crucial for the understanding of
the clonal composition and evolution of a given tumor. MPP on multiple
biopsies from individual patients is necessary to deeply investigate the
clonal evolution and the behavior of a diploid tumor population and their
potential impact on metastasis and therapy response.

