Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of three-dimensional primary tumor cell culture
method and novel drug sensitivity test


BackgroundPredicting sensitivity to anticancer drug and selecting the
most effective drug may help to enhance the therapeutic value, leading to
improve patients QOL. For these purposes, primary cancer cell from
patient specimen is being studied on anticancer drug sensitivity test. In
general cell culture method, primary cancer cells are difficult to
culture because of fibroblast cells are increasing predominantly than
cancer cells. For resolving the problem, collagen-gel-embedding culture
method has been developed. However this culture method remain having some
problems, for example, complexity of the cell culture preparation from
small cancer tissue like a biopsy sample, low efficiency of primary
cancer cells and difficulty in multi-drug sensitivity test.Therefore we
developed a three dimensional (3D) cancer cell culture kit that could
conduct a primary tumor cell culture and an evaluation of the anticancer
drug sensitivity in one-step process after dissociated small cancer
tissue. For 3D cell culture we have used NanoCulture Plate (NCP) which is
scaffold based 3D culture system and easily form spheroids than other
culture systems. Spheroids microenvironment are closely resemble to
actual tumor biology, and are therefore more relevant for drug
sensitivity. In this report, we carried out a sensitivity test in a lung
adenocarcinoma specimen harboring EGFR gene exon19 deletion mutation
indicating susceptibility to gefitinib to confirm the efficacy of the
system.MethodDissociation of cancer tissue and primary cancer cell
culture were performed by using 3D cancer cell culture kit and NCP.
Partially digested cancer fragments from surgical specimens were seeded
and cultured for 3 days. The spheroids were composed of both CK-18
expressing cancer cells and -SMA expressing fibroblast cells, then
spheroids were treated with gefitinib. After 4 days of drug treatment,
the susceptibility of the cells to gefitinib was investigated an index of
viability by ATP assay. Detection of EGFR mutations was performed by SRL
Inc., using real-time PCR that combines scorpion technology and
Amplification Refractory Mutation System (ARMS).Result and conclusionWe
found that primary cells with EGFR exon19 deletion were highly
susceptible to gefitinib, whereas the cells with intact EGFR were not.
These finding indicated the feasibility of 3D cancer cell culture kit and
NanoCulture Plate for primary cell culture and screening of effective
anticancer drugs. The cell lines generated through this procedure may
help to advance our knowledge of certain forms of lung cancer and may
also be useful for developing patient-specific anti-cancer drug screening
procedures. To clarify the causal relationship between the mutation type
and susceptibility, additional experiment and optimization of this kit
are currently underway.

