Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a NGS-based method for EGFRvIII detection: sequence
analysis of the junction


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive malignant
primary tumor in humans. One of the most common mutations in GBMs is an
interstitial deletion in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR),
EGFRvIII, which occurs at a frequency of 30%. EGFR is a transmembrane
tyrosine kinase receptor and the EGFRvIII mutant is characterized by a
deletion of 267 amino acids in the extracellular domain leading to ligand
independent constitutive activation. The deletion of exons 2-7 leads to
an in-frame deletion in EGFR with a novel glycine residue at the
junction. The amino acid at the junction of exons 1 and 2 is a valine,
making the novel transcript an attractive target for immunotherapy.A
custom next generation sequencing (NGS) based assay and bioinformatic
pipeline have been developed in our laboratory to detect EGFRvIII fromRNA
extracted from formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue. The targets
include the exon 1-2 boundary (wild type), the exon 1-8 boundary
(EGFRvIII), amplification of various sized RNA fragments to determine RNA
degradation and bioavailability, and expression levels of three
housekeeping genes. Following cDNA synthesis multiplex PCR of all targets
are captured simultaneously for the sequencing library with NGS performed
on the Illumina MiSeq. The output from the bioinformatics pipeline
includes the sequence and number of reads from the wild-type and mutant,
ratio of EGFRvIII reads with respect to total EGFR sequenced, expression
of three housekeeping genes and relative amount of bioavailable EGFR
RNA.This assay was validated through comparison of NGS sequence results
with an established qRT-PCR to detect normal and mutant EGFR. Negative
controls from normal brain (temporal lobe excisions from epilepsy
patients) and adipose tissue (a tissue with high expression of EGFR) were
used to determine whether low-level exon 1-8 fusions from mis-splicing
were detectable in normal tissue (Figure 1). Twenty five GBM specimens
were sequenced, with 8/25 positive for EGFRvIII (Figure 2), and confirmed
by RT-PCR. In addition to detection of the EGFRvIII mutant, relative
expression of EGFR is detected in this assay, and when taken together
with EGFR amplifications detected by routine NGS panels, we can determine
whether the EGFRvIII is present on the amplified or unamplified allele
and whether additional mutations are detectable.Detection of EGFRvIII
utilizing NGS improves the precision of mutant detection to better serve
CART-EGFRvIII clinical trial to ensure the target is present. The NGS
assay provides the EGFRvIII/wild-type ratio, relative expression levels
for EGFR and EGFRvIII and evaluation of RNA degradation in a single
assay.Figure 1A. Baseline in normal samples. EGFRvIII ratio in 18 normal
brain and 11 adipose tissue samples, plotted without (top panel) and with
(bottom panel) a EGFRvIII positive sample.Figure 2. EGFRvIII ratio in 25
GBM samples. Cutoff for EGFRvIII positive is EGFRvIII ratio of 0.3 (30%).

