Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylome analysis identifies epigenetic silencing of FHIT as
a determining factor for radiosensitivity in oral cancer and its
implication in treatment and outcome prediction


Radioresistance is still an emerging problem for radiotherapy of oral
cancer. Aberrant epigenetic alterations play an important role in cancer
development, yet the role of such alterations in radioresistance of oral
cancer is not fully explored. Using Illumina 27K methylation BeadChip
microarray, we identified promoter hypermethylation of FHIT (fragile
histidine triad) in radioresistant OML1-R cells, established from
hypo-fractionated irradiation (5-Gy by 10 fractions) of parental OML1
radiosensitive oral cancer cells. Further analysis confirmed that
transcriptional repression of FHIT was due to promoter hypermethylation
and H3K27me3 as demonstrated by MBDcap-PCR, bisulfite pyrosequencing and
ChIP-PCR. These phenomenon were partially attributed to overexpression of
EZH2 and DNMT3a, 3b in OML1-R cells. In consistent with these
observations, treatment of 5-azaDC, EZH2 inhibitor (GSK343) or depletion
of EZH2 by lentiviral knockdown restored FHIT expression in OML1-R cells.
Interestingly, knockdown of EZH2 also reversed histone modifications
(increased of H3K4me3 and decreased of H3K27me3) and reduced promoter
methylation of FHIT thus suggesting that H3K27me3 linked to DNA
methylation in this loci. We also analyzed the expression of FHIT in
primary human oral keratinocyte (HOK) and four other oral cancer cell
lines (OCSL, SCC25, SAS, and SCC4). FHIT expression demonstrated a tight
inverse relationship with its promoter methylation. Ectopic expression of
FHIT restored radiosensitivity (single fraction, 10-Gy) in OML1-R cells
and oral cancer cells (SAS, SCC25) showing epigenetic silencing of FHIT.
These phenomenon may be due to restoration of Chk2 phosphorylation,
induction of apoptosis and G2/M check point. Reciprocal experiments also
showed that depletion of FHIT in OSCL cells, which highly express FHIT,
slightly enhanced radioresistance. Clinically, bisulfite pyrosequencing
and iummnohistochemistry revealed that promoter hypermethylation of FHIT
inversely correlated with its expression. Patients with higher FHIT
methylation (methylation>10%, n = 22) are associated with lower
locoregional control (PRadioresistance is still an emerging problem for
radiotherapy of oral cancer. Aberrant epigenetic alterations play an
important role in cancer development, yet the role of such alterations in
radioresistance of oral cancer is not fully explored. Using Illumina 27K
methylation BeadChip microarray, we identified promoter hypermethylation
of FHIT (fragile histidine triad) in radioresistant OML1-R cells,
established from hypo-fractionated irradiation (5-Gy by 10 fractions) of
parental OML1 radiosensitive oral cancer cells. Further analysis
confirmed that transcriptional repression of FHIT was due to promoter
hypermethylation and H3K27me3 as demonstrated by MBDcap-PCR, bisulfite
pyrosequencing and ChIP-PCR. These phenomenon were partially attributed
to overexpression of EZH2 and DNMT3a, 3b in OML1-R cells. In consistent
with these observations, treatment of 5-azaDC, EZH2 inhibitor (GSK343) or
depletion of EZH2 by lentiviral knockdown restored FHIT expression in
OML1-R cells. Interestingly, knockdown of EZH2 also reversed histone
modifications (increased of H3K4me3 and decreased of H3K27me3) and
reduced promoter methylation of FHIT thus suggesting that H3K27me3 linked
to DNA methylation in this loci. We also analyzed the expression of FHIT
in primary human oral keratinocyte (HOK) and four other oral cancer cell
lines (OCSL, SCC25, SAS, and SCC4). FHIT expression demonstrated a tight
inverse relationship with its promoter methylation. Ectopic expression of
FHIT restored radiosensitivity (single fraction, 10-Gy) in OML1-R cells
and oral cancer cells (SAS, SCC25) showing epigenetic silencing of FHIT.
These phenomenon may be due to restoration of Chk2 phosphorylation,
induction of apoptosis and G2/M check point. Reciprocal experiments also
showed that depletion of FHIT in OSCL cells, which highly express FHIT,
slightly enhanced radioresistance. Clinically, bisulfite pyrosequencing
and iummnohistochemistry revealed that promoter hypermethylation of FHIT
inversely correlated with its expression. Patients with higher FHIT
methylation (methylation>10%, n = 22) are associated with lower
locoregional control (P<0.05) and overall survival rate (PRadioresistance
is still an emerging problem for radiotherapy of oral cancer. Aberrant
epigenetic alterations play an important role in cancer development, yet
the role of such alterations in radioresistance of oral cancer is not
fully explored. Using Illumina 27K methylation BeadChip microarray, we
identified promoter hypermethylation of FHIT (fragile histidine triad) in
radioresistant OML1-R cells, established from hypo-fractionated
irradiation (5-Gy by 10 fractions) of parental OML1 radiosensitive oral
cancer cells. Further analysis confirmed that transcriptional repression
of FHIT was due to promoter hypermethylation and H3K27me3 as demonstrated
by MBDcap-PCR, bisulfite pyrosequencing and ChIP-PCR. These phenomenon
were partially attributed to overexpression of EZH2 and DNMT3a, 3b in
OML1-R cells. In consistent with these observations, treatment of
5-azaDC, EZH2 inhibitor (GSK343) or depletion of EZH2 by lentiviral
knockdown restored FHIT expression in OML1-R cells. Interestingly,
knockdown of EZH2 also reversed histone modifications (increased of
H3K4me3 and decreased of H3K27me3) and reduced promoter methylation of
FHIT thus suggesting that H3K27me3 linked to DNA methylation in this
loci. We also analyzed the expression of FHIT in primary human oral
keratinocyte (HOK) and four other oral cancer cell lines (OCSL, SCC25,
SAS, and SCC4). FHIT expression demonstrated a tight inverse relationship
with its promoter methylation. Ectopic expression of FHIT restored
radiosensitivity (single fraction, 10-Gy) in OML1-R cells and oral cancer
cells (SAS, SCC25) showing epigenetic silencing of FHIT. These phenomenon
may be due to restoration of Chk2 phosphorylation, induction of apoptosis
and G2/M check point. Reciprocal experiments also showed that depletion
of FHIT in OSCL cells, which highly express FHIT, slightly enhanced
radioresistance. Clinically, bisulfite pyrosequencing and
iummnohistochemistry revealed that promoter hypermethylation of FHIT
inversely correlated with its expression. Patients with higher FHIT
methylation (methylation>10%, n = 22) are associated with lower
locoregional control (P<0.05) and overall survival rate (P<0.05) than
patients with lower FHIT methylation (n = 18). For patients treated with
post-operative radiotherapy alone (n = 19), sub-group analysis also found
that patients with higher FHIT methylation tend to have a 2-fold lower
locoregional control rate (P = 0.0998). Further in vivo therapeutic
experiments confirmed that treatment of 5-azaDC significantly
resensitized radioresistant oral cancer cell xenograft tumors. These
results show that epigenetic silencing of FHIT contributes partially to
radioresistance and predicts clinical outcomes in irradiated oral cancer.
The radiosensitizing effect of epigenetic interventions warrants further
clinical investigation.

