Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel c-Myc transgenic model for human cancers


Androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) is a standard therapy for advanced and
metastatic prostate cancer (PCa). However, most PCa will relapse and
become the lethal castration-resistant PCa (CRPC). Chemotherapy such as
Docetaxel, only modestly extends patient survival. To overcome castration
resistance and chemoresistance, it is crucial to delineate the underlying
molecular mechanisms. c-Myc is the most significantly amplified oncogene
in human PCa, and its overexpression is very common in PCa as early as
PIN. The Hi-Myc model uses an enhanced probasin promoter to drive c-Myc
overexpression in prostate epithelia. Hi-Myc mice develop invasive
prostate carcinomas that share molecular features with human PCa.
However, since the probasin promoter activity is androgen-dependent,
Hi-Myc tumors lose c-Myc expression upon castration. Therefore, the tumor
regression represents the mixed effects of both an artificial direct
effect from loss of c-Myc oncogene expression and a potential real effect
from tumor cellular response to androgen-ablation that is relevant to
human PCa. Finally, Hi-Myc mice do not develop CRPC tumors. To study CRPC
and chemoresistance of CRPC, we have developed a novel transgenic model
to express the c-Myc oncogene in Any tissue in an inducible manner
(Ai-Myc model). After crossing with PB-Cre4 mice expressing Cre in
prostate epithelia, this model allows us to specifically turn on the
expression of c-Myc along with Luc2 (an enhanced luciferase for BLI
imaging) in prostate. In addition, once turned on, the expression of
c-Myc and Luc2 are no longer dependent on androgen. The PB-Cre4/Ai-Myc
mice developed early onset of mPIN, but with much delayed prostate tumor
progression. Only a fraction of mice developed significant prostate
tumors after one-year of age. Since c-Myc oncogene may induce p53 tumor
suppressor activation, and loss or mutation of p53 is a frequent event in
late-stage human PCa, we further crossed these mice with p53loxP/loxP
mice to generate the PB-Cre4/Ai-Myc/p53loxP/loxP model. Loss of p53
greatly enhanced prostate tumor progression; about 40% of mice developed
significant prostate tumors within 4-5 months when all mice have to be
sacrificed due to the unexpected growth of large tumors of the
epididymis, a rare cancer in human. These epididymis tumors are positive
for c-Myc and Luc2, confirming the previously reported off-target
activity of PB-Cre4 mice. The nature of these epididymis tumors remains
to be determined. We are exploring using several approaches, including
early castration together with implantation of androgen pellets, to
overcome this problem, which will allow us to concisely study the c-Myc
signaling pathway in castration response, castration and chemo-resistance
of prostate tumors. Finally, different tissue / organ-specific Cre
transgenic mouse line will allow our Ai-Myc model to be used to study
different types of human cancers and/or other diseases.

