Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pim kinases and Pim inhibitors in the regulation of prostate
cancer cell migration and invasion


INTRODUCTIONPIM kinases (Proviral Integration Site for Moloney Murine
Leukemia Virus) are well known oncoproteins which have been shown to
regulate cell survival, proliferation and motility. In addition, their
expression is often up-regulated in human hematopoietic malignancies and
solid tumors. Since PIM kinases promote cancerous behavior of cells, they
have become attractive targets for drug development. We have previously
identified a novel PIM-selective kinase inhibitor
1,10-dihydropyrrolo[2,3-a]carbazole-3-carbaldehyde (DHPCC-9). Here we
show the potential of DHPCC-9 to efficiently prevent PIM-dependent
functions both in cell-based assays and in mouse models. To elucidate
signaling mechanisms via which PIM kinases regulate cell motility, we
studied the involvement of the previously known PIM substrate NFATC1
(Nuclear Factor of Activated T Cells). Here we show that NFATC1 may play
a role as a downstream mediator of PIM1 signaling in promoting cancer
cell migration.METHODSPIM inactivation by DHPCC-9 or PIM silencing was
studied in wound healing and Boyden chamber assays in PC-3 prostate
cancer cells. The effects of stable PIM overexpression on PC-3 cell tumor
growth and metastasizing were studied in subcutanic and in orthotopic
mouse models. Mice bearing PC-3/PIM3 cell-derived orthotopic tumors were
treated daily by injecting 50 mg/kg of DHPCC-9. Three weeks later tumors
were measured, and all the substantial organs were collected for further
analysis. Phosphorylation of NFATC1 was studied by mass spectrometry and
in vitro kinase assays while its transcriptional activity was measured by
luciferase reporter assays. In addition, wound healing assays were
performed to test the effect of NFATC1 on PC-3 prostate cancer cell
migration.RESULTSProstate cancer cell migration and invasion were
efficiently decreased by either PIM inhibition by DHPCC-9 or silencing of
both PIM1 and PIM2 by RNA interference. Stable PIM1 or PIM3
overexpression promoted prostate tumor growth, while PIM inhibitor
DHPCC-9 treatment decreased tumor size. Stable PIM overexpression induced
PC-3 cells to metastasize into the prostate- draining lymph nodes and
lungs, and treatment with PIM inhibitor DHPCC-9 decreased the amount of
both types of metastases. Mutagenesis of all PIM1 phosphorylation target
sites results in decreased NFATC1 phosphorylation and transcriptional
activity, along with a reduced potential of NFATC1 to promote prostate
cancer cell migration.CONCLUSIONSHere we have shown that PIM kinases
promote and PIM inhibition reduces tumor growth and the formation of
metastases in vivo. These findings not only support the role of PIM
kinases in the regulation of cancer cell invasiveness, but also reveal
DHPCC-9 as a highly potential lead compound for developing selective
PIM-targeted cancer therapy. In addition, we have discovered NFATC1
transcription factor as the first PIM substrate involved in the
PIM-promoted cancer cell motility.

