Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a key region in the HER2 subdomain III required
for transformation capability


About 25% of breast carcinomas are characterized by over-expression
and/or amplification of the HER2 receptor, one of four members of the HER
family of receptor tyrosine kinases. The strong correlation between HER2
levels/activity with more aggressive breast cancer disease, poor
prognosis as well as resistance to chemo- and endocrine therapies made it
a preferred target for anti-cancer therapy. However, current treatment
strategies are only partially effective and the majority of breast cancer
patients who initially respond favorably rapidly develop resistance to
treatments for still not fully understood reasons. Thus, novel
strategies/agents are in need. Structural analyses revealed that
sub-domain III in the extracellular domain (ECD) of the HER family
members is responsible for dimerization. We hypothesized that disrupting
the dimerization loop in the HER2-ECD sub-domain III would ultimately
convert HER2 to a non-functional receptor with diminished transforming
capacity. To this end, we generated a series of HER2-ECD deletion mutants
located in sub-domain III and assessed their oncogenic potential compared
to the HER2-wild type (WT) after their expression in MCF10A cells.
Importantly, a small deletion (16 amino acids) of the HER2 extracellular
domain (named HER26) abolished its homo- and hetero-dimerization and
profoundly affected HER2-catalyzed activation of the HER network.
Moreover, this mutant was not able to transform MCF10 cells as it failed
to promote anchorage-independent growth and interfered with the
activation/Tyr phosphorylation of HER1, HER2 and HER3. Compared to
HER2-WT-expressing cells, the HER26 mutant proved to be even more
effective in inhibiting the oncogenic properties of the receptor than the
current drugs of choice such as Trastuzumab and Pertuzumab alone or in
combination. In addition, while expression of HER2-WT conferred
resistance of MCF10A cells to Paclitaxel, the HER26 variant failed to do
so. To determine the molecular mechanisms underlying this behavior, we
assessed the mutant and WT expressing cells lines morphologically and
biochemically and demonstrated that the HER26 is absent from the plasma
membrane (PM) in MCF10A cells. Interestingly, we found that the mutant
receptor displayed an intracellular trafficking defect and was trapped in
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Our results reveal that the HER2-ECD
bears an essential activating region that is indispensable for
HER2-mediated oncogenic transformation. Targeting and eliminating this
activating element in HER2 seems to provide a strong innovative approach
for developing a valuable novel anti-HER2 therapeutic drug that would
specifically benefit patients with HER2 positive tumors resistant to
current therapies.

