Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive factors of c-kit-positive cancer stem cells,
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and circulating tumor cells in distant
metastasis formation in non-small cell lung cancer


Cancer stem cells (CSC) are a rare subpopulation of undifferentiated
cells that are responsible for tumor initiation and tumor regeneration
after chemotherapy. Although a universal marker for CSCs has not been
identified, previous studies showed that c-kit (CD117) functioned as a
stem cell factor (SCF) receptor, and SCF-ckit signaling axis was
essential for self-renewal and proliferation of lung CSCs. During
tumorigenesis, subsets of tumor cells disseminate from primary tumors by
undergoing phenotypic changes that allow the cells to penetrate blood
vessels. These changes are accompanied by a process described as
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT endows epithelial cells with
enhanced invasive potential by the loss of their epithelial
characteristics and the acquisition of a mesenchymal phenotype. The aim
of this study is to correlate c-kit-positive CSCs and EMT-positive,
subpopulations of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) with clinicopathological
parameters to verify whether these biomarkers contribute to cancer
distant metastasis in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). A total of 31
patients with NSCLC were enrolled into this study and evaluated for CTC
levels at baseline. Peripheral blood samples (5 ml, anticoagulated with
EDTA) were collected, transferred to the CanPatrol CTC tube, and then
processed within 8 hours. The CanPatrol CTC enrichment technique was used
to isolate and characterize CTCs. The first step of this technique was to
isolate CTCs via a filter-based method; then, an quantifiable,
quadruple-colorimetric RNA in situ hybridization (ISH) method was used to
examine CTCs for expression of four epithelial (E) biomarkers
(cytokeratins (CKs)8,18 and 19; and epithelial cell adhesion molecule
(EpCAM)), two mesenchymal (M) biomarkers (vimentin and twist), c-kit and
CD45. Using this technique, CTCs were detected in 25(80.6%) of 31 blood
samples, and five categories of CTCs were defined using EMT biomarkers
ranging from exclusively epithelial (E) to intermediate (E > M, E = M, M
> E) and exclusively mesenchymal (M). Of the CTC-positive samples,
13(52%) samples contained c-kit-positive CTCs, and the percentage of
cells with c-kit expression was 27.8%, with 2.1%, 4.6%, 2.1%, 18.3% and
0.8% in exclusively E, E > M, E = M, M > E and exclusively M CTCs,
respectively. The expression of c-kit showed a high statistically
significant correlation with distant metastasis (P = 0.0001). Compared
with the non metastatic or regional metastatic carcinoma, mesenchymal
CTCs (including M > E and exclusively M) were predominant in patients
with distant metastatic carcinoma (P = 0.033). However, the sample size
of this study was small, further validation needed to be done with a
larger sample size. In summary, mesenchymal CTCs or/and c-kit may be
potential predictive factors for invasion and metastatic spread of NSCLC.

