Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential effects of metformin and phenformin vs. other complex
1 inhibitors in vitro and in vivo


Biguanides, such as metformin and phenformin, are currently under
investigation for their potential use as anti-neoplastic therapy. Recent
publications suggest that both metformin and phenformin exert effects
through inhibition of Complex 1 in the electron transport chain. We
investigated the effects of metformin and phenformin compared to
rotenone, in vitro, and known Complex 1 inhibitor BAY 872243, in vitro
and in vivo.As expected, rotenone and BAY 872243 showed strong inhibition
of Complex I in cell-based and enzymatic assays with IC50 values in the
nanomolar range. The high affinity binding to Complex I was also
reflected by induction of cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) with
EC50 values in the nanomolar range. In contrast, the biguanides neither
inhibited Complex I in cell-based and biochemical assays, nor led to an
induction of ROS at concentrations up to 300 M.In vivo exposure analysis
shows that at the maximal tolerated dose (100 mg/kg QD i.p for phenformin
and 350 mg/kg i.p QD for metformin), neither metformin nor phenformin had
plasma exposure levels over the IC50 for proliferation in vitro. Recent
reports have suggested that biguanides, via the inhibition of Complex 1
and subsequent reduction in oxygen consumption, can be used to
re-oxygenate tumor areas prior to radiation therapy. Pimonidazole
staining demonstrated that metformin and phenformin effectively
eliminated hypoxic regions in NCI-H460 xenografts in a time course
dependent manner that reflected the exposure. In contrast to the
biguanides, BAY 87-2243 effectively eliminated hypoxic regions up to 24
hours post compound administration. Finally, both phenformin and
metformin had minimal effects on inhibition of tumor growth, even in
LKB1-deleted xenografts which have been reported to be especially
sensitive to biguanides. In conclusion, our in vitro experiments on the
mode of action of biguanides raise questions as whether the in vivo
effects on hypoxic tumor regions are related to direct inhibition of
Complex I.

