Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PA2G4 predicts poor prognosis in neuroblastoma patients and
promotes neuroblastoma progression by enhancing MYCN protein stability


MYCN oncogene amplification is found in one third of primary
neuroblastoma at diagnosis, and correlates with poor prognosis. We
identified Proliferation-associated protein 2G4 (PA2G4) as a binding
partner for MYCN using co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry. The
long isoform of PA2G4 (p48) has a known oncogenic function, whereas the
short isoform (p42) acts as a tumour suppressor. However, the role of
PA2G4 in neuroblastoma and its link with MYCN is currently unknown.Using
a panel of 11 human neuroblastoma cell lines and 477 patient tumour
samples, we analysed the expression of PA2G4 by real-time PCR and Western
blotting. We found that high expression of PA2G4 was a strong independent
clinical predicator of poor survival and positively correlated with MYCN
expression. Analysis of pre-cancerous ganglia cells from TH-MYCN
neuroblastoma mouse model showed that PA2G4 mRNA was expressed 8-fold
higher in ganglia from TH-MYCN transgenic homozygote, compared to
wild-type mice.Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed MYCN binds to PA2G4
promoter to activate its transcription. Surprisingly, suppression of
PA2G4 in neuroblastoma cell lines markedly reduced MYCN protein level.
Cycloheximide-chase assay confirmed that PA2G4 increased MYCN protein
stability, thus creating a positive forward feedback loop which we showed
resulted from effects on pERK. Suppression of PA2G4 down-regulated pMDM2
and pAKT, leading to an increase in p53 expression. Furthermore, PA2G4
knockdown promoted retinoid induced neurite formation, reduced cell
migration and colony formation. Importantly, the expression of MYCN was
required for the effect of PA2G4 on colony formation. A small molecule
inhibitor of PA2G4, WS6, significantly decreased neuroblastoma cell
growth and PA2G4 and MYCN protein levels.PA2G4 is a novel MYCN-binding
protein which increases MYCN protein stability and acts as an oncogenic
co-factor in a forward feedback expression loop with MYCN, to drive MYCN
protein levels to high thresholds even in the presence of MYCN
amplification.

