Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methotrexate resistance in relation to treatment outcome in
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia


Methotrexate (MTX) is an essential component of contemporary ALL
treatment regimens. This antifolate eradicates leukemic cells by
disrupting de novo biosynthesis of nucleotides, leading to inhibition of
DNA replication and consequent cell death. Over the past decades,
MTX-containing chemotherapy has proven to be crucial in achieving
curation in ALL. However, drug resistance continues to be a major
obstacle to curative ALL treatment. A number of alterations in MTX
metabolism, resulting in impaired accumulation of this antifolate in
cancer cells, have been identified as determinants of MTX resistance.
However, it remains unclear which of these molecular mechanisms have
clinical relevance. Therefore, the current study aimed at determining the
relation between MTX resistance and long-term clinical outcome of
ALL.Towards this end, we collected the available clinical data of 235
childhood ALL patients, including clinical data with a follow-up time of
10 years. For these patients, samples obtained at the time of diagnosis
were also characterized with respect to MTX resistance. This included
determination of MTX polyglutamate levels in leukemic cells, mRNA
expression of enzymes involved in (anti)folate metabolism and transport
(i.e. FPGS, FPGH, DHFR, TS and RFC); MTX sensitivity was determined by
the thymidylate synthase inhibition assay (TSIA) and in vitro FPGS
activity assay was performed.High levels of long-chain MTX polyglutamates
was strongly associated with favorable long-term event-free survival
(EFS, p = 0.029) and overall survival (OS, p = 0.008) of ALL patients
(10-year EFS 81% and OS 91%, compared to EFS 58% and OS 64% in patients
with low levels of this active metabolite). Similar relations were
observed for the total accumulation of MTX polyglutamates and FPGS
activity, which were associated with overall survival (p = 0.018 and p =
0.039, respectively). In the multivariate Cox regression model, including
clinical variables, the level of long chain MTX polyglutamates showed a
trend towards an association with event-free survival (p = 0.073) but not
with overall survival (p = 0.465). In addition, we assessed the
association between MTX resistance-related variables and the treatment
outcome in patients with different cytogenetic alterations. High MTX
sensitivity was associated with hyperdiploid ALL (PMethotrexate (MTX) is
an essential component of contemporary ALL treatment regimens. This
antifolate eradicates leukemic cells by disrupting de novo biosynthesis
of nucleotides, leading to inhibition of DNA replication and consequent
cell death. Over the past decades, MTX-containing chemotherapy has proven
to be crucial in achieving curation in ALL. However, drug resistance
continues to be a major obstacle to curative ALL treatment. A number of
alterations in MTX metabolism, resulting in impaired accumulation of this
antifolate in cancer cells, have been identified as determinants of MTX
resistance. However, it remains unclear which of these molecular
mechanisms have clinical relevance. Therefore, the current study aimed at
determining the relation between MTX resistance and long-term clinical
outcome of ALL.Towards this end, we collected the available clinical data
of 235 childhood ALL patients, including clinical data with a follow-up
time of 10 years. For these patients, samples obtained at the time of
diagnosis were also characterized with respect to MTX resistance. This
included determination of MTX polyglutamate levels in leukemic cells,
mRNA expression of enzymes involved in (anti)folate metabolism and
transport (i.e. FPGS, FPGH, DHFR, TS and RFC); MTX sensitivity was
determined by the thymidylate synthase inhibition assay (TSIA) and in
vitro FPGS activity assay was performed.High levels of long-chain MTX
polyglutamates was strongly associated with favorable long-term
event-free survival (EFS, p = 0.029) and overall survival (OS, p = 0.008)
of ALL patients (10-year EFS 81% and OS 91%, compared to EFS 58% and OS
64% in patients with low levels of this active metabolite). Similar
relations were observed for the total accumulation of MTX polyglutamates
and FPGS activity, which were associated with overall survival (p = 0.018
and p = 0.039, respectively). In the multivariate Cox regression model,
including clinical variables, the level of long chain MTX polyglutamates
showed a trend towards an association with event-free survival (p =
0.073) but not with overall survival (p = 0.465). In addition, we
assessed the association between MTX resistance-related variables and the
treatment outcome in patients with different cytogenetic alterations.
High MTX sensitivity was associated with hyperdiploid ALL (P<0.001),
which was also associated with increased MTX accumulation (p = 0.03) and
elevated RFC expression (p = 0.049). Moreover, cells characterized by
TEL-AML1 fusion displayed elevated MTX resistance (p = 0.023) compared to
samples devoid of this aberration, while MLL-rearrangements were
associated with low accumulation of cellular MTX polyglutamates (p =
0.012). These findings emphasize the central role which MTX lays in ALL
treatment thereby highlighting the necessity for further exploration of
the molecular mechanisms underlying MTX resistance in ALL
patients.Financial support by Kika (Children cancer-free)

