Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromatin remodelers are frequently disrupted by epigenetic and
genetic alterations at an early stage of carcinogenesis


Chromatin remodeling factors (chromatin remodelers), such as SWI/SNF and
ISWI complexes, regulate gene transcription by modulating chromatin
accessibility. Genes encoding subunits of chromatin remodelers are
frequently disrupted by loss of function mutations in various types of
cancers. In contrast, inactivation of chromatin remodelers by epigenetic
alterations, such as aberrant DNA methylation, is unknown. In this study,
we aimed to clarify 1) whether or not chromatin remodelers are
inactivated by aberrant DNA methylation, and 2) the timing of this
occurrence.DNA methylation statuses of 16 genes encoding chromatin
remodelers with promoter CpG islands were analyzed in non-cancerous
tissues of male gastric cancer patients using an Infinium
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip array. Among the 16 genes, two genes, ACTL6B
and SMARCA1, were frequently methylated in non-cancerous gastric tissues.
Among these genes, SMARCA1 was expressed at high levels in normal gastric
tissues, but ACTL6B was not. In four of 50 primary gastric cancers,
SMARCA1 was aberrantly methylated. It was re-expressed after treatment
with a DNA demethylating agent, 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC), in
gastric cancer cell lines, AGS and GC2. Somatic mutations of 18 genes
encoding chromatin remodelers were analyzed using a next-generation
personal sequencer in the 50 primary gastric cancers. Nine genes, ARID1A,
ARID1B, ARID2, SMARCA1, SMARCA2, SMARCA4, SMARCB1, PBRM1, and PHF10, were
mutated in one or more of the 50 gastric cancers. The mutant allele
frequency was close to the cancer cell content in cancer samples with a
specific mutation of a chromatin remodeler. Depletion of a chromatin
remodeler, SMARCA1 or SMARCA2, by shRNAs in cancer cell lines promoted
their growth.These results showed that epigenetic and genetic alterations
of chromatin remodelers are induced at an early stage of carcinogenesis
(Takeshima et al., Cancer Letters, in press).

