Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of CD4 T cells in murine model of NASH-promoted HCC


Aim: Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), a common condition in obese
patients, is an important risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
However, only little information exists about the immunological
mechanisms of how NASH promotes HCC. This study was designed to better
understand the role of adaptive immunity during the process of
NASH-promoted hepatocarcinogenesis.Experimental procedure: Methionine
choline deficient (MCD) diet is widely used to induce NASH. In this study
we fed Lap-tTA-myc mice, which develop HCC, with MCD diet.
Choline-deficient and amino acid-defined (CDAA) diet and high fat (HF)
diet was also used to induce NASH in B6 mice. GK1.5 antibody was used to
deplete CD4 T cells. Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry was performed
to identify free fatty acids. Difference immune cell subsets were
identified by flow cytometry. Cell death was measured by 7AAD/Annexin V
staining.Results: MCD diet accelerated tumor development in MYC-on mice.
A robust selective decrease of hepatic CD4 but not CD8 T cells was
observed in NASH mice, which was exacerbated by MYC transgene expression.
The selective decrease of hepatic CD4 T cells was also observed in B6
mice treated with CDAA or HF diet suggesting it's a general phenomena in
NASH. As expected higher level of cell death was detected in hepatic CD4
T cells after NASH. Phenotypic analysis demonstrated that these CD4 T
cells had a CD44highCD62Llow effector memory phenotype and produced more
IFN. Selective CD4 T cell depletion further accelerated HCC development
suggesting an important role of these cells for tumor development. Next,
we studied the cause of CD4 T cell death. In co-culture experiments we
demonstrated that lipid-laden hepatocytes from mice on MCD diet induced
selective CD4 but not CD8 T cells death through a contact-independent
mechanism. FFAs were found from hepatocyte culture medium to be
responsible for T cell cytotoxicity, and linoleic acid recapitulates the
selective toxicity to CD4 T cells. Blocking ROS abolished linoleic
acid-induced CD4 T cell death. In vivo study showed that N-acetyl
cysteine reversed the NASH-induced hepatic CD4 T cell decrease and
delayed NASH-promoted tumor development.Conclusion: Our results suggest
the critical role of CD4 T cells in the disease progression of NASH to
HCC, and provide a new link between lipid metabolism dysfunction with
impaired anti-tumor surveillance.

