Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the splicing of the EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript
reverses EWS-FLI1 driven oncogenic expression in Ewing sarcoma


Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a highly aggressive cancer of the bone and soft
tissue. In 85% of ES tumors the primary oncogenic event is a
t(11:22)(q24:q12) translocation that generates a fusion of the 5 end of
EWSR1 and the 3 end of FLI1 referred to as EWS-FLI1. The exact genomic
breakpoints within the EWSR1 and FLI1 genes vary, but typically occur
within introns and require the splicing machinery to generate an in-frame
EWS-FLI1 transcript. The most common EWS-FLI1 transcripts fuse either
exon 7 of EWSR1 to exon 6 of FLI1 (a type I or a 7/6 fusion), or fuse
exon 7 of EWSR1 to exon 5 of FLI1 (a type II or 7/5 fusion). In an
estimated 40% of EWS-FLI1 driven tumors the generation of an in-frame
EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript requires alternative splicing. In particular,
translocations that retain exon 8 of EWSR1 generate an out-of-frame
transcript unless this exon is removed. Using an assay of EWS-FLI1
activity and genome-wide siRNA screening we have identified RNA
processing as a therapeutic vulnerability in ES.Parallel genome-wide
siRNA-mediated RNAi screens were conducted in ES TC32 cell lines
expressing a luciferase (luc) reporter protein driven by either the
promoter of the EWS-FLI1 target gene NR0B1 (TC32-NR0B1-luc) or the CMV
promoter (TC32-CMV-luc). The top gene ontology terms associated with the
28 priority candidate genes that when silenced induced a differential
decrease in the TC32-NR0B1-luc signal versus the TC32-CMV-luc signal were
mRNA splicing (p-value = 1.42E-08) and mRNA processing (p-value =
2.32E-07). To investigate the mechanistic basis for the identification of
specific RNA processing proteins as required for the activity of EWS-FLI1
we focused on two lead candidate genes, the heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein H1, HNRNPH1, and the core splicing factor, SF3B1. Using
PCR analysis we determined that HNRNPH1 is required for the splicing of
EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts expressed in ES cells in which the chromosome
22 breakpoint retains EWSR1 exon 8, specifically in TC32 and SKNMC ES
cells. We also show ES cell lines harboring 7/ 6 (TC32, SKNMC, and TC71)
or 7/ 5 (RD-ES) EWS-FLI1 fusions are all sensitive to the
loss-of-function of SF3B1. Quantitative RT-PCR, immunoblot, and whole
transcriptome analysis show that disrupted splicing of the EWS-FLI1
transcript alters its expression and reverses the expression of a
significant proportion of genes that are targets of EWS-FLI1. These
observations were confirmed in four ES cell lines using the splicing
inhibitor Pladienolide B.Our results provide the basis for a novel
strategy to target fusion oncogenes by interfering with RNA processing.
This study has implications for the treatment of ES through inhibition of
proteins required for expression of the EWS-FLI1 transcript and
identifies a candidate lead compound for further clinical development.
Our findings may also open up strategies for treatment of other cancers
driven by fusion oncogenes.

