Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An in silico platform for characterizing ADC bystander effects


IntroductionThe bystander effect is the hypothesized process by which
neighboring cancer cells are killed when free drug is released into the
tumor environment by dying cells. The extent to which an antibody drug
conjugate (ADC) elicits the bystander effect can have significant impact
on the magnitude and dynamics of efficacy. Understanding the bystander
effect though experimental methods (e.g. video-microscopy) are
challenging; however, when supplemented with in silico modeling,
mechanistic details can be elucidated. The purpose of this work is to
develop a spatial-temporal in silico platform describing tumor cell
progression in the presence of an ADC in order to quantify the bystander
effect.MethodsThe model employs spatial-stochastic methods to simulate
the time evolution of cell death resulting from ADCs and freely diffusing
payload based on following parameters: drug to antibody ratio (DAR),
linker stability, antigen concentration, ADC cell membrane permeability,
ADC-antigen internalization, payload permeability, and payload potency.
Specifically, a 2-D rectangular grid of tumor cells, ADCs, and payload
are numerically implemented through binary pixel occupation of the grid.
Governing rules are then assigned for: mobility for freely diffusing ADCs
and payload, reaction rate for ADC binding to antigen-expressing cells,
rate of cell death dependent on payload concentration, and
internalization rate of payload into non-antigen expressing cells. The
simulation is run until stopping criteria are met, e.g. all cells are
killed. Baseline parameters can be optimized by fitting the model to in
vitro experimental video-microscopy data.ResultsExperimental conditions
were simulated with the model to characterize the influence of the
aforementioned ADC and biological parameters on the bystander
effect.ConclusionsBy incorporating the spatial aspect of ADC mechanics,
spatially dependent metrics can be formulated to quantify the bystander
effect. The model allows for wide adjustability of the ADC design
parameters as well as relevant biological parameters. Thus, by
understanding the relative parameter sensitivities, the model can explore
design optimization of ADCs that maximize the bystander effect. Through
such optimization, the magnitude and dynamics of drug exposure at the
site of action can be controlled to maximize efficacy and improve the
therapeutic window.

