Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MPT0B292 enhances acetylation of -tubulin through up-regulation of
acetyltransferase gene, MEC-17 and exhibits potent anti-tumor,
anti-angiogenesis and anti-metastatic effects in vitro and in vivo


In recent years, epigenetic therapeutics is a new generation of
chemotherapeutics for cancer. Microtubule-targeted agents constitute a
type of anticancer drugs largely used in the clinics. Cells generate
distinct microtubule subtypes through expression of different iso-types
and through post-translational modifications, including acetylation,
detyrosination, polyglutamination and polyglycylation. The acetylation of
-tubulin K-40 is controlled by the balance between acetyltransferase and
de-acetylase expression. MEC-17, one of -tubulin acetyltransferases,
plays an important role in the regulation of acetylation of -tubulin.
Through screening of compounds that is able to selectively acetylate
-tubulin, MPT0B292 was identified.Our results show that MPT0B292
up-regulate MEC-17 gene and protein expression, which subsequently lead
to enhancing -tubulin acetylation. MPT0B292 exhibits potent
anti-proliferative activities toward various human cancer cells with IC50
ranged from 75 to 200 nM. In addition, HUVEC and WI-38 cells were much
less susceptibility to the anti-proliferative effect of MPT0B292 with
IC50 4 and12 M, respectively. In FACS analysis of cell cycle, MPT0B292
induces G2/M phase arrest with concomitantly losses from G0/G1 and S
phases in a concentration-dependent manner. Furthermore, MPT0B292 induces
ROS generation in a concentration-dependent manner by FACS analysis,
which leads to damaging mitochondria and triggering cell apoptosis. The
effects MPT0B292-induced ROS and cell apoptosis could be significantly
rescued by pretreatment with N-acetylcysteine, Diphenyleneiodonium (DPI)
and rotenone. Moreover, the amount of ROS induced by MPT0B292 was
significantly reduced by knockdown of MEC-17 with siRNA and resulted in
rescuing cell viability. In addition, MPT0B292 inhibits cell motility by
an increase in cellular focal adhesion area. Moreover, MPT0B292 shows
potent activity against the growth of xenograft tumor of lung cancer
cell, A549, without significantly compromising the mice body weight.
MPT0B292 also decreases lung metastasis in orthotopical breast cancer
model. These data indicate MPT0B292 is a promising anticancer compound
with unique action of mechanism that has potential for future development.

