Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The collagen-dense tumor microenvironment increases neutrophil
recruitment in mouse mammary carcinoma


The breast tumor microenvironment (TME) is a diverse area where complex
interactions between the extra-cellular matrix (ECM) and multiple cell
types (tumor epithelial, endothelial, and inflammatory cells,
fibroblasts, and adipocytes) occur resulting in tumor promotion, invasion
and metastasis. Changes in breast tissue density have been correlated
with a 4-6-fold increased risk for developing breast cancer, and are
associated with increased stromal deposition of the ECM protein, collagen
I. In a transgenic mouse model of increased collagen (Col1A1Tm1Jae),
there is a 3-fold increase in MMTV-PyMT tumor formation and lung
metastases compared to control mice. Of the non-malignant cells in the
TME, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and tumor-associated neutrophils
(TANs) have been shown by several investigators to alter the TME and ECM,
enhance tumor cell migration and invasion, stimulate angiogenesis, and
suppress antitumor immunity. The direct interaction of both increased
collagen and immune (myeloid) cell recruitment leading to increased
cancer progression and metastasis has not been characterized. We
hypothesized that a collagen-dense tumor microenvironment recruits an
abnormal population of myeloid cells, which promotes tumor progression
and metastasis. Flow cytometry analysis of cells from collagen-dense
mouse tumors showed an increase in Ly6G+ TAN recruitment compared to wild
type tumors, while TAM recruitment did not seem to be affected. The
increased Ly6G+ neutrophil recruitment is a global immune response also
observed in the spleens and circulating blood. Using a cytokine/chemokine
ELISA plate array, we found that the collagen-dense TME cytokine cross
talk supports neutrophil and monocyte recruitment and maturation. In
addition, many classic inflammatory signals that support lymphocyte
recruitment and activation, B and T-cell proliferation, and natural
killer cell and monocyte activation are downregulated in the
collagen-dense TME. Further experiments will determine the time point
where neutrophil recruitment is critical for tumor progression.
Experiments are underway to study the possible suppression of natural
killer cell activity in the collagen-dense TME.This work is being
supported by NIH grants (NIH-CA-114462 and NIH-U54-CA163131) to P.J.K.
and NSF Graduate Research Fellowship (2011129283) to M.G.G.M.

