Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin has an inhibitory effect on cell proliferation but does
not induce death in colorectal cancer


Metformin, a widely used and well-tolerated antidiabetic drug, may reduce
cancer risk and improve prognosis of certain malignancies. In vitro and
in vivo studies on several cancer models have evaluated the potential
antitumorigenic effects of metformin and many clinical trials are looking
to its use for suppressing tumor growth. However, the mechanism for its
anti-cancer effect remains uncertain and needs to be clarified. Here we
investigated the anti-cancer activity of metformin on colorectal cancer
growth by treating three colorectal cancer cell lines, HT29, HCT116,
HCT116p53-/-, with the drug. We found that, at a dose of 5mM, metformin
reduced cell proliferation in all the colorectal cancer cells analyzed,
as shown by BrdU incorporation assays. Metformin induced cell cycle
arrest in G0/G1 phase that was accompanied by a strong decrease of cyclin
D1, c-Myc expression, and inhibition of pRB phosphorylation. The
antiproliferative activity of the drug resulted mediated by suppression
of mTOR and IGF-1/AKT pathways. In particular, we observed inactivation
of mTOR and of its downstream targets S6 and 4EBP1, both in an AMPK
dependent and independent way, and also downregulation of the activity of
IGF1R. We analysed the biological mechanisms by which metformin inhibited
cell proliferation by evaluating its ability to induce apoptosis,
autophagy or senescence, as observed in other cancer cell lines.
Unexpectedly, we found that metformin did not stimulate any of these
mechanisms in colorectal cancer cells. In support of these results, a
colony formation assay showed that metformin did not arrest growth of
cells, but only slowed down cell ability of forming colonies. Our
findings highlight that metformin inhibits the proliferation of
colorectal cancer cell lines as a consequence of promoting cell cycle
arrest in the G0/G1 phase, but does not induce cell death. Further
investigations are needed to better elucidate the mechanisms altered by
the drug in colorectal cancer and caution should be used when treating
cancer patients with metformin.

