Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CtBP1 is the molecular link that associates breast cancer and
metabolic syndrome


Breast cancer is still one of the most important public health problems
in the entire world. Obesity and metabolic syndrome (MS) increases the
incidence and aggressiveness of breast cancer. C-Terminal Binding Protein
(CtBP1) is a transcriptional corepressor of tumor suppressor genes and is
considered a molecular sensor of cell metabolic state due to is activated
in high energy conditions (high NADH). In this work we studied the
effects of the activation of CtBP1 pathway by metabolic syndrome on
breast tumor development and progression. We generated a murine model of
MS by chronic high fat diet (HFD) administration. By histological and
whole mount methods, we found that breast tissue of animals receiving HFD
presented higher levels of immature adipose tissue and an increased
glandular area with more generation of lateral branches and terminal end
buds of mammary ducts. Breast tissue of HFD animals also showed higher
expression of the proliferation markers (cyclin D1) and epithelial
markers (E-cadherin). Interestingly, HFD induced CtBP1 expression in the
mammary ducts. Furthermore, the number and size of mamospheres generated
with LM38-LP breast cancer cells were significantly increased when cells
were incubated with serum from HFD fed mice compared to the serum of
animals under control diet (CD). In addition, to investigate CtBP1 role
in tumor progression we performed xenografts in nude mice fed with CD or
HFD by subcutaneous injecton of breast tumor cells MDA MB 231 with
depleted CtBP1 expression (shRNA CtBP1) or control cells (shRNA
scramble). We found that CtBP1 depletion dramatically decreased tumor
growth and KI67 expression relative to control tumors. Furthermore,
xenografts developed in HFD fed mice were less differentiated compared to
CD. Finally, CtBP1 diminished expression tumors showed lower mesenchymal
markers expression, progenitor cells markers and markers involved in
mammary development. Our studies demonstrated for the first time that
gene transcription regulation by CtBP1 provides an important molecular
link among MS, CtBP1 function and tumor growth. Hence, these results
suggest an association to understand metabolism and breast cancer.

