Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: From profiling to function: A role for microRNA miR-888 in
promoting prostate cancer progression


Prostate cancer remains the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths
among men in the United States despite the widespread use of prostate
specific antigen (PSA) as a diagnostic marker for prostate cancer and as
a predictor of treatment outcome. MicroRNAs (MiRNAs) belong to a growing
class of small non-coding RNAs that are often abnormally expressed in
fluid and tissue specimens from prostate cancer patients compared to
non-cancer individuals. These miRNAs are hypothesized to play a direct
role in promoting disease progression and metastasis in the prostate and
are intensely studied for both their diagnostic and therapeutic potential
for human cancer. Our laboratory profiled candidate prostate-cancer
associated miRNAs in an innovative prostatic fluid biomarker source
called expressed prostatic secretions in urine (EPS urine) to determine
their utility as discriminating biomarkers for advanced forms of prostate
cancer. 10 out of 50 miRNA tested showed statistically significant
differences in expression between cancer and non-cancer patient groups
within the supernatant but not pellet fractions of whole EPS urine. We
are investigating if differential miRNA expression in EPS supernatant is
due to exosomal populations and how miRNA-loaded exosomes modulate
prostate tumorigenesis in mice. Our profiling studies identified miR-888
as a novel factor that correlates with advanced prostate cancer in human
prostate cancer cell lines, EPS urine, and primary tumors. Functional
assays revealed that miR-888 promotes proliferation, migration, and
colony formation of hormone-refractory and androgen-sensitive human
prostate cancer cells. Our working model is that miR-888 overexpression
in the diseased prostate suppresses SMAD4, RBL1, and TIMP2 targets
leading to tumor progression and metastasis. Human miR-888 belongs to a
genomic cluster of seven miRNAs on human chromosome Xq27.3. We are
currently testing how this miR-888 cluster interacts within a growing
network of coding and non-coding genes to regulate prostate tumor
progression. This research will provide a better understanding how
prostate tumor cells progress to a more metastatic, aggressive state and
facilitate the development of more effective diagnostic and therapeutic
strategies for this prevalent and deadly disease.

