Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic analysis of the effect of E6 star expression on cellular
pathways in HPV positive SiHa and HPV negative C33A cervical carcinoma
cells


High-risk types of the human papillomavirus (HR-HPV) are the causative
agents of nearly all cases of cervical cancer, as well as a significant
number of head, neck, penile, vulvar and anal cancers. Like many other
viruses with small genomes, HPV (8 kb) utilizes numerous mechanisms to
increase the capacity of its genome to encode the proteins necessary for
successful completion of its infectious life cycle, including alternative
splicing. Studies over the past few decades have focused intensively on
the activities and roles of E6 proteins from HR-HPVs during the process
of cellular transformation, clearly implicating E6 as a major
transforming agent. In contrast, the role of the smaller splice isoform,
E6*, in the carcinogenic process has not yet been established. In a
recent study, we demonstrated that the over-expression of E6* reduces
tumor growth by SiHa (HPV16 positive) and C33A (no HPV) cells in nude
mice, suggesting that therapies emulating the actions of E6* may be of
medical benefit. Furthermore, tumor growth inhibition by E6* was greater
in tumors derived from HPV positive cells than in tumors derived from HPV
negative cells. This difference implies that E6* interferes with the
oncogenic activity of the full-length protein as well as by acting
through HPV-independent mechanisms. The goal of this study is to
determine the pathways affected by E6* that may lead to the observed
reduction in tumor formation in xenograft models. To elucidate how E6*
may affect the levels of cellular proteins and thereby orchestrate
pathway regulation, in both E6 positive and negative environments, SiHa
pFlag, SiHa pE6*, C33A pFlag, and C33A pE6* cells were created and their
differential protein expression examined using mass spectrometry and
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software. Lysates of these cells were
reduced, alkylated, trypsinized, and TMT labeled, and the labeled
peptides were analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.
Proteins were quantified by TMT tags and identified by comparison against
the human library using Proteome Discoverer Software. 322 proteins were
detected as differentially expressed using a 1.3 fold-change cut-off
value. Further analysis by IPA revealed that E6* induced changes in
apoptosis and death receptor signaling pathways in both HPV- and HPV
positive cells, while other pathways, such as those involving
mitochondrial dysfunction and TNFR1 signaling, were more profoundly
affected in HPV negative cells. Our study provides several promising
leads for future experiments and analyses, specifically in the context of
human cancers, and carries with it the exciting possibility of
replicating the anti-oncogenic activity of E6* in such a way as to
provide therapeutic benefit. Future work will involve more detailed
examination of our preliminary results and comparing these observations
with those obtained from actual tumors derived from these cells.

