Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering nanoparticles of polymalic acid for controlled
delivery of anticancer drugs


Objective:In this work we report new esters obtained by partial or total
esterification of Poly(,L-malic acid) of microbial origin (PMLA) with
ethanol or 1-butanol, and the nanoparticles made from them, are explored
as drug delivery systems for the anticancer drugs temozolomide (TMZ) and
doxorubicin (DOX).Experimental procedures:Esterification of PMLA with
either ethanol or 1-butanol was performed with the polyacid dissolved in
the corresponding alcohol and using controlled amounts of DCC for
activation of the carboxylic side group. The conversion degree and purity
was ascertained by 1H NMR. Two methods were employed for the formation of
nanoparticles depending on the esterification degree of the polymer. For
100% modified polymers, the emulsion-solvent evaporation method and the
precipitation-dialysis for partially esterified PMLA. Particle morphology
was monitored by SEM and their sizes were determined by DLS. Primary
glioma cell line U87MG and invasive breast carcinoma cell line MDA-MB468
(ATCC, USA) were exposed to drug loaded and unloaded nanoparticles and
cell viability and uptake was measured using the MTT method and
fluorescent microscopy respectively.Results: Ethyl and butyl PMLA esters
with esterification degrees of approximately 50% and fully esterified
were obtained. Reaction yields were around 50-70% with higher values
attained in the esterification with ethanol. Molecular weights were: 33
KDa for coPMLA-Et50H50; 36 KDa for PMLA-Et100; 34 kDa for coPMLA-Bu50H50
and 53kDa for PMLA-Bu100. Nanoparticles diameters oscillated from 100 to
350 nm, depending on the polymer and on the methodology used for particle
formation. DOX and TMZ can be encapsulated in these nanoparticles with
efficiencies ranging 20 to 40% w/w. Drug-unloaded nanoparticles were not
cytotoxic for the tested cell lines, whereas drug loaded nanoparticles
were effective showing significant lower EC50 values when compared with
free drug. The most remarkable case was observed for MDA-MB468 cell line
treated with free TMZ and TMZ-NPs, in which free TMZ was shown to be
ineffective at all concentrations while TMZ loaded nanoparticles reached
EC50 at concentrations between 1-210-4 M. Two reasons can be invoked to
explain such differences. A more sustained presence of encapsulated TMZ
in the media and/or the nanoparticle internalization by cells that allows
TMZ to be released directly in the cytosol. The most efficient polymer
nanoparticles were coPMLA-Et50H50 which showed better internalization of
DOX by cells than the free drug.Conclusions: Esterification of microbial
poly(malic acid) with ethanol or 1-butanol rendered easily hydrolysable
polyesters and copolyesters, suitable for building nanoparticles useful
for anticancer drug encapsulation and controlled delivery.

