Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Andrographolide modulates cell cycle, cell migration and tumor
growth in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed non-cutaneous cancer and
is the second leading cause of cancer death in American men.
Chemopreventive strategies have been tested to prevent the development of
different types of cancer including prostate cancer. Andrographolide, a
labdane diterpenoid that is the main bioactive component of the medicinal
plant Andrographis paniculata, has been reported to have a wide range of
biological activities including anticarcinogenic properties. In this
study we aim to determine the role of Andrographolide in the progression
of prostate cancer using in vitro and in vivo models. Andrographolide
significantly inhibited PC3 cell growth at a concentration of 10M after
24 h of treatment (P Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed
non-cutaneous cancer and is the second leading cause of cancer death in
American men. Chemopreventive strategies have been tested to prevent the
development of different types of cancer including prostate cancer.
Andrographolide, a labdane diterpenoid that is the main bioactive
component of the medicinal plant Andrographis paniculata, has been
reported to have a wide range of biological activities including
anticarcinogenic properties. In this study we aim to determine the role
of Andrographolide in the progression of prostate cancer using in vitro
and in vivo models. Andrographolide significantly inhibited PC3 cell
growth at a concentration of 10M after 24 h of treatment (P < 0.001), and
inhibited LNCaP cell growth at a concentration of 15 M after 24 h of
treatment (P Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed
non-cutaneous cancer and is the second leading cause of cancer death in
American men. Chemopreventive strategies have been tested to prevent the
development of different types of cancer including prostate cancer.
Andrographolide, a labdane diterpenoid that is the main bioactive
component of the medicinal plant Andrographis paniculata, has been
reported to have a wide range of biological activities including
anticarcinogenic properties. In this study we aim to determine the role
of Andrographolide in the progression of prostate cancer using in vitro
and in vivo models. Andrographolide significantly inhibited PC3 cell
growth at a concentration of 10M after 24 h of treatment (P < 0.001), and
inhibited LNCaP cell growth at a concentration of 15 M after 24 h of
treatment (P < 0.001). Wound healing assays and boyden chamber
experiments showed that PC3 prostate cancer cells treated with
Andrographolide (25uM) significantly reduced (PProstate cancer is the
most frequently diagnosed non-cutaneous cancer and is the second leading
cause of cancer death in American men. Chemopreventive strategies have
been tested to prevent the development of different types of cancer
including prostate cancer. Andrographolide, a labdane diterpenoid that is
the main bioactive component of the medicinal plant Andrographis
paniculata, has been reported to have a wide range of biological
activities including anticarcinogenic properties. In this study we aim to
determine the role of Andrographolide in the progression of prostate
cancer using in vitro and in vivo models. Andrographolide significantly
inhibited PC3 cell growth at a concentration of 10M after 24 h of
treatment (P < 0.001), and inhibited LNCaP cell growth at a concentration
of 15 M after 24 h of treatment (P < 0.001). Wound healing assays and
boyden chamber experiments showed that PC3 prostate cancer cells treated
with Andrographolide (25uM) significantly reduced (P<0.001) their
migration and invasion. Flow cytometry assays for Annexin V, cell cycle
and cell count and viability were performed. Andrographolide (25uM)
significantly increased apoptosis, decreased cell population in G1 phase,
and reduced count and viability of PC3 cells treated for 48 hours.
Immunofluorescence analysis showed that MMP-11 expression levels were
significantly decreased and ZO-1 expression was significantly increased
in PC3 cells treated with Andrographolide (25uM). Tumor progression was
evaluated using a xenograft model in which the anterior prostate lobes of
SCID mice were injected with 250,000 22RV1 cells or 500,000 PC3 cells.
Andrographolide was administered bi-weekly at concentrations of 10uM and
25uM intraperitoneal injections during 4 weeks (22RV1) or 8 weeks (PC3).
Tumor tissue was collected for gross examination, immunohistochemical
analysis and gene expression analysis. In vivo results demonstrated that
Andrographolide treatment significantly decreased tumor volume when
compared with tumors generated in mice treated with vehicle. Our results
suggest that the anti-migration and anti-invasion effects of
andrographolide may be associated with alterations in the expression of
ZO-1 and MMP-11.

