Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SChLAP1 mediated epigenetic modifications in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is the leading cancer diagnosis in men, but only a subset
of patients die from the disease. Understanding the molecular basis of
aggressive prostate cancer remains elusive and few genomic biomarkers
exist to guide clinical management. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have
emerged as a class of regulatory genes that play a role in several
biological and disease processes, including cancer.Recently, we
identified SChLAP1, a novel, prognostic lncRNA expressed in a subset of
prostate tumors. Mechanistically, SChLAP1 interacts with and inhibits
genome-wide binding of the SWI/SNF nucleosome-remodeling complex.
Additionally, SWI/SNF plays a key role in the epigenetic control of gene
expression and has been shown to have tumor suppressive ability. Given
the emerging role of SChLAP1 in the pathogenesis of aggressive prostate
cancer and its interaction with the tumor suppressive SWI/SNF complex,
exploring the detailed mechanism of action of SChLAP1 warranted further
investigation.To identify the regions of SChLAP1 necessary for its
function, we created 250 base pair deletion constructs of SChLAP1 and
measured RNA-enrichment following SWI/SNF pull-down as well as cell
invasion using a Boyden chamber matrigel assay. To investigate whether
SChLAP1 preferentially interacts with specific components of the SWI/SNF
complex, we performed RNA immunoprecipitation assays using antibodies
targeting various enzymatic subunits of SWI/SNF. SChLAP1 enrichment was
measured by qPCR.Our results indicate that there is a 250bp region of
SChLAP1 that mediates its interaction with SWI/SNF and promotes an
invasive phenotype. Furthermore, SChLAP1 shows binding specificity for
certain SWI/SNF subunits. Future studies to elucidate the details of this
interaction will provide a more comprehensive understanding of the
biological and therapeutic consequences of SChLAP1 in prostate cancer
progression.

