Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomic analysis of hepatoblastoma identifies distinct
molecular and prognostic subgroups


Hepatoblastoma (HB), the most common primary liver cancer in children, is
a clinically heterogeneous embryonal malignancy. Previous studies of HB
have revealed a paucity of genetic alterations in these tumors, other
than mutations activating the WNT signaling pathway, and have not
provided an adequate biological explanation for the diverse clinical
outcomes of children with HB. To identify critical genes and pathways in
the pathogenesis of HB and provide insight into the biologic basis and
clinical heterogeneity of these tumors, we performed an integrated
genomic analysis of a large cohort of clinically-annotated tumor-normal
pairs utilizing whole exome sequencing (n = 35), mRNA and miRNA
expression arrays (n = 51; n = 58), and high-resolution copy number
arrays (n = 47). Somatic mutations/deletions of CTNNB1 or rare germline
mutations of APC were identified in >90% of cases, confirming the central
role of the WNT pathway in HB pathogenesis. The only other gene targeted
by recurrent mutations in our cohort was the transcription factor NFE2L2
(NRF2), which was found to harbor hotspot mutations at a similar
frequency (5-10%) to that reported for hepatocellular carcinoma.
Expression profiling revealed near-universal WNT-pathway activation: 7 of
the 20 most highly expressed genes in HB were WNT-pathway related genes,
and the WNT-pathway marker DKK1 was expressed hundreds of standard
deviations above its levels in normal liver.Unsupervised hierarchical
clustering identified three distinct molecular HB clusters that were
characterized by differential activation of hepatic progenitor cell and
metabolic pathways. Analysis of the expression and/or inferred-activity
of transcription factors and highly expressed genes identified prognostic
biomarkers, including the significantly predictive regulons of NFE2L2,
LIN28b, HNF1A, and NOTCH1. These were used to identify clinical groups
that overlapped with HB expression clusters and were associated with
patient survival. Tumors in the high-risk group were characterized by
high NFE2L2, low NOTCH1 activity, and high LIN28b expression and activity
(corresponding to low let-7b expression), as well as high expression of
the onco-fetal proteins AFP and GPC3 and stem cell markers EPCAM, DLK1,
and SALL4.In contrast, the low-risk group was characterized by high HNF1a
and NOTCH1 activities and low LIN28 expression and activity. Rare
chromosomal gains and losses were characteristic of the low risk group of
tumors, while gains of 20q13 (SALL4) and 1q chromosomal regions were
primarily found in the high and intermediate risk groups.
Immunohistochemistry for LIN28b, NFE2L2, HNF1alpha, PTEN, and EPCAM is
being performed on a validation set of tumors to assess their reliability
to classify formalin-fixed tumor specimens. Prospective studies will test
the prognostic utility of this method for children with HB.

