Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA adductome analyses at multiple sites of human gastric mucosa,
resected for gastric cancer


DNA adducts are recognized as an initiative step of mutagenesis, but the
measurement of them is still a technical challenge. So-called adductome
approach, based on LC-MS/MS, is a popular procedure to identify multiple
DNA adducts in various tissues at a single experiments. Recently we
reported 7 lipid peroxidation-induced DNA adducts in human gastric mucosa
resected for gastric cancer in two countries for the first time, and
showed the profile of these DNA adducts could indicate geo-pathological
background of gastric mucosa (Matsuda 2013). Though DNA adductome
approach posesses the high throghput potential in terms of finding
numerous specis of DNA adducts having different molecular weights, there
are still challenges to overcome. First of all, the numbers of the
standards of DNA adducts molecules available are less than the species
with identified molecular weight. This implies there are much more DNA
modifications in human tissues than previously characterized. The other
challaenge is that the absolute quantifications of these adducts requires
isotopic standard chemicals. In this study, we strengthened DNA adductome
method by including as many as known adducts in the assay system.
Mass/Charge value and liquid chromatography retention time of known 254
DNA addcuts were collected and incoporated into LC-MS/MS machine
(4000-QTRAP; Thermo). By this procedure we could measure the 254 DNA
adducts at one time in MRM mode. Using this system, we measured 254 DNA
adducts in the following human gastric mucosa. Written informed consents
were obtained from the patients who took gastrectomy for gastric cancer.
Under the hypothesis of field cancerization of gastric mucosa, in order
to analyze the spatial influence of the exposure of the potential
carcinogens toward cancer site, muocsal tissue at multiple sites with
different distance to cancer, (10cm and more distant from the tumor site
in the stomach to the site adjacent to the tumor) were taken. Three to 10
sites/case were investigated for DNA adducts measurements. Totally 11
cases and 77 sites are analyzed.Considerable numbers of known DNA adducts
were present in human gastric mucosa in different quantities. Among them,
tobacco-related and lipid-peroxidation-induced DNA adducts were noted. We
also did the same measurements in proximal, middle, and distal gastric
mucosa from autospy cases without gastric cancer and compared them to
those of the cancer cases. Among them, etheno-dA was able to be
quantitatively measured using isotopic standard. The mean level of etheno
dA in the gastric mucosa of autopsy cases without gastric cancer was
8.02/107 nucleotides, while that of gastric cancer patients mucosae was
4.80/107 nucleotides. These comprehensive identifications in adducts in
human gastric mucosa will provide the basic information for dosimetry and
risk assessment of environmental chemicals toward gastric cancer.

