Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic silencing of DACH1 in triple negative breast cancer
contributes to the tumorigenesis


BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence indicates that cell fate determination
factor DACH1 functions as a tumor suppressor. Specifically, in estrogen
receptor positive (luminal), highly expression of DACH1 predicted longer
cancer specific survival and disease free interval, as well as reduced
metastasis formation. Our analysis of over 2,000 patients demonstrated
increased nuclear DACH1 expression correlated inversely with cellular
mitosis and predicted 40 months survival advantage in breast cancer
patients. But, endogenous DACH1 was dramatically reduced in breast cancer
cell lines with high expression of tumor initiation cell markers and in
patient samples of triple negative breast cancer, the most aggressive
subtype. We proposed that epigenetically change might contribute to the
loss expression of DACH1 in breast cancer. MATERIALS AND METHODS:
Clinical samples included 10cases of normal breast tissues, 26 cases of
luminal breast cancer(ER+,PR+,HER1-2+), and 32 cases of triple negative
breast cancer(ER-,PR-,HER-). Genomic DNA was extracted from
formalin-fixed tissue and methylation-specific PCR of DACH1 promoter was
performed. DACH1 protein expression was detected in human breast cancer
tissue arrays by immunohistochemistry. Human triple negative breast
cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and sum159 were cultured in DME medium
supplied with 10% fetal bovine serum and growth factors. Stable cell
lines expressing DACH1 were established in MDA-MB-231 and Sum159 though
lentivirus transfection. In vitro cell growth was evaluated by MTT assay
and colony formation. In vivo tumor growth was measured in xenograft mice
model. RESULTS: There is no methylation of DACH1 promoter region was
found in normal breast tissues, but methylation was found in 2 out of 26
(7.7%) in luminal breast cancer and 10 of 32(32%) in triple negative
breast cancer. Consisting with previous report, immunohistochemical stain
revealed nuclear stain of DACH1 in all normal and majority of luminal
type breast cancer tissues, but lost or very weak expression of DACH1 in
triple negative cancer tissues. Correspondingly, expression microarrays
demonstrated that DACH1 mRNA levels in triple negative breast cancer cell
lines were dramatically less than that of normal breast cell line and
luminal breast cancer cell lines. Treatment of MDA-MB-231 and Sum159
cells with 5-Aza-2-deoxyazacytidine induced the expression of DACH1 and
decreased cellular proliferation. Ectopic expression of DACH1 inhibited
in vitro cell growth and in vivo tumor formation. CONCLUSION: Promoter
hypermethylation is a main factor leading to the inactivation of DACH1 in
triple negative breast cancer; Re-expression of DACH1by epigenetic
modification might provide a novel therapeutic strategy for this
aggressive cancer.

