Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of a 32-gene classifier for the subtyping of carcinomas
using the qNPA ArrayPlate Platform


Introduction: The majority of adult malignancies are carcinomas which are
broadly separated into four types: adenocarcinomas, squamous cell
carcinomas, neuroendocrine carcinomas and urothelial carcinomas. These
can usually be differentiated using routine morphology and
immunohistochemistry, but occasionally this distinction is difficult. We
developed a 32-gene classifier using microarray analysis of frozen
tissue, to differentiate among these four main types of epithelial
malignancies. In this study, we sought to validate our 32-gene classifier
on formalin fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue using the qNPA
ArrayPlate Platform by HTG.Materials and methods: A total of 288 FFPE
primary tumors were retrieved the Moffitt Cancer Center Anatomic
Pathology Department. Samples were analyzed using a custom 96 well micro
titer qNPA array plates supplied by the manufacturer. The qNPA assays
were carried out following the manufacturer's protocol (HTG, Tucson, AZ).
Digital images of the array plates were analyzed using HTG's SuperCapella
Imaging System software. The samples were used in developing models
utilizing gene expression profiles to predict the class (tumor type) of
future samples, based on the nearest shrunken centroids algorithm and
implemented using the Prediction Analysis of Microarrays (PAM) tool in
BRB-ArrayTools. We estimated the prediction error of the models using
10-fold cross-validation. For each 10-fold training set of 193 samples,
the entire model building process was repeated, including the gene
selection process.Results: The classifier had a 13.7% error rate overall.
The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value and the negative
predictive value for each tumor type were as follows (%): 93.8, 85, 81.5,
95 for adenocarcinoma; 82.1, 97.6, 85.2, 97 for neuroendocrine
carcinomas, 89.1, 92.2, 85.1, 94.4%for squamous cell carcinoma and 33.3,
100, 100 and 92.5 for urothelial carcinomas.Conclusions: The assay had a
high sensitivity for the identification of adenocarcinomas, squamous cell
carcinomas and neuroendocrine carcinomas, but lacked sensitivity for the
identification of urothelial carcinomas. Urothelial carcinomas were
misclassified as either squamous cell carcinomas or adenocarcinomas.
Similar difficulties are encountered with immunohistochemistry, due to
the overlap in protein expression between squamous cell carcinoma and
urothelial carcinoma. GATA3, one of the genes used to classify urothelial
carcinomas, is also expressed by breast carcinomas, which could account
for the difficulty in differentiating urothelial from adenocarcinomas.Key
words: carcinoma; class prediction; microarray; validation

