Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chloroquine and romidepsin: combination therapy for treatment of
breast cancer metastases


Cancer metastasis is favored through dynamic regulation of gene
expression and comprehensive cellular processes including epigenetic
regulation. Aberrant gene expression by altered epigenetic regulation
plays a fundamental role in the maintenance of breast cancer stem cell
(BCSC) and drug resistance. Additionally, intrinsic tumor heterogeneity
in primary tumors and the presence of the breast cancer stem cells
complicates treatment options even further. Thus, it is hypothesized that
the breast cancer metastasis can be cured by an effective treatment,
targeting both the bulk and the BCSCs at the same time. Previously,
chloroquine (CQ), inhibited spontaneous breast cancer metastasis to lungs
very effectively through inhibition of autophagy as well as DNA
hypomethylation. Romidepsin (RO), a highly potent and FDA-approved
histone deacetylases inhibitor, is known to exert outstanding anti-cancer
effects on numerous cancer types. Thus, we propose a combination therapy
of chloroquine and romidepsin to target the breast cancer metastasis.The
goal of this study is to test if the combined therapy will effectively
inhibit breast cancer metastasis by targeting both bulk tumors and BCSCs
compared to each single agent treatment.We evaluated in vitro anti-tumor
effects of the combination therapy of chloroquine and romidepsin by
measuring mammosphere forming efficiency (MSFE) and by analyzing
apoptosis through Annexin V staining in paclitaxel sensitive and
resistant Hs578t cells. Secondly, we investigated anti-tumor effects of
vehicle (Con), CQ, RO, or their combination (RO-CQ) using a cell line and
a patient-derived orthotopic xenograft models. Thirdly, we assessed BCSC
populations and tumor initiation ability by FACS analysis, MSFE
measurement, and limiting dilution assays (LDA). Finally, we evaluated
the metastatic potential of tumors after the each treatment using an in
vivo MDA-MB-231 lung metastasis model.We observed that the RO-CQ
treatment resulted in the most significant reduction of MSFE and
induction of apoptosis in BCSCs and bulk tumors compared to other
treatment groups in both paclitaxel sensitive and resistant Hs578t cells.
Secondly, only the RO-CQ treatment caused significant inhibition of tumor
growth in vivo with substantial decrease in the CD44+/CD24- or Aldefluor+
BCSCs. The reduction of BCSCs by the RO-CQ treatment was well correlated
with the severely reduced primary and the secondary MSFE. Also, the
reduction of BCSCs was well reflected in the LDA, in which the RO-CQ
treatment impaired tumor initiating ability. Finally, we confirmed in
vivo that CQ alone and the RO-CQ treatments substantially abolished the
metastatic potential of highly metastatic MDA-MB-231 cells.Our data
suggest that the two FDA-approved drugs on breast cancer metastases will
facilitate the rapid translation of basic discoveries into clinical
approaches which can lead to improved survival for breast cancer patients
with refractory metastases.

