Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of single mouse tumor response results from the Pediatric
Preclinical Testing Program (PPTP)


Traditional approaches to evaluating antitumor agents using human tumor
xenograft models have usually used 8-10 mice in control and treatment
groups against a limited panel of tumor models. However, with increasing
evidence of molecular/genetic subsets of tumors within a histotype, there
is a need to establish panels of tumors that accurately reflect such
heterogeneity. The consequences of evaluating agents in a large number of
models is that it is highly resource consuming. An alternative approach
is to use fewer animals per tumor line, allowing a greater number of
models to be evaluated that capture greater molecular/genetic
heterogeneity of the cancer type.We analyzed 67 agents evaluated by the
PPTP to determine whether a single mouse, chosen by a random number
generating routine in Excel, predicted the median response for groups of
mice (solid tumors n = 10; acute lymphoblastic leukemias n = 8). Agents
evaluated included standard cytotoxic agents, tyrosine kinase inhibitors,
receptor-binding antibodies, and anti-angiogenic agents. Data were
analyzed to determine predictive value for 79 xenograft models, and to
identify classes of antitumor agent where predictive value of single
mouse experiments was poor.The individual tumor response was compared to
the group median response using response criteria developed in the PPTP.
A total of 2106 comparisons were made. The single tumor response
accurately predicted the group median response in 1684 comparisons
(79.34%). Models had a range for accurate prediction (0.583 - 0.918).
Allowing for mis-prediction of + or - one response category, the overall
prediction rate increased to 95.63%. Single tumor results accurately
predicted objective response rates (ORR) determined by group response, in
66 of 67 studies. There was a single study where single mouse data
incorrectly predicted an agent as active (>20% ORR).For most tumor models
the single mouse appears to give results similar to groups of 8-10 mice.
Importantly, even allowing for slight inaccuracy ( 1 response category),
the single mouse experiment identified all active agents, and in the
worse case over-predicted activity in one tumor histotype. The advantage
of the single mouse experimental design is that it allows for inclusion
of models that encompass greater molecular heterogeneity, thus
recapitulating the clinical heterogeneity more accurately. Potentially,
this design also reduces the numbers of mice used for experimentation.
However, to generate these patient derived xenograft models, particularly
solid tumors at diagnosis and relapse will require national and
international coordination through organizations such as the Children's
Oncology Group.

