Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment with tumor lysate-pulsed autologous dendritic cells
prolongs survival in patients with recurrent glioblastoma multiforme


Background The survival rate in recurrent Glioblastoma multiforme (rGBM)
patients has not meaningfully changed in the past several decades. We
have treated two cohorts of rGBM patients, one consisting of patients
with early progression, and one of patients with progression following
several cycles of adjuvant temozomolide chemotherapy, with autologous
dendritic cells pulsed with autologous tumor cell lysate (DCVax-L). Such
treatment is intended to activate the immune system against the tumor
cells, so that the ensuing immune attack may delay progression and time
to death.Methods Disease progression in patients with GBM was determined
through MRI. Progression needed to be determined by independent review on
2 consecutive scans for early progressor classification to avoid
enrolling patients with pseudoprogression. Assessment of progression was
done using modified RANO criteria.Results Nineteen (19) patients
diagnosed with GBM were determined to have recurrence immediately
following radiation therapy with concomitant temozolomide chemotherapy.
Median overall survival in this cohort from initial GBM diagnosis is 15.1
months (95% CI: 10.5-17.2), and the range is 8.1->31 months. A literature
search revealed 6 publications with comparable populations of patients.
The table below demonstrates that these patients typically have a life
expectancy of 8-10 months.A second cohort of patients with rGBM consisted
of 8 patients with recurrence following several adjuvant temozolomide
treatment cycles. Median OS for these patients is 14.7 months from the
time of surgery for first recurrence. The comparator for this cohort is
derived from Friedman et al. (2009), who reported mOS of 8.7-9.3 months
from the time of first recurrence for rGBM patients treated with
Bevacizumab with or without Irinotecan.Results and Conclusion These
results suggest that treatment with DCVax-L can extend survival by 5
months or more in patients with rGBM.

