Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrin 64 regulates expression of Areg and Ereg through DNA
repair-dependent mechanisms


The integrin 64 is overexpressed in and contributes to the invasive
potential of pancreatic carcinoma cells. We have previously shown this
property is due to the ability of integrin 64 to alter the transcriptome,
in part, through the active DNA demethylation of pro-metastatic genes
such as S100A4/metastasin. In this study, we find that amphiregulin
(Areg) and epiregulin (Ereg), which are ligands for the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), are dramatically upregulated by integrin 64 in
pancreatic carcinomas. EGFR and associated ligands contribute to cancer
cell proliferation, invasion, angiogenesis, self-sufficiency in growth
signals and apoptosis resistance. To determine if Areg and Ereg
transcription is regulated by DNA methylation, we treated pancreatic
cancer cells that have low integrin 64 expression with the DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2deoxycytidine (DAC) resulting in
stable overexpression of Areg and Ereg, as measured by QPCR. Furthermore,
suppression of integrin 64 by RNAi, hindered induction by DAC. Pancreatic
cancer cells with high integrin 64 were treated with the methyl donor
S-adenosylmethionine, resulting in inhibition of Areg and Ereg
expression. Currently, the most accepted mechanism for transcriptional
upregulation by active DNA demethylation is through DNA repair. To
determine if DNA repair regulates Areg and Ereg expression, we modulated
DNA repair by treating pancreatic cancer cells with Gemcitabine, altering
expression of Gadd45A and thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG), or inhibition of
Parp-1. Gemcitabine inhibits multiple components of DNA repair including
Gadd45A-mediated DNA demethylation, while Gadd45A, TDG and Parp-1 are
involved in DNA demethylation by DNA repair. Gemcitabine treatment,
RNAi-mediated knockdown of Gadd45A or TDG, and Parp-1 inhibition resulted
in decreased expression of Areg and Ereg when integrin 64 is
overexpressed. Conversely, cDNA overexpression of Gadd45A increased
expression of Areg and Ereg. Unexpectedly, bisulfite conversion and
sequencing of CpG islands in the Areg and Ereg promoters revealed that
integrin 64 does not control demethylation of the proximal promoters, as
these were not methylated. However, a super enhancer associated with Areg
and Ereg, has been identified, and may be the target of integrin 64
signaling. To block super enhancer function, cells were treated with the
bromodomain inhibitor JQ1, which resulted in a dramatic decrease in
expression of Areg and Ereg, indicating regulation via a super enhancer.
Taken together these data indicate that the integrin 64 controls
expression of Areg and Ereg by targeting the DNA repair machinery to
regulatory regions of Areg and Ereg; this regulatory region is most
likely located in the Areg and Ereg associated super-enhancer.

