Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-340 is a modulator of oncogenic signaling in melanoma


Melanoma is responsible for only 4% of skin cancer diagnoses; nonetheless
80% of skin cancer deaths are attributed to this aggressive skin cancer
each year. Growing evidence points to an important role miRNAs may play
in the aberrant cellular signaling of cancers, including melanoma.
microRNAs (miRNAs) are highly conserved 22-25nt non-coding RNAs involved
in regulating RNA stability and translation and are predicted to regulate
60% of the human transcriptome. We are investigating the tumor suppressor
role miR-340 plays in the development and progression of melanoma. A
limited number of miR-340 targets were previously characterized, however,
it is unlikely the effects of miR-340 on the melanoma phenotype are the
result of directly targeting a few mRNAs, as miRNAs are likely to target
upwards of 100 mRNAs each. Using an in silico target identification and
pathway mapping system, we identified a multitude of potential miR-340
mRNA targets that encode proteins distributed amongst a variety of
cellular signaling pathways. In silico analysis revealed a high
proportion of miR-340 predicted mRNA targets that encode for members of
the MAPK signaling pathway. Our results show that miR-340 modulated most
of the assayed mRNAs that encode MAPK components. We also demonstrate
that miR-340 inhibits the tumorigenic phenotype of melanoma cells. We
recently developed a novel method to identify direct targets of miRNAs.
Using this method, we demonstrate miR-340 directly targets mRNAs that
encode protein kinases of the MAPK pathway. Further direct target
identification is crucial toward understanding the role miR-340-directed
regulation plays in triggering pleiotropic effects during melanoma
development and progression. Elucidating the roles aberrant gene
regulatory networks play in melanoma is critical for understanding the
disease and developing treatment options to improve the melanoma
prognosis.Supported by NIH grants ES007015 (to A.M.P.S.), AR063361 (to
V.S.S.) and CA191550 (to V.S.S.).

