Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Total synthesis of 6-deoxypladienolide D and assessment of
splicing inhibitory activity in a mutant SF3B1 cancer cell line


Hotspot mutations in several components of the spliceosome have been
reported in various hematological (CLL, MDS, etc.) and solid tumor
(melanoma, pancreatic, etc.) malignancies. SF3B1 is a component of the U2
snRNP complex of the spliceosome and is involved in the recognition of
3-splice sites during early spliceosomal assembly. We and others have
demonstrated that mutations in SF3B1 result in neomorphic activity and
trigger the production of aberrantly spliced transcripts. Thus, the
discovery of small molecule modulators of SF3B1 splicing activity may
have therapeutic potential in cancers harboring SF3B1 mutations.Members
of the pladienolide family of natural products have been shown to affect
RNA splicing through interaction with SF3B1. We have found that one
particular natural product in this family, 6-deoxypladienolide D,
demonstrates potent growth inhibition and cellular lethality in Panc
05.04 cells (a hotspot mutant SF3B1 cancer cell line). Due to the limited
natural supply of 6-deoxypladienolide D and our interest in identifying
chemical matter able to modulate splicing in these newly-identified
mutant SF3B1 cancers, a total synthesis of 6-deoxypladienolide D using
versatile and modular fragments was initiated.We will describe the first
total synthesis of the natural product 6-deoxypladienolide D. Two
noteworthy synthetic attributes are: 1) a late-stage allylic oxidation
which proceeds with full chemo-, regio-, and diastereoselectivity and 2)
the use of cost-effective starting materials and reagents to enable
access to 6-deoxypladienolide D and its analogs for biological
evaluation. We will show that 6-deoxypladienolide D demonstrates: 1) high
binding affinity to the SF3b complex, 2) ability to modulate canonical
pre-mRNA splicing, and 3) modulation of aberrant splicing induced by
mutant SF3B1.

