Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of collagen receptor discoidin domain receptor-1 (DDR1)
tyrosine kinase enhances cytotoxicity of anti-mesothelin immunotoxin for
cancer therapy


Discoidin domain receptor 1 (DDR1) is an emerging anti-cancer target that
belongs to the family of tyrosine kinases that are activated by collagen,
the most abundant component of extracellular matrix (ECM). Collagen
mediated induction of DDR1 facilitates cell adhesion, migration,
proliferation and matrix remodeling. The collagen/DDR1 axis is also
thought to modulate tumor-stromal interaction and potentially can affect
tumor response to therapy. Mesothelin is a cell-surface tumor-associated
antigen over-expressed in several human cancers including mesothelioma,
ovarian, lung, breast, and pancreatic cancers with limited expression on
normal cells. RG7787 is a clinically optimized recombinant immunotoxin
(RIT) being developed in collaboration with Roche that should enter
clinical trials late this year. It consists of a humanized
anti-mesothelin Fab fused to domain III of Pseudomonas exotoxin A in
which immunogenic B cell epitopes are silenced. Activation of tyrosine
kinase mediated signaling in tumor cells has been shown to modulate the
activity of RITs. Therefore, we hypothesized that DDR1 regulates RIT
activity and its inhibition might enhance the activity of RG7787.
Knockdown of DDR1 by siRNA or its inhibition with a novel and specific
inhibitor, 7rh, synergistically enhanced the cytotoxic activity of RG7787
in several cancer cell lines. Investigation into the mechanism of action
showed the knockdown of DDR1 increased mesothelin expression,
internalization of RG7787, and enhanced inhibition of protein synthesis.
Furthermore, stimulation of DDR1 activity by collagen treatment protected
cancer cells from killing by RG7787. However, this collagen mediated
resistance of cancer cells to RIT therapy can be overcome by addition of
7rh. Combination of 7rh with RG7787 synergistically inhibited growth of
A431/H9 tumors in nude mice. In conclusion, we report that collagen
protects cells from killing by RITs through DDR1 and that lowering DDR1
protein or inhibiting DDR1 kinase activity enhances the cytotoxic
activity of RITs. Our data suggest that the combination of 7rh and RG7787
represents a novel therapeutic strategy to target mesothelin-expressing
cancers. These data also provide insight into how tumor stroma might be
protecting cancer cells from therapy.

