Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plitidepsin shows antitumor activity in patient-derived tumor
xenografts and hematologic malignancies


Plitidepsin is a new marine-derived anti-tumor agent, originally isolated
from the tunicate Aplidium albicans that is now fully obtained by total
chemical synthesis. The compound is currently being evaluated in a
pivotal phase III trial in patients with refractory/relapsed multiple
myeloma. Previous in vitro studies in 26 hematological cell lines
demonstrated that plitidepsin was more active in multiple myeloma and
non-Hodgkin lymphoma compared to CML, AML and ALL derived cell lines as
determined in a 4 day proliferation assay in suspension cultures. We have
recently shown that plitidepsin interacts selectively with eEF1A2
(eukaryotic translation elongation factor 1 alpha 2) in tumor cells,
which results in apoptotic cell death. To identify target tumor types for
future clinical studies, the inhibition of colony formation of
plitidepsin was assessed in vitro in 116 established patient derived
xenografts tumor models from 23 different tumor types, including solid
tumors and hematological malignancies such as myeloma, leukemia and
lymphoma. The anti-tumor activity of plitidepsin varied depending on the
concentration used, achieving a mean IC70 (inhibitory concentration of
70%) value of 3 nM (range between 0.03 nM and >1 M), which can be also
achieved in patients treated using the clinical recommended dose or less.
39 out of 116 tumors showed above average sensitivity (IC70 Plitidepsin
is a new marine-derived anti-tumor agent, originally isolated from the
tunicate Aplidium albicans that is now fully obtained by total chemical
synthesis. The compound is currently being evaluated in a pivotal phase
III trial in patients with refractory/relapsed multiple myeloma. Previous
in vitro studies in 26 hematological cell lines demonstrated that
plitidepsin was more active in multiple myeloma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma
compared to CML, AML and ALL derived cell lines as determined in a 4 day
proliferation assay in suspension cultures. We have recently shown that
plitidepsin interacts selectively with eEF1A2 (eukaryotic translation
elongation factor 1 alpha 2) in tumor cells, which results in apoptotic
cell death. To identify target tumor types for future clinical studies,
the inhibition of colony formation of plitidepsin was assessed in vitro
in 116 established patient derived xenografts tumor models from 23
different tumor types, including solid tumors and hematological
malignancies such as myeloma, leukemia and lymphoma. The anti-tumor
activity of plitidepsin varied depending on the concentration used,
achieving a mean IC70 (inhibitory concentration of 70%) value of 3 nM
(range between 0.03 nM and >1 M), which can be also achieved in patients
treated using the clinical recommended dose or less. 39 out of 116 tumors
showed above average sensitivity (IC70 < 1nM) and IC70 values in these
tumors were about 9-fold lower than the mean of all tumors as tested.
Sensitive tumor types were seen among different tumor types, such as
hematological malignancies, pleuramesothelioma, melanoma, small cell and
non-small cell lung cancer (both adeno and large cell), as well as renal
cancer. In conclusion plitidepsin showed a broad differential antitumor
activity in vitro in hematological malignancies and in solid tumors.
Bioinformatic analyses are currently underway to identify biomarkers
and/or gene signatures that can predict sensitivity or resistance to
plitidepsin for selecting patients being responsive to the drug.

