Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgens interfere with enzalutamide agonism of mutant F876L
androgen receptor


Multiple lines of evidence demonstrate that castration-resistant prostate
cancers (CRPCs) remain reliant on androgens that activate the androgen
receptor (AR). Treatment with the novel anti-androgen enzalutamide
improves both progression-free and overall survival in CRPC patients
(Beer, 2014, Scher, 2012). However, progression is universal. Recently,
F876L mutations in the AR ligand binding domain have been described
(Balbas, 2013, Korpal, 2013, Joseph, 2013). This mutation confers
resistance to enzalutamide treatment and in some cases converts
enzalutamide to an AR agonist in pre-clinical studies (Balbas, 2013,
Korpal, 2013, Joseph, 2013). Clinical studies demonstrate that 10% of
patients harbor F876L mutations after treatment with novel anti-androgens
(Joseph, 2013). However, anti-androgen withdrawal effects (PSA responses)
after discontinuing enzalutamide are rarely seen clinically
(Rodriguez-Vida, 2014).An enzalutamide-resistant cell line was developed
after chronic treatment of LNCaP cells in vivo. We found that this
resistant cell line was dependent on AR expression for survival and that
this cell line harbored an AR F876L mutation. When these resistant cells
were cultured in complete serum, enzalutamide treatment did not lead to
agonistic effects. However, enzalutamide treatment of these resistant
cells or cell lines with ectopic expression of AR F876L cultured in
androgen-depleted serum led to a significant agonistic effect - an effect
that was attenuated by the addition of androgens to culture. Finally,
prior work and our own demonstrated that F876L mutant and wild-type AR
activate similar pathways (Joseph, 2013). Therefore, we determined if
suppression of previously described transcriptional co-activators of
wild-type AR also blocked AR F876L function. We found several targetable
AR co-activators that met that standard.Our data demonstrate that
androgens interfere with enzalutamide-induced agonism of F876L mutant AR.
Because androgens persist in enzalutamide-resistant CRPC, AR activation
by androgens, rather than enzalutamide, may explain why enzalutamide
discontinuation does not lead to anti-androgen withdrawal effects
clinically. Further, our results provide a cautionary note on therapeutic
efforts to deplete androgens concomitantly with enzalutamide treatment as
this may accentuate AR agonism by enzalutamide in tumors harboring AR
F876L mutations. Finally, targeting critical AR transcriptional
co-activators is a promising strategy to suppress mutant AR F876L
function irrespective of whether the AR agonist is androgens or
enzalutamide.

