Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Klotho in age-related melanoma progression


Background: Mortality rates due to melanoma are continuously increasing.
Specifically, in older patients, melanoma is very aggressive and has a
poor prognosis, compared to the young. Therefore, there is an urgent need
to understand the underlying molecular mechanisms behind this age-related
aggression. The expression level of klotho, an emerging tumor suppressor,
declines with the progression of age and is associated with several
pathologies related to human aging. A previous study from our group has
demonstrated that loss of klotho in melanoma cells is associated with
enhanced melanoma cell motility by decreasing the ability of melanoma
cells to internalize Wnt5A, a non-canonical Wnt protein, known to be one
of the drivers of melanoma metastasis. Therefore, we hypothesize that the
loss of Klotho in aging microenvironment contributes to enhanced Wnt5A
signaling and ultimately results in age-related melanoma
aggression.Methods: In order to study the effects of aged
microenvironment on melanoma cells, we have obtained and cultured normal
skin fibroblasts from aged (55-65 years old) and young donors (25-35
years old). The expression levels of klotho and Wnt5A in these
fibroblasts were analyzed by immunoblot, immunofluorescence and real
time-PCR assays. We examined melanoma cell/ fibroblast co-cultures and
artificial skin reconstructs made with these fibroblasts to understand
the age-related effects of tumor microenvironment on the disease
progression. We also used immunohistochemistry technique to examine the
expression levels of Klotho and Wnt5A in these artificial skin
reconstructs and in the paraffin-embedded skin sections obtained from
young and old melanoma patients.Results: Our western blot and real-time
PCR results of the young vs. old fibroblasts show that klotho expression
level is lost with progression of age. Analysis of artificial skin
reconstructs made using skin fibroblasts isolated from aged donors
demonstrate induced invasion of melanoma cells to a much greater extent
than those cultured from young donors. We also analyzed these skin
reconstructs for the expression levels of Klotho and Wnt5A, using
immunohistochemistry technique and the results confirm that Klotho is
decreased in aged fibroblasts. Furthermore, we also found that the loss
of Klotho in the aged microenvironment translated to a loss of Klotho in
melanoma cells. Our western blot results also suggest that loss of Klotho
in the aging microenvironment enhances Wnt5A internalization and
signaling and this promotes tumor metastasis. Our immunohistochemistry
results using patient samples further extend our in vitro findings and
support our hypothesis that Klotho plays pivotal role in age-related
melanoma progression.Significance: These results for the first time
demonstrate a correlation between age-related melanoma progression and
the loss of klotho level. In addition, these findings provide a molecular
explanation of age-related melanoma aggression.

