Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of HSulf-1 promotes defective autophagy and increased lipid
droplet biogenesis in ovarian cancer


Dysregulation of autophagy and altered metabolic pathways are frequently
observed in cancer. Due to these alterations, pharmacological targeting
of these two pathways simultaneously could provide a viable therapeutic
option. Although the association between these two pathways is well
characterized in metabolic disorders, it is not well defined in ovarian
cancer (OVCA). In this regard, we found that loss of endosulfatase
HSulf-1, a known putative tumor suppressor, suppresses LC3-GFP foci
formation and promotes increased lipid droplet (LD) biogenesis suggesting
that absence of HSulf-1 in OVCA affects both autophagy and lipid
metabolism. While isogenic cells with genetic ablation of HSulf-1
(OV202Sh1/2 and TOV2223Sh1 cells) displayed LDs, the nontargeted control
transduced (NTC) OV202 and TOV2223 cells had significantly less LDs. In
contrast, Transmission Electron Micrographs (TEMs) showed that OV202 and
TOV2223 NTC cells had significantly more autophagic vacuoles (AVs)
compared to their isogenic ShRNA targeted cells. Conversely, ectopic
expression of HSulf-1 in SKOV3 cells decreased the number of LDs and
increased the number of AVs compared to vector transfected controls. Here
we report that OV202Sh1 cells and HSulf-1 deficient OV2008 cells have
increased p-cPLA2(ser505) levels that are associated with biogenesis of
large number of LDs with reduced AVs. Interestingly, pharmacological
inhibition of cPLA2 with AACOCF3 in OV202Sh1 cells resulted in reduced LD
biogenesis, inhibited colony formation and reduced tumorigenesis in vivo.
More importantly, treatment of HSulf-1 deficient cells with HS mimetic
PG545 which can compensate for loss of HSulf-1, reduced LD biogenesis,
promoted autophagy and inhibited tumor growth in vivo. Collectively,
these results show a critical role of HSulf-1 in regulating both
autophagy and LD biogenesis in ovarian cancer.

