Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-random genomic alterations in BRCA1-related breast cancer


BRCA1-related breast cancer is characterized by a high degree of genomic
instability. However, to which extent this instability is a random result
of the homologous recombination defect or the selection of the tumor
phenotype, is unknown. The objective of this study is to investigate the
genomic aberrations (copy number variation and somatic mutations) of
BRCA1-related breast cancer, using a mouse model, to identify likely
nonrandom aberrations and their biological functions.We examined genomic
aberrations of three independent BRCA1-related tumors from a genetically
engineered mouse model, K14-Cre BRCA1f/fp53f/f. Tumors had been
propagated in Cre-negative littermates and liver tissue of the recipient
mice from the controls were used as a germline control. Fresh frozen
tumors and normal samples were used for exome sequencing and RNA-seq
using Illumina technology. A commonly used workflow, GATK, was used for
the sequence alignment, preprocessing and calling somatic mutations.
VarScan2 was used for calling somatic copy number variations. We
investigate the prevalence of common aberrations among these mouse in
human BRCA1-related breast and ovarian cancer from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA). We used the BioMart software tool to map mouse genes to
human genes for the cross species analysis. After identifying common
aberrant regions and genes across human and mouse we applied enrichment
analysis using GOSeq, MetaCore and MSigDB software tools to identify the
biological functions of the genetic alterations observed in BRCA1-related
breast cancer across species.The analysis of exome sequencing data from
BRCA1-related mouse tumors revealed surprisingly similar patterns of CNVs
and rates of non-synonymous mutations. Correspondingly, distinct pattern
were identified with regard to CNVs in human BRCA1-related breast and
ovarian cancer. The cross species analysis of BRCA1-related TCGA ovarian
and breast cancer tumors and BRCA1-related mouse tumors identified
commonly aberrant regions that mapped to the long arms of human
chromosomes 1, 8, 17 and 20 in both breast and ovarian cancer.
Functionally, the blocks of genes that were commonly amplified in
BRCA1-related breast or ovarian cancer included genes that transduce
mitogenic signaling and ligand independent activation of estrogen
receptors ESR1 and ESR2 as well as genes of the renin-angiotensin
system.To conclude, copy number aberrations in BRCA1-related breast or
ovarian cancers are not random and enrich for genes that enforce
mitogenic signaling. The data support the notion that in addition to loss
of cell cycle checkpoint control, tumor development requires activation
of a mitogenic signaling program that could potentially be targeted for
treatment.

