Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DOT1L inhibitor EPZ-5676 synergizes with cytarabine and
azacitidine in preclinical models of MLL-rearranged leukemia


EPZ-5676 is a small molecule inhibitor of the histone methyltransferase
DOT1L currently in clinical development and represents a first in class
novel therapeutic agent for the treatment of MLL-rearranged (MLL-r)
leukemia. In preclinical studies, EPZ-5676 selectively inhibited
intracellular histone H3K79 methylation, downstream target gene
expression and demonstrated complete tumor regression in a MLL-r leukemia
xenograft model. We previously reported synergistic and durable
anti-proliferative activity when EPZ-5676 was combined with current AML
standard of care drugs, cytarabine and daunorubicin in MLL-r leukemia
models MOLM-13 (MLL-AF9) and MV4-11 (MLL-AF4). Combination benefit was
also observed when MLL-r cells were treated with cytarabine, prior to
co-treatment with EPZ-5676. Additionally, both cytarabine and the DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor azacitidine, displayed synergistic
anti-leukemic activity in MLL-r rearranged cells in a 7 day co-treatment
model (7 days of continuous treatment with EPZ-5676 and second agent; see
Klaus et al, JPET, 2014). In this report we discuss results of
investigating additional treatment schedules using EPZ-5676 in
combination with azacitidine in MLL-r cells. Cells were pretreated with
azacitidine at nanomolar concentrations known to reverse promoter
DNA-hypermethylation and alter the chromatin state (Tsai et al., Cancer
Cell, 2012). We found treating MV4-11 and MOLM-13 cells once daily for
three consecutive days followed by sequential treatment with EPZ-5676
elicited a synergistic anti-proliferative effect using the Chou-Talalay
method (Chou, Pharmacol Rev., 2006). Results of studies to investigate
the mechanism of this synergistic cell killing, including evaluation of
differentiation markers and Annexin V staining will be reported. To
determine if combinations of EPZ-5676 with cytarabine or azacitidine were
tolerable and efficacious in vivo, nude rats implanted subcutaneously
with MV4-11 tumors were treated using a range of doses and schedules.
Azacitidine and cytarabine were delivered by intraperitoneal injection
once daily for 14 days at their respective maximum tolerated doses of 2
and 200 mg/kg. Dosing at the established MTD, these agents inhibited the
subcutaneous MV4-11 tumor growth by 50% compared to vehicle controls.
Efficacy results from the EPZ-5676 combination studies with cytarabine or
azacitidine will be presented. In summary, our results indicate that
EPZ-5676 in combination with cytarabine or azacitidine revealed a
synergistic effect, regardless of the treatment schedule used in
preclinical models of MLL-r leukemia. Tolerable in vivo rat combination
doses for EPZ-5676 with both cytarabine and azacitidine have been
determined in support of potential future assessment of these
combinations in MLL-r leukemia patients.

