Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: De novo engineering of chromosomal amplifications in human cells


Chromosomal amplifications are among the most common genetic alterations
found in human cancers. However, experimental systems to study the
processes that lead to recurrent amplification events are lacking.
Moreover, some common amplification events, such as that at 8p11-12 in
breast cancer, harbor multiple candidate driver oncogenes, which are
poorly modeled by conventional overexpression approaches. We sought to
develop an experimental system to model recurrent chromosomal
amplification events in human cell lines. Our general strategy is to use
homologous-recombination-mediated gene targeting to deliver a dominantly
selectable, amplifiable marker to a specified chromosomal location. We
chose regions recurrently amplified at high frequency in breast cancer,
including 8p11-12, 17q12, and 11q13-14. After confirmation of successful
gene targeting, the targeted cells are subjected to selective pressure
directed at the amplifiable marker. Spontaneous DNA breakage events lead
to varying degrees of co-amplification of linked loci near the targeting
site. We used adeno-associated virus vectors to target human MCF-7 breast
cancer cells at the ZNF703 locus, in the recurrent 8p11-12 amplicon,
using either the E. coli inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase enzyme IMPDH
or a mutant dihydrofolate reductase gene as a marker. We applied
selective pressure using IMPDH inhibitors. Surviving clones were found to
have increased copy number of ZNF703 (average 2.5-fold increase) by
droplet digital PCR. Genome-wide array comparative genomic hybridization
confirmed that amplification had occurred on the short arm of chromosome
8, without changes on 8q or other chromosomes. Patterns of amplification
were variable and similar to those seen in primary human breast cancers,
including sawtooth patterns, distal copy number loss suggesting a
breakage-fusion-bridge mechanism, and large continuous regions of copy
number gain. Amplification was confirmed by FISH. RT-PCR and
immunoblotting demonstrated overexpression of selected amplified
transcripts and proteins. In summary, we have used genome engineering
techniques to create focal chromosomal amplification events de novo in
human cell lines. These amplifications share many of the features of
amplifications observed in primary human cancers. This system will allow
study of the cis- and trans-acting factors that are permissive for
chromosomal amplification and provide a system to model oncogene
cooperativity in amplifications harboring multiple candidate driver genes.

