Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel immunotherapeutic activity of JAK and PI3K inhibitors in a
model of pancreatic cancer


Immunotherapeutic agents are emerging as key components of efficacious
multi-agent regimens in cancer. The majority of immunotherapeutic agents
developed thus far either attempt to stimulate a more productive
anti-tumoral immune response or to inhibit key proteins in the
immunosuppressive tumoral milieu. In contrast, agents targeting signal
transduction molecules have been largely developed for their ability to
impact the proliferative potential of tumor cells directly. Notably, the
JAK/STAT and PI3K signaling pathways have been shown to contribute not
only to tumor cell proliferation and survival but also to play a crucial
role in regulating stromal cells, including immune cells, which are
recruited to the tumor microenvironment. Activation of these pathways has
been shown to result in the recruitment and expansion of predominantly
negative regulatory cells such as myeloid derived suppressor cells and
regulatory T cells, suggesting that inhibition of JAK/STAT and PI3K
signaling may promote antitumor immunity.Therefore, we have examined the
immunotherapeutic potential of selective inhibitors of either JAK or
PI3K. We demonstrate that inhibitors of either JAK or PI3K block tumor
growth as single agents in the immuno-competent syngeneic PAN02
pancreatic model, which is not driven by oncogenic JAK or PI3K signaling.
Tumor growth inhibition is not observed in immunocompromised mice,
demonstrating that the anti-tumor effects of these agents require an
intact immune system. These agents were tested pairwise with each other
and in combination with other immune checkpoint modulators, including an
anti-PD-L1 antibody and the IDO1 inhibitor INCB24360. The combinations of
JAK inhibition with IDO1 inhibition, PI3K inhibition or PD-1/PD-L1
blockade resulted in enhanced efficacy. Mechanistic studies revealed that
the combination of JAK and IDO1 inhibition did not alter the number of
infiltrating T cells within the tumor, but instead resulted in a more
activated phenotype of the infiltrating T cells, leading to higher levels
of IFN production. In contrast, combination treatment with regimens that
included an inhibitor to PI3K led to a marked increase in the numbers of
T cell infiltrates, although the cells were not maximally activated.
Further studies to understand the complex cellular responses elicited by
these inhibitors may provide the mechanistic rationale to explore JAK or
PI3K inhibitor-based immunotherapy combinations in the clinic.

