Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-invasive prediction of molecular subtype in glioblastoma using
multi-parametric magnetic resonance imaging pattern analysis and machine
learning


Introduction: Imaging studies better capture the spatial heterogeneity of
tumors compared to histopathological analysis. Glioblastoma (GB), the
most common primary malignant brain tumor, is genetically diverse and may
be classified into four subtypes based on gene expression. In this study,
we use novel image analysis methods and machine learning to examine the
entirety of multi-parametric imaging data and develop an integrative
image-based model to predict GB molecular subtype.Methods: We performed a
retrospective cohort study of patients with de novo GB at a single
academic institution. Tissue samples underwent molecular subtyping using
a novel RNA isoform-based classifier. Subtypes included classical,
mesenchymal, proneural, and neural. Using initial magnetic resonance (MR)
images at time of diagnosis, image pattern analysis techniques identified
multiple imaging features from sequences that included T1, T2, T2-FLAIR,
and derivatives of diffusion-weighted and perfusion imaging. A machine
learning algorithm was then used to analyze multiple features
simultaneously to determine which features were most predictive of
subtype. Ten-fold cross validation was performed.Results: Molecular
subtype was determined for 99 tissue samples. The number of classical,
mesenchymal, proneural, and neural subtypes was 29, 22, 20, and 28,
respectively. After image feature extraction, a machine learning
algorithm identified the following features as most predictive of
molecular subtype: T2-FLAIR intensity of enhancing tumor, size of
enhancing tumor, and peak height of perfusion signal in edema for the
classical subtype, mean T1 intensity in enhancing tumor and T2-FLAIR
intensity in edema for the mesenchymal subtype, T2 intensity in edema for
the neural subtype, and T2-FLAIR intensity in enhancing tumor and mean T1
intensity in enhancing tumor for the proneural subtype. The balanced
accuracy of our image-based model in predicting molecular subtype was
0.71 for proneural, 0.79 for neural, 0.77 for mesenchymal, and 0.68 for
classical. Area under the curve was 0.87 for proneural, 0.92 for neural,
0.89 for mesenchymal, and 0.75 for classical subtype.Conclusions: We
non-invasively predicted GB molecular subtype with high accuracy using
pre-operative MR imaging alone. Imaging features predictive of subtype
corresponded with underlying tumor physiology and gene expression. Only
through advanced quantitative image analysis are predictive patterns
revealed, which would otherwise not be appreciated by examination of
individual features. Our image-based model uses standard imaging
sequences in clinical practice and is therefore easily translatable to
the clinic. Such informatics-derived imaging biomarkers of molecular
composition may be applied in future studies to evaluate treatment
response over time and in response to targeted agents.

