Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of combination treatment with cabozantinib and bortezomib
in the 5TGM1 murine multiple myeloma model


Cabozantinib (cabo) is an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases including MET,
VEGFR2, RET, and the TAM family kinases TYRO3, AXL, and MER, and has
shown clinical activity in patients with castration-resistant prostate
cancer and other solid tumors with bone metastases. Multiple myeloma (MM)
is a monoclonal B-cell (plasma cell) neoplasia representing 2% of all
cancer deaths. The clinical hallmark is presence of multiple osteolytic
lesions causing bone pain, pathologic fractures, and hypercalcemia.
Circulating levels of HGF and VEGF are upregulated in MM patients, and
regulation of plasma cell-osteoblast communication by the HGF-MET
signaling pathway has been implicated in the development of lytic bone
disease in these patients. We have previously shown that cabo is active
in the syngeneic 5TGM1 mouse MM model. This study aimed to determine
whether combination with bortezomib would yield additional benefit.Four
experimental groups were included: 1) Control group receiving vehicle, 2)
Bortezomib (0.5 mg/kg ip twice a week), 3) Cabo (10 mg/kg, PO QD) and 4)
Combination (bortezomib + cabo, same doses).Female C57BL/KaLwRij mice
were allocated to treatment groups (n = 15 per group) with equivalent
average body weights. At day 0, animals were inoculated with 5TGM1 cells
by IV administration. Dosing began at day 1 and continued daily until
euthanasia. Body weights were determined twice a week and blood samples
were collected at days -1, 16, 23, 35 and at sacrifice for analysis of
paraprotein (IgG2b), PINP and TRACP 5b. Development of osteolytic lesions
was detected by radiography at day 35 and at sacrifice. Mice were
sacrificed individually when they became paraplegic, lost over 20% of
body weight, or had severe breathing problems. The maximum length of the
study was 70 days.By study day 35, the osteolytic lesions were not
affected by bortezomib, were reduced by cabo alone, and further reduced
by the combination treatment. Bortezomib had inhibited the rise in serum
IgG2b levels, but cabo and the combination treatment had not. Despite the
effects on serum IgG2b, bortezomib did not significantly increase
survival, whereas cabo and the combination treatment did. Increased
survival with the combination was significant when compared to bortezomib
monotherapy, but not when compared to cabo monotherapy. Earlier we have
shown that cabo dose-dependently increases the necrotic tumor area in
bone, and proposed that the rise in IgG2b was due to lysis of plasma
cells and not tumor growth. Consistent with this hypothesis, the IgG2b
levels of cabo treated mice were lower at sacrifice than at day 35 in
this study.In summary, cabo increased survival and exhibited
bone-protective and anti-tumor effects in this murine model of MM.
Combination with bortezomib showed additive effects on survival. Based on
these results, further investigation of cabozantinib in multiple myeloma
is warranted.

