Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of the histone methyltransferase EZH2 induces chemoresistance
in acute myeloid leukemia (AML)


Resistance to chemotherapy and subsequent relapse is the most challenging
issue in the treatment of patients with Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML).
However, the underlying mechanisms still remain incompletely understood.
Here we report that loss of the histone methyltransferase EZH2 and
subsequent reduction of H3K27 trimethylation contribute to
chemoresistance in AML. In Myelodysplastic Syndrome (MDS) and
Myeloproliferative Neoplasms (MPN) EZH2 is often inactivated due to
mutations which is associated with poor prognosis. By use of quantitative
PCR and immunohistochemistry we show that a decrease of EZH2 mRNA and
protein also correlated with a poor prognosis of AML patients indicating
a tumor suppressor role of EZH2 in AML. EZH2 is located on chromosome
7q36.1 and it is not yet fully clear whether EZH2 expression is affected
in MDS and AML patients with del(7)/del(7q) who are largely refractory to
chemotherapy and have a poor prognosis. We found EZH2 levels to be
reduced in del(7)/del(7q) AML patients as determined by Western Blot.
Notably, the reduction of EZH2 protein levels via treatment with H3K27
methyltransferase inhibitors or lentiviral knockdown was sufficient to
induce chemoresistance of Normal Karyotype (NK)- AML blasts and cell
lines in vitro and in a xenograft mouse model. Furthermore, we observed
that EZH2 loss occurred during the acquisition of drug resistance in a
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor- and Cytarabine (AraC)- resistant AML cell
line. Pharmacological inhibition of CDK1 and treatment with the
proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib, respectively, increased EZH2 protein and
restored drug sensitivity. Functionally, the loss of EZH2 directly
induced upregulation of HOX genes, suggesting a stem-cell-like signature
to be associated with the resistance phenotype, which could be reverted
by Bortezomib treatment. To evaluate the potential of Bortezomib to
affect EZH2 levels in patient blasts we treated primary NK-AML blasts
collected at diagnosis ex vivo with Bortezomib. In almost all samples
Bortezomib treatment induced cytotoxic effects. In 5 out of 10 patients
the EZH2 protein level could be increased by Bortezomib treatment. We
furthermore examined the sensitivity of patient samples to AraC,
Bortezomib or combined treatment. Notably, for those patients with
increased EZH2 levels after Bortezomib exposure we found a significantly
decreased cell survival for the combined treatment compared to
single-agent treatment.Our data strongly suggest that restoration of EZH2
protein levels e.g. via proteasome inhibitors and thereby restoration of
EZH2 function might be a novel promising approach to increase therapy
response in AML.

