Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of novel Lithocholic acid carboxamides with
antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic effects on human cancer cells


Bile acids, the products of cholesterol catabolism, are synthesized in
the liver and subsequently excreted into the bile canaliculus and the
digestive tract as N-acyl conjugates of glycine or taurine. Among all
bile acids, Lithocholic acid (LCA) and Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA)
conjugates have been reported to inhibit the growth of various human
cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo. Most importantly LCA has been
shown to inhibit growth of different cancer cell lines including prostate
and neuroblastoma cells, while sparing normal cells. In addition, a
report has shown LCA-amphiphiles to be effective anti-tumor agents in a
colon cancer xenograft model. In contrast, there are reports indicating
that LCA may promote dimethyl hydrazine (DMH) induced colon
carcinogenesis and may also act as a carcinogen itself. This indicates
that in spite of having anti-cancer properties, LCA may pose a risk of
developing colon cancer. We hypothesized that LCA structure can be
optimized to eliminate the carcinogenesis promoting properties, while
enhancing its potency to create effective therapeutics against colon,
prostate, and other cancers. Therefore, we designed and synthesized a
series of novel cyclic and acyclic LCA-carboxamides by blocking the acid
functionality of LCA. The cytotoxicity of the novel analogs was evaluated
against colon (HT29) and prostate (DU145) cancer cells. Three analogs
ASR-320, ASR-322 and ASR-339 inhibited the viability of these cells with
an EC50 value of 5-10 M, while LCA had no effect on cell viability at
highest dose used (50 M). The results suggests that the new analogs are
at least 10 times more potent than the parent compound, LCA. One of the
agents, induced apoptosis in both prostate (DU145) and colon (HT29)
cancer cell lines, as indicated by Caspase 3 activation and PARP
degradation. Currently, we are further optimizing the structure based on
the initial leads and investigating efficacy and mechanistic studies in
prostate and colon cancer models. Detailed results of these
investigations will be presented.

