Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of critical residues in the C-terminal binding protein
(CtBP) dehydrogenase domain contributing to substrate binding, catalysis,
and oncogenic activity


C-terminal binding proteins (CtBP) 1 and 2 are transcriptional
coregulators that are upregulated in several cancers, including a
majority of studied breast, colorectal, and ovarian tumor samples. CtBPs
drive many cellular oncogenic properties, including migration, invasion,
proliferation, and survival, in part through repression of tumor
suppressor genes, such as E-cadherin, PTEN, BRCA1, and p16. CtBPs encode
an intrinsic dehydrogenase activity regulated by both intracellular NADH
concentration and the putative substrate 4-methylthio-2-oxobutyric acid
(MTOB). NADH binding induces CtBP dimerization, which regulates the
recruitment of transcriptional regulatory complexes. High levels of MTOB
appear to inhibit CtBP dehydrogenase function and induce cytotoxicity
among cancer cells in a CtBP-dependent manner. However, the function of
the substrate-binding domain has yet to be examined with regard to CtBP's
oncogenic activity. To this end, we have created several point mutations
in the substrate-binding pocket of CtBP and have determined key residues
for CtBP's enzymatic activity using an in vitro dehydrogenase assay. We
have found that a conserved tryptophan in the catalytic domain, and
specifically its aromatic moiety, is imperative for enzyme activity. This
tryptophan is unique to CtBP family proteins and distinguishes the CtBP
substrate-binding domain from that of all other families of
dehydrogenases. Additionally, we found arginine and histidine residues
lining the substrate pocket that are necessary for CtBP dehydrogenase
function. Knowledge of these residues allows the directed synthesis of
drugs with increased potency and higher CtBP specificity. Moreover, to
investigate the importance of the catalytic domain on CtBP's oncogenic
potential, we have transfected human cancer cell lines with several CtBP
substrate-binding domain mutants and observed the effects on cellular
processes, including growth, survival, migration, and recruitment of key
components of the transcriptional repressor complex. From this work we
have investigated the utility of CtBP, and specifically the CtBP
substrate-binding domain, as a target for cancer therapeutics. We also
provide preliminary insights into the function of this domain in cellular
models of cancer.

