Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microarray analysis of radioresistant mouse squamous cell
carcinoma: comparison of x-ray resistance and carbon-ion beam resistance


Radiotherapy is an effective locoregional control modality for many types
of tumors. However, sometimes treatment failures occur due to
radioresistance of cancer cells. To reduce treatment failure, elucidating
the epigenetic mechanism of radioresistance is very important.
Nucleotides associated with radioresistance could be promising treatment
targets or prognostic markers. The cancer stem cells (CSCs) theory helps
us to understand the resistance mechanism. CSCs are small population of
cells in cancer with stem cell properties such as self-renewal, cell
proliferation and multiple-differentiation. CSCs are very important
clinical target, because they induce tumor metastasis and recurrence.
Targeting CSCs would be promising therapy to reduce treatment failure.
X-ray induces DNA damages mostly through reactive oxygen species (ROS).
Since CSCs have the low levels of ROS and high DNA repair capacity, and
exist under hypoxia condition, CSCs are resistant to X-ray radiotherapy.
Therefore, it is difficult to eliminate CSCs with X-ray. Carbon ion beam
is known to be effective to cancer cells in hypoxic condition, since it
is high linear energy transfer (LET) beam inducing direct damage to DNA
rather than mediating ROS. Therefore, carbon ion beam radiotherapy is
more effective than x-ray radiotherapy against CSCs. However, even with
carbon ion beam, there are treatment failures, indicating that there
could be some protection mechanism other than ROS, associated in carbon
ion beam resistance. Our purpose is to elucidate the mechanism of
radioresistance and to identify the difference between X-ray resistance
and carbon-ion beam resistance by nucleotides profiling analysis.We
analyzed X-ray resistant (total 60Gy irradiated, 6fraction) and carbon
ion beam resistant (total 30Gy irradiated, 6fraction) mouse squamous cell
line NR-S1 by micro array. Total 23474 cDNA, 1265 micro RNA (miR) data
was obtained and each cell lines expression pattern was totally
different. We listed up all the cDNA and miR which specifically expressed
in X-ray resistant cells (64 cDNA, 20 miR) and carbon ion beam resistant
cells (34 cDNA, 16 miR). This data would be a basis in elucidating the
mechanism of radioresistance, and our next step is to identify which cDNA
or miR is related with the resistance.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

