Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Most patients with acquired aplastic anemia develop clonal
hematopoiesis early in disease


Clonal hematopoiesis is an expansion of hematopoietic stem cells, caused
by somatic mutations or epigenetic changes that confer a growth advantage
to the host cell. Although recently recognized as a phenomenon of aging,
clonal hematopoiesis has been traditionally associated with pre-cancerous
states and malignant transformation. Acquired aplastic anemia (AA), a
non-neoplastic autoimmune blood disorder occurring in children and
adults, has been associated with clonal hematopoietic disorders;
transformation to myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or acute leukemia is a
late complication in 10-15% of AA patients. Based on the association of
AA with clonal disorders, we hypothesized that clonal hematopoiesis is a
general phenomenon in AA, and can be seen in the majority of AA patients,
including children. To evaluate somatic genetic changes in AA, we used a
combination of single nucleotide polymorphism array (SNP-A) genotyping
and comparative whole exome sequencing of paired bone marrow aspirates
and skin in twenty nine patients with AA. All somatic mutations were
validated by bi-directional Sanger sequencing. The median age of
diagnosis was 14 years (range 1.5-65). Patients were analyzed at a median
of 1.1 years from diagnosis. None of the patients had histopathological
evidence of MDS at the time of analysis. Somatic mutations were
identified in the majority of patients, including patients with
pediatric-onset AA. Three patients (10%) had somatic loss-of-function
mutations in HLA class I alleles. Although MDS-associated mutations were
identified in 2 of 29 patients, the majority of mutations were not in
genes associated with MDS and hematologic malignancies. Pathway analysis
of mutated genes revealed an enrichment of genes in pathways of immunity
and transcriptional regulation. Comparison of somatic mutations in AA to
a patient with a 30-year history of AA who progressed to MDS revealed
that, unlike in AA, which was characterized by diverse and frequently
oligoclonal hematopoiesis, progression to MDS was associated with an
expansion of a dominant clone carrying multiple classical mutations
linked to malignancy: pathogenic mutations in SUZ12 (homozygous for the
mutated region due to copy number-neutral loss of heterozygosity (CN-LOH)
at the chromosomal region 17q11.2qter), ASXL1, RUNX1, and PHF6. In
conclusion, our data show that clonal hematopoiesis emerges in the
majority of patients with AA, including children and young adults, can be
detected early in disease, and has a mutational spectrum largely distinct
from MDS. Our results highlight that in the absence of morphologic
features of myelodysplasia, the presence of clonal hematopoiesis with
somatic mutations cannot be used to distinguish MDS from AA. Future
longitudinal studies of clonal hematopoiesis in AA will help to explain
differences in patients disease course, and will enable personalized
treatment approaches in AA.

