Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The proportion of breast and gynecological cancers in Australian
women that can be attributed to the use of oral contraceptives and
hormone replacement therapy


Introduction: In 2008 The International Agency for Research on Cancer
concluded that combined oral contraceptives (OCs) are a cause of cancer
of the breast and cervix but decrease the risk of ovarian and endometrial
cancer. They also concluded that estrogen-only hormone replacement
therapy (HRT) increases the risk of both endometrial and ovarian cancer,
while use of estrogen plus progestogen (combined) HRT increases the risks
of breast cancer. The level of risk associated with each cancer type
varies by duration and recency of use of hormones. Our aim was to
calculate the proportion of breast and gynecological cancers arising in
Australian women (population attributable fractions - PAF) that could be
attributed to these commonly used hormonal medications.Methods: We
calculated PAFs using the standard formula, which requires an estimate of
the relative risk for each exposure-cancer association and the prevalence
of the causal factor in the population. Relative risks were obtained from
published pooled or meta-analyses of the associations and prevalence
estimates were derived from Australian National Health Survey estimates
or other large national studies. For factors inversely associated with
cancer we calculated the prevented fraction and estimated the number of
cancers that were prevented due to exposure to the factor.Results: The
estimated PAFs suggested that fewer than 5% of breast and gynecological
cancers in Australia in 2010 could be attributed to oral contraceptive
use and estimates were similar for HRT use. However, the calculated
preventive fractions for oral contraceptives suggested that the numbers
of endometrial and ovarian cancers may have been 46% and 24% higher
respectively if no Australian women had used OCs. Given combined HRT
increases breast cancer risk and breast cancer is much more common than
endometrial or ovarian cancer we also assessed the likely effect if all
women taking combined HRT instead took estrogen-only HRT. Under this
scenario, we estimate the absolute numbers of ovarian and endometrial
cancers would increase slightly but the number of breast cancers
attributable to HRT use would decrease substantially.Conclusions: Our
analyses suggest that the use of combined OCs confers more benefit than
harm with respect to cancer incidence, with a small increase in
breast/cervical cancer diagnoses weighed against a much larger decrease
in numbers of endometrial and ovarian cancers. In contrast, our results
indicate that there would be fewer cancers overall if women did not use
HRT. When HRT is required, most guidelines recommend that women with a
uterus take combined HRT to prevent endometrial cancer. However, our
findings suggest that, in terms of total cancer burden, it might be safer
for women to avoid progestogens and use estrogen-only HRT for symptom
relief. Future studies should examine this possibility.

