Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacologic inhibition of the Np63/DGCR8 axis as a novel
therapeutic strategy for p53-deficient and mutant tumors


The p63 gene is a member of the p53 family, whose transcription is driven
by two alternative promoters, allowing the expression of two distinct
isoforms: TAp63 and Np63. In order to determine their roles in
tumorigenesis, our group has generated isoform-specific knockout mouse
models. TAp63 was found to be a pivotal tumor and metastasis suppressor,
whose function is achieved by the regulation of the miRNA biogenesis
pathway in a Dicer dependent way. Np63 was shown to be a master regulator
of the differentiation of epithelial tissues, such as the epidermis. Np63
is indeed able to directly induce the expression of DGCR8, a co-factor
essential in modulating miRNA biogenesis, sustaining in this manner a
proper epidermal differentiation. Accordingly, Np63 knockout mice die
shortly after birth because of developmental defects. In addition to
characterize its role in skin development, our group has recently
demonstrated that Np63 may act as an oncogene by counteracting TAp63
tumor suppressive activities in vivo: specific deletion of Np63 in p53/
thymic lymphomas caused TAp63 reactivation and consequent tumor
shrinkage.Based on all these findings, we hypothesized that Np63 might
support tumor formation not only by inhibiting TAp63, but also by
affecting miRNA maturation in a DGCR8 dependent manner. In line with this
hypothesis, we deem that the inhibition of the Np63/DGCR8 axis might be
crucial to curb Np63 tumor promoting activities. To this end, we screened
a drug library of more than 850 FDA approved compounds looking for
inhibitors of the Np63/DGCR8 axis. We found several small molecules that
were able to reduce Np63 protein stability and, as a result, to decrease
the expression levels of its target gene DGCR8 and that of a specific set
of miRNAs, whose biosynthesis is DGCR8-dependent. On the contrary, the
levels of DGCR8-independent miRNAs were not affected by the drug
treatments. In agreement with our hypothesis, curbing the Np63/DGCR8 axis
by either these drugs or inhibitors against the identified miRNAs,
reduced cell viability of different cancer cell types of both murine and
human origin, without affecting that of normal cells. In vivo analyses of
these compounds as well as of these miRNA inhibitors have showed their
efficacy in counteracting tumor formation and progression in mice. In
summary, we believe that the in vitro and in vivo characterization of the
Np63/DGCR8 axis will provide a novel and effective strategy to target
tumors relying on Np63 for their expansion, especially the most
therapeutically challenging ones devoid of a functional tumor suppressor
p53.

