Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclooxygenase inhibitors as delivery vehicles for histone
deacetylase inhibitors


Reversible acetylation state of histones determines the existence of the
chromatin in either the euchromatin state or the heterochromatin state,
which in turn control the accessibility of transcription factors to
promoter regions of genes on the chromatin. This reversible acetylation
state is regulated by two enzymes: histone deacetylases (HDAC) and
histone acetyl transferases (HAT). Imbalance in the expression of these
enzymes is associated with many diseases, with equilibrium tilted towards
HDAC in tumors. Reversal of the HDAC enzymes to their basal expression
level, by small molecule inhibition, has been shown to significantly
reduce the growth of tumors and/or completely eliminate them. Currently,
there are three (3) FDA approved HDAC inhibitors in the market:
vorinostat, FK228 and belinostat (all approved by the FDA for treatment
of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma). Although highly effective, these compounds
suffer drawbacks such as lack of activity against solid tumors,
off-target toxicities, short half-life, and lack of HDAC isoform
selectivity. To address some of these challenges, we chose to incorporate
a targeting moiety to the head group in the classical vorinostat
pharmacophoric model (comprising head group, linker and zinc binding
group (ZBG)). We envisaged that selective toxicity towards tumors (hence,
reduction in off-target toxicities), may be achieved if the HDAC
inhibitor is selectively delivered to tumor cells expressing
cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) enzyme. COX-2, which catalyzes the conversion of
arachidonic acid to prostaglandins, is ubiquitously expressed in a wide
range of cancer types and has been exploited to selectively image cancer
cells in the past. To achieve this, we designed and synthesized series of
hydroxamic acid-based compounds having either celecoxib or indomethacin
(COX-2 inhibitors) as the targeting moiety. In addition to these
compounds, we made compounds having biaryl group as ZBG. Compounds based
on this ZBG have been reported to selectively inhibit HDAC isoforms 1&2,
both culprits in a wide range of cancer types.Consistent with the
reported HDAC isoform selectivity, our biaryl ZBG compounds potently and
selectively inhibited HDACs 1& 2. Also, our hydroxamic acid-based
compounds were better than vorinostat in cell-free assay and showed
potent activity in MCF-7, A549 and HCT-116 cancer cell lines. Effort is
underway to evaluate the in vivo activity of our lead compounds in animal
models.

