Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct microbiome in colorectal cancers with the CpG Island
Methylator Phenotype


Introduction: Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) can be categorized by aberrant
CpG island methylation into CpG Island Methylator Phenotype (CIMP)
positive or negative disease. CIMP is also present in many cancers. In
glioblastoma, CIMP is associated with IDH mutations and malfunction of
ten eleven translocation (TET) enzymes which mediate DNA demethylation.
However, IDH and TET mutations are rare in CRC and the mechanism behind
CIMP in CRC remains elusive. Recently, our lab reported that
Fusobacterium was enriched in CIMP+ CRC cases. In the current study, we
explore if there are other CIMP associated microorganisms (CAM) in CRC,
and if CIMP is caused by microbial metabolites. Methods: Whole genome
sequencing was performed on 25 human CRC (16 CIMP+ and 9 CIMP-) and 19
adjacent normal tissues. The reads that did not map to the human genome
were aligned to a microbiome sequence database downloaded from Human
Microbiome Project. Bioinformatic analyses were performed to look for
CAM. To confirm CAM, qPCR was performed on additional samples. In
addition, a multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) method was developed to
detect 2-Hydroxygluterate (2HG), an inhibitor of TET enzymes, in
candidate bacteria. Results: 1) Unsupervised clustering and Spearman
correlation of microbiome data generated two distinct sample groups. One
contained 13 cases, all CIMP+ CRC (CIMP+ enriched group, G1). The other
had 6 CIMP- CRC and 17 adjacent normal tissues (CIMP- and adjacent normal
tissue enriched group, G2). 2) Volcano plot and statistical analysis
revealed that 656 and 1051 species/strains were present in G1 and G2,
respectively. 3) There was greater (p90 species, including bacteria,
viruses, and eukaryotes) than in G1 (16 species, all bacteria, including
Klebsiella pneumoniae. Most of them belong to Family Enterobacteriaceae).
4) qPCR showed that for CIMP1 CRC, 11/44 (25%) were positive for
Klebsiella sp. including 7 (15.9%) that were positive for K. pneumoniae,
while only 1/27 (3.7%) CIMP2, 2/45 (4.4%) CIMP0 CRC, and 2/49 (4%)
adjacent normal tissues were positive for Klebsiella sp.. 5) We used qPCR
to test for pks+ (enterotoxin associated with E. coli and K. pneumoniae)
bacteria. Pks was found in 16/83 (19.3%) CRC, including 13/51 (25.5%)
CIMP+ CRC, 3/32 (9.4%) CIMP- CRC and 6/66 (9.1%) adjacent normal tissues.
6) MRM detected 2HG production in Fusobacterium nucleatum cultures but
not in K. pneumoniae or E.coli. Conclusions: CIMP+ CRC are associated
with a distinct microbiome including pks containing bacteria (K.
pneumoniae and E. coli) and 2HG producing bacteria (Fusobacterium),
raising the possibility that the methylation defect could be contributed
to by the microbiome.

