Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sulforaphane suppresses the growth of triple-negative breast
cancer stem-like cells in vitro and in vivo


Approximately 10-20% of breast cancer consists of triple-negative tumors,
which present the poorest prognosis among the different subtypes. The
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) tumors are known to be enriched with
stem-like cells that are resistant to standard targeted drugs. Thus, it
is extremely important to develop new agents that are non-toxic and
specifically efficacious against these cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) that
are suggested to be responsible for the initiation and maintenance of
tumors. Here, we show that sulforaphane (SFN), a dietary component
abundant in broccoli and broccoli sprouts, inhibits cell proliferation
and sphere formation of the CSC population in TNBC cells.TNBC stem-like
cells were isolated from MDA-MB-231 Luci D3H1human triple negative breast
cancer cells using fluorescently activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis.
Six week old BalbC/nude mice were purchased from Jackson laboratory and
fed with an AIN-96G-purified diet containing no SFN (Harlan Teklad Inc)
until the end of experiments. The mice (n = 40) were treated with or
without daily i.p. injection of 50mg SFN/kg b.w. for 2 weeks prior to the
inoculation with MDA-MB-231 Luci D3H1 cells. The tumor cells were planted
into both sides of the 4th inguinal mammary fat pads. The SFN treatment
was continued for 3 additional weeks after the tumor cell xenografts.Our
results revealed that the CSC population isolated with CD49f+,
CD24-/CD44high showed the ability to form mammoshperes, which is a
characteristic of stemness. When these cells were treated with natural
dietary constituent SFN at the concentration of 7.5 M, they lost the
property of mammosphere formation in vitro. Furthermore, SFN pre-treated
animals (n = 20) exhibited a thirty percent reduction in tumor volume
compared with control (saline 0.9%) at day 30 after the tumor cell
inoculation. These data indicate that SFN suppresses triple negative
mammary tumor formation both in vitro (7.5uM) and in vivo (50mg/kg bw) by
targeting a CSC population. Further analysis on gene expression and
protein profiles are being performed to elucidate whether stem-related
developmental signaling pathways are being modulated by SFN.

