Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor treatment fields slow cell proliferation and enhance
radiosensitivity in a model of non-small cell lung cancer


Purpose: Mounting evidence suggests that tumor treatment fields (TTF) are
an effective and non-invasive treatment for Glioblastoma (GBM), non-small
lung cancer (NSCLCs) and pancreatic cancer. TTF is known to inhibit
microtubule spindle formation, leading to mitotic arrest and ultimately
cell death. Relatively few studies explore the biological effects of TTF
on cells and the mechanism of action of tumor control remains unclear.
Therefore, in this study we investigated the mechanism of TTF-induced
cell death in NSCLC and explored the potential conditional lethality of
combining radiation and TTF.Methods: All studies were conducted in vitro
using a panel of NSCLC cell lines and TTF was generated using the
Inovitro system developed by Novocure (Haifa, Israel). Experiments
assessing the effects of TTF on cell proliferation, cell viability, cell
cycle distribution, and clonogenic survival when combined with radiation
were conducted to assess the potential effectiveness of TTF in the
treatment of NSCLC.Results: Optimized TTF (frequency) was applied to a
panel of NSCLC cell lines displaying different genetic characteristics
(H1299, H1650, and A549) and resulted in a significant reduction in cell
proliferation irregardless of genotype. Trypan blue exclusion determined
that 96 hours of TTF the percentage of cell death was significantly
elevated in H1650 and H1299, but not in A549 cells indicating that TTF
may be slowing, rather than killing cells. Furthermore, cell cycle
analysis revealed a dramatic shift in cell cycle distribution in the
first 24-48 hours in some cell lines, a phenotype that was reversed by 96
hours, indicating that the cell population may be adapting to TTF. To
determine if the observed shift in cell cycle distribution effected
radiation sensitivity, clonogenic survival assays were performed on cells
irradiated with an acute dose of 2 Gy -rays followed by 48 and 72 hours
of TTF. TTF significantly enhanced the effect of radiation exposure after
both time points examined, however TTF enhancement of radiation induced
cell killing in A549 and H1650 after 48 hours of TTF (SF2 = 0.41, 0.16)
was greater than that observed after 72 hours of TTF (SF2 = 0.55, 0.38)
indicating that the adaptive response of cells to TTF observed in cell
cycle analysis may be effecting cellular radiosensitivity.Conclusions:
These results indicate that TTF dramatically slows cell proliferation and
significantly enhances radiation-induced cell killing of NSCLC cells. The
mechanisms of cell death and molecular responses to TTF are now under
investigation.

