Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ketogenic diet sensitizes FaDu human head and neck cancer
xenografts to cisplatin as well as ionizing radiation combined with
cetuximab


Purpose: Ketogenic diets (KDs) used in the treatment of epilepsy are high
fat, low carbohydrate diets that force cells to utilize fatty acid
oxidation for mitochondrial energy metabolism. KDs have been suggested to
sensitize tumors to standard radio-chemotherapy because cancer cells,
relative to normal cells, produce more reactive oxygen species from
mitochondrial metabolism and increased cancer cell glucose metabolism is
thought to provide reducing equivalents to compensate for the metabolic
production of hydroperoxides (PMID: 23743570). The current study was
designed to determine if the improved KetoCal formula that includes more
polyunsaturated fatty acids was efficacious in sensitizing human head and
neck cancer xenografts to standard radio-chemotherapies.Experimental
Design: Mice bearing FaDu human head and neck cancer xenografts were
assigned to either standard mouse chow or new KetoCal KD and treated with
cetuximab (6 mg/kg i.p. 2 times per week for 2 weeks), cisplatin (2 mg/kg
2 i.p. times per week for 2 weeks), and/or IR (6 Gy x 2 dose followed by
1.8 Gy x 2 doses). In similar experiments mice were fed either standard
chow or the new KetoCal formula and treated with IR (6 Gy 2 times a week
for 2 weeks, and then 1.8 Gy 3 times a week indefinitely) and cetuximab
(6 mg/kg cetuximab 2 times a week indefinitely). In parallel, tumors were
harvested from treated animals and blood samples were collected from head
and neck cancer patients treated with standard of care radio-chemotherapy
and the new KetoCal KD. Blood samples were used to confirm ketosis as
well as using tumors and blood to measure markers of redox homeostasis
(protein carbonyls, GSH/GSSG, and 4HNE-modified proteins).Results: Mice
tolerated all treatments as indicated by no change in general health
status as assessed by body condition scoring. Mice treated with new
KetoCal + cisplatin demonstrated increased survival relative to cisplatin
alone. Furthermore, mice treated with new KetoCal + IR + cetuximab showed
a significant decrease in tumor growth rate and survival, relative to any
other group. Western blot analysis of tumor homogenates demonstrated
increased phosphorylated epidermal growth factor in mice fed a KD which
was suppressed with the addition of cetuximab as well as increased 4HNE
modified proteins. Preliminary results from human studies indicated
ketosis was achieved without serious adverse event. Furthermore, patients
on KD demonstrate an increase in carbonyl content and a decrease in both
GSH and GSSG.Conclusions: KD remains an attractive adjunct therapy for
cancer patients, especially for head and neck cancer patients due to
their feeding status. The mice xenograft studies support the hypothesis
that the new KetoCal diet combined with standard of care treatments for
head and neck cancer has the potential to improve clinical outcomes.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

