Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A natural small molecule, catechol, induces c-Myc degradation by
directly targeting ERK2 in lung cancer in vitro and in vivo


For decades, lung cancer has been a leading cause of death in the U.S.,
mainly due to oncogenic signaling pathways activated by carcinogens such
as smoking. Various carcinogens induce EGFR/RAS/MAPK signaling that is
critical in the development of lung cancer. In particular, constitutive
activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (ERK2) is observed
in many lung cancer patients, and therefore developing compounds capable
of targeting ERK2 against lung carcinogenesis will be beneficial to these
patients. Herein, we examined the therapeutic effects of catechol (also
known as pyrocatechol or 1,2-dihydroxybenzene), a naturally occurring
chemical in many foods such as apple, banana, apricot, grape, plum,
avocado and mushroom. Co-crystallography results suggested that ERK2 is a
direct target of catechol. In agreement with the co-crystallography
result, catechol was confirmed to inhibit ERK2 kinase activity in vitro.
Catechol inhibited anchorage-independent KP2 and H460 lung cancer cell
growth in a dose-dependent manner. Phosphorylation of c-Myc, a substrate
of ERK2, was reduced in catechol-treated lung cancer cells compared to
untreated controls. Decreased c-Myc phosphorylation resulted in its
reduced protein stability and subsequent down-regulation of total c-Myc
levels. Treatment with catechol induced G1 cell cycle arrest and resulted
in a decrease of G1 phase related proteins, CDK2 and cyclin D1. In vivo
study results also revealed that catechol inhibited growth of KP2 and
H460 xenograft tumors. Phosphorylation levels of c-Myc were also strongly
decreased by catechol treatment in vivo. Taken together, we have shown
that catechol exerts inhibitory effects on the ERK2/c-Myc signaling axis
in lung cancer cells to reduce tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. These
findings suggest that catechol, a natural small molecule, possesses
potential as a novel therapeutic agent against lung carcinogenesis.

