Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) functions to downregulate the
transcription of MGMT gene in human glioblastoma cells


The O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) gene located at
chromosome 10q26 encodes a DNA repair protein that abrogates the
therapeutic effects of alkylating agents by preventing the formation of
mutagenic lesions or cytotoxic DNA crosslinks. MGMT is highly expressed
in human gliomas and its transcriptional regulation has emerged as a
major translational focal point in neuro-oncology, because the epigenetic
silencing of the MGMT gene which occurs in a subset of these malignancies
confers improved treatment responses to both chemo and radiation
therapies. While the promoter methylation and its contribution to glioma
therapy has been much studied, the regulation of MGMT transcription per
se, proteins accessory to the process and the chromatin structure thereof
are not well understood. The CCCTC-binding transcription factor (CTCF) is
one such multifunctional protein involved not only in DNA methylation but
also with transcriptional activation/repression, and induction of short
or long range chromatin looping. CTCF, an 11 zinc-finger containing
protein is more frequently known for its insulating effects by binding
diverse nucleotide sequences and restricting the function of
transcriptional enhancers. Our bioinformatic analysis of the human MGMT
gene showed an unusually high (7-10 sites) congregation of CTCF-binding
sites distal to the promoter in human cancer cell lines. Given these
considerations, we used CTCF siRNA to eliminate the transcription factor
in two MGMT-proficient GBM cell lines (SF180 and GBM10). A specific
reduction of CTCF protein by individual and pooled siRNAs was
consistently accompanied by increased MGMT protein and mRNA levels.
Furthermore, the DNA repair activity of MGMT was increased by 50%, which
correlated with a proportional reduction of the CTCF protein in
siRNA-exposed cells. Currently, we are investigating the effect of CTCF
on MGMT reactivation in cells with methylation, MGMT promoter activity in
CTCF silenced cells and the effect of enforced CTCF expression on MGMT
transcription. Our results for the first time highlight the involvement
of multivalent CTCF in MGMT expression. Since CTCF is tightly linked with
DNA methylation, further studies should reveal its role in silencing of
MGMT in human GBMs (supported by CPRIT RP130266 and NIH RO3CA125872
grants to KSS).

