Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-375 suppresses extracellular matrix degradation and
invadopodial activity in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a highly invasive cancer
having an association with locoregional recurrence and lymph node
metastasis. We previously reported that patients with lower microRNA-375
(miR-375) tumor:normal expression levels showed significantly decreased
disease-specific survival, increased locoregional recurrence and distant
metastasis. We also previously described that HNSCC cells with increased
miR-375 showed significantly diminished invasion in vitro. The ability of
cancer cells to degrade extracellular matrix (ECM) through secreted and
membrane-bound proteases allows local invasion into the surrounding
stroma, as well as possible metastasis. Invadopodia are specialized
actin-rich structures, which mediate ECM degradation. Our objective was
to determine whether elevated miR-375 expression in HNSCC cells also
affects invadopodia formation and activity.For the evaluation of the
matrix degradation properties of UMSCC1 and OSC19 cell lines, an
invadopodial matrix degradation assay was used. Western blot analyses
were conducted to measure the total protein levels of selected
invadopodia-associated proteins. The tyrosine phosphorylation states of
cortactin were evaluated by immunoprecipitation experiments. For the
detection of levels of secreted proteases in the conditioned cell growth
medium, Human Protease Arrays were used. Quantitative RT-PCR measurements
were used to evaluate the mRNA expression levels of the commonly
regulated proteases.We observed that the HNSCC cell lines with elevated
miR-375 expression showed significant reductions in ECM degradation. We
further identified that HNSCC cells expressing increased miR-375
expression had significantly suppressed amounts of mature invadopodia,
although the levels of invadopodium precursors were not significantly
altered. We determined that increased miR-375 expression in the HNSCC
cell lines did not reduce cellular levels of invadopodia components, such
as Tks5, cortactin and fascin. We also did not observe significant
alterations to the tyrosine phosphorylation states of cortactin in the
HNSCC cell lines. However, we found that the HNSCC cells with higher
miR-375 expression had significant reductions in the mRNA expression and
secreted levels of specific proteases, including Kallikrein 6, Kallikrein
10, and MMP-9.In summary, we have extended our understanding of the
impact of miR-375 expression levels on HNSCC invasion. We demonstrated
that increased miR-375 expression in HNSCC cells reduced ECM degradation
and invadopodial activity. Our data suggest that reduced miR-375
expression in HNSCC patients can contribute to the invasive properties of
head and neck cancer through increased invadopodial activity.

