Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Study of the functional importance of PPAR in honokiol-induced
apoptosis of hepatoma cells


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the leading cause of death in male
cancer patients in Asia. PPAR exhibited an inhibitory role in
hepatocarcinogenesis in vitro and in vivo. Recently, it was found that
honokiol functions not only as a RXR agonist but also a PPAR agonist, and
is capable of potentiating the activation of PPAR in the presence of PPAR
agonist rosiglitazone in HLE human hepatoma cells. It also has been
reported that honokiol exerts inhibitory effects on the growth and
migration in hepatoma cells. However, whether PPAR overexpression
modulates the honokiol-induced growth inhibition in hepatoma cells is not
known. Firstly, we examined the expression of PPAR in tumor samples from
83 HCC patients by immunohistochemical staining. Our results showed that
53 samples had no PPAR and the clinical parameters including tumor
number, stages, and macroscopic vascular invasion (MVI) showed
significant negative correlation with PPAR expression. However, the
expression of PPAR was not associated with disease free survival or
overall survival of patients with HCC. Using PPAR overexpressed SK-Hep1
cells (SK-Hep1-PPAR) for in vitro analyses, we found that 40 M honokiol
treatment of SK-Hep1-PPAR cells induced a 20% increase of growth
inhibition at 48 hour as compared to vector control cells by MTT assay.
This corresponded well with the 15% increase in G0/G1 phase after
honokiol treatment at 24 hour compared to vector control cells. In
addition, honokiol treatment resulted in decreased cyclin D1, increased
p21 and KLF4 expressions in SK-Hep1-PPAR cells. Moreover, miRNA array
analyses showed that increased expression of miR-222, let-7i, miR-628-3p
and miR-664 as well as decreased miR-1291, miR184 and miR1249 were
observed in SK-Hep1-PPAR cells. In conclusion, PPAR is not only a
biomarker for prognosis of patients with HCC but also play an important
role in the honokiol-induced growth inhibition of hepatoma cells. The
functional importance of PPAR regulated miRNA is currently under further
investigation.

