Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tyrosine phosphorylation of MACC1 is essential and druggable for
colorectal cancer metastasis restriction


We identified the previously undescribed gene Metastasis Associated in
Colon Cancer 1 (MACC1). MACC1 is a metastasis inducer and prognostic
biomarker for colorectal cancer (CRC). MACC1 has meanwhile been confirmed
as decisive driver for tumorigenesis and metastasis for a broad variety
of solid cancers. Here we aim to identify the impact of defined tyrosine
phosphorylations on the function of the metastasis inducer MACC1.In
silico identified MACC1 tyrosine phosphorylation (pY) sites were ranked
and most promising positions were site-directed mutated in wildtype (wt)
MACC1 constructs. Human CRC cells were transduced with these constructs.
Tyrosine phosphorylation was quantified by selected reaction monitoring
(SRM)-mass spectrometry. Effects of pY-MACC1 mutants on cell migration,
proliferation, dissemination and colony formation were assessed in cell
culture as well as on liver metastasis formation in human CRC-xenografted
mice. To identify MACC1-phosphorylating kinases the MACC1 interactome was
identified using mass spectrometry. Most promising binding partners were
validated by immunoprecipitation. Impact of inhibitors targeting kinases
phosphorylating MACC1 was assessed on MACC1-induced tumor growth and
liver metastasis in human CRC-xenografted mice by in vivo imaging.We
report that tyrosine phosphorylation of MACC1 is hierarchical and
essential for motility and proliferation in cell culture, as well as for
tumor growth and metastasis in mice. We identified kinases for MACC1
phosphorylation. Targeting these kinases using inhibitors employed in
clinical trials restricts MACC1-induced tumor growth and metastasis in
mice.MACC1 tyrosine phosphorylation is crucial for metastasis and is
druggable by small molecule inhibitors. This fundamental finding opens
new therapeutic options for inhibition of MACC1-induced cancer metastasis.

