Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidation of B cell receptor signaling in Burkitt's lymphoma
reveals novel signaling nodes with potential therapeutic relevance


B cell antigen receptors (BCR) control important cell fate decisions of
the B-lineage including differentiation, proliferation and B cell
survival. Recently, it was demonstrated that beside chronic lymphocytic
leukemia and diffuse large B cell lymphomas of the activated B cell-type
also major subgroups of Burkitt lymphomas (BL) critically depend on BCR
expression. As intensive chemotherapy and anti-CD20 antibodies are the
current treatment strategies, pharmacological interference with critical
BCR signaling pathways might open up the possibility for targeted
therapies in BL. Such targeted therapeutic approaches are needed in
particular for elderly patients and patients with endemic BL in
developing countries. In order to (i) identify putative drug targets in
BL and (ii) to elucidate BCR induced processes, we characterized BCR
signaling in BL by quantitative phosphoproteomics and transcriptome
sequencing. We identified about 10.000 phospho-sites in various BL
cell-types, of which more than 1000 in almost 600 proteins were regulated
in a BCR-dependent manner leading to dynamic transcription of more than
100 genes. The identified BCR signaling effectors belong to various
functional groups, of which kinases, transcription factors and
cytoskeleton regulators are most represented and bioinformatic analyses
revealed that 83% of the identified BCR effectors were not described in
the context of B cells or lymphoma before.For instance, we identified a
cell surface receptor that is highly expressed in BL and whose expression
is regulated by the transcription factor c-Myc which is known to be
frequently dysregulated in BL. ShRNA mediated knockdown of the cell
surface receptor in BL cells impaired phosphorylation of spleen tyrosine
kinase (Syk) and B-cell linker protein (BLNK) upon BCR stimulation, most
probably due to dysregulation of the cytoskeleton. By using stable
isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) we investigated
in a comprehensive manner, how the newly identified BCR co-receptor
influences BCR signaling. Our study is a considerable complement to
recent genetic studies that elucidated the mutational landscape in BL as
it reveals mechanisms of signaling addiction to non-mutated BCR effector
proteins that have to be validated in the future.

