Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SPARC in tumor microenvironment induces dormancy of prostate
cancer in bone


Despite significant advancement in early detection and treatment of
prostate cancer, approximately 35% of patients who had surgically
resected primary tumor experience recurrent disease after years of the
treatment, suggesting that tumor cells disseminated before surgery remain
dormant in patients for a period of time and awaken as recurrent disease.
Prostate cancer is known to frequently recur in the bone; however, how
dormant cells switch its phenotype leading to recurrent tumor remains
poorly understood. We have isolated two syngeneic cell lines (Indolent
and Aggressive), derived from in vivo selection after injection of PC3mm
stem-like cells as a model system, which recapitulates dormancy and
recurrence in bone microenvironment. We found that Indolent cells
retained dormant phenotype whereas Aggressive cells grew rapidly in the
tibial bone in vivo while the growth rates of both cells in culture were
similar, suggesting the role of microenvironment in regulation of
dormancy and recurrence. The expression profile by our microarray
analysis revealed that SPARC and Noggin (a known inhibitor of BMP7) were
significantly upregulated in Indolent and Aggressive cells, respectively.
Furthermore, SPARC secreted by Indolent cells was found to stimulate BMP7
and DKK1 in microenvironmental cells (bone stromal cells and bone
mesenchymal stem cells, respectively) that in turn kept cancer cells in
dormant state. We previously showed that BMP7 secreted by bone stromal
cells induced senescence in prostate cancer stem-like cells leading to
dormancy of tumor cells. On the other hand, DKK1, an inhibitor of the Wnt
pathway, suppressed Wnt-induced growth and decreased self-renewal of
prostate cancer stem-like cells. We also found that DKK1 inhibited
prostate cancer growth by inducing G1 cell cycle arrest. In addition, Wnt
was found to up-regulate Noggin expression which might be a possible
switch toward recurrence. Importantly, we observed elevated expression of
a DNA methylase gene, DNMT3B, in Aggressive cells. Treatment of
Aggressive cells with 5-Azacytidine reversed the SPARC gene expression in
vitro, suggesting that the SPARC gene is epigenetically controlled by
microenvironment via downregulation of the DNMT3B methylase gene.
Furthermore, when Aggressive cells were cultured in the conditioned
medium (CM) prepared from Indolent CM-treated bone mesenchymal cells,
cell proliferation was found to be significantly reduced. Therefore, Wnt
potentially serves as a recurrent factor in the bone microenvironment by
upregulating Noggin and by inhibiting the effect of BMP7 on cancer
stem-like cells. These findings suggest that SPARC plays a key role in
maintaining dormancy of prostate cancer cells in bone microenvironment.

