Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toward better selection of PD-1 blockade responders through direct
markers of adaptive immune resistance


Introduction. The role of PD-L1 as a predictive biomarker for response to
PD-1 blockade is unclear. Emerging evidence, including our findings
reported here, suggests that PD-L1 expression is important only when
induced by the presence of T cells producing interferons, in what is
termed adaptive immune resistance (Tumeh, Nature 2014). Therefore,
studying PD-L1 expression in response or not to interferons may define
molecular mechanisms to select patients whose tumors are incapable to
respond to T cell infiltration by upregulating PD-L1.Experimental
procedures. After the optimization process, we exposed 50 established
melanoma cell lines to interferons (alpha, beta and gamma) and measured
PD-L1, pSTAT1 (Y701), pSTAT3, pSTAT5, pSTAT6, NF-kB, pERK (1/2), pAKT,
pP38, cleaved PARP, CyD3 expression level by flow cytometry (FACS LSRII)
and PD-L1 as well as STAT1 transcript level was checked by quantitative
real time PCR. Western blots were performed to further analyze interferon
receptor signaling in selected cells lines.Results. Of 50 cell lines
tested, 44 responded to at least one interferon ranging from 2 to 10-fold
increase in PD-L1 compared to baseline expression, and 5 cell lines
failed to respond to interferons with PD-L1 upregulation. Measurement of
PD-L1 transcript level by qPCR as well as surface expression level by
flow cytometry demonstrated that PD-L1 transcript level was up-regulated
close to 20 fold by IFN in 30 minutes for two representatives of good
PD-L1 responders. Phosphoflow experiments confirmed that 3 representative
good responding cell lines had significant up-regulation of pSTAT1
compared to the baseline. However, among non-PD-L1 responding cell lines
M412B showed significant change in pSTAT1, but WM1366 and M395 did not
both, by phosphoflow and western blot analyses. M368 is a cell line that
did not up-regulate PD-L1 upon exposure to interferon gamma, but it did
up-regulate PD-L1 when exposed to type I interferons (alpha and beta).
This cell line showed loss of JAK2 expression. WM1366 showed low JAK2
expression with loss of pJAK2 and SOCS1 overexpression, which is
consistent with non-significant up-regulation of PD-L1 upon interferon
treatment.Conclusions. PD-L1 is inducible in the majority of melanoma
cell lines tested, but approximately 10% of them are not able to
up-regulate PD-L1 expression upon interferon exposure. JAK-STAT pathway
is critically important in regulation of inducible expression of PD-L1,
and we have defined molecular defects in individual cell lines, which did
not up-regulate PD-L1 expression. This information may be important to
assess clinical data from PD-1/L1 blockade trials as to whether intact
interferon receptor pathway inducible response may better predict the
response of anti-PD-1/L1 immunotherapy than baseline PD-L1 levels.

