Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the phosphorylated RXR on cellular proliferation and
liver tumorigenesis in mice


We have reported that a malfunction of RXR due to aberrant
phosphorylation at serine 260 by MAPK is associated with the development
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (Cancer Res 2001). The phosphorylated
RXR impairs normal receptor functions of either RXR or RAR, which are
respective homodimeric or heterodimeric partner of RXR, in a
dominant-negative manner. Besides, these impaired receptor functions
result in the downregulation of their target gene expression and inducing
hepatocarcinogenesis by promoting cell proliferation and the inhibition
of apoptosis, which suggesting that phosphorylated RXR plays a crucial
role in the development of HCC. However, these findings were revealed
primarily using HCC cell lines that express the phosphorylated-RXR
(p-RXR) proteins and it still remains unclear whether p-RXR may impact in
the process of hepatocarcinogenesis in vivo. Therefore, in order to
investigate the biological functions of the p-RXR in vivo, we generated
doxycycline-inducible ES cell line and transgenic mouse, both of which
overexpress phosphomimic mutant of RXR (T82D/S260D). We found that the
T82D/S260D inducible ES cells kept undifferentiated state in
differentiating media, which indicating that the phosphorylated form of
RXR plays an important role to maintain pluripotency of ES cells. On the
other hand, the development of liver tumors induced by liver carcinogen
diethylnitrosamine (DEN) was enhanced in the transgenic mice that
overexpress T82D/S260D protein in the liver. Besides, the increased liver
tumors in the transgenic mice resulted from the promotion of cell cycle
progression, not the inhibition of apoptosis. Interestingly, expression
of -catenin and its target genes, cyclin D1 and c-myc, were increased in
transgenic liver tumors, although the expression of retinoid-related
genes, such as RAR, p21 and p27, were not altered compared with control
mice. These results suggest that a retinoid nuclear receptor, RXR may
prevent the development of DEN-induced liver tumors by regulating the
canonical Wnt/-catenin signaling pathways in mice.

