Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of cervical cancer stem cells by using an imaging
system for proteasome activity


Cervical cancer is one of the most common cancers among women worldwide
and the fourth most common cause of cancer death in women worldwide
(275,100 deaths in 2008). For advanced cervical cancer, concurrent
radiotherapy and chemotherapy are commonly administered. However, the
5-year survival rate remains at only 60%, indicating the need for
significant improvements in clinical outcomes. Recurrence and metastatic
potential can be due to a specific radioresistant subpopulation of cells
with stem-like characteristics, cancer stem cells (CSCs) which maintain
the capacity to regenerate entire tumors. Targeting of the CSCs is a
promising avenue to explore to develop new therapies for this devastating
cancer. Recently, cancer cells with low proteasome activity have been
identified as CSCs in breast cancer, glioma, and pancreatic cancer with a
fluorescence marker system for level of proteasome activity. We stably
infected two cervical cancer cell lines, HeLa and CaSki, with an
expression vector for a fusion protein between the green fluorescent
protein, ZsGreen, and the C-terminal degron of murine ornithine
decarboxylase to monitor 26S proteasome activity in living cells. we
divided these cells into ZsGreen-high (low proteasome activity) and
ZsGreen-low (high proteasome activity) groups according to their
fluorescence intensity. Sphere forming assay revealed that the
self-renewal ability of the ZsGreen-high population was significantly
higher than that of the ZsGreen-low population. Tumorigenicity assay
confirmed that the ZsGreen-high population exhibited higher tumorigenic
potential than the ZsGreen-low population. The radioresistance of the
ZsGreen-high population of both HeLa and CaSki cells and the
chemoresistance of the ZsGreen-high population of CaSki cells were
confirmed by clonogenic survival assay and the MTT assay, respectively.
These results indicated that ZsGreen-high populations of both the HeLa
and CaSki cell lines possess CSC-like properties and therapeutic
resistance. We conclude that established cervical cancer cell lines are
heterogeneous with regard to their intrinsic proteasome activity and that
they contain CSCs-enriched subpopulations that can be identified by low
proteasome activity.

