Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of the Rho-GTPase CDC42 in glioma migration


Introduction: Malignant astrocytoma is a highly proliferative and
invasive neoplasm that infiltrates diffusely into regions of normal brain
rendering total surgical extirpation impossible and effective local
radiation therapy difficult. Conventional chemotherapy frequently fails
because most agents administered systemically will not cross the
blood-brain barrier. Despite recent reports which have shown a 2-month
survival advantage when adjuvant temozolomide chemotherapy is used for
glioblastoma multiforme, death ensues in most cases within 2 years of
diagnosis. For truly significant advances to be made in the treatment of
patients with malignant astrocytoma, we must develop a greater
understanding of the basic biology of these neoplasms. PURPOSE: The aim
of this study is to examine a key pathway involving the Rho-GTPase family
of proteins that regulates glioma cell migration from the tumor mass into
normal brain tissue. One of the Rho-GTPase family proteins, CDC42 is the
major regulator of cell polarity. It plays a crucial role in controlling
the direction of cell migration by determining the cell membrane
localization of lamellipodia, and by moving the microtubule-organizing
center and Golgi apparatus in front of the nucleus and towards the
leading edge of the cell. However, there have been few reports on the
role of CDC42 in human astrocytomas. METHOD: In order to examine the role
of CDC42 in glioblastoma, we generated stable doxycycline (DOX) inducible
cell lines expressing wild type (WT) -, constitutively active (CA) -, and
dominant negative (DN) -CDC42. Cell viability, migration, and invasion
assays were performed using the cell lines. We also used orthotopic
xenograft mouse models and evaluated the survival by Kaplan-Meier
analysis. RESULTS: Administration of DOX induced the expression of
CA-CDC42 and demonstrated significantly increased migration and invasion
properties compared to WT and DN-CDC42. Furthermore, CA-CDC42 bearing
mice with DOX treatment had significantly decreased survival compared to
WT and DN with DOX. CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrated that CA-CDC42
enhances the astrocytoma invasion and migration. Furthermore, CA-CDC42
increased the size of implanted tumor in the murine brain leading to
early mortality. We concluded that CA-CDC42 plays an important role for
astrocytoma malignancy.

