Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of mucin-like 1 (MUCL1) in breast cancer and its
novel role as a potent activator of cell proliferation


MUCL1 was first identified as a breast-specific gene in 2001. Based on
its highly restricted mRNA expression in normal tissues, and its
continued expression during breast tumorigenesis and progression
(expressed in >90% of breast cancers), MUCL1 is an attractive tumor
associated antigen as a potential therapeutic target. However, very
little is known about the cellular location and biological functions of
the MUCL1 protein, which will have a major impact on its druggability.
Here we describe our efforts to fully characterize the cellular
localization of MUCL1 and discover its functional roles in breast cancer.
Protein sequence analysis yielded an ambiguous prediction as MUCL1
contains a peptide signal sequence for targeting to the ER/Golgi
secretory pathway, but it could also act as a weak transmembrane domain.
Flow cytometry and cell surface protein biotinylation studies were
performed to assess whether it could be a surface membrane protein. The
MUCL1 protein was found in both whole cell lysates and conditioned
mediums of native cancer cell lines or ectopically expressing cell lines.
However, cell surface expression was not detectable in either system.
Interestingly, intracellular protein expression did not necessarily
correspond with levels of secreted protein. Phenotypic assays revealed a
strong dependence on MUCL1 for cell proliferation, but not cell
migration/invasion, in several breast cancer cell lines. We further
explored the mechanism by which MUCL1 regulated cell growth by carrying
out cell cycle analysis and assessing expression of cell cycle markers.
Knockdown of MUCL1 by siRNA triggered a G1/S phase growth arrest along
with decreased Cyclin D1 expression and increased expression of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CDKIs) p21 and p27. Finally, we
investigated the impact of MUCL1 loss on kinase signaling pathways in
breast cancer cells through phospho-kinase array profiling. Strong
phospho-FAK, JNK and c-Jun signals were detected in control cell lines
which were abrogated by MUCL1 siRNA and confirmed by Western blot. Our
data indicate that MUCL1 is not a membrane bound protein, but is secreted
by some breast cancer cells, while others only express high levels of
intracellular MUCL1. We are the first to identify an important role for
MUCL1 in the proliferation of breast cancer cells, likely mediated via
the FAK/JNK signaling pathway. These data suggest a potential use for
targeting this protein in breast cancer.

