Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vardenafil is superior to idarubicin in treatment of glioma


Idarubicin (IDA) is a very potent second generation anthracycline that
has shown high efficacy against glioma in vitro. However, this agent has
failed to exert satisfactory therapeutic response in patients with brain
tumors.Phosphodiesterase (PDE-5), an enzyme which hydrolyzes
intracellular cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), is highly expressed
in many brain tumor cell lines. We proposed that increasing cGMP in the
brain by the potent PDE-5 inhibitor vardenafil (VAR) will augment the
antitumor efficacy of IDA against glioma. We also proposed that VAR will
induce apoptosis of glioma cells. Here we show for the first time that
VAR (10 mg/kg) enhanced the antitumor activity of IDA (0.1mg/kg). VAR
alone inhibited tumor growth and prolonged survival of glioma bearing
rats. Histopathological examination revealed that tumors from glioma
bearing rats treated with VAR alone or VAR+ IDA presented a significant
reduction in mitotic index, indicating less proliferative tumors, as
compared to those which received PBS (control) or IDA. Real time PCR
results demonstrated that VAR inhibited mRNA expression of PDE-5 in the
brains of animals treated with VAR, compared to control-treated group,
implicating an important role for the inhibition of PDE-5 in the
antitumor activity of VAR. Interestingly, the antitumor activity of VAR
was similar to that of IDA. Moreover, animals receiving either VAR alone
or VAR+IDA demonstrated statistically significant improvement in overall
survival when compared with control (PBS) or IDA groups. In order to
explain such an unexpected finding, we examined the antiproliferative,
pro-apoptotic and anti-invasive activities VAR in vitro. MTT assay
results showed that VAR significantly inhibited the growth of rat C6
glioma cells. Annexin V propidium iodide assay results revealed that the
inhibition of C6 cell growth is mediated at least in part by inducing C6
apoptosis. Wound healing and soft agar colony formation assays showed
that VAR inhibited the migration and anchorage-independent growth of C6
cells, respectively. This suggests that the enhanced antitumor effect of
VAR could be due to a combined antiproliferative, pro-apoptotic and
anti-invasive activities.Together, our data support anti-glioma
properties of VAR, and provide a proof-of-concept basis for further
development of VAR as potential adjuvant for treatment of brain tumors.

