Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prospective profiling of systemic and loco-regional alterations
during intraperitoneal chemotherapy for ovarian cancer, results from GOG
271


Objectives: The concept of personalized approaches for recurrence in
ovarian cancer has progressed at a modest pace, compared to other
cancers. This is partly due to our limited understanding of the local
tumor microenvironment during and immediately following
chemotherapy-induced tumor involution, which requires sampling of the
peritoneal cavity. Most studies to date have focused on chemo-naive
tumors and on the more easily accessible peripheral blood samples, yet
these are often not reflective of local changes. We hypothesize that
sequential sampling and analysis of blood and intraperitoneal (IP) fluid
during IP chemotherapy is feasible and will provide molecular insight
into chemotherapy-induced systemic and local changes in the tumor
environment.Methods: Peritoneal fluid aspiration or wash and blood
samples were obtained from patients (n = 13) at three time points
(baseline and following the first and second rounds of chemotherapy,
respectively) Nanostring was performed to profile miRNA from peritoneal
samples and plasma. RNA extraction from peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) followed by Nanostring was performed to evaluate changes in
511 immune genes during chemotherapy. Flow cytometry for surface and
intracellular immune markers was performed on PBMCs.Results: From 13
patients, 30 blood, 12 intraperitoneal fluid (PF), and 20 intraperitoneal
wash (PW) samples were obtained. Despite small volumes, cell counts were
measurable in 7 of 12 (58%) PF and 11 of 20 (55%) PW samples. Nanostring
results revealed 12 immune genes and 29 miRNAs differentially expressed
during chemotherapy (pObjectives: The concept of personalized approaches
for recurrence in ovarian cancer has progressed at a modest pace,
compared to other cancers. This is partly due to our limited
understanding of the local tumor microenvironment during and immediately
following chemotherapy-induced tumor involution, which requires sampling
of the peritoneal cavity. Most studies to date have focused on
chemo-naive tumors and on the more easily accessible peripheral blood
samples, yet these are often not reflective of local changes. We
hypothesize that sequential sampling and analysis of blood and
intraperitoneal (IP) fluid during IP chemotherapy is feasible and will
provide molecular insight into chemotherapy-induced systemic and local
changes in the tumor environment.Methods: Peritoneal fluid aspiration or
wash and blood samples were obtained from patients (n = 13) at three time
points (baseline and following the first and second rounds of
chemotherapy, respectively) Nanostring was performed to profile miRNA
from peritoneal samples and plasma. RNA extraction from peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) followed by Nanostring was performed to evaluate
changes in 511 immune genes during chemotherapy. Flow cytometry for
surface and intracellular immune markers was performed on PBMCs.Results:
From 13 patients, 30 blood, 12 intraperitoneal fluid (PF), and 20
intraperitoneal wash (PW) samples were obtained. Despite small volumes,
cell counts were measurable in 7 of 12 (58%) PF and 11 of 20 (55%) PW
samples. Nanostring results revealed 12 immune genes and 29 miRNAs
differentially expressed during chemotherapy (p<0.05). Additionally,
changes amongst miRNA were noted to occur earlier than immune genes in
which the majority was differentially expressed only after the second
round of chemotherapy. The miRNA tended to be significantly changed, in
the same direction, throughout chemotherapy. Bioinformatics analyses
revealed the top immune pathways most affected by chemotherapy and
included cell-to-cell signaling, immune cell trafficking, and
inflammatory response among the top functions.Conclusions: Sampling of
the peritoneal cavity through IP catheters during chemotherapy is
feasible and can be implemented through standardized protocols. Despite a
small sample size, we were able to identify chemotherapy-induced
molecular changes in immune genes and miRNAs systemically and
loco-regionally. The findings suggest that miRNA alterations may be more
suggestive of early tumor microenvironment alterations compared to immune
genes in which changes are seen after subsequent cycles of chemotherapy.
Larger studies are needed for validation to assess these changes as
therapeutic targets.

