Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analytical platform evaluation for quantification of ERG
oncoprotein in prostate cancer using protein and mRNA detection methods


Current molecular tests that aid in the diagnosis of prostate cancer
(PCa) are based on the detection of PSA and PSA isoforms (blood),
overexpression of PCA3 (urine), and overexpression of AMACR (tissue) as
biomarkers. The discovery of cancer specific fusion transcripts, which
are detected in over 50% of prostate cancers, revolutionized the field.
As such, the cancer specific TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion drives the
overexpression of the ERG oncoprotein. Based on this, we hypothesized
that ERG protein may serve as a valuable biomarker and for which
quantification methods can be applied for the diagnosis of prostate
cancer.An antibody-free assay for ERG protein detection was developed
based on PRISM (high-pressure high-resolution separations with
intelligent selection and multiplexing)-SRM (selected reaction
monitoring) mass spectrometry. We utilized TMPRSS2-ERG positive VCaP and
TMPRSS2-ERG negative LNCaP cells to simulate three different sample types
(cells, tissue, and post-DRE urine sediment) for evaluation. Recombinant
ERG protein spiked into LNCaP cell lysates could be detected at levels as
low as 20 pg by PRISM-SRM analysis. The sensitivity of the PRISM-SRM
assay was approximately 10,000 VCaP cells in a mixed cell population
model of VCaP and LNCaP cells. Interestingly, ERG protein could be
detected in as few as 600 VCaP cells spiked into female urine, presumably
due to more effective loading of ERG protein and the reduced sample
complexity. In comparison the detection limit of the in-house
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was 30 pg of recombinant ERG protein
and 10,000 VCaP cells, while Western blot analysis demonstrated the
detection of 195 pg of recombinant ERG protein and 10,000 VCaP cells in
these two sample types, respectively. On the other hand, qRT-PCR
exhibited a higher sensitivity, as TMPRSS2-ERG transcripts were detected
in as few as 250 VCaP cells spiked into female urine, in comparison to
NanoString methodologies which detected 10,000 VCaP cells in the same
sample.In summary the data presented here suggest that qRT-PCR and
PRISM-SRM platforms are highly sensitive in detecting TMPRSS2-ERG
transcripts and proteins, respectively. Compared to other RNA (without
preamplifcation step) and protein detection technologies, the PRISM-SRM
assay has several significant advantages: it is not affected by RNA
stability, it does not rely on a specific antibody, and it is ideal for
isoform-specific detection with high multiplexing capability. Therefore,
PRISM-SRM assays can be adapted to detect ERG protein in cells present in
clinical specimens (e.g., tissue and urine), and cell-free ERG protein
present in the blood sera, providing an opportunity for their use in the
clinical setting for detection of ERG in prostate cancer patients and for
defining appropriate treatment strategies.

