Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRIM24 acts as a transcriptional co-activator of the androgen
receptor during prostate cancer progression


The steroid hormone androgen mediates a wide range of developmental,
physiological and malignant responses by acting as an agonist for the
androgen receptor (AR). AR in turn functions as a nuclear receptor
transcription factor and executes specific gene expression programs in an
androgen-dependent manner. Since the growth of prostate cancer cells
initially depends on androgen, cancer therapy uses hormone-deprivation
approaches to reduce the levels of androgen. While prostate cancer (PC)
initially responds to androgen-ablation, most tumors progress to a
castration resistant (CR) state insensitive to treatment. Both the
androgen-dependent and the CRPC state depend on AR, which is probably
activated by alternative molecular pathways in CRPC in response to low
androgen levels. Here, we assessed the role of the transcriptional
co-activator TRIM24 in mediating AR-dependent gene expression and growth
in our CRPC cell model LNCaP-abl. We observed that knock-down of TRIM24
impairs CRPC cell growth, while TRIM24 and AR physically interact in
these cells in the absence of androgen. When we identified
TRIM24-dependent gene expression programs by combining genome-wide
binding analyses with microarray studies, we found that TRIM24 and AR
co-regulated many genes in CRPC cells. TRIM24- and AR-co-activated genes
often function in mitosis and their expression is higher in patients with
an increased chance of prostate cancer recurrence. These findings are
corroborated by IHC-analyses of prostate cancer patients, where higher
TRIM24 protein levels correlated with a greater chance of biochemical
recurrence, higher Gleason scores and larger tumor sizes. Importantly,
TRIM24 staining was positively correlated with AR staining. This supports
a model where TRIM24 acts as an important activator of AR in the
castration-resistant setting and therefore may harbor therapeutic
potential.

