Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Giant obscurins: Novel tumor and metastasis suppressors in breast
cancer


Obscurins, encoded by the single OBSCN gene, are giant cytoskeletal
proteins containing tandem adhesion and signaling domains, including an
active RhoGEF motif that directly binds and activates RhoA. The OBSCN
gene is highly mutated in breast cancer resulting in a 2-fold reduction
of its mRNA levels. Consistent with this, obscurin proteins are nearly
lost from breast cancer cell lines and human biopsies, independently of
their hormonal status or molecular differentiation. Loss of giant
obscurins from breast epithelial cells confers them with a survival and
growth advantage, following exposure to current chemotherapies. Moreover,
obscurin-depleted breast epithelial cells fail to form adhesion
junctions, undergo epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and generate
primary and secondary mammospheres bearing markers of cancer-initiating
cells. In line with these phenotypic alterations, obscurin-deficient
cells display markedly increased motility as a sheet in 2-dimensional
(2D) substrata and individually in confined spaces, and invasion in 3D
matrices. More importantly, loss of giant obscurins from breast
epithelial cells promotes primary tumor formation and lung colonization
in vivo. Obscurin depletion leads to >50% reduction in RhoA activity, as
well as decreased phosphorylation of RhoA effectors, including myosin
light chain phosphatase, myosin light chain, lim kinase, and cofilin, in
both attached and suspended cells. These molecular alterations manifest
as decreased actomyosin contractility, allowing suspended cells to escape
detachment-induced apoptosis. Moreover, 40% of obscurin-depleted cells
extend microtentacles, tubulin-based projections that mediate the
attachment of circulating tumor cells to endothelium, an advantage that
persists even after paclitaxel exposure. Collectively, our findings
reveal that loss of giant obscurins from breast epithelium results in
disruption of cell-cell contacts and acquisition of a mesenchymal
phenotype that leads to enhanced tumorigenesis, migration and
invasiveness in vitro and in vivo by affecting RhoA-mediated processes.
Moreover, our data suggest that loss of obscurins may represent a
substantial selective advantage for breast epithelial cells during
metastasis, and that treatment with paclitaxel may exacerbate this
advantage by preferentially allowing obscurin-deficient, stem-like cells
to attach to the endothelium of distant sites, a first step towards
colonizing metastatic tumors.

