Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NKCC1 regulates migration of glioblastoma tumor initiating cells
by interacting with the actin cytoskeleton


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive and deadliest primary human
brain tumor in adults due to the extensive tumor cell migration
throughout surrounding brain parenchyma. The capacity to form new tumors,
distant from the original location, resides in a specific cell
subpopulation called brain tumor initiating cells (BTICs). Combined local
and systemic therapies have been ineffective at targeting these invasive
cells; furthermore, the mechanisms that confer GBM cells their invasive
behavior have not been fully elucidated. The electroneutral Na+-K+-Cl-
cotransporter 1 (NKCC1) is an important cell volume regulator that is
implicated in cell migration and overexpressed in GBM compared to
non-cancer brain tissue. We have shown that both downregulation and
pharmacological inhibition (using Bumetanide, BMT) of NKCC1 in BTICs lead
to decreased cell migration, in vitro and in vivo. In addition, we
reported that NKCC1 knockdown cells (NKCC1 KD) show significantly larger
focal adhesions, suggesting a potential role of NKCC1 in cell adhesion.
We now report the role of NKCC1 on cytoskeletal dynamics. We found that
glioma cells display a significant decrease in cell spreading capacity
upon NKCC1 KD or inhibition by BMT. Further, F-actin organization
(observed with phalloidin staining) showed dramatic changes upon NKCC1 KD
in BTICs. These changes include concentration of actin filaments on the
membrane periphery in a ring shaped form and decreased bundled actin
content. To analyze actin changes in a dynamic model, we transduced BTICs
with the Lifeact-RFP construct for live imaging of F-actin. We observed
that upon EGF stimulation, control cells responded by uniform spreading,
as reflected by an increased cell circularity within seconds after
stimulation, while NKCC1 KD cells did not respond. This suggests that the
dynamic response of the actin cytoskeleton to external stimuli is
decreased when NKCC1 is down-regulated. To determine the potential
actin-regulatory mechanisms affected by NKCC1 inhibition we studied the
small Rho-GTPases, RhoA and Rac1. We observed that the levels of active
(GTP-bound) forms of RhoA and Rac1 were decreased in NKCC1 KD cells.
Moreover, when BTICs were treated with the ROCK1 inhibitor, Y-27632, they
showed a dose-dependent decrease in cell migration and activity of MLC
(ROCK substrate). These effects were significantly weaker when the ROCK
inhibitor was applied on NKCC1 KD or BMT-treated cells, suggesting that
decreased RhoA and ROCK1 activity mediates the effects of NKCC1
inhibition. In summary, NKCC1 regulates BTIC migration beyond cell volume
changes, by modulating the cytoskeleton through multiple targets that
include F-actin regulation and RhoA and Rac1 activity. Due to its
essential role in cell migration and high expression in GBM, NKCC1 may
serve as a specific therapeutic target to decrease BTIC cell invasion and
increase survival in patients with primary brain cancer.

