Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishing robust pharmacodynamic (PD) immunofluorescence assays
of clinical biopsies at the National Cancer Institute: Optimized quality
control procedures for the evaluation of DNA damage response and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) biomarkers


Robust PD assay results are valuable for informing decisions about
continued preclinical and clinical development of new agents and for
identifying effective combinations of targeted agents. The National
Cancer Institute's Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis (DCTD)
develops and validates PD assays to obtain accurate information about
drug effect on intended molecular targets in first-in-human clinical
trials. Our group utilizes quantitative immunofluorescence assays (qIFA)
of PD biomarkers in FFPE slides prepared from pre- and post-dose tumor
biopsies collected from patients on early phase clinical trials. Paired
biopsies are fixed and paraffin embedded, in parallel with tissue
controls, such that all tissues are sectioned onto the same slide.
Stringent methods to maintain the biopsy orientation are utilized during
fixation, blocking and microtomy. A large number of sections are
generated to increase the likelihood of finding optimal tumor regions of
interest for biomarker analyses. Flanking H&E slides are utilized to
assess the quality of the tumor biopsies. Whole slide scans of the H&E
slides are shared with a clinical pathologist who determines whether the
sections are sufficient or insufficient for the intended analysis. The
pathology review allows the assay operator to select the optimal range of
slides to stain and quantitatively analyze for the biomarker(s) of
interest. Pathology-guided regions allow the operator to focus on tumor
regions of interest and avoid normal tissue and/or confounding regions
compromised by handling and processing artifacts. For nuclear biomarkers
such as H2AX and related DNA damage response biomarkers the pathologist
annotates areas of sufficient tumor content and viability. For biomarker
changes in tissue architecture such as that seen in Epithelial
Mesenchymal Transition biomarkers, including E-Cadherin, Vimentin and
-catenin, the pathology annotation denotes areas of normal tissue and
necrosis to eliminate from the qIFA analysis. All other areas of
sufficient tumor cellularity from the entire slide are evaluated for the
EMT biomarkers. Use of the pathology-annotated whole slide image as a
tool for guidance of the operator performing the quantitative evaluation
of the PD biomarker helps to ensure a non-subjective analysis. Finally,
steps are taken to ensure proper storage of the paraffin slides,
including paraffin dipping after microtomy, which is critical for
preservation of labile epitopes such as phosphorylated proteins. We will
present details of these optimized methods as well as key lessons learned
during the preclinical and clinical implementation of qIFA measurements
of PD biomarkers for various molecular targeted agents. Funded by NCI
Contract No HHSN261200800001E.

