Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive simulation-driven personalization methodology for
refractory multiple myeloma


Background: Given the genomic variability observed across multiple
myeloma patients, treatment personalization becomes imperative.
Personalization (N = 1) driven by actionable mutations alone is a step
forward but has limitations. Holistically incorporating genomic profiling
information to create a patient simulation avatar provides a
personalization paradigm beyond the one-drug one-mutation method of
individualization.Methods: A bone marrow sample from the patient was
analyzed for chromosome alterations and molecular aberrations by NYU and
Gen Path Diagnostics. Using this genomic profiling information, a
predictive simulation avatar of the patient was created that
comprehensively models signal transduction, epigenetic regulation,
protein homeostasis, autophagy, and metabolic pathways. The simulation
highlights the patient's dominant driver characteristics and enables
personalized therapy design. Here, a library of FDA-approved, molecularly
targeted drugs from across indications were simulated individually and in
combination on the patient simulation avatar.Results: The patient had
high risk IgA multiple myeloma and refractory to following treatment
regimens: Thalidomide/Dexamethasone (DEX), Velcade/DEX, Revlimid
(REV)/DEX, REV/DEX/Elotuzumab, stem cell collection with high dose
Cytoxan, stem cell transplant with high dose Melphalan,
Velcade/Bendamustine, Pomalidomide, Carfilzomib (CAR), Doxil,
CAR/Cytoxan, CAR/Pomalidomide.The patient's cytogenetic information
revealed tetrasomy of chromosomes (Ch) 9 and 15; trisomy of Ch 2, 3, 5,
7, 11, 14, 19, 20, and 22; monosomy of Ch 16. Also, additional material
was attached to the short (p) arms of Ch 1 and 21 and the long (q) arms
of Ch 6, 14 (involving the IGH locus), and 16. The amplified and deleted
genes were used to create the patient simulation avatar definition. The
resulting patient avatar demonstrated increased expression of the
following key growth factor receptors and signaling intermediates: EGFR,
HGF, MET, IGF1R, SHC, and SRC. Additionally, increased PI3K and AKT copy
number was noted, resulting in a dominant AKT/PI3K signaling axis. IL6,
IL6R, and JAK2 amplification was observed, resulting in increased
JAK/STAT signaling.Nelfinavir and Ruxolitinib was administered to impact
the PI3K/AKT and JAK/STAT signaling axis predicted by simulation. This
treatment exhibited a clinical response in the highly refractory patient
indicated by a significant drop in the IgA from 3610 to 2650 mg/dl, the M
spike from 3.9 to 2.7 g/dl and the total protein from 10.6 to 8.2 gm/dl.
The response lasted 2.5 months with minimal toxicity.Conclusions: This
study demonstrates and provides validation of technology to holistically
incorporate big data from genomics for actionable insights for treatment
personalization.

