Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LIX1L, an EMT-correlated gene that behaves as if it inhibits the
EMT


Background: We previously reported that LIX1L (LIX1-like), a gene whose
functions are unknown, has an expression pattern exhibiting strong
negative correlation with the expression of genes of epithelial-specific
functions in the NCI-60 human cancer cell line panel of the US National
Cancer Institute (Kohn et al PLoS ONE 9:6, 2014). This observation
suggested a possible role in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) and led to the current investigation. Method]: We examined the
correlation of LIX1L with gene expression in the data of the Broad
Institute's CCLE cell lines and the cancer genome atlas (TCGA) tissues.
We then investigated the functions of LIX1L in breast and colon cancer
cell lines. We knocked down LIX1L expression by means of siRNA and
overexpressed LIX1L by means of recombinant LIX1L-GFP plasmid. We also
generated LIX1L knockout cell lines (LIX1L-KO) using the CRISPR/Cas
system. We compared the expression levels of LIX1L with well-known
EMT-related genes by Western blot and quantitative PCR. We examined the
migration and invasion properties of these cell lines and constructs by
means of wound healing assays, and migration and invasion assays.
Results: LIX1L expression is correlated with non-epithelial or
mesenchymal genes in analyses of the CCLE and TCGA gene expression data.
Experiments suggested the surprising result that LIX1L-KO MDA-MB231 cell
lines showed higher expression of ZEB1 and increased invasion ability.
Conclusion: LIX1L gene expression is positively correlated with the
expression of non-epithelial or mesenchymal genes in the NCI-60, CCLE and
TCGA databases. Up- or down-regulation of LIX1L however seemed to produce
the opposite of the expected phenotypic changes. Our findings suggest
that LIX1L may be expressed coordinately with genes that favor
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions in cancer cells while having a
moderating effect on the transition.

