Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of tumor types highly susceptible to FASN inhibition and
biomarker candidates for clinical analysis


Inhibition of de novo palmitate synthesis by fatty acid synthase (FASN)
is a novel cancer therapeutic approach with strong biological rationale.
Tumor cells have an increased dependence on FASN-synthesized palmitate
compared to non-tumor cells, which obtain many of their required lipids
from the extracellular milieu. FASN expression increases with tumor
progression in human tumors and associates with chemoresistance,
metastasis, and diminished patient survival in many tumor types.
Palmitate and palmitate-derived lipids comprise diverse cellular
components and function in processes required for tumor cell
proliferation and survival.TVB-2640 and TVB-3166 belong to a series of
orally available, reversible, potent, and selective FASN inhibitors
discovered and developed by 3-V Biosciences that exhibit anti-tumor
activity in diverse preclinical tumor models. FASN inhibition induces
tumor cell apoptosis by remodeling tumor cell membranes, blocking signal
transduction, and reprogramming gene expression. These effects lead to
inhibition of anchorage-independent tumor cell growth under lipid-rich
conditions and inhibition of in vivo xenograft tumor growth in mice and
rats.Studies to understand the mechanisms of action and biological
consequences of FASN inhibition are guiding the discovery of tumors
highly dependent on FASN activity and biomarkers for assessment of
pharmacodynamic activity and patient selection. Using quantitative
genomics and a variety of directed analytical approaches, we identified
lipid, mRNA, and protein profiles in tumor cells that change in response
to FASN inhibition. Subsets of the changes show correlation with FASN
inhibitor sensitivity. Marker candidates, such as gene expression
signatures that classify in vitro sensitivity to FASN inhibition, are
being investigated for detection in clinical human tumor data sets. Our
studies also identified FASN inhibitor-mediated mechanisms of action that
function in specific tumor types and biomarkers with potential utility
for selecting responsive patients and measuring tumor response.
Inhibition of the Wnt/b-catenin pathway and expression of
TCF-promoter-regulated genes such as c-Myc are examples. Tumors dependent
on Wnt/b-catenin activity or with lower intracellular palmitate stores
prior to drug treatment may be susceptible to FASN inhibitor treatment.
Pairing MYC expression with additional markers improves the performance
of MYC as a marker to select tumor cell lines highly sensitive to FASN
inhibition. Biomarker candidates from in vitro studies have been examined
in vivo using xenograft tumor studies. These preclinical data support 3-V
Biosciences ongoing Phase I clinical study of a first-in-class FASN
inhibitor TVB-2640, and help guide the next steps in its development.

