Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cross-site reproducibility and orthogonal validation of copy
number and somatic mutation calls of OncoScan FFPE Assay Kit in solid
tumors


ObjectivesCopy number (CN) and somatic mutation (SM) analysis in tumors
is rapidly gaining importance in cancer management as a tool for
differential diagnosis, determination of prognosis, and selection of
therapeutic. Genome-wide copy number and LOH detection as well as a panel
of frequently tested somatic mutations can be detected with OncoScan FFPE
Assay Kit. We report on a validation study of OncoScan FFPE Assay Kit CN
and SM data by orthogonal technologies (FISH and NGS, respectively) to
estimate the sensitivity and specificity parameters of the platform. In
addition, we assessed the reproducibility of the platform across three
different sites in the UK: Leeds Institute of Cancer and Pathology
(LICP), West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory (WMRGL), and Almac
Diagnostics (Almac).MethodsValidation of CN data was performed on a
cohort of cancer samples identified as Her2 positive/ambiguous by FISH.
The panel of SMs available was validated by a custom targeted amplicon
NGS panel on a diverse collection of samples derived from multiple
cohorts across several tumor types sourced from both LICP and WMRGL. For
the reproducibility study, 162 samples encompassing six different tumor
types (breast, colorectal, lung, melanoma, prostate, and ovarian) were
collected from LICP and WMRGL. DNA was extracted and plated in triplicate
and distributed to the three testing sites: LICP, WMRGL, and Almac. Data
from all sites was analyzed for reproducibility of genome-wide CN/LOH
calls and SM calls.ResultsCross-site comparisons of genome-wide CN and
LOH profiles on 162 FFPE solid tumor samples showed greater than 95%
average agreement between three sites (LICP, WMGRL, and Almac), while SM
classification concordance between the sites averaged 97%. Initial
orthogonal validation of Her2 amplification by FISH showed greater than
90% concordance, as did initial test samples used for validating OncoScan
SM calls by a targeted amplicon NGS panel.ConclusionIn this study we
validated both CN and SM calls using OncoScan FFPE Assay Kit and
demonstrated a high degree of agreement with orthogonal methods in all
aspects. Reproducibility of whole-genome CN, LOH, and SM data using
OncoScan FFPE Assay Kit has also been demonstrated for a range of FFPE
samples, including highly degraded samples. This study is a step forward
in evaluating the potential clinical utility of a platform combining
genome-wide copy number and somatic mutation calls within the national
health service of the UK.

