Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apoptotic priming is regulated by a developmental program and
predisposes children to therapy-induced toxicity


Pediatric cancer patients frequently suffer higher levels of
treatment-induced toxicities than adults, limiting the use of potentially
curative therapies. For example, brain irradiation contributes to the
cure of medulloblastomas in 80% of children yet also causes cell death in
healthy neurons, resulting in a permanent and devastating loss of IQ.
Likewise, children commonly experience dose-limiting cardiotoxicity from
doxorubicin treatment. These treatments are comparatively well tolerated
in adults yet the basis for this dramatic contrast in sensitivity is
unknown. Both radiation and cytotoxic chemotherapies can induce an
apoptotic cell death, prompting us to hypothesize that apoptosis may be
regulated in a fundamentally different manner in children versus
adults.By testing the functional state of the apoptotic pathway in
tissues with BH3 Profiling, we found that healthy brain, heart and kidney
tissues from young mice are extremely sensitive to pro-apoptotic signals
and are therefore primed for apoptosis. In stark contrast, these same
tissues are completely insensitive to even saturating amounts of
pro-apoptotic signals in adult mice. Apoptosis could be triggered in
adult brain, heart or kidney cells only when complemented with exogenous
BAX protein suggesting that these tissues lack sufficient levels of BAX
or BAK for mitochondrial permeabilization and are thus incompetent for
apoptosis. Immunoblotting revealed that BAX and BAK protein levels are
strongly downregulated in these tissues during postnatal development and
become nearly undetectable by adulthood, along with several other
components of the apoptotic machinery. Parallel studies with spleen and
bone marrow demonstrated high levels of apoptotic priming in young
animals which continued into adulthood, highlighting the organ-specific
nature of apoptosis regulation. In agreement with these findings, we
observed apoptotic cell death in response to radiation damage in the
brain, heart and kidneys of early postnatal but not adult mice. Likewise,
the extent of doxorubicin-induced damage to cardiac tissue correlated
strongly with changes in apoptotic priming and competence. Furthermore,
we utilized BAX and/or BAK knockout mice to characterize the pivotal
roles of these proteins in regulating apoptotic competence and damage
responses in somatic tissues.We extended these findings to humans by BH3
profiling normal brain tissue and confirmed that brain tissue in young
children is primed to undergo apoptosis while in adults it is
apoptotically incompetent. Finally, we identified the epigenetic
mechanisms that modulate apoptotic pathways during postnatal development.
Our findings elucidate the molecular mechanisms responsible for the
devastating vital organ sensitivity to damage in children and a strategy
for its prevention.

