Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCL9 induction in myeloid cells of the premetastatic niche
enhances tumor cell survival and metastatic colonization


Tumor cell survival in the hostile distant organ is a rate-limiting step
in cancer metastasis. Bone marrow-derived myeloid cells can form a
premetastatic niche and provide a tumor-promoting microenvironment.
However, it is unclear whether these myeloid cells in the premetastatic
site have any direct effect on tumor cell survival. Here we report that
chemokine CCL9 was highly induced in Gr-1+CD11b+ immature myeloid cells
and in premetastatic lung of mice bearing 4T1 mammary tumor and B16
melanoma. Knockdown of CCL9 in myeloid cells decreased tumor cell
survival and metastasis. The expression level of CCL23, the human
orthologue for CCL9, in peripheral blood mononuclear cells correlated
with progression and survival of cancer patients. Our studies identify
CCL9 as a key pro-survival factor for cancer cells in the premetastatic
organ.Interestingly, the expression of CCL9 in myeloid cells is regulated
by TGF- signaling as overexpression of CCL9 in myeloid cells lacking TGF-
signaling rescued the tumor metastasis defect observed in mice with
myeloid-specific deletion of TGF- signaling. These data together with our
previous report of a fundamental role of myeloid TGF- signaling in host
compromised immune surveillance (Cancer Discovery 2013); demonstrate that
myeloid-specific TGF- signaling constitutes an essential component of the
metastasis-promoting puzzle of TGF-. This finding is different from TGF-
signaling in fibroblasts and a variety of epithelial cells, as well as T
cells in which the TGF- signaling functions as a tumor suppressor. This
new understanding of TGF- at the interface of tumor and host may provide
insight into how TGF- switches from a tumor suppressor to a tumor
promoter, a long-standing challenge in cancer biology field. Our study
demonstrates that CCL9 could serve as a good candidate for
anti-metastasis treatment by targeting the rate-limiting step of cancer
cell survival. Additionally, targeting CCL9 may avoid the adverse effects
of TGF--targeted therapy.

