Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Senescent hepatocytes secrete CCL2 to accelerate liver cancer
growth via accumulation of immunosuppressive myeloid cells


Aim: Oncogene-induced senescence causes hepatocytes to secrete cytokines,
which induce the immune-mediated clearance of these senescent cells,
preventing malignant transformation and tumor initiation; a process
termed senescence surveillance. However, senescent hepatocytes can give
rise to hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC), if additional oncogenic
mutations, e.g. p53 mutation, abrogate the senescence program. We set out
to investigate the effect of senescent cell secreted cytokines on growth
of neighboring liver tumor cells.Experimental procedure: To induce
senescence in mouse livers, we hydrodynamically injected a transposon
system, which encodes for either oncogenic Nras (NrasG12V) or an effector
loop mutant (NrasG12V/D38A) that is incapable of signaling to downstream
pathways, into C57BL/6 or CCR2-/- mice. To achieve tumor development in
senescent livers, hepatocellular carcinoma cells were intrasplenically
injected into mice, which expressed either NrasG12V or NrasG12V/D38A in
the liver. Hepatic immune cell infiltrates were analyzed using flow
cytometry and immunohistochemistry. Immunosuppressive ability of
CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid cells was analyzed in vitro after
fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Furthermore, peritumor tissue of 226
HCC patients was hierarchical clustered based on the expression of 35
senescence-associated genes. Senescence-associated gene signature was
then compared with CCL2 expression and survival.Results: Senescent
hepatocytes promoted growth of hepatocellular carcinoma cells through
accumulation of immunosuppressive CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid cells. CD11b+Gr1+
cells inhibited T cell proliferation via an iNOS-dependent mechanism.
Immunosuppressive myeloid cell accumulation as well as tumor growth
promotion was abrogated, when senescence was induced in livers of CCR2
knockout mice, indicating a pivotal role for CCL2 in creating a tumor
promoting immune environment. Finally, gene expression analysis in
patients with hepatocellular carcinoma confirmed the association of
senescence-induced CCL2 expression in peritumor tissue and poor
prognosis.Conclusion: Senescent hepatocytes not only induce an
inflammatory response that leads to their own clearance, preventing tumor
initiation, but surprisingly also induce the accumulation of
immunosuppressive myeloid cells that promote growth of neighboring
hepatocellular carcinomas.

