Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel 3D cancer model by cultivation of malignant
effusions in a 3D cell culture system


Introduction: Metastatic spread and the occurrence of tumour cell
resistance to therapeutic interventions can be induced by different
molecular processes. Among those, tumour stroma interactions play a
crucial role. So far only few cell culture models exist to study these
cell processes.Therefore, we describe the development of a hanging drop
technology for 3D culture of primary cells isolated from malignant
effusion obtained from cancer patients.Methods: A 96-well hanging drop
microtiter plate (InSphero AG, Zrich, Switzerland) was applied for the 3D
cultivation of cells. Primary cells were isolated either from malignant
ascites or pleura effusion of cancer patients. Cells were seeded either
into 2D cell culture plates or into hanging drops for an incubation
period of ten days. Apart from conventional histology (H&E), protein
expression was displayed immunohistochemically (IHC) and by flow
cytometry. The applied antibodies displayed the expression of e-cadherin,
vimentin, Ki67, CD31, CD45, Epcam, Leucine-rich repeat-containing
G-protein coupled receptor 5 (Lgr5) and -smooth muscle actin (-SMA). In
addition, viability of all samples was determined by an
AnnexinV/Propidium Iodide staining using flow cytometry.Results:
Microtissue aggregation differed significantly depending on whether the
malignant cell effusions displayed expression of Epcam. Effusions
consisting of a high number of Epcam positive cells formed solid and
viable microtissues. The viability of microtissues remained high (>80%)
similar to cells cultivated in 2D cell culture plates. Tumour cells,
defined as e-cadherin and Epcam positive by flow cytometry were still
detected in microtissues after ten days of incubation in 3D.Furthermore,
endothelial cells, defined as CD31 and Lgr5 positive could also be
discriminated in microtissues.Conclusion: We demonstrate that our method
is a promising tool for the generation of tumour microtissues consisting
of primary isolated cells from malignant effusions. Therefore, our
technology represents a promising method to investigate tumour stroma
interactions in an in vitro system that reflects more closely the in vivo
environment.

