Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HO-3867, a selective inhibitor of stat3, suppress ovarian tumor
growth and metastasis in human tissue culture and in an orthotopic mouse
model


The lack of an efficient pre-clinical model predicting a drug's clinical
response before it enters into clinical trials is a major reason behind
the limited success or complete failure of most of the traditional
anti-cancer compounds. In this study, we evaluate our novel, safe and
selective STAT3 inhibitor HO-3867 for its anti-cancer
efficacy/bio-availability using a pre-clinical relevant, orthotopic
ovarian tumor model and ex-vivo human tumor tissue culture. Treatment
with HO-3867 (100PPM) significantly suppressed ovarian tumor growth and
metastasis when compared to the standard Cisplatin (4mg/kg). A
substantial amount of HO-3867 was detected in the ovarian tumor tissues
and quantified using EPR spectroscopy. Markers specific to cell
proliferation (Ki-67, Cyclin D1), angiogenesis (VEGF and Kinase array)
and apoptosis (caspase-3 activity) were significantly altered by
treatment with HO-3867. In vivo histopathological evaluation of internal
organs collected from treated tumor mice revealed no evidence of toxicity
specific to HO-3867. Normal and malignant tissues were collected and
TUNEL/8-OHdG staining revealed selective induction of apoptosis limited
to neoplastic cells and concomitant increase in reactive oxygen species
within the orthotopic tumor. Suppression of STAT3 and its downstream
target proteins (cell proliferative, anti-apoptotic and angiogenic) was
confirmed with proteomic array. HO-3867 treated samples had significantly
reduced vessel formation (4 times) as compared to the untreated control
as is evident by in vivo Matrigel assay. HO-3867 was also found to have
cytotoxic effects in ex vivo culture of freshly collected human tumor
samples, including patients with chemotherapy resistant form of the
disease. Overall, these results highlight the clinical anti-cancer
potential of HO-3867 using a relevant preclinical orthotopic ovarian
tumor model, and provide a rationale for the inclusion of ex vivo patient
tumor slice culture in oncologic drug development processes.

