Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcontinental characterization of the Hispanic BRCA1 3450del4
breast cancer founder mutation


Breast cancer (BC) is the most commonly diagnosed cancer among women,
with 1 in every 7 women in the U.S. developing BC in their lifetime.
While BC may not be the leading cause of cancer incidence in many
minority populations, such as Hispanics, it is the leading cause of
cancer death, highlighting a cancer disparity. Moreover, the contribution
of mutations in BC susceptibility genes remains poorly investigated in
Hispanic populations. To begin to address these voids, we screened
Colombian BC patients for common BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations using the KASP
genotyping system. Strikingly, 27 of 722 unselected cases (4%) harbored
the same BRCA1 3450del4 mutation. Clinical data and family history
indicate that these individuals originate from a distinct geographic
region in Colombia, Neiva. Significantly, 10% of the unselected BC cases
in Neiva and the surrounding region harbor the 3450del4 mutation,
potentially representing one of the most profound founder effects
reported in human populations. Interesting, this BRCA1 mutation has also
been reported in other countries, including Portugal, Spain, and Chile.
To determine whether this mutation stems from a single origin, mutation
carriers from each of these countries (n = 26), along with mutation
carriers from Colombia (n = 27), were subjected to the Affymetrix Axiom
Human UK Biobank Array (>800 thousand markers). Haplotypes in which the
BRCA1 mutation resides were estimated by SHAPEIT, and pairwise segmental
sharing was determined using GERMLINE. Our data suggest that the mutation
carriers, although from different countries and continents, share a core
haplotype, likely to have originated from Spain. Additionally, the
mutation seems to be fairly new to Colombia, with individuals sharing up
to a 40Mb haplotype comprising the mutation. We are currently estimating
the age of the mutation using the bioinformatic software DMLE+, which
exploits the rate of linkage disequilibrium decay due to recombination.
By understanding the prevalence of mutations in known breast cancer risk
genes in minority populations, cancer disparities can be better addressed
and breast cancer screening can be improved. Furthermore, these findings
have direct implications in robust and cost-effective targeted screening
in regions where there is a high prevalence of the BRCA1 3450del4
mutation.

