Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The ketogenic diet alters the expression of microRNAs that play
key roles in tumor development


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common, and most aggressive,
primary brain tumour in adults. Despite advances in surgical techniques
and improvements in radiotherapy and chemotherapy protocols, the
prognosis for patients with these tumors is extremely poor, with a median
survival of 14 months in patients receiving maximal aggressive treatment.
Although several targeted therapies have been tried in GBM, these have
proved to be ineffective, with no targeted agent showing an improvement
in overall survival. These dismal facts highlight the need for new
therapeutic approaches.One strategy is to take advantage of the metabolic
dysregulation of tumor cells and their high dependence on glucose for
survival using dietary measures. This approach would target the tumor as
a whole and help to overcome the problems associated with tumour
heterogeneity.One such approach is the ketogenic diet, (KD). This high
fat, low carbohydrate diet has been used clinically for the management of
refractory paediatric epilepsy and has been shown to extend survival in a
number of animal models of glioma. Furthermore, studies using the
GL261-luc2 syngeneic intracranial model of malignant glioma also
highlighted the ability of the KD to potentiate the effects of
chemotherapy and radiotherapy. However, the mechanisms underlying these
responses are poorly understood.MicroRNAs (miRs) are small noncoding
single-stranded RNAs that are capable of altering mRNA expression of
target genes and hence have crucial roles in a diverse array of
biological processes. To investigate changes in the expression of miRs
during the KD, we profiled brain tumors from mice fed either a KD or
standard diet for differential miR expression using the miScript miRNA
PCR Array Mouse Brain Cancer (Qiagen Ltd., Manchester, UK). We observed
that miRs with an oncogenic potential were generally downregulated
whereas those with a tumor suppressor function were upregulated in tumors
from mice fed KD compared to tumors from mice fed SD. Upregulation of miR
296-5p is of particular interest, since its target, Pin 1, a Ser/Thr-Pro
cis/trans isomerase, is a regulator of cell metabolism through its
interaction with glycolytic enzymes for the Warburg effect. Furthermore,
miR 296-5p has been implicated in DNA damaging chemotherapy resistance in
breast and lung cancer cell lines.Taken together our results suggest that
the KD could inhibit tumor growth and contribute to therapy sensitivity
through differential expression of miRs.

