Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting of miRNA networks for prevention of basal-like breast
cancers


Introduction: Approximately 75% of women who develop sporadic breast
cancer have no known epidemiological risk factors. This creates a
significant challenge for identification of at risk patients for
prevention. We hypothesized that detailing the molecular signature of the
precancerous state by subtype will provide opportunities to identify
biomarkers of subtype specific breast cancer risk and identify pathways
that can be targeted for subtype specific prevention. Experimental
procedures: Using cell lines that model breast cancer progression and The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) genome-characterization datasets, we have
identified common microRNA (miRNA)-gene signatures as potential
biomarkers for early detection and targets for prevention of basal/
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). We have performed next generation
RNA and small RNA seq of MCF10A cell line based TNBC progression model
(10A P; parental, 10AT1; atypia, DCIS; ductal carcinoma in situ and Ca1d;
invasive carcinoma) and used cell proliferation assay, western blotting,
and miRNA analysis by QPCR to study the effects of target inhibition.
Results: We have identified miRNA-29c as a lead candidate because it
satisfied 3 key criteria necessary for subtype-tailored intervention.
First, it found it to be expressed at high levels in MCF10A (immortalized
normal line), and showed a steady decrease in the TNBC progression model.
Second, it strongly inhibited migration of the metastatic TNBC cell line,
MDA MB 231. Third, its downstream targets include druggable pathways such
as src kinase, GSK-3, Pan-ErbB TK, EGFR, MEK1/2, PI3K, PI3K and c-met.
One particularly interesting candidate is DNMT3A, the DNA methyl
transferase, which we show to be inversely correlated to miRNA-29c and
up-regulated in the progression from normal to cancer in the TNBC model.
The miRNA-29c-DNMT3A connection that we uncovered strongly suggests an
epigenetic component to tumorigenesis in basal like breast cancers and
thus, we have tested natural occurring HDAC inhibitor and a small
molecule drug, sulforaphane and sodium butyrate, for their ability to
revert cellular phenotype of MCF 10A.AT1 and DCIS cells and found these
compounds inhibit cell proliferation. We have also used small molecule
synthetic inhibitors to target miRNA-29c regulated pathways and studied
their effect on cell proliferation and target inhibition. In these
analyses a small molecule inhibitor of PI3K/AKT, LY294002 effectively
inhibited the AKT signaling and cell proliferation in MCF10A.AT1, and
MCF10A.DCIS cells. Similarly, MEK inhibitors PD032590 and GSK1120212
inhibited MEK signaling and cell proliferation in both hyperplastic and
DCIS cells. Conclusions: Our study suggests that miRNA-29c-network, may
play a key role in the development of triple negative of breast cancer
and this networks may provide novel opportunities at several levels for
prevention of TNBC/ basal like breast cancer.

