Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-Met inhibition sensitivity in vitro: Autocrine vs. paracrine
activation of the c-Met pathway


Tumor cells frequently harbor abnormalities in signaling pathways,
leading to increased migration, invasion, survival, angiogenesis, and
proliferation. C-Met is one such commonly aberrant pathway. C-Met is a
receptor tyrosine kinase critical for embryogenesis and liver repair, and
protein levels are often elevated in a large variety of tumors. C-Met is
activated by the endogenous ligand Hepatocyte Growth Factor (HGF). HGF is
produced by mesenchymal cells and stimulates the c-Met protein, leading
to a variety of downstream signaling pathways that result in increased
migration, proliferation, survival, and angiogenesis.While many tumor
cells express the c-Met receptor, a number of tumor types, including
glioblastoma and osteosarcoma, have been observed to co-express both HGF
and c-Met, and activate the pathway in an autocrine manner. The purpose
of the current study was to determine whether tumor cells utilizing
autocrine c-Met signaling would more sensitive to c-Met inhibition than
those relying on the paracrine pathway. Experimental procedures include
ELISA, western, migration, invasion, and clonogenic cell survival. Cell
lines investigated include: two glioblastoma cell lines (U87 and U118),
two osteosarcoma cell lines (OS156 and OS521), two fibrosarcoma cell
lines (KHT and RIF), a breast (MDA-MB-231) and a prostate cancer cell
line (PC-3). The small molecule c-Met inhibitor BMS-777607 and an
HGF-neutralizing antibody were used to compare the effects interrupting
the c-Met axis in these tumor cell lines.Data obtained using ELISA of
conditioned media show that the glioblastoma (U87 and U118) and
fibrosarcoma (KHT) cells secrete HGF, while the breast and prostate cells
(MDA-MB-231; PC-3) do not. Furthermore western blot analysis showed
higher basal levels of phospho-c-Met among the HGF-secreting cell lines
in comparison to the non-HGF secreting cell lines, indicating that the
KHT, U87, and U118 models activate c-Met in an autocrine manner, while
the MDA-MB-231 and PC-3 lines activate c-Met in a paracrine manner.
Importantly preliminary assessments indicate the autocrine glioblastoma
and fibrosarcoma cell lines to be more sensitive to small molecule c-Met
inhibition than the paracrine breast and prostate cancer cell lines.
Investigations of additional cancer models are ongoing but our findings
to date support the notion that cancer cells that autocrine activate the
c-Met pathway may more susceptible to c-Met inhibition than those
utilizing primarily paracrine activation of this pathway.

