Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Examining the role of ABCA1 cholesterol transporter in ovarian
cancer spheroids


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is a devastating disease which accounts
for a large proportion of gynaecological cancer-related deaths. Poor
survival is largely due to late diagnosis of the disease which typically
presents with peritoneal dissemination. In order to achieve reduced tumor
burden and improved survival, it is imperative to identify new prognostic
markers and potential therapeutic targets. Recent work by our group
identified high ATP- Binding Cassette A1 (ABCA1) transporter expression
as being associated with poor outcome in EOC. ABCA1 has been widely
studied as a cholesterol transporter, however there is little research
investigating its potential roles in cancer biology. The aim of this work
was to ascertain whether ABCA1 may promote aggressive characteristics in
EOC. siRNA-mediated suppression of ABCA1 in EOC cell lines led to reduced
colony forming ability, growth and migration by comparison with controls.
By culturing EOC cell lines (Skov3, 27/87 and HEY) in a 3-dimensional
spheroid model, we have shown that ABCA1 suppression significantly
reduced overall spheroid volume (p = 0.0003, ANOVA with Dunnett's
multiple comparison test). In Skov3 and 27/87 spheroids, reduced volume
was associated with cell death; however in HEY spheroids, ABCA1
suppression significantly reduced cell numbers in the absence of
detectable cell death (p = 0.0002, ANOVA with Dunnett's multiple
comparison test). Detailed characterisation of spheroid architecture
revealed an increased volume-to-cell ratio in those depleted of ABCA1,
indicating a lower degree of compaction compared to controls. It was
further observed that whilst HEY spheroids derived from control
siRNA-transfected cells develop a prominent necrotic core this feature
was dramatically impaired by ABCA1 suppression. Compaction and core
necrosis are both well-documented processes in spheroid biology that are
indicative of cellular contractility and a hypoxic tumour environment,
both key characteristics of more aggressive, chemo-resistant and
recurrent tumors. Collectively these data suggest that ABCA1 may be
involved in regulating multiple processes associated with aggressive and
invasive characteristics of EOC, highlighting ABCA1 as a potential
therapeutic target.

