Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HDAC8 is recruited to DNA double strand breaks sites and affects
the homologous recombination efficiency in multiple myeloma


Epigenomic changes have emerged as an important player of cellular
regulation and understanding of pathogenesis of Multiple Myeloma (MM) as
well as of other cancers. In recent years, both clinical and preclinical
studies have confirmed that MM is vulnerable to epigenetic intervention,
with histone deacetylases (HDACs) emerging as the most promising
epigenetic targets. Although Pan-HDAC inhibitors are effective as
therapeutic agents, there is increasing emphasis on understanding the
biological and molecular roles of individual HDACs. Here we evaluated the
role of HDAC8, a member of Class I HDAC isoenzymes in MM.First, we
evaluated the expression of HDAC8 in 172 newly-diagnosed MM patients from
the IFM myeloma dataset and observed HDAC8 overexpression as well as its
significant correlation with poor survival outcome (PEpigenomic changes
have emerged as an important player of cellular regulation and
understanding of pathogenesis of Multiple Myeloma (MM) as well as of
other cancers. In recent years, both clinical and preclinical studies
have confirmed that MM is vulnerable to epigenetic intervention, with
histone deacetylases (HDACs) emerging as the most promising epigenetic
targets. Although Pan-HDAC inhibitors are effective as therapeutic
agents, there is increasing emphasis on understanding the biological and
molecular roles of individual HDACs. Here we evaluated the role of HDAC8,
a member of Class I HDAC isoenzymes in MM.First, we evaluated the
expression of HDAC8 in 172 newly-diagnosed MM patients from the IFM
myeloma dataset and observed HDAC8 overexpression as well as its
significant correlation with poor survival outcome (P<0.0015). We further
evaluated the expression of HDAC8 in HMCLs (probe ID_223909-s_at,
223345_at) and confirmed the high expression and its cytoplasmic and
nuclear localization in all MM cells lines studied.The HDAC8 depletion
(lentiviral-shRNA)in HMCLs resulted in significant inhibition of
proliferation of MM cells as measured by 3[H]-thymidine assay, and as
decrease in colony formation evaluated after 3 weeks post transfection
(PEpigenomic changes have emerged as an important player of cellular
regulation and understanding of pathogenesis of Multiple Myeloma (MM) as
well as of other cancers. In recent years, both clinical and preclinical
studies have confirmed that MM is vulnerable to epigenetic intervention,
with histone deacetylases (HDACs) emerging as the most promising
epigenetic targets. Although Pan-HDAC inhibitors are effective as
therapeutic agents, there is increasing emphasis on understanding the
biological and molecular roles of individual HDACs. Here we evaluated the
role of HDAC8, a member of Class I HDAC isoenzymes in MM.First, we
evaluated the expression of HDAC8 in 172 newly-diagnosed MM patients from
the IFM myeloma dataset and observed HDAC8 overexpression as well as its
significant correlation with poor survival outcome (P<0.0015). We further
evaluated the expression of HDAC8 in HMCLs (probe ID_223909-s_at,
223345_at) and confirmed the high expression and its cytoplasmic and
nuclear localization in all MM cells lines studied.The HDAC8 depletion
(lentiviral-shRNA)in HMCLs resulted in significant inhibition of
proliferation of MM cells as measured by 3[H]-thymidine assay, and as
decrease in colony formation evaluated after 3 weeks post transfection
(P<.001). We observed similar cell growth inhibition using PCI-34051, a
small molecule HDAC8 inhibitor. Interestingly, the combination of HDAC8
inhibitor with melphalan or bendamustine enhanced the anti-MM effects of
the DNA damaging agents (all pEpigenomic changes have emerged as an
important player of cellular regulation and understanding of pathogenesis
of Multiple Myeloma (MM) as well as of other cancers. In recent years,
both clinical and preclinical studies have confirmed that MM is
vulnerable to epigenetic intervention, with histone deacetylases (HDACs)
emerging as the most promising epigenetic targets. Although Pan-HDAC
inhibitors are effective as therapeutic agents, there is increasing
emphasis on understanding the biological and molecular roles of
individual HDACs. Here we evaluated the role of HDAC8, a member of Class
I HDAC isoenzymes in MM.First, we evaluated the expression of HDAC8 in
172 newly-diagnosed MM patients from the IFM myeloma dataset and observed
HDAC8 overexpression as well as its significant correlation with poor
survival outcome (P<0.0015). We further evaluated the expression of HDAC8
in HMCLs (probe ID_223909-s_at, 223345_at) and confirmed the high
expression and its cytoplasmic and nuclear localization in all MM cells
lines studied.The HDAC8 depletion (lentiviral-shRNA)in HMCLs resulted in
significant inhibition of proliferation of MM cells as measured by
3[H]-thymidine assay, and as decrease in colony formation evaluated after
3 weeks post transfection (P<.001). We observed similar cell growth
inhibition using PCI-34051, a small molecule HDAC8 inhibitor.
Interestingly, the combination of HDAC8 inhibitor with melphalan or
bendamustine enhanced the anti-MM effects of the DNA damaging agents (all
p<0.01). Immunoblotting analysis using a panel of 15 antibodies for DNA
damage response (DDR) pathway confirmed increased levels of DNA damage in
OPM2 and MM1S cells lacking HDAC8. Consistent with this observation HDAC8
depletion led to decreased homologous recombination (HR) activity as
measured by plasmid-based assay. We performed singe cell electrophoresis
(Comet-assay) and observed decreased repair of DSBs after IR in
OPM2-HDAC8 depleted cells as well as after pharmacologic inhibition of
HDAC8. Importantly, using laser micro-irradiation in myeloma and U2OS
cells, we observed HDAC8 recruitment to DSBs sites. The HDAC8 was
co-localized and co-immunoprecipitated with Rad51 after IR, and with
Scm3, member of cohesion complex suggesting its relation with
cytoskeleton. In MM1s cells containing a stably integrated
Rad51-luciferase reporter construct, the addition of HDAC8 inhibitor
suppressed Rad51, confirming the immunoblotting findings. A mass
spectromentry-based analysis identified the HDAC8-interacting complexes
with cohesion- (cohesin subunit SA-2, Condensin-2) and DDR-key components
(Mre11a, XRCC1, Rad50).In conclusion, our results demonstrate impact of
epigenomic change on DNA integrity through connection between HDAC8 and
DNA damage response pathway, and provide insights into the effect of
HDAC8 on DNA stability and cell growth and survival that may have
therapeutic implications in MM.

