Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of 148 ovarian cancer tumografts (Avatars) using
BROCA-HR deep sequencing


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy and the fifth
leading cause of cancer deaths among women. The current standard of care
post surgical cytoreduction is combination platinum/taxane chemotherapy.
The initial response varies widely; subsets of carcinomas demonstrate
resistance or sensitivity from the onset. The underlying cause of this
response heterogeneity remains incompletely understood. Patient-derived
xenografts (PDX) serve as useful in vivo models to study molecular
response markers and test the efficacy of targeted therapies. Our group
has demonstrated a high engraftment rate (>70%) of ovarian cancer PDXs
(Avatars) by injecting treatment nave patient tumor directly into the
peritoneal cavity of an in immunocompromised mouse host in an effort to
better mimic the anatomic context by which ovarian cancer naturally
develops. We now have 328 engrafted Avatar models representing the wide
range of ovarian cancer subtypes, including serous (65%), mixed
epithelial (10%), endometrioid (7%), clear cell (4%), mucinous (3%),
carcinosarcoma (1%) and other (10%). Using these models, we are
performing a massively parallel sequencing strategy referred to as
BROCA-HR to detect all mutation classes (e.g. gene rearrangements, copy
number variations, etc.) and gene aberrations within the Fanconi
Anemia-BRCA homologous recombination (HR), non-homologous end joining
(NHEJ), PTEN, and DNA Mismatch repair pathways. To date, 148 Avatar
models have undergone BROCA sequencing. Observed deleterious mutations
included 12 BRCA1 (8%), 6 BRCA2 (4%), and 4 PIK3CA (3%); additional loss
of function mutations were also evident in the following genes: ATM,
RAD51C, FANCM, FANCD2, FANCA, CHEK2, PALB2, MHS6, CDK12 and GEN1. These
models are representative of mutations seen in the TCGA mutation set.
Models harboring said mutations are currently being tested with platinum
agents and/or PARP inhibitors. Taken together, the Avatars represent a
high throughput model system for pre-clinical testing in vivo that
effectively recapitulates ovarian cancer (e.g. mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2
and other DNA damage response proteins). We have been able to establish
avatars at a high rate, including those with mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2
and other DNA damage response genes. These models will be a unique
resource for future studies of biomarkers and novel therapeutic
approaches.This work is funded by the Ovarian Cancer Research Fund
(750563), Mayo Ovarian SPORE (CA136393), National Cancer Institute (RO1
CA184502).Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

