Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GPER-mediated activation of the cAMP response element-binding
protein (CREB) and subsequent IGFBP-1 expression is altered during the
development of tamoxifen resistance


Tamoxifen is a commonly prescribed anti-estrogen treatment for breast
cancer patients; this selective estrogen receptor modulator functions as
an ER-antagonist in breast tissue and inhibits cell proliferation and
survival of breast cancer cells. More recently, the active metabolite of
tamoxifen, 4-OHT (Tam), has been shown to activate the G protein-coupled
estrogen receptor (GPER). Previous studies from our laboratory identified
a novel, GPER-dependent mechanism of Tam action in breast cancer cells
that requires the extracellular accumulation of the insulin-like growth
factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1). The molecular mechanisms of
Tam-induced IGFBP-1 production mediated by GPER have not been determined.
GPER activation has been shown to stimulate cAMP production and PKA
activation in several cell types. We hypothesized the cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) activation is required for Tam-induced
IGFBP-1 production in breast caner cells. To determine if CREB activation
may be involved in IGFBP-1 transcription, CREB phosphorylation (S133)
status and nuclear accumulation were determined in MCF-7 cells after Tam
treatment. The phosphorylation and nuclear accumulation of CREB were
observed in Tam-treated MCF-7 cells suggesting that CREB activation may
be required for Tam-induced IGFBP-1 transcription. Increased CREB
phosphorylation and IGFBP-1 transcription were inhibited by pretreatment
with the PKA inhibitor H-89 supporting a role for CREB in Tam-induced
IGFBP-1 expression. H-89 pretreatment also significantly decreased the
previously reported inhibition of IGF-1-stimulated signaling by Tam
treatment in breast cancer cells. We have previously reported that
Tam-induced IGFBP-1 expression is dysregulated in Tam-resistant MCF-7
cells (MCF-7TamR). To determine if aberrant CREB signaling results in the
observed dysregulation, similar experiments were performed in MCF-7TamR
cells. Our results show that CREB phosphorylation and nuclear
accumulation are decreased in Tam-resistant cells compared to
Tam-sensitive cells. Taken together, these results suggest that
activation of GPER results in CREB-dependent IGFBP-1 production and
subsequent inhibition of IGF-1-stimulated signaling in breast cancer
cells treated with Tam. Furthermore, dysregulation of GPER-mediated CREB
activation may be involved in the development of Tam resistance in breast
cancer.

