Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotypic selection screening reveals cancer stem cell
therapeutic targets


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) represent an important subpopulation of tumor
cells that are untouched and perhaps even expanded after chemotherapy and
radiation. This population has been shown in murine models of cancer to
be solely responsible for the regrowth of tumors following chemotherapy,
underscoring the importance of therapeutically targeting this population.
Therefore, we sought to find novel targets against CSCs using a
phenotypic selection screen. Using a designed ankyrin repeat (DARpin)
library, we panned cells disaggregated from tumor spheres from three
patient-derived xenograft models of late stage pancreatic cancer to
enrich for DARPins that bind CSCs. Once released from the cells, the
DARPins were further analyzed for binding to both normal, pancreatic
cancer total tumor cells and pancreatic CSCs in order to choose targets
that showed either pancreatic cancer-specific or pancreatic CSC-specific
binding. These DARPins were then tested in a sphere formation assay, an
EZH2-based high content imaging screen, and a standard proliferation
assay. Those DARPins showing good cancer-specific binding profiles were
also tested for internalization and killing using a saporin-conjugated
secondary antibody. Using this approach, we identified 30 DARPins of
interest for either direct inhibitory antibody approaches or for
potential antibody drug conjugate or nanoparticle delivery approaches.
Identification of the proteins bound by each of the DARPins was done
using either immunopreciptation followed by liquid chromatography
tandem-mass spectrometry or through Retrogenix's cell expression
microarray technology. Identified targets included known CSC antigens
such as integrin alpha6 (CD49f) as well as other potentially novel
targets. These results highlight the possibilities of finding therapeutic
targets for CSCs and opens up an exciting possibility for novel therapies.

