Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systems pathology for characterization of cancer model systems in
a multicenter IMI-PREDECT project


Despite of our increased understanding of cancer biology, the majority of
anti-cancer therapies fail at late-stage clinical trials. Thus, there is
an urgent need to develop and validate novel preclinical models that
could predict drug efficacy in humans. For this purpose, as a part of
IMI-PREDECT public-private research consortium, this study describes
methodology and infrastructure for characterization and comparison of
preclinical models for drug target validation applying a systems
pathology approach. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples from
1050 different in vitro and in vivo models of breast, prostate and lung
cancers, as well as 364 clinical tumors from the same origin, were
collected from 26 PREDECT collaborators across the EU. We established
standard operating procedures for central processing of FFPE samples,
including tissue microarray (TMA) construction and immunohistochemistry
(IHC) with 15 different antibodies (CK8, Ki67, p-histone H3, ER, AR,
p-AKT, p-ERK, p-p38, H2AX, cleaved caspase 3, p-MET, HIF1, p63, vimentin,
E-cadherin). We constructed 50 TMA blocks, from which sections were cut
and stained as well as digitized using whole slide imaging. Images were
hosted on a WebMicroscope digital pathology platform and sample metadata
on a PREDECT Metadata database (MBase). We developed image analysis
methods for the detection and quantification of IHC biomarkers in the
48,800 stained TMA spots. As a proof-of-concept, we compared MCF-7 on
several preclinical platforms including cell cultures, xenografts and
xenograft tissue slices. Our results of the integrated biomarker
phenotype suggest that of the various MCF-7 in vivo and ex vivo complex
cell culture models, the xenograft tissue slice model was the most
similar model platform to human clinical samples. In summary, we
established a systems pathology approach to analyse and compare novel
preclinical cancer models with IHC and digital imaging. The intention is
that this large database will be made publicly available on the web as
images and summary data that could be broadly useful to the community of
cancer researchers and drug developers in comparing cancer model systems.
The established infrastructure and workflow integrating molecular and
digital pathology in a large-scale consortium setting could be applied to
quantitative characterisation of consortium data in collaborations
similar to PREDECT.

