Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal evolution of metastatic colorectal cancer


Introduction: Death from colorectal cancer (CRC) occurs via sequelae of
metastases. Our lack of understanding of the mechanisms driving
metastatic formation is a critical barrier to the identification and
direct targeting of critical genes and pathways. This is further
complicated by tumor heterogeneity and subclonal architecture. To
reconstruct the patterns of tumor evolution and metastasis in CRC, we
have conducted the first comprehensive clonality analysis of ten
patients.Methods: Primary tumor, metastases in multiple liver segments,
and matched normal tissues were procured from consented patients during
operative resection. Deep exome (200x coverage) and whole genome
sequencing (50x coverage) were used to identify somatic mutations and
estimate variant allele frequency (VAF) for somatic single nucleotide
variants (SNVs). Clonal architecture and evolution models were derived
from the SNVs by VAF-based clustering, clonal ordering, and phylogeny
analysis.Results: Non-silent somatic alterations were enriched in genes
known to be involved in CRC and other major cancers, including APC, TP53,
KRAS, PIK3CA and TCF7L2. Each patient had a founding clone originating
from the primary tumor (carrying non-silent mutations in at least one
cancer driver gene) that survived to metastasis, possibly following
evolution and acquisition of additional somatic mutations. Branched
evolution was common and spatially-distinct liver metastases within the
same patient sometimes arose from different (sub)clones in the primary
tumor. Unique subclones appeared to arise in all metastatic samples, and
in some cases, were shared among various metastases of the same patient.
This suggests that one metastasis seeded another or an ancestor common to
those metastases was present in the primary tumor or elsewhere, but not
observed due to spatial heterogeneity. In several cases, mutations in the
dominant clone of the primary tumor were absent from metastases,
suggesting these were subclonal events in more aggressive cancer cells
that arose in the primary tumor after metastasis. These additional
somatic events may involve (possibly novel) cancer driver
genes.Conclusions: Understanding the genomic events driving tumor
evolution and metastasis is critical for explaining why existing
therapies fail and determining optimal treatment strategies. Our analyses
have outlined several clonal evolution patterns in metastatic CRC. We are
currently using ultra-deep targeted and multi-region sequencing to
validate genomic alterations in our CRC cohort to refine clonal evolution
models and evaluate which subclones may be biologically relevant to
disease progression and treatment resistance. Additionally, by revealing
critical altered genes and pathways associated with metastatic clones we
can improve our understanding of the mechanisms driving metastasis in CRC
that may lead to novel targeted cancer therapies.

