Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclooxygenase-1 gene expression contributes to multiple oncogenic
pathways in high grade serous ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy. Most women
diagnosed with high grade serous ovarian cancer present with advanced
disease characterized by widespread peritoneal carcinomatosis. Recent
epidemiological results indicate that cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors
aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are a promising
preventive strategy to reduce the risk of developing ovarian cancer.
COX-1 and COX-2 catalyze the rate-limiting step in the biosynthesis of
prostaglandins and thromboxanes, which contribute to tumorigenesis by
promoting proliferation, escape from apoptosis, and angiogenesis.
Emerging evidence from our group and others suggests that COX-1 is an
important molecular target in ovarian cancer, distinguishing ovarian
cancer from most other solid tumors, where COX-2 is the dominant isoform.
However, the precise roles of COX-1 and COX-2 in human ovarian cancer
remain controversial. Therefore, the aim of this study was to gain
additional insight into COX-1 gene expression and function in human
ovarian cancer. First, we extracted RNA-seq V2 mRNA expression data for
COX-1 and COX-2 in the PANCAN12 tumor panel of The Cancer Genome Atlas.
COX-1 mRNA levels were significantly higher than those of COX-2 in high
grade serous ovarian tumors, and higher than COX-1 expression in 11 other
solid tumor types. We confirmed these findings in a tissue microarray
generated from 209 ovarian cancer patients. COX-1 protein was highly
expressed in a large subset of serous tumors, with significantly lower
COX-2 expression present. In contrast, there was markedly lower COX-1
expression in endometrioid, mucinous and clear cell ovarian tumors
compared to COX-2. Second, stable COX-1 knockdown in
serous-representative OVCAR-3 cells significantly reduced cell viability
compared to control cells. Pathway analysis from RNA-seq data revealed
that COX-1 knockdown induced a coordinated transcriptional response
consistent with reduced cell proliferation (eg. reduced cyclin D1 and
increased p21 expression), cell migration/invasion (eg. reduced TGF-
signaling and expression of MMPs), angiogenesis (eg. reduced VEGF
expression), epithelial-mesenchymal transition (eg. increased E-cadherin
expression and reduced BMP signaling), and NF-B signaling. Gene
expression changes were validated by western blot. In SKOV-3 ovarian
cancer cells stably overexpressing COX-1, opposite effects on cell
viability and on these genes/pathways were observed. Our findings confirm
that COX-1 is over-expressed in serous ovarian cancer, and likely plays a
key role in tumor progression. Exploiting high COX-1 expression in
ovarian cancer with COX-1-targeted molecules has the potential to improve
the treatment and detection of this deadly disease.

