Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Broad therapy resistance is induced by suppression of apoptotic
priming by lineage programs and oncogenic activation


Understanding the mechanisms of resistance to anticancer therapies may
improve personalized treatment regimens and responses to therapy. The
mitochondrial apoptosis pathway is activated by most targeted and
cytotoxic therapies and represents a node that may be modulated for broad
therapy resistance. It has been shown that some cancers, especially those
of hematopoietic origin, are primed for apoptosis (as measured by BH3
Profiling) and consequently undergo apoptosis readily in response to
therapies while others are unprimed and resistant. However, despite the
importance of apoptotic priming in governing response to anticancer
therapies, the upstream molecular determinants of apoptotic priming are
unknown. Prior work has shown that oncogenes, including c-Myc, can
sensitize some cells to apoptosis. We therefore hypothesized that lineage
programming and activation of oncogenes may modulate apoptotic priming in
normal cells undergoing neoplastic transformation.Using numerous in vitro
and in vivo ovarian, breast, kidney and liver tumorigenesis models we
discovered that the strongest determinant of apoptotic priming and
chemosensitivity in a cancer cell is the level of priming measured in the
cell of origin. To illustrate, ovarian adenocarcinomas, which originate
from primed ovarian or fallopian tube epithelia, are considerably more
primed than hepatocellular carcinomas originating from unprimed
precursors. Notably, we also found that activation of certain oncogenes
can meaningfully increase apoptotic priming and chemosensitivity while
others decrease it. For example, transformation of normal epithelial
cells via forced expression of the c-Myc oncogene increased priming and
chemosensitivity. In contrast, activation of Ras in isogenic cells
dramatically decreased both priming and chemosensitivity. We have
systematically characterized the effects of 27 oncogenes on apoptotic
priming and chemosensitivity including PI3K, Notch, Src, BRAF, -catenin,
Akt, and Aurora B kinase. Certain subsets of oncogenes consistently
reduced apoptotic priming in cells undergoing transformation and, in
combination with cell lineage programs, established broad resistance to
targeted and cytotoxic therapies. Importantly, our experimental findings
are complemented by clinical correlates. Overall, this work may aid
efforts to deploy personalized and efficacious cancer treatments and
enhance our knowledge of how cancers evade cell death, which is a
hallmark of cancer.

