Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An androgen response element-based reporter assay for the
detection of androgen receptor activity in prostate cells


Background: The androgen receptor (AR) transcription factor plays pivotal
roles in the development and progression of prostate cancer. AR is
activated and maintained throughout prostate cancer progression even in
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). AR and its classical target
genes such as PSA (KLK3) are, however, efficiently shut off in basal
epithelial prostate cells and possibly in prostate cancer stem cells
(CSCs). There is limited information on the mechanisms that keep the AR
OFF in these cells, and the conditions that turn the AR and target genes
ON.Results: Fluorescent and luminescent reporters were constructed to
develop a functional assay for AR activity. These reporters contain the
repeated AR binding promoter sequences and were designed in a way that
the AR can activate these AR element (ARE) reporters. The 241B reporter
was selected among the constructed ARE reporters on the basis of higher
activity. The AR positive prostate cancer cell line, LNCaP, was
transduced with the lentiviral 241B-mCherry fluorescence reporter. FACS
analysis quantitated the ARE reporter activity when reporter cells were
treated with androgen and with the AR antagonist, enzalutamide, or the
anti-androgen, abiraterone. AR expression vectors were also constructed
with the AR open reading frames cloned into lentiviral expression
vectors. All constructs were sequenced to verify the correct AR DNA
sequence and their activity were tested using ARE reporter
system.Conclusion: The developed ARE reporter system is useful to
understand the mechanisms of AR and AR target gene activation in
different subpopulations of prostate cancer cells. It will help us to
investigate the role of the AR in differentiation and proliferation of
prostate cells and to study the AR activity in two and three dimensional
cell cultures. This system can also be useful in screening for drugs with
activity against the AR.

