Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early detection and longitudinal imaging of breast cancer
metastatic microlesions using short-wave infrared light emitting
rare-earth nanoprobes


Metastatic cancer is the leading cause of almost 90% of cancer-related
deaths. Early detection of metastatic lesions in breast cancer would lead
to judicious therapeutic choices in the management of the disease.
Current clinical imaging techniques are unable to detect micro-metastases
due to limited resolution. Optical imaging technologies are challenged by
high tissue scattering and absorption of visible light, limiting
resolution of deeper tissue lesions. While optical imaging modalities
have the potential for real-time in vivo monitoring, poor penetration
through biological mediums limits their application to subcutaneous
lesions. Our approach utilizes rare earth (RE) nanoprobes that absorb
near infrared (NIR) radiation and emit in the shortwave infrared (SWIR)
spectrum (1000-3000 nm), allowing for greater depth of detection.In this
study, we demonstrate the ability of CXCR4-targeting Rare Earth Albumin
NanoComposites (ReANCs) to preferentially accumulate in receptor positive
tumor lesions and image lesion dynamics in an in vivo MDA-MB-231 derived
lung metastatic model. ReANCs or AMD3100 (small molecule inhibitor of
CXCR4) functionalized ReANCs (fReANCs) were injected via the tail vein
once a week and SWIR imaging was performed up to 48 hours post injection.
Tumor burden in the lungs was assessed by MRI and compared to the SWIR
signal from the nanoprobes. Longitudinal in vivo imaging confirmed
improved accumulation of functionalized nanoprobes in tumor lesions
compared to control ReANCs. This improved accumulation at early lesion
stages allowed for earlier and more sensitive detection of internal
tumors. We also observed control ReANCs cleared faster through the liver
as evidenced by increased SWIR signal in the liver of these animals.In
addition to the targeted imaging effect of fReANCs, we were able to
demonstrate the ability of ReANCs to image micro-metastatic lesions in
long bones and spine of animals prior to their detection via conventional
imaging techniques such as MRI and CT. This was confirmed by ex-vivo SWIR
imaging of the skeleton and micro-CT of the long bones. This advancement
is exciting due to the paucity of imaging modalities capable of detecting
micro-metastasis of breast cancer to bone. Histological analysis was
performed to validate the presence of micro-lesions in the bones.
Furthermore, immunohistochemical analysis of bone sections using markers
over-expressed by MDA-MB-231 cells, namely Vimentin and pan-Cytokeratin
confirmed the presence of tumors in the regions of interest.. Findings
from this study support the promise of the new window imaging platform
and suggest future clinical translatability for nanomedicine. Given the
multifunctional nature of ANCs as drug delivery vehicles, our imaging
probes can also be adapted for pre-clinical pharmacogenomic screening, an
emerging component of precision medicine.

