Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The therapeutic strategy using Nek2 siRNA and 5FU for
cholangiocarcinoma cell


Introduction: Nek2 (NIMA-related kinase 2) is a member of the
serine/threonine kinase family, which is involved in cell division and
centrosome splitting. We reported that Nek2 suppression causes growth
inhibition in several cancers, such as cholangiocarcinoma, breast cancer
and colon cancer. In this study, we investigated a therapeutic strategy
using Nek2 siRNA combined with the cytotoxic chemotherapy drug
5FU.Methods: HuCCT1 cells (cholangiocarcinoma cell line) were first
transfected with Nek2 siRNA or Control siRNA, and then treated with 5FU
(0, 1, 5, 10, 50 and 100M) 24h after transfection. Cell death was
determined using the Trypan blue dye exclusion test. Floating and
attached cells were collected 72 h after transfection and stained with 1%
Trypan blue. Viable cells and Dead cells were counted under microscope.
Cell proliferation was analyzed using a MTT assay, which is based on the
cleavage of tetrazolium salt by mitochondrial dehydrogenases. Absorbance
of the formazan dye was evaluated at 1.5 h after adding the reagent.
Antitumor efficacy was assessed using Nek2 siRNA in a xenograft nude
mouse model. HuCCT1 cells were inoculated subcutaneously into the femoral
area of the mice. The siRNAs were injected around the tumor, and then 5FU
was administered orally at a dose of 4 mg/kg body weight for each mouse
from 7 days after tumor inoculation. The siRNA and 5FU was administered
once a week for a total of three weeks. Estimated tumor volume (mm3) was
calculated by the following equation; (LW2)/2, where L is the tumor
length and W is the tumor width (in mm).Result and discussion: 5FU alone
induced the cell death of HuCCT1 in dose-dependent manner. The number of
dead cells treated with Nek2 siRNA and 5FU was significantly higher than
that of cells treated with Control siRNA and 5FU. Combined treatment of
Nek2 siRNA with 5FU also suppressed proliferation of HuCCT1 cells
compared to Control siRNA with 5FU. The combination of Nek2 siRNA and 5FU
was more effective than the administration of Nek2 siRNA alone.
Furthermore, the combined treatment suppressed the tumor formation in a
xenograft nude mouse model. There was no complication related to combined
chemotherapeutic treatments of Nek2 siRNA and 5FU. Nek2 siRNA can be used
in combination with conventional chemotherapeutic drugs for cancer
treatment.Conclusion: The therapeutic strategy using Nek2 siRNA and 5FU
may be an effective treatment option for cholangiocarcinoma. Further
investigation is necessary to clarify the detailed mechanism regulating
cell growth and death by a combination of Nek2 siRNA and 5FU.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

