Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ZFAS1, long non-coding RNA with significance in colorectal cancer


Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers
in the world. However, the existence of multiple known carcinogens and
varying genetic backgrounds makes it difficult to determine which factors
are most important in the development of CRC. Therefore, the
identification of a bona fide molecule involved in progression of CRC has
been greatly sought after. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNA) are emerging as
key molecules in human cancer, and some of them were shown to have
potential for cancer diagnosis and prognosis. ZFAS1, an lncRNA, has been
recently revealed involving in human breast cancer as putative tumor
suppressor. However, whether ZFAS1 is involved in CRC pathogenesis or
could serve as novel biomarker in CRC is unknown.Patients and methods: By
use of high throughput technology we identified ZFAS1 as one of the
highly up-regulated lncRNA in CRC tissue. Thus, aim of the current study
was to explore the correlation between ZFAS1 expression and progression
of CRC and its clinical significance. The expression levels of ZFAS1 were
determined by quantitative real-time PCR and in selected cases by
Northern blot and evaluated in larger cohort (120 cases) of CRC tissues
and cell lines (HCT116, DLD1, SW620), which were compared to paired
adjacent normal tissues or normal colonic cell lines. The potential
relationship between ZFAS1 levels in tumor tissues and the
clinicopathological features of CRC was also evaluated. Further, we
assessed whether ZFAS1 influences cell proliferation, apoptosis, cell
cycle and migration in-vitro. The different isoforms of ZFAS1 were
determined by RACE-PCR and protein interacting partners of ZFAS1 were
analyzed by pull-down experiment and mass spectrometry. The identified
candidate proteins were evaluated by RNA-IP.Results: Our results showed
that ZFAS1 expression in CRC tissues and cell lines were significantly
increased compared with matched normal tissues (p Introduction:
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers in the world.
However, the existence of multiple known carcinogens and varying genetic
backgrounds makes it difficult to determine which factors are most
important in the development of CRC. Therefore, the identification of a
bona fide molecule involved in progression of CRC has been greatly sought
after. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNA) are emerging as key molecules in
human cancer, and some of them were shown to have potential for cancer
diagnosis and prognosis. ZFAS1, an lncRNA, has been recently revealed
involving in human breast cancer as putative tumor suppressor. However,
whether ZFAS1 is involved in CRC pathogenesis or could serve as novel
biomarker in CRC is unknown.Patients and methods: By use of high
throughput technology we identified ZFAS1 as one of the highly
up-regulated lncRNA in CRC tissue. Thus, aim of the current study was to
explore the correlation between ZFAS1 expression and progression of CRC
and its clinical significance. The expression levels of ZFAS1 were
determined by quantitative real-time PCR and in selected cases by
Northern blot and evaluated in larger cohort (120 cases) of CRC tissues
and cell lines (HCT116, DLD1, SW620), which were compared to paired
adjacent normal tissues or normal colonic cell lines. The potential
relationship between ZFAS1 levels in tumor tissues and the
clinicopathological features of CRC was also evaluated. Further, we
assessed whether ZFAS1 influences cell proliferation, apoptosis, cell
cycle and migration in-vitro. The different isoforms of ZFAS1 were
determined by RACE-PCR and protein interacting partners of ZFAS1 were
analyzed by pull-down experiment and mass spectrometry. The identified
candidate proteins were evaluated by RNA-IP.Results: Our results showed
that ZFAS1 expression in CRC tissues and cell lines were significantly
increased compared with matched normal tissues (p < 0.0001). In addition,
siRNA-mediated knockdown of ZFAS1 expression significantly influenced the
proliferation of CRC cells (p Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is
one of the most common cancers in the world. However, the existence of
multiple known carcinogens and varying genetic backgrounds makes it
difficult to determine which factors are most important in the
development of CRC. Therefore, the identification of a bona fide molecule
involved in progression of CRC has been greatly sought after. Long
noncoding RNAs (lncRNA) are emerging as key molecules in human cancer,
and some of them were shown to have potential for cancer diagnosis and
prognosis. ZFAS1, an lncRNA, has been recently revealed involving in
human breast cancer as putative tumor suppressor. However, whether ZFAS1
is involved in CRC pathogenesis or could serve as novel biomarker in CRC
is unknown.Patients and methods: By use of high throughput technology we
identified ZFAS1 as one of the highly up-regulated lncRNA in CRC tissue.
Thus, aim of the current study was to explore the correlation between
ZFAS1 expression and progression of CRC and its clinical significance.
The expression levels of ZFAS1 were determined by quantitative real-time
PCR and in selected cases by Northern blot and evaluated in larger cohort
(120 cases) of CRC tissues and cell lines (HCT116, DLD1, SW620), which
were compared to paired adjacent normal tissues or normal colonic cell
lines. The potential relationship between ZFAS1 levels in tumor tissues
and the clinicopathological features of CRC was also evaluated. Further,
we assessed whether ZFAS1 influences cell proliferation, apoptosis, cell
cycle and migration in-vitro. The different isoforms of ZFAS1 were
determined by RACE-PCR and protein interacting partners of ZFAS1 were
analyzed by pull-down experiment and mass spectrometry. The identified
candidate proteins were evaluated by RNA-IP.Results: Our results showed
that ZFAS1 expression in CRC tissues and cell lines were significantly
increased compared with matched normal tissues (p < 0.0001). In addition,
siRNA-mediated knockdown of ZFAS1 expression significantly influenced the
proliferation of CRC cells (p < 0.05) Interestingly, ZFAS1 intronically
hosts three C/D box snoRNAs (SNORDs): SNORD12, 12B, and 12B. The general
assumption that noncoding SNORD-host transcripts function only as
vehicles to generate snoRNAs, knockdown of ZFAS1 in a CRC cell lines
resulted in decreased cellular proliferation, while not substantially
altering the levels of the SNORDs.Conclusion: Our current study
demonstrates that ZFAS1 levels are increased in CRC tissue and influences
significantly proliferation of CRC cells in vitro, indicating its
potential oncogenic functioning in CRC.The work has been supported by
Project CZ.1.07/2.3.00/30.0037, and IGA MZCR NT13549-4/2012,
NT13860-4/2012.

