Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic dendritic cell targeting MIP3-gp100 DNA vaccination
with immunomodulatory IL-10 and PD-1 antibodies significantly enhances
survival in a mouse melanoma model system


The current study demonstrates that the combination of a DNA vaccine
encoding the chemokine MIP-3 fused to melanoma antigen gp100 with
immunomodulatory antibodies prolongs survival in a melanoma mouse model.
The current studies utilize the B16F10 mouse spontaneous melanoma
syngeneic transplantable mouse model system. Previous published work with
this vaccine platform has indicated the MIP-3 component targets nascent
peptides to immature dendritic cells leading to processing by class I and
class II MHC pathways. It has further been shown in this tumor system
that prophylactic vaccination with the DNA construct alone delayed tumor
growth. Other studies have provided evidence that PD-1 or IL-10
neutralizing antibodies enhance immunological melanoma therapies by
modulating the tolerogenic tumor microenvironment. First, this study
expanded previous results by finding a significant decrease in tumor
burden and increase in survival by prophylactic intramuscular
electroporation [IM EP] of the DNA vaccine construct. Adding three
therapeutic doses of IL-10 given subcutaneously [subQ] at the tumor site
to the treatment further increased mouse survival. The development of
cell-mediated and humoral immune responses were documented for the first
time in this system by Elispot and in-cell ELISA assays. Secondly, a
novel therapeutic vaccination protocol was developed by initiating
vaccination and antibody therapies after tumor challenge. With this
therapeutic protocol, we demonstrated for the first time that vaccine
significantly delays tumor burden and increases median survival from 17
to 21 days (p = 0.006). Addition of IL-10 (subQ) and PD-1
(intra-peritoneally) antibodies led to further highly significant
decreases in tumor burden and increased median survival from 17 to 25
days (p = 0.0005). Efficient targeting of antigen to immature dendritic
cells with a chemokine fusion vaccine offers a potential alternative
approach to the ex vivo dendritic cell antigen loading protocols
currently undergoing clinical investigation. Combining this approach with
agents able to modulate the tolerogenic tumor microenvironment offers
promise as a novel melanoma therapy.

