Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Receptor tyrosine kinases can mediate compensatory signaling and
phenotype-switching associated with resistance to BRAF inhibitors


BRAF/ERK is the most frequently activated oncogenic signaling pathway in
metastatic melanoma. Although clinical studies have demonstrated initial
efficacy of BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi), the therapeutic responses are
short-lived in many patients due to the acquisition of resistance.
Inhibition of mutant BRAF in melanoma has been reported to induce
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like phenotype switching. One
mechanism of phenotype-switching associated with resistance to BRAFi is
down-regulation of MITF and increased levels of WNT5A.Across a panel of
22 BRAFV600E melanoma lines, those intrinsically resistant to BRAFi were
found to express significantly higher levels of mesenchymal markers
whereas the sensitive lines exhibited more epithelial-like
characteristics. The intrinsically resistant lines featured high
expression of multiple receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) including EGFR,
but low levels of other RTKs such as IGFR. RTKs are known able to mediate
melanoma phenotype-switching and can confer BRAFi resistance via
reactivation of ERK signaling. Hence, we further assessed the link
between specific RTKs and drug resistance, ERK signaling and
phenotype-switching.In A375 and other drug sensitive cell lines, specific
RTKs constitutively expressed and activated with ligands, differed in
their ability to confer a proliferative advantage during drug treatment,
which was associated with variation in signaling. Activated EGFR was able
to drive compensatory ERK signaling whereas activated IGFR strongly
activated AKT signaling.In the absence of RTK expression, BRAFi-treated
A375 cells displayed an EMT-like phenotype switch. Drug adaptation
induced resistance to BRAFi, a mesenchymal-like phenotype and increased
migration in A375 cells, which were reversible by removal of the drug.
During this period, we found reversible hyper-activation of ERK signaling
due to relief of feedback regulation by BRAFi, and an altered composition
of the AP-1 complex with down-regulated expression of FRA-1.
Interestingly this was associated with increased MITF and SLUG in A375
cells. Expression and activation of EGFR in A375 cells treated with BRAFi
maintained ERK signaling, expression of feedback regulator Sprouty2
(SPRY2) and FRA-1. Enforced expression of SPRY2 was able to reverse BRAFi
resistance induced by EGFR signaling. EGFR activation also suppressed
BRAFi induction of MITF, expression of EMT-inducers, including SLUG and
ZEB2, with cells retaining the morphology similar to the drug-naive
state. In contrast, activated IGFR did not alter the drug-induced effects
in A375.Our study reveals that RTKs differ in their ability to confer
proliferation signaling and the EMT-like phenotype-switching, both having
strong implications in the development of resistance to BRAFi in melanoma.

