Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ODM-203, a novel, selective and balanced FGFR and VEGFR inhibitor
with strong activity on primary and metastatic tumor growth in
FGFR-dependent and angiogenic cancer models


Genomic alterations in fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFR) and
upregulation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFR) are
often found in the same cancer types such as gastric, lung and breast and
these alterations correlate with patient survival and disease
progression. In addition, both FGFR and VEGFR signaling promote tumor
angiogenesis. Activation of FGFR signaling has also been described to
function as a compensatory angiogenic signal following development of
resistance to VEGF inhibition.ODM-203 is a novel and selective inhibitor
of the FGFR and VEGFR families exhibiting equal potency to both receptors
both in vitro and in vivo. In recombinant kinase assays, ODM-203 inhibits
both the FGFR and VEGFR family kinases in the low nanomolar range (IC50
6-35 nM). In cells, ODM-203 suppresses FGFR and VEGFR signaling with
similar potency. It also inhibits VEGF-induced endothelial cell (HUVEC)
proliferation (IC50 33 nM) with similar potency as it inhibits
proliferation in FGFR-dependent cell lines (IC50 50-150 nM). In vivo,
ODM-203 shows strong anti-tumor activity in FGFR-dependent xenograft
models and in angiogenic xenograft models with similar well tolerated
doses. In addition ODM-203 inhibits metastatic tumor growth in angiogenic
xenograft models. Lack of activity in a FGFR and VEGFR independent tumor
models further supports the selective mode of action of ODM-203. Oral
administration of ODM-203 was well tolerated with only FGFR or VEGFR
inhibition related physiological events observed in vivo in rat and
dog.Based on our findings, ODM-203 has a unique profile with equal
potency for both FGFR and VEGFR kinase families which correlates with
with strong activity on primary and metastatic tumor growth in
FGFR-dependent and angiogenic tumor models. Therefore, a clinical trial
with ODM-203 is ongoing in patients with solid tumors (NCT 02264418).

