Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotype-based development of novel therapies for the treatment
of colorectal cancer


Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most commonly
diagnosed cancer worldwide. Treatment of late stage CRC using
Bevacizumab, a targeted anti-VEGF, produces insufficient patient response
rates and acquired tumour resistance. There is a clinical need for
development of improved treatment options.Materials and Methods:
Previously, anti-angiogenic screens in Tgfli1:EGFP zebrafish identified
Quininib, a small molecule drug as effective as Bevacizumabat reducing
tumour volume in vivo and which reduces tumour CD31 expression in
xenografted mice. Here, structural analogues of Quininib were synthesised
to identify novel chemical entities with higher anti-angiogenic and
anti-inflammatory efficacy. Analogues were examined for anti-angiogenic
effects in the zebrafish intersegmental-vessel assay. Hits were
progressed for safety analysis in cytotoxic assays, anti-angiogenic
efficacy in aortic explants, and effects on cell proliferation and tubule
formation using HT29_Luc2 and HMEC cells. Leads were then tested in ex
vivo human CRC tumour explants to determine effects on angiogenic and
inflammatory factor secretion. A CRC-specific murine xeongraft model was
created by subcutaneous injection of HT29_Luc2 cells for anti-tumorigenic
analysis of the Quininib analogues.Results and Discussion: Five out of 12
drug candidates (CTB_1, CTB_2, WP_1, WP_2 and WP_11) reduced
developmental angiogenesis in fli1:EGFP zebrafish significantly more than
Quininib (98% vs 67%, ***PIntroduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the
third most commonly diagnosed cancer worldwide. Treatment of late stage
CRC using Bevacizumab, a targeted anti-VEGF, produces insufficient
patient response rates and acquired tumour resistance. There is a
clinical need for development of improved treatment options.Materials and
Methods: Previously, anti-angiogenic screens in Tgfli1:EGFP zebrafish
identified Quininib, a small molecule drug as effective as Bevacizumabat
reducing tumour volume in vivo and which reduces tumour CD31 expression
in xenografted mice. Here, structural analogues of Quininib were
synthesised to identify novel chemical entities with higher
anti-angiogenic and anti-inflammatory efficacy. Analogues were examined
for anti-angiogenic effects in the zebrafish intersegmental-vessel assay.
Hits were progressed for safety analysis in cytotoxic assays,
anti-angiogenic efficacy in aortic explants, and effects on cell
proliferation and tubule formation using HT29_Luc2 and HMEC cells. Leads
were then tested in ex vivo human CRC tumour explants to determine
effects on angiogenic and inflammatory factor secretion. A CRC-specific
murine xeongraft model was created by subcutaneous injection of HT29_Luc2
cells for anti-tumorigenic analysis of the Quininib analogues.Results and
Discussion: Five out of 12 drug candidates (CTB_1, CTB_2, WP_1, WP_2 and
WP_11) reduced developmental angiogenesis in fli1:EGFP zebrafish
significantly more than Quininib (98% vs 67%, ***P<0.01). These analogues
were well-tolerated in human endothelial and CRC cell cytotoxic assays
and were more effective than Quininib at reducing tubule formation and
angiogenic factor secretion in HMEC cells. Two analogues reduced aortic
ring vessel sprouting equally or more effectively than Quininib.
Preliminary data suggests that certain analogues can reduce inflammatory
and angiogenic factor secretion from ex vivo human CRC explants more so
than Quininib. We successfully established a CRC-specific murine tumour
xenograft model. Using a ranking efficacy table, we chose analogues to
analyse their anti-tumorigenic and anti-metastatic effects, by i/p
injection in an optimised model of HT29_Luc2-CRC tumourigenesis in Balb/c
nude mice.Conclusion: We identified 5 analogues which are significantly
more effective than Quininib within in vitro and ex vivo models of
inflammation and angiogenesis. Our highest ranking analogue will be
tested in murine xenografts to determine effects on tumour burden and
metastasis.

