Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post-transplantation cyclophosphamide depletes vaccine primed
donor T cells and compromises graft-versus-tumor effects in alloBMT model


Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) remains a major complication of
allogeneic bone marrow transplant (alloBMT) for patients with hematologic
malignancies. Donor T cell depletion or recipient immunosuppression
reduces GVHD, but may increase the risks of infection and relapse. High
doses of cyclophosphamide (Cy) in the early post-transplantation period
(PT/Cy) have been shown to reduce GVHD incidence by eliminating
alloreactive proliferating cells both in the HLA-matched and
-haploidentical settings. Donor vaccination with tumor cells or tumor
antigens has been shown to reduce the risk of relapse in syngeneic BMT.
We wished to explore whether donor vaccination could increase the
frequency of the tumor specific T cells and reduce the risk of relapse in
the content of alloBMT with PT/Cy.Donor mice were vaccinated with chicken
ovalbumin (OVA) expressing Listeria monocytogenes OVA (Lm-OVA) 7 or 30
days before T cell transfer. Recipients were challenged with thymic
lymphoma cells expressing OVA and luciferase (EL4-mOVA-Luci). Splenocytes
from nave or Lm-OVA primed donors were transferred along with T cell
depleted bone marrow into lethally irradiated recipients harboring tumor.
Half of the recipients were treated with Cy (200 mg/kg IP) on day 2. In
the syngeneic setting, we examined anti-tumor immunity after
donor/recipient vaccination with tumor antigen and characterized the
reconstitution of nave/memory/effector T cell subsets with or without
PT/Cy. Significant numbers of OVA-specific CD8+ effector T cells were
found on day 15 after transplantation in mice that did not receive PT/Cy.
PT/Cy reduced percentages of KLRG1+ effector CD8+ T cells, but
CD27+CD127+ memory T cells were increased in mice receiving
vaccine-primed donor cells. Both OVA-specific CD4+ effector and memory T
cell numbers increased after PT/Cy. Our data showed that donor
vaccination on either day -7 or on day -30 prior to BMT delayed tumor
growth and significantly prolonged survival of tumor-bearing mice. In an
MHC matched, minor antigen mismatched alloBMT mouse model, we further
demonstrated PT/Cy decreased donor T cell mediated graft-versus-tumor
(GVT) effects. Among mice receiving PT/Cy, overall and event-free
survivals at 120 days after transplantation were 38% (day-30) and 31%
(day -7), versus 0% among mice receiving cells from unprimed donors.
Among mice treated with PT/Cy, those receiving cells from donors primed
on day -7 survived slightly longer than those primed on day -30. All mice
receiving PT/Cy were dead of tumor by day 70.In summary, our data
demonstrate that PT/Cy compromised the GVT effect of vaccinating donors
with tumor antigen and worsened survival. We also showed that there were
Cy-resistant OVA-specific T cells found after PT/Cy. Further work is
required to reduce the risk of tumor relapse in the content of this
alloBMT platform.

