Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dual role of autophagy in cadmium induced prostate
carcinogenesis


Cadmium chloride (Cd) and cadmium products cause both acute and chronic
cytotoxicity and Cd exposure correlates with the risk of cancer,
especially prostate cancer in humans. On the cellular and molecular
level, Cd compounds may promote transformation of healthy cells to a
malignant state by inducing expression of pro-survival signaling
molecules. However, the precise molecular mechanism by which Cd affects
cellular transformation in different tissue types, especially in
prostate, is yet to be delineated. Autophagy is an intracellular
lysosomal degradation process by which cells remove damaged organelles
and maintain the integrity of intracellular components. In cancer cells,
autophagy promotes cancer cell survival as well as cell death. It is
unclear of how, and under what circumstances, these dual and opposite
roles of autophagy affect both anti-oncogenic and oncogenic functions. It
is possible that uncharacterized molecular switch that influences the
anti-oncogenic function of autophagy in healthy cells to become
oncogenic.In our studies, we found that exposure of normal prostate
epithelial cells (RWPE-2) in culture to Cd (10M) results in growth
inhibition. By contrast, the growth of Cd-transformed prostate epithelial
(CTPE) cells was not inhibited by the same Cd treatment. While analyzing
the molecular link between Cd induced toxicity and generation of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) generation in RWPE-2 and CTPE cells; we found there
was no significant change in the ROS induction in both cell types. In
addition, no changes in the expression of autophagy targeted genes (Atg
family proteins) were seen in Cd treated in both non-transformed and
transformed cells. However, microtubule-associated protein 1A/1B-light
chain 3B (LC-3B), which is directly involved in autophagy initiation was
upregulated in Cd-treated non-transformed cells, but not in Cd-treated
transformed cells. LC-3B activation also correlated with growth
inhibition in non-transformed cells, while impairing LC-3B activation in
RWPE-2 cells causes resistance to CD induced growth inhibition. Our
ongoing study will determine whether induction of autophagy via LC-3B is
a key event that facilitates Cd-mediated conversion of non-transformed
prostate epithelial cells to a malignant state. We strongly believe our
studies will define a new concept of LC-3B mediated autophagy in
Cd-induced prostate carcinogenesis.

