Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Population pharmacodynamics: Mechanism-based modeling of receptor
tyrosine kinase networks in cancer


The genetic heterogeneity of cancer results in patient-to-patient
variability that makes it difficult to predict whether the patient will
respond to a treatment. Molecular biomarkers such as the expression
levels of genes or proteins have proven useful in limited cases, but
these biomarkers are typically univariate and linear, whereas
multivariate, nonlinear biomarkers are needed to adequately describe the
network of molecular interactions targeted by a drug.We have developed a
method for building multivariate biomarkers that incorporate BOTH
patient-specific transcriptomic/proteomic data AND detailed mechanistic
models of the nonlinear interactions between ligands and receptors. The
mechanistic models that we use are computational pharmacodynamic models,
with multiple compartments, each with multiple cell types that express
the ligands and receptors under investigation. The models incorporate
detailed protein-protein interaction networks to simulate the complex
dynamics of growth factor families and their receptors. By integrating
this molecular detail into whole-body simulations with tumors, we can
evaluate many different therapeutic approaches - different drugs, doses,
schedules, and routes of administration. Our models make predictions of
the dynamics of receptor tyrosine kinase activity and of key blood-borne
biomarkers following therapeutic intervention. These predictions can and
have been validated against clinical experimental data.We applied the
method to the EGFR/ErbB family in breast cancer, using individualized
data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), and showed that the
personalized models were able to capture the observed variability in
receptor phosphorylation. Before the addition of drugs, the models
behaved in a relatively monotonic fashion, with signaling outputs closely
following the expression of the key ligands. However, the response to the
addition of drugs was much more complex; the baseline expression of
genes/proteins was not as good a predictor of the response.We simulated
the addition of three antibody drugs that each target one of EGFR, HER2,
and HER3. We found that biomarkers derived from gene expression data were
outperformed by biomarkers derived from simulated baseline tumor behavior
(i.e. that combined quantitative mechanistic information with gene
expression data). This suggested that linear transformations of
transcriptomic and proteomic data may not be adequate for predicting drug
response; instead, the nonlinear mechanism-based transformation that is
central to the computational model is more predictive. In addition, for
each of the antibodies investigated, the incorporation of mechanistic
protein interactions resulted in the identification of off-target effects
with high inter-individual heterogeneity that have the potential to
significantly blunt the response.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

