Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A gain-of-function mutation in tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2 enhances
breast carcinoma malignant phenotypes


Breast cancer is the most common malignant tumor in women worldwide, and
it is the second leading cause of cancer-related mortality in the US
women. Evidences suggested that overexpression of Src homologous protein
phosphotyrosyl phosphatase 2 (SHP2) has been observed in most of the
breast cancer cell lines and in breast cancer tissues, and accompanied
with lymph nodes metastasis. Inhibition of SHP2 in the breast cancer cell
lines abolishes the growth and decrease survival of tumor cells, which
leads to the differentiation of malignant cells into normal breast
epithelial phenotype. These observations suggest that SHP2 promotes the
tumor development though increase tumor formation and metastasis.
However, the pathophysiologic role of SHP2 (overexpression or
gain-of-function mutation) and its relevance to tumorigenesis are still
largely unknow. In this study, we focused on the in vivo and in vitro
effects of the gain-of-function mutant SHP-2 on phenotypes of breast
cancer. Mutant PTPN11 cDNA (D61G) was transduced into MDA-MB231 and MCF-7
cells. The effects of D61G mutant on breast cancer tumorigenesis and
malignant behaviours, such as cell adhesion, proliferation, migration and
invasion were tested. The potential underlying molecular mechanisms,
i.e., the activation of the Gab1-Ras-Erk axis were also examined. In
vitro studies found that, in SHP2 D61G mutant groups, the tumour
adhesion, proliferation, migration and invasion were increased
significantly. Consistently, in vivo studies also found that the
incidence of tumour and the tumour weights of the SHP-2 D61G-MB231 group
were increased significantly (PBreast cancer is the most common malignant
tumor in women worldwide, and it is the second leading cause of
cancer-related mortality in the US women. Evidences suggested that
overexpression of Src homologous protein phosphotyrosyl phosphatase 2
(SHP2) has been observed in most of the breast cancer cell lines and in
breast cancer tissues, and accompanied with lymph nodes metastasis.
Inhibition of SHP2 in the breast cancer cell lines abolishes the growth
and decrease survival of tumor cells, which leads to the differentiation
of malignant cells into normal breast epithelial phenotype. These
observations suggest that SHP2 promotes the tumor development though
increase tumor formation and metastasis. However, the pathophysiologic
role of SHP2 (overexpression or gain-of-function mutation) and its
relevance to tumorigenesis are still largely unknow. In this study, we
focused on the in vivo and in vitro effects of the gain-of-function
mutant SHP-2 on phenotypes of breast cancer. Mutant PTPN11 cDNA (D61G)
was transduced into MDA-MB231 and MCF-7 cells. The effects of D61G mutant
on breast cancer tumorigenesis and malignant behaviours, such as cell
adhesion, proliferation, migration and invasion were tested. The
potential underlying molecular mechanisms, i.e., the activation of the
Gab1-Ras-Erk axis were also examined. In vitro studies found that, in
SHP2 D61G mutant groups, the tumour adhesion, proliferation, migration
and invasion were increased significantly. Consistently, in vivo studies
also found that the incidence of tumour and the tumour weights of the
SHP-2 D61G-MB231 group were increased significantly (P<0.001), which is
also associated with tumour metastasis. Mechanistically, the PTPN11 D61G
mutation resulted in the activation of Ras-ErK pathway. And
interestingly, the interaction between Gab1 and mutant SHP2 was also
significantly increased. The mutant SHP-2 significantly promoted tumour
migration and invasion at least partially through the activation of
Gab1-Ras-Erk axis. In conclusion, our findings clearly establish a role
for the SHP-2 GOF mutant in breast tumour growth and provide novel
insight into the mechanisms of SHP-2 GOF mutant-mediated tumor promotion.
This finding could have direct implications for breast cancer
therapy.This study was supported by a grant from the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (codes: 30873046, 30973424, and 81072663) and
by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
(code:3290004402).Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

