Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk for death from prostate cancer predicted from complete family
history of lethal prostate cancer


Background: Familial relative risks (RR) for death from prostate cancer
(lethal prostate cancer or LPC) are rare. Most risk estimations are for
diagnosis of prostate cancer (PC); and typically focus on close
relatives, rather than on complete family history. This study provides
RRs for LPC based on specific family history data of LPC obtained from a
statewide Cancer Registry linked to genealogy data. The risk estimates
presented avoid common recall, recruitment, and ascertainment biases, and
provide more individualized risk estimates.Methods: We used a
population-based resource to estimate RRs for LPC based on a full
constellation of family history of LPC. We include complete family
history, taking into account degree of relationship (first to
third-degree), age at diagnosis, paternal or maternal family history,
number of affected individuals, and age at diagnosis of youngest
relative. Estimations of RR for LPC based on specific family history are
informative for patients and clinicians for appropriate screening
decisions.The Utah Population Data Base (UPDB), a computerized population
genealogical resource linked to a statewide SEER cancer registry, and
statewide death certificates was analyzed. Over 1 million individuals
were analyzed. All males with specific constellations of LPC were
identified in the UPDB (probands) and the observed number of LPC cases
among these probands was compared to the expected number using internal
cohort-specific rates to obtain RR estimates.Results: Over 3,921 LPC
cases were identified. Risk for LPC was significantly elevated with each
additional LPC first-degree relative (FDR), ranging from RR = 2.26 (95%
CI: 2.09, 2.44) for >0 FDRs to RR = 3.93 (1.69, 7.73) for >2 FDRs
affected. Even in the absence of FDR family history, significantly
increased risk for LPC was observed in the presence of >0 second degree
relatives (SDR) affected (RR = 1.53: 1.41, 1.66). In the absence of
affected FDRs and SDRs, there was significantly increased risk for LPC
for >1 third degree relative (TDR) affected (RR = 1.22: 1.15, 1.29).
Results indicated higher risks for maternal vs paternal history, e.g. RR
= 1.50 (1.27, 1.76) for affected paternal uncle versus RR = 1.83 (1.59,
2.09) for affected maternal uncle.Discussion: RRs for LPC have more
clinical significance than RRs for PC. This study provides unbiased,
population-based estimates of LPC risk based on a man's specific family
history LPC constellation. Many individuals at 2-3 times increased risk
for dying from PC were identified based on family history. This study
provides a means for containing healthcare costs and conserving resource
utilization through informed use of familial LPC risks. Using informative
LPC family history in the planning of screening, treatment, and
monitoring opens additional avenues for implementation of more sound
translational medicine practices, decreasing morbidity and mortality, and
improving the quality of life in patients.

