Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Revolutionizing clinical care using prospective, institution-wide
tumor sequencing


Identification of predictive and prognostic biomarkers is central to
clinical oncology. Use of targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) is
increasing in molecular diagnostics labs, however the feasibility and
impact of its routine application across all tumor types is largely
untested. We launched an institution-wide effort to generate targeted NGS
data (Oncopanel) for invasive tumors of all consenting patients. We
hypothesized that this approach could replace traditional targeted
testing, generate robust data on copy number alterations and structural
variants, and provide novel patient-specific observations to facilitate
clinical trial enrollment. Illumina NGS was performed on libraries
prepared with Agilent SureSelect custom-designed hybrid capture of 4430
exons from 275 genes plus selected introns of 30 genes. Results were
analyzed by an internally-developed computational pipeline for mutations,
small insertions/deletions, copy number variation and rearrangements.
Variants were characterized according to predictive, prognostic, or
diagnostic actionability. Data is available for the first 4291 cases
sequenced. Oncopanel succeeded in 96% of specimens with adequate DNA. In
a subset analysis performed on the first 1000 cases, assay success ranged
from 83-100% according to tumor type; breast carcinoma was most prone to
failure (pIdentification of predictive and prognostic biomarkers is
central to clinical oncology. Use of targeted next generation sequencing
(NGS) is increasing in molecular diagnostics labs, however the
feasibility and impact of its routine application across all tumor types
is largely untested. We launched an institution-wide effort to generate
targeted NGS data (Oncopanel) for invasive tumors of all consenting
patients. We hypothesized that this approach could replace traditional
targeted testing, generate robust data on copy number alterations and
structural variants, and provide novel patient-specific observations to
facilitate clinical trial enrollment. Illumina NGS was performed on
libraries prepared with Agilent SureSelect custom-designed hybrid capture
of 4430 exons from 275 genes plus selected introns of 30 genes. Results
were analyzed by an internally-developed computational pipeline for
mutations, small insertions/deletions, copy number variation and
rearrangements. Variants were characterized according to predictive,
prognostic, or diagnostic actionability. Data is available for the first
4291 cases sequenced. Oncopanel succeeded in 96% of specimens with
adequate DNA. In a subset analysis performed on the first 1000 cases,
assay success ranged from 83-100% according to tumor type; breast
carcinoma was most prone to failure (p<0.0001). Median number of
mutations per case was 8 (range 0-205) and was lowest in endocrine
malignancies and highest in skin malignancies. Three percent of tumors
were hypermutated with mutational signatures revealing distinct
pathogenic underpinnings, including prior temozolomide therapy,
microsatellite instability, and UV exposure. Compared to clinical
testing, Oncopanel showed 100% accuracy for detection of KRAS and BRAF
point mutations in colon adenocarcinoma, EGFR exon 19 deletion mutations
in lung adenocarcinoma, and for EGFR amplification in glioblastoma.
Oncopanel was 97.5% sensitive and 87.5% specific for 1p19q deletion as
compared to aCGH or FISH and was 80% sensitive and 100% specific as
compared to ALK FISH and additionally detected 2 ALK rearranged tumors
for which FISH failed. In the overall cohort, 26% of patients had an
actionable variant (most commonly KRAS) and 39% had alterations with
implications for clinical trial enrollment (most commonly in
PI3K/PTEN/AKT pathway). TP53 was the most commonly altered gene overall
and the most likely to be co-mutated with oncogenic drivers. High level
amplifications were most common for EGFR, MDM2, CDK4, ERBB2, MYC, and
CCND1. Two-copy deletions were most common for CDKN2A/B, followed by TP53
and PTEN. In several cases, Oncopanel data uncovered alterations that
informed diagnosis and treatment of difficult-to-classify tumors. These
efforts demonstrate that high quality, high throughput NGS data can be
generated prospectively on an institutional level, thereby informing
disease course and therapeutic options at an unprecedented scale.

