Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Performances evaluation of algorithms for identifying
differentially expressed genes in RNA-seq data


IntroductionRNA sequencing (RNA-seq) has rapidly become one of the main
methods to study transcriptome. It has become an important and popular
issue to identify biomarkers based on their differential expression
patterns in NGS data. Currently, more than 10 different algorithms can be
used to detect differentially expressed genes. However, challenge arises,
when trying to choose the best algorithm under different experimental
conditions. To address this issue, we aimed to perform a series of
simulations under distinct scenarios, which can help researchers to
select the best algorithm according to their data types and
structures.MethodRNA-Seq data were simulated by a published method named
as flux-simulator. Three parameters including the proportion of
differentially expressed genes, the relative fold changes of
differentially expressed genes, and the replicate number of samples, were
considered to define distinct simulation scenarios. To make the
parameters more practical, we determined the parameters based on a real
dataset. Three types of differentially expressed genes were simulated
according to their fold changes between two groups. A total of 7
algorithms including DESeq, DESeq2, DEGseq, edgeR, limma, baySeq and
Cuffdiff, were compared and evaluated. The raw read count table was
analyzed in all algorithms, except Cuffdiff. In order to avoid errors
from performing the alignment, the read count table is obtained directly
from the simulated fastq file.ResultsSpecificity and sensitivity were
calculated and compared in different scenarios. As expected, the more
replicate count is, the higher accuracy is obtained in all algorithms.
Although previously studies showed that there were marginal effect
between replicate numbers and number of reported differentially expressed
genes, our results did not demonstrate such phenomenon. It might be
attributed to that the replicate number is not large enough. In addition,
the results showed limma, edgeR and DESeq were more conservative than the
other algorithms, DEGseq has highest accuracy but follow with lower
specificity when a large amount of genes are differentially expressed.
Over all, edgeR shows the best trade off within sensitivity and
specificity. Further research efforts are warranted to compare algorithms
in different scenarios, especially the number of differentially expressed
genes is low.ConclusionIn conclusion, this study provided a direct
comparison of different algorithms under different experimental
scenarios. The results showed that edgeR algorithm worked better in the
scenario of finding novel genes in new disease. With its high precision,
it will be more efficiency to validate identified gene through experiment.

