Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of exhaustion-resistant memory CD8 T-cells by
simultaneous downmodulation of mTORC1 and PD-1 in activated CD8 T-cells


CD8 memory T cells play a crucial role in controlling chronic infections
and certain malignancies. It is possible to expand the population
redirecting early-activated T-cells toward memory differentiation by
altering intracellular signaling of mTORC1 pathway. Indeed, treatment
with mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin increased formation of memory cells as
published previously; however, animals treated with the drug exhibited
signs of immune suppression and rapamycin-generated CD8 memory T-cells
failed to protect animals against melanoma challenge. We introduced
highly efficient RNAi-based method to downmodulate mTORC1 signaling
specifically in target cells. siRNA against raptor, a critical component
of the signaling complex, was delivered in vivo into activated T-cells by
conjugating to the 4-1BB-binding RNA aptamer resulting in expansion of
CD8+ memory T-cells formation.Memory T-cells are generally resistant to
immune suppression, yet in vivo, the population suffers from the gradual
attrition mediated by PD-1 signalling. We developed the conjugate with
two highly effective siRNAs against raptor and PD-1 linked to the same
4-1BB aptamer molecule. In vitro, both siRNAs efficiently dissociated
from the conjugate inside target cells and simultaneously downregulated
its respective mRNAs. In vivo, using OT-I adoptive transfer model, we
demonstrated that treatment with 4-1BB-raptor-PD1 conjugates increased
formation of memory CD8+ T-cells (as measured by absolute number of OT-1
cells 30 days after the treatment) in a rate similar to the 4-1BB-raptor
conjugate. There was, however, qualitative difference between two
populations, as CD8+ memory T-cells expanded with 4-1BB-raptor-PD1
conjugates expressed significantly less PD-1 on cell surface, and were,
therefore, resistant to PD-1-mediated immune suppression. Thus, we
introduced a new method to generate memory cells with enhanced functional
potential and currently exploring its therapeutic usefulness in various
models.

