Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-30a-5p functions as a tumor suppressor gene in gastric cancer


Gastric cancer (GC) is the second leading cause of cancer-related death.
MicroRNAs(miRNAs) are an abundant class of negative gene regulator and
regulate multiple gene targets. miRNAs control a wide range of biological
functions such as cellular proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis.
Moreover, many miRNAs are highly conserved, and their deregulation is
often associated with human malignancies. The aims of this study are to
determine the miR-30a functions as a tumor suppressor gene and to
evaluate whether the miR-30a-5p is able to use the diagnostic or
prognostic marker in GC. To identify the gastric tumor-associated miRNAs,
miRNA microarray was performed using the gastric cancer tissues. Among
them, miR-30a-5p was down-regulated in GC tissues compared to normal
mucosa. qRT-PCR was employed to confirm the microarray results.
MiR-30a-5p expression was frequently down-regulated in our GC cohort, (n
= 55, PGastric cancer (GC) is the second leading cause of cancer-related
death. MicroRNAs(miRNAs) are an abundant class of negative gene regulator
and regulate multiple gene targets. miRNAs control a wide range of
biological functions such as cellular proliferation, differentiation and
apoptosis. Moreover, many miRNAs are highly conserved, and their
deregulation is often associated with human malignancies. The aims of
this study are to determine the miR-30a functions as a tumor suppressor
gene and to evaluate whether the miR-30a-5p is able to use the diagnostic
or prognostic marker in GC. To identify the gastric tumor-associated
miRNAs, miRNA microarray was performed using the gastric cancer tissues.
Among them, miR-30a-5p was down-regulated in GC tissues compared to
normal mucosa. qRT-PCR was employed to confirm the microarray results.
MiR-30a-5p expression was frequently down-regulated in our GC cohort, (n
= 55, P<0.0001). To determine the miR-30a-5p biological functions in GC,
miR-30a-5p mimic or inhibitor was treated in GC cell lines. Ectopic
expression of miR-30a-5p decreased cell growth, migration capacity and
colony formation in vitro. Some previous studies have elucidated that
miR-30a-5p is associated with metastasis in some cancer types.
Accordingly, we confirmed its expression in our GC cohort with lymph node
metastasis (n = 13) using qRT-PCR. MiR-30a-5p was significantly
down-regulated in lymph node metastasis tissues than normal or tumor
tissues. Taken together, the miR-30a-5p expression was frequently
down-regulated in GC and lymph node metastasis. In addition, the
miR-30a-5p suppressed tumorigenesis. Therefore, we suggest that
miR-30a-5p activation may be a useful strategy of GC patient therapy and
it can serve as a diagnostic or prognostic marker for GC.

