Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of programmed cell death ligand 1/2 and BCG
immunotherapy in bladder cancer


Background: Immunotherapy based on BCG has been a standard therapy to
prevent tumor recurrence and progression in bladder cancer. Activation of
immune checkpoint pathways by binding of PD-1 to its ligands, PD-L1 or
PD-L2, is vital for the physiologic regulation of the immune system.
Tumor cells can at times co-opt the PD-1 pathway to escape from
immunosurveillance mechanism. We investigated expression of immune
checkpoints and their effects on T cells in bladder cancer.Methods: A
panel of transitional cell carcinoma cell lines (UC-3, T24, K1919 and
253J) and normal human bladder urothelial cells (SVHUC1) were used to
evaluate expression of immune checkpoints including PD-1, PDL1, PD-L2 and
CTLA-4. Western blot analysis was used for protein expressions from cell
lines and qPCR for RNA expression from human bladder tissues. Human
bladder cancer/normal paired tissues were obtained at two time points;
surgical resection and then after BCG immunotherapy. Immunohistochemical
staining was performed to assess infiltration and distribution of CD4+
and CD8+ T cells in bladder tumor tissues and normal bladder tissues.
Immune cells were isolated and T cells were isolated by FACS sorting
after immune cell isolation from tumor/normal tissues.Results: PD-L1 and
PD-L2 proteins were highly expressed in bladder cancer cell lines
compared to normal bladder epithelial cell line (SVHUC-1). In paired
human samples (cancer and normal tissues), PD-L1 and 2 were also highly
expressed in bladder cancer tissues compared with paired normal tissues.
Real time RT-PCR comfirmed the high expression of PD-L1/2 in bladder
cancer tissues. Interestingly, normal epithelial tissues regenerated
after surgical resection of the tumor and BCG immunotherapy had low
PD-L1/2 expression while recurred tissues after surgical resection of the
tumor and BCG had high expression of PD-L1/2, which suggest that PD-L1/2
might be involved in tumor relapse after surgical resection and BCG
immunotherapy. Immunohistochemical staining with CD4 and CD8 showed that
the number of T cells was in bladder cancer tissues compared with paired
normal tissues regardless of PD-L1/2 expression. T lymphocytes isolated
from human bladder cancer tissues and paired normal tissues showed that
infiltrating T cell function is significantly deteriorated in bladder
cancer tissue compared with cells from paired normal tissues.Conclusions:
PD-L1 and PD-L2 are highly expressed in bladder cancer and though to be
involved in relapse after BCG intravesical immunotherapy through
suppressing infiltrating T cell function. Our data suggest that
immunecheckpoint might be a novel targets in bladder cancer.

