Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial SOD2 regulates EMT and cancer stem cell-like cell
populations


Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is involved in cancer cell
invasion, metastasis and treatment failure. EMT may promote conversion of
a subset of cancer cells defined by low expression of CD44 (CD44L) to
those with high expression of CD44 (CD44H), the latter associated with
increased malignant properties of cancer cells. Triggered by a variety of
stimuli such as transforming growth factor (TGF)-, hypoxia and
chemoradiation, EMT may be activated in cancer cells via stress-induced
reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the tumor microenvironment. Excessive
ROS may cause cell death or senescence; however, cells undergoing EMT may
require a physiological level of ROS. It remains elusive as to how
cellular antioxidant capabilities may influence EMT. Mitochondrial
superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) is frequently overexpressed in oral and
esophageal cancers. Here, we investigated mechanisms of SOD2
transcriptional regulation in EMT as well as the functional role of this
antioxidant in EMT. Using well-characterized genetically engineered oral
and esophageal human epithelial cell lines coupled with RNA interference
(RNAi) and flow cytometric approaches, we find that TGF- stimulates EMT,
resulting in conversion of CD44L to CD44H cells, the latter of which
display SOD2 upregulation. SOD2 induction in transformed cells was
concurrent with suppression of TGF--mediated induction of both ROS and
senescence. SOD2 gene expression appeared to be transcriptionally
regulated by NF-B and ZEB2, but not ZEB1. Moreover, SOD2-mediated
antioxidant activity may restrict conversion of CD44L cells to CD44H
cells at the early stages of EMT. In aggregate, this study provides novel
mechanistic insights into the dynamic expression of SOD2 during EMT and
delineates a functional role for SOD2 in EMT, influencing distinct CD44L
and CD44H subsets of cancer cells that have been implicated in oral and
esophageal tumor biology.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

