Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting the NOTCH3 receptor with antibody drug
conjugates


Activation and mutation of the NOTCH signaling pathway is oncogenic in
many tissue types and the target of multiple anti-cancer therapies
currently in clinical development. Initial therapeutic strategies
designed to target the NOTCH pathway have focused on inhibition of
aberrant signaling, but can have undesirable side-effects or insufficient
anti-tumor activity. Antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) are an emerging
therapeutic modality that equips antibodies with potent cytotoxic
payloads that can be directly delivered to tumor cells. We have developed
and compared anti-NOTCH3 ADCs using two different classes of therapeutic
anti-NOTCH3 antibodies that target the juxtamembrane Negative Regulatory
Region (NRR). The first class is unable to stabilize the NOTCH3-NRR in an
auto-inhibitory conformation in the presence of ligand and does not block
ADAM protease cleavage of the receptor. The second class contains an
antibody that exhibits potent signaling inhibition by stabilizing the NRR
in an inactive state. Despite antagonizing NOTCH3 signaling, the
inhibitory anti-NOTCH3 antibody was unable to regress preclinical tumor
xenografts with active NOTCH3 signaling. To enhance their potency, both
classes of anti-NOTCH3 antibodies were conjugated to an auristatin-based
microtubule inhibitor through a cleavable linker. Unexpectedly, the
inhibitory anti-NOTCH3 antibody demonstrated more rapid trafficking to
the lysosome than the non-inhibitory antibody suggesting that the two
antibodies have distinct internalization routes with important
implications for NOTCH3-ADC pharmacology. Pharmacodynamic biomarker
analysis demonstrated anti-NOTCH3 ADCs disrupted the mitotic spindle
apparatus, induced cell cycle arrest and triggered apoptosis. Anti-NOTCH3
ADCs exhibited robust anti-tumor activity and induce prolonged tumor
regressions in preclinical models of breast, lung and ovarian cancer
regardless of their ability to block signaling. Furthermore, anti-NOTCH3
ADC treatment was able to regress OVCAR3 ovarian tumor xenografts that
were refractory to a platinum-based agent or relapsed anti-VEGF therapy.
Our studies demonstrate that anti-NOTCH3 ADCs had enhanced efficacy
compared to other NOTCH signaling inhibitors and also allowed targeting
of tumors that over-expressed NOTCH3 but were not necessarily addicted to
its signaling. The safety and efficacy of the non-inhibitory anti-NOTCH3
ADC, PF-06650808, is currently being examined in a Ph1 clinical trial
(Protocol B7501001).

