Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells isolated from non-small cell lung cancer
patients using the in vivo CellCollector Technology


Access to tumor tissue is often limiting and archival samples may not be
reflective of the current disease. Alternative approaches using liquid
biopsies are being explored to support personalized treatment of cancer
patients. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) detached from primary tumors or
metastases into the blood may reflect the current molecular tumor profile
providing the opportunity to monitor molecular changes in the tumor. As
CTCs are rare cells in the bloodstream and most in vitro approaches for
capturing CTCs are based on small samples volumes (5 - 10 ml), accurate
and reliable quantification of CTCs is difficult to achieve. We report on
a comprehensive clinical study using a novel CellCollectorTM for in vivo
isolation of CTCs.Eighty four stage I - IIIB non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients and 7 healthy individuals were screened for CTCs using a
CellCollectorTM (Gilupi, Germany) device. Molecular analysis of a patient
with known mutation in the KRAS gene (G12D) was performed to confirm the
predictive value of CTCs as liquid biopsy. CTCs were detected in 65 out
of 84 NSCLC patients (77.4%) (median: 13 CTCs; range from 0 - 300). For
comparison, using the U.S. Food and Drug Administration-cleared
CellSearch system only fifteen samples (17.8%) in this cohort were
positive (median: 0 CTCs; range from 0-300). In all paired samples, the
CellCollectorTM detected the same or higher numbers of CTCs. Healthy
individuals were devoid of any cells classified as CTC. Investigating the
KRAS status on CTCs captured by the CellCollectorTM, we were able to
substantiate the G12D mutation that has earlier on been identified in the
tissue of the primary lung tumor.Conclusions: The CellCollectorTM is a
promising novel device for the in vivo isolation of CTCs and the device
effectively isolated CTCs from NSCLC patients of all stages including the
non-metastatic setting. The implementation of the CellColletorTM into
clinical practice has the potential for early disease detection.
Furthermore, this approach allows the molecular characterization of CTCs
for possible therapeutic targets and early response to treatment which
might be used in the setting of personalized cancer therapies and
clinical development.

