Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The use of complementary health approaches among US cancer
survivors


Background: There are over 14 million cancer survivors in the United
States (US). In addition to conventional care, many cancer survivors use
complementary health approaches post-diagnosis for general health and
wellness and for cancer treatment. This study sought to examine the use
of complementary health approaches for any reason, and specific use for
cancer treatment, by types of cancer among US adult cancer survivors with
a diagnosis within the past 5 years.Methods: Data from the 2002, 2007,
and 2012 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) were used. Adults aged
18 and older with a cancer diagnosis within five years of their interview
were selected for analysis (n = 2,355). The sample size was sufficient to
examine use of complementary approaches among prostate, lung, colorectal,
bladder and breast cancer survivors. Participants were asked about the
use of named approaches in the past 12 months, and whether their most
frequently used alternative therapies were used specifically for cancer.
Responses were analyzed by their mode of practice: biologically based,
manipulative and body based, mind and body approaches, and whole medical
systems. Information on concurrent use of conventional medical treatment
for cancer was not available. Sample data were weighted to produce
national estimates that are representative of the civilian
noninstitutionalized US adult population.Results: The study sample
represented more than 5 million cancer survivors. In general, 35% of
these survivors used complementary health approaches in the past 12
months; however, only 3.3% specifically used an approach for cancer
treatment. More cancer survivors used a biologically based approach for
any reason (22.8%) and specifically for cancer treatment (2.3%) in the
past 12 months compared to mind and body approaches (14.9% and 1.9%),
manipulative and body based approaches (14.2% and 1.1%) and whole medical
systems (3.7% and 0.5%). Biologically based approaches were the most
common approaches used for any reason among prostate (22.7%), lung
(17.3%), colorectal (19.5%), and bladder (23.5%) cancer survivors. Breast
cancer survivors were equally as likely to use biologically based (24.9%)
and mind and body (26.2%) approaches. More than 5% of colorectal cancer
survivors used a biologically based approach for treatment (5.5%); while
6.8% of lung cancer survivors used mind and body and 5.1% used
manipulative and body based approaches.Conclusion: The study findings
offer information on the use of complementary health approaches and use
specific to treatment among cancer survivors with a diagnosis within the
past 5 years. The use of complementary health approaches among survivors
differs by type of approach and by cancer type. When combined with
evidence-based research, the knowledge gained may be used in
physician-patient dialogue about the use of complementary health
approaches during cancer treatment, or lend to developing personalized
comprehensive and integrative cancer care plans.

