Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-driven eutrophication of the tumor ecosystem selects for
cancer cell clones that overcome evolutionary inertia leading to
increased metastatic capacity


Cancer biology has striking parallels to the ecological frameworks of
conservation biologists: multiple ecosystems (tumor sites) within a
larger biosphere (body), interacting species (cell types), resource
cycling (cell signaling and metabolism), and ultimate ecosystem collapse.
While tumor heterogeneity is typically attributed to intrinsic genetic
instability, we propose that it is due to the evolution of cancer cells
under the selection of ecological pressures in the tumor ecosystem. Like
any ecosystem, a healthy organ requires balanced feedback mechanisms to
respond dynamically to small perturbations. Small disturbances result in
a robust ecosystem, such as immunity following viral infection. In
contrast, the native ecosystem is unable to recover from catastrophic
perturbation such as an invasive species: cancer. Invasive species are
inherent ecosystem engineers that alter their habitat and modify resource
availability. As a tumor grows, it consumes high levels of nutrients and
oxygen and increases the local concentration of cellular waste, analogous
to the ecological process of eutrophication associated with polluted
swamps. The cancer swamp is a hypoxic, acidic, and nutrient-poor habitat.
This ecosystem engineering alters the selective pressure and subsequent
adaptation of the cancer cells. According to evolutionary inertia, while
all cancer cells have the capacity to attain metastatic traits, an
unchanged trait will remain unchanged (stasis) and a trait undergoing a
change will maintain that change (thrust) unless an external force acts
upon it. We hypothesize that the cancer swamp provides the external force
to instigate evolutionary thrust by exerting selective pressure to
promote the generation of clones with high metastatic capacity. To test
this, mice will be inoculated with epithelial prostate cancer cells
(PC3-Epi) or prostate cancer cells that have undergone EMT and display
increased metastatic capacity (PC3-EMT). At time points prior to, during
the establishment of, and after formation of the cancer swamp, tumors
will be excised and cells exiting the primary tumor into the circulation
will be assessed. We expect that PC3-Epi cells will have a greater than
1:1 ratio of migrating cells : primary tumor burden and that the
migrating cells will become more EMT-like as the cancer swamp evolves and
the tumor cells overcome evolutionary stasis. Because the PC3-EMT cells
have already attained evolutionary thrust towards a metastatic phenotype,
we expect migrating tumor cells to be unaffected by the pressures of the
growing cancer swamp. Using ecological models to understand cancer
biology introduces new avenues for therapy and metastatic prediction.
Conservation biology provides several promising strategies that can be
adapted to treat cancer including ecological traps, invasive species
management, and land use restoration of the cancer swamp.

