Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of the role of MDM2 in regulation of cell cycle arrest
through p21 pathways in LNCaP-MST cells using PCR array


Cell cycle checkpoints are imperative for assuring genomic fidelity and
integrity during cell division. In normal cells, the cell cycle arrest
occurs in response to nuclear DNA damage via activation and inactivation
of a series of cell cycle regulatory molecules that can impact the
transition from G1 to S phase and G2 to M phase. However, in cancerous
cells, this process is disrupted resulting in uncontrolled cell
proliferation and resistance to apoptosis. Therefore, cell cycle
regulatory molecules are accepted as suitable targets for drug
development and cancer treatment. It has been well known that
overexpression of MDM2, a negative regulator of p53, will eventually lead
to the inactivation of cell cycle control and loss of apoptotic ability
in many tumors. In this study, we aimed to investigate the effectiveness
of MDM2 inhibition in mediating cell cycle arrest through p53 dependent
pathways by using the MDM2 transfected prostate cancer cells (LNCaP-MST).
During our experiments the LNCaP-MST cells were treated for 24 hrs with
20 uM Nutlin-3, a small molecule inhibitor of MDM2/p53 interaction. The
impact of Nutlin-3 treatment on the gene expression profile of LNCaP-MST
cells was established by using the cell cycle pathway specific PCR array.
Our study clearly demonstrates a significant increase of p21 gene
expression after Nutlin-3 treatment, which indicates a possible
restoration and release of the transcriptional activity of p53 in
LNCaP-MST cells. In addition to the elevation of p21, a significant
increase in the expression of Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 4 Inhibitor B
(CDKN2B) along with multiple folds increase in the expression of Growth
Arrest and DNA Damage 45 (GADD45A) genes were also found. These results
clearly point towards efficient initiation of cell cycle arrest
mechanisms in LNCaP-MST cells, possibly through p21 and CDKN2B mediated
inhibition of the CDKs (cyclin dependent kinases). In addition, it
appears that MDM2 inhibition may effectively block both G1 to S and G2 to
M transition and cause DNA damage through apoptosis that could lead to
the death of LNCaP-MST cells. Activation of the above outlined mechanisms
following MDM2 inhibition is quite evident due to increased expression of
GADD45A and decreased levels of anti-apoptotic B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2)
genes. Our results offer convincing evidence towards the effectiveness of
MDM2 inhibition in causing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis during cancer
treatment. (This research was supported by the generous funds provided by
the Royal Dames of Cancer Research Inc., Ft. Lauderdale, Florida)

