Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteogenomic characterization of breast cancer sub-types in
patient derived xenografts


The goal of this talk is to introduce an integrated quantitative
proteogenomic approach to comprehensively map proteomic information back
to their encoding genes. We seek evidence from mass spectrometry-based
large-scale proteomic data of patient populations in conjunction with
patient-centric next-generation sequencing data and unbiased sequencing
strategies to study breast cancer (BC) subtypes from a genomic context.We
have obtained global and phosphoproteomic data with matching next
generation sequencing data for 18 patient-derived xenografts (PDXs)
representing the major clinical subtypes of BC. Our workflow starts with
the creation of several protein sequence databases that serve as a
template for mass spectrometry database identifications. These databases
include 1) completely annotated reference protein sequences, 2)
patient-specific databases that were created using next generation
sequencing data, 3) isoform databases that contain all possible splicing
combinations, and 4) amino acid sequence database resulting from a
six-frame translation of the entire human reference and customized
genomes. All mass spectrometry raw data are searched against the
databases for obtaining identifications at the peptide level, and
assembly of peptides for quantification using taxonomy-based label-free
quantitation (LFQ) that can specifically quantify unique human peptide
sequences found in PDXs. The peptides are then mapped to the human genome
and visualized using a genome browser. Quantitative changes across PDXs
are presented at the protein level or at the isoform level via peptide
role-up to specific exons and visualized as a quantitative data track.By
combining search results from these databases we obtain a comprehensive
view of our PDXs. The complementary nature of the databases enable
greater proteomic depth, i.e. databases with complete splicing
combinations capture proteomic evidence when patient-specific databases
fail due to possible erroneous RNA-seq reads. Similarly, 6-frame
translated amino acid databases can capture potentially novel coding
regions but are unable to detect splicing. Peptide maps are obtained for
individual genes or specific protein isoforms covering both
knowledge-driven and novel genomic annotation types. We compile peptides
carrying variants, splice junctions, fusions, and new coding regions
specific to each PDX or in common with a specific BC subtype. Majority of
data is mapped back to the genome loci using unmodified peptides via
global proteomics while phosphopeptides that contain variants and
splicing are also mapped in a similar manner using phosphoproteomic
data.We have currently annotated 455 novel proteogenomic hits covering
many examples outlined above for genes related to breast cancer and show
how these can be specifically identified and in some instances
differentially quantified in the PDX models.

