Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Type 2 cGMP-dependent protein kinase activates antineoplastic
signaling in the colon


Signaling through cGMP has emerged as a potentially important suppressor
of tumorigenesis in the colon but the mechanisms are poorly defined.
Studies of guanylyl-cyclase (GCC) knockout mice indicate that cGMP
signaling inhibits proliferation in the colon epithelium and that AKT may
have an important role. Type-2 cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG2) is a
central effector of cGMP in the colon epithelium and likely mediates the
suppressive signaling. An important growth-inhibitory effect of AKT is
the inactivation of forkhead transcription factors (FoxO). FoxO proteins
are tumor suppressors that regulate growth-inhibitory and pro-apoptotic
target gene expression but these proteins have not previously been
examined in the intestinal tract. The present study sought to determine
whether PKG2 can activate FoxO in colon cancer cells and in the colon
epithelium. Activation of PKG2 in LS174T colon cancer cells inhibited
cell proliferation but did not significantly affect apoptosis. Suggestive
of a mechanism, it was found that PKG2 inhibited the activity of AKT but
not ERK in these cells. Activation of PKG2 also significantly increased
luciferase reporter activity driven by FoxO-responsive elements in LS174T
cells. In support of FoxO activation, PKG2 also increased the expression
of several FoxO target genes, including catalase, GADD45, and p27kip.
Treatment of colon explants with 8Br-cGMP also activated FoxO target gene
expression at both RNA and protein levels, and this was associated with
reduced redox stress. The regulation of FoxO by cGMP in vivo most likely
requires PKG2, because target gene expression was reduced in the colon
mucosa of Prkg2-/- mice compared to wild type siblings. Since FoxO has
not previously been studied in the colon, we first examined expression
using IHC. These data showed that FoxO3a is the most prominent isoform,
and was concentrated almost exclusively at the lumenal border. While
FoxO1 showed negligible staining, FoxO4 was observed deeper in the crypt.
In order to determine whether cGMP could activate FoxO in vivo, the PDE-5
inhibitor vardenafil (Levitra) was used. Mice treated with vardenafil
showed a dramatic mobilization of FoxO3a to the nucleus of lumenal
epithelial cells. Analysis of the colon mucosa from treated animals
showed increased levels of FoxO target genes and reduced redox stress.
This was likely to be mediated by FoxO3a since vardenafil did not
significantly affect the localization of FoxO1 or FoxO4. Taken together
these data define a novel signaling pathway in the colon epithelium,
where PKG2 leads to activation of FoxO. The established tumor suppressor
role of FoxO proteins highlights the potential therapeutic role for cGMP
signaling in colon cancer prevention.

