Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue engineered models of metastatic bone disease for the study
of prostate cancer cell dormancy


Cellular dormancy refers to a state of quiescence during metastatic
progression, in which disseminated tumor cells enter cell cycle arrest.
Such dormant cells are thought to influence cancer drug sensitivity, and
strategies have hence emerged to target dormant cells for novel
therapeutic approaches. Mechanisms of cellular dormancy remain poorly
understood, with current evidence suggesting a major role of the
metastatic microenvironment in deciding cell fate. Research in this area,
however, is hampered by the lack of appropriate experimental models of
cancer cell dormancy. Here, we described the use of tissue engineering
methods to generate an in vitro model of bone-metastatic disease.
Briefly, human fetal mesenchymal stem cell (hfMSC) and human umbilical
vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) were co-cultured to respectively represent
the osteo-progenitor and vascular compartments, and subsequently induced
to form a vascularized bone marrow model. Metastatic prostate cancer PC3
cells were then added to simulate metastatic dissemination and the
co-culture was maintained for 28 days. Reporter genes were employed to
facilitate live-monitoring of HUVEC and PC3 cells in the co-culture.
Using this system, we observed single cell dormancy, particularly when
osteogenic induction was performed. Additionally, PC3 cells were observed
to exert osteo-modulatory effects on the engineered bone
microenvironment. Immunostaining for cellular markers indicated low
expression of proliferation marker Ki-67 and various mesenchymal markers,
indicating absence of Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT). Dormancy
was functionally assessed by retrieving the PC3 cells and subsequently
replating under normal culture conditions to rescue cellular
proliferation. Finally, drug sensitivity assays demonstrated reduced
susceptibility of dormant cells to conventional chemotherapeutic drugs.
This in vitro model of prostate cancer cell dormancy in the engineered
bone marrow may thus be useful for furthering our understanding of
cellular dormancy, and may further provide a useful tool for drug testing.

