Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA-mediated silencing of COP1 and altered ubiquitination of
key oncogenic transcription factors promote cancer stem cell (CSC)
phenotype and prostate cancer progression


Mutations and deletions of ubiquitin ligase complex proteins are emerging
as important mechanisms driving tumorigenesis. In this study we report an
alternative mechanism, depending on microRNA-mediated
post-transcriptional silencing, leading to altered ubiquitination of key
oncogenic proteins and induction of tumorigenic and CSC properties in
prostate epithelial cells (PrECs). We found that increased expression of
miR-424 promotes malignant transformation of normal PrECs by targeting
the E3 ubiquitin ligase COP1. miR-424 was upregulated in primary prostate
cancers and prevalently in ERG negative tumors. Bioinformatics and
functional analysis demonstrated that miR-424 targeted COP1 mRNA in PrECs
drastically reducing its protein level. Moreover, miR-424 and COP1
expression were inversely correlated in prostate tumors and associated
with enrichment of CSC features. Functionally, over-expression of miR-424
or knockdown of COP1 in PrECs increased anchorage-independent growth,
cell migration and prostatosphere formation under CSC selective
conditions. Consistently, inhibition of miR-424 or over-expression of
COP1 prevented these phenotypic changes in normal PrECs and prostate
cancer cell lines. Moreover, COP1 knockdown reproduced closely the
effects of miR-424 upregulation in PrECs. Mechanistically, we found that
silencing of COP1 by miR-424 resulted in reduced turnover and increased
level of several oncogenic transcription factors, including known COP1
substrates like c-JUN and ETV1. Furthermore, we identified STAT3 as a
novel substrate of the miR-424/COP1 axis. Consistently, miR-424
upregulation and COP1 silencing increased STAT3 protein level and
enhanced basal and cytokine induced STAT3 activity in PrECs and prostate
cancer cells. These effects were blocked by miR-424 inhibition and COP1
overexpression. These results establish the miR-424/COP1 axis as a
relevant oncogenic pathway acting through deregulation of key
transcription factors and with important prognostic and therapeutic
implications.

