Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KD019: Blood brain barrier penetrant HER2/neu, Src, and EGFR
inhibitor


KD019 is an orally bioavailable small molecule inhibitor of molecular
drivers of cancer growth and progression, including HER2/neu, Src family
nonreceptor tyrosine kinases (Src) and EGFR. This profile of activity
underlies the robust activity of KD019 in animal models of cancer.
Although alternative agents targeting these tyrosine kinase receptors are
available, only KD019 targets all of these pathways without the need for
a combination strategy. A more important shortcoming of alternative
agents is a lack of blood brain barrier (BBB) penetration (Brain/Plasma
concentration ratioKD019 is an orally bioavailable small molecule
inhibitor of molecular drivers of cancer growth and progression,
including HER2/neu, Src family nonreceptor tyrosine kinases (Src) and
EGFR. This profile of activity underlies the robust activity of KD019 in
animal models of cancer. Although alternative agents targeting these
tyrosine kinase receptors are available, only KD019 targets all of these
pathways without the need for a combination strategy. A more important
shortcoming of alternative agents is a lack of blood brain barrier (BBB)
penetration (Brain/Plasma concentration ratio<KD019 is an orally
bioavailable small molecule inhibitor of molecular drivers of cancer
growth and progression, including HER2/neu, Src family nonreceptor
tyrosine kinases (Src) and EGFR. This profile of activity underlies the
robust activity of KD019 in animal models of cancer. Although alternative
agents targeting these tyrosine kinase receptors are available, only
KD019 targets all of these pathways without the need for a combination
strategy. A more important shortcoming of alternative agents is a lack of
blood brain barrier (BBB) penetration (Brain/Plasma concentration
ratio<<1), significantly limiting their ability to target oncogenic
molecular pathways in intracranial tumors. The BBB permeability of KD019
was heretofore untested.In the present work, KD019 is demonstrated to
achieve concentrations in the brain equivalent to that in blood utilizing
quantitative whole body autoradiography (QWBA). Lister Hooded partially
pigmented rats were administered a single dose of 14C labeled KD019 and
tissue radioactivity was evaluated utilizing phosphor-storage imaging
plates and a Fuji FLA-5100 fluorescent image analyzing system (Quotient
Bioresearch, Rushden, UK). Brain/blood radioactivity ratio was
approximately 1 at 6-24 hours after dosing indicating significant brain
penetration of KD019. BBB penetrance was further supported by a study
performed in CD1 mice utilizing LC/MS/MS to determine tissue KD019
concentrations following a single oral dose of 100 mg free base/kg
unlabeled drug (Pharmaron, Beijing, China). Brain/plasma KD019 ratios
were 2.3-4.4 from 1-24 hours after dosing with brain concentrations of
2137-8253 ng/g tissue, compared to 0.03-0.07 for the EGFR/HER2 inhibitor
lapatinib with brain concentrations of 0-286 ng/g tissue. To demonstrate
that the penetration of KD019 into the brain parenchyma would translate
into anticancer effects, KD019 efficacy was tested in a GL261 orthotopic
syngeneic model of glioma (Molecular Imaging, Michigan, USA). GL261-luc2
luciferase expressing cells were implanted intracranially (2 mm right
lateral and 1 mm anterior from Bregma, 2-3 mm down from burr hole) into
C57BL/6 albino mice. KD019 dosed orally once daily at 75 mg base/kg on
Days 8-12 and 15-19 after intracranial implantation significantly reduced
the intracranial tumor growth as evaluated by bioluminescence, and
extended median survival time by 20%.In conclusion, KD019 is a BBB
penetrant TKI with an important and novel profile of kinase activity
that, based on the data presented, will be advanced further in
nonclinical and clinical experiments aiming at benefiting patients with
intracranial tumors, a significant unmet clinical need. KD019 is
currently being tested in combination with trastuzumab in patients with
HER2-positive breast cancer and brain metastases.

