Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liver selective acetyl-CoA carboxylase inhibition by ND-654
improves survival in cirrhotic rats with hepatocellular carcinoma


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is increasing in incidence
worldwide. Current treatment options for HCC are limited, and as such,
prognosis is extremely poor with a 5-year survival less than 12%.
Therefore, there is an urgent medical need for new therapeutic
strategies. Metabolic attenuation is a promising approach to cancer
therapy, and rate-limiting steps in key biosynthetic pathways are
particularly attractive targets. Simultaneous inhibition of the
acetyl-CoA carboxylase isozymes, ACC1 and ACC2, results in concomitant
inhibition of fatty acid synthesis (FASyn) and stimulation of fatty acid
oxidation (FAOxn) in cultured cells and in animals and impedes tumor cell
growth in vitro. We recently identified ND-654, a hepatoselective (3000:1
liver to muscle exposure), allosteric ACC inhibitor that binds to the ACC
subunit dimerization site and inhibits the enzymatic activity of both
ACC1 (IC50 = 3 nM) and ACC2 (IC50 = 8 nM). We previously demonstrated
that daily oral administration of 10 mg/kg ND-654 reduced tumor incidence
by 55% in a rat model of HCC. Here, we test the hypothesis that ND-654
can decrease the number of tumor-related deaths and improve survival time
in this model. Methods: Male Wistar rats were treated weekly with 50
mg/kg diethylnitrosamine (DEN) to induce sequential development of
fibrosis, cirrhosis and HCC. After establishment of cirrhosis (13 wks),
rats were treated daily by oral gavage with vehicle containing either 0,
10, or 30 mg/kg ND-654. At the time of death, tumor nodules were counted
and liver and tumor tissue was analyzed to assess the effects of ND-654
on disease progression. Results: Simultaneous inhibition of ACC1 and ACC2
significantly improved median survival time in this lethal model of
cirrhosis and HCC from 114 days in vehicle control animals to 126 (p =
0.02) and 129 days (p = 0.009) in animals treated with either 10 or 30
mg/kg ND-654. Analysis of tumor tissue revealed that ND-654 decreased
tumor cell proliferation as assessed by PCNA staining. In addition,
compared to vehicle control, ND-654 induced massive tumor necrosis, as
assessed by H&E staining, but minimal apoptosis, as assessed by caspase-3
staining. Sirius red staining of the liver parenchyma revealed decreased
accumulation of collagen fibers and therefore fibrosis in ND-654 treated
animals as compared to vehicle control animals. Conclusions: These
results provide further evidence that de novo lipogenesis is an important
mediator of hepatic fibrosis and carcinogenesis and that selective
inhibition of hepatic ACC is a viable cancer metabolism therapeutic
strategy for treating HCC and liver fibrosis/cirrhosis.

