Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nicotinamide phosphoribosyl transferase (NAMPT) inhibitors: novel
modulators of antitumor immunity


Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT), an essential enzyme
involved in NAD metabolism, is a pleiotropic player in cell signalling
and is implicated in a number of diseases, including cancer, inflammatory
and metabolic disorders. NAMPT inhibitors (e.g. FK866 and CHS828) have
been shown to be potentially effective in cancer therapy and have entered
clinical trials in oncology. NAMPT could represent a putative link
between metabolism, inflammation and cancer. This study investigated the
role of NAMPT in cancer-related inflammation.A mouse model of
transplantable MNMCA1 fibrosarcoma was utilized. WT Mice or NAMPTflox
CrelysM+/- mice were injected with 10^4 MN-MNCA1 or G217R MNMCA1 (NAMPT
inhibitors resistant cell line) cells and subsequently treated or not
with 10 mg/kg of NAMPT inhibitors. Next, tumor growth, metastasis
formation, tumor angiogenesis and the inflammatory infiltrate were
estimated. In addition, monocytic (M-MDSCs) and granulocytic (G-MDSCs)
myeloid derived-suppressor cells (MDSCs), isolated from the spleen of
tumour bearing mice (untreated and treated with NAMPT inhibitors), or
differentiated in vitro from bone marrow precursors, were analysed for
their suppressive activity, nitric oxide (NO) production, gene profile
and expression of enzymes involved in cancer-associated immunosuppression
(e.g. iNOS, ARG1, NOX2).In the fibrosarcoma mouse model, NAMPT inhibitors
inhibited tumor growth, tumor vessel formation and delay metastasis
formation. Phenotypic analysis of the immune infiltrate revealed that the
number of macrophages and dendritic cells was not affected by NAMPT
inhibition. However MDSCs displayed a marked decreased in blood, spleen
and primary tumour, which was associated with an increase number of both
CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes. On the contrary an increase number of MDSCs
have been found in the bone marrow. A detail analysis of CXCR4 expression
revealed that NAMPT inhibitors affect MDSCs migration in vivo. Moreover,
in NAMPTflox CrelysM+/- mice fibrosarcoma growth is reduced.Expression
analysis revealed that NAMPT was up-regulated in MDSCs in response to
M1-stimulation, suggesting a role of this enzyme during inflammatory
process. Moreover, NAMPT inhibitors blocked the NO-mediated T cell
suppressive activity induced by IFN in M-MDSC. Preliminary evidences
indicate a role of both AMPK and SIRT 1/3 in the inhibition of M-MDSC
suppressive activity operated by NAMPT inhibitors. Furthermore, both
M-MDSCs isolated from spleen of NAMPT inhibitors treated mice and MDSCs
isolated from NAMPTflox CrelysM+/- mice display a reduced T-cell
suppression activity.Here, we demonstrate for the first time a role of
NAMPT metabolism in the functional differentiation of suppressive M-MDSCs
associated with cancer development and suggest that pharmacological
inhibition of NAMPT may prevent cancer-associated immunosuppression,
restoring adaptive antitumor immunity.

