Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and in vivo activity of a highly potent and novel
FGFR2/FGFR4 dual targeting antibody-drug conjugate


The fibroblast growth receptors 2 and 4 (FGFR2, FGFR4) are overexpressed
in a broad spectrum of malignancies. In a subset of breast, gastric, and
esophageal cancers, increased FGFR2 expression is driven by FGFR2 copy
number (CN) gain, which renders these tumors dependent on FGFR2 pathway
activation and is associated with poor prognosis. FGFR4 expression is
increased in response to both FGFR4 CN gain, as seen in embryonal
rhabdomyosarcoma, or by the PAX3-FOXO1 fusion gene product which
transcriptionally activates FGFR4, as seen in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma.
Additionally, other mechanisms drive increased FGFR2 expression, e.g. in
subsets of lung and breast cancer, and increased FGFR4 expression, e.g.
in subsets of hepatocellular, breast, and pancreatic cancer. This
elevated expression in malignancies combined with the observation that
FGFR2 and FGFR4 are efficiently internalized upon antibody binding make
both receptors attractive targets for antibody-drug conjugate (ADC)
therapy. To this end, a drug discovery campaign was initiated and a
novel, highly potent FGFR2, FGFR4 dual targeting ADC was discovered. This
ADC consists of a fully human antibody (discovered in collaboration with
MorphoSys) conjugated to the potent maytansine-derived
microtubule-disruptor, DM1, via an SMCC non-cleavable thioether linkage
(linker payload technology licensed from ImmunoGen, Inc.). In vitro, the
ADC is active against FGFR2 and FGFR4 positive cells in viability assays
and is efficiently processed yielding the principle catabolite
Lys-SMCC-DM1. In vivo, the ADC is highly efficacious against a variety of
disease relevant xenograft models including FGFR2 amplified breast and
gastric models and a PAX3-FOXO1 translocation positive alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma model. Additionally, the ADC is potent against a subset
of primary tumor derived breast and lung xenograft models that lack FGFR2
CN gain or the PAX3-FOX01 translocation. Consistent with the molecule's
mode of action, anti-tumor activity is preceded by G2/M cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis. Taken together these data suggest that this novel, dual
targeting ADC may be an effective treatment for patients with FGFR2 or
FGFR4 positive tumors including, but not limited to those with FGFR2 CN
gain or the PAX3-FOXO1 fusion gene.

