Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTHrP(12-48) localization is intracellular and it inhibits cell
proliferation and osteoclastogenesis


Background: PTHrP is produced by various osteotropic malignancies and
promotes progression of bone metastasis. PTHrP(12-48) is a unique,
proteolytically-derived fragment of full length PTHrP and is the first
PTHrP fragment, identified in the serum of breast cancer patients. Serum
PTHrP(12-48) levels in breast cancer patients, correlate with a high
sensitivity and specificity with the presence of bone metastasis. The
purpose of this study was to define the role of PTHrP(12-48) in the
metastatic breast tumor microenvironment. PTHrP(12-48) activity at the
cellular level, was examined by PTHrP(12-48) agonist/antagonist activity
at the PTH1 receptor (PTH1R), examination of subcellular localization and
the effects of PTHrP(12-48) on cell proliferation, survival and
osteoclast differentiation.Methods: To test the agonist/antagonist
activity of PTHrP(12-48), c-AMP and IP3 assays were performed in cells
expressing the PTH1R, in the presence of potent PTH1R agonists (PTH 1-34)
and antagonists (PTH7-34). Immunolocalization of PTHrP(12-48) was
examined by immunohistochemistry (IHC) using a specific anti-PTHrP(12-48)
antibody and by immunofluorescence in PTH1R expressing human cells and
human peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC)-derived osteoclasts, which
lack PTH1R. Cellular proliferation was measured in PTH1R expressing and
PTH1R lacking cells. In addition, the effect of PTHrP(12-48) on human
osteoclast precursor survival and osteoclast differentiation was assessed
in receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa beta ligand (RANKL) treated
PBMC cultures.Results: The data demonstrate that PTHrP(12-48) is not an
agonist or an antagonist of the PTH1R receptor. IHC demonstrated positive
immunostaining in primary breast tumors and bone metastases, whereas
normal breast tissue was negative. Immunofluorescence successfully
identified the cytoplasmic localization of PTHrP(12-48), 90 minutes after
addition of ligand in PTH1R expressing cells. In contrast, no cytoplasmic
staining was observed in PTH1R lacking cells. In addition PTHrP(12-48)
significantly inhibited serum-induced proliferation of PTH1R expressing
cells, but not PTH1R lacking cells. Interestingly, although human
osteoclast precursors lack PTH1R expression, PTHrP(12-48) treatment
strongly inhibited the survival and proliferation of PBMCs as well as
their differentiation into osteoclasts.Conclusions: PTHrP(12-48) is a
circulating bone metastasis biomarker that is expressed by primary breast
tumors as well as bone metastasis. PTHrP(12-48) does not interact
productively with the PTH1R in terms of second messenger activation.
However, treatment of cells with PTHrP(12-48) results in cellular uptake
by PTH1R expressing cells, with a resultant inhibition of serum-induced
cell proliferation and osteoclastogenesis.

