Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic oxidative stress increases resistance in renal carcinoma
cells to doxorubicin-induced cytotoxicity potentially through epigenetic
mechanism


Human renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common form of kidney
cancer. Regardless of therapeutic advancement, patients with metastatic
RCC are failed to clinical treatment due to rapidly developing
resistance. Resistance to chemotherapy can be of innate or acquired
overtime following exposure to drug and can arise through a number of
different intrinsic and extrinsic factors and their interactions. While
some reports suggest role of ROS in developing drug resistance, response
of cancer cells with chronic exposure to oxidative stress to
chemotherapeutic drugs is not known. Hence, the objective of this study
was to evaluate the impact of chronic exposure to elevated levels of
oxidative stress in human kidney cancer cells. Caki-1 human renal
carcinoma cells were given chronic (6 months) exposure to direct ROS
source hydrogen peroxide (25 M and 200 M). Using these cells the effect
of oxidative stress on sensitivity to doxorubicin-induced cytotoxicity
was measured by MTT assay. The result was further confirmed by anchorage
independent growth on soft agar and cell cycle analysis using flow
cytometer. To understand the molecular mechanism, the expression of genes
involved in drug resistance, cell survival, and DNA repair dependent
apoptosis were measured by qRT- PCR. Results of MTT, soft agar assay, and
cell cycle analysis showed that doxorubicin-induced cytotoxicity was
significantly less in Caki-1 cells chronically exposed to H2O2 when
compare to H2O2 unexposed control cells. The alterations in the
expression of genes involved in drug transport further confirmed the
increased resistance to doxorubicin-induced cytotoxicity in cells exposed
to oxidative stress. Decreased expression of MSH2 gene in cells exposed
to H2O2-induced oxidative stress suggests that loss of DNA
repair-dependent apoptosis could be a potential mechanism for increased
resistance to doxorubicin-induced cytotoxicity. To further evaluate the
role of epigenetic process of DNA methylation in oxidative stress-induced
drug resistance, cells were pretreated with demethylating agent 5-aza-2
deoxycytidine (5-aza 2dC), and then treated with doxorubicin. The
pretreatment with 5-aza 2dC significantly resensitized the chronic ROS
adapted Caki-1 cells to doxorubicin-induced cytotoxicity and restored the
expression of MSH2 gene in these cells. This suggests that epigenetic
silencing of MSH2 and therefore DNA repair-dependent apoptosis could be a
potential mechanism for oxidative stress-induced resistance to
chemotherapeutic drugs in renal cancer cells. In summary, this study for
the first time provides direct evidence for the role of oxidative stress
in chemoresistance in renal carcinoma cells. Additionally, the findings
of this study also suggest that epigenetic therapy may be a useful
strategy in re-sensitizing the chemotherapeutic resistant RCC cells.

