Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tolcapone, a catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitor, alone and in
combination with oxaliplatin induces cell death in neuroblastoma


Background: Neuroblastoma (NB) is an aggressive childhood cancer that
arises from neural crest cells of the sympathetic nervous system. These
cells contain cathecholamines which may be a therapeutic target.
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) metabolizes catechol-containing
compounds, including dopamine. COMT inhibitors, including tolcapone, are
used as an adjunctive treatment for Parkinson's disease, as they increase
dopamine within cells. Increase in dopamine and other catecholamines
within cells may result in cell toxicity.Methods: Cell viability was
measured using Calcein AM fluorescent assay at tolcapone doses 1.5625 M -
200 M, both alone and in combination with oxaliplatin at doses 1.5 M - 6
M. Western blot analysis was used to measure cleaved poly ADP ribose
polymerase (PARP) and cleaved and full caspase-3 levels. ATP level per
cell was measured using CyQuant fluorescent DNA assay combined with the
Cell Titer GLO luminescent cell viability assay. Expression of COMT was
confirmed using microarray analysis and immunofluorescence. Reactive
oxygen species (ROS) levels were measured using DCFDA - Cellular Reactive
Oxygen Species Detection Assay Kit. IncuCyte ZOOM machine was used in
conjugation with SYTOX Green dye to measure cell death and CellPlayer
Kinetic Caspase-3/7 Apoptosis Assay Reagent to measure apoptosis over 48
hours. Microarray analysis using U133+ RNA expression profiles were used
to evaluate gene expression changes after cells were treated with
tolcapone for 12 hours.Results: Tolcapone IC50 values ranged from 13.33 M
to 156 M in seven different NB cell lines. Concentrations of 25 M and 50
M increased levels of cleaved PARP and cleaved caspase-3 over 48, 72, and
96 hours treated. Intracellular ATP decreased significantly with
concentrations ranging from 12.5-200 M treated over 48 hours and ROS
levels increased significantly with concentrations ranging from 12.5-200
M treated over 24 hours. IncuCyte Zoom analysis displayed dose dependent
levels of cell death and presence of cleaved caspase-3 and 7 with
increasing concentrations ranging from 1.5625 M -200 M. The combination
of tolcapone at 25 M and oxaliplatin at 3.5 M show synergy in cell
viability assays.Conclusion: There is no curative therapy for
relapsed/refractory NB patients. The preclinical evidence suggests that
patients with overexpression of COMT may respond to tolcapone via
catecholamine induced ROS and cytotoxicity, especially when combined with
oxaliplatin. Therefore, tolcapone and oxaliplatin may be a potential new
therapy for children with NB with plans to be evaluated in a Phase I/II
trial.

