Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyaluronan-dependent growth of human triple negative breast cancer
MDA-MB-468 in mouse xenograft models


Hyaluronan (also known as hyaluronic acid or HA) is a nonsulfated
glycosaminoglycan in the extracellular matrix. Elevated levels of HA in
the tumor microenvironment have been associated with poor prognosis of
several human cancers, including pancreatic, breast, colon and prostate.
In many cases of breast cancer, HA is found to be associated with the
stromal compartment. To understand the interaction between tumor cells
and HA containing stromal compartment, we engineered a HA-high stromal
cell line by overexpressing the human HAS3 gene in Balb/c 3T3 fibroblast
cells. In vitro, the 3T3/HAS3 cells produced and secreted HA, which was
shown to bind to the HA-low/CD44-high breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-468
at the cell surface. When co-grafted with MDA-MB-468 cells in mice,
3T3/HAS3 cells promoted the in vivo growth of MDA-MB-468 cells.
Furthermore, depletion of HA with PEGPH20 (a pegylated form of the
recombinant human PH20 protein) significantly inhibited the growth of
MDA-MB-468 cells co-grafted with 3T3/HAS3 cells, suggesting that the HA
provided by 3T3/HAS3 cells is critical for the growth of MDA-MB-468 cells
in vivo. Immunohistochemical analysis of tumor xenograft samples showed
that HA-low MDA-MB-468 cells were surrounded by HA-high stromal cells,
resembling the tumor morphology observed in certain breast cancer
patients. To model for breast cancers with tumor cell-associated HA, we
overexpressed the human HAS3 gene directly in MDA-MB-468 cells. The in
vivo growth of MDA-MB-468 was significantly enhanced by HAS3
overexpression. Depletion of HA by PEGPH20 synergized with Abraxane and
improved its anti-cancer efficacy in the MDA-MB-468/HAS3 xenograft model
compared to PEGPH20 and Abraxane alone. Taken together, we have developed
tumor xenograft models that mimic HA-high breast cancers and can be used
to test the pharmacological activity of anticancer agents. Further
characterization of these models will provide insights into the
understanding of the mechanisms by which increased levels of HA and the
associated changes in the tumor microenvironment promote the disease
progression in breast cancer and how depletion of HA can interfere with
this process and synergize with chemotherapies to inhibit tumor
progression.

