Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining molecular mechanisms linking Endophilin A2 to metastasis
in human breast cancer models


Breast cancers in the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) and
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) subtypes have high rates of tumor
metastasis. Tumor metastasis is driven by formation of invadopodia that
degrade extracellular matrix (ECM) in basement membranes to spread
locally and colonize distant sites. Endophilin A2 (Endo II) is an adaptor
protein that coordinates internalization and trafficking of receptors
that drive invadopodia formation and breast cancer metastasis. We have
recently identified Endo II as a positive regulator of human TNBC
metastasis, invadopodia formation, epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) internalization and signaling. Here, we extend these studies of
Endo II to HER2 breast cancers, and define molecular mechanisms that link
Endo II to invadopodia formation and cell invasion. Analysis of Endo II
expression in human invasive ductal carcinomas revealed significantly
high expression of Endo II in HER2 primary tumors, and significantly
higher expression in paired lymph node metastases compared to other
subtypes. We also observed that high levels of Endo II mRNA was
associated with reduced rates of relapse free survival in patients with
lymph node positive, estrogen receptor negative tumors. This correlates
with our findings that Endo II promotes invadopodia formation and breast
cancer cell invasion. Mechanistically, these defects may be due to
reduced EGFR signaling and lowered expression of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) signature genes observed in Endo II knock-down (KD)
cells. We are currently validating these results in mammary orthotopic
tumor xenograft models of HER2 and TNBC cell models with stable Endo II
KD. Together, these findings identify high levels of Endo II in high risk
breast cancer subtypes, with high expression of EMT genes, and a
potential link between Endo II levels and poor prognosis in breast cancer
patients.

