Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly complex oligonucleotide libraries for use in
high-resolution RNA and RNA/DNA fluorescence in situ hybridization in
various sample types


Fluorescence in situ Hybridization (FISH) is a powerful technique for
determining the localization specific nucleic acid sequences within
individual cells. Previously, the use of FISH has often been dependent
upon access to cloned template DNA for the generation of probes, which
can be difficult if clones for specific regions are unavailable, or if
the genomic region of interest contains repetitive and/or other
problematic sequences. We have developed the ability to chemically
synthesize DNA in massively parallel reactions, which we have used to
produce libraries of oligonucleotides up to 200 bases in length that can
be utilized for the generation of FISH probes. The sequences of the
oligonucleotides in these libraries are selected in silico using
empirically determined criteria so as to avoid repetitive elements or
regions homologous to other non-targeted loci. We have found that these
oligonucleotide library-derived FISH probes can detect human genomic
regions as small as 1.8 kb and as large as whole chromosomes in both
metaphase and interphase cells, using the same simple assay protocol.
Because of the inherent flexibility in our probe design methods, we can
readily visualize regions rich in repeats and/or GC content. We have also
used these oligonucleotide library-derived FISH probes to detect the
localization of a variety of both coding and non-coding RNAs in fixed
tissue culture cells and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue
sections, using both conventional fluorescence and structured
illumination microscopy. Simultaneous hybridization of FISH probes
labeled with different fluorophores enables visualization of multiple
sequences at once. Using probes designed specifically to transcribed vs.
non-transcribed regions has enabled the simultaneously detect DNA and RNA
from the same locus, or from two different loci, in the same FISH assay.
The ability to generate high performance FISH probes using chemically
synthesized oligo libraries that can simultaneously detect DNA and RNA
yields a valuable tool for studies of how localization of specific
nucleic acids impacts biological function.

