Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Annexin A1 overexpression preferentially predicts poor prognosis
of basal-like breast cancer patients by activating m TOR-S6 signaling


Introduction: Annexin A1 is an anti-inflammatory protein reported to play
a role in cell proliferation, apoptosis and to be deregulated in breast
cancer. The role and regulation of annexin A1 in the biology and
prognosis of breast cancer remain unclear because most of the studies did
not consider specific differences between the different subtypes of
breast cancer. Thus, in this study, we hypothesize that annexin A1 plays
subtype-specific role in basal like breast cancer progression and
metastasis. Methods: By mining The Cancer Genome Atlas-Breast Cancer
Dataset (TCGA-BRCA) and manipulating annexin A1 levels in breast cancer
cell lines, we studied the role of annexin A1 in breast cancer and
underlying signaling pathways. Results: Our in-silico analysis of
TCGA-BRCA dataset demonstrated that annexin A1 mRNA expression is higher
in basal subtype compared to luminal and HER2 subtypes. Within the basal
subtype, patients show significantly poorer survival associated with
higher expression of annexin A1. In both TCGA patient samples and cell
lines, annexin A1 levels were significantly higher in basal-like breast
cancer tumors than luminal and Her2/neu-positive breast cancer tumors.
Stable annexin A1 knockdown in TNBC cell lines suppressed the mTOR-S6
pathway. Specifically, annexin A1 knockdown inhibited phosphorylation of
mTOR and S6 (18-73% inhibition in pmTOR and 50-60% inhibition in pS6).
But annexin A1 knockdown had no impact on the MAPK, c-Met, and EGFR
pathways. In cell migration assays, annexin A1-depleted TNBC cells showed
delayed migration as compared to wild-type cells which we found to be
through suppression of MMP9. Conclusions: Our data suggest that annexin
A1 is prognostic only in patients with basal like breast cancer. This
appears to be due in part to the role of annexin A1 in activating
mTOR-pS6 pathway.

