Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumour lymphocyte infiltration has prognostic value in lymph node
negative breast cancer patients with high proliferation


Introduction: The incidence of breast cancer, and especially lymph node
negative breast cancers, is increasing. Currently nearly 70% of affected
women have lymph node negative cancers, and up to 90% of them receive
adjuvant systemic treatment. However, only 10-20% of all node negative
patients develop distant metastases without chemotherapy, and the side
effects of the treatment cannot be neglected. The use of accurate and
reproducible treatment-selection criteria is critical for reducing
overtreatment while not increasing undertreatment. Our previous results
have shown that proliferation is the strongest prognostic feature for
lymph node negative breast cancer for patients under 71 years old. In
addition to proliferation, this study evaluates the prognostic value of
tumour infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and the expression pattern of
miR-18a and miR-18b in lymph node negative breast cancer tissue.Methods:
Two hundred and four breast tumours were scored for degree of
proliferation (Mitotic activity index (MAI), KI67 and PPH3) and TILs,
both stromal (sTILs) and infiltrating TILs (iTILs). The relative amount
of tumour infiltrating lymphocytes in the tumour area was then assessed
as percentage of sTILs or iTILs. Furthermore, the expression of miR-18a
and miR-18b was measured by qPCR in all the 204 patients and in 40 cases
the expression pattern and level was measured by chromogenic in situ
hybridization.Results: Kaplan Meier curves show that patients with high
proliferation (MAI 10 or PPH3 13) and more than a few sTIL (>5%) have a
85% chance of remaining free for distant metastasis, whereas those with
lower sTILs have a 62% change (p = 0.039). Chromogenic in situ
hybridization with LNA-probes for miR-18a and miR-18b shows that these
microRNAs are expressed in those areas with inflammation which are
located within or closely surrounding the tumour. High expression of
miR-18a and miR-18b is significantly associated with high proliferation,
ER negativity, triple negative phenotype and cytokeratin 5 and 6 positive
tumours and the presence of TILs. High expression of miR-18a or miR-18b
is associated with worse prognosis for patients with a low percentage of
TILs (5%). Cox regression analyses with traditional prognostic features
and sTILs (less than 5% or >5%) show that sTILs, Her2 and PPH3 are the
most prognostic features in this study cohort.Conclusion: The presence of
TILs in and around a tumour has additional prognostic value in breast
tumours with high proliferation. A standardized scoring method for the
assessment of TILs might be a valuable biomarker for good prognosis in a
patient group that otherwise has a worse prognosis and is treated with
chemotherapy.

