Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel PARP inhibitor resistance mechanism mediated by the
RNA-binding protein HuR


Introduction: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the 4th leading
cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States, and the 3rd most
common cancer associated with BRCA mutations. Frontline therapies have
significant toxicities and only minimally extend overall survival,
highlighting the need to optimize targeted therapies.Poly-ADP ribose
polymerase (PARP) inhibitors (PARPi), a poster child for personalized
medicine, depend on the concept of synthetic lethality where the combined
perturbation of DNA repair genes, via genetic mutations within the tumor
cells, and pharmacological PARP inhibition effectively targets
BRCA-deficient tumors. Although PARPi have delivered promising
preclinical and clinical results, initially- responsive patients
ultimately develop resistance.A unique mechanism elucidated by our lab
demonstrates that the mRNA-binding protein HuR mediates resistance to DNA
damaging agents through post-transcriptional regulation of select mRNA
cargo. Predominantly expressed in the nucleus, HuR translocates to the
cytoplasm upon tumor-associated stress. Cytoplasmic HuR binds and
stabilizes unique pro-survival transcripts, resulting in resistance to a
harsh tumor microenvironment. Here, we sought to evaluate the role of HuR
in regulating PARPi response.Methods and Results: Through
immunofluorescence and western blot of fractionated lysates, we
demonstrate that the PARP inhibitors Veliparib, Olaparib, and Rucaparib
induced cytoplasmic HuR localization. Conversely, pre-treatment with
MS-444 (Novartis), an established small molecule inhibitor of HuR,
abrogated its nuclear export induced by PARPi treatment. Consistent with
these findings, the growth-inhibitory effects of PARPi treatment were
significantly potentiated upon HuR silencing whereas ectopic HuR
overexpression promoted resistance, as observed in short term cell
survival and long-term anchorage-independent growth assays. Additionally,
silencing of HuR enhanced PARPi-induced cytotoxicity, assessed by
increased accumulation of DNA damage (H2Ax) foci and Poly ADP-ribose
(PAR) polymers. Ribonucleotide protein immunoprecipitation (RNP-IP)
assays demonstrated that HuR binds and upregulates Poly-ADP Ribose
Glycohydrolase (PARG) mRNA, the major enzyme responsible for catabolism
of PAR. Taken together, when PDA cells are exposed to PARPi, HuR mediates
upregulation of PARG, thereby decreasing PARylation and facilitating DNA
repair. Conversely, HuR inhibition results in detrimental accumulation of
PAR and enhanced DNA damage, which ultimately leads to increased
PARPi-conferred cytotoxicity.Discussion: These results demonstrate that
HuR imposes a significant barrier to PARPi therapy by orchestrating a
strong chemoresistance mechanism. Thus, we provide evidence that HuR
(and/or its target) inhibition via an HuR inhibitor (MS-444) can optimize
PARPi-based therapies for better patient outcomes.

