Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of reactive oxygen species in the extracellular
matrix-influenced sensitivity of various prostate cancer cell lines to
methylseleninic acid and selenite


Understanding various factors that influence cancer-preventive actions of
chemopreventive agents is important in order to optimize their potential
to prevent cancer. Particularly, this is important for various forms of
selenium which have a differential ability to prevent tumor promotion.
Previously, we compared the relative selenium sensitivity of various
prostate cancer cell lines with a common lineage showing progression
characteristics from low to high degree of malignancy and mimicking
different stages of tumor progression. In the current study, we used
prostate cancer cell lines with increasing tumorigenicity and invasive
ability: WPE1-NA22 showing the lowest, WPE1-NB11 and WPE1-NB14 showing
intermediate, and WPE1-NB26 showing the greatest. In all these cell
lines, both methylseleninic acid (MSA) and selenite induced growth
inhibition and apoptosis, but all cell lines were more sensitive to
selenite than MSA. These cell lines showed a variation in sensitivity to
MSA and exhibited a decrease in sensitivity with an increase in tumor
progression. On the contrary, no appreciable variation in the sensitivity
to selenite was observed among these cell lines. Additionally, the cell
lines were less susceptible to MSA-induced growth inhibition when they
were grown on a surface coated with collagen. However, such differences
were not observed with selenite. We measured the rate of generation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS), particularly hydrogen peroxide, using
2,7-dichlorofluorescin diacetate in cells treated with MSA and selenite.
The rate of generation of ROS was relatively higher in the MSA-sensitive
cell line (WPE1-NB11), whereas it was lower in the MSA-resistant cell
line. Overall, the rate of generation of ROS correlated to the relative
sensitivity of these cell lines to MSA, whereas selenite did not induce
an appreciable increase in ROS generation under these conditions.
Furthermore, cells grown on a collagen surface showed a decrease in the
rate of ROS generation. This suggested that collagen-induced prevention
of MSA action might have been caused by either a low rate of generation
of ROS or enhanced scavenging of ROS. This data is in agreement with our
previous findings showing the reaction of methylselenol, a reduced
product of methylselenol with hydrogen peroxide. MSA reacts with
cysteine-rich regions in critical molecular targets, such as protein
kinase C isoenzymes, and during this process, MSA is converted to a
volatile methylselenol. Methylselenol is converted back to nonvolatile
MSA by reacting with hydrogen peroxide. This peroxidatic redox cycle is
effective in inactivating these types of targets. Contrary, selenite
reacts directly with cysteine-rich regions in protein kinase C without
the need for ROS. Therefore, different selenocompounds may vary in their
mode of action. This study was supported by the National Cancer Institute
grant CA099216.

