Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microenvironmental impact on breast cancer cell dormancy and drug
sensitivity in a 3D model


Solid tumor contains heterogeneous and complex extracellular matrix
environment. Tumor phenotypes are highly dependent on complex
interactions with the surrounding cells and the ECM. Tumor dormancy is
commonly observed clinically, however, the sources of dormant cells are
unknown and their biological properties unclear. Recent evidence suggests
that tumor residues are always ECM associated. Ioundt is important to
replicate in vivo tumor environment with defined extracellular matrix in
3D environment to study tumor cell distinctive states. In this study, we
engineered a construct by using transglutaminase crosslinked gelatin to
recapitulate the in vivo breast cancer milieu and mimicking distinctive
density of breast cancer matrix. First, we found that 3D matrix
restriction had significant impacts on proliferation rate, cell
morphology, tumoroid size and protein expressions of breast cancer cell
MDA-MB-23 when growing in 3D matrices with different stiffness. Besides
MDA-MB-231, ten different other tumor cell types were placed in a
spectrum of gel conditions and their proliferation profiles have been
established. We therefore could setup tumor culture models specifically
for proliferative or dormant cells by changing gel concentration or
crosslinking rates. Second, we used exogenous collagenase to mimic
autocrine or paracrine proteases activity to mimic ECM degradation in
dynamic tumor progression. We found that alteration of matrix mechanical
restriction by enzyme degradation or ECM deposition could reversibly
induce breast cancer cell from dormancy to proliferative or vise versa.
Third, we tested the drug sensitivity at different matrix conditions.
Both paclitaxel and gemcitabine displayed significant efficacy when cells
in the highly proliferative state. However, paclitaxel had strong impact
on breaking up tumor clusters but with little effect on inducing their
apoptosis. Gemcitabine could diffuse into different size cell clusters to
induce apoptosis. When cells were adopted dormant state, they showed less
drug sensitivity for both drugs. We further demonstrate that there was no
additive effect of paclitaxel and gemcitabine at all tested conditions.
In conclusion, we setup a tailorable 3D model to study tumor cell
proliferative and dormant states by taking into consideration of cell
type preference on ECM conditions. There is an urgent need for tools to
reliably and quickly predict responses of patients cancers to treatment
regimens. With this in vitro drug screening model, it has potential to
predict the drugs in single use or in combination effect.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

