Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glioblastoma whole transcriptome analysis: molecular mechanisms
related to recurrence-free survival (RFS)


Introduction. Diffusely infiltrating astrocytomas represent the most
frequent intracranial neoplasms, with the glioblastoma (GB) as the most
malignant phenotypic endpoint. Surgical resection, radiotherapy and
adjuvant chemotherapy currently represent the standard of care for this
disease. From a practical perspective, controlling growth and spreading
of the recurrence may have a great impact on disease-free survival. The
invasive nature of glioblastoma cells represents a major cause of
therapeutic failure, so clarification of the molecular mechanisms
associated with cellular migration and invasion is crucial to allow
better prediction of these patient. Our study had the intent to provide
novel information on glioblastoma behavior, with regard to the type of
genetic changes involved in length of recurrence free survival
time.Materials and Methods. We used whole-transcriptome RNA sequencing
(Ion Proton system) to analyze 12 primary formalin fixed, paraffin
embedded GBs specifically selected for different length of time of first
recurrence.Results. A total of 83 genes resulted to have a statistical
significant differential expression, which allowed us to distinguish
three distinct groups of tumors with different recurrence free survival
times: the short term group (S) with recurrence free survival time less
than 6 months (n = 6), the medium group (M) between 16 and 23 months (n =
3), and the long term group (L) with more than 25 months (n = 3). Gene
expression comparison analysis identified 51, 21, 26 significant genes
between L/S, L/M and S/M respectively. Interestingly the highest number
of genes differentialy expressed was found between the two extreme groups
(S vs L). Two genes, BOD1L1 and GLUD2 were identified as significantly
upregulated in the L group.Conclusions. The analysis of the whole
transcriptome of GBs, with different recurrence free survival time,
revealed that many of the genes that seem to be related to time of
recurrence, after first surgery, are involved in the epigenetic landscape
of the transcriptional potential of the cell such as histone and miRNA
expression dis-regulation. Two genes were confirmed such as BOD1L1, which
is mostly unknown and seems to be involved in the bio-orientation of
chromosomes, and the mitochondrial enzyme GLUD2 which has been recently
reported as involved in glioma growth. Moreover, some of the upregulated
genes, in the group with the worst prognosis, had been related to the Rho
family of GTPases which are key mediators of GB invasion. More thorough
analyses are ongoing. A comprehensive better understanding of the
molecular mechanisms underlying GB recurrence free survival would make a
long step forward in the improvement of the clinical management of
patients with such deadly disease.

