Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A gene signature defines chromosomal instability (CIN) and poor
survival in liver cancer patients


BackgroundThe molecular stratification of cancer patients into different
subgroups becomes more and more important for clinical treatment. For
human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which is the third most common
cause of cancer related deaths, molecular classification can be useful to
discriminate between patient subgroups with different biological and
clinical features. Especially chromosomal instability (CIN) represents
one determinant for poor overall survival of HCC patients; however, a
respective molecular signature has not been defined so far. In order to
stratify HCC patients into groups with CIN we utilized a gene expression
signature (termed CIN25 signature) that has been shown to correlate with
CIN in other tumor entities such as glioma and breast cancer (Carter et
al. 2006). In this study we examined the presence of the CIN25 signature
in HCC patients and its correlation with overall survival. Moreover, the
most important genes for patient classification were
determined.MethodsGene expression data from 242 HCC patients (Roessler et
al., 2010) was quantile discretized into ten bins and the patients were
clustered into 3 groups using the k-means algorithm. The differential
expression between these groups was visualized as a heatmap, while
cluster specific changes in overall survival were shown using
Kaplan-Meier curves. Statistical significance of survival was assessed
using the log-rank-test and cox proportional hazard models. The Boruta
method, which makes use of Random Forest classification models, was used
to determine the most important genes for patient subgroup clustering.
Results for CIN25 gene expression were confirmed in an independent cohort
(n = 20) using quantitative real-time PCR.ResultsGene expression analysis
of HCC patients revealed the presence of the CIN25 signature. Patients
could be clustered into three different groups with low (32%), moderate
(35%) and high (33%) expression levels of the CIN signature genes.
Survival data analysis showed that patients with high expression levels
had a significantly worse overall survival in comparison to patients with
low expression levels (p = 0.01). Moreover, the elevated expression of 19
out of the 25 CIN genes was significantly correlated to poor survival.
The Boruta method identified MAD2L1, TTK, TPX2 and MCM2 as possible risk
stratification markers of HCC patients. In an independent cohort the
expression levels of selected CIN genes (n = 9) were measured and
revealed significant upregulation in 57-82% of HCC
patients.ConclusionThese data demonstrate that the presence of the CIN25
signature correlates with poor prognosis in HCC patients and could be
used to predict overall survival. The determination of genes that
classify patients into different subgroups may lead to the establishment
of new biomarkers for HCC in the clinics.ReferencesCarter SL, et al., Nat
Genet. 2006 Sep;38(9):1043-8.Roessler S, et al., Cancer Res. 2010 Dec
15;70(24):10202-12.

