Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting the potential distinct role/s of the four RNA binding
domains in a phosphoprotein nucleolin using bioinformatics tools


Nucleolin is an abundant RNA binding protein within the nucleolus
containing four copies of a consensus RNA-binding domain (RBD1-4). Two of
these contiguous RNA-binding domains (RBD12) are sufficient to bind to a
variety of RNAs (e.g. rRNA, mRNA, ncRNA) through their highly conserved
RNP-1/2 motifs. Nucleolin controls gene expression either
post-transcriptionally through mRNA stability or by post-translational
regulation, targeting mRNAs with ARE (AU-rich elements), NRE (nucleolin
recognition elements) and/or G-rich regions. Nucleolin's RNA binding
functions are directly implicated in various pathological conditions e.g.
Alzheimer's disease, cancer and viral infection. Interestingly, nucleolin
RNA binding properties and phosphorylation pattern change during the
cellular response to stress suggesting possible collaboration in
regulating gene expression. However, most RNA binding properties of
nucleolin studied to date exclude its highly acidic N-terminus
phosphorylation domain. Importantly, NMR structures are only available
for RBD12 although RBD1-4 of nucleolin is required to interact with the
evolutionary conserved motif (ECM) on pre-RNAs, which have important
role/s in RNA processing. Our work in accordance with others has shown
that the N-terminus domain plays a vital role in cell proliferation and
therefore has potential to influence RNA-binding properties of nucleolin
to regulate gene expression. Here we use bioinformatics tools to
elucidate the RNA binding functions of all four RBDs of nucleolin
individually and in various combinations. Using I-TASSER, a tertiary
structure prediction algorithm, and the available structural data for
RBD12, we first predicted models for RBD3 and 4.These models displayed
nearly perfect superimposition of RBD34 with RBD12 where RBD3/2 and
RBD4/1 align. Our central hypothesis is that nucleolin RBD3/4 domains can
replace RBD1/2 domains in binding to RNAs. To test our hypothesis we have
generated a variety of theoretical constructs of RBD1-4 with mutations in
the RNP1/2 conserved sites of individual RBDs. We present the
computational analyses of these constructs to predict the role/s of
RBD3/4. We further predict any role/s imparted by N-terminus
phosphorylation and/or the C-terminus GAR (Gly-Arg rich) domains in
regulating RNA binding by nucleolin. This bioinformatics-based knowledge
will provide useful insights about nucleolin-RNA interactions that can be
framed into rationally designed experiments.

