Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining roles of SIN3 isoforms in breast cancer metastasis


Metastasis continues to be the most difficult clinical challenge for
breast cancer. These patients have unacceptable survival rates that have
not changed in the past 20 years. Therefore, more effective therapeutic
options are needed. The purpose of this study is to better understand
molecular mechanisms of the SIN3 chromatin complexes that have been
functionally associated with breast cancer progression to identify novel
targeting strategies. Alteration of the composition of SIN3 complexes
regulates the metastatic potential of breast cancer cells; and inhibition
of SIN3 complexes induces differentiation and inhibits invasion of breast
cancer cells. However, differences in the function of SIN3 isoforms
(SIN3A and SIN3B) in breast cancer metastasis have not been
characterized. To better define the role of SIN3 isoforms in breast
cancer metastasis, we generated stable knockdown of SIN3 isoforms
individually and in combination using 3 non-overlapping shRNA in two
different metastatic breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231 and -435). No
significant change was noted in the proliferation rate of the transduced
cells in vitro. Stable knockdown of SIN3B caused a significant decrease
in invasion through Matrigel (28 4 invaded cells/field compared to 50 8
for control; p = 0.027) using a modified Boyden chamber that was
corroborated by the decreased presence of stellate projections and a more
epithelial phenotypic growth in 3D. Surprisingly, stable knockdown of
SIN3A significantly increased invasion through Matrigel (98 14 invaded
cells/field; p = 0.008) and increased the presence of stellate
projections in the 3D growth assay. Dual knockdown of SIN3A and SIN3B
caused a significant decrease in invasiveness (19 5 invaded cells/field;
p = 0.003) and decreased presence of stellate projections similar to the
phenotype noted with individual knockdown of SIN3B. These results were
confirmed in vivo with an experimental metastasis assay (lateral tail
vein injection in athymic nude mice) in which SIN3B knockdown
significantly decreased lung metastasis (70% decrease compared to
control; p = 0.009) and SIN3A knockdown increased metastasis (163%
increase compared to control; p = 0.096). These results demonstrate key
functional differences between SIN3 isoforms in regulating the process of
metastasis. Our data suggests metastasis suppressive roles of SIN3A and
metastasis promoting roles of SIN3B that will be important in discovering
novel therapeutic strategies for metastatic breast cancer patients.

