Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple myeloma in a physiologically relevant Me-HA -3D Hydrogel:
Discovering new phenotypes of drug resistance


Background: Extracellular matrix (ECM) characteristics, including
stiffness, geometry, chemistry, and spatial interaction with the
neighboring cells and soluble factors are key components for cancer cell
survival in a pathogenic tissue microenvironment (TME). However, poor
performance of 2D in vitro systems and animal models for metastatic
cancer types demands physiologically relevant well controlled 3D
platforms to quantitatively assess (a) metastatic cancer stem cell
survival (b) oncogenic mechanisms and (c) drug resistant phenotypes and
(d) new drug efficacy. Advances in the state of the art 3D platforms with
difference in matrix stiffness and viscoelastic properties are showing
promising results in identifying changes in drug resistant phenotypes,
cell behavior and gene expression profiles. Preliminary findings by us
and others using 3D matrices for human multiple myeloma (MM) reveal
promising results on cancer /stromal cell interactions. In this study we
have shown that Hyaluronic acid (HA) based 3D hydrogel support human
metastatic MM cancer cells survival and thus reveal new oncogenic
mechanisms of drug resistant cancer stem cells.Experimental approaches:
Bone marrow derived CD138 positive cells and BMSCs were isolated from MM
patient samples (with IRB approval) using magnetically labeled CD138
MicroBeads (autoMACS Pro Starting Kit). Bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs)
were cultured as described by us earlier. Cell viability measurements and
quantitative RT-PCR for c-myc and other related gene targets were
performed using total RNA. Me-HA-3D hydrogels were created containing
either fibronectin/collagen/laminin or ME-HA mixture of
Matrigel/fibronectin/laminin in different ratios. Cells were grown as
surface seeded or encapsulated in Me-HA gels, and analyzed between 4 and
21 days in the conditioned medium. Cell proliferation analysis was
performed by both MTS and live dead cell assays using CFSE stain.Results:
The overall cell viability by surface coating and in encapsulated gel was
found to be higher than 80% for up to 21 days in all the conditions
including changes in the UV cross linking time and gel stiffness. Colony
forming units (CFU) of the mononuclear cells were higher (27%) at 21 days
compared to the 4 days 3% (p>0.001). Spheroids were found on the surface
of the hydrogels with PC-3 cells as well as inside the encapsulated
hydrogels specifically for MM, and were higher in numbers (>30%) compared
to that in surface coating (5%) p>0.001. qRT-PCR analysis determined
c-myc, cyclin D1, E-cadherin, and ZEB-1 showed>4 fold increase (p>0.001)
in encapsulated cells compared to that in cells transfected with siRNA
for c-myc, suggesting c-myc mediated cell survival in 3D.Summary: Me-HA
hydrogels are found to be suitable platform for the first time to
identify new metastatic cancer phenotypes types and to investigate drug
resistance mechanisms.

