Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LSR transcript variant iota drives nuclear localization and
altered transcriptome regulation in breast cancer


Breast cancer remains the second highest cause of cancer-related deaths
among women despite continuous improvements in diagnosis and treatments.
African-American (AA) women have higher mortality rates and shorter
survival times then Caucasians. Higher prevalence of aggressive
triple-negative tumors in young AA women, and increased mortality rates
in AA women, at all ages, diagnosed with less aggressive Luminal A tumors
denotes cancer disparities in multiple molecular phenotypes. Lipolysis
stimulated lipoprotein receptor (LSR) was originally identified as a
hepatocyte receptor involved in the dynamics of lipid distribution
between the liver and peripheral tissue. Upon activation LSR mediates the
binding, cellular uptake, and degradation of triacylglyceride-rich
lipoproteins. LSR has also been highlighted as an important regulator of
tricellular tight junctions (tTJs). tTJs are specialized junctions within
tricellular contacts of epithelial sheets. LSR regulates tTJs through the
recruitment and arrangement of several proteins including tricellulin,
ILDR1 and ILDR2. While previous studies have described tTJ and hepatic
functions of LSR, our lab was the first to directly show LSR enhances
aggressive breast cancer cell behaviors including proliferation and
migration, and promotes cancer-stem cell properties such as survival in
anchorage-independent conditions. Herein, we have taken a closer
examination of breast cancer samples, and found nuclear localization of
LSR, a novel observation for a proposed membrane localized protein.
Moreover, we show nuclear localization is significantly correlated with
poor patient outcome. In vitro assays confirmed LSR localizes to the
plasma membrane, cytoplasm, and the nucleus. From these results it is
clear that LSR has an additional nuclear function that may alter gene
expression and promote more severe cancer phenotypes. Of note, given the
high breast cancer mortality rate in African-American women, we have
looked for and identified LSR SNPs unique to African-Americans.
Furthermore, we used in silico sequence analysis and determined putative
functional motifs and post-translational modifications of the LSR protein
as well as identified nine unique transcript variants of LSR. We then
focused upon one variant (Iota), which lacks a transmembrane domain and
features a nuclear localization sequence. We used in vitro assays to show
cellular localization and behavioral consequence of LSR iota expression
in breast cancer cell lines. Collectively, our novel data highlight the
complex roles of LSR including alternate transcripts, nuclear
localization, and possible enzymatic function, which may impact cancer
progression and potentially provide insight into breast cancer health
disparities.

