Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemopreventive studies of multiple agents in the
methylnitrosourea-induced ER+ mammary cancer model in animals on standard
and Western diets


Multiple positive and negative preventive agents [tamoxifen, vorozole
(aromatase inhibitor), targretin (RXR agonist), gefitinib (EGFR
inhibitor), metformin, and Lipitor] were examined for efficacy in rats
given either standard Teklad (4% fat) diet or a modified Western diet
[high fat (42%)]. Female Sprague Dawley rats were placed on the high fat
or standard diet at 43 days of age, and administered methylnitrosourea
(MNU) at 50 days of age. Rats on high fat diet vs standard diet gained
approximately 40% more weight, exhibited a 50% increase in cancer
multiplicity, and a decrease in cancer latency. The strong preventive
agents (tamoxifen, vorozole, targretin, and gefitinib) were highly
effective in animals on standard or high fat diets (reducing cancer
multiplicity >75% in rats on either diet). It was unclear whether the
altered physiology of animals on high fat diet or altered PK of agents in
animals with higher fat content might alter activity of these agents. We
had previously found that both metformin and Lipitor were ineffective in
rats on a standard fat diet, but thought that they might be effective in
rats on a high fat diet. Interestingly, neither compound decreased
tumorigenesis; but, at least marginally, increased tumor incidence and
final tumor weights in rats on both diets. The ability of the various
agents to alter proliferation of normal mammary epithelium in MNU-treated
rats exposed for 2 weeks to the various agents was determined. It was
found that inhibition of proliferation in mammary epithelium corresponded
well to the efficacy of these agents in long-term chemopreventive assays.
These results demonstrated that: (1) a high fat diet can be employed in
this rat model to increase tumor multiplicity; (2) tamoxifen, vorozole,
targretin and gefitinib were highly effective in rats on standard or high
fat diet; (3) metformin and Lipitor were ineffective with either diet;
and (4) there is a correlation between inhibition of proliferation in
normal mammary epithelium and long-term preventive efficacy of agents;
but this may reflect the homogeneity of the rat mammary cancers.
Supported by NCI contract HHSN261201200021I.

