Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of GDC-0810 a novel, non-steroidal selective estrogen
receptor degrader with robust activity in pre-clinical models of
endocrine-resistant breast cancer


The majority of breast cancers express estrogen receptor alpha (ER) and
thus are treated with anti-hormonal therapies that directly block ER
function (e.g.Tamoxifen) or hormone synthesis (Aromatase Inhibitors).
While these therapies are initially effective, acquired resistance
emerges and disease progression ensues. Importantly, the majority of
these tumors continue to depend on ER for growth and survival via both
ligand-dependent and ligand-independent pathways. The emerging evidence
that ER can be activated in the absence of estrogens via point mutations
in ER or cellular signaling pathways supports the development of agents
that are not only competitive ER antagonists but also reduce steady state
levels of the receptor and thus limit both ligand dependent and
independent signaling.Here we disclose the discovery of ARN-810, also
known as GDC-0810. ARN-810 is an oral, potent antagonist of ER that also
induces degradation of ER at picomolar concentrations. ARN-810 treatment
results in significant reduction in steady state ER protein levels in
breast cancer cell lines. Using peptide-based conformational profiling,
we show ARN-810 induces ER conformations that are distinct from both
fulvestrant and tamoxifen indicating novel mechanism of action. In vitro,
ARN-810 is active on wild-type and the constitutively active ER mutants
found in endocrine resistant breast cancer patients. Importantly, ARN-810
is active in cell-line and in vivo models of ESR1 wild-type and mutant,
primary and endocrine-resistant breast cancers including patient derived
xenograft (PDX) models. These preclinical data indicate that ARN-810, a
novel Selective Estrogen Receptor Degrader (SERD), holds promise as a
next generation therapy for the treatment of ER+ breast cancer as
monotherapy, as well as in combination with agents that target other
pathways involved in both intrinsic and acquired endocrine resistance.
ARN-810 is in clinical development for the treatment of ER+ breast cancer.

