Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Western diet enhances benzo(a)pyrene [B(a)P]-induced colon
tumorigenesis in the PIRC rat model via cytochrome P450 drug metabolizing
enzymes


Colorectal cancer ranks third in terms of mortalities in the United
States, with 50,000 deaths per year and around 140,000 new cases expected
to be diagnosed in this year. Epidemiological studies have pointed out
that obese people have a higher risk for colon cancer. It is well known
that overweight or obesity is induced by excess energy intake from
dietary fat. Additionally, consumption of well-done red meat and
saturated fats, rich in food-borne environmental toxicants such as
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) has also been implicated as one
of the causative factors for sporadic colon cancer. Therefore, the
objective of this study was to investigate the effect of dietary fat type
on B(a)P-induced colon cancer in an adult male rat model, the Polyposis
In the Rat Colon (PIRC) kindred type. Specifically, this research sets
out to determine whether the colon polyp burden potentiated by WD when
exposed to B(a)P employed drug metabolizing enymes (cytochrome P450
family) to enhance the effect of the WD. Groups of PIRC rats (n = 5) were
fed with AIN-76A regular diet (RD) or Western diet (WD) and received 25,
50 and 100 g B(a)P/kg body wt. via oral gavage for 60 days. Rats fed the
diets alone, but no B(a)P, served as controls. Subsequent to exposure,
rats were sacrificed; colons, liver and other tissues were retrieved and
preserved in 10% formalin for observation of gross pathological changes.
Colon and liver samples were analyzed for activation of drug metabolizing
enzymes (DMEs) CYP1A1, CYP1B1 and GST. Benzo(a)pyrene metabolite
concentrations were measured using a HPLC equipped with UV and
fluorescence detectors. An increased incidence of adenomas and high grade
dysplasia were encountered in rats that were fed with WD compared to RD
and controls (p Colorectal cancer ranks third in terms of mortalities in
the United States, with 50,000 deaths per year and around 140,000 new
cases expected to be diagnosed in this year. Epidemiological studies have
pointed out that obese people have a higher risk for colon cancer. It is
well known that overweight or obesity is induced by excess energy intake
from dietary fat. Additionally, consumption of well-done red meat and
saturated fats, rich in food-borne environmental toxicants such as
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) has also been implicated as one
of the causative factors for sporadic colon cancer. Therefore, the
objective of this study was to investigate the effect of dietary fat type
on B(a)P-induced colon cancer in an adult male rat model, the Polyposis
In the Rat Colon (PIRC) kindred type. Specifically, this research sets
out to determine whether the colon polyp burden potentiated by WD when
exposed to B(a)P employed drug metabolizing enymes (cytochrome P450
family) to enhance the effect of the WD. Groups of PIRC rats (n = 5) were
fed with AIN-76A regular diet (RD) or Western diet (WD) and received 25,
50 and 100 g B(a)P/kg body wt. via oral gavage for 60 days. Rats fed the
diets alone, but no B(a)P, served as controls. Subsequent to exposure,
rats were sacrificed; colons, liver and other tissues were retrieved and
preserved in 10% formalin for observation of gross pathological changes.
Colon and liver samples were analyzed for activation of drug metabolizing
enzymes (DMEs) CYP1A1, CYP1B1 and GST. Benzo(a)pyrene metabolite
concentrations were measured using a HPLC equipped with UV and
fluorescence detectors. An increased incidence of adenomas and high grade
dysplasia were encountered in rats that were fed with WD compared to RD
and controls (p < 0.05). The colon tumor counts were more in B(a)P + WD
rats compared to their B(a)P + RD counterparts, and also exhibited a
B(a)P dose-response relationship, with 100 g B(a)P/kg registering greater
counts. Adenomas with high grade dysplasia were prominent in B(a)P + WD
rats compared to B(a)P + RD rats. Western diet consumption increased DME
activation among rats that were given B(a)P + WD with marked increase in
enzyme expression and B(a)P metabolite concentrations in rats that were
administered 100 g/kg B(a)P + WD (p Colorectal cancer ranks third in
terms of mortalities in the United States, with 50,000 deaths per year
and around 140,000 new cases expected to be diagnosed in this year.
Epidemiological studies have pointed out that obese people have a higher
risk for colon cancer. It is well known that overweight or obesity is
induced by excess energy intake from dietary fat. Additionally,
consumption of well-done red meat and saturated fats, rich in food-borne
environmental toxicants such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)
has also been implicated as one of the causative factors for sporadic
colon cancer. Therefore, the objective of this study was to investigate
the effect of dietary fat type on B(a)P-induced colon cancer in an adult
male rat model, the Polyposis In the Rat Colon (PIRC) kindred type.
Specifically, this research sets out to determine whether the colon polyp
burden potentiated by WD when exposed to B(a)P employed drug metabolizing
enymes (cytochrome P450 family) to enhance the effect of the WD. Groups
of PIRC rats (n = 5) were fed with AIN-76A regular diet (RD) or Western
diet (WD) and received 25, 50 and 100 g B(a)P/kg body wt. via oral gavage
for 60 days. Rats fed the diets alone, but no B(a)P, served as controls.
Subsequent to exposure, rats were sacrificed; colons, liver and other
tissues were retrieved and preserved in 10% formalin for observation of
gross pathological changes. Colon and liver samples were analyzed for
activation of drug metabolizing enzymes (DMEs) CYP1A1, CYP1B1 and GST.
Benzo(a)pyrene metabolite concentrations were measured using a HPLC
equipped with UV and fluorescence detectors. An increased incidence of
adenomas and high grade dysplasia were encountered in rats that were fed
with WD compared to RD and controls (p < 0.05). The colon tumor counts
were more in B(a)P + WD rats compared to their B(a)P + RD counterparts,
and also exhibited a B(a)P dose-response relationship, with 100 g
B(a)P/kg registering greater counts. Adenomas with high grade dysplasia
were prominent in B(a)P + WD rats compared to B(a)P + RD rats. Western
diet consumption increased DME activation among rats that were given
B(a)P + WD with marked increase in enzyme expression and B(a)P metabolite
concentrations in rats that were administered 100 g/kg B(a)P + WD (p <
0.05) compared to other treatment groups. Our results demonstrate that WD
accelerates the development of colon tumors induced by B(a)P, utilizing
cytochrome P450 metabolic pathways. This research was supported from NIH
grants 1F31ESO2407901, 5RO1CA142845-04, 5R25GM059994-11, and Southern
Regional Education Board.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

