Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOCS-1 inhibits proliferation of ovarian cancer cell lines by
regulating JAK/STAT3 pathway and p53


[BACKGROUND]Ovarian cancer (OC) is a leading cause of the gynecological
malignancy death in United States and many developed nations, and the
number of OC patients is increasing. Patients with OC have poor prognosis
because most OCs are detected at late stage and they often recur after
chemotherapy with chemoresistance. So we need novel therapies for
refractory OC. Recently, lines of evidence showed that constitutive
activation of IL-6/JAK/STAT3 (signal transducers and activators of
transcription 3) pathway is involved in proliferation of many kinds of
cancer, including OC. SOCS (suppressor of cytokine signaling) families
are known as negative regulators of JAK /STAT signal pathway. The aim of
this study is to evaluate the effect of SOCS-1 in proliferation of OC and
to develop a new therapy for intractable OC.[MATERIAL and METHOD]We
overexpressed SOCS-1 in ten human OC cell lines (MCAS, OVISE, OVCAR-3,
OVSAHO, OVTOKO, OVMANA, ES-2, A2780, SKOV-3, RMG-1) by infecting cells
with adenovirus vector expressing SOCS-1. Adenovirus vector expressing
LacZ was used as a control. Anti-proliferative effect of SOCS-1 in OC was
assessed by WST-8 assay. Proteins related to apoptosis and other signal
pathways were assessed by Western blot analysis. The interaction between
SOCS-1 and p53 was examined by immunoprecipitation assays.[RESULT]
Overexpression of SOCS-1 inhibited proliferation of 9 OC cell lines.
Significantly enhanced apoptosis was observed in these cell lines. In
most cell lines, STAT3 pathway was constitutively activated and was
downregulated by SOCS-1 overexpression. However, growth inhibition by
SOCS-1 was also observed in cell lines in which STAT3 activation at
baseline was hardly detectable. Our screening analyses indicated that
AKT, FAK and p44/p42 MAPK pathways were not affected by overexpression of
SOCS-1. Finally, we found that in cell lines possessing wild type p53,
overexpressed SOCS-1 associated with p53 and increased its protein
levels. In contrast, JAK inhibitor failed to influence p53
expression.[Conclusion]SOCS-1 inhibited proliferation of OC cell lines by
regulating JAK/STAT3 pathway and interacting with p53. SOCS-1 contributed
to the enhancement of the stability and/or transcription activity of p53.
In addition, signal pathways other than JAK/STAT3 and p53 pathways seemed
to be regulated by SOCS-1. Now we analyze these unidentified signal
pathways which may be regulated by SOCS-1 in OC.

