Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural basis for the failure of the C1 domain of RasGRP2 to
bind phorbol ester


C1 domains represent the recognition motif for the second messenger
diacylglycerol (DAG) and for the phorbol esters in protein kinase C,
RasGRP, and several other families of signaling proteins. In addition to
such typical C1 domains, atypical C1 domains have been identified which
possess varying levels of sequence and structural homology with the
typical C1 domains but fail to bind DAG or phorbol ester. Among RasGRP
family members, RasGRP1 and RasGRP3 possess typical C1 domains, whereas
the C1 domain of RasGRP2 stands out as being atypical. In order to better
understand the structural constraints for ligand binding, we have
analyzed the basis for the failure of the C1 domain of RasGRP2 to bind
ligands. Using site-directed mutagenesis, we have identified four
critical amino acid residues responsible for the lack of phorbol ester
sensitivity. We found that the C1 domain of RasGRP2 had weak binding
affinity (Kd = 2890 240 nM) in vitro for [3H]phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate
([3H]PDBu). Replacing all four of critical amino acid residues (Asn7,
Ser8, Ala19 and Ile21) with the corresponding residues (Thr7, Tyr8, Gly19
and Leu21, respectively) of RasGRP1 resulted in potent [3H]PDBu binding
affinity (Kd = 1.47 0.03 nM) and translocation in response to PMA in the
LNCaP cell line. The mutant C1 domains incorporating one to three of
these critical residues showed intermediate binding and translocation
properties. Of the four substitutions, S8Y made the greatest
contribution. Phospholipid requirements for [3H]PDBu binding to the
mutant C1 domains were determined; at constant total phospholipid, the
requirement for the proportion of phosphatidylserine in
phosphatidylserine : phosphatidylcholine mixtures decreased in going from
the single S8Y mutant to the quadruple mutant. Binding activity for DAG
was also restored in the mutant C1 domains, in parallel with that for
phorbol ester. The full length RasGRP2 protein containing the mutated C1
domains likewise showed strong phorbol ester binding, albeit modestly
weaker than that of the purified C1 domain (Kd = 8.2 1.1 nM for the full
length protein containing all four mutations) and displayed translocation
in the LNCaP (human prostate adenocarcinoma) cells in response to phorbol
ester. RasGRP2 is a guanyl exchange factor for Rap1. A Rap1 GTPase
pull-down assay was used to compare the guanine nucleotide exchange
activity of wild type and mutated full length RasGRP2 in human embryonic
kidney 293 (HEK 293) cells in the presence or absence of phorbol ester.
These cells were transfected with either the wild type or the mutant
RasGRP2. Consistent with the ability of phorbol ester to induce
translocation of the full length RasGRP2 with the mutated C1 domain,
phorbol ester enhanced the ability of the mutated RasGRP2 to activate
Rap1.

