Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Slit2 stimulation induces a chemorepellent effect on the migration
of human GBM brain tumor initiating cells


Gioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and aggressive form of primary brain
tumor in adults. Despite the use of radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and
surgery, survival still averages 14 months. GBM has a recurrence of
almost 100% due to highly invasive brain tumor initiating cells (BTICs)
left behind after surgery. As reported by our group and others, survival
expectancy of GBM patients is greatly affected by tumor location.
Specifically, tumors in close proximity to the lateral ventricles (LV)
show a higher incidence of distant recurrence, as well as worse survival
expectancy. This location is the site of the subventricular zone (SVZ),
the largest neurogenic niche in the adult brain of mammals, which
maintains continuous production of neural stem cells (NSCs) throughout
adult life. The cause for worse prognosis in patients whose tumors are in
close proximity to the SVZ is not known, but one hypothesis is that
regulators of the neurogenic niche might be influencing tumor cells to
become more invasive and migratory. In rodents, Slit-Robo is one of these
signals which functions as a chemorepulsive ligand-receptor system
involved in guiding the migration of newly generated NSCs from the SVZ to
other regions of the central nervous system. Further, it has been found
that Slit2 affects the migration of glioma and medulloblastoma commercial
cell lines. We have previously demonstrated that primary cultured human
GBM BTICs respond to slit stimulation in a chemorepellant manner.
However, the robo receptor implicated in this response as well as the
intracellular mechanisms affected by Slit stimulation in BTICs have not
been described. Here we propose to study the effects of Slit-2
stimulation on the migration of human GBM BTICs obtained from
intraoperative samples. Furthermore we evaluated the activity of Rac1 and
CDC42 in GBM BTICs upon slit stimulation. We determined that Robo1 is
expressed by multiple primary human GBM samples. BTICs obtained from
these samples present a migratory behavior in vitro that presents a
chemorepellent response upon slit2 stimulation. This chemorepellant
response is not due to a decrease of cell migration as Slit2 stimulation
also induced an increase in BTIC migration speed. This migratory response
of BTICs to Slit2 is decreased when the Robo1 receptor is knocked down
using shRNA transduction. Intracellularly, we observed that Slit2
stimulation induces a decrease in the active (GTP-bound forms) of Rac1
and CDC42. Our findings demonstrate that Slit2 can induce a
chemorepellent effect on the migration of human GBM BTICs through the
activation of Robo1 receptor and the subsequent modulation of the Small
GTPases Rac1 and CDC42. Our results indicate that regulators of SVZ cells
migration can also affect GBM cells behavior and could potentially
contribute to the more aggressive behavior of SVZ-contacting GBMs.

