Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Creation of a novel gene delivery system for high throughput
candidate oncogene validation


IntroductionThe purpose of this study is to develop an in vivo, high
throughput candidate oncogene validation screen, focusing specifically on
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) specific oncogenes.Experimental
ProcedureLiver cancer is globally the 6th most commonly diagnosed cancer
and the 2nd most deadly cancer. There are few therapies available,
especially for late stages of the disease, and most treatments only
prolong survival by months. Although much research has been done to
determine the mutations responsible for driving HCC, including
large-scale analysis by TCGA, it is becoming obvious that HCC involves
numerous cell pathways and that many driver mutations are found in a
small percentage of tumors. As groups such as TCGA discover more
candidate driver mutations, a high throughput method to validate those
genes in vivo is needed. We have engineered a novel gene delivery system,
called Ad-PB, that uses recombinant adenoviruses to deliver piggyBac
transposons expressing individual candidate oncogenes. The piggyBac
transposase (PBase) mediates transfer of the transposon cargo from the
adenoviral to the host cell genome where it can be stably expressed.Our
current screen is designed to simultaneously test 31 candidate oncogenes
previously discovered by characterizing recurrent copy number alterations
in tumors from patients with HCC verses matched nontumor tissue.
Expression of these 31 genes within the piggyBac transposon is
Cre-inducible, and each candidate is tagged with a unique barcode to
facilitate tracking of individual genes within adenoviral pools. The
plasmids encoding the genes are grown up using a recombinant virus
(adenovirus) which is then pooled, purified, and injected into Alb-Cre;
Trp53R27OH/+ mice. Expression of PBase from a separate adeno-associated
virus mediates gene transfer into hepatocytes. Cells that express bona
fide oncogenes will then be predisposed to HCC formation. Tumors with
matched nontumor tissue will be analyzed using the Illumina platform to
sequence the unique barcodes associated with each gene. Statistical
models using sequence reads from both tumor and nontumor tissue will
allow us to determine which candidates are enriched in tumor tissue.
Positive controls for the screen are known oncogenes, a -cateninN90 and
N-rasG12V that will be co-delivered using the Ad-PB
system.ResultsPreliminary results using the Ad-PB system to deliver a
mCherry transposon demonstrated that the Ad-PB system can cause stable
transgene integration and expression for up to 20 weeks. In addition, a
semi-quantitative method has been established to perform barcode scanning
to assess the relative abundance of individual candidate genes within a
pool of adenoviruses.ConclusionThe Ad-PB system will allow simultaneous
validation of candidate oncogenes and although we are verifying the
system using HCC specific oncogenes, we expect that it will be adaptable
for many gene delivery systems.

