Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SATB1 (special AT-rich binding protein 1) as a putative
therapeutic target in colorectal cancer


The Special AT-rich Binding Protein 1 (SATB1) is a global chromatin
organizer that regulates the expression of a large number of genes in
direct and indirect manners. By functioning as a landing platform for
chromatin remodeling enzymes, SATB1 targets chromatin remodeling
complexes to DNA at the base of chromatin loops. Thus, SATB1 influences
the expression of multiple genes in an epigenetic manner. In several
human cancers, SATB1 overexpression has been described and connected to
carcinogenesis. Furthermore, the expression of SATB1 correlates with
tumor progression and is associated with poor prognosis.Colorectal cancer
is one of the most common causes for cancer-related deaths worldwide.
Although methods of diagnosis and treatment have improved over the last
few decades, the tumor stage at diagnosis is still the most important
prognostic marker and the overall survival of patients with advanced
colorectal cancer is still poor due to the high risk of metastasis.
Therefore, it is critical to determine potential targets for new
therapeutic strategies.In this study, we have analyzed the function of
SATB1 in primary and in established colorectal cancer cell lines and
determined the therapeutic relevance of SATB1-specific gene knockdown
approaches by RNA interference (RNAi). In CRC cells, an RNAi-mediated
knockdown of the SATB1 was achieved by transient or by stable
transfection with specific siRNAs or shRNAs-encoding plasmids, each
leading to markedly reduced SATB1 mRNA and protein levels. SATB1
knockdown caused an inhibition of proliferation, a deceleration of cell
cycle progression and pro-apoptotic effects. Further analyses revealed
effects of SATB1 on multiple signaling pathways influencing e.g. EMT,
apoptosis and ErbB receptor expression. The functional relevance of SATB1
(knockdown) was also determined in vivo in an s.c. tumor xenograft model
in athymic nude mice, using stable LS174T knockdown cells. Notably, a
marked inhibition of tumor growth was observed.Beyond stable established
cell lines, studies were extended towards primary colorectal carcinoma
cells. Transient siRNA-mediated SATB1 knockdown led to antiproliferative
and proapoptotic effects in primary cell lines with different SATB1
expression levels. The therapeutic potential of SATB1 inhibition was
further explored in vivo in mice bearing s.c. xenografts. For the
induction of therapeutic RNAi in vivo, mice were treated with polymeric
nanoparticles containing siRNAs, i.e., polyethylenimine
(PEI)/siRNA-complexes. Notably, a marked inhibition of tumor growth was
observed in the siRNA treatment group, indicating profound therapeutic
effects of SATB1 knockdown in primary colorectal cancer cells.Taken
together, these results indicate an important and complex role of SATB1
in the tumorigenesis of colorectal cancer, and establish SATB1 inhibition
or siRNA-mediated knockdown as a promising target for pharmacological
intervention.

