Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-378 exerts anti-fibrotic role by regulating hedgehog
signaling in murine liver fibrosis


Liver fibrosis that is a major characteristic of chronic liver diseases,
including liver cancers, is regulated by the complex network of signaling
pathways. Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is known to promote the hepatic
fibrogenesis and modulate the cancer-favorable microenvironment.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs), the endogenous short non-coding RNAs, negatively
regulate the expression of their target genes, controlling a variety of
cellular processes. The dysregulation of miRNAs has been involved in
liver diseases, but little is known on their role in the liver fibrosis.
Hence, we investigated the regulation of miRNAs in chronic liver disease
in mice. MiRNA expression profiles were investigated in livers from
healthy (corn-oil treated) and carbon tetrachloride (CCl4)-treated mice
for 10 weeks. The regulatory mechanism of related miRNAs was further
studied. Among liver-expressed miRNAs, three members of miR-378 family,
including miR-378a-3p (0.395-fold), miR-378b (0.390-fold) and miR-378d
(0.372-fold), were greatly downregulated in CCl4-treated mice compared to
corn-oil-treated mice (p0.005). QRT-PCR analysis confirmed the lower
expression of miR-378a-3p, -b and -d in the livers with CCl4 treatment
and the activated LX2 cells, human hepatic stellate cell (HSC) line.
Computational predictions revealed the binding of miR-378 (miR-378a-3p)
with glioblastoma (Gli) 2 and/or Gli3, a transcriptional factor of Hh
signaling, and luciferase assay proved that miR-378 directly targeted
Gli3. The level of mRNA and protein of both Gli3 and Gli2 decreased in
LX2 cell transfected with miR-378 mimic. As the expression of Glis was
reduced, the mRNA expression of profibrotic genes, including vimentin,
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and connective tissue growth factor,
decreased, but the expression of glial fibrillary acidic proteinn, an
inactivation marker of HSC, increased in miR-378 mimic-transfected LX2
cells. Inversely, treatment of GDC-0449, an inhibitor of Smoothened (Smo)
which is the Hh receptorm, upregulated the expression of miR-378 family
in LX2 cells, indicating that Smo suppressed the expression of miR-378,
upregulating Gli3 in the activated HSCs. In addition, the expression of
miR-378 family was significantly alleviated in the damaged livers of mice
fed with methionine/choline-deficient and ethionine-supplemented diet for
4 weeks. Therefore, our results demonstrated that miR-378 family was most
downregulated in the chronically damaged liver, suppressed the activation
of HSCs by targeting Gli3 and its inhibitory action was regulated by Smo
expression, suggesting that Hh-dependent regulation of miR-378 influenced
the liver fibrosis in mice.

