Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal structure analysis of cancer genomes at single molecule
resolution


Somatic genetic aberrations are a fundamental driver of cancer. Their
characterization in cancer genomes is increasingly being used to guide
therapeutic decisions. The ongoing evolution of subclones in a growing
tumor leads to a heterogeneous and complex mixture of mutations and other
genetic aberrations with a wide range of different allelic fractions.
Accurately deciphering a tumor's clonal composition and structure
frequently requires very high genome sequencing coverage, in the
thousand-fold range if not higher, to reliably detect and quantify
variant mutant alleles. However, current short read sequencing
technologies are unable to distinguish individual DNA molecules from
duplicates without the use of error-prone and complicated molecular
indexing strategies. Thus, the vast majority of cancer genome sequencing
data is confounded by limitations on linking cancer genome DNA sequences
to their clonal origin.In this study, we developed a new and robust
strategy to identify individual DNA molecule sequences in cancer genomes,
improve detection of mutations at minor allelic fractions, and thus
reliably delineate clonal populations in tumors. We introduce a unique
and highly error-resistant DNA molecular tag that can identify every
individual DNA molecule in the sample. This molecular tag is based on the
combinatorial assembly of rationally-designed sequences and utilizes
engineering principles that minimize data transmission errors. It readily
scales from billions to trillions of molecular species without prior
sequence knowledge and is easily incorporated using a rapid
transposase-based sequencing library protocol. In stark contrast,
existing molecular indexing methods require random nucleotide DNA
barcodes to ostensibly quantify molecular species. Unlike our new
combinatorial molecular tagging system, the older random barcode method
is highly sensitive to sequencing errors that substantially reduces
performance in clonal delineation.As a proof-of-concept, we assessed the
quantification of variants and gene isoforms respectively from known
admixtures of well-characterized diploid genomes and mRNA samples. We
determined that high depth sequencing leads to hidden but extensive
variability in variant quantification, but can be corrected with our
approach. Subsequently, we applied our combinatorial DNA molecular
tagging technology to matched normal-primary tumor samples. By performing
ultra-high depth sequencing for approximately 100 cancer-related genes,
we can identify mutations at single molecule resolution and can determine
clonal composition. We also observed substantial variability in somatic
variant abundances that was previously undetectable. Overall, we
demonstrated an approach to study the clonal structure in cancer genomes
through the identification and characterization of individual molecules.

