Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Slug knockdown suppresses malignant phenotype of
nanomaterial-transformed human lung epithelial cells


Nanomaterials have increasingly become part of modern everyday life, but
their long-term health effects are largely unknown. Previous studies have
shown that carbon nanotubes (CNTs), one of the most widely used
nanomaterials in industry, can induce or promote tumor formation in
animals, but the underlying mechanisms are unclear. We previously found
that chronic exposure to CNTs induced malignant transformation of human
lung epithelial cells, the primary cellular target of inhaled
nanomaterials. The transformed cells exhibited aggressive cancer
phenotypes, including increased cell migration, invasion and
anchorage-independent cell growth. We hypothesized that such increased
aggressiveness may be due to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). To
test this hypothesis, cultured human lung epithelial BEAS-2B cells were
continuously exposed to physiologically relevant concentration (0.02
g/cm2 surface area dose) of single-walled CNT (SWCNT) for a period of 6
months. The cells were then analyzed for EMT markers and aggressive
cellular behavior. Western blot analysis of EMT markers indicated an
increased expression of mesenchymal markers and decreased epithelial
markers, indicating the activation of EMT in the chronic SWCNT-exposed
cells. Moreover, the cells exhibited a dramatic increase in one of the
EMT master regulators, a transcription factor Slug (Snail2). We
hypothesized that Slug upregulation may be responsible for the aggressive
phenotype of the cells. We stably downregulated the Slug expression using
lentiviral shRNA particles, and examined its effect on cell migration and
invasion by Transwell assays. Our results showed that knockdown of Slug
attenuated cell migration and invasion without having any effect on cell
proliferation. Together, our results indicated the activation of EMT by
SWCNT and demonstrated its role in aggressive cancer phenotype. Slug
plays a crucial role in this process and could serve as a potential
biomarker for CNT-induced malignancies.

