Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel role for PAK4 in the regulation of EMT and stemness in
glioblastoma


Glioblastomas (GB) are the most aggressive of primary brain tumors with
high rates of tumor recurrence and poor prognosis. Epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) is the dynamic transdifferentiation process which leads
to acquisition of invasiveness, stem-like characteristics and drug
resistance in tumor cells. A small fraction of radio- and chemo-resistant
cancer stem cells (CSC) with a capacity of self-renewal is considered to
be crucial for tumor recurrence. Our previous studies indicated high
levels of expression of p21-activated kinase 4 (PAK4) in GBs and
confirmed its role in the regulation of proliferation, migration and
invasion. Here, we aimed to determine whether PAK4-regulated invasiveness
was associated with mesenchymal transition of glioma cells and to
delineate the essential signaling events that governed EMT and
maintenance of stemness in GBs. PAK4 overexpression in glioma cells
resulted in loss of E-cadherin and Zo-1 and a significant increase in
N-cadherin and vimentin levels. Conversely, shRNA-mediated PAK4
downregulation led to loss of mesenchymal phenotype and markers in glioma
cell lines. Further, irradiation (IR, 8 Gy) treatments significantly
elevated PAK4 expression and nuclear localization in correlation with
increased EMT in glioma cells. FACS analysis and western blotting
indicated an enrichment of CD133+ CSCs with high expression of CD133 and
Nestin in IR-treated cells. In order to study the significance IR-induced
EMT and stemness with PAK4 nuclear translocation, we performed a
transcription factor (TF) interaction array with immunoprecipitated PAK4
as bait, which revealed nuclear-PAK4 association with PPAR and other TFs.
Moreover, immunoprecipitation, ChIP and re-ChIP experiments showed
IR-induced PAK4 binding with PPAR nuclear receptor complex and
recruitment on the PPREs of NADPH oxidase-1 promoter and elevated Nox1
expression in IR-treated cells. PAK4-knockdown suppressed the IR-induced
EMT and stemness in the glioma cells lines. In line with these in vitro
results, mouse orthotopic intracranial xenograft experiments showed
decreased tumor growth and N-cadherin expression in tumors from
PAK4-shRNA expressing cells when compared with controls. These results
strongly support a role for PAK4 in the regulation of IR-induced EMT and
stemness via PPAR/Nox1 signaling and provide a rationale for PAK4 as a
new therapeutic target against glioblastoma and suggest a potential for
overcoming radioresistance in these tumors.

