Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral administration of an acid stable liposomal formulation of
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) delivers DHA and its LOX-metabolites to the
circulation and the breast tissue of sprague dawley rats


We have shown that dietary ratios of omega-3 to omega-6 fatty acids that
significantly inhibited chemically-induced mammary carcinogenesis in the
rat were in excess of 10:1 suggesting that a particular omega-3 fatty
acid or its metabolite may account for the chemopreventive effects of
such high ratios. Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA; 22:6 n-3), a component in
fish oil, has been shown to inhibit mammary cancer-induced by chemical
carcinogens (7,12-dimethylbenz-[a]-anthracene and N-methyl-N-nitrosourea)
in the rat. The Western Diet in humans, with a ratio of 1:15
omega-3:omega-6 fatty acids, is not sufficient to provide the levels of
DHA required for cancer prevention. Furthermore, mammals can't synthesize
this fatty acid. Previously, a liposomal formulation for DHA for
intravenous administration has been developed, but this route of
administration is not appropriate for chemoprevention. Oral delivery for
long term is the preferred approach. Therefore, we hypothesize that the
oral delivery of a liposomal formulation of DHA which is resistant to
oxidation and low gastric pH will enhance its bioavailability in the
circulation and the breast tissues, and thus enhance the chemopreventive
efficacy. We have developed for the first time an acid stable liposomal
delivery system of DHA; average size determined by Dynamic Light
Scattering is approximately 135nm, while that of the ghost formulation is
approximately 150nm. This size is ideal for oral administration and can
cross the enterocytes of the intestine. In a pilot study a single dose of
liposomal DHA(1.54mg DHA/rat) was orally administered to female Sprague
Dawley rats 21 days of age; rats were sacrificed after 24 hours by CO2
asphyxiation and their plasma and various organs including the breast
tissue were harvested. The amount of DHA in the plasma and breast tissue
was determined by gas chromatography flame ionization detection.
Approximately 3.4% of the dose was determined to be in the plasma, while
levels of DHA that reached the breast tissue were at least 5-fold higher
than those measured in plasma. Using LC-MS/MS we detected DHA and its
metabolites, 14-hydroxy DHA and 17-hydroxy DHA, catalyzed by LOX enzymes
in rat plasma. In the breast tissue 4-hydroxy DHA, 14-hydroxy DHA,
17-hydroxy DHA, and 20-hydroxy DHA were detected. In summary, we report
for the first time the detection of DHA and its LOX-metabolites in the
circulation and breast tissue following the oral administration of
liposomal DHA, suggesting that our nanotechnology-based approach is a
promising strategy for breast cancer prevention. (Support: Institutional
Funding)

