Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative microRNA profiling of prostate carcinomas with
increasing tumor stage by deep-sequencing


Background: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short, non-coding RNAs that
post-transcriptionally regulate gene expression and play an important
role in tumorigenesis. Previous deep-sequencing identified the microRNA
profile of prostate carcinoma (PCa) vs. non-malignant prostate tissue. As
an extension of our recent analyses, we now compared organ-confined
prostate tumors (pT2), tumors with extra capsular growth (pT3, pN0), and
lymph node metastasizing (pN1) PCa relative to corresponding
non-malignant prostate tissue and healthy prostate tissue.Material and
Methods: We performed comparative miRNA expression profiling using deep
sequencing of cDNA libraries. Potential target genes of deregulated
miRNAs were identified by database analysis and subsequently validated in
vitro using reporter gene constructs. miRNA and mRNA expression was
determined using quantitative real-time PCR.Results: The miRNA expression
from the healthy and non-malignant tissue is consistent with our previous
findings, indicating a high fidelity of the method employed. Some miRNAs
(miR-375, miR-148a, miR-141 and miR-21) are expressed at increasing
levels with increasing tumor stage, while other miRNAs (miR-200b/c,
miR-25, miR-17 or miR-93) are up-regulated only from organ-confined
tumors (pT2) to tumors with extra-capsular growth (pT3) but then
expressed at lower levels after the transition to lymph node
metastasizing tumors (pN0 vs. pN1). The same trend was seen in qRT-PCR
analysis but due to the limited sample number, no significance was
reached. Interestingly, miR-375, found to be up-regulated in tumor vs.
normal tissue, and miR-15a, found induced by sequencing in T2 and T3
tumors but not in lymph node metastasizing tumors, target the
phosphatases PHLPP1 and PHLPP2, respectively. PHLPP1 and PHLPP2
dephosphorylate members of the AKT-family of signal transducers thereby
inhibiting cell growth. Co-expression of miR-15a and miR-375 resulted in
down-regulation of PHLPP1/2 and a strongly increased PCa cell
growth.Conclusion: miRNA profiling of pT2 (pN0), pT3 (pN0), and lymph
node metastasizing prostate carcinoma (pN1) by deep sequencing revealed
clearly changed miRNA levels.

