Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the immune system in lymph node positive ER+ breast
cancer


Estrogen receptor (ER) positive breast cancer (BC) accounts for 70% of BC
diagnoses and is associated with a good outcome when treated with
conventional therapies, including tamoxifen. However, there remains a
sub-population of patients who undergo relapse within 10 years of
diagnosis and do not respond well to standard therapies. While lymph node
(LN) status is an important indicator of poor prognosis, additional
information is needed to more accurately predict patients who will or
will not relapse. Previous genomic studies from our lab have shown that
immune response is an important feature of LN+ BCs that do not relapse.
In addition, other studies have also examined the role of the immune
system in ER+ BC, but due to varying study designs, it is unclear how
immune response pertains to ER+ BC relapse. The goal of this project is
to characterize immune response in ER+ BC by measuring levels of immune
markers using immunohistochemistry (IHC) and RNA expression levels and
comparing those to tumour characteristics. We have developed a cohort of
retrospective ER+ BC patients with tumour samples available through the
Hamilton Health Science tumour bank. Patients were selected for
eligibility based on ER status, early stage disease, and having long term
clinical follow-up. Clinical charts for each patient were reviewed and
pathological, treatment, and outcome data were abstracted. Tumour blocks
were obtained and sections stained for haematoxylin and eosin were marked
for tumour boarders then used to construct Tissue microarrays (TMA) for
IHC assays and RNA is to be extracted from each tumour block. 318 patient
samples have been obtained that meet eligibility requirements. Among
those, 163 are LN- and 110 are LN+, and the remainder have unknown LN
status. Primary endpoint for this study is the development of distant
metastasis. Roughly 10% of LN- patients developed distant metastasis
within 10 years and roughly 20% of LN+ patients developed distant
metastasis. In total, 14% of patients came to endpoint during the study
period. TMAs were stained for pathological markers, including ER, PR,
HER2, and Ki67 as well as immune markers such as CD8 and CD20. RNA
expression levels for each of these were also determined and both were
compared with clinical outcome. Here we present a retrospective cohort of
ER+ BC patients with 10 years of clinical follow-up data that can be used
for IHC and RNA analysis. Further, we have examined the association
between immune response and prognosis in lymph node positive ER+ BC
patients.

