Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of some common organics on cellular glycolysis and the
differential survival of lung fibroblast and lung carcinoma cell lines


Tumor growth and abnormal cell survival were shown to be associated with
a number of cellular metabolic abnormalities revealed by impaired oral
glucose tolerance, depressed lipoprotein lipase activity leading to
hypertriglyceridemia, and changes in amino acid profile as evidenced by
increased plasma free tryptophan levels in patients with breast, lung,
colon, stomach, and other cancers from various origins. The above
findings seem to relate to or indicate a shift to non-oxidative metabolic
pathways in cancer. In contrast to normal cells, cancer cells may lose
the ability to utilize aerobic respiration due to either defective
mitochondria or hypoxia within the tumor microenvironments. Glucose was
shown to be the major energy source in cancer cells where it utilizes
aerobic /anaerobic glycolysis with the resultant lactic acid formation.
The role of energetic modulations and use of glycolytic inhibitors on
cancer/normal cell survival is not clearly established in the literature.
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to evaluate six potential
glycolytic inhibitors namely, sodium ascorbate, oxalic acid, oxaloacetic
acid, sodium citrate, fructose diphosphate (FDP) and sodium bicarbonate
at mM concentrations on growing A549 (lung cancer) and MRC-5 (normal;
human lung fibroblast) cell lines with the objective of determining their
influence on cell survival. Exposed and non-exposed cells were tested
with phase-contrast micro-scanning, survival/death and metabolic activity
trends through MTT-assays, as well as death end-point determinations by
testing re-growth on complete media and T4 cellometer counts. Results
showed that oxalic acid and oxaloacetic acid both influenced the pH of
the medium and resulted in differential massive cell debris within the
exposure period. Sodium ascorbate, sodium citrate, sodium bicarbonate and
FDP did not cause pH changes; however, they caused detectable cell
disfigurement and loss of metabolic activity and survival/ death end
points with the resultant death of the A549 cell line. MRC-5 cells were
differentially unaffected by exposure to sodium ascorbate, sodium
citrate, sodium bicarbonate, FDP and oxaloacxetic acid, underwent
complete recovery and remained both attached and healthy for 6 weeks upon
subculture when transferred to a new complete medium. Oxalic acid did not
show differential modulation with the consequent loss of survival and
death of the MRC-5 cell line. Phase contrast findings as well as the cell
counts confirmed the findings of other tests. These studies show the
potential for exploiting cellular metabolic differences in cancer control.

