Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of mouse PTEN-deficient prostate cancer with next
generation antisense oligonucleotide targeting the androgen receptor


Resistance to androgen deprivation therapies is characterized by the
persistent activation of the androgen receptor (AR). Traditional
approaches for the development of novel androgen deprivation therapies
have focused on inhibition of AR activity by blocking the production or
binding of androgens to the AR. These novel treatment strategies have
shown improvements, however, patients still develop castration-resistant
disease. Continued AR activity in castration-resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC) may be the result of ligand dependent or ligand independent
mechanisms. Antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) have the ability to block
specific genes inhibiting the associated proteins thus providing an
alternate treatment strategy for CRPC. Here, we investigated the in vivo
antitumor effects of a generation 2.5 ASO targeting the mouse AR in a
PTEN-deficient mouse model of prostate cancer. Pharmacodynamic analysis
demonstrated strong inhibition of target RNA by the AR-ASO in prostate
tumor tissues. The AR-ASO also exhibited strong suppression of AR protein
levels in prostate tumors as demonstrated by western blot analysis.
Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed reduced levels of AR expression
and transcriptional activity in tumor tissue. Furthermore, AR was also
inhibited in normal tissues of the accessory sex glands. The treatment
efficacy of the AR-ASO was evaluated in pharmacological intervention
trials in mice with castration-nave prostate cancer (CNPC) and CRPC.
Treatments effects in CNPC were also compared to androgen deprivation by
surgical castration. Compared to saline treated controls, tumor growth
was significantly inhibited by the AR-ASO (34%) and was comparable to
that of surgical castration (38%). In the CRPC model, significant
suppression of tumor growth (10% vs control) was also observed in mice
treated with the AR-ASO. Furthermore, strong inhibition of AR expression
and activity was observed in AR-ASO-treated mice harboring either CNPC or
CRPC, but not in mice treated with surgical castration. Gene expression
profiling using the Fluidigm Biomark platform revealed that 40
AR-dependent target genes were significantly altered in CNPC after
treatment with the AR-ASO; 34 of these genes were also significantly
changed following castration. A decrease of ERK phosphorylation in was
observed in AR-ASO-treated mice in both CNPC and CRPC intervention models
and was associated with decreased protein levels of AR. These findings
demonstrate that treatment with generation 2.5 AR-ASO is effective
against preclinical mouse models of prostate cancer and may provide a
promising approach to overcoming treatment resistance of CRPC.

