Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical exome and transcriptome sequencing for identification of
actionable cancer targets: A pilot study for children and young adults
with relapsed or refractory solid tumors


Background. With technological advances such as next-generation
sequencing, recent gains in understanding pediatric cancer can aid in
treatment decisions, especially in the setting of relapse. To discover
expressed, clinically significant mutations for pediatric patients with
relapsed tumors, we performed a pilot trial using a combination of whole
exome sequencing (WES) of tumor/normal DNA and whole transcriptome
sequencing (WTS) of tumors, complemented by single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) arrays.Objectives. We identified 48 pediatric and
young adult patients with relapsed or refractory solid tumors with
matched tumor/normal samples. Our goals were to determine the feasibility
of performing comprehensive genomic analyses in this population, to
compare the genomic profile of relapsed tumors to prior reports of
primary tumors, and to delineate the percentage of patients with
actionable mutations. Actionable changes were defined as reportable germ
line mutations determined by the American College of Medical Genetics
(ACMG), a change in diagnosis, and somatic changes targetable by FDA
approved medications or drugs undergoing clinical trials.Methods. WES was
performed on matched tumor and normal samples to identify germ line and
somatic mutations. WTS was performed on tumor samples to identify fusion
genes, gene expression profiling, and expressed variants. SNP arrays were
performed to identify copy number changes. Sanger validation confirmed
reportable mutations.Results. In the exome, we noted a median of 33
somatic mutations per sample (range 1-375), a higher mutational burden
compared to previously reported primary pediatric malignancies.
Transcriptome data further refined results to a median of 7 expressed
somatic mutations per sample (range 0-95). The majority of patients had
one oncogenic driver. Sequencing relapsed tumors at multiple time points
showed the continued presence of driver mutations but a shift in
passenger mutations. Eleven of the 48 patients (23%) had a targetable
mutation, such as ALK, BRAF, GNAQ, GNA11, IDH1, MTOR, PIK3CA, and SKP2.
Two patients (4%) had a change in diagnosis due to the presence or
absence of diagnostic fusion genes. In the germ line of 5 patients (10%)
we discovered mutations in ACMG-reportable genes MUTYH, SCN5A, TP53, and
MLH1. A total of 16 patients (33%) had actionable mutations.Conclusions.
Our study showed the feasibility of next-generation sequencing in
relapsed pediatric solid tumors, with actionable mutations detected in a
third of our patients. We demonstrated the utility in using exome and
transcriptome sequencing with SNP arrays. Implementation of these
techniques has the potential to change the practice of precision
medicine. In summary, we have developed a prototype that will be utilized
to design a nationalPediatricMatch trial in collaboration with
theChildren's Oncology Group.

