Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NMU induction of mammary tumors in ovariectomized rats
administered peroral estrogen and progesterone


Mammary tumors induced by carcinogens such as N-nitroso-N-methylurea
(NMU) are thought to be estrogen dependent since ovariectomy (OVX) or
treatment with tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors inhibits mammary tumor
development. However, whether NMU-induced tumor formation can be restored
in OVX animals with estradiol (E2) and/or progesterone (P4)
administration is unclear. Common methods of hormone administration such
as pellet implants, injections or gavage feeding can lead to
supraphysiological levels of hormone or unwarranted stress for use in
long term tumor studies. To circumvent these problems, we administered
hormones daily in peanut butter to OVX Sprague-Dawley rats. Short-term
(10 day) pilot studies were conducted to determine the dose of E2 that
would decrease body weights and increase uterine weights of OVX animals
relative to sham controls. An initial pilot using 150 g/kg E2 for 10 days
led to decreased body weight gain in OVX animals but was unable to
restore uterine weights. A second pilot analyzed a dose of 300 g/kg or
600 g/kg E2. Body weights were repressed in both groups relative to OVX,
but only the 600 g/kg dose was able to restore uterine weights. Therefore
the 600 g/kg dose was used to test whether hormones fed in peanut butter
could drive tumor development. Following surgery on PND 40, rats received
daily treatments in peanut butter throughout the study. Rats that were
OVX were divided into four treatment groups (n = 8): 1) E2; 2) P4 (15
mg/kg); 3) E2 + P4; and 4) vehicle, with a fifth group given vehicle
after sham surgery (n = 8) as a positive control. On PND 50, all animals
received a single I.P. injection of 50 mg/kg NMU to induce mammary
tumors. Rats were weighed and palpated biweekly. Blood was collected via
tail vein at 4, 8 and 12 weeks following NMU administration 2 to 4 hours
after hormone feeding. Analysis of serum E2 indicated that levels were
elevated and not supraphysiological. Body weights of E2 groups with or
without P4 were similar to sham body weights while the P4 group had body
weights similar to those of untreated OVX rats. Mammary tumors were first
observed between 6 and 7 weeks post NMU-injection in sham, E2 + P4 and E2
animals. At 18 weeks, 62.5, 37.5, and 25% of rats presented with tumors
and total tumors per group were 8, 3 and 3 in sham, E2 + P4 and E2
groups, respectively. One tumor was observed in an OVX + vehicle rat at
8.5 weeks while no tumors were observed in the P4 group. Collectively,
these studies indicate that administering hormones perorally in peanut
butter restores body weights and uterine weights of OVX animals and
allows for tumor formation in response to NMU. The lower tumor incidence
in OVX animals receiving hormones suggests that additional factors may be
necessary to fully restore NMU-induced tumors.

