Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MSI status frequency, MSI-target genes mutation profile and
ancestry proportions in Brazilian colorectal carcinoma patients


Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the fourth in incidence and in
mortality worldwide for both sexes. There are three pathways in the
pathogenesis of CRC: chromosome instability (CIN), microsatellite
instability (MSI) and CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP). These
pathways are closely related and some tumors may harbor alterations in
multiple pathways. The MSI is the less common and is more frequently
related with HNPCC Syndrome. In Brazil, CRC incidence is increasing and
the frequency of MSI and its biological and clinical impact are largely
unexplored. Furthermore, the literature has reported the influence of
ancestry factors on the incidence and prognosis in this tumor type.
Goals: to assess the frequency of MSI status in Brazil CRC tumors; to
analyze the mutation profile of MSI target genes in MSI-positive tumors
and to determine the patients ancestry by molecular markers. Materials
and Methods: 1013 CRC patients were enrolled in the study. The MSI
evaluation was performed using a multiplex PCR comprising 5 markers
(NR27, NR21, NR24, BAT25, and BAT26). The MSI-H tumors were also assessed
for mutations in a panel of 25 MSI-target genes, and their genetic
ancestry will be evaluated using a panel of 46 AIMs (Ancestry-Informative
Markers). Results: MSS status was observed in 86.0%, MSI-L in 4.0% and
MSI-H in 10.0% of cases. The analysis of 25 MSI-target genes in 101 MSI-H
cases showed distinct mutations frequencies, with the highest mutated
genes been ATM (83.0%), EGFR (80.0%) and MRE11 (78.0%) and the lowest
mutated genes been BLM (3.0%), WISP3 (2.0%) and TRBP2 (1.0%). No
alterations were observed in BRCA1, BRCA2, XRCC2, PTEN and XPO5. We
showed that the average ancestry proportions for MSS+MSI-L group were
74.1% of European, 12.3% of African, 6.6% of Native Americans, and 7.0%
of East Asian, while for MSI-H group were 73.7% of European, 14.3% of
African, 6.8% of Native Americans, and 5.2% of East Asian. So, no
statistical difference was observed between distinct MSI status groups.
Conclusion: The MSI frequencies identified in Brazilian CRC patients are
in agreement with the international literature. We identify altered
MSI-target genes in MSI-H tumors samples with potential clinical impact.
For while, the ancestry proportions not showed an important factor for
MSI status in Brazilian CRC patients.

