Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms governing lung adenocarcinoma metastasis


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in men and women in the
United States. Most lung cancer patients are diagnosed at a stage when
they already have inoperable metastases. Identifying the drivers of lung
cancer metastatic potential and the underlying mechanisms by which this
state is induced, reversed or maintained is a question of immense
clinical importance.Understanding the metastatic process in humans is
limited, as early tumors exist in undiagnosed patients. Genetically
engineered mouse models of lung adenocarcinoma provide an opportunity to
study lung tumor progression and metastasis in vivo. We have recently
improved upon existing lung adenocarcinoma mouse models enabling us to
alter genes in developing tumors in vivo using lentiviral vectors that
co-deliver Cre-recombinase and a cDNA. Additionally, the introduction of
a tdTomato Cre reporter allows us to identify and isolate cells from all
stages of cancer progression including primary tumors, disseminating
tumor cells, circulating tumor cells, and micro-and macro-metastases.We
hypothesize that differential gene expression between primary tumors and
their metastases will identify key determinants of lung cancer metastatic
progression. To this end, we have used RNA-Seq to identify differentially
expressed genes between tumors and their metastases and validated a
subset of these genes by Fluidigm microfluidics qPCR. Our validated genes
include the lysyl hydroxylase Plod2 (a collagen modifier) and the
transcription factor Arntl2, both recapitulating gene expression
correlations observed in human metastatic lung adenocarcinoma.Our data
demonstrate that knockdown of Plod2 decreases the metastatic properties
of mouse metastatic cell lines, specifically migration and the ability to
give rise to metastases in transplantation assays. Migration and colony
morphology defects upon knockdown of Plod2 could be rescued by the
addition of normal collagen.Further in vitro experiments using soft agar
assays demonstrated that an additional candidate gene, the transcription
factor Arntl2, is required for anchorage independent growth of mouse
metastatic cell lines. These findings were extended to in vivo transplant
experiments, demonstrating that Arntl2 is critical for metastatic
seeding. This in vivo phenotype was rescued by expression of a hairpin
insensitive Arntl2 cDNA, demonstrating the specific role of Arntl2 in
metastatic progression. Current efforts are focused on confirming the
role of Arntl2 in human lung adenocarcinoma and determining the molecular
mechanism of how Arntl2 modulates cancer progression and metastasis using
RNA-Seq.Together, these studies will increase our knowledge of factors
that mediate human lung adenocarcinoma progression with the potential to
identify new targets for intervention at distinct steps of the metastatic
cascade.

