Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug response profiling to inform individualized treatment
approaches in high risk leukemia


Novel treatment approaches are needed for patients with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) who respond poorly to current therapies. The
genotypic diversity identified recently by next generation sequencing
technologies within ALL calls for individualized novel strategies.
However, functional correlations of oncogenic lesions with drug response
profiles are ill defined for ALL. We have established an imaging-based
cell viability analysis platform to generate drug response profiles for
primary patient-derived ALL samples co-cultured with mesenchymal stroma
cells, expecting to derive functional information directly from
individual patient samples. Such response profiles may mirror
perturbations in relevant cellular programs that could be exploited
therapeutically. Our pipeline integrates high-content screening, newly
developed bioinformatics tools and biochemical approaches. We screened a
library of 65 compounds for activity in 37 precursor B-ALL and 23 T-ALL
samples including refractory cases. Cross-sample comparisons revealed
that cells from relapsed refractory patients showed a more resistant
phenotype for most of the drugs. While only a few agents including
genotoxic drugs showed activity across all samples, we detected selective
activity of given drugs that distinguish patient sample groups.
MLL-rearranged and TCF3-HLF-positive ALL samples as well as a subgroup of
T-ALL cases were highly sensitive to the BCL-2 specific BH3-mimetic
ABT-199 suggesting BCL-2 dependency for these cases. Multiparametric
analyses of in vitro responses predicted in vivo activity of ABT-199 in
xenografted mice. Moreover, we could identify synergistic activity of
ABT-199 with clinical and preclinical compounds, such as topotecan or
epigenetic modifiers. Our drug response profiling pipeline contributes to
the identification of distinct vulnerabilities in leukemia and may
facilitate the selection of candidate drugs for further development into
clinical application.

