Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells from
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes


Human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from somatic cells
of patients hold great promise for autologous cell therapies. One of the
possible applications of iPSCs is to use them as a cell source for
producing autologous lymphocytes for cell-based therapy against cancer.
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) were found to have tumor-reactive T
cells and have been used for adoptive cell therapy for metastatic
melanoma. The objective in this study is to generate iPSCs from TILs and
assess their pluripotency. Under the approved protocol by the
Institutional Review Board and the Human Pluripotent Stem Cell Research
Oversight Committee, we obtained melanomas from a patient who provided
informed consent for tissue procurement and generation of iPSCs. TILs
were reprogrammed by Sendai virus (SeV) vector encoding four pluripotency
transcription factors (Oct3/4, Klf4, Sox2 and c-Myc). TIL-derived iPSCs
(TIL-iPSCs) were characterized by their pluripotency. Within 3 weeks of
infection with SeV to deliver pluripotency transcription factors, we
identified colonies that resembled embryonic stem cells (ESCs) among the
T cell derivatives. TIL-iPSCs displayed typical stem cell morphology and
had a normal karyotype. Alkaline phosphatase and immunofluorescence
staining with stem cell surface markers, OCT3/4, SSEA3, SSEA 4, TRA1-81
and TRA1-60 proteins suggested pluripotency of colonies. RT-PCR analyses
revealed that TIL-iPSCs expressed pluripotent stem cell markers such as
NANOG, OCT3/4 at levels comparable to those in ESCs. T cell receptor
(TCR) gene rearrangement analysis in TIL-iPSCs confirmed that they
originated from mature T cells and retained diversity of TCR gene
rearrangement. In conclusion, human iPSCs with diverse TCR gene
rearrangement can be generated from TILs efficiently by SeV encoding four
pluripotency transcription factors. Future work will explore their
differentiation potential to T cells for cancer immunotherapy. We
acknowledge in DNAVEC Corporation for kindly providing Sendai virus
vectors. This study was supported by the University of Michigan Start-up
fund, American College of Surgeons and Central Surgical Association.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

