Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TP508 sensitizes cancer stem cells to radiation and delays brain
cancer cell relapse in vitro


In 2014, approximately 70,000 adults and 4,500 children are expected to
be diagnosed with brain cancer in the U.S alone, making this disease the
second leading cause of cancer related deaths in children and young
adults. Currently available therapies such as radio/chemotherapy are
ineffective in completely eradicating the tumor bulk and cancer stem
cells within the tumor, thus allowing recurrence of the disease.
Therefore, it is important to develop novel therapeutics that sensitize
cancer cells to make them more susceptible to radiation therapy and
reduce the number of viable cancer stem cells. Preliminary data showed
that injection of TP508, a 23 amino acid thrombin derived peptide drug,
increased brain tumor shrinkage post-radiation therapy (RT) in mice. To
study this phenomenon, we chose to use an in vitro model of tumor relapse
that selects for and allows quantification of tumor stem cells in 3D
spheroid cultures. Our goal was to determine whether TP508 could
specifically sensitize cancer stem cells to the effects of RT and prevent
or delay stem cell mediated in vitro tumor relapse. Medulloblastoma
(Daoy) cells were grown as 3D spheroids in vitro to select for the growth
of stem cells. Primary spheroids were treated on day 5 with either saline
or TP508 (0.5mg/mL), and exposed to radiation (10Gy) on day 7 using a
Cs137 source. One day post-RT, cells were dissociated and cultured as
secondary spheroids to determine the stemness or relapse potential of the
cells following RT. Daily images were taken to quantify neurosphere
formation. Spheroids were also analyzed for viability, apoptosis,
proliferation (PCNA), and for stem cell markers
(CD133/LGR5/CD44/DCLK1/Sox-2), using western blots, flow cytometry, and
immuno-fluorescent staining. TP508 treatment of Daoy cell spheroids prior
to RT significantly delayed the formation of secondary spheroids,
decreased cell viability, number of proliferating cells, and the number
of cells expressing cancer stem cell markers. Thus, in this in vitro
assay, TP508 sensitized cancer stem cells to the effects of RT and
delayed relapse of brain tumor stem cells in vitro. These findings
suggest that injection of TP508 prior to RT treatment may sensitize
cancer stem cells to radiation and help prevent brain tumor relapse.
Studies are underway to determine the mechanism by which TP508 sensitizes
cancer stem cells to RT and whether TP508 has similar effects on other
types of cancer stem cells. This work was supported by NCI Contract #
HHSN261201300076C to DC.

