Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tolerance and intolerance of proximal thymine glycol in DNA
double-strand break repair by nonhomologous end joining


Double-strand breaks (DSBs) induced by ionizing radiation are often
accompanied by ancillary oxidative base damage that could prevent or
delay their repair. In order to better define the features that make some
DSBs repair-resistant, plasmid DSB substrates were constructed with two
blunt ends, one having the oxidatively modified nonplanar base thymine
glycol at the first, second or third positions from the 3 terminus (Tg1,
Tg2 and Tg3, respectively). End joining was examined in extracts of
Bustel fibroblasts, wherein end joining is completely dependent on
addition of exogenous recombinant XLF, and therefore reflects classical
nonhomologous end joining. Tg at the third position had almost no effect
on end-joining even when present on both ends of the break. However, the
Tg1 and Tg2 substrates yielded tenfold to twentyfold less head-to-tail
joins and no detectable head-to-head joins, suggesting that Tg as the
terminal or penultimate base is a serious barrier to NHEJ and an absolute
barrier when present at both ends. For all substrates, Tg-containing
ligation products predominated at early times, and remarkably, a 3
terminal Tg was in some cases directly ligated to an undamaged blunt end.
Dideoxy trapping of base excision repair intermediates indicated that Tg
was excised in the extracts, but largely if not exclusively after DSB
ligation. For all substrates, accurate blunt end ligation without end
trimming predominated. However addition of excess Artemis nuclease to the
extracts resulted in a slightly shorter ligation product, and a slight
increase in yield, for the Tg2 substrate only. For the Tg1 substrate,
there was a distinct 2-hr delay between addition of substrate and the
detection of ligated products, while the unmodified and Tg3 products
showed a much shorter delay of 30 min. Overall, the results suggest that
Tg can be a major impediment to DSB repair when present as the terminal
or penultimate base, being relatively resistant to both trimming and
ligation.

