Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prospective clinical application of circulating cell-free DNA
sequencing in metastatic colorectal cancer


Background:Recent finding have suggested that discordance between primary
and metastatic colorectal tumors is influenced by time, intervening
therapy, and sites of metastatic disease. CfDNA allows a non-invasive
assessment of the present molecular features of the tumor, but the degree
of information provided and the clinical utility of the testing remains
to be defined.Methods: Patients were prospectively consented for
collection of cfDNA from plasma samples for sequencing on a 54-gene
platform optimized for very low allele frequencies (Guardant360), a CLIA
certified lab, and concurrent sequencing of clinically available and FFPE
tissue following institutional standard of care (Ion-Torrent panel).
Results were returned to patients and physicians within 12-19days, and
used for evaluating clinical trial options. Surveys of treating
physicians were provided to assess clinical utility of the additional
ctDNA testing.Results: 105 patients were enrolled after a median of two
prior lines of therapy for metastatic disease. Plasma testing was
successful in all patients, and tissue sequencing was only able to be
performed in 90% of patients, due to limited tissue availability. In the
plasma testing, 85% of samples had a detectable genomic alterations
(including 21% with detectable amplifications in EGFR, MET, or ERBB2),
with an average of 4.6 mutations detected per patient. In the cases with
tissue sequencing results, 38% of the cases had mutations detected in the
plasma that were not present in the historic tissue. Only 8% of these
were the previously described acquired mutations in KRAS, NRAS, and EGFR
with anti-EGFR monoclonal inhibition. Mutation in TP53 and SMAD4 genes
were the most common newly detected in plasma. In many cases, it appeared
that these represented minor clones not represented in the sequenced FFPE
tumor. In support of this, the median allele quantification for these
newly detected mutations was only 4% (IQR = 1.7% to 31%) of the dominant
clone, in contrast to concordant mutations that were present at 87% (IQR
= 54% to 100%) of the allele burden of the dominant clone
(PBackground:Recent finding have suggested that discordance between
primary and metastatic colorectal tumors is influenced by time,
intervening therapy, and sites of metastatic disease. CfDNA allows a
non-invasive assessment of the present molecular features of the tumor,
but the degree of information provided and the clinical utility of the
testing remains to be defined.Methods: Patients were prospectively
consented for collection of cfDNA from plasma samples for sequencing on a
54-gene platform optimized for very low allele frequencies (Guardant360),
a CLIA certified lab, and concurrent sequencing of clinically available
and FFPE tissue following institutional standard of care (Ion-Torrent
panel). Results were returned to patients and physicians within
12-19days, and used for evaluating clinical trial options. Surveys of
treating physicians were provided to assess clinical utility of the
additional ctDNA testing.Results: 105 patients were enrolled after a
median of two prior lines of therapy for metastatic disease. Plasma
testing was successful in all patients, and tissue sequencing was only
able to be performed in 90% of patients, due to limited tissue
availability. In the plasma testing, 85% of samples had a detectable
genomic alterations (including 21% with detectable amplifications in
EGFR, MET, or ERBB2), with an average of 4.6 mutations detected per
patient. In the cases with tissue sequencing results, 38% of the cases
had mutations detected in the plasma that were not present in the
historic tissue. Only 8% of these were the previously described acquired
mutations in KRAS, NRAS, and EGFR with anti-EGFR monoclonal inhibition.
Mutation in TP53 and SMAD4 genes were the most common newly detected in
plasma. In many cases, it appeared that these represented minor clones
not represented in the sequenced FFPE tumor. In support of this, the
median allele quantification for these newly detected mutations was only
4% (IQR = 1.7% to 31%) of the dominant clone, in contrast to concordant
mutations that were present at 87% (IQR = 54% to 100%) of the allele
burden of the dominant clone (P<0.0001).Physicians felt that the plasma
testing improved the quality of provided care in 87% of the cases, and
improved patient satisfaction in 97% of the cases. Plasma testing results
were available before the tissue testing results 89% of the time.
Actionable alterations, as determined by the physician, were identified
in 37% of patients, including 17% rate of actionable amplification. Of
these, 56% of the patients had enrolled or were planning to enroll on a
clinical trial based on the results. Conclusions:Comprehensive analysis
of the plasma from patients with metastatic colorectal cancer
demonstrates a high rate of new molecular information, including
identification of in potentially actionable mutations. This approach
appears to improve physician perception of quality of care obviating the
need for repeat invasive biopsy for genomic testing.

