Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomes analysis in non-small cell lung cancer: looking for a
clinical application


BACKGROUNDCancer cells produce a heterogeneous mixture of vesicular,
organelle-like structures (microvesicles or MVs) into their surroundings
including blood and body fluid. In particular exosomes are biological
nanovescicles (40-100 nm) that are formed by the inward budding of
multivescicular bodies (MVB), as a component of the endocytic pathway.
They are released from different cell types under both normal and
pathological conditions. Exosomal content is composed by proteins, DNA,
mRNA and microRNA (miRNA) that are transferred to distant site and
mediate inter-cellular communication.PURPOSE OF THE STUDYThe aim of this
pilot study is to investigate whether exosomes isolation from clinical
samples (plasma from NSCLC patients) is feasible. Furthermore we have
analyzed a panel of 7 miRNA related to NSCLC.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND
METHODSThe study population was selected among lung cancer patients
diagnosed with NSCLC, histotype adenocarcinoma, in the Oncology
department of Antwerp University Hospital. A total of 12 patients
participated in the project. Six blood samples from healthy volunteers
were also collected. After obtaining the informed consent, blood samples
(10 ml) were stored in the UZA-tumor biobank. Clinical data were also
collected from patients medical records.Exosomes were isolated by means
of both Density Gradient (DG) centrifugation and the Total Exosome
Isolation kit (from plasma) (Invitrogen) according to manufacturers
instructions. The Total exosome RNA and protein isolation kit
(Invitrogen) was used for proteins recovery from exosome. Extracted
proteins are used for western blot analysis aimed at the identification
of specific exosome protein markers: CD63, ALIX and TSG101. Nanoparticle
Tracking Analysis (NTA) was performed by means of the NanoSight NS500
instrument. In order to visualize the isolated exosomes a TEM
(Transmission Electron Microscopy) analysis was performed.The total
exosome RNA and protein isolation kit (Invitrogen) was used to extract
small-RNA from exosomal samples. The analysis of 7 miRNAs (miR-30b, -30c,
-103, -122, -195, -221, -222) was performed on the LightCycler 480
(Roche) and the fold change was calculated according to the formula 2Cq.
miR-1228 was used has endogenous control to normalize the
reaction.RESULTS ALIX protein is a reliable protein marker for exosome
identification TEM analysis have shown that exosomes can be isolated in
NSCLC plasma samples 7 selected miRNAs are strongly deregulated in our
clinical samples and seem related to staging miR30b and -30c might be
related to squamous cell carcinoma histotypeCONCLUSIONThe analysis of
exosomes in NSCLC could represent a noninvasive test for patients
management. With this pilot study we have demonstrated that exosome
analysis and exosomal miRNA profiling is feasible. Due to the small
sample size we cannot make significant statistic conclusion. Further
analyses in a larger series are needed.

