Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific delivery of immunostimulatory RNA via nanoparticles
blocks growth of primary and disseminated ovarian tumors


One important mechanism of immune evasion is the accumulation of
tumor-infiltrating regulatory T cells creating an immunosuppressive
microenvironment in situ. Many new therapies target immune checkpoint
receptors, CTLA-4 and PD-1, on immunosuppressive T-cells to reverse tumor
immune evasion. Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are double stranded,
sequence-specific inhibitors of gene expression. The paradigm for using
siRNA to block cancer is to target mRNA sequences of oncogenes. Several
limitations have suppressed the use of siRNA in human cancer therapy,
such as off-target effects and lack of tumor-specific delivery.
Additionally, certain siRNA sequence motifs activate toll-like receptors
that induce the systemic innate immune response, including induction of
interferon and interleukin-6 release that is traditionally considered as
an undesirable clinical outcome. The hypothesis proposed here is to
control the innate immune response by directing it only to tumors and not
other organs by delivering an immunostimulatory siRNA (isRNA) directly to
tumors. An isRNA designed to silence no human genes was synthesized as an
unmodified triphosphate 19-mer double-stranded RNA with a GUGA motif on
the 5 antisense end. This isRNA was delivered into human ovarian tumors
grown from SK-OV-3 cells surgically implanted into the ovaries of
immunosuppressed mice by an L1CAM-targeted elastin-like polypeptide
(ELP-L) nanoparticle. The isRNA/ELP-L nanocomplex was dosed into ten mice
by i.p. injection 14 times at 10 mg/kg with respect to the isRNA over 28
days. The isRNA was delivered to the tumors, not to liver, spleen, heart,
or lungs. The total tumor mass and number of disseminated nodules both
decreased by 50% with respect to vehicle control. Six ovaries harboring
tumors were resected from isRNA/ELP-L nanocomplex-dosed mice and each
displayed elevated levels of interferon alpha and interleukin 6 mRNA as
determined by RT-PCR. Mean AST, ALT and BUN serum biomarkers of liver and
kidney function were elevated by 68%, 128% and 14%, respectively,
compared to vehicle dosed mice; none of which were outside average normal
levels. These results indicate that specifically targeting isRNA to
tumors using a targeted nanoparticle may provide an effective therapy for
ovarian cancer, either alone or in combination with agents that affect
immune check point pathways in tumors.

