Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular secreted Ref-1 triggers triple negative breast
cancer cells apoptosis


Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) are most aggressive type and
resistant to standard chemotherapy. There is a high demand for developing
approaches to treat TNBCs. Recently, some agents inducing
post-translational modification (PTM) were suggested to treat
therapeutic-resistant cancer cells. We previously discovered that
trichostatin A (TSA), histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), - mediated
acetylation induced extracellular secretion of the acetylated apurinic
apyrimidinic endonuclease 1/redox factor-1 (Ac-APE1/Ref-1). This is the
first report showing that the Ac-APE1/Ref-1 is not merely a secreted
protein but also a signal molecule that plays a critical role in the
apoptotic cell death pathway in TNBC. To study the functional
significance of the secreted Ac-APE1/Ref-1, we induced PTM,
hyperacetylation of intracellular proteins with co-treatment of
acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) and TSA in MDA-MB-231 cells. In response to
hyperacetylation, the secretion of Ac-APE1/Ref-1 in a form of
exosome-like vesicles was observed in both electron microscopy and
confocal image analysis. Accordingly, it was caused a statistically
significant inhibition of cell viability and induction of apoptotic DNA
fragmentation, leading activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
and apoptotic cell death. Blockade of Ac-APE1/Ref-1 thoroughly recovered
from the cell death effects. The hyperacetylation-mediated apoptotic cell
death was comparably efficient in treatment of another TNBC cell lines,
BT549, and MDA-MB-468. Keeping in view secreted APE1/Ref-1 following
acetylation - causing apoptotic cell death we suggest that PTM qualifies
as an excellent candidate to be exploited for therapeutic agents to treat
TNBCs. For future clinical investigations of TNBCs, this study offers a
novel paradigm, which stimulation of apoptotic pathway by action of
PTM-induced auto- or paracrine signaling molecules is prior to treatment
of standard chemotherapeutic resistant cancer cells.

