Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Withanolide E sensitizes renal carcinoma cells to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis by increasing cFLIP degradation


Withanolide E (WE), a steroidal lactone from Physalis peruviana, was
found to be highly active for sensitizing renal carcinoma cells and a
number of other human cancer cells to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis. WE, the
most potent and least toxic of 5 TRAIL sensitizing withanolides
identified, enhanced death receptor-mediated apoptotic signaling via a
rapid decline in the levels of both cFLIPL and cFLIPS proteins. Normal
non-transformed human renal epithelial cells were completely resistant to
the WE plus TRAIL combination. Other mechanisms by which TRAIL
sensitizers have been reported to work: generation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS), changes in various pro-and anti-apoptotic protein
expression, death receptor upregulation, activation of intrinsic
(mitochondrial) apoptotic pathways, ER stress, and proteasomal inhibition
proved to be irrelevant to withanolide E activity. Loss of cFLIPL and
cFLIPS was predominantly due to destabilization and/or aggregation of the
proteins subsequently leading to their proteasomal degradation. Since
cFLIPL and cFLIPS are reported to be HSP90 client proteins, and WE can
inhibit HSP90 activity, the effect of WE on various other HSP90 client
proteins was assessed. WE treatment of ACHN renal carcinoma cells altered
the stability of a limited number of HSP90 client proteins when compared
to the well-known HSP90 inhibitor geldanamycin. The destabilization of
cFLIP proteins provides a potentially novel mechanism for sensitizing
cancer cells to TRAIL mediated apoptosis. Sensitization of human renal
carcinoma cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis by WE and its lack of toxicity
were confirmed in animal studies, in which a combination treatment of WE
with an agonist antibody to TRAIL death receptor 5 (DR5) provided a
significant therapeutic benefit compared to either agent alone in a renal
cancer xenograft model. Due to its novel activity, WE is a promising
reagent for analysis of mechanisms of TRAIL resistance, for understanding
HSP90 function, and for further therapeutic development. Various
structural analogs of WE are currently being tested for their
TRAIL-sensitizing activity to provide more insight into Structure
Activity Relationships (SAR) for these compounds. In marked contrast to
bortezomib, among the best currently available TRAIL sensitizers, WE's
more specific mechanism of action suggests minimal toxic side effects
might accompany its combination with TRAIL death receptor agonists for
cancer therapy.

