Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An early innate stress response precedes acquired drug resistance
in melanoma


Acquired drug resistance constitutes a major challenge for effective
cancer therapies. The dynamics of early drug resistance leading to
permanent resistance are poorly understood. Melanoma cell lines were
exposed to molecular targeted inhibitors like BRAF or MEK inhibitors or
chemotherapy at sublethal drug concentrations for over 90 days.
Alternatively melanoma cells were exposed to hypoxic conditions or low
glucose media. Cells surviving drug exposure, hypoxia or nutrient
starvation were monitored for the expression of CD271, ALDH activity,
differentiation markers, ABCB5, chromatin remodeling, histone
demethylases and markers for angiogenesis to characterize cells exposed
for a minimum of 12 days. Further gene expression analyses, RPPA analyses
and in vivo tumorigenicity were performed in these cells. Drug exposure,
hypoxia or nutrient starvation leads to an early innate cell response in
melanoma cells resulting in multi-drug resistance, termed induced drug
tolerant cells (IDTC). Transition into the IDTC state seems to be an
inherent stress reaction for survival towards unfavorable environmental
conditions or drug exposure independent of any subpopulation or cancer
stem cell. The response comprises chromatin remodeling, activation of
signaling cascades, and markers proposed to be stem cell markers with
higher angiogenic potential and tumorigenicity. These changes are
characterized by a common increase in CD271 expression concomitantly with
loss of differentiation markers such as melan-A and tyrosinase, enhanced
ALDH activity and upregulation of histone demethylases. Accordingly,
IDTCs show a loss of H3K4me3, H3K27me3 and gain of H3K9me3 suggesting
activation and repression of differential genes. Drug holidays at the
IDTC state allow for reversion into parental cells re-sensitizing them to
the drug they were primarily exposed to. However, upon continuous drug
exposure IDTCs eventually transform into permanent and irreversible drug
resistant cells. Knockdown of CD271 or KDM5B decreases transition into
the IDTC state substantially but does not prevent it. Our results suggest
a phenotypic shift of parental cells to the induced drug tolerant cell
(IDTC) state irrespective of a given subpopulation thus not representing
cancer stem cells. Targeting IDTCs would be crucial for sustainable
disease management and prevention of acquired drug resistance.

