Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Citrullination of miRNA regulators by PADs: A potential mechanism
for the promotion of colitis and colitis-associated colorectal cancer


Ulcerative Colitis (UC) is a chronic, relapsing inflammatory bowel
disease that affects millions of people worldwide. As a result of DNA
damage caused by the chronic inflammatory state of UC, people suffering
from UC are at a higher risk of developing colorectal cancer (CRC).
Although the cause of UC is still unknown, the protein arginine deiminase
(PAD) family of enzymes has been found to be a key component in many
human inflammatory diseases and cancer, including UC and CRC. PADs are
calcium-dependent enzymes that post-translationally convert positively
charged peptidyl-Arginine to neutral peptidyl-Citrulline through a
process called citrullination. In hopes of treating UC and preventing
CRC, we developed Chlor-amidine (Cl-amidine), a novel small molecule
inhibitor of PADs. Previous results from our group have shown that
miR-16, which is often downregulated in cancers, had increased expression
levels in mice treated with Cl-amidine. MiR-16 targets (i.e. Cyclin D1
and E1) and colon carcinogenesis were also suppressed in mice treated
with Cl-amidine. Our goal is to determine the mechanism(s) by which
Cl-amidine targets miR-16 and other tumor suppressor miRNAs. One
hypothesis is that Cl-amidine is preventing the citrullination of DNA
methyltransferases (DNMTs). Citrullinated DNMTs show hyperactivity,
resulting in hypermethylation and subsequent silencing of miRNAs.
Evidence suggests that PADs can citrullinate DNMT3A, resulting in
methylation-mediated gene silencing. We predict that this silencing
negatively regulates tumor suppressor miRNAs and Cl-amidine treatment
will restore these miRNA levels. Initial results suggest citrullination
of DNMT3A in our in vitro colon cancer cell line model. Experiments are
ongoing to confirm the ability of Cl-amidine to prevent
citrullination-induced activation of upstream miRNA regulators. Results
from our study will elaborate on the mechanism of action of Cl-amidine
and provide further insight into using Cl-amidine as an anti-cancer
therapy.

