Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MyD88-dependent signaling decreases the anti-tumor efficacy of
epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition in head and neck cancer cells


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is upregulated in the majority of
head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC). However many HNSCC
patients respond poorly to EGFR inhibitors (EGFRIs) despite tumor
expression of EGFR. Gene expression analysis of erlotinib-treated HNSCC
cell lines revealed an upregulation of genes involved in MyD88-dependent
interleukin-6 (IL-6) expression compared to their respective vehicle
treated cell lines. We therefore proposed that MyD88-dependent signaling
may reduce the anti-tumor efficacy of the EGFR inhibitor erlotinib in
HNSCC. Erlotinib significantly upregulated IL-6 secretion which we have
previously reported to result in reduced drug efficacy and drug
resistance (Fletcher et al, 2013). Suppression of MyD88 expression
significantly blocked erlotinib-induced IL-6 secretion in vitro and
increased the anti-tumor activity of erlotinib in vivo. There was little
to no evidence of toll-like receptor (TLR) or interleukin-18 receptor
(IL-18R) involvement in erlotinib-induced IL-6 secretion. However,
suppression of the interleukin-1 receptor (IL-1R) signaling through
pharmacologic and genetic methods significantly reduced erlotinib-induced
IL-6 production and increased HNSCC cell sensitivity to erlotinib in
vitro. A time-dependent increase of IL-1 alpha (IL-1) but not IL-1 beta
(IL-1) was observed in response to erlotinib treatment and IL-1 blockade
significantly increased the anti-tumor activity of erlotinib and the EGFR
antibody inhibitor cetuximab in vivo. Pre-treatment with a pan-caspase
inhibitor but not a caspase-1 inhibitor reduced erlotinib-induced IL-1
secretion suggesting that IL-1 was released due to cell death. Human
HNSCC tumors showed higher IL-1 mRNA levels compared to matched normal
tissue, and IL-1 was found to be negatively correlated with survival in
HNSCC patients. Overall, the IL-1/IL-1R/MYD88/IL-6 pathway may be
responsible for the reduced anti-tumor efficacy of erlotinib and other
EGFRIs; and blockade of the MyD88-dependent signaling may improve the
efficacy of EGFRIs in the treatment of HNSCC.

