Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing and enriching human tumor cell content in
patient-derived cancer xenografts and co-cultures


Purpose: To develop a robust real-time PCR-based assay with improved
accuracy for quantifying the relative fractions of human and mouse DNA in
heterogeneous samples such as patient-derived cancer xenografts or
cultures. Background: Patient derived mouse xenografts (PDXs), or
irradiated mouse fibroblast conditionally reprogrammed cancer cultures
(CRCs) provide valuable resources for studying cancers, but as mouse
tissue in heterogeneous samples can significantly confound downstream
functional and molecular assays (such as next-generation sequencing) it
is important to determine the fraction of mouse DNA in mixed samples.
Methods: Using an approach different from a previously reported PCR assay
(Alcoser SY et al BMC Biotech 2011, 11:124), we established a Taqman
real-time PCR assay employing mouse- and human-specific primers that
amplified the same chromosomal region of PTGER2 on human chromosome
14q22.1 and mouse chromosome 14 22.68 cM. We also developed a method to
enrich human tumor cells from PDXs using enzymatic digestion with
Liberase (Roche), followed by differential centrifugation and adherence.
Results: Utilizing serial dilutions of heterogeneous DNA mixtures of
mouse spleen DNA and normal human white blood cell DNA at varied DNA
ratios we demonstrated the assay to be linear (Pearson r = 0.9984, human
DNA; r = 0.9998, mouse DNA; p6.4 pg DNA/reaction). The assay was
evaluated in 66 samples of human tumors (lung, ovary, neuroblastoma,
colon, pancreas, stomach and melanoma) including 25 PDXs before and after
tumor cell enrichment, 12 non-enriched PDXs, 2 CRC-derived xenografts and
2 CRCs. Of the PDXs 28 were subcutaneous tumors and 9 were malignant
ascites. A wide range of human:mouse DNA ratios were found from zero to
99% among all samples, with two PDXs and 2 CRC-derived xenografts lacking
detectable human DNA. The highest human cell fractions were in the
malignant ascites samples. Of the enriched samples, 18 of 25 (72%) showed
tumor cell enrichment of 2 to 71-fold as compared with the value of
matching non-enriched PDX. Conclusions: We developed a robust real-time
PCR assay for measuring the relative fraction of species-specific DNA in
human:mouse heterogenous samples. The human:mouse DNA ratios in PDX
samples varied widely and the human tumor cell populations in PDXs can be
effectively enriched in vitro. Assessing human tumor cell content with
this assay will facilitate molecular studies with PDXs and mouse-human
cocultivated cells.

