Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cathepsin L inhibition reverts epithelial mesenchymal transition
in prostate and breast cancer cells


The Epithelial Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) is a key event in tumor
migration and invasion processes whereby epithelial cells lose polarity
together with cell-cell contacts associated with loss of epithelial
markers such as E-cadherin and then undergo a dramatic remodeling of the
cytoskeleton associated with expression of mesenchymal markers such as
vimentin, as well as increased production of extracellular matrix
(ECM)-degrading proteases. Snail is a gene that promotes epithelial
mesenchymal transition (EMT) by using its zinc finger domains to bind to
target genes that would otherwise stop EMT. Cathepsin L (Cat L) is a
cysteine protease involved in cell invasion and has recently been
associated with poor prognosis in Colon and Breast Cancer with Cat L
being localized in the nucleus. We have shown previously that
Snail-mediated EMT can be antagonized by muscadine grape skin extract
(MSKE), a natural product rich in anthocyanin. In preliminary data we
found that Snail, an inducer of EMT, could up-regulate Cat L activity and
expression in breast cancer cells. We hypothesized that antagonizing Cat
L activity would lead to mesenchymal epithelial transition (MET). We
utilized breast and prostate EMT models to analyze Cat L activity using
gelatin zymography and subsequently treated mesenchymal cells with 1M, 5M
or 20M Z-FY-CHO (Cat L specific inhibitor) or MSKE for 72 hours. We
performed western blot analysis and immunofluorescence for EMT markers as
well as invasion and migration assays. Our data indicates that
mesenchymal MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells showed higher Cat L expression
and activity as compared to epithelial MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
Interestingly, immunofluorescence analysis revealed cells displaying a
higher snail expression have an increase in Cathepsin L activity and
expression as well as Cat L being localized in the cytoplasm and nucleus.
Additionally, mesenchymal breast (MDA-MB-231, MCF-7 cells overexpressing
Snail) and prostate (ARCaP-M, ARCaP-E cells overexpressing Snail) cells
displayed decreased expression of vimentin and Cat L expression and
activity when treated with Z-FY-CHO or MSKE, while E-cadherin increased
suggestive of MET. This was associated with decreased cell migration and
invasion. We also show for the first time that treatment with MSKE or
Z-FY-CHO changes the localization of Cat L from nuclear to cytoplasmic.
Based on these results, the inhibition of Cat L could play a role in
reverting EMT and preventing tumor progression.

