Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor C in promoting
radioresistance of prostate cancer


Radiotherapy is an important treatment regimen for prostate cancer. We
have shown that the lymphangiogenic growth factor, Vascular Endothelial
Growth Factor C (VEGF-C), induces docetaxel resistance and autophagy in
prostate cancer (Muders et al., Cancer Res 2009 and Stanton et al.,
Cancer Res 2013). In this study we have evaluated the role of VEGF-C and
VEGF-C induced autophagy in radioresistance of prostate cancer using cell
culture experiments and human tissue samples.The human prostate carcinoma
cell lines PC-3, LNCaP and DU145 were used in these cell culture
experiments. Clonogenic survival of prostate cancer cells, after RNA
interference (RNAi) of VEGF-C, autophagy related gene 5 (ATG5), and after
addition of recombinant human VEGF-C following irradiation therapy, was
evaluated. Autophagic flux was tested after ionizing irradiation using a
Light-Chain-3 II immunoblot. To confirm our in vitro findings, human
tissues of patients who underwent radical prostatectomy and adjuvant
radiotherapy at Mayo Clinic were evaluated for VEGF-C expression. The
quantity and intensity of VEGF-C staining was evaluated by two
pathologists independently and correlated with biochemical relapse free
survival (BRFS). The follow-up time is up to 23 years after radiotherapy.
Multivariate Cox analysis was performed.VEGF-C levels correlated with a
significantly higher radioresistance in colony formation assays and human
tissue samples by multivariate analysis. The risk of biochemical
recurrence increased 2.8 fold (95% confidence interval: 1.109 to 7.237; p
= 0.03) when VEGF-C was highly expressed in prostatectomy patients with
adjuvant radiotherapy. In line with our studies on autophagy in VEGF-C
mediated docetaxel resistance of prostate cancer, autophagic flux was
reduced after VEGF-C depletion during radiation. Interestingly, RNAi for
ATG5 showed no effect on radiosensitivity which suggests that the
decrease in autophagic flux after VEGF-C depletion is not responsible for
the increased radiosensitivity.We conclude that VEGF-C is an important
mediator of radiotherapy resistance in prostate cancer. In contrast to
our published results on chemotherapy resistance, VEGF-C induced
autophagy appears to be less important for resistance against ionizing
radiation. Other VEGF-C dependent mechanisms for therapy resistance are
under investigation.

