Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The HIV-derived protein Vpr52-96 has anti-glioma activity in vitro
and in vivo


Background: Patients with actively replicating human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) are highly radiosensitive and exhibit adverse reactions even
at low irradiation doses. A major underlying cause is high intra- and
extracellular levels of a virus-encoded peptide termed viral protein R
(Vpr). As Vpr efficiently crosses the blood-brain barrier and accumulates
in astrocytes, we examined whether it may be utilized as a drug in the
treatment of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM).Methods: Four
glioblastoma-derived cell lines with and without lentivirus-mediated
Methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) overexpression (U251, U87,
U251-MGMT, U87-MGMT) were exposed to Vpr, temozolomide (TMZ),
conventional photon irradiation (2-6 Gy) or to combinations. Caspase
assays were employed to detect apoptosis. Colony formation assays were
used to analyse clonogenic survival. Dose escalation was performed using
n = 12 NOD/SCID/c/ (NSG) mice in a classical 3+3 manner. This strain was
also used as an orthotopic implant model of glioma using
luciferase-expressing U87 cells (n = 18). Continuous Vpr administration
was achieved using osmotic pumps, irradiation (35 Gy) was performed using
a small-animal irradiation device and intracerebral tumor growth was
monitored using repetitive contrast-enhanced micro CT scans.Results: Vpr
showed high rates of acute toxicities with a LD50 of 4.01.1 M for U251
and a LD50 of 15.77.5 M for U87 cells. Caspase assays revealed
Vpr-induced apoptosis in U251 but not in U87 cells. Vpr also efficiently
inhibited clonogenic survival both in U251 and U87 cells and showed
additive effects with irradiation. In contrast to TMZ, Vpr acted
independently of the MGMT expression status. Dose escalation in mice (n =
12) was feasible and resulted in no evident renal or liver toxicity.
Similar to irradiation with 3 5 Gy (n = 8), Vpr treatment of
orthotopically implanted NSG mice (n = 5) delayed tumor growth and
significantly (p = 0.041; log-rank test) prolonged overall survival
compared to untreated animals (n = 5).Conclusion: The HIV-encoded peptide
Vpr exhibits all properties of an effective chemotherapeutic drug and may
be a useful agent in the treatment of GBM.

