Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting error-prone alternative nonhomologous end joining
(A-NHEJ) DNA repair pathway to treat ESR1-mediated therapy resistance


Endocrine therapies for estrogen receptor (ESR1) positive breast cancer
involve modulation of ESR1 signaling using either antiestrogens (AE) or
aromatase inhibitors (AI). Despite initial positive response, most
patients develop resistance to these drugs and therapy resistance is a
major clinical problem. Emerging findings suggest that during the
progression of ESR1 positive breast cancer, the cancer cell increasingly
becomes dependent on the error-prone alternative-non-homologous end
joining (A-NHEJ) DNA repair pathway for double strand break (DSB) repair
leading to an increase in chromosomal abnormalities contributing to
hormonal therapy resistance. The mechanism by which ESR1 pathway
regulates A-NHEJ remains unknown. Recent studies from our lab discovered
that ESR1 coregulator Proline-, Glutamic acid-, and Leucine-rich
Protein-1 (PELP1) is phosphorylated by the DNA damage response kinases
and plays a key role in the A-NHEJ pathway. In this study, we dissected
the mechanism by which PELP1 regulates the A-NHEJ pathway and developed a
novel inhibitor of PELP1-A-NHEJ axis. Using plasmid based repair assay,
we provided evidence that PELP1 regulates degree of end-resection that is
essential for A-NHEJ pathway mediated DNA repair. Immunoprecipitation
assays revealed that PELP1 interacts with exonuclease protein, Mre11 that
plays an essential role in A-NHEJ pathway. Using PELP1 domain deletions
and GST pull down assays, we identified C-terminus of PELP1 as the region
that interacts with key components of the A-NHEJ pathway. We have
rationally screened a random peptide library composed of 10 million
peptides, and identified a tight-binding peptide to the C-terminus of
PELP1 that interferes with PELP1- Mre11 interaction. Using emerging
stapled peptide technology, we converted this peptide to a stable cell
permeable Peptide Inhibitor of PELP1 (sPIP3). sPIP3 bound to PELP1 with
high affinity, interfered PELP1-Mre11 interaction, reduced A-NHEJ repair
frequency in reporter based assays and significantly reduced frequency of
chromosomal translocation. In MTT based assays, sPIP3 demonstrated
significant cytotoxic effect on breast cancer cells with minimal effect
on normal cells. Further, sPIP3 significantly reduced survival and
promoted apoptosis of hormonal therapy resistant breast cancer model
cells. Collectively, these findings demonstrate the therapeutic potential
of sPIP3 which represents a novel drug for the treatment of therapy
resistant breast cancer by inhibiting error prone A-NHEJ pathway.

