Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential efficacy of p53 restoration in induction and
maintenance of senescence in premalignant and malignant cells


Restoration of p53 in tumors has been suggested as a possible therapeutic
approach, based on preclinical in vivo and in vitro evidence of possible
efficacy. However, the relationship between the timing of p53 restoration
and its efficacy is still unclear. We now show that restoration of p53 in
murine pre-malignant proliferating pineal tumors results in effective
cell cycle exit and induction of cellular senescence, while p53
reactivation in established malignant pineal tumors does not impact cell
proliferation, unless paired with DNA damaging therapies. This
differential effect was not related to levels of p19Arf expression, as
its expression was more pronounced in malignant tumors, nor to MAPK
pathway activity. Interestingly, in premalignant lesions induced to
senesce by p53 restoration, inactivation of p53 after senescence resulted
in re-entry into the cell cycle, and rapid tumor progression. These
findings were also validated in cell culture models of Cyclin D1-induced
and RasV12-induced senescence in murine pineal cells and mouse embryo
fibroblasts, respectively. Evaluation of a panel of human supratentorial
primitive neuroectodermal tumors (sPNET), of which pineoblastoma is a
subtype, showed low activity of the p53 pathway, while only one of 6
tumors had p53 deletion or mutation. Together, this data shows that
restoration of the p53 pathway has different effects in premalignant
versus invasive pineal tumors, where it may need to be paired with DNA
damaging agents, to engage it in tumor suppression. Furthermore, p53
activation may need to be continually sustained for effective tumor
suppression in such lesions undergoing senescence as a tumor suppressor
mechanism. Finally, p53 restoration approaches may be worth exploring in
sPNET, where the p53 gene seems to be intact but the pathway inactive in
the majority of examined tumors.

