Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring minimal residual disease by urinary or plasma
circulating tumor DNA of KRAS mutation burden in colorectal cancer
patients with resectable liver metastases


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most commonly diagnosed
cancer and the third leading cause of cancer deaths. Over half of
patients with CRC will develop liver metastases. Surgical resection, in
combination with systemic therapies, greatly improves long-term outcomes,
and around 40% of patients with resected liver limited disease are alive
5 years after diagnosis. While tumor staging and radicality of surgery
are commonly used for prognostic assessment, better non-invasive markers
are needed for monitoring chemo-responsiveness, following minimal
residual disease (MRD), and guiding complex treatment decisions in these
patients. This study evaluated the utility of quantitating KRAS mutation
burden in urinary and plasma ctDNA as a means of monitoring MRD in
surgical CRC patients with liver limited metastases.Methods: We developed
a novel, NGS-based method for enrichment and quantitative detection of
KRAS mutations in urinary and plasma ctDNA. A blinded retrospective study
was conducted on 20 Stage I-IV CRC patients, 15 of whom had undergone
curative or palliative intent surgical resection of primary tumor or
liver metastases in combination with various systemic therapies.Results:
Archived, matched urine and plasma samples were collected from 20
patients with KRAS positive primary tumor. For operable patients,
specimens were collected prior to surgery, during and immediately after
surgery, plus additional time points post-surgery. A total of 193 plasma
and urine samples archived for 3-5 years were tested. All 101 of 101
plasma samples (100%) and 79 of 92 urine samples (86%) had sufficient DNA
and were deemed evaluable. In a blinded analysis, a correct KRAS mutation
that correlated with KRAS mutation in tissue was identified in 95% of
evaluable baseline plasmas (19 of 20) and 92% of evaluable baseline
urines (11 of 12). In one patient, a KRAS mutation distinct from that
identified in the tumor biopsy was detected consistently across all
serial ctDNA samples. Overall, we observed a clear correlation and highly
comparable fold change between plasma and urinary ctDNA KRAS levels on
treatment. Significantly, in all patients with curative intent surgery,
ctDNA KRAS levels were undetectable in urine or plasma after surgery. In
contrast, in 8 of 10 patients with incomplete, palliative surgery, the
ctDNA KRAS signal remained detectable or increased after surgery. Further
correlation between ctDNA KRAS and clinical outcomes will be
discussed.Conclusion: We demonstrate for the first time that quantitative
changes of mutational KRAS burden in plasma and urinary ctDNA are highly
correlated. We further demonstrate clinical applicability of urinary
ctDNA KRAS analysis for monitoring quantitatively, with single molecule
sensitivity, the MRD post-surgery for CRC patients with liver resectable
metastases. Supported by Grant no. 13660.

