Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estradiol-inducible dependence receptor UNC5a restricts estrogen
receptor activity and imparts estradiol dependence to breast cancer cells


Signaling by Dependence Receptors (DRs) is a new paradigm in cell
signaling and recently has been recognized to play a major role in
cancers. DRs are cell surface receptors that function as tumor
suppressors or induce apoptosis when disengaged from their ligands. In
the presence of ligands, these receptors transmit proliferation,
migratory, and anti-apoptotic signals thus creating a cellular state that
is dependent on ligands for survival. This study was focused on
regulation of their expression in breast cancer. We observed that UNC5a,
a DR, and its ligand Netrin-1 (NTN1) are estradiol (E2)-inducible
depending on cell types. Since E2 and its receptor estrogen receptor
alpha (ER) are major signaling hubs in ER-positive breast cancers, we
examined the function of UNC5a in ER-positive breast cancer cells.
Knockdown of UNC5a resulted in deregulated expression of E2-regulated
genes, E2-independent and anti-estrogen-resistant growth in vitro, and
E2-indpendent tumor formation in xenograft models. RNA-seq analyses of
parental and UNC5a knockdown cells with or without E2 treatment revealed
10-fold increase in number of E2-regulated genes in UNC5a knockdown cells
compared with parental cells. The basal expression of E2-inducible
anti-apoptotic BCL-2 was elevated >30-fold at mRNA and/or protein levels
in UNC5a knockdown cells compared with vector control cells. In addition,
UNC5a knockdown resulted in aberrant NF-B signaling, which is typically
under negative regulation by ER:E2. Furthermore, UNC5a knockdown cells
showed elevated expression of p63, a p53 family transcription factor that
promotes breast epithelial stem cell maintenance and basal-like breast
cancer. Consistent with the known role of NF-B and p63 in cancer stem
cells, UNC5a-knockdown cells displayed cancer stem cell phenotype as
evident from 3-fold increase in the number of CD44+/CD24+ and
CD44+/EpCAM+ subpopulation compared with parental cells. Overall, our
results suggest that E2 induces UNC5a expression as a negative regulatory
loop to restrict or fine tune ER:E2 signaling and maintain luminal
phenotype. Loss or mutation of UNC5a, as observed frequently in cancer,
could lead to unrestricted E2:ER signaling and anti-estrogen resistant
growth while simultaneously enabling ER-positive luminal breast cancer
cells to acquire basal-like and cancer stem cell-like features.This work
is supported by grants from the Susan G. Komen for the Cure (SAC110025 to
HN)

