Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A simple method to screen patients for SNPs in NAT1 gene for
prostate cancer risk


Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are single base differences in DNA
and are suitable for genotyping markers of risk in human disease. With
emerging bio-technology and a cross-platform application of techniques
improvements can be made in methodology. Although a number of
high-throughput SNP genotyping systems are available the technology is
expensive for it requires both trained personnel and dedicated platforms.
The method reported here is a simple qPCR based High Resolution Method
(HRM) based method and can be cost effectively used in screening patients
in a general molecular biology and clinical laboratories. The NAT1 gene
directs N-acetylation and O-acetylation of toxins including heterocyclic
amines through the phase II xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes toxicity
pathway. The purpose was to develop a screening tool to screen
individuals with SNPs at locations 190, 445, 560 and 640.A modified qPCR
approach was used with HRM analyses. Primers were designed using an
in-house protocol; the rs sequence for the site-specific mutation was
obtained from SNP database and fed to Primer Quest and having diligently
identified the location of the mutation primers were designed and
assessed using OligoAnalyzer Tool. The Tm for the forward and reverse
were kept as close as possible and G was kept between -1 and -9 and the
GC content greater than 50%. The following sequences were used rs58379106
(190C>T); rs4987076 (445G>A); rs4986782 (560G>A) and rs4986783 (640T>G).
A RT qPCR 10l reaction was designed using iTAQ Supermix (BioRad, CA),
forward and reverse primers and genomic DNA obtained from prostate cancer
cases and controls. Standard cycling conditions described for iTAQ were
observed for 44 cycles. The data collected was analysed using HRM
software (BioRad, CA) as per the guidelines described by the software.The
data shows that when all the conditions are normalized and benchmarked
the shape of the HRM curves are typical and characteristic of the SNP.
The figures show the symmetry and similarity in the HRM. The similarity
from the standard curve (Fig.1) and standard curve with unknown SNP (Fig.
2) and curves with a complementary SNP at 445 along with SNP at 640 (Fig.
3).Fig. 1 Std. curve with NAT1640 Fig. 2 Std. curve with unknown samples
Fig. 3 Unknown samples with 640 and 445 This data shows that with this
approach it is possible to identify site specific mutation and the
presence of other mutation in the vicinity of the SNP of interest. The
presence or absence of mutations among cases and controls can be assessed
using this approach.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

