Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RASSF- 1A methylation in squamous cell carcinoma of the lower lip
using pyrosequencing technique


Background: Chronic exposure to UVB radiation can cause hypermethylation
and silencing of the tumor suppressor gene RASSF-1A. The protein encoded
by this gene has multiple important functions in cell cycle control.
Objective: to investigate the clinical significance of the methylation
profile of RASSF-1A and of its protein expression in lower lip squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC). Methods: The demographic and clinical-pathological
data of 87 patients with a confirmed diagnosis were collected from the
medical records. DNA was extracted from paraffin-embedded tissue samples
and treated with sodium bisulfite. 2ug of treated and intact DNA was
submitted to PCR amplification using a specific primer targeting the
RASSF-1A promoter segments 1 and 2. RASSF1A methylation was investigated
by pyrosequencing; the complementary strand was synthesized automatically
and the signal emitted during the reaction was detected with a camera and
transformed into peaks on a pyrogram. Results: Lower lip SCC was more
frequent in men than women, with a proportion of 2.4:1. The mean patient
age was 63.3 years. Lymph node involvement was absent (N0) in 73 (83.1%)
of cases and present (N+) in 14 (16.1%). In group N0, most patients (n =
49, 67.1%) were in an early clinical stage (CS I and II). Analysis of the
methylation of RASSF1A_01 was possible in 29 of the SCC cases.
Hypermethylation was observed in 15 (51.7%) cases, one (3.4%) of them
being associated with metastasis to regional lymph nodes. Analysis of
RASSF1A_02 was possible in 20 cases and hypermethylation was observed in
only 9 (45.0%). No significant correlation was found between the
clinical-pathological parameters (age, gender, clinical stage) and
aberrant methylation of the promoter region studied (p>0.05).
Conclusions: Hypermethylation of the two RASSF-1A segments studied was
observed in approximately 50% of SCC cases, but was not correlated to
clinicopathologic parameters.

