Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploratory analyses suggest ovarian tumors with somatic or
germline loss of function mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 are biologically
similar and sensitive to PARP inhibition


The PARP inhibitor olaparib (LynparzaTM) elicits responses in ovarian
cancer patients with inherited (germline) loss of function mutations in
the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes (gBRCAm). In the tumors of such patients the
unmutated (wt) copy of the relevant BRCA gene is usually lost. Many
patients are aware of their BRCA mutation status due to the wide
availability of blood testing. However, in around a third of ovarian
tumors with BRCA mutations the mutation has not been inherited but is
tumor-specific (sBRCAm). Given the difference in origin of mutation, it
is important to determine whether there are genotypic and phenotypic
differences between sBRCAm and gBRCAm ovarian tumors. In a randomized,
Phase II trial of 265 patients with platinum-sensitive relapsed serous
ovarian cancer (NCT00753545; Study 19), maintenance treatment with
olaparib (400 mg bid; capsules) led to a significant increase in
progression-free survival (PFS) vs placebo in patients with a BRCA
mutation (HR 0.18; 95% CI 0.10-0.31; PThe PARP inhibitor olaparib
(LynparzaTM) elicits responses in ovarian cancer patients with inherited
(germline) loss of function mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes
(gBRCAm). In the tumors of such patients the unmutated (wt) copy of the
relevant BRCA gene is usually lost. Many patients are aware of their BRCA
mutation status due to the wide availability of blood testing. However,
in around a third of ovarian tumors with BRCA mutations the mutation has
not been inherited but is tumor-specific (sBRCAm). Given the difference
in origin of mutation, it is important to determine whether there are
genotypic and phenotypic differences between sBRCAm and gBRCAm ovarian
tumors. In a randomized, Phase II trial of 265 patients with
platinum-sensitive relapsed serous ovarian cancer (NCT00753545; Study
19), maintenance treatment with olaparib (400 mg bid; capsules) led to a
significant increase in progression-free survival (PFS) vs placebo in
patients with a BRCA mutation (HR 0.18; 95% CI 0.10-0.31; P<0.00001).
Diagnostic tumor samples from the study were sequenced by Foundation
Medicine. After filtering for common polymorphisms, BRCA gene variants
were classified using American College of Medical Genetics standards as
mutant, wild type or variant of unknown significance (VUS). VUS were
further classified on the basis of information from the Breast
Information Core database. Mutation origin (g vs s) and zygosity were
determined by tumor allele frequency analysis and/or by comparison to
germline sequencing, and heterogeneity was determined using the
Foundation Medicine SGZ algorithm, which compares allele frequency to
model expectations, taking into account tumor purity, ploidy and local
copy number. BRCA mutations were found in 53% of the 209 samples with
data available. Known germline BRCA mutations were correctly classified
as germline by the SGZ algorithm. Tumor BRCA mutations were identified in
40 patients without confirmation of a mutation in a blood sample. Twenty
of these patients were classified as sBRCAm (12 BRCA1 and 8 BRCA2) by the
algorithm. Only one case was called without loss of the wt BRCA allele.
It has been hypothesized that TP53 mutation is an early event and was
found to be consistent between tumors and precursor lesions. Allele
frequencies/clonality for BRCA and TP53 mutations were comparable and
there was no evidence of systematic subclonality in the sBRCAm cases. An
exploratory analysis of PFS and overall survival (OS) was performed on
the 20 patients (10 received treatment and 10 placebo). Consistent with
results from the gBRCAm population, a trend in event rate in favor of
treatment over placebo was observed (3/10 vs 8/10 events for PFS and 3/10
vs 7/10 for OS). Although from a small number of patients, data are
consistent with sBRCA mutation as an early event in tumorigenesis and
support phenotypic similarity of gBRCA and sBRCA mutated tumors.

