Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIF-1/NDUFA4L2 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma progression
through reducing oxidative stress


Background: Liver is well characterized as a major metabolic organ, the
metabolic machineries driving liver cancer (hepatocellular carcinoma,
HCC) progression remains poorly understood. Oxygen deprivation, hypoxia,
is frequently found in regions of tumors with insufficient blood supply.
Hypoxia stabilizes hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) which
transcriptionally activates genes that utilize glycolysis over oxidative
phosphorylation for ATP production. This metabolic switch reduces
mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) production that would
otherwise occur due to electron imbalance through the electron transport
chain (ETC) in hypoxic condition. In our transcriptome sequence analysis,
among all the mitochondrial subunits in the complex I of the electron
transport chain (ETC), only NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1 alpha
subcomplex 4-like 2 gene (NDUFA4L2) was distinctly and significantly
induced by hypoxia and over-expressed in human HCC. However, the clinical
implications and functions of this gene in HCC progression remain
unknown.Methods: The mRNA expression of NDUFA4L2 in an expanded cohort of
100 HCC patients was evaluated by qRT-PCR. ChIP assay was performed to
study the interaction of HIF-1 with NDUFA4L2. Stable knockdown by shRNA
or knockout by TALEN of HIF-1/NDUFA4L2 was established in HCC cells to
explore the roles of NDUFA4L2 in HCC. ROS, mitochondrial membrane
potential, and oxygen consumption rate were measured in the
HIF-1/NDUFA4L2 knockdown or knockout HCC cells. Orthotopic implantation
model was employed to evaluate the in vivo effect of NDUFA4L2 and the
efficiency of HIF inhibitors.Results: NDUFA4L2 was significantly
overexpressed in human HCC and was markedly induced by hypoxia.
Overexpression of NDUFA4L2 in human HCC was significantly correlated with
aggressive HCC clinicopathological parameters including absence of tumor
encapsulation, formation of tumor microsatellite, and poorer overall
survival. ChIP assay confirmed the binding of HIF-1 with hypoxia response
elements (HREs) in NDUFA4L2 promoter and expression study showed that
hypoxia-induced NDUFA4L2 was abolished in HIF-1knockdown or knockout HCC
cells. Genetic ablation of HIF-1/NDUFA4L2 increased the mitochondrial
activity that coupled with higher intracellular reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and ROS-induced apoptosis. Knockdown of NDUFA4L2 markedly
suppressed tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. HIF inhibitors, digoxin and
Sorafenib, profoundly inhibited the growth of HCC that expressed high
levels of NDUFA4L2.Conclusion: Over-expression of NDUFA4L2 is associated
with poor clinical outcome in HCC patients. Hypoxia-induced NDUFA4L2
reduced the mitochondrial ROS production and ROS-triggered apoptosis,
thereby conferring HCC cells growth advantage in hypoxic environment.
Targeting HIF-1/NDUFA4L2 pathway by HIF inhibitors represent a new
therapeutic strategy for HCC.

