Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of the environmental carcinogen dibenzo[a,l]pyrene on
genome-wide methylation and the impact of dietary black raspberry in
mouse oral tissues


We had previously reported the carcinogenicity of dibenzo[a,l]pyrene
(DB[a,l]P) in mouse oral cavity; we also found that that diets containing
black raspberry (BRB) significantly reduced the levels of DNA adducts
derived from DB[a,l]P in mouse oral tissues. Epigenetic alternations
including DNA methylation have been shown to contribute to carcinogenesis
induced by certain carcinogens. Literature data showed that dietary BRB
can modulate DNA methylation at certain gene-specific promoters; however,
the genome-wide methylation alterations by DB[a,l]P and the impact of BRB
are not known. Therefore, to mimic the bioassay employed in our previous
carcinogenicity study, B6C3F1 female mice (n = 3/group) were fed either
control diet or diet containing BRB (5%) for 2 weeks prior to topical
application of DMSO containing DB[a,l]P (24 nmol, 3 times a week for 5
weeks); animals treated with DMSO and control diet were used as a control
group. DNA was isolated from oral tissues and subjected to enhanced
reduced representation bisulfite sequencing analysis which is a single
nucleotide resolution technique used to study DNA methylation in CpG
sites and the surrounding regions. Briefly, DNA was digested by MspI
followed by end repair, adenylation and adapter ligation with a
modification of bead size selection to capture MspI fragments of 70-320
bp size. The resulting libraries were bisulfite-converted followed by PCR
amplification and read by 150 bp on HiSeq 2500. Base calls of bisulfite
treated sequencing reads were mapped to the mm9 mouse assembly and
methylation calls were performed using Bismark v0.10.1. The methylKit R
package was then used to calculate the differential methylation.
Differentially methylated bases with q-value 25% were extracted.
Differential methylation of 30 genes was observed in DB[a,l]P compared
with control; 12 genes were hypermethylated including -catenin;
hypomethylation of 18 genes was observed. Differential methylation of 960
genes was observed in mice treated with DB[a,l]P and fed BRB compared to
DB[a,l]P. Ingenuity Pathways analysis was performed on each of the
resulting gene sets in the three groups. Pathway analysis of the genes
with altered methylation patterns identified canonical pathways for the
involvement of cancer related network for genes involved in Wnt/-catenin
signaling, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), glycolysis and p53
signaling pathways in mice treated with DB[a,l]P. On the other hand, the
canonical pathways identified in mice treated with DB[a,l]P and fed BRB
are genes involved in glutamate receptor signaling, IGF-1 signaling, EMT,
glycolysis, and protein citrullination. Using this quantitative
sequencing-based approach, our work uncovers significant global DNA
methylation alterations in mouse oral tissues by DB[a,l]P alone and
together with BRB. Support: NCI R01-CA173465

