Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic modulation of microRNAs for treatment of glioblastoma
cancer initiating cells


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive and invasive brain tumor
primarily found in adults. Survival outcomes after standard clinical
treatment of GBM are poor due to the sub-population of GBMs, the cancer
initiating cells (CICs). CICs are highly invasive and resistant to
multimodal therapeutic treatment strategies. It has been shown that
microRNAs (miRs) that modulate apoptotic signaling pathways are
dysregulated in GBMs, particularly miRs 34a and 21. Our study
investigated the therapeutic potential of modulating levels of the
pro-apoptotic miR34a and anti-apoptotic miR21 in the CICs. To accomplish
this, we complexed both miR34a and the anti-sense oligonucleotide
inhibitor for miR21 (ASO21) to targeted cationic liposomes, as these can
be systemically administered in vivo and extravasate through the leaky
vasculature of the blood-brain barrier to reach the tumor. The isolated
CICs overexpress epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). An EGFR peptide
was custom synthesized that has a high binding affinity to the receptor
and was used as the targeting ligand on the cationic liposomes. We
analyzed the effect of miR34a and/or ASO21 on the CIC viability,
senescence, and invasion. Our results demonstrate that after treatment
with miR34a, ASO21, and combination of the two, the tumor viability
decreased to 65%, 70%, and 45%, respectively as compared to the media
control (100%). In addition, using -galactosidase as an indicator for
senescent cells, it was observed that the number of cells that were
senescent increased. For the miR34a, ASO21, and the combination of the
two, 40%, 23%, and 70%, respectively, of the cells were senescent,
compared to the 4% of untreated cancer initiating cells. The number of
CIC spheres formed was also significantly reduced, as cancer initiating
cells treated with the combination had an average of 1125 spheres formed
versus the media (untreated) of 2860 spheres formed, suggesting a
decreased potential to form bulk tumors. Preliminary protein and gene
profiling has demonstrated fold changes in pathway and migration markers
Stat3, Reck, and Notch, as well as apoptosis markers Bax, PDCD4, and
Caspase 3 for the treatment conditions compared to the medial control.
Furthermore, our data demonstrates that the enhanced effect of the miR34a
and ASO21 combination treatment had a synergistic effect compared to the
individual treatments rather than additive. Therefore, this study
demonstrates that modulating miR34a and 21 is a potential therapeutic
strategy to induce apoptosis and senescence, and decrease migration in
the difficult to treat GBM cancer initiating cells.

