Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct types of cetuximab resistant KRAS mutant of colorectal
cancer revealed by an integrated sensitivity assay


Purpose: Cetuximab, an anti-EGFR antibody, is clinically used in
colorectal cancer (CRC) patients. Several clinical trials revealed that
KRAS mutant is resistant to cetuximab. As KRAS is one of the downstream
molecules in EGFR pathway, KRAS mutants are thought to be resistant to
cetuximab due to the constitutive activation of downstream signaling,
although mechanism of resistance in KRAS-mutant CRC remains to be
elusive. We developed a primary culture system, CTOS method, by which
cancer cells are prepared and cultured from patient tumors, maintaining
histological and molecular characteristics of original tumors (Kondo 2011
PNAS). CTOS method can be applied to patient tumors as well as mouse
xenografts. In this study, we performed integrated sensitivity assays by
in vivo/in vitro CTOS sensitivity assay, and CTOS signaling assay in
order to investigate characteristics of KRAS mutant CRC cells.Methods:
Nine CTOS lines (3 KRAS-wild type, and 6 KRAS-mutant) were analyzed. For
in vivo sensitivity assay, growth suppression by cetuximab was evaluated
in mouse xenografts derived from CTOSs. CTOSs were classified into three
groups according to the response (Regression: tumors became smaller than
initial size; Intermediate; tumors became smaller than untreated control
but bigger than initial size; Progression: no effect). For in vitro
sensitivity assay, growth suppression by cetuximab was evaluated in
CTOSs. For signaling analysis, CTOSs were treated with EGF and/or
cetuximab, and phosphorylation of EGFR, AKT, and ERK were
evaluated.Results: Regression in vivo was found in the tumors originated
only from KRAS-wt (2/3). KRAS-mutant CTOSs were able to be clearly
divided into two groups. Type I (2 CTOSs) showed Progression in vivo, no
response in vitro, and no response in signaling assay. Even the
phosphorylation of EGFR was not inhibited by cetuximab treatment. On the
other hand, Type II (4 COTSs) showed Intermediate in vivo, moderate
response in vitro, and variable responses in signaling assay. ERK
phosphorylation was inhibited by cetuximab treatment in all 4
CTOSs.Conclusions: Using integrated in vivo and in vitro assays, KRAS
mutant was able to be divided into two distinct groups according to the
response to cetuximab. Resistant mechanism of KRAS mutant rather than
MAPK pathway activation can be studied in this integrated assay system.

