Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cellular hierarchy of intestinal tumors


Activation of the Wnt signaling is the initiating event in the majority
of human colorectal cancers. In mouse models, disruption of the tumor
suppressor gene, Apc, induces the adenomatous lesion. However, the
analyses of initial events in animal models are hampered by difficulties
to control the timing and the efficiency of introducing mutations. To
overcome this problem, we used three dimensional organoid culture, which
contain all epitherial components of intestinal cells with the defined
organization of the crypt- and villus-like domains. In vitro
4-hydroxy-tamoxifen (4OHT) treatment of mouse organoids carrying Apc
conditional mutation and CreERT2 allele led to the rapid and efficient
gene aberration. Gene expression analysis revealed that the change in
response to Apc inactivation was strikingly similar to those observed in
the animal model. These observations demonstrated that the oragnoid
culture is a useful tool to investigate the early cellular and molecular
invents upon Apc inactivation.Recent analyses identified stem cells in
normal intestine as well as cancer stem cells of human colorectal cancer.
We found that Apc inactivation in the intestinal organoids led to the
alteration in their expression profiles in a strikingly similar manner
with those in animal models. The expression levels of tested stem cell
markers were increased, except Aldh1. Immunofluorescence analysis
demonstrated that their elevated epressions were caused by the increase
of the stem cell population. Paneth cells, which provide the stem cell
niche, consistently resided with the stem cells, indicating the
accelerated growth of stem cells was accompanied by the differentiation
process of the normal intestine. Notably, Aldh1 was exclusively expressed
in the villus-like domains, which were decreased after 4OHT treatment. In
the mouse intestine, it was expressed in the villi of normal intestine,
and was not detected in the adenomatous lesion. These observations
demonstrated that Apc inactivation led to the expansion of crypt-like
domains by altering the proliferation and differentiation program of stem
cells.Since the organoids share the features of the early response upon
Apc inactivation with mouse models, they allowed detailed investigation
of tumorigenesis. We have used the organoid culture system to elucidate
the roles of oncogenic mutations as well as to evaluate the potential
therapeutic targets.

