Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes modulate the ubiquitination
and downregulation of the EGFR by the Cbl RING finger ubiquitin ligase


Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are known drivers of malignant
transformation. Many RTKs (e.g., EGFR, MET) are negatively regulated by
ubiquitination and degradation mediated by Cbl proteins, a family of RING
finger (RF) ubiquitin ligases (E3s). Loss of Cbl protein function is
associated with malignant transformation driven by increased RTK
activity. E3s such as the Cbl proteins confer specificity to the
ubiquitination process and direct the conjugation of ubiquitin to one or
more lysines on the target proteins in collaboration with
ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes (E2s). We used enzymatic and yeast
two-hybrid assays to characterize the E2s that can interact with Cbl
proteins. Using an in vitro E3 assay, we found that only the Ube2d family
of E2s mediates autoubiquitination of the Cbl proteins. Subsequently,
using the yeast two-hybrid system, we found that Ube2e1, Ube2e2, Ube2e3,
Ube2l3, Ube2u, Ube2w and Ube2z can interact with Cbl even though they do
not support autoubiquitination of Cbl in the in vitro E3 assay. Among
these E2s, three Ube2e family members and Ube2w bind to the RF domain of
Cbl as demonstrated by the loss of interaction when the RF domain is
disrupted. This suggests that Ube2e and Ube2w are relevant to the
ubiquitination and degradation of substrates by Cbl. Knockdown of Ube2w
decreases downregulation of EGFR in Hela cells. In the in vitro E3 assay
we found that Ube2w can increase autoubiquitination of Cbl mediated by
ube2d2. Surprisingly, we found that knockdown of Ube2e increases
downregulation and ubiquitination of EGFR in HeLa cells. Mechanistically
we found that three Ube2e members inhibit autoubiquitination of Cbl
mediated by Ube2d2 in vitro. Further, we showed that Ube2e does not
affect ubiquitin charging of Ube2d2 by the ubiquitin-activating enzyme
(E1) in vitro. This suggests that Ube2e does not compete with Ube2d2 for
the E1 under these conditions. Thus, our data suggest that Ube2e acts as
a positive modulator of EGFR signaling by competing for Cbl with Ube2d2
and thus prevents ubiquitination and downregulation of the EGFR by Cbl in
combination with Ube2d2. Together these data demonstrate that there is an
E2 network which modulates the ubiquitination and downregulation of the
EGFR by Cbl.

