Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel synthetic pyridyl analogues of CDDO-Im with improved
stability and their potential use in cancer prevention


Synthetic oleanane triterpenoids are non-cytotoxic, multifunctional drugs
with a broad spectrum of applications for prevention and treatment of
cancer and for many other chronic diseases. CDDO-Im,
1[2-Cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9(11-dien-28-oyl] imidazole, synthesized
more than a decade ago, is one of the most potent triterpenoids known to
date with marked anti-inflammatory, cytoprotective, antiproliferative,
differentiative and proapoptotic activity on various human and murine
tumor cell lines. However, pharmacokinetics of CDDO-Im are not optimal.
Therefore, three new pyridyl analogues of CDDO-Im, namely CDDO-3P-Im,
CDDO-2P-Im and CDDO-4P-Im, have been synthesized and screened for their
possible use as chemopreventive or chemotherapeutic drugs. At low
nanomolar concentrations, they were equivalent to CDDO-Im for induction
of differentiation in U937 leukemia cells and at higher doses they
induced apoptosis. As inflammation and oxidative stress contribute to
carcinogenesis, we also assessed their cytoprotective potential. The new
compounds suppressed inducible nitric oxide synthase expression in
RAW264.7 macrophage-like cells and significantly induced heme oxygenase-1
and NADPH quinone reductase mRNA and protein levels in lung cancer cells
as well as in various mouse tissues. Most importantly, pharmacokinetic
studies performed in vitro in human plasma and in vivo revealed superior
stability for each new analogue. While CDDO-Im was almost completely
degraded after 30 min ( 50% still detectable. Six hours after gavage,
much higher concentrations of the new derivatives were found in mouse
liver, lung, pancreas and kidney in contrast to CDDO-Im. Thus, the new
pyridyl analogues have better bioavailability, and because of their
potent anti-inflammatory activity and improved stability, they will be
tested in vivo in relevant carcinogenesis models.

