Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment sequence and molecular biomarker in EGFR mutant lung
cancer cells


IntroductionLung cancer is the leading cause of cancer related death in
the US. A subset of patients with lung cancer has a mutation in the
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) which makes them extremely
responsive to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) erlotinib. The
emergence of EGFR TKI resistance is new challenge in the management of
these patients. We conducted a study to determine the best treatment
sequence after resistance to EGFR TKI, testing the use of chemotherapy
Pemetrexed (P), Afatinib (A), Rociletinib (R) and the combination of
these agents in lung cancer cell lines with EGFR mutation that were
pretreated with erlotinib.Material and methodsLung cancer cell lines with
EGFR mutation CRL-2868 (E746 - A750 deletion) and CRL-2871 (L747 - E749
deletion, A750P) mutation were treated with 5 nM erlotinib for 24h and 72
h.The erlotinib resistance cells were then treated with 10nM of A or 10nM
of P, or 21.5 nM of R, or the combination AP or the combination of RP. As
control, we used lung cancer HTB-177 which does not have EGFR mutation.
MTT proliferation assay was performed after 24, 48, 72 and 144h after the
treatment. microRNA profiling was done by real time PCR in all cells
after erlotinib treatment to find potential biomarkers as hallmark of
erlotinib resistance cells.ResultsRociletinib induced the maximum
inhibition of cell proliferation at 144h in both cell lines with EGFR
mutation. The RP also induced decreased cell proliferation in both cell
lines with EGFR mutation. RP combination was more effective then R alone
in CRL 2871. The use of A alone, P alone or AP combination was not
different in CRL2871 but P had antagonistic effect when combined with A
or R in CRL 2868. microRNA 10b, 27a and 27b were upregulated in the
erlotinib resistant cells.Conclusion.EGFR resistance arises after
treatment with erlotinib in lung cancer cell lines with EGFR mutation.
Treatment with R and the combination of RP induced greater inhibition of
proliferation compared to A, P alone. The combination of AP was
antagonistic. This may have implications in the management of patients
resistant to EGFR TKI. microRNA analysis showed up-regulation of several
microRNA that should be tested in clinical setting.

