Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A functional role for the MYC i-motif in transcription


MYC is overexpressed in most types of tumors, but a means to selectively
decrease its expression has yet to be found. Our recent findings on
modulation of bcl-2 gene expression through protein interactions with the
bcl-2 i-motif have provided a basis for further investigation of MYC gene
control. It is proposed that the MYC i-motif could function in a similar
molecular switch mechanism as in bcl-2. Binding sites for heterogeneous
nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (hnRNP K) within the MYC promoter also exist
in the i-motif-forming sequence. Circular dichroism and bromine
footprinting confirmed that this DNA sequence is able to form an i-motif,
and systematic mutation of the cytosine residues in this sequence has
revealed a 5:5:5 loop configuration. Indeed, all loops of the i-motif,
when folded into a 5:5:5 loop configuration, contain the hnRNP K
consensus sequence (CCCT). Previous studies show that hnRNP K binds to
this i-motif-forming sequence, but it was assumed to be single-stranded.
Binding studies revealed that hnRNP K has more binding affinity to its
consensus sequence in the i-motif compared to a mutant sequence where the
i-motif cannot form. Further investigation of the MYC promoter revealed
an additional two runs of cytosine seven bases downstream of the MYC
i-motif. Biophysical studies showed that the additional two runs were not
involved in i-motif formation; however, recent studies describe their
importance for transcriptional activation. We found that hnRNP K
preferred the longer 5CT sequence compared to the i-motif-forming 4CT
sequence when using a competitive binding assay. Utilizing luciferase
reporters containing either the 4CT or 5CT sequence validated that hnRNP
K required both the i-motif and the fifth CT element for maximum
transcriptional activation. Competition binding studies and bromine
footprinting showed that hnRNP K bound to the downstream fifth CT element
and the central and lateral loops of the i-motif. Additionally, we found
that co-overexpression of Sp1 and hnRNP K induced a 10-fold increase in
luciferase activity in the 5CT reporter only. We hypothesize that Sp1
continuously primes the promoter to initiate transcription, inducing more
negative superhelicity and increasing the melting of duplex DNA. This
increased melting grants hnRNP K's three KH domains access to the i-motif
loops and the fifth CT element. Confirmation by ChIP analysis validated
that Sp1 overexpression causes an increase in hnRNP K occupancy at the
MYC promoter. These findings provide new insight into the mechanisms of
MYC transcriptional control by the i-motif and G-quadruplex. We are
employing drug discovery efforts that can target this molecular switch
and inhibit MYC from being transcribed. The use of such interactive
compounds is the first step in the development of new innovative
approaches to treat cancers that have MYC overexpression.

