Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Uncovering novel radiation sensitivity syndromes through exome
sequencing


INTRODUCTION: The study of genetic disorders resulting in heightened
sensitivity to ionizing radiation provides important molecular insights
to DNA damage checkpoint and repair mechanisms. Individuals with these
disorders have an increased risk of cancer and developmental
abnormalities. We identified patients with unexplained radiation
sensitivity disorders through the Texas Children's Cancer Center and
Genetics Consult Service at Texas Children's Hospital. Children were
screened for the known disorders prior to enrolling in a research study
with whole exome sequencing. SUBJECTS: We identified three families with
documented ionizing radiation sensitivity: (1) a sibling pair, one of
whom had sternal osteomyelitis and a lung transplant (age 2) and a
brother with eosinophilia and pneumonia (age 1); (2) a sibling pair, one
child with astrocytoma (age 2) with severe leukoencephalopathy after
radiation and a sister with medulloblastoma (age 2) and atypical
encapsulated neuroma (age 13); and (3) a proband with leukemia and
astrocytoma (age 2). All parents were unaffected. METHODS: We performed
Illumina whole exome sequencing of probands and parents (when available),
calling single nucleotide variants and insertions/deletions with ATLAS
and PINDEL. We removed events >1% in 1079 unaffected normal samples, >1%
dbSNP, or > = 20 individuals in Exome Aggregation Consortium. We kept
rare missense and truncating variants, and prioritized rare compound
heterozygous, homozygous, or mutations shared by affected sibs. RESULTS:
In the proband with sternal osteomyelitis and lung transplant, we
identified and validated compound heterozygous missense mutations in
NDNL2 (MAGEG1), a small, intronless gene. NDNL2 is involved in the
SMC5-SMC6 complex, and suggested to play a role in DNA repair. The known
functions of NDNL2 may explain the finding of the patient's cells
displaying altered phosphorylation upon DNA damage for NBN (absent) and
SMC1 (reduced). We are currently investigating the link between mutant
NDNL2 and phosphorylation of NBN and SMC1. In kindred 2 (previously shown
to transmit a SMARCB1 splice site mutation), the siblings share rare
compound heterozygous missense mutations in ROBO1, and a nonsense
mutation in MEGF6. In kindred 3, the proband with leukemia and
astrocytoma was known to carry a large Xp deletion, but we identified no
obvious candidate underlying radiation sensitivity. CONCLUSION: Careful
study of rare kindreds with unexplained radiation sensitivity may provide
new insights to the DNA damage response. Interestingly, two families also
carried a known genetic condition (SMARCB1 mutation and Xp microdeletion)
that may explain cancer phenotype but does not appear to underlie
radiation sensitivity. The very rare biallelic missense mutations in
NDNL2 implicate it as a candidate radiation sensitivity gene to be
validated by further functional testing. Both siblings in this family had
severe infections resulting in death in early childhood.

