Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual targeting of MEK and PI3K pathways can act via
tumor-intrinsic mechanisms to overcome resistance and tumor-extrinsic
mechanisms to modulate immunity and limit cancer cachexia


Prior studies by our group have shown that single-agent MEK inhibitors
have clinical activity in cholangiocarcinoma (CC), including objective
responses. Yet no relationship was found between clinical benefit, and
oncogenic driver mutations such as KRAS or BRAF. Strategies to expand
upon MEKi have focused on combinations with agents targeting resistance,
such as the PI3K/Akt pathway. CC patients treated with MEKi also had
reduced pro-inflammatory cytokines and weight gain with restoration of
muscle mass. These findings are clinically significant, and led us to
hypothesize that MEKi act via tumor-extrinsic mechanisms to modulate
immunity and limit cancer cachexia, while overcoming tumor-intrinsic
resistance. We used the colon-26 adenocarcinoma model to evaluate the
effect of single and combined treatment with MEK162 (30mg/kg) and
buparlisib (25mg/kg) on muscle wasting, tumor growth, and immune
modulation. This murine model depends on interleukin-6 (IL-6) and
recapitulates the cancer cachexia syndrome. Single agent MEK162 inhibited
growth initially, but after 14 days, tumor volume was comparable between
MEKi and vehicle treated mice, possibly from acquired MEK162 resistance.
Despite these data, reduced serum IL-6 and splenic Gr1+CD11b+ cells were
evident compared to control mice (mean = 358 pg/mL to 43 pg/mL, and 13.8%
to 8.4%, respectively), while body weight from MEK162 treated mice was
spared (mean = 24.0g to 20.5g in control mice). In addition, markers of
muscle catabolism, including the E3 ubiquitin ligases Atrogin-1 (from 1
to 0.043 in combo) and MuRF1 (from 1 to 0.03 in combo), and the autophagy
gene, Bnip3, were all reduced in tibialis anterior muscles from
tumor-bearing mice treated with MEK162. Similar to our clinical data,
these results suggest MEK162 modulates immune biomarkers, and acts as an
anti-cachexia agent. Since cross talk between MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways
promotes resistance to monotherapy, we next investigated the effects of
MEK162 combined with buparlisib in the colon-26 model. As before, single
agent MEK162 had a modest growth inhibitory effect, yet rescued body
weight. Consistent with in vitro studies, single agent buparlisib was
cytostatic, but not as effective as MEK162 in rescuing weight loss.
However, dual treatment with MEK162 + buparlisib significantly inhibited
tumor growth. This combination also significantly reduced splenic MDSC
(mean = 37% to 9% in control mice) and increased CD4+ and CD8+ (mean =
24% to 6%, and 7.7% to 2%, respectively) T cells. These results suggest
that dual inhibition of MEK and PI3K has efficacy, while MEKi may have
under-appreciated tumor-extrinsic mechanisms of activity that can be
leveraged to benefit patients with advanced malignancy. This treatment
combination will be evaluated in CC patients in the setting of a Phase II
clinical trial.

