Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting HER2-positive brain metastases by incorporating the
brain-penetrant Angiopep-2 peptide to an anti-HER2 antibody and anti-HER2
antibody drug conjugate


Monoclonal antibodies directed against receptor tyrosine kinases such as
HER2 have been demonstrated to reduce tumor size and increase survival.
However, these agents achieve little to no brain penetration, making them
ineffective against metastatic brain tumors. The blood-brain barrier
(BBB), efficient at restricting entry of proteins such as mAbs and
anticancer drugs into the brain, is comprised of capillary endothelial
cells with tight junctions and efflux pumps. We have created a family of
peptides (Angiopeps) which use receptor-mediated transcytosis to enter
the brain. Conjugation of the Angiopep-2 (An2) to confer brain
permeability has been validated for small molecules (ANG 1005, Phase II),
peptides and proteins. The brain-penetrant An2 has also been incorporated
to a humanized anti-HER2 mAb. This Angiopep-Antibody Conjugate, ANG4043,
displays HER2 binding affinity and in vitro cytotoxic potency similar to
that of native anti-HER2. ANG4043 demonstrates a high rate of entry into
the brain. ANG4043 reduces the tumor size of BT-474 human breast cancer
cells when implanted in the brain, consistent with achieving therapeutic
concentrations. Here we describe chemical conjugation between three
molecules: the An2, a cytotoxic drug (docetaxel or maytansine), and a mAb
directed against HER2. These new An2-antibody-drug-conjugates (An2-ADCs)
show a higher in vitro anti-proliferative potency than unconjugated mAb
against HER2+ BT-474 and HC-19554 cells that are sensitive and resistant
to Herceptin, respectively. Furthermore, they demonstrate a high rate of
entry into the brain when compared to controls, leading to a reduction in
brain tumor size and to an increase in the survival of mice bearing
intracranial BT-474 tumors. Furthermore, An2-anti-HER2 derivatives are
also efficacious in peripheral tissues since they inhibited the growth of
subcutaneous BT-474 luciferase tumors. Overall, these data demonstrate
that the conjugation of an Angiopep to therapeutic mAbs or ADCs can
increase their efficacy in the CNS without affecting their anticancer
properties outside of the brain. These results extend the validation of
Angiopep conjugation beyond small anticancer drugs to include larger
molecules such as therapeutic mAbs and ADCs for development of new
brain-penetrant therapeutics for brain malignancies.

