Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying copy number alterations from targeted sequencing data


Identification of copy number alterations (CNAs) in tumors can assist in
determining diagnosis, prognosis, or predicting response to therapy in
certain cancer types. Many CNA detection tools have been developed for
whole genome sequencing (WGS). These algorithms typically call
alterations by using significant deviations of the log2 ratio of tumor to
normal coverage from the expected diploid log2 ratio. Several factors,
however, including reporting pertinent genomic information, hardware and
software limitations, and cost, have impeded the routine application of
WGS in a clinical setting. Targeted sequencing - hybrid capture and
massively parallel sequencing of defined regions (targets) of the genome
can overcome some of these challenges and can specifically interrogate,
for example, known cancer genes, thus maximizing the actionability or
utility of the information generated. Though more suited for large-scale
clinical testing, targeted sequencing of smaller gene panels with
specific clinical reference presents some significant bioinformatic
challenges that hinder the application of pre-existing CNA detection
tools, resulting in a heavy dependence on manual review in the clinic.In
addition, varying quality of DNA, minor variations in laboratory
protocols, along with batch effects, are known to confound CNA profiles
and are exasperated by the decreased number of sequenced regions of
targeted gene panels. These variables alter the log2 ratio, and thus, our
ability to call CNAs suffers. We note, that using matched normals may
mitigate some deleterious effects, however, to minimize clinical cost and
throughput, we tackle these challenges with unmatched tumor-normal pairs.
Similar to the closest normal approach used in SNP array analyses, we
rely on the assumption that some normal (non-tumor) samples experience
similar experimental variability that affects the tumor samples.
Minimizing maximally informative cost-functions (incorporating both
global and local CNA variation), we iteratively investigate different
combinations of normal samples which best resemble a given cancer sample.
The new set of normals which minimize the cost-function, defines a panel
of normals (PON) whose target medians are used to generate the log2
ratio. Along with batch-effect reduction techniques, we then call CNAs
with statistically significant thresholds at the
target-level.Interestingly, we find that approximately 15 normals are
typically needed to minimize CNA profile variation, as opposed to our
typical approach of using all available normals (60). In addition, we
demonstrate that our procedure can improve our sensitivity and
specificity from 581% to 812% and 941% to 99.50.1%, respectively, on
simulated data. We further compared our approach with other published
algorithms and found a significant improvement in performance, reducing
the time required to manually review CNAs and interpret copy number
profiles in the clinic.

