Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Does an increased underlying immune/inflammatory response in
healthy females put them at a higher risk for thyroid cancer


The SEER (Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program) and
American Cancer Society data indicate that the incidence of papillary
thyroid cancer is 3 times greater in females, as compared to males. The
American Cancer Society estimates that out of a total of 62,980 new
thyroid cancer cases in 2014, approximately 47,790 of these will be
women. There is strong evidence that supports the role of estrogen in the
pathogenesis of thyroid cancer. Estrogen also plays a critical role in
the inflammatory process. For example, mouse models have demonstrated
that in vivo exposure to estrogen promotes an inflammatory response,
including the enhanced secretion of Th-1 related cytokines (IFN, IL-12,
IL-1) and inflammatory chemokines (MCP-1 and MCP-5). Studies in rats and
mouse models have shown that females exhibit stronger humoral and
cellular immune responses as compared to males. As the association
between inflammation and cancer is widely accepted, we hypothesize that
an underlying immune and inflammatory response in the normal female
thyroid puts it at a higher risk of developing cancer. The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) provides a means to assess gender differences at the
molecular level. Using the SUBIO platform version 1.17 (SUBIO Inc., Amami
Island, Japan), we performed bioinformatics and statistical analyses on
the Level 3 RNA-Seq data available in the TCGA Data Portal. Differential
gene expression analysis of 39 normal thyroid samples (26 females and 13
males) revealed that out of the 20,531 genes analyzed, 73 genes exhibited
>2 fold increased expression in females vs. males (p-value, 0.05). Of
these 73 genes, 10 genes were involved in immune response and
inflammation. We are currently analyzing expression levels of these genes
on the RNA and protein levels. Such analysis will help us to elucidate a
possible link between the gender disparity in thyroid cancer and
inflammation.

