Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the mTORC2-dependent regulation of FOXO3a in
UVB-induced apoptosis


The greatest environmental risk factor for developing non-melanoma skin
cancer (NMSC) is ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation. Both complexes of the
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway, the
rapamycin-sensitive mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and the rapamycin-resistant
mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2), are stimulated in response to UVB. Cell survival
in UVB-induced keratinocyte carcinogenesis has been shown to be
mTORC2-depedent. The tumor suppressor FOXO3a, a member of the Forkhead
box family of proteins, is an important transcription factor involved in
regulating cell survival. FOXO3a activity is attenuated as a result of
AKT activation, which is downstream of mTORC2. UVB has been shown to
activate AKT through the mTORC2 pathway; however, the role of FOXO3a in
UVB-induced apoptosis in keratinocytes has yet to be studied. To
investigate the role of mTORC2 and FOXO3a in UVB-induced apoptosis, we
utilized both human keratinocytes (HaCaT cells) as well as inducible
Rictor-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts (iRictKO cells) following
treatment with 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen (4OHT). We also employed the use of
inhibitors and shRNA targeting Rictor or mSIN1. The Rictor and mSIN1
proteins are key structural components unique to mTORC2 and their removal
dramatically lowers mTORC2 activity. Finally, we compared the effects of
shRNA targeting FOXO3a with the expression of a constitutively active
mutant FOXO3a. For all the experiments described, cells were exposed to
an apoptotic dose of UVB and allowed to incubate for defined
experimentally established intervals. Our results show that there is an
mTORC2-dependent regulation of FOXO3a expression, localization, and
activity upon UVB-irradiation. Through western analysis we demonstrate
that UVB exposure promotes the phosphorylation of FOXO3a by AKT in cells
with intact mTORC2 signaling, which is repressed when mTORC2 is
inhibited. This phosphorylation has been shown in other systems to reduce
FOXO3a activity by causing a cytoplasmic localization of the protein. In
agreement with this, we observed a rapid cytoplasmic localization of
FOXO3a and decreased FOXO3a promoter activation in response to UVB, which
is rescued following disruption of mTORC2 signaling. Additionally, we
find that FOXO3a protein expression is reduced upon UVB-irradiation when
mTORC2-signaling is reduced. These data support previous findings that
suggest the mTORC2-driven FOXO3a cytoplasmic sequestration protects
FOXO3a from dephosphorylation and degradation. Taken together, these
studies provide strong evidence that mTORC2 plays a critical role in
regulating FOXO3a expression, localization and activity following
UVB-irradiation. In addition, our results support the hypothesis that the
mTORC2-dependent UVB-induced apoptosis is due at least in part to
FOXO3a.Supported by ES19242 (LMS)

