Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interactions between co-cultured myoblasts and prostate cancer
cells kill myoblasts but promote cancer cell proliferation and fusion:
implications for cachexia and metastasis to skeletal muscle


Severe muscle loss (cachexia) is the major cause for the cancer related
death and 70% prostate cancer patients suffer from cachexia.
Multinucleated cells of skeletal muscles are generated and regenerated by
cell-to-cell fusion. It has been suggested that cell-to-cell fusion also
takes place during carcinogenesis and promotes tumor cell diversity, drug
resistance and the ability to metastasize. However fusion between cancer
cells has remained elusive due to a very low efficiency of this process
in earlier studies. Here we explored interactions between cancer cells
and muscle environment in vitro. Co-culturing cells of human prostate
cancer line (PC3) with primary murine proliferating myoblasts (muscle
stem cells) resulted in differentiation and then apoptosis in muscle stem
cells. Conditioned medium from PC3 cells also caused 50% decrease in
proliferation of muscle stem cells. On the other hand, fusion-committed
myoblasts co-cultured with PC3 cells lost their characteristic shapes and
went through apoptosis. In addition to these effects of PC3 cells on
murine myoblasts, we observed striking effects of myoblasts on PC3 cells.
Co-culturing of PC3 cells with either proliferating myoblasts or
fusion-committed myoblasts resulted in a robust fusion between cancer
cells that yielded PC3 syncytia with up to 5 nuclei. Fusion promotion
between PC3 cells was accompanied by a 1.5-fold increase in expression of
Annexin A5, a protein recently implicated in myoblast fusion. In
contrast, the expression of Annexin A5 in myoblasts was halved. Both
co-culturing and using conditioned medium from fusion-committed myoblasts
also resulted in a 2-fold increase in cancer cells proliferation and a
3-fold increase in the expression of the phosphorylated protein kinase
AKT (pAKT). pAKT activity is associated with proliferation, drug
resistance and cancer stem cell phenotype generation. Therefore we
examined cancer stem cell marker, CD133 expression in PC3 cells.
Treatment with conditioned medium from either proliferating or
fusion-committed myoblasts doubled a percentage of CD133-expressing
cells. Our results suggest an intriguing interplay between prostate
cancer and muscle cells that may contribute to the progression of cancer
and potentially explain cachexia.

