Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mouse model of pRb2/p130 in prostate cancer


INTRODUCTIONProstate Cancer (PCa) is the most commonly diagnosed cancer
in men and it is responsible for the second highest number of
cancer-related deaths in the United States. There is an urgent need for
new treatments and better experimental animal models to study PCa
development, progression, and metastasis.Prostate cancer is a
heterogeneous and multifocal disease that arises from several genetic and
epigenetic aberrations. Among different altered pathways, the
Retinoblastoma is inactivated in more than fifty percent of PCa. Despite
a plentiful literature, the activity of pRb members (pRb, pRb2/p130 and
p107) is not fully elucidated.From a previously published mouse model, we
know that the inactivation of all the pRb members induces aberrant
proliferation and it is sufficient for tumor initiation.Here, we describe
a novel double ko (Rb, pRb2/p130) mouse model, which offers a new
opportunity to dissect prostate tumor initiation and
development.MATERIALS AND METHODSTo study the effect of pRb2/p130
inactivation on prostate tumorigenesis and progression, we knocked out
pRb and/or pRb2/p130 in the prostate tissue (Probasin-CRE). The genotypes
of each gene were determined by PCR. To analyze the effects of pRb2/p130
loss, we collected prostate tissues at different time points (3, 6, 9, 12
and 18 months). A portion of each prostate sample was fixed in formalin
and embedded in paraffin to perform immunohistochemistry analyses and
another portion was flash-frozen for molecular studies.The histological
classification of each prostate samples was made on H&E-stained sections
by A.K.S., a veterinary pathologist with extensive experience in murine
prostate pathology.RESULTSAs reported in literature, pRb family
disruption in the prostate epithelium induces prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia. The prostate of triple ko mice showed extensive abnormal gland
architecture beginning as early as 2 months of age with a focal
hyperplasia. By 3 months of age, all the triple ko mice displayed
characteristic traits of murine prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia
(mPIN). Double ko (pRb and pRb2/p130) mice developed hyperplasia after 6
months and focally invasive well-differentiated adenocarcinomas by 12-18
months.CONCLUSIONSOur preliminary findings suggest that the inactivation
of pRb and pRb2/p130 leads to the development of a prostate tumor
phenotype and highlight the importance of the function of pRb2/p130 in
the prostatic epithelium.This model will be useful to clarify the
molecular mechanism of pRb2/p130 function and represents a new
opportunity for cancer therapy.

