Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: THE WNT SIGNALING PATHWAY IN THE OVARIAN CARCINOMA


Ovarian carcinoma is the most lethal gynecological cancer and currently
ranks as the fifth in causing cancer-related deaths among women. This is
attributed to frequent presentation at late stage, when the tumor has
metastasized, as well as to development of chemotherapy resistance along
tumor progression. Patients with advanced-stage ovarian carcinoma have
widespread intraperitoneal metastases, including the formation of
malignant serous effusions within the peritoneal cavity. Unlike the
majority of solid tumors, particularly at the primary site, cancer cells
in effusions are not amenable to surgical removal, and failure in their
eradication is one of the main causes of treatment failure.Three WNT
signaling pathways have been characterized: the canonical WNT pathway,
the non-canonical planar cell polarity pathway, and the non-canonical
WNT/calcium pathway. All three WNT signaling pathways are activated by
the binding of a WNT-protein ligand to a Frizzled family receptor, which
passes the biological signal inside the cell. Several lines of research
indicate on the involvement of these pathways also in ovarian carcinomas.
However, the specific pathway or their regulation in the process of tumor
progression in this disease has not been elucidated, so far.The aim of
the current study is to identify the acting components of these pathways
during tumor progression namely, which receptors and which ligands are
activated at the different stages of ovarian carcinoma. We have analyzed
the expression 7 frizzle genes (fzd1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10), 4 WNT genes
(wnt 2,3,4,5a,7) and 2 co-receptors LRP (5,6) on 222 samples (143
effusions, 44 primary, and 35 metastatic lesions) using real-time PCR.
All the tested genes were found to be expressed at all sites. FRZ5 (p =
0.002), FRZ6 (pOvarian carcinoma is the most lethal gynecological cancer
and currently ranks as the fifth in causing cancer-related deaths among
women. This is attributed to frequent presentation at late stage, when
the tumor has metastasized, as well as to development of chemotherapy
resistance along tumor progression. Patients with advanced-stage ovarian
carcinoma have widespread intraperitoneal metastases, including the
formation of malignant serous effusions within the peritoneal cavity.
Unlike the majority of solid tumors, particularly at the primary site,
cancer cells in effusions are not amenable to surgical removal, and
failure in their eradication is one of the main causes of treatment
failure.Three WNT signaling pathways have been characterized: the
canonical WNT pathway, the non-canonical planar cell polarity pathway,
and the non-canonical WNT/calcium pathway. All three WNT signaling
pathways are activated by the binding of a WNT-protein ligand to a
Frizzled family receptor, which passes the biological signal inside the
cell. Several lines of research indicate on the involvement of these
pathways also in ovarian carcinomas. However, the specific pathway or
their regulation in the process of tumor progression in this disease has
not been elucidated, so far.The aim of the current study is to identify
the acting components of these pathways during tumor progression namely,
which receptors and which ligands are activated at the different stages
of ovarian carcinoma. We have analyzed the expression 7 frizzle genes
(fzd1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10), 4 WNT genes (wnt 2,3,4,5a,7) and 2
co-receptors LRP (5,6) on 222 samples (143 effusions, 44 primary, and 35
metastatic lesions) using real-time PCR. All the tested genes were found
to be expressed at all sites. FRZ5 (p = 0.002), FRZ6 (p<0.001), Wnt2 (p =
0.029), Wnt3 (p = 0.034) and Wnt6 (p = 0.022) were lower in
effusion-derived cells compared to solids lesions. Further, Wnt2
expression was higher in pre-chemo (p = 0.037) samples compared to
post-chemo ones. FRZ6 expression was higher in FIGO stage IV compared to
stage III of the disease (p = 0.041), and FRZ4 expression was higher in
cases with lower residual disease volume (p = 0.002). Wnt5a was higher in
patients with better (complete) response (p = 0.019). FRZ6 expression was
associated with poor overall survival (p = 0.045) and progression-free
survival (p = 0.009). FRZ10 expression was associated with better overall
survival (p = 0.005) and progression-free survival (p = 0.005).

