Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radium-223 dichloride exhibits dual mode-of-action inhibiting both
tumor and tumor-induced bone growth in two osteoblastic prostate cancer
models


Radium-223 dichloride (radium-223), an alpha particle-emitting
calcium-mimetic, improves overall survival in prostate cancer patients
with symptomatic bone metastases. Here, we define radium-223
mode-of-action and efficacy in two clinically relevant prostate cancer
xenograft models demonstrating PSA expression and osteoblastic growth
upon intratibial inoculation of cancer cells.Immunocompromized male mice
were inoculated with human LNCaP or patient-derived LuCaP 58 prostate
cancer cells in the intratibial compartment and subsequently stratified
into treatment groups based on lesion grade and/or serum PSA levels.
Radium-223 (300 kBq/kg) or vehicle was administered intravenously, two
times at 4-week intervals during the experiment. X-rays and serum samples
were obtained biweekly and at sacrifice. Soft tissue tumors were examined
macroscopically at sacrifice and tissue samples were collected and
processed for -counter measurements, micro-CT, autoradiography and
histology.Radium-223 treatment inhibited tumor-induced osteoblastic bone
growth as indicated by reduced bone volume and surface in LNCaP and LuCaP
58 prostate cancer mouse models. In addition, radium-223 treatment
suppressed metabolic activity in bone as evidenced by decreased number of
osteoblasts and osteoclasts relative to bone surface and reduced levels
of the bone formation marker PINP. Radium-223 resulted in lower PSA
values as early as two weeks after the first dose, indicating constrained
tumor growth following treatment. This phenomenon was further supported
by reduced total tissue and tumor area in tibia in LNCaP and LuCaP 58
models and increased percentage of necrotic tumor area in the LuCaP 58
model in radium-223-treated mice as compared to vehicle-treated mice.
Moreover, DNA double-strand breaks were increased in cancer cells 24
hours post radium-223 treatment in the LuCaP 58 model providing further
evidence of anti-tumor effects. Radium-223-treated mice exhibited less
visceral metastases in the LuCaP 58 model (not significant). Based on
autoradiography, radium-223 was deposited in the intratumoral bone matrix
and in conjunction with osteoblasts in osteoblastic metastases.We
demonstrate that radium-223 dichloride is successfully incorporated into
the intratumoral bone matrix and inhibits tumor growth in both cell line-
and patient-derived osteoblastic prostate cancer metastasis models. Given
the -particle range of 50-80 m, potent radiation effects on the tumor
microenvironment are evident whereas relevant effects on the more distant
bone marrow are not expected. Taken together, radium-223 therapy exhibits
a dual mode-of-action that impacts tumor growth and tumor-induced bone
reaction, both important players in the destructive vicious cycle of
osteoblastic bone metastasis in prostate cancer.

