Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEK and TAK1 signaling interactions coordinately regulate
inflammation and apoptosis in KRAS dependent colon cancer cells


The KRAS protooncogene is mutated in 40 to 50% of colon cancers. In an
effort to identify strategies to treat KRAS mutant colon cancers, we
previously implicated the TGF- activated kinase (TAK1) as a candidate
therapeutic target that promotes the survival of KRAS dependent cancers.
In follow-up studies, we have explored and investigated the detailed
mechanistic basis for TAK1 mediated survival signaling in KRAS dependent
cancer cells. Using proteomic and transcriptomic analyses of
proinflammatory signaling mediators, we have uncovered complex
autocrine/paracrine signaling loops that are constitutively activated in
KRAS dependent colon cancer cells. A central mediator of these signaling
loops is the BMP7-BMP receptor (BMPR1A) pathway, which functions
coordinately with oncogenic KRAS to drive TAK1 and NF-B mediated
transcriptional upregulation of proinflammatory cytokines such as GM-CSF,
CCL5/RANTES and IL-8. Conversely, a number of cytokines and cytokine
regulators are negatively regulated by KRAS-BMPR signaling interactions,
including CXCL9/MIG and IL1RN.We previously showed that TAK1 inhibition
with a small molecule agent, 5Z-7-oxozeaenol promotes apoptosis in colon
cancer cells. We have now determined that 5Z-7-oxozeaenol, in addition to
irreversibly inhibiting TAK1 kinase activity, also transiently inhibits
the MEK kinase. Therefore, combined TAK1/MEK inhibition explains the
potent killing effects that we have observed in KRAS dependent colon
cancer cells. To test this empirically, we have used 2 selective kinase
inhibitors targeting each respective kinase, AZ-TAK1 and AZD6244 to show
either single agent can induce apoptotic cell selectively in KRAS
dependent cells, with TAK1 inhibition resulting in stronger killing
effects. Importantly, treatment of KRAS dependent colon cancer cells with
combinations of AZ-TAK1 and AZD6244 results in additive killing effects,
revealing a potential therapeutic strategy for KRAS dependent cancers in
the clinic.Mechanistically, MEK and TAK1 converge on the control of NF-B
and canonical Wnt-dependent transcriptional activities. Surprisingly, we
find that NF-B and Wnt signaling mutually antagonize each other in terms
of cytokine expression to create a finely-tuned balance between pro-death
and pro-survival signals. We hypothesize that, as a consequence, these
balanced signals allow for both efficient maintenance of tumor cell
survival and as well as for communication with stromal components in the
tumor microenvironment. Thus, KRAS, MEK or TAK1 blockade results in a
tipping of the balance to favor pro-death signals.

