Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor wound healing in response to treatment-induced tumor cell
death increases tumor metastasis


20% of all breast cancers occur in pre-menopausal women, a relatively
under-investigated group of breast cancers. These studies addressed a
subset of pre-menopausal breast cancers, those which are diagnosed during
post-partum involution. Post-partum breast cancers (ppBCs) account for
nearly 25% of all pre-menopausal breast cancers, are more frequently
diagnosed at metastatic stages than other breast cancers in young women,
and correlate with decreased disease-free survival, regardless of the
woman's age at the time of diagnosis or the molecular breast cancer
subtype. Increasing evidence shows that stromal remodeling events that
occur during post-partum involution accelerate the malignant progression
of breast cancers, although the mechanisms underlying this observation
have remained poorly understood.Using transgenic mouse models of
spontaneous breast cancer and allografted models of mammary tumors in
immune-competent mice, we investigated pro-metastatic changes that occur
during post-partum involution, recapitulating the findings that
post-partum involution increases mammary tumor metastasis at least
10-fold. We investigated how physiological events that occur during
post-partum involution, such as epithelial cell death, influx of
macrophages, and local alterations in cytokines, might accelerate the
metastasis of tumors within the post-partum mammary microenvironment. We
discovered that a transient wave of widespread cell death occurs not only
in normal mammary epithelial cells (MECs) during post-partum involution,
but also within the mammary tumor epithelium. Like MECs in the normal
mammary gland, these dying tumor cells are cleared from the tumor
microenvironment by efferocytosis, the process by which macrophages or
other phagocytes engulf dying cells. Efferocytosis by macrophages
requires the receptor tyrosine kinase MerTK, and is followed by
MerTK-mediated M2 macrophage polarization and production of
pro-metastatic wound healing cytokines. Pharmacological inhibition of
MerTK or genetic MerTK ablation impaired efferocytosis in the post-partum
tumor microenvironment, blocked M2 macrophage polarization and dampened
expression of pro-metastatic wound healing cytokines (IL-4 and TGF-1).
Further, blockade of TGF1 (but not IL-4) downstream of efferocytosis
impaired post-partum metastasis.These data demonstrate for the first time
that 1) efferocytosis occurs in the tumor microenvironment, 2.)
efferocytosis promotes a pro-metastatic microenvironment, 3.)
physiological induction of widespread epithelial cell death in the
post-partum breast trigger the pro-metastatic stromal remodeling events
of post-partum involution, and, 4.) targeted MerTK inhibition impairs
efferocytosis-induced wound healing events that contribute to enhanced
metastasis.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

