Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyisoprenylated cysteinyl amide inhibitors exhibit anti-tumor
effects in human breast cancer cell lines


PURPOSE: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most aggressive and
fatal form of breast cancer. TNBC has no effective therapies since it is
not driven by the estrogen (ER), progesterone (PR), and human epidermal
growth factor type 2 (Her2/Neu) receptors for which there are targeted
drugs. Human epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR) are overexpressed
in 92% of TNBC cases, however, anti-EGFR therapies are ineffective.
Monomeric G-proteins that regulate cell proliferation, angiogenesis,
migration and apoptosis operate downstream of EGFR and other signal
transduction pathways. Polyisoprenylated methylated protein methyl
esterase (PMPMEase) metabolizes monomeric G-proteins, allowing them to
function properly. PMPMEase is overexpressed in many cancers and may
serve as a biomarker and target for cancer therapy. We have synthesized
polyisoprenylated cysteinyl amide inhibitors that may inhibit PMPMEase
and/or disrupt polyisoprenylated protein function. We hypothesize that
the PCAIs will promote anti-tumorigenic effects, inducing apoptosis,
while inhibiting cell survival, proliferation, migration, and invasion.
The purpose of this study was to test the effectiveness of PCAIs against
the biological hallmarks of TNBC.METHODS: Four TNBC cell lines were
treated with the PCAIs and analyzed for their effects on cell survival,
viability, F-actin organization, cell migration and apoptosis.RESULTS:
Treatment of TNBC cells with the PCAIs resulted in a
concentration-dependent death of the TNBC cells with EC50 values ranging
from 2.13 to 2.78 M for NSL-BA-040 and NSL-BA-055 in media containing 5%
FBS. AO/EB staining revealed early apoptosis at 1 M. NSL-RD-036 inhibited
MDA-MB-231 cell migration by 71% (16310.7 cells in control versus 476.9
in treated (SEM, N = 3). PCAIs induced complete disruption of F-actin
filament organization at 2 M in MDA-MB-468 cells.CONCLUSION: The PCAIs
ability to induce apoptosis, and inhibit cell migration by disrupting
F-actin filaments suggest that their potential therapeutic value could
involve the inhibition of TNBC tumor growth, metastasis, and
angiogenesis, which are all essential hallmarks for breast cancer
progression. The PCAIs may ultimately fill the targeted therapy void in
TNBC therapy.

