Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying molecular targets and mechanisms of treatment
resistance in inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) using next-generation
sequencing (NGS) and reverse-phase protein microarrays (RPMA)


BackgroundInflammatory Breast Cancer (IBC) is a clinicopathologic entity
characterized by rapid progression and poor prognosis, even with the
advent of targeted therapies and a multimodal approach. Gene expression
profiles of IBC tumors vs. non-IBC demonstrated that HER2+ IBC have
increased mTOR signaling compared to non-IBC (Iwamoto et al). mTOR
activation is a mechanism for both HER-2 targeted and endocrine
resistance. Combining the molecular diagnostics of next-generation
sequencing (NGS) and reverse-phase protein microarray (RPMA) may identify
additional therapeutic targets as well as mechanisms of resistance to
targeted therapy.MethodsThis is an observational analysis of 12 IBC
patients who had tissue biopsy after progression on standard therapies.
All patients had tissue analysis by NGS and RPMA. NGS was performed by
either FoundationOne or our in-house hot spot panel of 45 genes. RPMA was
performed using TheraLink to identify expression of cancer-related
phosphoproteins; it quantifies HER1, HER2, and HER3 receptor
overexpression, and evaluates for phosphorylation of the receptor which
indicates activation. Phosphorylation of HER downstream signaling
pathways such as JAK2, AKT/mTOR and MEK1/2 are also detected. Subset of 7
patients had AR, MET, ALK and PDL1 expression evaluation.ResultsAll
patients had IBC and 75% had metastatic disease. 17% of patients were
ER+/HER2-, 42% ER+/HER2+, 25% ER-/HER2+, and 17% TNBC. All HER2+ patients
by IHC had activation of HER2 on RPMA, and 75% of those patients had
confirmed ERBB2 amplification on NGS. 75% of patients had mTOR activation
on RPMA, 78% of whom had a concomitant alteration in the PIK3CA pathway
on NGS. 71% of the patients evaluated had ALK expression and 80% of those
patients had concomitant mTOR activation. Also, both TNBCs had HER2
activation by RPMA. HER2 targeted therapy was continued on 2 patients
after RPMA confirmed activation of HER2. 4 patients were initiated on
combinations with an mTOR inhibitor, Everolimus (Afinitor), and one of
whom initially obtained a clinical response, upon progression had repeat
RPMA demonstrating only persistent mild activation of mTOR with a
decrease in downstream proteins. Another patient with TNBC IBC who
underwent 3 lines of neoadjuvant therapy prior to surgery was found to
have HER1, HER2, HER3 and mTOR activation; she was started on adjuvant
lapatinib and capecitabine and remains with no recurrent
disease.ConclusionsPatients with IBC often have activation of members of
the HER family and mTOR pathway indicating molecular targets and
potential mechanisms of resistance in IBC. The concomitant use of NGS and
RPMA is an intriguing approach to molecular diagnostics as they provide
complimentary data on molecular pathways activation which expands
therapeutic options, predicts treatment-sensitivity and selects more
effective combinations.

