Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Changes in PD-L1 expression during cisplatin containing treatment
in patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, and their
association with epithelial-mesenchymal transformation


Background: Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression is regarded as a
predictive marker to anti-PD-1/ PD-L1 therapy. However, the underlying
mechanism of PD-L1 up-regulation has been poorly defined. The purposes of
study are to explore 1) the changes of PD-L1 expression in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) during cisplatin containing treatment,
and 2) PD-L1 up-regulation related genetic alteration.Methods: We
compared PD-L1 expressions by immunohistochemisty (IHC, score 0-3) with
rabbit anti-PD-L1 antibody (E1L3N) XP (Cell Signaling Technology,
Danvers, MA, USA) of 33 baseline tissue samples of HNSCC and 17 paired
follow-up tissue samples after ciaplain containing treatment. Baseline
PD-L1 expression as well as a change of PD-L1 expression were analyzed
with overall survival (OS) of the patients. Changes of PD-L1 expressions
in HPV-negative PD-L1 positive HNSCC cell lines (SNU-1066, SNU-1076,
Detroit-562) were also analyzed by flow cytometry after various dose of
cisplatin treatment. RNA sequencing (RNAseq) of eight HNSCC cell lines
was analyzed to find genes of significant correlation with PD-L1
expression by regression method. RNA expression of PD-L1 was assayed by
comparing ranks of fragments per kilobase of transcript per
million.Results: Among the 17 patients who had paired samples after
cisplatin containing treatment, PD-L1 expressions of HNSCC tumor were
changed in 10 patients (58.8%). PD-L1 expressions were decreased in 5
patients, and increased in 5 patients.We analyzed changes of PD-L1
expression in 3 HPV negative PD-L1 positive HNSCC cell lines, In vitro,
PD-L1 expression was up-regulated after cisplatin treatment in
dose-dependent manner (1-10 micromole/L for 24 hours). RNA expression
profile by RNAseq of 8 HNSCC cell lines showed that PD-L1 expression was
significantly correlated with expression level of epithelial-mesenchymal
transformation (EMT) related genes. Expression of epithelial markers such
as EPCAM, E-cadherin, SYK, and MUC1 were decreased as PD-L1 expression
increased, in contrast, the positive correlations between PD-L1 and
mesenchymal markers such as Vimentin, ADAM12, FGF2, and FGFR1 were
observed.Conclusion: PD-L1 expression in HNSCC can be changed during
cisplatin containing treatment in more than half of patients. When
considering anti PD-1/ PD-L1 therapy, PD-L1 expression should be
evaluated using most recent biopsy. In vitro, PD-L1 expression was
induced in response to cisplatin, and it was correlated with EMT related
gene expression.

