Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HMG Box Domain Containing 3 (HMGXB3), a novel TGF-induced cancer
gene that influences cancer stem cells and metastasis in triple negative
breast cancer


The role of HMGXB3 (HMG Box Domain Containing 3), member of the
non-canonical high mobility group (HMG) genes, in cancer remains largely
unknown. A preliminary mutual exclusivity analysis of the Breast Invasive
TCGA database showed a significant association between HMGXB3 and TGF
(Transforming Growth Factor ). TGF plays a significant role in metastasis
and increases stem-like properties of breast cancer cells. This work
aimed at elucidating whether there is a relationship between HMGXB3 and
TGF, and their role on breast cancer stem cells (BCSC) and metastasis in
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC).Changes in HMGXB3 protein levels
(Abgent) were assessed by Western blot in MCF10A cells treated with human
recombinant (hr) TGF1 (R&D) with/without the TGFR1 kinase inhibitor,
LY2157299. Knockdown was performed in MCF10A and two TNBC cell lines,
SUM159 and MDA-MB-231. Cells transfected with two different siRNAs
against HMGXB3, siRNA#1 and siRNA#2, and one negative control (siRNA-SCR)
were assayed for proliferation as well as primary and secondary
mammosphere (MS) formation for 48h with hrTGF1 (10ng/ml). Cell migration
was determined in transfected TNBC cell lines treated with 10ng/ml hrTGF1
for 72h. For in vivo experiments, MDA-MB-231, stably transfected with a
luciferase/GFP reporter plasmid, were injected in the right mammary fat
pad of female SCID Beige mice (n = 10). Tumor-bearing mice were treated
with DOPC (dioleoyl phosphatidylcholine) liposomes loaded with 5g of
either siRNA-SCR or HMGXB3-siRNA#2 with/without docetaxel (20mg/kg) for
21 days. Tumors were digested and cells isolated. Single cells were
assayed for aldefluor (ALDF+) by flow cytometry and MS formation. Lung
metastases were determined in lungs by ex vivo imaging of luciferase
positive cells.Our results show a concentration- and time-dependent
induction of HMGXB3 protein levels under treatment with hrTGF1 in MCF10A
cells. Such an enhancement was efficiently abrogated by the addition of
LY2157299. Knockdown of HMGXB3 in presence of hrTGF1 significantly
reduced cell proliferation, migration and MS formation in the TNBC cell
lines tested herein. In vivo experiments demonstrated that silencing of
HMGXB3 correlates with reduced tumor growth, ALDF+ BCSC subpopulation,
and formation of secondary MS compared to siRNA-SCR. Finally, silencing
HMGXB3 significantly abrogated progression of metastasis from primary
tumor to lungs in contrast to siRNA-SCR with/without chemotherapy.In
conclusion, we are the first to identify HMGXB3 as a TGF-induced cancer
gene that impacts tumor cell proliferation, migration, BCSC self-renewal
and lung metastases in TNBC. Our preliminary results suggest HMGXB3 as a
novel target for prevention of metastasis. Future experiments will
elucidate the role and mechanism of HMGXB3 in cancer. This work will give
rise to novel therapeutic targets for the treatment of breast cancer.

