Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A MALDI imaging mass spectrometry approach using tissue
microarrays to identify an N-glycan biomarker panel for pancreatic cancers


We have recently developed a MALDI imaging mass spectrometry (MALDI-IMS)
method to spatially profile N-linked glycans in frozen and formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue sections and tissue microarrays (TMAs).
Tissues are incubated with peptide N-glycosidase, and released N-glycans
are detected directly using MALDI-FTICR, linked directly with tissue
histopathology. Other methods to detect the localization of glycans in
tissues rely on detection of broader glycan structural motifs (i.e.,
lectins or carbohydrate antigen antibodies), whereas our method is able
to simultaneously identify and distinguish 40 or more components of the
N-glycome on a single slide. To demonstrate the ability of MALDI-IMS to
generate biomarker panels, pancreatic cancer tissue blocks and six TMAs
containing matched tumor and non-tumor regions from over 70 patients were
profiled. Aberrant glycosylation, such as elevated CA-19-9, is well
documented in pancreatic cancer, making this an ideal sample set. To best
analyze this complex data set, we developed an in-house analysis script
that can extract spectra from tissue cores, and return non-biased
statistics for observed glycan ions. Panels were generated using a
training set of data and tested on external validation data set. The most
accurate panel of 12 glycans achieved an overall sensitivity of 92.9% and
specificity of 86.7%. Structural identification of N-glycans has been
confirmed by techniques such as on-tissue CID, ethylation analysis,
sequential glycosidase digestions, and comparison to glycan structural
databases. Furthermore, imaging of entire FFPE sections matched with
histological analysis revealed a vast diversity of N-glycan
localizations, which could distinguish not only tumor from normal tissue,
but also regions of pancreatitis and pancreatic intraepithelial
neoplasia. The generated glycan tissue maps will also be used to
determine specific glycoprotein carriers of biomarker candidate glycans
in tissue and biofluid samples.

