Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ezrin binds to DEAD-box RNA helicase DDX3 and regulates its
function and protein level


Ezrin is a member of the ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) family of
actin-membrane linker proteins that play key roles in regulating cell
shape, movement, adhesion and signal transduction pathways. The
expression of ezrin is linked to the metastatic progression in several
cancers including osteosarcoma (OS). We discovered a small molecule,
NSC305787, that inhibits ezrin activity and metastatic phenotype both in
vitro and in vivo. We hypothesized that the anti-metastatic effects of
NSC308787 could be mediated through preventing specific protein-protein
interactions involving ezrin. In this study, we used affinity pull-down
coupled with mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach to unravel
putative ezrin interactors that are competed away by NSC305787. We
identified a number of candidate ezrin binding proteins that are
associated with metastatic behavior and implicated in the regulation of
stress granule dynamics and protein translation initiation. We selected
DDX3, a DEAD-box RNA helicase, as a candidate for further analysis. We
confirmed that ezrin directly binds to DDX3. Depletion of ezrin protein
expression by RNA interference in several cancer cell lines resulted in
substantial reduction in DDX3 protein levels without affecting its
transcription, which suggested that ezrin is required for
post-transcriptional maintenance of DDX3 in the cell. Paradoxically,
recombinant ezrin specifically inhibited the RNA duplex unwinding
activity and stimulated the ATPase activity of DDX3. Our data suggest
that ezrin regulates the translation of mRNAs with 5 secondary structure
through DDX3, at least in part, through maintaining its intracellular
protein level and/or modulating its unwinding and ATPase activities.
Therefore, our findings suggest that a novel function of ezrin regarding
the regulation of mRNA translation exists that is independent from its
classical role as a cytoskeletal cross-linker protein at the plasma
membrane.

