Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lung cancer stem cell targets sensitizing tumor cells to chemo
therapy and radiation therapy by exploiting synthetic lethal
relationships in an RNAi high-throughput screen


Platinum-based concurrent chemoradiation therapy is the mainstay of
treatment for locally advanced lung cancer. However patient outcomes
remain dismal and overall survival at 5 years is only 15%. The resistance
mechanisms for concurrent chemoradiation therapy are poorly studied.
Cancer stem cells have been proposed to be the driver for many cancers
including lung cancer and may be also responsible for therapy resistance.
We sought therefore to identify therapy resistance pathways in lung
cancer by using small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) to increase the
sensitivity of tumor cells to therapeutic challenge.To identify novel
genes that modulate the response to platinum chemotherapy and radiation
therapy we have performed a genome-wide RNAi high-throughput screen via a
shRNA viral library containing approx. 60,000 individual shRNAs on a
human lung adenocarcinoma cell line (PC9). After two weeks of cisplatin
and/or radiation treatment of PC9 cells with shRNA and controls, depleted
versus enriched shRNAs were identified through library sequencing. We
hypothesized that depleted shRNAs in the treated versus control cells
might represent genes whose function is crucial for resistance to
therapy-induced cell death.From the cisplatin and radiation screen,
analysis of out of top 100 potential hits (depleted shRNAs) interestingly
showed several cancer stem cells markers including Sox, Lrg6, and members
of the Hedgehog signaling pathway Patched and Bmi1. We further determined
the effects of Bmi1 on therapy resistance with survival assays by
treating PC9 cells with Bmi1 inhibitor PTC-09. MTT cell survival and
colonogenic assays was performed by treating PC9 cells with PTC-09 in
triplicate and then treated with increasing dosage of cisplatin (0.1, 1
and 10 M) or X-ray radiation (2, 4 and 6 Gy). Significantly decreased
cell survival was observed in PTC-09 treated PC9 cells treated with
cisplatin or radiation compared to control and cisplatin or radiation
alone treated cells. Further colonogenic assay of PC9 cells treated with
2Gy+1 um cisplatin and increasing dosage of PTC-09 showed significant
decrease in the ability of cells to form colonies compared to control.By
performing an unbiased genome wide for therapeutic resistance, we have
successfully identified and validated a target in the cancer stem cell
pathways. We are further evaluating effect of Bmi1 using CRISPR-Cas9
knock out model.

