Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pilot study of VPAC1 targeted PET imaging of prostate cancer


Introduction: Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide and Pituitary Adenylate
Cyclase Activating Peptide Receptor 1 (VPAC1) is over-expressed in
prostate cancer (PC), representing a highly suitable target for imaging
and treatment. VPAC1 expression occurs at the onset of the malignancy,
before alterations of cell morphology, which may be prior to elevation of
serum PSA. We have successfully used VPAC1 receptor-specific peptide
constructs to image breast cancer in experimental animal models, and in
humans. We hypothesized that VPAC1 expressed in high density on PC can be
targeted for detection of intraprostatic tumor foci, as correlated with
whole mount radical prostatectomy specimens, using TP3805, a VPAC1
specific biomolecule labeled with Cu-64 a PET imaging
radionuclide.Methods: Twenty five men with prostate cancer undergoing
radical prostatectomy were imaged preoperatively as part of a PET imaging
protocol targeting VPAC1. The PET images were compared to whole mount
radical prostatectomy pathologic analysis. De-paraffinized whole mount
pathology slides from two patients who participated in VPAC1 PET imaging
protocol, as well as slides from 3 BPH patients, one malignant lymph node
and one benign lymph node were incubated with Cu-64-TP3805, washed
thoroughly with PBS, dried and subjected to 15 second digital
autoradiography. Slides were then H&E stained and autoradiography images
were compared with prostate H&E staining in which tumor foci were
delineated.Results: Prostate cancer foci (n = 30/31) were identified by
autoradiography imaging. Autoradiography missed one malignant lesion due
to technical artifact. Additionally 6 small cancerous lesions were
identified by autoradiography that were not previously noted by
histologic examinations. A total of 7 additional lesions seen by
autoradiography in areas without prostate cancer foci corresponded to
areas of high grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN). The
positive lymph node and the benign lymph node were correctly identified
by autoradiography. For the three BPH patients without any cancer, no
lesions were noted by autoradiography.Conclusion: VPAC1 peptide analog
constructs accurately identified foci of prostate cancer on whole mount
radical prostatectomy specimens. Several additional lesions were also
identified. Detection of HGPIN is consistent with the early expression of
VPAC1 prior to the modulations in cell morphology. The PPV (97%) and
NPV(100%) were excellent, validating VPAC1 as a potential theranostic
target for prostate cancer imaging and treatment.Support: NIH R01
CA157372-01 and by NuView, Inc. (MLT).

