Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein palmitoylation in breast cancer: DHHC5
palmitoyltransferase as a potential therapeutic target


Protein S-palmitoylation is a widespread and dynamic post-translational
modification that regulates protein-membrane interactions,
protein-protein interactions, and protein stability. S-palmitoylation is
catalyzed by members of a family of 23 palmitoyl acyl transferases,
termed the DHHC family due to the presence of a common catalytic motif.
The role of protein palmitoylation in cancer is largely unexplored.In our
previous study, we have shown that DHHC5 palmitoyltransferase supports
the growth of non-small cell lung cancer. To further investigate the role
of DHHC5 in cancer, we expanded our study to include breast cancer cell
lines. Stable knockdowns of DHHC5 were undertaken in 8 breast cancer cell
lines (including 4 triple-negative breast cancer lines) as well as in two
normal human mammary epithelial cell lines (HMECs) using lentiviral
shRNAs. The protein levels of DHHC5 were analyzed by immunoblotting,
which all showed efficient knockdown. Cell proliferation and
anchorage-dependent/ independent colony formation assays indicated that
DHHC5 knockdown led to cell growth arrest and decreased cell
clonogenicity in most of the tested breast cancer cell lines in vitro,
but not in the HMECs. BT-549, SkBr3 and T-47D cell lines were
particularly dependent on DHHC5 expression, and rescue experiments
involving ectopic plasmid-driven DHHC5 and its catalytic mutant DHHS
expression are in progress. In vivo tumor formation assays will be
carried out by injecting MCF-7 and T-47D control cells and DHHC5 stable
knockdown cells as well as rescued cells subcutaneously into NOD/SCID
mice. Tumor xenograft formation will be measured.As DHHC5 function is
needed for optimal breast cancer cell growth, it will be important to
identify physiologically relevant substrates in order to develop
inhibitors of DHHC5 function. Future plans include microarray and protein
kinase array analysis to identify possible signaling pathways in which
DHHC5 may be involved, as well as palmitoyl-protein profiling of control
and knockdown DHHC5 cell lines by mass spectrometry.

