Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mRNA-destabilizing protein tristetraprolin suppresses
tumorigenic phenotypes in a triple-negative breast cancer cell model via
a non-canonical mechanism


The purpose of this study was to define mechanisms by which the
mRNA-destabilizing factor tristetraprolin (TTP) impacts tumorigenic
phenotypes in an aggressive model of metastatic breast cancer. Widespread
repression of TTP levels in human tumors and cancer cell lines relative
to non-transformed tissues suggests that TTP may function as a tumor
suppressor in diverse neoplastic contexts, and low TTP expression is a
negative prognostic indicator in breast cancer. TTP is a tandem zinc
finger protein that binds to AU-rich elements (AREs) and targets their
associated mRNAs for degradation. AREs are potent cis-acting determinants
of cytoplasmic mRNA turnover in mammalian cells, and are essential for
limiting cellular production of many clinically important gene products
including regulators of inflammation, cell proliferation, and
apoptosis.In this study, we show that restoration of TTP levels
attenuates several tumorigenic phenotypes in the aggressively metastatic
breast cancer line MDA-MB-231. Notably, TTP-expressing cell lines
replicate approximately 70% slower than non-transfected controls.
Inhibition of cell proliferation did not result from apoptosis but rather
by a delay at the G1/S checkpoint. TTP expression also significantly
reduced the formation of cultured mammospheres based on both
sphere-forming efficiency frequency and extreme limiting dilution
analyses, indicating that this protein reduces stemness and non-adherent
growth potential. Finally, cell motility was suppressed by TTP,
demonstrated using wound healing assays. These findings are consistent
with a tumor suppressor role for TTP.To identify potential mechanisms
linking TTP to diminution of tumorigenic phenotypes, we surveyed the
expression of genes encoding select pro-tumorigenic factors, including
several known to encode TTP-targeted mRNAs. Expression of cyclin D1,
cyclin E and c-Myc proteins were significantly reduced in TTP-expressing
MDA-MB-231 cells, however, this was not mediated by accelerated mRNA
decay. Interestingly, we observed that the mRNA-destabilizing function of
TTP is abrogated by the constitutively active ERK signaling pathway in
MDA-MB-231 cells, suggesting that TTP suppresses tumorigenic properties
in this cell model independently of its canonical mRNA-destabilizing
function. Consistent with this model, expressing a non-RNA-binding mutant
form of TTP (C147R) robustly attenuated the same tumorigenic properties
suppressed by the wild type protein. Together, these findings show that
the mRNA-destabilizing activity of TTP is dispensable for its tumor
suppressive properties in MDA-MB-231 cells, and by extension that TTP
must limit diverse tumorigenic properties in these cells via an as yet
uncharacterized non-canonical mechanism.

