Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyaluronan: A novel target of dietary flavonoid fisetin in
prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the most prevalent cancers affecting
males in western countries. Many therapeutic strategies are available for
treatment of PCa but cancer relapses in 10-50% of cases. Hyaluronan (HA),
an extracellular glycosaminoglycan, is primarily synthesized by HA
synthase (HAS) enzymes HAS-1, -2 and -3. In the undiseased state, HA
regulates several cellular functions such as reepithelization, tissue
healing, wound repair and brain development. Elevated HA levels have been
shown to be associated with aggressiveness and disease progression in
certain cancer cell types. We observed increased levels of HA in human
PCa cells compared to normal prostate epithelial cells. Prostate tissues
from TRAMP, a spontaneous murine PCa progression model, exhibited gradual
increase in HA levels with disease progression. Serum samples and
prostate tissues from human PCa patients showed significant increase in
HA levels that correlated with advance in disease stage. Notably, all PCa
cell lines expressed both HAS-2 and -3 at much higher levels compared to
normal prostate epithelial cells. Identifying a dietary non-toxic
inhibitor at achievable concentrations that can effectively suppress HAS
levels and lessens HA production can significantly improve the disease
outcome. Epidemiological studies over the past decade have identified
plant-based diet rich in flavonoids as an attractive option in cancer
prevention and therapy. Fisetin, found in many fruits and vegetables
belongs to the flavonol subgroup of flavonoids and has shown potential to
be effective against PCa. Using discovery based metabolomics, we
identified HA as a novel target of the dietary flavonoid fisetin. In
vitro studies in MNU-6 model, a unique family of human PCa cell lines
(NrPEC, RWPE, NA22, NB14, NB11 and NB26) that mimics multiple steps of
prostate carcinogenesis, with fisetin treatment (40M: 48h) decreased HA
levels and inhibited cell growth and proliferation. HA interaction with
its primary receptor CD44 results in activation of pSTAT3, pSrc, MMP-2,
MMP-9 proteins. Fisetin treatment of tumorogenic NB11 and NB26 cells
inhibited protein expression of pSTAT3, pSrc, MMP-2, and -9. To establish
in-vivo relevance of these in-vitro findings, we determined HA levels in
two different murine models. LC-MS/MS analysis of tumors from athymic
nude mice xenografted with tumorogenic NB11 and NB26 cells showed a
significant decrease in HA abundance in fisetin treated animals.
Moreover, reduced HA levels in fisetin-treated TRAMP mice were associated
with inhibition of PCa development and increased survival. This study
establishes that fisetin is a HAS inhibitor and a potential agent for
treating human PCa. Modulation of HA using fisetin may be a viable option
for augmenting the current standard of care in PCa patients.

