Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stable isotope resolved metabolomics (SIRM) on fresh human tissues
as a preclinical drug testing platform


Introduction: All preclinical drug testing models have advantages and
drawbacks. We have been using SIRM to evaluate metabolic reprogramming of
lung cancer cells in monoculture, in mouse xenograft/explant models, and
in NSCLC patients in situ (1), and to determine the influence of the
tumor microenvironment using these models. We have now extended the range
of models to fresh human tissue slices, similar to those originally
described by Warburg (2), which retain the original tissue architecture
and heterogeneity with a paired benign versus cancer design under
controlled cell culture conditions.Experimental: Freshly resected tissue
slices from individuals (ca. 1 mm or less thick and 5-40 mg wet weight)
were incubated in standard cell culture conditions with gentle rocking
for efficient gas, nutrient and waste product exchange. The metabolic
activity was determined by measuring the uptake and transformation of 13C
and/or 15N-enriched nutrient tracers such as glucose and glutamine, using
high-resolution MS, GC-MS, and NMR after a period of incubation. Acute
metabolic and histologic response to inhibitors or drugs was readily
detected in treated tissue slices.Findings: Analysis at different time
points by NMR, MS and histology shows that the NSCLC tissue slices, both
benign and tumorous, retained their architecture and remained
metabolically viable for at least 48 h of incubation. Glucose and
glutamine metabolism was reprogrammed in the tumor relative to the paired
benign tissues. The paired tissue also showed very different responses to
Se-containing compounds when incubated at the IC50 established for cell
lines. After 24 h of incubation, large scale necrosis was evident in the
tumor, but not in the benign slices, which was accompanied by large
changes in metabolic activities observed by SIRM analysis.Conclusions:
This platform offers a human tissue model for preclinical studies on
metabolic reprogramming of human cancer cells in their tissue context,
and response to drug treatment (3). As the microenvironment of the target
human tissue is retained and individualized response to drugs is
obtained, this platform promises to transcend current limitations of drug
selection for clinical trials or treatments.Supported by NCI
P01CA163223-01A1 and NIEHS 1R01ES022191-011. Lane, A.N., Fan, T.W.-M.,
Bousamra II, M., Higashi, R.M., Yan, J. and Miller, D.M. (2011) Clinical
Applications of Stable Isotope-Resolved Metabolomics (SIRM) in Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer. Omics, 15, 173-182.2. Warburg, O. (1923) Versuche an
berlebendem Carcinomgewebe (Methoden). Biochem. Zeitschr., 142,
317-333.3. Xie, H., Hanai, J., Ren, J.-G., Kats, L., Burgess, K.,
Bhargava, P., Signoretti, S., Billiard, J., Duffy, K.J., Grant, A. et al.
(2014) Targeting lactate dehydrogenase-A (LDH-A) inhibits tumorigenesis
and tumor progression in mouse models of lung cancer and impacts tumor
initiating cells. Cell Metabolism 19, 795-809.

