Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of two novel quinoline-based non-nucleoside DNA
methyltransferase inhibitors against bone sarcomas


Introduction.Identification of new drugs against sarcomas still
represents an urgent clinical need due to the rarity of these diseases.
Aberrant DNA methylation of gene promoter regions is recognized to be
highly involved in cancer and efforts have been made to synthesize
non-nucleoside compounds that can effectively modulate gene expression,
with bearable side effects. Two novel DNMT inhibitors (DNMTi), MC3353 and
MC3343, were tested in Ewing sarcoma (EWS) and osteosarcoma (OS) cell
lines to determine their effects on proliferation, apoptosis/necrosis
induction, and cell differentiation.Methods and Results.We evaluated
specificity on DNMTs inhibition of these compounds together with
anticancer activities (cell growth inhibition, cell cycle perturbations,
effects on programmed cell death) in a panel of EWS and OS cell lines.
Cellular response to DNMTi treatment was assessed also at the molecular
level by evaluation of key regulators of cell cycle and apoptosis.
Effects on neural differentiation were assessed by -III tubulin and heavy
neurofilament modulation in Ewing sarcoma cells. Concurrently, effects on
osteoblastic differentiation were carried out on Saos-2 OS cell line and
evaluated by RT-PCR. Both inhibitors determined a significant inhibition
of DNMTs activity. In vitro, MC3343 was found to slow cell proliferation
by increasing the percentage of cells in G1 or G2/M phases, while MC3353
compound was unable to modulate cell cycle but induced an increase in
cell death indicating a cytotoxic rather than a cytostatic effect.
Modulation of key regulators of cell cycle and evaluation of PARP
cleavage confirmed these results. Both DNMTi induced cell
differentiation. In EWS, treatment significantly modulated the expression
of neural markers (positivity to -III tubulin; NF-H; neurite outgrowth).
In OS cells, DNMTi increased both matrix mineralization and expression of
genes specifically related to
osteoblastogenesis.Conclusions.Non-nucleoside DNMTi may represent a
possible new therapeutic approach to bone sarcoma.Grants from:
Association for Cancer Research (IG2013_14049; to KS); 5 per mille
contributions to Rizzoli Institute. FIRB RBFR10ZJQT, IIT-Sapienza
Project, and FP7 Projects BLUEPRINT/282510 and A-ParaDDise/602080 to AM.
CC is a recipient of a fellowship from the Associazione Onlus il
Pensatore: Matteo Amitrano

