Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinico-pathological significance of LINE-1 and ESR1 methylation
levels in sporadic colorectal cancer


Background: Epigenetic changes including the global DNA methylation and
the site-specific CpG island promoter methylation have been proposed to
play an important role in colorectal carcinogenesis. The long
interspersed nucleotide element-1 (LINE-1) methylation is good indicator
of global DNA methylation levels, which is known to be hypo methylation
in sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC). The promoter region of estrogen
receptor 1 (ESR1) has been shown to be highly methylated in CRC compared
to normal colorectal mucosa, and to be methylated in normal colorectal
mucosa in an age-dependent manner. However, clinico-pathological
significance of LINE-1 and ESR1 methylation levels in CRC has not
sufficiently been investigated.Aim: The aim of this study was to
investigate the association between LINE-1 and ESR1 methylation levels
and clinico-pathological findings including with microsatellite
instability (MSI), KRAS and BRAF mutations, and tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs) in CRC.Materials and Methods: We quantified the LINE-1
and ESR1 methylation levels in CRC (n = 182), adjacent normal mucosa (AN)
(n = 18), normal colon mucosa (N) (n = 18) using a bisulfite
pyrosequencing analysis. MSI status was determined using five
mononucleotide-repeat microsatellite markers. KRAS (exons 2 and 3) and
BRAF (V600E) mutations were also analyzed by a bisulfite pyrosequencing.
TILs were evaluated by counting numbers of intra-tumor Foxp3- and
CD8-positive T cell by immunohistochemistry.Results: LINE-1 methylation
levels in CRC were significantly lower than in AN or N, respectively.
Lower LINE-1 methylation levels were significantly correlated with
differentiated cell types, microsatellite stable (MSS) and low TILs in
CRC. However, no significant association between LINE-1 methylation
levels and tumor progression including with prognostic outcome was
recognized. On the other hand, ESR1 methylation levels in CRC were
significantly higher than in AN or N, respectively. Higher methylation
levels of ESR1 were significantly associated with MSS and KRAS mutation
in CRC. Although ESR1 methylation levels were not associated with tumor
progression in CRC, survival curves showed that CRC patients with low
ESR1 methylation levels had significantly poorer overall survival and
disease free survival than those with high methylation levels.
Furthermore, ESR1 methylation levels were independent indicators for poor
prognosis and early recurrence of CRC patients.Conclusion: We
demonstrated novel evidence of ESR1 methylation levels as promising
biomarkers for prognosis and predictive recurrence in patients with CRC.

