Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PU.1 enrichment to intronic enhancers is required for meis1 gene
expression in both hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis


Hematopoiesis is a tightly regulated process with multiple transcription
factors (TFs) involved sequentially. Aberrant expression of the lineage
specific transcription factors may disturb normal differentiation of
hematopoietic cells and result in leukemia. Myeloid Ectropic viral
Integration Site 1 (MEIS1), induces and maintains MLL transformation, and
plays a rate-limiting regulatory role in MLL leukemogenesis. Meis1 gene
is identified as the downstream targets of PU.1, another important
hematopoietic transcription factor, which is inversely correlated with
worse prognosis. Though multiple regulatory elements have been identified
throughout the Meis1 locus, little is known about how PU.1 plays its role
on Meis1 gene expression.To gain insight into the transcriptional
regulatory role of PU.1 during myeloid differentiation, we isolated the
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPC, Lin-kit+CD34+ cells) and
matured myeloid cells (Lin+Gr1+cells) from bone marrows of C57 mice,
performed ChIP sequencing assay, and analyzed PU.1 enrichment and histone
modifications. The ChIP seq data was then confirmed with an induced
differentiation model of mouse MLL-ENL leukemia cells. In addition to
DNaseI hypersensitivity, the PU.1 binding elements were also
characterized with H3K4me1 and H3K27ac modification. We studied the
transcriptional activation role of one common PU.1 binding elements with
luciferase assay. Insertion of PU.1 binding elements before the promoter
increased the luciferase reporter activity, suggesting that the PU.1
binding region be the enhancer element of Meis1 gene. The association
between PU.1 enrichment and Meis1 gene expression was studied in further
with PU.1 knocking down assay in the MLL leukemia cells. Bioinformatics
analysis results suggest that there were other transcription factors,
including HOXA9 and MEIS1 itself enriched around the PU.1 binding sites.
Our results suggest that PU.1 enrichment to the intronic enhancers of
Meis1 gene is required for the proper expression during hematopoiesis.
PU.1 together with histone modification and many other TFs, including
MEIS1 itself, contributed to the hematopoietic expression of Meis1 gene.
(The work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant number 81100380) to Y.L.)

