Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MLN4924 inhibition of Cullin-Ring ligases activates a hypoxic
response and secretion of tumor promoting factors in human MCF7 breast
cancer cells


Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) are the key transcription factors that
mediate the cellular response to low oxygen tension. During normoxia, HIF
activity is tightly controlled by its oxygen-dependent prolyl
hydroxylation which allows polyubiquitination by von Hippel-Landau tumor
suppressor (VHL), leading to HIF degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome
pathway. During hypoxia, low oxygen tension prevents HIF prolyl
hydroxylation resulting in HIF accumulation and subsequent transcription
of HIF target genes. VHL is a known Cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligase (CRL)
that is dependent on neddylation of the Cul-2 subunit by NEDD8 Activating
Enzyme (NAE) for its enzymatic activity. The small molecule inhibitor
MLN4924 inhibits NAE neddylation of Cullins by covalently binding the
nucleotide-binding site of NAE. HIF-1 is a well-known CRL substrate that
increases in abundance upon MLN4924 treatment. We investigated the
response of MCF-7 human breast cancer cells to MLN4924 treatment compared
to hypoxia (1% O2, 48 hours) treatment. Cell lysates tested using the
Human Oncology Antibody Array and Western blot showed that both
treatments induced accumulation of HIF-1 protein, with protein levels in
MLN4924 treated cells greater than levels in hypoxia treated cells. This
correlated with the expected attenuation of HIF-1 ubiquitination as
detected by the Human Ubiquitin Antibody Array. The specificity of
MLN4924 targeting Cullin proteins was tested using Western blots. The
neddylation of the VHL subunit Cul-2, as well as Cul-1, was not
detectable in MLN4924 treated cells, but was readily detectable in
hypoxia treated cells. Since MLN4924 was reported to inhibit mTORC1
activity, Western blots were used to evaluate signaling of the mTORC1
complex. Thr-389 phosphorylation of p70 S6K was not detectable upon
treatment with MLN4924 and attenuated in hypoxia treated cells. Thr-389
phosphorylated p70 S6K was not detectable in Rapamycin-treated cells, a
potent mTORC1 inhibitor. The relative protein levels of several known
HIF-1 target genes were tested using the Human Angiogenesis Antibody
Array. VEGF was detected in cell culture supernates from normoxia,
hypoxia, and MLN4924 treated cells. ELISAs were used to measured VEGF and
Carbonic Anhydrase IX and were found to be highest in MLN4924 treated
cells. Interestingly, these same array profiles detected tumor promoting
factors Angiogenin, Amphiregulin, Endothelin 1, and PDGF-AA in cell
supernates from MLN4924 treated cells at higher levels than hypoxia
treated MCF-7 cells. Recent reports found MLN4924 to inhibit tumor
angiogenesis in mouse models, indicating that the effects of MLN4924 on
secretion of tumor promoting factors by MCF-7 cells may be context
dependent.

