Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TCRP1 gene promotes NIH/3T3 cell transformation by over-activating
PDPK1 and Akt


TCRP-1 (Tongue Cancer Resistance-related Protein-1) gene was recently
cloned from the multidrug resistance tongue cancer cell (Tca8113/PYM)
which developed by ourselves team (GeneBank accession number: EF36480).
Subsequently we found that the gene can mediate tongue cancer cells to
specific cisplatin chemotherapy tolerance and radiotherapy tolerance, and
its mechanism may be caused at least in part by TCRP1 induced activation
of the PI3K/Akt/NF-B signaling pathway and promotes cell survival.
Recently, using real-time quantitative PCR and immunohistochemical method
to detect various types of tumors and control normal tissue, we found
that expression of TCRP1 in lung cancer, ovarian cancer and glioma were
significantly higher than that of normal tissue. These results suggest
that TCRP1 gene may be closely related to the carcinogenesis. In the
present study we constructed a lentiviral vector expressing TCRP1 to
transfect NIH/3T3 cells, and found proliferation rate of NIH/3T3/TCRP1
cells was significantly improved compared with NIH/3T3 cells and
NIH/3T3/vector cells by detection with the CellTiter-Glo Assay.
Clonogenic capacity of NIH/3T3/TCRP1 cells was 5.39 times and 20.18 times
higher than the control group in plate cloning and soft agar cloning
assay. Subcutaneous tumorigenicity experiment with self-controlled in 10
nude mice found only the injected site of NIH/3T3/TCRP1 cell emergence
nodular masses about 1cm diameter after 3 weeks, and the tumorigenic rate
was 90%. Pathological diagnosis of mass was fibrosarcoma. These results
suggest that TCRP1 gene own an oncogene-like effect. In order to study
the TCRP1 tumorigenic mechanisms, gene chips were used and showed that
expression of total of 1894 genes were up-regulated and 3626 genes were
down-regulated. Among these genes, the verification results of PDPK1,
Akt, GSK3 and cyclinD1 were consistent with microarray results.
Co-immunoprecipitation assay indicate that TCRP1 interact with PDPK1;
FRET(Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer)experiments shows that TCRP1
can directly bind to PDPK1. On the other hand, the growth rate and in
vitro colony forming ability of NIH/3T3/TCRP1 cells was significantly
inhibited after using PDPK1 inhibitor AR-12 and TCRP1 interference. These
data suggest that TCRP1 mediated PI3K/Akt pathway to the excessive
activation by recruiting recruitment and activating of PDPK1, resulting
in a series of growth and proliferation and cell transformation related
factor expression or activation of its downstream. This may be the
possible mechanism of cell malignant transformation induced by
TCRP1.{This study was supported by grant from National Natural Science
Foundation (81472184) of China.}

