Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Different gene expression between men and women patients with lung
adenoarcinoma reveals enrichment of immune gene sets


INTRODUCTION:There is different susceptibility to DNA damage induced by
tobacco smoking between women and men. In despite of the great advances
in the knowledge of the genomic landscape of lung cancer, is not explored
the molecular differences between man and women. Our aim was to evaluate
differentially enriched gene sets between the two genders.METHODS:We
evaluated 03 public databases containing gene expression values from lung
adenocarcinoma patients: GSE50081 (HG-U133_Plus_2; n = 181 samples),
GSE47115 (Illumina HumanHT-12 WG-DASL V4.0 R2; n = 46 samples), GSE10072
(HG-U133A; n = 107 samples). We perform the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
(GSEA) to find differences between the genders. Each dataset was analyzed
individually and was divided in cohorts of smokers and non-smokers (and
healthy tissues by smoking status when it was included in the dataset).
Cases with unknown smoking status and former smokers were excluded from
the analysis. We use the Gene Ontology biological process terms to find
similar enriched pathways between cohorts. We consider enriched process
with statistical differences (pINTRODUCTION:There is different
susceptibility to DNA damage induced by tobacco smoking between women and
men. In despite of the great advances in the knowledge of the genomic
landscape of lung cancer, is not explored the molecular differences
between man and women. Our aim was to evaluate differentially enriched
gene sets between the two genders.METHODS:We evaluated 03 public
databases containing gene expression values from lung adenocarcinoma
patients: GSE50081 (HG-U133_Plus_2; n = 181 samples), GSE47115 (Illumina
HumanHT-12 WG-DASL V4.0 R2; n = 46 samples), GSE10072 (HG-U133A; n = 107
samples). We perform the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) to find
differences between the genders. Each dataset was analyzed individually
and was divided in cohorts of smokers and non-smokers (and healthy
tissues by smoking status when it was included in the dataset). Cases
with unknown smoking status and former smokers were excluded from the
analysis. We use the Gene Ontology biological process terms to find
similar enriched pathways between cohorts. We consider enriched process
with statistical differences (p<0.05) or trends (PINTRODUCTION:There is
different susceptibility to DNA damage induced by tobacco smoking between
women and men. In despite of the great advances in the knowledge of the
genomic landscape of lung cancer, is not explored the molecular
differences between man and women. Our aim was to evaluate differentially
enriched gene sets between the two genders.METHODS:We evaluated 03 public
databases containing gene expression values from lung adenocarcinoma
patients: GSE50081 (HG-U133_Plus_2; n = 181 samples), GSE47115 (Illumina
HumanHT-12 WG-DASL V4.0 R2; n = 46 samples), GSE10072 (HG-U133A; n = 107
samples). We perform the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) to find
differences between the genders. Each dataset was analyzed individually
and was divided in cohorts of smokers and non-smokers (and healthy
tissues by smoking status when it was included in the dataset). Cases
with unknown smoking status and former smokers were excluded from the
analysis. We use the Gene Ontology biological process terms to find
similar enriched pathways between cohorts. We consider enriched process
with statistical differences (p<0.05) or trends (P<0.08) in at least a
cohort.RESULTS:The analysis did show immune genes enrichment in women
such as cytokine production, defense response to bacteria and response to
other organisms. In another hand, regulation of JNK and MAPKKK cascades
was enriched in tumors and healthy tissues from non-smokers women. In
men, the oxidoreductase activity acting on sulfur group of donors was
enriched in smoking men.CONCLUSION:There are differences between tumors
from women and men that should be deeply explored.

