Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer risk prediction: An update to the Rosner-Colditz
breast cancer incidence model


Purpose: To update and build on the Rosner-Colditz breast cancer
incidence model by evaluating the contributions to breast cancer risk of
childhood and adolescent somatotype, fruit and vegetable intake,
breastfeeding, and physical activity. Secondarily, we evaluated the
contributions of these variables to breast cancer incidence models
defined by ER and PR status of the tumor.Methods: Using data from the
Nurses Health Study (NHS) and Nurses Health Study II (NHSII), we added
childhood somatotype (average of somatotype at ages 5 and 10; 9 unit
scale), adolescent somatotype (average of somatotype at ages 10 and 20; 9
unit scale), fruit and vegetable intake (servings/day), breastfeeding
(months), and physical activity (METs/week) to the Rosner-Colditz breast
cancer incidence model to determine whether these variables improved the
discriminatory power of the model. We evaluated the contribution of these
variables to a model for all invasive breast cancer as well as to models
for ER+/PR+, ER+/PR-, and ER-/PR- breast cancer.Results: In the
NHS/NHSII, we accrued over 3000 cases of invasive breast cancer with
complete data on the selected breast cancer risk factors. Compared to the
original Rosner-Colditz model, the models that included childhood or
adolescent somatotype were significantly improved (pPurpose: To update
and build on the Rosner-Colditz breast cancer incidence model by
evaluating the contributions to breast cancer risk of childhood and
adolescent somatotype, fruit and vegetable intake, breastfeeding, and
physical activity. Secondarily, we evaluated the contributions of these
variables to breast cancer incidence models defined by ER and PR status
of the tumor.Methods: Using data from the Nurses Health Study (NHS) and
Nurses Health Study II (NHSII), we added childhood somatotype (average of
somatotype at ages 5 and 10; 9 unit scale), adolescent somatotype
(average of somatotype at ages 10 and 20; 9 unit scale), fruit and
vegetable intake (servings/day), breastfeeding (months), and physical
activity (METs/week) to the Rosner-Colditz breast cancer incidence model
to determine whether these variables improved the discriminatory power of
the model. We evaluated the contribution of these variables to a model
for all invasive breast cancer as well as to models for ER+/PR+, ER+/PR-,
and ER-/PR- breast cancer.Results: In the NHS/NHSII, we accrued over 3000
cases of invasive breast cancer with complete data on the selected breast
cancer risk factors. Compared to the original Rosner-Colditz model, the
models that included childhood or adolescent somatotype were
significantly improved (p<0.001). The relative risk (RR) of invasive
breast cancer for a 4 unit change in somatotype was 0.69 for childhood
somatotype and 0.59 for adolescent somatotype. Including childhood
somatotype increased the age-adjusted concordance statistic from 0.613 to
0.616 whereas including adolescent somatotype increased the age-adjusted
concordance statistic from 0.613 to 0.618. Childhood and adolescent
somatotypes also significantly improved ER+/PR+ and ER-/PR- breast cancer
incidence models (pPurpose: To update and build on the Rosner-Colditz
breast cancer incidence model by evaluating the contributions to breast
cancer risk of childhood and adolescent somatotype, fruit and vegetable
intake, breastfeeding, and physical activity. Secondarily, we evaluated
the contributions of these variables to breast cancer incidence models
defined by ER and PR status of the tumor.Methods: Using data from the
Nurses Health Study (NHS) and Nurses Health Study II (NHSII), we added
childhood somatotype (average of somatotype at ages 5 and 10; 9 unit
scale), adolescent somatotype (average of somatotype at ages 10 and 20; 9
unit scale), fruit and vegetable intake (servings/day), breastfeeding
(months), and physical activity (METs/week) to the Rosner-Colditz breast
cancer incidence model to determine whether these variables improved the
discriminatory power of the model. We evaluated the contribution of these
variables to a model for all invasive breast cancer as well as to models
for ER+/PR+, ER+/PR-, and ER-/PR- breast cancer.Results: In the
NHS/NHSII, we accrued over 3000 cases of invasive breast cancer with
complete data on the selected breast cancer risk factors. Compared to the
original Rosner-Colditz model, the models that included childhood or
adolescent somatotype were significantly improved (p<0.001). The relative
risk (RR) of invasive breast cancer for a 4 unit change in somatotype was
0.69 for childhood somatotype and 0.59 for adolescent somatotype.
Including childhood somatotype increased the age-adjusted concordance
statistic from 0.613 to 0.616 whereas including adolescent somatotype
increased the age-adjusted concordance statistic from 0.613 to 0.618.
Childhood and adolescent somatotypes also significantly improved ER+/PR+
and ER-/PR- breast cancer incidence models (p<0.02). Breastfeeding and
vegetable intake suggestively improved the ER-/PR- model. The RR for five
servings of vegetables per day was 0.82, while the RR for 12 months of
breastfeeding was 0.87. While these variables were significantly
associated with ER-/PR- breast cancer risk in the updated models, the
differences in concordance statistics comparing models with to models
without these variables were not statistically significant.Conclusion:
Childhood and adolescent somatotype significantly improved breast cancer
risk classification in the NHS/NHSII.

