Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AMH and AMHR2 regulate survival signaling, epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and resistance to HSP90 inhibition in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC)


In spite of encouraging advances in the treatment of lung cancer, the
five-year survival rate has remained below 20 percent. Much of the
mortality is associated with uncontrolled metastasis. Members of the
TGF-/BMP superfamily have long been known to regulate progression and
metastasis in NSCLC. In this study, we identify unexpected inputs into
TGF-/BMP superfamily signaling that significantly modulate intrinsic
tumor properties and drug response in NSCLC.Anti-Mullerian Hormone (AMH)
and its specific type II receptor, AMHR2, share common type I receptors
with BMP, and regulate overlapping signaling outputs. AMH and AMHR2 have
thus far predominantly been studied in the context of gonadal
development, in regulation of the female reproductive cycle and in
gynecological malignancies. However, using a focused RNAi library
designed to detect genes associated with resistance to the HSP90
inhibitor ganetespib, siRNAs against AMH and AMHR2 sensitized 4 out of 5
and 3 out of 5 NSCLC cell lines to ganetespib, respectively. We for the
first time confirmed autocrine expression of AMH and AMHR2 in this
non-gonadal tumor environment.TGF- and BMP signaling is important for the
regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Strikingly,
depletion of AMH/AMHR2 induced EMT-like features, including
downregulation of cadherins, assumption of a mesenchymal morphology, and
expression of mesenchymal markers, which are generally associated with
resistance to chemotherapy. In contrast, inhibition of HSP90 selected for
a more epithelial-like population of cells, as evident by increased
E-Cadherin or P-Cadherin, and down regulation of mesenchymal markers such
as vimentin and -smooth muscle actin. To confirm that mesenchymal-like
cells are indeed more responsive to HSP90 inhibition, we depleted
E-cadherin or P-cadherin and again observed sensitization to ganetespib.
We further found that AMH and AMHR2 did not confer sensitization to
cisplatin.These data suggested an unusual relationship between ganetespib
control of cell growth and differentiation status. We further established
that inhibition of HSP90 increased expression of AMH and AMHR2 as well as
several of the type 1 receptors (ALK2, ALK3, ALK6) that are necessary for
signaling by BMP. Mechanistically, AMH and AMHR2 depletion increased
phosphorylation of SMAD proteins, but depressed activity of NF-kB and
AKT, both critical regulators of EMT and survival. These results for the
first time indicate the presence of an AMH-AMHR2-NFkB-AKT signaling axis
of therapeutic relevance in NSCLC. Importantly, our results also suggest
that AMH and AMHR2 may serve as biomarkers to predict resistance to HSP90
inhibitors, and that it may be beneficial to prime lung tumors with HSP90
inhibitors, to reverse EMT and decrease survival signaling, prior to
treatment with chemotherapy.

