Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adrenergic regulation of MCP-1 leads to enhanced macrophage
recruitment and ovarian carcinoma growth


Increased adrenergic signaling is known to promote tumor progression, but
the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Tumor associated
macrophages (TAMs) are key components of the tumor microenvironment that
contribute to pro-inflammatory processes and tumor growth. Recently, it
has been reported that patients with higher levels of adrenergic
signaling have higher counts of MMP-9-producing TAMs. Here, we examined
factors responsible for stress-mediated effects on monocyte/macrophage
recruitment into the tumor microenvironment and the resultant effects on
tumor growth. Conditioned media from norepinephrine- or
epinephrine-treated ADRB positive SKOV3ip1 ovarian cancer cells had
significantly increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as
MCP1, fractalkine, IL6, IL8 and VEGF. MCP1, a key modulator of
monocyte/macrophage recruitment, gene and protein levels were
significantly increased in vitro after catecholamine exposure, which was
mediated by cAMP and PKA, while this effect was abrogated by a
beta-blocker. SKOV3ip1 tumor samples from mice, subjected to daily
restraint stress, had elevated MCP1 gene and protein expression levels,
increased CD14+ cells, and increased infiltration of CD68+ cells. Both,
propranolol, a non-specific beta-blocker, and hMCP1 siRNA packaged in
DOPC nanoparticles significantly abrogated daily restraint stress-induced
tumor growth and inhibited infiltration of CD68+ and F4/80+ cells. Of
patient samples evaluated (n = 462), 28% had elevated absolute peripheral
blood monocyte (>0.7 106/L) and 43% had high peripheral blood monocytes
when measured as the percent of white blood cell content (>8%). Elevated
peripheral blood monocytes and increased CD68+ cells (>15/hpf) in samples
from ovarian cancer patients were significantly associated with advanced
disease and worse overall survival. In summary, increased adrenergic
signaling is associated with enhanced macrophage infiltration mediated by
tumor cell-derived MCP1 production.

