Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Not all ribosomes are created equal: How cancer abuses the
translational machinery


Translational Dysregulation is emerging as a prominent mechanism leading
to the malignant phenotype. These changes in protein levels can lead to
cancer initiation, maintenance and progression. Cap-dependent translation
is the primary mechanism of mRNA translation in eukaryotic cells.
Cap-dependent translation is initiated by eIF4E1 binding to the
7-methyl-guanosine-cap (cap). The conventional translation initiation
complex eIF4F consists of eIF4A, eIF4G and eIF4E. eIF4E binds the cap
structure in the mRNA functioning as a bridge between mRNA and the
ribosome. MNK kinases are responsible for phosphorylating eIF4E1. We
observed that knocking down MNK kinases translationally represses total
eIF4E1 expression. Interestingly, MNK down regulating total eIF4E1 occurs
specifically in B-cells. This novel impact on total eIF4E1 demonstrates
the potential for MNK1 and MNK2 to directly impact a large subset of
oncogenes in a B-cell specific manner. Inhibiting MNK kinase activity and
subsequent eIF4E1 phosphorylation results in an increase in eIF4E3
protein expression. eIF4E3 is another member of the eIF4E family that has
been shown to bind the cap by an atypical mechanism. We explored the
biological function of eIF4E3 in a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma model.
The increase in total eIF4E3 competes with eIF4E1 for binding to the cap.
We found that eIF4E3 also physically associates with eIF4A and eIF4G
forming a novel eIF4F complex. We interrogated the functional aspects of
eIF4E3-mediated translation by analyzing the translatome and
transcriptome of eIF4E3 expressing cells. eIF4E3 and eIF4E1 mutually
regulate a high fraction of total mRNA transcripts while both family
members exclusively modulate translation of select messages. We
identified selective motif enrichments in the 5UTR that may facilitate
transcript selection by eIF4E1 or eIF4E3. These findings imply
alternative ribosomal complexes that are able to selectively translate
mRNA via transcript recognition. The dual roles of MNK proteins for both
eIF4E1 phosphorylation and total expression highlight MNK as a powerful
oncogenic translation switch.

