Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNA associated with distal metastasis and local recurrence after
post-operative radiotherapy in high-risk head and neck cancer


Distal metastasis and local-regional recurrence after radiation therapy
is a major cause of treatment failure for patients with head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma. miRNA have been proposed as biomarkers in cancer
to predict therapeutic outcomes and has been associated with the cellular
response to radiation. The advantages of miRNA as a biomarker lies in its
stability in tissues as well as body fluids, hence the potential for
non-invasive diagnosis and prognosis. In this study, we performed miRNA
expression profiling using tumor samples from 114 head and neck cancer
patients treated by post-operative radiotherapy (PORT) at M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center from 1992 to 1999. All patients were considered to be at
high-risk for recurrence having histologically proven advanced squamous
cell carcinoma. Amongst these samples, 41 had distal metastasis (DM), 24
recurred locally or local/regional (LR) and 49 responded to PORT (no
evidence of disease (NED)). Total RNA was extracted using a modified
protocol of the Qiagen RNeasy Plus kit which retains small RNA fractions.
miRNA profiling was performed using miRCURY 7th gen LNA microRNA Array
from Exiqon. Microarray data were background-subtracted using mis-match
control probes and normalized with median scaling. An ANOVA model based
on clinical outcome was used to compare of miRNA expression between DM
vs. NED and LR vs NED. There are 94 miRNAs that differentially expressed
in DM and 60 miRNAs differentially expressed in LR with statistical
significance (p 1.4). Among them, miR-551a and miR-551b-3p are
significantly associated with the DM group and have been validated using
qPCR. By transfection of either mimic or an inhibitor of these miRNAs
using the HN5 head and neck cancer cell line, we have confirmed that both
miR-551a and miR-551b-3p promote cell proliferation, enhance cell
migration and invasion. We have further discovered GLIPR2, an autophagy
inhibitor, as a direct binding target of both miRNAs using luciferase
assay. By over-expressing miR-551a/miR-551b-3p or suppressing GLIPR2
expression, we detected higher level autophagy with increased LC3 foci
and overexpression of lipidated LC3B. Base on the above data, we propose
a model that miR-551a and miR-551b-3p enhance radio-resistance and
metastasis by promoting autophagy via suppressing GLIPR2 expression. A
panel of 49 head and neck cancer cell lines were used for aCGH study and
miRNA profiling. Further analysis is underway to correlate the patterns
of DNA copy number variation and miRNA expression with radio-sensitivity.
The findings in these cell lines will also be validated in tumor tissue
samples. In summary, our data demonstrated the potential of miRNAs as
biomarkers that predict therapeutic outcomes and mechanistic studies of
miRNA markers will lead to novel pathway discovery and further
improvement of cancer treatment.

