Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Doxorubicin induced gender differences in tumor-bearing
spontaneously hypertensive rats, with an emphasis on cardiotoxicity


Treatment of cancer with anthracyclines such as doxorubicin (Dox) causes
dose-limiting cardiotoxicity, particularly in younger females and adult
males. However, the exact reason for gender differences in toxicity is
unclear. Dox metabolites prompt the generation of excess reactive oxygen
species (ROS) using an iron-mediated mechanism in the mitochondria.
Cardiomyocytes, in addition to having lower levels of antioxidant enzymes
also have higher concentrations of mitochondria and are therefore
hypersensitive to ROS. In this study, we investigated the role of gender
in Dox induced cardiotoxicity using male, castrated male (c-male), female
and ovariectomized female (o-female) adult spontaneously hypertensive
rats (SHRs). The SHRs were implanted with a syngeneic breast cancer cell
line previously derived from SHRs. Tumor-bearing SHRs were treated with
saline, Dox (10 mg/kg iv), dexrazoxane [(50 mg/kg ip) Drz], or a
combination of both Dox and Drz. Tumor size was used to monitor
anticancer activity. In all genders, the addition of Dox (alone or in
combination with Drz) induced a significant reduction in tumor volume.
Addition of Dox (or Dox + Drz) also caused an increase in the heart:body
weight ratio for all genders. Histopathological analyses of cardiac
sections treated with Dox showed higher heart lesion scores in males than
c-males, females, or o-females. We are currently analyzing serum cardiac
troponin T, estradiol and testosterone levels for correlation with
histopathology. Preliminary findings suggest that sex hormones (estradiol
and testosterone) may be influenced by Dox induced cardiotoxicity and may
be important in the mode of action of this therapy. After Dox treatment,
gene expression analysis of mitochondria-related genes showed increased
expression levels in pro-apoptotic genes in both females and, to a
greater extent, males. Genes associated with oxidative stress responses
also showed a significant increase in male hearts. Our data indicate that
adult male SHR hearts were more sensitive to Dox treatment than other
genders. Sex hormone levels may influence cardiotoxicity, since Dox
treated SHRs for all genders had little to no testosterone or estradiol.
Overall, our findings demonstrate Dox induced cardiotoxicity is gender
specific and adult males are more cardiosensitive than other genders. The
mechanism behind Dox induced cardiotoxicity is currently being elucidated
and likely functions, at least in adult male SHRs, through the induction
of oxidative stress and expression of apoptotic genes and is inversely
correlated to sex hormone levels.

