Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling patient-derived lung cancer in mice: Preclinical tool for
drug development


Background: Genotype directed treatment is the standard of care for
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However,
acquired drug resistance invariably develops. There is a need to develop
clinically relevant animal models from patients who have developed
acquired resistance in order to study mechanisms of resistance and
validate new therapeutic strategies. We have generated a portfolio of
clinically relevant, early passage, patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
models of lung cancer.Methods: Tumor biopsies (core biopsies (n = 8),
pleural effusions (n = 28) and surgical samples (n = 11)) were implanted
subcutaneously (n = 39) or into the sub-renal capsule (n = 8) of NSG mice
under an IRB approved protocol. After implanting 35 specimens, mostly
from pleural effusions, several mice exhibited weight and fur loss.
Histopathology revealed infiltration of the liver, skin and lungs by
human derived T-cells consistent with graft-versus-host disease (GVHD).
Subsequent pleural effusions were then subjected to CD45 depletion using
a human CD45 microbead separation kit which eliminated the incidence of
GVHD. Tumors from all three sources were allowed to grow and subsequently
passaged only as subcutaneous implants in NSG mice. Molecular
characterization of PDX models was performed using targeted next
generation sequencing and tumor histology confirmed by H&E staining. Some
established tumor models have also been propagated as cell lines in
vitro.Results: 47 specimens were implanted with an overall take rate of
30%. The initial take rate was 22% but increased to 66% following CD45
depletion. We have established 11 NSCLC adenocarcinoma and 3 small-cell
lung cancer (SCLC) PDX models from patient samples. The models
established thus far range from erlotinib resistant EGFR mutant models
with T790M mutation (n = 3), MET amplification (n = 1), SCLC
transformation (n = 2) or an unknown mechanism (n = 1); to models
including SCLC with an NRAS Q61K mutation (n = 1); EML4-ALK resistant to
crizotinib and ceritinib (n = 1); KRAS G12C mutation (n = 1); NUT-mid
line carcinoma with BRD4 rearrangement (n = 1); pan wild-type (n = 2) and
a PIK3CA mutation (n = 1). We have used these models to study therapeutic
interventions. Treatment of the NRAS Q61K mutant SCLC with trametinib
resulted in complete tumor regression. Pharmacodynamic analyses revealed
inhibition of pERK 1/2 and induction of apoptosis. Data will be presented
with further characterization and platform development of the lung PDX
models. Notably, >50% of the models do show pulmonary metastases from the
subcutaneous implant site.Conclusions: PDXs can be established from lung
cancer patients undergoing routine clinical biopsies. Establishment of
models from pleural effusions is also feasible following CD45 depletion
to prevent GVHD. These models will provide unique information on
mechanisms of drug resistance and can be used to evaluate pre-clinical
therapeutic strategies.

