Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase inhibitors promote persistent binding of
PARP-1 to DNA double strand breaks in chromatin, thus decreasing repair
via non-homologous end joining


Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) induce acetylation of histone and
non-histone proteins, and trigger an increase in DNA double-strand breaks
(DSBs) in addition to widespread acetylation. Additionally, research has
also shown that post-translational modifications, such as
acetylation/deacetylation of DSB repair proteins, influence their overall
function. The focus of our study is to determine how HDACi influence the
repair of DSBs by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) and thus the
potential genomic instability of cancer cells. We have previously
demonstrated that HDAC inhibition in leukemia cells (K562 and HL60) with
trichostatin A (TSA) results in differential acetylation of Ku70 and
PARP1, and this is associated with decreased repair via classical NHEJ
(c-NHEJ). Our new studies, using a chromosomally integrated reporter for
measuring c-NHEJ, confirms that treatments with TSA significantly
downregulate c-NHEJ activity. Recent reports have indicated that Ku70 and
PARP compete for binding to DSBs following DNA damage. Since the
structure of chromatin can impede the accessibility of these repair
proteins, we questioned whether HDAC inhibitors directly (via
acetylation) or indirectly (via DSB induction), influence the recruitment
of repair factors to sites of DNA damage in chromatin. To test this, we
performed subcellular fractionation of TSA-treated K562 cells into
cytoplasmic, nuclear and chromatin fractions and by Western blotting
analysis observed a significantly increased presence of several c-NHEJ
proteins (Ku70, Ku80 and 53BP1) and ALT NHEJ protein PARP1.
Interestingly, homologous recombination (HR) DSB repair factor RAD51 is
also present in chromatin following TSA treatment. Also, chromatin
localization of DSB repair proteins increases with higher doses of TSA.
To investigate whether TSA treatment alters the binding of these DNA
repair proteins to DSBs, we used a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assay in K562 cell line with stable chromosomal integration of a c-NHEJ
reporter. Here, a DSB can be induced in a site-specific manner and
recruitment of DSB repair components can be studied at the site of a DSB
in the c-NHEJ reporter. Our ChIP analysis shows that of all DSB repair
proteins tested, PARP-1, is most significantly increased and persists at
the DSB after TSA treatment. These results suggest that increased binding
of PARP1 to DSBs block subsequent repair steps, a phenomenon similar to
PARP1 trapping observed with the potent PARP inhibitors. The results
presented here provide a mechanism by which HDACi treatment increases
cytotoxic DSBs in leukemia cells.

