Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel method to quantify gamma H2AX foci in circulating tumor
cells in patients receiving chemotherapy for colorectal cancer


Phosphorylated H2AX (H2AX) is a marker of DNA double-strand break damage
and has been proposed as a pharmacodynamic biomarker following treatment
with chemotherapy. H2AX levels in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) may
provide a sensitive direct marker for assessing drug effects in tumor
tissue without the need for biopsy. In the present study, we established
a novel assay to quantify changes in H2AX in CTCs from patients with
metastatic colorectal cancers undergoing treatment with Fulfox or
Folfiri. H2AX foci were initially assessed in human colon adenocarcinoma
cancer cell lines (HT-29) treated with different concentrations of
Oxaliplatin and SN-38 at different time points. Image capture was
conducted using Confocal Microscope Leica SPE2 and H2AX foci were
analyzed with CellProfiler software. The highest number of H2AX
foci/nucleus was induced at 5uM for Oxaliplatin and 0.01uM for SN-38 and
the peak of H2AX foci/nucleus was observed between two-six hours post
dose. To reproduce the analytical process for CTCs, we evaluated the H2AX
signal using both the CellSearch System (Janssen Diagnostics) and the
DEPArray System (Silicon Biosystems). HT-29 cells were used, either as
untreated controls or following 2 hours treatment with Oxaliplatin 5uM or
SN-38 0.01uM and spiked in to healthy donor blood. Cells were defined as
positive for H2AX on the CellSearch according to a previously validated
assay. For Oxaliplatin and SN-38 treated cells, 15.28% and 18.37%
respectively were classified as positive for H2AX, compared with 5.10%
for untreated controls. However, using CellSearch, the fluorescent signal
could not be quantified and we therefore repeated the experiment using
the DEPArray platform. HT-29 cells were treated with SN-38 as above, and
compared with an untreated control group using two different exposure
times for fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated antibody (FITC): FITCI
(100 ms and gain 1X) and FITCII (800 ms and gain 4X). The treated group
showed a significantly increased intensity of FITC staining compared with
the untreated control group: mean 363 vs mean 220 (pPhosphorylated H2AX
(H2AX) is a marker of DNA double-strand break damage and has been
proposed as a pharmacodynamic biomarker following treatment with
chemotherapy. H2AX levels in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) may provide a
sensitive direct marker for assessing drug effects in tumor tissue
without the need for biopsy. In the present study, we established a novel
assay to quantify changes in H2AX in CTCs from patients with metastatic
colorectal cancers undergoing treatment with Fulfox or Folfiri. H2AX foci
were initially assessed in human colon adenocarcinoma cancer cell lines
(HT-29) treated with different concentrations of Oxaliplatin and SN-38 at
different time points. Image capture was conducted using Confocal
Microscope Leica SPE2 and H2AX foci were analyzed with CellProfiler
software. The highest number of H2AX foci/nucleus was induced at 5uM for
Oxaliplatin and 0.01uM for SN-38 and the peak of H2AX foci/nucleus was
observed between two-six hours post dose. To reproduce the analytical
process for CTCs, we evaluated the H2AX signal using both the CellSearch
System (Janssen Diagnostics) and the DEPArray System (Silicon
Biosystems). HT-29 cells were used, either as untreated controls or
following 2 hours treatment with Oxaliplatin 5uM or SN-38 0.01uM and
spiked in to healthy donor blood. Cells were defined as positive for H2AX
on the CellSearch according to a previously validated assay. For
Oxaliplatin and SN-38 treated cells, 15.28% and 18.37% respectively were
classified as positive for H2AX, compared with 5.10% for untreated
controls. However, using CellSearch, the fluorescent signal could not be
quantified and we therefore repeated the experiment using the DEPArray
platform. HT-29 cells were treated with SN-38 as above, and compared with
an untreated control group using two different exposure times for
fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated antibody (FITC): FITCI (100 ms and
gain 1X) and FITCII (800 ms and gain 4X). The treated group showed a
significantly increased intensity of FITC staining compared with the
untreated control group: mean 363 vs mean 220 (p<0.0001) for FITCI, and
mean 5521 vs mean 4365 (pPhosphorylated H2AX (H2AX) is a marker of DNA
double-strand break damage and has been proposed as a pharmacodynamic
biomarker following treatment with chemotherapy. H2AX levels in
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) may provide a sensitive direct marker for
assessing drug effects in tumor tissue without the need for biopsy. In
the present study, we established a novel assay to quantify changes in
H2AX in CTCs from patients with metastatic colorectal cancers undergoing
treatment with Fulfox or Folfiri. H2AX foci were initially assessed in
human colon adenocarcinoma cancer cell lines (HT-29) treated with
different concentrations of Oxaliplatin and SN-38 at different time
points. Image capture was conducted using Confocal Microscope Leica SPE2
and H2AX foci were analyzed with CellProfiler software. The highest
number of H2AX foci/nucleus was induced at 5uM for Oxaliplatin and 0.01uM
for SN-38 and the peak of H2AX foci/nucleus was observed between two-six
hours post dose. To reproduce the analytical process for CTCs, we
evaluated the H2AX signal using both the CellSearch System (Janssen
Diagnostics) and the DEPArray System (Silicon Biosystems). HT-29 cells
were used, either as untreated controls or following 2 hours treatment
with Oxaliplatin 5uM or SN-38 0.01uM and spiked in to healthy donor
blood. Cells were defined as positive for H2AX on the CellSearch
according to a previously validated assay. For Oxaliplatin and SN-38
treated cells, 15.28% and 18.37% respectively were classified as positive
for H2AX, compared with 5.10% for untreated controls. However, using
CellSearch, the fluorescent signal could not be quantified and we
therefore repeated the experiment using the DEPArray platform. HT-29
cells were treated with SN-38 as above, and compared with an untreated
control group using two different exposure times for fluorescein
isothiocyanate-conjugated antibody (FITC): FITCI (100 ms and gain 1X) and
FITCII (800 ms and gain 4X). The treated group showed a significantly
increased intensity of FITC staining compared with the untreated control
group: mean 363 vs mean 220 (p<0.0001) for FITCI, and mean 5521 vs mean
4365 (p<0.0040) for FITCII. The DEPArray system therefore has an
advantage in being able to quantify differences in signal intensity
caused by induction of H2AX in CTCs and then select individual cells for
further downstream analysis. This analysis is now being applied to
patient samples collected pre and post-chemotherapy to evaluate the
utility of the assay in a clinical setting.

