Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High resolution telomere FISH analysis of testicular germ cell
tumors reveals telomere anomalies specific to cancer subtypes and
demonstrates telomere shortening as an early event in TGCT carcinogenesis


Testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT) is the most common malignancy of young
men between 15 and 40 years of age. TGCT is exceptional, as most men can
be completely cured. We evaluated 76 TGCT cases using high resolution
(single-cell) telomere-specific fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
combined with Oct4 immunofluorescence staining to delineate telomere
length patterns in different TGCT subtypes, as well as in the precursor
lesion, intratubular germ cell neoplasia unclassified type (ITGCNU).
Telomere lengths were qualitatively scored by comparing the intensity of
the telomere signals from cancer cells to benign reference cell types and
then grouped (short, medium, and long). For isolated tumors and for those
part of a mixed germ cell tumor (containing 2 or more TGCT types), we
determined the overall trends in telomere length in comparison to
reference cell populations. This comparison demonstrated medium telomeres
for normal germ cells, short telomeres for ITGCNU and seminomas (p =
0.006 and p = 0.0005, respectively), and a wide range of average telomere
lengths in the non-seminomas. Among the non-seminomas, embryonal
carcinomas displayed the longest telomeres, on average, and were the only
subtype (27% of cases) to display the alternative lengthening of
telomeres (ALT) phenotype, as evident from abnormally large telomeric
foci and telomere length heterogeneity. ATRX and DAXX protein expression
was not absent in a subset of embryonal carcinoma cases. Compared to
somatic tissues, germ cells have a high basal telomerase activity and
longer telomeres. Hence, short telomeres in ITGCNU are surprising.
Telomere attrition does not occur in normal germ cells; therefore,
telomere shortening in ITGCNU may play a role in TGCT tumorigenesis.
Embryonal carcinoma, the TGCT subtype that is most aggressive and has the
worst prognosis, showed very long telomeres. Seminomas, with short
telomeres, are exquisitely sensitive to standard platinum based
chemotherapy. A recent study implicates telomere damage as a consequence
of platinum based chemotherapeutic agents in a male germ cell line. Thus,
the knowledge of telomere length differences and that of chemotherapeutic
agents damage to telomeres together may help shed light on the
differential sensitivities of TGCT subtypes to certain chemotherapeutic
agents. In summary, TGCT can demonstrate varied telomere lengths
depending on lesion subtype and whether the lesion occurs in the context
of a mixed tumor. The presence of short telomeres in ITGCNU suggests a
major role of telomere shortening in the pathogenesis of TGCT. In the
future, telomere length information may also inform point-of-care
diagnostic and treatment decisions for clinicians caring for TGCT
patients.

