Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Split-dose R-CHOP: A novel approach to administer cytotoxic
chemotherapy to geriatric patients with DLBCL


IntroductionDiffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common
subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. R-CHOP 21 (rituximab, cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone given in 21 day cycles) is the
standard chemotherapy for DLBCL. Due to age-related comorbidities, this
regimen may be too toxic for the geriatric population. At our institution
we have developed a modified regimen for the frail elderly termed
split-dose R-CHOP (SD R-CHOP). Patients (pts) receive CHOP at a 50% dose
reduction on day 1 and day 15 of each 28 day cycle. Rituximab is given at
full dose on day 1 of each cycle. The total amount of chemotherapy
delivered during each 28 day cycle of SD R-CHOP is equivalent to the
total doses in R-CHOP 21. All pts are supported with G-CSF after each
half cycle.MethodsWe performed a cohort study of DLBCL pts treated with
SD R-CHOP since 2007 at our institution. International prognostic index
(IPI) and Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) were calculated
retrospectively for all pts. Descriptive and survival analyses using the
Kaplan-Meier methodology and univariate Cox-Proportional hazard models
were performed. The primary endpoints, overall survival (OS) and
progression free survival (PFS) were estimated from the date of first SD
R-CHOP to death, progression, or end of follow-up.ResultsWe identified 20
pts with DLBCL treated with SD R-CHOP. The median age was 82 (range 60 to
90 years) and 70% were female. 14 pts had an elevated LDH and 13 pts had
stage III/IV disease. Pts had a mean IPI of 3 and a mean CCI score of 2.
Of the 20 pts, 9 completed prescribed treatment and achieved a complete
response on post-treatment imaging. Of the remaining 11 pts, 2 are in the
midst of treatment, 3 died during treatment, and 6 required further
modification of treatment due to infectious complications or organ
toxicity. The cause of death in those three pts included pulmonary emboli
(N = 1), progressive lymphoma (N = 1), and myocardial infarction (N = 1).
13/20 pts required hospitalization during chemotherapy.The median OS for
all pts treated with SD R-CHOP was 47 months and the median PFS was 43
months. For the 9 pts who completed treatment, the median OS was not
reached and the PFS was 50 months. Univariate Cox analysis revealed that
age, sex, elevated LDH, CCI, IPI, and stage of disease did not impact OS.
However, pts who did not complete their prescribed therapy had a hazard
ratio (HR) for OS of 5.7 (95% CI 1.2 to 27.3, p = 0.03) and those who
were hospitalized had a HR for OS of 5.9 (95% CI 0.74 to 46.6, p =
0.09).ConclusionsThe treatment of aggressive DLBCL in older patients
remains a challenge in geriatric oncology. Our SD R-CHOP approach allowed
administration of the same total chemotherapy dose as R-CHOP 21 in a
geriatric population felt not to be fit for the standard regimen. With
this dose modification patients who were able to complete therapy
achieved durable responses. We plan to validate these results in a larger
prospective trial.

