Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of the transcription factor MAZ on kRAS transcription:
a role for the G-quadruplex


kRAS is a GTPase protein affecting normal cell proliferation, division,
and apoptosis. It is mutated in >30% of all cancers, particularly in
60-90% of pancreatic cancers. Mutated kRAS leads to continuous activity
and uncontrolled proliferation. To date there have been no successful
clinical agents targeting mutant kRAS activity. Modulating kRAS
expression has shown anti-proliferative promise as an approach in
pancreatic cancer models, but is not a main avenue of pursuit for
clinical development due to lack of a molecular target. Our lab is
focused on the regulation of kRAS transcription through a variety of
G-rich regions of DNA in the promoter capable of forming non-B-DNA
structures termed G-quadruplexes (G4s). In the current study, we sought
to determine the effect of the transcription factor MAZ on the regulation
of kRAS, with a particular focus on the three putative G4-forming regions
(herein termed near, mid, and far in reference to their relative
proximity to the transcriptional start site). In a study of the kRAS
promoter using a series of luciferase plasmids, MAZ expression led to a
concentration-dependent decrease in promoter activity. This action was
localized to interactions with the mid-G4-forming region. In the context
of a more multifaceted intracellular mileu as found in the pancreatic
cancer cell lines MiaPaCa-2, Panc-1, and BxPc3, the effects of MAZ were
much more complex. In particular, 48 hr post-transfection with MAZ
expression plasmids, monitoring of kRAS transcription revealed a cell
line-specific modulation with an increase in kRAS expression in Panc-1
cells only, confirming a previous study, and no changes noted in either
the MiaPaCa-2 or the Bx-Pc3 cells. Further studies are ongoing evaluating
the direct binding of MAZ to the various G-rich regions in those cell
lines, as well as determining the DNA structure (single-stranded,
double-stranded, or G4-DNA) to which the MAZ protein is binding.
Ultimately, an understanding of the regulation of this G-rich region of
DNA, by MAZ or any other transcription factors such as Sp1 or p53, is an
important part of the larger puzzle leading to a targeted drug discovery
program focused on G4-regulation. Ultimately, G4-stabilization-mediated
down regulation of kRAS has high potential for anti-cancer efficacy in
pancreatic cancers, where there is a dire need for novel therapeutic
development.

