Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glutamine, glutaminase and -glutamyl-transferase activities are
essential for lung tumorigenesis


Increased glutamine uptake has been found to drive cancer cell
proliferation, making tumor cells glutamine-dependent or even addicted.
Glutamine is believed to provide additional carbon and nitrogen sources
for cell growth. The first step in glutamine utilization is its
conversion to glutamate by glutaminase (GLS). Glutamate is a precursor
for glutathione synthesis, a pathway known to be activated in tumor
cells. Additionally, glutathione concentrations are known to be elevated
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and is believed to protect against
oxidative stress. In contrast, glutathione's participation in the
-glutamyl-cycle is less well studied. Here we investigated the hypothesis
that glutamine drives glutathione synthesis and export, drives the
-glutamyl-cycle, and thereby contributes to NSCLC tumor cell
proliferation. Glutamine consumption and glutathione excretion were
measured in H460, A549 and MRC-5 cell lines. Treatment with BPTES, a
known GLS inhibitor, led to reduced cell proliferation. This was also
demonstrated when -glutamyl-transferase (GGT) was inhibited with
acivicin. GGT transfers glutamyl groups from glutathione to amino acids
to facilitate the amino acid transport into the cell. These results
suggest active utilization of the -glutamyl cycle in the tumor cells. The
formation of metabolites downstream of GLS and GGT were essentially
abolished at the lowest inhibitor concentrations studied. In contrast,
biological endpoints, such as MTT assay response, required up to 30-fold
higher inhibitor concentrations. Culturing in stable isotope-labeled
glutamine demonstrated that >50% of excreted glutathione and >80% of
-glutamyl amino acids were derived from glutamine. Together these results
demonstrate that glutamine is actively utilized for synthesis and
excretion of glutathione which, in turn, is utilized to promote amino
acid uptake by the formation of -glutamyl amino acids. These findings add
yet another important function to the glutamine dependence of tumor
cells. In addition to providing TCA cycle intermediates, we show that
glutamine promotes glutathione synthesis to increase cellular defense
mechanisms, and drives the -glutamyl cycle to enhance amino acid uptake.

