Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating chemoresistance mechanisms in colorectal cancer stem
cells


Treatment of advanced colorectal cancer (CRC) is impacted by a lack of
selectivity, the development of drug resistance and overall tumour
heterogeneity. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a subpopulation of tumour
cells believed to be responsible for tumour recurrence due to their
ability to self-renew, differentiate and evade current treatments. This
project explores the responses of CRC CSCs to chemotherapy and aims to
identify therapeutic targets of the CSC population. We used serial
colonosphere culture to enrich for CSCs from two human CRC cell lines,
HCT116 and SW480. Limiting dilution analysis showed that CSC enriched
cell lines have significantly higher colonosphere formation ability
compared to their respective parental cells. Further characterization of
CSC cell lines was performed via qPCR and flow cytometry to determine the
expression of colorectal CSC markers. A significant upregulation in CD166
and EpCAM gene expression was seen in HCT-CSC and SW-CSCs compared to
parental cell lines. In vitro assays were used to determine cellular
responses to three commonly employed chemotherapeutics, 5-fluorouracil,
cisplatin and epirubicin. A limiting dilution analysis demonstrated that
cells treated with chemotherapy for 48 hours had reduced colonosphere
forming potential. Cell viability in response to chemotherapy was
analyzed via PrestoBlue assays in both monolayer and 3D culture. CSC and
parental cell lines responded similarly in a dose-dependent manner to
treatment in monolayer, but CSC colonospheres were more resistant to high
doses of chemotherapy than their respective parental cells. ABC
transporter expression plays a major role in the development of
multi-drug resistance so the expression of ABCB1, ABCC1 and ABCG2 was
examined via qPCR. There was a significant upregulation in ABCB1 and
ABCG2 in HCT-CSCs compared to HCT-P cells. SW-CSCs also had significant
upregulation in ABCB1 compared to SW-P cells. Other resistance mechanisms
may also be key targets for therapeutic intervention including the
functional CSC marker aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). The detoxification
effects of ALDH could have a protective effect against the surges of
reactive oxygen species resulting from chemotherapy treatment. The
expression of ALDH and ABC transporter genes was also explored in
response to chemotherapy. The goal of this project is to elucidate drug
resistance mechanisms in colorectal CSCs, in order to target and
eradicate the tumour cells responsible for metastases and recurrent
disease. Our analysis demonstrates that colorectal CSCs possess
heightened protective mechanisms in comparison to other cancer cells
originating from the same tumour. Future experiments will further
investigate these resistance mechanisms to determine their therapeutic
potential.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

