Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of GLI1 antagonists for breast cancer therapy


Introduction: The transcription factor, glioma-associated oncogene
homolog 1 (GLI1) is a downstream marker for hedgehog (Hh) pathway
activation. Recently, Hh-GLI has emerged as a central pathway target in
several human cancers (breast, leukemia, lung etc.) with elevated GLI1 in
breast cancer having been linked to poor survival outcomes. A number of
GLI targeted inhibitors have been shown to inhibit Hh/GLI signaling with
some having efficacy in tumor models. We have previously demonstrated
that siRNA downregulation of GLI1 expression in inflammatory breast
cancer reduced proliferation and migration[1]. Further, we previously
demonstrated the feasibility of employing a high throughput (HT) approach
to profile drugs in dose response in cell line panels [2]. In this study,
we have taken a comprehensive approach to profile a panel of GLI
antagonists (including GANTS, HPIs, ATO and JK184) in a range of breast
cancer cell lines with varying GLI1 expression levels to identify those
with effects on growth. Experiment procedure: to assess cell
proliferation, we employed an automated quantitative high throughput
(qHT) approach to profile compounds on three phenotypic subtypes of
breast cancer cell line models: triple negative breast cancer (TNBC),
inflammatory breast cancer, and Claudin low breast cancer cell lines.
High-content imaging of nuclear count utilizing Hoechst staining was also
used as an alternative measure of proliferation. Quantitative PCR and
Western blotting was used to assess the effects of the inhibitors on the
GLI1 expression. Results: A subset of GLI antagonists were identified as
decreasing cell growth and viability in all the cell lines. Conclusion:
Several agents showed efficacy in in vitro BC cancer models demonstrating
that GLI inhibitors may be a valid therapeutic approach for targeting
GLI-dependent BC cancers.[1] Z. Thomas, W. Gibson, J. Sexton, K. Aird, S.
Ingram, A. Aldrich, H. Lyerly, G. Devi, K. Williams, Targeting GLI1
expression in human inflammatory breast cancer cells enhances apoptosis
and attenuates migration. British Journal of Cancer 104 (2011)
1575-1586.[2] K.P. Williams, J.L. Allensworth, S.M. Ingram, G.R. Smith,
A.J. Aldrich, J. Z Sexton, G. R Devi, Quantitative high-throughput
efficacy profiling of approved oncology drugs in inflammatory breast
cancer models of acquired drug resistance and re-sensitization. Cancer
Lett. 337 (2013) 77-89.Funded in part by DOD/CDMRP IDEA W81XWH-13-1-0141
award (KPW); NIH U54CA156735 (KPW); Duke Cancer Institute - Cancer and
Environment Initiative P3917733 sub-award (GRD); W81XWH-13-1-041
subcontract (GRD) and National Cancer Institute training grant
T32CA009111 (SJS).

