Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic antitumor effect of vemurafenib and metformin in
thyroid cancer


Advanced thyroid cancer patients such as those with
radioiodine-refractory and metastatic differentiated thyroid cancer or
anaplastic thyroid cancer lack effective treatment options. Targeted BRAF
kinase inhibitors such as vemurafenib have shown promising results in
clinical trials and off-label use for patients with BRAFV600E-positive
tumors. While targeting BRAFV600E offers particular effectiveness and
selectivity in inhibiting cancer cells in the short term, resistance does
develop. Prior results in our laboratory confirmed that vemurafenib halts
DNA synthesis and induces apoptosis in our mutated thyroid cancer cells.
In addition, resistant BCPAP (papillary thyroid cancer) cells were
developed in our laboratory by exposing cells to increasing
concentrations of vemurafenib. Resistant cells were characterized by
hyperactive mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling and
resistance to mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibition. These
additional targets mediating resistance provide an opportunity to devise
novel synergistic combination therapies. Since antitumor effects of the
widely used antidiabetic agent metformin were observed in thyroid cancer
cells and the drug is thought to suppress mTOR, we investigated metformin
adjuvant therapy in combination with vemurafenib. Various cell lines
including Nthy-ori 3-1 (normal immortalized thyroid cells), BCPAP
(papillary thyroid cancer), vemurafenib-resistant BCPAP, and 8505c
(anaplastic thyroid cancer) were analyzed in terms of cellular viability,
apoptosis and expression of cell signaling molecules after exposure to
both drugs. We found that the combination of vemurafenib and metformin
caused significantly decreased viability in vemurafenib-resistant BCPAP
cells. Furthermore, synergistic apoptosis was observed in BCPAP papillary
thyroid cancer cells and 8505c anaplastic thyroid cancer cells in
response to the combination treatment. These effects appeared to be
mediated by inhibition of both mTOR and MAPK signaling. Results support
further investigation into the use of metformin in combination with
targeted kinase inhibitors to treat advanced thyroid cancer patients.

