Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SGKs survival signal via inhibition of pro-apoptotic Mixed Lineage
Kinase 3 (MAP3K11) in cancer cells


Survival of cancer cells requires activation of pro-survival and
inhibition of pro-apoptotic pathways in concert. It is utmost important
to understand the underlying molecular pathways that regulate cancer cell
survival and death, so that specific inhibitor could be identified and
used to target cancer cell death pathways. Dexamethasone (DEX) is
routinely administered to cancer patients, in order to reduce allergic
responses. It is reported that DEX use in certain cancer patients could
lead to early cancer relapse and detrimental. Earlier, we reported that
insulin regulated PI3K-AKT pathway down regulated pro-apoptotic Mixed
Lineage Kinase 3 (MLK3) and this down regulation of kinase activity,
favored cancer cell survival. Since SGK family members are also regulated
by PI3K via Glucocorticoid Receptor (GR) in response to DEX, and SGK is
reported to have similar function like AKT, we hypothesized that SGKs
might also regulate pro-apoptotic function of MLK3, similar to AKT but
probably via a non-redundant pathway.Here we report that MLK3 is a direct
target of SGK in cancer cells. Endogenous SGK physically associated with
and phosphorylated MLK3 in HepG2 cells and this interaction was regulated
by synthetic glucocorticoid, dexamethasone. JNK and MLK3 kinase
activities were significantly inhibited either by over expression of SGK3
or by dexamethasone. The SGK3 and dexamethasone-mediated attenuation of
MLK3, MKK7 and JNK kinase activities were blocked by PI3K inhibitor,
LY294002, suggesting a link between PI3K-SGK and MLK3-JNK signaling
pathways. SGK phosphorylated MLK3 both in vivo and in vitro. SGK1 and
SGK2/3 phosphorylated MLK3 on Ser674 and Thr738, respectively.
Furthermore, SGK3 inhibited MLK3-mediated cell death and JNK kinase
activity in a manner, dependent on Thr738 phosphorylation of MLK3. Taken
together, these data define the mechanisms of glucocorticoid-mediated
inhibition of MLK3-JNK axis and cell death pathways. Furthermore, our
data also identify MLK3 as an indirect target of glucocorticoids that
might play a significant role in the pro-survival and anti-inflammatory
actions of glucocorticoid in cancer cell. Therefore, it is conceivable
that targetting MLK3 with its agonist, ceramide (by nano-ceramide
particles) could possibly overcome DEX-induced cancer relapse.This work
is supported by VA Grant #: BX000312 and NIH, R01 CA 176846 to AR; and VA
Grant #: BX000571to BR.

