Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene therapy for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma using SOCS-1
expressing adenoviral vector


Objective Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is the major
histological form of oesophageal cancer in East Asian countries. Despite
recent improvements in multimodality treatment, including surgery,
radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the prognosis for patients with ESCC
remains unsatisfactory. Therefore, development of novel therapy is
urgently required. Suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 (SOCS-1) has been
cloned as a negative regulator of various cytokine signaling. Recently,
lines of evidences suggest that overexpression of SOCS-1 has been
considered as a promising therapeutic approach for treatment of cancer.
This study was aimed to evaluate the therapeutic effect of the
overexpression of SOCS-1 by adenoviral vector (AdSOCS-1) against
ESCC.METHODS By WST-8 assay, cell growth inhibition via infection with
various dose of AdSOCS-1 was evaluated in 11 ESCC cell lines in vitro. We
also evaluated the induction of apoptosis by overexpression of SOCS-1 in
vitro. To evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of AdSOCS-1, ESCC cell line
(TE-8) was subcutaneously implanted into the ICR nu/nu mice. In addition,
therapeutic efficacy was also assessed using human xenografts
subcutaneously transplanted in imuune-deficient mice. Mice were
intra-tumorally injection with AdSOCS-1 or control adenovirus vector
(AdLacZ) twice a week for 4weeks.RESULTS Among 11 ESCC cell lines,
AdSOCS-1, markedly suppressed proliferation of 8 ESCC cell lines in
vitro. AdSOCS-1 strongly induced apoptosis in vitro, via inhibiting
JAK/STAT3 pathway. In the TE8 xenograft model, the volume of tumors after
therapy in AdSOCS-1 group (1,580 1,005mm3) were lower than that in
control group (2,690 1,309mm3). Furthermore, compared with AdLacZ,
injection with AdSOCS-1 also inhibited the tumor growth of patient
derived ESCC xenografts.CONCLUSIONS Our results indicated that
overexpression of SOCS-1 inhibited the progression of ESCC both in ESCC
cell lines and ESCC xenograft model derived from patient. SOCS-1 can be a
promising novel therapeutic approach for intra-lesional therapy in ESCC.

