Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Annexin A3 regulates MET-like aldehyde dehydrogenase positive
breast cancer stem cells


Background: Many cancers, including breast cancer, are hierarchically
organized and contain a subpopulation of self-renewing cells that display
stem cell properties. Breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) drive tumor growth
and metastasis and contribute to therapeutic resistance. Recent studies
suggest that BCSCs exist in alternative mesenchymal-like (EMT) and
epithelial-like (MET) states which are characterized by expression of the
BCSC markers CD44+/CD24- and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), respectively.
BCSCs maintain the plasticity to transition between EMT and MET-like
states in a process regulated by the tumor microenvironment. However, the
pathways involved in regulation of these stem cell states remain
undefined.Approach and Results: In order to elucidate the mechanisms
which regulate EMT and MET BCSCs, we performed gene expression and
proteomic analysis of BCSC populations enriched for EMT (CD44+/CD24-) or
MET, ALDH (Aldefluor-positive). Among the genes enriched in the MET BCSC
populations were Annexin A3 (ANXA3). Validation by qPCR and western
blotting confirmed increased ANXA3 mRNA and protein expression in the
ALDH+ fractions of MCF7, SUM 159, T47D and SUM 149 breast cancer cells,
as well as normal mammary epithelial cells. Immunohistochemical analysis
revealed that ANXA3 expression was significantly higher in breast cancers
compared to normal breast tissue with over 75% of primary human tumors
demonstrating significant ANXA3 expression. To determine the functional
role of ANXA3 in regulating BCSCs we established breast cancer cell lines
with inducible knockdown of ANXA3 utilizing a doxycycline (DOX) inducible
shRNA. ANXA3 knockdown reduced cell proliferation and decreased colony
formation in soft agar. In addition, ANXA3 knockdown significantly
decreased the proportion of ALDH+ BCSCs. In contrast, ANXA3 knockdown
increased the relative proportion of EMT-like (i.e. CD44+/CD24-) cells as
well as expression of EMT regulatory genes including Twist1 and Snail1.
In addition, ANXA3 knocked down significantly decreased tumorsphere
formation in vitro and tumor initiating capacity of breast cancer cells
in NOD/SCID mice.Conclusions: These results suggest that ANXA3 may play a
significant role in regulating the self-renewal of the MET-like ALDH+
BCSC. Studies are underway to determine the mechanisms of this regulation
and to assess the potential of ANXA3 as a cancer stem cell therapeutic
target.

