Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pentarins: Improved tumor targeting through nanoparticle
encapsulation of miniaturized biologic drug conjugates


The specific targeting of cytotoxic drugs to solid tumors has achieved
success with the advent of antibody drug conjugates (ADCs). This approach
has had notable success but has also met with limitations. The most
common issue limiting ADC effectiveness is believed to be low tumor
permeation by these large (150 kDa) molecules. Attempts to address this
limitation have been focused on the design of miniaturized biologic drug
conjugates such as those with small protein or small molecule targeting
moieties. However, these efforts uniformly result in conjugates with poor
pharmacokinetics in contrast to the extended plasma pharmacokinetics
observed with ADCs. The Pentarin platform encapsulates miniaturized
biological drug conjugates within nanoparticles to improve the
biodistribution of these classes of conjugates. There are multiple
benefits to this strategy. Through the enhanced permeability and
retention (EPR) effect the nanoparticles accumulate in the perivascular
space of the tumor tissue. Next the nanoparticles release the permeable
miniaturized conjugate that can penetrate in to the tumor, bind to an
over-expressed target on the cancer cell surface, internalize the payload
and elicit a strong biological effect. All of this is further enhanced by
the extended plasma pharmacokinetics of the nanoparticle when compared to
the conjugate alone. To exemplify the Pentarin platform we have designed
novel miniaturized biologic drug conjugates to an over-expressed target
found in small cell lung cancer. In vitro data has shown the designed
conjugates specifically and potently target tumor cells expressing the
receptor of interest. When encapsulated in nanoparticles, these
miniaturized biologic drug conjugates have improved plasma
pharmacokinetics, the amount of payload delivered to xenograft tumors is
increased and the xenograft efficacy is significantly more pronounced
over drug conjugate not in a nanoparticle. These observations correlate
with in vivo mechanistic assays in the xenograft tissue. These data will
be presented, together with the name of the target, to demonstrate the
impact of the Pentarin platform and to show progress towards the first
clinical candidate from this work.

