Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple mechanisms of action may contribute to the lymphoma
cell-killing activity of SH7139


The tridentate selective high affinity ligand (SHAL) SH7139 is
selectively cytotoxic at sub-nanomolar concentrations to lymphoma cells
over-expressing HLA-DR10. Recent studies suggest SH7139 is unusual in
that multiple mechanisms may contribute to its killing of targeted tumor
cells. Electron microscopy data suggest one mechanism involves the
triggering of a cell-signaling event that leads to the induction of
apoptosis when SH7139 binds to a unique site on HLA-DR10 (the same
region/epitope recognized by the Lym-1 antibody). A second mechanism
appears to involve the internalization of SH7139 by tumor cells and the
subsequent release of it's three individual recognition elements/ligands
by metabolic cleavage of the amide bonds that link them to a scaffold (a
unique feature of SHALs). Analogous to the process of toxin delivery by
antibody-drug conjugates, once these ligands are released inside the
cell, they can each inhibit a different key pathway required for tumor
cell survival. Additional metabolic conversions of these ligands by the
tumor cells to toxic metabolites may also contribute to cell killing
through the inhibition of a number of other critical cellular functions.
The third proposed mechanism is based on the fact that the target
receptor HLA-DR10 participates in the activation of T-cells. The binding
of SH7139 to the antigen binding pocket of HLA-DR10 may trigger an immune
response that targets the cancer cells with bound drug. All three
proposed mechanisms are currently under study. If multiple diverse
mechanisms of action contribute to SH7139's cytotoxicity, it will be
extremely difficult for lymphoma cells to develop a resistance to the
drug. This research was supported by the National Cancer Institute Phase
II SBIR Award R44CA159843-02 to SHAL Technologies Inc. Part of this work
was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344.

