Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colorectal cancer cell lines recapitulate molecular and
pharmacological features of clinical samples


Colorectal Cancer (CRC) is characterized by wide genetic, biological and
clinical heterogeneity. Oncogenic events, such as KRAS, NRAS and BRAF
mutations, are known negative biomarker of response to EGFR targeted
therapies. In addition to mutational analysis, transcriptional profiling
has been recently exploited to identify distinct CRC molecular subtypes,
associated with biological and clinical features such as cell of origin,
microsatellite instability, prognosis and response to treatments.
Detailed analysis of the relationships between the subtypes and
clinical/biological features requires a large panel of preclinical models
closely recapitulating the molecular heterogeneity of CRC. To this aim,
we assembled a large collection of 151 CRC cell lines. For each line, we:
(i) verified genetic identity by short tandem repeat (STR) analysis; (ii)
assessed microsatellite instability (MSI) status; (iii) sequenced
mutational hotspots in the KRAS, BRAF, NRAS and PIK3CA genes; (iv)
performed microarray-based global mRNA expression profiling; (v)
evaluated sensitivity to the EGFR-targeting drug cetuximab. STR analysis
revealed that some cell lines previously thought to be unrelated are
indeed derived from the same individual. This result was confirmed by
cell line hierarchical clustering based on mRNA expression profiles.
Overall, the mutational landscape of the compendium was concordant with
what observed in patients (mutation rates: KRAS = 47%; BRAF = 17%; NRAS =
0.7%; PIK3CA = 18%). Similarly, sensitivity to cetuximab was confined to
lines without RAS or BRAF mutations. Gene expression profiling was
exploited to assign cell lines to molecular subtypes, according to five
different published transcriptional classifiers. We found that all
molecular subtypes previously identified in CRC patients were robustly
maintained in the lines. Moreover, significant overlaps were detected
between individual subtypes across distinct classifiers. Subtype-specific
molecular and pharmacological associations previously defined in CRC
samples were largely recapitulated in the compendium. In particular, MSI+
cells were significantly enriched in inflammatory and goblet subtypes and
less prevalent in the Transit Amplifying (TA) and Stem groups. Cell lines
carrying BRAF mutations clustered in the inflammatory subtype, while RAS
mutations were equally distributed among all subtypes. Notably, in TA
lines without RAS or BRAF mutations, the fraction of cetuximab-sensitive
cells was strongly enriched (56%), confirming clinical data and
indicating that addiction to the EGFR pathway is an intrinsic feature of
this CRC subtype. In conclusion, our results describe a powerful
preclinical resource reflecting the molecular and functional
heterogeneity of CRC, which can be used to explore multidimensional
information of potential clinical relevance.

