Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmaceutical effect of vitamin C (ascorbate) on B16 melanoma in
vitro and in vivo


In 2014, 76,100 new cases of melanoma were diagnosed in the United
States. Treatment consists of surgery and chemotherapy, but efficacy is
low. Indeed, five-year survival rates for patients with metastatic
melanoma remain below 25%, indicating the need for new therapeutic
strategies. In parallel, some studies indicate that vitamin C (ascorbic
acid, ascorbate) only in pharmacologic doses may have a beneficial
anti-tumor effect. Although ascorbate is an essential nutrient for
humans, who are unable to synthesize it, pharmacologic ascorbate
concentrations are achieved by parenteral administration. Although
pharmacologic ascorbate in cancer treatment in humans is unproven, many
studies report a selective cytotoxic effect in cancer cells in vitro.
Cytotoxicity is thought to be mediated by hydrogen peroxide formation. To
investigate the effect of high dose ascorbate in melanoma, we first used
a murine melanoma cell line B16F10. We confirmed that ascorbate induced
cell death in a dose-dependent manner (up to 40mM) in this cell line
which is mostly reversed by adding catalase into the media, reinforcing
the hydrogen peroxide dependent effect. We next investigated the role of
ascorbic acid in vivo using a murine B16 melanoma model. Tumor-bearing
C57BL/6 mice were treated with pharmacological ascorbic acid (4g/kg
mice/twice a day) or hypertonic NaCl solution. We observed that the tumor
size was decreased by 63% in the vitamin C treated group compared to the
control group. We also used this model to analyze collagen expression in
B16 tumors from ascorbate or saline-treated mice by qPCR and ELISA.
Vitamin C treated tumors showed increased expression of various types of
collagen. Indeed, we observed a five-fold increase in Col1A1, Col1A2,
Col1A3, Col8A1 and Col28A1 mRNA expression and we also observed an
increase in the Prolyl 4-hydroxylase, alpha peptide III (P4HA3)
expression, an enzyme involved in collagen formation. No side effects
were evident from administration of high dose ascorbate, which is fully
consistent with previously published clinical data. We are currently
investigating the role of hydrogen peroxide in the murine model by
generating tumors with B16F10 cells that overexpress catalase. Taken
together, these results showed that pharmacologic ascorbate is cytotoxic
to B16F10 melanoma cells, with cytotoxicity in vitro mediated by hydrogen
peroxide. Ascorbate is effective in reducing melanoma tumor size without
apparent host toxicity. These data support the idea that vitamin C should
be studied in humans both for combination chemotherapy and also as a
stand-alone treatment.

