Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Double receptor targeting multifunctional iron oxide nanoparticles
drug delivery system for the treatment and imaging of prostate cancer


Purpose: As an alternative to the drawbacks of current advanced prostate
cancer chemotherapy, we propose a multifunctional double targeting drug
delivery system that utilizes the combination of two cancer-targeting
peptides: a modified luteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LHRH), the
ligand for luteinizing hormone releasing hormone receptor (LHRH-R), and
AE105, the ligand for urokinase type plasminogen activation receptor
(uPAR). Both ligands are fused to amphiphilic polymer coated iron oxide
nanoparticles (IONPs) and loaded with the anticancer drug Paclitaxel
(PTX) as the payload.Materials and Methods: Targeted IONPs were
characterized by both gel electrophoresis and dynamic light scattering
(DLS). PTX was absorbed on the IONPs. Drug loading and release
characteristics were conducted by HPLC. The binding specificity and the
internalization efficiency of the targeted IONPs were both examined by
Prussian blue staining and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Cytotoxicity
of the targeted IONPs was evaluated by MTT assay.Results:
Characterization of targeted IONPs by gel electrophoresis confirmed the
successful attachment of the peptides to IONPs. Conjugation of peptides
to carboxylic groups of polymer coating on IONPs resulted in an increase
in the average hydrodynamic size of targeted IONPs (16.34 nm) as compared
to non-targeted IONPs (12.51 nm), as well as a decrease of zeta potential
from -70.43 mV to -58.06 mV, respectively. Prussian blue staining
demonstrated that both, LHRH and AE105 conjugated IONPs were internalized
efficiently by cells of the human prostate cancer cell line, PC3. In
vitro MRI results showed that double-targeted IONPs significantly
maintained T2 MRI contrast effect and reduction of T2 values upon
internalization by PC3 cells. MRI imaging confirmed the preferential
binding and accumulation of double-targeted IONPs in PC3 cells when
compared to normal prostate epithelial cells (RC77N/E). PTX loaded
double-targeted IONPs were stable at physiological pH and efficiently
released around pH 4, the optimum pH inside the tumor cells. PTX loaded
double-targeted IONPs showed an approximately 2-fold reduction in PC3
cell viability when compared to non-targeted IONPs. In addition, the
percentage of cell death resulting from the PTX loaded, double-targeted
IONPs was very similar to the percentage of cell death attributed to 100
ng/ml of free PTX, thereby demonstrating that their capability of
reducing drug concentration.Conclusions: Our results indicate that we
have developed a LHRH-R and uPAR targeted IONPs drug delivery system that
potentially provides a MRI tractable delivery of cancer therapeutics such
as PTX to prostate cancer cells. Therefore, our optimized double-targeted
IONPs drug delivery system has the potential to significantly improve the
health outcomes and quality of life for cancer patients as a novel type
of targeted nanomedicine therapy.

