Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparing gene expression of matched FFPE colorectal cancer
samples measured by Nanostring nCounter platform and Affymetrix GeneChip
Human Transcriptome Array platform


OBJECTIVE: Due to the lack of clinically annotated fresh frozen tumor
samples, defining molecular features that can predict the recurrence of
colorectal cancer (CRC) for stage II or stage III patients remains
challenging in cancer research. Most available clinical samples are
Formalin Fixed and Paraffin Embedded (FFPE). Nanostring nCounter and
Affymetrix GeneChip Human Transcriptome Array (HTA) are two latest
platforms that enable gene expression profiling of FFPE samples. In this
study, we evaluated these two platforms for validating the prognostic
gene expression signature based on FFPE-derived CRC samples.METHODS: We
designed a custom nCounter codeset based on elements from multiple
published prognostic gene signatures for CRC based on frozen tissues and
used this platform to measure the gene expression of FFPE-derived CRC
tissues passing strict quality control measures. Then, we measured the
gene expression of 42 matched FFPE-derived samples on the HTA platform.
Gene expression data for matched CRC samples measured by the two
platforms were compared. Finally, we compared the previously published
prognostic subtype assignments based on gene expression data measured by
the two platforms.RESULTS: In total, 42 pairs of matched CRC samples
including 31 pairs of technical replicates and 11 pairs of biological
replicates measured by both platforms passed the quality control. Our
results showed moderate positive correlation of gene expression between
matched samples measured by both platforms, which is not correlated with
the RNA quality. When comparing the gene expression of patients with
metastatic recurrence to that of patients with no recurrence over a
7.4-year mean follow up, we identified 5 differentially expressed genes
(SYT17, LRIG1, PTPRJ, BSG, PTEN) in common (p OBJECTIVE: Due to the lack
of clinically annotated fresh frozen tumor samples, defining molecular
features that can predict the recurrence of colorectal cancer (CRC) for
stage II or stage III patients remains challenging in cancer research.
Most available clinical samples are Formalin Fixed and Paraffin Embedded
(FFPE). Nanostring nCounter and Affymetrix GeneChip Human Transcriptome
Array (HTA) are two latest platforms that enable gene expression
profiling of FFPE samples. In this study, we evaluated these two
platforms for validating the prognostic gene expression signature based
on FFPE-derived CRC samples.METHODS: We designed a custom nCounter
codeset based on elements from multiple published prognostic gene
signatures for CRC based on frozen tissues and used this platform to
measure the gene expression of FFPE-derived CRC tissues passing strict
quality control measures. Then, we measured the gene expression of 42
matched FFPE-derived samples on the HTA platform. Gene expression data
for matched CRC samples measured by the two platforms were compared.
Finally, we compared the previously published prognostic subtype
assignments based on gene expression data measured by the two
platforms.RESULTS: In total, 42 pairs of matched CRC samples including 31
pairs of technical replicates and 11 pairs of biological replicates
measured by both platforms passed the quality control. Our results showed
moderate positive correlation of gene expression between matched samples
measured by both platforms, which is not correlated with the RNA quality.
When comparing the gene expression of patients with metastatic recurrence
to that of patients with no recurrence over a 7.4-year mean follow up, we
identified 5 differentially expressed genes (SYT17, LRIG1, PTPRJ, BSG,
PTEN) in common (p < 0.05) based on both platforms. Subtype analysis
assigned Zhu et al.'s subtypes (Zhu, J. et al., PLOS One 2013) to 29
pairs of matched technical replicates measured by both platforms with
posterior probability greater than 50%. Overall, we found that the gene
expression patterns visualized in the HTA dataset were more consistent
within defined subtypes as compared to those of the nCounter dataset and
the HTA-based assignments are better supported by the corresponding
survival estimates.CONCLUSION: We found a moderate positive correlation
between matched samples across both HTA and nCounter platforms, however
the gene-by-gene correlations were weak. Both platforms support 5
potential biomarkers of poor prognosis. Discovery of CRC subtypes was
more definitive using data from the HTA platform as compared to the
nCounter platform. Further comparisons of matched FFPE-derived CRC
tissues across these platforms can lead to the discovery of additional
prognostic biomarkers and increased confidence in the optimal platform
for expanded clinical trial studies.

