Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of miRNA expression pattern from in-vitro
obtained exosomes of different urinary bladder cancer cell lines


Introduction & objectives:Interaction of tumor cells and the tumor
microenvironment (TME) plays an important role in tumor development and
progression. It was shown that microRNAs (miRNAs), packed in exosomes,
can affect cell-cell communication at the site of origin as well as the
TME. The aim of the project is the identification of a specific miRNA
expression pattern from in-vitro obtained tumor-derived exosomes of
different UBC cell lines in correlation to their malignant potential.
Furthermore, we want to analyze the effect of these exosomal miRNAs on
tumor-associated fibroblasts (TAFs).Materials & methods:Exosomes were
isolated from invasive (T-24,253J-BV, J82) and non-invasive (RT-112,
5637) UBC cell lines. The number and size of vesicles were measured by
NTA. The vesicles were examined for exosomal and contamination markers by
Western blotting. TotalRNA was isolated from the exosomes upon treatment
with RNase. MiRNA expression pattern was analyzed from exosomes secreted
by invasive and non-invasive UBC cells using miRNA microarray. The
validation of significantly differently expressed miRNAs was performed by
using qPCR. Exosome-mediated miRNA transfer between cancer cells and TAFs
was verified by 1) transfection of donor UBC cells with the C.
elegans-specific miRNA, cel-miR-39, 2) Exosome isolation and RNAse
treatment, 3) Transfer to recipient TAFs, and 4) miRNA-specific qRT-PCR
analysis using totalRNA from the recipient TAFs.Results:The isolated
exosomes from UBC cells exhibited a high amount of exosomal markers
(CD63, CD81, syntenin). 16 miRNAs were identified, which distinguishes
invasive UBC cells from non-invasive cells. Exosomes secreted by invasive
UBC cells are characterized by a specific miRNA signature of 25 miRNAs
compared to exosomes from non-invasive UBC cells. The validation of
differently expressed miRNAs is ongoing. After successful transfection of
RT-112 and T-24 with cel-miR-39, cel-miR-39 was detected in RT-112 and
T-24 exosomes as well as in recipient TAFs cultivated in the presence of
these exosomes.Conclusion:Exosomes secreted by UBC cells exhibit a
specific miRNA signature depending on the invasive potential of the
originating cells. We could proof an exosome-mediated transfer of miRNAs
between tumor cells and TAF.These results emphasize the role of exosomal
miRNAs for the interaction between tumor cells and the tumor
microenvironment. Further studies have to show the functional relevance
of selected exosomal miRNAs.

