Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of ZEB1/ZEB2 and III-tubulin in mediating
docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer


Docetaxel therapy is the gold standard treatment for advanced
castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). However, patients either do
not respond or develop resistance over time. Transcriptomic and proteomic
analysis of docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer sub-lines developed by
our group revealed multiple mechanisms of resistance in line with
advanced disease, including over-expression of anti-apoptotic proteins
and alterations of NF-KB activation. The sub-lines also demonstrated a
coordinated loss and gain of epithelial and mesenchymal markers
respectively; a process characteristic of Epithelial-Mesenchymal
Transition (EMT). Studies have highlighted a role of EMT in prostate
cancer progression, metastasis and docetaxel resistance. However, the
role of EMT drivers in mediating resistance is not defined. We
hypothesise EMT to be a central mechanism of apoptotic resistance in
advanced docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer, representing a target for
therapeutic manipulation.EMT was characterised in the PC-3 D12 and DU145
R docetaxel-resistant sub-lines through an increased invasive capacity,
MMP-1 secretion and protein expression of E-cadherin transcriptional
repressors ZEB1 and ZEB2, in comparison to parental cell lines. This was
associated with an increased expression of III-tubulin; a tubulin isotype
linked to taxane resistance and tumour aggressiveness. Upon treatment
with the apoptotic trigger docetaxel (20nM), the PC-3 D12 and DU145 R
sub-lines demonstrated significant resistance compared to parental
controls. Simultaneous siRNA knockdown of ZEB1 and ZEB2 resulted in both
a partial reversal in apoptotic resistance and a decrease in cell
viability; this was also associated with a down-regulation of III-tubulin
and a re-expression of E-cadherin.Our results provide evidence of the
process of EMT in in vitro models of docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer,
which is associated with differential susceptibility to docetaxel and is
partially reversed through siRNA knockdown of the EMT drivers, ZEB1 and
ZEB2. In addition, we have identified a link between EMT and III-tubulin
in our models of docetaxel resistance. Current experiments are
investigating the tissue expression of ZEB1 and III-tubulin in prostate
cancer metastases following docetaxel therapy, which will determine the
clinical relevance of EMT and III-tubulin as mediators of docetaxel
resistance in CRPC.

