Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone demethylase KDM3A: Epigenetic target for pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC)


Purpose: A growing body of evidence suggests that cancer stem cells/tumor
initiating cells (CSC/TIC) within a solid tumor including in pancreatic
cancer initiate and sustain tumor growth. Our preliminary data implicates
KDM3A (histone lysine demethylase 3A)/Jmjd1A (jumonji domain demethylase
1A), non-heme iron (II)- -ketoglutarate (kg) dependent enzyme, as a prime
regulator of stems cell self-renewability for cancer progression and is
overexpressed in PDAC. Hypoxia most prominently controls malignant
properties of cancer cells by stimulating hypoxia inducible factor 1
(HIF1). The fact that HIF1 binds to its responsible elements (HREs) in
the KDM3A promoters and subsequently up-regulates its expression could
explain why hypoxia exacerbates malignancy. Based on these observations,
we hypothesize that hypoxia induces KDM3A that regulates
self-renewability of CSC/TIC, thereby promoting tumor
initiation.Experimental Procedure: We have used RNA technology to silence
KDM3A in different pancreatic cancer cells and overexpressed KDM3A in
non-cancerous immortal pancreatic ductal epithelial cells (HPNE). We have
determined KDM3A expression in pancreatic cancer patient's samples. We
performed quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis as
an indicator of KDM3A recruitment.Results: KDM3A was overexpressed in
human pancreatic cancer patient tissue samples particularly in the area
of the pancreatic ducts and also in pancreatic cancer cells. Knockdown of
KDM3A in pancreatic cancer cells significantly reduced the enzyme
activity resulting in increased substrate (H3K9Me2) expression. KDM3A
knockdown cells decreased oncogenic potential as demonstrated by
inhibition of proliferation, clonogenicity, sphere-forming potential,
migration and tumor formation in orthotopic mouse model
(immunocompromised mice). KDM3A overexpressed transformed HPNE cells
increased oncogenic potential as evidenced by foci formation, pancosphere
formation and tumor formation in orthotopic mouse model. ChIP following
deep sequencing analysis suggested that KDM3A recruited one of the CSC
stem cell markers, DCLK1. N-oxaloglycine, -kg inhibitor, inhibited KDM3A
enzyme activity and spheroid formation in overexpressing HPNE cells and
in pancreatic cancer cells.Conclusions: KDM3A was overexpressed in PDAC.
ChIP-seq analysis revealed that KDM3A recruitment was higher when DCLK1
is expressed. Taken together, KDM3A appears to be responsible, at least
in part, for PDAC progression and could be a novel preventive or
therapeutic target in pancreatic cancer.

