Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive integrative characterization of hepatocellular
carcinoma: The TCGA HCC project


Background: Hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) are heterogenous primary
liver cancers with pleomorphic histologic features. We present a
comprehensive genetic, genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of
203 HCCs in The Cancer Genome Atlas Program (TCGA) on behalf of the TCGA
Liver analysis working group to provide a deeper understanding of the
molecular features of HCCs, to classify them in a clinically-relevant
manner, and to provide a public resource that identifies potential
targets for emerging therapies.Results: Mutation analyses confirmed the
presence of TERT promoter mutations in 40% of HCCs. The analysis also
revealed the first reported germline mutation in the TERT promoter in a
30 year old male, possibly reflecting an inherited predisposition to HCC.
TERT promoter mutations were enriched in hepatitis C virus infected
subjects. Analyses of hepatitis B virus (HBV)-induced HCCs demonstrated
recurrent integrations of HBV in the TERT locus. Thus, HBV integration
may substitute for TERT promoter mutations as an alternate mechanism of
telomerase activation. Other tumor suppressor genes inactivated by
mutation included the cell cycle genes TP53 (32% of cases), RB1 (8%), and
PTEN (3%), the Wnt/beta catenin pathway gene AXIN1 (4%), and the
chromatin remodeling genes ARID1A (9%), BAP1 (6%), ARID1B (4%), ARID2
(4%), and PBRM1 (3%). The oncogene CTNNB1 was mutated in 27% of HCCs.
Mutations were also found in the MTOR pathway genes, MTOR (4%), TSC2 (4%)
and TSC1 (3%). The patterns of mutational signatures observed included
signatures characteristic of the known carcinogens aristolochic acid and
aflatoxin B1. Clustering of mRNA, miRNA, or protein expression, DNA
hypermethylation and DNA copy number profiles identified five, four, two,
five and three clusters, respectively. Analysis of mRNA expression data
identified five groups. In particular, Group 1 was associated with Asian
race, higher histologic grade, and micro- and macrovascular invasion.
Integrated clustering showed a grouping of HCCs into three superclusters:
iCluster 1 had a low frequency of CDKN2A silencing, lack of CTNNB1
mutation, a normal-like methylation pattern, and overexpression of
proliferation marker genes; iClusters 2 and 3 had a high frequency of
CDKN2A silencing, CTNNB1 mutation, and overexpression of oxidative
response genes; iCluster 3 tumors had a higher degree of chromosomal
instability, high frequency of 17p loss, and a highly altered methylation
profile. Copy number aberrations included gains in the MYC, VEGFA, CCND1,
TERT, and MET loci and losses in the TP53, RB1, ERFFI1, CDKN2A, ARID1A
and PTEN loci. Discussion: Based on integrated analysis of genome,
transcriptome, methylome and proteome we showed that HCCs naturally
separate into three to five distinct groups with associated molecular and
clinical characteristics. Importantly, we identified a novel germline
mutation in the TERT promoter that may be associated with an inherited
risk for HCC.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

