Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of NOXA expression by INI1/SNF5 loss impaired sensitivity to
chemotherapeutic agents in malignant rhabdoid tumor in vitro and iv vivo


Background: We previously showed that INI1/SNF5 reexpression increased
transcriptional activity at the NOXA locus in malignant rhabdoid tumor
(MRT) cell lines resulting in NOXA protein production. In other cancer
cells, the binding between NOXA and MCL-1 induces apoptosis after
exposure to chemotherapeutic agents. Therefore, we hypothesized that loss
of NOXA alters the apoptotic pathway in MRTs and contributes to their
resistance to chemotherapeutic agents.Methods: The TTC549 and KP-MRT-RY
MRT cell lines were transfected with the pcDNA 3.1(+)-wild type hNOXA
plasmid, a kind gift from Dr. Kelekar, University of Minnesota, using
Lipofectamine reagent and then selected with G418. To generate MCL-1
knockdown MRT cell lines, we transfected a small interfering (si) RNA
targeting MCL-1 using Lipofectamine reagent. Cells were plated in growth
medium for 24 hrs and then treated with serial dilutions of doxorubicin
(DOX) and/or TW-37. To generate mice xenografts for both TTC549 MCL-1
stable knockdown (KD) and control cell lines, we established two
independently derived MCL-1 stable knockdown TTC549 cell lines using
lentiviral vectors encoding a shRNA targeting MCL-1 and a negative
control cell line (pLKO.1). We injected either 5 106 TTC549 MCL-1 KD or
control cell lines s.c. into athymic mice. One week after injection, mice
were treated once daily with DOX (15mg/kg) or vehicle alone for five
days.Results: In both NOXA expressing and MCL-1 KD MRT cells, we observed
a dramatic reduction of the IC50 values of DOX treatment. Moreover,
apoptosis was also observed at 48 hrs after DOX treatment at
concentrations less than the IC50 values for control cells.
Immunoprecipitation of MCL-1 showed that expressed NOXA associated with
MCL-1 in MRT cells. Furthermore, we observed that mean tumor volume in
the DOX-treated MCL-1 KD group was significantly smaller than that in the
vehicle-treated MCL-1 knockdown group. Next, we assessed the effects of
TW-37, an inhibitor that binds to the Bcl-2 homology domain 3 (BH3) of
proteins including MCL-1, in combination with DOX. Using the combination
index, we found that DOX and TW-37 displayed modest synergy in both MRT
cell lines (CIBackground: We previously showed that INI1/SNF5
reexpression increased transcriptional activity at the NOXA locus in
malignant rhabdoid tumor (MRT) cell lines resulting in NOXA protein
production. In other cancer cells, the binding between NOXA and MCL-1
induces apoptosis after exposure to chemotherapeutic agents. Therefore,
we hypothesized that loss of NOXA alters the apoptotic pathway in MRTs
and contributes to their resistance to chemotherapeutic agents.Methods:
The TTC549 and KP-MRT-RY MRT cell lines were transfected with the pcDNA
3.1(+)-wild type hNOXA plasmid, a kind gift from Dr. Kelekar, University
of Minnesota, using Lipofectamine reagent and then selected with G418. To
generate MCL-1 knockdown MRT cell lines, we transfected a small
interfering (si) RNA targeting MCL-1 using Lipofectamine reagent. Cells
were plated in growth medium for 24 hrs and then treated with serial
dilutions of doxorubicin (DOX) and/or TW-37. To generate mice xenografts
for both TTC549 MCL-1 stable knockdown (KD) and control cell lines, we
established two independently derived MCL-1 stable knockdown TTC549 cell
lines using lentiviral vectors encoding a shRNA targeting MCL-1 and a
negative control cell line (pLKO.1). We injected either 5 106 TTC549
MCL-1 KD or control cell lines s.c. into athymic mice. One week after
injection, mice were treated once daily with DOX (15mg/kg) or vehicle
alone for five days.Results: In both NOXA expressing and MCL-1 KD MRT
cells, we observed a dramatic reduction of the IC50 values of DOX
treatment. Moreover, apoptosis was also observed at 48 hrs after DOX
treatment at concentrations less than the IC50 values for control cells.
Immunoprecipitation of MCL-1 showed that expressed NOXA associated with
MCL-1 in MRT cells. Furthermore, we observed that mean tumor volume in
the DOX-treated MCL-1 KD group was significantly smaller than that in the
vehicle-treated MCL-1 knockdown group. Next, we assessed the effects of
TW-37, an inhibitor that binds to the Bcl-2 homology domain 3 (BH3) of
proteins including MCL-1, in combination with DOX. Using the combination
index, we found that DOX and TW-37 displayed modest synergy in both MRT
cell lines (CI<1) in vitro and in vivo.Discussion: Ectopic expression of
NOXA or knockdown of MCL-1 increased DOX sensitivity in MRT cell lines.
These results indicate that loss of INI1/SNF5-mediated regulation of NOXA
expression impairs an apoptotic pathway leading to repression of MCL-1
followed by the resistance to chemotherapeutic agents. We also found that
TW-37, a BH3 only protein mimetic, has a synergistic effect with DOX on
MRT cell lines in vitro and in vivo, providing a potential foundation for
molecular targeting therapy for MRT.

