Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct roles of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) isoforms in skin
cancer


The c-Jun-N-terminal kinases (JNKs), are activated by stress, growth
factors and cytokines, and are encoded by three separate genes (JNK 1, 2,
and 3), with 10 total isoforms. Our published data has demonstrated that
off-target effects on JNK signaling by BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi) are
important for the induction of cutaneous squamous carcinoma (cuSCC).
Overexpression of JNK2, has been found to promote transformation of
keratinocytes, also suggesting an important role of JNK signaling pathway
in promoting tumor development. However, it is still unclear how
different JNK isoforms, especially ubiquitously expressed JNK1 and JNK2,
really function in skin cancer.To delineate the specific roles of JNK1
and JNK2, we expressed C116S mutants, which rendered them insensitive to
the pan-JNK inhibitor JNK-IN-8, without affecting their activity.
Wild-type and mutant JNK1 and JNK2 were transduced into cuSCC (SRB1) and
keratinocyte (HaCaT) cell lines and application of JNK-IN-8 enabled
chemical-genetic dissection of JNK1 and JNK2 activity. JNK-IN-8
significantly attenuated UV-induced apoptosis by 80-90% in SRB1 and HaCat
cells overexpressing WT JNK1, WT JNK2 or C116S JNK2 mutant compared to
vehicle control while having only a slight effect (0-10%) on cells
overexpressing C116S JNK1 mutant, suggesting JNK1 is the key player in
UV- induced apoptosis. This difference served as the basis for a gene
expression profiling study in which we identified differentially
expressed genes regulated by JNK1 vs. JNK2.We also showed that the
Leucine-zipper and sterile- motif kinase (ZAK), which is a MAP3K, is an
important upstream activator of JNK-mediated UV-induced apoptosis in skin
cancer. To probe how ZAK activates JNK signaling, we knocked down ZAK in
SRB1 and HaCaT cells with lentiviral shRNA. Following UV exposure, we
found that both JNK1 and JNK2 activation occurred with JNK1 activity
peaking within 6 hours and JNK2 activity sustained over 24 hours. In ZAK
knockdown cells, JNK1 activation was selectively suppressed, suggesting
that ZAK preferentially activates JNK1 in this context.In conclusion, our
results indicate that JNK signaling pathway, part of which is regulated
by ZAK, plays a critical role in skin cancer. JNK1 and JNK2 exert
opposing influences that center on the regulation of apoptosis and cell
proliferation in skin cancer.

