Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular modeling studies of novel receptor targeted peptides in
the treatment of prostate cancer


Purpose: Prostate Cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of
cancer-related deaths among men in the United States. Due to the harsh
side effects of conventional chemo- and radio-therapies, targeted drug
delivery is now gaining focus of cancer researchers. The key for success
for any newly developed targeted drug delivery systems is the novel
design of targeting peptides which have high binding affinities to
differentially over-expressed receptors on the surface of PCa cells. Four
over-expressed receptors which can be targeted on the cell surface of PCa
cells are: (GnRH), (EGFR), (PSMA), and (uPAR). Thus, we propose to study
the binding affinity of tweleve novel designed targeting peptides (three
peptides per receptor) for these over-expressed receptors. Initially, we
will study the binding affinity using a computerized molecular modeling
program. We will corroborate our modeling data by determining the
dissociation constants of the peptide-receptor interaction using
sensitive experimental tools such as miscroscale thermophoresis.Methods:
The newly designed peptides were generated in pdb (protein database)
format and the known pdb files of the receptors were collected from
protein data bank. Cluspro 2.0, developed by Boston University, is a
protein docking server with a molecular modeling program that was used to
calculate the binding energies of these peptides to their corresponding
receptors. The data obtained was analyzed using Pymol. Results: The
molecular docking studies showed that the GnRH tarteting peptide QH10,
uPAR targeting peptide CV13, EGFR targeting peptide RL10, and PSMA
targeting peptide TH12 have the lowest mean binding energies for their
respective top three binding conformations. The calculatd binding
energies for the aftermentioed peptides-receptors combination are: -1285
KCal/M, -1029 KCal/M, -1019 KCal/M and -1037 KCal/M, respectively. There
results suggested a very high interaction for these newly designed
peptides and their corroponding receptors as the typical calculated
binding energy for an antigen-antibody interaction is -700
KCal/M.Conclusion: Based on our molecular docking studies, we have
determined the best targeting peptides among all the newly desiged
peptides. The binding efficiency of the targeting peptides with the
lowest binding energies will be further investigated using microscale
thermophoresis.This work is supported by grant funding from NIH/RCMI
G12MD00758 (T. Turner) and NIH/NCI U54 CA118623 (T. Turner & M.
Abdalla).Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

