Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging the tumor microenvironment of metastasis reveals the
mechanism of transient blood vessel permeability and tumor cell
intravasation


Sites of direct contact between a macrophage, a tumor cell and
endothelial cell [Tumor MicroEnvironment of Metastasis (TMEM)],
correlates with metastasis in breast cancer patients independently of
other clinical prognostic indicators suggesting a direct role for TMEM
function in hematogenous dissemination. Here we show, using intravital
high-resolution two-photon microscopy, that tumor cell intravasation
occurs only at TMEM. Tumor cell intravasation occurs concurrently with
transient, local vascular permeability at TMEM in an autochthonous mouse
mammary carcinoma model and a human patient-derived xenograft model.
Ablation of the presence or activity of the TMEM associated macrophages
blocks tumor cell intravasation at TMEM demonstrating an essential role
of perivascular macrophages in TMEM function. A subset of TMEM
macrophages are identified as Tie2-expressing macrophages that are
characterized by F4/80+/CD11b+/CD68+/MRC1+/Tie2Hi/VEGFAHi/CD11c-. VEGFA
signaling from Tie2Hi TMEM-associated macrophages causes the local loss
of vascular junctions resulting in transient vascular permeability and
tumor cell intravasation at TMEM. Macrophage-specific ablation of VEGFA
results in increased vascular junction stability and inhibition of
intravasation, demonstrating that vascular junction dissolution at
VEGFAHi/Tie2Hi TMEM-associated macrophages leads to vascular permeability
and tumor cell intravasation. Inhibition of Tie2 with the first in class
small molecular inhibitor rebastinib impairs TMEM function leading to a
reduction in vascular permeability, tumor cell dissemination and
metastasis. Further, rebastinib inhibition of Tie2 blocks tumor cell
extravasation and metastatic growth in the lungs.Together, the findings
that TMEM macrophages mediate vascular permeability and tumor cell
intravasation demonstrate an essential role for TMEM within the primary
mammary tumor as sites of tumor cell dissemination. These data reveal the
mechanism of tumor cell intravasation in breast cancer, explain the
prognostic value of TMEM density in predicting distant metastatic
recurrence in breast cancer patients and document a strategy for
inhibition of dissemination.This research is supported by the Department
of Defense Breast Cancer Research Program under award number BC120227
(ASH), NIH CA100324 (JSC) and the Integrated Imaging Program.

