Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer histologic and cell nucleus architecture differentiate
prostate cancer Gleason patterns 3 from 4


There will be an anticipated 29,480 prostate cancer (PCa) deaths in 2014
in the US. Nearly 40% of PCa patients will undergo radical prostatectomy
(RP), which reduces the risk of death from PCa. Roughly 15% of these PCa
patients tend to recur and of these a portion will metastasize (40%).
Hence, a more accurate and objective computer-assisted image analysis
(CAIA) automated PCa grading system should be considered. The current
standard for Gleason grading involves an expert pathologist visually
scoring Gleason grade patterns based upon H&E histologic glandular
architecture (size, shape and organization).Using the same tissue
microarray (TMA) containing 80 radical prostatectomy (RP) cases
stratified by Gleason scores, the authors selected a subset of up to
fifty 20X Aperio whole slide scanned H&E images representing GG 3 and GG4
cases. Three separate approaches to measure tissue texture and nuclear
structure were used: 1) adaptive active contour scheme (AdACM)
segmentation which focuses on nuclear shape and texture features 2)
Curvelet transform based histologic tissue texture method and 3)
MediaCybernetics ImagePro 9.1 software that includes 22 nuclear structure
features. Data analysis utilized area under the curve (AUC) for the
receiver operating characteristics (ROC) with assessment of accuracy,
sensitivity and specificity.Ali and Madabhushi at Case Western Reserve
University utilized AdACM segmentation approach and three nuclear
features to obtain an AUC = 0.88 yielding an accuracy of 86.1% with
sensitivity = 85.2% and specificity = 87.1% applying a quadratic
discriminant analysis (QDA) classifier to separate GG 3 from GG4. Next,
the University of Pittsburgh's EEE group (Wen-Chyi Lin and C. C. Li)
applied a curvelet based tissue feature extraction method and a
tree-structured classifier consisting of three Gaussian-kernel support
vector machines each with an embedded voting mechanism and discriminated
Gleason grade (GG) 3 vs GG 4 generating a AUC = 0.98 yielding an accuracy
= 95.7% with sensitivity = 94.5% and specificity = 96.9%. Finally, the
Veltri laboratory differentiated GG3 and GG4 and obtained an AUC = 0.96
and yielding an accuracy = 85%, sensitivity = 82%, specificity = 90% to
separate GG pattern 3 from 4.Therefore using CAIA with three different
laboratories we were able to use PCa glandular histologic and cell
nuclear quantitative measurements to accurately discriminate GG patterns
3 and 4. More work is required to apply these automated tools to confirm
the optimal method and also to predict PCa outcomes of recurrence,
metastasis and survival.

