Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of fusion genes in lung cancer biopsies of crizotinib
resistant patients


Purpose: A small proportion of lung cancer patients have an inversion
involving the ALK gene on chromosome 2. These ALK+ patients initially
respond to crizotinib, but later develop progressive disease. This
resistance can be due to gatekeeper mutations in the kinase domain of the
ALK gene like L1196M and G1269A, copy number gain of the EML4-ALK fusion
gene, and mutations in EGFR and KRAS. We aimed at identifying fusion
genes that may explain the resistance mechanism in patients progressing
on crizotinib.Materials and Methods: Frozen tissue of the resistant tumor
samples was available for four EML4-ALK positive patients (Table 1).
Paired end RNA sequencing was performed using the Illumina TruSeq RNA
platform. DeFuse (v.0.6.1) was used to identify fusion products.
Candidate fusion genes were validated by RT-PCR. In addition, we used the
IGV browser to identify mutations in resistance-associated genes in the
RNA-seq data.Results: Thirteen fusions genes were identified with high
confidence (Table 1). In three of the four patients we detected an
EML4-ALK fusion product. Four novel fusion products with a functional ORF
were confirmed by RT-PCR. Three of these fusion products were present in
patient 1 (Table 1). The fourth fusion involving CLIP4-VSNL1 was detected
in patient 3. Interestingly, three of the 4 fusion products observed in
patient 3 involved 5 genes that are all close to the ALK locus, i.e.
EML4, ALK, CLIP4, VSNL1 and MCFD2 (Table 1). In addition, we found two
resistance-related mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the ALK
gene, i.e. p.C1156Y and p.G1269A, in patients 2 and 3,
respectively.Conclusion: We found four new fusion products with a
functional ORF using RNA sequencing of crizotinib resistant tumor
samples. Further analysis of the primary tumor samples is ongoing and
will reveal if these fusion genes might have been induced by the
crizotinib treatment. Two of the four patients have a known
resistance-inducing mutation in the ALK gene.

