Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination activity of the MEK inhibitor Pimasertib and the
hypoxia-activated prodrug TH-302 in pancreatic and biliary tract tumor
xenograft models


The efficacy and tolerability of the MEK inhibitor Pimasertib and the
hypoxia-activated prodrug TH-302 combination were explored in pancreatic
and biliary tract preclinical tumor xenograft models. These studies were
based on the hypotheses that combination efficacy may occur by several
possible mechanisms including inhibition of DNA repair or increase of
hypoxia by Pimasertib, or by differential targeting of the oxic and
hypoxic tumor compartments by Pimasertib and TH-302 respectively. Since
Pimasertib and TH-302 had each been tested in separate clinical trials in
pancreatic cancer with gemcitabine (NCT01016483 and NCT01144455
respectively), these data could provide the rationale for clinical
testing of this novel combination in pancreatic cancer. The combination
was also tested in biliary tract cancer models (cholangiocarcinoma and
gall bladder) based on the reported sensitivity of these tumor types to
MEK inhibitors, their hypoxic nature, and the prevalence and high unmet
need of these indications, particularly in Asia. The results showed that
in the MIA PaCa-2 human pancreatic xenograft model, combination efficacy
was observed and found to be schedule dependent. The greatest combination
efficacy occurred when Pimasertib was administered first, 2 hours prior
to TH-302, suggesting a unique combination mechanism in cells when the
MAPK signaling pathway is suppressed first. The combination was
subsequently explored in 2 additional pancreatic models and a panel of
biliary tract patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models. In 10
cholangiocarcinoma PDX models tested, 3 models were responders to
Pimasertib monotherapy and 4 models converted from being a non-responder
with either monotherapy to a responder with the Pimasertib TH-302
combination using the%TV (tumor volume) criteria, which is related to a
clinical PR RECIST response. Combination effects were not observed in 2
additional pancreatic or 6 gall bladder models tested. Some models were
highly sensitive to Pimasertib or TH-302 monotherapy, making combination
effects difficult to observe. Biomarker analyses are ongoing to identify
markers that could predict which tumors are the most sensitive to this
combination therapy.

