Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of rare dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
variants relevant to 5-fluorouracil toxicity


5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) is a cornerstone drug for the treatment of several
aggressive tumors; however, adverse 5-FU toxicity contributes to
approximately 1,300 deaths annually in the U.S. While three genetic
variations in dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD; DPYD gene) are
well-established predictors of toxicity (i.e., *2A, I560S, D949V), the
contributions of additional reported missense DPYD variants (>130) have
not been adequately evaluated in clinical studies. Our lab has previously
developed methods to study DPYD variants for potential clinical relevance
to 5-FU toxicity using in vitro and cellular approaches (see Offer et al.
Cancer Research 2013 & 2014). In the current study, we measured the in
vitro enzyme activity of 47 uncharacterized missense variants that have
been previously reported in dbSNP and NHLBI ESP databases. Additionally,
we assessed the impact of these variants on 5-FU sensitivity in multiple
transgenic human cellular models using real-time cellular analysis.
Approximately one-third of the studied variants showed significantly
reduced enzyme activity compared to wild type. Of the DPD-deficient
variants identified in this study, 8 were profoundly deficient (25%
activity, but significantly lower than wildtype), similar to D949V.
Cellular sensitivity to 5-FU for cells expressing these variants
paralleled the in vitro enzyme activity results, with deleterious
variants showing reduced tolerance to 5-FU relative to cells transgenic
for wildtype DPD. These trends were observed in multiple cell lines
derived from various tissues and tumor types. Overall, our results add to
the growing database of deleterious DPYD variations. Many of these
variants have been observed primarily in non-Caucasian racial groups,
consistent with our previous reports. These data suggest that the
deleterious variants classified in this study may be important predictors
of 5-FU toxicity, particularly in individuals of non-Caucasian ancestry.
Additionally, these data suggest that genetic testing for rare variants
may improve the success of predictive tests for 5-FU toxicity. Finally,
this study suggests that in vitro and cellular models may be important
pharmacogenomic methods to rapidly characterize variants of potential
relevance in additional drug-gene pathways.

