Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models to
evaluate clinical and therapeutic responses of glioblastoma multiforme


BACKGROUND/PURPOSEThe Mayo Clinic has developed a large panel of
patient-derived xenografts (PDX) from patients with glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM). Here we report initial molecular profiling of the Mayo
PDX panel and a comparison of patient and PDX molecular profile and
response to therapy.METHODS & MATERIALSClinical data was retrieved by
retrospective chart review. Animal data from all PDX investigations
conducted between 2004-2014 were retrieved from experimental logs and
subsequently consolidated into a database for analysis.RESULTSFrom 1999
to 2014, 182 patient tumor samples of varying histological grades were
attempted for xenograft with 73 resulting viable PDX lines. Viable
xenografts were only produced from WHO grade IV tumor specimens, yielding
an overall success rate of 49% for these tumors. GBM patients that
produced viable xenografts compared to those that did not exhibited a
trend for decreased overall survival (P = 0.18). There was no significant
association between successful xenografting and whether tissue was from
newly diagnosed (45/93%) or recurrent (20/40; 50%) tumors. Patient age >
45 at diagnosis was correlated with increased PDX viability in GBMs (p =
0.05). Of the viable PDX models analyzed, EGFR mutation was identified in
17 lines, TERT mutation was found in 13 lines, IDH mutation in 1 line,
and MGMT hypermethylation in 25 lines. RNAseq was performed on orthotopic
tumor samples from 53 PDX models. After excluding contaminating murine
sequence reads, expression analysis demonstrated 32 models with a
mesenchymal phenotype. Array comparative genomic hybridization was
performed on 9 patient samples and derivative early, mid and late passage
PDX tumors. Using unbiased hierarchical clustering, there was a high
concordance between patient and xenograft models. Within the PDX panel,
fractionated radiation (RT) alone and RT combined with temozolomide (TMZ)
was tested in orthotopic tumors in 38 lines. The overall median survival
benefit (ratio of median survival for treated vs. placebo) in PDX lines
treated with RT only was 1.6 (range: 0.9-2.5) and with RT/TMZ was 2.5
(range: 1.1 - 8.9). There was a positive association between observed
patient survival and the corresponding survival benefit in the PDX for
subjects treated with RT/TMZ (r = 0.2; n = 17). Response to adjuvant TMZ
was evaluated in 42 tumor lines, and response to bevacizumab was tested
in 33 tumor lines, and correlations with clinical treatment response are
being evaluated.CONCLUSIONS: The Mayo GBM PDX panel is widely used in the
neuro-oncology community. The initial molecular analysis suggests a good
correlation between patient and PDX at the level of genotypic
characteristics and therapeutic sensitivity.

