Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical activity in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of Selinexor, a
selective inhibitor of nuclear export (SINE), is enhanced through
combination with standard-of-care therapies


The nuclear export protein Exportin 1 (XPO1) is overexpressed in diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), follicular small cell cleaved Lymphoma
(FSCCL) and a wide variety of other cancers, which often correlates with
poor prognosis. Selinexor is an oral SINE currently in Phase 1/2 clinical
testing, which targets XPO1 to induce apoptosis across a broad spectrum
of tumor types. This broad action is primarily due to forced nuclear
retention and reactivation of tumor suppressor proteins (TSPs), resulting
in selective tumor cell death. We have previously reported anti-lymphoma
activity of selinexor in murine models of DLBCL, in spontaneous canine
aggressive lymphomas and in preliminary results from B-cell lymphoma
patients enrolled in a Phase 1 trial of hematological malignancies. One
promising finding thus far is that efficacy of selinexor appears to be
independent of the presence of the mutations in MYC and BCL2/6 found in
double-hit DLBCL, which is typically resistant to standard treatments.
Here we report combination studies involving Selinexor-Dexamethasone and
Selinexor-mTOR inhibitor everolimus in Non Hodgkin's lymphoma relative to
front-line standard of care.Selinexor was found to be potently cytotoxic
across a broad panel of B-cell lymphoma cell lines. Furthermore,
combination of selinexor with dexamethasone (Dex) or the mTOR inhibitor
everolimus resulted in synergistic cytotoxicity in the WSU-DLCL2 and
WSU-FSCCL cell lines. The superior cytotoxicity observed in the
combination was consistent with enhanced nuclear retention of different
TSPs. In WSU-DLCL2 xenografts, analogs of selinexor KPT-251 and KPT-276
showed comparable efficacy to R-CHOP and in a model of disseminated
follicular lymphoma using WSU-FSCCL cells, selinexor had similar efficacy
to rituximab for extending survival. The combination of selinexor and Dex
or selinexor and everolimus in both xenografts are ongoing.B-cell
lymphoma cells in culture are highly sensitive to selinexor. Furthermore,
combination of selinexor with Dex or everolimus is synergistically toxic
to DLBCL cells. This synergism is consistent with the mechanism of action
of these drugs in that both selinexor and Dex antagonize NF-B and mTOR is
an XPO1 cargo protein. The comparable in vivo activity of selinexor and
related SINE compounds relative standard of care is consistent with the
observations of objective responses in B-cell lymphoma patients in Phase
I clinical testing. Ongoing preclinical work is designed to extend
comparisons of selinexor with other standard of care and broaden the
characterization of combination therapies in an effort to provide a
rational basis for studying specific combinations in B-cell lymphoma
clinical trials.

