Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-human LSR monoclonal antibody inhibits tumor growth of
ovarian cancer directly


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy; thus developing
new treatment options is urgently required. Molecular targeted therapies
for cancers, which are generally more tolerable than widely used
cytotoxic agents, have shown highly specific inhibition of target
molecules. We previously identified bone marrow stromal antigen 2 (BST2)
as an endometrial cancer antigen using iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic
technology focused on cell surface membrane proteins, and also
demonstrated the usefulness of an anti-BST2 monoclonal antibody (mAb) for
endometrial cancer. In this study, we aimed to identify a new ovarian
cancer antigen. We also aimed to develop a novel monoclonal antibody
(mAb) and evaluate its preclinical efficacy against ovarian cancer.To
identify a new ovarian cancer antigen, cell surface membrane proteins of
normal ovarian epithelial and ovarian cancer cell lines were analyzed by
iTRAQ-based proteomic technology. As the new therapeutic target for
ovarian cancer, we identified lipolysis-stimulated lipoprotein receptor
(LSR) which had one of the largest significant differences in protein
level between normal ovarian epithelial and ovarian cancer cell lines.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the overall survival of ovarian
serous carcinoma patients with high LSR expression was significantly
shorter than those with low LSR (p = 0.0293). We newly developed anti-LSR
mAb and investigated its preclinical efficacy. Anti-LSR mAb showed
significant in vivo inhibition of tumor growth against a xenograft model
of hLSR-positive ovarian cancer in an antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC) and complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC)
independent manner (p = 0.0001). And anti-LSR mAb also induced G0/G1 cell
cycle arrest by regulation of MEK and p44/42 MAPK activities and
expression levels of cell cycle related proteins in vitro. Furthermore,
anti-hLSR mAb, which crossreacts with mouse LSR, had little detectable
toxicity in mice.In summary, high expression of LSR in ovarian cancer was
the poor prognostic factor. Our newly developed anti-LSR mAb showed
significant tumor growth inhibition in ADCC and CDC independent manner in
vivo. Anti-human LSR mAb also inhibited LSR function and showed direct
tumor growth inhibition inducing G0/G1 cell cycle arrest in vitro. Our
preclinical data demonstrated that targeting LSR by mAb is a promising
therapy for patients with LSR-positive ovarian cancer.

