Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCL12/CXCR4 activation by cancer-associated fibroblasts promotes
integrin 1 clustering and invasive ability in gastric cancer


Purpose: Gastric cancer (GC) is the fourth most commonly diagnosed cancer
and the third leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide. The range of
therapeutic strategies available for the treatment of GC has improved in
recent decades. However, the prognosis of patients with advanced GC
remains poor even after curative resection, mainly because of recurrence,
such as peritoneal dissemination and liver metastases. Previous studies
have shown that the interaction between cancer cells and their
surrounding stroma plays an important role in tumor development.
Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) have been reported to be involved in
invasion and metastasis in cancers, including gastric cancer (GC), via
their stimulation of CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling. However, the mechanisms
underlying the tumor-promoting effects and the potential of developing
therapeutic targets using CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling activated by CAFs are
not fully understood.Experimental Design: We first analyzed CXCL12
expression in resected GC tissues of 110 patients by immunohistochemistry
(IHC). We next established primary normal fibroblasts (NFs) and CAFs from
GC tissues and examined the functional differences between these primary
fibroblasts using co-culture assays with GC cell lines. Furthermore, we
evaluated the efficacy of a CXCR4 antagonist (AMD3100) and a FAK
inhibitor (PF-573,228) on the invasive ability of GC cells.Results: We
determined that high CXCL12 expression was significantly associated with
larger tumor size, deeper tumor depth, lymphatic invasion and poor
prognosis in GC. We established new primary CAFs and their adjacent NFs
from resected stomach tissue in GC patients. We evaluated the change in
mobility during the direct co-culture of GC cells and fibroblasts using
real-time imaging. The motility of GC cells significantly increased upon
direct co-culture with CAFs more than it did in cells with NFs compared
with control RPMI during observation for 24 hours. The motility of GC
cells with CAFs was effectively suppressed by AMD 3100 compared to GC
cells with NFs. CXCL12/CXCR4 activation by CAFs mediated the clustering
of integrin 1 on the cell surface and promoted the invasive ability of GC
cells. Notably, AMD3100 was more efficient at inhibiting GC cell invasion
through the suppression of integrin 1/FAK signaling compared with
PF-573,228.Conclusions: These results suggest that CXCL12 derived from
CAFs promotes invasive ability by enhancing the clustering of integrin 1
in GC cells and results in GC progression. The current data provide
evidence that CXCL12/CXCR4 inhibition by AMD3100 is more efficient in
suppressing GC cell invasion by not only inhibiting intracellular
signaling but also by attenuating the interaction between cancer cells
and the extracellular matrix compared with PF-573,228. Our present study
represents the rationale for establishing a therapeutic strategy
targeting CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling.

