Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling pathway in preclinical
thyroid cancer models: Antitumor and antiangiogenic activity of
lenvatinib to target VEGFR/FGFR/RET


Background: Inhibition of tumor angiogenesis through the vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) signaling and oncogenic RTK
signaling is a promising therapeutic target in thyroid cancer. Lenvatinib
mesilate (LEN) is the selective inhibitor of VEGFR1-3, and other
proangiogenic and oncogenic pathway-related RTKs including fibroblast
growth factor receptors (FGFR1-4), the platelet-derived growth factor
receptor (PDGFR) , KIT, and RET. We studied the antitumor and
antiangiogenic activity of LEN by using various thyroid cancer
models.Methods: Roles of RTK signaling pathways in 11 thyroid cancer
(differentiated (DTC), medullary (MTC), and anaplastic (ATC)) cells were
examined by testing antiproliferative activity of selective RTK
inhibitors. Mutation profiling of DTC cells was done by MassARRAY
systems. Antitumor and antiangiogenic (immunohistochemical staining of
the endothelial cell marker CD31) activity of LEN was tested in s.c.
xenograft models. Phosphorylation of molecules in the FGFR1 and RET
signaling pathways was evaluated through Western blotting (WB).
Pharmacodynamic (PD) biomarker analyses of VEGF and FGF signaling pathway
in xenograft models by treatment of LEN were performed.Results:DTC:
Molecular profiling in DTC cells showed K1 cells had BRAF V600E and
PIK3CA mutation (E542K). Other DTC cells didn't have active tumor driver
mutations. Among 5 DTC cells, only RO82-W-1 (W1) cell showed the
selective sensitivity against LEN and FGFR selective inhibitors (PD166866
and PD173074). W1 cells overexpressed FGFR1 and LEN inhibited
bFGF-induced phosphorylation of FGFR1, FRS2, MEK and ERK in W1 cells in
vitro. LEN inhibited in vivo tumor growth and decreased microvessel
density (MVD) in 5 human DTC xenografts. LEN decreased phosphorylation of
FRS2, which a substrate FGFR, in W1 xenografts.MTC: TT cells were
reported to have activated mutation in RET. The IC50 value of LEN was
0.078 M. Oral administration of LEN at dose of 10, 30 and 100 mg/kg
inhibited in vivo tumor growth but did not decrease MVD in TT xenograft
model. LEN inhibited phosphorylation of RET within TT xenograft at the
same doses to show antitumor activity. ATC: LEN did not show anti
proliferative activity against 5 ATC cells in vitro (IC50 value > 10 M).
LEN showed the both antitumor and antiangiogenic activity in 5 ATC
xenografts.Conclusion: LEN showed the antitumor activity in 11 human
thyroid cancer xenografts through antiangiogenic activity based on
inhibition of VEGFR2 whereas inhibition of FGFR and RET signaling pathway
contributes antitumor activity of LEN in some of DTC and MTC preclinical
models. These data suggest that LEN provides therapeutic benefits in
various human thyroid cancer models through VEGFR/FGFR/RET inhibitory
activity.

