Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and synthesis of hybrid drugs to target inflammatory
pathways in breast cancer


In breast tumors, activation of the nuclear factor B (NFB) and
cyclooxygenase (COX)-prostaglandin pathways promote cell survival,
migration, invasion, angiogenesis, and resistance to therapy - all
phenotypes of aggressive disease where therapy options remain limited.
Thus, adding an anti-inflammatory agent to breast cancer treatment would
be beneficial but no such drugs have been approved, either as mono- or
adjuvant therapy. Moreover, redundancy and interdependence between
inflammatory signaling implies that blocking one pathway is unlikely to
be effective. We rationalized that targeting of multiple inflammatory
pathways can be achieved via a hybrid drug, which, by definition, is a
chemical entity capable of interacting simultaneously with multiple
targets. Hence, hybrid drugs consisting of clinically relevant moieties
aimed at multiple inflammatory pathways were synthesized and tested.To
target the NFB pathway, we utilized dimethyl fumarate (DMF), a safe and
effective anti-inflammatory drug already in clinical use. For the first
time, we show that DMF effectively blocks NFB activity in breast cancer
cells. To target the COX2-PGE2 axis in breast cancer cells, we selected
the classical NSAID aspirin (ASA), given its beneficial effect in
reducing breast cancer incidence with extended ASA use. Our first hybrid
drug, GTCpFE, consists of DMF linked to ASA. We find that GTCpFE inhibits
NFB activity as does DMF, while retaining its ASA-like activity. GTCpFE
blocks p65 nuclear entry like DMF but, in addition, also inhibits key
kinases (IKK/) in the NFB pathway. This suggests that GTCpFE as a hybrid
drug has gained new activities over parental DMF or ASA. GTCpFE inhibits
breast cancer stem cells, an important NFB- and PGE2-dependent phenotype
in aggressive cancers, more effectively than ASA, DMF, or the combination
of the two. Thus, as a proof-of-principle, the hybrid drug GTCpFE shows
increased efficacy and potency by modulating multiple inflammatory
pathways.Because an anti-inflammatory therapy is not cytocidal on its own
on the bulk of the tumor, we decided to combine DMF with more
conventional therapies. Given that majority of breast cancers express
estrogen receptor (ER), our second hybrid drug, Ral-Fum, consists of DMF
linked to Raloxifene (Ral), a selective ER-modulator, to specifically
target ER+ breast cancers. This hybrid drug shows improved anti-NFB
activity over DMF while maintaining ER antagonism, hence is both an
endocrine therapy and an anti-inflammatory agent. Moreover, Ral-Fum
attenuates the formation of endocrine resistant colonies. Taken together,
our results indicate that a hybrid drug strategy to target essential
factors for breast cancer cell proliferation and survival, such as ER,
and multiple aspects of inflammation can generate promising and novel
therapeutic agents to treat aggressive breast cancers.

