Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cystine stones as a potential cause of bladder cancer in Slc3a1
knockout male mice


Bladder cancer is the sixth leading cause of cancer in the United States.
Patients with bladder stones are at an increased risk for developing
bladder cancer. Bladder stones are an established cause of bladder
irritation and inflammation. Proliferative and phenotypic changes induced
by chronic inflammation are the proposed etiology for the development of
bladder cancer in individuals with chronically irritated bladders. The
purpose of this study was to identify the early genetic changes
associated with bladder inflammation that may be associated with the
development of bladder cancer. Slc3a1 knockout male mice develop cystine
bladder stones from the second month of life. Prior investigations
demonstrated bladder inflammation in these mice, which may closely mimic
inflammation inducing the earliest stages of bladder cancer in humans. To
investigate changes in cell structure, proliferation, and
differentiation, we performed PCR expression arrays on tissue from
bladders of Slc3a1 knockout mice and compared them to wild-type mice. We
tested genes in the uroplakin (UP), cytokeratin (CK), and tissue
inhibitor of mellatoprotease (TIMP) families of proteins, as well as
genes involved in EMT. We localized expression of selected markers by
immunofluorescence. Results demonstrated pronounced alterations in
expression of E-cadherin, TIMP-1, TIMP-2, UP1A, UP2, UP3A, UP3B and CK 14
and CK17. E-cadherin and TIMP proteins are involved in cell motility
underpinning epithelial-mesenchymal transition. CKs are structural
proteins believed to be indicative of the stem-cell population in
urothelial cancers. Metastatic potential and stem-cell behavior are key
features of cancer cells, and expression changes in genes underpinning
these functions may represent the earliest steps in the progression to
bladder cancer. Prior studies had shown UP2 to be up-regulated in bladder
cancer, suggesting that it could serve as a marker for the disease. We
found up-regulation of UP2, as well as up-regulation of UP1A, UP3A, and
UP3B in our model, indicating that changes in expression of these genes
may occur before the disease is clinically evident. Thus, they have the
potential to serve as biomarkers for this disease in its early, silent
stages. Genetic changes discovered in Slc3a1 knockout mice may closely
mirror the early cellular changes seen in bladder cancer. Our study has
provided insight into the earliest genes exhibiting altered expression by
inflammation-induced changes in the bladder, including a set of potential
biomarkers for early detection of the disease. These genes require
in-depth analysis to identify the mechanistic contribution of each one to
the development and progression of bladder cancer in the hopes of
generating molecular targets for future therapy.

