Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic investigation of neutropenia associated with
palbociclib


Bone marrow suppression, especially neutropenia, has been identified as
one of the main dose-limiting toxicities for the selective CDK4/6
inhibitor, palbociclib, in the clinic. However, compared to
chemotherapy-induced myelotoxicity, palbociclib-induced neutropenia is
quickly reversible, uncomplicated and is proactively managed by a short
duration treatment-free period between cycles, or reactively by dose
delay or reduction. To aid in understanding the mechanism by which
neutropenia occurs and to further differentiate it from chemotherapy-
induced myelotoxicity, an in vitro bone marrow toxicity assay was
utilized to evaluate the cellular mechanism and the reversibility of bone
marrow suppression induced by palbociclib as a single agent or in
combination with anti-estrogens.This investigation has demonstrated that
palbociclib-induced bone marrow suppression manifested through cell cycle
arrest without apoptosis; by contrast, chemotherapeutic agents, including
paclitaxel, doxorubicin, and carboplatin, primarily caused apoptotic cell
death in the bone marrow. Following palbociclib treatment withdrawal in
vitro, bone marrow cells resumed proliferation in the presence or absence
of the anti-estrogen (fulvestrant); while breast cancer cells (MCF-7)
remained arrested in the presence of fulvestrant. Bone marrow cells did
not resume proliferation following chemotherapy treatment withdrawal. To
further investigate the mechanism of reversibility, we evaluated the
involvement of cellular senescence. Bone marrow cells did not enter
senescence following treatment with palbociclib, anti-estrogen, or a
combination of both agents. MCF-7 cells, on the other hand, became
senescent following palbociclib or anti-estrogen treatment, and this
effect was larger in the presence of both agents.In summary, the current
investigative work shed light on the mechanism of palbociclib- induced
bone marrow suppression and clearly differentiated it from that induced
by chemotherapeutic agents. These results potentially explain the quick
reversibility of palbociclib-induced myelosuppression and its
uncomplicated nature when compared to traditional cytotoxic agents.
Moreover, the data supports the current dosing regimen in the clinic,
which provides time for bone marrow cells to recover during the 1 week
treatment-free period without impacting tumor efficacy. This
investigative work provides valuable information to the clinicians in
managing the neutropenia risk associated with breast cancer
treatment.This research was funded by Pfizer, Inc.

