Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Study of a new splice variant of Neuropilin-1: Antagonistic
functions in the regulation of tumor progression


Neuropilin-1 (NRP1) is a transmembrane glycoprotein functioning as a
co-receptor for several soluble factors, including some variants of the
Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A (VEGF-A). Therefore it contributes
to regulating angiogenesis but its expression is also associated with
cancer. Neuropilin can be also considered as a proteoglycan as it can be
modified by the addition glycosaminoglycans on serine 612.Six splice
variants of NRP1 have been described in the literature. An additional
form was recently identified in our laboratory. Depending upon the cell
types, it represents 5-20% of the total amount of NRP1. As compared to
the full size NRP1 (NRP1-FS), it lacks the 7 amino acids encoded by the
last 21 bases of exon 11. As the missing sequence is located 2 amino
acids downstream of the Ser612 required for glycosaminoglycan side chain
formation, it could possibly affect the glycosylation process and modify
the function of the entire molecule. The glycosylation of NRP1-FS and
NRP1-7 was analyzed in HEK293 cells engineered to overexpress each
isoforms. As expected, Western blotting analyses suggested that NRP1-7
was less glycosylated than NRP1-FS. Experiments with deglycosylating
enzymes are in progress to confirm the differential glycosylation of
these two variants.Prostate Cancer cells (PC3) expressing a
tetracycline-sensitive repressor were further transfected with an
appropriate expression vector (PC3/TR/NRP1-FS) or (PC3/TR/NRP1-7)
allowing the conditional expression recombinant NRP1-FS or NRP1-7 only in
the presence of doxycycline. Anchorage-independent growth was analyzed by
seeding these cells on soft agar. As compared to control conditions,
forced expression of NRP1-FS by doxycycline stimulated cell growth and
colony formation. By contrast, the expression of NRP1-7 induced a sharp
reduction of cell proliferation and colony number, suggesting an
inhibition of tumorigenesis by this variant. The same cells were further
evaluated in a migration scratch assay, with or without doxycycline in
the medium. As compared to controls and to NRP1-FS expressing cells, a
decrease migration rate was observed with cells producing NRP1-7. As PC3
cells express basal level of endogenous NRP1, this suggests a mechanism
of competitive inhibition of NRP1 functions by NRP1- 7.Finally, the
involvement of the two Neuropilin-1 variants in tumorigenesis was
assessed in vivo in a model of injection in the flanks of nude mice of
PC3 cells conditionally expressing NRP1-FS or -7. Increased tumor size
and weight were observed using cells expressing NRP1-FS as compared to
the control condition. By sharp contrast and in agreement with the in
vitro observations, the expression of NRP1-7 induced a reduction of tumor
growth. These results suggest that NRP17, though lacking 7 amino acids as
compared to the full size variant, can have specific and perhaps
antagonistic functions.

