Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Control and function of the PROX1 transcription factor in
malignant glioma


Malignant gliomas remain to be fatal and highly resistant to therapy.
PROX1 is a transcription factor critical for embryonic development, with
a role in cell cycle control and progenitor cell differentiation. PROX1
is highly relevant to study in relation to brain tumors due to its role
in normal CNS development, where it leads to progenitor cell
differentiation and initiation of neurogenesis. We have previously shown
that PROX1 is expressed in human gliomas where there is a positive and
statistically significant correlation between PROX1 expression and glioma
tumor grade. We have also evaluated the prognostic value of PROX1 in a
cohort of patients with grade II gliomas and found that a high number of
PROX1 positive cells correlated significantly with poor outcome, a
clinically important finding, as such predictors do not exist at present.
The mechanism behind PROX1 overexpression in high-grade glioma and its
functional consequences remain unclear. To this end we set out to study
PROX1 effects on the behavior of glioma cells. We found that glioma cell
lines in general expressed only low levels of PROX1 protein and mRNA.
However, PROX1 was readily detected in the U343MGa Cl2:6 glioma cell
line. This cell line also expresses GFAP and SOX2 and has features in
common with glioma stem cells. Depletion of PROX1 in U343MGa Cl2:6 cells
using siRNA had a marginal positive effect on cell proliferation in a
short term assay. Furthermore, ectopic PROX1 impaired the ability of
glioma cells to proliferate as indicated by reduced colony formation and
decreased BrdU incorporation. We present experimental evidence showing
that PROX1 induces p27. By regulating p27, PROX1 may block the activity
of Cdk2/Cyclin E complex, and thus inhibit cell cycle progression. The
functional consequences of PROX1 expression on the stemness, migration,
and invasion phenotypes of glioma cells remain to be further investigated
and preliminary results will be presented.

