Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of aberrant crypt foci in the colon of mice exposed to
tobacco carcinogen 2-amino-9H-pyrido[2,3-b]indole


Epidemiological studies indicate that tobacco smoking is a risk factor
for colon cancer. However, the etiological agents in tobacco smoke remain
uncertain. Heterocyclic aromatic amines (HAAs) that are produced during
high-temperature cooking of the proteinaceous food are associated with
the elevated risk of colon cancer. Tobacco smoking also produces HAAs,
the most abundant one being 2-amino-9H-pyrido[2,3-b]indole (AC). The
carcinogenic potency of AC is unknown in humans, but AC forms DNA adducts
in multiple organs, including liver and colon, as well as being
carcinogenic in rodents. In this study, AC-induced colon cancer risk was
assessed by determining DNA adducts and putative colonic precancerous
lesions, aberrant crypt foci (ACF) and dysplastic ACF. For comparison,
the HAA, 2-amino-3,4-dimethylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoline (MeIQ), a liver and
colon carcinogen in mice, and azoxymethane (AOM), a potent colon
carcinogen in rodents, were also administered. AC (400 ppm) or MeIQ (300
ppm) were fed in a high-fat diet to A/J mice (n = 12 per group) for 4
weeks. AOM was injected intraperitoneally to another 12 mice at 5 mg/kg
body weight weekly for 6 weeks. At the end of carcinogen treatment, liver
and colon were harvested from 4 mice from each group for DNA adduct
measurement. dG-C8-AC, dG-C8-MeIQ, and O6-methyl-dG DNA adducts were
measured by liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry. The remaining 8 mice
from each group were then fed a carcinogen-free diet for additional 8
weeks, and then colons harvested. Colonic total and dysplastic ACF were
counted by light microscopy after appropriate staining. AC feeding
induced the greatest number of DNA adducts in liver, followed by AOM and
MeIQ. AOM administration and AC feeding induced similar numbers of DNA
adducts in the colon, both of which were significantly greater than MeIQ.
However, AOM administration induced a significantly greater number of
total and dysplastic ACF in the colons than did feeding either AC or
MeIQ, which had similar numbers of ACF and dysplastic ACF. The high
levels of AC DNA adducts and induced dysplastic ACF in this animal model,
provide biological plausibility for a causal role for AC in
tobacco-induced colorectal carcinogenesis. However, DNA adduct numbers
induced by these three carcinogens was not proportional to the colonic
ACF or dysplastic ACF number, suggesting that different types of DNA
adducts differ in their ability to promote colonic precancerous lesions.

