Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting chronic lymphocytic leukemia with p53 deficiency with
phenethyl isothiocyanate


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most common adult leukemia in
the United States and Europe. Despite recent advance in new therapeutic
agents that have improved treatment outcomes, CLL remains incurable. CLL
patients with loss of p53 due to unfavorable cytogenetic alterations such
as chromosome 17p deletion often exhibit more malignant disease
phenotype, are resistant to many standard therapeutic agents, and have
poor clinical outcomes. Thus, finding effective treatment for CLL with
p53 deficiency represents a significant challenge, and development new
agents and therapeutic strategies to effectively kill CLL cells with loss
of p53 function would have profound clinical implications in CLL
treatment. We have recently created a mouse model with Tcl1-Tg:p53-/-
genotype that resembles the aggressive human CLL disease with p53
deficiency (17p-deletion). We showed that leukemia cells isolated from
this mouse model as well as primary human leukemia cells with 17p
deletion isolated from CLL patients are resistant to standard anti-CLL
agents. Because p53 plays important roles in regulation of apoptosis and
in maintaining mitochondrial function/normal metabolism/redox
homeostasis, we hypothesized that a loss of p53 function in CLL with 17p-
or p53 mutations would on one hand lead to drug resistance and poor
therapeutic response to conventional treatment, and would on the other
hand also cause mitochondrial dysfunction and high ROS stress. Our study
tested the possibility to use the high oxidative stress as a biochemical
basis to effectively target the drug-resistant CLL cells with p53
deletion using redox-modulating strategy in vitro and in vivo. Our
results showed that ROS-mediating strategies could overcome drug
resistance of CLL cells with p53 deficiency, and was able to effectively
eliminate fludarabine-resistant CLL cells using phenethyl isothiocyanate
(PEITC), which induced rapid glutathione depletion and caused severe ROS
accumulation leading to massive death of CLL cells in culture.
Importantly, PEITC also exhibited promising in vivo therapeutic activity
in the CLL mouse model as a single agent, leading to a significant
prolongation of the mouse survival time. Since PEITC is a natural
compound found in vegetables with very low toxicity to normal cells, the
results of this study may have important therapeutic implications. Our
study suggests that PEITC may potentially be used for clinical treatment
of CLL with 17p deletion and improve the outcome of this subpopulation of
CLL patients, who would otherwise refractory to standard therapeutics.

