Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic antitumor interaction between valproic acid,
capecitabine and radiotherapy in colorectal cancer as a rationale for the
innovative V-shoRT-R3 trial in locally advanced rectal cancer patients


We have recently demonstrated that the histone deacetylase-inhibitor
(HDACi) vorinostat induces synergistic antitumour effects in combination
with capecitabine by up-regulating, in vitro and in vivo, in colorectal
cancer cells but not in ex vivo treated peripheral blood lymphocytes, the
mRNA and protein expression of thymidine phosphorylase (TP), the key
enzyme converting capecitabine to 5-FU (Di Gennaro, Brit J Cancer 2010).
We confirmed a time and dose-dependent induction of TP mRNA and protein
expression by several other HDACi, including valproic acid (VPA). We
investigated potential antitumor interaction between capecitabine
metabolite 5-deoxy-5-fluorouridine (5-DFUR) and several HDACi showing
synergistic/additive antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic effects in all
cancer cells tested, with good results with VPA. Interestingly, TP
protein induction is achieved also at low doses of VPA (0.5-1 mM),
corresponding to a plasma level between 50 and 100 g/ml, easily reached
in patients with normal anticonvulsant doses. Although at these doses VPA
did not induce growth inhibition as single agents, a significant
synergistic antitumor effect was still demonstrated in combination with
5-DFUR, suggesting a specific mechanism of interaction. TP knockdown
experiments confirmed a crucial role of TP protein modulation in the
observed synergism. Radiotherapy further potentiated in colorectal cancer
cells the antiproliferative, pro-apoptotic and DNA damage effects induced
by 5-DFUR/VPA combination, as demonstrated by clonogenic assay, Caspase-3
cleavage and H2AX foci formation, respectively. On these bases we
launched a phase I/II clinical study (V-ShoRT-R3 trial) to explore
whether the addition of both VPA and capecitabine to short-course
radiotherapy (SCRT) before optimal radical surgery, might increase the
pathologic complete tumor regression rate in low-moderate risk rectal
cancer patients (ClinicalTrials.gov number NCT01898104). Several
biomarkers will be evaluated comparing normal mucosa with tumor and on
blood samples. Tumor metabolism will be measured by 18FDG-PET at baseline
and 11 days after the beginning of SCRT. Currently phase I clinical study
is ongoing. We have also optimized a protocol to evaluate histones and
proteins acetylation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of recruited
patients by flow cytometry, as pharmacodynamic/predictive specific marker
of VPA HDACi activity and preliminary results will be presented.

