Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutrophils protect B-cell lymphomas against chemotherapy via
cell-cell interactions mediated by CD44 and ICAM1 receptors


Background: Neutrophils are innate immune cells that play an established
role in the killing of microorganisms. While much less studied than
adaptive immune cells, neutrophils are detected in different solid
tumors. Current evidence suggests that neutrophils show high functional
plasticity and can display either protumor or antitumor activity. Given
the abundance of significant portion of tumor-associated neutrophils in
many cancer models and due to lack of information about the role of
neutrophils in lymphoma, we investigated the impact of neutrophils on the
sensitivity of B cell lymphomas to chemotherapy.Methods: Freshly isolated
human neutrophils were cocultured with different types of human B cell
non Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL) in the presence of various chemotherapies
(vincristine, doxorubicin, cisplatin, bortezomib and mafosfamide).
Chemotherapeutic effect on cell proliferation and cytotoxicity was
assessed by flow cytometry using CFSE and DAPI assays, respectively.
Expression profiling of cells exposed to neutrophils was performed by
Illumina cDNA array. Blocking antibodies were added to the coculture
system. In vivo, RL cells were co-injected with neutrophils
subcutaneously into SCID CB17 mice and treated with vincristine. Ex vivo,
peripheral blood was obtained from chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)
patients. CLL B cells were cocultured with autologous neutrophils then
exposed to vincristine, ibrutinib or idelalisib. CLL cells were analyzed
for their content in Bcl2, BclXL and Mcl1.Results: We found that freshly
isolated human neutrophils protect NHL cells against the chemotherapeutic
cytotoxicity. Neutrophils protective role was not due to sequestration of
chemotherapy. This effect was not due to soluble factors produced by
neutrophils and required direct cell-cell interactions between
neutrophils and NHL cells. Expression profiling of RL cells in the
presence of neutrophils showed enhanced expression of CD44. Blocking
antibodies against CD44 and ICAM1 receptors inhibit neutrophil-mediated
protection of RL cells against chemotherapy in vitro. In vivo, freshly
isolated human neutrophils co-injected with tumor cells reduced
sensitivity of RL cells to vincristine resulting in enhanced tumor
growth. Similarly autologous neutrophils protected fresh CLL cells from
the cytotoxic effect of various agents. Exposure of CLL cells to
neutrophils increased the content of Bcl2 and Mcl1 with no effect on
BclXL.Conclusion: Neutrophils protect B cell lymphomas against
chemotherapy in vitro and in vivo. This protective role is due to
cell-cell interactions mediated by CD44 and ICAM1 receptors. Our results
also suggest that neutrophils enhance CLL survival by inducing the
expression of anti apoptotic proteins Bcl2 and Mcl1. Our findings
underline the importance of neutrophils in tumor growth or
chemoresistance and may contribute to therapeutic strategies to inhibit
their protective effect.

