Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of height, BMI and serum lipid levels on ovarian cancer
prognosis in over 12,000 women: a Mendelian randomization study


IntroductionPrevious observational studies investigating height, body
mass index and serum lipid levels as prognostic factors in ovarian cancer
have been inconclusive. In addition to possible influences of reverse
causation, it is possible that factors such as diet, socio-economic
status and other lifestyle factors are confounding true associations.
Mendelian Randomization (MR) utilises genotype data for variants
associated with phenotypes of interest to create genetic risk scores for
these modifiable exposures. One advantage of using genetic markers as
proxies is that they are determined from birth and are therefore
unaffected by confounding variables. We aim to use MR to investigate the
association between height, BMI and serum lipid levels (high-density
lipoprotein (HDL), low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and triglycerides) and
ovarian cancer prognosis in the absence of confounding
variables.MethodsWe used data from 12,908 invasive ovarian cancer cases
with 5,813 events from 26 studies in the Ovarian Cancer Association
Consortium. All individuals were of European ancestry. We calculated
genetic risk scores for each individual for height, BMI and serum lipids
by taking the sum of the alleles associated with the trait, weighted by
the size of their effect on the trait. The genetic risk scores were then
included in a Cox proportional hazards model adjusted for study and two
principal components to test for association with prognosis. For the
analysis of height, we included 422 uncorrelated single nucleotide
polymorphisms identified by the Genetic Investigation of Anthropometric
Traits (GIANT) consortium as associated with height at genome-wide
significance. In the analysis of BMI, we included 32 SNPs associated with
BMI in analyses by the GIANT consortium. In order to account for the
pleiotropy between the three lipid types we included the genetic risk
scores for each of the three traits in a joint analysis. SNPs identified
by the Global Lipids Genetics Consortium as associated with lipid levels
were included: 95 with HDL, 82 with LDL and 64 with
triglycerides.ResultsWe found no evidence of association between the five
genetic risk scores and ovarian cancer prognosis. The genetic risk score
for height had an estimated hazard ratio of 1.01, 95% confidence interval
0.94 - 1.08, p-value = 0.82. The hazard ratio for BMI was 1.00, 95% CI
0.95 - 1.05, p-value = 0.99. The hazard ratios for HDL, LDL and
triglycerides were 1.03(0.94-1.13), 1.02(0.94-1.12) and 1.08(0.96-1.21)
respectively with p-values = 0.53, 0.58 and 0.19.ConclusionOur study does
not provide any evidence of association between height, BMI and serum
lipid levels and ovarian cancer prognosis.

