Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of theranostic mesoporous silica nanoparticles for
pancreatic cancer


Purpose: Modern methods of pancreatic cancer diagnosis and treatment are
severely lacking and have failed to provide effectual treatment options
for patients. The root cause of this inadequacy stems from the
hypovascularized nature of pancreatic cancer, making traditional
chemotherapeutics and cancer detecting contrast agents nearly obsolete. A
potential solution for tumor-targeting difficulties is through the
implementation of nanotechnology, specifically targeting ligand capped,
theranostic nanoparticles. We hypothesize that silica based, mesoporous
nanoparticles capped with the targeting ligand, urokinase plasminogen
activator (UPA) will serve as theranostic agents for treatment and
diagnosis of pancreatic cancer.Methods: Mesoporous, silica nanoparticles
(MSNs) were synthesized through the covering of acetyl trimethylammonium
bromide (CTAB) scaffolding with tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) in an
aqueous environment. Refluxing was later used to remove the CTAB
scaffolding and construct the desired mesoporous structure of the
nanoparticles. MSNs were chemically engineered to be sensitive to acidic
pH, contain fluorescent dye, and utilize a protein targeting ligand UPA.
Multiple characterization techniques were employed to analyze the
synthesized MSNs including UV-Vis spectroscopy, Zeta Potential, and
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). Pancreatic cancer tumor cells,
S2CP9 and S2VP10, were treated with UPA-targeted or no-ligand
encapsulated MSNs at pH 7.4 and 6.5. Following treatment, cells were
washed to remove unbound particles followed by particle visualization
based upon fluorescent dyes rhodamine or indocyanine green.
Alternatively, cells treated with indocyanine green (ICG) loaded MSNs
were placed into a tissue phantom and viewed using the Multispectral
Optoacoustic Tomography system (MSOT). Mice with S2CP9 orthotopic
pancreatic tumors were i.v. injected with 100 L of UPA-ICG loaded MSNs.
Particle localization was conducted using MSOT after 4h post
injection.Results: Zeta potential and UV-Vis analysis confirmed the MSNs
chemical conjugation, attributing the MSNs properties of pH sensitivity
and fluorescence. pH sensitivity tests on the MSNs displayed drug release
quantities at pH 6.5 to be x2 the quantities of pH 6.8 and 7.4.
Fluorescence microscopy showed the MSN uptake into S2VP10 and S2CP9 cell
lines, while NIH3T3 cells (negative control) showed less binding. Use of
UPAR antibody on S2VP10 and S2CP9 cell lines (positive control) blocked
cellular binding. In tissue phantoms, UPA-ICG loaded MSNs at pH 6.5
demonstrated 20X and 7X more cell signal than without ligand or at pH
7.4, respectively. In-vivo, UPA-ICG loaded MSNs were detected within the
orthotopic pancreatic tumor.Conclusion: UPA targeted, pH sensitive MSNs
were found to possess substantial tumor cell binding against multiple
cell lines and demonstrate potential as a theranostic nanoparticle for
pancreatic cancer.

