Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Panaxynol, a potential treatment for colitis, selectively targets
pro-inflammatory macrophages for DNA damage and apoptosis


Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
that has been associated with a high risk for colorectal cancer. Since
available conventional treatments provide mostly modest relief and are
paired with a high risk of side effects, complementary and alternative
medicines (CAMs) can offer a safe and effective option for the treatment
of IBD. Earlier studies in our lab have shown that American Ginseng can
suppress colitis and also prevent colitis-associated colon cancer in
mice. During the process of isolating active ingredients from this plant,
Panaxynol was identified as a key component. Panaxynol has been shown to
have anti-cancer and anti-inflammatory properties, but it has not been
studied in macrophage-driven autoimmunity models. Here, we study the
effects of Panaxynol on macrophages and other cell lines in an attempt to
understand its mechanism of action. We show that Panaxynol induces DNA
damage and apoptosis in macrophages in a dose-dependent manner using
phosphorylated -H2AX detection and TUNEL assays, respectively.
Importantly, DNA damage and apoptosis were induced in other cell types
(e.g. epithelial cells and fibroblasts) only when using higher doses of
Panaxynol (>50M). Co-culture experiments confirm that Panaxynol
selectively targets macrophages in the presence of colon cancer cells. To
explore mechanisms, we asked whether Panaxynol inhibits the STAT1
pathway. Results showing an inhibition of STAT1 phosphorylation are
consistent with the hypothesis. We plan to extend these studies to an in
vivo mouse model of DSS-induced colitis in order to understand the
anti-inflammatory mechanisms of Panaxynol. Positive outcomes from this
study can potentially serve as a model for the treatment of colitis and
other autoimmune diseases (at least partly) associated with macrophage
dysfunction.

