Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apigenin increases maspin expression and suppresses invasiveness
in prostate cancer cells


Acquisition of metastatic capability during prostate cancer progression
leads to clinically incurable malignancy and accounts for the majority of
deaths from this disease. Metastasis involves multiple processes,
including invasion, intravasation, extravasation and tumor growth at the
secondary site. Maspin, a unique member of the serpin (serine protease
inhibitor) family, shown to regulate cell motility, invasion and
contributes in tumor metastasis. Loss of maspin has been frequently
identified in clinical prostate cancer specimens and prostate cancer cell
lines, therefore novel therapeutic approaches to restore its expression
are needed. Apigenin (4, 5, 7-trihydroxyflavone), a plant flavone has
shown to possess anticancer properties and alters pathways that regulate
tumor cell invasion and metastasis, however molecular basis of these
effects remains unclear. We demonstrate that apigenin enhances maspin
expression in human prostate cancer cells through upregulation of p53
activity and downregulation of histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity.
Treatment of human prostate cancer LNCaP cells (harboring wild type p53)
with 1-40 M apigenin for 72 h resulted in dose- and time- dependent
decrease in cell invasion and migration with concurrent increase in
maspin expression and increased its nuclear localization. Apigenin
treatment also resulted in the inhibition of HDAC enzyme activity,
increase in H3 and H4 acetylation and p53 activation, similar with the
use of Class I HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A. In human prostate cancer
DU145 cells, harboring mutant p53, apigenin treatment resulted in an
increase in maspin expression which correlated with upregulation of
wild-type p53 activity, conversely trichostatin A was unable to
upregulate maspin expression. Transfection of DU145 cells with maspin
reporter plasmid increased the activity of maspin promoter, consistent
with the results. In another approach, endogenous levels of mapsin was
restored after transfection of cells with wild type p53 in prostate
cancer PC-3 cells (p53 null), which was further increased by apigenin
treatment. Furthermore, knockdown of HDAC1 did not affect maspin levels
in human prostate cancer LNCaP and DU145 cell lines suggesting that HDAC1
inhibition does not play a role in maspin regulation, whereas it appears
that apigenin-dependent global modulation of HDAC activity resulted in
decreased cell invasion and proliferation. Taken together, our findings
suggest that apigenin-mediated increase in maspin expression is
regulated, in part, by p53 and its activation resulting in decreased
invasiveness and migration capabilities of prostate cancer cells.

