Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BGB-3111 is a novel and highly selective Bruton's tyrosine kinase
(BTK) inhibitor


BTK, an essential component of the BCR pathway, has emerged as novel
target in the treatment of B-cell malignancies. Although Ibrutinib, the
first-in-class irreversible inhibitor of BTK, showed promising clinical
activity, recent study revealed that ibrutinib could antagonize rituximab
induced antigen-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) by inhibiting
ITK kinase activity (Kohrt et. al., 2013), suggesting the potential
limitations in its clinical application. BGB-3111 is a novel, highly
selective, second generation BTK inhibitor, currently under clinical
investigation in hematological cancers. Its biochemical, cellular and in
vivo activities were reported in this study.In both biochemical and
cellular assays, BGB-3111 demonstrated nanomolar BTK inhibition activity.
In several MCL and DLBCL cell lines, BGB-3111 inhibited BCR
aggregation-triggered BTK autophosphorylation, blocked downstream PLC-2
signaling, and potently inhibited cell proliferation. In comparison with
ibrutinib, BGB-3111 showed much more restricted off-target activities
against a panel of kinases, including ITK. While ibrutinib significantly
inhibited rituximab-induced NK cell IFN- secretion and in vitro
cytotoxicity on mantle cell lymphoma cells, BGB-3111 was at least 10-fold
weaker than ibrutinib in inhibiting rituximab induced ADCC, consistent
with its weak ITK inhibition activity.In mouse BTK occupancy assays,
treatment with BGB-3111 resulted in a dose-dependent BTK occupancy and
showed about 3-fold more potency than ibrutinib in target organs,
including PBMC and spleen. BGB-3111 induced dose-dependent anti-tumor
effects against REC-1 MCL xenografts engrafted either subcutaneously or
systemically via tail vein injection in mice. In the subcutaneous
xenografts, BGB-3111 at 2.5 mg/kg BID showed similar activity as
ibrutinib at 50 mg/kg QD, its clinical relevant dose. In the systemic
model, the median survival of BGB-3111 25 mg/kg BID group was
significantly longer than those of both ibrutinib 50 mg/kg QD and BID
groups. In an ABC-subtype DLBCL (TMD-8) subcutaneous xenograft model,
BGB-3111 also demonstrated better anti-tumor activity than ibrutinib.
Preliminary 14-day toxicity study in rats showed that BGB-3111 was very
well tolerated and maximal tolerate dose (MTD) was not reached when it
was dosed up to 250mg/kg/day.In conclusion, BGB-3111 is a highly
selective and potent BTK inhibitor. It does not affect rituximab-induced
ADCC and demonstrated better efficacy than ibrutinib in xenograft models,
supporting further clinical investigation of this compound both as single
agent and in combination with anti-CD20 antibodies in hematological
cancers.

