Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A LIN28B/RAN/AURKA signaling network promotes neuroblastoma
tumorigenesis


Background: Neuroblastoma, a childhood cancer of the sympathetic nervous
system, accounts for approximately 10-15% of pediatric oncology deaths.
The genetic basis of neuroblastoma has grown clearer, with genome-wide
association studies performed by our laboratory uncovering CASC15, BARD1,
NBPF23, LMO1, HACE1, TP53 and LIN28B as susceptibility genes, with many
(if not all) playing a major role in tumorigenesis. Here we focus on
LIN28B, which binds mRNAs directly and is a master regulator of the let-7
family of tumor suppressor microRNAs, as we previously showed that high
LIN28B expression is associated with advanced stage disease and worse
patient outcome.Methods: To discover LIN28B-associated pathways in
neuroblastoma, we performed gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) on mRNA
expression datasets and analyzed SNP-array based DNA copy number
datasets. We used siRNAs, shRNAs, and microRNA mimetics to perturb
transcripts of interest in neuroblastoma cells and measured effects on
downstream signaling, protein-protein interactions, and
proliferation.Results: We applied GSEA to mRNA expression profiles from
250 neuroblastoma tumors and found LIN28B expression to be robustly
correlated with several biologically relevant gene sets, including RAN
signaling. We focused on RAN signaling as RAN is a member of the Ras
family of GTPases implicated in the pathogenesis of several malignancies
and we demonstrated a strong positive correlation between LIN28B and RAN
expression, most strikingly in the MYCN-amplified context (p = 2.21010).
We next analyzed 374 high-risk neuroblastoma tumors and found that 28% of
them displayed recurrent somatic copy number gain of chromosome 12q24,
the genomic location of RAN, which was associated with increased RAN
expression (p = 0.0004) and was inversely related to MYCN amplification
(p = 0.0021). Increased RAN expression was associated with stage 4
disease (p = 0.0047) and decreased overall survival (p = 0.0002). To
further dissect the LIN28B-RAN relationship, we depleted LIN28B using
shRNAs, showing that it reduced RAN RNA and protein levels. LIN28B
directly bound RAN mRNA, likely enhancing its translation. As RAN
promotes the phosphorylation and activation of Aurora kinase A (AURKA),
we then demonstrated that LIN28B leads to AURKA activation via RAN.
Moreover, we demonstrated that AURKA is a direct let-7 target, defining a
separate mechanism by which LIN28B/let-7 influences AURKA expression.
Finally, we showed that RAN depletion resulted in decreased neuroblastoma
proliferation, phenocopying LIN28B depletion.Conclusions: These results
demonstrate that enhanced LIN28B expression and chromosome 12q24 gain
each independently promote RAN expression and that LIN28B and RAN
signaling further converge on AURKA. Collectively, our studies support
LIN28B as a master regulator of multiple oncogenes implicated in
neuroblastoma pathogenesis, nominating it as a candidate for therapeutic
targeting.

