Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LY500307 as a novel therapeutic agent for treatment of glioblastoma


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common type of primary brain tumor with
poor prognosis. A gender bias exists in the development of GBM with
incidence of developing GBM is greater in males compared to females.
Epidemiological studies and several lines of evidence suggest tumor
suppressive role of female sexual hormone estrogen on brain tumors.
However, estrogen as potential therapy for GBM has limited therapeutic
application due to safety concerns including breast cancer, uterine
cancer, heart disease, and feminization in men. Therefore alternative
agents that mimic estrogen effects will have potent utility in treating
GBM. Estrogen effects are mediated though its cognate receptors ER and ER
and ER functions as a tissue-specific tumor suppressor. Recent studies
identified a synthetic LY500307 as a selective ER agonist (developed by
Eli Lilly and Company) with an excellent preclinical profile and is
currently in clinical trials for treating Schizophrenia. We recently
showed that ER is the major ER subtype expressed in GBM. The objective of
this study is to determine the therapeutic effects of novel ER agonist
LY500307 using both in vitro and orthotopic preclinical models and to
determine its mechanism(s) of action. In this study, we have tested the
therapeutic efficacy of LY500307 using several established as well as
patient derived GBM cells. Treatment of LY500307 significantly reduced
the proliferation of GBM cells with no activity on normal astrocytes
suggesting its tumor specific effects. Overexpression of ER reduced
proliferation of GBM cells and knockdown of ER compromised the treatment
effect of LY500307 further suggesting the specificity. RNA sequencing
analysis of LY500307 treated and untreated GBM cells revealed several
novel pathways related to apoptosis, cell cycle, stem cells and
differentiation that were significantly modulated by LY500307.
Mechanistic studies revealed that LY500307 mediated apoptosis of GBM
involve genes activated by both ER- classical as well as AP1 mediated
non-classical pathways and also involve p38MAPK and JNK pathways. Since
Glioma Stem Cells (GSCs) are implicated in tumor initiation, invasion and
therapy resistance of GBM, we also tested the effect of LY500307 on GSCs.
LY500307 treatment significantly inhibited the proliferation, neurosphere
formation and self-renewal of GSCs and also resulted in the loss of
stemness of GSCs and induction of differentiation and apoptosis. Further,
LY500307 treatment significantly reduced the tumor growth in in vivo
orthotopic GBM models and promoted apoptosis of tumors. Together, our
results demonstrate that LY500307 as a potential therapeutic agent for
treatment of GBM. Since LY500307 has good blood-brain barrier
permeability and less neuronal toxicity, it can be readily transferred to
clinical use with current radiation and chemotherapies, thereby providing
an additional tool for enhancing survival in GBM patients.

