Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between genetic profiles and histological
classifications of 18 Japanese pseudomyxoma peritonei


Pseudomyxoma peritonei (PMP) is a rare disease occurring in 1-2 /
1000,000 and shows a distinct clinical feature caused by cancerous cells
that produce mucin or gelatinous fluid in the abdominal cavity. Tumor
cells are the most frequently originated from appendiceal mucinous
cancer, and less frequently from mucinous tumors of the ovary. PMP is
histologically classified into two types; disseminated peritoneal
adenomucinosis (DPAM) showing milder phenotype, and peritoneal mucinous
adenocarcinomas (PMCA) exhibiting more aggressive phenotype. Several
molecular studies have shown frequent mutations in the KRAS and GNAS
genes. However molecular profiles associated with different histological
and/or clinical characteristics remain largely unknown. To elucidate
molecular mechanisms underlying PMP, we analyzed 18 Japanese PMP tumors
comprising of 10 DPAMs and 8 PMCAs. DNA was extracted from tumor tissues
and their matched normal samples, and was subjected to amplicon
sequencing using Ion AmpliSeq Cancer Panel v2 (Life Technologies)
containing 49 cancer-related genes. In the 18 tumors, we identified a
total of 42 somatic mutations (34 missense, 1 deletion, 1 insertion, 2
intron, 1 splice site mutations, and 3 synonymous mutations) in 13 genes.
Of the 42 mutations, 35 were judged as pathogenic, and the remaining
seven as non-pathogenic by the search of public databases and reports, or
by in silico analysis. KRAS and GNAS mutations were found in 14 (77.8%)
and 8 (44.4%) tumors, respectively. Interestingly, no mutations were
detected in APC or CTNNB1. Notably, TP53 mutation was found in 3 of the 8
PMCAs, but not in the 10 DPAMs. Two of the 8 PMCAs carried mutation in
either PIK3CA or AKT1. These data suggest that KRAS and/or GNAS mutations
play a vital role in the development of both types of PMP, and that
inactivation of Wnt signaling pathway may not be involved in the
tumorigenesis. Furthermore, mutations in TP53 and/or genes related to
PIK3CA-AKT pathway may be associated with malignant properties of PMCA.
Further studies will facilitate the elucidation of molecular mechanism
underlying PMP, and contribute to the development of effective
therapeutic and preventive strategies to this disease.

