Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF-/SMAD2 signaling drives tumor-progression via
c-KIT/STAT3-signaling in advanced HCC


Background: Current systemic agents for advanced Hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) achieve minimal survival benefits. Tumor Growth Factor- (TGF-) is a
potent tumor suppressor via its SMAD2/3 signaling axis; its inactivation
has been implicated in hepatocarcinogenesis. Paradoxically, TGF- serum
concentrations are elevated in patients with advanced HCC. The TGF-
receptor is currently explored in clinical trials as a therapeutic
target. However, the mechanisms mediating the functional switch of the
TGF- pathway to an oncogenic role in advanced HCC are unknown.Material
and Methods: Gene expression profiling of human HCC was performed using
the Oncomine database. Immunohistochemical analysis of human HCC samples
was performed using Tissue Micro Arrays. Established human HCC cell lines
were used for in vitro studies. Gene expression was assessed by qRT-PCR,
ELISA and immunoblot analyses. shRNA was used for gene silencing. Cell
cycle analysis was performed by FACS. Cell proliferation was assessed by
microscopic quantification, MTS- and BrdU-assay. Apoptosis was analyzed
by TUNEL assay and DAPI. Migration was evaluated by wound assay, and
invasion by Boyden Chamber assay.Results: In human HCC, SMAD2
overexpression and decreased expression of the negative TGF-/SMAD
regulator SKI was correlated to shortened survival. Intranuclear
pSer465/467-SMAD2 was identified in up to 65% of human HCC tumors, and
correlated with TNM-stage, survival and pTyr705STAT3. In 50% of human HCC
cell lines, the TGF-/SMAD2 axis was functional. Exclusively in HCC cells
with intact SMAD-signaling, TGF- induced STAT3 Tyr705-phosporylation and
nuclear translocation. We show that TGF-1 transcriptionally regulates
expression of the c-KIT ligand Stem Cell Factor (SCF). SCF is
overexpressed in advanced HCC tumors, and correlated to pSMAD2,
metastases and decreased survival. In human HCC cells, SCF activates
STAT3 via auto- and paracrine stimulation of its cognate receptor c-KIT.
TGF-1-induced activation of STAT3 is inhibited by SCF-knockdown,
inhibition of c-KIT or JAK1. The TGF-1/STAT3 axis neutralizes the cell
cycle inhibitory function of TGF- in human HCC cell lines, and instead
promotes EMT, tumor cell migration and invasion. Disruption of the
TGF-/STAT3 signaling axis inhibits its tumor promoting effects and
restores TGF- antiproliferative effects.Conclusion: In advanced HCC,
TGF-/SMAD2-signaling is constitutively activated and correlated to worse
outcomes. The functional switch of TGF- is mediated through aberrant
expression of SCF with subsequent stimulation of the c-KIT/STAT3
signaling axis. Disruption of this axis restores TGF- tumor suppressor
function. Disruption of the molecular network between TGF-1/SMAD2 and
SCF/STAT3 constitutes a novel therapeutic strategy aiming at restoration
of a dysregulated tumor suppressor.

