Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition in the metastatic progression
of gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors


Gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs) are malignant
epithelial cancer arising from the diffuse neuroendocrine system.
Diagnosis is usually made late in the disease course, with 60-80% of
diagnosed cases presenting with, or developing metastatic disease. The
lack of biomarkers indicative of aggressive behavior, in particular
metastasis, hinders prognosis and proper treatment of GEP-NETs. A
cellular process underlying the aggressive behavior of cancer is
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). In this study, we aimed to
determine whether EMT is involved in the pathogenesis of NETs. Using
tissue samples from NETs arising from small intestine (SI-NET), pancreas
(P-NETs), and colorectum (C-NETs), we have examined EMT and profiled the
signaling mechanisms involved.Initial studies utilizing targeted
real-time PCR-based gene profiling comparing primary (n = 9) and
metastatic (n = 4) SI-NETs relative to control (normal small bowel
epithelium, n = 3) revealed gene expression profiles suggestive of EMT
and cell guidance in both primary and metastatic tumors, including
elevation of vascular endothelial growth factor signaling, changes in
matrix remodeling genes, and abundant transforming growth factor- (TGF-)
receptor 1. A more comprehensive examination of the EMT phenotype was
then undertaken based on primary site of origin. RNA samples from P-NETs
(n = 9), SI-NETs (n = 8), and C-NETs (n = 8) were used for gene
expression studies utilizing an EMT-focused PCR array. Changes in gene
expression profiles consistent with an EMT phenotype were seen across all
primary sites, including elevated expression of transcription factors
SMAD2, ZEB1/2, HIF-1. Differential expression of TGF- family receptor
ligands, including TGF-1 and BMP2, was observed when comparing results
from NETs of different primary sites, suggesting alternate signaling
pathways leading to EMT. Confirmatory immunohistochemistry studies were
then carried out, demonstrating an EMT phenotype as evidenced by loss of
E-cadherin/-catenin expression and/or vimentin induction in 42% of cases
(n = 52).Well-differentiated GEP-NETs, while morphologically similar, are
extremely heterogeneous in both clinical presentation and outcome. We
have examined a series of 52 GEP-NETs, of which 77% either presented
with, or eventually developed metastatic disease. EMT is likely a key
process by which this occurs, as we observe expression changes in
EMT-associated genes across all subtypes of GEP-NETs, and an EMT
phenotype by immunohistochemistry in 42% of the tumors. Our gene
expression studies suggest that differential TGF- family signaling is a
key mediator in driving EMT, however, the specific pathway may involve
different factors depending on the site of NET origin. Future studies are
needed to elucidate the exact pathways involved in this process.

