Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progesterone receptor isoform ratio regulates the stem cell
population in the mouse mammary gland


The ovarian steroid hormones progesterone and estrogen play vital roles
in the development of normal mammary gland and are likewise linked to
mammary carcinogenesis via their receptors. Progesterone receptor (PR) is
expressed as two isoforms, PR-A and PR-B, both in human and mouse. It has
been reported that in human breast tumors the PR-A/PR-B expression ratio
is altered. To further study the role of PR isoforms on mammary gland
biology, transgenic mice carrying either an additional A form of PR
(PR-A) or the B form of PR (PR-B) were generated. Both mice strains
present abnormal development in their mammary glands. Overexpression of
the A isoform of PR leads to increased side branching and multilayered
ducts, while overexpressing the B isoform leads to limited ductal growth.
The characteristics of mammary glands from these mice provide direct
evidence that an aberration in the mechanisms regulating the differential
expression of the two isoforms of PR can have major implications to
mammary carcinogenesis and might affect the stem cell population of the
gland.Recent studies have shown that a hierarchy of mammary
stem/progenitor cells exists among the mammary epithelium in both human
and mouse and PR signaling has been shown to play a major role in the
maintenance of the stem cell population. So far, however, the
differential role of the PR isoforms in the regulation of the stem cell
population in the breast has not been established. We propose that the
altered ratio of PR A/B might affect the stem cell population expansion
and self renewal in the mammary gland.We found that mammary glands of
mice overexpressing the B isoform presented a higher percentage of cells
positive for stem cell markers (CD24+/CD29+) than those derived from PR-A
and WT mice. Furthermore cells derived from PR-B mammary glands had
increased mammosphere forming capacity compared to both PR-A and WT.
Moreover, when mammosphere cultures were carried out in the presence of
4-OH-tamoxifen 10-8M, the number of mammospheres formed from mammary
glands of WT and PR-A mice was reduced compared to control cultures
treated with vehicle, whereas there were no differences for cultures
derived from mammary glands of PR-B mice. Additionally, upon ovariectomy
(OVX), mammary glands from PR-A and WT mice showed a higher percentage of
cells positive for stem cell markers by flow cytometry, and increase
mammosphere forming capacity than control sham mice, while in mammary
glands derived from PR-B OVX mice neither parameters changed.Our results
suggest that the B isoform of PR, may play a predominant role in the
maintenance of stem cell population of the mammary gland and in the
development of hormone resistance given that ovarian regulation affected
mammary glands of WT and PR-A mice, but not those derived from PR-B mice.

