Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential tumour response to birinapant and irinotecan revealed
by non-invasive MRI


Background: Effective tumour therapy requires induction of cell death.
Non-invasive serial imaging is desirable to detect processes such as
necrotic and apoptotic cell death in cancer patients undergoing treatment
with conventional as well as new drugs within clinical trials. This study
investigated the use of diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging
(DW-MRI) for imaging cell death induced in human tumour xenografts by
either the cytotoxic drug irinotecan, or the mimetic of the second
mitochondria-derived activator of caspases (Smac) birinapant, which
induces apoptosis by antagonising the inhibitors of apoptosis proteins
(IAPs) and activating caspases.Methods: Nude mice bearing human SW620
colon carcinoma xenografts were treated with vehicle, irinotecan or
birinapant for 1, 3 or 5 days. DW-MRI was performed at days 1, 3 and/or 5
during treatment to assess tumour response in vivo. Assessment of
apoptosis and necrosis ex vivo in tumour tissues was used to validate the
imaging findings. Apoptosis was assessed by quantifying cleaved PARP
expression, and cleaved caspase-3 and DNA fragmentation staining, whereas
necrotic areas were measured on H&E stained tumour sections.Results: Both
birinapant and irinotecan induced significant tumour growth delay.
Irinotecan induced a small increase in the tumour apparent diffusion
coefficient (ADC) after 1 day, with a 20% and 30% increase at days 3 and
5 respectively. ADC was unchanged in the vehicle- and birinapant-treated
tumours despite growth delay in the latter. Histological analysis showed
that birinapant induced apoptosis after day 3, but had no effect on
tumour necrosis compared to vehicle. Irinotecan increased necrosis at
days 3 and 5, and induced apoptosis after 1 day.Conclusion: Tumour water
diffusion changes after irinotecan treatment were associated primarily
with induction of necrosis with associated apoptotic cell death, and
could be measured as early as 24 hours post-treatment prior to changes in
tumour volume. Induction of apoptosis alone in the same tumour model as a
result of treatment with birinapant was not sufficient to induce changes
in tissue microstructure that were detectable with DW-MRI within 5 days
of the treatment, despite the drug suppressing tumour growth. A possible
explanation for the lack of changes on water diffusivity or tissue
microarchitecture after birinapant treatment might be that removal of the
dead cells is followed by tumour cell repopulation driven by apoptosis,
and more particularly by activated caspase-3. ADC is a useful, clinically
translatable, non-invasive biomarker for early detection of response to
cytotoxic drugs. However, when considering apoptotic cell death in
response to targeted therapeutics, use of ADC may result in false
negatives, particularly if imaging at an early time-point before
significant disruption to tissue microarchitecture has occurred.

