Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of alpha-enolase and annexin as candidate
tumor-associated antigens by immunoseroproteomic profiling of
autoantibodies in African American and Caucasian men with prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the
second leading cause of cancer-related male deaths in the U.S. PCa is
diagnosed more frequently in African American men (AA), with a mortality
rate that is two-fold higher than in other ethnic groups. The current
diagnostic test for PCa relies on the detection of prostate specific
antigen (PSA). Although this minimally invasive test has high
sensitivity, its limited specificity leads to false positives and
unnecessary biopsies. This test may also fail to recognize PCa in men
with low PSA levels, especially in obese and young AA men. Therefore,
there is a critical need for identifying additional minimally invasive
PCa biomarkers, especially in high-risk populations such as AA men.
Immunoseroproteomics is a powerful approach for profiling circulating
autoantibodies targeting tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) in cancer
patients. These autoantibodies may serve as reporters to tumorigenic
events and potential diagnostic biomarkers relevant to tumor biology.
Based on recent reports of racial differences in the immunobiology of
PCa, we hypothesized that AA and CC men with PCa may produce different
anti-TAA autoantibody profiles. To evaluate this hypothesis, total
proteins from aggressive PCa cells were separated by one or
two-dimensional (2D) gel electrophoresis and then probed by
immunoblotting with sera from AA (n = 40) and CC (n = 50) PCa patients to
identify immunoreactive protein bands or spots. Protein spots recognized
by the patient sera were then excised from the 2D gels and analyzed by
mass spectrometry to profile the anti-TAA autoantibody repertoire in a
given patient. Sera from AA PCa patients showed stronger immunoreactivity
against PC3 cell proteins than sera from the CC cohort when evaluated
under identical conditions in immunoblots. A common immunoreactive band
around 45-50kD was produced by several AA sera (n = 8), and by one CC
serum, and subsequent analysis by mass spectrometry showed that it
corresponded to alpha-enolase. Confirmation that the AA PCa sera
recognized 47kD alpha-enolase was obtained by immunoblots showing that
these sera recognized the same protein bands recognized by a monoclonal
antibody to this protein. Some of these sera also reacted against annexin
A2. Additional validation studies are currently under way. Alpha-enolase
and annexin A2 have been recently identified as candidate plasminogen
receptors with roles in PCa. Alpha-enolase has been shown to promote
cancer aggressiveness properties and its expression in tumors is
associated with poor clinical outcomes. Alpha-enolase is a promising
candidate biomarker that if used in combination with other TAAs for
autoantibody profiling in PCa might help in the early detection and
management of PCa, particularly in AA men.

