Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a new therapeutic target in prostate cancer from
siRNA screening in Docetaxel-resistant cells


Background: Prostate cancer is the most common male cancer and the second
leading cause of death. Docetaxel is a chemotherapy used to manage the
Metastatic Castrate-Resistant Prostate Cancer (mCRPC). Inexorably,
patients will develop resistance to this treatment. Therefore, new
efforts are needed to understand the molecular mechanisms of resistance,
enabling the discovery of specific therapeutic targets to avoid this
resistance in patients.Methods: We developed a series of
Docetaxel-resistant cell lines (IGR-CaP1-R, PC3-R, 22RV1-R, LNCaP-R) and
we generated a signature of 1,006 highly differentially expressed genes
potentially implicated in chemoresistance. Moreover, we performed a high
throughput siRNA screening in IGR-CaP1, allowing us to select 60 genes
with a functional role in Docetaxel resistance.Results: We focused our
attention on the role of a chaperone protein, which is localized in the
endoplasmic reticulum and belongs to the FKBP-type peptidyl-prolyl
cis/trans isomerase (PPIase) family. This protein is highly overexpressed
in Docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer cell lines and its overexpression
is specifically induced by agents targeting microtubules such as taxanes
(Docetaxel, Cabazitaxel, and Paclitaxel) or Nocodazole. Induction of its
expression was also observed in tumors obtained from sub-cutaneous
injection of IGR-CaP1 after Docetaxel treatment in vivo. Specific
inhibition with siRNA leads to cell death of the Docetaxel-resistant
IGR-CaP1-R and PC3-R cell lines as well as the Cabazitaxel-resistant
IGR-CaP1 cells. In LNCaP-R and 22RV1-R resistant cell lines, it decreases
the proliferation rate. Moreover, knockdown of this protein restores
Docetaxel response of all the resistant cell lines. In addition, although
this chaperone is highly expressed in several non cancerous cells, its
extinction does not affect cell growth suggesting a different function of
the protein between chemoresistant cells and non cancerous cells.
Preliminary observations suggest that this protein could be mislocalized
in Docetaxel-resistant cells in some cytoplasmic vesicles, as a
consequence of taxane treatment.Conclusion: We identified a new chaperone
harbouring an enzymatic activity which could be a relevant therapeutic
target in chemoresistant CRPC. We are now focusing on the identification
of a specific inhibitor in order to validate the role of this target in
two Docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer mice models established within
the laboratory.

