Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: All-trans retinoic acid induces proliferation, survival and
migration in A549 lung cancer cells by activating the ERK signaling
pathway through a transcription independent mechanism


All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) have tumor-suppressive capacity by their
ability to promote differentiation and inhibit proliferation, mainly in
leukemia, however in other tumor types the treatment with ATRA is
restricted because not all the patients have the same results. ATRA is
able to modulate the PI3K and ERK signaling pathways and promote
differentiation in neuronal cells by a transcription independent
mechanism. In lung cancer cells this non genomic mechanism by ATRA is
able to active the PI3K signaling pathway and trigger cellular processes
like invasion and survival. Nevertheless is unknown if ERK could be
modulated by ATRA in lung cancer cells. We investigated the effects of
ATRA on the activation of ERK pathway in the ATRA-resistant A549 lung
adenocarcinoma cell line. The phosphorylated form of ERK was detected by
western blot within 5 and 15 min after ATRA treatment. Further evaluation
using specific RAR antagonists, AGN 193109 and Ro 41-5253, which prevent
expression of ATRA target genes, showed the same effect over ERK. To
elucidate the potential crosstalk between PI3K and ERK signaling, we used
cells pretreated with wortmannin, a potent and specific PI3K inhibitor,
and showed that wortmannin alone or in combination with ATRA increased
the activation of ERK. These data suggest that PI3K negatively regulate
ERK phosphorylation through the signaling complex ATRA/RAR. As we
reported previously, ATRA does not induce significant changes on
proliferation, however, the combination of ATRA with PD98059, the
pharmacological inhibitor of MEK-ERK, decreases proliferation by 50%.
These results suggest that activation of ERK is involved in blocking the
classical anti-proliferative effects of ATRA in A549 cell line. Moreover,
ERK pathway activation promotes anti-apoptosis in response to ATRA
treatment in A549 cells. In addition, wound healing assay in presence of
PD98059 showed that migration promoted by ATRA in A549 cells can be
delayed. Our results indicate that ATRA activates the ERK signaling
pathway by a transcription independent mechanism through signaling
cascade, which involves RAR and PI3K modulating the ERK activation. This
signaling pathway promotes proliferation, survival and migration in lung
cancer cells. The inhibition of ERK signaling pathway restores the
anti-tumoral effects of ATRA. It is interesting to speculate that using a
combination of ERK and PI3K inhibitors may improve the tumor-suppressive
activity of ATRA in lung cancer patients.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

