Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic antitumor activity of PD-1 signaling blockade and CD27
costimulation correlates with enhanced ratio of effector to regulatory T
cells at the tumor site


Varlilumab (CDX-1127) is a fully human agonist antibody to CD27, a TNF
receptor superfamily member expressed on the majority of T cells and
subsets of NK cells and B cells. As such, varlilumab is an immunotherapy
designed to harness the body's natural immune response by enhancing the
activation of T cells that can specifically recognize and kill cancer
cells. In an ongoing Phase 1 clinical trial, varlilumab has been very
well tolerated and has demonstrated clear biologic activity and promising
signs of clinical activity in advanced, treatment-refractory patient
populations. This clinical data provides the rationale for combination
studies with other immunomodulatory therapies, including inhibitors of
PD-1 signaling. In this study we investigated the activity of varlilumab
in combination with anti-PD-L1 using a disseminated murine B cell tumor,
BCL1 in human CD27 transgenic mice. In this model of i.v. inoculated BCL1
cells, we have previously shown that varlilumab can delay tumor growth,
but rarely results in cures. Despite expression of PD-L1, the BCL1 tumors
were completely resistant to anti-PD-L1 monotherapy. However, the
combination of varlilumab and anti-PD-L1 resulted in a significant
improvement in survival and approximately 50% long-term survivors. To
investigate the mechanism resulting in the synergistic activity, we
collected spleens (the major site of tumor growth) from tumor bearing
animals treated with individual or combined regimens and processed them
for flow cytometry analysis. We found that animals treated with the
combination of varlilumab and anti-PD-L1 had a higher ratio of
infiltrating immune cells to tumor cells relative to monotherapy or
saline controls. In particular, the ratio of effector (CD8+) T cells to
Treg and the number of IFN+ CD4 and CD8 T cells were highly increased
with the combination treatment. These data demonstrate that CD27
costimulation combined with checkpoint inhibition with anti-PD-L1 can
result in improved immune profile in the tumor and synergistic survival
benefit. This study, along with the good safety profile of varlilumab
reported in the Phase 1 study, support the design of future combination
studies in patients with cancer.

