Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caveolin-1 drives oncogenic TGF effects in prostate cancer: in
vitro mechanistic insights integrated with systems pathology
visualization in primary tumor samples


Caveolin-1 (Cav1) can have both a tumor suppressive or promoting role
depending on cancer tissue, and its potential active role in the
progression of prostate cancer remains poorly understood. In this study,
we found out that Cav1 represses the expression of E-cadherin in prostate
cancer cell lines, and that the expressions of these two genes show an
inverse correlation both at the mRNA and protein levels in PCa patient
samples. We show that the combined loss of E-cadherin and gain of Cav1
expression is an early event in a subgroup of patients (Caveolin-1 (Cav1)
can have both a tumor suppressive or promoting role depending on cancer
tissue, and its potential active role in the progression of prostate
cancer remains poorly understood. In this study, we found out that Cav1
represses the expression of E-cadherin in prostate cancer cell lines, and
that the expressions of these two genes show an inverse correlation both
at the mRNA and protein levels in PCa patient samples. We show that the
combined loss of E-cadherin and gain of Cav1 expression is an early event
in a subgroup of patients (<10%) (n(patients) = 80, n(glands) = 263, r =
-0.35, pCaveolin-1 (Cav1) can have both a tumor suppressive or promoting
role depending on cancer tissue, and its potential active role in the
progression of prostate cancer remains poorly understood. In this study,
we found out that Cav1 represses the expression of E-cadherin in prostate
cancer cell lines, and that the expressions of these two genes show an
inverse correlation both at the mRNA and protein levels in PCa patient
samples. We show that the combined loss of E-cadherin and gain of Cav1
expression is an early event in a subgroup of patients (<10%)
(n(patients) = 80, n(glands) = 263, r = -0.35, p<0.001). Cav1 positively
regulates TGF targets with known oncogenic and pro-EMT functions (e.g.
Slug, Pai-1), and its absence switches the TGF to become inhibitory to
PCa cells by inducing p21 (CDKN1A) and STAT1 signaling. These changes
were strongly associated with changes in 3D-invasive growth. By using
RNAi image-based screening, we found out that Cav1 is positively
regulated by beta1-integrins and cell adhesion to ECM. This association
together with different alpha-integrins was visualized and quantified in
human prostate cancer patient tissues (n = 80) using novel multiplexed
fluorescent imaging. Both the integrin beta1 and alpha2 showed high
correlation with Cav1 expression (p-valuesCaveolin-1 (Cav1) can have both
a tumor suppressive or promoting role depending on cancer tissue, and its
potential active role in the progression of prostate cancer remains
poorly understood. In this study, we found out that Cav1 represses the
expression of E-cadherin in prostate cancer cell lines, and that the
expressions of these two genes show an inverse correlation both at the
mRNA and protein levels in PCa patient samples. We show that the combined
loss of E-cadherin and gain of Cav1 expression is an early event in a
subgroup of patients (<10%) (n(patients) = 80, n(glands) = 263, r =
-0.35, p<0.001). Cav1 positively regulates TGF targets with known
oncogenic and pro-EMT functions (e.g. Slug, Pai-1), and its absence
switches the TGF to become inhibitory to PCa cells by inducing p21
(CDKN1A) and STAT1 signaling. These changes were strongly associated with
changes in 3D-invasive growth. By using RNAi image-based screening, we
found out that Cav1 is positively regulated by beta1-integrins and cell
adhesion to ECM. This association together with different alpha-integrins
was visualized and quantified in human prostate cancer patient tissues (n
= 80) using novel multiplexed fluorescent imaging. Both the integrin
beta1 and alpha2 showed high correlation with Cav1 expression
(p-values<0.001) in tumor epithelium as well as in stroma.In conclusion,
the results suggest that Cav1 could be an important promoter of invasive
growth in a subgroup of PCa, where it is upregulated by beta1-integrins,
and where it promotes oncogenic TGF signaling.

