Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adaptation to histone deacetylase inhibitors induces switching of
histone H3 lysine 27 modifications, reprograming of cancer cell gene
expression, and attenuation of the malignant phenotype


Background: Vorinostat a histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) approved
for treatment of cutaneous T cell lymphomas, inhibits the growth of
cancer cell lines and human tumor xenografts. HDACi's increase
acetylation of many proteins including histones, and lead to changes in
cellular gene expression, however their mechanisms and optimal
therapeutic uses are not known. HDACi's have multiple effects on cancer
cell lines, ranging from induction of differentiation to apoptosis,
senescence, and autophagy. We hypothesized that chronic treatment of
malignant cells with HDAC inhibitors would attenuate the malignant
phenotype by inducing reprogramming of cancer cell gene
expression.Methods: We derived a subclone of SW480 colon cancer cells (S3
cells, with K-Ras, p53 and APC mutations), which were treated with
step-wise increases of vorinostat (to 3M) resulting in vorinostat-adapted
cells (SH80). SH80 cells were studied for growth rate, colony formation,
and tumorigenicity in nude mice. Gene expression arrays (Affymetrix
U133A2.0) were performed and gene expression changes validated by qPCR.
Histone modifications were analyzed by Western blot and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays.Results: SH80 vorinostat-adapted cells
exhibited a marked decrease in cell growth, colony formation and
tumorigenicity in nude mice, as well as features of differentiation
including gland formation, increased intestinal alkaline phosphatase
production, and increased cell size. Decreased growth rate and colony
formation were seen even following drug withdrawal (for >12weeks),
suggesting that drug-adaptation resulted in a relatively stable
phenotype. Gene expression microarrays demonstrated >2 fold changes in
expression of more than 10% of transcripts. Increased expression of
colonocyte differentiation markers, putative tumor antigens and tumor
suppressor genes was observed, as was decreased expression of several
oncogenes and colonocyte-associated transcription factors. SH80 cells
exhibited activation of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) target
genes, associated with reduction of histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation
and increased H3K27 acetylation at the enhancer/promoter regions of these
genes. These changes were distinct from those observed in SAHA-resistant
cells obtained as survivors of acute drug treatment, which maintained
oncogenic characteristics despite exhibiting resistance to vorinostat.
Similarly, long term low dose (1uM) vorinostat treatment of HCT116 colon
cancer cells also resulted in decreased growth rate and reduced colony
formation.Conclusions: Chronic HDAC inhibitor treatment induces a
reprogramming of cancer cell epigenetic modifications and gene
expression, even in the presence of multiple oncogenic mutations, leading
to attenuation of the malignant phenotype.

