Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HDAC and Hsp90 inhibition as therapeutic strategy for
translocation renal cell carcinoma


Background: Xp11.2 translocation renal cell carcinoma (tRCC) is an
aggressive subtype of kidney cancer, which mainly occurs in young
patients. The prevalence of this disease is about 30% in pediatric RCC,
but 1% in adult RCC cases. Patients with tRCC are refractory to standard
therapies for clear cell RCC. Therefore, there is no efficient treatment
for this type of kidney cancer. The tRCC harbors gene fusions involving
the TFE3 transcription factor on chromosome X with several partner genes,
leading to TFE3 elevation in the cell nucleus, but its function remains
unclear. We have successfully established a cell line and patient-derived
xenograft from a tRCC patient to develop rational therapeutic strategies
and understand the tumor biology.Methods: We have utilized a feeder layer
containing a ROCK inhibitor to favorably generate a cell line, 277T, from
a young tRCC patient. Also, we have implanted tumor samples from the
patient subcutaneously into SCID mice to establish a patient-derived
xenograft model, RP-R-07, and continuously maintain tumor growth in vivo.
Cells were treated with different drugs, and then assessed by MTT assay
and trypan blue staining for growth inhibition and cell death
investigations. TFE3 expression in cells and tumors were detected by
immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry. The combined drug effects
were determined by CalcuSyn analysis.Results: Our preliminary results
demonstrated that TFE3 is predominately expressing in the nucleus of 277T
cells and RP-R-07 tumor model compared to other subtypes of RCC by
immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry, respectively. Further, we
treated 277T cells with several cytotoxic drugs showing that the cells
didn't respond to docetaxel, doxorubicin, rapamycin, or a PI3K-mTOR
inhibitor, but were sensitive to the Hsp90 inhibitor AUY922, and the HDAC
inhibitor LBH589. Moreover, combining both AUY922 and LBH589 induced
greater cell death compared to each single treatment (73% vs 41% for
LBH589; 73% vs 19% for AUY922). In addition, an in vivo experiment
indicated that LBH589 did inhibit tumor growth.Conclusions: Overall our
results indicate that tRCC is sensitive to HSP90 and HDAC inhibitors both
in vitro and in vivo. The combination of LBH589 and AUY922 represents a
promising strategy for treating tRCC

