Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Creation of endothelial-targeted adenoviral vectors for genetic
engineering of the metastatic tumor microenvironment


The endothelium is an attractive gene therapy target for metastatic
cancer, providing access to systemic tumors. Previous work has focused on
either viral entry/attachment (transductional targeting), or cell type
specific enhancer promoter vector transgene expression regulation
(transcriptional targeting). While previous studies demonstrated
endothelial targeting, the tumor wide extent and transgene expression
level quantification have been uncertain. Indeed, obtaining robust and
stringent tumor expression has been challenging due to: insufficient
transduction, focal rather than widespread intratumoral vascular
expression, viral particle liver sequestration, and host preformed
immunity. We developed a set of adenoviral vectors, containing 3 kb of
the human ROBO4 enhancer/promoter, that are expressed at high levels
throughout tumor vasculature. We now have three vectors representing four
tiers of genetic modification. Transgenes encoding fluorescent proteins
allowed us to quantify endothelial expression frequency by image
analysis, and expression level using whole tissue Western blotting. Our
first vector was Ad5.ROBO4. Compared with Ad5.CMV, Ad5.ROBO4 evidenced
complete retargeting from hepatocytes to low-level expression in host
organ and tumor endothelial cells. Warfarin-mediated hepatocyte
detargeting produced a striking increase in tumor and bone marrow
sinusoidal endothelial expression, without change in other host organs.
Our second vector is Ad.RGD.H5/H3.ROBO4. Insertion of a cyclized RGD
peptide in the fiber/knob HI loop engages enhanced tumor endothelial
transduction via v/3 and v/5. Swapping hexon hypervariable regions
responsible for Ad Type 5-Factor X binding with corresponding regions
from serotype 3 enables marked diminution of hepatocyte sequestration.
Use of the ROBO4 enhancer promoter produces high-level pan-intratumoral
vascular expression particularly in cancers with markedly elevated VEGF
production, such as orthotopic and metastatic renal cell carcinoma,
orthotopic colonic liver metastases, and prostate cancer bone, brain, and
liver metastases. Most striking, was enhancement of Ad.RGD.H5/H3.ROBO4
vector expression within interior tumor regions undergoing hypoxic
necrosis; regions notoriously resistant to radiation or chemotherapies.
Our third vector contains a polycistronic array, enabling triple
transgene expression from a single vector within the tumor vasculature.
Thus, we have panel of endothelial-targeted vectors with distinctive
vascular tropism for use in cancers metastatic to individual host organs.
These vectors enable expression of a palette of transgenes that can
manipulate the tumor microenvironment to achieve metastatic growth
inhibition alone, or staggered with chemo- or irradiation therapies.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

