Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunization with minicircle and mini-intronic DNA vectors induce
LAG-3 expressing CD8+ T cells and inferior anti-tumor responses


BACKGROUND: Plasmid DNA-based gene delivery is a safe and economical
vaccine modality that has demonstrated elicitation of robust cellular and
humoral immunity and remarkable pre-clinical efficacy in multiple tumor
models. In spite of this, DNA vaccines have been relatively unsuccessful
in several human trials so far. One explanation for the difference in
preclinical and clinical studies has been low or insufficient transgene
expression from the plasmid vector, effectively reducing the antigen/body
mass ratio in relatively large human subjects. Recent work in the gene
therapy field has led to the discovery of a novel class of DNA vectors
devoid of bacterial backbone sequences that leads to enhanced and
sustained transgene expression in vitro and in vivo. In the following
study we examined the potential of these vectors to induce enhanced
immune responses compared to conventional plasmid vectors.METHODS:
Minicircle (DMC) and mini-intronic (MIP) plasmid vectors encoding the
cancer testis antigen SSX-2 (synovial sarcoma breakpoint protein 2) were
constructed from a conventional plasmid (pTVG-SSX2) and produced using
standard methods. Sustained antigen expression was assessed following
direct transfection of reporter cells after 2 or 7 days. The efficacy of
these vectors as immunization vehicles was evaluated in HHDII-DRI
transgenic mice (expressing human HLA-A2 and HLA-DR) by CD8 tetramer
staining, IFN ELISPOT, intracellular cytokine staining, and in vivo
anti-tumor response against syngeneic tumors expressing SSX2.RESULTS: As
expected, DMC and MIP vectors led to sustained and elevated levels of
SSX2 protein in vitro when compared to standard plasmid DNA. Immunization
with DMC-SSX2 led to a 3-fold increase in antigen-specific CD8+ T cells
as measured by tetramer staining and with IFN release as measured by
ELISPOT. However, these CD8+ T cells were less multifunctional as
measured by IL2 and TNF release using intracellular cytokine staining.
This was associated with higher expression of LAG3 on SSX2-specific CD8 T
cells. No significant changes in the expression of other regulatory
markers (TIM3, PD1 or CD160) were noted. Immunization with a MIP-SSX2
construct similarly elicited higher numbers of antigen-specific LAG3+
CD8+ T cells and an inferior anti-tumor response compared to plasmid
DNA.CONCLUSION: Elevated and sustained antigen expression in vivo as
mediated by minicircle and mini-intronic vectors led to the generation of
greater frequencies of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells as compared to a
standard plasmid vector. These T cells were, however, not
multifunctional, expressed LAG3, and provided an inferior anti-tumor
response compared to plasmid DNA. We suspect induction of tolerance to a
DNA-encoded antigen might be mediated by sustained antigen presentation
in a non-inflammatory context. Studies to evaluate this mechanism further
are underway.

