Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Employing reduced representation bisulfite sequencing for
biomarker discovery in colorectal cancer


Using reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS), we have
identified 3 candidate loci with aberrant methylation in colon cancer
that in combination have 92% sensitivity for CRC tumor detection with
100% specificity. Aberrant DNA methylation is an important epigenetic
event occurring early in the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer (CRC).
Detection of aberrantly methylated DNA in CRC can be exploited for
clinical utility as a minimally invasive screening and/or monitoring tool
by assaying for methylated tumor DNA in either stool or plasma. In this
study we employed RRBS to identify novel methylated loci in CRC for use
as early detection markers. We first performed RRBS on a discovery set of
21 normal colon epithelia samples and 43 CRC tumor samples seeking loci
unmethylated in normal colon yet methylated in CRC, referred to as UnUp
loci. We identified 50 such UnUp loci using the following criteria:
individual CpGs demonstrating less than 5% DNA methylation level in each
normal sample (with > = 20 read coverage), having > = 20 percentage point
increased methylation above the normal range in at least 80% CRC tumors
(with > = 10 read coverage), and encompassing more than one such
informative CpG within a 200 bp interval. We validated these 50 UnUp loci
by PCR amplification of each locus followed by next generation bisulfite
sequencing in an expanded validation cohort consisting of 40 CRC tumors,
their matched normal colon tissue, plus 8 CRC cell lines and their
matching parental tumors. The best 12 candidate UnUp biomarkers were then
identified that had a combination of highest sensitivity for tumor and
highest specificity for normal colon, based on total CpGs methylated in
each sequencing read. Individually, these 12 best candidate loci were
6%-90% sensitive in detecting colon cancers, and 92%-100% specific in not
detecting normal colon. The 12 best candidate loci were further
scrutinized for the feasibility of designing an assay for methylation
detection in body fluids. To this end, we restricted window size to 100
bp and performed a bioinformatic scan to identify the best small windows
containing the greatest number of CpGs simultaneously having the lowest
per-CpG methylation in normal samples, and the highest methylation in
cancer. A panel of the 3 most robust small windows showed 92% sensitivity
and 100% specificity of distinguishing colon cancers from normal colon
tissue. The performance of these small-window loci is being further
tested in an independent set of 96 CRC tumors with matched normal colon
tissue. Other ongoing studies include examining expression of neighboring
genes in these loci as well as testing the performance of our top
candidates in detecting CRC from patient blood samples.

