Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the acetyl-lysine binding site of BRD4 with dual
nanomolar BET-JAK2 inhibitors: A new anticancer therapeutic strategy


Bromodomain (BRD)-containing proteins are essential for the recognition
of acetylated lysine residues of histones during transcriptional
activation. The BRD-containing proteins have emerged as promising drug
targets for a number of diseases, including many cancers, that are
characterized by changes in the epigenetic cell signature. Recent reports
have shown that targeting BRD4 with small molecules may represent a new
way to treat prostate and breast cancer, acute myeloid leukemia and
melanoma. We have identified many type 1 and type 2 kinase inhibitors
which also inhibit BRD4 by robotic co-crystallization screening of kinase
inhibitor libraries against BRD4. In each case the co-crystal structure
unambiguously revealed the inhibitor bound to the acetyl lysine site of
BRD4-1. The identified BRD4 ligands were subjected to differential
scanning fluorimetry (DSF) and AlphaScreen assay to assess their binding
and inhibitory potentials against BRD4. As shown previously for other
BRD-inhibitor-protein complexes, the melting temperatures of BRD4-kinase
inhibitor complexes were logarithmically proportional to their IC50
values. We now report the design, synthesis, structural analysis and
biological evaluation of next-generation nanomolar BET-selective and
nanomolar dual-activity BET-JAK2 inhibitors, based on the initial
co-crystallization screening hits. Structure activity relationships were
developed using both DSF and co-crystallization of the ligands with BRD4,
to assess binding potential and binding modes, respectively. We report
initial evaluation of the anticancer potential of compounds possessing
dual potent BRD4 and JAK2 inhibitory properties. In addition to myeloma
cell lines, this includes the evaluation of dual BRD4-JAK2 inhibitor
compounds against JAK2-driven myeloproliferative neoplasm cell lines and
primary cells from patients.

