Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using 1ng of DNA to detect haplotype phasing and gene fusions from
whole exome sequencing of cancer cell lines


We have used a new platform from 10X Genomics to obtain ultra-deep and
long-range exome sequencing data from 1ng of cancer cell line DNA. While
traditional Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) methods have inputs of 50-500ng
and lack long-range data, we demonstrate that the 10X platform can
successfully obtain both gene fusion and haplotype phasing information
along with standard SNP and indel variant-calling from WES on an Illumina
HiSeq using just 1ng of DNA.The 10X platform massively partitions long
DNA into >100,000 individual reactions. Each partition generates
sequencing libraries with a unique barcode; the integrated downstream
analysis platform uses the barcodes to map Illumina's short reads back to
original long DNA fragments. Because the barcoding is performed prior to
exome enrichment, the long-range information conveyed by the barcodes is
retained even after standard hybrid capture enrichment. Powerful
algorithms are implemented using a custom informatics toolset that is
self-contained and easy to install, and the resulting structural variant
calls can be easily visualized and explored using 10X's haplotype-aware
genome browser.We used the 10X platform to analyze cancer cell lines with
previously reported gene fusions. In all cases described, the fusion
breakpoints were in introns of > 5.9kbp, and would therefore not be
detectable with standard WES. In lung cancer cell line NCI-H2228, we
called two annotated fusions, EML4/ALK, and ALK/PTPN3. Two fusion genes
(MCHR2/ANO4, and CR627240/SACS) were identified in glioblastoma cell line
U-87MG, and at least four (CD44/FGFR2, PVT1/PDHX, PVT1/ATE1,
PVT1/PPAPDC1A) in gastric cancer cell line SNU-16.Long-range information
provided by the technology also enables haplotype phasing of exome
samples. Our algorithms phased the vast majority of SNPs within genes,
with phase blocks up to 1.25Mbp. We used this haplotype information to
phase somatic structural variants, including large-scale deletions and
amplifications.To achieve the sensitivity required to call somatic
mutations from low purity tumor specimens, it is necessary to be able to
attain high coverage depth. This can be a significant challenge for low
inputs; however we demonstrate duplicate-removed depth of >200x from
inputs as low as 1ng, and sensitivity and precision for variant calling
from 1ng libraries that is equivalent to that from ligation-based
libraries prepared from 200ng of DNA.It is becoming increasingly apparent
that a complete understanding of tumor genomic profiles requires the
ability to detect structural variation and phasing information from low
input and high coverage sequencing libraries. With this study we
demonstrate the ability of the 10X platform to enable such applications
from ultra-deep targeted sequencing data using only 1ng of DNA.

