Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ligand-directed and transcription-based molecular imaging and
treatment of cancer


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is a rare and aggressive disease that
progresses rapidly, often in a matter of weeks or months. In the United
States, IBC accounts for 1 to 5 percent of all breast cancers diagnosed
per year. Due to the lack of reliable and effective detection methods,
IBC can be difficult to diagnose and thus, it is more likely to have
metastasized by the time it is identified. Specific delivery of drugs
and/or imaging agents to tumors takes advantage of dynamic molecular
addresses on the surface of tumor cells and the tumor vasculature through
inherent receptor/ligand interactions. By using a combinatorial phage
display library in vivo (consisting of more than 1109unique CX(7/8)C
amino acid residues) we identified an unique peptide sequence - WIFPWIQL
- that mediates targeting to breast cancer metastasis. We further
validated that the WIFPWIQL peptide specifically binds to the
stress-response 78 kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP78), expressed at
the cell surface of IBC tumors. GRP78 expression is elevated with breast
cancer progression, and correlates with metastatic disease in IBC. Using
near infrared (NIR) fluorescent-tagged phage variants and/or antibody
fragments, we demonstrate WIFPIWIQL specifically targets breast tumors in
vivo. As a therapeutic approach, we coupled a toxic apoptotic moiety
D(KLAKLAK)2 - to the WIFPWIQL peptide to create BMTP-78. BMTP-78 is
cytotoxic to cultured IBC cells in vitro. Furthermore, BMTP-78 prevents
the growth of IBC tumor xenografts, reduces tumor burden and mitigates
metastasis in breast cancer pre-clinical models. Taking into
consideration that phage particles can be adapted to transduce mammalian
cells by targeting a specific receptor, we developed a unique phage-based
targeted vector by combining genomic elements from adeno-associated virus
(AAV) and an M13-derived phage (P) - termed AAVP. AAVP chimeras are able
to deliver reporter genes that can be used to image, diagnose and treat
pre-clinical breast cancer. In our initial in vivo assessment, AAVP
particles harboring the tumor targeting peptide, WIFPWIQL, delivered the
Herpes Simplex Virus thymidine kinase gene (HSVtk) driven by the CMV
promoter, to EF43.fgf-4 mouse mammary tumors after a single intravenous
injection. Positron emission tomography (PET) studies demonstrated
WIFPIWIQL-targeted AAVP-HSKtk tumors could be non-invasively imaged. More
importantly, transcriptional targeting of AAVP vectors was achieved by
replacing the CMV promoter with a human GRP78 promoter that selectively
controls transgene expression and allows molecular imaging of breast
tumors in real time. Taken together, our data presents a GRP78
receptor/ligand system that can be used to specifically image and target
breast tumors. Our findings infer potential clinical applications of AAVP
for targeted detection and eradication of IBC tumors via a GRP78-targeted
mechanism in a disease for which no effective treatment currently exists.

