Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel genetic drivers of vulvar carcinoma in a
Sleeping Beauty model of spontaneous cancer


Introduction:The purpose of this study was to develop a Sleeping Beauty
(SB)-induced mouse model of metastatic vulvar carcinoma with which we
could identify novel tumor-driving mutations.Experimental Procedures:An
existing transgenic mouse model known to induce development of benign
vaginal papillomas, (PrCre/+;KrasG12D), was bred to mice containing the
components of the SB system to render (PrCre/+;KrasG12D;SB) mice. The SB
system consists of a transposable element (transposon) and an activating
enzyme (transposase) that induces excision of the transposon from one
site to another in the host cell genome. Insertional mutations that
enhance cell survival and proliferation are selected for, resulting in
the development of cancer. We utilize the SB system to identify candidate
driver mutations since the transposon is not only the mutagen but also
serves as a sequence tag for localization of mutations. Mice were aged
and monitored for phenotypic signs of disease. Upon necropsy, gynecologic
and other grossly abnormal organs were harvested. Genomic DNA was
extracted from each sample, prepared for genetic analysis, and sequenced
using the Illumina platform. Candidate genes were identified using an
unbiased Monte-Carlo approach in conjunction with a gene-centric
Chi-Squared analysis. Paraffin-embedded human tumor samples were obtained
from the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics for immunohistochemical
labeling of protein expression for selected genes.Results:Vulvar
carcinoma developed in 29 of 29 PrCre/+;KrasG12D;SB female mice with
metastases by seven months of age confirmed in 13 animals. Organs within
the abdominal cavity including the uterus and ovaries contained
metastatic lesions in some mice. In one mouse, a distant metastasis
within the subcutaneous tissue of the thoracic back was observed.
Illumina sequencing of primary lesions from all mice revealed 77
candidate tumor drivers.Conclusions:To our knowledge, the
PrCre/+;KrasG12D;SB mouse is the first reported metastatic model of
vulvar carcinoma. Protein expression of candidate genes identified by our
SB screen are being assessed in human tissue samples. Patient clinical
data will be incorporated into analyses to determine whether candidate
genes are correlated to patient outcomes. This work will permit insights
into the pathophysiology and future treatment of vulvar cancer.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

