Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Restricting aerobic glycolysis provides functional improvement of
chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-modified T cells


Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapy targeting CD19 has proven
effective at treating hematologic malignancies, however similar success
has not been observed using CARs targeting other antigens. We have
observed that several CARs, including a GD2-targeted CAR, are limited in
efficacy due to T cell exhaustion induced by tonic, antigen-independent
signaling. This phenomenon is triggered by oligomerization of scFvs on
the surface of transduced T cells, leading to chronic CAR zeta signaling
and early exhaustion characterized by a diminished proliferative
potential, poor cytokine production, and overexpression of inhibitory
receptors including PD1, TIM3 and LAG3. Early CAR T cell exhaustion is
also associated with an altered cellular metabolism that is more highly
dependent on glycolysis compared to CD19 CAR T cells or untransduced,
activated control cells. Using a Seahorse Extracellular Flux Analyzer, we
found that the rate of glycolysis (ECAR) in GD2 CAR T cells was twice
that of CD19 CAR T cells or untransduced controls, and no deficiencies in
oxidative phosphorylation in GD2 CAR T cells were observed (normal OCR
and spare respiratory capacity). To evaluate whether increased glycolytic
metabolism contributes to the development of CAR T cell exhaustion, we
sought to restrict glycolysis by culturing GD2 CAR T cells with the
hexokinase inhibitor 2-deoxyglucose (2DG) or in media supplemented with
galactose instead of glucose. Restricting CAR T cell glycolysis was
associated with decreased TIM3 and LAG3 expression and enhanced cytokine
production of GD2 CAR T cells but a modest decrease in cytokine
production of CD19 CAR T cells. Given the previously reported role of
mTOR on promoting glycolytic metabolism, we used rapamycin (sirolimus) in
the cell culture during transduction and expansion. Culturing GD2 CAR T
cells with rapamycin similarly resulted in slower acidification of cell
culture medium and diminished expression of TIM3 and LAG3. Rapamycin
treated GD2 CAR T cells retain specific lytic ability of GD2-positive
tumor cells compared to non-treated GD2 CARs as measured by chromium
release, and these cells persist longer than non-treated cells in a
murine xenograft model of GD2-positive 143b osteosarcoma. These results
suggest that modulation of T cell metabolism may provide functional
benefit and enhance antitumor activity of adoptively transferred tumor
antigen specific T cells by diminishing the susceptibility of highly
activated T cells to exhaustion.

