Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic and mutational profiling of human colon adenomas reveals
early driver mutations and a TGF--CEA regulated profile


Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most commonly
diagnosed cancer in the world with 143,700 newly diagnosed cases in 2012.
The rapid development of cancers in small, sessile adenomas could be a
contributing factor that may have been overlooked. Identifying high risk
patients through genomic analysis of adenomas could potentially lead to
an early intervention therapy.Methods: Whole Genome Sequence (WGS) and
Whole Exome Sequence (WES) analyses were performed for 4 pairs of normal
controls (two from proximal colon and two from the distal colon) and
colorectal adenomas (2 sessile serrated (SSA) and 2 tubulovillous
adenomas (TVA) less than 1 cm in size). Transcriptome sequence analysis
was performed in seven pairs of control-test matched adenomas (6 TVA and
1 SSA). Expression level of CEA and TGF- pathway members were carried out
on 30 non dysplastic adenomas and normal colon tissues by
immunohistochemistry.Results: 1. Hyper-mutator profiles were observed in
two of the samples (1 SSA and 1 TVA) by WGS with 1709 mutations after
normalization with normal paired samples. 2. The samples showed an
average mutation frequency of 0.55 mutations per 106 bases. 3. Aberrant
mutational profiles was detected in seven of the eleven adenomas, with
distinct mutational signatures among the samples, two with high, two
intermediate and three low mutational rates. 4. Six of the eleven
adenomas (1 SSA and 4 TVAs) showed alteration in the Wnt and p53 pathway.
5. Transitional single nucleotide substitutions of C:T>G:A in the
mutational spectrum were observed in 37% of the samples. 6. Subtle
localized hyper mutation (kataegis) was observed among two of the
samples. 7. Five out of eleven adenomas showed mutations in the TGF-
(transforming growth factor-) and CEA pathways members, overlapping with
Wnt/p53 mutations in four adenomas. 8. Analyses of expression level of
CEA and TGF- pathway members in 30 non dysplastic tissues revealed a
marked increase (over 8 fold) in CEA expression in 25% of adenoma samples
which was linked to concomitant loss of TGF- signaling. 9. Further
functional studies revealed that CEA associated with TGF- Type I receptor
and disruption of TGF- tumor suppressor signaling with activation of
STAT3.Conclusions: Our studies indicate that small adenomas both TVAs and
SSAs can resemble CRCs in genomic profiling and may reflect a high risk
population. Genetic and mechanistic analyses reveal that disruption of
CEA/TGF- pathway in early adenomas may reflect a new and early role for
these pathways in CRC. This study further supports the biomarker driven
targeting of CEA/TGF- in high risk adenomas and can be used as a
prognostic marker for early detection of aggressive adenoma-CRC
progression.

