Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tackling the obstacles facing the implementation of a molecular
screening program in an early drug development unit: The Jules Bordet
Institute Program for Molecular Profiling of Metastatic Lesions -
feasibility (Precision-f)


IntroductionThe identification of pathways involved in carcinogenesis,
the emergence of high-throughput technologies enabling tumor molecular
analysis and the development of targeted therapies have led to the
concept of precision medicine. Higher response rates and longer survivals
have been achieved in recent genomic-driven clinical trials. However,
genomic-driven cancer medicine is hindered by multiple obstacles. Our aim
was to assess the feasibility of incorporating real-time targeted gene
sequencing (TGS) of DNA derived from metastatic biopsies into daily
clinical practice.Experimental proceduresPrecision-f (NCT01932489) is a
pilot trial conducted at the Jules Bordet Institute. Patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC), melanoma or non-small cell lung
(NSCLC) cancer were enrolled. Two FFPE blocks and one fresh frozen sample
embedded in OCT were collected from newly performed metastatic biopsies
as well as one whole blood sample. The FFPE samples were checked for
tumor cellularity and 55 m sections were cut and sent to 2 laboratories.
Targeted gene sequencing was performed on DNA extracted for the same
sample using the Illumina TruSeq Amplicon Cancer Panel performed on a
MiSeq Desktop Sequencer, and the Life Technologies Ion AmpliSeq Cancer
Hotspot Panel performed on an Ion Personal Genome Machine. Results were
reported to the institutional sequencing tumor board for discussion,
annotation and treatment assignment. The main objectives were the
evaluation of biopsy quality, turnaround time, the presence of actionable
alterations, technology cross-validity and treatment
assignments.ResultsThirty-four patients were enrolled between December
2013 and August 2014: 13 NSCLC patients, 11 CRC patients, 10 melanoma
patients. Successful molecular results were achieved from 32/34 biopsies
(94%). The most frequent site of biopsy was the liver (10) followed by
the lung (7), the skin (5) and lymph nodes (5). 27/34 (79%) samples had
20% tumor cells. 31/34 (91%) of samples had > 10 ng of DNA for TGS. The
median turnaround time for results reporting was 15 calendar days [8-22].
Actionable mutations were found for 66% (21/32) of patients, 76% (16/21)
of which were treated with therapy according to the identified molecular
alteration. Reasons for non-targeted therapy were: non-eligibility (2),
unavailable drugs (2) and patient refusal (1). The results of the
comparison of TGS data across the 2 platforms is ongoing and will be
presented at the meeting.ConclusionThe precision-f pilot trial has
demonstrated the feasibility and clinical relevance of a molecular
screening program in a clinical pharmacology unit. A Belgian national
initiative will follow in order to enhance patient participation in
genomic-driven clinical trials.

