Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacodynamic and genomic markers associated with response to
the XPO1/CRM1 inhibitor selinexor (KPT-330): a report from the Pediatric
Preclinical Testing Program


Background: Selinexor (KPT-330) is an inhibitor of the major nuclear
export receptor, exportin 1 (XPO1, also termed chromosome region
maintenance 1 or CRM1) that has demonstrated activity in preclinical
models of several solid and hematological cancers.Procedures: Selinexor
was tested against the PPTP in vivo xenograft panels administered orally
at a dose of 10 mg/kg (3 times per week) for 4 weeks. For collection of
specimens for pharmacodynamic testing, KT-10 tumors that regressed
rapidly after treatment with selinexor were harvested 24 hours after a
single dose of drug (10 mg/kg). Other, less responsive tumors, were
harvested 2 hours after dose 6 (MWF dosing) at 10 mg/kg/dose. Immunoblots
were probed for p53, p21, PARP and cleaved PARP and XPO1/CRM1. IHC
analysis was performed for a comparable set of proteins to assess nuclear
localization. For exome sequencing, all mutations were verified and
assessed as somatic using a virtual normal subtraction algorithm.Results:
Objective responses (CRs) to selinexor were observed for 3 of 38 solid
tumor xenografts including Wilms tumor (KT-10), medulloblastoma (BT-50)
and ependymoma (BT-41) xenografts. For the ALL panel, 2 of 8 (25%)
xenografts achieved either CR or MCR (ALL-8 and ALL-19). The mutation
profiles for models with objective responses for which exome sequencing
data were available (KT-10, BT-50, ALL-8 and ALL-19) were examined. The
only recurring mutation was for FBXW7, with known oncogenic mutations
identified for both BT-50 (R465H) and ALL-8 (R465C). One additional
tested xenograft (ALL-31) had an FBXW7 mutation, but it was in the
N-terminal region in the nuclear localization signal domain
(c.45_46insCCT; p.15_16TR>TLR). KT-10 has a PALB2 mutation that leads to
defective homologous recombination and to sensitivity to PARP
inhibition.Selinexor induced a robust increase in p53 in KT-10 xenografts
with PUMA induction and cleavage of PARP that was apparent after the
first dose of drug, consistent with the rapid response of this tumor to
treatment. Models that showed growth delay rather than regression showed
a lesser induction of p53 and showed increased nuclear localization of a
number of proteins (e.g., FOXO1, NFB, and p53).Conclusions: Selinexor
induced regression against several solid tumor and ALL xenografts, and
slowed tumor growth for a larger number of models. Pharmacodynamic
effects expected for XPO1 inhibition were noted in models without regard
to tumor regression, although p53 induction was most robust in a highly
sensitive Wilms tumor model. Exome sequencing identified potential
genomic alterations (FBXW7 mutation and mutation in a homologous
recombination gene) associated with sensitivity that require validation
in a larger, independent set of tumors.

