Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Skeletal consequences of bone resorption inhibitors (zoledronic
acid and RANKL blocking antibody) injections during growth: mouse strain
disparities and synergic effect


AbstractBackground: High doses of bone resorption inhibitors are
currently evaluated for the treatment of malignant primary bone tumors.
The impact of such an intensive treatment on growing skeleton is a
critical question in the context of pediatric oncology.Methods: Protocols
adapted from pediatric treatments were developed for mice (a total of 4
or 5 injections of Zoledronic acid (50 g/kg) or IKK-22.5 antibody (50
g/injection) every two or three days). Their impact on tibias, skull
bones and teeth growth was analyzed by micro-CT and histology up to 3
months after the last injection. Potential disparities between mouse
strains were evaluated using both CD1 and C57BL/6J mice, as was the
possible synergic effect of the two inhibitors.Results: In both mouse
strains, bone resorption inhibitors administrations induced a transient
delay of tibia and skull bone growth. Indeed, three months after the last
injection all bone parameters were back to normal. Regarding tooth
eruption and root elongation, both were severely impaired in C57BL/6J
mouse whatever the inhibitor considered while in CD1 mouse highly more
important doses are necessary to observe similar effects. Combination of
both inhibitors, at half-doses in CD1 mouse, induced severe delay of
tooth eruption demonstrating the existence of synergic effect between the
two inhibitors.Conclusions: In mouse, high doses of bone resorption
inhibitors disturbed teeth eruption and elongation, and delayed tibias
and skull bone formation. Difference of sensitivity to these inhibitors
was observed between mouse strains which understanding will require
further studies. A synergic effect was also observed for these
inhibitors. In human, similar treatments may impact the permanent teeth
eruption. These observations are crucial for the follow-up of pediatric
patients treated with high doses of bone resorption inhibitors in ongoing
European and American protocols.

