Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of Oct-2, OCA-B, BCL6, PU.1 and IRF8 predicts prognosis
in Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma patients


Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common B cell Non
Hodgkin lymphoma in adults. While 50% of patients are cured with standard
therapy, a large fraction either relapse or have primary refractory
disease. Relapse is the major cause of treatment failure and death in
these patients.Remains imperative the availability of markers that could
predict response to therapy.DLBCL is a heterogeneous group of diseases
that arise from germinal center (GC) B cells. Gene expression profiling
has classified DLBCL into two subgroups Activated B Cell Like (ABC) and
Germinal Center B Cell Like (GCB). Multiple mutations associated with its
biology have been identified by next generation sequencing but little is
known about their prognostic role.The transit of B cells through the GC
is controlled by sequential activation and repression of transcription
factors. BCL6 role in GC development and derived B cell lymphomas is well
known. Oct2 and its cofactor OCAB control BCL6 expression being
responsible for its up regulation in centroblasts (Blood 144; 22).
Oct2/OCAB recognize a non canonical binding site in BCL6 promoter. Oct2
is recruited to its target gene by PU1/IRF8. Co-IPs assays in BJAB and
HBL1 showed the interactions among these factors. The downregulation of
PU1 or IRF8 expression using shRNAs significantly decreased Oct2/OCAB
binding enrichment on BCL6 promoter. Based on these observations we
decided to analyze the expression of the GC highly expressed Oct2, OCAB,
BCL6, PU1 and IRF8 transcription factors by immunohistochemistry, in
paraffin embedded biopsies of DLBCL patients obtained at diagnosis. We
included 73 patients [38 male Md age and range 59.07 (25-85); 35 female
59.4 (17-82)]. The univariate analysis showed no correlation between the
percentage of positive tumor cells and the clinical-pathological
parameters indicative of prognosis. Similarly there was a lack of
correlation both with the immune-phenotype markers routinely evaluated
and the growth fraction marker Ki67. The Kaplan-Meier study showed that
tumors with Oct2, BCL6 and IRF8 expression higher than 70% [(Log Rank
Test X2 = 3,7) p = 0.05; 4,0 p = 0.04 and 4,0 p = 0.04 respectively]
correlated with poor prognosis and reduced OS. This correlation remained
independent of the tumor stage in the multivariate analysis. Meanwhile
88%, 54% and 60% of patients showed more than 70% of positive tumor cells
for Oct2, BCL6 and IRF8, only 17.8% and 5.5% reached that percentage for
OCAB and PU1. Furthermore, OCAB and PU1 expression was completely lost in
42.5% and 63% of the patients. The OCAB and PU1 expression loss
correlated with poor prognosis and reduced OS. We believe that the
evaluation of these molecules would be useful to assess prognosis in
DLBCL patients at the time of diagnosis. All together these findings
imply potential therapeutic considerations since we might need to attack
simultaneously diverse interactions among multiple proteins in this B
cell lymphoma.

