Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mammalian glutamine metabolism controls circadian rhythm through
regulation of reactive oxygen species


Circadian rhythms are twenty-four hour physiologic cycles present in all
eukaryotes that control a variety of organismal processes, including
metabolism, but the role of metabolism in control of circadian rhythms is
still not well understood. Peripheral clocks such as those present in the
liver control metabolic pathways such as glucose metabolism and
respiration as well as amino acid metabolism. It has been recently
demonstrated that the availability of the metabolite NAD (nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide) can feed back to control circadian rhythm. There is
much interest in targeting glutamine metabolism in cancer, but it is
still not fully understood how inhibition of glutamine metabolism affects
normal cell physiology, including circadian rhythm. Here we show using
the commonly-used circadian model U2OS osteosarcoma cells and other cell
lines that glutamine withdrawal blocked proper circadian oscillation of
gene expression. Glutamine withdrawal led to distinct and dramatic
changes in circadian gene expression in several cell lines with highly
different tissue origins, which could be rescued by addition of the cell
permeable TCA-intermediate -ketoglutarate. However, cells withdrawn from
glutamine did not show signs of metabolic stress or impairment of the
mTOR pathway. While alterations to histone modifications possibly
stemming from impairment of KG-dependent enzymes were observed, these did
not explain the observed alterations in circadian rhythm. Rather, RNA-seq
analysis of genetic changes after glutamine withdrawal and -ketoglutarate
rescue revealed strong induction of several genetic pathways associated
with reactive-oxygen species (ROS) induction, particularly those
resulting from chemotherapy or photodynamic therapy of cancer. Further
supporting the importance of ROS in regulation of circadian rhythm,
addition of cell permeable antioxidants rescued the disruption of
circadian oscillation in the absence of glutamine. Finally, inhibiting
expression of the key ROS-defense catalase phenocopied circadian rhythm
disruption observed after glutamine withdrawal. Together, these data
suggest that glutamine availability and metabolism are critical to
support circadian rhythm and gene expression through modulation of
intracellular ROS, and furthermore that cancer treatments that lead to
induction of ROS could affect normal cellular circadian rhythm.We thank
the following funding: NIH F32CA180370, NIH F32CA174148, NIH R01CA051497,
LLS 610614

