Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction between keratin intermediate filament proteins K8/18
and cancer related signal transduction proteins in epithelial cells


Intermediate filaments (IFs) are cytoskeletal polymers formed by a large
family of proteins that are expressed in a cell differentiation and
tissue specific manner. Keratins (K) are the IF proteins present in
epithelial cells. They are known to provide structural supports to cells
and play roles in maintaining cellular integrity against mechanical and
toxic stresses. More recently, keratins have been recognized to play
non-mechanical functions which include the regulation of signaling
pathways that control cell growth and survival. In tumor pathology, K8
and K18 which are the only keratin present in hepatocytes were, for a
long time, just considered as cell type markers. However, in recent years
various studies have provided evidence that keratins should be considered
as regulators of cancer cell signaling. For instance, K8/18 loss is a
hallmark of epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) but their role in
tumor progression is unclear. In an attempt to bring more insight into
the function of keratins in this process, we first investigated whether
K8/18 expression played an active role in EMT. Using shRNA, we produced
new K8/18 stable knockdown cell lines (human endometrial carcinoma KLE,
human hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2 and human cervical carcinoma HeLa
cell). Our K8/18 stable knockdown model presented a hyperactivation of
the PI3K/Akt/NF-B axis. Moreover, these changes were associated with an
increase in collective cell migration and invasiveness. Because of these
results, we considered whether NF-B and its activators (PI3K, Akt (1, 2,
3), pAkt, IKK (, , ), IB- and pIB-) are associated with keratins in
epithelial cells. Using immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence, our
current results show that pAkt, NF-B and IKK are indeed associated with
keratins. Taken together, these results support the hypothesis that
keratin intermediate filament proteins provide a platform for these
proteins involved in signal transduction. Further studies will be done to
determine if posttranslational modifications that affect keratins (K8/18
phosphorylation on specific serines and/or K18 O-glycosylation) interfere
with their association to signaling protein and transcription factors
previously found. Changes in K8/18 posttranlational modifications and
their association with different proteins could be important determinants
in cancer progression of epithelial cells. This work was supported by
CRSNG grants to MC and EA.

