Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Framework for clinical evaluation of chemopreventive agents:
Defining criteria for future assessment


Background Although a number of cancer chemopreventive agents have now
been evaluated in phase II and phase III clinical trials that assess
their efficacy and tolerability in both high risk and general
populations, few have shown clear efficacy and uptake of approved agents
has been disappointingly low. Therefore, chemopreventive agents should
undergo rigorous screening prior to clinical trial evaluation in order to
improve the selection of suitable agents for testing in large, expensive
multi-center phase III trials. The aim of this study is to develop a
descriptive method for prioritizing candidate agents for further
development.Methods This framework was developed through a systematic
literature review of Pubmed/Medline, Embase and The Cochrane Library. A
semi-quantitative assessment focusing on efficacy and
toxicity/tolerability was established based on expert input. Data from
clinical trials, cancer epidemiological, observational and preclinical
studies, including in vivo and in vitro basic research, was used to
retrospectively evaluate the clinical application and effectiveness of
cancer chemopreventive agents. Two chemopreventive agents with either a
positive (aromatase inhibitors (AIs) for breast cancer) or negative
(selenium for lung cancer) phase III clinical trial outcome were
subsequently evaluated to determine the usefulness of the
framework.Results Chemopreventive agents must reduce or reverse the
process of carcinogenesis in normal or pre-malignant tissue with minimal
toxicity. Evaluation of efficacy included data from preclinical and
animal models, epidemiological studies, and clinical trials (both early
phase trials in the organ of interest as well as secondary endpoints from
other relevant studies). Agent suitability evaluation included assessment
of toxicities, tolerability, and agent specific attributes (PK/PD,
bioavailability, dosing, etc.). Examination of selenium and AI historical
data in these categories revealed strong concordance with phase III
outcomes. The detailed descriptive evaluation of the agents will be
presented.Conclusion This framework provides a descriptive paradigm for
cancer chemopreventive agent evaluation through systematic and rigorous
interrogation. Thorough, standardized evaluation of all available
preclinical, epidemiological, and clinical data should be strongly
encouraged to better inform the investments required for clinical trials.

