Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inducible overexpression of bHLH transcriptional regulator Id4
abrogates tumorigenicity of prostate cancer xenografts


Introduction: Inhibitor of DNA binding/differentiation 4 (Id4) has been
shown to be highly expressed during prostate development. However, in
many cancers including prostate, Id4 is epigenetically silenced due to
promoter hyper-methylation. In this study we developed a doxycycline
inducible system for Id4 overexpression and show that controlled increase
of Id4 in an aggressive metastatic prostate cancer cell line DU145, which
lacks Id4 expression results in attenuation of tumor forming ability of
this cell line and confirming its role as a tumor suppressor.Methods:
Tetracycline inducible system was used to stably overexpress Id4 in DU145
cells. Empty vector backbone was used as a control. The Id4 overexpressed
(DU(+)iId4) and vector control (DU(+)iVC) cells were used to investigate
migration (scratch wound assay) and anchorage independent growth (soft
agar assay). Tumorigenicity of DU(+)iId4 and DU(+)iVC cells was
investigated in Scid beige mice. The gene expression profile between
DU(+)iId4 and DU(+)iVC cells was analyzed by RNAseq. The DU(+)iId4 and
DU(+)iVC tumors from mice were used for immunohistochemistry to validate
prostate cancer pathways and RNAseq data.Results: Id4 was cloned in
pcDNA4/TO/myc-His version A and stably transfected and clonally selected
for overexpression in DU145 cells stably expressing pcDNA6/TR. The
overexpression of Id4 on induction by doxycycline (a tetracycline
analogue) was confirmed by qRT-PCR and western blotting. A clone with
maximum expression was selected for further studies. On inducing the
DU145 cells with doxycycline, an increase in apoptosis was observed as
compared to un-induced DU145 as well as cells expressing the empty
control vector. Decrease in migration and anchorage independent colony
forming ability was also observed upon induction of Id4 in scratch wound
and soft agar assay, respectively. Subcutaneous injection of DU145 cells
in Scid beige mice resulted in formation of tumors, however upon
induction of Id4 expression by doxycycline from day 0 or 2 weeks after
injection of the cells showed a significant decrease in the tumor forming
ability of the DU145 cells as evident from the reduction in the tumor
weight and volume. Immunohistochemistry on tumor tissues was found to be
in support of the RNAseq data.Conclusion: This study reports for the
first time that conditional overexpression of tumor suppressor Id4 in
prostate cancer cell lines DU145 results in diminution of tumor
formation. The data describes use of a system that allows for the
temporal regulation of Id4 expression in vivo which could act as a
preliminary step in mimicking controlled delivery of Id4 for therapeutic
purpose.Acknowledgement: This study was supported by NIH/NCI RO1 CA128914
and NIH/NCRR/RCMI G12MD007590.

