Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 inhibits cholangiocarcinoma tumor growth
in patient-derived xenograft models


Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a lethal malignancy of the biliary epithelium
that can arise in any part of the biliary tree. Surgery is the only
curative treatment for CCA, but only 30% of patients present with
resectable disease. The remaining 70% of patients present with advanced
or metastatic disease and, if eligible, undergo systemic chemotherapy
with the first-line combination of gemcitabine and cisplatin. This
combination was shown in a phase II clinical trial to significantly
increase median survival from 8.1 to 11.7 months, compared to gemcitabine
alone. In order to improve on current treatment, pre-clinical evaluation
of novel therapeutics is essential to improving outcome. Unfortunately,
the paucity of data describing characteristics common to CCA make
development of targeted therapy difficult. However, as is true for other
types of solid tumors, c-Myc expression likely contributes to CCA
phenotype: c-Myc expression has been observed in 95% of CCA tumors, and
experimental down-regulation of c-Myc decreases the invasive potential of
CCA cells in vitro. Recently it has become possible to inhibit expression
of c-Myc using BET inhibitors. Therefore, we evaluated the efficacy of
the bromodomain (BET) inhibitor JQ1 using in vivo models of CCA. The five
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of CCA that we developed are the
first such models to be reported. These models retain the heterogeneity,
architecture and specific genetic characteristics of the primary tumors
from which they were derived.We used three of these models to examine
whether the BET inhibitor JQ1 inhibited CCA tumor growth and generated
expression profiles of vehicle- and drug-treated tumors. We administered
50 mg/kg of JQ1 i.p. daily for 20 days and monitored tumor growth. This
treatment regimen was well tolerated by tumor-bearing mice, without
apparent toxicity. Our data demonstrate that JQ1 suppressed tumor growth
in two of the three models, compared to vehicle control treated mice. The
data also showed that JQ1-treated tumors had lower levels of c-Myc RNA
(5-fold) and protein and of RNA encoding multiple transcriptional targets
downstream of this oncogenic transcription factor. We conclude that BET
inhibitors such as JQ1 warrant further investigation as potentially
effective drugs for the treatment of CCA.

