Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting -catenin with a Dicer-substrate siRNA (DsiRNA) in a
sleeping beauty transposon-driven murine hepatoblastoma model


Hepatoblastoma (HB), the commonest pediatric liver tumor is frequently
associated with an N-terminal deletion in the CTNNB1 gene, which encodes
stable -catenin and promotes nuclear localization and transactivation
activity. In 80% of patients, nuclear localization of -catenin and Yes
Associated Protein (YAP), a Hippo-related transactivator, is seen
together. Further, stable hepatic co-expression of 90-CTNNB1 and
active-YAP in mice causes rapid and aggressive HB. Dicer-substrate siRNAs
(DsiRNAs) are potent RNA interference (RNAi) triggers that that are
efficacious in preclinical tumor models of diverse origin, and are
currently under clinical evaluation. To determine if CTNNB1-targeting
DsiRNAs have potential as a therapy in HB, we encapsulated this
oligonucleotide payload into lipid nanoparticles (LNPs), and systemically
administered into mice bearing CTNNB1/YAP-induced HB. The LNP platform
used, termed EnCore (because of its specific Envelope and Core lipid
components), enables high encapsulation efficiency, long-term stability,
and consistent analytical criteria. Downstream of LNP-mediated DsiRNA
delivery, both qPCR and in situ hybridization were used to visualize
changes in CTNNB1 expression in both tumor and normal liver. Robust and
specific silencing of CTNNB1 mRNA was achieved in the tumors. The
distribution of mRNA knockdown within each tumor nodule suggests
efficient extravasation and internalization of the LNP and its payload
into the tumor parenchyma, in contrast to previous reports of
vascular-channel limited nanoparticle accumulation in tumors.
Intriguingly, a liver-centric LNP formulation, which delivers cargo
efficiently to a normal liver due to rapid hepatic extraction and
apolipoprotein-mediated internalization, was inactive in the tumors.
Further evaluation demonstrated efficacy of -catenin targeting in this
model. In conclusion, we report a highly relevant modality of RNAi
delivery in a mouse model of hepatoblastoma to target a
classically-undruggable oncogene.

