Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Grainyhead-like 2 (GRHL2) regulates epithelial plasticity and
stemness in oral cancers


Purpose: Grainyhead-like 2 (GRHL2) is one of the three mammalian
homologues of Drosophila Grainyhead involved in epithelial morphogenesis.
GRHL2 also controls epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation.
Our objective was to evaluate the role of GRHL2 in oral carcinogenesis
and the underlying mechanism.Experimental Design: GRHL2 expression was
evaluated in multiple oral cancer cell lines and tissues of oral squamous
cell carcinomas (OSCCs) by qRT-PCR, western blot assay,
immunohistochemistry and laser-captured microdissection assay. The
effects of shRNA-mediated GRHL2 knockdown were evaluated by tumor
spheroid assay, colony formation assay, gene promoter luciferase assay
and immunofluorescent staining and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
In vivo the effect of GRHL2 loss on cancer cell tumorigenicity was
evaluated by tumor xenograft assay.Results: GRHL2 expression was elevated
in cells and tissues of oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCCs) compared
with normal counterparts. Knockdown of GRHL2 resulted in the loss of in
vivo tumorigenicity, cancer stemness, and epithelial phenotype of oral
cancer cells. GRHL2 inhibition decreased oral cancer cell proliferation
and colony formation. GRHL2 regulated the expression of miR-200 family
and Octamer-binding transcription factor 4 (Oct-4) genes through direct
promoter DNA binding. Overexpression of miR-200 genes in the oral cancer
cells depleted of GRHL2 partially restored the epithelial phenotype,
proliferative rate and cancer stemness.Conclusion: GRHL2 plays pivotal
role in the maintenance of the transformed phenotype in OSCCs.
Downregulation of GRHL2 leads to the decrease of tumorigenicity, cancer
stemness of oral cancer cell, in which miR-200 and Oct-4 genes partially
mediate the tumorigenic effects of GRHL2 in OSCC. This study was
supported in part by the grants R56DE024593 and Jack Weichman Endowed
Fund.

