Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclooxygenase-2 downregulation reduces activated fibroblasts and
modifies the extracellular matrix in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer xenograft


COX-2 is an important mediator of inflammation that significantly
influences tumor angiogenesis, invasion and metastasis. Here, we have
investigated the role of COX-2 in modifying the number of activated
cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and in altering the extracellular
matrix (ECM) in a breast cancer model.To investigate the role of COX-2 in
modulating the ECM, we used an MDA-MB-231 cell clone (Clone 13)
expressing a short hairpin RNA (shRNA) to downregulate COX-2 [1]. Clone
13 cells were characterized for significantly lower basal and TPA-induced
COX-2 and PGE2 expression compared to parental MDA-MB-231 cells using
ELISA (PGE2), western blot (COX-2 protein) and q-RT-PCR (COX-2 mRNA).
Tumors were derived from parental (n = 5) and Clone 13 (n = 6) MDA-MB-231
cells following inoculation in the mammary fat pad in SCID mice. Tumors
were excised at 500 mm3 and immunohistochemically stained to quantify
vessel density (CD31) and activated CAFs (-smooth muscle actin (SMA)) in
5 m thick formalin fixed sections. Stained sections were digitally
scanned and positive staining quantified using manufacturer supplied
software (Aperio Technologies, CA).Clone 13 tumors showed delayed tumor
growth compared to parental MDA-MB-231 tumors. We have previously
observed that collagen 1 (Col1) fiber density and fiber volume were
significantly lower in COX-2 reduced Clone 13 tumors compared to parental
tumors [2]. While cancer cells shape Col1 fiber patterns through the
secretion of various enzymes, Col1 fiber is laid down by activated CAFs
within or around the tumor. Quantification of activated CAFs by
immunohistochemistry for -SMA in the tumors, and immunoblotting for -SMA
of crude protein extracted from the tumors, revealed significantly fewer
CAFs and significantly reduced levels of -SMA protein in Clone 13 tumors
compared to parental MDA-MB-231 tumors. We previously observed a
significant decrease in permeability as well as reduced influx and efflux
of macromolecular transport in Clone 13 tumors compared to parental
tumors, but no difference in vascular volume [2]. Immunohistochemistry
for CD31 staining of endothelial cells did not detect a significant
difference in CD31 density between Clone 13 and parental tumors further
confirming our previous observations about vascular volume. These data
reveal the multi-faceted effects of COX-2 in modifying the structure and
function of the ECM, and identify the ability to attract and activate
fibroblasts as one mechanism by which COX-2 modifies the
ECM.Acknowledgements: We thank Mr. Gary Cromwell for technical
assistance. This work was supported by NIH R01CA82337 and P50
CA103175.References: [1] Stasinopoulos, I., et al., Mol Cancer Res, 2007;
[2], Stasinopoulos, I., et al., AACR, 2013 Chicago.

