Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDM2 promotes tumor cell migration through the induction of
epithelial to mesenchymal transition


Objectives: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), which occurs in
the initiation of metastasis, offers tumor cells increased invasive
properties. MDM2 overexpression has been reported to predict distant
metastasis, with mechanisms undefined. The present study will investigate
the role of MDM2 in regulating EMT, so as to promote the discovery and
development of novel targets for anti-metastasis therapy.Methods: (1)
MDM2 expression in human ovarian adenocarcinoma tissues was examined by
immunohistochemical staining; (2) SKOV3 cells were transfected with MDM2
plasmid, then the alteration of cell motility was detected using
wound-healing and transwell assays; the protein and mRNA expression of
E-cadherin and Slug/Snail were detected by Western Blot and real-time PCR
respectively; (3) Smad2, Smad3 or Smad4 was silenced by siRNA, then
E-cadherin protein expression affected by MDM2 overexpression was
determined by Western Blot; (4) After transfection with MDM2 siRNA,
TGF--triggered activation EMT and cell migration were observed; (5) The
effect of MDM2 inhibitor Nutlin-3 on EMT and cell motility were observed
by Western Blot and transwell assays.Results: MDM2 expression in 123
clinical samples was examined by immunohistochemical staining, which
identified a significant correlation between MDM2 expression and clinical
staging. The reduction of E-cadherin protein expression, as the indicator
of the occurrence of EMT, was observed in SKOV3 cells transfected with
MDM2 plasmid, which led to increased cell motility. In addition, evident
upregulation of Slug and Snail expression was induced by MDM2
overexpression. Smad complexes directly activate the transcription of
Slug and Snail. In our study, after silencing Smad2, Smad3 or Smad4, the
inhibitory effect of MDM2 on E-cadherin expression was counteracted,
indicating that Smad pathway might be critical for MDM2-promoted EMT.
Then we found that TGF--Smad-induced EMT and cell migration could be
suppressed by silencing MDM2. Further investigation suggested that the
MDM2 inhibitor Nutlin-3 could prevent the downregulation of E-cadherin
induced by TGF- or MDM2 overexpression through interrupting Smad
activation. Additionally, Nutlin-3 exhibited inhibitory effect on cell
migration, which might be owing to its antagonism on the EMT.Conclusion:
In summary, this study explored the molecular mechanisms underlying the
role of MDM2 in cancer progression. MDM2 expression has been demonstrated
to be closely correlated to human ovarian adenocarcinoma clinical
staging, indicating the possible utilization of MDM2 in prognosis.
Further study clarified MDM2 promoted tumor cell migration through the
induction of EMT, which provides new theoretical evidences for the roles
that MDM2 plays in tumor metastasis. Our study implicates that MDM2 may
be a potential target for inhibiting metastasis and contributes to the
translational research of MDM2 inhibitors as anti-metastatic agents.

