Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variation in mutational landscape among small colonic polyps with
differential growth rates


Background: Benign adenomatous colonic polyps are transformed into
cancers through the stepwise accumulation of mutations. However, not all
polyps will progress. A significant number remain static in size,
regress, or resolve completely. The mechanisms underlying these
differential fates are unknown, and currently there are no biological
characteristics that can reliably predict which polyps will grow or
progress into invasive cancer. A multiancestral origin contributes to
tumor heterogeneity and might provide additional growth promoting signals
via increased genetic diversity.Methods: Utilizing a unique cohort of
patients with small (Background: Benign adenomatous colonic polyps are
transformed into cancers through the stepwise accumulation of mutations.
However, not all polyps will progress. A significant number remain static
in size, regress, or resolve completely. The mechanisms underlying these
differential fates are unknown, and currently there are no biological
characteristics that can reliably predict which polyps will grow or
progress into invasive cancer. A multiancestral origin contributes to
tumor heterogeneity and might provide additional growth promoting signals
via increased genetic diversity.Methods: Utilizing a unique cohort of
patients with small (<9mm) colorectal polyps in which growth was followed
over a mean of 2.3 years by CT colonography, we performed next generation
sequencing followed by micro-dissection and quantitative PCR to determine
tumor origin.Results: The mutational landscape of small polyps is highly
heterogeneous. Polyps carried 0 - 5 pathogenic mutations, with the most
commonly altered gene being APC, which is considered the gatekeeper of
the intestine. Interestingly, the percentage of cells harboring mutations
in APC within a single polyp ranged from 2.0% to 70.6% with an average of
22.1%. In contrast, the frequency of a common APC single nucleotide
polymorphism was 0% for non-carriers (n = 3), 55.9% for heterozygotes (n
= 6), and 97.9% for homozygotes (n = 10). In the presence of an APC
mutation, the average frequency of a second pathogenic mutation within a
sample was 6.2% (n = 10).Conclusions: These data indicate that early
intratumoral heterogeneity arising as a consequence of multiancestral
origin affects tumor formation and growth. By determining the relative
fitness advantage of heterogeneous polyps, we can begin to better predict
which polyps may be more likely to progress into adenocarcinomas and
which patients are predisposed to developing advanced disease.

