Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOX17 gene promoter methylation in high-grade serous epithelial
ovarian cancer


Introduction: Impaired DNA methylation patterns hold promise as cancer
biomarkers. SOX17, a member of the SOX family of transcription factors,
is conserved in many species and plays critical roles in the regulation
of development and stem/precursor cell function, at least partly through
repression of the canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway. Global
analysis of CpG island hypermethylation and gene expression in colorectal
cancer cell lines revealed that SOX17 gene silencing is associated with
DNA hypermethylation. We have already shown that this gene is
hypermethylated in circulating tumor cells and circulating tumor DNA of
patients with breast cancer (Chimonidou et al, Clin Chem 2011, Chimonidou
et al, Clin Chem, 2013). High grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) is the
most common histological subtype of ovarian cancer, with a worse disease
prognosis and overall survival. In this study, we investigated for the
first time the status of SOX17 promoter methylation in patients with high
grade serous ovarian cancer.Materials and methods: HGSC tumors (FFPEs)
from ovarian cancer patients belonging to an independent group (n = 78)
and a training group (n = 47) were analyzed.For the evaluation of the
specificity of our results, a small group of 10 corresponding normal
tissues from the first ten individuals of the training group was also
analyzed. Genomic DNA was isolated from all samples, and then was
modified by Sodium Bisulfite (SB). All SB converted DNA samples were
analyzed by a real time Methylation Specific PCR (MSP) assay, for
detecting SOX17 promoter methylation. The IGROV1 ovarian cancer cell line
was used as a positive control in all procedures.Results: In the training
group, SOX17 promoter methylation was detected in 25/47 ovarian tumor
samples (53.2%) and in 5/10 corresponding normal tissues. The same 5/10
matched pathological samples of the training group, were also found
methylated for the SOX17 gene. In the independent group, SOX17 promoter
methylation was observed in 61/78 tumor samples (78.2%).Conclusion: Our
results indicate for the first time that SOX17 promoter methylation is a
frequent event in high grade serous ovarian cancer. Further investigation
is required to determine the prognostic significance of SOX17 promoter
methylation status in ovarian cancer and correlate these findings with
patients clinicopathological characteristics.

