Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin E delta-tocotrienol inhibits metastasis and targets cancer
stem cell signaling in human pancreatic cancer


Background: Pancreatic cancer, a lethal and aggressive malignancy is the
fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States. One
of the main reasons for this outcome includes the lack of effective
prevention strategies for recurrent disease. Pancreatic cancer stem cells
(CSCs) have been implicated in the development of pancreatic cancer
metastasis, resistance to chemotherapy and its recurrence following
surgical extirpation. We have shown that natural vitamin E -tocotrienol
is the most bioactive tocotrienols against pancreatic cancer in vitro as
well as in vivo models. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the
effect of -tocotrienol on tumor metastatic EMT, migration, invasion,
angiogenesis and CSCs signaling in metastatic human pancreatic cancer
cells.Methods: Human metastatic pancreatic cancer cells L3.6pl expressing
luciferase were orthotopically implanted into pancreas of Athymic nude
mice (n = 10) and after one week they were randomized in two groups: 1)
vehicle control (ethanol extracted olive oil) and 2) -tocotrienol (200
mg/kg, orally twice a day) for 4 weeks. The tumor volume, tumor weight,
liver and lung metastasis were recorded. The tumor tissues were analyzed
for metastasis markers, epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), and
angiogenesis. In vitro L3.6pl cells were treated with -tocotrienol (50 M)
and used for migration and invasion assay, isolation of CSCs and spheroid
formation, transcription factors and CSCs signaling markers were
determined by Western blotting.Results: Vitamin E -tocotrienol
significantly inhibited the pancreatic tumor growth [tumor volume (50%)
and weight (60%)] and metastasis in the liver and lung, CSCs spheroid
formation, migration and invasion compared to control. -tocotrienol
induced apoptosis (PARP1 cleavage and Bax expression) compared to
control. -tocotrienol also inhibited EMT (E-cadherin to vimentin),
metastasis (MMP9), angiogenesis (VEGF), CSCs transcription factors
(Nanog, Oct4, Sox2 and KLF4) and oncogenic signaling (Notch-1 and pERK)
compared to control.Conclusion: Vitamin E -tocotrienol inhibited
metastasis of human pancreatic tumor through inhibition of EMT,
migration, invasion, angiogenesis, cancer stem cell signaling and
induction of apoptosis.

