Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment, characterization, and clinical correlation of a
platform of ovarian patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models


High grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC) is the most common form of
ovarian cancer; effective therapeutics for HGSOC remains elusive and is
major unmet medical need. Standard treatment for these patients is
surgery followed by platinum- based therapy. While the majority of
patients exhibit an initial response to this standard therapy, many
develop disease recurrence. In order to advance therapeutic development
we have established a panel of low passage, well characterized,
orthotopic, luciferized HGSOC patient derived xenografts (PDXs) that
accurately represent the disease characteristics and are amenable to
assess efficacy evaluations of novel therapeutics.Ovarian PDXs were
established by implanting mice intraperitoneally with fresh human ovarian
cancer cells purified from operative or paracentesis samples under an
IRB-approved protocol. Implanted mice were sacrificed after showing signs
of abdominal distension and ascites development. Fresh mouse
ascites-derived ovarian cancer cells were luciferized ex vivo by
lentivirus based methodologies to allow non-invasive methods of tumor
burden measurement. Luciferized PDX models were further expanded, banked
and utilized for drug efficacy and biomarker evaluation studies.DNA from
patient material and matched established PDX models was extracted and
subjected to CNV on the Affymetrix CytoscanTM HD microarray platform and
BROCA cancer risk panel targeted sequencing. Data from these analyses
indicated that the PDXs are molecularly diverse and faithfully maintain
the genetic alterations and copy number variation profiles of the patient
tumors. Consistent with clinical disease, these orthotopic PDX models
exhibit diffusely disseminated peritoneal disease with tissue
infiltration to the omentum, ovaries and pancreas, along with ascites and
abdominal distention. Immunohistochemical analysis of PDX tumor tissues
infiltrated in major organs for ovarian specific PAX8, p53 and WT1
markers confirmed the high grade serous type of ovarian tumors.
Orthotopic PDXs have been validated and are shown to be robust and
amenable for drug efficacy evaluations by Bioluminescent Imaging. Their
response to standard carboplatin mirrors the response in the patients
from which they were derived. Surrogate biomarkers such as plasma CA-125
measured by BioScale AMMP method and circulating human cfDNA by LINE-1
qPCR have been validated and qualified in these models to support
secondary methods of tumor burden evaluation.Conclusion: A platform of
HGSOC PDX models that retain histologic and molecular characteristics of
primary tumors that are expected to be predictive of clinical outcomes
and amenable for efficacy testing of novel therapeutics is established.
These models are being utilized for hypothesis driven combination
efficacy and biomarker studies for translation to the clinic.

