Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic and microRNAome subtraction identifies pathogenic viral
sequences in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma


Introduction:Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is by far the most
common type of pancreatic cancer. It constitutes about 90% of tumors of
the exocrine pancreas. The aggressive nature of PDAC along with its poor
diagnostic markers contributes to a high lethality of this disease.
Studies from other cancer entities implicate the role of viruses in tumor
development. However, there have been no established reports about
virus(es) associated with pancreatic cancer. The present study identified
a virus by genomic and digital microRNAome subtraction between healthy
and PDAC patients, suggesting that this virus may play a role in
carcinogenesis.Experimental procedures:Representational difference
analysis (RDA) was utilized to perform an experimental genome-wide search
for DNA sequences that occur in PDAC but not in normal tissues. Ten
healthy and ten PDAC tissue DNA samples were used for the generation of
representations and subtractive hybridization. The difference products
(DPs) so obtained were paired end sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq
platform. The sequencing data were aligned against the viral RefSeq
database. We also did in silico subtraction of microRNA content
(miRNA-seq) of PDAC samples. Eight PDAC samples were analyzed for viral
sequences using relevant RefSeq databases. The two approaches (RDA and
miRNA-seq) were pursued in parallel. RT-qPCR analysis and the in vitro
functional characterization of viral sequences in PDAC cell lines were
respectively performed using hydrolysis probes and second generation
microRNA mimic systems. Stable cell lines expressing viral microRNA and
luciferase were produced using lentivirus for mice in vivo
studies.Results and Summary:We found DNA sequences of a virus in the
difference products of RDA whose signature was also implicated in the
microRNA analysis. Further, using RT-qPCR, we identified that a
particular microRNA from this virus is expressed at significantly higher
levels in PDAC samples than in normal tissue. This observation was also
verified by droplet digital PCR analysis. Non-metastatic PDAC cell lines
overexpressing viral microRNA showed significant invasion against
relevant controls, interestingly with no significant change in
proliferation. We are currently analyzing the functional consequences of
these viral sequences and their involvement in
carcinogenesis.Conclusion:From two different robust approaches, these
findings strongly indicate viral sequences associated with PDAC that
could affect pathways relevant to tumor development.

