Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BGB-290, a novel PARP inhibitor with unique brain penetration
ability, demonstrated strong synergism with temozolomide in subcutaneous
and intracranial xenograft models


Temozolomide (TMZ) is a DNA alkylating agent, used for treating several
malignancies, including glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and small cell lung
cancer (SCLC) with brain metastasis. PARP inhibition could potentially
enhance the cytotoxicity of TMZ by hindering the base excision repair
(BER) pathway. BGB-290 is a potent and selective inhibitor of PARP1 and
PARP2, which is currently under clinical investigation in solid tumors.
BGB-290 has significant brain penetration, making it attractive for
combining with TMZ in treating brain tumors or tumors with brain
metastasis. In this study, we evaluated the combination effect of BGB-290
and TMZ in cellular assays and in animal models.The in vitro combination
effect of BGB-290 and TMZ was evaluated in 7 SCLC and 8 GBM cell lines.
BGB-290 demonstrated strong synergism with TMZ in most of those cells
lines, lowering EC50 of TMZ by at least 5-fold in 4 out of 7 SCLC cell
lines, and 7 out of 8 GBM cell lines.The in vivo combination activity was
explored in H209 SCLC xenograft model. TMZ single agent was quite
effective in this model. One cycle of treatment resulted in all animals
tumor-free. However, resistance occurred quickly during the second cycle.
Combination of BGB-290 and TMZ significantly delayed resistance without
additional toxicity. Tumors remained sensitive to the combination
treatment after multiple cycles. In order to investigate whether BGB-290
could overcome the TMZ resistance, TMZ-resistant (TR) H209 tumors were
generated by treating the H209 tumors with multiple cycles of TMZ in
vivo. The derived H209-TR lines remained sensitive to the combination of
BGB-290 and TMZ both in vitro and in vivo, suggesting BGB-290/TMZ combo
might work in the TMZ-resistant settings.Approximately 50% of SCLC
patients have brain metastases at the time of postmortem examination.
BGB-290 showed significant brain penetration in C57 mice. The drug
exposure in brain vs. that in plasma was close to 20% after oral
administration of BGB-290. Mice with established intracranial H209
xenografts were used to further investigate the combination activity of
BGB-290 and TMZ on SCLC in brain. PARylation in brain/tumor tissues was
well inhibited at 4 hours after single oral administration of 3 mg/kg of
BGB-290. Addition of BGB-290 significantly prolonged animal survival
compared to TMZ single agent in this intracranial model.In conclusion,
BGB-290 demonstrated strong synergism with TMZ in cellular assays and in
SCLC subcutaneous and intracranial xenograft models. When combined with
TMZ, BGB-290 can overcome the induced TMZ resistance. Its favorable brain
penetration ability warrants further evaluation of BGB-290 in combination
with TMZ in GBMs as well as in SCLCs with brain metastasis.

