Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long non-coding RNAs deregulated in Multiple Myeloma impact
therapeutic response to proteasome inhibitors


Multiple Myeloma (MM) is a complex disease that frequently leads to fatal
outcome and accurate risk classification to optimize the choice of
therapy may have impact on clinical outcomes. MM stratification based
upon cytogenetic abnormalities and protein-coding gene expression does
not adequately correlate with the depth or durability of therapeutic
response. Therefore, the new class of molecular effectors, non-coding
RNAs (ncRNAs), may enhance the basic understanding of myelomagenesis,
drug resistance and provide better stratification of myeloma subtypes.
NcRNAs include long ncRNAs (lncRNAs) and microRNAs (miRNAs) that may act
as positive or negative regulators of gene expression to control cell
proliferation, apoptosis and drug resistance. We hypothesized that
lncRNAs commonly deregulated in the 3 resistant cell lines would have
significant overlap to the deregulated lncRNA in MM patients. To
investigate the role of lncRNAs in resistance to proteasome inhibitors
(PIs), we compared global lncRNA profiling in drug-nave cells to cells
with acquired resistance to the PIs bortezomib, carfilzomib and ixazomib.
RPMI 8226 cells resistant to each of the three PIs were generated through
successive exposure to bortezomib, carfilzomib or ixazomib. Total RNA was
isolated and genome-wide ncRNA expression profiling was performed using
Affymetrix 3.0 microarray chips LncRNA expression profiles from
drug-resistant cells were compared to that of drug-nave cells treated
with vehicle alone. MM patients bone marrow aspirates were obtained after
UCCOM IRB-approval. Bioinformatic analysis identified a panel of 18
lncRNAs that were significantly (>100-fold) deregulated in all three
drug-resistant cell lines relative to drug-nave cells. Strikingly, the
majority of the deregulated lncRNAs exhibited a similar expression
pattern in all 3 PI-resistant cell lines (Figure 2a). RPMI 8226 cells
carry a t(14,16) and none of the deregulated lncRNAs detected localized
to chromosomes 14 or 16, suggestive of a cytogenetic-independent
mechanism of drug resistance. We also identified lncRNAs deregulated in
MM patient samples relative to plasma cells from healthy age-matched
individuals. We found a significant overlap (>90%) between deregulated
lncRNAs in PI-resistant cells and MM cells. The lncRNA COL4A-2A was
upregulated >5,000-fold in resistant cells and displayed extensive
sequence complementarity to miRNA-29 that was downregulated in resistant
cells. Taken together, we identified a curated panel of deregulated
lncRNAs in common within myeloma cells generated with acquired resistant
to three different clinically-relevant proteasome inhibitors and MM
patients. Further investigation is warranted to shed light on the role of
these lncRNAs in the development of MM, to identify their targets and to
define their role in drug resistance.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

