Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BH3 profiling predicts clinical response in a phase II clinical
trial of ABT-199 (GDC-0199) in acute myeloid leukemia


Background: ABT-199 is a potent and selective small molecule inhibitor of
the anti-apoptotic protein BCL-2, currently in a Phase II clinical trial
for relapsed/refractory acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Results from the
trial indicate that AML patients have a heterogeneous response to ABT-199
used as a single agent. Therefore, it would be beneficial to
prospectively identify patients who will be most sensitive to ABT-199
treatment. We have developed BH3 profiling, which is a rapid, functional
assay that measures dependence on any of the anti-apoptotic BCL-2 family
proteins for an individual sample. We have previously shown in many
cancer cell lines and primary samples that BH3 profiling predicts in
vitro sensitivity to ABT-199. Here, we test for correlation between
clinical response to ABT-199 and BH3 profiling.Methods: Twelve
pre-treatment AML bone marrow or peripheral blood samples were BH3
profiled using a panel of peptides which included BAD (measures BCL-2,
BCL-XL, BCL-W dependence), MS1 (MCL-1 dependence), HRK (BCL-XL
dependence) and mitochondrial ABT-199 (BCL-2 dependence). In addition,
three samples obtained after 4 wks on study were also BH3 profiled to
assess the in vivo mechanism of action of ABT-199.Results: BH3 profiling
predicted clinical response in several ways. BCL-2 dependence predicted
reduction of blast count at 4 wks, with an AUC of the ROC of 0.86.
Myeloblast dependence on the anti-apoptotic protein MCL-1 or BCL-XL alone
predicted low blast count reduction at 4 wks, with an AUC of the ROC of
0.80 and 0.97 respectively. Since dependence on MCL-1 or BCL-XL both
predict poor clinical performance, we asked whether we could combine the
information to make a superior predictor by arithmetically adding
response to HRK to that to MS1. We found that this metric was a perfect
binary predictor of blast reduction at 4 wks (AUC = 1.0).Additionally, we
asked whether ABT-199 was working on-target, at the mitochondria in vivo.
We BH3 profiled bone marrow aspirates collected while patients were on
treatment and analyzed the response to the MS1, HRK and BIM peptides. We
found that the AML blasts remaining following 4 wks of treatment have an
increased response to the HRK, MS1 and BIM peptides compared to
pre-treatment samples. This suggests that ABT-199 is working on target as
it displaces pro-apoptotic proteins from BCL-2 to BCL-XL and MCL-1 and
diminishes the overall anti-apoptotic reserve at the
mitochondrion.Conclusions: The results of this study indicate that BH3
profiling can be used to exclude AML patients destined to respond poorly
and enrich for those patients destined to respond well to single agent
ABT-199. Since we have previously found that the level of mitochondrial
apoptotic priming predicts clinical response to conventional
chemotherapy, we speculate that ABT-199 could facilitate myeloblast
killing via conventional chemotherapy in vivo.

