Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The interaction of epithelial 51 integrin and stromal fibronectin
is a candidate seed-and-soil mechanism in prostate cancer and bone
metastases


Background: Morbidity and mortality from prostate cancer relates
principally to its unique proclivity to disseminate with near-exclusivity
within the hematopoietic bone marrow microenvironment. Prostate cancer
cells compete for the bone marrow niche with CD45+ hematopoietic stem
cells (Shiozawa, 2011). Several lines of evidence have implicated
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) as key architects of the hematopoietic
niche (Nakamura-Ishizu, 2013). The molecular mechanisms that determine
the tropism of prostate cancer cells to the MSC-regulated niche are
undetermined. We hypothesized that specific tropic interactions between
human MSCs and prostate cancer cells contribute toward the efficient
colonization of the bone marrow. Methods and Results: Bone-derived
prostate cancer cells (PC-3) exhibit a strong migratory response when
placed in co-culture with human MSCs. Serum-free conditioned media from
MSCs similarly induces adhesion, migration and invasion of PC-3 cells,
but not proliferation. Heat-inactivation and trypsin digest suggested the
bioactive principle was a protein. Size-fractionation by spin-columns
determined the bioactivity to reside in the >100kD fraction.
Size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) recovered peak activity in a 440kD
fraction containing thrombospondin-1 (TSP1). TSP1 put-back assays did not
reproduce bioactivity. Further purification of the TSP-1 containing
high-molecular weight fraction of the MSC secretome with heparin-affinity
chromatography recovered bioactivity with highly restricted bands on
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, determined by mass spectroscopy to be
fragments of fibronectin (FN). Put-back experiments with FN recovered
bioactivity. Monospecific antibodies to FN blocked adhesion. Neutralizing
monoclonal antibodies to FN receptors, 5 and 1 integrins, but not 4, v, 6
or 3 integrins blocked the adhesion and migration of prostate cancer
cells cells to the MSC secretome and FN. Conclusions: The affinity of
bone-derived human prostate cancer cells to the MSC secretome is mediated
by fibronectin acting via the 5 and 1 integrins. Human prostate cancer
cells isolated from clinical bone marrow specimens express 51 integrin in
high-frequency (Putz, 1999) and fibronectin is richly expressed in the
bone microenvironment (Van der Welde-Zimmermann 1997). The FN-51
interaction requires translational study as a candidate molecular target
for therapy, specific to prostate cancer and hematopoietic marrow
interaction, the lethal phenotype of the disease.

