Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genistein does not alter the effectiveness of taxane
chemotherapeutics on human prostate cancer cells


Prostate cancer (PCa) continues to be a major health problem in the
United States. Despite the general effectiveness of androgen deprivation
therapy, nearly all cases will progress to become resistant to this
first-line treatment. The standard of care for castrate-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC) includes a regimen of chemotherapy with
taxane-based agents. Patients with CRPC commonly make dietary
modifications and/or use nutritional supplements in addition to their
standard of care therapy. Soy products are commonly used by men with PCa,
but there are only few publications addressing either the safety or
efficacy of soy products in combination with chemotherapy. Previously
published studies (Prostate 2013;73:1681-9) suggest that the soy
isoflavone genistein has synergistic activity when combined the taxane
drug cabazitaxel. We studied the effects of the combination of taxane
chemotherapy with genistein. PC-3, 22Rv1, and C4-2 prostate cancer cells
were treated with genistein (1, 10, and 100 M) in combination with
docetaxel or cabazitaxel (0.1, 1.0, and 10.0 nM); after 72 hours
proliferation was measured using the SRB assay and combination index (CI)
analysis was performed to identify synergistic or antagonistic activity.
Similar dose response curves were observed for docetaxel and cabazitaxel
as expected since both drugs have the same mechanism of action. Compared
to cells treated only with taxanes (either docetaxel or cabazitaxel),
treatment with physiologically relevant concentrations genistein (1 M and
10 M) did not yield additional inhibition or enhancement of proliferation
in any of the cell lines studied. There was slight synergistic activity
at 100 M in combination with 1 nM docetaxel in C4-2 (CI = 0.03), PC-3 (CI
= 0.60), and 22Rv1 (CI = 0.20) cells. Similarly, slight synergism with 1
nM cabazitaxel was observed in all cell lines: C4-2 (CI = 0.29), PC-3 (CI
= 0.40), and 22Rv1 (CI = 0.53). We did not observe any antagonism at
clinically relevant concentration combinations of genistein and taxanes.
These findings suggest that genistein supplementation is not harmful for
PCa patients undergoing chemotherapy, but do not fully support findings
of others that demonstrate synergistic activity. Although we did observe
an enhancement of growth inhibition, it only occurred at the highest
concentration of genistein (100 M) tested, which is beyond what is
achievable through dietary consumption of soy products. Quantities of
genistein consumed in the diet or by supplementation are likely not
sufficient to enhance the cytotoxicity of chemotherapy, but can be used
without reducing the effectiveness of taxane drugs.

