Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antiproliferative activity of 8-methoxypsoralen without UV light
irradiation: A new perspective for cancer therapy


The furanocoumarin-derivative 8-methoxypsoralen (8-MOP) is commonly used
combined with UV light irradiation for treatment of skin diseases. We
have recently demonstrated that 8-MOP inhibits GST-P1 in tumor cells and
acts as chemosensitizer. These new data show direct antitumor activity of
this compound without photoactivation in an in vitro model of glioma, the
most common and lethal primary malignant brain tumor. Rat glioma C6 cells
and human glioblastoma GL-15 cells were submitted to treatment with
8-MOP, as well as primary rat astrocytes cultures for comparison. Cell
viability was measured by MTT assay; phase contrast microscopy and
quantification of total protein content were also performed. The trypan
blue dye exclusion assay and colony formation test were used to analyze
cell proliferation. Flow cytometry was used for cell cycle analyses.
Morphological changes were accessed by electron microscopy and proteins
expression was studied by using immunolabeling techniques. As main
results, 8-MOP reduced cell viability and cellularity, time- and
dose-dependently, more efficiently in tumor than in normal cells. The
compound also showed considerable antiproliferative effect against tumor
cells and induced cell death by apoptosis when used at high
concentration. However, 8-MOP did not promote cell cycle arrest and also
did not increase labeling of markers associated to bad prognostic.
Additional tests with cell lines from other tumors (breast cancer,
colorectal cancer and lymphoma) showed that they respond differently to
8-MOP treatment, pointing to a pathway-specificity of its action. A
qualitative structure-activity relationship study was also performed
using coumarin derivatives structurally related to 8-MOP, from these
experiments it was possible to suggest the relevance of each part of
8-MOP molecular structure for antiproliferative action. These results
point furanocoumarin derivatives as a possible new class of anticancer
agents.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

