Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of soluble CD26 in malignant pleural
mesothelioma


There is no established diagnostic marker for malignant pleural
mesothelioma (MPM). CD26 is a 110 kDa, multifunctional, membrane-bound
glycoprotein on the surface of many cell types that has dipeptidyl
peptidase IV (DPPIV) enzyme activity. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the clinical significance of soluble CD26 in patients with MPM.
The study included 80 MPM patients, 79 subjects with past asbestos
exposure (SPE), and 134 patients with other benign pleural diseases (OPD)
that were included as a control group. Soluble CD26 levels and DPPIV
activity in serum and/or pleural fluid were determined using an ELISA
kit. Serum sCD26 levels and DPPIV enzyme activity in patients with MPM
were significantly decreased compared with those in the SPE group (P =
0.000). The level of serum sCD26 was significantly decreased in patients
with advanced stages of MPM compared with those with earlier stages (P =
0.047). The median OS of patients with MPM who had higher DPPIV enzyme
activity was significantly longer than that of those with lower DPPIV
enzyme activity (P = 0.032). The sCD26 levels in the pleural fluid of MPM
patients with an epithelioid subtype were significantly increased
compared with the OPD cohort (P = 0.012). Moreover, DPPIV enzyme activity
in the pleural fluid of patients with MPM with an epithelioid subtype
were significantly increased compared with those in the OPD cohort (P =
0.009). Patients with MPM who had lower specific DPPIV activity,
determined as DPPIV/sCD26, showed significantly prolonged survival
compared with those with higher specific DPPIV activity (P = 0.028).
Serum sCD26 and DPPIV enzyme activity appear to be useful biomarkers for
differentiating patients with MPM from SPE. The sCD26 levels or DPPIV
enzyme activity in pleural fluid appear to be biomarkers in patients with
an epithelioid subtype of MPM. DPPIV activity in serum or pleural fluid
appears to be predictive for the prognosis of patients with MPM.

