Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of sentinel node-derived antibodies from breast
cancer patients


Lymph nodes are one of the important sites in the body where immune
responses to antigens are initiated. The tumor-draining lymph node or
sentinel node is the first site where cancer cells and cancer-related
antigens are most likely to spread. In response to antigen exposure and
immune activation, the lymph node B cells undergo clonal expansion and
somatic hypermutation, leading to the affinity-matured populations of
effector B cells secreting antibodies that bind to the tumor. The
cancer-draining node is therefore an ideal source of B cells that produce
anticancer antibodies. In the present investigation, we have
characterized the antibodies derived from immortalization of sentinel
node B cells from 29 breast cancer patients. The antibodies were screened
for their isotypes and for binding to breast cancers classified as
luminal A, luminal B, HER2, and basal/normal subtypes, based on the
expressions of estrogen, progesterone and HER2 receptors. The isotype
analysis showed a higher percentages of antibodies belong to IgG (48%)
and IgM (34%) isotypes along with a smaller share of IgA (18%). The
cell-binding studies were conducted using ELISA, immunofluorescence
microscopy, and flow cytometry techniques. Of the studied antibodies,
about 28% showed binding to the tumor cells. The comparative studies of
antibody-binding to breast tumor cells and non-cancer breast cells
identified several antibodies showing differential binding profile. The
binding analyses also demonstrated that all of the tumor-binding
antibodies belonged to IgM isotype. It is evident from the results that
the tumor-reactive antibodies are generated in the sentinel nodes of
breast cancer patients; however, the absence of class-switched anti-tumor
antibodies in the repertoire raises a possibility of tumor-induced node
suppression leading to an inefficient humoral immune response towards
tumor antigens. The results are important in assessing the tumor immune
response/lymph node suppression, and the possible role of the
autoantibodies in diagnosis and therapy of breast cancer.

