Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thrombopoietin and megakaryocytes in breast cancer metastasis to
bone


Bone is one of the preferred sites for breast cancer cells to metastases.
Once patients are diagnosed with skeletal metastases, the relative
five-year survival rate falls from 90% to less than16%. Thrombocytosis is
a sign of poor prognosis for survival, and thromboembolisms are one of
the leading causes of death in all cancers patients. These conditions are
due to high numbers and/or high platelet activity. Megakaryocytes (MKs)
are responsible for platelet production, but also play a role in bone
metabolism and skeletal homeostasis.We had determined in two mouse models
of experimental metastasis (MDA-MB-231 in athymic mice, and 4T1.2 in
Balb/c mice), that bone metastasis was associated with increased numbers
of MKs. Under normal conditions MKs represent less than 1% of the total
bone marrow cell population, but after analysis of the femurs of the mice
with metastasis, we found at least a two-fold increase in the numbers of
MKs present in the bone marrow in the MDA-MB-231mice. The Balb/c mice
injected in the mammary glands with mouse 4T1.2 cells showed a four-fold
increase in MKs in the spleen (extrameduallary hematopoiesis). Therefore
we hypothesized that increased megakaryocytosis was linked to metastasis,
and that decreasing the number of MKs would decrease metastasis. We
transferred a thrombopoietin (TPO) expression deletion mutation to a
Balb/c background and inoculated the mice with 4T1.2 cells. These TPO -/-
mice showed approximately a 90% decrease in bone marrow MKs compared to
the wild type mice. The numbers of blood platelets was also decreased by
90%. We tested our hypothesis by inoculation of 4T1.2LUC cells into the
mammary gland, and then followed the course of the cancer and metastasis
by luciferase imaging. Contrary to our hypothesis the TPO -/- mice
developed metastasis to the bone more rapidly than the heterozygotes or
wild type mice. Literature suggests that platelets interact with tumor
cells to contribute to hematogenous metastasis and angiogenesis. In the
TPO-/- mice with very few platelets, metastasis was more aggressive and
developed more rapidly than in the wild type or the heterozygote mice.
The next step will be to separate the role of the megakaryocytes from the
platelets.This work was sponsored by the U.S. Army Medical Research and
Materiel W81XWH-10-1-0253

