Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The relevance of aberrant FPGS splicing for ex vivo MTX resistance
and clinical outcome in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia


Methotrexate (MTX) is one of the key components of current ALL treatment
protocols. This antifolate inhibits de novo nucleotide biosynthesis,
hindering DNA replication, hence leading to cell death. However, despite
the overall good cure rates in ALL, drug resistance continues to hamper
the efficacy of MTX, contributing to relapse of leukemia. Multiple
molecular mechanisms underlying drug resistance have been characterized,
however, their clinical relevance often remains unclear. We recently
identified impaired FPGS splicing, in particular intron 8 partial
retention (intron 8 PR), as a possible contributor to decreased FPGS
activity in both MTX-resistant leukemia cell lines and primary ALL
specimens.In the current study we explored the association between FPGS
splicing alterations and MTX resistance as well as the clinical outcome
of 91 pediatric ALL patients. With respect to MTX resistance, we
determined the levels of MTX polyglutamates in leukemic cells, as well as
FPGS activity along with the expression of several enzymes and
transporters involved in (anti)folate metabolism and transport, including
FPGS, FPGH, RFC, DHFR and TS. The sensitivity of leukemic cells to MTX
was determined using the thymidylate synthase inhibition assay (TSIA).
Moreover, the sensitivity to other chemotherapeutics as measured in the
MTT assay was determined for these patient specimens. The levels of FPGS
splicing alterations were semi-quantified using PCR and fragment
analysis. We found that intron 8 PR plays an important role in MTX
resistance in the studied patient cohort. In a subset of patients with
relatively low levels of MTX polyglutamates, high levels of intron 8 PR
were associated with inferior EFS (HR = 4.2, P = 0.006) and OS (HR = 5.6,
P = 0.003). The relation between intron 8 PR and OS remained significant
in multivariate analysis, which included known prognostic factors,
including WBC and age. Interestingly, in this subgroup of patients,
intron 8 PR correlated with higher MTX resistance as determined by the
TSIA assay (p = 0.015) and lower accumulation of long chain MTX
polyglutamates (p = 0.027). Moreover, high levels of intron 8 PR were
associated with resistance to the glucocorticoids dexamethasone and
prednisone. Remarkably, we found that a MTX-resistant FPGS-deficient
subline of CCRF-CEM - CEM/FPGS-, harbors a high level of intron 8 PR and
displays high level of dexamethasone cross-resistance (over 350-fold).Our
findings suggest that intron 8 PR is not only relevant for MTX resistance
but may also reflect a broader splicing defect affecting multiple genes,
thereby resulting in multidrug resistance. These findings may have
important implications for personalized treatment as well as
circumvention of drug resistance in ALL patients.Financial support by
Kika (Children cancer-free)

