Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Value of miRNA profiling in urine to predict significant prostate
cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most frequently diagnosed malignancy among
men in Western Europe and the United States. Due to PSA-testing and early
detection strategies, the proportion of men diagnosed with low risk
disease according to the DAmico criteria (PSA 10ng/ml, Gleason-Score 6,
clinical stage T2a) has significantly increased from 27.5% in 1990 to
1994 up to 46.4% from 2000 to 2001. Nonetheless, even among patients with
low-grade and low-volume prostate cancer, more than 90% currently receive
definitive treatment, e.g. surgery or radiotherapy. This in turn has
raised concerns about overtreatment that may result in a decreased
quality of life, typically related to an impairment of sexual or urinary
function following therapies with curative intent.With the aim of
reducing the risk of overtreatment in this subgroup, the strategy of
active surveillance (AS) has been proposed a reasonable initial treatment
option, which means to manage low-risk patients expectantly with the
intention to treat only if signs of tumor progression emerge.
Unfortunately all current models available to predict the probability of
insignificant or low-risk PCa are not infallible as a considerable number
of presumed low-risk tumors are misclassified.We aimed to provide
additional molecular parameters that may be included into current models
that help to improve the accuracy of predicting the actual PCa risk
category and thus facilitate treatment planning. In this context we are
searching for miRNA profiles in urine obtained after digital rectal
examination (DRE) of apparently low-risk PCa patients, that in fact
suffer from intermediate or high-risk PCa and thus should not be offered
an AS strategy. This is a clinically pivotal issue since up to 40% of
seemingly low-risk tumors are currently misclassified by
clinicopathological criteria alone. Conversely, the identification of
signatures that approve low-risk tumors may aid to better counsel
patients eligible for AS.DRE-urine total RNA isolates of 16 patients with
low-risk (Gleason score 6) and 14 of high-risk patients (GS 8) were
subjected to microRNA array analysis (Exiqon A/S, 7th Gen) with a present
call number of approx. 500. Unsupervised PCA analysis and two-way
hierarchical clustering indicate that the samples do not separate by
Gleason score. The supervised comparison of both GS groups identified 15
significantly differentially expressed miRNAs (1 upregulated, 14
downregulated), among them miR-106b, miR-20a, miR-21, and let-7a. When we
compared miRNA profiles generated from PCa tissue or from blood of
prostate cancer patients, our top-50 regulated DRE-urine miRNAs display a
concordance of 56% (28/50). This and our experimentally optimized miRNA
isolation protocol should further encourage the use of DRE-urine as a
suitable non-invasive resource for generating PCa biomarkers.

