Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plant polyphenols inhibit cellular 24-hydroxylase (CYP24A1)
expression and elevate serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels


1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D) is known to regulate various cellular
functions, including cell proliferation and differentiation. Both 1,25D
and its precursor, 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 [25(OH)D], are catabolized by
24-hydroxylase encoded by the CYP24A1 gene, which is one of the most
responsive vitamin D receptor (VDR) target genes, and a is candidate
oncogene frequently overexpressed in various malignancies. Therefore,
compounds which can inhibit CYP24A1 expression and/or activity, thereby
reducing degradation of vitamin D derivatives, may potentiate their
anticancer effects. We have previously shown that the plant polyphenols
carnosic acid, curcumin and silibinin synergistically enhance
differentiation of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells induced by near
physiologic concentrations of 1,25D. This was associated with the
transcription factor Nrf2-assisted elevation of both VDR and the retinoid
X receptor alpha (RXR) protein levels. Here, we demonstrate that despite
the latter effect the polyphenols markedly inhibited 1,25D-induced
CYP24A1 mRNA expression in AML cell lines but not in osteoblast-like
cells. Furthermore, while potentiating 1,25D-induced transactivation of
the direct repeat-3 (DR3)-type consensus vitamin D response element
(VDRE) in AML cells, as measured by the luciferase (Luc) reporter gene
assay, the polyphenols strongly inhibited 1,25D-dependent activation of
the CYP24-Luc reporter construct containing an early (-298 bp) promoter
region with two critical DR3-type VDREs (VDRE1 and VDRE2). In contrast,
the polyphenols failed to inhibit and even enhanced 1,25D-induced
transactivation of CYP24-Luc transfected into osteoblastic cells.
Inactivating mutations of the VDRE1 or VDRE2 sequence in this construct
did not abolish the inhibitory effect of polyphenols. However,
overexpression of Nrf2 resulted in reduced CYP24-Luc activation by 1,25D,
while dominant-negative Nrf2 had an opposite effect. Importantly, feeding
of healthy Balb/c mice with standard rodent chow supplemented with
carnosic acid-rich rosemary extract resulted in a marked dose- and
time-dependent increase in serum levels of 25(OH)D, as compared to
control animals. This was associated with a significant decrease in
CYP24A1 mRNA levels in the kidneys of these mice. Collectively, the above
data suggest that by downregulating CYP24A1 in a tissue-dependent manner,
plant polyphenols may potentiate therapeutic and preventive effects of
vitamin D derivatives. These findings may also contribute to our
understanding of the beneficial effects of healthy diets. (Supported by
the Israel Science Foundation grant 635/11 to M.D. and Y.S. and by the
American Institute for Cancer Research grant #10A049 to G.P.S. and M.D.).

