Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor cell-derived exosomes educate bone marrow mesenchymal
stromal cells toward a protumorigenic function


The bone marrow constitutes a microenvironment for tumor cells that
promotes their survival, dormancy and therapeutic resistance. Central to
this sanctuary function are mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) which, like
tumor-associated macrophages, can have an anti- or a pro-tumorigenic
function in cancer progression. Here, using neuroblastoma, the second
most common cancer in children that is highly metastatic to the bone
marrow as a model of tumor cell - MSC communication - we have explored
the mechanism by which tumor cells educate MSC toward a pro-tumorigenic
function. We demonstrate that neuroblastoma cells release 30-100 nm size
extracellular vesicles rich in tetraspanins (CD63) and chaperone proteins
(HSP70), and therefore with characteristics of exosomes, and that they
are captured by MSC. As a result, MSC increase their expression of
several pro-tumorigenic cytokines and chemokines like interleukin (IL)-4,
IL-6, IL-8, vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF) and
monocyte-chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1). Capture of tumor-derived exosomes
by MSC activates MEK/ERK1/2 and Akt (but not NF-B), and whereas
MEK/ERK1/2 activation is critical for the production of pro-tumorigenic
cytokines/chemokines, Akt activation is not. In addition to the presence
of structural, metabolic and chaperone proteins and the absence of
inflammatory cytokines, a proteomic analysis of the cargo of these
neuroblastoma-derived exosomes revealed an abundance of Galectin-3
binding protein (Gal-3BP), a protein that we had previously reported to
increase the transcriptional expression of IL-6 in MSC. Further
supporting the role of exosomes in educating MSC, we found that
inhibition of exosome release in neuroblastoma cells by knock-down of
Rab-27B, a GTPase involved in exosome secretion, was associated with a
suppression of cytokine/chemokine production by MSC. We then demonstrated
that educated MSC stimulate neuroblastoma cell proliferation both in
vitro and in vivo and their resistance to chemotherapy in a signal
transduction and activation (STAT)3 and MEK-ERK1/2- dependent manner.
These data thus indicate that the production of exosomes by tumor cells
induces the production of cytokines and chemokines in bone marrow-derived
MSC, contributing to the protective microenvironment of the bone marrow
niche.

