Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2 activating mutations are potential targets for colorectal
cancer treatment


Background:Cancer genome sequencing is identifying new genetic
alterations and new driver events in human cancers. The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) colorectal cancer project found that 7% of colorectal cancer
(CRC) patients have HER2 somatic mutations or HER2 gene amplification.
HER2 gene amplification in CRC is known to produce resistance to the EGFR
monoclonal antibodies, cetuximab and panitumumab. However, the impact of
HER2 somatic mutations in CRC has not been studied and it is open
question as to whether HER2 mutations are clinically important in
CRC.Results:Introduction of the HER2 mutations, S310F, L755S, V777L, and
V842I, into immortalized colon epithelial cells increased cell signaling
pathways and anchorage-independent cell growth, indicating that they are
activating mutations. Introduction of HER2 V842I mutation into colorectal
cancer cell lines produced resistance to the EGFR antibodies, cetuximab
and panitumumab. HER2 mutations are potently inhibited by low nanomolar
doses of the second generation, irreversible tyrosine kinase inhibitors
neratinib and afatinib. HER2 gene sequencing of 48 cetuximab resistant,
quadruple WT (KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, and PIK3CA WT) colorectal cancer patient
derived xenografts (PDXs) identified 4 PDX's with HER2 mutations (4/48 =
8.3%). Treatment of these PDX's with a single HER2 targeted drug
(trastuzumab, neratinib, or lapatinib) delayed tumor growth, but dual
HER2 targeted therapy with trastuzumab plus a tyrosine kinase inhibitor
produced durable shrinkage of the tumors in mice. After the final
timepoint in each PDX experiment, the mice were sacrificed and the tumors
excised. The tumor histology demonstrated that dual HER2 targeted therapy
caused reduction in tumor cellularity and acquisition of more
differentiated features.Conclusions:These data demonstrate that HER2
activating mutations are a new drug resistance mechanism to EGFR
monoclonal antibodies. More importantly, these data suggest that HER2
activating mutations may themselves be a drug target for the treatment of
colorectal cancer. These data form a strong pre-clinical rationale for
clinical trials targeting HER2 activating mutations in metastatic CRC
patients. The NSABP Foundation is in the design stage for such a clinical
trial and will use its living patient biorepository (MPR-1 trial) that
contains 1350 colorectal cancer patients to identify subjects for this
trial.

