Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-15 enhances rituximab-dependent cytotoxicity ex vivo
and in vivo against a mouse lymphoma expressing human CD20


Rituximab (RTX), an anti-CD20 antibody, revolutionized treatment for
B-cell malignancies, but it is not without its own shortcomings, most
notably tumor relapse. Recent research has provided evidence supporting
the increased efficacy of RTX when combined with interleukin-15 (IL-15).
IL-15 enhances antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC), an
important mechanism of RTX, by increasing the proliferation and
activation of natural killer (NK) cells, as well as monocytes and
macrophages. However, the majority of this evidence has been obtained
through in vitro experiments and in vivo models using xenografts in
immuno-deficient mice. Given the complexity of the immune system, we used
an immuno-competent, syngeneic mouse model of human B-cell lymphoma to
further investigate the effect of combining IL-15 with RTX to enhance
ADCC. Wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 mice (n = 40) were distributed into
treatment groups of 10 mice each, and inoculated intravenously with
EL4-CD20 cells, a mouse lymphoma line transfected with human CD20. IL-15
was given five times per week for 4 weeks (5g/mouse), starting on day 3
after tumor inoculation, and RTX was given once per week for 4 weeks (100
g/mouse), starting on day 5. While IL-15 and RTX individually prolonged
survival of the mice when compared with the control (pRituximab (RTX), an
anti-CD20 antibody, revolutionized treatment for B-cell malignancies, but
it is not without its own shortcomings, most notably tumor relapse.
Recent research has provided evidence supporting the increased efficacy
of RTX when combined with interleukin-15 (IL-15). IL-15 enhances
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC), an important mechanism
of RTX, by increasing the proliferation and activation of natural killer
(NK) cells, as well as monocytes and macrophages. However, the majority
of this evidence has been obtained through in vitro experiments and in
vivo models using xenografts in immuno-deficient mice. Given the
complexity of the immune system, we used an immuno-competent, syngeneic
mouse model of human B-cell lymphoma to further investigate the effect of
combining IL-15 with RTX to enhance ADCC. Wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 mice (n
= 40) were distributed into treatment groups of 10 mice each, and
inoculated intravenously with EL4-CD20 cells, a mouse lymphoma line
transfected with human CD20. IL-15 was given five times per week for 4
weeks (5g/mouse), starting on day 3 after tumor inoculation, and RTX was
given once per week for 4 weeks (100 g/mouse), starting on day 5. While
IL-15 and RTX individually prolonged survival of the mice when compared
with the control (p<0.05), the combination of IL-15 and RTX showed an
additive effect, prolonging mouse survival significantly when compared
with the monotherapies alone (pRituximab (RTX), an anti-CD20 antibody,
revolutionized treatment for B-cell malignancies, but it is not without
its own shortcomings, most notably tumor relapse. Recent research has
provided evidence supporting the increased efficacy of RTX when combined
with interleukin-15 (IL-15). IL-15 enhances antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC), an important mechanism of RTX, by increasing the
proliferation and activation of natural killer (NK) cells, as well as
monocytes and macrophages. However, the majority of this evidence has
been obtained through in vitro experiments and in vivo models using
xenografts in immuno-deficient mice. Given the complexity of the immune
system, we used an immuno-competent, syngeneic mouse model of human
B-cell lymphoma to further investigate the effect of combining IL-15 with
RTX to enhance ADCC. Wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 mice (n = 40) were
distributed into treatment groups of 10 mice each, and inoculated
intravenously with EL4-CD20 cells, a mouse lymphoma line transfected with
human CD20. IL-15 was given five times per week for 4 weeks (5g/mouse),
starting on day 3 after tumor inoculation, and RTX was given once per
week for 4 weeks (100 g/mouse), starting on day 5. While IL-15 and RTX
individually prolonged survival of the mice when compared with the
control (p<0.05), the combination of IL-15 and RTX showed an additive
effect, prolonging mouse survival significantly when compared with the
monotherapies alone (p<0.01). At day 75 after tumor inoculation, 90% of
the mice in the combination group were still alive. In comparison, only
30% of the mice in each of the IL-15 and RTX groups and none of the mice
in the control group were alive. In contrast, treatment of
EL4-CD20-bearing FcR-/- mice with RTX, under the same dose and dosing
schedule as those used in WT mice, did not show a therapeutic effect when
compared with the control. We further confirmed the role of ADCC by
performing an ex vivo experiment using NK cells purified from splenocytes
of either WT or FcR-/- mice treated with IL-15 five days before
extraction. NK cells were cultured in triplicate with 51Cr-labeled
EL4-CD20 cells with or without RTX and lysis was evaluated using a
chromium-51 release assay. NK cells from IL-15-treated WT mice combined
with RTX resulted in a three-fold increase in ADCC when compared with the
monotherapies alone (16% combination vs. 6% IL-15 and 5% RTX, at a 10:1
E:T ratio). In contrast, NK cells from FcR-/- mice showed no difference
in ADCC with or without RTX treatment. In agreement with previously
published research, our study gives further evidence that IL-15 increases
the efficacy of RTX, primarily through enhancing ADCC. Confirming this
synergistic effect in an immuno-competent mouse model better supports a
future study of RTX with IL-15 in human clinical trials for indolent
B-cell lymphomas.

