Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired resistance to sunitinib is not associated with functional
re-vascularization in 786-O renal cell carcinoma xenografts


Anti-angiogenic therapy has shown considerable efficacy in metastatic
renal cell carcinoma (mRCC). However, the ability of drugs such as
sunitinib to delay tumour progression and extend survival is limited, due
to both innate and evasive drug resistance, thought to arise through
alternative, VEGF-independent mechanisms of tumour re-vascularization.
Furthermore, there are no validated biomarkers that predict which mRCC
patients will benefit from anti-angiogenic therapy. In investigating the
response of 786-O RCC xenografts to sunitinib, a model of acquired
resistance has been established with chronic treatment. The aims were to
evaluate fractional blood volume (fBV) derived from susceptibility
contrast MRI with ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide (USPIO)
particles as a non-invasive imaging biomarker of response, and
interrogate the vascular phenotype of 786-O xenografts exhibiting
acquired resistance to sunitinib.Mice bearing established xenografts
underwent MRI prior to and two weeks after daily treatment with 40mg/kg
sunitinib. USPIO particle uptake was reduced in all treated tumours,
resulting in a highly significant reduction in fBV in the absence of any
change in tumour volume (Table 1). This response was associated with a
significant reduction in the uptake of the perfusion marker Hoechst
33342. The average pre-treatment tumour fBV was significantly positively
correlated (R2 = 0.92, pAnti-angiogenic therapy has shown considerable
efficacy in metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC). However, the ability
of drugs such as sunitinib to delay tumour progression and extend
survival is limited, due to both innate and evasive drug resistance,
thought to arise through alternative, VEGF-independent mechanisms of
tumour re-vascularization. Furthermore, there are no validated biomarkers
that predict which mRCC patients will benefit from anti-angiogenic
therapy. In investigating the response of 786-O RCC xenografts to
sunitinib, a model of acquired resistance has been established with
chronic treatment. The aims were to evaluate fractional blood volume
(fBV) derived from susceptibility contrast MRI with ultrasmall
superparamagnetic iron oxide (USPIO) particles as a non-invasive imaging
biomarker of response, and interrogate the vascular phenotype of 786-O
xenografts exhibiting acquired resistance to sunitinib.Mice bearing
established xenografts underwent MRI prior to and two weeks after daily
treatment with 40mg/kg sunitinib. USPIO particle uptake was reduced in
all treated tumours, resulting in a highly significant reduction in fBV
in the absence of any change in tumour volume (Table 1). This response
was associated with a significant reduction in the uptake of the
perfusion marker Hoechst 33342. The average pre-treatment tumour fBV was
significantly positively correlated (R2 = 0.92, p<0.0001) with
sunitinib-induced changes in tumour fBV across the cohort.Additional
tumour-bearing mice exhibiting acquired resistance to sunitinib
(designated 786-O-R) were imaged when their tumours reached at least 4x
their volume at commencement of treatment. Resistant 786-O- R xenografts
revealed a suppressed fBV whilst still being treated with
sunitinib.Pre-treatment tumour fBV is a predictive biomarker of
subsequent response to sunitinib in RCC. Acquired resistance to sunitinib
is not associated with functional re-vascularization in 786-O RCC
xenografts.Table 1

