Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Parity and short-term estradiol treatment confers protection
against breast cancer by suppressing cell survival and migration


Early pregnancy is the only natural phenomenon known to confer protection
against breast cancer. We have earlier demonstrated that short-term
treatment with pregnancy levels of estradiol (STET) is very effective in
preventing mammary carcinogenesis. The underlying mechanisms behind the
protective effect of parity and STET remain unclear. In the current
study, we attempted to delineate the influence of the mammary gland
microenvironment on mammary carcinogenesis among parous and STET compared
to age matched virgin rats. Parous, STET, and virgin (control) Sprague
Dawley rats were administered N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (50mg/kg BW) at 15
weeks of age. Mammary cancer development was monitored by weekly
palpations for 9 months post carcinogen treatment. A subset of rats (n =
4) were euthanized five weeks post carcinogen treatment. Mammary gland
samples were surgically excised and used for histological and molecular
analysis. Our analysis demonstrated that parity and STET resulted in
reduced expression of cell survival markers (pAKT, pmTOR), extracellular
matrix mediated signaling proteins (ERK1/2, pFAK, Itgb1) hormonal (ER,
PR, GHR) and growth factor receptors (pEGFR, pIGFR1) compared to age
matched virgin group. Further, expression of EMT markers and regulators
of cell migration were significantly reduced in parous and STET mammary
glands. MicroRNA analysis disclosed that both parity and STET
differentially regulated the expression of 23 microRNAs. Among these 18
microRNAs were down regulated and 5 microRNAs were up regulated in both
parous and STET treatment. In silico analysis revealed that several of
the differentially regulated microRNAs are direct regulators of the cell
survival and cell migratory proteins. Parity and STET by altering
microRNA expression influences cell survival, cell migration and cell
death signaling pathways reduces the cancer promoting microenvironment in
the mammary gland.

