Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analytical and clinical validation of the Epic Circulating Tumor
Cell (CTC) Platform: enrichment-free CTC detection and biomarker
characterization


Introduction:CTCs hold promise as prognostic and predictive biomarkers
for cancer management. Many CTC technologies enrich CTCs based on cell
surface markers or physical parameters such as cell size. However,
genomic and phenotypic intra-tumor heterogeneity is well documented and
similarly observed in CTCs. We sought to validate the Epic Platform, an
enrichment-free approach, for CTC identification and biomarker
characterization. In addition, we sought to enumerate and molecularly
characterize CTCs in Metastatic Castrate Resistant Prostate Cancer
(mCRPC) patients.Experimental Procedures:To assess intra/inter-assay and
-operator reproducibility, cell line cells (CLCs) were spiked into
healthy donor (HD) blood and processed onto slides (0.5mL/slide) in
dilutions ranging from 6-300 CLCs/slide and assessed by%CV of CLC counts
in replicate samples. Accuracy and linearity were assessed via linear
regression and slope of all dilutions. CLCs were also molecularly
characterized by immunofluorescence (IF), FISH, and NGS.To test clinical
sensitivity, 1mL of blood from 28 mCRPC patients was processed. CTCs
(CK+, CD45-, DAPI+) and CTC subtypes including apoptotic (CK+, CD45-,
fragmented DAPI), and CK- (CK-, CD45-, DAPI+) were enumerated. Androgen
receptor (AR) expression was quantitated on each CTC. A subset of samples
were further analyzed for ERG rearrangements via FISH and whole genome
copy number variation (CNV) by NGS. In addition, 18 HDs were tested to
assess clinical specificity.Results:Intra/inter-assay and operator
reproducibility across 3 runs each produced 20% CV at 300 CLC/slide and
30% CV at 25 CLC/slide. The CTC enumeration assay demonstrated accuracy,
linearity and sensitivity throughout all dilutions tested, 6-300 CLC/mL,
(x = 1.15, r2 = 0.9987,%CV 30%). CLCs exhibited expected biomarker
expression (IF) and genetic aberrations (FISH and NGS).No CTCs or CTC
subtypes were detected in HD samples. At least 1 CTC/mL was detected in
82% of mCRPC patient samples. Including CK- and apoptotic CTCs, 100% of
mCRPC patients had at least 1 CTC/mL. Analysis of AR
expression/localization, ERG rearrangements by FISH, and whole genome CNV
analyses were consistent with malignant origin.Conclusions:We established
the reproducibility, linearity, accuracy, and sensitivity of the Epic
Platform. CTCs and CTC subtypes were absent in HDs and present in all
mCRPC samples tested. We also demonstrated integrated IF, FISH, and NGS
characterization of single CTCs, which has powerful implications for
improved patient selection for targeted therapy and could enable a better
understanding of intra-patient heterogeneity, clonal evolution, and drug
resistance and response over time.

