Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capture and release of circulating tumor cells by
temperature-sensitive graphene oxide-polymer composite


Introduction and Objective: Recently, various microfluidics-based
circulating tumor cells (CTC) isolation technologies have been developed
to isolate, enumerate, and characterize CTCs, but there are few studies
reporting CTC release after selective capture. Existing devices face
impediments to the easy release of captured cells due to the conjugation
of antibodies to permanent structures within the devices. Here we present
a tunable microfluidic polymer graphene oxide (GO) Chip based on a
temperature-sensitive graphene oxide-polymer composite for selective
capture and efficient subsequent release of CTCs.Methods: A blend film of
GO sheets and thermo-responsive polymers serves as a platform enabling
cell capture and release in our microfluidic devices. The polymers with a
tunable lower critical solution temperature (LCST) allow for stimulated
release of the captured cells when the device temperature is below the
LCST. The GO sheets serve as a carrier for phosophlipid-PEG-amine, which
is used for the immobilization of an antibody against the
epithelial-cell-adhesion-molecule (EpCAM). To investigate the capture
efficiency, MCF-7 cells labeled with cell tracker dye were spiked into 1
mL of whole blood and flowed through the microfluidic device. After
thoroughly washing the device with PBS at 25 C to remove any
non-specifically bound cells, we dissolved the thermo-responsive
composite with 1 mL of PBS at 5 C in a cold room and collected released
cells from the device outlet. The released cells were cytospun and
stained to identify CTCs as cytokeratin positive, DAPI positive, and CD45
negative cells. We also tested peripheral blood samples obtained from
patients with metastatic breast cancer in a similar manner.Results: The
graphene oxide-polymer based CTC-chip showed a capture efficiency of
95.21% at 95.21% and a release efficiency of 92.45% for MCF-7 breast
cancer cells. This new GO Chip was also able to isolate viable CTCs from
blood samples of metastatic breast cancer patients for further molecular
characterizations.Conclusion: We present a sensitive and tunable
microfluidic chip based on a GO-polymer composite to capture, release,
identify, and characterize extremely rare CTCs. The CTCs released from
the chip are viable, suggesting that this polymer based GO Chip offers
great potential for clinical applications due to its high-affinity cell
capture and the ability to enable various downstream analyses of captured
CTCs.

