Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the role of mitochondria in the progression from
normal fibroblasts to DCIS associated fibroblasts


Background and Purpose: Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a non-invasive
breast cancer which may progress to invasive breast cancer. Many studies
have focused on the epithelial cell mechanisms of progression from normal
breast tissue to DCIS. However, in this study we want to study mechanisms
of progression in cancer associated fibroblasts from normal breast tissue
to DCIS.Loss of caveolin 1 (CAV1) in fibroblasts is a marker of reduced
mitochondrial membrane potential and is a prognostic biomarker in ductal
carcinoma in situ. High mitochondrial membrane potential in epithelial
cells is a crucial determinant of carcinogenesis.Methods: In the study we
use MCF10DCIS as a model for DCIS. MCF10DCIS.com (MCF10DCIS) is a clonal
breast cancer cell line. The MCF10A, non-tumorigenic epithelial cell
line, and human immortalized but non-transformed dermal fibroblasts (BJ1)
were used study the difference between non-tumorigenic epithelial cells
and DCIS and interactions between these two epithelial cells and
fibroblasts. In order to study the interaction between epithelial cells
and fibroblasts, we set up a coculture model system comprised both
epithelial cells and fibroblasts. Immunofluorescence staining and
confocal microscopy were used here to visualize the specific protein
expression in different cell types.Results: (1) MCF10DCIS cells in
coculture with fibroblasts have increased mitotracker red staining while
as fibroblasts have decreased mitotracker staining compared to homotypic
culture. However, coculture of MCF10A cells with fibroblasts did not
change the mitotracker staining in either MCF10A or fibroblasts. (2) Loss
of stromal CAV1 protein expression is observed in fibroblasts when
fibroblasts are cocultured with MCF10DCIS cells compared to homotypic
culture. CAV1 protein expression is unchanged in coculture with MCF10A
cells.Conclusion: Previous studies have demonstrated that loss of stromal
CAV1 and changes in mitochondrial membrane potential are factors involved
in the transition from DCIS to invasive breast cancer. In this study we
show that loss of stromal CAV1 and increases in epithelial mitochondrial
membrane potential may play a role in the progression to DCIS.

