Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arsenic trioxide induces cell cycle arrest, apoptosis through
interaction of DAXX and degradation of MDM2 in acute leukemia cells


Arsenic trioxide (ATO) alone or combination with all trans retinoic acid
(ATRA) has been successfully used in the treatment of all age group of
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients. Recent human clinical trails
result of ATO and their combination with ATRA shown complete remission in
both de novo and relapsed APL patients. However, the detailed molecular
mechanisms of its anti-leukemic action through cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis are poorly known. We have used APL cell line and transgenic
mice model to elucidate the anti-cancer properties of arsenic trioxide.
We hypothesized that ATO arrests cell cycle and apoptosis through
activation of p53 and interaction of death domain-associated protein
(DAXX), which disrupted the MDM2-DAXX-HAUSP interactions. It also
promoted MDM2 self-ubiquitination and degradation. To test the
hypothesis, we used western blotting, confocal imaging and other
molecular techniques to identify detailed cellular and molecular
mechanisms of ATO action in APL cells and transgenic mice hepatocytes as
well as bone marrow cells. We found that the expression levels of p53 and
p21 increased significantly, whereas MDM2, DAXX and HAUSP decreased dose
dependent manner. Our immunoprecipitation (IP) studies shown that they
are well associated each other in cells and ATO disrupts associations.
After 21 days treatment of ATO different doses (1.25, 2.5, 5.0 and 7.5
mg/kg body wt) in transgenic mice, we have collected liver tissue and
isolated hepatocytes and bone marrow. In liver tissue, we found p53
nicely activated dose dependent ATO treated mice. On the basis of these
findings, we conclude that ATO induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in
APL cell line as well as mice hepatocytes through p53 activation, MDM2
self-ubiquitination and disruption of MDM2-DAXX-HAUSP interaction. It is
novel target for treatment of APL patients through designing of new
anti-leukemic drugs.Keywords: Arsenic trioxide, HL-60 cells, cell cycle
arrest, apoptosis, mitochondrial pathway, Mice hepatocytes and bone
marrow.Acknowledgements: This research was financially supported by
National Institutes of Health NCRR Grant No. 5G12RR013459 and MIMHD Grant
No. 8G12MD007581, through the RCMI-Center for Environmental Health at
Jackson State University.

