Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo discrimination of tumor modifications during
antiangiogenic and cytotoxic therapy using ultrasonography modalities:
Shear Wave Elastography (SWE), Contrast Enhanced Ultrasound (CEUS) and
Quantitative Ultrasound (QUS)


Robust, novel image-based information on the tumor microenvironment would
improve therapeutic follow-up in oncology. SWE evaluates tissue
stiffness, CEUS assesses microvascular flow using intravascular
microbubbles and QUS measures tissue microstructure. Our goal was to
evaluate sensitivity and complementarity of these techniques during
cytotoxic and antiangiogenic therapies in ectopic, murine tumors.A
multi-targeted receptor tyrosine kinase antiangiogenic drugs inhibiting
vascularization (sunitinib, N = 24, 40mg/kg/day), an alkylating cytotoxic
agent that adds an alkyl group to DNA to interfere with DNA replication
(cyclophosphamide, N = 26, 150mg/kg for 3 days) and placebo (N = 26) were
administered in murine Lewis Lung Carcinomas bearing C57BL6 mice. Six
days after implantation, tumors were imaged (SWE, CEUS and QUS) prior to
therapy (Day 0) and on Days 1, 3, 7, 9 and 13. Tumors were harvested at
Day 9 (N = 2 per group) and Day 13 (N = 10 per group) and stained to
evaluate% necrosis and fibrosis.Table. 1 summarizes the% variation of
each measured parameter from the start to the end of therapy. Imaging
parameters for microvascular function and stiffness were most strongly
modified for tumors treated with sunitinib compared to cytotoxic and
placebo therapies. At Day 13, tumors treated with sunitinib presented a
heterogeneous structure with more fibrosis and necrosis than for other
treatment groups. This heterogeneous structure may explain why the
standard deviation of stiffness was highest for the antiangiogenic group.
The sensitivity of CEUS to microvascular modifications and SWE to
biomarkers such as necrosis and fibrosis, in this model, underline
potential for monitoring complementarity aspects of the tumor
microenvironment during therapy.Table 1: Variation between Day 0 and Day
13 of mean values of each parameter for each group.

