Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of the citrus flavonoid naringenin and metformin for
effects on breast cancer in obese ovariectomized mice


Metformin has been shown to decrease breast cancer incidence in diabetic
women, suggesting that improvement of metabolic status may be a useful
approach to decrease breast cancer risk. As the putative cellular target
of metformin, AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) not only regulates
energy metabolism in liver, muscle, and adipose tissue but also inhibits
protein synthesis and induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Naringenin
is a flavonoid abundant in citrus fruits that may have beneficial effects
on metabolic health and tumorigenesis. Our in vitro data showed that
naringenin inhibited proliferation of E0771 murine breast cancer cells,
increased AMPK activity, and reduced expression of cell cycle regulatory
proteins Cyclin D1 and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein. In this study, we
evaluated whether dietary naringenin acts like metformin to suppress
mammary tumor growth in a mouse model of postmenopausal obesity.
Ovariectomized female C57BL/6J mice were fed a high-fat diet (60% energy
as fat) for 3 weeks to induce obesity. Then mice were randomized to
experimental diets of HF (continued the high-fat diet), LN (high fat + 1%
wt/wt naringenin in diet), HN (high fat + 3% wt/wt naringenin in diet),
and Met (high fat + 180 mg/kg metformin in water) for 5 weeks. After 2
weeks of treatment, 5 10(5) E0771 cells were injected into one thoracic
mammary fat pad. Mice were maintained on study diets for another 3 weeks.
For all mice tumor weight correlated with weight gain in the first 5
weeks prior to cell inoculation (r = 0.51, p Metformin has been shown to
decrease breast cancer incidence in diabetic women, suggesting that
improvement of metabolic status may be a useful approach to decrease
breast cancer risk. As the putative cellular target of metformin,
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) not only regulates energy metabolism
in liver, muscle, and adipose tissue but also inhibits protein synthesis
and induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Naringenin is a flavonoid
abundant in citrus fruits that may have beneficial effects on metabolic
health and tumorigenesis. Our in vitro data showed that naringenin
inhibited proliferation of E0771 murine breast cancer cells, increased
AMPK activity, and reduced expression of cell cycle regulatory proteins
Cyclin D1 and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein. In this study, we evaluated
whether dietary naringenin acts like metformin to suppress mammary tumor
growth in a mouse model of postmenopausal obesity. Ovariectomized female
C57BL/6J mice were fed a high-fat diet (60% energy as fat) for 3 weeks to
induce obesity. Then mice were randomized to experimental diets of HF
(continued the high-fat diet), LN (high fat + 1% wt/wt naringenin in
diet), HN (high fat + 3% wt/wt naringenin in diet), and Met (high fat +
180 mg/kg metformin in water) for 5 weeks. After 2 weeks of treatment, 5
10(5) E0771 cells were injected into one thoracic mammary fat pad. Mice
were maintained on study diets for another 3 weeks. For all mice tumor
weight correlated with weight gain in the first 5 weeks prior to cell
inoculation (r = 0.51, p < 0.01). There was no difference in fasting
glucose levels among the groups on week 8. No difference was observed
between the HF and LN groups regarding final body weight, food intake,
tissue weights, and tumor mass. HN significantly decreased final body
weight, food intake, and adipose depot mass. mRNA expression of two
inflammatory cytokines, interleukin 6 and monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1 were decreased in perigonadal fat of the HN group. Although
tumor growth (cm2) decreased over time in HN mice, there was no
significant difference in tumor mass between HF and HN groups at necropsy
(p = 0.4). HN did not affect AMPK activity in tumor tissue, but decreased
Bcl-2 protein expression. Additionally, dietary naringenin resulted in a
dose dependent accumulation in plasma, tumor, and mammary fat. In
comparison to naringenin enriched diets, metformin significantly reduced
tumor growth and final tumor weight, without affecting body weight, food
intake, and tissue weights. Metformin decreased protein expression of
Cyclin D1 in mammary tumors. However, we did not observe AMPK activation
and changes in Bcl-2 protein levels in tumors. Taken together, these data
suggest that metformin may inhibit mammary tumor growth without affecting
metabolic status as assessed by body weight, adiposity, and fasting
glucose. There may be different mechanisms of action for naringenin and
metformin to alter mammary tumorigenesis.

