Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Constitutively active NF-B signaling switches estrogen receptor
positive breast cancer cells from a proliferative to an invasive
phenotype through luminal/basal plasticity


Estrogen receptor (ER) is a good prognostic marker expressed in 75% of
breast tumors. Women with ER+ tumors will receive endocrine therapy, yet
50% will experience relapse, often with more aggressive and metastatic
tumors. A growing body of evidence indicates that an inflammatory
microenvironment and activation of the NF-B pathway are highly associated
with progression of ER+ tumors to more aggressive stages. However, it is
not known whether activation of the canonical arm of the NF-B pathway is
sufficient to drive progression to a more aggressive phenotype. In order
to study this, we developed MCF-7 and T47D breast cancer cell lines
expressing a DOX-inducible, constitutively active form of IB kinase
(CA-IKK), a key kinase in the canonical arm of the NF-B pathway.
Unexpectedly, we found that DOX induced CA-IKK inhibited 17-estradiol
(E2)-dependent proliferation. However, the combination of CA-IKK and E2
induced a highly migratory and invasive phenotype. Although this
phenotype was accompanied by a change in cell morphology, typical markers
of epithelial-mesenchymal transition were not observed. Rather, a
decrease in luminal markers (e.g. Gata3, cytokeratin 8 and 18) and an
increase in basal markers (e.g. p63, cytokeratin 5 and 14) were observed,
suggesting luminal to basal plasticity as an underlying mechanism in the
phenotype switch. In addition, we find that the invasive phenotype
coincides with significantly lower ER expression, which is similar to
that observed in aggressive, Luminal B, ER+ breast tumors. However, ER
was still transcriptionally active since the combination of CA-IKK and E2
recapitulated the regulation of genes from an ER-NF-B crosstalk
signature, which we have previously reported as enriched in Luminal B
tumors. In fact, both transcription factors, ER and NF-B, proved to be
necessary for the observed invasive phenotype. In order to explore the
clinical relevance of our finding, we examined primary invasive breast
tumors for the presence of phosphorylated IB kinases / (IKK/), as an
indicator of IKK activity. IKK/ phosphorylation was observed at the
invasive edge of the tumors whereas total IKK was observed throughout the
tumor, further supporting a role for IKK activity in breast tumor
invasiveness. Taken together, our findings indicate that activation of
the canonical arm of the NF-B pathway in the presence of E2 switches ER+
breast cancer cells from a highly proliferative to a highly migratory and
invasive phenotype, potentially through luminal to basal plasticity.
Since the most deadly aspect of breast cancer is metastasis and 70% of
metastatic tumors are ER+, understanding the effect of the canonical NF-B
pathway can help define new specific drug targets and therapeutic
strategies for the treatment of ER+ breast cancers.

