Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD40 ligand expressing recombinant vaccinia virus (rVV40L)
modulation of central memory CD8-mediated immune response


In cancer immunotherapy, induction of tumor-reactive CD8+ T cells
displaying phenotypic and functional profile of central memory T cells
(TCM) is associated with favorable prognosis. A key element in the
generation of TCM CD8+ cells is represented by the help provided by CD4+
T cells during the priming of nave CD8+ T cells. In particular CD40
ligand (CD40L) expressed and/or secreted by activated CD4+ T cells
triggers CD40 receptor expressed on antigen presenting cells (APCs)
thereby enhancing their antigen presentation capacity. In order to bypass
the requirement of CD4+ T cells we generated a non-replicating
recombinant vaccinia virus encoding human CD40L (rVV40L) and compared its
ability to shape CD8-mediated immune response to soluble CD40L
recombinant protein (sCD40L).In this regard, our data clearly underline
the different biological properties of membrane-bound CD40L, as provided
by rVV40L infection, as compared to its soluble form, in CD14+ APCs
activation. Notably, considering expression of IL-12p40, IFN-a and -b
genes, cytokines of proven relevance for memory T cell induction,
rVV40L-infection was much more potent than s40L-treatment alone or
combine with WT infection. In parallel, s40L-stimulation induced a much
more significant expression of IL-10 and indoleamine-2, 3-dioxygenase
(IDO) genes encoding immunosuppressive factors. Considering a panel of
molecules involved in the generation of the immunological synapse with T
cells on CD14+ cells, rVV40L appeared to promote a less intense up
regulation of CD80 co-stimulatory molecules but, most importantly, only a
minor increase of programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1). Therefore, gene
expression and phenotypic profiles suggested that rVV40L-infected CD14+
cells might be highly effective APC in the induction of TCM CD8+ cells.
Indeed, a single in vitro stimulation of nave CD8+ T cells by
rVV40L-infected CD14+ cells, in the absence of CD4+ T cells, was able to
promote the rapid generation of central memory TAA (MAGE and MART-1)
specific CD8+ T cells. These TCM were characterized by the typical
central memory phenotype, as indicated by co-expression of CD45RO, CD62L
and IL-7Ra, and by the high proliferative potential upon antigen
recognition.Collectively our data indicate that rVV40L efficiently
modulates the quality of different APC signals delivered during the
formation of the immunological synapse with CD8+ T cells. These in-vitro
observations validate the strong clinical potential of our recombinant
vaccinia virus constructs co-expressing CD40L for cancer immunotherapies.

