Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Study of mitochondria in multi-drug resistance and Polyphyllin D
anti-cancer effect in hepatocellular carcinoma


Liver cancer, being the sixth common cancer, causes approximately 700,000
deaths worldwide annually. Major treatment relies on chemotherapies
because of the late diagnosis in many cases of liver cancer. However, the
results are not satisfactory since the cancer cells develop multi-drug
resistance (MDR), which greatly hampers the efficacy of multiple kinds of
structurally different drugs, during the course of treatment. Several
mechanisms of MDR were identified, the most notable one is the
over-expression of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters, such as
P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and multi-drug resistance protein 1 (MRP-1), on
plasma membrane. These transporters act as efflux pump of various types
of chemo-drugs to accentuate the MDR phenotype. Nevertheless, the
complete picture of MDR formation is yet to be explored. As mitochondria
contribute vitally in apoptosis and energy production, in which both
criteria are substantially altered in cancer context, we hypothesized
that the organelle also takes part in the development of MDR in liver
cancer. In our study, with the support of conventional assays such as
western blotting and confocal imaging analysis, we adopted a novel
approach by making use of the tunable resistive pulse sensing (TRPS)
technique to characterize isolated mitochondria of HepG2 and R-HepG2,
which corresponds to the native and multi-drug resistant liver cancer
cell lines respectively. We identified a difference in volume and amount
of mitochondria present in HepG2 and R-HepG2, plus the expression of P-gp
and MRP-1 on mitochondria of R-HepG2. These suggest a potential role of
mitochondria in MDR. On the other hand, a drug candidate Polyphyllin D
(PD) was found to exert selective potency against R-HepG2. However, the
mechanism is not lucid. We investigated the possible participation of
mitochondria in this phenomenon and identified PD causes stronger
swelling and membrane potential depolarization to isolated mitochondria
of R-HepG2. Future attempt in elucidating pathways involved in PD
toxicity will bring insight on designing therapeutics against cancer
cells with MDR phenotype. This study also suggested future research in
mitochondria can aid the discovery of more mechanisms in MDR development.

