Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination with vorinostat overcomes ABT-263 resistance of small
cell lung cancer


Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer related mortality
worldwide, with small cell lung cancer (SCLC) representing 15% of cases,
accounting for 30,000 new cases in the US each year. While SCLC is
initially a highly chemotherapy-responsive disease, relapse and
progressive development of chemotherapy resistance is the rule. One
promising approach to overcome the therapeutic resistance would be to
utilize agents targeting molecular abnormalities regulating resistance to
apoptosis.Tumor cell death induced by chemotherapy or lack of appropriate
cellular survival signals is mediated by the BCL-2 family-dependent
mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. We and others have shown that the
pro-survival member BCL-2, as well as BCL-XL and MCL-1, is overexpressed
in SCLC. BH3 mimetic antagonists have been developed to block the
function of pro-survival BCL-2 family members. ABT-737 and its orally
available derivative ABT-263 bind to and block BCL-2 and BCL-XL, but not
MCL-1 function. Although SCLC is the only non-hematologic malignancy
against which ABT-737/ABT-263 are effective as single agents, the
sensitivity of SCLC to these drugs varies over a broad range in vitro and
in clinical trials. We have shown in a model SCLC system that expression
of Noxa, a BH3-only pro-apoptotic BCL-2 family protein, is a critical
determinant of ABT-737 sensitivity, demonstrating that Noxa specifically
binds to and recruits MCL-1 from the cytosol to the mitochondria.Recent
integrative genome analysis in SCLC implicates histone modification as a
major feature of SCLC. It has also been demonstrated that Noxa is
transcriptionally activated by HDAC inhibitors. Thus, we hypothesized
that alteration of histone modification by a HDAC inhibitor, vorinostat
could induce Noxa to enhance cell death by ABT-737/263 treatment. We have
found that combination of ABT-263 and vorinostat efficiently induces
apoptosis in a variety of SCLC cell lines, even in the ABT-263 resistant
cells. Cell death induced by combined treatment is Noxa- and/or
BIM-dependent in some cell lines but in others appears to be mediated by
an alternative mechanism. These results suggest that combination of HDAC
inhibitors and BCL-2 inhibitors could be an alternative effective regimen
for SCLC treatment.

