Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptin Notch VEGFR-2 axis influences cancer stromal cell behavior


PURPOSE: Breast cancer cells induce changes in the stromal environment
during malignancy. These changes promote growth, angiogenesis, invasion,
and metastasis. The secretion of the adipokine, leptin, from adipose
tissue has been shown to contribute to cell proliferation, migration and
survival. We previously reported that leptin induces Notch, a
pro-survival factor and contributor to the VEGF/VEGFR-2 pro-angiogenic
system. We hypothesize that the leptin Notch axis induces activation of
fibroblast cells and leads to endothelial cell proliferation, tubule
formation, and survival.These effects could be related to leptin-induced
Notch expression and VEGFR-2 transactivation, independent of
VEGF.METHODS: Mouse Embryo Fibroblast cells (NIH/3T3), human umbilical
vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) and porcine aorta endothelial cells (PAEC)
were challenged with leptin (dose and time-response), and inhibitors of
Notch (DAPT) and VEGFR-2 (SU5416 kinase inhibitor). Expression of Notch,
VEGFR-2, Ob-R and phosphorylation of VEGFR-2 were determined. The impact
of treatment on angiogenic features of endothelial cells was determined.
To determine whether leptin-Notch axis activates fibroblast cells, leptin
doses 0.6, 1.2, and 6.2 were used. RESULTS: Leptin induced
phosphorylation of VEGFR-2 at intracellular site Y1175 and tubule
formation in HUVEC. Leptin induced phosphorylation of VEGFR-2 at sites
Y951, Y996, Y1059, and Y1175 in PAEC VEGFR2. Protein expression of Notch4
and Jagged1 was induced by leptin treatment in NIH/3t3 cells.CONCLUSION:
Leptin secreted by fibroblast cells and/or adipose tissue may contribute
to tumor angiogenesis by acting directly on stromal cells and inducing a
VEGFR-2/Notch crosstalk. Novel therapies that target leptin signaling
could be a new strategy for the prevention and treatment of breast
cancer. These therapies could be more relevant for obese cancer patients
with high circulating amounts of leptin.

