Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole exome sequencing reveals a distinct mutation pattern in
metastatic small cell lung cancer compared to non-small cell lung cancer


Purpose: Lung cancer is divided into two main groups, small cell lung
cancer (SCLC) and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the latter
subdivided in squamous, large cell and adenocarcinoma. Many studies have
shown intra-tumor heterogeneity in lung cancer with multiple minor clones
characterized by their own specific mutational landscape. These minor
clones can become predominant under selective pressure caused by therapy.
Aim of our study is to investigate the relation between primary lung
cancer and multiple distant metastases using whole exome
sequencing.Materials and methods: Normal tissue, primary lung tumor, and
multiple metastases were obtained from 2 SCLC and 3 NSCLC patients
resulting in a total of 29 samples (Table 1). DNA was isolated from
total, macro-dissected, or laser micro-dissected tissue to obtain a
purity of at least 80% tumor cells. Library preparation was based on the
SureSelect All Exon V5 bait (Agilent) and paired-end sequencing was done
using Illumina HiSeq2000. Genome analysis toolkit (GATK) was used to
analyze data and the 1000-Genome database was used to remove single
nucleotide polymorphisms.Results: In four patients more than 70% of the
observed variants were true somatic mutations. In the adenocarcinoma
patient, only 32% of the variants were called as true somatic mutations.
After excluding personal variants, 79 to 446 true somatic mutations were
observed in any of the tumor samples of the five lung cancer patients
(Table 1). Comparison of the mutations observed in the primary and
metastatic samples revealed that around 50% of the mutations were shared
between all tumor samples of the three NSCLC patients, whereas more than
95% of mutations were shared in all samples of the two SCLC
patients.Conclusion: We found a high percentage of metastasis specific
mutations in NSCLC patients. In contrast, SCLC patients show a limited
number of metastasis specific mutations, consistent with the
aggressiveness of these tumor and the very poor prognosis.

