Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insulin receptor substrate-1 regulates immune cell content in lung
adenocarcinoma


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. In the
United States, lung cancer accounts for 160,000 deaths per year while the
five-year survival rate remains stagnant at 15%. A better understanding
of the pathobiology for this disease is imperative for development of
novel therapeutics to improve mortality rates. Lung adenocarcinoma (ADCA)
accounts for over 50% of non-small lung cancer cases. Within this subset,
K-ras is the most common activating mutation accounting for 35% of cases.
Our group previously showed that K-ras activation generates an
inflammatory response in lung tumors, mediated largely through the
increased production of CC/CXC chemokines by tumor cells. The
corresponding influx of neutrophils increased tumor growth, which was
associated with degradation of the intracellular protein insulin receptor
substrate-1 (IRS-1). Since IRS-1 is generally thought of as a pro-tumor
entity, we decided to undertake a controlled study to further elucidate
its pro-host role. We performed a study using a well-annotated human lung
ADCA TMA (n = 136) and found that positive IRS-1 staining provided a
75-month median survival advantage among all cases (p = 0.01) and an
81-month median advantage within the K-ras subtype (p = 0.006). EGFR and
non-K-ras/non-EGFR cases did not display differences. To further dissect
the role of IRS-1 in tumor growth we generated LSL-K-ras/IRS-1fl/fl mice
and studied them over a time course. LSL-K-ras/IRS-1-/- mice displayed
highly significant early mortality (pLung cancer is the leading cause of
cancer deaths worldwide. In the United States, lung cancer accounts for
160,000 deaths per year while the five-year survival rate remains
stagnant at 15%. A better understanding of the pathobiology for this
disease is imperative for development of novel therapeutics to improve
mortality rates. Lung adenocarcinoma (ADCA) accounts for over 50% of
non-small lung cancer cases. Within this subset, K-ras is the most common
activating mutation accounting for 35% of cases. Our group previously
showed that K-ras activation generates an inflammatory response in lung
tumors, mediated largely through the increased production of CC/CXC
chemokines by tumor cells. The corresponding influx of neutrophils
increased tumor growth, which was associated with degradation of the
intracellular protein insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1). Since IRS-1
is generally thought of as a pro-tumor entity, we decided to undertake a
controlled study to further elucidate its pro-host role. We performed a
study using a well-annotated human lung ADCA TMA (n = 136) and found that
positive IRS-1 staining provided a 75-month median survival advantage
among all cases (p = 0.01) and an 81-month median advantage within the
K-ras subtype (p = 0.006). EGFR and non-K-ras/non-EGFR cases did not
display differences. To further dissect the role of IRS-1 in tumor growth
we generated LSL-K-ras/IRS-1fl/fl mice and studied them over a time
course. LSL-K-ras/IRS-1-/- mice displayed highly significant early
mortality (p<0.0001) and increased tumor burden when compared to
LSL-K-ras/IRS-1+/+ controls (pLung cancer is the leading cause of cancer
deaths worldwide. In the United States, lung cancer accounts for 160,000
deaths per year while the five-year survival rate remains stagnant at
15%. A better understanding of the pathobiology for this disease is
imperative for development of novel therapeutics to improve mortality
rates. Lung adenocarcinoma (ADCA) accounts for over 50% of non-small lung
cancer cases. Within this subset, K-ras is the most common activating
mutation accounting for 35% of cases. Our group previously showed that
K-ras activation generates an inflammatory response in lung tumors,
mediated largely through the increased production of CC/CXC chemokines by
tumor cells. The corresponding influx of neutrophils increased tumor
growth, which was associated with degradation of the intracellular
protein insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1). Since IRS-1 is generally
thought of as a pro-tumor entity, we decided to undertake a controlled
study to further elucidate its pro-host role. We performed a study using
a well-annotated human lung ADCA TMA (n = 136) and found that positive
IRS-1 staining provided a 75-month median survival advantage among all
cases (p = 0.01) and an 81-month median advantage within the K-ras
subtype (p = 0.006). EGFR and non-K-ras/non-EGFR cases did not display
differences. To further dissect the role of IRS-1 in tumor growth we
generated LSL-K-ras/IRS-1fl/fl mice and studied them over a time course.
LSL-K-ras/IRS-1-/- mice displayed highly significant early mortality
(p<0.0001) and increased tumor burden when compared to LSL-K-ras/IRS-1+/+
controls (p<0.01). Surprisingly, IRS-1 loss in tumor cells generated a
robust immune response. The bronchial alveolar lavage fluid of
LSL-K-ras/IRS-1-/- mice had increased infiltration of macrophages (2.5x),
neutrophils (40x) and lymphocytes (5x). Significant increases in many
immune cell-recruiting chemokines were observed in the LSL-K-ras/IRS-1-/-
mice compared to controls. Many cancers are able to manipulate the host
immune response through signaling pathways that interface with IRS-1,
including: phosphoinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), extracellular signal
regulated kinase (MEK/ERK) and Janus kinase/signal transducer and
activator of transcription (JAK/STAT). An array of IRS-1 silenced A549
cells versus controls displayed no change in CC/CXC chemokine production.
Evaluation of the tumor microenvironment, however, provided evidence for
a role for IL-17 and IL-22 producing cells, which are present at tumor
sites in human lung cancer cases and LSL-K-ras mice. We found that loss
of IRS-1 increases pSTAT3 production in vivo and in vitro in the presence
of IL-22, triggering chemokine release and the generation of a pro-tumor
immune response. This is the first description of a pro-host role for
IRS-1 in human cancer. This study provides an important marker in a
subset (K-ras) of lung ADCA with a very poor prognosis that may be
susceptible to JAK/STAT antagonism.

