Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevention of MICA shedding from HBV infected hepatocytes to
activate NK cells for better clearance of malignant foci and
virus-infected cells


Introduction: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is an important issue to
public health of the world. By a genome-wide association study, we
previously identified that a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the
promoter region of the MHC class I polypeptide-related sequence A (MICA)
gene is significantly associated with the risk of hepatitis-virus-related
HCC. MICA is a ligand for NKG2D, a cell receptor of NK cells, which
activates NK cells to clear the pathogenic cells expressing MICA such as
infected cells or malignant cells as a danger signal. However,
unexpectedly, the Hepatitis B virus (HBV)-infected patients with risk
allele of MICA gene showed higher levels of serum MICA. This suggested
that the serum MICA, which is excreted from the infected hepatocytes by a
shedding mechanism, may work as a decoy for NK cells and inhibit their
activities. Therefore, increasing cellular MICA levels by preventing
those shedding and release may contribute to the clearance of the
pathogenic cells and the prevention of HCC. In this study, we constructed
a convenient MICA shedding assay system and, by a comprehensive
screening, we identified several compounds which may prevent MICA
shedding from the cells.Methods: We constructed lentivirual vector
expressing MICA protein tagged with nano-luciferase (nanoLuc) in its N
terminal because N terminal of MICA is excreted from the cells by
shedding. We expressed this construct in HBV replicating cells,
HepG2.2.15, and after adding compounds, we determined the luciferase
activities in the supernatant and cell lysates.Results: We picked up the
samples which showed low activities in supernatant with high activities
in the cell lysates, indicating low levels of shedding and high levels of
remaining cellular MICA. Out of over 1,000 compounds screened, we
determined four candidate compounds which efficiently prevented MICA
shedding. We confirmed the effects of these compounds in other cell
systems infected with HBV.Conclusion: Because these compounds enhanced
the expression levels of cellular MICA and decreased its shedding in
HBV-replicating human hepatocytes, using these compounds may be favorable
during HBV chronic infection to enhance the NK cell-mediated clearance of
the pathogenic hepatocytes and to prevent HCC.

