Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOX2 as a marker of oral cancer stem-like cells: Cell division
patterns and chromosomal instability


Introduction:Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is a serious public
health problem, caused primarily by smoking and alcohol consumption. The
prognosis remains poor due in part to therapeutic resistance. The cancer
stem cell (CSC) theory posits that oral cancer stem-like cells (CSLCs)
show unique characteristics, including self-renewal by symmetric cell
division and tumor recapitulation by asymmetric cell division.
Identifying markers of CSLCs is an important step in better understanding
the biology of these cells. Chromosomal instability is a feature of
cancer cells that leads to altered gene copy numbers; some of which is
caused by chromosome segregation defects (CSDs). We observed previously
that chromosomal instability occurs in colon CSLCs. Here, we compare
instability between OSCC CSLCs and non-CSLCs from the same
tumors.Methods:We assessed CSLCs in two OSCC cell lines (UPCI:SCC040 and
UPCI:SCC131) using spheroid enrichment assays. We examined the marker,
SOX2 in our cell lines using double antibody staining with division and
other stemness markers. We then evaluated the cell division patterns of
CSLCs marked by SOX2 to test the hypothesis that cell division patterns
change from asymmetric to symmetric after ionizing radiation (IR)
treatment. Finally, we analyzed the CSDs after IR in CSLCs marked by SOX2
compared to non-CSLCs.Results:Both cell lines formed spheroids. Strongly
SOX2-positive cells were a rare population (3%) in our OSCC cell lines.
SOX2 positivity was highly correlated with other CSLC markers, including
CD44, CD133 and BMI1. A cluster plot of the mitotic pair analysis
revealed that SOX2-positive cells divide both symmetrically and
asymmetrically (pIntroduction:Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is a
serious public health problem, caused primarily by smoking and alcohol
consumption. The prognosis remains poor due in part to therapeutic
resistance. The cancer stem cell (CSC) theory posits that oral cancer
stem-like cells (CSLCs) show unique characteristics, including
self-renewal by symmetric cell division and tumor recapitulation by
asymmetric cell division. Identifying markers of CSLCs is an important
step in better understanding the biology of these cells. Chromosomal
instability is a feature of cancer cells that leads to altered gene copy
numbers; some of which is caused by chromosome segregation defects
(CSDs). We observed previously that chromosomal instability occurs in
colon CSLCs. Here, we compare instability between OSCC CSLCs and
non-CSLCs from the same tumors.Methods:We assessed CSLCs in two OSCC cell
lines (UPCI:SCC040 and UPCI:SCC131) using spheroid enrichment assays. We
examined the marker, SOX2 in our cell lines using double antibody
staining with division and other stemness markers. We then evaluated the
cell division patterns of CSLCs marked by SOX2 to test the hypothesis
that cell division patterns change from asymmetric to symmetric after
ionizing radiation (IR) treatment. Finally, we analyzed the CSDs after IR
in CSLCs marked by SOX2 compared to non-CSLCs.Results:Both cell lines
formed spheroids. Strongly SOX2-positive cells were a rare population
(3%) in our OSCC cell lines. SOX2 positivity was highly correlated with
other CSLC markers, including CD44, CD133 and BMI1. A cluster plot of the
mitotic pair analysis revealed that SOX2-positive cells divide both
symmetrically and asymmetrically (p<0.05) at a ratio of 4:1 with a
percentage difference cut-off of 20%. Phospho-histone H3 and
alpha-tubulin co-staining with SOX2 confirmed the occurrence of both
division patterns. Short-term and long-term IR treatment did not change
this proportion. CSLCs showed fewer and different CSDs after IR treatment
than non-CSLCs.Conclusions:Our results show that therapeutic intervention
does not change the ratio of symmetric to asymmetric cell division in
CSLCs. These results suggest that only therapies that target the
self-renewal potential of CSLCs might effectively eradicate these cells.
CSLCs showed less chromosomal instability as assessed by CSDs, possibly
due either to the relative quiescence of these cells or enhanced
checkpoints that result in cell death when CSDs are present. Cell
division and chromosome segregation patterns in CSLCs may provide insight
into the biology of therapeutic resistance in CSLCs and reveal strategies
to eradicate these cells.Keywords:Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC),
Cancer stem-like cells (CSLCs), ionizing radiation (IR), chromosome
segregation defects (CSDs).

