Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microarray analysis of melanoma autologous tumor cell lines used
as the source of tumor associated antigens in patient-specific dendritic
cell immunotherapy phase II trial in patients with metastatic melanoma


Melanoma cells that are proliferating and self-renewing in short-term
cell culture, have the phenotypic and functional characteristics of tumor
stem cells, and they express unique patient-specific neoantigens, as well
as numerous common melanoma associated antigens. Patient-specific
therapeutic vaccines, produced by Incubating autologous dendritic cells
with autologous tumor cells from such cell lines (DC-TC), have yielded
promising results in phase II trials in metastatic melanoma. In this
study we examined the expression of genes on the tumor cell lines which
had served as the sources of tumor associated antigens loaded onto
autologous dendritic cells as part of a phase II trial in which there was
an observed 5-year survival rate of 50%.[Dillman 2009] There was
sufficient melanoma tumor cells to analyze for 50 of the 54 patients
enrolled in the phase II trial. Microarray analysis was performed by
Response Genetics, Inc. (Los Angeles) for 54,000 genes. The Excel data
file was entered into an Affymetrix data processing algorithm using the R
programming language. Gene ranking was performed using prediction
analysis of microarrays.[Tibshirani 2002] Correlation with overall
survival was done for 26 patients who survived 5 years or longer, and 24
patients who survived less than 5 years. Hierarchical clustering for over
and under expression yielded 9 genes, VEPH1, ZNF280B, FGF13, ST6GALNAC3,
QPCT, ZNF280B, BST, PBRM1 and C21orf91 which identified 11/11 patients
who had a survival greater than 5 years, and 17/18 patients who died in
less than 2 years. Using the top six genes, overall survival greater than
5 years was correctly predicted for 80.3% of patients, and survival less
than 5 years was correctly predicted for 74.2% of patients. Gene array
data obtained from self-renewing, proliferating, autologous tumor cells
was prognostic for survival. It is unclear whether these genes are
predictive of an effective immune response after repeated injections of a
therapeutic dendritic cell-tumor cell vaccine.

