Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global gene expression profiling of mice tumor-derived organoids
identifies key microRNAs and metabolic genes involved in CRC progression


Background. Progressive accumulation of mutations in oncogenic and tumor
suppressor pathways are associated with colorectal cancer (CRC).
Mutations in APC, KRAS and p53 represent key drivers events in CRC
initiation and progression and are simultaneously mutated in about 30% of
CRC. Tumor derived Organoids (TDO) are three-dimensional (3-D) structures
composed of cells that are spatially organized like mini-guts and
represent a useful ex vivo tool to study intestinal physiology and cancer
progression. Here, we investigated the progressive deregulation of mRNA
and microRNA (miRNA) genes in TDOs from intestines of three different
Genetically Engineered Mouse models (GEMMs) harboring mutations in Apc,
Apc plus Kras and Apc plus Kras and p53. Methods. Array analysis of
protein coding and non-coding RNAs from mice TDOs was performed to
identify mRNAs and miRNAs that were differentially expressed following
Apc, Kras and p53 mutations. Agilent Feature Extraction software was used
to analyze acquired array images and subsequent data processing was
performed by the GeneSpring GX v11.5.1 software package. Results.
Twenty-five% of mRNAs showed more than 2 fold changes in expression level
and considered differentially expressed. Pathway analysis found that a
great number of mRNAs, which were significantly differentially expressed
(P-value 0.001), were involved in metabolic process. Of these, 10 were
involved in metabolism of different amino acids or other compounds (e.g.,
arachidonic acid, ascorbate, alendrate, and linoleic acid) and 4 were
encoding the cytochrome p450 family drug and xenobiotic metabolizing
enzymes. In addition, 28 and 10% of miRNAs in Apc vs Apc/Kras and
Apc/Kras vs Apc/Kras/p53 respectively were identified as differentially
expressed miRNA. Twenty-two of these miRNAs were related to deregulated
metabolic genes in this study. Selected metabolic genes (e.g., Pipox)
were constantly down regulated from early (Apc only mutants) to advanced
(Apc/Kras/p53 mutants) CRC, whereas their associated miRNAs (mir-883a-3p
and mir-1943) were constantly up regulated. High expression level of
mir-125 which was detected in Apc/Kras/p53 group was also associated to
down regulation of associated metabolic genes: Pipox and Ggt7.
Conclusions. Using 3-D TDOs, we have identified deregulated miRNAs that
are involved in regulation of metabolic pathways associated with CRC
progression. Further analysis of miRNA-mRNA interaction in these models
may help identify metabolic vulnerabilities that may be exploited for CRC
therapy.

