Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced expression of galectin-3 isassociated with the
alternative activation of macrophages and development oflung fibrosis
following radiation


Radiotherapy is a major treatment approach to non-operable lung cancer
patients. Unfortunately, radiation-induced lung injury occurs in 5-20% of
lung cancer patients following radiotherapy. Radiation-induced lung
fibrosis contributes to an increased risk of death or a decreased quality
of life.The mechanism(s) for the development of radiation-induced lung
fibrosis is not fully understood, and no interventions to
prevent/ameliorate it have proven successful. Macrophages are the first
line of defense for airways and alveolar surfaces and play a key role in
the initiation and orchestration of inflammatory responses. Two distinct
macrophage subsets have been identified; classically activated
macrophages (M1) and alternatively activated macrophages (M2).Increased
numbers of activated M2 macrophages have been seen in human fibrotic
conditions and rodent models of fibrosis. However, the mechanism(s)
driving the persistent activation of M2 macrophages and how this leads to
the development of fibrosis remains undefined. Recent studies indicate
that galectin-3 (gal-3) is potentially a key regulator of M2 macrophage
activation; inhibition of gal-3 expression prevents M2 macrophage
activation. In this paper, we show elevated numbers of Ym-1 positive
alveolar macrophages in the irradiated lung. Increased expression of
gal-3 cells was found in the fibrotic lung, which was associated with
fibrotic lesions. M2 macrophages were the majority of cells that
expressed gal-3.In our in vitro studies, we found that knocking-down
gal-3 using Mission lentiviral transduction particles prevented
radiation-induced increases in the expression of YM-1 in Raw 264.7
macrophage. Mouse recombinant gal-3 stimulated mouse lung fibroblast cell
proliferation and expression of -SMA. These data suggest that gal-3
appears to regulate alternative activation of M2 macrophage and play an
important role in the development of radiation-induced lung injury.

