Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular mechanism of synergy between BET-protein bromodomain
antagonist (BA) and pTEFb kinase inhibitor against human AML blast
progenitor cells


We have previously reported that treatment with BET-protein bromodomain
antagonist (BA) reduces the enhancer/promoter occupancy of BRD4 and
induces the expression of HEXIM1, which sequesters and inhibits pTEFb (a
complex of CDK9 and cyclin T). pTEFb phosphorylates serine 2 in the
C-terminal heptad repeats in the stalled RNA pol II (RNAP2), causing its
pause-release and the mRNA transcript elongation. While relatively
sparing normal bone marrow progenitor cells, BA treatment attenuates the
expression of cMYC, BCL2 and CDK4/6 and induces apoptosis of cultured
(OCI-AML3, MOLM13 and MV4-11) and primary AML blast progenitor cells
(BPCs), including those expressing FLT3-ITD. Because of its ability to
inhibit CDK9 and pTEFb, we determined whether co-treatment with
flavopiridol (FP), a known inhibitor of CDK9, would enhance the activity
of BA against the cultured and primary AML BPCs. Our findings demonstrate
that co-treatment with BA and FP synergistically induced apoptosis of the
cultured and primary AML BPCs (CI of 100-fold in vitro resistance to FLT3
tyrosine kinase inhibitors. We next determined whether HEXIM1 levels
regulate the activity of BA and FP in the AML BPCs. While shRNA-mediated
stable knockdown of HEXIM1 significantly reduced the lethal activity of
BA in OCI-AML3/HKD and MOLM13/HKD cells, tetracycline-inducible ectopic
overexpression of HEXIM1 significantly enhanced BA-induced apoptosis of
MOLM13 and OCI-AML3 cells. Notably, the significant improvement in the
median survival of NOD/SCID mice treated with JQ1 (50 mg/kg/5 days per
week/for 3 weeks) was not observed in the similarly treated mice
engrafted with MOLM13/HKD cells (p 100-fold in vitro resistance to FLT3
tyrosine kinase inhibitors. We next determined whether HEXIM1 levels
regulate the activity of BA and FP in the AML BPCs. While shRNA-mediated
stable knockdown of HEXIM1 significantly reduced the lethal activity of
BA in OCI-AML3/HKD and MOLM13/HKD cells, tetracycline-inducible ectopic
overexpression of HEXIM1 significantly enhanced BA-induced apoptosis of
MOLM13 and OCI-AML3 cells. Notably, the significant improvement in the
median survival of NOD/SCID mice treated with JQ1 (50 mg/kg/5 days per
week/for 3 weeks) was not observed in the similarly treated mice
engrafted with MOLM13/HKD cells (p < 0.01). The lethality induced by
co-treatment with JQ1 and FP was significantly reduced in MOLM13/HKD
versus MOLM13 cells; conversely, it was significantly increased in MOLM13
cells with ectopic overexpression of HEXIM1 (p 100-fold in vitro
resistance to FLT3 tyrosine kinase inhibitors. We next determined whether
HEXIM1 levels regulate the activity of BA and FP in the AML BPCs. While
shRNA-mediated stable knockdown of HEXIM1 significantly reduced the
lethal activity of BA in OCI-AML3/HKD and MOLM13/HKD cells,
tetracycline-inducible ectopic overexpression of HEXIM1 significantly
enhanced BA-induced apoptosis of MOLM13 and OCI-AML3 cells. Notably, the
significant improvement in the median survival of NOD/SCID mice treated
with JQ1 (50 mg/kg/5 days per week/for 3 weeks) was not observed in the
similarly treated mice engrafted with MOLM13/HKD cells (p < 0.01). The
lethality induced by co-treatment with JQ1 and FP was significantly
reduced in MOLM13/HKD versus MOLM13 cells; conversely, it was
significantly increased in MOLM13 cells with ectopic overexpression of
HEXIM1 (p < 0.01). These findings indicate that co-treatment with BA and
FP exerts synergistic lethality, and BA-mediated induction of HEXIM1 is
mechanistically involved in mediating the lethal effects of BA and FP
against human AML BPCs.

