Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic relevance of the Rad6/translesion synthesis pathway in
BRCA1-related triple-negative breast cancer cells


Triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) comprise 15-20% of all breast
cancers (BrCas), and their treatment is challenging because they are not
treatable with ER, PgR or Her2/neu-targeted therapies. Since TNBCs and
BRCA-mutated BrCas share many histopathologic features including aberrant
DNA repair pathways, the concept of targeting DNA repair defects with
agents such as platinum (Pt) compounds is applied for treatment of TNBC
patients. Pt drugs induce DNA replication stalling interstrand DNA
crosslinks (ICLs), the repair of which require concerted activities of
nucleotide excision repair, Fanconi anemia (FA)/BRCA homologous
recombination repair (HRR) and translesion synthesis (TLS) pathways. The
therapeutic efficacies of these drugs are often limited by the cancer
cell's enhanced ability to repair/tolerate these toxic DNA lesions. The
TLS pathway a.k.a DNA damage tolerance pathway is critical for cell
survival in the face of DNA damage. TLS is a crucial initial step in ICL
repair as it synthesizes DNA across the lesion thus preparing the damaged
DNA template for repair by the FA network and HR pathway, processes
critical for ICL repair. The Rad6 gene is a principal component of the
TLS pathway and previous work in our lab has shown its important role in
BrCa development/progression and acquisition of cisplatin (CDDP)
resistance. To understand the involvements of Rad6/TLS and FA/BRCA in
CDDP-induced DNA damage repair, we evaluated CDDP sensitivities,
CDDP-induced DNA damage responses and stalled replication restarts in
wt-BRCA1 (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468) and mut-BRCA1 (HCC1937, SUM1315) TNBCs.
Data from MTT assays showed no correlation between CDDP sensitivity and
BRCA1 status; however, pretreatment with our recently developed Rad6
small molecule inhibitor (SMI) enhanced CDDP sensitivity of all TNBC cell
lines regardless of their BRCA1 status. Consistent with these data,
immunoblot analysis showed that treatment with the Rad6 SMI attenuated
the CDDP-induced PCNA ubiquitinations (a hall mark of Rad6/TLS activity),
as well as the steady-state levels of FancD2 (a surrogate marker of FA
pathway activation), pol eta (TLS polymerase), and Rad51 (critical for
HRR) in both wt-BRCA1 and mut-BRCA1 TNBC cells. IdU/CldU labeling assays
showed that Rad6 inhibition mitigated the restart of CDDP-induced stalled
replication forks. Whereas Rad6 is expressed weakly in normal breast
tissues and overexpressed in BrCas, immunohistochemical analysis showed
strong nuclear staining for Rad6 in the normal ducts of mut-BRCA1
clinical breast tissues implicating an important role for Rad6 in
mut-BRCA1 BrCas. Our data suggest an important role for the Rad6/TLS
pathway in processing Pt-induced ICLs in both wt-BRCA1 and mut-BRCA1
TNBCs and the potential therapeutic value of inhibiting this pathway in
TNBCs. Supported by NIH CA178117-01.Note: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

