Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and pharmacological characterization of the second
generation of Btk inhibitors with improved target selectivity and
enhanced in vivo efficacy


Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) is an essential component of the B-cell
receptor (BCR) signaling pathways regulating survival, activation,
proliferation, and differentiation of B lymphocytes. The first Btk
inhibitor, Ibrutinib, has demonstrated a significant clinical efficacy in
a variety of B-cell malignancies. Through structure-guided approach, we
have discovered two series of novel and potent Btk inhibitors,
represented by EBI-1266 and EBI-1367, respectively. Both of these
compounds showed high potency in inhibiting Btk kinase activity and
growth of a number of aggressive lymphoma cell lines driven by aberrant
BCR signaling, with IC50 value within low nanomolar range. Mechanistic
studies examining BCR signaling pathway in related B cell lymphoma cell
lines revealed that both EBI-1266 and EBI-1367 potently inhibited Btk
phosphorylation and downstream Erk phosphorylation, similar to Ibrutinib.
Furthermore, each compound showed unique and significant superiority over
Ibrutinib: EBI-1266 had a cleaner selectivity profile against a panel of
kinases with a cysteine residue in the conserved catalytic domain, and
EBI-1367 exhibited >10-fold higher in vivo exposure in multiple
preclinical species. In a tumor xenograft mouse model where tumor growth
is dependent on Btk activity, both EBI-1266 and EBI-1367 showed
significant oral anti-tumor activities, with EBI-1367 being more
efficacious than Ibrutinib, consistent with a higher exposure of EBI-1367
in both blood and tumor tissues. No evidence of overt toxicities was
observed in rodents with prolonged oral administration for two weeks with
doses at least 3-fold above a highly efficacious dose. In summary, the
pharmacological profiles of EBI-1266 and EBI-1367 indicate that these
compounds have a great potential to become the next generation of Btk
inhibitors, offering advantages in pharmaceutical development, enhanced
in vivo efficacy and reduced toxicities. We are currently performing
IND-enabling studies aiming to initiate phase I clinical trials for these
Btk inhibitors.

