Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential use of saliva and hair samples to identify genetic
markers for anti-VEGF therapy


Anti-angiogenic therapy to block and disrupt tumor angiogenesis has been
used in clinical treatment of various malignancies including:
glioblastoma, colorectal, lung and kidney cancer. Currently, the most
clinically effective anti-angiogenic agents are the humanized monoclonal
antibody (bevacizumab) against vascular endothelia growth factor (VEGF)
and the small molecule receptor-tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (RTKIs) of
VEGF receptors. However, the therapeutic benefit varies substantially for
many of these agents. Predictive biomarkers that are required for
personalized treatment with these agents are currently not available.
Recently the role of germline single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) has
been investigated as potential biomarkers for anti-angiogenic treatments.
The rationale is that these agents target the vasculature in host
(vessels) rather than tumor tissue, which could mean that much of the
variability is dictated by the host. Several studies reported the
association of SNPs in VEGFA with differential outcomes from clinical
trials with these agents. SNP genotyping assays in these studies used
germline DNA extracted from blood. However, collection of peripheral
blood is invasive. Saliva and hair that are known to contain genomic DNA
can be used as noninvasive and convenient DNA sampling resources, but the
limited quantity of DNA in the hair and the low quality of DNA in the
saliva make genotyping assays non-reproducible.We have sought to improve
SNP genotype assays with DNA from saliva and hair by applying SNP target
pre-amplification for genotyping five SNPs (rs699947, rs833061,
rs1570360, rs201093, rs3025039) in VEGFA. The concordance of genotyping
calls of individual SNP using DNA from blood, saliva and hair from the
same volunteer was compared. Our preliminary results demonstrated that
pre-amplification substantially improved genotyping calls with saliva DNA
and hair DNA samples. The average genotyping call rate with saliva and
hair samples was about 45% and 10%, respectively, without
pre-amplification. The pre-amplification improved the call rate with
saliva and hair samples to 100% and 94%, respectively. The current report
may facilitate easier clinical sample collection for genetic tests for
these SNPs.

