Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Marrow-derived macrophages mediate invasion of pancreatic
adenocarcinoma by RET activation


Introduction: Perineural invasion of cancer cells (CPNI) is found in most
patients with pancreatic adenocarcinomas (PDAs). Although the presence of
M2 macrophages in the perineural environment has been associated with
shortened survival rates in PDA patients, the mechanism underlying this
phenomenon has not been elucidated. It has been suggested that secretion
of the RET ligand glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) by M2
macrophages causes cancerous RET-expressing cells to migrate along
affected nerves. This concept, however, has not been demonstrated in
vivo. This study was aimed at understanding the contribution of
macrophages to perineural invasion for in vivo models of PDA, and to
characterize the role of the GDNF-RET axis in this unique
microenvironmental niche.Methods: Immunohistochemical analysis of PDA
specimens of a novel Pdx-1-Cre/KrasG12D /p53R172H (KPC) mouse model,
revealed that CD163+ (M2) endoneurial macrophages (EMs) predominate the
endoneural space of invaded nerves. In a bone marrow transplant (BMT)
from CX3CRGFP/+ mice, a 23- fold increase in the recruitment of GFP+
macrophages to the perineural space was witnessed as compared to GFP-
cells, indicating recruitment of bone marrow- derived macrophages to the
perineural niche, rather than resident tissue macrophages. A BMT from
CCR2-/- mice lacking macrophage recruitment capacity resulted in a 6-fold
decrease of the invasion severity score, and a 2.5-fold decrease in
perineural invasion index. Analysis by fluorescence microscopy indicated
that EMs expressed higher levels of GDNF compared to EMs in premalignant
lesion and normal controls. In order to differentiate between the
contributions of GDNF secreted by nerves to the invasion presses and its
secretion from recruited M2 macrophages, we performed a BMT from GDNF+/-
mice. The BMT led to a 1.5-fold improvement in both the invasion severity
score and the perineural invasion index. Similarly, mice treated with
PP1, a RET receptor inhibitor, caused a 1.5-fold decrease in the invasion
severity score, and a 1.3-fold decrease in the perineural invasion index.
Finally, xenografts of PDAC cells, in which RET was silenced using siRNA,
resulted in a 3.5-fold decrease in the invasion severity score and a
3.2-fold decrease in the perineural invasion index.Discussion: Taken
together, our results suggest a paracrine response between bone
marrow-derived tumor-associated EMs and PDA cells. This loop probably
orchestrates the formation of cancer nerve invasion. Further studies
using novel transgenic animal models aimed at specifying the specific
molecular signals that induce disease invasion and proliferation in the
perineural microenvironment are needed.

