Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comprehensive system of congenic mouse melanoma models for
evaluation of immune therapies


There has been longstanding interest in the relationship between the
immune system and malignant melanoma, the deadliest form of skin cancer.
Melanoma has been the tumor of choice for the evaluation of a wide
variety of therapeutic approaches that rely on stimulation of the immune
system to combat cancer. The striking responses to immune checkpoint
inhibitors noted in some melanoma patients have now been observed in
several other malignancies, including renal cell carcinoma, lung cancer,
and prostate cancer. These findings are very encouraging, however the
specific mechanisms of response and reasons why only a subset of patients
respond to therapy are not known. The extraordinary potential of immune
therapies in cancer suggests that human-relevant mouse models of cancer
are required to understand mechanisms of response and to optimize therapy
so that a larger proportion of patients respond.We have generated and
evaluated a series of genetically engineered mouse models driven by
alterations in Braf, Pten, Cdkn2a, beta catenin, p53, and Nras that
reflect the genetic diversity of the vast majority of human melanoma. We
have backcrossed 6 of these models to C57Bl/6, generated tumors, and
isolated a series of over 20 congenic mouse melanoma cell lines. Several
independent lines have been isolated for each melanoma genotype
generated. Injection of these lines into C57Bl/6J mice results in
reproducible tumor formation in the absence of co-injection of Matrigel.
We are in the process of characterizing the tumor microenvironment in
each of the models using flow cytometry and a novel quantitative imaging
approach of histological sections, which produces flow cytometry-like
data, but retains spatial and morphologic information that can be
utilized to characterize much smaller tumors. This series of congenic
lines represents an ideal set of models for the study of cancer
immunology and responses to immune therapies.

