Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker evaluation in a randomized phase 2 study of MEHD7945A
(MEHD) versus cetuximab (Cet) in 2 line recurrent/metastatic (R/M)
squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck (SCCHN) [MEHGAN]


BackgroundMEHD is a novel dual-action humanized IgG1 antibody that blocks
ligand binding to EGFR and HER3, inhibiting all major ligand-dependent
HER complex signaling. Preclinical and Phase 1a clinical data suggested
ligand-driven HER3 signaling as a promising target for therapy in a
subset of patients with SCCHN. Results from the MEHGAN study showed
comparable objective response rates and PFS for MEHD and Cet (Fayette et
al, ESMO 2014). Here we report the results of comprehensive and
comparative biomarker analyses from that study.MethodsArchival and fresh
(as available) tumor tissues were evaluated to characterize the biology
of anti-HER therapy in SCCHN, and to identify potential predictive
biomarkers for improved outcomes with MEHD compared to Cet, with
particular attention to the HER3 ligand NRG1. NRG1 and ERBB3 RNA
expression was measured by both ISH (data analysis are ongoing) and
qRT-PCR. Additionally, extensive gene expression analyses and HPV
detection were performed by qRT-PCR.ResultsOf 121 randomized patients in
MEHGAN, 107 had archival tissues with sufficient tumor content and
quality for biomarker analyses. Key findings include: 1) Most patients
with CT RECIST responses on either treatment arm had higher ( median)
tumor expression levels of NRG1 as measured by qRT-PCR 2) EGFR ligands
such as amphiregulin were co-expressed with NRG1, consistent with
preclinical analysis in an independent panel of SCCHN tumor samples
(Genentech data on file). 3) 24 HPV (+) patients (20%) were identified,
consistent with published prevalence reports. 4) Higher EGFR and HER3
ligand expression was observed in HPV (-) samples relative to HPV (+)
samples and, moreover, no responses were seen in HPV (+) patients. These
results are consistent with prior correlative ligand observations and may
point to differential roles for HER signaling biology in HPV (-) versus
HPV (+) SCCHN.ConclusionsNRG1 expression did not predict enhanced
responsiveness to MEHD versus Cet or, conversely, resistance to Cet. NRG1
and EGFR ligands appear to have similar expression patterns in SCCHN.
Higher levels of NRG1 and EGFR ligands were associated with greater
activity for both MEHD and Cet, and were consistently observed in HPV (-)
SCCHN versus HPV (+) SCCHN. These data suggest distinct HER signaling
biology in these 2 patient groups and warrant further evaluation to
potentially inform treatment approaches in SCCHN.* We would like
acknowledge and thank all of the MEHGAN study investigators and patients.

