Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo role of miR-32 in prostate cancer


The androgen receptor (AR) signaling pathway is central to the emergence
of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). We set out to identify
androgen-regulated microRNAs (miRNAs) that may contribute to the
development of CRPC. We found miR-32 to be an androgen regulated miRNA
which is differentially expressed in CRPC compared to benign prostatic
hyperplasia (BPH) and able to provide a significant growth advantage to
LNCaP cells by reducing apoptosisTo study how increased miR-32 expression
contributes to prostate cancer formation and/or progression in vivo, and
to search for in vivo targets of miR-32 in the prostate tissue, we have
established transgenic mice expressing miR-32 specifically in the
prostate. FVB/N mouse strain was used to create transgenic mice with
probasin promoter (ARR2PB) driving expression of miR-32
androgen-responsively in prostate epithelium post-puberty. The mice
develop and breed normally, and express the transgene specifically in the
ventral and dorsolateral lobes of the prostate, with no transgene
expression detected in anterior prostate or seminal vesicles up to six
months of age. To provoke lesions in prostate epithelium, the miR-32 mice
were cross-bred with mice heterozygous for tumor suppressor Pten.
Histological analysis of the prostates of ARR2PB-miR-32xPten+/- mice
shows increased number of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN)
lesions in the dorsal prostate compared to Pten+/- mice. In addition,
transgenic miR-32 can induce goblet cell metaplasia in prostate
epithelium in lateral to ventral prostate, in addition to stromal
responses, in the prostate in the Pten+/- background.In search for in
vivo targets of miR-32, we have performed a gene expression microarray
analysis comparing the wild type and ARR2PB-miR-32 prostate tissue.
Several candidate targets have been identified, and will be discussed
further for their potential cancer relevance.We find that miR-32 is
potentially an important gene in the progression of prostate cancer and a
putative drug target. We are currently analyzing histology of the miR-32
transgenic mouse prostates further, and assessing tissue targets of
miR-32. With the transgenic mouse model, we aim to determine whether
miR-32 is an oncomiR for prostate cancer in vivo, and will assess the
potency of miR-32 as a therapeutic target.

