Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of primary penile carcinoma
cell culture versus xenograft by using transcriptome analysis


Background: The establishment of tumor cell lines in penile carcinoma
(PeCa), a rare and high morbidity disease, is essential to conduct
functional genomic and epigenomic studies. However, penile cancer cell
line is not commercially available. In addition, xenograft in
immunodeficient mouse is a valuable model between in vitro testing and
pre-clinical trials.Aim: This study aimed to establish and characterize
PeCa primary cultures and xenografts by using large-scale gene expression
analysis.Methods: Primary tumor cultures were established from one
untreated verrucous PeCa sample (HPV- negative). Tumor tissue was minced
and digested with 0.2% trypsin for 30 minutes at 37C. After extensively
washing with 3 KSFM (GIBCO):1 DF12 (GIBCO). After passage 5 (36 days),
two cell cultures with distinct morphologies were isolated and implanted
subcutaneously on the right (epithelial cells) and left (fibroblast-like
cells) flanks of BALB/C nude mouse. Analyses of AE1AE3(ABCAM), Vimentin
(ABCAM), Desmin (DAKO), Myogenine (SIGMA), HHF35 (DAKO), 1A3 (SIGMA),
34E12 (ABCAM) and CD44 (DAKO) by immunohistochemistry and ALDH (ABCAM) by
flow cytometry were performed in xenograft tissues. Total RNA was
extracted from cell cultures and xenograft tissues in duplicate and
evaluated for gene expression by using Human Transciptome Array (HTA) 2.0
(Affymetrix). Expression Console (Affymetrix), SAM, hierarchical
clustering analysis, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA).Results: After 5
passages of verrucous PeCa cells, distinct epithelial and fibroblast-like
cell morphologies were observed. After four weeks of inoculation of both
cell types into right and left flanks of nude mouse, tumor growth was
observed in both flanks. Both tumor tissues obtained from the patient and
xenograft showed positive immunostaining for epithelial cell markers
(AE1AE3, 5-10% of cells and high molecular weight cytokeratin 34E12, 15%
of cells), for mesenchymal cells (vimentin, 95%; myogenin, 95%; desmin,
80-90%; HHF35, 10%; 1A4, 95%) and also for stem cells (CD44, 5% of
cells). ALDH activity was evaluated by flow cytometry and high ALDH
activity was detected in vitro and in vivo cells. Preliminary results
from transcriptome analysis showed 485 differentially expressed genes
between primary tumor and Pre Xenograft passage 1; 502 genes in primary
tumor and Pre Xenograft passage 5; 468 genes in verrucous PeCa sample vs
xenografts passage 1 and 2; 402 genes in verrucous PeCa sample vs
xenograft passage 3. It was verified upregulation of STAT3, IFNg, KRT14
and IFNA2 genes as well as genes involved in ROCK2 signaling
networks.Conclusions: We successfully established a primary tumor cell
culture and xenograft derived from a verrucous penile carcinoma. Our data
also support that despite cell cultures showed different morphologies
compared to primary tumor, they present genotypic and phenotypic features
similar to the tissue of origin.

