Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44 isoform expression illuminates multiple CSC subpopulations in
PC3


The concept of the cancer stem cell (CSC) is neither new nor without
controversy. It is important to study these cells since they are often
hypothesized to be androgen insensitive and resistant to
chemotherapeutics. Therefore, finding reliable markers for identifying
and targeting these cells has become increasingly attractive. The
hyaluronic acid receptor, CD44, is associated with a wide variety of cell
types, including CSCs. CD44 has many different isoforms which can be
categorized as belonging to one of two groups; one expressing different
combinations of 10 variant extracellular exons (CD44v), and the other
only expressing standard exons found in all isoforms, but none of the 10
variant exons (CD44s). CD44s is typically associated with the mesenchymal
stem cell niche, while the various CD44v forms are related to
hematopoietic stem cells and increased cell adhesion. However, both CD44s
and CD44v have been linked to the CSC niche and cancer progression.
Similar to CD44, the aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDH) superfamily
expression is also associated with CSCs and cancer progression.
Previously, our laboratory demonstrated that epithelial cancer cells
undergo an EMT upon exposure to M2 macrophages. In order to obtain a
purely epithelial PCa population, our laboratory isolated a single cell
clone of PC3 that had high E-cadherin expression, denoted PC3-Epi.
PC3-Epi cells were then incubated with M2 macrophages, which caused a
stable EMT to occur after only a few days in culture, denoted PC3-EMT.
Our finding demonstrate that these PC3 clones exhibit numerous CSC
characteristics, such as high ALDH activity, CD44 expression and cell
plasticity. FACS analysis of CD44 isoform expression show distinct CSC
subpopulations within these PC3-Epi and PC3-EMT cell types. These
subpopulations showed the ability to recapitulate the presorted parental
population after being returned to culture. This data suggests not only
that the PC3 cell line displays numerous CSC characteristics, but also
that distinct CSC subpopulations may exist.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

