Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanotechnology delivery and mechanism of action of telomere
oligonucleotides in melanoma


In nearly 90% of cancer cell types, telomere ends are stabilized by
inappropriate activation of telomerase, thereby preventing telomeres from
sequential shortening and establishing conditions which promote malignant
transformation and immortality. As a result, telomeres and telomerase
have recently become attractive targets in the development of novel
anticancer therapeutics. Administration of an 11-mer oligonucleotide
homologous to the 3 overhang of the telomere, T-oligo, is presumed to
mimic or signal for damaged telomeric DNA, thereby inducing inherent
telomere-based DNA damage responses. Exposure to T-oligo induces cell
cycle arrest, senescence, apoptosis, and differentiation in a cancer
cell-type specific manner. Intravenous administration of T-oligo
drastically reduces tumor burden in mice. Remarkably, T-oligo has minimal
side-effects on normal cells, and has shown no detectable toxicity in in
vivo mouse studies. However, as an oligonucleotide, T-oligo has limited
stability due to serum and intracellular nucleases. We have previously
improved the delivery of T-oligo by complexing it with a novel cationic
alpha helical peptide, PVBLG-8, which improved its efficacy both in vitro
and in vivo. Moreover, the T-oligo-PVBLG (TOP) nanocomplex demonstrated
increased charge stability and diameter in comparison to T-oligo. In this
study we have further optimized the TOP nanocomplex, thereby improving
the physiochemical properties of T-oligo for delivery and bringing
T-oligo closer to clinical fruition as an innovative, anticancer
therapeutic. The binding efficiency of T-oligo and PVBLG was optimized by
measuring the amount of naked DNA under a range of nitrogen/phosphorus
(N/P) ratios. We then compared the biodistribution of both T-oligo and
TOP in vivo at various N/P ratios. T-oligo was conjugated with FITC and
intravenously administered to the tail vein of mice in the presence or
absence of PVBLG and monitored using molecular imaging. We found that
T-oligo distribution was isolated to the kidneys, indicating that its
small size makes it susceptible to renal filtration. In contrast, the TOP
complex, which has a larger diameter, was able to bypass renal filtration
and enter the liver and/or lungs. We also found that PVBLG was able to
protect T-oligo from nucleolytic degradation in vitro. In addition, to
further elucidate T-oligo's mechanism of action, we investigated its
ability to form G-quadruplexes, since increasing G-quadruplex stability
is known to induce apoptosis. G-quadruplex formation by T-oligo was
confirmed by NMR and native-PAGE. Furthermore, since increasing
G-quadruplex stability is known to activate the SAPK/JNK signaling
pathway, we also investigated T-oligo's effect on the SAP/JNK pathway
using immunoblotting. Collectively, these studies will significantly
advance the therapeutic utility of T-oligo against melanoma.

