Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IQGAP1 in human acutae myelogenous leukemia


Background: AML is phenotypically diverse. However, genome-wide
sequencing studies indicate that median number of non-synonymous
mutations in AML is 8 (B Vogelstein Science 2013) and that the same
pathways are affected in tumors with distinct genetic alterations. These
insights provided the impetus to confirm and extend the previously
published observation that immunization with normal human white blood
cells (WBC) whose surface charge had been modified in vitro by incubation
with fluorodinitrobenzene (FDNB) elicited an antibody response that
cross-reacted against a broad range of leukemias (Nature
232:197-198,1971).Specific Aims: 1) Isolation and molecular
characterization of a shared antigenic moiety from human AML, 2) Examine
the prevalence- and role in AML of IQGAP1, which was identified as a
shared antigenic moiety.Methods: WBCs from healthy donors were incubated
with FDNB at 104 molecules/cell for 12-15 minutes in PBS. Three rabbits
were immunized with FDNB-treated cells (experimental rabbits). A control
rabbit was immunized with sham-treated cells. After complement
inactivation, immune sera were absorbed against WBCs from healthy donors.
Absorbed immune sera were tested for their ability to stain AML cell
lines by flow cytometry and clinical AML samples by Western blotting.
Immunoprecipitation of antigens from whole cell lysates of clinical AML
samples was done using IgG adsorbed on protein A/G Agarose beads. Liquid
chromatography and mass spectrometry of the immuneprecipitated material
was performed. Fold change in IQGAP1 expression in normal vs AML bone
marrow was determined from raw data from Gene Expression Omnibus at the
NCBI using Partek Genomic Suite. IQGAP1 expression was knocked down by
shRNA and the effect on proliferation and colony formation was
measured.Results: Sera from experimental rabbits stained AML cell lines
with greater intensity by flow cytometry compared to serum from the
control rabbit. Western blotting of whole cell lysates of clinical AML
samples revealed bands that were recognized by immune serum from
experimental rabbits but not the control rabbit. Immunoprecipitation of
antigens from whole cell lysates of clinical AML samples revealed IQGAP1
as being differentially recognized in independent experiments. Western
blots of human AML samples probed with anti-IQGAP1 antibody revealed the
predicted 190 kDa band. The fold change in IQGAP1 expression in normal
bone marrow versus AML was -3.22636, p-value 2.62 10e-7. Knocking down
expression of IQGAP1 in K562, MV4-11 and THP1 cell lines resulted in
significant decrease in proliferation and colony formation.Conclusion and
Future Directions: IQGAP1 was identified as a shared antigenic moiety in.
IQGAP1 is over-expressed in AML compared to normal bone marrow. Knocking
down IQGAP1 expression in AML cell lines decreased proliferation and
colony formation. Experiments to determine the mechanistic basis of the
effect of FDNB on cells and if IQGAP1 is druggable are underway.

