Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A Microbiomic analysis in African American with colonic lesions
reveals bacterial markers with potential diagnostic value


Background: Increasing evidence suggests a role of the gut microbiota in
colorectal carcinogenesis. However, no specific bacteria have been
unequivocally linked to either initiation or progression of colorectal
cancer (CRC).Aim: To analyze the taxonomic composition and functional
potential of the gut microbiome in African Americans with colorectal
lesions with the goal of detecting markers of diagnostic value.Materials
& Methods: DNA extracts from 10 stool samples of colon adenoma patients,
10 healthy subjects stool samples and from 10 CRC tumors and their
matched normal tissues were analyzed for their microbiota composition and
genomic content using Illumina MiSeq. Metagenomic Linkage Groups (MLGs)
were established and those with high discriminative power between healthy
and neoplastic specimens were analyzed for their genetic content.
Metagenomic reads from stool samples were mapped against bacterial genes
from tissues and vice-versa to identify common markers with
discriminative power.Results: The microbiota in both cancer vs. normal
tissues and adenoma vs. normal stool samples were different at the 16S
rRNA gene level. The metagenomic analysis led to 5 statistically
significant MLGs in each set of samples. There was little overlap between
the stool-based and tissue-based significant MLGs. Mapping stools reads
to annotated tissue genes and vice-versa revealed a panel of 9 bacterial
markers with statistically significant discriminative power between
normal and adenoma in the stool dataset and visually striking (though
non-significant) discriminative power between normal and tumor samples in
the tissue dataset.Conclusion: We defined MLGs with discriminative power
among cancers vs. normal and adenomas vs. normals and identified 9
bacterial markers that can potentially be used as a panel for
non-invasive colorectal cancer screening tests. These findings will need
to be validated in a larger population of patients at different stages of
the carcinogenic process and from different ethnic/racial backgrounds.

