Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of aerobic exercise on oxygenation and vascularity in
breast cancer models


Background: Intratumoral hypoxia (pO2 Background: Intratumoral hypoxia
(pO2 <10mmHg) is associated with aggressive tumor progression and poor
patient outcome. It is often found in solid tumors, and can constitute a
major obstacle to anticancer therapy. The primary cause of abnormal
oxygen tensions in tumors is the aberrant tumor vasculature,
characterized by tortuous, leaky and immature vessels. A number of
intervention strategies designed to overcome tumor hypoxia have been
investigated including high oxygen content breathing and the use of
bioreductive prodrugs, but these have had only moderate success in the
clinic.Purpose: The goal of the present investigations was to determine
whether aerobic exercise could be applied as a means to improve tumor
physiology and decrease tumor hypoxia in breast cancer models.Methods:
The effects of single and repeated bouts of moderate intensity exercise
(treadmill running) were studied in mice bearing syngeneic murine mammary
carcinoma models (EMT6 and 4T1). The exercise intensities were determined
by measuring the anaerobic threshold, which is reflected by the steady
rise in blood lactate during an exercise bout. Mice were orthotopically
injected with tumor cells and once the tumors reached a size of 250 mm3,
the mice were exposed to either a single bout of exercise or daily
exercise bouts performed for 5 consecutive days. Controls for each
treatment consisted of sedentary mice exposed to a stationary treadmill
for the equivalent amount of time. Following cessation of each exercise
regime tumors were harvested, sectioned and evaluated by
immunofluorescence. Vessel density (MECA-32), blood perfusion
(Hoechst-33342) and hypoxia (EF5) were quantified and significance was
established at pBackground: Intratumoral hypoxia (pO2 <10mmHg) is
associated with aggressive tumor progression and poor patient outcome. It
is often found in solid tumors, and can constitute a major obstacle to
anticancer therapy. The primary cause of abnormal oxygen tensions in
tumors is the aberrant tumor vasculature, characterized by tortuous,
leaky and immature vessels. A number of intervention strategies designed
to overcome tumor hypoxia have been investigated including high oxygen
content breathing and the use of bioreductive prodrugs, but these have
had only moderate success in the clinic.Purpose: The goal of the present
investigations was to determine whether aerobic exercise could be applied
as a means to improve tumor physiology and decrease tumor hypoxia in
breast cancer models.Methods: The effects of single and repeated bouts of
moderate intensity exercise (treadmill running) were studied in mice
bearing syngeneic murine mammary carcinoma models (EMT6 and 4T1). The
exercise intensities were determined by measuring the anaerobic
threshold, which is reflected by the steady rise in blood lactate during
an exercise bout. Mice were orthotopically injected with tumor cells and
once the tumors reached a size of 250 mm3, the mice were exposed to
either a single bout of exercise or daily exercise bouts performed for 5
consecutive days. Controls for each treatment consisted of sedentary mice
exposed to a stationary treadmill for the equivalent amount of time.
Following cessation of each exercise regime tumors were harvested,
sectioned and evaluated by immunofluorescence. Vessel density (MECA-32),
blood perfusion (Hoechst-33342) and hypoxia (EF5) were quantified and
significance was established at p<0.05.Results: Preliminary data indicate
that even a single exercise bout may begin to demonstrate improvements in
blood vessel perfusion and tumor oxygenation. Importantly, after 5 daily
bouts of exercise, there was a significant increase in the number of
patent vessels and improvement in oxygenation in the tumors of exercising
mice compared to those of sedentary controls.Conclusion: The results
indicate that moderate aerobic exercise can improve the oxygenation
status of solid tumors. These findings suggest that such a non-toxic
intervention may have potential utility in overcoming hypoxia-associated
treatment resistance in cancer patients and improve patient outcome.

