Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT3 inhibition using shRNA inhibits GBM proliferation, cell
migration, anchorage-independent growth of mouse, rat, and human
stem-like cells in vitro; and it induces long term survival and anti-GBM
immunity in vivo


The purpose of this study was to elucidate the role of Signal Transducers
and Activators of Transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling on the tumor
microenvironment in the most commonly occurring and aggressive primary
brain tumor, Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM), including preclinical testing
of inhibition of STAT3 expression in vivo in syngeneic and patient
derived xenograft (PDX) models of GBM. GBM is genetically heterogeneous,
but always overexpresses genes that are vital to cell cycle regulation,
cell growth and proliferation, cell invasion, and angiogenesis. STAT
proteins are transcription factors associated with gene regulation and
expression signatures that are implicated in several survival pathways
that enable human GBMs to grow in the brain parenchyma. In addition,
STAT3 has been identified as a central mechanism in tumor-induced
immunosuppression in GBM and other cancers. We studied the effects of
STAT3 inhibition via shRNA down-regulation in vivo and in vitro using
patient derived primary glioma cells (HF2303 & MGG8) in conjunction with
other glioma lines from humans, mice, and rats (U251, GL26, and CNS-1,
respectively). In this study, we found that GBM cells harboring
down-regulated STAT3 signaling exhibit delayed proliferation, increased
apoptosis, and anchorage independence. In vivo, STAT3 inhibition resulted
in increased survival rates when tumor cells were treated with the STAT3
shRNA both pre- and post-GBM implantation (syngeneic GBM model). Our data
demonstrate that STAT3 has a profound influence on the GBM
microenvironment, which prevents the host from clearing the tumor.
Down-regulating this signaling pathway using gene therapeutic strategies
allows for infiltration of immune cells, decreased invasion, and a
decrease in GBM cells proliferation that leads to the tumor elimination
in 83% of the animals, this was associated with the development of an
effective anti-tumor immunity that prevents tumor recurrence. Given the
phenotype of STAT3 inhibition in in vitro assays and its success in in
vivo GBM models, inhibition of STAT3 expression using shRNA and gene
therapy technologies constitutes an attractive strategy for preclinical
development as a potent therapeutic target for GBM.

