Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Search for potential penile cancer biomarkers using frozen tissue
proteome profiling by mass spectrometry


Penile squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) corresponds to 2.1% of Brazilian
men's malignant tumors. In the present study, it was our objective to
provide information regarding the differential protein pattern in penile
SCC and look for potential prognostic markers. Twenty-four frozen
samples, fourteen of penile SCC and ten of normal penile epithelium (NPE)
were compared, using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. A total of 268
spots were identified, 23 were identified only in penile SCC, 207 only in
normal tissue and 38 proteins were found differentially expressed between
the two groups (pPenile squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) corresponds to 2.1%
of Brazilian men's malignant tumors. In the present study, it was our
objective to provide information regarding the differential protein
pattern in penile SCC and look for potential prognostic markers.
Twenty-four frozen samples, fourteen of penile SCC and ten of normal
penile epithelium (NPE) were compared, using two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis. A total of 268 spots were identified, 23 were identified
only in penile SCC, 207 only in normal tissue and 38 proteins were found
differentially expressed between the two groups (p<0.05). Additionally,
ongoing experiments for protein identification by Matrix-Assisted Laser
Desorption/Ionization - Time of Flight - Mass Spectrometry (MALDI-TOF)
have already detected two key proteins with critical role in all aspects
of RNA metabolism. The heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein C (C1/C2)
(HNRNPC) were found expressed only in penile SCC and the RNA helicase
DEAD (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp) box polypeptide 59 (DDX59) were upregulated on
tumor samples, which both are associated to tumor aggressiveness. Our
data provide a novel proteomic approach to investigate the protein
profile of penile SCC and might represent the basis for further studies
on the characterization of these proteins, some of which may be of
potential clinical value.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

