Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BGB-283, a novel RAF kinase and EGFR dual inhibitor, displays
potent antitumor activity in B-RAF mutated colorectal cancers


Oncogenic B-RAF, which drives cell transformation and proliferation, has
been detected in approximately 70% of human malignant melanomas and 5-15%
of colorectal cancers (CRC). B-RAFV600E mutation, which gives rise to
constitutive MAPK signaling, accounts for at least 90% of oncogenic B-RAF
mutations. Despite the remarkable clinical activities achieved by
vemurafenib and dabrafenib in treating B-RAFV600E metastatic melanoma,
their clinical efficacy in B-RAFV600E CRC is far less impressive. Prior
studies suggested that feedback activation of EGFR and MAPK signaling
upon B-RAF inhibition contributed to the intrinsic resistance of CRC to
the first generation B-RAF inhibitors. This report represents the first
characterization of a dual RAF kinase/EGFR inhibitor, BGB-283, which is
currently under clinical investigations. BGB-283 is a potent and
selective pan-RAF and EGFR inhibitor with IC50 ranging from 5 to 47 nM on
RAF and EGFR kinases. In vitro, BGB-283 potently inhibits
B-RAFV600E-activated ERK phosphorylation and cell proliferation. It
demonstrates selective cytotoxicity and preferentially inhibits
proliferation of cancer cells harbouring B-RAFV600E and EGFR
mutation/amplification. In B-RAFV600E CRC cell lines, BGB-283 effectively
inhibits the reactivation of EGFR and achieved sustained inhibition of
MAPK pathway. In vivo, BGB-283 is highly efficacious in inhibiting tumor
growth accompanied by partial and complete tumor regressions in both
BRAFV600E mutant cell derived CRC xenograft models, including HT29,
Colo205, WiDr, as well as two primary human CRC xenograft models. In
particular, BGB-283 shows compelling efficacy and potent inhibition of
EGFR/MAPK signaling in WiDr xenograft model where EGFR reactivation
occurs upon B-RAF inhibition. These findings support BGB-283 as a potent
antitumor drug candidate with clinical potential for treating CRC
harboring B-RAFV600E mutation.

