Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delivery of an epigenetic agent using a microparticle drug
delivery system


Conventional cancer treatment protocols are either toxic or of minimal
therapeutic value, necessitating investigation of new modalities for
efficacious treatment and management of cancers. Among the various novel
compounds, histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) target cancer cells
over-expressing deacetylases (HDACs). The inhibition of HDACs changes
gene expression without altering the DNA sequence. In the present study,
an albumin-based microparticulate drug delivery system containing
vorinostat was formulated and evaluated for breast cancer therapy.
Drug-loaded microparticles were prepared by a microencapsulation method
through spray drying. Prepared microparticles containing the active drug
were characterized for their physiochemical properties, including size,
surface morphology, Zeta potential and surface properties. Dissolution
studies were carried out to examine the release profile of the drug from
the delivery system. For in vitro characterization and efficacy studies,
breast carcinoma HTB-126 wells were used. Histone deacetylase (HDAC)
activity was determined from cancer cells, and the efficacy of the free
vorinostat and microparticle formulations was compared. Global histone
changes in cells were analyzed using two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (2D-PAGE). Western blot was also utilized to detect
acetylation marks in cells. Uptake studies were carried out in cancer
cells to examine the internalization capability of microparticle drug
formulations. Data indicated that microparticles were approximately 2-m
in size with Zeta potential measurements of about -30 mV. Release studies
in cells showed that the drug released from the microparticulate delivery
system at an extended rate over a period of over 24 hours. In vitro data
in cancer cell line indicated that there was at least 10% more inhibition
of cell viability when vorinostat was used with the microparticles.
Similar results were observed from clonogenic studies. Additionally, in
vitro data suggested that cell death induced by the drug-loaded
microparticles was caused by apoptosis. Drug-loaded microparticle
formulations were able to be internalized into cancer cells.
Microparticles were shown to be a promising targeting strategy for cancer
epigenetic therapy by providing an extended-release of the drug in the
body.

