Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the genomic landscape of premalignant colorectal
polyps using next-generation sequencing


Adenomatous polyps are the premalignant lesions that precede the
development of colorectal cancers (CRC). The normal
mucosa-adenoma-carcinoma sequence was originally described more than 2
decades ago; however, no comprehensive annotation of the genomic
landscape of polyps has been reported to date. Familial Adenomatous
Polyposis (FAP) is a mendelian disorder caused by germline mutations in
the APC gene, has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance and is
characterized by the development of adenomas in the entire intestine,
thus conferring patients with a life-time risk for CRC development of
100%. Patients diagnosed with hereditary polyposis syndromes such as FAP
represents the perfect model to acquire tissue samples from polyps,
at-risk normal mucosa and germline allowing this type of high-throughput
studies. We have performed whole exome sequencing in paired polyps and
germline blood samples of 12 individuals with FAP (25 polyps and 12 blood
samples) using the Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform. Using standard
bioinformatics pipelines, we have identified a total of 1064 functional
mutations (somatic mutations and indels) that we have classified using a
5-tier system based on functional predictions generated by several in
silico tools. We have used hapLOH to ascertain for genomic imbalances
from exome data and identified 26 events. Validation was performed using
Sanger sequencing in a set of the identified events confirming 90% of the
somatic mutations and 50% of the indels. Allelic imbalances in 5q were
partially confirmed using microsatellite analysis. APC, KRAS, FBXW7,
TCFL2 and ARID1A were among the 16 genes found to be recurrently mutated.
Pathway enrichment analysis of the mutated gene list revealed
deregulation of the Wnt, MAPK kinase and ERBB pathways, thus indicating
potential avenues for chemoprevention drug development. Moreover, we
assessed and compared the genomic characteristics such as the rate of
transitions/transversion, mutational rate [mutations/Megabase (Mb)] and
genomic imbalances with stage I CRC from the The Cancer Genome Atlas in
order to understand better the carcinogenic process in the colonic
epithelium at the genomic level. The signature profile of
transition/transversions displayed by polyps showed abundance of C>T
(followed by T>C changes) and was very similar to stage I
non-hypermutator CRCs. In contrast, the mutational rate was lower in
polyps (1.75 vs 3.95 mutations/Mb) and the pattern of genomic imbalances
shared some events with stage I CRCs (loss of 5q and events in chromosome
7) but there were notable events seen only in the stage I CRCs most
likely involved with further steps in the carcinogenesis process (loss of
18q and 17p). In conclusion, genomic assessment of premalignant colonic
polyps revealed mutational patterns that are similar to stage I CRC and
pointed to deregulated pathways that are potential candidates for
biomarker and chemoprevention drug development.

