Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of c-Myc expression by aspirin and salicylic acid in
colon cancer cells through a novel pathway


Epidemiological studies have demonstrated a significant correlation
between regular aspirin use and reduced colon cancer incidence and
mortality; however, the exact pathway has not been identified. We
hypothesized that aspirin's anti-cancer effect may occur through
modulation of c-Myc gene expression. Being a transcription factor, c-Myc
controls nearly 15% of the expression of all genes and its activity is
highly regulated in normal cells. In many cancers including colon cancer,
c-Myc is mutated and constitutively activated which leads to uncontrolled
cell proliferation. In the present study, we demonstrate that aspirin and
its primary metabolite, salicylic acid, significantly decrease the c-Myc
protein levels in colon cancer cells. In total cell lysates, both drugs
decreased the levels of c-Myc in a concentration dependent (250 M to 2500
M) fashion (up to 70%). Interestingly, greater inhibition was observed in
the nucleus than the cytoplasm, and immuno-fluorescence studies further
confirmed these observations. Pre-treatment of cells with lactacystin
partially reversed the inhibitory effect of both aspirin and salicylic
acid, suggesting that 26S proteasomal pathway is involved. Transfection
of HCT-116 cells with DDK-tagged c-Myc produced abundant c-Myc protein;
but, it was unaffected by aspirin and salicylic acid. In the same
lysates, the endogenous c-Myc level were significantly decreased. HPLC
analysis showed that aspirin taken up by cells was metabolized to
salicylic acid in a time-dependent fashion. This further supports the
finding aspirin's inhibitory effect on c-Myc occurs through formation of
salicylic acid. Our result suggests that aspirin and salicylic acid
regulate c-Myc level at both transcriptional and post-transcription
level. Inhibition of c-Myc levels may represent an important pathway by
which aspirin exerts its anti-cancer effect and decrease the occurrence
of cancer in epithelial tissues.

