Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker and PK/PD analyses of first in class FASN inhibitor
TVB-2640 in a first-in-human phase 1 study in solid tumor patients


TVB-2640 is a potent, reversible and selective fatty acid synthase (FASN)
inhibitor currently in its first Phase 1 study (3V2640-CLIN-002) in solid
tumor patients. This study includes biomarker assays for this first in
class agent to assess pharmacodynamic activity and refine strategies for
patient selection. We describe translational approaches and report early
Phase 1 data on FASN biomarkers, in tumor, serum and surrogate tissues
such as PBMC and whole blood.FASN is a central mediator of neoplastic
lipogenesis. FASN uniquely catalyzes the production of palmitate, the
building block of long chain fatty acids, providing a mechanism to
convert glucose into lipids needed to support cancer cell signaling and
proliferation. Tumor cells have increased dependence on de novo
lipogenesis than normal cells, and express higher levels of FASN. Several
studies have shown a correlation between high levels of FASN expression
and both advanced disease stage and poorer prognosis in patients. FASN
plays several roles in cancer cell signaling, including production of
phospholipids, alteration of membrane architecture, formation of lipid
rafts and the subsequent assembly of signaling molecules in microdomains
juxtaposed to the membrane. FASN is upregulated by RTK signaling and also
by androgen and estrogen signaling.The profile of FASN expression was
characterized by IHC across several hundred archival human tumors and
sera (unmatched) across 8 different tumor types. Highest FASN expression
by IHC was observed in colorectal, prostate and bladder tumors, with a
similar rank ordering for serum with NSCLC and endometrial also among the
highest. Normal donors had significantly lower serum levels. Follow up
studies are being conducted to investigate the effect of FASN inhibitors
on secreted FASN, and its use as a biomarker.Seventeen patients have been
enrolled in 3V2640-CLIN-002, and four dose levels of TVB-2640 have been
tested to date as monotherapy. PK data show a mean half-life of
approximately 16.5 hours following oral administration. Plasma Cmax and
AUC increase with dose on day 1, with some overlap between the two
highest dose levels at steady state. Several exploratory biomarker
analyses have been initiated. Tumor IHC data are available for one
patient, and decreased pS6 S240/244 and pAKTS473 were observed after
TVB-2640 administration. Secreted proteins such as FASN, VEGF and related
proteins in serum are being assessed by ELISA and PK/PD analysis will be
shown. A serum metabolomics screen has been initiated to assess changes
in lipids and related metabolites.These translational and clinical
biomarker assessments inform on FASN biology and clinical development of
the first in class FASN inhibitor TVB-2640.

