Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tamoxifen inhibited cell migration and increased chemosensitivity
by reversal of EMT in ER-negative breast cancer cells


BACKGROUND: Tamoxifen (TAM) is the mainstay endocrine drug used as
adjuvant therapy for postmenopausal breast cancer (PMBC) patients.
Although the efficacy of tamoxifen has been attributed to the induction
of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis by inhibition of ER signaling pathway,
recent evidence indicates that tamoxifen also possesses ER-independent
antitumor activity in breast cancer treatment. However,the mechanism is
not clear. Therefore, the present study is aimed to investigate the
anti-tumor mechanism of tamoxifen on ER negative breast cancer.METHODS:
The cell morphology changes were observed by using electron microscopy.
Proteins expression was tested by western blot. miRNAs expression was
examined by Real-Time PCR. And cells migration ability was observed by
trans-well assay. Mice experiments were carried by using nude mice.
Inhibition of protein expression was done by RNA interfering
experiments.RESULTS: Our results showed an interesting morphology change
of ER negative breast cancer cells. After treated with TAM, the
morphology ER negative MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7/ADR breast cancer cells were
reversed from mesenchymal type to epithelial type accompanied by down
regulation of Vimentin and up-regulation of E-cadherin. Meanwhile cells
migration ability was also significantly decreased. But ER positive MCF-7
breast cancer cells didn't show any changes after exposure to TAM. Mice
experiments demonstrated that TAM significantly suppressed lung
metastasis rate of ER negative breast cancer cells. In addition, TAM
enhanced adriamycin effect on ER negative but not ER positive breast
cancers cells. To explore the mechanisms, we screened miRNAs changes by
miRNA array analysis, and found that miR-200c is obviously up-regulated.
Through Biological information analysis, CPG island is found exist in the
promoter region of miR-200c. The DNA methyltransferase inhibitor
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5Aza-dC) also increased miR-200c expression.
Further investigation demonstrated that DNA (cytosine-5)-
methyltransferase DNMT 1 and 3A were down-regualted by TAM. And
inhibition of DNMT 1 and 3A by RNAi increased miRNA-200c. These results
indicated that TAM inhibited cells migration and enhanced adriamycin
sensitivity of ER negative breast cancer cells by reversing their
EMT-like property. And the EMT reversal effect resulted from
up-regulation of miR-200c. Down-regualtion of DNMT 1 and 3A and CPG
island demethylation of miRNA-200c contributed to up-regulation of
miR-200c.CONCLUSIONS: Tamoxifen inhibited cells migration and increased
chemosensitivity by reversal of EMT in ER negative breast cancer cells.
Our findings described a novel mechanism to explain how TAM effect on ER
negative breast cancer cells.

