Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CYP3A4 epoxygenase activity mediates ER+ mammary tumor growth and
angiogenesis, in part, through EET biosynthesis and is inhibited by
biguanides


While cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYPs) are implicated in tumor angiogenesis
through biosynthesis of epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs), little is known
about breast cancer cell-intrinsic CYPs that exhibit epoxygenase
activity, such as CYP3A4. In an orthotopic breast cancer model, silencing
of epithelial CYP3A4 suppressed angiogenesis-related escape of ER+ breast
tumors from dormancy. While the diabetes drug metformin inhibits
mitochondrial complex I and inhibits tumor growth, how it does so is
unknown. Metformin inhibited CYP epoxygenase activity and co-crystallized
in the active site of CYP3A4, hydrogen bonding with arginine 212,
allowing the development of hexyl-benzyl-biguanide (HBB) as a CYP3A4
inhibitor using molecular modeling. HBB exhibited more than 10-fold
greater potency than metformin for inhibition of ER+ mammary tumor growth
and inhibited associated tumor angiogenesis. HBB inhibited EET
biosynthesis 40-fold more potently than metformin and was 40-fold more
potent for activation of AMPK phosphorylation. EETs suppressed and CYP
silencing promoted AMPK phosphorylation, linking CYPs with AMPK
regulation in breast cancer. HBB depolarized mitochondria, reduced oxygen
consumption rates and suppressed the Warburg effect, while EETs restored
the mitochondrial membrane potential. CYP3A4 silencing and HBB treatment
increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, suggesting that CYPs
suppress cancer cell death, in part, through suppression of ROS. CYP3A4
silencing sensitized breast cancer cells to hormonal therapy and
chemotherapy, abrogated by EETs. Because EETs are autocrine, paracrine
and endocrine, these results implicate CYPs in tumor growth, in part,
through cell-cell mediation of mitochondrial homeostasis and demonstrate
the potential of CYP3A4 as a therapeutic target in breast cancer.

