Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance to ERK inhibitors as a result of an acquired novel
P-loop mutation of ERK2


Genomic aberrations frequently target and activate the MAPK and PI3K
pathways in human cancers and combined inhibition of these pathways is
being explored widely in the clinic. In a panel of 45 human colorectal
cancer cell lines we found the presence of a KRAS mutation resulted in
reduced sensitivity to PI3K and MEK inhibitors when used as single
treatments. In addition, prolonged exposure to the individual PI3K
(GDC-0941) or MEK (GDC-0973) inhibitors resulted in resistance that was
associated with acquisition of mutations of the respective pathway being
targeted. Resistance to individual targeted agents is challenge in clinic
and can be overcome by combining treatments and in our colorectal cancer
panel combined MEK/PI3K inhibition exhibited potent synergy in the KRAS
mutant lines. However, as with the single treatments prolonged exposure
to the combination regime also resulted in resistance through acquisition
of a mutation of the allosteric drug-binding site of MEK2 that abrogates
binding of the inhibitor. The clinical development of small-molecule ERK
inhibitors is of considerable interest as ERK signaling represents a key
downstream effector of RAS mutations and ERK inhibitors may retain
activity in cells resistant to RAF and MEK inhibitors. Consistent with
the latter, the combination resistant line retained sensitivity to an ERK
inhibitor (VTX-11e) that also rescued the synergistic interaction when
combined with PI3K inhibition. However, prolonged exposure of this
MEK/PI3K resistant line to the combination of VTX-11e/GDC0941 resulted in
the acquisition of additional resistance to the ERK inhibitor component
of the combination. Resistance to VTX-11e was a result of an ERK2
mutation, novel to protein kinases, in a conserved residue of the kinase
domain P-loop. Recombinant wild-type and P-loop mutant ERK2 had similar
Vmax and ATP Km values, but exhibited a 20-fold increase in IC50 for
VTX-11e. Stable expression of the P-loop mutant ERK2 in parent cells
resulted in resistance to VTX-11e. Development of an additional VTX-11e
resistant line, in this case by prolonged exposure to a single treatment
resulted in the acquisition of the same ERK2 mutation. The repeated
development of resistance to the MEK/ERK inhibitor arm of the combination
is intriguing as the parent cells were not particularly sensitive to
treatment with MEK or ERK inhibitors alone, with a GI50 30-fold higher
than BRAF mutant cell lines that are sensitive to these inhibitors. Our
data show that dual combination of agents, at least for MEK and PI3K
pathway inhibition, is insufficient to block the acquisition of
resistance, an observation similar to that of clinical trials of BRAF and
MEK inhibitors in melanoma. Finally we recommend sequencing of P-loop of
the ERKs in clinical studies of ERK inhibitors to determine whether these
mutations will occur in the clinic.

