Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Brentuximab vedotin-mediated immunogenic cell death


Brentuximab vedotin (ADCETRIS) is an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC)
directed against CD30. It consists of an anti-CD30 monoclonal antibody
conjugated to monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE), a microtubule-disrupting
agent. Brentuximab vedotin is approved for the treatment of relapsed
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) and systemic anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL).
Brentuximab vedotin antitumor activity is due to the binding of the ADC
to CD30-expressing cells, followed by internalization, and release of
MMAE after proteolytic cleavage resulting in apoptotic cell death. While
Brentuximab vedotin induced cell death has been extensively studied, its
potential immune modulatory activity has yet to be explored. Normal
apoptosis is non-immunogenic, however multiple chemotherapeutic agents
have been shown to induce a unique form of cell death termed Immunogenic
Cell Death (ICD). ICD is characterized by exposure of danger-associated
molecular patterns (DAMPs), many of which are Toll-like receptor ligands,
which can reinitiate the immune responses suppressed by the tumor
microenvironment. To test whether Brentuximab vedotin mediated tumor cell
death induced ICD the phenotypic characteristics of Brentuximab
vedotin-killed CD30+ HL tumor cell lines was examined. Brentuximab
vedotin, dose-dependently induced surface exposure of the hallmark ICD
markers calreticulin and HSP90 to similar levels induced by oxaliplatin,
a chemotherapeutic agent known to mediate ICD. Since ICD is downstream of
the ER stress response, Brentuximab vedotin was assessed for its ability
to induce ER stress. Brentuximab vedotin treatment upregulated the
apoptotic ER sensor C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) and induced the
cleavage and activation of ATF6, a transcription factor required for
induction of the ER stress response. ER stress response occurred
concurrently with induction of ICD markers and preceded the appearance of
active caspase 3/7. These results indicate that Brentuximab vedotin
mediated disruption of the microtubule network, in addition to perturbing
the cell division cycle and mitosis, also induces ER stress contributing
to ICD-dependent cellular toxicity. The functional consequence of ICD is
activation of an immune reaction. Thus, exposure of dendritic cells to
Brentuximab vedotin-killed tumor cells evoked an inflammatory phenotype
including an increase in co-stimulatory markers CD86 and MHC Class II
antigens, and activation of NFkB, an intermediate of inflammatory
signaling pathways. Taken together, this report suggests that
CD30-expressing tumor cells killed by Brentuximab vedotin may potentially
activate the innate immune system to initiate antitumor immune response.
It also provides a rationale for exploring therapeutic strategies that
combine Brentuximab vedotin with other immune stimulatory regimens.

