Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole exome sequencing of pre and post treatment diffuse large B
cell lymphoma reveals the mutation spectrum of the relapse/refractory
patient population


Our current understanding of the mutation spectrum of relapse/refractory
patients is limited. Several published studies describing the mutational
landscape of Diffuse Large B cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) have focused, by
design, on diagnostic (pre-treatment) biopsies alone, while re-biopsy of
patients who are refractory to first line therapy or who relapse on
treatment is not standard of care in DLBCL. We have performed whole exome
sequencing on 47 post treatment DLBCL core needle biopsies, 8 with
matched diagnostic biopsies. Samples were obtained during a phase II
trial prior to the start of treatment with the BCR targeted agent
fostamatinib (1,2). Patients had progressed following therapy with an
anthracycline-based regimen such as R-CHOP and had a median of 3 prior
therapies (range 1-8). We compared the whole exome somatic variant and
copy number calls from the post treatment and matched pairs to 2 cohorts
of primary DLBCL (n = 112) analyzed with the same mutation caller (3,4).
The average mutation rate between the pre and post treatment samples (n =
250, 282 respectively) and the paired diagnostic and post treatment
biopsies were similar. However, we found that the mutation spectrum
between the paired biopsies differed. Known DLBCL hotspot mutations such
as MYD88 L265P remained consistent between pre and post treatment
biopsies, however novel mutations in known DLBCL targets were found to
emerge in the post treatment biopsies.1. Veldman-Jones, M. et al.
Reproducible, quantitative and flexible molecular sub-typing of clinical
DLBCL samples using the NanoString nCounter system. Clin Cancer Res
(2014)2. Flinn I, B.N., Blum KA, et al. A Phase II Trial to Evaluate the
Efficacy of Fostamatinib in Patients with Relapsed or Refractory Diffuse
Large B-Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL). American Society of Hematology (San
Francisco, 2014).3. Zhang, J. et al. Genetic heterogeneity of diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110, 1398-403 (2013).4.
Pasqualucci, L. et al. Analysis of the coding genome of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma. Nat Genet 43, 830-7 (2011).

