Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel resveratrol-analog HPIMBD inhibits breast cancer cell
metastasis by reversal of epithelial-mesenchymal transition


Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a biological process that
mediates a phenotypical change in the polarized epithelial cells to
mesenchymal cells. The process of EMT increases a cell's migratory and
invasive properties. It is well documented that the process of EMT plays
a very critical role in cancer metastasis. The objective of this study
was to characterize the role of a novel Resveratrol analog
4-(E)-{4-hydroxyphenylimino)-methylbenzene, 1,2-diol} (HPIMBD) on EMT in
human breast cancer cells.Human breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231 were
treated with Resveratrol (Res) and HPIMBD for up to 48 hours. Protein
expression levels of E-cadherin, matrix metalloproteases (MMPs), snail,
slug, zeb1/2 and nuclear migration of -catenin were quantified after
treatment with Res or HPIMBD and compared with that of the
vehicle-treated control cells. mRNA expression levels of -catenin and
wnt-7b were also quantified. Migration MDA-MB-231 cells was determined
after treatment with Res or HPIMBD by wound healing assay.Treatment with
HPIMBD significantly up-regulated E-cadherin protein expression levels.
The up-regulation of E-cadherin by HPIMBD was associated with suppression
of snail, slug and Zeb1 protein levels. HPIMBD significantly
down-regulated mRNA expression levels of -catenin and wnt-7b.
Furthermore, HPIMBD restricted nuclear migration of -catenin. Treatment
of breast cancer cells with HPIMBD resulted in down-regulation of MMP3
and MMP9 but not MMP2 protein expression levels. Treatment with HPIMBD
also prevented breast cancer cell migration.Our studies demonstrtae that
HPIMBD decreases the metastatic properties of breast cancer cells by
inhibition of EMT and down-regulation of wnt/ catenin pathway. These
findings suggest that HPIMBD may have a potential in inhibtion of EMT and
may be explored as as a potential therapy to prevent breast cancer
metastasis.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

