Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating hTERT (human telomerase) mRNA: mechanism of action and
potential use for early diagnosis of malignancy


In contrast to current impressive achievements in the biological
knowledge and therapy of cancer, the field of early diagnosis lags behind
and presents an unmet need. We hereby present the human telomerase as a
potential tool for early diagnosis of cancer. Telomerase activation is a
prerequisite for the perpetuation of the malignant clone during cancer
progression as it elongates telomeres in each cell division. hTERT mRNA
is shed into the serum and remains stable in vesicular forms named
Exosomes. Exosomes are secreted by most cells containing nucleic acids,
proteins and lipids. We established a method for the detection and
quantification of hTERT mRNA products in exosomes derived from growth
media of cancer cell lines and human sera for the future use as a
diagnostic tool for the early detection of cancer. In four cancer cell
lines we detected exosomal hTERT RNA expression, which also correlated
with its telomerase activity and intracellular hTERT mRNA expression,
compared to a non-telomerase expressing cell line. We studied the
crosstalk between T cell leukemia derived exosomes and primary human
fibroblast cells and revealed that primary cells can uptake exosomes
derived from a different type of cell. The secreted exosomes affected the
recipient cells by increasing the hTERT mRNA 6 hours post exposure and
increasing telomerase levels and expression 24 hours post exposure, while
the levels of the hTERT core promoter transcription factors did not
change. For the future goal of establishing a method of early diagnosis
of malignancies we screened 63 patients with different malignancies and
compared their exosomal hTERT mRNA expression in the sera to that of 20
healthy volunteers. The results have shown that the expression of hTERT
is variable among malignancies and between different patients with the
same cancer type. To exclude some variables, such as drugs, that can
influence exosome secretion from cells, we examined the influence of
three chronically administered drugs on our chosen experimental cell
lines. The drugs tested were Aspirin, Simvastatin and Captopril. While
Simvastatin significantly decreased hTERT mRNA in exosomes derived from
one cell line, neither aspirin nor Captopril effected the secretion of
exosomes, indicated by a similar hTERT expression in the relevant treated
cells. Furthermore, no change in the intracellular hTERT expression and
telomerase activity after drug exposure was evident. In the light of
these results we concluded that exosomes derived from tumor cells can
affect the surrounding microenvironment by exploiting the recipient cell
mechanism and promoting the activation of telomerase in those recipient
cells. Understanding of these mechanisms may have a strong impact on
deciphering metastases formation. Hopefully, promoting hTERT mRNA as a
novel marker for malignancies will enable us to develop a new diagnostic
tool for future use in the early diagnosis of cancer.

