Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 couples with HOTAIR to inhibit tumor
suppressor miR-34a in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma


We attempt to study the role of EZH2 in suppressing (microRNA-34a)
miR-34a, an important tumor suppressor miR-34a silenced in PDAC cells,
and identify the silencing partner of EZH2. We have previously showed
that enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), an enzyme catalyzing
trimethylation of H3K27, represses microRNA in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) by multiple mechanisms including H3K27
trimethylation, heterochromatin formation and DNA methylation. miR-34a is
frequently downregulated in human cancers by inactivation of p53 or
promoter DNA methylation, but in PDAC the major player that silences
miR-34a is unknown.Methods: miR-34a levels were measured by qRT-PCR in
PDAC cells treated with small molecule inhibitor of EZH2
3-deazaneplenocin A (DZP) and siRNAs targeting EZH2 and HOTAIR. miR-34a
levels were also measured in human pancreatic ductal epithelial (HPDE)
cells overexpressed with EZH2 and various EZH2-domain deleted mutants. We
studied the effect of EZH2 to the promoter activity of miR-34a gene by
luciferase assay. To identify the silencing partners of EZH2, we
inhibited SUZ12, DNMT1, DNMT3A, DNMT3B and HOTAIR in PDAC cells and
measured the change of miR-34a level. The effect of miR-34a to
EZH2-induced cell growth and tumor formation were studied by MTT assay
and in vivo subcutaneous tumor formation study respectively. Colony
formation rate was also measured in HPDE cells overexpressed with
wildtype and EZH2-binding domain deleted HOTAIR.Results: miR-34a was
upregulated upon the inhibition of EZH2 and HOTAIR, while EZH2
overexpression in HPDE reduced miR-34a level. Consistent to previous
studies, inhibition of DNMTs failed to upregulate miR-34a in PDAC cells.
Inhibition of EZH2 by shRNAs increased the promoter activity of miR-34a
in PDAC cells. We showed that EZH2 enhanced cell proliferation and colony
formation of HPDE cells, and overexpression of miR-34a could attenuate
this growth promoting effect. EZH2-mediated cell proliferation was
attenuated by miR-34a mimics transfection and miR-34a precursor
lentivirus transduction. Inhibition of miR-34a by miRZIP-34a lentivirus
could decrease the tumor formation rate of PDAC cells expressing shEZH2.
Moreover, overexpression of HOTAIR increased colony formation in HPDE
cells, while deletion of EZH2-binding domain in HOTAIR attenuated this
effect.Conclusion: Ectopic expression of EZH2 suppressed miR-34a in
non-tumor human pancreatic duct cells and PDAC cells. In addition to PRC2
core member Suz12, inhibition of miR-34a by EZH2 is dependent on HOTAIR.
miR-34a was the functional target silenced by EZH2 that contributed to
EZH2-mediated cell proliferation and tumor growth in PDAC. We believed
that HOTAIR guided EZH2 to exhibit silencing effect to the promoter of
miR-34a.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

