Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Musashi-2 (MSI2) activates TGF- signaling and inhibits CLDN7 to
promote non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) metastasis


Approximately 220,000 new patients were diagnosed with lung cancer and
160,000 died from this disease in the United States in 2014. Non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has a 5 year survival rate of approximately 16%,
with most deaths associated with distant metastasis. To gain a better
insight into the regulation of metastasis, we studied
metastasis-competent versus low metastasis-potential cell lines derived
from NSCLC tumors of KrasLA1/+; P53R172HG/+ (KP) mice. Initial screening
showed consistent and statistically significant upregulation of Musashi-2
(MSI2) in highly metastatic cells on both mRNA and protein level.
Furthermore, we established statistically significant elevation of MSI2
protein expression in 123 human NSCLC tumor specimens versus normal lung
tissue (pApproximately 220,000 new patients were diagnosed with lung
cancer and 160,000 died from this disease in the United States in 2014.
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has a 5 year survival rate of
approximately 16%, with most deaths associated with distant metastasis.
To gain a better insight into the regulation of metastasis, we studied
metastasis-competent versus low metastasis-potential cell lines derived
from NSCLC tumors of KrasLA1/+; P53R172HG/+ (KP) mice. Initial screening
showed consistent and statistically significant upregulation of Musashi-2
(MSI2) in highly metastatic cells on both mRNA and protein level.
Furthermore, we established statistically significant elevation of MSI2
protein expression in 123 human NSCLC tumor specimens versus normal lung
tissue (p<0.0001).MSI2 is an RNA binding protein that regulates mRNA
translation and is upregulated and functionally important in hematologic
malignancies including CML and AML. MSI2 knockdown in four independent
metastatic murine and human NSCLC cell lines very significantly decreased
invasion in vitro but did not significantly change cell proliferation or
survival. In orthotropic lung injection of mouse NSCLC cells into the
lungs of immunocompetent 129Sv mice, MSI2 depletion dramatically
decreased invasion of mediastinal lymph nodes and abrogated metastasis.
Reverse-phase protein array (RPPA) screening indicated that Msi2
depletion significantly affected the expression of multiple proteins
associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and control of
cell-cell attachments, including the extracellular matrix component
fibronectin (FN1) and the tight junction protein claudin-7 (CLDN7). These
and additional targets were validated in all four NSCLC model systems.
MSI2 dependent control of FN1 expression was mediated at the level of
mRNA induction, while CLDN7 expression was strikingly upregulated
(10-fold) at the protein but not mRNA level, nominating CLDN7 as a
putative direct MSI2 target. Parallel evaluation of a series of candidate
direct MSI2 translational targets indicated MSI2 depletion downregulated
translation of TGF- receptor (TGF-RI) and SMAD3. Morphologically, MSI2
depleted cells were marked by a greater degree of cell-cell attachment,
potentially explaining their decreased invasive capacity. Based on this
work, we propose that MSI2 supports TGF-RI dependent EMT signaling and
downregulates tight junction controls in a subset of metastatic NSCLC,
and may influence tumor response to inhibitors targeting the TGF- pathway.

