Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BGB-290: A highly potent and specific PARP1/2 inhibitor
potentiates anti-tumor activity of chemotherapeutics in patient biopsy
derived SCLC models


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is one of the most aggressive forms of lung
cancer with a 5-year survival rate of less than 10%. Despite the initial
high response rate to the frontline platinum based chemotherapy, relapse
is common and rapid. The clinical activity of PARP inhibitors has shown
good correlation with platinum sensitivity in breast and ovarian cancers.
Thus, there is good rationale to test PARP inhibitors in SCLC. BGB-290 is
a novel PARP-1/2 inhibitor, which is currently under clinical
investigation in solid tumors. In this study, we evaluated the in vitro
and in vivo activities of BGB-290, and its combination activity with
chemotherapies in patient biopsy derived SCLC xenograft models.In the
biochemical assays, BGB-290 demonstrated great potency for PARP1/2 (IC50
= 0.83 and 0.11 nM, respectively) and high selectivity over other PARP
enzymes. The DNA-trapping activity of BGB-290 was measured in a
fluorescence polarization (FP) binding assay. BGB-290 showed potent
DNA-trapping activity with IC50 of 13 nM. In the cellular assays, BGB-290
inhibited intracellular PAR formation with an IC50 of 0.24 nM. Tumor cell
lines with homologous recombination defects were profoundly sensitive to
BGB-290. Oral administration of BGB-290 resulted in time-dependent and
dose-dependent inhibition of PARylation in MDA-MB-436 (BRCA1 mutant)
breast cancer xenograft, correlating well with the tumor drug
concentrations. Compared to olaparib, BGB-290 induced PAR inhibition was
more sustained. Consistent with this finding, BGB-290 demonstrated
excellent anti-tumor activity in this model, over 10-fold more potent
than olaparib.In a panel of 7 SCLC cell lines tested, 3 of them were
sensitive to BGB-290. SCLC primary tumor models were established in house
using patient biopsy samples obtained from Beijing Cancer Hospital. The
anti-tumor activities of BGB-290 as single agent or in combination with
etoposide/carboplatin (E/C) were evaluated in 8 SCLC primary tumor
models. BGB-290 showed weak single agent activity in these models. Six of
the 8 models (75%) were sensitive to E/C treatment, consistent with the
clinical response observed in these patients. Addition of BGB-290 as
concomitant treatment or maintenance therapy significantly prolonged the
response duration in these chemo-sensitive models. In the two
chemo-insensitive models, BGB-290 and E/C combo was less effective.
Addition of BGB-290 to the chemo regiment was well-tolerated throughout
the study.In conclusion, BGB-290 is a potent and selective inhibitor of
PARP1/2. It is highly active both in vitro and in vivo in BRCA mutant
tumors. BGB-290 has also demonstrated good combination activity with
chemotherapeutics in patient biopsy derived SCLC models, supporting
further investigation in the clinic.

