Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A yeast synthetic lethal screen identifies a conserved interaction
between PLK1 and CKS1b affecting cancer cell viability


The CKS1b gene is located on chromosome 1q21 and is frequently amplified
in breast, lung and liver cancers. CKS1b codes for a conserved regulatory
subunit of cyclin-CDK complexes that functions at multiple stages of cell
cycle progression. We used a high throughput screening protocol to mimic
cancer-related over-expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutants to
identify genes whose functions become essential only when CKS1 is over-
expressed, a genetic interaction termed synthetic dosage lethality (SDL).
Mutations in genes affecting the mitotic entry checkpoint and genes
affecting mitotic exit are evident among the SDL interactions identified.
The mitotic entry checkpoint controls the stability of the mitotic
inhibitor Swe1 (Human WEE1), resulting in delayed mitosis when cell
polarity is disrupted. Swe1 is a tyrosine kinase that inhibits the
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) complex by phosphorylation of a conserved
tyrosine-19 on Cdc28 (Human CDK1). We find that the SDL interaction
between Cks1 and the mitotic entry checkpoint requires both Swe1 and the
Cdc28 tyrosine-19 residue. The mitotic exit network is a signaling
cascade that controls post-anaphase inhibition of CDK activity necessary
for progression into G1. Since the polo-like kinase Cdc5 (Human PLK1)
functions in both the mitotic entry and mitotic exit pathways, we
investigated the effect of targeting PLK1 in breast cancers with varying
expression of CKS1b. We analyzed published datasets and found that growth
inhibition resulting from PLK1 knockdown was strongly correlated with
increased CKS1b expression levels in breast cancer cell lines [Marcotte,
R., Brown, K., Suarez, F., & Sayad, A. (2012). Cancer Discovery, 2:172].
We independently confirmed sensitivity to PLK1 knockdown in 8 breast
cancer cell lines in which 3 of 4 sensitive lines had high CKS1b
expression and 3 of 4 insensitive lines had low CKS1b expression. We
modified CKS1b expression in hMEC cells and showed that increased
expression enhanced apoptosis upon PLK1 knockdown while decreased CKS1b
expression abrogated sensitivity. Thus identification of a yeast
synthetic dosage lethal (SDL) interactions identifies a conserved
interactions that may be targeted to kill cancer cells.

