Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of epigenetic, differentiation and DNA damaging agents
induce tumor cell death and stem cell depletion in breast cancer


The histone deacetylase inhibitor, entinostat, is a new-generation
epigenetic drug, which has recently demonstrated notable clinical
efficacy when used in combination with standard therapy. Retinoids induce
differentiation in various types of stem cells. However, its delivery to
patients is challenging because of its rapid metabolism. Also, epigenetic
changes in the retinoic acid receptors often render cancer cells
retinoid-resistant. We have shown that a combination of entinostat,
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and doxorubicin causes significant
regression of xenografts of triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells
and investigated the mechanism underlying the effectiveness of this
combination therapy. Combinations of entinostat, retinoic acid and
doxorubicin were optimal in causing tumor regression in triple negative
breast cancer xenografts. Gene expression analysis of treated TNBC cells
identified genes most effectively reprogrammed by entinostat and
doxorubicin (ED) combination therapy. These genes are involved in cell
cycle arrest, inflammation and differentiation, which are related to
better survival outcome in patients. Entinostat sensitizes the cells to
doxorubicin-induced growth arrest, resulting in increased apoptosis and
necrosis. Adding ATRA to ED regulated interferon genes and members of the
cancer/testis antigens (CTA) and tripartite motif (TRIM) family of
proteins and induces inflammation in nude mice. Entinostat/ATRA/dox
therapy was most effective to target breast cancer stem cells (BCSC) in
limiting dilution assays of growth in mammary fat pads. The
epithelium-specific ETS transcription factor-1 (ESE-1 or ELF3), known to
regulate cellular proliferation and differentiation mediates the
epigenetic differentiation effect. Patient-derived distant metastases
responded to entinostat/ATRA/dox therapy in culture. Thus, the
combination therapy may have significant effects in decreasing both local
and metastatic growth in breast cancer, especially in decreasing
recurrence by targeting breast cancer stem cells.

