Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional polarization of macrophage triggered by
tumor-conditioned medium


Purpose: Macrophages are important components of leukocyte infiltrates in
various tumor stroma. Macrophages that infiltrate into tumor tissues are
called tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). TAMs show
anti-tumorigenesis(M1) or pro-tumorigenesis (M2) functions depending on
the cytokine milieu of the tumor microenvironment. TAMs perform some key
homeostatic functions that allow tumor maintenance and growth. However,
the signals involved in communication between tumor cells and macrophages
are poorly defined. The aim of this study is to explore the macrophage
polarization treated with the tumor-conditioned medium.Methods: Ana-1
macrophages, human THP-1 monocytes, and bone-marrow-derived macrophages
(BMDMs) from C57BL/6J mice were incubated with HCT116-conditioned medium,
respectively. Then we detected M1/M2 specific molecular markers by flow
cytometry, Western blot and Real-time PCR. Flow cytometry was used to
quantitatively assess the change of macrophage populations in macrophages
treated with conditioned medium or normal medium. CD68(human) and
CD11b(human), F4/80(mouse) and CD11b(mouse) were used as total-macrophage
markers, CD206 as a marker of M2 macrophage. Secretory cytokine profile
of the polarized macrophages was measured by cytokine array. Then, HCT116
cells were treated with conditioned medium of M2-like macrophage and
applied to cell growth and colony formation assay.Results: By Western
blot, we found that HCT116-conditioned medium could induce BMDMs and
Ana-1 cells to overexpress arginase1(Arg1), but Ana-1 cells to express
low inducible nitric oxide synthase(iNOS). Flow cytometry showed high
expression level of CD68(human) and CD11b(human), F4/80(mouse) and
CD11b(mouse), CD206 in HCT116-conditioned medium induced macrophages.
Additionally, mRNA level of Arg1 was higher and M2-related cytokines
IL-10,IL13 were also significantly upregulated, while mRNA level of iNOS
was lower and M1-related cytokines IL-12,IFN-were downregulated in
HCT116-conditioned medium induced macrophages. Conditioned medium of
M2-like macrophages promoted the HCT116 cell growth and
proliferation.Conclusions: HCT116 can secrete the soluble factors into
conditioned medium, which would induce TAM polarization. Subsequently,
conditioned medium of M2-like macrophages can promote tumor cells growth.

