Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of the autophagosomal marker LC3 on circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) of patients with early and metastatic breast cancer (BC)


Background: Autophagy is a protein and organelle degradation pathway
involved in the regulation of cancer development and progression. Recent
evidence suggests that autophagy serves as a cell survival mechanism
under stressed conditions and it is considered to be involved in
determining the response of cancer cells to anticancer therapy.
Microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3) has been identified
as a marker for monitoring autophagy. CTCs, which have been linked to
tumor progression in BC, may employ autophagy associated mechanisms to
survive. Here, we investigated the expression of LC3B on CTCs isolated
from patients with BC.Methods: The expression of LC3B was first assessed
by immunofluorescence using MCF7 treated with tamoxifen as a model
system. LC3B expression was then evaluated in 22 and 25 CTC positive
patients with early and metastatic BC before the initiation of adjuvant
and first-line chemotherapy, respectively. Metastatic patients were also
assessed before the administration of the second treatment cycle.
Cytospins of MCF7 cells and of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
were stained with a monoclonal A45-B/B3 anti-cytokeratin (CK) antibody
and an LC3B anti-rabbit antibody. LC3B density was measured using the
automated fluorescent microscope ARIOL system. The cutoff value for high
and low LC3B expression, was set at the median value of the integrated
optical density (IOD).Results: Among 142 CTCs identified in patients with
early BC, 55 (38%) presented high LC3B expression. A total of 176 CTCs
were detected in metastatic patients before the initiation of first-line
chemotherapy and 99 (59%) presented high LC3B expression (p = 0.0003
compared with early BC patients). After the first treatment cycle, 62
CTCs were detected with 37 (60%) of them demonstrating high LC3B
expression. Nine metastatic patients remained CTC-positive both before
and after the first cycle of chemotherapy. In these patients, the
proportion of cells presenting high LC3B expression was 40% and 75%, pre-
and post- chemotherapy, respectively (p = 0.0049).Conclusions: The
autophagosome marker LC3B is expressed in CTCs from patients with BC.
High LC3B expression in CTCs was more commonly observed in metastatic,
whereas low LC3B expression prevailed in early disease. Moreover, LC3B
expression on CTCs was significantly increased after the administration
of chemotherapy. The above observations suggest that metastatic
progression in breast cancer could be linked to LC3B expression. Moreover
the evaluation of LC3B on CTCs merits further investigation regarding its
association with chemotherapy efficacy.

