Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel anti-CEACAM5 maytansinoid-antibody-drug conjugate for the
treatment of colorectal, lung and gastric tumors


Carcinoembryonic antigen cell adhesion molecule 5, CEACAM5 (CEA, CD66e)
is a well known tumor marker, in particular in colorectal carcinomas,
where circulating CEA is used to monitor response to chemotherapy. This
GPI anchored glycoprotein belongs to the CEA-related cell adhesion
molecule (CEACAM) family and shares domains identity to other members,
like CEACAM6. CEACAM5 is expressed in non-human primate and also shares
identity to different members, making it difficult to find an antibody
both selective to human CEACAM5 and cross-reacting solely with monkey
CEACAM5.CEACAM5 has been described in the literature as a poorly
internalizing surface protein, but interestingly, antibodies with
different uptake capacities have been found.CEACAM5 is highly expressed
at the surface of tumor cells in several epithelial tumors, including
CRC, lung and gastric tumors and displays a limited expression in normal
tissue where it is found solely at the luminal surface of columnar
absorptive cells. This prompted us to develop an anti-CEACAM5
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) for the treatment of CEACAM5-positive
tumors.We generated multiple anti-CEACAM5 antibodies by immunization of
Balb/c mice with recombinant human and monkey CEACAM5 extracellular
domain and CEACAM5-positive tumor cells. We selected a highly specific
CEACAM5 antibody that cross-reacts with monkey. The Alexa488-labeled anti
CEACAM5 antibody internalizes in tumor cells and is processed in
lysosomes leading to free Alexa488 molecules. Although the
internalization rate was shown to be moderate, the high number of CEACAM5
at the surface of tumor cells allowed to produce a high number of free
Alexa488, suggesting that the antibody could be suited for conjugation to
a cytotoxic molecule.Indeed, conjugation of the antibody to the cytotoxic
maytansinoid, DM4, with the cleavable SPDB linker generated SAR408701,
which kills different CEACAM5-positive tumor cells at sub-nM
concentration. SAR408701 in vivo efficacy was evaluated in CRC, lung and
gastric patient-derived xenografts (PDXs), following a single injection
of ADC at low doses (2.5-5 mg/kg). The conjugate was able to elicit
strong and specific antitumor efficacy in a number of PDX models
representative of the CEACAM5-positive patient population. Repeating the
administrations resulted in most cases in a more pronounced antitumor
efficacy even at doses that were otherwise marginally active as single
dose.SAR408701 was well tolerated in cynomologus monkey and displayed
similar toxicity profile as other SPDB-DM4 ADCs. Based on preclinical
efficacy data and the absence of target mediated toxicity in monkey,
SAR408701 is expected to have anticancer activity with a favorable
therapeutic index, warranting its evaluation in patients with
CEACAM5-positive tumors.

