Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) and miR-301b
interactively enhance disease aggressiveness by targeting NR3C2 (nuclear
receptor subfamily group c member 2) in human pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a highly aggressive and lethal
malignancy. Aberrant macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF)
expression is associated with disease aggressiveness and increased MIF in
PDAC predicts poor patient survival. Here we show that MIF-induced
disease aggressiveness and poor survival in PDAC involves the inhibition
of the nuclear receptor subfamily group c member 2 (NR3C2). Tumors with
aberrant high levels of MIF (MIF-high) showed an increased expression of
mir-301b and a decrease in NR3C2 expression as compared to the tumors
with a lower level of MIF (MIF-low) in PDAC cases and a negative
correlation existed between MIF and NR3C2 expressions in these tumors.
Furthermore, patients with an increase in mir-301b or decrease in NR3C2
expression had a significantly shorter survival than other patients. MIF
overexpression and knockdown confirmed that MIF up-regulates miR-301b,
which then binds to the 3UTR of NR3C2 and markedly decreases its
expression. Moreover, MIF-overexpressing orthotopic tumor xenografts
showed an increase in mir-301b and a decrease in NR3C2 expressions.
MIF-induced regulation of mir-301b and NR3C2 functionally involved the
PI3Kinase/Akt pathway. Examination of the tumor suppressor mechanism of
NR3C2 revealed that it inhibits proliferation, colony formation,
migration and invasion, and enhances sensitivity to chemotherapeutic drug
gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer cells. Furthermore, NR3C2 knock down
enhanced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. These data identify a
novel MIF-induced signaling pathway targeting NR3C2, leading to increased
disease aggressiveness and poor outcome in PDAC. We identified a
MIF-driven signaling pathway that inhibits a previously undescribed tumor
suppressor of PDAC, NR3C2, involving miR-301b. The inhibition of NR3C2
enhanced disease aggressiveness and predicted to poor survival, as shown
by our survival analysis. Therapies that target the MIF-miR-301b-NR3C2
axis may improve disease outcome in pancreatic cancer.

