Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modified dietary inflammatory index and increased number of
colonic aberrant crypt foci


Pro-inflammatory dietary intake has been linked to the development of
colorectal cancer (CRC). There is a paucity of data, however, concerning
dietary behavior and prevalence of colonic aberrant crypt foci (ACF), an
emerging pre-polyp intermediate endpoint thought to be on the pathway to
CRC. We assessed this question in a cross-sectional study of 130 patients
(mean age = 57.1 yrs) who received colonoscopy at the Colon Cancer
Prevention Program at University of Connecticut Health. Typical diet
intake was ascertained from the Brief Block Food Frequency Questionnaire,
which provided 29 of the 45 food items in the standard Dietary
Inflammatory Index (DII). Using advanced chromoendoscopy imaging, ACF
were counted by an endoscopist and external reviewer for consensus. In
bivariate analyses between ACF quartiles and mean number of daily
servings in four food groups, using the Kruskal-Wallis Non-Parametric
test, we found evidence of an inverse dose response with reduced intake
of grains (3.9, 3.6, 3.1, 2.7, mean servings per ACF quartile,
respectively, p = 0.06) and fruit (1.4, 1.2, 1.0, 1.1, mean servings per
ACF quartile, respectively, p = 0.06). We observed little variation in
vegetable or dairy intake across ACF quartiles. The association between
the modified DII (mod-DII) and ACF number (continuous) was assessed using
latent variable modeling controlling for continuous variables of age and
waist-hip ratio, and, categorical variables of sex, regular aspirin use (
1 pill per week in past 12 months), regular statin use ( 1 pill per week
in past 12 months), cigarette smoking (ever, never), polyp history (yes,
no) and education level. The final model had a good fit (CFI = 0.92,
RMSEAPro-inflammatory dietary intake has been linked to the development
of colorectal cancer (CRC). There is a paucity of data, however,
concerning dietary behavior and prevalence of colonic aberrant crypt foci
(ACF), an emerging pre-polyp intermediate endpoint thought to be on the
pathway to CRC. We assessed this question in a cross-sectional study of
130 patients (mean age = 57.1 yrs) who received colonoscopy at the Colon
Cancer Prevention Program at University of Connecticut Health. Typical
diet intake was ascertained from the Brief Block Food Frequency
Questionnaire, which provided 29 of the 45 food items in the standard
Dietary Inflammatory Index (DII). Using advanced chromoendoscopy imaging,
ACF were counted by an endoscopist and external reviewer for consensus.
In bivariate analyses between ACF quartiles and mean number of daily
servings in four food groups, using the Kruskal-Wallis Non-Parametric
test, we found evidence of an inverse dose response with reduced intake
of grains (3.9, 3.6, 3.1, 2.7, mean servings per ACF quartile,
respectively, p = 0.06) and fruit (1.4, 1.2, 1.0, 1.1, mean servings per
ACF quartile, respectively, p = 0.06). We observed little variation in
vegetable or dairy intake across ACF quartiles. The association between
the modified DII (mod-DII) and ACF number (continuous) was assessed using
latent variable modeling controlling for continuous variables of age and
waist-hip ratio, and, categorical variables of sex, regular aspirin use (
1 pill per week in past 12 months), regular statin use ( 1 pill per week
in past 12 months), cigarette smoking (ever, never), polyp history (yes,
no) and education level. The final model had a good fit (CFI = 0.92,
RMSEA<0.05), and showed statistically significant direct associations
between ACF number and both increasing mod-DII score ( = 0.18) and ever
having smoked cigarettes ( = 0.19). No significant effects were found
between ACF number and the remaining variables in the model. In summary,
these cross-sectional findings support the growing evidence base about
the adverse impact of an overall pro-inflammatory diet in CRC development
and potential value of ACF as intermediate endpoints in research. A
limitation of this study is lack of information on physical activity, a
lifestyle behavior known to reduce CRC risk presumably through
anti-inflammatory effects. More research is warranted to explore possible
mitigating effects of physical activity, and other factors known to have
pro- or anti-inflammatory properties, in the context of
inflammation-based classification of diet.

