Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of target therapies in liver cancer PDX tumor models:
Response, resistance and predictive biomarkers


Liver cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer mortality worldwide.
Hepatocelluar carcinoma (HCC) is the most common form of liver cancer,
followed by intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (IHCC). HCC has dismal
clinical outcome, whereas the prognosis is even worse for IHCC as it is
more difficult to diagnose and to treat comparing to HCC. Surgical
resection and local ablation remain the top choices of therapy for early
liver cancer while chemoembolization-TACE is commonly used to treat
intermediate HCC. Sorafenib is the only FDA approved target therapy for
advanced HCC and its clinical utility in IHCC is still being examined in
clinical trials. On-going clinical trials are also testing therapeutic
modalities against oncogenic pathways including RTK signaling pathways,
PI3K/Ras pathways and the angiogenesis pathway.PDX tumor models
recapitulate the clinical complexity of the original human cancers. At
GenenDesign, we have established over 800 PDX tumor models and conducted
extensive drug response tests in a mouse trial format. GenenDesign liver
cancer PDX tumor panel comprises of 36 HCC and over 10 IHCC models. Our
in-house mouse trials in liver PDX tumor models include treatment with
sorafenib as well as XL184, a multi-kinase inhibitor currently being
evaluated in clinical trials. In addition, crizotinib (a cMET inhibitor)
and AZD4547 (an FGFR inhibitor) as mono-therapies as well as in
combination with sorafenib are also tested in search of therapeutic
signals. From these studies, we have identified both drug sensitive and
de novo drug resistant models. Through long-term treatment, acquired
resistance models and reversible resistance models are also
established.Currently, GD liver cancer PDX tumors are being analyzed by
genetic and genomic profiling (hot-spot mutational analysis, exome-seq,
RNA-seq, SNP array and gene expression array). Bioinformatics analysis is
on-going to identify genomic signatures with the potential as predictive
biomarkers for sorafenib and other targeted therapies in liver cancer.
Together with genomic profiling, signal search in PDX mouse trials
promise to be effective in generating preclinical datasets to facilitate
clinical trial designs.

