Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cytosolic domain of a disintergrin and metalloprotease (ADAM)
15 promotes non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) proliferation


Emerging evidence has indicated that proteins of a disintergrin and
metalloprotease (ADAM) family contribute to cancer progression and
metastasis. One member of this family, ADAM15, was reported to
over-express in multiple cancers, including gastric, lung, breast, and
prostate cancers. It has been shown that the enzymatic activities of its
extracellular metalloprotease domain mediate ErbB signaling pathway and
promote breast cancer proliferation and migration. Nevertheless, in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the role of ADAM15 and its
correlation to patient prognosis is still not well understood. Moreover,
unlike in breast cancer, the enzymatic activities of the ADAM15
extracellular domain appeared to be independent of ErbB signaling and
lung cancer proliferation, indicating an alternative mechanism of ADAM15
in promoting lung cancer progression. Here, we demonstrated that ADAM15
was over-expressed in primary NSCLC tissues compared to the adjacent
normal tissues. Patients with ADAM15 high-expressing lung tumors had
shorter survival times. Furthermore, we examined different isoforms of
ADAM15 and discovered that, isoform 6 (i6), which contains the most
cytoplasmic Src homology 3 (SH3) binding motifs, was significantly
upregulated in primary lung cancer tissues. Comparison of i6 and isoform
1 (i1), which has no cytoplasmic SH3 binding motifs, revealed that the
cytoplastmic domain is essential for lung cancer proliferation, as well
as aggressiveness in an in vitro lung cancer migration model. We also
showed that ADAM15 i6, but not i1, mediated ErbB signaling pathway
through physical interaction with growth factor receptor-bound protein 2
(Grb2), and activation of Src homolog 2 domain containing (Shc). Most
importantly, overexpression of ADAM15 i6 promoted NSCLC cell growth in a
xenograft mouse model while knockdown of i6 resulted in tumor shrinkage.
Thus, we identified a novel mechanism of the ADAM15 cytoplasmic domain in
NSCLC tumor progression, which will not only shed light on the molecular
mechanisms of ADAM proteins, but also facilitate development of novel
therapy in NSCLC.

