Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3K/AKT-induced stabilization of FUSE binding proteins (FBPs) in
liver cancer cells


Far upstream element-binding proteins (FBPs) represent a family of
transcription factors, which are highly overexpressed in the majority
human liver cancer (hepatocellular carcinoma; HCC). Nuclear accumulation
of FBP-1, -2, and -3 in HCC cells support cell proliferation and
migration. However, the mode of FBP dysregulation in HCC cells has not
been defined so far.Genomic alterations of the fubp (FBP-1; chr. 1p31.1),
khsrp (FBP-2; chr. 19.p13.3), and fubp3 (FBP-3; 9p34.11) gene loci in
primary human HCCs were determined by matrix-comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH). In order to identify specific stimuli of FBP
enrichment, different human HCC cell lines were cultured under different
cell density and hypoxic conditions or treated with growth factors (e.g.,
TGF, IGF-II), chemical inhibitors (e.g., AG1478, SB203580, MEK1/2,
sorafenib, and PI3K inhibitors), and gene-specific siRNAs (e.g., Akt1-3,
rictor, raptor). The in vivo relevance of the findings was confirmed
using HCC mouse models (e.g., Mdr2-/- animals) and human HCC tissue
specimens (immunohistochemistry and western blotting).Only few genomic
gains were found for all FBP family members in human HCC samples (e.g.,
6% for fubp). In vitro, inhibition of EGFR (by AG1478) or administration
of the multi-kinase inhibitor sorafenib reduced FBP protein levels.
Furthermore, inhibition of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway revealed strong
effects on FBP protein half-live without significant impact on FBP
transcription. Other pathways or stimuli only caused minor effects on FBP
expression (e.g., p38 or Raf1 inhibition). These findings were confirmed
in mouse HCC models with high-level expression of FBPs, where injection
of sorafenib or rapamycin significantly diminished FBP amounts. Reduction
of FBP concentrations after inhibition of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway was
rescued after inhibition of caspase-3/-7 activity. Lastly, a significant
correlation between pAkt and nuclear FBP expression was detected in human
HCC tissues.These results demonstrate that activation of the
PI3K/Akt/mTOR signalling axis is responsible for increased stabilisation
of FBPs in human HCC cells. Elevated FBP half-live is at least partly
mediated through crosstalk between the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway and caspase
activity. These data are important for a deeper understanding of how
druggable upstream regulators may affect FBP bioavailability in
hepatocarcinogenesis.

