Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of the ABCG2 drug efflux transporter in breast cancer
cells


The ABC transporters, including ABCG2 or breast cancer resistance protein
(BCRP) are drug efflux transporters. Their overexpression in cancers
including breast cancer has been associated with the development of
multidrug resistance (MDR) due to ABC transporter-mediated export from
tumour cells of therapeutic drugs such as chemotherapeutic (eg.
mitoxantrone, doxorubicin) and targeted agents (eg. tyrosine kinase
inhibitors). PCR microarray analysis identified that ABCG2 expression was
downregulated in the breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7 and T-47D following
treatment of cells with the androgen, 5-dihydrotestosterone (DHT), the
Hedgehog pathway inhibitor, cyclopamine, or a combination of 10-8M DHT
and 2M cyclopamine. RT-qPCR analysis confirmed that DHT and cyclopamine
treatments of MCF-7 cells rapidly downregulated ABCG2 mRNA levels by 24
hours. ABCG2 protein levels were also progressively decreased over 8 days
of treatment, with earlier reductions in ABCG2 levels observed in cells
co-treated with DHT and cyclopamine. As the ABC transporters are
primarily active on membrane surfaces as drug exporters, the
intracellular localisation of ABCG2 was investigated by
immunofluorescence microscopy. In MCF-7 cells, DHT and/or cyclopamine
decreased ABCG2 accumulation in cell-to-cell membrane junction complexes
and interestingly, accumulation of ABCG2 into cytoplasmic vesicles which
resembled aggresomes was observed in cells exposed to cyclopamine.
Consistent with the reduced levels of membrane-bound ABCG2, export of the
fluorescent ABCG2-specific substrate, mitoxantrone from MCF-7 cells was
delayed following treatment of cultures with DHT and cyclopamine, thereby
indicating diminished ABCG2 efflux activities. Moreover, these DHT- and
cyclopamine-treated cells were also more responsive to the cytotoxic
effects of mitoxantrone as the IC50 for mitoxantrone was decreased by 80%
in treated cells compared to controls. Resistance to drug therapies,
which is often facilitated by the ABC transporters, is a major cause of
treatment failure and recurrence of breast cancer. As such, development
and implementation of adjuvant compounds such as androgens and Hedgehog
inhibitors, which inhibit expression and function of ABCG2 and other
efflux transporters in breast cancer cells, may improve treatment
outcomes and prolong recurrence-free survival of patients.

