Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of ATP6V1B1 in HER2-overexpressing human breast
cancer cell line leads resistance against trastuzumab-mediated
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity


Introduction: PIK3CA mutation has been becoming widely recognized as a
resistant mechanism or therapeutic biomarker for trastuzumab based anti
HER2 targeting therapy, however little is clear on resistant mechanism of
trastuzumab mediated antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) in
HER2 overexpressing (HER2+) breast cancer patients. In the current study,
we investigated the role of Vacuolar-ATPase subunit ATP6V1B1 on the
resistant mechanism of trastuzumab mediated ADCC in HER2+ human breast
cancer cell line SK-BR-3.Methods and Results:To establish the trastuzumab
mediated ADCC resistant SK-BR-3, isolated healthy PBMCs are co-cultured
with 1-10 g/ml of trastuzumab and SK-BR-3 for 4-9 hours. The cell mixture
was incubated with CD45 magnetic beads and CD45 positive PBMCs were
removed from the mixture using MACS cell separation system (Miltenyi
Biotec, Germany). The survived SK-BR-3 thereafter co-cultured with 1-10
g/ml of trastuzumab and PBMCs for several times. After 7 passages of the
resistant cell making procedure (approximately for 6 months),
cytotoxicity was measured by conventional ADCC assay (E/T ratio = 10/1)
with various concentration of trastuzumab. The cytotoxicity of ADCC
resistant SK-BR-3 was significantly reduced as compared with normal
SK-BR-3 cytotoxicity in 10g/ml of trastuzumab (15.9% and 42.8%,
respectively). Then, we analyzed the gene expression profile of ADCC
resistant SK-BR-3 by using DNA microarray to sort candidate genes for the
resistance. Several genes were up- or down-regulated in ADCC resistant
SK-BR-3 and we focused on ATP6V1B1 gene that was significantly reduced on
the resistant cells. To clarify the result of comprehensive gene
expression analysis, we investigated ATP6V1B1 mRNA level of SK-BR-3 and
resistant cell by using real time PCR and found the 50% reduction of
ATP6V1B1 mRNA level in ADCC resistant cells. Thus, to evaluate the role
of ATP6V1B1 on the trastuzumab mediated ADCC resistant mechanism,
ATP6V1B1-knocked down SK-BR-3 (sh-RNA knockdown method) were tested in
trastuzumab mediated ADCC assay and found that ATP6V1B1-knocked down
SK-BR-3 were significantly less ADCC activity with LDH assay as compared
to control SK-BR-3 (19.1% and 40.0%, respectively).Conclusions: ATP6V1B1
might be one factor for trastuzumab mediated ADCC resistance in HER2+
breast cancer cells.

