Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying novel cancer stem cell target for triple-negative
breast cancer


Triple negative breast cancer is characterized by its aggressive clinical
behavior with high incidence of metastasis to the lungs and brain. These
patients do not respond to hormonal therapy and show intrinsic resistance
to conventional chemotherapy. Robust evidence indicates that
treatment-resistance and metastases may arise from a subpopulation of
cells with tumor-initiating capacity called breast cancer stem cells
(BCSC). We are one of the first groups to demonstrate that residual
tumors after exposure to chemotherapy are enriched for BCSC. We have
previously described a treatment-resistant gene signature of 493 genes
derived from patient biopsies.This finding narrowed down the possible
cancer stem cell growth related genes from genome wide to only 493 genes
and provided candidate genes for screening potential targets that affect
BCSC self-renewal. Re-evaluation of the candidate genes determined a
previously unidentified cancer gene, Hematological and Neurological
Expressed 1-Like (HN1L) as the target of cancer stem cell self-renewal.
The objective of this study was to investigate the role of HN1L in
regulating BCSC and metastasis in TNBC, and to determine the mechanism of
action of HN1L in BCSC. Knocking down HN1L by shRNA in SUM159 and
MDAMB231 cell lines significantly decreased mammosphere forming
efficiency (MSFE) and CD44+/CD24low/- population. To assess the
contribution of HN1L to BCSC and tumor growth, a patient derived
human-cancer-in-mouse xenograft model and two cancer cell line xenograft
models were employed. To ensure targeted delivery, siRNA was packaged
into DOPC liposomes and delivered into mice via intraperitoneal
injection. Results showed that silencing HN1L alone or in combination
with chemotherapy in xenografts reduced tumor volume and BCSC population
as measured by MSFE, CD44+/CD24low/- markers, ALDF+ cell population and
limiting dilution assay. Liposomal HN1L siRNA treated mice also showed
lower level of lung metastasis. A gene signature obtained from microarray
analysis on HN1L siRNA treated tumor tissues highly correlated with
better prognosis in TNBC patients. Overexpression of HN1L in TNBC cell
lines activated STAT3 signaling, induced CD44+/CD24low/- population and
cancer cell migration. Moreover, chemoresistance were also observed with
HN1L overexpression. HN1L colocalized with CNTFR and STAT3 in cytoplasm
and nucleus by immunofluorescence staining. Changes in HN1L expression
level resulted in corresponding changes in phospho-STAT3. Furthermore,
CNTFR knockdown compromised the effect of HN1L overexpression in
activating STAT3.These results suggest that the HN1L gene plays an
important role in BCSC through regulating CNTFR-STAT3 signaling pathway,
and is associated with poor prognosis. Taken together, the results from
our study demonstrate for the first time that HN1L is a novel target for
TNBC. Targeting HN1L and/or CNTFR-STAT3 pathway might provide an
alternative therapeutic strategy for TNBC.

