Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective inhibitor of nuclear exporter CRM1/XPO1, Selinexor
(KPT-330), exhibits remarkable activity against AML leukemia-initiating
cells while sparing normal hematopoietic cells


Current treatments for acute myeloid leukemia (AML) often fail to induce
long-term remissions and are toxic to normal tissues, prompting the need
to develop new targeted therapies. The frequent disease relapse that is
observed in patients with AML is thought to occur because of the
inability of the existing drugs to target the self-renewing
leukemia-initiating cells (LICs). An attractive new strategy for AML
therapy is inhibition of the nuclear export protein exporter 1 (XPO1), or
CRM1. XPO1 regulates export of proteins that contain leucine-rich nuclear
export signals (NES), including protein adaptors that mediate transport
of RNA. XPO1 cargo encompass tumor suppressor proteins, cell cycle
regulators, and apoptotic proteins. Recently, small molecule inhibitors
of nuclear export (SINE) that inhibit the export function of XPO1 by
targeting Cys528 in its NES-binding groove, were developed using an in
silico molecular modeling. Selinexor (KPT-330), the orally bioavailable
SINE compound, is in Phase 1 and 2 studies in adult patients with AML
(NCT01607892 and NCT02088541) and in a Phase 1 study for relapsed
childhood ALL and AML initiated in March 2014 (NCT02091245).To define the
anti-leukemic activity of selinexor against primary AML blasts and LICs
in a clinically relevant setting, we established mouse models of primary
human leukemia, or patient-derived xenografts (PDX), in which leukemic
blasts from AML patients were transplanted into immunodeficient
NOD-SCID-IL2Rcnull (NSG) mice. Mice engrafted with leukemic blasts were
treated with either vehicle or selinexor. Selinexor was highly active
against blast cells from two of the three patients with poor-prognosis
disease (cytogenetically normal AML with FLT3-ITD (AML-CN) and complex
karyotype AML (AML-CK1 and AML-CK2)), as evidenced by a reduction in
leukemic engraftment in primary mice after 4 weeks of treatment.
Secondary transplantation assays indicated that selinexor greatly reduced
the frequency of LICs in PDX models derived from all three patients (6-
to 430- fold reduction compared to controls), indicating that this agent
not only targets the bulk leukemic cells, but also eliminates LICs. These
findings show that selinexor has potent activity against LICs, even when
it has only moderate activity against the bulk AML cell population.
Furthermore, preliminary results of combination studies of selinexor with
Ara-C, a standard chemotherapeutic agent, demonstrate synergistic effect
of the two drugs against LICs in a PDX model of AML-CN. Importantly, 4
weeks of selinexor treatment demonstrated minimal toxicity in mice
engrafted with normal human CD34+ hematopoietic cells. These findings
demonstrate that inhibition of nuclear export with selinexor overcomes an
important obstacle to cure of AML, which is to destroy the very critical
LIC compartment while sparing normal hematopoietic cells.

