Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IAP inhibitor CUDC-427 induces tumor regression or stasis in
preclinical models of B cell lymphoma


Evasion from apoptosis is a characteristic of human cancers. The family
of Inhibitor of Apoptosis (IAP) proteins plays a pivotal role in
apoptosis, proliferation, and signal transduction. Furthermore,
mutations, amplifications and chromosomal translocations of IAP genes as
well as aberrant expression of IAP proteins are associated with tumor
progression, drug resistance and poor prognosis in various malignancies.
For example, XIAP is found to be overexpressed in 55% of diffuse large B
Cell Lymphomas (DLBCLs) and significantly linked to poor clinical
outcome. Thus, IAP proteins have become promising targets for therapeutic
intervention.CUDC-427 is a potent, oral, monovalent IAP antagonist
currently in early-stage clinical testing (NCT01908413). In the present
study, the anti-tumor activity of CUDC-427 was evaluated against a large
panel of human cell lines of hematologic cancer origin. This screen
identified DLBCL to be the most sensitive cell type. Consistent with
these results, CUDC-427 activated caspase3/7 in the sensitive cell line
WSU-DLCL2 but not in the resistant cell line Karpas 422. Subsequent
mechanism-of-action studies demonstrated that CUDC-427 activated caspases
3, 8 and 9 by inhibiting cIAP1 and XIAP, as well as activating the
non-canonical NF-B pathway and inducing TNF in WSU-DLCL2 cells. The
anti-tumor effect of CUDC-427 was further confirmed in vivo using the
WSU-DLCL2 xenograft model, in which daily oral administration of CUDC-427
induced 94% tumor growth inhibition in a 21-day efficacy study.TNF family
ligands have been shown to act synergistically with IAP antagonists in
preclinical studies. In our study, the addition of TNF family ligands
significantly increased the sensitivity to single-agent CUDC-427
treatment in insensitive DLBCL cell lines. The presence of stromal cells
in the culture also sensitized the insensitive Karpas 422 DLBCL cells to
CUDC-427 treatment. In addition, daily treatment with CUDC-427 induced
tumor regression and prolonged animal survival in the Karpas 422
xenograft model. To further elucidate the role of stromal cells and
interaction between the tumor microenvironment and CUDC-427, we examined
the efficacy and cytokine/chemokine profile of CUDC-427 in the A20 B cell
lymphoma mouse syngeneic model. CUDC-427 treatment achieved tumor stasis
in the fast growing A20 model grown in immunocompetent BALB/c mice, which
may be partially due to the high levels of TRAIL in this model.In
summary, CUDC-427 appears to have potent anti-tumor activity in DLBCL
cell lines and in vivo models. The interaction between TNF family ligands
or stromal cells with CUDC-427 in induction of tumor cell death in B cell
lymphomas merits further analysis. This preclinical study supported
further clinical investigation of CUDC-427 to improve patient outcomes in
DLBCL.

