Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In-vivo non-invasive mitochondrial evaluation of 3D human skin


Alterations in metabolism are considered one of the hallmarks of cancer
and have been associated with changes in mitochondrial organization. The
latter is typically studied in two-dimensional cell cultures, using
exogenous stains, and qualitative or at best semi-quantitative
approaches. We have recently developed a method that relies on the
automated analysis of high resolution intrinsic NADH two-photon excited
fluorescence (TPEF) images of three-dimensional specimens to assess
quantitatively mitochondrial clustering levels. The purpose of this study
was to assess whether this approach could be extended to the analysis of
endogenous TPEF images acquired in vivo from human subjects.In-vivo
depth-resolved TPEF and SHG images were acquired in vivo using a MPTflex
clinical tomograph (Jenlab) at 790nm excitation. The TPEF signal was
detected over 410nm-650nm, whereas SHG signal was detected in the
385nm-405nm range. In this proof of principle study a patient with a
basal cell carcinoma lesion and a healthy volunteer were imaged. All in
vivo measurements were conducted according to an approved institutional
protocol. Image processing was performed in ImJ and Matlab. A series of
analytical steps were implemented to exclude from the analysis the nuclei
and interstitial space and also the collagen and melanin-associated
fluorescence. After the cytoplasmic isolation, we proceeded with an
automated, thresholding and digital object cloning method we have
previously described. The power spectral density of the corresponding
two-dimensional fourier transform of each processed image was fit to a
simple inverse power law decay expression to extract a parameter
indicative of the levels of mitochondrial clustering, . Increased in our
study represents more clustered mitochondrial formations.The detailed
depth-dependent analysis demonstrates distinct patterns of the clustering
for the healthy and diseased tissue examined. An increase in
mitochondrial clustering from the superficial to the basal layer is
detected for the healthy sample, an outcome in accordance to previously
results observed in fresh biopsies from healthy cervical epithelia. Since
both the cervical and the skin epithelium are of similar histological
type our finding is not startling but rather encouraging. The
mitochondrial clustering values of the BCC lesion on the other hand, are
depth-invariant, which implies an undifferentiated cellular phenotype,
finding consistent with both the cancerous nature of the lesion and
previously published in vitro and ex-vivo studies.In conclusion, we
demonstrate that characterization of mitochondrial organization is
feasible within three dimensional tissues of human subjects. This
approach offers the potential to observe dynamically subtle changes in
mitochondrial dynamics that occur during cancer development or in
response to treatment, which would enrich our understanding of tissue
metabolism and could further enhance current diagnostic approaches.

