Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The DEK oncogene may serve as a predictive plasma biomarker in
head and neck cancer patients


Head and neck cancer (HNC) remains the sixth most common cancer worldwide
with almost 50,000 new diagnoses in the US each year. Although, infection
with HPV has emerged as a favorable prognostic factor for head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) leading to de-intensifying treatment
strategies, no serum biomarkers currently exist to predict tumor response
and/or relapse. One candidate serum biomarker is encoded by the human DEK
gene. DEK mRNA and protein is highly upregulated in tissue specimens from
several tumor types including HNSCC, breast cancer and melanoma and
antibodies to DEK are detected in patients with auto-immune disease
(juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematous, etc.). Our
previous work has demonstrated that DEK is highly and universally
expressed in HNSCC tissue specimens regardless of stage or HPV infection.
Additionally, in vitro data has suggested that tumor associated
macrophages secrete DEK protein leading to the hypothesis that DEK may be
present in the serum of cancer patients. In fact, the detection of DEK
protein in urine is currently being explored as a diagnostic biomarker
for bladder cancer. Here, we sought to determine if secreted DEK protein
can be detected in human plasma and if it could be used as a biomarker
for HNSCC. Peripheral blood was collected from either patients with newly
diagnosed, untreated, HNSCC or age-matched normal healthy controls.
Plasma was separated from the samples and subjected to DEK specific ELISA
(Cusabio, Wuhan, China). Plasma DEK levels were compared to tumor stage,
response to therapy, and overall tumor burden in patients. Preliminary
results demonstrate that DEK is indeed present in the plasma of HNSCC
patients and we are currently comparing these levels to normal healthy
controls. Further analyses are ongoing to determine whether DEK levels
predict response to various treatment modalities, correlate with the
body's immune response, and whether DEK presence in the serum will
predict residual disease and/or early relapse. These data will be
important to verify DEK plasma measurements as a clinically useful test
and may give insight to future personalized and targeted treatment
strategies for HNSCC.

