Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GATA3 modulates chromatin structure to establish active enhancers
in breast cancer cells


Master transcription factors regulate cell-type-specific gene expression
to define cellular identities. One such gene, GATA3, is a key regulator
of multiple cellular programs, including T lymphocyte development,
mammary luminal epithelial cell differentiation and trophoblast
development. Recently, comprehensive genomic analysis has identified
GATA3 as one of the most frequently mutated genes in breast cancer. It is
also known that GATA3 expression levels directly correlate with favorable
prognosis. These findings strongly suggest that GATA3 plays a critical
role in tumorigenesis. However, the molecular mechanism(s) underlying
GATA3-mediated gene regulation in breast cancer cells is not clearly
defined. GATA3 participates in a complicated regulatory network with
FOXA1 and ER-alpha, governing the transcriptional program in luminal
tumors. Biochemical analyses indicate that: (1) GATA3 binds to chromatin
in an estrogen-independent manner, (2) GATA3 acts upstream of FOXA1.
These studies suggest GATA3 may act as a pioneer factor, which is capable
of independently associating with closed chromatin and modulating
chromatin structure to establish an active enhancer. In order to
investigate GATA3 function as a pioneer transcription factor, we chose
the MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line, which is GATA3, FOXA1 and
ER-alpha negative, and established stable cell lines expressing wild-type
GATA3 or GFP as a control. Consistent with previous results,
GATA3-expressing cells represented an epithelial phenotype at the
cellular and molecular level. To determine whether GATA3 can direct
reprogramming of chromatin conformation, we performed genome-wide
analyses of the chromatin binding activity of GATA3 and its impact on
histone modifications and chromatin structure. We will present recent
results describing how GATA3 licenses enhancer function to direct the
luminal transcriptional program.

