Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of plasma-derived exosomes in CLL reveals a
distinct microRNA signature and the BCR regulation in exosome secretion


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most diagnosed adult leukemia
and has a very heterogeneous clinical course attributed to its defective
apoptosis and sustained nurture of the microenvironment. In vivo, CLL
resides in close contact with T lymphocytes, stromal cells,
monocyte-derived nurse-like cells, follicular dendritic cells, and
macrophages, collectively referred to as the microenvironment.
Interactions between these components result in CLL cell trafficking,
survival, proliferation, and anti-apoptosis, which may be partly
dependent on direct cell-to-cell contact or mediated through the soluble
factors, including the secreted extracellular vesicles (EVs) as an
alternative means for intercellular communications. These EVs have
distinct biochemical properties and contain cellular components, such as
proteins, lipids, mRNAs and microRNAs (miRs). Exosomes are EVs with 40 -
100nm in diameter and considered to initiate from the late endosomal
membrane, giving rise to intracellular multivesicular bodies that later
fuse with the plasma membrane and release the exosomes to the exterior.
The secretion of exosomes has been reported to be regulated by
intracellular calcium levels, activation of the cell surface receptor or
stress responses. Emerging evidence suggests that cancer releases large
amount of exosomes and exosome functions in recipient cells are
associated with tumor immune response, metastasis, tumorigenesis,
angiogenesis, drug resistance, and changes in signaling transduction.
With increasing evidence implicating the importance of these EVs, it
prompts us to elucidate the exosome biochemical property and to
investigate the relevance of exosome in CLL.Our data demonstrate that CLL
releases high levels of exosomes in plasma than healthy donor and its
concentration is not associated with the absolute lymphocyte count. These
CLL plasma-derived exosomes express abundant CD63, CD9 and CD37 but not
CD41, CD3 or CD56. Activation of BCR by -IgM stimulation induces CLL to
release more exosomes while inhibition of BCR via ibrutinib, a BTK
inhibitor, abrogates -IgM induced exosome secretion. Moreover, analyzing
plasma samples collected on an ibrutinib phase 2 clinical trial
(OSU-11133, NCT01589302), the exosome concentration decreases in post
ibrutinib treatment. In addition, profiling the exosome miR isolated from
69 CLL and 15 healthy donors reveals a distinct miR signature, including
up-regulation of miR-29 family, miR-155, miR-150 and down-regulation of
miR-223 that have been shown to be associated with the CLL disease. In
all, we have successfully characterized the composition of CLL exosome
with the optimal methods and demonstrated the control of BCR signaling in
the CLL exosome release. Furthermore, the identified CLL exosome miR
profile can be explored further to uncover the exosome function and its
relevance to the CLL disease.

