Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short isoform ARID5B protein is expressed in endometrial cancer
cell lines by usage of the second translation initiation codon


ARID5B, also known as MRF2, is a transcription factor with the ARID-type
DNA binding domain. The ARID5B gene generates two types of mRNA isoforms
(short and long isoforms) using alternative first exons; the long and
short mRNA isoforms encode 130kDa long and 100kDa short isoform ARID5B
proteins, respectively. The ARID5B gene is highly mutated in endometrial
cancer. Nonsense and frame-shift mutations, generating premature
termination codons, are common. This transcription factor may play a role
as a tumor suppressor in development of endometrial cancer and the
inactivation of the gene by the mutations may contribute to
carcinogenesis of this cancer.To characterize functional significance of
the gene products in this cancer, we analyzed the ARID5B gene in three
endometrial cancer cell lines (Ishikawa, HEC59, and KLE).Two cell lines,
Ishikawa and HEC59, predominantly expressed the long isoform mRNA while
KLE expressed both the long and short isoform mRNAs. However,
surprisingly, all the cell lines predominantly expressed the 100 kDa
protein, which was detected by an antibody recognizing the ARID-domain.
To characterize the 100kDa protein, we generated rabbit anti-serum
recognizing amino-terminus of the long isoform protein, which failed to
detect the 100kDa protein. The data suggested that the 100kDa protein
lacked the N-terminus of the long isoform ARID5B protein. Internal
ribosome entry site (IRES) activity was found in the sequence between the
first and second ATGs of the long isoform ARID5B mRNA by the bicistronic
reporter gene assay. Our data suggested that the second translation
initiation codon was used to generate the short isoform ARID5B protein in
the cell lines.To elucidate functional property of this short isoform
ARID5B protein expressed in the cell lines, we suppressed the expression
of the ARID5B protein by shRNA. The expression was decreased by 50% using
the shRNA constructs. Colony formation assay of Ishikawa cells
transfected with the shRNA constructs showed that repression of ARID5B
short isoform protein decreased the number of the colonies. In summary,
the short isoform ARID5B protein generated by usage of the second
translation initiation site was indispensable in these endometrial cancer
cells.

