Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RSK2 is a driver of estrogen receptor positive breast cancer


For unknown reasons, high levels of active Ser/Thr protein kinase RSK in
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive (ER+) breast cancer patients correlate
with better responsiveness to anti-estrogen therapies. Investigation of
these surprising observations led us to discover an unanticipated
mechanism in which ER controls RSK2 nuclear accumulation. RSK2 is
retained in the nucleus by physical association with ER and this
interaction is disrupted by anti-estrogen treatment. Consistent with
these findings, in primary human ER+ breast tissue organoids,
4-hydroxy-tamoxifen (4-OHT) drove export of RSK2 to the cytoplasm.
Importantly, RSK2 nuclear accumulation is critical for the expression of
the oncogene, cyclin D1. This conclusion is supported by the observations
that a RSK2 mutant, which cannot accumulate in the nucleus, does not
rescue cyclin D1 in cells silenced for endogenous RSK2. Analysis of
RNAseq data shows that ER and RSK2 cooperatively regulate a
transcriptional program, which includes cyclin D1. The physiological
relevance of these conclusions is supported by our observations that in
60% of ER+ breast cancer patients, active nuclear RSK correlates with ER
and cyclin D1 levels. Taken together, these findings suggest that
responsiveness to endocrine-based therapy is driven by reduced RSK2
nuclear accumulation, which in turn reduces expression of cyclin D1 and
of other tumor-promoting effectors. Based on these observations we
hypothesized that nuclear RSK2 cooperates with ER and is a
physiologically relevant driver of ER+ breast cancer. To test this
hypothesis we generated a transgenic mouse model in which the MMTV
promoter controls expression of RSK2 fused with the nuclear localization
signal (NLS) of SV40. Strikingly, in 50% of transgenic mice forced
nuclear accumulation of RSK2 in the mammary gland caused hyperplasia and
ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). These results are the first
demonstration that RSK2 can drive proliferation and transformation in
vivo. Transgenic animals had a 4-fold increase in the number of cyclin D1
expressing cells and a 6-fold increase in Ki67 levels. Surprisingly, in
vivo expression of nuclear RSK2 expanded the population of ER+ cells.
These results demonstrate, for the first time, that nuclear RSK2 drives
the amplification of the cell population relevant to ER+ breast cancer.
In agreement with these observations we found that overexpression of ER
in the mouse mammary gland expands exclusively, by 3 fold, the cell
population that co-expresses ER and active nuclear RSK. These results
further support our hypothesis that RSK2 cooperates with ER and is an
important drug target for ER+ breast cancer.

