Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotypic and molecular characterization of circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) in patients with castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC)
undergoing treatment with abiraterone acetate or enzalutamide


Despite the introduction of a number of new treatment options (such as
abiraterone acetate and enzalutamide) for castration resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC), patients with this disease eventually progress. In order
to understand how to help such patients, it is paramount to understand
the biological characteristics of the resistant disease that emerges in
response to new lines of therapy. Unfortunately, repeat biopsy samples
are difficult to attain and may not reflect the full complexity of the
disease. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) provide a powerful alternative to
biopsies for determining the molecular characteristics of cells that
emerge following development of resistance. The presence of 5 CTCs
measured with the CellSearch system is associated with poor survival in
patients with CRPC and increases in the number of CTCs following
treatment with abiraterone acetate or enzalutamide appears to be
indicative of a lack of clinical response. Such association with clinical
outcome suggests that CTCs play an important role in metastatic process.
Moreover, detailed molecular characterization of CTCs at various points
of the disease course may be useful in understanding of evolution of
tumors and aid in selection of optimal therapeutic regimens. To better
characterize resistant phenotypes that emerge following treatment with
abiraterone acetate or enzalutamide, we collected blood from CRPC
patients that prior to starting abiraterone acetate or enzalutamide, or
upon a switch between the two therapies. We also collected blood at 4, 8,
12 weeks and at progression. CTCs were enumerated using CellSearch and
also stained for synaptophysin (SYP) expression. Blood was also collected
for analysis of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) that are often
associated with cancer progression. Like most other CTC isolation
instruments, CellSearch is a CTC-enrichment device that efficiently
captures CTCs while also retaining a few thousand non-specifically
captured white blood cells. To obtain molecular profiles of CTCs, we
isolated single tumor cells and performed RNA sequencing of pools of a
small number of cells, which enabled us to track changes of molecular
characteristics of CRPC upon progression. Initial observations suggest
that CRPC is an evolving heterogeneous disease that utilizes several
escape mechanisms upon application of specific treatments.

