Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single-cell RNA-seq analysis of heterogeneous populations within
gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors: the role of Sox
transcription factors


Gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GPNETs) are rare, with
8,000-estimated cases/year in the United States. Several transcriptome
analyses have been performed at the population level, but the
heterogeneity of these tumors has never been assessed at the single cell
level. Moreover, few genetic mutations have been consistently linked to
the origin and progression of GPNETs and prognostic biomarkers are
greatly lacking. The most commonly reported familial mutations in GPNETS
are found in the Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia type 1 gene (MEN1) or Von
Hippel-Lindau's gene (VHL). Similar to other neoplasias, we would expect
that a combination of mutations drive the malignant transformation in
GPNETs. We are interested in assessing the role of Sox factors in GPNET
initiation and progression, particularly Sox4 and Sox9. These Sox factors
are expressed in stem and progenitor cells in the gastrointestinal tract.
Using a Sox9EGFP mouse, we have shown that Sox9 is expressed at
differential levels in stem and progenitor cells, demonstrating high
expression in a cell population consistent with long-lived secretory
progenitor cells with endocrine and stem cell like properties. Other
studies from our lab and others point at the role of Sox4 and Sox9 in
differentiation of intestinal/pancreatic progenitors and endocrine cells.
Based on these observations, we hypothesize that differential levels of
Sox factors mark cells with different potential to initiate carcinoids
with an underlying secretory signature, consistent with that of GPNET.
Using histological analysis, we assessed the expression of Sox 4/9 in
samples from 20 GPNETs patients and we found that the majority exhibited
heterogeneity within the tumor. We further confirmed that these tumors
expressed putative GPNET markers such as CHGA, serotonin and substance P
among others. To gain a more global understanding of the genetic
heterogeneity present in these tumors, we performed single-cell RNA-seq
analysis from a GPNET patient. Consistent with histological analysis, we
also observed heterogeneous levels of several Sox Transcription Factors,
including Sox4 and Sox9. These data provided insight into the pathways
that may be responsible for GPNET initiation and progression. Notable
genes highly expressed include markers of stemness, endocrine progenitor
cells, endocrine secretion/differentiation, immune subpopulations and
cytokine production. These data also elucidated some potential targets
for immunotherapies such as IL-10. Through collaborations with 3
different hospitals, we now have access to at least 24 more fixed/fresh
GPNET tissues and we are currently focusing our efforts on the
confirmation of our findings. Our results suggest the potential use of
single-cell RNA-seq analysis to untangle the pathways that drive the cell
populations present in the invasive and proliferative front of GPNETs.

