Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interstitial fluid flow-induced hepatocellular carcinoma cell
invasion requires MEK/ERK signaling


Background: Worldwide hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading
cancer-related cause of death. Within the United States, HCC maintains a
rising incidence rate of 3% each year since 1992 with a 5 year survival
rate of less than 15%. The American Cancer Society has estimated 33,190
new cases off HCC and 23,000 HCC related deaths in the year 2014 within
the United States. Our work aims to determine the role of biomechanical
forces such as interstitial fluid flow (IFF) in HCC cell invasion. We
hypothesized that HCC cells utilize the hypothesized autologous
chemotaxis mechanism to invade via secretion of the chemokine CXCL12 and
expression of its receptor CXCR4. Autologous chemotaxis occurs when a
biologically significant chemokine gradient is established by IFF,
driving downstream invasion. In an effort to elucidate signaling pathways
involved in IFF-induced HCC invasion, we have identified a potential role
for MEK/ERK signaling.Materials and Methods: HCC cells or primary rat
hepatocytes (PRH) were seeded into in a 3-D matrix composed of Matrigel
and type I rat tail collagen, then exposed to static or interstitial flow
conditions for 24 hours. The functional role of CXCR4 was tested using
the CXCR4-antagonist AMD3100. MEK and ERK were inhibited using U0126 (25
M) and FR180294 (10 M), respectively. Phospho-MEK/ERK was assessed using
western blot.Results and Discussion: The 3D invasion assay demonstrated
that the HCC cells, Huh7 and Hep3B, invaded significantly more in
response to IFF (5.5 fold increase in invasion compared to their
respective static condition), while PRHs showed no response. AMD3100 was
used to block the CXCR4 receptor which resulted in reduced invasion in
Huh7 and Hep3B cells. Furthermore when U0126 and FR180204 were
incorporated into the 3D invasion assay a significant reduction in
flow-induced invasion was observed in Huh7 cells. However, interstitial
flow or CXCR4 inhibition did not affect pMEK/ERK, suggesting that MEK/ERK
are not modulated directly by IFF and are not downstream of
CXCR4.Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that interstitial fluid flow
stimulates HCC cell invasion. CXCR4/CXCL12 signaling and MEK/ERK
signaling both are required for invasion, but appear to operate via
separate mechanisms. Further investigation into these two separate
mechanisms would provide better insight into flow-induced HCC invasion.
This information could potentially enhance current cancer therapies and
provide patients with better treatment options.

