Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A model to assess clonal evolution of metastatic colorectal cancer
during chemotherapy utilizing patient derived xenografts


IntroductionChemotherapy (FOLFOX) with or without surgical resection is
the primary treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). However,
intrinsic and acquired resistance to chemotherapy poses a major obstacle.
The lack of predictors of response to treatment and of understanding of
mechanisms of resistance leads to ineffective chemotherapy and, hence,
unnecessary morbidities. Patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) represent a
model system to evaluate the effectiveness of treatment regimens
utilizing human tumors in the context of precision medicine. We have
developed a heterotopic PDX model of mCRC that emulates acquired
chemoresistance.MethodsTumor samples from treatment nave or chemo-treated
mCRC patients were implanted subcutaneously into immunodeficient mice. At
an optimal volume, the tumor was either divided into pieces and implanted
subcutaneously or processed into a single cell suspension and implanted
into mice. Mice were classified into either 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin,
plus oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) (n = 10) or vehicle (n = 5) groups. FOLFOX was
dosed weekly at the maximum tolerated dosage. Mice were sacrificed when
tumors reached 20mm diameter, at which time a single cell suspension was
created for implantation into the next generation. Tumors were passaged
using this method until FOLFOX resistance was attained. DNA and RNA were
isolated from all samples for genetic analysis.ResultsLiver metastasis
from six patients, including chemo-treated (n = 3) and chemo-nave (n =
3), were consecutively used to generate PDX lines. PDX tumor growth from
one of the patients exhibited no difference between treatment and
control. Within the remaining treatment cohorts, chemo-treated PDX tumors
overall grew significantly slower than matching untreated PDX tumors at
the first passage (pIntroductionChemotherapy (FOLFOX) with or without
surgical resection is the primary treatment for metastatic colorectal
cancer (mCRC). However, intrinsic and acquired resistance to chemotherapy
poses a major obstacle. The lack of predictors of response to treatment
and of understanding of mechanisms of resistance leads to ineffective
chemotherapy and, hence, unnecessary morbidities. Patient-derived
xenografts (PDXs) represent a model system to evaluate the effectiveness
of treatment regimens utilizing human tumors in the context of precision
medicine. We have developed a heterotopic PDX model of mCRC that emulates
acquired chemoresistance.MethodsTumor samples from treatment nave or
chemo-treated mCRC patients were implanted subcutaneously into
immunodeficient mice. At an optimal volume, the tumor was either divided
into pieces and implanted subcutaneously or processed into a single cell
suspension and implanted into mice. Mice were classified into either
5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, plus oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) (n = 10) or vehicle
(n = 5) groups. FOLFOX was dosed weekly at the maximum tolerated dosage.
Mice were sacrificed when tumors reached 20mm diameter, at which time a
single cell suspension was created for implantation into the next
generation. Tumors were passaged using this method until FOLFOX
resistance was attained. DNA and RNA were isolated from all samples for
genetic analysis.ResultsLiver metastasis from six patients, including
chemo-treated (n = 3) and chemo-nave (n = 3), were consecutively used to
generate PDX lines. PDX tumor growth from one of the patients exhibited
no difference between treatment and control. Within the remaining
treatment cohorts, chemo-treated PDX tumors overall grew significantly
slower than matching untreated PDX tumors at the first passage (p<0.05)
regardless of whether the tumor originated from single cell suspension or
pieces. However, PDX tumors from the first patient entered into the study
showed chemo-resistance at passage 3. Further, innate resistance was seen
in some PDXs from the same patient displaying rapid growth at initiation
of chemotherapy treatment. Utilizing tumor tissue obtained from this
model, we are currently assessing the genetic and epigenetic mechanism(s)
responsible for resistance.ConclusionWe have developed a PDX model that
recapitulates acquired chemoresistance in mCRC, which allows for the
genomic characterization of FOLFOX resistant liver metastasis. We are
currently defining the clonal architecture of chemotherapy resistant and
responsive PDXs with the goal of identifying predictors of response and
resistance. The ability to treat a patient and their personalized model
in real time represents an ideal tool to test response to treatment and
further investigate treatment resistance.

