Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Earth mover's distance for the identification of genes associated
with drug resistance in cancer


Conventional methods for differential gene expression analysis perform
well when intra-class heterogeneity is low and inter-class heterogeneity
is high. However, many problems in biology and biomedicine, such as drug
resistance in cancer, contain samples that show both significant intra-
and inter-class heterogeneity. Conventional methods, which use means and
variances to compute test statistics, lack power to identify genes
differentially expressed between classes in these cases. To address this
challenge, we developed EMDomics, a new method for differential gene
expression analysis designed to perform well in the setting of
intra-class heterogeneity.EMDomics uses the Earth mover's distance (EMD)
to measure the overall difference between the distribution of a gene's
expression in two classes of samples and uses permutations to estimate
false discovery rates and obtain q-values for each gene. To evaluate the
theoretical basis for EMDomics, we model heterogeneous mechanisms of drug
resistance using simulated data and compare the performance of EMDomics
to the commonly used conventional methods (SAM and Limma), in terms of
sensitivity and specificity for identifying genes truly associated with
drug resistance in the simulation. To test EMDomics on real biological
data, we applied it to the challenging problem of identifying genes
associated with drug response in ovarian cancer, using data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas.In both the simulated and real biological data,
EMDomics outperformed the competing approaches for the identification of
differentially expressed genes. Using simulated data, EMDomics yielded
higher sensitivity and precision for highly heterogeneous data. Using
real data, EMDomics was able to identify genes that are highly relevant
for ovarian cancer biology, which were not identified by the conventional
methods. Also, applying gene set enrichment analysis showed that most
highly enriched gene sets includes pathways known to play critical roles
in ovarian cancer pathogenesis. The most enriched gene set identified by
the EMDomics analysis is a set of genes down-regulated in cancer cell
lines with mutated TP53. Other gene sets identified as highly enriched by
the EMDomics analysis, include gene sets related to LEF1, BMI1, KRAS,
EZH2, and PTEN, and pathways related to cell-cell junction organization,
cell-cell communication, WNT signaling, and extracellular matrix
organization.EMDomics represents a new approach for the identification of
genes differentially expressed between heterogeneous classes. It is a
robust non-parametric method, which does not make any assumptions about
the distributions or differences between the two classes being compared,
and thus has significantly more power than conventional approaches for
identifying differential Omics features between heterogeneous classes.
The method can be applied in a wide variety of settings to compare
distributions of Omics data between two classes.

