Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel gene fusion in glioblastoma and a radiation response
methylation signature identified by genomic characterization of glioma
sphere-forming cells


Purpose: High fidelity models of the lethal primary brain tumor
glioblastoma (GBM) are essential to develop new therapies. Glioma
sphere-forming cells (GSCs) are derived from surgical specimens and are
thought to play important roles in tumor maintenance and treatment
resistance. We performed genomic characterization of the largest reported
panel of GSCs. We hypothesized that GSCs would recapitulate the genomic
alterations of their GBMs of origin while identifying novel changes
identifiable only in a pure tumor cell population.Methods: All GSCs were
obtained at the time of surgical resection and all analyses were
conducted at early passage. We performed exome and transcriptome
sequencing, DNA methylation profiling (Illumina Infinium 450K Bead
Arrays) and DNA copy number determination (Affymetrix OncoScan).
Radiation (RT) sensitivity was determined by clonogenic survival and in
vivo survival by orthotopic xenograft.Results: We analyzed 43 GSCs, 40 of
which had tissue available from their tumors of origin. Somatically
mutated genes previously described in GBM, such as TP53, EGFR, PTEN, NF1,
PIK3CA and RB1, were found at similar mutation frequencies. Likewise, DNA
copy number variations were similar to their matched tumor and those
reported by the TCGA, with novel or more pronounced alterations, such as
MYC application and QKI deletion, identified in the GSCs. GSCs were
classified into TCGA GBM subtypes by expression signatures, identifying a
subset of GSCs with a subtype differing from their matched tumors that
correlated to decreased stromal enrichment. GSCs exhibited upregulation
of self-renewal pathways, such as MYC, WNT, and NOTCH, and of stem-cell
factors, such as MSI1, NESTIN, OLIG2, and SOX2, consistent with the
stem-like phenotype attributed to GSCs. Transcript analyses identified
the previously reported FGFR3-TACC3 and EGFR-SEPT14 gene fusions as well
as a novel KIF1B-KMT2A (MLL) fusion, which was found to have been
retained in the matching recurrent GBM as well as the GSC derived from
the recurrence. A signature derived by the differential methylation
pattern of RT sensitive vs. resistant GSCs was applied to the subset of
TCGA cases that received upfront RT. Survival by methylation class in
this subset was significantly different (median survival 84 vs. 61 weeks;
HR 1.64 adjusting for patient age, p-valuePurpose: High fidelity models
of the lethal primary brain tumor glioblastoma (GBM) are essential to
develop new therapies. Glioma sphere-forming cells (GSCs) are derived
from surgical specimens and are thought to play important roles in tumor
maintenance and treatment resistance. We performed genomic
characterization of the largest reported panel of GSCs. We hypothesized
that GSCs would recapitulate the genomic alterations of their GBMs of
origin while identifying novel changes identifiable only in a pure tumor
cell population.Methods: All GSCs were obtained at the time of surgical
resection and all analyses were conducted at early passage. We performed
exome and transcriptome sequencing, DNA methylation profiling (Illumina
Infinium 450K Bead Arrays) and DNA copy number determination (Affymetrix
OncoScan). Radiation (RT) sensitivity was determined by clonogenic
survival and in vivo survival by orthotopic xenograft.Results: We
analyzed 43 GSCs, 40 of which had tissue available from their tumors of
origin. Somatically mutated genes previously described in GBM, such as
TP53, EGFR, PTEN, NF1, PIK3CA and RB1, were found at similar mutation
frequencies. Likewise, DNA copy number variations were similar to their
matched tumor and those reported by the TCGA, with novel or more
pronounced alterations, such as MYC application and QKI deletion,
identified in the GSCs. GSCs were classified into TCGA GBM subtypes by
expression signatures, identifying a subset of GSCs with a subtype
differing from their matched tumors that correlated to decreased stromal
enrichment. GSCs exhibited upregulation of self-renewal pathways, such as
MYC, WNT, and NOTCH, and of stem-cell factors, such as MSI1, NESTIN,
OLIG2, and SOX2, consistent with the stem-like phenotype attributed to
GSCs. Transcript analyses identified the previously reported FGFR3-TACC3
and EGFR-SEPT14 gene fusions as well as a novel KIF1B-KMT2A (MLL) fusion,
which was found to have been retained in the matching recurrent GBM as
well as the GSC derived from the recurrence. A signature derived by the
differential methylation pattern of RT sensitive vs. resistant GSCs was
applied to the subset of TCGA cases that received upfront RT. Survival by
methylation class in this subset was significantly different (median
survival 84 vs. 61 weeks; HR 1.64 adjusting for patient age,
p-value<0.008), suggesting this signature is predictive of clinical RT
response.Conclusions: Based on genomic analyses, GSCs are robust models
of GBM which can be used for therapeutic development. We have identified
a novel gene fusion involving MLL with a predicted driving role
suggesting a new mode of gliomagenesis. A methylation signature
predictive of RT response may have potential for personalizing RT
treatment of GBM patients and provides insights into RT sensitivity
phenotypes.

