Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody/drug-conjugated micelle as a versatile platform
technology for targeted tumor delivery


Background:Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) have been recognized as a
promising anticancer agent, despite their stringent requirements of
antibody affinity, internalization, payload potency, and linker
stability. To drive the next generation of ADCs and improve versatility
of the component combination, we have designed, prepared and recently
developed Antibody/Drug-Conjugated Micelle (ADCM) system. ADCM is
composed of polyethylene glycol-poly (amino acid derivative) polymers,
which can form a micellar nanoparticle spontaneously in aqueous media
with a diameter of 20-100 nm. Antibodies are attached to the surface of
the nanoparticle, while payloads are incorporated in the inner core at a
payload-to-antibody molecular ratio of 100-200. In this study, monoclonal
antibody, trastuzumab or cetuximab, and anticancer drug, anthracycline
antibiotic epirubicin or novel hemiasterlin analogue E7974, were used as
a targeting sensor and a payload of the ADCM, respectively. Here we
report the results of in vitro and in vivo studies.Methods:The ADCMs were
prepared as described previously (Japan Patent No.4538666) with slight
modification. To examine the cell binding behavior, flow cytometry
analysis was performed using an Accuri C6 system. The antigen affinity
was evaluated using a Biacore system. The cellular uptake was examined
fluorescently using ADCMs employing Alexa 488-labeled antibodies. To
compare the in vivo antitumor effects, ADCM, untargeted micelle and the
payload were administered intravenously 3 times weekly at the same
payload-equivalent dose to nude mice bearing human tumor xenografts with
HER2 (NCI-N87 gastric or trastuzumab-resistant JIMT-1 breast tumor) or
EGFR (BxPC-3 pancreatic or LS174T colon tumor) expression. Tumor volumes
and animal body weights were monitored 2 or 3 times a week.Results:The
ADCMs showed similar cell-binding behavior and antigen affinity to the
original antibodies. They were found to be internalized more efficiently
than the original antibodies. In vivo efficacy studies demonstrated that
the ADCMs inhibited tumor growth most effectively compared to control
formulations. The therapeutic indexes were significantly improved in
terms of the maximum tolerated dose/ED50 (50% effective dose) compared to
untargeted micelles and native payloads. These results suggest the
potential clinical application of the ADCMs.Conclusion:These data showed
improved versatility of the component combination and increased
therapeutic indexes of ADCM system, indicating a promising next
generation of ADCs.

