Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rats heterozygous for Pten develop fibroadenoma and adenocarcinoma
arising from the mammary gland


To further characterize the function of the tumor suppressor Pten in the
role of tumorigenesis we have created a colony of Pten mutant Sprague
Dawley (SD) rats. Utilizing zinc finger nuclease technology we introduced
a 7bp deletion in Exon 7 of the Pten gene, creating a frameshift mutation
and an early stop codon. Pten homozygous null animals are not viable so a
colony of heterozygous animals is maintained. Spontaneous tumors of the
mammary gland arise in these animals and were removed for staining and
pathological analysis. We describe briefly the creation of this model and
preliminary genotypic and proteomic characterization. Further we describe
pathological observations made on tumor tissues removed from aging Pten
heterozygous animals.We have confirmed a reduction in Pten expression by
Western Blot utilizing a monoclonal antibody targeting a central locus in
the protein. Heterozygous Pten animals develop spontaneous tumors of the
mammary gland which were removed if animals demonstrated deteriorating
health or any condition within our Humane Care and Use guidelines. Thirty
six tissues from 16 animals were submitted for histopathological
analysis. Eight of the animals were male, 8 of the animals were female
and had a mean lifespan of 159 days (165 male, 153 female). Remaining
consistent with human breast cancer incidence in women below 30 years of
age, the most common lesion observed is a benign fibroadenoma (30/36
samples). The malignant adenocarcinoma was observed in 5/36 samples
submitted. Fibroadenoma only lesions were observed in 12 of the 16 rats
while both fibroadenoma and adenocarcinoma was observed in 4 of the 16
rats.Taken together we believe that a Pten heterozygous rat provides an
additional tool for the elucidation of the role of Pten in human cancers.
This model may also be useful in the study of neurological disorders such
as Autism, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, obesity,
cardiovascular disease, and diabetes.Mutations in Pten strongly correlate
with several human disorders including Cowden syndrome, Bannayan-Zonana
syndrome, and Lhermitte-Duclos disease. These disorders result in a tumor
pathologies including an increased risk for breast cancers.

