Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiethnic triple negative breast cancer comparisons of gene
expression shows enrichment of distinct pathways in ALDH1+ subpopulations
compared to CD44+/CD24-/EpCAM+


Triple negative breast cancers are a heterogeneous group with diverse,
usually poorer survival outcomes and are more prevalent in individuals of
African descent. Given the 8-12% higher mortality in breast cancers in
individuals of African descent, we set out to identify differences in
pathway enrichment in patients with TNBC of Caucasian, African American,
and African (Ghanaian) ethnicity. Moreover, we analyzed subpopulations of
cells previously found to exhibit stem-like characteristics of
self-renewal, within each tumor in order delineate the heterogeneity of
gene expression patterns also in different subpopulations of cells within
tumors of patients of diverse ethnicities. Based on previous work, we
hypothesized that there are distinct sub populations of rare cells, which
exhibit distinct signaling pathway enrichment that may confer to TNBCs
their highly metastatic and drug resistant characteristics. We developed
PDX models from TNBC of 5 Ghanaian, 5 African American and 5 Caucasian
patients. We collected bulk cells from the PDXs and used
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) to select and collect ALDH+
cells and CD24-CD44+EpCAM+ (CD44+) cells. We extracted RNA from the
sorted cell populations and performed RNA-sequencing using the Illumina
Next Generation Sequencing platform. Our results showed that the bulk,
ALDH1+ and CD44+ populations within each tumor segregate closely
together, and we noted no distinct ethnic separation when we performed
the analyses either of the bulk or special subpopulations. Upon centering
on the mean for each sample in each tumor, thereby abrogating differences
between individual tumors, we observe a significant separation between
the ALDH1+ and the CD44+/CD24- sub populations. In particular, the
following pathways are most differentially enriched in these
subpopulations. The numbers between parentheses indicate the numbers of
genes significantly altered that contribute to each pathway.ALDH1+ : Wnt
(10), MAPK (13), axon guidance (6), GnRH signaling (7), TGFbeta (9),
endocytosis(5) CD44+/CD24-/EpCAM+: tRNA synthesis (5), N-glycan
biosynthesis (7), RNA degradation (6) We are focusing our experiments on
verifying whether the above pathways are indeed active in these
subpopulations and we are exploring their biological significance with
regards to tumor growth and metastases. Although we did not detect any
specific clustering of tumors by ethnicity, our work suggests the
presence of an ALDH1+ subpopulation of cells that exhibit characteristic
enrichment of pathways distinct from those enriched in CD44+/CD24-/EpCAM+
cells.

