Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacodynamic evaluation of the combination of carboplatin and
paclitaxel associated with either pioglitazone or hydroxyurea, within a
randomized phase 1 dose escalation clinical trial in patients with
advanced solid tumors


Background: Hidroxyurea acts synergistically with DNA alkylating agents;
pioglitazone is a ligand of PPAR-gamma, a nuclear receptor with great
potential in controlling oncogenic mechanisms unexplored in clinic,
upregulated after exposure to several cytotoxic agents. Purpose: To
evaluate pharmacodynamic effects of the combination of carboplatin and
paclitaxel, associated with either hydroxyurea or pioglitazone, within a
phase 1-2 clinical study.Material and Methods: Patients with
unresectable, advanced solid tumors, refractory to standard therapies
were considered eligible for this randomized, dose escalating trial.
Patients received weekly administration of carboplatin (AUC = 2) and
paclitaxel (80 mg/m2) on days 1, 8, 15 q 28d. Patients were randomly
allocated to additionally receive either pioglitazone (P) or hydroxyurea
(H). The doses of P were 30, 45 and 60 mg/d, whereas the doses of H were
1000 and 1500 mg/d.The comet assay was chosen as a tool to assess the
added effects of hydroxyurea, whereas UCP-2 (Uncoupling Protein 2) was
selected for the evaluation of the effects of pioglitazone. These events
were determined in mononuclear cells from peripheral blood, at baseline
and at week 4. Alkaline comet assays were performed using a single-cell
electrophoresis protocol and comet lengths were measured with the ImageJ
software. UCP-2 was determined by quantitative RT-PCR. For these results,
intrapatient and intercohort variations were analyzed.Results: The UCP-2
gene expression was increased after treatment in the majority of patients
in our cohort. The increased expression of UCP-2 was lower in patients
treated with pioglitazone versus hydroxyurea, however there were no
significant differences between treatments. The rate of affected cells
with double-strand breaks after treatment, was significantly higher in
patients treated with hydroxyurea than in patients treated with
pioglitazone (27.1% vs. 16.3% of cells affected, PBackground: Hidroxyurea
acts synergistically with DNA alkylating agents; pioglitazone is a ligand
of PPAR-gamma, a nuclear receptor with great potential in controlling
oncogenic mechanisms unexplored in clinic, upregulated after exposure to
several cytotoxic agents. Purpose: To evaluate pharmacodynamic effects of
the combination of carboplatin and paclitaxel, associated with either
hydroxyurea or pioglitazone, within a phase 1-2 clinical study.Material
and Methods: Patients with unresectable, advanced solid tumors,
refractory to standard therapies were considered eligible for this
randomized, dose escalating trial. Patients received weekly
administration of carboplatin (AUC = 2) and paclitaxel (80 mg/m2) on days
1, 8, 15 q 28d. Patients were randomly allocated to additionally receive
either pioglitazone (P) or hydroxyurea (H). The doses of P were 30, 45
and 60 mg/d, whereas the doses of H were 1000 and 1500 mg/d.The comet
assay was chosen as a tool to assess the added effects of hydroxyurea,
whereas UCP-2 (Uncoupling Protein 2) was selected for the evaluation of
the effects of pioglitazone. These events were determined in mononuclear
cells from peripheral blood, at baseline and at week 4. Alkaline comet
assays were performed using a single-cell electrophoresis protocol and
comet lengths were measured with the ImageJ software. UCP-2 was
determined by quantitative RT-PCR. For these results, intrapatient and
intercohort variations were analyzed.Results: The UCP-2 gene expression
was increased after treatment in the majority of patients in our cohort.
The increased expression of UCP-2 was lower in patients treated with
pioglitazone versus hydroxyurea, however there were no significant
differences between treatments. The rate of affected cells with
double-strand breaks after treatment, was significantly higher in
patients treated with hydroxyurea than in patients treated with
pioglitazone (27.1% vs. 16.3% of cells affected, P<0.05).Conclusions: Our
study has the limitations of a small sample size, but we have seen that
the use of hydroxyurea can lead further damage to cellular DNA. UCP-2
expression was increase after both treatments, and we can not attribute
it to one drug in particular. We should note that we could not
discriminate between the different drug doses administered to patients
due to small sample. A correlation between these effects and tumor
response will be analyzed and shown.

