Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Severe obesity and colorectal cancer patient survival


Background: More than one-third of all U.S. adults are obese (BMI >30);
and 15% of middle-aged adults, the group most commonly diagnosed and
treated for colorectal and other cancers, meet the criteria for class II
obesity (BMI> = 35). In contrast to the large and consistent body of
evidence for obesity and increased colorectal cancer risk, several recent
meta-analyses indicate that the association with colorectal patient
survival is poorly defined. Some evidence suggests that moderate
adiposity may be protective. In a prospective cohort of
well-characterized CRC patients, we evaluated class I and class II
obesity in relation to 5-year and 10-year survival outcomes.Methods:
Histologically-confirmed colorectal adenocarcinoma patients (n = 634)
evaluated at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center were
followed for a median period of 4 years. We collected epidemiological
data through questionnaires and abstracted treatment, anthropometric, and
clinicopathologic data from patients electronic medical records. Overall
survival (OS) and progression/recurrence-free survival (PFS) were
calculated from the date of pathologic diagnosis until disease
progression, first recurrence, or death. Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated in multivariable Cox
proportional hazards models adjusted for demographics, lifestyle factors,
tumor characteristics, and treatment modality.Results: We observed a
1.5-fold increased risk of death among class II obese (BMI> = 35), as
compared to overweight CRC patients in multivariable-adjusted models.
Among patients who reported stable weight and among stage I-III patients,
the association between class II obesity and OS was more pronounced [BMI>
= 35 vs. BMI 25-29.9 (ref), HR and 95% CI: 3.49 (1.68-7.22) and 2.40
(1.33-4.31), respectively], but no associations were observed among
metastatic patients or among patients who experienced recent weight loss.
Similar associations were observed with PFS, but few reached statistical
significance.Conclusions: Severe adiposity defined as class II obesity
(BMI > = 35) was associated with significantly higher mortality among CRC
patients. Clarifying what is not a healthy weight for cancer patients and
survivors remains both a clinically relevant and timely concern.
Understanding and targeting this relationship may improve long-term
outcomes among growing numbers of obese patients and cancer survivors.

