Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SIPA1 negatively regulates the survive in breast cancer patients
and promotes CD44 expression to drive cancer cell stemness


Background:SIPA1 (signal-induced proliferation-associated protein 1)
encodes for a GTPase-activating protein, known to be a negative regulator
of Ras-related Protein (RAP1). It has been implicated in cancer invasion
and metastasis, including cervical cancer, breast cancer and colorectal
cancer. In our previous study of SIPA1 activates the integrin beta1 to
promote metastasis, we found that SIPA1 may effect series of surface
adhesive protein expression, including an important glyco-protein, CD44.
CD44 is reported as a critical marker of breast cancer stem cells, so we
hypothesis that SIPA1 may induce the stemness in breast cancer through
regulating the expression of CD44.Methods:We examined the relationship
between the expression of SIPA1 and CD44 in breast cancer tissues and
different breast cancer cell lines. Then we used the knockdown of SIPA1
in MDA-MB-231 and an overexpression in the MDA-MB-361 to examine the
effects of SIPA1 expression to CD44 in breast cancer cell lines. In vitro
tumorigenic properties of SIPA1 high cells were characterized with
sensitivity to 5FU and the ability to form tumorspheres, the expression
of cancer stem cell markers, including CD44, CD24, ALDH, and the
proportion. In vivo analysis used a tissue microarray chip with
clinicopathologic features and survival data from 240 breast cancer
patients were reviewed with immunohistochemistry (IHC) against
SIPA1.Results:In vitro studies showed that SIPA1 high cells with a high
level of CD44 expression. They displayed an obviously EMT phenotype, and
found to have a higher ability to form tumor spheres, improved expression
level of breast cancer stem cell markers, increased resistance to 5FU,
and decreased in the cell proliferation. SIPA1 may induce cancer stem
cell features through the expression of CD44 and induced the EMT through
CD44-PI3K-Akt pathway with a changed CD44 splicing isoform pattern.
Studies with breast cancer tissues showed that SIPA1 expressed in the in
situ breast cancer, while SIPA1 and CD44 are co-expressed in the
metastasis breast cancer. The Kaplane-Meier survival analysis of 240
breast cancer samples found that SIPA1 negative-associated with breast
cancer survive (p = 0.003) and prognosis (p = 0.002), and the Cox's
proportianal hazard model analysis of prognostic factors in patients with
potentially curatively treated breast cancer showed that SIPA1 expression
correlated with 5 disease free survive(p = 0.047) and 5 year overall
survive(p = 0.015).Conclusion:Taking together, our data suggest that
SIPA1 induced CD44 expression in breast cancer cells, SIPA1/CD44high
cells display stemness and EMT phenotype, and found to be more resistance
to 5FU with a decreased proliferation ability. SIPA1 expression
contributes to the survival and prognosis of breast cancer. Further
studies to investigate how SIPA1 promotes CD44 expression are needed.

