Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of microbeam radiation therapy on the pharmacokinetics
of PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin in a triple negative breast cancer GEM
model


Background: Carrier-mediated agents (CMAs), such as nanoparticle and
liposomes, can achieve greater exposure in tumors compared with small
molecule drugs; however, the overall percent of CMAs that distribute from
the plasma to tumor is relatively low (e.g. Background: Carrier-mediated
agents (CMAs), such as nanoparticle and liposomes, can achieve greater
exposure in tumors compared with small molecule drugs; however, the
overall percent of CMAs that distribute from the plasma to tumor is
relatively low (e.g. <10-20%). Thus, there is a need to discover methods
of improving the overall delivery of CMAs to tumors. Microbeam radiation
therapy (MRT) is a novel radiation therapy treatment that has been shown
to eradicate tumor without damaging the function of normal tissues
exposed to the same high dose radiation in animal studies. MRT utilizes
an array of parallel microplaner beams delivering periodically
oscillating high and low dose regions in the treatment volume. Our
preliminary results suggest that MRT alters tumor microvasculature
differently than normal tissue microvasculature. We hypothesize that the
changes in microvasculature induced by MRT can be used to enhance drug
delivery to tumors. Thus, we evaluated the effects of MRT on the
pharmacokinetics (PK) of PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) in
preclinical tumor models.Methods: Studies were performed in mice bearing
p53 null syngeneic orthotopic tumor transplants. This model, named T11,
has been characterized by gene expression array to reflect the
claudin-low subtype of triple-negative breast cancer. Prior to
administration of PLD, mice received a single treatment of 28Gy or 34Gy
(peak dose at skin entrance) MRT to the tumor site (treatment area is 1cm
x 1cm), or no radiation treatment. All groups were then administered PLD
at 6 mg/kg IV x 1 at 16 h after MRT. Mice (n = 3) were sacrificed at 5
min, 6 h, and 24 h after PLD. Mice treated with 34 Gy MRT were only
sacrificed at 24 h after PLD. The PK of PLD in plasma and tumor was
evaluated.Results: Mice treated with 28 Gy MRT prior to PLD
administration and PLD alone had a total doxorubicin tumor AUC of
206,040.0 ng/mLh and 55,506.5 ng/mLh, respectively. After treatment with
28 Gy and 34 Gy MRT the concentration of total doxorubicin in tumor at 24
h after administration of PLD were 10,665.8 ng/ml and 20,779.0 ng/ml,
respectively. The plasma PK of PLD was similar in all groups.Conclusions:
MRT treatment prior to PLD administration significantly improves the
delivery of PLD to tumors without altering the plasma PK. In addition,
higher doses of MRT resulted in a greater increase in the delivery of PLD
to tumors. The improved delivery of PLD to tumors may be due to MRT's
acute effects on tumor microvasculature; however, the exact mechanism
needs to be further evaluated. Future studies include evaluation of the
effect of duration and dose of MRT on drug uptake in tumor, effects of
MRT on other CMAs, and the mechanisms of enhanced tumor delivery.

