Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor endothelium regulates microenvironment-mediated migration
via the proteolysis of extracellular TFPI-2 by trypsinogen 4


Proteases secreted from endothelial cells (EC) play an important part in
angiogenesis, tumor metastasis and blood coagulation processes. In
particular, perivascular proteases influence tumor vascularization in
many different ways: regulating migration and invasion of endothelial and
mural cells, activating chemokines, growth factors, growth factor
receptors, break down extracellular matrix and modifying cellular
adhesion molecules. Understanding the complexity of protease activities
and their regulation by endothelium in response to different
microenvironment stimuli might help identify new targets for the
inhibition of vascularization in cancer and angiogenesis related
diseases.The expression of serine protease 3 (PRSS3) a member of the
trypsinogen family, in vivo is associated to the tumors vasculature and
in vitro characterizes EC isolated from cancer specimens [Ghilardi, BMC
Genomics 2008]. Herein, we used EC isolated from cancer specimens
(tumor-derived EC) to elucidate a mechanism linking micro-environment
cues to endothelium migration.We show that trypsinogen 4 isoform of PRSS3
is the trypsin family member expressed by human endothelium, and its
expression is up-regulated by a tumor pro-angiogenic milieu (i.e. the
combined action of VEGF, FGF-2 and EGF; particularly rich in the cancer
environment). Trypsinogen 4 depletion profoundly impaired the migratory
capability of tumor-derived EC initiated and driven by the tumor
pro-angiogenic milieu. We identified Tissue Factor Pathway Inhibitor-2
(TFPI-2) as the functional proteolitic target. TFPI-2 negatively
regulated the migration of tumor-derived EC; trypsinogen 4 was capable to
cleave TFPI-2 and also to displace it from the extracellular matrix (ECM)
deposited by tumor-derived EC. Accordingly, we observed an increased
accumulation of TFPI-2 in the extracellular matrix of tumor-derived EC
silenced for trypsinogen IV.Altogether, the results indicate that the
tumor microenvironment triggers and sustains the expression of
trypsinogen 4 to impair TFPI-2 function and permits the migration of
endothelium; essential for angiogenesis and blood vessel remodeling.Our
findings contribute to advance the understanding of tumor vascular
biology, and the comprehension of an active role for trypsinogen 4 and
TFPI-2 in microenvironment-mediated tumor neo-vascularization. The
identification of the specific protease and its functional target may be
of aid for the design of inhibitor(s) exploitable as anti-cancer
therapeutics.Supported by the Italian Association for Cancer Research
(AIRC) and the CARIPLO foundation.

