Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genes associated with histopathologic features of triple negative
breast tumors predict molecular subtypes


Distinct subtypes of triple negative (TN) breast cancer have currently
been identified by tumor expression profiling and are thought to be
influenced by the tumor microenvironment. However, little is known about
the relationship between distinguishing histopathologic features of TN
tumors, which reflect aspects of both tumor behavior and tumor
microenvironment, and molecular TN subtypes. We analyzed whole genome
expression profiles of 593 TN tumors from the Triple Negative Breast
Cancer Consortium (TNBCC) using the Illumina Whole Genome DASL array.
Histopathologic review of mitotic index, grade, trabecular pattern,
growth pattern, involution, presence of ductal carcinoma in situ, and
degree of lymphoid infiltrate, necrosis, fibrosis, and lobulitis was
completed for 310 of these tumors. Clusters were identified both
agnostically and using genes associated with these histopathologic
features, and subtypes were evaluated for enriched pathways and
associations with histopathologic features. Agnostic clustering
identified four stable clusters which represented a basal-like (BL)
signature, a luminal signature with overexpression of androgen receptor
and targets, an immune signature, and a stromal (STR) signature. Overall,
the TN tumors tended to have little or no necrosis (91%), high grade
(88%), a high mitotic index (80%), fibrosis (77%), an epicentric growth
pattern (62%), incomplete lobular involution (55%), trabecular structures
(37%), lymphocytic infiltration (25%), adjacent ductal carcinoma in situ
(24%), and variable amounts of lobulitis. Using a combined total of 2,776
unique probes individually associated with the ten histopathologic
features measured, we identified six distinct TN subtypes, with an
additional BL and STR signature compared to the four agnostic subtypes.
Our findings suggest that histopathologic features that reflect
heterogeneity in tumor cell structure and behavior as well as the tumor
microenvironment, particularly the presence of lymphocytic infiltrate,
are critical for TN subtype identification. Further work is needed to
validate these signatures and to better understand the immunologic
pathways associated with each subtype.

