Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of LKB1 in development of lung squamous cell carcinoma in
mice


LKB1 is frequently dysregulated in human lung cancer and has been shown
to be one of the critical genes controlling the development of lung
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in mice1,2. However, it's unclear that the
contribution of LKB1 in the development of lung SCC in mice. Here we took
advantage of our new enhanced Cre (CCSPiCre) to efficiently deplete Lkb1
in the mouse airway epithelial cells. Although ablation of Lkb1 failed to
show any discernable morphological changes, microarray analysis revealed
503 genes and 202 LincRNAs were significantly altered after single
ablation of Lkb1. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) showed that LXR/RXR
activation and inflammatory pathways were significantly dysregulated by
ablation of Lkb1. Using the CCSPiCre mouse, we ablated Pten in addition
to Lkb1. As previously reported by Xu and coworkers who used Adenoviral
delivery of Cre recombinase to achieve Lkb1 and Pten ablation2, the
resulting phenotype was SCC while much rapider tumor initiation age,
higher mouse metastasis ratio and a worse mortality were observed in this
efficient mouse model. Analysis of the tumor development showed
progression from mucous cell hyperplasia of the large airways to a
papillary transition stage, then to the SCC phenotype. Mice with airway
specific loss of Lkb1 and only one allele of Pten
(CCSPiCrePtenf/+Lkb1f/f) showed slower tumor progression with the strong
metastasis ability to multiple organs, such as liver, uterus, intestine
and spleen. Comparison of the microarrays of CCSPiCrePtenf/f and
CCSPiCrePtenf/fLkb1f/f in the pretumor stage showed 1463 genes and 339
LincRNAs were significantly altered. Again the major altered pathways
were inflammatory and cholesterol biosynthesis. Using this model the
developmental progression of lung SCC and the contribution of LKB1 to
lung SCC progression were determined.References1.Ji, H., et al. LKB1
modulates lung cancer differentiation and metastasis. Nature 448, 807-810
(2007).2.Xu, C., et al. Loss of Lkb1 and Pten leads to lung squamous cell
carcinoma with elevated PD-L1 expression. Cancer cell 25, 590-604 (2014).

