Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The IGF axis regulates hepatic stellate cell recruitment and
activation during colorectal carcinoma liver metastasis


Background: The hepatic stellate cells (HSC) play a major role in
orchestrating the liver's fibrogenic (wounding) response and have been
identified as an important player in the prometastatic microenvironment
in the liver. Here we analyzed the role of the IGF axis in the
recruitment and activation of HSC during the early stages of colorectal
carcinoma (CRC) liver metastasis.Methods: Murine CRC MC-38 cells were
inoculated via the intrasplenic/portal route into female mice with a
conditional liver IGF-1 deletion (iLID), induced by a single tamoxifen
(Tx) injection 2 days or 3 weeks earlier. Vehicle (sunflower oil)
injected iLID mice or Tx - injected wild type mice were used as controls.
Experimental liver fibrosis was achieved by repeated carbon tetrachloride
(CCl4) administration. The stromal response of the liver was analyzed
using immunohistochemistry with emphasis on HSC recruitment and
activation. In addition, in vitro assays were utilized to explore the
role of IGF-1 in HSC activation.Results: In iLID mice treated with Tx, a
75% reduction in circulating IGF-1 levels could be observed within 24 hr
and it persisted for the duration of the experiments. When injected with
MC-38 cells, 3 weeks post Tx injection, these mice developed
significantly fewer liver metastases than non-treated controls, while no
reduction in the number of metastases was seen in WT mice injected with
Tx or in oil-injected iLID controls. Interestingly, we observed that Tx
treatment 48 hr prior to tumor injection, failed to reduce liver
metastasis in iLID mice, although their circulating IGF-1 levels were
markedly reduced, suggesting that the loss of direct paracrine IGF-1
effects on the tumor cells was not sufficient to inhibit tumor growth in
the liver and that other effects on the hepatic microenvironment were at
play. Analysis of HSC recruitment and activation subsequently revealed a
significant reduction in HSC activation around micrometastases as
compared to controls. This was evident as early as 3 days post tumor
inoculation, persisted for the duration of the experimental period (16-18
days) and corresponded with reduced IGF-1 receptor and Akt activation in
these cells. In vitro studies confirmed that IGF-1 could directly
activate isolated HSC and rescue them from serum-depletion induced
apoptosis. Finally, in iLID mice with sustained IGF-1 depletion, a
significant reduction in HSC-mediated collagen deposition was observed
following continuous treatment with CCl4, confirming the role of IGF-1 in
HSC activation in a second tumor-free model.Conclusion: Our results show
that a sustained reduction in circulating IGF-1 levels altered HSC
recruitment and activation to tumor sites and reduced tumor cell growth
in the liver. We identify IGF-1 as a regulator of HSC function and the
response of the microenvironment to invading cancer cells, thereby
affecting metastatic expansion.Supported by CIHR Grant MOP 81201 (to PB)
and MICRTP Fellowship (to MCF).Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

