Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination therapy of reovirus and PD-1 blockade effectively
establishes tumor control via innate and adaptive immune responses


We have developed the use of reovirus as a systemically delivered
oncolytic agent in both pre-clinical models and in early Phase clinical
trials. Reovirus has direct oncolytic activity against many human/murine
tumor cells, partly because of disruption of the PKR-mediated anti-viral
response in malignant cells. In addition however, we have shown that
anti-tumor therapy is directly associated with immune activation by virus
replication in tumors. The immune mechanisms of therapy include both
innate immune activation against virally infected tumor cells, as well as
the generation of adaptive anti tumor immune responses as a result of in
vivo priming against tumor associated antigens released during that
killing. Therefore, to exploit the immune components of reovirus
anti-tumor therapy, we hypothesized that the combination of reovirus
therapy with systemic checkpoint inhibition would augment therapeutic
efficacy. To test the hypothesis, we used C57Bl/6 mice, an
immune-competent murine model, with established subcutaneous (s.c.) B16
melanomas. In this model, intra-tumoral injection of reovirus into s.c.
tumors generated moderate therapy. Provision of systemic anti-PD-1
antibody along with i.t. reovirus, significantly enhanced survival
compared to i.t. reovirus alone (p40% of mice being cured long term.
Immune analysis suggested that the enhanced therapeutic benefit of
reovirus plus checkpoint inhibition is contributed by at least two
factors. First, blockade of PD-1 significantly enhanced the ability of NK
cells to recognize (TNF- secretion), and kill, reovirus-infected target
tumor cells. Second, anti PD-1 antibody led to a significant reduction in
Treg activity in reovirus-treated mice, with the overall effect of
increasing the adaptive CD8+ anti-tumor T cell response. Furthermore, in
vivo depletion studies demonstrated that NK cells had a dramatic effect
in reducing the therapeutic efficacy of reovirus plus anti-PD-1 therapy.
Overall, the results indicate that combination therapy of reovirus with
PD-1 blockade confers significant survival benefit, by augmenting
tumor-specific NK responses and specifically attenuating tumor-specific
immunosuppression. These data also suggest that combination of PD-1
inhibition therapy with reovirus oncolytic/immunotherapy represents a
readily translatable method to enhance the therapeutic efficacy.

