Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reducing breast cancer risk with hormone replacement therapy


Menopause occurs in women between the ages of 45 and 55 and often results
in symptoms that can be alleviated with hormone replacement therapy
(HRT). HRT improves the symptoms associated with menopause that
negatively affect quality of life, such as hot flashes, difficulty
sleeping, fatigue, and vaginal atrophy. HRT also prevents osteoporosis. A
current HRT formulation, which includes conjugated equine estrogens (CE)
and medroxyprogesterone acetate, unfortunately increases the risk of
breast cancer. Over the years, the number of women taking HRT has
decreased due to this perceived increased risk. A new form of HRT, which
contains CE and bazedoxifene (BZA), a selective estrogen receptor
modulator, has recently been approved by the FDA for treatment of
moderate to severe hot flashes and for the reduction of osteoporosis
development. The CE/BZA mixture has been shown to not only relieve
symptoms associated with menopause, but also does not stimulate the
breast or uterus. Various studies show that CE/BZA may be protective in
the breast. Currently, the mechanism of action of this new combination
therapy is not known. Our goal is to identify the molecular mechanism of
action of CE/BZA through transcriptome and whole genome occupancy
analysis in breast cancer cell lines. In addition, we are determining the
effects of the combination therapy on breast cancer progression in a
transgenic mouse model. The overall hypothesis of our project is that the
ability of CE/BZA to delay the onset of mammary tumors and decrease the
number of lesions in the polyoma middle T antigen transgenic mouse model
is due to its action as an estrogen receptor antagonist in the mammary
gland. We have determined that CE stimulates gene expression in MCF7
cells at a similar rate to 17-estradiol, and that BZA is able to decrease
this stimulation. Similarly, we have found that CE increases ER occupancy
at promoters of some estrogen target genes, while a combination of CE and
BZA decreases this occupancy. Through understanding the molecular
mechanism of CE/BZA and by determining whether it reduces the incidence
of invasive breast cancer in a transgenic mouse model, we will be able to
improve quality of life for many women by relieving menopausal symptoms
in a safe manner.

