Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NF-B as a prognostic marker and therapeutic target in prostate
cancer


NF-B, a pleiotropic transcription factor, is broadly associated with
oncogenesis through its ability to control cell proliferation and
apoptosis. Aberrant NF-B activation has been observed in various human
malignancies including prostate cancer. Clinical studies demonstrate
higher expression of p65/RelA, p50/RelB, and cRel in primary prostate
cancer specimens and in metastatic tumors which correlate with poor
survival. While NF-B is considered to play a key role in prostate cancer
progression, its value as prognostic marker and therapeutic target has
not been elucidated. Through development of a new in vivo model and
real-time imaging, we established the relevance of NF-B as a biomarker
and therapeutic target in prostate cancer. Crossbreeding of NF-B-Luc Tag
mice and TRAMP (transgenic adenocarcinoma mouse prostate) provide
bi-transgenic offspring (LucTg/TRAMPTg mice) for the study. Noninvasive
in vivo and ex vivo bioluminescence imaging for NF-B activation, prostate
cancer progression was followed for 40 weeks in these mice. Age-dependent
cancer progression was observed in the prostate which positively
correlated with NF-B activation. Ex vivo analysis showed increased NF-B
activity in the dorsal-lateral prostate which was associated with tumor
progression as evident by increase expression of proliferation marker,
prostate weight and histologic analysis. For therapeutic relevance, 12
weeks old NF-B-Luc Tag mice and bi-transgenic mice were gavaged with
parthenolide (10 mg/kg), an NF-B inhibitor for 5 days/week for 8 weeks.
Whole body NF-B activity was performed every 2 weeks, while ex-vivo NF-B
activity in the genitourinary complex, thymus, spleen, bladder and
prostate gland was determined after 8 weeks. Other upstream and
downstream NF-B target proteins were determined by Western blotting in
the dorsal-lateral prostate. Parthenolide treatment blocked NF-B activity
in the prostate; preserved gross anatomy, shape and size of the GU
complex; and suppressed tumor progression as evident from decrease in
p65/RelA, p50/RelB, PCNA and phosphorylation of IB in the dorso-lateral
prostate. To analyze the role of NF-B in metastasis, mice were subjected
to surgical castration followed by measurement of NF-B activity. Initial
castration of mice exhibited decreased NF-B activity in the prostate;
whereas 67% of the castrated mice exhibited increase in NF-B activity 2
weeks after castration which correlated with tumor recurrence and poor
survival. Our findings for the first time demonstrate real-time NF-B
imaging in a pre-clinical model and establishes the relevance of NF-B as
a prognostic biomarker and potential therapeutic target in prostate
cancer.

