Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Live cell and in vitro analysis of p53 interactions


Dysregulation of protein-protein interactions between the tumor
suppressor p53 and its binding partners is implicated in the pathogenesis
of various cancers. Here we describe several novel assays for analysis of
p53 interactions and their inhibitors both in live mammalian cells and in
vitro.To evaluate putative inhibitors of protein-protein interactions
between p53 and its negative regulators Mdm2 and Mdm4, we recently
developed two comparative live-cell Fluorescent-Two Hybrid (F2H) assays.
The F2H principle is based on a tethering strategy: the GFP-tagged
protein (here p53) is enriched at the protein interaction platform of the
engineered F2H-BHK cells and serves as bait, whereas the RFP-tagged
protein serves as a prey (here Mdm2 or Mdm4). By performing p53:Mdm2 and
p53:Mdm4 F2H assays side-by-side, we could evaluate the dual inhibitory
activity of the previously published stapled peptides. Furthermore, since
F2H allows visualization of the dynamics of protein-protein interactions,
we could compare the compound's kinetics with real-time imaging. We
performed a mutant analysis with F2H and showed that several
Nutlin-resistant mutants of Mdm2 are sensitive to inhibition with stapled
peptides sMTide-02 and sMTide-02a.For in vitro validation of p53
interactions, we developed novel p53 immunoprecipitation reagents. We
employed the single-domain antibody technology in conjunction with phage
display to isolate two specific anti-p53 VHHs (also termed nanobodies)
from immunized alpacas. When conjugated to agarose beads, these VHHs
serve as highly efficient pull-down reagents (p53-Traps), specific
exclusively against N- and C-terminus of p53 respectively. Using both
p53-Traps, we could confirm our F2H results in immunoprecipitation
followed by Western blotting. Furthermore, p53-Traps enabled us to extend
our analysis of the p53 interaction network and evaluate interactions
between the p53 isoforms.Taken together, we developed a toolbox for
analysis of p53 interactions both biochemically and by fluorescence
microscopy. Our fully reversible live-cell F2H assays can be applied for
side-by-side profiling of new inhibitors of p53:Mdm2 and p53:Mdm4
interactions with respect to their intracellular activity, cell
penetration and kinetics. Our N- and C-terminal p53-Traps complement p53
interaction analysis and enable highly efficient biochemical
investigation of the p53 network and discovery of new interaction
partners of p53.

