Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms associated with blood flow modifying effects of
electric pulses used for electrochemotherapy on normal and tumor blood
vessels


Electropermeabilization/electroporation (EP) is a physical method that by
applying external electric pulses to cells increases cell membrane
permeability and thus enables the introduction of molecules into the
cells. Nowadays, it is used in treatment of tumors, where its benefits
are exploited in electrochemotherapy (ECT). In vivo EP also modifies
blood flow, resulting in a decreased blood flow and increased
permeability of blood vessel walls; whereas ECT has a vascular disrupting
effect. The aim of our study was to evaluate the effects of EP on normal
blood vessels and the effects of EP and ECT with bleomycin on tumor
vasculature with the use of in vivo microscopy.The effects of pulse
parameters used for ECT (8 pulses, 1300 V/cm, 100 s, 1 Hz) on normal
blood vessels were determined via a dorsal skinfold window chamber (DWC)
with intravital two-photon microscopy after in vivo labelling of CD31
with fluorescently labeled antibodies. Furthermore, 70 kDa fluorescently
labeled dextrans was used to visualize the increased permeability of
blood vessel walls. Additionally, Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging (FLIM)
was used to determine the stability of the used fluorochrome. In tumors
the effects of ECT pulse parameters on tumor blood vessels after EP or
ECT with bleomycin were determined using 70 kDa fluorescently labeled
dextrans either with two-photon or widefield intravital microsocopy via
DWC. Solid mouse sarcoma SA-1 tumors were induced by a subcutaneous
injection of dense cell suspension into the area of DWC in mice and an
intravenous injection of bleomycin (100 g/mouse) was performed 3 min
before the application of electric pulses.EP resulted in immediate
constriction of the affected normal blood vessels and in a rapid increase
of vascular permeability. This was accompanied by the change of the
endothelial cells shape and a decrease of CD31 labelling in the
cell-to-cell junctions. In vivo 3D FLIM showed no difference in the
lifetime of the used fluorochrome before and after EP. When electric
pulses or ECT were applied to tumors the increase in vascular
permeability and the constriction of tumor blood vessels were not as
pronounced as in normal blood vessels. However, there was a complete
vascular lock that lasted for more than 30 min. Furthermore, ECT had a
differential vascular disrupting effect on tumor blood vessels, leaving
the larger normal blood vessels surrounding the tumors functional after
the therapy.In conclusion, the results of our study provide direct in
vivo evidence of the difference in vascular effects of electric pulses
used for ECT in normal and tumor blood vessels, show the response of
normal endothelial cells to EP with two-photon microscopy and 3D FLIM,
and provide evidence of the differential vascular disrupting action of
ECT.

