Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Off-target based drug repurposing opportunities for tivantinib in
acute myeloid leukemia


GSK3 alpha has been shown to be a new target in the treatment of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML); however current GSK3 inhibitors are unselective
and target both GSK3 alpha and GSK3 beta. Interestingly, a known pan-GSK3
inhibitor LiCl has been previously investigated for the treatment of AML
yet has met limited clinical success. This could be partly due to the
fact that pan-GSK3 inhibition results in beta-catenin stabilization,
which has been shown to mediate hematopoietic self-renewal and
leukemogenesis. As beta-catenin stabilization requires inhibition of both
kinases and most GSK3 inhibitors target GSK3 alpha and GSK3 beta with
equal potency, these compounds may possess some significant limitations.
We have previously shown GSK3 alpha to be a prominent target of the
intended MET inhibitor tivantinib (ARQ197) and that tivantinib shows some
specificity for GSK3 alpha over GSK3 beta. We thus hypothesized that
tivantinib would be an effective therapy for the treatment of AML.
Consistently, tivantinib potently inhibited cellular viability across
several AML cell lines. Using an unbiased, mass-spectrometry based
chemical proteomics approach; we confirmed GSK3 alpha (and to a slightly
lesser extent GSK3 beta) to be targeted by tivantinib in AML. Tivantinib
strongly induced apoptosis as compared to the pan-GSK3 inhibitor LiCl in
these cells while LiCl showed larger effects on cell differentiation.
Interestingly tivantinib caused less stabilization of beta-catenin as
compared to LiCl. Subsequent drug combination studies identified the
Bcl-2 inhibitor ABT-199 to synergize with tivantinib and to amplify
apoptosis as seen by PARP1 cleavage. Furthermore, the combination of
tivantinib with ABT-199 completely abrogated beta-catenin stabilization.
Tivantinib was able to significantly inhibit colony formation of primary
AML patient bone marrow mononuclear cells (BMNCs) and ABT-199 combination
showed significant benefit over tivantinib or ABT-199 alone. In summary,
tivantinib has potent anticancer activity in AML based on targeting GSK3
alpha; and tivantinib single agent or combination with ABT-199 may
represent a novel and exciting opportunity for the treatment of AML.

