Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of inflammatory markers and mast cells in
association with prostate cancer


Evidence suggests that there is a strong association between chronic
inflammation and prostate cancer development and/or progression. While
chronic inflammation is known to serve as an enabling characteristic in
many cancers, the mechanism whereby it contributes to carcinogenesis and
progression is still very controversial. This is particularly true for
cells of the innate immune system, such as mast cells, that have been
shown to possess both pro- and anti-tumor properties. The role of mast
cells in prostate cancer is of particular interest, as evidence suggests
that they influence cancer progression and immune modulation. The current
study seeks to characterize mast cell density and mast cell-to-epithelial
ratio in relation to prostate cancer recurrence using a unique set of
tissue microarrays (TMAs) from a case-control study nested in a cohort of
prostate cancer patients who underwent radical prostatectomy. These
studies are aided by novel digital image analysis using a software
framework integrating whole slide imaging, virtual microscopy, and ImageJ
based analysis algorithms. Our preliminary results, obtained via analysis
of a prostate cancer TMA containing matched cancer and benign tissues
from 727 cases of radical prostatectomy patients, correlated with the
literature in that the mast cell density (mast cell number/total tissue
area) was significantly higher in cancer versus benign (p = 0.0016). We
will expanded this study to determine if mast cell number correlates with
epithelial area in the same cohort and to examine mast cell density in
correlation to the presence, grade, or progression of prostate cancer.
Furthermore, we will be examining this in a large full tissue slide
cohort in relation to Gleason grade and stage. Finally, we are expanding
this study to explore a possible role for mast cells in the racial
disparity in prostate cancer incidence and prognosis.

