Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of NQO1 as a potential diagnostic marker for bladder
cancer


The present method for detection of bladder cancer involves
ultrasonography followed by cystoscopy. This process is time intensive,
requires skilled personnel and is unpleasant for the patient as a result
of its invasive nature. This results in patient drop-out and patients
that have recovered from bladder cancer are lost to follow-up due to the
necessity for hospital visits for monitoring. We have used a novel test
in order to monitor NAD(P)H quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) activity in
cells recovered from routine urine samples since expression of NQO1 has
previously been reported to be increased in several tumour types
including transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder.Informed consent and
urine samples were obtained from 73 bladder cancer patients and 42
age-matched bladder cancer-negative outpatients at the University
Hospital of Wales, Cardiff. Live exfoliated cells were collected from the
urine and assessed for their ability to metabolise an NQO1-specific
substrate into a highly fluorescent product. Fluorescence intensity was
then measured in a simple, inexpensive instrument. Results were checked
against clinical correlates, bladder cancer stage, age, medication, and
smoking status. Initial tests in cell lines showed excellent correlation
with NQO1 levels detected by other methods. We found that in patient
samples, while cell numbers in urine and expression of NQO1 per cell were
not in themselves significant, NQO1 per ml of urine was highly
significantly increased in bladder cancer patients (p = 0.009). Further,
NQO1 was higher in patients that had high grade tumours as described in
the WHO 2004 guidelines (p = 0.003).The sensitive fluorescence-based
method to detect NQO1 activity in exfoliated urothelial cells shows
exceptional promise in the development of rapid, non-invasive bladder
cancer diagnostics. The method will be used on larger numbers of samples
in order to be able to verify these initial findings.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

