Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipid oxidation via CPT1 as a target for prostate cancer imaging
and therapy


Introduction: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common cancer in males
and is currently treated medically with androgen deprivation therapy.
However, resistance to androgen receptor (AR) targeted therapy develops
in almost all patients over time. Simultaneously targeting multiples
pathways may prevent the development of this resistance. Recent studies
suggest PCa relies on lipid fuel over glycolysis. Blocking the ability of
PCa to use lipids inhibits its growth and leads to apoptosis but enhances
glucose uptake initially, potentially enhancing glucose-based FDG-PET
(18F-dexyglucose-Positron Emission Tomography) imaging of PCa
tumors.Experimental approach: To address the role of lipid metabolism in
PCa we have used etomoxir, a clinically utilized drug that blocks lipid
oxidation by inhibiting carnitine palmitoyltransferase (CPT1) in the
mitochondria. Enzalutamide is a clinically available anti-androgen, which
was used by itself or in combination with etomoxir. The gene/drug
interaction was studied in LNCaP cells with decreased expression of CPT1A
(via shRNA). PET-FDG of mouse xenografts were used to evaluated the
glycolytic switch induced by systemic etomoxir treatment in 24 hours and
the therapeutic effect over time.Results: Treatment with etomoxir alone
significantly decreased cell viability and AR content, including ARv7
variant. Combinatorial treatment with enzalutamide synergistically
enhanced this effect on viability. CPT1A Knockdown clones were also more
sensitive to enzalutamide (2 fold, pIntroduction: Prostate cancer (PCa)
is the most common cancer in males and is currently treated medically
with androgen deprivation therapy. However, resistance to androgen
receptor (AR) targeted therapy develops in almost all patients over time.
Simultaneously targeting multiples pathways may prevent the development
of this resistance. Recent studies suggest PCa relies on lipid fuel over
glycolysis. Blocking the ability of PCa to use lipids inhibits its growth
and leads to apoptosis but enhances glucose uptake initially, potentially
enhancing glucose-based FDG-PET (18F-dexyglucose-Positron Emission
Tomography) imaging of PCa tumors.Experimental approach: To address the
role of lipid metabolism in PCa we have used etomoxir, a clinically
utilized drug that blocks lipid oxidation by inhibiting carnitine
palmitoyltransferase (CPT1) in the mitochondria. Enzalutamide is a
clinically available anti-androgen, which was used by itself or in
combination with etomoxir. The gene/drug interaction was studied in LNCaP
cells with decreased expression of CPT1A (via shRNA). PET-FDG of mouse
xenografts were used to evaluated the glycolytic switch induced by
systemic etomoxir treatment in 24 hours and the therapeutic effect over
time.Results: Treatment with etomoxir alone significantly decreased cell
viability and AR content, including ARv7 variant. Combinatorial treatment
with enzalutamide synergistically enhanced this effect on viability.
CPT1A Knockdown clones were also more sensitive to enzalutamide (2 fold,
p<0.001) compared to control clones, and this effect was associated with
reduced AR expression. Systemic treatment with etomoxir alone in nude
mice resulted in decreased xenograft growth over 21 days, underscoring
the therapeutic potential of blocking lipid catabolism to decrease PCa
tumor growth. Interestingly, FDG uptake by VCaP xenografts was increased
with systemic etomoxir in 24 hours (1.5 fold, PIntroduction: Prostate
cancer (PCa) is the most common cancer in males and is currently treated
medically with androgen deprivation therapy. However, resistance to
androgen receptor (AR) targeted therapy develops in almost all patients
over time. Simultaneously targeting multiples pathways may prevent the
development of this resistance. Recent studies suggest PCa relies on
lipid fuel over glycolysis. Blocking the ability of PCa to use lipids
inhibits its growth and leads to apoptosis but enhances glucose uptake
initially, potentially enhancing glucose-based FDG-PET
(18F-dexyglucose-Positron Emission Tomography) imaging of PCa
tumors.Experimental approach: To address the role of lipid metabolism in
PCa we have used etomoxir, a clinically utilized drug that blocks lipid
oxidation by inhibiting carnitine palmitoyltransferase (CPT1) in the
mitochondria. Enzalutamide is a clinically available anti-androgen, which
was used by itself or in combination with etomoxir. The gene/drug
interaction was studied in LNCaP cells with decreased expression of CPT1A
(via shRNA). PET-FDG of mouse xenografts were used to evaluated the
glycolytic switch induced by systemic etomoxir treatment in 24 hours and
the therapeutic effect over time.Results: Treatment with etomoxir alone
significantly decreased cell viability and AR content, including ARv7
variant. Combinatorial treatment with enzalutamide synergistically
enhanced this effect on viability. CPT1A Knockdown clones were also more
sensitive to enzalutamide (2 fold, p<0.001) compared to control clones,
and this effect was associated with reduced AR expression. Systemic
treatment with etomoxir alone in nude mice resulted in decreased
xenograft growth over 21 days, underscoring the therapeutic potential of
blocking lipid catabolism to decrease PCa tumor growth. Interestingly,
FDG uptake by VCaP xenografts was increased with systemic etomoxir in 24
hours (1.5 fold, P<0.05), enhancing the visualization of the tumors in
the PET scans. FDG uptake in the mouse non-cancerous prostate tissue was
negligible with etomoxir.Conclusions: Safely blocking lipid oxidation in
PCa results in decreased viability with temporarily increased glucose
uptake, due to a flare of glucose uptake to compensate for the fat
oxidation blockade. Validation in human PCa patients with localized
disease is needed to confirm these preclinical studies. Additionally, the
decreased viability over time suggests that lipid metabolism is needed to
maintain AR expression and combination of fat burning inhibitors and
enzalutamide may offer novel approach to anti-AR resistance in PCa.

