Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of demethylase, JMJD3 sensitizes diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) to chemotherapy


IntroductionDiffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common form
of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) representing more than 30% of new cases
diagnosed in the United States. DLBCL comprises multiple biologically and
clinically distinct subtypes including germinal center B-cell-like (GCB)
and activated B-cell like (ABC) DLBCL. Despite improvement in current
therapies, nearly 40% of patients die from the disease. Recent studies of
the epigenome and the methylome in particular, have revealed widespread
epigenetic changes in DLBCL. Aberrant methylation of core histone tails
occur with deregulation of methylase enzymes such as Ezh2 in DLBCL. In
contrast, the role of JMJD3 and UTX, H3K27(me)3 demethylases in DLBCL
remains unknown. In this study, we have evaluated the activity of the
selective JMJD3 inhibitor GSK-J4 in DLBCL and investigated the mechanism
of its action.MethodsPanel of DLBCL cell lines: DB, KARPAS 422, Pfeiffer,
Toledo, Sudhl2, Sudhl6, Sudhl8, TMD8, OCI-Ly1, OCI-Ly3, OCI-Ly7, OCI-Ly8,
OCI-Ly4, OCI-Ly10, and primary DLBCL cells were analyzed for the
expression of lysine demethylases (KDMs) using RT-PCR and Western blot
analysis. Sub-G1 analysis was performed to analyze drug-induced
apoptosis. Chemical inhibitor GSK-J4 and siRNAs were used for specific
inhibition of the JMJD3.ResultsJMJD3 inhibitor, GSK-J4 induced the
killing of DLBCL cell lines of both GC and ABC subtypes. Cell sensitivity
to GSK-J4 could not be predicted from the expression of prognostic
markers in DLBCL such as Bcl6, IRF4 and Ezh2. For further studies, we
selected a cell line Sudhl6 (Bcl6 dependent), sensitive to the killing
effect of GSK-J4. Treatment with GSK-J4 reduced the Bcl6 levels along
with concomitant increase in IRF4 and FBXO11, negative regulators of
Bcl6. Knockdown of JMJD3 by siRNAs also reduced the levels of Bcl6,
implicating Bcl6 in the mechanism of action of GSK-J4. Additionally,
GSK-J4 synergized in killing with vincristine, doxorubicin as well as
proteasome inhibitors bortezomib and carfilzomib.ConclusionWe demonstrate
the potent effects of inhibition of H3K27(me)3 demethylase JMJD3 by
GSK-J4 on proliferation and apoptosis of DLBCL cells. Our results clearly
show synergistic effects of inhibition of demethylase with standard drugs
in elimination of DLBCL cells.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

