Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: H2AX phosphorylation assays, gene expression and epigenomic
profiles as markers in bladder cancer: an integrated approach


Bladder cancer (BC), which is the fourth most common malignancy among men
in the Western world, has a typical aetiology characterized by a
multistep carcinogenesis, reflecting that multiple lesions in the DNA are
required for tumour development. DNA repair capacity (DRC) is a complex
marker comprising the sum of several factors such as gene variants, gene
expression, stability of gene products, and effect of
inhibitors/stimulators and might account for different susceptibility of
developing this cancer. Individuals with low DRC will tend to accumulate
more damage than those who have a better ability to repair such damage.
The identification of patients with particular DRC and at high-risk of BC
and/or recurrence of the disease could help in personalizing both
surveillance and treatment.We aimed at studying the relationship between
DRC evaluated by H2AX phosphorylation assays and BC, integrating gene
expression and epigenetic profile data (methylation levels and microRNA
expression) in cryopreserved lymphocytes from 159 BC cases and 159
controls matched by age and smoking habits.We observed a significant
association between -H2AX basal levels and H2AX dephosphorylation
capacity and risk of BC recurrence. Patients with high basal DSB
signaling had a better event-free survival (HR 0.35, 95% CI 0. 19-0.63, p
= 0.0005). Additionally, there was an association when considering the
percentage of dephosphorylation after 3h divided into two categories
(above and under the calculated best cut-off). Interestingly, when
compared with the lower category (slow repair), the other group (fast
repair) had a better event-free survival (HR 0.41, 95%CI 0.23-0.72, p =
0.002). Our data suggest that -H2AX can be considered as a possible
molecular biomarker to identify patients with a higher risk of BC
recurrence.A subgroup of cases and controls (39 and 44, respectively) was
also analyzed for evaluating their gene expression (Illumina HumanHT-12
Expression BeadChip array) and methylation profile data (Illumina
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip array). We found a set of CpG islands that
were differentially methylated among cases and controls and a set of
genes whose expression was deregulated among different subgroups (e.g.
cases vs healthy controls, controls vs BC patients with muscle invasive
tumor, etc).We performed an integrated analysis on the genotype/phenotype
correlation in the analysed BC cases and healthy controls provided with
detailed description of the follow-up for response to
therapy/recurrence/survival. This integrated approach will help in
elucidating the role of DRC (and its determinants) as predictive and
prognostic marker and to identify DNA repair phenotypic assays to be
performed in blood cells as non-invasive predictive method. Results will
be presented at the AACR Annual Meeting.

