Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen withdrawal and breast cancer development in the presence
of the KRAS-variant


Background: The KRAS-variant is a germ-line, microRNA binding site
mutation in the KRAS oncogene, which predicts increased breast cancer
risk and aggressive breast tumor biology. We have recently shown
clinically that estrogen withdrawal enhances the risk of breast cancer
(BC) development and predicts aggressive tumor biology for women with the
KRAS-variant. To better understand our clinical results, we have studied
the impact of the KRAS-variant and estrogen withdrawal in a newly created
isogenically matched normal breast epithelial line, with (MCF10aKRAS+/-;
MUT1 and MUT2) versus without (MCF10aKRAS-/-; PAR) the
KRAS-variant.Methods: We evaluated phenotypic alterations in appearance,
gene and microRNA expression and growth in the lines with the
KRAS-variant versus the parental line. We further characterized the
impact of estrogen withdrawal on cellular transformation. We used MTT
(proliferation), 3-D culture on Matrigel (acini formation), and soft agar
colony formation (anchorage independent growth) to evaluate growth and
transformation differences. We used charcoal stripped media, as well as
other clinically used anti-estrogen medications to simulate estrogen
withdrawal. We also investigated the underlying molecular changes that
lead to transformation in our isogenic MUT cell lines by performing
targeted qRT-PCR, western blotting, and Immunocytochemistry.Results: When
grown under standard culture conditions, both MUT lines exhibited a
fibroblast-like, mesenchymal appearance. Consistent with an epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT), the MUT lines showed downregulation of
epithelial markers (E-cadherin and Occludin) and upregulation of
mesenchymal markers (vimentin, and fibronectin). Furthermore, in 3D
culture MUT cells formed small irregularly shaped spheroids, whereas
MCF10a PAR cells formed well-organized, polarized spheroids, supporting a
mesenchymal phenotype for MUT lines. In anchorage independent growth
analysis, MUT1 and MUT 2 cell lines did not form colonies in soft Agar
when grown in regular growth culture conditions. However, both MUT cell
lines exhibited enhanced transformation with estrogen withdrawal, with a
2-fold increase in colony formation rate in the presence of tamoxifen, a
6.2 fold increase in colony formation rate in charcoal stripped media,
and a 7.9 fold increase in colony formation rate with the
combination.Conclusions: These findings confirm that normal breast
epithelial cells with the KRAS-variant are biologically different than
non-variant cells, and that estrogen withdrawal increases their
transformation. Studies are ongoing to determine the impact of additional
anti-estrogen medications used clinically on the rate of transformation
in these lines, as well as to better characterize baseline and oncogenic
changes in the presence of the KRAS-variant.

