Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression levels of ABCA6 or ABCA7 predict primary Ewing sarcoma
progression at diagnosis


Introduction:Ewing Sarcoma (EWS), the second most common bone tumor
occurring in children and young adults, is a clinically very aggressive
tumor with high metastatic tendency. EWS therapy is still firmly based on
chemotherapy and development of chemoresistance is a major cause of
disease progression. The mechanisms of chemoresistance are, however,
still poorly defined. In this study, we analyzed the prognostic value of
21 ABC transporters with different mechanisms of action.Materials and
methods:Gene expression of 21 ABC transporters was determined by RT-PCR
in two different series of EWS patients with primary localized tumor at
diagnosis (training set: 30 pts; validation set: 109 pts) and in human
EWS cell lines. Association with patient outcome was determined by
log-rank test and Kaplan-Meier survival curves (EFS and OVS). Sensitivity
to conventional chemotherapeutic agents, such as Doxorubicin,
Vincristine, Etoposide, Actinomicin-D and Ifosfamide, was tested in a
representative panel of human EWS cell lines.Results:Among the 21 ABC
transporters that were analyzed in the training set, expression of ABCA2,
ABCA6, ABCA7, ABCB9 and ABCC4 was found to be associated with
differential prognosis. Of these genes, only ABCA6 and ABCA7 were
confirmed to be significant indicators of EWS progression when the
analysis was extended to a new series of 109 patients with localized
primary tumor (validation set): high expression of ABCA6 or ABCA7 was
associated with a better prognosis. Correlative in vitro studies on EWS
cell lines showed that the high expression of ABCA7 was not associated
with higher response to conventional drugs, indicating a more complex
role in the regulation of EWS aggressiveness.Conclusions:The study
validated the impact of ABCA6 or ABCA7, the still poorly understood
members of ABC transporters, on EWS progression. However, since high
expression of these two transporters is related to better prognosis
rather that worse, a different role from the canonical function of drug
extruders should be supposed. We are currently testing the association
between ABCA7 expression and ceramide levels, which are known to induce
cell apoptosis, and macrophage-mediated phagocytosis as indicated in the
literature (Kielar D. et al. J Invest Dermatol. 2003 Sep;121(3):465-74;
Jehle AW et al. J Cell Biol. 2006 Aug 14;174(4):547-56).Funded by: AIRC
to KS IG 14049.

