Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel MDM2 inhibitor suppresses breast cancer growth and
metastasis


The MDM2 oncogene is amplified and/or overexpressed in many human
cancers, including breast cancer, and it has been suggested as a
molecular target for treating human cancers. MDM2 is a major negative
regulator of tumor suppressor p53. Most MDM2 inhibitors under development
are targeting the MDM2-p53 binding, and have little or no effects on
cancers without functional p53, such as advanced breast cancer.
Therefore, new strategies to target MDM2 are desirable. The present study
was designed to develop a new class of MDM2 inhibitors that exert
anti-breast cancer activity, regardless of p53 status in the cancers. The
selective MDM2 inhibitors were discovered by a computational
structure-based screening, yielding a lead compound, termed JapA.
Fluorescence polarization (FP)-based binding assay and cellular thermal
shift assay were performed to determine the binding between MDM2 and
JapA. Its cytotoxicity was initially evaluated in breast cancer cell
lines (MCF-7, MCF-7/p53/, MDA-MB-231, and MDA-MB-468) and normal human
breast cells (MCF-10A). Its anti-breast cancer activities were further
assessed in in vitro and in vivo MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 models. The
molecular mechanisms for its targeting effects on MDM2 were elucidated in
various cell models in vitro and in vivo. We further found that JapA
selectively inhibited breast cancer cell growth, decreased cell
proliferation, and induced G2/M phase arrest and apoptosis in breast
cancer cells through an MDM2-dependent mechanism, regardless of p53
status. In MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 xenograft models, JapA inhibited MDM2 and
suppressed tumor growth and lung metastasis in a dose-dependent manner,
without host toxicity. Furthermore, JapA directly bound to MDM2 protein
and reduced MDM2 levels in cancer cells in vitro and in vivo by promoting
MDM2 protein degradation and inhibiting MDM2 transcription, which is
distinct from the existing MDM2 inhibitors. In conclusion, JapA
represents a new class of MDM2 inhibitor that exerts its anticancer
activity through directly down-regulating MDM2, and might be developed as
a novel cancer therapeutic agent. (Supported by the NIH R01 CA112029, R01
CA121211, and R01 CA186662)

