Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRCA1 N-terminal-deficient proteins provide PARP inhibitor and
platinum resistance


Introduction: Tumors harboring BRCA1 mutations initially respond well to
platinum and PARP inhibitor therapy; however, resistance invariably
arises and is a major clinical problem. The BRCA1 185delAG allele is a
common founder mutation located close to the protein translation start
site, thought to produce a short peptide devoid of function.Experimental
procedures: In this study, we utilized the SUM1315MO2 breast cancer cell
line that harbors a BRCA1 185delAG mutation to study mechanisms of PARP
inhibitor and platinum resistance. SUM1315MO2 cells were cultured in the
presence of increasing concentrations of the PARP inhibitor rucaparib or
cisplatin until rucaparib resistant (RR) and cisplatin resistant (CR)
clones emerged.Results: DNA sequencing revealed that no BRCA1 gene
reversion mutations were present in resistant cells. We next measured
BRCA1 protein levels by Western blotting with antibodies specific for the
N- and C-terminal domains of BRCA1. As a control, the wild-type BRCA1
protein expressed in MDA-MB-231 cells was detectable with both N- and
C-terminal antibodies. In contrast, BRCA1 protein was undetectable in
both SUM1315MO2 parental and resistant clones using the N-terminal
specific antibody. However, the C-terminal specific antibody identified a
more quickly migrating band of low abundance in parental cells, but with
elevated expression in both RR and CR clones. We inferred that this
protein was devoid of the extreme N-terminal RING domain-containing
region that mediates interaction with BARD1. To investigate the
functionality of the N-terminal truncated BRCA1 protein (Nt-BRCA1), we
measured BRCA1 and RAD51 irradiation-induced focus formation by
immunofluorescence. RR and CR clones demonstrated 2.25 - 2.75-fold
increase (P = 0.024) in the number of cells with BRCA1 foci compared to
parental cells. Similarly, we detected a 2 - 2.85-fold increase (P =
0.0325) in RAD51 foci formation in resistant clones compared to parental
cells. Additionally, BRCA1 siRNA treated cells were 12- and 9-fold more
sensitive to rucaparib compared to scrambled siRNA-treated control cells
(P = 0.0002). Similarly, CR-1 cells treated with BRCA1 siRNAs were 1.56-
and 1.7-fold more sensitive to cisplatin (P = 0.0346) compared to
scrambled siRNA treated cells. Furthermore, N-terminal truncated BRCA1
proteins were detectable in a primary tumor from a germline BRCA1185delAG
mutation carrier.Conclusions: Taken together, these results provide
evidence for a novel, mutation location-dependent mechanism of PARP
inhibitor and platinum resistance.

