Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of stem-like cells with malignant properties by chronic
exposure of immortalized normal human urothelial cell line to arsenic


Although there is extensive epidemiologic evidence of increased risk for
the development of urothelial carcinoma (UC) associated with arsenic
exposure, the mechanisms by which arsenic participates in tumorigenesis
are not well understood. To gain mechanistic insights, we recently
developed an in vitro arsenic model in an immortalized normal human
bladder cell line (HUC1) and in this study we performed extended
phenotypic and molecular characterization of the arsenic exposed in vitro
model.To assess the impact of arsenic exposure at a time progressive
manner, we performed MTT assay using the arsenic exposed and unexposed
HUC1 cells. The growth of the HUC1 cells was increased in a time
dependent manner after arsenic exposure. In soft agar assay, colonies
were observed only in arsenic exposed cells. Similarly, invaded cells in
invasion assay were observed only in arsenic exposed cells. To identify
whether arsenic exposure induce self-renewal properties, we performed
spheres forming assay and our data showed arsenic exposed cells formed
more spheres under serum-free medium and non-adherence condition, and the
number gradually increased with longer periods of exposure. The sphere
forming ability was maintained through two subsequent serial passages,
indicating of self-renewal ability. The spheroid cells showed
differentiated morphology when cultured in serum containing medium.
Finally, to identify epigenetic events associated with the later
phenotypic alterations, we performed illumina methylation array and
expression array and determined a panel of genes that are epigenetically
altered that may be related to arsenic-induced tumorigenesis. Among 29
genes that exhibited reduction of promoter methylation and up-regulation
of the expression, 6 genes (EDNRA, GJB2, KRT17, GDF15, S100P, and LCN2)
were reported as the oncogenes. Furthermore 2 genes (GJB2 and KRT17) were
maintained the alteration even in withdrawal of arsenic for 2.5 months.
While, among 13 genes that exhibited induction of promoter methylation
and down-regulation of the expression, one gene (TSPYL5) as a tumor
suppressor gene was maintained the alteration in withdrawal of arsenic
for 2.5 months. In conclusion, chronic arsenic exposure induces malignant
phenotype with the acquisition of stem-like activity, and epigenetic
alteration might be partial mechanism of tumorigenesis. Validation and
detail molecular understanding of later genes are ongoing to determine
the arsenic associated pathway alterations in the genesis of UC.

