Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of DNA methyltransferase and PARP inhibitors as a
novel therapy strategy for poor prognosis acute myeloid leukemia


We present here strong preclinical data for a novel, mechanistically
based, combinatorial approach to using DNA methyltransferase inhibitors
(DNMTis), such as decitabine (DAC) and 5-Azacytidine (AzaC), with PARP
inhibitors (PARPis) as a treatment strategy for acute myelogenous
leukemias (AML). AzaC and DAC alone show efficacy in AML but
combinatorial approaches will be required to maximize therapeutic
responses. PARPi's have not been well studied as agents for these
diseases. The mechanistic rationale for our approach is based upon: 1)
data from our group and others showing DNMT's and PARP co-reside in DNA
damage induced protein complexes; 2) the fact that AzaC and DAC trap
DNMT's into DNA via their mechanism of action, led us to hypothesize that
these drugs might also increase PARP trapping at DNA damage sites 3) the
cytotoxicity of clinically available PARPis, and especially the most
potent ones, appears to correlate with degree of trapping of PARP1 at DNA
damage sites in chromatin. We first find that, indeed, in cultured human
AML cells, the DNMTi's (10 to 20 nM DAC) and PARPi's (1 to 10 nM BMN 673)
alone trap PARP into chromatin and this effect is enhanced when the drugs
are combined. Concomitant with this, the combined doses, especially,
strongly reduce double strand break (DSB) repair thereby increasing
cytotoxic DNA damage. In association with these findings, in
methylcellulose cloning assays of both cultured (N = 4) and primary AML
cells (N = 9), a combination of the DNMTi's and PARPi's strongly
decreased colony survival compared to each of the agents alone.
Interestingly those cell lines and primary samples expressing poor
prognostic FLT3/ITD (Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 internal tandem
duplication) mutations, were particularly sensitive to the combination
treatment. Based on all the above results, we developed an in-vivo
treatment model, using human FLT3/ITD-positive, MV411-luc xenografts in
immunocompromised mice. As opposed to mock treatment, and treatment with
AzaC or BMN673, alone, the combined drug treatment, over a 40 day
treatment course, starkly and significantly decreases leukemia burden, as
measured by luciferase imaging, peripheral blood blast counts and spleen
weights. Our data suggest a novel use of both DNMTi's and PARPi's in a
compelling therapeutic strategy for poor prognosis AML, that will be
funded by Van Andel-SU2C for a clinical trial to be based at the
University of Maryland.

