Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The composition and interactions in the microenvironment of human
prostate cancer


Background: Prostate cancer is a heterogeneous disease both genetically
and in its clinical behavior. It is widely accepted that a tumor does not
only consist of cancer cells but also contains many other non-malignant
cells, including immune cells and cancer associated fibroblasts. These
non-malignant cells create the tumor microenvironment. It is previously
suggested that the tumor microenvironment modulates the behavior of
various cancers, including prostate cancer. Little is known about the
exact interactions between prostate cancer cells and its micro
environment. In this study we aim to gain insight into the composition of
the microenvironment and the interaction between malignant and
non-malignant cells. Moreover, these interactions might hold a predictive
signature for disease progression and metastatic disease.Methods:
Biopsies were obtained from Formalin Fixed Paraffin Embedded (FFPE) human
prostate cancers from 10 patients with pelvic lymph node metastases and
10 gleason score (7-8-9) matched patients with non-metastatic disease.
RNA was isolated from the FFPE samples and sequenced. A tissue micro
array was constructed from the same prostate cancers. Fresh prostate
cancer biopsies were taken right after radical prostatectomy, and
fibroblast cells were isolated for short term culture.Results: The RNA
sequencing of FFPE prostate biopsies revealed an increased expression of
cancer related stroma genes in tumor tissue compared to non-tumorous
tissue. Presence of various cell types was confirmed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). The subtypes of various immune cell
populations could be identified, including regulatory T cells and
pro-tumorous M2-like macrophages. The percentage of M2-like macrophages
identified by the CD163 marker showed a significant increase in tumor
tissue compared to non-tumorous tissue, which was unique for patients
with metastatic disease. Furthermore we could confirm that decreased
stromal Androgen Receptor (AR) expression correlated with disease
progression and also correlated with metastatic disease. To investigate
which stromal cells were AR positive we performed double stainings of
PDGFR beta and AR. Costaining of both markers confirmed AR expression in
fibroblasts. The stromal cells cultured from the fresh prostate cancer
biopsies were morphologically fibroblasts and expressed AR, Smooth Muscle
Actin and PDGFR beta, suggesting a cancer associated phenotype.
Testosterone stimulation of these fibroblasts showed increased chromatin
binding of the AR. This suggests that the AR is functional in these
cancer associated fibroblasts.Conclusions: This study gained insight into
the composition of the prostate cancer microenvironment. The increased
expression of CD163 and the decreased expression of stromal AR was
related to pelvic lymph node metastases.

