Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpressed Rab1A is associated poor prognosis and promotes
oncogenic growth and metastasis through mTORC1 activation in
hepatocellular carcinoma


Background: The mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is a
pivotal regulator of cell growth and proliferation in response to
nutrition and various factor. In recent years, studies have focus on
over-activation of mTORC1 in normal cells leading to tumorigenesis and
malignant tumor development. However, the precise factors of mTORC1
hyperactivation to promote the growth of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
or other cancers are still not well characterized. Thus, in this study,
we aimed to clarify a novel gene -Rab1A, and it's expression and
functional role in mTORC1 signal in of HCC. Methods: We analyzed the
Rab1A protein in HCC and para-cancer samples from 143 patients and the
correlation with its survival. To identify Rab1A's role in tumor
progression, a serious of functional study were applied including
overexpression and knockdown Rab1A in different cell lines both in vivo
and in vitro. For mechanism research, western bolt was demonstrated to
identify the signal dysregulation between Rab1A abnormity and mTORC1
pathway under involvement of irritants. Results: Our results showed that,
compared with normal livers, Rab1A was frequently overexpressed in HCC
and significantly associated with HCC prognosis. Functional study
demonstrated that overexpression of Rab1A in HCC cells increased cell
growth, cell migration, cell cycle progression and tumor formation in
vivo and/or in vitro, all of which were effectively inhibited when Rab1A
was silenced by shRNA. We further provided evidences that Rab1A promotes
HCC growth and migration through phosphorylation of S6K, the consequence
of activating mTORC1 signaling pathway. Mechanism research of the signal
pathway between Rab1A and mTORC1 suggest that Rab1A is likely to
stimulate mTORC1 directly, with the cooperation of Amino acid stimulation
but not depend on the pathway of PI3K/AKT and MAPK/ERK..

