Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of laser capture microdissection on cancer signaling
proteins and phosphoproteins


Background: Tissues are heterogeneous in terms of cell composition and
the percentage of tumor epithelium can vary tremendously in any clinical
biopsy. Given the importance and focus on the cancer phosphoproteome due
to the mechanism of action of nearly all targeted therapies, we and
others have shown the importance of upfront cellular enrichment
strategies such as laser capture microdissection (LCM). However, despite
the improved data quality, retention of dynamic range, and correlations
with IHC and genomic data shown with LCM based analysis; questions
remained about the overall impact of LCM on protein and phosphoprotein
measurements. The aim of the study was to investigate whether a
real-world tissue processing workflow using infrared (IR) based LCM for
the isolation of pure cell populations affect the overall expression and
activation/deactivation levels of protein signaling molecules that are
important in druggable target analysis and companion diagnosis.Materials
and methods: Five Non Small Cell Lung Cancer samples were used for this
study. Eight micron sections were cut and mounted on glass slides.
Samples were microdissected or lysed within 30 minutes once stained. For
each sample, using alternating adjacent slides, three different protein
lysates were collected: the first lysate was generated after tumor
epithelium enrichment was performed via LCM, the second one was obtained
by lysing of the undissected whole tissue directly from the glass slide
(TL) and the last was obtained by microdissecting the entire tissue slide
(LCM-TL) without regard to the underpinning cell population. Lysates were
then analyzed by Reverse Phase Protein Microarray to evaluate the
expression/activation levels of 87 proteins. Unsupervised hierarchical
clustering analysis was used to compare the expression/activation of the
87 analytes across the different collection methods.Results: Tumor
percentage was estimated as 50% (n = 1), 60% (n = 1) and 70% (n = 3).
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis showed that for all five
pairs (100%), the TL and matched LCM-TL samples clustered within the same
arm of the dendrogram while only one of the LCM samples (with tumor
percentage of 70%) clustered in the same arm of the dendrogram as the
matched LCM-TL. On the other hand, two of the five LCM samples were
contained in the same cluster.Conclusion: These results confirm the
importance of using LCM for upfront cellular enrichment for the accurate
measurement of the expression/activation levels of proteins for biomarker
discovery, even when the tumor cells percentage in the specimen is high.
Importantly, based on this pilot study we conclude, that the LCM process,
using an IR based direct capture laser system, itself does not appear to
have a significant impact on the integrity of proteome and
phosphoproteome.

