Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Snai2(Slug) regulates tumor angiogenesis through the induction of
EndoMT


Anti-angiogenic therapy remains an attractive option in the treatment of
cancer since it has the potential to both control growth of the primary
tumor and limit metastasis. However, many current anti-angiogenic cancer
drugs fail to deliver long-term efficacy, likely due to adaptation of the
tumor to utilize alternative angiogenic pathways. The high level of cross
talk between pro-angiogenic pathways makes targeting the downstream
effectors a potentially more beneficial strategy.We have recently
demonstrated that the transcription factor Slug (Snai2), a master
regulator of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), is expressed in
angiogenic endothelial cells (EC) and can augment sprouting angiogenesis
in vitro, likely by inducing a partial endothelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EndoMT). Slug is induced by many pro-angiogenic pathways
(e.g. TGF, Notch, VEGF) and can directly regulate several key steps in
angiogenesis, such as migration and proliferation, making it an
attractive anti-angiogenic drug target.In this study we used Slug
knockout mice, which are viable but runted, to test the hypothesis that
Slug regulates pathological angiogenesis in vivo by inducing an EndoMT.
Using a Matrigel plug assay we found that angiogenesis was reduced in
Slug knockout mice compared to littermate controls. Initial analysis
suggests this is the result of impaired vascular recruitment. In
addition, a syngeneic subcutaneous tumor model showed that the growth of
wild type tumor cells is reduced by over 50% in Slug knockout mice
compared to controls. In an in vitro angiogenesis assay Slug
overexpression induces hypersprouting and an increased number of
disconnected cells, suggesting the complete loss of cell-cell junctions,
consistent with a full EndoMT. RNA-seq comparing Slug overexpressing EC
to wild type EC revealed targets that are implicated in both autocrine
and paracrine regulation of tumor angiogenesis. In conclusion, these data
suggest that EC expression of Slug regulates tumor angiogenesis, and that
the level of slug expression may set the threshold between a partial and
a full EndoMT.

