Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Superoxide anion (O2.-) mediated activation of mTORC2 by estrogen
receptor in breast cancer cells: Role of acetylation dependent inhibition
of MnSOD


Introduction:We recently reported a hitherto unknown nongenomic pathway
unique to estrogen responsive breast-cancer cells wherein, following
stimulation by estrogen (E2), Estrogen-receptor-alpha (ER-) may redox
regulate mTORC2 activity by affecting transient up-regulation of O2.-
levels particularly within mitochondria. Our study established O2.- not
only as an upstream regulator of mTORC2 but a critical mediator of ER
signaling. Precise knowledge of the mechanisms underlying aforementioned
O2.- potentiation may lead to development of novel and more efficacious
measures to intervene the breast-cancer progression.The principle enzyme
that regulates mitochondrial superoxide anion levels is MnSOD (SOD2),
thus current study was planned to determine whether ER may affect
transient superoxide anion O2.- upregulation in E2 stimulated
breast-cancer cells by modulating MnSOD activity, if so,
how?Methodology/Principle findings:Evaluation of MnSOD specific activity
in accordance with Mishra and Fridovich (1971) revealed time dependent
inhibition of MnSOD enzyme in MCF-7 breast-cancer cells following their
stimulation with E2. Detailed analysis revealed that the transient
inhibition of MnSOD was a receptor dependent phenomenon. Western-blotting
analysis revealed potentiation of inhibitory Lysine-K68 acetylation of
MnSOD in a characteristic ER dependent manner. Co-immunoprecipitation and
reverse co-immunoprecipitation studies revealed physical-interaction
between ER and MnSOD which in-turn was associated with impaired
association of MnSOD with key deacetylase SIRT3. Furthermore, knocking
down SIRT3 levels through SIRT3 directed siRNA resulted in elevated
superoxide anion O2.- levels and potentiated mTORC2 signaling. In-vivo
experiments employing 4T1-BALB/c mouse model of breast-cancer
corroborated these findingsSummary of the results:Collectively our
results demonstrate for the first time direct physical-interaction
between ER and MnSOD following E2 stimulation; physical-interaction of ER
with MnSOD in-turn resulted in disengagement of SOD2 with SIRT3.
Resultant compromised deacetylation of SOD2 at critical K68 may lead to
its inhibition and thus cause a transient buildup of superoxide anion
O2.- within mitochondria leading to activation of mTORC2
signaling.ConclusionOur findings unravel a new role of MnSOD as an
important control-switch through which ER might affect its downstream
non-genomic signaling cascades in a redox dependent manner particularly
potentiation of mTORC2. We present data in support of MnSOD being
responsible for previously reported ER dependent superoxide anion O2.-
potentiation in breast-cancer cells following E2 exposure. We showed that
MnSOD interacts with ER-alpha leading to its diminished SIRT3 dependent
deacetylation, its inhibition and superoxide anion O2.- build up and
consequent mTORC2 activation.

