Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of endocrine disruptors on rat mammary transcriptome at
critical developmental windows


Background: Endocrine disruptors (EDs) are environmental chemicals that
may disrupt endogenous hormones and have been linked to many adverse
health outcomes including breast cancer. EDs have been shown to modulate
the risk for mammary tumors in animal models, but their mechanisms at
biologically relevant doses and during critical developmental windows
remain poorly understood.Methods: We examined the individual and
combinatorial (MIX) effects of three EDs commonly found in personal care
products - diethyl phthalate (DEP), methyl paraben (MPB) and triclosan
(TCS). Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed at four developmental windows -
prenatal, neonatal, prepubertal and pubertal - at doses comparable to
human exposure based on urinary levels reported in NHANES.
Whole-transcriptome profiling was done using Affymetrix rat gene 2.0 st
arrays.Results: Differential gene expression analysis by limma revealed
that there were no substantial differences between the transcriptomes of
prenatal and neonatal rats, so they were combined into a perinatal group.
Control rats: Expression levels of 702 transcripts significantly differed
between the prepubertal and perinatal periods; gene ontology (GO)
enrichment showed that GO terms related to development and response to
estrogen stimuli were up-regulated and immune signaling pathways were
down-regulated. Upstream analysis using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis showed
that -estradiol and estrogen receptor were among the top regulators
up-regulated in the prepubertal window, and T-cell receptor and
interleukins were among the top regulators down-regulated. The difference
between later windows, i.e., between puberty and prepuberty was much less
pronounced, with only 39 differentially expressed transcripts. ED-exposed
rats: Large scale changes in mammary transcriptome were driven by
developmental stage, while changes due to ED exposure appeared to be more
subtle. One-way ANOVA among developmental windows demonstrated that only
3000 transcripts were significantly changed in DEP and MPB and 4000
transcripts changed in TCS and MIX compared to 6000 differentially
expressed transcripts in control rats. Importantly, distinct signatures
of genes were associated with each individual ED as well as MIX,
suggesting distinctive mechanisms. Additionally, our data suggested that
the pubertal window was the most susceptible; for example, 440
transcripts were differentially expressed in the MPB group relative to
control only at the pubertal window and GO terms related to DNA damage
and ion transport were up- and down-regulated, respectively.Conclusions:
Exposure to common EDs at levels comparable to human exposure resulted in
measurable changes in mammary transcriptome and reveal novel mechanisms
of ED action in mammary development. Findings from our study highlight
the importance of taking into account the timing of exposure when
studying the relationship between environment and disease.

