Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recurrent 3p21 deletion in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
identifies SEMA3F as an anti-lymphangiogenic metastasis suppressor gene


Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) often metastasize to
locoregional lymph nodes, and lymph node involvement represents one of
the most important prognostic factors of poor clinical outcome. HNSCC are
remarkably lymphangiogenic and represent a clear example of a cancer that
utilizes the lymphatic vasculature for malignant dissemination; however,
the molecular mechanisms underlying lymphangiogenesis in HNSCC is still
poorly understood. Of interest, we found that an axon guidance molecule,
Semaphorin 3F (SEMA3F), is among the top 1% underexpressed genes in
HNSCC, and that genomic loss of SEMA3F correlates with increased
metastasis and decreased survival. SEMA3F acts on its co-receptors,
plexins and neuropilins, among which neuropilin-2 (NRP2) is highly
expressed in lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) but not in oral
epithelium and most HNSCCs. We show that recombinant SEMA3F promotes LEC
collapse and potently inhibits lymphangiogenesis in vivo. By
reconstituting all possible plexin and neuropilin combinations, we found
that SEMA3F acts through multiple receptors, but predominantly requires
NRP2 to signal in LECs. Using orthotopic HNSCC metastasis mouse models,
we provide direct evidence that SEMA3F re-expression diminishes
lymphangiogenesis and lymph node metastasis. Furthermore, analysis of a
large tissue collection revealed that SEMA3F is progressively lost during
HNSCC progression, concomitant with increased tumor lymphangiogenesis.
SEMA3F is localized to 3p21, an early and frequently deleted locus in
HNSCC and many other prevalent human malignancies. Thus, SEMA3F may
represent an antilymphangiogenic metastasis suppressor gene widely lost
during cancer progression, hence serving as a prognostic biomarker and an
attractive target for therapeutic intervention to halt metastasis.

