Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next generation sequencing of human tumor xenografts is
significantly improved by prior depletion of mouse cells


Human tumor xenografts represent the gold standard method for research
areas such as drug discovery, cancer stem cell biology, and metastasis
prediction. When compared to in vitro cell culture models, human tumor
xenografts show a higher validity for most assays (DeRose et al.,
2011).During the growth phase in vivo, xenografted tissue is vascularized
and infiltrated by cells of murine origin. The level of infiltration is
highly dependent on multiple factors like tumor subtype, growth rate, and
region of transplantation. However, even when these factors are kept
constant, the amount and composition of infiltrating mouse cells is
highly variable. Due to this, molecular downstream analyses such as
microarray based expression profiling are challenged by cross
hybridization of mouse derived molecules to human probes. In addition, a
reduction of sensitivity caused by measuring mouse signals during
next-generation sequencing analysis can be expected.To overcome these
limitations, we have developed a fast and easy method allowing for the
comprehensive depletion of all cells of mouse origin by using automated
tissue dissociation and magnetic cell sorting (MACS). We have performed
whole exome sequencing of bulk human tumor xenografts from lung, bladder,
and kidney cancer, and compared the results to samples depleted of mouse
cells. A significant increase (p Human tumor xenografts represent the
gold standard method for research areas such as drug discovery, cancer
stem cell biology, and metastasis prediction. When compared to in vitro
cell culture models, human tumor xenografts show a higher validity for
most assays (DeRose et al., 2011).During the growth phase in vivo,
xenografted tissue is vascularized and infiltrated by cells of murine
origin. The level of infiltration is highly dependent on multiple factors
like tumor subtype, growth rate, and region of transplantation. However,
even when these factors are kept constant, the amount and composition of
infiltrating mouse cells is highly variable. Due to this, molecular
downstream analyses such as microarray based expression profiling are
challenged by cross hybridization of mouse derived molecules to human
probes. In addition, a reduction of sensitivity caused by measuring mouse
signals during next-generation sequencing analysis can be expected.To
overcome these limitations, we have developed a fast and easy method
allowing for the comprehensive depletion of all cells of mouse origin by
using automated tissue dissociation and magnetic cell sorting (MACS). We
have performed whole exome sequencing of bulk human tumor xenografts from
lung, bladder, and kidney cancer, and compared the results to samples
depleted of mouse cells. A significant increase (p < 0.05) in cluster
density as well as an average increase in read counts of 33% was observed
for the mouse cell depleted samples, indicating improved sample quality.
Indeed, we observed a strong reduction of debris and dead cells upon the
depletion procedure. We mapped the reads of all samples against human and
mouse genomes and determined their putative origin. An average of 12% of
reads derived from non-depleted samples was assigned to mouse cells. This
amount could be reduced to 0.28% by prior depletion of mouse cells. As
15% of the mouse-derived reads mapped erroneously to human genome (1.9%
of total reads) in the non-depleted samples, a strong positive influence
of mouse cell depletion (0.04% of total reads) on downstream analyses can
be expected. The number of predicted SNPs was 2-fold higher in the
non-depleted samples and 56% of SNPs identified in the non-depleted
samples were not present anymore after depletion of mouse cells.
Furthermore, the increase in coverage from 39-fold (non-depleted) to
56-fold (depleted) resulted in a higher sensitivity of relevant SNP
detection after mouse cell depletion. 16% of SNPs identified in the
depleted samples were exclusively found in these samples.Taken together,
removal of mouse cells significantly improves the analysis of human tumor
xenografts by next generation sequencing. As this effect was observed
although a human sequence specific selection has been carried out during
exome enrichment, the influence on whole exome and whole transcriptome
sequencing are expected to be even more prominent.

