Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-associated fibroblasts in invasive lobular breast carcinoma


Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) can promote breast cancer
progression and therapy response through paracrine and juxtacrine
signaling pathways. CAFs are abundantly observed in especially the
invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) subtype of breast cancer. Surprisingly,
there is nothing known about the function of these CAFs in ILC. Given the
fact that human ILC is generally resistant to standard chemotherapy, we
believe that the cause of this therapy resistance lies into the active
crosstalk between CAFs and tumor cells leading to a more progressive and
resistant phenotype. Therefore, we aim to discover the exact function of
CAFs in ILC as well as their drugable targets.In order to reliably study
the role of CAFs in ILC, we generated a genetically engineered mouse
model for ILC based on the tissue-specific loss of E-cadherin and PI3K
signaling pathway activation, two hallmarks of human ILC. This clinically
relevant mouse model spontaneously developed tumors that grow as
typically invasive indian files into a rigid extracellular matrix (ECM)
that is very rich of CAFs. Uniquely, these tumors closely resemble human
classical ILC, including its growth rate. Based on a mammary gland
transplantation setting using fluorescent labeled hosts, we have shown
that fibroblasts are recruited by ILC, both in vivo and in vitro,
suggesting ILC-secreted mediators. Interestingly, in vitro inhibition of
PDGFR (expressed by fibroblasts) can at least in part inhibit this
recruitment. We are currently investigating whether inhibition of PDGFR
in vivo can prevent the recruitment of fibroblasts and subsequently tumor
development or progression. In parallel, we have isolated fibroblasts and
epithelial cells from primary mouse ILCs and wild-type mammary glands to
screen for other important players in the tumor-stroma crosstalk using
RNA-seq and secretome proteomics. We will subsequently assess their
functional significance during ILC development, progression and therapy
response.

