Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of ECM remodeling in disseminated ovarian cancer
as a result of loss of HtrA1 and deregulated TGFB signaling


Dissemination of ovarian cancer is promoted by deregulated cell adhesion
that selectively enhances detachment at primary site and attachment and
invasion at secondary sites. Modifications in the extracellular matrix
composition within tumor microenvironment can facilitate deregulated cell
adhesion, migration, and invasion. We aim to understand how
tumor-intrinsic changes affect expression and composition of ECM proteins
in disseminated ovarian cancer. The serine protease HtrA1 has been shown
to inhibit TGFB by targeting TGFB family ligands and receptors for
proteolysis. In addition, HtrA1 also degrades ECM proteins, such as
decorin, fibronectin, and collagens. We have shown that HtrA1 is
down-regulated in ovarian cancer cells with loss contributing to
chemotherapy resistance. We propose that loss of HtrA1 in the ovarian
tumor microenvironment enhances TGFB signaling that in turn facilitate
compositional changes in ECM proteins from stromal cells and promote
cancer dissemination. To characterize compositional changes that occur in
ECM proteins as a result of increased TGFB signaling, stable isotope
amino acid labeling (SILAC) and LC-MS analysis were used. Mesothelial
cells were cultured in heavy or light isotopically labeled media to
confluence. Tumor cells expressing HtrA1 (NT) or stably transfected with
HtrA1-targeting shRNA (sh1) were added to either heavy or light
mesothelial cultures with or without TGFB (10 ng/ml). Cells were lifted
by EDTA and the remaining matrix proteins were subjected to LC-MS. The
data show that ECM compositional changes in fibronectin, laminin and
collagen were up regulated in mesothelial cells co-cultured with sh1
compared to NT cells. All extracted proteins with 4 fold change were
analyzed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Proteins up regulated in
co-cultures with HtrA1-deficient cancer cells (sh) were determined to be
associated with migration, invasion and tumorogenesis whereas proteins
upregulated in co-culture with HtrA1-expressing cancer cells (NT) were
associated with protein modifications and ER stress. HtrA1-deficient
cells show decreased adhesion to collagen I/III matrix and enhanced
adhesion to collagen I/VI matrix. HtrA1-deficient cancer cells show
morphology characteristics of epithelial-mesenchymal transition and shows
higher motility and invasion through mesothelial cell layer. Finally, in
clinical samples, decreased HtrA1 expression in primary tumor was
significantly associated with higher incidence of carcinomatosis and
nodal metastasis in ovarian cancer. We conclude that loss of HtrA1 in
ovarian cancer cells results in compositional changes in ECM within the
tumor microenvironment, and these changes may contribute to the
dissemination of ovarian cancer.

