Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a miRNAs signature of radioresistance in a
prostate cancer model


IntroductionRadiotherapy (RT) has a prominent role when used as a single
modality or in combination with androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) in the
management of prostate cancer patients. However, even with currently
available high-dose RT protocols, many patients develop recurrence or
biochemical failure associated with a rise in PSA, and ultimately reduced
overall survival. Key regulators of cancer cell behavior, dysregulation
of miRNAs expression is associated with both prostate cancer pathogenesis
and treatment resistance. This study aimed to identify a miRNAs signature
of radioresistance in a prostate cancer model, as a prerequisite for the
future development of a novel pre-treatment assay for the identification
of radiotherapy prostate cancer patients at risk of biochemical
failure.MethodsTwo models of radioresistance were used : (1) an isogenic
radiation resistant model generated through weekly exposure to 2-Gy
fractionated ionising radiation of 22Rv1 (primary) prostate cancer (CaP)
cells to a cumulative dose of 60Gy. (2) chronically hypoxic 22Rv1 cells
(48hrs). miRNA profiling of radioresistant and wild type cells was
performed using the Exiqon miRCURY array and overlapping differentially
expressed miRs were identified.ResultsThe radiation survival curve of the
resulting subline RR22Rv1 was associated with a significant increase in
clonogenic survival (1.3 fold increase in survival after 2Gy and 2.2 fold
increase after 10Gy), when compared to both parent 22Rv1 and aged-matched
controls. The RR22Rv1 cell line is associated with decreased sensitivity
to DNA damage (comet assay), enlargement of the S-phase cell population
(PI staining) but no evidence for expansion of the senescent cell
fraction (-Gal assay). miRNA profiling identified 105 significantly
differentially expressed miRNAs in RR22Rv1, when compared to the parent
and age-matched control 22RV1 cells. A total of 12 miRNA were
differentially expressed in chronically hypoxic compared to normoxic
22Rv1 cells. Three candidate miRNAs were associated with a radioresistant
phenotype across the models: miR200a, miR210 and miR4284. Functional
validation of these candidates is currently under way.ConclusionAvailable
in tissues, serum and urine, miRNAs are ideal candidates for the
development of novel biological tests. This study identifies a miRNAs
signature of radioresistance in prostate cancer cells with potential for
the development of a miRNA-based prognostic assay for radiotherapy
prostate cancer patients.

