Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BC-BET: an online bladder cancer biomarker evaluation tool


Cancer is a genetic disease whose biology is driven by mutated and
abnormally expressed genes. In the past 15 years, the identification of
diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers from genomic data has increased our
understanding of cancer biology and has led to advances in the
personalized treatment of many cancers. Despite these advances, however,
there are no clinically approved biomarkers for the treatment of bladder
cancer, which is the fourth most common cancer in males in the United
States and one of the most expensive cancers to treat.Although gene
expression profiles of bladder cancer patients are publicly available,
their analysis is time-consuming and requires computational resources and
bioinformatics expertise often not available to biologists or
clinician-researchers. Here we describe BC-BET, an online Bladder Cancer
Biomarker Evaluation Tool for evaluating candidate diagnostic and
prognostic biomarkers in bladder cancer.The BC-BET database contains gene
expression data collected from 11 publicly available patient cohorts (N =
1041). For a chosen gene, BC-BET evaluates whether the gene is
differentially expressed (P Cancer is a genetic disease whose biology is
driven by mutated and abnormally expressed genes. In the past 15 years,
the identification of diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers from genomic
data has increased our understanding of cancer biology and has led to
advances in the personalized treatment of many cancers. Despite these
advances, however, there are no clinically approved biomarkers for the
treatment of bladder cancer, which is the fourth most common cancer in
males in the United States and one of the most expensive cancers to
treat.Although gene expression profiles of bladder cancer patients are
publicly available, their analysis is time-consuming and requires
computational resources and bioinformatics expertise often not available
to biologists or clinician-researchers. Here we describe BC-BET, an
online Bladder Cancer Biomarker Evaluation Tool for evaluating candidate
diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers in bladder cancer.The BC-BET
database contains gene expression data collected from 11 publicly
available patient cohorts (N = 1041). For a chosen gene, BC-BET evaluates
whether the gene is differentially expressed (P < 0.05) between normal
cells and tumors, between low-grade (LG) and high-grade (HG) tumors, and
between non-muscle invasive (NMI) and muscle invasive (MI) tumors.
Survival analysis is carried out to evaluate whether gene expression is
significantly associated with survival in all patients, or in clinically
important subsets of patients with NMI, LG tumors, or in patients with
MI, HG tumors. Results are summarized graphically and can be downloaded
in an Excel spreadsheet. A user can also look at the relative expression
of a gene or the correlation between the expression of two genes across
40 bladder cancer cell lines.This tool is freely available to the cancer
research community and will be updated as additional bladder cancer
biomarker data becomes available. BC-BET is available from
http://bioinformatics.easternct.edu.

