Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of rigidity in myeloid-tumor cell interactions in bone


Bone is one of the most common metastatic sites for breast cancer, where
nearly 70% of patients that die from disease develop skeletal metastases.
Skeletal metastases can cause hypercalcemia, fractures, and pain. With
the use of 2D polyurethane films (PUR) that mimic tissue rigidity ranging
from the basement membrane (10 MPa) to bone (2600 MPa), we have
previously published that bone rigidity increases expression of
Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP). This factor is important in
tumor-induced bone disease in several cancer cell lines that metastasize
to bone. Current in vivo studies implanting 3D scaffolds seeded with the
bone metastatic breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231 GFP into athymic nude mice
indicate that cells from the microenvironment infiltrate into the
scaffolds, suggesting that these cells may play a role in tumor response
to rigidity. Myeloid cells, which have been implicated in promoting tumor
progression by altering the tumor microenvironment, are one of major
infiltrating populations as determined by flow cytometry. Specifically
CD11b+ myeloid cells made up 15% of overall cells within the scaffold,
with the remaining population being mostly GFP+ tumor cells. Since few
studies have examined the effect of rigidity on myeloid cells, we
hypothesize that the physical rigidity of the bone promotes myeloid
secretion of pro-tumorigenic factors that lead to an increase in
tumor-expression of factors important in bone metastasis. In order to
determine how rigidity influences myeloid cell differentiation and their
effect on tumor progression, we seeded the macrophage/osteoclast cell
line, RAW 264.7 cells on 2D PUR films. Differentiation of cells was
monitored and conditioned media collected and used to treat MDA-MB-231
cells seeded on 2D PUR films. Surprisingly, we found that the conditioned
media from RAW cells that were seeded onto the rigid films (bone-micking)
decreased expression of PTHrP in tumor cells seeded on both rigid and
soft films using RT-PCR. This effect was not seen from conditioned media
from RAW cells seeded on soft films. Additionally, RAW cells seeded on
soft films upregulate their expression of TGF-, a factor important in
regulating the expression of PTHrP, by 6-fold as compared to cells seeded
on a rigid film. In contrast, PTHrP expression increases on rigid
scaffolds in the absence of RAW conditioned media. Together these results
suggest that myeloid cells sense changes in rigidity and alter their
signaling profile accordingly to aid bone metastasis. Importantly, these
studies highlight the need to perform studies that include more diverse
cell populations, since the presence of myeloid cells or other cell types
can alter gene expression within tumor cells. The use of 3D scaffolds
will allow us to include multiple cell types and examine the interactions
between tumor cells and cells in the bone microenvironment. Better
understanding this interaction will help identify new therapeutic targets
for the inhibition of tumor-induced bone disease.

