Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic anti-tumor activity of the Notch gamma secretase
inhibitor BMS-906024 and paclitaxel in the treatment of lung
adenocarcinoma


Notch signaling is aberrantly activated in approximately one third of
non-small cell lung cancer cases, primarily through loss of the
endogenous Notch inhibitor, Numb, or via gain-of-function mutations in
the Notch1 receptor. Notch activity is associated with poor overall
survival among non-small cell lung cancer patients whose tumors are
wildtype for TP53. We set out to evaluate the combination of
Notch-targeted therapy with front-line chemotherapy as an effective
treatment for non-small cell lung cancer. Our study focused on lung
adenocarcinoma, the most common histological subtype in lung cancer. To
target Notch, we utilized the gamma secretase inhibitor (GSI) BMS-906024
which inhibits Notch activation. BMS-906024 is currently in Phase 1
clinical trials for patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and
metastatic solid tumors, including lung cancer. Human cell lines
representing the major genetic subtypes of lung cancer, most of which
were derived from adenocarcinomas, underwent MTS drug synergy assays
consisting of treatment with BMS-906024, cisplatin or paclitaxel, or the
combination of GSI and chemotherapy. The dosing and timing for BMS-906024
administration were optimized by examination of maximal Notch1
inhibition. Analysis of the drug effects with CalcuSyn yielded
Combination Index (CI) values, in which a CI of 0.5 or less was
considered as strong synergism for the drug combination. We found that
there were significantly lower CI values for the GSI BMS-906024 combined
with paclitaxel than with cisplatin (average CI = 0.54 vs 0.85,
respectively; P = 0.001). We then grouped the cell lines by major genetic
subtype (wildtype versus mutant or null for EGFR, Kras or TP53). The
synergy between BMS-906024 and paclitaxel was significantly greater in
Kras-wildtype than Kras-mutant cells (average CI = 0.39 vs 0.68,
respectively; P = 0.009), while there was no correlation with EGFR or
TP53 status. These results are a step toward identification of potential
biomarkers that could be used to predict patient response to
Notch-targeted therapy, which could have a positive impact on the care of
lung adenocarcinoma patients and be informative for treatment decisions.

