Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated approach to identify functional signaling modules in
retinoblastoma cancer progression


This study illustrates a multi-omics approach combining transcriptomics
and metabolomics datasets to study molecular events leading to
progression of retinoblastoma. Retinoblastoma is a pediatric ocular
cancer affecting children usually less than five years of age. It is a
complex disease predisposed primarily by biallelic inactivating mutations
in the RB1 gene. This gene has essential roles in cell cycle,
differentiation, chromosome stability and is implicated in other
functions. From a cohort of 9 patients undergoing enucleation of the
affected eyes, we obtained tumor, aqueous humor, vitreous humor and tear
samples. We obtained retina, aqueous humor and vitreous humor from
enucleated eyes of 2 deceased pediatric controls, whose cause of death is
not due to any eye related disease. The patients comprise of both high
and low clinical and pathological risks. In the first stage of the study,
we performed mRNA and miRNA gene expression using microarrays followed by
pathway analysis to identify gene enrichment that would enable functional
characterization of tumors. Differential expression analysis was carried
out using moderated t-test with Benjamini Hochberg multiple testing
correction. 108 (p0.05, fold change10) genes were found to be unique to
patients possessing high risk of metastasis. Pathway analysis revealed
key pathways that are known to be involved in the progression of
retinoblastoma including cell cycle and Rap1 signaling pathway. Many of
these responders were verified by RT-PCR and corroborated by immuno
histochemistry studies. The study also revealed 18 novel miRNAs which had
not been previously implicated in the disease, with a significant overlap
of the miRNA target list with our mRNA expression data set. Metabolomics
studies were performed using monophasic solvent extraction of aqueous,
vitreous and tear samples. The extracted metabolites were analyzed on
Accurate Mass QTOF mass spectrometer in positive and negative mode on a
reverse phase C18 and HILIC columns. Data dependent MS/MS analysis was
performed to confirm the compounds. Pathway analysis of the
differentially expressed metabolites revealed enrichment of several
pathways, including nucleotide metabolism and amino acids among others.
Combined pathway analysis of metabolomics and transcriptomics data was
performed in order to gain an understanding of the interrelationship
between changes in gene expression and metabolomic profile. The results
show overlap of key cellular pathways which can be mechanistically linked
to disease progression. The study provide new biological insights that
are made accessible by combining data from different biological and
biochemical domains with a comprehensive integrated method. The
information is useful not only to correlate expression markers with
disease mechanism but also to better predict appropriate chemotherapy
regimens and identify new mechanisms to treat even advanced stages of
retinoblastoma.

