Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lenvatinib, tri-specific targeted therapy to VEGFR/FGFR/RET,
suppresses angiogenesis through the inhibition of both VEGFR and FGFR
signaling pathways


Lenvatinib mesilate (lenvatinib) is an oral multiple receptor tyrosine
kinase (RTK) inhibitor that selectively inhibits the kinase activities of
vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFR1-3), in addition to
other proangiogenic and oncogenic pathway-related RTKs including
fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFR1-4), the platelet-derived growth
factor receptor (PDGFR) , KIT, and RET. Recently, lenvatinib showed a
highly statistically significant improvement of progression free survival
compared to placebo control in subjects with radioiodine-refractory
differentiated thyroid cancer in a Phase 3 trial. To elucidate the
mechanism of action in anti-tumor effect by lenvatinib, we examined the
antiangiogenic activity of lenvatinib in the VEGF and FGF driven
angiogenesis models both in vitro and in vivo.First, in in vitro
angiogenesis model, lenvatinib inhibits both VEGF-driven and FGF-driven
tube formation of HUVEC at almost similar dose (IC50 values are 2.1
nmol/L and 7.3 nmol/L, respectively). Next, the effects of lenvatinib on
in vivo angiogenesis, which was enhanced by overexpressed VEGF or FGF in
human pancreatic cancer KP-1 cells, were examined in the mouse dorsal air
sac assay. In vivo angiogenesis induced by overexpressed VEGF (KP-1/VEGF
transfectants) or FGF (KP-1/FGF4 transfectants) was significantly
suppressed with oral treatments of lenvatinib at 10 and 30 mg/kg. In
addtion, lenvatinib significantly inhibited bFGF-induced angiogenesis in
matrigel plug assay, which is driven by recombinant human bFGF and
stromal-derived mouse VEGF, at even 3 mg/kg. Increase of plasma FGF23
level is PD biomarker for an inhibition of FGFR1 signaling and it has
been known that plasma FGF23 level is up-regulated by administration of
FGFR inhibitors in mice. Lenvatinib at 10 mg/kg significantly elevated
mice FGF23 levels 24 hours after lenvatinib treatment in a dose dependent
manner.In conclusion, lenvatinib has potent both VEGF and FGF
driven-antiangiogenic activity in vitro and in vivo. Inhibition of FGFR
signaling pathway with lenvatinib was also supported by increase of
plasma FGF23 levels at the same dose to show an inhibition in FGF-driven
in vivo angiogenesis model. Therefore, the significant clinical outcome
might be based on the unique antiangiogenesis activity of lenvatinib, in
particular VEGFR and FGFR inhibition, which should be further
investigated.

