Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a new mechanism of microRNA turnover from
miR-106a-363 cluster leading to epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in
prostate cancer


Background: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer
mortality in US. The majority of PCa mortality is due to the recurrent of
metastatic castration resistant PCa. The acquisition of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) signifies PCa metastasis. In
particular, altered microRNAs (miRNAs) expression is closely associated
with PCa progression from prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia to
metastatic adenocarcinoma. miRNAs are small noncoding RNAs regulating
approximately 60% protein-coding genes by post-transcriptional
suppression or translational inhibition. miRNA gene expression at
post-transcriptional level becomes more complicated when multiple miRNAs
derived from the same cluster generate a polycistronic primary
transcript, and each individual miRNA displays different expression
profile and functional role. miRNA-363 (miR-363) belongs to the
miR-106a-363 cluster containing miR-106a, miR-18b, miR-20b, miR-19b-2,
miR-92a-2 and miR-363. Unlike the other five miRNAs which are closely
resemble to the oncogenic miR-17-92 cluster in their seed sequence and
function, miR-363 has been implicated to play a tumor suppressor role in
several types of cancer, indicating a different regulatory mechanism of
miR-363 from the miR-106a-363 cluster. Interferon-induced
tetratricopeptide repeat 5 (IFIT5) is first characterized as a viral RNA
binding protein and has been shown to directly bind to cellular tRNA,
which partially shared a structural similarity with precursor miRNAs
(pre-miRNAs). However, until now, there is no report indicating the RNA
recognition role of IFIT5 in miRNA biogenesis machinery.Results: In the
present study, miR-363 was clearly identified as a tumor suppressor miRNA
by inhibiting EMT in PCa cells via targeting slug/SNAI2. More
importantly, we have demonstrated, for the first time, that IFIT5 is able
to recognize a unique structure at the 5 end of precursor miR-363, which
facilitates pre-miR-363 degradation by the recruitment of a
5-3exoribonuclease, XRN1. Meanwhile, we have also shown that the
significant elevation of IFIT5 is detected in several PCa cells undergone
EMT leading to highly metastatic potential. In addition, an inverse
correlation between miR-363 and IFIT5 mRNA level was found in human PCa
specimens.Conclusion: We unveil IFIT5 complex as a new
post-transcriptional regulatory mechanism specific for miR-363 turnover
at the precursor stage, which determines the stability and unique
functional role of miR-363 distinct from other oncogenic miRNA members in
the miR-106a-363 cluster. Overall, this study provides an insight of
miRNA biogenesis machinery in cancer metastasis and new strategies of
therapeutic intervention of PCa.

