Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mAb with in vivo therapeutic activity against spontaneous breast
tumors in FVB-neuN mice recognizes SLP-2


BCSC (breast cancer stem cells) derived from FVB-neuN mice bearing
primary breast tumors were used to vaccinate mice and vaccine-draining
lymph node T cells were adoptively transferred to mice with advanced
primary tumors. Treated mice experienced tumor regression and importantly
a concomitant serologic response was induced to an antigen that is
expressed by BCSC even in Neu-antigen loss tumor cells. We generated a
specific mAb (mAb2) reactive against a membrane antigen on BCSC
tumorsphere cultures derived from NeuN spontaneous breast tumors but not
the counterpart adherent cultures. In vivo administration of mAb2
inhibited progression of macroscopic primary tumors in Her-2/neu
transgenic mice. We further observed that the molecule bound by mAb2 is
expressed on proliferating but not growth-arrested C2D1-tumorspheres and
this antigen is re-expressed when cells are digested into single cell
suspension and re-fed with fresh medium. Similar results are observed
with 4T1-tumorsphere cells, an additional breast cancer cell line arising
initially in BALB/c mice. Interestingly, the target of mAb2 is also
down-regulated following irradiation-induced growth arrest of tumor
cells. To identify the antigen recognized by mAb2, cultured
C2D1-tumorsphere or 4T1-tumorspheres were cells were lysed and the
supernatant was immunoprecipitated with mAb2. The proteins captured by
mAb2 were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and visualized by silver staining.
The bands of interest were excised then subjected to liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometric (LC-MS/MS) analysis. A 40 KDa protein
was detected in all five experiments from either C2D1-tumorsphere or
4T1-tumorsphere cells. Stomatin-like protein 2 (SLP-2) a 38.5 KDa protein
was consistently identified whereas 14 other proteins were sporadically
found. Western blots of mAb2 immunoprecipitates from C2D1 or
4T1-tumorsphere lysates were probed with two distinct commercial
antibodies against SLP-2 and we confirmed its presence. To validate SLP-2
as the target, an expression vector was transfected into NIH 3T3 cells
and FACS analysis demonstrated 19% positive cells versus 3.6% for
un-transfected 3T3 cells. SLP-2 overexpression is associated with tumor
metastasis and poor prognosis in several types of human tumors. Our
results indicate that the antigen recognized by this auto-antibody might
have immunodiagnostic or immunotherapeutic potential.

