Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MET expression in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) isolated on the
ISET platform correlates with MET expression in matched tumor tissue in
advanced NSCLC patients


Background: Overexpression of the MET receptor tyrosine kinase is
frequent in lung cancers and is associated with poor prognosis. Recent
clinical studies of MET targeted therapies have used immunohistochemistry
(IHC) in tissue biopsies to evaluate MET protein expression. Due to the
difficulty in obtaining adequate tissue in diseases such as NSCLC, we
investigated the utility of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) as a
non-invasive method to evaluate MET status in NSCLC patients. We compared
two platforms for CTC capture, CellSearch and ISET, and assessed MET
expression in CTCs vs. matched bronchial biopsies in patients with
advanced-stage III/IV lung adenocarcinomaDesign: CTC capture and MET
expression in CTCs was evaluated in 358 MET positive NSCLC patients
(Phase III OAM4971 trial) using the CellSearch platform. CTC capture and
MET expression was evaluated in a cohort of 80 CTC-positive NSCLC
patients using the ISET platform (filtration). MET was detected in
CellSearch-captured CTCs by immunofluorescence using the 15A5 mouse
monoclonal antibody (Genentech), and in ISET-captured CTCs and FFPE
tissue sections by immunohistochemistry using the SP44 c-MET antibody
from Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, USA. Both reagents performed
equally on the CellSearch platform.Results: CTCs were detected in 108 of
358 (30%) patients evaluated on CellSearch, with CTC enumeration ranging
from 0 to 193 CTCs/7.5 ml blood, and median 0 CTCs/7.5ml blood. Although
OAM4971 patients were selected for positive MET expression in tissue, we
failed to detect MET expression in most CTCs isolated by CellSearch, with
75% patients showing CTC H-score Background: Overexpression of the MET
receptor tyrosine kinase is frequent in lung cancers and is associated
with poor prognosis. Recent clinical studies of MET targeted therapies
have used immunohistochemistry (IHC) in tissue biopsies to evaluate MET
protein expression. Due to the difficulty in obtaining adequate tissue in
diseases such as NSCLC, we investigated the utility of circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) as a non-invasive method to evaluate MET status in NSCLC
patients. We compared two platforms for CTC capture, CellSearch and ISET,
and assessed MET expression in CTCs vs. matched bronchial biopsies in
patients with advanced-stage III/IV lung adenocarcinomaDesign: CTC
capture and MET expression in CTCs was evaluated in 358 MET positive
NSCLC patients (Phase III OAM4971 trial) using the CellSearch platform.
CTC capture and MET expression was evaluated in a cohort of 80
CTC-positive NSCLC patients using the ISET platform (filtration). MET was
detected in CellSearch-captured CTCs by immunofluorescence using the 15A5
mouse monoclonal antibody (Genentech), and in ISET-captured CTCs and FFPE
tissue sections by immunohistochemistry using the SP44 c-MET antibody
from Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, USA. Both reagents performed
equally on the CellSearch platform.Results: CTCs were detected in 108 of
358 (30%) patients evaluated on CellSearch, with CTC enumeration ranging
from 0 to 193 CTCs/7.5 ml blood, and median 0 CTCs/7.5ml blood. Although
OAM4971 patients were selected for positive MET expression in tissue, we
failed to detect MET expression in most CTCs isolated by CellSearch, with
75% patients showing CTC H-score < 15. On the ISET platform, CTCs
enumeration ranged from 2 to 268 CTCs/ml, with median 65 CTCs/ml.
Clusters of CTCs were observed in 93% of patients, exhibiting between 1
to 23-clusters/ml blood. The MET assay on CTCs was positive in 54 of 75
(72%) patients, and the MET assay on tissue was positive in 46 of 75
(62%) patients using the onartuzumab IHC scoring algorithm*, with MET
status in CTCs concordant with status in patient-matched tumor
tissue.Conclusion: Based on our data, CTCs enumeration and MET status on
CTCs from NSCLC patients captured and evaluated on the ISET system were
more successful than on the CellSearch platform. On ISET, MET status in
CTCs correlated strongly with MET status in tumor tissue biopsies,
illustrating the potential for using CTCs as a non-invasive, real-time
biopsy to determine MET status of patients entering clinical trials. We
are now expanding the CTC analysis on ISET to other biomarkers with
relevance for lung therapeutics.* Koeppen H et al. Clin Cancer Res. 2014
Sep 1;20(17):4488-98

