Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depleting cells expressing fibroblast activation protein disrupts
tumor-promoting desmoplasia


Solid tumors recruit and activate a heterogeneous population of
non-transformed stromal cells (CASCs) in the tumor microenvironment
(TME). There has been growing interest in the field to develop strategies
to treat cancer and circumvent resistance to therapy by targeting CASCs.
Defining the phenotypic subsets and the function of distinct
subpopulations including myofibroblasts (defined by the expression of
SMA) and the overlapping but distinct population of CASCs expressing
Fibroblast Activation Protein (FAP) will be critical to informing the
rational design of stromal-targeted therapies. FAP is a membrane serine
protease that is selectively up-regulated in CASCs including
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), and
a subset of M2 macrophages, of virtually all common human epithelial
cancers. Based on its selective expression on CASCs across a wide range
of tumor types, we engineered FAP-specific chimeric antigen receptor
expressing T cells (FAP-CAR T cells) and adoptively transferred them into
tumor bearing mice to: 1) define the requirement for FAP+ cells for the
accumulation and maintenance of a desmoplastic matrix; 2) define the
relationship between the degree of desmoplasia, the capacity of FAP-CAR T
cells to disrupt the tumor stroma and to inhibit tumor growth; and 3)
determine whether FAP-CAR T cells can inhibit tumor growth through immune
independent mechanisms. We found that FAP+ CACSs are responsible for
maintaining the desmoplastic response and that conditional depletion
following treatment with FAP-CAR T cells inhibits growth of human lung
cancer xenografts and mouse pancreatic tumors in an immune-independent
fashion. Taken together with recently published studies (1-3), our data
provide important distinctions between the function of FAP+ CASCs and
SMA+ myofibroblasts and provide support for further development of FAP+
stromal cell-targeted therapies for a wide range of solid
tumors.Reference:1. Feig, C., Jones, J. O., Kraman, M., Wells, R. J.,
Deonarine, A., Chan, D. S., et al. (2013). Targeting CXCL12 from
FAP-expressing carcinoma-associated fibroblasts synergizes with
anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy in pancreatic cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
110, 20212-20217.2. Ozdemir, B. C., Pentcheva-Hoang, T., Carstens, J. L.,
Zheng, X., Wu, C. C., Simpson, T. R., et al. (2014). Depletion of
carcinoma-associated fibroblasts and fibrosis induces immunosuppression
and accelerates pancreas cancer with reduced survival. Cancer Cell 25,
719-734.3. Wang, L. C., Lo, A., Scholler, J., Sun, J., Majumdar, R. S.,
Kapoor, V., et al. (2014). Targeting fibroblast activation protein in
tumor stroma with chimeric antigen receptor T cells can inhibit tumor
growth and augment host immunity without severe toxicity. Cancer Immunol
Res 2, 154-166.

