Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of tumor vascularity in colorectal cancer using
contrast enhanced ultrasonograpy in comparison with microvessel density


Background : The relationship between tumor vascularity and malignant
potential in colorectal cancer a(CRC) is reported by many authors.
Therefore, to assess the tumor vascularity before surgical treatment is
thought to be one of very important factors in CRC patients. Contrast
enhanced ultrasonography (CEUS) can visualize the tumor vascularity
vividly. We aim to determine the reliability of CEUS for the assessment
of vascularity of CRC and to analyze the relationship between tumor
vascularity and clinicopathological characteristics. In addition, to find
the clinical application, we assessed the efficacy of chemotherapy in
unresectable advanced CRC patients by CEUS.Methods : 56 patients
undergoing surgical resection of CRC were studied. An ultrasound system
(GE health care, LOGIC 7) is used and visualized the colo-rectal tumor
using a 4.5MHZ probe. The 2nd generated ultrasonic contrast medium
(Belfulbuttan, Sonazoid) is injected intravenously. Approximately 20 s
after injection, microbubbles were obtained to enhance the B-mode image.
Using the tumor image showing the strongest vascularity, region of
interest were determined to measure mean echo intensity in the tumor.
Their images were analyzed with NIH image program (developed by the US
National Institutes of health) and calculated tumor vascularity as
Vascular Index (VI). The clinicopathological features are based on the
TNM classification from UICC. Using surgical specimens, tumor vascularity
was assessed by immunohistochemistry as microvessel density in order to
do statistical analysis for the correlation between VI, clinicopathologic
features and microvessel density.Results : CEUS could visualize the tumor
vascularity in all patients. In advanced CRC patients, we observed that
the tumor invaded into other organ, such as prostate gland, small
intestine and so on. The VI correlated significantly with depth of tumor
invasion, liver metastasis and microvessel density. Furthermore, in
patients with abundant vascularity in tumor before treatment,
chemotherapy led to the reduction of VI prior to the radiographically
visible difference in tumor size.Conclusion : CEUS can evaluate the tumor
vascularity non-invasively and is very useful for the evaluation of their
pathological diagnosis and the efficacy of chemotherapy in CRC.

