Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deregulation of NAC complex inhibits muscle differentiation and
blocks apoptosis in rhabdomyosarcoma cells


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a common malignant soft tissue sarcoma in
children with limited treatment options and high failure rate during
standard therapy. New therapeutic targets or strategies are therefore in
high demand. The NAC complex performs many diverse biological functions,
and the deregulation of its subunits has been correlated with many
cancers. We sought to understand the function of NAC complex in normal
muscle cells and rhabdomyosarcoma cells. With western blot, quantitative
real time PCR (qRT-PCR), chromatin immunoprecipitation and immunostaining
analysis, we found that the muscle specific subunit of NAC complex,
skNAC, which is the alternatively spliced isoform of NAC, was
downregulated in RMS cells. In normal cells, skNAC shuttled from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus upon differentiation. We also showed that skNAC
associated with muscle specific promoters together with BTF3 in
differentiated cells, and this association is dependent on the expression
of BTF3. The expression of skNAC was regulated by the splicing factor
SRPK3, a serine arginine protein kinase. Overexpression of SPRK3 induced
skNAC expression and muscle differentiation. We also detected the
deregulation of another NAC complex subunit, NAC (also known as BTF3). We
found that BTF3 is highly overexpressed and localized in the nucleus in
both RMS cell lines and human RMS tumor samples compared with normal
samples. Depletion of BTF3 induced apoptosis as detected by the strong
cleavage of PARP and caspase 3. BTF3 depletion also decreased the cell
viability in RMS by a cologenic assay. We also confirmed that BTF3
downregulation promoted muscle gene expression and induced muscle
differentiation in RMS cells. However, BTF3 played a different role in
normal cells. With the deletion of BTF3 in C2C12 cells, no apoptosis
signal was detected and cell differentiation was inhibited, which
suggested that a precise level of BTF3 is important for normal cell
function. In conclusion, we found that the NAC complex subunits, skNAC
and BTF3, were deregulated in RMS cells. The restoration of skNAC by
SRPK3 overexpression rescued muscle differentiation. BTF3 functioned as
an anti-apoptosis factor in RMS cells and depletion of BTF3 induced
apoptosis and promoted differentiation. With no apoptosis effect in
normal cells, BTF3 could serve as a cancer specific therapeutic target in
RMS cells.

