Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decrease of microRNA-122 is a key event during
hepatocarcinogenesis from non-alcoholic steatohepatitis


Background and Aim: Despite improvement in the treatment of viral
infection, the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) worldwide is
still high. Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is a severe form of
non-alcoholic fatty liver diseases and is known to develop liver
cirrhosis (LC) and HCC in patients with obesity, diabetes, and metabolic
syndrome. NASH may account for a large proportion of virus-independent
HCC in developed countries. The aim of this study was to reveal the
molecular mechanism underlying hepatocarcinogenesis from NASH, especially
in the change of microRNA (miRNA) expression during carcinogenesis in an
animal model. Methods and Results: MiRNA expression profiles were
analyzed in STAM mice, a NASH-HCC animal model. MicroRNA expression was
also examined in 42 clinical samples from patients with HCC.
Histopathology of the liver in STAM mice at the ages of 6, 8, 12, and
18-weeks showed findings compatible with simple fatty liver, NASH, LC,
and HCC, respectively. The result of miRNA expression profile showed that
the liver-specific miRNA, miR-122, significantly decreased in non-tumor
LC at the age of 18-weeks than that in LC at the age of 12-weeks.
Expression of miR-122 was further decreased in HCCs than non-tumor LC at
the age of 18-weeks. Expression of miR-122 was also decreased in clinical
samples of liver tissue showing macrovesicular steatosis and HCC, being
consistent with the findings in the NASH model mice. To further
investigate the mechanism of decrease in miR-122 expression, the promoter
region of miR-122 in human cell lines, HepG2 and HuH7, clinical samples
and mice livers was analyzed. In vitro study using human cell lines
revealed that the miR-122 promoter region was CpG-poor but DNA
methylation of the specific region in miR-122 promoter, where peroxisome
proliferator activated receptor- is associated, was critical for
regulation of miR-122 expression, which was demonstrated by treatment
with a DNA methylation inhibitor. However, the average levels of DNA
methylation in the miR-122 promoter region were significantly reduced in
HCC tissues than non-tumor liver tissues in human clinical samples. And
also there was no significant difference in the level of DNA methylation
between non-tumor LC and HCC in mice samples. These results suggested
that that silencing of miR-122 was not mediated by DNA hypermethylation
of the promoter region in this NASH-HCC model. Conclusion: Thus, although
epigenetic regulation of miR-122 expression was still unclear, the
results in the present study indicated that silencing of miR-122 was an
early event during hepatocarcinogenesis from NASH, and that miR-122 could
be a novel molecular marker for evaluating the risk of HCC in patients
with NASH.

