Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blocking wound-induced tumor repopulation between chemotherapy
cycles as a novel approach to abrogate chemoresistance


Acquired chemoresistance remains a major clinical issue in the management
of advanced solid cancers. Initial response to cytotoxic chemotherapy is
common, but certain patients progressively become unresponsive after
multiple chemotherapy cycles. While causes of drug resistance are
multiple and complex, here we approach this problem from a new angle: we
studied whether repopulation of residual surviving cancer cells between
chemotherapy cycles contributes to progressive chemoresistance. Currently
the identity of repopulating cancer cells following chemotherapy is
unknown, and the underlying molecular mechanisms that initiate tumor
repopulation remain poorly understood. In the present study we use
bladder cancer as a model and report that quiescent cancer stem cells
(CSCs) are unexpectedly recruited to proliferate and repopulate residual
tumors in response to chemotherapy-induced damage. This phenomenon is
similar to how normal resident tissue stem cells mobilize to wound sites
for tissue repair. We further investigate whether blockade of this
wound-induced CSC repopulation can provide an innovative approach to
abrogate chemoresistance.Previously we showed that cytokeratin 14 (CK14)
marks the most primitive bladder cancer cells and abundance of CK14+
cancer cells in patients correlates with poor survival. Here, we followed
the standard clinical chemotherapy regimen with gap periods to allow
recovery of normal tissues between treatment cycles. While one cycle of
gemcitabine and cisplatin effectively reduced tumor growth in vivo, a
generalized expansion of CK14+ CSCs occurred in residual tumors during
these gap periods between cycles. Further analysis revealed the induction
of a wound-response gene signature in residual tumors and active
recruitment of quiescent CSCs into proliferation in response to
chemotherapy-induced damage. We demonstrated that prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)
released by neighboring dying cancer cells could induce CSC expansion in
a paracrine manner. This undesirable CSC expansion could be abrogated by
a PGE2 neutralizing antibody and Celecoxib, an FDA approved COX2
inhibitor that blocks PGE2 signaling. In vivo administration of Celecoxib
blocked the induction of wound-response gene signature and significantly
attenuated progressive development of chemoresistance in xenograft
tumors, including primary xenografts derived from a patient who failed
chemotherapy.These results revealed a new mechanism by which CSCs
contribute to therapeutic resistance via repopulating residual tumors
between chemotherapy cycles. Repopulation was initiated by dying cells
that induced wound response and recruitment of CSCs to repair
chemotherapy-induced damages. Therapeutic intervention with Celecoxib
effectively blocked this process and improved chemotherapeutic response
in bladder tumors, supporting further validation in other solid cancers.

