Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rearrangements of the erythropoietin receptor are recurrent in
Ph-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia and are sensitive to Jak2 inhibition


Introduction: Ph-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is characterized
by a diverse range of genetic alterations that activate cytokine receptor
and kinase signaling. We recently identified (Roberts KG, NEJM 2014)
rearrangements of the erythropoietin receptor (EPOR) with immunoglobulin
heavy (IGH) or kappa (IGK) chain loci in 154 Ph-like ALL. Here, we aimed
to investigate their spectrum and recurrence in an extended cohort, as
well as their pathogenic role and therapeutic potential in childhood
Ph-like ALL.Methods: Whole transcriptome sequencing, real-time
quantitative PCR (qPCR) and Sanger sequencing were performed to detect
and map the EPOR rearrangements in 307 Ph-like ALL. Wild-type or EPOR
rearranged alleles were expressed in IL-3-dependent mouse hematopoietic
Ba/F3 cells and IL-7-dependent pre-B cells harboring alterations of Arf
and/or the dominant negative IKZF1 allele IK6. Proliferation and
downstream EPOR signaling were examined in absence or presence of
erythropoietin (EPO). Leukemic growth was monitored in C57BL/6 mice
transplanted with Arf-/- pre-B cells expressing rearranged EPOR.
Luciferase-marked xenografts were established in NOD-SCID-IL2R gamma
(NSG) null mice. Signaling, EPO-dependent proliferation and sensitivity
to the JAK inhibitors were assessed ex vivo and in vivo.Results: EPOR
rearrangements were identified in 8.3% of Ph-like ALL as the result of:
i) inversion and cryptic insertion under the promoter region of IGH/IGK;
ii) reciprocal translocation; or iii) fusion to 5 LAIR1. All
rearrangements resulted in ectopic overexpression of a C-terminal
truncated receptor, confirmed by qPCR, that retained the phosphorylation
site required for STAT5 activation, but lacked multiple tyrosine residues
required for normal negative regulation. The rearranged alleles were
expressed at higher and more prolonged levels than wild-type EPOR in
Ba/F3 and Arf-/- mouse pre-B cells, and sustained cell proliferation with
increased STAT5 phosphorylation following exogenous EPO stimulation. In
vivo, the truncated receptor promoted leukemia development in C57BL/6
mice. Xenografted EPOR-rearranged leukemic cells exhibited high levels of
truncated EPOR, STAT5 phosphorylation and ex vivo sensitivity to JAK2
inhibition using ruxolitinib, fedratinib, momelotinib, or pacritinib
alone or in combination with daunrobucin, vincristine or dexamethasone
(synergistic effect). The efficacy of Jak2 inhibition and the synergistic
effect of combining ruxolitinib and dexamethasone were subsequently
demonstrated in vivo.Conclusions: EPOR rearrangements are recurrent in
Ph-like ALL and result in ectopic expression of truncated EPOR and
activation of JAK2-STAT5 signaling pathway, sustaining leukemia
development in vivo. Xenografted EPOR-rearranged leukemia cells exhibit
ex vivo and in vivo sensitivity to JAK2 inhibitors alone or in
combination with chemotherapy.

