Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of small molecule inhibitors of the PIM kinases
in in vitro models of hematological malignancies


The three members of the Pim kinase family, Pim-1, -2, and -3, are
established oncogenes and are attractive targets in hematological
malignancies. We have developed multiple potent and selective scaffolds
of pan-Pim inhibitors with picomolar enzymatic potency and nanomolar
cellular potency. Using these agents, we have observed that the
abolishment of Pim activity impairs tumor cell viability in multiple
settings, both in vitro and in vivo. We have developed numerous assays to
measure Pim protein levels and activity, including Pim downstream markers
p-PDCD4 and p-BAD, that might be broadly applicable to human tissues.
These assays have allowed us to establish a correlation between Pim
protein levels and sensitivity to Pim inhibition across multiple tumor
settings, in vitro.We have observed that all tested multiple myeloma (MM)
cell lines express high levels of Pim-2 protein and that pan-Pim
inhibition impairs viability in 90% of these lines and induces apoptosis
in a subset. In acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) cell lines, sensitivity
to Pim inhibition significantly correlates with Pim-1 protein expression.
Numerous diffuse, large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cell lines have high Pim
levels and many are sensitive to Pim inhibition.We have also assessed Pim
expression and activity in human tumor and normal tissues. Studies
performed with myeloma cells isolated from patient bone marrow aspirates
have revealed elevated Pim-2 protein levels as well as sensitivity to ex
vivo dosing with Pim inhibitors, as evidenced by inhibition of PDCD4
phosphorylation. Primary patient samples from numerous other
hematological tumors have also been found to have high Pim-1 or Pim-2
protein levels.To expand the possible utility of Pim inhibitors in the
clinic, we have combined our molecules with numerous clinical agents,
including dexamethasone, carfilzomib, and PI3K inhibitors, across
multiple settings, in vitro. In all indications surveyed, we have
observed that the combination of Pim molecules and these agents can lead
to synergistic effects on cell viability, apoptosis and pathway
signaling. In some cases, cell lines that show mild or no response to
either single agent alone are sensitive to combination treatment.
Collectively, our data provide a rationale for the development of Pim
kinase inhibitors for use either as monotherapy or in combination with
other agents in diverse tumor settings.

