Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel class of inhibitors of the immunosuppressive enzyme
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) with potential for the treatment of
cancer


A broad range of cancers express the tryptophan catabolising enzyme
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) as a mechanism of suppressing the
endogenous anti-tumour immunity. High IDO1 expression by their tumours is
associated with poor patient prognosis and has prompted the discovery of
small molecule inhibitors of the enzyme for development as anti-cancer
agents. Towards this end, we carried out a high throughput screen of
42,000 small molecules in the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute for Medical
Research compound library and retrieved over 30 good hits with diverse
structures that inhibited recombinant human IDO1 with potencies in the
low M range. Initial structure activity relationship studies of the best
hits led us to focus on one chemical class, which, although less potent
than some of the other hits on the list, exhibited a number of features
that make it more favourable for development as a therapeutic agent.
SN35837, the non-optimised hit from the high throughput screen is highly
cell permeable and displays improved potency in inhibiting cytoplasmic
hIDO1 in cell-based assays, compared to that for enzymatic assays.
Complete inhibition of IDO1 function is seen at concentrations that has
no measurable effects on cell viability. The imidazole lead from New
Links Genetics, NLG919 has decreased activity in cells, whilst Incyte's
hydroxyamidine inhibitor INCB024360 has similar potency in cellular and
enzymatic assays. The maximum tolerated dose SN35837 in C57Bl/6 mice
given as a single intraperitoneal bolus dose was 500 mg/kg. Mice
tolerated daily intraperitoneal or subcutaneous administrations of
SN35837 at 150 mg/kg. Statistically significant inhibition of growth of
subcutaneously implanted GL261 gliomas and Lewis Lung carcinomas in
syngeneic hosts were achieved after daily administration of 75 mg/kg
SN35837. Preliminary studies indicate that the non-optimised hit also
synergises when given in combination with anti-PD1 and anti-CTLA-4
antibodies. We conclude that derivatives of SN35837 may provide effective
and potent inhibitors of IDO1 suitable for development as anti-cancer
agents.

