Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Embigin is overexpressed in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and
regulates cell motility through epithelial to mesenchymal transition via
the TGF- pathway


Embigin is a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily and encodes a
transmembrane glycoprotein. Strong expression of Embigin has been
observed in the mouse endoderm during early postimplantation
embryogenesis and in the gut and visceral endoderm at the somite stage.
There have been reports of Embigin involvement in neuromuscular junction
formation and plasticity; however, the molecular functions of Embigin in
other organs are unknown. Pancreatic cancer is an extremely aggressive
malignancy, and it is necessary to understand the biology of pancreatic
cancer to better detect and treat this disease. Our aim was to
investigate the possible role of Embigin in pancreatic cancer. In
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma tissues, Embigin expression was higher
than that in normal pancreatic tissues. Immunohistochemical analysis
revealed expression of Embigin in pancreatic cancer cells, as well as
expression of monocarboxylate transporter 2 (MCT2) in cancer tissues. To
gain further insight, we transfected BxPC-3 and HPAC pancreatic cancer
cells with siRNA or shRNA targeting Embigin and observed reductions in
cell proliferation, migration, invasion, wound healing, and reduced
levels of matrix metalloproteinases-2 and -9. Silencing of Embigin
increased intracellular L-lactate concentration by 1.5-fold and decreased
MCT2 levels at the plasma membrane. Furthermore, Embigin silencing led to
a reduced expression of PI3K, GSK3-, and Snail/Slug. Upon treating BxPC-3
cells with transforming growth factor- (TGF-), we observed elevated
expression of Snail/Slug, Embigin, and Vimentin; meanwhile, when treating
cells with SB-216763, a GSK3- inhibitor, we noted decreases in GSK3-,
Snail/Slug, and Embigin expression, suggesting that the TGF- signaling
cascade, comprising PI3K, GSK3-, Snail/Slug, and Embigin signals,
mediates epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in pancreatic cancer
cells. These findings indicate the involvement of Embigin in EMT in
pancreatic cancer progression and suggest Embigin as a putative target
for the detection and/or treatment of pancreatic cancer.

