Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and in vivo antitumor efficacy of sequentially combined
vinorelbine and gefitinib in non-small cell lung cancer


Introduction: The current standard of care for advanced non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) is systemic chemotherapy or treatment with epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) for
EGFR-mutated tumors. Preclinical studies suggest that the combination of
cytotoxic agents and EGFR-TKIs may increase the inhibitory effect albeit
influenced by the type of drug and the order of administration. Whether
these combinations may exert similar effects in tumors poorly responsive
to EGFR-TKIs is still unclear. The antitumor efficacy of different
protocols with vinorelbine (VNB) and gefitinib (GEF) were investigated in
two NSCLC cell lines, in vitro and in vivo, as a rationale to be
potentially exploited in the clinical setting.Methods: The EGFR-wild-type
A549 and the EGFR-mutated (exon 21 L858R/exon 20 T790M) H1975 cell lines
were treated for 72 hrs with VNB and GEF according to different schemes
and concentrations: GEF followed by VNB, VNB followed by GEF and the two
drugs given individually or concurrently. The cytotoxicity was determined
by MTT assay (short-term). In addition, the efficacy of repeated weekly
VNB treatment along with sequential or continuous GEF administration was
investigated by cell count (long-term). The expression levels of
activated EGFR and downstream pathway molecules were investigated by
western blot. The in vivo effects of single or combined treatments were
studied in a CD1-Nude mouse model by subcutaneous injection of the H1975
cells. Cancer growth was determined by measurements of tumor diameters
with a Vernier caliper, while lesion glucose consumption was estimated by
means of a dynamic micro Positron Emission Tomography scans. To this
purpose, a bolus of 3-6 MBq of 18F-fluorodeoxyglycose was injected
through a tail vein during a list mode acquisition lasting one hour.
After framing rate optimization, pixelwise maps of cancer glucose
consumption (MRGlc) were created using dedicated software (PMOD) and
applying Patlak graphical approach.Results: In vitro short and long-term
studies demonstrated that the sequence of VNB followed by GEF was
significantly more active than GEF followed by VNB or the concurrent
administration of the two drugs. Western blot analyses indicated that the
increased cytotoxic effect of the VNB and GEF sequence was accompanied by
inhibition of p-EGFR, p-AKT and p-ERK1/2 expression levels, mainly in the
EGFR-mutated H1975. Moreover, the increased antitumor efficacy of the
sequence VNB followed by GEF was also confirmed in vivo by a significant
inhibition of the H1975 tumor growth (pIntroduction: The current standard
of care for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is systemic
chemotherapy or treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) for EGFR-mutated tumors. Preclinical
studies suggest that the combination of cytotoxic agents and EGFR-TKIs
may increase the inhibitory effect albeit influenced by the type of drug
and the order of administration. Whether these combinations may exert
similar effects in tumors poorly responsive to EGFR-TKIs is still
unclear. The antitumor efficacy of different protocols with vinorelbine
(VNB) and gefitinib (GEF) were investigated in two NSCLC cell lines, in
vitro and in vivo, as a rationale to be potentially exploited in the
clinical setting.Methods: The EGFR-wild-type A549 and the EGFR-mutated
(exon 21 L858R/exon 20 T790M) H1975 cell lines were treated for 72 hrs
with VNB and GEF according to different schemes and concentrations: GEF
followed by VNB, VNB followed by GEF and the two drugs given individually
or concurrently. The cytotoxicity was determined by MTT assay
(short-term). In addition, the efficacy of repeated weekly VNB treatment
along with sequential or continuous GEF administration was investigated
by cell count (long-term). The expression levels of activated EGFR and
downstream pathway molecules were investigated by western blot. The in
vivo effects of single or combined treatments were studied in a CD1-Nude
mouse model by subcutaneous injection of the H1975 cells. Cancer growth
was determined by measurements of tumor diameters with a Vernier caliper,
while lesion glucose consumption was estimated by means of a dynamic
micro Positron Emission Tomography scans. To this purpose, a bolus of 3-6
MBq of 18F-fluorodeoxyglycose was injected through a tail vein during a
list mode acquisition lasting one hour. After framing rate optimization,
pixelwise maps of cancer glucose consumption (MRGlc) were created using
dedicated software (PMOD) and applying Patlak graphical approach.Results:
In vitro short and long-term studies demonstrated that the sequence of
VNB followed by GEF was significantly more active than GEF followed by
VNB or the concurrent administration of the two drugs. Western blot
analyses indicated that the increased cytotoxic effect of the VNB and GEF
sequence was accompanied by inhibition of p-EGFR, p-AKT and p-ERK1/2
expression levels, mainly in the EGFR-mutated H1975. Moreover, the
increased antitumor efficacy of the sequence VNB followed by GEF was also
confirmed in vivo by a significant inhibition of the H1975 tumor growth
(p<0.0001) that was paralleled by a corresponding decrease in cancer
glucose consumption.Conclusions: These preclinical findings in NSCLC cell
lines, poorly responsive to EGFR-TKIs, showed that the sequential
treatment with VNB followed by GEF induced a significant antitumor
efficacy supporting the application to clinical trials.

