Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In silico prescription of anticancer drugs to cohorts of 28 tumor
types reveals novel targeting opportunities


Recent advances in DNA sequencing technologies provide unprecedented
capacity to comprehensively identify the alterations, genes, and pathways
involved in the tumorigenic process, raising the hope of extending
targeted therapies against the drivers of cancer from a few successful
examples to a broader personalized medicine strategy. However, high
intertumor heterogeneity is a major obstacle to develop and apply
therapeutic targeted agents to treat most cancer patient. In addition,
advances in our ability to precisely assign the most effective targeted
therapy to each patient based on the genome events driving the tumor are
urgently needed.The present study offers the first comprehensive
assessment of the scope of targeted drugs in a large pan-cancer cohort.
To pursue this goal, we developed a three-step in silico drug
prescription strategy. We first identified the driver genes acting across
6792 tumor samples from 28 different cancer types via an integrated
analysis of their mutations, copy number alterations and gene fusions.
All information pertaining these driver genes has been compiled in a
publicly available Drivers Database. Next, following the rationale that
targeted therapies are effective only if they are administered to treat
tumors driven by the alterations they are aimed at, we collected all
therapeutic agents capable of targeting altered driver genes either
directly, indirectly or through gene therapies. The catalog of available
therapeutic agents and ancillary information on their application,
referred here as Drivers Actionability Database, included FDA (Foods and
Drugs Administration Agency) approved drugs, agents undergoing clinical
trials, and ligands in pre-clinical stages. Finally, based on the driver
alterations in each tumor in the cohort and the rules in the Drivers
Actionability Database, we connected each patient to all targeted
therapies that could benefit them, thus producing the landscape of
utility of targeted therapeutic agents in the cohort.We found that only a
minority of patients could benefit from approved targeted therapy
interventions following clinical guidelines (5.9%), while up to 40% could
benefit from different types of repurposing opportunities of approve
drugs, and up to 78% considering treatments currently under
investigation. In addition, we identified 16 therapeutically unexploited
cancer genes targeted by small molecules currently in pre-clinical
stages, and 66 others structurally suitable for small molecule binding or
accessible by antibody targeting. These results highlight the current
scope of targeted anti-cancer therapies and its prospects for growth. The
application of the strategy to larger cohorts and the continuous update
of drug-target interactions information, will improve the in silico
prescription rules contained within the two databases, thus enhancing its
usefulness within personalized cancer medicine.

