Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plumbagin induces growth inhibition of human glioma cells by
downregulating the expression and activity of FOXM1


Plumbagin, a natural quinonoid constituent isolated from the root of
medicinal plant Plumbago zeylanica L, has exhibited anti-tumor and
anti-proliferative activities in various tumor cell lines as well as in
animal tumor models. However, its anticancer effects and the mechanisms
underlying its suppression of glioma cell growth have not been
elucidated. Oncogenic transcription factor Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) has
garnered particular interest in recent years as a potential target for
the prevention and/or therapeutic intervention in glioma, nevertheless,
less information is currently available regarding FOXM1 inhibitor. Here,
we reported that plumbagin could effectively inhibit cell proliferation,
migration and invasion and induce apoptosis of glioma cells. Cell cycle
assay showed that plumbagin induced G2/M arrest. Interestingly, we found
that plumbagin decreased the expression of FOXM1 both at mRNA level and
protein level. Plumbagin also inhibited the transactivation ability of
FOXM1, resulting in down-regulating the expression of FOXM1 downstream
target genes, such as cyclin D1, Cdc25B, survivin, and increasing the
expression of p21CIP1 and p27KIP1. Most importantly, down-regulation of
FOXM1 by siFOXM1 transfection enhanced plumbagin-induced change in
viability. On the contrary, over-expression of FOXM1 by cDNA transfection
reduced plumbagin-induced glioma cell growth inhibition. Further
investigation revealed that plumbagin inhibition of glioma cell growth
was also evident in a nude mouse model. Taken together, these results
suggest that plumbagin exhibits its anticancer activity partially by
inactivation of FOXM1 signaling pathway in glioma cells. Our findings
indicate that plumbagin may be considered as a potential natural FOXM1
inhibitor, which could contribute to the development of new anticancer
agent for therapy of gliomas.

