Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic oxidative stress induces conversion of estrogen-dependent
non-aggressive breast cancer cells into estrogen-independent aggressive
phenotype


We have recently reported increased growth and tumorigenic potential of
estrogen receptor (ER) positive breast cancer cells with chronic exposure
to oxidative stress. In this study, we evaluated mechanistic basis for
chronic oxidative stress-induced aggressiveness in ER positive MCF-7
breast cancer cells. Loss of estrogen dependency is known to be
associated with acquisition of aggressive form in breast cancer cells.
Therefore, the objective of this study was to evaluate changes in
estrogen response in ER-positive breast cancer cells exposed to chronic
oxidative stress. MCF-7 cells were exposed to hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2)-induced oxidative stress for chronic period (6 months). Using
these cells, growth response to 17- estradiol was evaluated by MTT assay
and cell cycle analysis. Surprisingly, in response to 17- estradiol
treatment, there was no significant growth stimulation in cells exposed
to chronic oxidative stress. Cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry
further confirmed the cell growth data. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis also
revealed significant down regulation of ER- in chronically exposed breast
cancer cells. To understand the role of epigenetic mechanism, the
expression of epigenetic regulatory genes were determined at both
transcript and protein level. In addition, the levels of histone
modifications were also evaluated by Western blot analysis. Changes in
both the expression of epigenetic regulatory genes (DNMT1, DNMT3b, HDAC1,
MBD4, and HAT1) and the levels of histone modifications (H3K27
tri-methylation and H3K18 acetylation) were observed in MCF-7 cells
chronically exposed to H2O2. Treatment with DNA de-methylating agent
(5-aza-2-deoxycytidine) restored the ER- expression level,
estrogen-induced growth and oxidative stress induced histone
modifications. To summarize, the findings of this study suggest that
chronic exposure to oxidative stress can convert estrogen-dependent
non-aggressive breast cancer cells into estrogen-independent aggressive
form potentially by epigenetic mechanism.

