Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta facilitates castrate-resistant
prostate cancer cell growth and sensitivity to mTOR inhibitors


Adaptive changes that frequently occur in castrate-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) cells are genomic mutations which enhance the activity of
the PI3K-mTOR signaling pathway. Although there have been several
promising clinical trials for the treatment of CRPC utilizing inhibitors
of mTOR, these efforts failed to show significant improvement of patient
outcomes. Thus, identifying potential mechanisms of resistance to these
agents could improve their therapeutic efficacy. CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein beta (C/EBP) is a broadly expressed transcription factor, with
three isoforms that are differentially translated by mTOR activity. T
reatment of cells with mTOR inhibitors increases the translation of the
larger C/EBP LAP isoforms and decreases the truncated LIP isoform. The
function of C/EBP LAP has been previously associated with survival and
cellular senescence, while the LIP isoform facilitates cell cycle
progression. Our central hypothesis was that the differential translation
of LAP and LIP C/EBP isoforms was essential for the survival of CRPC
cells treated with mTOR inhibitors. We found that treatment of PC3 cells
with mTOR inhibitors unexpectedly increased the protein levels of all
three C/EBP isoforms, while androgen-sensitive LNCaP cells largely showed
decreased C/EBP protein levels. However, the PI3K inhibitor LY294002,
decreased the LIP isoform of C/EBP without affecting LAP expression in
LNCaP and PC3 cells. C/EBP gene expression decreased in both LNCaP and
PC3 cells in response to treatment with mTOR inhibitors. We next
evaluated whether C/EBP facilitated cell survival during mTOR inhibition.
We found that PC3 cells deficient in C/EBP, via shRNA knockdown or TALEN
gene editing, were less sensitive to the mTORC1/2 inhibitor, INK128, as
assessed by a significant increase in IC50 value determined by the WST-1
assay. Further, suppression of C/EBP through shRNA KD or TALEN targeting
dramatically decreased the rate of PC3 cell growth, clonogenic potential
and induced a senescent phenotype. Intriguingly, loss of C/EBP in LNCaP
cells increased clonogenic potential. Collectively, these data suggest
that C/EBP has a differential role for cell growth in androgen-sensitive
versus castrate-resistant prostate cancer and that C/EBP levels inversely
correlate with mTOR inhibitor resistance.

