Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: XPO1 is selinexor prime target: validation by mutating cysteine
528 on both XPO1 alleles using CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing


Human Exportin-1 (XPO1) is the key nuclear-cytoplasmic transport protein
that exports a variety of different cargo proteins out of the cell's
nucleus. Inhibition of XPO1-mediated protein export results in nuclear
retention of cargo proteins including tumour suppressor proteins and is a
novel therapeutic strategy for cancer. Selinexor, an orally bioavailable
XPO1 inhibitor, effectively demonstrates potent activity against multiple
types of cancer. Here we directly demonstrate the high selectivity of
selinexor for XPO1 inside living cells.Selinexor binds to the
cargo-binding pocket of XPO1 and inhibits the formation of XPO1-cargo
complex. The binding of selinexor to XPO1 involves a slowly reversible
Michael addition type interaction of its acrylate moiety with cysteine
528 residue of XPO1. Using CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing we have now created
a homozygous Jurkat T-ALL cell line carrying a Cys528Ser mutation in
XPO1. This cell line was used to study the specificity of selinexor for
XPO1 inside the cancer cell. Selinexor was highly toxic to wild-type
Jurkat cells in the low nanomolar range while the mutant cells were
resistant up to micromolar concentrations. These results were confirmed
by resistance to induction of caspase dependent apoptosis as well as cell
cycle arrest in mutant cells. The single Cys528Ser mutation thus confers
resistance to selinexor. In addition, selinexor failed to accumulate
cargo proteins in the nucleus of mutant cells. Moreover, the Cys528Ser
substitution conferred resistance to the direct interaction of this drug
to XPO1 in cells.In conclusion, these results validate XPO1 as the
selinexor's prime target and pinpoint its unique selectivity to the
Cys528 residue of XPO1. Our findings also demonstrate the general utility
of CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing for introducing point mutations in the
genome of cancer cells for drug-target specificity validation.

