Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal heterogeneity in patient-derived xenografts: The SCLC model
LG0904F1496M23 contains stable clones with epithelial or mesenchymal
characteristics and differential drug sensitivities


It is well established that cancers are heterogeneous diseases with
biological, genetic, and histopathological differences among patients and
within individual tumors. Consequently, it is not surprising that animal
models based on established cell lines with their clonal nature and
adaptations to defined media have limited preclinical value. Recent
advances in the generation of patient-derived xenografts (PDX), where
patient material is engrafted into immunosuppressed mice, suggests that
this approach may provide a more representative surrogate for therapeutic
development. In this study, a mixed cell culture derived from a SCLC PDX
model was analyzed for clonal heterogeneity. Following two rounds of
growth in soft agar, seven clones were derived; three were further
characterized. The 1st clone, 7-7-2, similar in morphology to the
parental culture was a mixture of cuboidal and spindle-shaped cells. FACs
analysis confirmed two populations of cells; EpCAM+/CD90 low and
EpCAM-/CD90 high population. The 2nd clone, 2-2-1, consisted of a single
population of spindle-shaped EpCAM-/CD90+ cells; the 3rd clone, 7-7-1,
contained a homogeneous population of cuboidal cells that were
EpCAM+/CD90 low. DNA analysis confirmed all 3 clones were derived from
the same patient. Furthermore, all 3 clones were tumorigenic in NSG
mice.To exclude fibroblast contamination, the clones were analyzed using
a quantitative RT-PCR array capable of identifying human fibroblasts and
other stromal constituents. None of the 3 clones had a classical
fibroblast profile. Comparison of 2-2-1 relative to the other 2 clones
revealed higher expression of VIM mRNA and lower KRT5, CDH1 and EpCAM.
Results were confirmed by Western blot. Additionally, ITGAV and TWIST
were up-regulated. These results suggest that clone 2-2-1 had undergone
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Further confirmation was
provided by microarray and proteomic analysis where GNG11, MMP2, ZEB,
DDR2, TESK2, DESM and MOES were elevated consistent with EMT.Next, clones
were tested for sensitivity against a panel of clinically relevant agents
(trametinib, everolimus, temozolomide, ABT-888, carboplatin, MK 1775)
either alone or in combination. Clone 2-2-1 proved to be more sensitive
than parental cells or clones 7-7-1 or 7-7-2 to the majority of these
drugs. Further studies showed the combination of temozolomide/ABT-888 was
synergistic against each of the clones while the combination of MK
1775/carboplatin lacked synergism. In vivo, the parental tumor responded
to the temozolomide/ABT-888 combination with tumor regressions.In
summary, these data serve to highlight 1) heterogeneity within this PDX
model 2) profound biological differences between clones and 3) EMT is
implicated and alters drug responses. Funded by NCI Contract No.
HHSN261200800001E.

