Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel mechanism of NF-B regulation in bladder cancer


Protein methyltransferases (PMTs) methylate protein lysine and arginine
residues and play an important role in regulating chromatin remodeling
and gene transcription. Deregulation of SET-domain-containing PMTs has a
crucial role in carcinogenesis (1). SETD6 is a novel methyltransferase
that has been shown to monomethylate p65/RelA (a principal subunit of
NF-B) at Lys310. Monomethylated p65 recruits GLP (G9A-like protein), a
histone dimethyl transferase to the NF-B target genes, which results in
transcriptional repression (2). The role of SETD6, in carcinogenesis in
general and bladder cancer in particular is unknown. We identified SETD6
as a significantly upregulated gene in a screen of chromatin modifying
genes that are differentially regulated in bladder cancer cells compared
with normal urothelial cells. Subsequently qPCR and immunoblotting showed
upregulation of SETD6 at the mRNA and protein level in bladder cancer
cells and tissues relative to their normal counterparts. Surprisingly, we
found that overexpression of SETD6 increased nuclear level of NF-B,
phosphorylation of NF-B at Ser536 and the transcriptional activity of
NF-B. Overexpression of wild type SETD6 increased viability and
proliferation of non-tumorigenic urothelial cells while overexpression of
mutant SETD6 had no effect. Furthermore, knocking down SETD6 transiently
with si-SETD6 significantly decreased viability and proliferation of
bladder cancer cells suggesting that SETD6 may have a growth promoting
role in bladder cancer. Our data shows for the first time that
non-histone protein lysine methylation of NF-B-p65 by SETD6 may be a
novel way to regulate NF-B pathway in bladder cancer. The lack of
curative strategies for bladder cancer leads to recurrence rates of
45-70% with >15% of patients developing muscle invasive disease (3).
These observations underscore the need to understand survival mechanism
in bladder cancer. In this regard our findings are highly significant and
could lead to targeting SETD6/ NF-B axis in bladder cancer in the
future.References:1.Schneider, R., et al. (2002) Unsafe SETs: histone
lysine methyltransferases and cancer. Trends in biochemical sciences, 27,
396-402.2.Levy, D., et al. (2011) Lysine methylation of the NF-B subunit
RelA by SETD6 couples activity of the histone methyltransferase GLP at
chromatin to tonic repression of NF-B signaling. Nature immunology, 12,
29-36.3.Nativ, O., et al. (2009) Combined thermo-chemotherapy for
recurrent bladder cancer after bacillus Calmette-Guerin. The Journal of
urology, 182, 1313-1317.

