Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel role of transient receptor potential vanilloid type 2
(TRPV2) for augmentation of chemotherapeutic drug efficacy in
triple-negative breast cancer


Transient receptor potential vanilloid type 2 (TRPV2) is a non-selective
cation channel that is triggered by agonists like cannabidiol (CBD).
Chemotherapeutic drugs such as doxorubicin (DOX) and paclitaxel (PAC) are
routinely used for treatment of Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)
patients however, these drugs are usually resisted and show limited
efficacy and more side effects at higher doses. In the present study, we
analyzed the ability of TRPV2 activation in enhancing the
chemotherapeutic efficacy in TNBC cells. Interestingly, we found that
TRPV2 is significantly up regulated in primary and metastatic breast
tumor tissues compared to normal breast tissues using tissue microarray
analysis. In addition, using publically available Kaplan Miere Plotter
datasets, we found that estrogen receptor (ER) negative patients with
higher TRPV2 expression levels and committed to anti-tumor chemotherapy
have significantly higher survival than patients committed to anti-tumor
chemotherapy but have lower TRPV2 expression levels. Our in vitro studies
showed that TNBC cells subjected to combination treatment of CBD and DOX
show enhanced proliferation inhibition compared to cells treated with DOX
only . Analysis of molecular mechanisms showed higher levels of cleaved
PARP and cleaved Caspase-3 in combination treatment compared to Dox
alone. Further studies revealed that CBD activates more uptake of DOX
into TNBC cells. This increased uptake was abrogated upon treatment with
specific TRPV2 blocker. Furthermore, TRPV2 blocker inhibited the
increased levels of cleaved PARP and cleaved caspase-3 in the combination
treatment. By using two orthotopic mouse model, we showed that mice
treated with CBD in combination with doxorubicin have significantly less
tumor weight, fewer Ki67 and CD31 positive cells, and significantly
higher level of cleaved caspase 3 and cleaved PARP compared to the mice
treated with CBD or DOX alone. This study suggests the use of TRPV2
agonists as an adjuvant therapy to improve the anti-tumor
chemotherapeutic efficacy especially in TNBC patients.

