Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel approach to treat medulloblastoma: The omega-3 fatty acids
DHA and EPA reduce medulloblastoma tumor growth in vitro and in vivo


Background: The omega-3 fatty acids docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) exert antitumoral properties shown in several
cancer types. DHA is found in abundance in the brain and is of importance
in normal brain development and maintenance of function including
cognitive functions.Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant CNS
tumor of childhood. Intensive multimodal treatment is necessary including
surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy. However, treatment often results
in significant neurological sequelae and the risk of resistant relapses
is still significant. The neuroprotective and antitumoral properties of
omega-3 could therefore be of great benefit. Our aim was to investigate
the effect of DHA and EPA on medulloblastoma in vitro and in
vivo.Methods: In a panel of medulloblastoma cell lines the cytotoxic
activity of DHA and EPA was studied using cell viability assays. The
molecular mechanisms were characterized using cell- and molecular biology
techniques. Mice with human medulloblastoma xenografts were treated with;
DHA alone or with DHA and EPA for 30 days from time of tumor take while
tumor growth was monitored. Control mice were fed with normal chow. The
incorporation of fatty acids was analyzed in tumors, erythrocytes and
brain tissue by LS-MS/MS.Results: DHA and EPA induced medulloblastoma
cell toxicity with IC50 values ranging from 1.9 to 68 M in six
medulloblastoma cell lines. DHA reduced the prostaglandin E2 production,
indicating a possible mechanism of action. In vivo, omega-3
supplementation resulted in significant reduction of tumor growth when
established tumors were treated. DHA levels were increased in both tumor
tissue and erythrocyte membrane compared to control. The in vivo
treatment was non-toxic.Conclusions: DHA and EPA exert toxic effect on
medulloblastoma cells in vitro and reduce tumor growth in vivo. These
omega-3 fatty acids could therefore be good candidates for improving
current therapy and at the same time protect healthy neurons from
therapy-induced toxicity promoting cognitive function in survivors.Thus,
omega-3 fatty acid supplementation has the potential of reducing tumor
growth as well as reducing sequelae.

