Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal evolution and integral analysis of hepatoblastoma


[Background]Hepatoblastoma (HB) is a rare and heterogeneous childhood
malignancy of liver. It is mainly affecting young children in the first 2
years of life, underscoring the unique sensitivity of the immature liver
to tumorigenesis. The unique age range affected by this embryonal tumor
suggests that developmental factors contribute to the tumor development.
On the other hands it is well recognized activation of Wnt/-catenin
signaling pathway was frequently occurred in HB through somatic mutation
of CTNNB1 and germline mutation of APC; however, the exact mechanism that
normal hepatic developmental processes are altered by mutational events
is an area of current research and the definitive contribution to
tumorigenesis is unclear mainly due to its rarity.[Methods]To elucidate
the genetic aberration underlying development and progression of HB, we
performed whole exome sequencing and RNA sequencing using Illumina HiSeq
2000 on 14 HB specimens. In addition, we employed detailed genomic
analysis on 5 multiple samples obtained from primary, post-chemotherapy
and relapsed HB with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). All the
candidates for mutations and fusions were validated by target and Sanger
sequencing. Detected genetic alterations were sequenced in additional 53
HB samples.[Results]The somatic mutation rate was 8.1 (range of 1-41) per
tumor with median of 0.16 non-silent mutations per Mb. It is
statistically significant that number of somatic mutations is correlated
with age. Consistent with the previous reports, most frequent mutated
gene in our cohort was CTNNB1 with frequency of 71.4%. Overall, HBs have
low mutation rates in concordance with other pediatric solid tumors. In
our cohort, recurrent somatic mutations with high frequency was not
detected, but overlapping germline mutations in Wnt signaling pathway
were found, even if they were not affected with FAP. In total, 42 (79.2%)
of 53 HB had mutations in genes regulating WNT/-catenin signaling
pathway. In multisampling sequencing analysis based on 5 different sites
of HB specimens, progression from normal hepatocyte to HB seemed to be
accompanied by few trancal events including only APC mutation in
Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway and gain of 1q and loss of 4q in copy
number analysis.The major clone of relapsed tumors derived from minor
clone of the primary tumor after chemotherapy getting additional genomic
aberrations.[Conclusion]Our results revealed that mutations in
Wnt/catenin-signaling pathway were truncal and significant mutations. In
addition, even if only one cases multisampling sequencing, it is useful
for revealing clonal evolution of HB. This study disclosed comprehensive
genetic features of HB and identified potentially important therapeutic
targets, as well as insight into possible cancer predisposition genes.

