Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor expression reduces post-hepatectomy surgery
recurrence risks of hepatocellular carcinoma


Introduction: Androgen Receptor (AR) promotes hepatocarcinogenesis, yet,
suppresses HCC (hepatocellular carcinoma) progression of HCC mouse
models. Yet, the translational value of AR expression in HCC patients is
not clear. The CD90 membrane protein is cancer stem/progenitor cells
(CSPC) marker, which can be detected in Circulating Tumor Cells (CTC).
It's recognized as post-surgery HCC recurrence confounder. In this
report, we examined the roles of AR expressions in post-hepatectomy HCC
recurrence, and provide cellular and molecular insight to AR effect in
HCC recurrence.Methods: We detected AR vs. CD90 expressions in primary
tumor and CTC of HCC patients whom subjected to hepatectomy surgery to
associated with HCC recurrence. In addition, we delineated the cellular
and molecular mechanisms in AR knockout (ARKO)-HCC model, as well as in
human HCC cell lines. Furthermore, systems biological approach was also
introduced to examine AR-mediated gene expression pathways
enrichment.Result: We found opposite association power of AR vs. CD90
that higher CD90 was related to higher risk; yet, higher AR was refer to
lower risks of HCC recurrence. The mechanisms are summarized as
follow:1). AR suppresses CD90 through Histone 3H2A (H3H2A) acetylation:
The AR vs. CD90 is reversely expressed in the specimens. The CD90+ cells
increases in ARKO compared to that in wildtype (WT) mouse HCC. AR
abolishes CD90 expression in two HCC cell lines, in which H3H2A
upregulation and acetylation also noted. Knockdown of H3H2A could recover
CD90 expression under AR effect.2). AR reprogram gene expression to
inhibit cell migration: AR suppresses HCC cell migration in an AR-level
dependent manner with shifted gene expression pattern. Systems biological
analysis revealed that low AR is related to cell-cycle enrichment gene
settings; yet, shift to cell migration suppression setting while AR level
increased.3). AR promotes cell anoikis through facilitating cellular
stress produced by resolving cytoskeletons (amorphosis) in circulation:
AR promotes cell anoikis through a non-classical AR function, by which to
activate PI3K/AKT- and ROCK-related cytoskeletal rearrangement stress
while the cells in anchorage independent condition.Conclusion: To sum up,
this report demonstrated that AR expressions could serves as prognostic
marker for HCC recurrence. And there are three mechanisms involved: AR
reduces CD90 population through epigenetic modification, AR inhibits cell
migration through gene expression shift, and AR promote anoikis through
increasing amorphosis stress.

