Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncolytic Newcastle disease virus: armed but not dangerous


Oncolytic viruses are live, replication-competent viruses that infect
and/or replicate selectively in tumour cells leading to the destruction
of the infected cell. Cell lysis occurs as a natural consequence of the
viral life cycle and released virions can infect and kill neighbouring
tumour cells leading to an amplified therapeutic effect. Oncolysis has
the added benefit of releasing multiple tumour antigens that may further
induce an immune-mediated therapeutic response.Newcastle Disease Virus
(NDV) is an avian paramyxovirus, which has proven safety and demonstrated
efficacy against a variety of preclinical cancer models and in PhI
clinical studies as an oncolytic agent, oncolysate or whole cell vaccine.
Using reverse genetics, we have generated a recombinant strain of NDV
that overcomes environmental and regulatory concerns uncoupling oncolytic
potency and avian pathogenicity. Furthermore we have enhanced the immune
modulatory properties ofNDV by engineering the virus to express
granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). We have
evaluated the biological characteristics of recNDVGM-CSF in vivo and in
vitro. RecNDVGM-CSFselectively replicates in and kills a wide variety of
human and mouse tumour cell lines. Additionally NDV infection of cancer
cells results in the increased production and secretion of
pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines which are able to recruit
mediators of both the innate and adaptive immune responses. NDV is a
potent activator of the type I interferon response and is also able to
directly activate many immune cell types. In vivo, using a range of
syngeneic and xenograft models we have demonstrated that NDV treatment
has profound anti-tumour activity. In aHT1080 fibrosarcoma xenograft
model a single administration (intra-tumoural or systemic) was able to
cure 80% of tumour bearing mice. In syngeneic mouse tumour models, NDV
treatment causes profound changes in the immune suppressive
microenvironment and can result in long-lasting anti-tumour immune
responses.The inherent properties of NDV (self-propagation,
tumour-selective replication, and immunostimulatory properties) coupled
with the ability to genetically engineer NDV to express therapeutic
transgenes may provide a multi-modal attack on the tumour, delivering
greater benefit to patients.

