Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of estrogen receptor alpha phosphorylation sites
as a marker for tamoxifen resistant breast cancer


A major focus of breast cancer research is to understand the mechanisms
responsible for disease progression and drug resistance. Most treatment
options target endocrine therapy, however, the processes that modulate
these signaling pathways are poorly understood. Here, we seek to gain
additional understanding about the phosphorylation status of the estrogen
receptor as it relates to tamoxifin drug treatment. Tamoxifen, a
selective ER inhibitor, was the first targeted breast cancer therapy
developed. Unfortunately, tamoxifen therapy was shown to be ineffective
for certain kinds of cancers and even in affected tumors an acquired
resistance was eventually seen. Previous research has shown that the
estrogen receptor protein is phosphorylated at more than 20 different
sites and some of these sites are linked with poor prognosis in tamoxifen
treated patients. For example, phosphorylation at the S305 site may lead
to an activation of ER and to transcription of ER-responsive gene after
tamoxifen treatment, leading to tamoxifen resistance. In addition, other
phosphorylation sites have also been found to correlate with poor
prognosis of tamoxifen treated patients. Thus, differential
phosphorylation of ER may serve as a biomarker to identify patients
unlikely to respond to tamoxifen treatment. Here, utilizing a newly
developed medium throughput IHC test system we have interrogated multiple
sites of ER for phosphorylation status by screening an extensive panel of
different breast cancer patient samples and other non-breast cancer
tissue microarray (TMA) samples. These patient samples were classified
according to their clinical grade (ER positive or negative, Her2,
progesterone positive or negative, and Ki67 index) and tamoxifen
treatment and then screened for their ER phosphorylation status. The
results show unique staining patterns depending upon the tumor
classification and conclusions about the utilization of this information
as a potential for diagnostic applications will be discussed.

