Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and quantification of somatic structural variations
in tumor, urine and plasma from bladder cancer patients


Bladder tumors can be divided into two clinically divergent groups,
non-muscle invasive (NMIBC) and muscle invasive bladder tumors (MIBC).
NMIBCs have a recurrence rate of 50-70%, while MIBCs often develop
metastases. No molecular biomarkers are yet available to directly guide
treatment and follow-up regimes for patients with BC.Aim of this study
was to identify tumor specific, large somatic structural variations (SSV)
in DNA from tumors and quantify SSVs in DNA from urine and in circulating
free DNA (cfDNA) in plasma from successive visits during treatment and
follow-up.Methods: Whole genome paired-end (WGS) or mate-pair (MPS)
sequencing on HiSeq2000 and Nextseq sequencers. SSVs called by algorithms
CREST or Breakdancer. cfDNA was extracted from 1-3 ml plasma.
Quantification of SSVs was done by droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) using
probes covering the breakpoint.We selected six patients with
progressive/metastatic disease, followed for 4 to 19 years with
consecutive sampling of tumors, urine and plasma samples (4 to 27
visits). WGS was carried out on DNA from germ-line and tumors from four
patients (57x and 45x read depth). CREST identified 20-226 SSVs per
tumor. PCR assays (n = 170, 21-64 per patient) showed validation rates of
60-75% (CTX), 75-90% (ITX), 88-100% (INS) and 50% (INV) among the eight
tumors. MPS was carried out on DNA from two patients (22-30x physical
read depth). Breakdancer identified 82 and 120 SSVs, 24 and 13 were
potential somatic with a validation rate of 69% and 79%. For each
patient, 3-5 fluorescent probes covering the breakpoint were used to
quantify the level of tumor specific by ddPCR. SSVs were quantified in
tumor DNA from several visits. Their frequency varied considerably
(0.08-0.54) between the individual tumors, indicating a large inter-tumor
heterogeneity. SSVs detected in DNA from urine pellets were correlated to
the presence of tumor and treatment for some cases. Inter-individual
cfDNA level ranged from 600-3500 genomic equivalents (GEs) per ml plasma.
SSVs were identified in plasma. The level of ctDNA ranged between 5-300
GEs/ml plasma and an increase in ctDNA was already detectable up to 21
months before progression to muscle invasive disease. For metastasized
disease, a 42-fold increase of the ctDNA level was observed compared to
localized disease. No SSVs were detected in cfDNA from patients cured
from BC (3 and 7 years post-recurrence and 5 years
post-cystectomy).Conclusions: Tumor derived SSVs were identified and
quantified in cfDNA from plasma of patients with progressive and
metastatic BC. Detection of SSVs in cfDNA was possible at early time
points before progression and metastasis of the disease were discovered
by cystoscopy or image diagnostic. The tumor specific and highly
sensitive detection and quantification of SSVs in cfDNA from plasma may
offer a unique tool to monitor disease course, residual tumor burden,
disease progression and treatment response in BC.

