Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin enhances the benefit of ALK inhibitors in ALK
translocation-positive non-small cell lung cancer cells


Background: Crizotinib is an effective tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
against non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) with anaplastic lymphoma
receptor tyrosine kinase (ALK) translocation. Recently, the second
generation ALK inhibitors, including alectinib (CH5424802) and ceritinib
(LDK378) are actively investigated in clinical trials and show strong
anti-tumor effect both in crizotinib-nave and refractory NSCLC patients
with ALK translocation. Unfortunately, the efficacy of these ALK
inhibiting TKIs is limited due to primary and acquired resistance to
these agents. Metformin is a widely used antidiabetic drug and shows
promising anti-tumor effect in several cancers. Here, we define a
therapeutic synergism between ALK inhibitors and metformin.Material and
Methods: NSCLC cells with ALK translocation-positive (ALK+) and
crizotinib-sensitive H2228 and H3122, and ALK+, crizotinib-resistant
SNU2535 and ALK translocation-negative H226 were evaluated. We assessed
response of these NSCLC cells to crizotinib, alectinib and ceritinib
alone or in combination with metformin by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium (MTT) assay and
anchorage independent growth in soft agar. Combination indices (Cis) were
calculated by CalcusynTM (Biosoft, Cambridge, UK). Western blots were
performed to assess biochemical changes, especially those related with
ALK signaling components.Results: The combination of ALK inhibitors with
metformin induced a strong anti-proliferative effect only in ALK+ cell
lines (CI of crizotinib and metformin: 0.31 - 0.79, CI of alectinib and
metformin: 0.40 - 0.86, CI of ceritinib and metformin: 0.38 - 0.65).
Alectinib and ceritinib effectively inhibited growth of
crizotinib-resistant SNU2535, while crizotinib did not. Notably,
synergistic effects of these ALK inhibitors and metformin were also shown
in SNU2535 cells. Compared to ALK inhibitor alone, the combination of ALK
inhibitor plus metformin resulted in decreased phosphorylation of ALK and
downstream targets, such as AKT or ERK, both in crizotinib-sensitive and
resistant ALK+ cells.Conclusion: Collectively, these data support that
ALK inhibitors and metformin are synergistic in ALK+ NSCLC cells.
Resistance to crizotinib as well as alectinib and ceritinib might be
overcome by addition of metformin.

