Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular characterization of aggresome formation in choroid
plexus carcinoma


Our long-term goal is to define and characterize the mechanisms
underlying aggresome formation in choroid plexus carcinoma a rare
pediatric tumor. Protein misfolding is inevitable, 30% of newly
synthesized polypeptides can end up misfolded, such proteins are either
refolded or eliminated by cellular quality control pathways which include
the ubquitin proteosome system and autophagy. In recent years, protein
misfolding has been implicated in the pathophysiology of many diseases
such as diabetes, neurological disorders and cancer. Studies from our
laboratory have shown that choroid plexus carcinoma tumors are
characterized by the formation of aggresomes at the microtubules
organizing centers (MTOC) in FFPE tumor tissues. This was further
conformed by the development of choroid plexus carcinoma cell line
(CPC-45) which was characterized by the constitutive formation of
aggresomes at MTOC. When examining the soluble and insoluble fractions,
vimentin was only identified in the insoluble fraction. These results
were further confirmed using electron microscopy. Aggresome formation
implies presence of toxic protein over load and/or defective autophagy.
CPC-45 cells displayed normal LC3B (an indicator of autophagosome)
expression and regulation upon nutrient deprivation. To further monitor
autophagy, CPC-45 and SHY-5Y cells were infected with the dual Tandem
Sensor RFP-GFP-LC3B to label autophagosome and its maturation to
autolysosome. While SHY-5Y displayed both green and red fluorescence upon
infection, CPC-45 was only positive after serum starvation thus
confirming the targeting of aggresomes by LC3B mediated autophagy.
Recently, the LC3B paralog LC3AV1 was found to be silenced by DNA
methylation in several cancer cell lines and reported as major player in
autophagy and as a potential tumor suppressor. To further explore the
role of LC3A in aggresome formation, CPC-45 cells were transfected with
either GFP empty vector or LC3AV1-GFP construct. Only LC3A-GFP
transfected cells were positive for aggresome formation while in GFP
transfected we did not observe any signal. Consistent with previous
reports that over expression of GFP results in protein accumulation at
the aggresomes. Our results suggest that LC3A is the mediator of the
basal quality control function of autophagy which is different from the
stress induced autophagy mediated by LC3B. Based on our findings, we
propose that perturbation in the autophagic pathway due lack of LC3Av1
expression lead to a failure in the aggresome degradation process and
hence provide an advantage to tumor cells to overcome protein misfold
overload thus contributing to the tumorigenicity of the disease.

