Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imipramine blue: a novel NOX inhibitor as potent therapeutic agent
to treat triple-negative breast cancers


Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women and the second leading
cause of cancer death in US. Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) are
the most aggressive forms of breast cancer. Almost 60% of patients with
TNBCs develop chemo-resistance, leading to early relapse and shorter
survival. The family of NADPH oxidases (NOX) enzymes is more abundant
source of reactive oxygen species, which generally over expressed in a
wide range of cancers including breast cancer. Over expression of NOX
family of proteins in the tumor cells and stroma results in the
activation of several intracellular pathways that promotes neoplastic
transformation. Moreover, NOX is an important metabolic enzyme that plays
a critical role in supporting increased glycolysis in cancer cells by
generating NAD+, a substrate for one of the key glycolytic reactions. The
constitutive upregulation of glycolysis is thought to confer significant
growth advantage to cancer cells leading to uncontrolled proliferation
and increased invasion. This is especially true for TNBC that shows a
strong association with the Warburg effect. Herein we evaluated first
time the role of imipramine blue (IB), a NOX inhibitor and a derivative
of the FDA approved antidepressant imipramine in TNBC cells growth and
progression. Our results demonstrated that imipramine blue inhibits TNBC,
MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468 and Bt-549 cells growth without affecting normal
mammary epithelial (MCF-10A) cells. Notably, our studies revealed that
imipramine blue targets multiple NOX family members, which are highly
expressed in breast tumors when compared to adjacent normal tissue.
Imipramine blue treatment also reduced migration and invasion and
inhibited the self-renewal capability of MDA-MB-231 cells. Importantly,
imipramine blue treatment significantly reduced experimental lung
metastasis of MDA-MB-231 cells in athymic nude mice without induce
apparent toxicity. Our gene microarray results further showed that IB
treatment significantly altered an array of genes, including FOXM1,
Aurora kinase A (AURAK) and Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1), which play
important roles in cancer growth and progression as well as in mediating
sensitivity/resistance of paclitaxel (PTX), a chemotherapy drug that is
routinely used as a first line treatment for breast cancer patients.
Taken together, our findings propose NOX inhibitor imipramine blue as a
novel therapeutic agent with less toxicity to treat triple negative
breast cancers.

