Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of candidate predisposition genes for familial
uterine leiomyomas


Uterine leiomyomas are benign smooth muscle tumors that cause
considerable morbidity. They are among the most common human tumors and
are the leading indication for hysterectomy. Genetic factors play an
important role in the development of these hormone-dependent tumors.
First-degree relatives of uterine leiomyoma patients are at increased
risk for developing leiomyomas. Twin studies have shown that an inherited
predisposition is likely to contribute to the formation of these lesions.
Furthermore, the clinical and molecular features of familial leiomyomas
differ from those of sporadic cases. Thus far, the only known high risk
predisposition defect is dominantly inherited loss of function mutations
in fumarate hydratase (FH) that underlie a tumor predisposition syndrome
hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC). The aim of this
study is to identify novel candidate high risk susceptibility genes for
uterine leiomyomas. The study material consists of five FH
mutation-negative families, which have at least four individuals
diagnosed with uterine leiomyomas, originating from Northern Finland.
Genomic DNA extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes from one affected
individual from each family has been exome sequenced. Exome sequencing
data have been analyzed for rare non-synonymous variants with allele
frequencies less than 0.1% in 4 019 controls. All protein-truncating
variants as well as missense and splice site variants affecting the same
gene in at least two individuals that are predicted to be
protein-damaging have been included for further analysis. Preliminarily
25 candidate susceptibility genes have been shortlisted. Relevant variant
calls will be verified by direct sequencing, followed by segregation
analysis and assessment of loss of heterozygosity in the corresponding
tumor samples. Identification of novel genes predisposing to familial
uterine leiomyomas may provide a better understanding into the
tumorigenic mechanisms and could lead to new prevention approaches and
personalized medical treatments in the future.

