Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exome sequencing of 243 liver tumors identifies new mutational
signatures and potential therapeutic targets


Background and Aims: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a heterogeneous
disease mainly developing in chronic liver disease and caused be a
variety of etiologies. Hepatocarcinogenesis is a multi-step process in
which pre-cancerous lesions can ultimately transform into advanced liver
cancer. Genomic analyses promise to unravel the mutagenic processes in
order to identify molecular profiles and to optimize personalized patient
care.Methods: We performed exome sequences of 243 liver tumors from
European patients (France, Italy and Spain), associated with cirrhosis
(F4, n = 118), fibrosis (F2+F3, n = 46), or non-fibrotic livers (F0+F1, n
= 79). Cirrhosis-associated tumors presented different stages along HCC
progression: 7 dysplastic macronodules, 7 early, 17 small and progressed,
58 classic, and 29 poor-prognosis HCC. Tumors were categorized by varying
risk factors: Significant alcohol intake (41%), HCV (26%), non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis (18%), HBV (14%), hemochromatosis (7%), no known etiology
(11%).Results: We identified 8 mutational signatures of which 6
(Signatures 1A, 1B, 4, 5, 6, and 16) were previously validated in a
pan-cancer analysis, while 2 (Signatures 23 and 24) are novel.
Hierarchical clustering, based on mutational signatures, revealed 6
groups (MSig1 to 6) and 4 singletons which were significantly associated
with specific risk factors, mainly combined alcohol/tobacco consumption,
and aflatoxin B1. Next, we identified 161 putative driver genes
associated with 11 recurrent pathways. Associations of mutations defined
3 groups of genes centered on CTNNB1 (alcohol), TP53 (HBV), and AXIN1.
Analyses according to tumor stage progression revealed TERT promoter
mutation as an early event whereas FGF/CCND1 amplification, TP53 and
CDKN2A alterations, appeared at more advanced stages in aggressive
tumors. Altogether, 28% of patients harbored at least one damaging
alteration potentially targetable by an FDA-approved drug and 86% by a
drug which has been studied in phase I to phase III clinical
trials.Conclusions: In conclusion, our study identified relationships
between environmental exposures and mutational patterns in HCC as well as
the landscape of driver genes and pathways altered in different clinical
stages and etiological backgrounds. For patient care, genomic alterations
identified in targetable genes will be useful to determine HCC patients
that could potentially benefit from targeted treatment in future clinical
trials.

