Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantification of blood perfusion in rhabdomyosarcoma xenograft in
3D using contrast-enhanced ultrasound imaging


This study aims to estimate individual 3D perfusion maps using nonlinear
contrast-enhanced ultrasound imaging (CEUS) over the volume of individual
rhabdomyosarcoma xenograft tumors in CD1 nude mice. We implanted the
tumors subcutaneously close to the right kidney. We administered
MicroMarker microbubbles via tail vein catheter and acquired images using
VisualSonics VEVO 2100 imaging system. We used the burst-replenishment
technique to image tumor perfusion. To maintain a steady concentration of
microbubbles, we used a programmable pump to inject a small bolus
followed by constant infusion, achieving a steady state in less than 1
min, significantly shorter than the commonly used constant infusion
without an initial bolus. Our preliminary analysis showed that the
nonlinear CEUS signal intensities of kidney cortex have less than 20%
variation between mice. We used a custom program to acquire the CEUS
perfusion images over a 3D volume that included the tumor and the right
kidney. We used the kidney as a reference organ to normalize whole tumor
perfusion data. We applied temporal clustering methods to identify
regions with similar perfusion profiles. We fitted three perfusion models
to each region: a) mono-exponential, b) lognormal, c) beam-specific. We
compared the performance of the models based on their overall quality of
fit (across all the regions) and their error in estimated pre-burst
signal level. Our preliminary analysis showed that log-normal and
multi-vessel beam-specific models provide better performance than the
mono-exponential model. We estimated individual 3D perfusion maps based
on the model fits. These perfusion maps over the entire tumor volume
represent tumor perfusion more accurately than the commonly used methods
based on a single 2D plane over a region of interest and without
including a reference organ. Our approach quantifies intratumoral blood
perfusion heterogeneity and enables comparison of perfusion across
individuals. Our method is extensible to other animal models and cancer
types provided they can be imaged using ultrasound and a reference tissue
can be imaged reliably in tandem on a subset of planes containing the
tumor.

