Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ormeloxifene attenuates wnt/-catenin signaling in colon cancer
cells by modulation of PKD1 and glycolytic pathways


Background: Colorectal cancer is the third most commonly diagnosed cancer
and third leading cause of cancer-related deaths. Aberrant Wnt/-catenin
signaling is implicated in development and progression of colon cancers.
Therefore, modulation of this master regulatory signaling is essential
for the prevention and treatment of colon cancer. Protein Kinase D1
(PKD1) which is downregulated in colon cancer, regulates -catenin
transcriptional activity by its phosphorylation. Therefore, drug mediated
upregulation of PKD1 may have high clinical significance for the
prevention/treatment of Wnt/-catenin signaling induced cancers. We have
identified, ormeloxifene, a synthetic non-steroidal selective estrogen
receptor modulator (SERM), as a novel PKD1 modulator. Herein, we have
investigated the effect of ormeloxifene on tumorigenic phenotypes of
colon cancer cells and its effect on PKD1 and glycolytic pathways
mediated oncogenic -catenin signaling.Materials and Methods: We have used
SW480-PKD1-GFP and SW480-GFP colon cancer cells (SW480 has a mutated APC
gene leading to stabilization of -catenin due to lack of degradation) to
investigate the effect of PKD1 on -catenin activity and xenograft mouse
model. SW480, SW48, SW620 and Lovo cell lines have been used to observe
the effect of ormeloxifene (5-20 M) on various cellular characteristics,
including cell proliferation, clonogenic potential, motility and
aggregation. -catenin/T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) transcription activity was
measured by Dual-Glo luciferase reporter assays. The expression and
subcellular localization of proteins was determined by immunoblotting and
confocal microscopy. Chemokine (C-C) motif ligand 2 (CCL2) and glucose
assay were performed using ELISA technique.Results: Ormeloxifene
treatment restores PKD1 expression, thereby, attenuates -catenin
transcriptional activity. We have also observed that ormeloxifene
treatment effectively inhibits CCL2 expression, glucose uptake, glucose
metabolism and Glut1 receptor expression in cancer cells. Ormeloxifene
(5-20M) inhibits cell proliferation and motility of colon cancer cells.
Additionally, ormeloxifene effectively inhibited CCL2 mediated cellular
migration of colon cancer cells. Furthermore, Western blot results depict
that PKD1 inhibits TCF4 activity in colon cancer cells. SW480 PKD1
overexpressing cells clearly delayed tumor formation in nude mice,
compared to control cells. In addition, SW480-PKD1-GFP cells showed less
hypoxia (Glut1) and increased Vasculature (CD31) in tumors.Conclusion:
Our findings demonstrate that ormeloxifene treatment effectively
attenuates -catenin mediated oncogenic signaling and tumorigenic
phenotypes of colon cancer cells via upregulation of PKD1 and suppression
of glycolytic pathways. Thus it can be used as a potential new
preventive/treatment modality for colon cancer.

