Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical targeted sequencing from FFPE tumor tissue samples for
early-phase clinical trials at the National Cancer Center of Japan


Next-generation sequencing is becoming an important tool in diagnosis for
personalized cancer treatment because of its ability to examine a large
number of genes in a single test and to detect mutations with high
sensitivity. We developed a clinical sequencing system at the National
Cancer Center of Japan that can identify actionable genetic alterations
from FFPE tumor tissue samples, and started to use this system for
patient entry into early-phase clinical trials of molecular target drugs.
In the present version of this system, 90 potentially actionable genes
were selected to construct an original panel (NCC oncopanel v2). All
exons of these 90 genes and introns of 10 genes among them are captured
and sequenced for detection of mutations/gene amplifications and gene
fusions, respectively. Target capturing and sequencing are performed
using an Agilent SureSelect system and an Illumina MiSeq sequencer. To
ensure the stable operation on FFPE samples, we developed a method to
qualify FFPE tissue-derived DNA using the content of PCR-amplifiable DNA
as a quality value. This value is calculated as a ratio of DNA
concentration determined by quantitative PCR to that measured using a
fluorescent dye-binding method. By changing the DNA quantity used for
sequencing depending on their quality values, approximately 90% of the
archived FFPE samples were able to be successfully analyzed. In addition,
we also developed a novel algorithm, cisCall, to accurately identify
genetic alterations in FFPE samples. At present, our clinical sequencing
system has enabled highly accurate mutation detection; accuracies of the
base substitution and indel mutations were verified as being more than
99% and more than 90%, respectively, in a MassARRAY examination. To
evaluate the feasibility and utility of our system in a clinical setting,
we initiated a study to use our system for early-phase clinical trials,
which we named TOPICS-1 (Trial of Onco-Panel for Introduction into
Clinical Study-Phase 1). Up to the present, more than 100 patients with
breast, gastric, ovarian, lung, and other cancers have been subjected to
the study, and 1.9 mutations and 0.3 amplifications have been found in
each patient on average. Among those mutations, 40% were COSMIC
database-registered mutations and 25% were truncating mutations. Nearly
half of the patients had at least 1 actionable alteration, which is
informative for the entry into some clinical trials.

