Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-specific genomic profiling for advanced cancers in young
adults


Purpose: Large-scale cancer genome analyses have uncovered the genetic
landscape of common cancers. However, rate tumor types in adolescent,
young adult (AYA) have not been well-characterized genetically. We
performed a pilot study of patient-specific cancer genome analysis to
know whether we can analyze individual cancer genome without the existing
large-scale genomics data of same tumor types in advanced and rare AYA
tumors.Methods: The patients were prospectively enrolled from a medical
oncology clinic in a university hospital. Tissue samples of the study
patients were acquired from the fresh tissue, formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue and cancer cells from pleural effusion as
well. Cancer genome data was acquired using massive parallel sequencing
technique from seven AYA patients with advanced solid tumors. WES and WTS
data were generated from 6 tumors with matched normal and 4 tumors,
respectively. Somatic alterations of cancer genome were classified with 2
distinct categories with heuristic ways and level 1 to 3 depends on
differences of genetic alterations based on clinical and biological
relevance, and mutation context.Results: Each different tumor types of 7
study patients were as follows; atypical prostate cancer (AYA01, 30 years
old), olfactory neuroblastoma (AYA02, 30 years old), tongue cancer
(AYA04, 33 years old), urachal carcinoma (AYA06, 32 years old), germ cell
tumor (AYA07, 21 years old), lung cancer (AYA09, 34 years old) and
liposarcoma (AYA10, 33 years old). Patients with GCT and tongue cancer
had higher mutation rate based on WES data; 476 and 97 non-synonymous
somatic nucleotide variations respectively. However, there were only 1316
non-synonymous somatic nucleotide variations and 718 indel somatic
variations in patients with other four cancers. We identified one level-1
(strong) oncogenic alterations and eight level-1 tumor suppressor
alterations as well as 19 level-2 (moderate) and level-3 (modest)
alterations were found from 5 WES data (we excluded 1 hypermutated germ
cell tumor sample). Some level-1/2 alterations were considered as
targetable by developed or developing drugs. Each tumor was characterized
by tumor-unique manner. AYA01 was characterized with concurrent tumor
suppressor alterations of RasGAP family genes (NF1 and RASA2), AYA02 with
chromosome-level copy number alteration and CDKN2C stopgain mutation,
AYA04 with concurrent oncogenic (AMER3) and tumor suppressor (FAT1, LGR6,
MSX1) alterations of Wnt signaling, AYA06 with KRAS mutation and AYA09
with a fusion of EML4-ALK.Conclusion: Our study showed that we can
characterize rare AYA tumors with WES or WTS data without pre-existing
large-scale genomics data of same tumor types, although there are much
hurdles in identifying major driver and/or druggable genetic alterations.

