Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of AMPK by androgen receptor signaling and its role in
promoting prostate cancer through the use of autophagy


While we now know that the androgen receptor (AR) is important for
progression to the deadly advanced stages of prostate cancer, it is
poorly understood what AR-regulated processes drive this pathology.
Autophagy, an enigmatic cellular recycling process, has received
increased attention as of late due to its potential oncogenic role in
late-stage cancers. One of the master regulators of autophagy is the
5-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). Previous work from several
independent laboratories has suggested AR signaling promotes cancer
progression through an AMPK-dependent signaling mechanism. Further, it
was demonstrated this enzymatic cascade was specifically regulated by
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase 2 (CaMKK2). Given AMPK's
known role as a regulator of autophagy, we hypothesized that AR-mediated
CaMKK2-AMPK signaling could promote prostate cancer through increasing
cellular rates of autophagy.To test this hypothesis, we initially
assessed whether AR signaling could regulate autophagy and if so, what
effect(s) this had on prostate cancer cell growth and tumor formation. We
then used a variety of pharmacological and molecular approaches to
determine whether CaMKK2-AMPK signaling was required and sufficient to
regulate autophagy and subsequent prostate cancer cell growth in vitro
and in vivo.Here, we have determined that 1) AR regulates cell metabolism
and cell growth in part by increasing autophagy in prostate cancer cells,
2) functional autophagy was clinically detected in metastatic,
castration-resistant cancers but not treatment-nave, localized tumors and
3) autophagy is required for prostate cancer progression in preclinical
animal models. Additionally, AR-mediated autophagy was mediated through
the direct expression of CaMKK2 and subsequent phosphorylation/activation
of AMPK. Correspondingly, levels of both CaMKK2 and
phosphorylated/activated AMPK correlated with prostate cancer progression
in genetic mouse models and patients. Mechanistically, AR-mediated
autophagy appears to promote cell growth by augmenting intracellular
lipid accumulation, a hallmark of prostate cancers.Taken together, our
findings converge to demonstrate that AR signaling can co-opt the AMPK
signaling cascade, a known homeostatic mechanism, to promote prostate
cancer by increasing autophagy. The current study points to the potential
utility of developing metabolic-targeted therapies directed towards the
CaMKK2-AMPK signaling axis for the treatment of prostate cancer. Further,
an inhibitor of this signaling cascade could serve as an alternative,
more specific therapeutic compared to existing inhibitors of autophagy
that, to date, have demonstrated limited efficacy in clinical trials due
to their toxicity and poor pharmacokinetics.

