Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-targeting with novel 6-substituted thienoyl[2,3-d]pyrimidine
antifolates via cellular uptake by folate receptor , and inhibition of de
novo purine nucleotide biosynthesis


Recent interest has focused on folate receptor (FR) in delivering
folate-based therapeutics to solid tumors, as FR is expressed in human
tumors, notably ovarian and non-small cell lung cancers. While FR is
present in normal epithelial tissues, this occurs at apical membranes
where it is inaccessible to the circulation. Selectivity of FR-targeted
agents would be enhanced if these were poor substrates for the ubiquitous
reduced folate carrier (RFC). We previously described 6-substituted
thieno[2,3-d]pyrimidine benzoyl antifolates with varying bridge lengths
(n = 2-8 carbons) as potent and selective inhibitors of tumor cells that
express FRs. The most potent compound (AGF50) included a 4-carbon bridge
and showed FR selectivity and inhibition of de novo purine biosynthesis.
To investigate the role of the side-chain aromatic ring in transport and
pathway inhibition, we synthesized AGF50 analogs with a variety of aryl
side-chain modifications (AGF102, AGF103, AGF55, AGF65, and AGF132). The
various 6-substituted thienoyl[2,3-d]pyrimidine antifolates were tested
in proliferation assays with isogenic Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)
sublines expressing RFC, proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT), or FR,
and with KB tumor cells. The analogs were inert toward RFC- and
PCFT-expressing cells. Toward FR-expressing CHO and KB cells, inhibitory
potencies were in the order, AGF102 = AGF132 = AGF103 > AGF50 > AGF64 >>
AGF55, with IC50s ranging from 1 nM to 182 nM. Drug effects were
abolished with excess folic acid, confirming FR uptake. Inhibition of
cell proliferation was reflected in binding affinities to FR, measured by
competition with [3H]folic acid. While PCFT-targeted activity was
nominal, all drugs still bound to PCFT, as reflected in inhibition of
[3H]methotrexate uptake at pH 5.5 and 6.8. By protection experiments with
thymidine or adenosine, de novo purine biosynthesis was confirmed as the
principal targeted pathway for the active analogs. While protection by
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide (AICA) was complete with AGF64 (suggesting
glycinamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase (GARFTase) as the primary
target), for AGF50, AGF102, AGF103 and AGF132, protection was incomplete,
implying a dual targeting of GARFTase and AICA ribonucleotide
formyltransferase (AICARFTase). Our studies establish an important
structure-activity relationship for FR-targeted antifolates, involving
modifications of the side-chain aromatic group that are well tolerated
for FR binding and transport. 6-Substituted thienoyl[2,3-d]pyrimidine
analogs were all inhibitors of de novo purine biosynthesis, although
relative targeting of GARFTase versus AICARFTase varied with the nature
of the aromatic side-chain.

