Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An endothelial-mesenchymal transition of brain endothelial cells
is required for metastatic extravasation


Endothelial-mesenchymal transition (EndMT) is an embryonic program
necessary for organ development. Despite being normally dormant in adult
organisms, this mechanism can be reactivated during several pathological
conditions, such as cancer and fibrosis. EndMT is characterized by the
downregulation of the endothelial program, activation of the
mesenchymal-fibrogenic program, and finally the activation of the
myogenic program. Cancer progression towards metastasis follows a defined
sequence of events described as the metastatic cascade. For extravasation
and transendothelial migration metastatic cells interact first with
endothelial cells. Yet the role of endothelial cells during the process
of metastasis formation and extravasation is still unclear, and the
interaction between metastatic and endothelial cells during
transendothelial migration is poorly understood. Since tumor cells are
well known to express TGF-, and the compact endothelial layer undergoes a
series of changes during metastatic extravasation (cell contact
disruption, cytoskeletal reorganization, contractility), we hypothesized
that an EndMT may be necessary for metastatic extravasation.We show that
primary rat brain endothelial cells (BECs) undergo EndMT upon TGF-1
treatment, characterized by the loss of tight and adherent junction
proteins, the expression of fibronectin, 1-integrin, calponin and -smooth
muscle actin (SMA), and an increase in N-cadherin levels. B16/F10
activated conditioned medium (ACM) induced claudin-5 downregulation,
fibronectin and SMA expression in BECs. Inhibition of TGF- signaling
during B16/F10 ACM stimulation using SB-431542 maintained claudin-5
levels and mitigated fibronectin and SMA expression. SB-431542 prevented
SMA upregulation upon stimulation of BECs with A2058, MCF-7 and MDA-MB231
ACM. Moreover, B16/F10 ACM caused a reduction in transdendothelial
electrical resistance and enhanced the number of melanoma cells adhering
to the endothelial layer, both in a TGF- dependent manner. Finally,
pretreatment with TGF-1 or B16/F10 ACM enhanced transendothelial
migration of B16/F10 cells.Our results indicate that an EndMT may be
necessary for metastatic transendothelial migration, and may play a
relevant role during the complex phenomenon known as metastatic
extravasation.

