Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BMP-2 induces motility and invasiveness of colon cancer through
upregulation of cancer stem cell


The majority of deaths in cancer patients are will present with
metastasis and relapses. One of the key steps in metastasis is the
migration, and Cancer stem cells(CSCs) activate migration. So, targeting
of CSC is an important strategy for cancers. Bone morphogenetic
protein(BMP) signaling, member of the TGF- superfamily, plays an
important role in development of bone and in regulation of stem cell
properties. In Previous study, Bone morphogenetic protein(BMP) signaling
has been associated with various types of cancers. BMPs contributes
through autocrine and paracrine mechanisms to tumor development, invasion
and metastasis. However, their roles and mechanisms are unclear. In this
study, we investigated the function of BMP-2 and relevance BMP-2 and CSCs
in Colon cancer cells.First, We compared the endogenous protein level of
parental and spheroid cells by western blotting. The spheroid cells
showed higher level of EMT(Epithelial mesenchymal transition) markers
N-Cadherin and Snail, CSC markers (EpCAM and CD133), and p Smad1/5 known
BMP-2 downstream than the corresponding parental cells. Then expression
of EpCAM and CD133 was confirmed by flow cytometry. We found that BMP-2
plays a key role in Cancer stem cell. To determine function of BMP-2 in
Colon cancer cells, we stimulated the colon cancer cells with recombinant
human BMP-2. Stimulation of BMP-2 increased EMT, CSC markers(EpCAM and
CD133). In addition, BMP-2 enhanced cell motility, and invasiveness by
wound healing and matrigel invasion assay. These results indicated BMP-2
signaling pathway enhance metastasis through increase of CSC portion.
Blockade of BMP-2 pathway by Noggin(BMP2 antagonist) or Smad1/5 siRNA
inhibited BMP2-induced EMT marker, MMP2, and CSC portion. The morphologic
changes though the EMT process were monitored by immunofluorescence
staining and Western blot for EMT markers. And Blockade of BMP-2 pathway
inhibited cell motility and invasiveness.Our findings suggest that BMP-2
signaling regulates metastatic potential through regulation of CSCs in
colon cancer cell.

