Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-infiltrating FOXP3+ T-regulatory (Treg) cells in early-stage
human lung cancer exhibit enhanced suppressive function when compared to
blood or lymph node (LN) Treg cells


Aim: Advances in immunotherapy require a detailed understanding of host
immunity. Data from murine models indicate solid tumors of various types
can recruit Tregs and/or promote iTreg development, and thereby curtail
antitumor responses. However, clinical data have been restricted to
either evaluation of Treg numbers in tumors, or studies of PBMC Treg in
patients with cancers. Surprisingly, no studies of Treg function have
ever been reported using Tregs isolated from tumors themselves.Methods:
Using our recently reported technique, we isolated Tregs within 20 mins
of resection from 13 lung cancer patients, stages Ia-IIIa, and 2 control
non-cancer patients (diaphragmatic hernia and lung granuloma). The mean
age of the cancer patients (10 males, 3 females) was 65.42.2 years; 7
patients had adenocarcinoma, 3 had squamous cell carcinoma, and the
remainder had large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, colon adenocarcinoma
and high-grade carcinoma. The mean size of their tumors was 4.00.8 cm,
and 1 of the 13 patients developed metastases during the follow-up
period. We compared the suppressive function of Tregs isolated from each
patient's freshly resected tumor, LN and blood, using cryopreserved
healthy donor PBMC aliquots as responders, and area-under-curve (AUC)
analysis. We controlled for comparable CD4+ and FOXP3+ purity in all
isolated Treg samples, and cell viability, excluding from further
analysis all data from non-comparable FOXP3+ subsets. Thus, we were able
to avoid artifacts arising from different cell conditions (e.g. use of
autologous responder cells) or from unequal FOXP3+ content in Treg
isolates.Results: Tumor-infiltrating Tregs had significantly enhanced
suppressive function when compared with Tregs isolated from other
locations in the same patient. Thus, tumor Tregs were significantly more
suppressive than lung LN Tregs (p = 0.0003), and significantly more
suppressive than blood Tregs (p = 0.03). Tregs isolated from LN in close
proximity to tumors had comparable suppressive function to Tregs isolated
from distant LN (p>0.05), and blood Tregs had comparable suppressive
function to that of LN Tregs (p>0.05). Additional analyses showed that
the enhanced suppressive function of tumor Treg was not due to
Treg-induced killing/apoptosis of responder cells, cytokine and/or growth
factor deprivation, or soluble factors produced by tumor Treg
cells.Conclusions: We demonstrate for the first time that
tumor-infiltrating human lung cancer Treg have significantly increased
suppressive function. This finding is important for the development of
effective anti-tumor therapy. While we are continuing to study the basis
for such differences, our data suggest that studies of peripheral blood
Tregs in cancer patients may be inadequate and inefficient approaches for
understanding the fundamental mechanisms of limited host antitumor immune
responses.

