Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic potentials of STAT5 inhibitors in overcoming
bortezomib resistance in human T-cell leukemia


The purpose of our study is to define the mechanism of bortezomib
resistance in cancer therapy and to identify novel approaches in
overcoming the resistance. Bortezomib is the first FDA-approved
reversible proteasome inhibitor in treating multiple myeloma and mantle
cell lymphoma patients. Numerous clinical trials are ongoing in testing
the efficacy of bortezomib and its derivatives in treating human cancers.
One of the major concerns in using single-agent bortezomib is that
patients develop resistance during the course of treatment and cancers
relapse. To explore the underlying mechanisms, we recently established a
bortezomib-resistant human acute T lymphoblastic cell line Jurkat-BR.
Jurkat-BR remains sensitive to carfilzomib, a FDA-approved
second-generation irreversible proteasome inhibitor. An inhibitor
targeting upstream proteasome pathway, MLN 4924, also exhibits cytotoxic
effects toward Jurkat-BR.Overexpression and hyperactivation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is associated with
many forms of blood malignancies. Compared with parental Jurkat,
Jurkat-BR has significant elevation of STAT5b, but not STAT5a, at both
mRNA and protein levels. Pimozide is an antipsychotic drug that recently
found to specifically inhibit STAT5 activity. Consistent with STAT5b
overexpression, Jurkat-BR is more sensitive than parental Jurkat to
cytotoxicity induced by pimozide. Another inhibitor targeting STAT5 SH2
domain, the nonpeptidic nicotinoyl hydrazone (CAS# 285968-31-4, STAT5I)
also exhibits similar effects. Both pimozide and STAT5I synergize with
bortezomib in killing Jurkat-BR cells. These results support the
importance of STAT5b upregulation in acquired bortezomib resistance.We
reported previously that STAT5 translocates to mitochondria (BBRC
402:778) and represses mitochondrial gene expression (manuscript
submitted). In Jurkat-BR cells, we also observed STAT5b mitochondrial
translocation, reduced mitochondrial gene expression, and repression of
mitochondrial respiration. These results suggest that both STAT5b
overexpression and reduced mitochondrial activity may be important
molecular markers for cancer cell's resistance to bortezomib. Our data
further support the clinical benefit of STAT5 inhibitors in complementing
proteasome inhibitors and in overcoming its resistance in patients who
acquire resistance through upregulating STAT5. More importantly, the link
between reduced mitochondrial respiration and bortezomib resistance
highlights the potentials of targeting mitochondria in developing novel
combined chemotherapy for cancer patients.

