Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Xanthohumol induces apoptosis and reduces notch in neuroblastoma


Background: Neuroblastoma (NB) is a common neuroendocrine tumor with a
high incidence of malignancy and recurrence. It signifies the most common
extracranial solid cancer in childhood and accounts for 15% of childhood
cancer-related deaths. More than 40% of patients present at diagnosis
with aggressive disease and distant metastases which poses numerous
therapeutic challenges. Despite intensive treatment options, the 5-year
disease free survival remains less than 50%. Therefore, effective
treatment approaches are required. Although recent studies revealed
deregulated expression of Notch signaling in NB, therapeutic targeting of
Notch represents a significant challenge. Xanthohumol (XN)
(3-[3,3-dimethyl allyl]-2,4,4-trihydroxy-6-methoxychalcone), prenylated
flavonoid from the Humulus lupulus L. (hops) exerts anti-proliferative
activity against various cancers but the molecular mechanism of action
remains unclear.In addition, the effect of XN on NB is not known. Based
on our findings, we hypothesize that the XN treatment will reduce NB
growth and the growth suppression may be mediated by Notch reduction.
Therefore, the present study is designed to elicit, for the first time,
anti-proliferative effect of XN on NB cell lines as well as understanding
the molecular mechanism of action of XN.Methods: The proliferation
effects of XN on a panel of human NB cell lines (SK-NA-S, NGP
andSH-5Y-SY) were assessed by MTT assay as well as in real-time cellular
proliferation assay using IncuCyte Live-Cell Imaging system. The
expression levels of pro-apoptotic (c-PARP and cleaved caspase-3) and
anti-apoptotic proteins (Bcl2, and survivin) were analyzed by Western
blotting after XN treatment. Effects of XN on Notch pathway proteins
(Notch3, Hes1, and ASCL1) were studied by Western blotting in addition to
quantitative RT-PCR. Short hairpin RNA (shRNAs) targeting Notch3 was used
to determine the XN sensitivity in NB.Results: NB cells treated with
increasing concentrations of XN (0-30 M) had a dose-dependent reduction
in growth. A significant reduction in growth was noted at or above 10 M
of XN (40% or above; pBackground: Neuroblastoma (NB) is a common
neuroendocrine tumor with a high incidence of malignancy and recurrence.
It signifies the most common extracranial solid cancer in childhood and
accounts for 15% of childhood cancer-related deaths. More than 40% of
patients present at diagnosis with aggressive disease and distant
metastases which poses numerous therapeutic challenges. Despite intensive
treatment options, the 5-year disease free survival remains less than
50%. Therefore, effective treatment approaches are required. Although
recent studies revealed deregulated expression of Notch signaling in NB,
therapeutic targeting of Notch represents a significant challenge.
Xanthohumol (XN) (3-[3,3-dimethyl
allyl]-2,4,4-trihydroxy-6-methoxychalcone), prenylated flavonoid from the
Humulus lupulus L. (hops) exerts anti-proliferative activity against
various cancers but the molecular mechanism of action remains unclear.In
addition, the effect of XN on NB is not known. Based on our findings, we
hypothesize that the XN treatment will reduce NB growth and the growth
suppression may be mediated by Notch reduction. Therefore, the present
study is designed to elicit, for the first time, anti-proliferative
effect of XN on NB cell lines as well as understanding the molecular
mechanism of action of XN.Methods: The proliferation effects of XN on a
panel of human NB cell lines (SK-NA-S, NGP andSH-5Y-SY) were assessed by
MTT assay as well as in real-time cellular proliferation assay using
IncuCyte Live-Cell Imaging system. The expression levels of pro-apoptotic
(c-PARP and cleaved caspase-3) and anti-apoptotic proteins (Bcl2, and
survivin) were analyzed by Western blotting after XN treatment. Effects
of XN on Notch pathway proteins (Notch3, Hes1, and ASCL1) were studied by
Western blotting in addition to quantitative RT-PCR. Short hairpin RNA
(shRNAs) targeting Notch3 was used to determine the XN sensitivity in
NB.Results: NB cells treated with increasing concentrations of XN (0-30
M) had a dose-dependent reduction in growth. A significant reduction in
growth was noted at or above 10 M of XN (40% or above; p<0.01) in all
three cell lines tested. This was confirmed by real-time imaging of the
cells after treatment with XN. The growth suppression effect is due to
apoptosis as evidenced by increased expression of c-PARP and cleaved
caspase-3 and decreased levels of Bcl2 and survivin proteins.
Furthermore, XN inhibitedNotch signaling by reducing Notch3 and
associated downstream targets; Hes1 and ASCL1. Concomitant treatment with
XN and Notch3 shRNA augmented growth suppression.Conclusions: We report
for the first time that XN targets Notch3 signaling in NB cells. In
summary, the similarity of XN metabolism between animals and humans, the
antiproliferative effects on various cancers, and safety profile, we
anticipate that XN could potentially be used in future clinical studies
on patients with disease.

