Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemoprevention of mammary cancer: Modeling predictive values of
short-term morphologic assays for efficacy in animal tumor assays


Background: Understanding the ability of chemopreventive agent efficacy
in morphologic (in vitro/in vivo) assays to predict efficacy in animal
(mouse and rat) in vivo tumor assays has not been well studied. The
Chemopreventive Agent Development Research Group (CADRG) in the U.S.
NCI's Division of Cancer Prevention has, over 25 years, tested
approximately 800 agents for potential chemopreventive activity. Of these
agents, a subset of 146 that were tested in both morphologic and mammary
gland tumor assays constitutes the focus of our current project. Our goal
is to gain deeper insight into the relevant predictive values.Materials
and Methods: Two critical steps are involved in the early stages of the
CADRG testing pathway: (1) in vitro/in vivo morphologic assays and, for
agents successful in these, (2) testing for tumor prevention (measured in
terms of tumor incidence and multiplicity reduction) in animal tumor
assays. Ultimately, our goal is to test agents that successfully decrease
tumor incidence and multiplicity in animal tumor assays in humans. In the
project presented here, we evaluated the predictive values of
earlier-stage (morphologic) assays for efficacy in later-stage (animal
tumor, specifically mammary tumor) assays. We used statistical modeling
to determine how well the six most commonly used morphologic assays
predicted efficacy of the 146 tested agents in mouse and rat mammary
gland tumor assays. For this purpose multimodel inference was applied to
ordinal logistic regression.Results: We evaluated the ability of the six
morphologic assays to predict tumor outcomes in the mouse and rat mammary
gland cancer assays. In our statistical modeling approach, each
morphologic assay was assigned a value describing how strongly it
predicted outcomes in the mammary gland tumor assays. Specific
morphologic assays (mouse mammary organ culture/MMOC and human foreskin
epithelial cell/HFE morphologic assays) in combination yielded predictive
values that are reasonably suggestive of the efficacy demonstrated by
chemopreventive agents in the mouse and rat mammary gland tumor
assays.Conclusions: Predictive models such as these should prove useful
in guiding future decision-making regarding agent selection and
morphologic and animal tumor assay use. Our current strategy is to gain
insight into the Predictive Value approach by: (1) identifying the
mammary gland tumor assays that best reflect anti-tumor efficacy in
animals; (2) teasing apart those classes of agents that exhibit the
highest predictive values overall; and (3) examining those classes of
agents that exhibit the highest efficacy in specific mammary gland tumor
assays.

