Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic signaling by MET and other cabozantinib targets in cells
derived from urothelial carcinoma of the bladder


Background: Mounting evidence supports MET as a target in urothelial
carcinoma (UC) of the bladder. Activated MET can promote tumor growth and
metastasis, as well as tumor angiogenesis by upregulating VEGF, and may
play a role in UC pathogenesis. The effects of MET inhibitor cabozantinib
on MET-driven UC cell growth, invasion and tumorigenicity were previously
analyzed in biochemical, cell-based and animal models. Current known
cabozantinib targets (MET, KDR, FLT3, KIT, RET, AXL and ROS) and possible
targets based on structural similarity (MERTK, TYRO3, RON, RYK, CSF1R,
ROR1, ROR2, ALK and LTK) were characterized in 13 UC-derived cell lines
by determining the frequency and absolute level of mRNA expression, and
ultimately, for targets where mRNA was present, encoded protein
abundance, ligand expression and cabozantinib sensitivity.Methods: The
effects and the targets of cabozantinib on human UC-derived cell lines
were studied in vitro. Cells at 80% confluence were serum deprived 16h,
then left untreated or treated with hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and/or
cabozantinib prior to analysis of MET, phospho- (p)MET, pAKT1, total
AKT1, pMAPK1/2 and total MAPK1/2 by two-site immunoassay and/or
immunoblotting. Cabozantinib effects on basal and HGF-induced UC cell
invasion and proliferation were measured. Gene mRNA abundance (absolute
copy number) of cabozantinib targets was measured using real time PCR
from the extracted RNAs of 13 UC cell lines.Results: Basal pMET content
was uniformly low, and was increased significantly by HGF; the latter was
reversed by cabozantinib treatment. HGF-driven increases in pAKT1:AKT1
and pMAPK1/2:MAPK1/2 ratios in all cell lines were reversed by
cabozantinib treatment, as were HGF-enhanced UC cell invasion,
proliferation and tumorigenicity. UC cell lines displayed uniformly
robust mRNA expression of MET, AXL, RYK, RON, CSF1R, ROR1 and ROR2, and
frequent modest expression of RET and ROS, whereas KDR, ALK, KIT, LYK,
TYRO3, MERTK and FLT3 showed little or no expression. MET mRNA and
protein abundance were significantly positively correlated among these 13
UC cell lines.Conclusions: UC cell MET content was higher with higher UC
grade. HGF was not expressed in any UC cell line tested, suggesting that
this pathway is predominantly paracrine in vivo. Added HGF stimulated
activation of MET and known effectors, and enhanced invasion, growth rate
and anchorage-independent growth; cabozantinib effectively reversed these
HGF-driven effects. Based on receptor expression, cabozantinib is most
likely acting through MET, AXL and ROS, and potentially through RYK,
ROR1, ROR2, and/or RET, in UC cells, all of which have been implicated in
oncogenesis in other human malignancies.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

