Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch signaling promotes survival and recurrence of dormant
mammary tumor cells following HER2/neu targeted therapy


Breast cancer remains the leading cause of cancer-related deaths among
women despite significant improvements in diagnosis and treatment.
Mortality is principally due to the propensity of breast cancers to recur
from reservoirs of local and disseminated residual tumor cells that
survive therapy. Importantly, breast cancers can recur after long periods
of clinical remission, implying that at least some breast cancers pass
through a dormant phase prior to relapse. However, little is known about
the signaling pathways that permit residual tumor cells to survive in a
dormant state and eventually resume growth. Development of effective
therapeutic interventions will require more detailed understanding of
these fundamental processes in tumor biology.Our laboratory has developed
a series of mouse models that permit the conditional activation of
oncogenes in the mammary glands of mice and can be used to recapitulate
key features of breast cancer progression including dormancy and
recurrence after targeted therapy. In the MMTV-rtTA;TetO-neu (MTB/TAN)
model, treatment with doxycycline permits mammary specific activation of
HER2/neu and drives primary tumor formation. Upon removal of dox and
resultant down-regulation of HER2/neu, primary tumors regress as a
consequence of oncogene addiction. However, a small population of tumor
cells persists in a histologically identifiable residual lesion. After a
period of cellular dormancy, residual tumor cells re-enter the cell cycle
in a stochastic manner and give rise to recurrent tumors, independent of
HER2/neu signaling.Combining this model for recurrent mammary
tumorigenesis with bioinformatics analyses of breast cancer patients, we
now identify a role for Notch signaling in the recurrence of
HER2/neu-driven mammary tumors. We find that Notch signaling is acutely
up-regulated in tumor cells following HER2/neu pathway inhibition and
that Notch activation is both necessary and sufficient for the survival
and recurrence of dormant residual tumor cells that persist following
HER2/neu blockade. Consistent with this, computational analysis revealed
that Notch pathway activity is an independent prognostic factor for
breast cancer recurrence in patients. Together, these results implicate
Notch signaling in the survival and recurrence of dormant residual tumor
cells and identify dormancy as a discrete, targetable stage of breast
cancer progression. Therapeutics targeting Notch could address the unmet
need for treatments directed against minimal residual disease for the
prevention of breast cancer recurrence.

