Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serine/arginine splicing factor 1 (SRSF1) mediates DNA repair and
chemo-sensitivity and drives growth in small cell lung cancer


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is the most aggressive subtype of lung
cancer. Despite a high response rate to chemotherapy, more than 95% of
patients eventually die from SCLC. We have identified that
Serine/Arginine Splicing Factor 1 (SRSF1) DNA copy number gain and mRNA
over-expression in tumor is strongly associated with poor survival based
on whole exome sequencing (WES) and transcriptomic sequencing of primary
tumors from 99 Chinese SCLC patients. Here, SRSF1 is evaluated as a tumor
driver in SCLC. Treatment of SCLC cell lines in vitro with a low dose of
cisplatin or topotecan (two of the most common standard of care in SCLC)
only induced a modest decrease of cell growth. However, knockdown of
SRSF1 with siRNA along with a sub-lethal dose of cisplatin or topotecan
enhanced the overall growth inhibition effect compared to the
chemotherapy alone. SRSF1 siRNA alone induced modest but significant
caspase-3 activation, similar to cisplatin or topotecan treatment alone.
The combination of SRSF1 siRNA with chemotherapy treatments produced a
significantly higher caspase induction. DNA-damage induction as a
potential mechanism of SRSF1 knockdown was assessed. Phosphorylation of
H2AX and Chk2, established markers of DNA-strand breaks and DNA-repair
response, was consistently induced upon SRSF1 abrogation in cells, and
further increased the phosphorylation of these proteins when combined
with cisplatin or topotecan treatment. The knockdown of SRSF1 in SCLC
cells also resulted in significant growth inhibition when cells were
grown as 3D spheroids. Cells transfected with non-targeting siRNA
produced large and well-organized spheroids; in contrast, cells
transfected with SRSF1 siRNA did not form well-organized structures but
mainly existed as single cells with poor viability. Results were
confirmed by colony formation assays and could be rescued with a
siRNA-resistant SRSF1 expression construct. Finally, we investigated the
impact of SRSF1 loss on kinase signaling pathways in SCLC cells through
phospho-kinase array profiling. Strong phospho-AKT and ERK signals were
observed in control siRNA-transfected cells, and were abrogated by SRSF1
siRNA. Western blot confirmed this in several SCLC cell lines. These
targeting studies demonstrate that SRSF1 plays a key role in DNA repair,
chemo-sensitivity and cell proliferation. Together, these data reveal
SRSF1 as a therapeutic target in SCLC and provide a rationale for
personalized therapy in SCLC.

