Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: uPA modulates angiogenesis through transcriptional regulation of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptors VEGFR1 and VEGFR2


The urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) system has multifunctional
roles in neoplastic grows and metastasis, affecting cancer cell
proliferation, adhesion, migration and survival, and tumor angiogenesis.
uPA mediates tumor angiogenesis and vascular permeability through
proteolytic degradation of extracellular matrix proteins, activation of
release of growth factors and by intracellular signaling initiated upon
its binding to the uPA receptor (CD87) and others. In accord with this,
we observed that VEGF-induced endothelial cell (EC) proliferation is
dependent on uPA; ECs isolated from uPA knockout mice (uPA-/- ECs) show
less proliferation in response to VEGF than their wild type counterparts
or than uPA-/- ECs in which expression of wild type uPA has been restored
using lentiviral transfection.We reported previously that uPA is
transported from cell surface to nuclei through a mechanism that requires
its kringle domain, and that intranuclear uPA modulates gene
transcription by binding to a subset of transcription factors (1, 2).
Here, we show that uPA regulates angiogenesis in part through this novel
mechanism. Wild type single-chain uPA (WT-scuPA) translocates to the
nuclei of ECs, but not a kringle-deficient uPA variant (K-scuPA)
incapable of nuclear transport(1). Translocation of uPA is accompanied by
increased expression of cell surface VEGF receptor 1 (VEGFR1) and VEGF
receptor 2 (VEGFR2), whereasK-scuPA had no effect on expression of either
receptor.We used a transcription factor protein-protein microarray to
identify the intranuclear target responsible for regulating receptor
expression. We report that uPA binds hematopoietically expressed homeobox
transcription factor (HHEX), also referred to as proline-rich homeobox TF
(PRH), which has been identified by us previously as a transcriptional
repressor of vegf, vegfr1 and vegfr2 promoters(3). uPA directly binds to
HHEX/PRH, interferes with its binding to the target DNA sequence, and
de-represses transcription of vegfr1 and vegfr2 genes.These studies
identify a novel mechanism underlying the pro-angiogenic effects of VEGF
through uPA binding to HHEX/PRH leading to de-repression of vegfr1 and
vegfr2 gene transcription and thereby suggest that interruption of this
pathway might provide a new approach to mitigate tumor
angiogenesis.References.1. Stepanova V, Lebedeva T, Kuo A, Yarovoi S,
Tkachuk S, Zaitsev S, Bdeir Kh, Dumler I, Marks M.S., Parfyonova Ye,
Tkachuk VA, Higazi A.-A., Cines D.B. (2008) Blood 112(1): 100-110.2.
Asuthkar S, Stepanova V, Lebedeva T, Holterman AL, Estes N, Cines DB, Rao
JS, Gondi CS. (2013) Mol Biol Cell. 24(17):2620-32.3. Noy P, Williams H,
Sawasdichai A, Gaston K, Jayaraman PS. Mol Cell Biol. (2010)
30(9):2120-34.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

