Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomic analysis of chromosome 11 in squamous tumors


Background: Studies by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and others have
identified regions of somatic copy number alteration (SCNA) in cervical
squamous cell carcinoma (CESC), head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSC), and lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC). These three tumor types
exhibit frequent SCNAs in chromosome 11, including focal gains in 11q13
and 11q22, as well as broad losses in 11p and 11q22-qter. Because
expression levels are affected by underlying genomic events, we
hypothesized that an integrated analysis of multiple genomic data types
would provide increased ability to identify target genes in SCNA regions
when compared to methods based on copy number alone while providing
insight into mechanisms regulating expression. Examination of multiple
tumor types provides a method to validate findings.Techniques: Gene
expression (GE), DNA copy number (CN), DNA methylation (ME), and microRNA
expression (miR) data were obtained from the TCGA studies of CESC, HNSC,
and LUSC. For each tumor type, univariate and multivariate linear models
were constructed on a gene-by-gene basis to investigate the effect of
changes in CN, ME, and miR on GE. Analysis of model output provided an
approach to identify target genes in SCNA regions and assess the effect
of genomic alterations on expression.Results: Genome-wide GE, CN, ME, and
miR data were available for n = 191 (CESC), n = 453 (HNSC), and n = 326
(LUSC) tumor samples. Univariate modeling detected a strong overall
association between GE and CN, as measured by the coefficient of
determination (model R2). Underlying CN events produced high model R2 for
widely recognized genes, e.g. FADD in HNSC and LUSC, and less well-known
genes. For example, DCUN1D5 (11q22) exhibits high model R2 in all three
tumor types. Univariate analyses suggest that ALDH3B1 (11q13), a
predicted target of the tumor suppressor miR-205, is epigenetically
regulated. Most samples exhibit high expression of miR-205 and moderate
expression of ALDH3B1, but increased ALDH3B1 levels are seen when miR-205
levels are low. This is notable in light of the striking negative
association between miR-205 expression and methylation levels,
particularly in CESC and LUSC. Fanconi anemia family member FANCF lies in
a broad region of CN loss in 11p that contains no clear driver gene.
Whereas univariate associations between FANCF GE and CN were moderate,
multivariate analyses highlighted this gene because of the additional
effect of ME on GE, which was pronounced in CESC and LUSC.Conclusion:
Linear modeling techniques provide a flexible and powerful basis for
performing integrated analysis of genomic data. Our approach produces
predicted results when analyzing known cancer genes, highlights lesser
known genes for future study, provides insight into gene regulation, and
draws attention to genes relevant in multiple tumor types.

