Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTEN regulates polycomb repressive EZH2 expression and its
deficiency correlates with active transcription mark H3K4Me3


Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) is one of the most commonly lost
tumor suppressors in human cancers. Frequent genetic inactivation of PTEN
occurs in glioblastoma, endometrial cancer, and prostate cancer; and
reduced expression is found in many other tumor types such as lung and
breast cancer. PTEN is mostly found in the cytosol and it transiently
associates with the inner surface of the plasma membrane and removes a
phosphate group from phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3) and
by this, it regulates various cellular functions. However in the nucleus,
PTEN mediates phosphatase independent functions and is believed to be
important for its tumor suppressive roles. Functional studies further
confirm the transcriptional regulatory role of the PTEN; however, the
process by which PTEN acts as a potential modulator of chromatin
structure and histone modification is unexplored. We observed that the
enhancer of zeste 2 polycomb repressive complex 2 subunit (EZH2), a
histone methyltransferase is upregulated in PTEN null mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) as compared to wild type counterparts, which suggested
an inverse relation between EZH2 expression and PTEN expression. We
further observed that phospho EZH2 levels (pEZH2ser21) were specifically
upregulated in the PTEN null cells and coincided with the high pEZH2:EZH2
ratio in these settings, indicating that the majority of the upregulated
EZH2 exists in the phosphorylated form. We also found that the pEZH2ser21
is mainly localized in the nucleus and only a small fraction exists in
the cytoplasm, suggesting additional roles for pEZH2ser21 after
partnering with cytoplasmic proteins. However, the non-phosphorylated
form of the EZH2 is totally a nuclear protein under these conditions.
Interestingly in PTEN null MEFs, transcriptional repression mark such as
H3K27Me3 expression was downregulated with the simultaneous upregulation
of H3K4Me3, an active transcription mark. Also, the increased expression
of EZH2 primarily linked with the pause of active transcription, was
associated with corresponding decrease in the H3K27Me3 repression mark
which subsequently influenced the expression of various genes including
senescence associated genes such as p21. Since, these aberrant histone
methylation marks are hallmarks of various cancer pathologies, targeting
EZH2 or its phosphorylation component could be a potential therapeutic
strategy in cancers involving loss of PTEN. Taken together, these results
demonstrate that in PTEN null processes, the pEZH2ser21 is capable of
translocation, altering the histone marks and influencing genes
associated with transcriptional repression and senescence. We also
suggest that EZH2 could serve as important target for novel
chemotherapeutics against cancers that are associated with loss of PTEN.

