Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate cancer microenvironment modulates macrophage phagocytosis


Macrophages play an important role in the body's immune system. There are
two main phenotypes of macrophages, M1 and M2. M1 polarized macrophages
participate in tumorcidal activity and pro-inflammatory responses. M2
macrophages perform anti-inflammatory responses and promote tissue
repair, angiogenesis, and tumor growth. Macrophages within the vicinity
of cancer cells may be influenced by the microenvironment and change
their gene expression accordingly. Macrophages can express different
cytokine profiles depending on their polarization state (M1 or M2). We
investigated whether macrophages exposed to cancer cells demonstrate a M2
or M1 phenotype. We stimulated U937 cells with phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate (PMA) for 24 hours to allow for adhesion and differentiation.
We co-cultured PMA-stimulated U937 macrophages with PC3 and DU145
prostate cancer cell lines in a 1:1 ratio with a transpermeable membrane
to allow for cell to cell contact and communication, and with PC3 and
DU145 conditioned media for 48 hours. We isolated the RNA from the
treated macrophages and performed qPCR to assess gene expression levels
of the following cytokines: IL-10, a cytokine demonstrating a M2
phenotype was upregulated by 10 and 15 fold for PC3 and DU145 cells
respectively and by 3 fold in both cell lines exposed to conditioned
media. We also found a trend of downregulation with the cytokines IL-1,
IL-12, and TNF - alpha, which also depict a M2 phenotype. We also
assessed macrophage function by measuring engulfment by flow cytometry.
Treated macrophages were allowed to phagocytose fluorescent microbeads
for 1 hour. Flow cytometry analysis revealed that total bead engulfment
decreased by up to 80% in macrophages treated with PC3 cells. Moreover,
the population of macrophages that engulfed 3+ beads decreased
significantly from both the cells and media treatments. Macrophages
treated with DU145 cells and spent media also showed a similar trend to
macrophages exposed to PC3 cells. The results show that macrophages
exposed to PC3 and DU145 cancer cell lines polarized towards an M2
phenotype and could be important in the success of cancer within the
microenvironment. Further research will reveal whether this process of a
M2 polarization of macrophages is mediated by cytokines and cell vesicles
or other factors.

