Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting CTC phenotypes: insights into mechanisms of breast
cancer dormancy


Uncovering phenotypes of patient-derived Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs)
offers the promise to dissect CTC heterogeneity in relation to metastatic
competence, and to determine biomarkers of therapeutic utility for
improved treatment. However, it is still unknown whether and how CTCs
differ in their capacity to circulate while maintaining metastatic
potential. Rates of CTC survival are highly variable, lasting less than
few hours in some patients but in the order of decades in others. This
can lead to many questions for yet unexplored mechanisms of CTCs
responsible for dormancy, along with their properties and biomarker
functionalities.We hypothesized that breast cancer CTC subsets possessing
markers of pluripotency avoid organ arrest with extreme efficiency by the
concomitant presence of quiescence and stem cell properties; and that
expression of urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) and beta-1
integrin (1int), two biomarkers known to be directly implicated in tumor
cell dormancy, are relevant in controlling the recurrence of breast
cancer brain metastasis (BCBM). First, we isolated CTC subsets not
expressing the epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM-negative CTCs),
and characterized these subsets using DEPArrayTM, a new CTC platform able
to dissect CTC heterogeneity at a single-cell level, thus interrogating
the smallest functional unit of cancer. We captured
EpCAM-negative/CD45-/CD44+/CD24- breast cancer CTC subsets that possessed
combinatorial uPAR and 1int expression using multiparametric flow
cytometry. Second, CTC subsets grew in vitro and were further
characterized by DEPArrayTM. Markers expression was confirmed by confocal
microscopy with subsets possessing a specific breast cancer gene
profiling. Third, EpCAM-negative CTC subsets (uPAR+/1int+ and
uPAR-/1int-) were interrogated for human embryonic stem cell markers by
RT2 PCR arrays. Gene expression profiling was consistently distinct among
uPAR+/1int+ vs. uPAR-/1int- CTC subsets and dependent upon patients BCBM
status: expression of genes implicated in cell cycle progression (e.g.,
CDK42, CDK1), angiogenesis (e.g., FGF-2), and pluripotency (e.g., KLF4)
was >30-fold higher than controls. Third, CTC subsets gene patterns
isolated from patients with BCBM possessed RT2 profiles that were
strikingly distinct from ones derived from patients with no BCBM. Of
note, gene expression for RIF-1, a protein that counteracts actions of
the breast cancer suppressor BRCA1, was highest (>50-fold) with distinct
RIF-1 nuclear patterns in BCBM CTC subsets.In summary, we have linked
EpCAM-negative uPAR/1int CTC subsets and their properties to clinical
BCBM; and will assess the therapeutic inhibition of uPAR/1int CTC
biomarkers on BCBM development and its timing. Deciphering the relevance
of uPAR/1int as key CTC biomarkers of dormancy vs. metastatic competence
will elucidate CTC mechanisms responsible for BCBM onset.

