Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tid1 mediating cancer initiating properties of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma


Background: Accumulating studies suggest that the existence of cancer
initiating cells (CICs) may explain the results of chemoresistant and
radioresistant from cancer treatment and the incidence of metastasis and
recurrence. Previously, we demonstrate that Tid1 plays a crucial role as
a tumor suppressor during head and neck cancer tumorigenesis. In
addition, the protein level of Tid1 is negatively correlated to the
overall stage, survival and recurrence of both head and neck cancer and
breast cancer patients. Moreover, we also observe that glucose regulatory
protein 78 (GRP78), one of the Tid1-interacting protein, mediates the
stemness properties of head and neck cancer-initiating cells (HN-CICs) in
our recent studies. Nevertheless, the role of Tid1 in CICs properties
remains elusive.Methods: We have identified the HN-CICs from head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and established HNSCC
xenograft-derived cell lines by sphere formation assay. To further
investigate whether Tid1 mediates the stemness properties of HN-CICs, we
will overexpress or knockdown the Tid1 expression to determine the sphere
formation ability and the expression of stemness markers, GRP78, Oct-4
and Nanog, of HN-CICs. The oncogenic ability of the HN-CICs mediated by
Tid1 expression will also be examined by both in vitro and in vivo
assays. Further, we have successfully established mice with epithelial
specific ablation of Tid1 by crossing Tid1flx/flx mice with transgenic
K5-Cre mice. Consequently, the mutant and control mice have been subject
to carcinogen 4-NQO (4-Nitroquinoline 1-oxide) treatment within drinking
water for monitoring head and neck cancer progression.
Immunohistochemistry staining was applied to examine the expression
profile of stemness/differentiation markers within tumors formed in
mutant and wild type mice.Results: Up to date, we discovered that mutant
mice treated with 4-NQO displayed faster incident of neoplasia in oral
cavity and reduction of body weight in comparison to control mice under
same administration. In addition, the histopathological analyses showed
that the tumors formed in mutant mice were squamous cell carcinoma
whereas tumors formed in wild type mice were benign squamous papilloma.
Further, we observed that the expression of Tid1 protein was down
regulated in the HN-CICs and SAS xenograft-derived cell lines comparing
to the HNSCCs by microarray gene expression analysis and immunoblotting
assay.Conclusion: Deficient of Tid1 can accelerate the incident of
tumorigenesis and tumor progression mediated by 4-NQO treated mice model.
We also found that Tid1 expression was negative correlated to the
stemness properties. Therefore, Tid1 may play an important role of
controlling stemness properties. However, the molecular mechanisms
mediated by Tid1 to regulate the progression of HNSCC remain elusive.
Further research effort is needed in this area.

