Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Local chemotherapy and chemoradiation therapy using INCeRT
brachytherapy implants in cancer models


Systemic chemotherapy which is often used in combination with radiation
therapy in the treatment of prostate cancer, often leads to severe
systemic toxicities. Localized chemotherapy has the potential of
delivering a high and effective dose directly to the tumor while
minimizing adverse toxicities to healthy tissue. An efficient local
delivery system should be able to deliver the therapeutic drug at the
diseased site in a slow and sustained manner with minimal systemic
toxicity. We have fabricated an Implantable Nanoplatform for
Chemo-Radiation Therapy (INCeRT) spacer that can deliver planned,
localized, and sustained delivery of a chemotherapeutic and imaging
agent. Delivery of this new chemotherapy modality can leverage technology
used in a routine clinical brachytherapy procedure that uses image
guidance to insert radioactive seeds into the prostate using thin
needles. The current procedure uses inert plastic spacers with no
therapeutic impact to guide the spatial delivery of the radioactive
seeds.This work presents the fabrication, characterization, and
therapeutic benefit of a docetaxel loaded spacer in the treatment of
prostate-tumored mice. First, INCeRT spacers were fabricated and
characterized using optical imaging to track free dye and multi-sized
fluorescent silica nanoparticles from spacers in vivo to optimize the
temporal and spatial properties of diffusion distribution from a
degrading biocompatible polymer matrix. In vivo optical imaging of
spacers doped with free dye demonstrates a spatial and temporal release
profile appropriate for sustained localized exposure of a
chemotherapeutic during the course of brachytherapy. The optimized spacer
were loaded with chemotherapeutics and inserted intratumorally for
efficacy and toxicity of the localized chemotherapy in comparison to the
standard systemic dosing. The in vivo results suggest that local
chemotherapy is not only feasible, but as effective as current treatment
options. An intratumoral free docetaxel spacer showed to be as effective
as a one-time equivalent dose of the clinically used systemic taxotere
without the associated adverse toxicities. This new localized
chemo-treatment shows great potential for increasing tumor regression
while decreasing systemic toxicity. Further experiments for studying the
combined chemo-radiation therapy are underway. This demonstrates that
local chemotherapy and chemo-radiation therapy has the potential to be a
superior treatment option to current chemo-treatments.This work was
supported partially by ARMY/ W81XWH-12-1-0154, NSF-DGE-0965843,
HHS/1U54CA151881 CORE1 and a seed grant from the BWH Biomedical Research
Institute.

