Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IKK at the crossroad between inflammation, oxidative stress and
lung carcinogenesis


Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide. We
previously demonstrated that IKK kinase dead knock-in (IkkK44A/K44A, KA)
mice spontaneously develop lung SCCs, which is associated with IKK
reduction and increased inflammation. Currently, lung adenocarcinoma
(ADC) has surpassed SCC. Although downregulation of IKK has been reported
in lung ADCs, the role of IKK is not clarified yet. Here, we attempted to
verify whether IKK inactivation plays a role in development of lung
adenocarcinomas (ADCs). K-rasG12D (Kras) mice are a well-established lung
ADC model. Thus, we generated K-rasG12D;IkkK44A/K44A (Kras;KA) and
K-rasG12D;Ikkf/f (Kras;FF) mice and activated oncogenic K-rasG12D with
intratracheal injection of adenovirus carrying the cre recombinase gene
in these mice. At 44.5 months after treatment, both Kras;KA and Kras;FF
mice showed enhanced bronchial hyperproliferation and increased number of
lung tumors than Kras mice. The histology showed that lung tumors from
both mice can be classified into ADCs, while no SCCs were found in
Kras;KA and Kras;FF mice. Finally, Kras;FF mice had shorter life span due
to labored breathing than Kras mice. Thus, IKK plays an important role in
lung ADCs as well as SCCs. It is well known that the oncogene activation
such as Kras can induce a senescence program to suppress the progression
of benign tumors. We found that IKK loss diminished Kras-induced
senescence, given the results from senescence-associated -gal assay and
Ki67 staining. We previously reported that inflammation is required for
development of lung SCCs in KA mice. Macrophages were significantly
accumulated in the lung of Kras;FF mice as well. In general, inflammation
can cause oxidative stress. In line with this notion, the microarray
analysis revealed that several antioxidant genes were markedly
downregulated, while expression of some reactive oxygen species
(ROS)-generating genes was increased in the lung tissues from Kras;FF
mice compared to Kras mice. In consistent, IKK depletion was correlated
with increased level of ROS in lung tumors, which resulted in further
oxidative DNA damage. Interestingly, tumors from Kras mice also showed
IKK reduction compared to WT lungs. Taken together, these findings
suggest that IKK reduction can promote Kras-driven lung tumorigenesis
through its interplay between inflammation and oxidative stress.
Inflammation and oxidative stress can sustain and exacerbate each other,
leading to a vicious cycle of tumor-prone microenvironment. It is evident
that IKK plays a crucial role in inflammation from massive
investigations. The role of IKK in oxidative stress, however, is not
clarified yet. Thus, our investigation of the role of IKK on lung ADC
development in the context of modulating oxidative stress will provide
better strategies to break the vicious cycle between inflammation,
oxidative stress and lung tumorigenesis and noble therapeutic targets for
treatment.

