Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The functional role of insulin-like growth factor binding
protein-2 in esophageal adenocarcinoma chemoresistance


Despite improved understanding of esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC)
progression and advances in endoscopic surveillance and multimodality
treatment, patients commonly present with advanced stage disease and
demonstrate resistance to therapy, with complete response rates below
40%. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of resistance is crucial for
predicting and overcoming this resistance.IGFBP2 is a member of the IGFBP
family of proteins that has been shown to modulate both insulin growth
factor (IGF) and integrin signaling and is a mediator of cell growth,
invasion and resistance in other tumor types. Because these pathways have
been implicated in esophageal cancer growth and progression, we evaluated
the functional role of IGFBP2 in EAC tumorigenesis and chemoresistance.
High IGFBP2 expression was observed in a subset of EAC patients and was
found to be significantly higher in patients with shorter disease-free
intervals as well as in treatment-resistant EACs as compared to
chemonaive EACs.To evaluate the role of IGFBP2 as a potential modulator
of chemoresistance in vitro, IGFBP2-expressing Flo-1 EAC cells were
pretreated with siRNA to IGFBP2 while non-expressing OE33 EAC cells were
stably-transfected with an IGFBP2 expression construct or pre-treated
with exogenous recombinant IGFBP2 followed by 3-day treatment with
chemotherapy. All experiments were performed in serum-deprived and
serum-replete conditions and were assessed using WST-1 cell proliferation
reagent.IGFBP2 siRNA inhibition sensitized Flo-1 cells to cisplatin in
the presence of serum but exogenous treatment or ectopic expression of
IGFBP2 in OE33 cells did not alter their chemosensitivity. Immunoblot
analyses of Flo-1 cells treated with cisplatin showed a dose-dependent
reduction in IGFBP2 expression but a dose-dependent induction of ERK and
AKT phosphorylation at 24 hours post-treatment. Knockdown of IGFBP2
blocked IGF1 and CDDP-induced ERK activation at 15 minutes and 3-days
post-treatment, respectively. In contrast, IGFBP2 knockdown resulted in
the activation of AKT and was further enhanced by the addition of IGF1 up
to 24 hours post-treatment. In an attempt to augment siIGFBP2-induced
CDDP chemosensitization, we pretreated Flo-1 cells with either a MEK1/2
inhibitor, selumetinib or trametinib, or the AKT inhibitor, AKT Inhibitor
VIII, in repeat cytotoxicity assays. The MEK1/2 inhibitors increased
sensitivity in serum-replete conditions while AKT Inhibitor VIII
increased sensitivity in serum-deprived conditions as compared to CDDP
alone, IGFBP2 knockdown alone, and the combination of IGFBP2 knockdown
and CDDP. These results suggest that targeted modulation of IGFBP2 and
either the MAPK or PI3K/AKT signaling pathway in IGFBP2-overexpressing
EAC tumors may be an effective approach for sensitizing resistant tumors
to standard-of-care chemotherapy treatment options.

