Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-invasive cellular nano-permeabilization to enhance drug
delivery and improve therapeutic outcome in solid tumors: Mitigating the
path to destruction


Quantum Magnetic Resonance Therapy (QMRT) is a device-mediated,
innovative therapeutic modality for cancer, currently in the clinical
stage of development. This platform technology can also be used to
deliver an electromagnetic force with strong, embedded, variable radio
signals to induce Focused Resonance Nano-permeabilization (FORN) to
selectively target multiple lesions in the whole body with parenteral or
oral drugs used in standard of care cancer treatment. Transient
permeabilization of cells by radiofrequency (RF) mediated pulses to
target lesions allows drug(s) to be optimally internalized based on
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic parameters like drug molecular
weight, peak plasma concentration of drug/active metabolite and drug wash
out time. FORN has been used in a pilot study in a variety of solid
tumors including treatment refractory pediatric medulloblastoma,
recurrent adult glioblastoma, metastatic breast, ovarian, nasopharyngeal
carcinoma and metastatic osteosarcoma, in patients who were administered
protocol-driven chemotherapy under routine standard of care management.
The combination of chemotherapy with FORN significantly reduced
drug-induced cytotoxicity primarily associated with myelosuppression and
other commonly encountered adverse effects during conventional treatment.
Improved clinical benefit and efficacy was established using imaging
criteria (MRI and or PET-CT based PERCIST 1.0 criteria), biomarker
evaluation as well as a comparison of chemotherapy cycles that were
previously administered without concurrent FORN.All solid tumors,
irrespective of pathological sub-type or grade, can be resonated with
customized, high, instantaneous magnetic fields and radio frequency (RF),
followed by nano second signals which penetrate only resonating cells to
induce cellular nanopermeabilization, non-invasively. This protocol
allows for extremely accurate QMR dosing for therapeutic purposes. FORN
can be achieved using a safe, non-ionizing extraneous RF and MR source to
permeate tractable and intractable tumors by creating molecular
dimension-specific transient pores in the cell membrane of tumor cells.
Both large and small molecule (oral and parenteral) therapeutics can be
safely targeted and delivered using FORN. It is known that
electroporation of cultured cells potentiates cytotoxicity of various
chemotherapy agents and other targeted molecules. This potentiation can
be highly customized using FORN and the pharmacokinetics of any drug
administered. FORN technology can potentiate antitumor effectiveness of
drugs several fold and can be precisely localized and targeted without
implanting any electrodes, probes or invasive nano-particles to deliver
drug payloads.

