Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Definition of the Ewing sarcoma specific oncomir-1 targetome


MicroRNAs (miRNA) serve to fine-tune gene expression and thus play an
important regulatory role in tissue specific gene networks. The
identification and validation of miRNA target genes in a given tissue
still poses a significant problem, since the presence of a seed sequence
in the 3UTR of an mRNA and its expression modulation upon forced ectopic
expression of the miRNA do not reliably predict regulation under
physiological conditions. Here, we used a combination of AGO2 pull-down
experiments by PAR-CLIP - to enrich and sequence RISC-associated RNAs -
and of RNAseq upon miRNA depletion by ectopic sponge expression, to
identify the targetome of miR17-92 in Ewing sarcoma (ES) cells. The
chimeric oncoprotein EWS-FLI1 is the driving pathogenic force in ES. As
an aberrant ETS transcription factor it directly deregulates a multitude
of genes related to proliferation control and differentiation. Recently,
we reported on the EWS-FLI1 microRNA (miRNA) signature based on knockdown
experiments in ES cell lines and on differential expression in primary
tumors versus mesenchymal stem cells. Comparison of both datasets
revealed miR20a-3p to be the top EWS-FLI1 activated miRNA. MiR-20a
belongs to the miR17-92 cluster, also known as oncomir-1, which is one of
the most potent oncogenic miRNAs. The whole cluster is among the small
number of miRNAs down-regulated upon knockdown of EWS-FLI1 in multiple ES
cell lines. Since feedback loops exists between the E2F transcription
factor family and miR-17-92 and between EWS-FLI1 and E2F3, we sought to
investigate the role of this miRNA cluster in ES.We found a significant
enrichment of PAR-CLIP hits for members of the miR-17-92 cluster, in the
3UTRs of genes up-regulated in response to mir-17-92 specific sponge
expression. Among them we consistently identified known (i.e. CTGF, MXD1,
CYLD1) and a multitude of so far unknown targets of the oncomir-1 cluster
in ES in three PAR-CLIP experiments. Preliminary experiments using 3UTRs
of select novel candidate genes in gene reporter assays showed
up-regulation of luciferase activity upon transfection of a sponge
specific to miR-17-92 and 20a, but not to unrelated miR-9 and 10b. Site
directed mutagenesis of seed sequences in the 3UTR of these candidate
genes will be used for further validation.This study provides an example
for the comprehensive definition of the targetome for a defined group of
miRNAs under physiological conditions.This study was supported by the 7th
framework program of the European Commission (FP7-259348, ASSET) and the
Austrian Science Fund FWF (24708-B21)

