Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of function of two closely linked tumor suppressors
contributes to biologic aggressiveness in endometrial cancers:
Co-mutation of CTCF and ZFHX3


Therapies for recurrent or advanced endometrioid endometrial cancer (EEC)
are ineffective, and no targeted therapies, or genetic markers to
identify high-risk patients exist. There is an urgent need to identify
factors contributing to aggressiveness.We performed whole exome
sequencing of 8 early stage endometrial cancers that subsequently
recurred. Two chromosome 16q tumor suppressor genes, CTCF and ZFHX3, were
identified as candidates associated with recurrence. The endometrial
Cancer Genome Atlas proved that both of these genes are frequently
mutated in EEC.To further explore the relationship between CTCF and ZFHX3
mutations and ECC tumorigenesis/aggressiveness, targeted deep sequencing
of both genes was performed on 541 EEC tumors. We relied on
microsatellite typing and a novel Bayesian method to assess copy number
alterations (CNAs). The Bayesian method's use of deep sequencing data to
predict CNAs showed 97% concordance with microsatellite typing.The
overall mutation rate (SNVs and small indels) was 24% and 18% for CTCF
and ZFHX3, respectively. The majority of mutations were loss of function
(stop, frameshift or splice site), with CTCF at 89% and ZFHX3 at 59% loss
of function defects. There was a significant excess of mutational
co-occurrence in both genes (P = 0.003). Deletion/CNA was also common: 79
of 497 informative tumors had CNAs involving both genes (16%). Taken
together, the high rate of co-mutation and co-deletion suggests selective
advantage for inactivation of both tumor suppressors.Patients with tumors
having mutation or CNA of both CTCF and ZFHX3 had significantly shorter
recurrence-free survival (RFS) compared to wt (P = 0.007, HR = 2.4, 95%CI
= 1.3-4.4). Mutation/loss of both genes was significantly associated with
features portending aggressive disease: high grade (P60 years, P = 0.02).
There was no association with stage.Although our ability to determine the
contributions of CTCF and ZFHX3 individually was limited by sample size
and their frequent co-occurrence, we assessed them separately as
independent prognostic markers. It is noteworthy that mutation/CNA of
ZFHX3 significantly correlated with shorter RFS (P = 0.003, HR = 2.4,
95%CI = 1.4-4.0), whereas no such association was seen with CTCF. In a
multivariable analysis including grade, stage, LVSI and therapy, ZFHX3
mutation/CNA remained an independent prognostic marker (P = 0.04). We are
currently validating these results in a larger independent cohort.Here we
describe emerging markers that could be useful for identifying high-risk
patients. Our data point to what may be a complex interplay between the
ZFHX3 and CTCF tumor suppressors in EEC tumorigenesis.

