Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A targeted bisulfite sequencing method combining
microfluidics-based PCR with Next-Gen sequencing


DNA methylation plays an important role in normal organismal development
and in cellular differentiation in higher organisms. Changes in DNA
methylation have been shown to correlate with disease risk, response to
therapy and survival in a wide range of clinical conditions such as
cancer and autoinflammatory diseases. Recent advances in next-generation
sequencing and microarray technology have made it possible to map DNA
methylation genome-wide, at a high resolution. However, these genomic
assays tend to be costly, labor-intensive and impractical in the clinic.
Thus, DNA methylation assays that measure a small number of genomic
regions in large cohorts are needed for validating biomarker candidates
discovered from genomic studies. For this reason, we have developed a
targeted bisulfite sequencing platform for simultaneously measuring DNA
methylation in multiple loci with multiple samples by combining
microfluidics-based technology with next generation sequencing. First,
post-bisulfite PCR primers for each target region were designed using our
proprietary program Bisulfite Primer Seeker, and then experimentally
validated using a standard genomic control. Primers which pass the
validation were used for the subsequent target amplification. Target
amplification were performed using Fluidigm Access Array 48.48 which
allows parallel PCR reactions for 48 samples by 48 single-plex assays. An
attractive aspect of this platform is that relatively small quantities of
template are required (50 ng/sample). Assays can also be multiplexed to
improve throughput. Furthermore, as with many targeted approaches, index
or barcoding tags can be incorporated into the universal adapter regions
of the PCR product enabling the pooling of samples before direct
sequencing. Using this platform we have evaluated 9 genomic loci with 9
artificial mixed samples containing different methylation levels. Results
showed the target bisulfite sequencing platform to be robust and
reproducible. The methylation value between the technical replicates were
highly correlated. Each of the amplicons was covered by a thousand or
more reads, making the detection sensitivity reach down to the low
methylation levels. Compared with other target bisulfite sequencing
methods, our assay has several advantages. First, it uses relatively
small amounts of gDNA as input, making it practical for most clinical
samples. Secondly the workflow is simple, straightforward and can be
automated. Finally, it avoids the complexity and difficulties of
multiplex PCR by utilizing microfluidics-based single-plex PCR. All these
features make it an ideal platform for DNA methylation biomarker
validation.

