Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of macrophage behavior by 4-dimensional label
free, quantitative holographic imaging


Introduction:Macrophages perform a wide range of tasks, including
bacterial suppression, tumor suppression, immune-stimulation, tissue
repair, angiogenesis, and cellular debris phagocytosis Behavior is
controlled by a large number of chemo-stimulants, and broadly are
classified into two polarization groups, M1 (classically activated,
pro-inflammatory) and M2 (alternatively activated, anti-inflammatory).
Understanding the macrophage phenotype is essential in the development of
pharmacological agents designed to influence macrophage behavior. Due to
the plethora of macrophage stimulants, it is desirable to do analysis
under label-free conditions.Materials and Methods:The murine macrophage
cell line, J774A.1 was analyzed untreated (M0), stimulated with LPS to
drive M1, and stimulated with IL-4 to drive M2. Efficacy of the
stimulations was monitored by PCR analysis of the expression levels of
iNOS and TNF-Alpha (up-regulated in the M1 state) and Arginase-1 and
IL-10 (up-regulated in the M2 state). Imaging data was obtained on a
holographic imaging cytometer Holomonitor M4 (Phase Holographic Imaging,
Lund, Sweden). The instrument permits acquisition of time-lapse
holographic image sets of unstained cells in standard vessels placed in
the incubator. Images are segmented, and quantitative features are
recorded for individual cells, including optical volume, thickness, area
amongst others. Positional information includes X and Y positions, as
well as X and Y center of mass. Data can be presented as positional track
maps, position vs. feature graphs, and feature vs. feature graphs. We
also obtained time-lapse videos and generated 4-dimensional (X-pos.,
Y-pos., cell height and time) plots in ImageJ software.Results:In
untreated cells, we were able to observe the morphological and behavioral
changes in cells involved in the phagocytic process. These include
elongation and development of bilateral symmetry of the cells, and
formation of podosomes involved in the phagocytosis of cellular remnants
- all hallmarks of the M1 polarization state. We detected the same
effects in cells treated with LPS under conditions known to induce M1,
but without the influence of target cells. Cells present an oscillating
phenotype, which we believe was caused by the redistribution of the
center of mass within the cell as the polarity of the cell reverses. In
Cartesian time course plots and 4D images, M1 polarized cells present
linear tracking profiles. Cells treated with IL4 under conditions known
to induce M2, maintained radial symmetry observable in cell images and
videos. In Cartesian time course plots and 4D images, M2 polarized cells
presented initial starburst patterns, suggesting oscillations with
rotations occurring around the center of mass during
cycles.Conclusions:Recently developed label-free imaging techniques
provide a new tool for classifying macrophages based on cellular behavior.

