Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary sugar induces tumorigenesis in mammary gland partially
through 12 lipoxygenase pathway


Background: Compelling evidence from numerous epidemiological studies
worldwide shows that high-sugar diets are associated with increased
breast cancer risk, but the data is not wholly consistent and the
molecular mechanisms remain unclear. One proposed mechanism for the role
of sugar in cancer development involves inflammation. Bioactive lipids,
especially cyclooxygenases and lipoxygenases (LOXs) metabolites of
arachidonic acid, are known to be involved in inflammation and cancers.
Here we examined the effect of sucrose enriched diet in the development
of primary and metastatic breast tumor and relevant molecular mechanism
primarily focusing on 12-LOX pathway. Methods: Mice bearing three
different types of breast tumors were fed with sucrose-enriched diets,
and the primary tumors and lung metastasis were measured. The levels of
12- LOX protein expression and its arachidonate metabolite 12-HETE were
determined in both tumor tissues from the mice and breast cancer cells in
vitro. Results: A diet with 125 g/kg sucrose, a concentration equivalent
to the average sugar consumption of American population (70
lb/person/year), notably shortened the breast tumorigenesis in
MMTV-ErbB2/neu mice with increase of tumor incidence by 77%. Sucrose
enriched-diets (125 g/kg) promoted the development of primary breast
tumors in mice bearing mouse breast cancer 4T1 cells with an average
tumor weight of 389.464.2 mg in the control animals vs. 534.090.5 mg in
sucrose fed animals. The tumor weight was increased by 2.2-fold in mice
injected with human triple negative breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells upon
sucrose diet feeding. Further, sucrose diet (125 g/kg) potentiated lung
metastasis of 4T1 mouse mammary tumor evidenced by increasing the average
numbers of lung nodules per mouse from 6.62.2 in control group to 13.05.0
in 125 g/kg sucrose group. The increased tumorigenicity of sucrose
appears to be consistently associated with up-regulation of 12-LOX
protein expression and 12-HETE production within the tumor tissues across
the three breast tumorigenesis models. Additionally, 12-LOX and 12-HETE
were induced in the glucose (30 mM) treated MDA-MB-231 cells and 12-HETE
promoted MDA-MB-231 cell growth, invasion and migration. Proliferation of
MDA-MB-231 cells cultured in 3-D matrigel was stimulated by glucose
treatment, which was abrogated with the presence of 12-LOX inhibitor,
Baicalein. Conclusion: Our data provides a strong evidence that added
sugar (sucrose) accelerates the development of breast cancer partially
through up-regulating expression of 12-LOX and production of 12-HETE.
Therefore, dietary sugar induced 12-LOX signaling may play an important
role in increased incidence for breast cancer that is associated with a
high-carbohydrate diet and could be a promising target for intervention
and risk-reducing strategies for breast cancer.

