Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progesterone promotes estrogen induced mammary tumorigenesis
through the activation of nodal and notch signaling


Nodal and Notch are considered to be important embryonic morphogens,
regulating cell - cell communication, determining left - right asymmetry
and in formation of the mesoderm. Cellular processes in embryogenesis can
be compared to processes occurring during tumorigenesis. Nodal has been
shown to re emerge in aggressive triple negative breast carcinomas, and
Notch is known to promote breast cancer. The role of Nodal and Notch in
breast carcinomas is being studied; however hormonal regulation of theses
two cancer-promoting genes is unknown. Ovarian hormones Estrogen (E) and
Progesterone (P) play a vital role in the normal development and function
of breast tissue, while extensive exposure to these hormones increases
the risk of breast cancer. Studies conducted by the Women's Health
Initiative (WHI) have demonstrated that combined Hormone Replacement
Therapy (HRT) increases breast cancer risk. The objective of this study
is to determine whether P promotes E induced mammary tumorigenesis
through the activation of Nodal and Notch signaling. To study the
molecular mechanism, MCF-7 cells were cultured and treated with hormones:
E, P, E+P and E+Mifepristone (MP - a progesterone antagonist). MTS assay
for cellular proliferation, PCR array for gene expression, and western
blot for protein expression, were performed. MTS assay showed increased
cell proliferation of MFC-7 hormone treatment E+P when compared to
control. PCR array analysis showed significant alteration of genes
associated with Nodal signaling, specifically Lefty in E+MP treatment,
protein expression analysis showed activation of Notch and up -
regulation of its downstream targets HES1 and HEY1 with E and P
individual and combination treatments while it was down regulated in E+MP
treatment. Based on our findings, we suggest that P mediates E induced
mammary tumorigenesis through the activation of Nodal and Notch
signaling, proposing a possible crosstalk between both pathways in the
development and progression of breast cancer.

