Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mobilizing prostate cancer cells from the endosteal niche by
targeting the SDF-1/CXCR4 axis


Metastatic prostate cancer cells preferentially home to bone, and
skeletal metastases are present in approximately 90% of patients upon
autopsy. Our lab was the first to show that prostate cancer cells compete
with hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) for space within the endosteal
niche. The HSC niche is located on the surface of endosteal osteoblasts,
where HSCs are kept in a slow-cycling, protective state. The niche also
provides prostate cancer cells with a chemoprotective environment in
which they can remain dormant for an extended period of time, even
decades. C-X-C chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) is required for HSC
recruitment to the HSC niche. Osteoblasts secrete stromal cell derived
factor 1 (SDF-1, also known as CXCL12), the ligand for CXCR4, which
attracts HSCs to the niche via a chemotactic gradient. CXCR4 is also
expressed by disseminated prostate cancer cells and is required for
prostate cancer cells homing to bone. HSCs can be mobilized from the
niche into the bloodstream physiologically via infection or stress and
pharmacologically via proteins like granulocyte-colony stimulating factor
(G-CSF) or small molecule inhibitors like AMD3100 (plerixafor). AMD3100,
which antagonizes CXCR4, is capable of mobilizing both HSCs and prostate
cancer cells from the niche. When combined with AMD3100, docetaxel (the
standard of care for prostate cancer) is more effective at killing tumor
cells than when given as a single agent. This indicates that mobilization
of disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) from the endosteal niche by targeting
the SDF-1/CXCR4 axis might cause these cells to be more sensitive to
chemotherapy in patients. This strategy would theoretically kill DTCs,
which, when they become metastatic lesions, lead to most of the morbidity
and mortality that affects prostate cancer patients. We are engaged in a
Phase 0 clinical trial in metastatic prostate cancer patients to test
this strategy in human patients. To complement the human trial, we are
testing several CXCR4 inhibitors combined with G-CSF and docetaxel. We
are able to detect CTCs in human patients, as well as CTCs and DTCs in
mice via several techniques, and will use this technology as a readout
for the clinical trial, as well as the preclinical studies.

