Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of glioblastoma tumorsphere by combination of
2-deoxyglucose and metformin


The treatment failure of glioblastoma (GBM) is thought to be the presence
of refractory cancer cells. It has been suggested that deprivation of
tumor bioenergetics by inhibition of multiple energy pathways could be an
effective new therapeutic approach for various human tumors. However, the
effectiveness of this idea has not been evaluated in GBM tumorspher (TS)
model. We hypothesized that the dual inhibition of glycolysis and
oxidative phosphorylation could suppress GBM TS effectively. We evaluate
the effect of 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG), metformin alone, and their
combination in the comparison of temozolomide. The viability of GBM TS
was tested in different conditions, and protein expression related to
adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK)-mammalian target
of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway were examined. The influence of combination
treatment on cytotoxicity, stemness and invasion properties of GBM TSs
were evaluated with sphere formation assay and 3-demensional culture
system. Glucose metabolism was checked with 18fluorodeoxyglucose (18FDG)
positron emission tomography (PET) scan. Microarray was performed and its
results were analyzed with gene set enrichment analysis. Lastly, animal
experiment was performed with mouse orthotopic xenograft model in
different conditions. Viability of GBM TS were not decreased by any
single or combination treatments of 2-DG and metformin. However,
mTOR-related proteins were down-regulated with AMPK-independent manner.
Sphere was not formed with 2DG, metformin combination treatment and the
proteins related to stemness were less expressed as well. Invasion
capacity of GBM TS was dramatically inhibited by combination treatment in
the 3D invasion model assay. PET scan showed the radioactivity of 18FDG
uptake was decreased in the TS which was treated by combination drugs.
Transcriptome assay with gene set enrichment analysis showed several
genes related to extracellular matrix and adhesion, cellular metabolism
were turned off or turned on after combination treatment. Combination of
2-DG and metformin showed survival benefit, and the examination of their
autopsied brain revealed decreased invasion of GBM TS. The combination of
2-DG and metformin did not show cytotoxicity for GBM TS. But, dual
inhibition (2DG and metformin) effectively decreased the stemness and
invasion capacity of GBM TS, and showed potential survival benefit in
mouse orthotopic xenograft model experiment. We believe this dural
inhibition (2DG and metformin) would be helpful in the treatment of GBM
patients by targeting GBM TS.

