Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Secreted serglycin in tumor microenvironment promotes tumor
malignancies in a CD44-dependent manner


Tumor microenvironment (TME) plays an important role in cancer
progression; however, the communication between TME and cancer cells
remains largely unclear. CD44, a type I cell surface receptor functioning
in cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix interactions, has been
implicated in tumor formation and progression. Using gain-of-function and
loss-of-function approaches, we report in this study that serglycin
(SRGN), a glycoprotein secreted from cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs)
as well as aggressive cancer cells, works to promote the malignant
behaviors of non-small cell lung cancer cells through its interaction
with CD44. We showed that SRGN promotes cell transformation and tumor
formation and metastasis using in vitro and in vivo tumorigenic assays.
Furthermore, we showed that SRGN induced lung cancer cell stemness in a
CD44-dependent manner. SRGN enhanced cancer cells sphere formation via
Nanog induction, accompanied with increased drug resistance and
resistance to anoikis. We also demonstrated that SRGN promotes cell
migratory activity through promoting epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) and enhancing adhesions turnover by upregulating vimentin
expression and SRC activity via CD44/NF-KB/Claudin-1 axis. In support,
Claudin-1 expression was tightly associated with SRGN expression in
primary lung cancer tissues (p Tumor microenvironment (TME) plays an
important role in cancer progression; however, the communication between
TME and cancer cells remains largely unclear. CD44, a type I cell surface
receptor functioning in cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix
interactions, has been implicated in tumor formation and progression.
Using gain-of-function and loss-of-function approaches, we report in this
study that serglycin (SRGN), a glycoprotein secreted from
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) as well as aggressive cancer cells,
works to promote the malignant behaviors of non-small cell lung cancer
cells through its interaction with CD44. We showed that SRGN promotes
cell transformation and tumor formation and metastasis using in vitro and
in vivo tumorigenic assays. Furthermore, we showed that SRGN induced lung
cancer cell stemness in a CD44-dependent manner. SRGN enhanced cancer
cells sphere formation via Nanog induction, accompanied with increased
drug resistance and resistance to anoikis. We also demonstrated that SRGN
promotes cell migratory activity through promoting epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and enhancing adhesions turnover by upregulating
vimentin expression and SRC activity via CD44/NF-KB/Claudin-1 axis. In
support, Claudin-1 expression was tightly associated with SRGN expression
in primary lung cancer tissues (p < 0.0001). In summary, we demonstrate
that the crosstalk between tumor cells and TME promotes malignant
phenotypes through the interaction of tumor-borne CD44 and CAF- or
tumor-derived SRGN, suggesting that targeting CD44 or its ligands may
represent an attractive strategy for development of cancer therapy.

