Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDKs inhibitor: potential monotherapy for treatment of
triple-negative breast cancer


Background: Limitless replicative potential is one of the hallmarks of
cancer which occur due to dysregulated cell cycle. Cyclin dependent
kinases (CDKs) are major regulators of mammalian cell cycle, which are
often hyperactivated in cancer. Therefore, inhibition of cyclin dependent
kinases represents an attractive therapeutic approach in cancer therapy.
Dinaciclib is a CDK1, CDK2, CDK5 and CDK9 inhibitor, currently being
tested in clinical trials in patients with advanced malignancies. The
goal of this project was to determine the efficacy and the mechanisms of
action of Dinaciclib in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) by using
patient derived xenografts (PDXs).The study results will provide more
insights in identification of predictive biomarkers that are important
for its clinical development.Methods: The efficacy of Dinaciclib was
determined in 3 TNBC PDXs and 3 established TNBC cell lines by in vitro
cytotoxic assays and calculating the IC50. Colony formation assay was
also performed in 3 dimensional matrigel matrixes to confirm in vitro
cytotoxic assay results. Cell cycle analysis was done using PI staining
to determine the percentage of cells in G2/M phase after Dinaciclib
treatment. Apoptosis analysis was done by Annexin V and PI double
staining using FACS. Effect of CDK1, CDK2, and CDK9 on cell proliferation
and Dinaciclib efficacy was determined by knocking down these proteins
using CRISPER-CAS plasmid. Efficacy of Dinaciclib on tumor growth
inhibition was also determined in vivo by implanting PDX cell lines in
nude mice.Results: All the PDXs and established breast cancer cell lines
tested were sensitive to Dinaciclib as demonstrated by IC50 value ranging
from 1 to 20nM. Dinaciclib effectively inhibited the colony formation in
3D culture in all the PDXs and established breast cancer cell lines at
10nM dose. Dinaciclib significantly caused cell cycle arrest at G2/M
phase after 24 hours of treatment. It also caused apoptosis induction
after 24 hours of treatment. Dinaciclib reduced the CyclinB1,
phospho-CDK1, Survivin and MYC protein levels after 24 hour of treatment
as analyzed by western blotting. Knockdown of CDK1 and CDK2 inhibited
cell proliferation by 30% and 50% in MDA-MB-231 cells in vitro.
Dinaciclib significantly inhibited PDX tumor growth in vivo.Conclusions:
These data suggest that Dinaciclib is effective in inhibiting triple
negative breast cancer growth in vitro and in vivo. Dinaciclib induced
both cell cycle arrests at G2/M phase and apoptosis in breast cancer
cells. Dinaciclib targets multiple proteins like CDK1, CDK2, CyclinB1 and
cMYC, which can be further validated as predictive biomarkers. Dinaciclib
can be used as a potential monotherapy for TNBC patients in clinics.

