Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variable expression of 5-alpha reductase 2 in the aging adult
prostate is regulated by DNA methylation


BACKGROUND:5-alpha reductase type 2 (SRD5A2), an enzyme that is critical
for prostatic development and growth, is utilized as an inhibitory target
by finasteride for patients with bladder outlet obstrution secondary to
BPH. However, we have found that many aging benign prostate tissues do
not express the enzyme. Since the SRD5A2 promoter contains a CpG island,
we hypothesized that somatic methylation of the promoter would be
regulated by DNA methyltransferases leading to suppression of
SRD5A2.METHODS:Benign prostatic tissues from wild-type mice at 3, 6 and
12 months of age were used. In addition, 96 prostate samples from human
male patients who were treated by TURP for bladder outlet obstruction
secondary to BPH were used. Methylation of SRD5A2 promoter was assessed
using Methylated CpG Island Recovery Assay (MIRA). DNMT1 siRNA and
5-AZA-C were used to determine the methylation status of SRD5A2 in benign
prostatic cell line, BPH-1. To determine the effect of CpG methylation,
SRD5A2 promoter-luciferase constructs were methylated in vitro using
M.SssI methylase. Statistical analyses were performed with JMP Pro
version 11 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).RESULTS:We analyzed 96 human
BPH samples from transurethral resection of prostate (TURP) surgeries and
found that absence of SRD5A2 was closely associated with hypermethylation
of the SRD5A2 promoter region. We found that methylation of SRD5A2 was
regulated by DNA methytransferase 1 (DNMT1) and the cytokines, TNF-alpha,
NF-B and IL-6, regulated DNMT1protein expression and thereby indirectly
affected SRD5A2 promoter methylation and gene expression. Suppression of
cytokines inhibited activity of DNMT1, while over-expression of p65 or
treatment with TNF-alpha or IL-6 up-regulated DNMT1. In addition, we
found that methylation of the SRD5A2 promoter and concomitant decrease in
protein expression were closely associated with patient's increasing age
(PBACKGROUND:5-alpha reductase type 2 (SRD5A2), an enzyme that is
critical for prostatic development and growth, is utilized as an
inhibitory target by finasteride for patients with bladder outlet
obstrution secondary to BPH. However, we have found that many aging
benign prostate tissues do not express the enzyme. Since the SRD5A2
promoter contains a CpG island, we hypothesized that somatic methylation
of the promoter would be regulated by DNA methyltransferases leading to
suppression of SRD5A2.METHODS:Benign prostatic tissues from wild-type
mice at 3, 6 and 12 months of age were used. In addition, 96 prostate
samples from human male patients who were treated by TURP for bladder
outlet obstruction secondary to BPH were used. Methylation of SRD5A2
promoter was assessed using Methylated CpG Island Recovery Assay (MIRA).
DNMT1 siRNA and 5-AZA-C were used to determine the methylation status of
SRD5A2 in benign prostatic cell line, BPH-1. To determine the effect of
CpG methylation, SRD5A2 promoter-luciferase constructs were methylated in
vitro using M.SssI methylase. Statistical analyses were performed with
JMP Pro version 11 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).RESULTS:We analyzed 96
human BPH samples from transurethral resection of prostate (TURP)
surgeries and found that absence of SRD5A2 was closely associated with
hypermethylation of the SRD5A2 promoter region. We found that methylation
of SRD5A2 was regulated by DNA methytransferase 1 (DNMT1) and the
cytokines, TNF-alpha, NF-B and IL-6, regulated DNMT1protein expression
and thereby indirectly affected SRD5A2 promoter methylation and gene
expression. Suppression of cytokines inhibited activity of DNMT1, while
over-expression of p65 or treatment with TNF-alpha or IL-6 up-regulated
DNMT1. In addition, we found that methylation of the SRD5A2 promoter and
concomitant decrease in protein expression were closely associated with
patient's increasing age (P<0.05). Finally, in murine prostate tissues,
cytokine levels, DNMT1 and global methylation were all increased in older
mice. Induction of inflammation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulated
the TNFR1/NF-B/IL-6/DNMT1 pathway, leading to hypermethylation of the
SRD5A2 promoter and silencing of SRD5A2, while treatment with both LPS
and TNF-alpha inhibitor reversed this pathway and reactivated
SRD5A2.CONCLUSIONS:Expression of SRD5A2 is not static and ubiquitous in
benign adult prostate tissues.We show that SRD5A2 expression is lacking
in many benign human adult prostate tissues. Methylation of SRD5A2
promoter region, which is regulated by DNMT1, accounts for absence of
SRD5A2 expression in many adult human prostate tissues. Methylation and
expression of SRD5A2 may be used as a gene signature to tailor therapies
for more effective treatment of prostatic diseases.

