Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high through-put bioluminescent assay to monitor the deamidation
of asparagine and isomerization of aspartate residues in therapeutic
proteins and antibodies


Spontaneous degradation reactions such as oxidation, glycation,
deamidation, Isomerization, and racemization are non-enzymatic
modifications and produce functionally damaged species reflecting aging
effect at the molecular level. L-asparagine (Asn) and L-aspartate (Asp)
are among the most unstable residues in proteins- linked to deamidation,
isomerization and racemization Rx. Under physiological conditions,
succinimide-linked deamidation of Asn occurs with t1/2as short as 6 hrs
while that for isoaspartate are generally 10-fold longer. A number of
biological peptides and proteins possess labile Asn and Asp residues and
the formation of IsoAsp at these sites adversely affect their function.
The degradation of Asn and Asp sites via succinimide pathway has
significant effect on protein function. Loss of function associated with
isoAsp formation are found in many biologically critical proteins and is
a major source of antibody instability and micro heterogeneity, Thus it
is critical to accurately determine both the levels and the site of Asn
deamidation in therapeutic antibodies and proteins. Although mass
Spectroscopic platforms have been at the forefront of technologies to
quantitate and identify sites of isoAsp formation, it fails in accurately
determining Asn level and has problems with Asp isomerization due to the
various steps required for sample preparation such as denaturation,
reduction, alkylation, and enzyme digestion of the Ab before analysis
resulting in problems with Asp isomerization and Asn determination
artifacts. Although peptide mapping is the most powerful tool in isoAsp
analyses, it is very time consuming and may itself actually cause sample
degradation during preparation and analysis and is not always practical
when large number of samples are needed for analysis. To improve on and
complement existing technologies, we have developed a bioluminescent,
homogenous, robust, sensitive and easy to use assay to accurately monitor
the deamidation of Asn and isomerization of aspartate. The assay is based
on the use of protein isoaspartate methyltransferase to catalyze the
methylation of isoaspartate using S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) and
resulting in the formation of S-adenosylhomocysteine and methylated
isoaspartate. The assay is very sensitive, it can detect as little as 100
fmol of IsoAsp in as little as 5-10 pmol of proteins.

