Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VX-970, the first-in-class inhibitor of the DNA damage repair
enzyme ATR


Proficient repair of DNA damage is important for cancer cell survival and
is a leading cause for the poor response many patients experience when
treated with DNA-damaging drugs or ionizing radiation. The protein kinase
ataxia telangiectasia mutated and Rad3 related (ATR) regulates an
important DNA damage response pathway that is most commonly activated by
replication stress (RS). RS arises during S-phase when the cell's DNA
replication machinery attempts to copy through an unresolved damage
lesion. Such events are common after cells are treated with DNA-damaging
agents. Unresolved RS often leads to double strand breaks, which in turn
may cause DNA mutations, chromosomal rearrangements or cell death.
Pre-clinical data suggests a reliance on ATR for survival is a common
feature in cancer cells. This may occur when there are defects in other
DNA damage repair pathways or high levels of background RS.VX-970 is the
first potent (Ki Proficient repair of DNA damage is important for cancer
cell survival and is a leading cause for the poor response many patients
experience when treated with DNA-damaging drugs or ionizing radiation.
The protein kinase ataxia telangiectasia mutated and Rad3 related (ATR)
regulates an important DNA damage response pathway that is most commonly
activated by replication stress (RS). RS arises during S-phase when the
cell's DNA replication machinery attempts to copy through an unresolved
damage lesion. Such events are common after cells are treated with
DNA-damaging agents. Unresolved RS often leads to double strand breaks,
which in turn may cause DNA mutations, chromosomal rearrangements or cell
death. Pre-clinical data suggests a reliance on ATR for survival is a
common feature in cancer cells. This may occur when there are defects in
other DNA damage repair pathways or high levels of background RS.VX-970
is the first potent (Ki <0.3nM) and highly selective ATR inhibitor to
enter clinical trials (EUDRACT: 2012-003126-250). In pre-clinical
studies, it markedly increases the cytotoxic activity of multiple DNA
damaging agents across large panels of cancer cell lines. In contrast,
normal cells tolerate inhibition of ATR by activating compensatory repair
signaling for example the pathway mediated by ATM. Defects in this ATM
pathway, most notably as a result of mutations in the TP53 gene that
encodes p53 (a principle substrate for ATM) is found to be a predictive
marker for cell sensitivity in cancer cell lines. In mouse xenograft
models VX-970 strongly potentiates the anti-cancer activity of DNA
damaging drugs that include cisplatin, carboplatin, irinotecan and
gemcitabine. Combinations are generally well tolerated and have been
shown to provide better anti-cancer activity than the cytotoxic alone at
its MTD. In addition, VX-970 has marked cytotoxic activity when combined
with inhibitors of PARP (base excision repair protein) in multiple cancer
cell lines, but is well tolerated by normal cells. Emerging data suggests
that the cancer cell specificity for this combination may again be
associated, at least in part, with defective ATM-p53 pathway signaling.
Finally, VX-970 has potential as a monotherapy since potent single agent
cytotoxic activity is observed in certain cancer cell lines. The basis
for sensitivity to monotherapy may require both defects in alternative
repair pathways and high background replication stress levels.VX-970 is
currently in Phase 1 clinical studies as monotherapy and in combination
with gemcitabine, cisplatin and carboplatin.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

