Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BNC420 is a novel VEGFR3 selective inhibitor, which unlike the
pan-VEGFR inhibitor Sunitinib, suppresses lymphatic metastasis in a model
of metastatic melanoma


The dissemination of cancer cells through the lymphatic system is a
well-known route of metastasis. Studies have implicated the hypoxic tumor
microenvironment as an instigator of tumor cell invasion and metastatic
spread. The use of angiogenesis inhibitors targeting VEGFR2 has been
reported in preclinical models to augment metastasis through increased
hypoxia within the tumor microenvironment. We have sought to identify a
selective VEGFR3 targeting compound that will inhibit metastatic spread
through lymphatic dissemination without the concomitant hypoxia induced
metastasis effect associated with VEGFR2 targeting. BNC420 is a novel
small molecule inhibitor of VEGFR3 phosphorylation that displays
significant selectivity over VEGFR2. In phosphorylation detection ELISA
based assays BNC420 exhibited a 25 fold greater potency for VEGFR3 over
VEGFR2 with IC50 of 30nM and 744nM respectively. We investigated the
activity of BNC420 and the pan-VEGFR inhibitor Sunitinib in the B16F10
murine melanoma model. This model involves the intradermal administration
of B16F10 melanoma cells in the mouse ear resulting in the formation of a
primary lesion, metastatic satellite lesions (in-transit) and regional
lymph node metastasis. While Sunitinib slowed the growth of the primary
lesion, as expected, it did not inhibit the development of lymph node
metastasis and appeared to enhance the development of in-transit
satellite lesions by 38% compared to its corresponding vehicle control.
In contrast, only 20% of animals treated with BNC420 exhibited in-transit
lesions compared to 53% in the corresponding vehicle control.
Furthermore, a 50% reduction in the number of metastasis to the draining
lymph nodes was seen in BNC420 treated animals. The lymph node metastatic
lesions were significantly smaller compared to control and in some
instances only detected under microscopic examination. Melanoma lesions
in animals treated with BNC420 were devoid of peritumoral lymphatic
vessels. These results demonstrate that selective inhibition of VEGFR3
utilising the novel small molecule BNC420 effectively inhibits the
development of both in-transit metastatic lesions and lymph node
metastasis while being unencumbered by the pro-metastatic effects that
can accompany VEGFR2 inhibition through the induction of tumor hypoxia.

