Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unraveling the cellular hierarchywithin human tonsillar crypt
epithelium and oropharyngeal squamous cellcarcinoma tumors


OPSCCs commonly arise from the epithelium lining the lingual and palatine
tonsillar crypts. The stratified epithelium at the surface gives way to
complex reticulated epithelium in the crypts which contain a diverse cell
population with varying cytokeratin expression patterns. How such a
diverse cell population is maintained has not yet been explored. It has
been observed that HPV+ HNSCC consistently arise from the tonsillar
crypts. In addition, somatic stem and progenitor cells have been
identified as the likely targets of tumorigenesis in many tissues. To
further evaluate whether tonsillar crypts contain unique multi-potent
stem cells that are targets of tumorigenesis, and similar stem cells are
maintained in OPSCC tumors of tonsillar origin, we propose the following
studies: Aim 1: Characterize the cellular populations of crypt epithelium
and compare to oral cavity epithelium. Human tissue obtained from the IRB
approved EVMS Biorepository will be evaluated. We will stain for
purported markers of stem cell activity including LGR5/6, CD34, p63,
Bmi-1, cytokeratins 15, 19, and hTert using tyramide signal amplification
when necessary. Cytokeratins 5, 8, 14 and 17 (previously identified in
subsets of crypt epithelium) will be evaluated and co-stained with the
above markers. Ki67 will be used to identify proliferative regions within
the crypt epithelium. Aim 2: Characterize the cellular population of
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma and compare to normal tonsillar
crypt epithelium. Human tumor obtained from above biorepository will be
evaluated. HPV+/- OPSCC cell lines will be quantified for the markers of
stem cell activity listed in Aim 1. Similarly, the same markers will be
evaluated in HPV+/- human OPSCC tumors and compared to normal tonsil. The
cell cycle regulator, p16, which is up-regulated in HPV-induced OPSCC and
has previously been identified in a subset of normal tonsillar crypt
epithelial cells will also be co-stained with any identified stem cell
markers to determine if it is associated with any stem/progenitor cell
function. Patient data will be correlated to identify prognostic value of
these markers. Aim 3: Evaluate clonal expansions of cells in tonsillar
crypts and OPSCC tumors by mitochondrial lineage tracing. Acquired
deficiencies in the mitochondrial gene for the respiratory chain enzyme
cytochrome c oxidase (CCO) can be exploited to identify cellular lineages
within human tissues and tumors. This aim will evaluate if such CCO
deficient (CCO-) clones exist within normal tonsillar crypts and OPSCC
tumors, which will allow for careful lineage tracing in future
experiments to fully understand the cellular hierarchy underlying
tonsillar crypt and OPSCC tumor morphology. Elucidating the cellular
hierarchy within tonsillar crypts, and identifying whether multi-potent
stem cells exist within the tissue is imperative to understanding OPSCC,
including those that are HPV-induced.

