Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive molecular profiling of circulating tumor cells from
metastatic breast cancer patients


Background: Recent enumeration studies on CTCs have demonstrated the
clinical value of these cells. The molecular biology of CTCs, however,
remains poorly understood.Methods: We performed RNA and DNA profiling of
CTCs from metastatic breast cancer (MBC) patients. 244 blood samples from
162 MBC patients were subjected to immunomagnetic enrichment and
fluorescence activated cell sorting (IE/FACS) to isolate highly pure
CTCs. Microfluidic-based multiplex QPCR analysis was utilized to
determine the expression levels of 64 cancer-related genes. Parallel
genome-wide copy number analysis by array comparative genomic
hybridization was also performed on CTCs isolated from the same enriched
blood samples.Results: Transcriptional analysis of CTCs was successfully
performed in 151 samples from 105 patients. We observed the up-regulation
of several genes including CCND1, EPCAM, KRT7 and MUC1 and the
down-regulation of hematopoietic-related genes including PTPRC (CD45) and
CD68 (adjusted p Background: Recent enumeration studies on CTCs have
demonstrated the clinical value of these cells. The molecular biology of
CTCs, however, remains poorly understood.Methods: We performed RNA and
DNA profiling of CTCs from metastatic breast cancer (MBC) patients. 244
blood samples from 162 MBC patients were subjected to immunomagnetic
enrichment and fluorescence activated cell sorting (IE/FACS) to isolate
highly pure CTCs. Microfluidic-based multiplex QPCR analysis was utilized
to determine the expression levels of 64 cancer-related genes. Parallel
genome-wide copy number analysis by array comparative genomic
hybridization was also performed on CTCs isolated from the same enriched
blood samples.Results: Transcriptional analysis of CTCs was successfully
performed in 151 samples from 105 patients. We observed the up-regulation
of several genes including CCND1, EPCAM, KRT7 and MUC1 and the
down-regulation of hematopoietic-related genes including PTPRC (CD45) and
CD68 (adjusted p <0.001) in CTCs. Clustering analysis of expression
profiles revealed three CTC clusters, one containing both subtypes basal
(ESR1-low) and normal-like (ESR1-low, CAV1/VIM-high) and two other
clusters containing luminal subtype (ESR1-high). A subset of CTCs
expressed epithelial-mesenchymal transition genes, however, genes for
stem cellness were not generally expressed. Serial CTC expression
profiling in 28 patients demonstrated changes in expression over time.
Exploratory single CTC expression analysis revealed cell-to-cell
heterogeneity. Parallel genome-wide copy number analysis in matched CTCs
from 49 patients revealed gains (e.g. 1q and 8q), losses (e.g., 8p and
16q), and focal amplifications (e.g. on 8q and 11q including CCND1) that
are frequently observed in primary breast cancers. We also observed three
copy number clusters with varying levels of genomic aberrations.
Up-regulation of CCND1 and ERBB2 in CTCs was associated with increased
level of genomic instability.Conclusions: Parallel gene expression and
copy number profiling provided novel insights on the biology of CTCs.
Molecular characterization of CTCs may shed further light on the biology
of metastasis and disease progression.

