Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3D morphological hallmarks of breast carcinogenesis: Diagnosis of
non-invasive and invasive breast cancer with Lightsheet microscopy


BACKGROUND:Since the early 20th century, the pathological classification
of breast cancer has been based primarily on the visual analysis of H&E
stained images using conventional 2D microscopy. With the recent
development of new state-of-the-art microscopy platforms, such as
fluorescent Lightsheet microscopy (LSM), the rapid acquisition of three
dimensional (3D) images directly from tissue samples up to several
millimeters in thickness is now possible. The aim of this project is to
develop methods to perform LSM on formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE)
breast tissue samples and to use this approach to identify 3D
morphological hallmarks of breast carcinogenesis, which may aid in breast
cancer research and diagnostics.METHODS:30 breast tissue samples,
including normal breast, ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and invasive
breast cancer (IBC), were collected. To prepare the tissue for LSM, we
obtained 1 mm diameter tissue cores from the FFPE blocks, which we
deparaffinized, permeabilized with Triton X-100, treated with sodium
borohydride for autofluorescence reduction, stained with Gel Green for
nucleus detection and clarified using a modified Scale A2 solution to
increase light penetration. We then designed and implemented an image
analysis pipeline to obtain measurements from the 3D images and to build
classification models. The pipeline for nuclear segmentation consisted of
adaptive thresholding, morphological operations and watershed
segmentation, followed by the extraction of morphometric features (11
morphology, 7 intensity, 18 texture, and 5 spatial graph-based features).
Lastly, we performed logistic regression with Lasso regularization to
build LSM image feature-based models to classify cases into diagnostic
categories. Model performance was assessed by computing the area under
the curve (AUC) in cross-validation.RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS:The
deparaffinization, permabilization, clarification, and fluorescent
staining protocol we developed enabled visualization of 3D breast
architecture with sub-cellular resolution from FFPE specimens. To assess
the diagnostic utility of LSM in breast pathology, we used the
LSM-derived features to build classification models, which showed strong
performance for the discrimination of normal breast from both DCIS and
IBC (AUC = 0.94 in cross validation for both tasks). Morphological and
spatial graph-based features were the strongest predictors of
pathological diagnoses in the classification models. These data suggest
that 3D morphometric and spatial features are highly informative of
pathological diagnosis and may supplement conventional morphological and
molecular approaches in breast cancer diagnostics. These results lay the
ground work for future larger scale studies to more fully evaluate the
utility of LSM for breast cancer research and diagnostics.

