Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of sodium-independent and sodium-dependent nucleobase
transport activities by tyrosine kinase inhibitors


Inhibition of nucleobase transport activities by tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) has not been studied to date. Since many targeted TKIs
are often combined with either capecitabine or 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in
treatment of various advanced cancers, we examined TKI effects on both
equilibrative nucleobase transport (ENBT) and sodium-dependent nucleobase
transport (SNBT) activities. Our goal was to study effects of TKIs on
human ENBT and SNBT activities to explore potential TKI interactions with
nucleobase chemotherapy drugs. Effects of TKIs on ENBT activities were
investigated in normal human renal proximal tubule epithelial cells
(hRPTECs). TKI effects on SNBT activities were assessed in a pig kidney
cell line (LLC-PK1). We showed that TKIs inhibited both ENBT and SNBT
activities to different extents. Gefitinib inhibited ENBT activity with
an IC50 value of 0.7 M thus indicating high sensitivity of ENBT to
inhibition by gefitinib in hRPTECs. Erlotinib > sorafenib > imatinib >
sunitinib inhibited ENBT with IC50 values of 15, 40, 60, 78 M,
respectively whereas dasatinib, lapatinib and vandetanib were not
inhibitory at concentrations >100 M. Similar studies in LLC-PK1 cells,
which exhibit SNBT activity, showed that vandetanib was the most potent
inhibitor followed by sorafenib > erlotinib > gefitinib > sunitinib >
imatinib with IC50 values of 14, 25, 28, 40, 47 and 94 M, respectively
whereas dasatinib and lapatinib were not inhibitory at concentrations
>100 M. These results indicate inhibition of both ENBT and SNBT
activities by exposure of cells to TKIs. These effects on nucleobase
transport activities, which could be direct or indirect, suggest why
regimens combining gefitinib and 5-FU have failed. Further studies should
test all TKI classes for such inhibitory activities to assess potential
effects on combination regimens using TKIs with nucleobase drugs such as
5-FU in cancer treatment.

