Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel synthetic lethal interactions in small
cell lung cancer with the proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib


Proteasome inhibition (PI) has emerged as a valuable cancer treatment in
hematological malignancies by causing a disruption of protein
homeostasis. While proteasome inhibitors have been historically
unsuccessful in the clinic for solid tumors, all cancer cell lines
succumb to proteasome inhibition in vitro. Solid tumor cell lines have a
higher threshold for disruption of protein homeostasis; as they require
continuous exposure to achieve cytotoxicity similar to pulsatile exposure
of PI in heme cell lines. The in-vivo half-life of proteasome inhibitors
is short (1hr) making it challenging to mimic in vitro continuous
treatment. Therefore we explored the option of sensitizing solid tumors
to proteasome inhibitors through combination therapy.In order to identify
novel synthetic lethal interactions with PI, we performed a screen
utilizing a pooled siRNA library targeting 2240 genes of the druggable
genome in combination with the proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib (CFZ) or
DMSO. Cells were first transfected with the siRNA for 24 hours and then
treated with CFZ or DMSO for an additional 72h to assess synergy. We
performed the screen in small cell lung cancer (SCLC), an unmet medical
need. Preliminary responses in SCLC patients were observed with CFZ in an
all comers solid tumor trial (Papadopoulos, et al. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol, 2013).The screen was performed in NCI-H841 cells that are
adherent, easy to culture, and have high transfection efficiency. The
combined effect of siRNA and CFZ on viability was measured using a
Sensitivity Index (SI), which ranges from -1 (antagonistic) to 1
(synergistic). Using an SI threshold >0.2, we identified 33 synthetic
lethal genes when H841 cells were treated with an IC9 of CFZ.To validate
screen hits, we performed experiments using single siRNA reagents (4 - 6
sequences per gene) in combination with CFZ in NCI-H841. Two hits were
confirmed with two or more single siRNAs sensitizing cells to CFZ. These
genes (TGFBR3 and GRK6) are of particular interest because of their
involvement in proliferation signaling mechanisms. Subsequent screens
have also uncovered two additional genes, involved in the protein
degradation and trafficking pathway (CLPP and COG8), which meet the same
validation criteria for synergy.The characterization of these hits is
currently on-going in a panel of SCLC lines, and in cells engineered with
CRISPR technology to achieve a near complete knockout. In parallel, we
are testing commercially available reagents targeting our proteins of
interest to validate our results. Preliminary data with a published GRK6
inhibitor, GF109203x, demonstrates synergy with Bliss scores of 0.35 in
H841 and 0.44 in DMS114 SCLC lines (Zhou et al. J Pharmacol Exp Ther,
2001). In summary, we have identified druggable targets that would
potentiate CFZ efficacy towards solid tumors and may elucidate the PI
mechanism of action.

