Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biodistribution of liposomal docetaxel prodrug MNK-010 in mice
bearing A549 human NSCLC xenografts


The anti-mitotic taxanes belong to one of the most important families of
anticancer drugs that have broad anti-tumor activity and are widely used
for a variety of human cancer types. However, the taxanes are limited by
a number of serious pharmacological and toxicological effects. We are
developing a unique delivery system for docetaxel, comprised of a
PEGylated liposomal nanoparticle containing a prodrug of docetaxel to
improve solubility, tolerability and increase efficacy through improved
pharmacokinetics and biodistribution. In this study we evaluated the
biodistribution of MNK-010, a liposomal formulation of a docetaxel
prodrug in immunodeficient mice bearing A549 Human Non-Small Cell Lung
Carcinoma (NSCLC) xenografts. This study tested the hypothesis that
MNK-010 can produce greater plasma and tumor accumulation of docetaxel
than with delivery of standard of care free docetaxel in tumor-bearing
mice.Female nude mice bearing A549 human NSCLC xenografts were given a
single intravenous (IV) dose of MNK-010 (40 mg/kg docetaxel molar
equivalent) or free docetaxel (50 mg/kg). For each treatment group, three
animals were sacrificed at various time points between 1 hr and 504 hr
post injection. After euthanasia, blood, tumor, liver, kidney, spleen,
lung and skeletal muscle specimens were collected. Tissue and blood
samples were assayed to determine docetaxel concentrations.Administration
of MNK-010 IV provided a reservoir for the continual slow release of
docetaxel in the circulation and in tumors. MNK-010 increased systemic
docetaxel exposure (AUC) ten-fold greater than free docetaxel injected at
similar doses. MNK-010 produced sustained docetaxel levels in tumor
through the 21 day observation period, resulting in four-fold greater
docetaxel tumor exposure (AUC) compared to free docetaxel. The increase
in MNK-010 plasma exposure as well as the enhanced permeability effect
observed with liposomes likely contributed to the increased tumor
exposure. In addition to improved accumulating in tumor tissue, docetaxel
derived from MNK-010 also accumulated in liver, spleen and kidney. These
tissues contain phagocytic cells (macrophages or mesangial) and serve as
organs of elimination for chemotherapeutics. Docetaxel derived from
MNK-010 was not detectable in skeletal muscle and was only found in lung
over the first 24 hours post administration. In contrast, IV injection of
free docetaxel produced high initial concentrations of docetaxel in all
tissues evaluated, before falling quickly over time. Tumor levels
decreased below levels of quantitation after nine days. This study
demonstrated that Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals PEGylated liposomal
docetaxel prodrug MNK-010 provided a reservoir for the continual release
of docetaxel into the systemic circulation and produced an enhanced
accumulation of docetaxel in A549 human NSCLC xenografts in mice compared
to the standard of care docetaxel.

