Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TET1-mediated epigenetic reprogramming switches metabolism and
promotes malignant phenotypes of ovarian cancer


Epigenetic dysregulation is one of the mechanisms involved in ovarian
cancer carcinogenesis. Recently identified a new epigenetic modulator
ten-eleven translocation protein 1 (TET1), a DNA dioxygenase which is
believed in DNA demethylation through a 5-methylcytosine to
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) conversion, plays an important role in
regulating self-renewal and specification in embryonic stem cells. In
addition, it works as a tumor suppressor gene by inhibition of cell
invasion, migration and tumor growth in breast and prostate cancer.
However, the role of TET1 in ovarian cancer remains unknown. Thus we
examed the expression level of TET1 in ovarian cancer tissues. We found
that TET1 expression level correlated with cancer staging (p = 0.03) in
88 ovarian cancer from our biobank and poor survival (p = 0.012) in TCGA
database. High expression of TET1 was observed in advanced stage,
high-grade primary tumor specimens in comparison with normal ovarian
surface epithelium (OSE) brushings (p = 0.0005) by NCBI database
(GSE18520). These results suggested that TET1 may play some roles in
ovarian cancer development, which is different from those previously
published in other cancers. To study the function of TET1 in ovarian
cancer, we generated TET1 over-expressing and knockdown cell lines model,
the expression level and enzymatic activities of TET1 were confirmed by
real time PCR, western and 5hmC stain. Here we found that TET1 increases
the abilities of cell migration, anchorage-independent growth and
promotes tumor growth. In addition, TET1 actives cancer stem markers and
enhances the abilities of spheroid formation. Ovarian cancer stem cells
(OCSCs) from cell line express high level of TET1 while the
differentiated progenies suppress TET1 expression. Moreover, seven of
eight patient-derived OCSCs revealed high expressing of TET1 in
comparison with its parental cancer cells by quantitative PCR. To further
examine the TET1 regulation network, we combined the expression array and
MethCap-seq to analyze the epigomic changes. We found that a cluster of
target genes which were up-regulated through DNA demethylation were
enzymes responsible for oxidative phosphorylation. We investigated
metabolic status by Extracellular Flux Analyzer (seahourse) on the
TET1-overexpressing cells. Compared with control cells,
TET1-overexpressing cells revealed 1.7 fold (p = 0.011) increase of
oxygen consumption rate (OCR); while the extracellular acidification rate
(ECAR) showed no difference (p = 0.856). This bioenergetic metabolism
shift may be due to demethylation of subunits of mitochondria complexs.
Taken together, TET1 reprograms the epigenome, shifts the metabolism,
increases the malignant phenotypes and confers a poor prognosis of
ovarian cancer. Targeting mitochondria on TET1-expressing ovarian cancer
patients may provide a new way of personalized therapy.

