Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reducing GC bias and increasing complexity: Clinical
implementation and validation of KAPA library preparation protocol for
Oncopanel, a targeted next generation sequencing panel


The recent understanding of cancer as a genomic disease, coupled with the
advent of targeted therapeutic agents that more specifically and
effectively treat a patient's cancer, has paved the way for genomic
profiling of tumor samples for prognostic, diagnostic and predictive
purposes. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) enables rapid, high-throughput
simultaneous detection of multiple types of variations, in hundreds or
thousands of genes. From a clinical perspective, accurate and
high-quality variant identification is of great importance in identifying
these genetic variants. Several factors challenge the reliability of NGS
data, including GC content of target DNA, PCR amplification, and
hybridization conditions. While bioinformatic solutions can overcome some
of these challenges, improvements to the laboratory protocols that
generate the sequence data are also important. KAPA HiFi polymerase is a
new recombinant DNA polymerase reported to have better processivity,
accuracy and improved coverage across GC- and AT-rich templates. In this
study, we optimized KAPA library preparation protocol in OncoPanel, a
targeted next generation sequencing Panel interrogating 300
cancer-related genes for single nucleotide variants (SNVs), small
insertions/deletions (indels), copy number variants (CNV) and a limited
number of structural variants. Briefly, indexed sequencing libraries were
prepared from tumor specimens using either KAPA or TruSeq LT reagents,
followed by pooling, solution-based hybrid capture, and massively
parallel sequencing on Illumina HiSeq 2500. Sequencing QC metrics and
variant calls were generated using an internally-developed analysis
pipeline. We compared the sequencing metrics from an equal number of
samples processed with KAPA or TruSeq protocol (n = 800). Use of KAPA
protocol improved several quality metrics: (1) a significant increase in
mean target coverage (from 133 to 209, increase of 36.1%; p value:
6.3E-61); (2)a significant reduction in the duplication rate (from 74% to
60%, reduction of 18.2%, p value: 5.2E-110) and (3) a significantly lower
GC bias as measured by average slope of coverage vs GC content (from 3.0
to 2.6, 14.9% lower, p value: 0.007). Validation with orthogonally tested
tumor specimen showed increased sensitivities for SNV/indels (from 95.2%
to 100%), CNV (from 76.9% to 91.7%) and structural variants (from 85.7%
to 87.5%). Overallsensitivity was 94.8% and 93.4% for KAPA and TruSeq LT,
respectively, while 100% specificity was observed for both methods. In
summary, the KAPA library protocol developed for OncoPanel significantly
improved sequencing quality and sensitivities for calling of genomic
alterations.

