Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of differential protein profiles in co-culture models of
pancreatic cancer cells and fibroblasts


Background: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains one of the
most lethal human malignancies. The vast majority of patients with
advanced disease die within a year of diagnosis.Tumor microenvironment
plays a critical role in tumor initiation, progression, metastasis, and
response to treatment in PDAC. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells often
appear to grow within a fibrotic, abundant, and poorly perfused stroma,
with epithelial cells frequently accounting for Background: Pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains one of the most lethal human
malignancies. The vast majority of patients with advanced disease die
within a year of diagnosis.Tumor microenvironment plays a critical role
in tumor initiation, progression, metastasis, and response to treatment
in PDAC. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells often appear to grow within a
fibrotic, abundant, and poorly perfused stroma, with epithelial cells
frequently accounting for <20% of the tumor volume. Cellular components
of tumor stroma include fibroblasts, macrophages, and stellate cells plus
extracellular proteins. Moreover, the network of tumor stroma imposes a
barrier for drug delivery.The aim of this study was to search for novel
protein biomarkers of tumor-stroma interaction for a better understanding
and intervention of PDAC.Methods: 1- Co-cultures between two pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cell lines (PL45 and Capan-1) and embryonic fibroblasts
(LC5) were established. LC5 cell line was stably transfected with Green
Fluorescent Protein (GFP) to allow their detection, and later separation
by flow cytometry, of the co-cultures. 2- In addition, tumor cells were
grown with fibroblasts secretome. 3- After 72 hours of co-culture, tumor
cells were isolated and protein extraction was performed. 4- Proteins
differentially expressed in tumor cells grown in co-cultures, or in tumor
cells grown with fibroblasts secretome, versus in tumor cells
monocultures, were identified by using two-dimensional
electrophoresis-based proteomic tools (2D-DIGE) followed by mass
spectrometry (MS/MS) of the spots of interest.Results: A total of 105
differentially expressed proteins were documented between PL45 cells
growing in mono-culture, co-culture and conditioned medium. Also, 161
differentially expressed proteins were recognized under similar
conditions in the Capan1 cell line.Our study identified seventeen
different proteins mainly involved in cytoskeleton organization (Filamin
B, Alpha-actinin-4, Annexin A2, Radixin, T-complex protein 1 subunit
epsilon, Actin cytoplasmic 1); regulation of cell migration and adhesion
(Prelamin-A/C, 40S ribosomal protein SA); protein biosynthesis (EF-2);
DNA damage and repair response (VCP, XRCC6); nucleotide biosynthetic
process (MTHFD1) and, heat-stress response (HSPD1, GRP78, STIP1, CCT5,
Stress-70 protein mitochondrial).Conclusion: This in vitro model
identifies several processes that might be responsible for the
tumor-stromal interactions occurring in vivo, which should be considered
potential targets for therapeutic interventions in PDAC, in addition to
those targets already known to exist in PDAC cells.

