Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and synthesis of novel conjugates for targeting the folate
receptor: Exploiting cytotoxic GARFTase inhibitors for delivering
additional chemotherapeutic payloads to cancer cells


Background:Antifolates targeting glycinamide ribonucleotide
formyltransferase (GARFTase) disrupt cell division (mitosis) by
inhibiting the de novo purine biosynthesis pathway. Recently, novel
GARFTase inhibitors, exhibiting high folate receptor (FR) binding
affinity and low affinity for the reduced folate carrier (RFC), have been
explored as chemotherapeutic agents. Theoretically, these GARFTase
inhibitors could also be used as FR-targeting ligands for delivering
additional payloads to tumor types over-expressing the FR. In this
poster, we will present our practical approach to explore the dual role
of these new GARFTase inhibitors as cytotoxic agents and as targeting
ligands for delivering tubulysins. Tubulysins are natural products
isolated from myxobacterial species and are highly potent mitotic poisons
that inhibit tubulin polymerization.Methods:We developed a general method
for preparing dual drug/ligand conjugates possessing two disulfide-based
self-immolative linker systems. In our synthetic protocol we relied on
consecutive introduction of two heterosubstituted disulfide bonds. A
GARFTase inhibitor was first connected to a hydrophilic spacer unit
through the first disulfide-based linker system. The obtained conjugate
contains also an S-9-fluorenylmethyl (Fm)-protected thiol in its
molecular architecture. Treatment with a strong organic base resulted in
spontaneous removal of the Fm moiety. The deprotected thiol reacted in
situ with a propreatary thiophilic tubulysin derivative, present in the
reaction mixture, and a second self-immolative disulfide-based linker
system was formed.Results:Novel conjugates of GARFTase inhibitor with
tubulysins were prepared using newly designed synthetic strategies. In a
high-yielding chemoselective reaction we introduced a second disulfide
bond into a molecular framework without destroying the pre-existing
disulfide linker system. The versatility of this synthetic protocol was
demonstrated by synthesizing several related drug
conjugates.Conclusion:In the poster to be presented, we will disclose,
for the first time, the structure and synthesis of novel conjugates of
GARFTase inhibitors with tubulysins. The target compounds contain two
self-immolative disulfide linker systems. The observed excellent in vivo
activity in tumor xenografts demonstrates the dual role of GARFTase
inhibitors as therapeutic agents and as FR-targeting ligands for
simultaneously delivering two highly potent payloads.

