Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor evolution inferred by patterns of miRNA expression through
the course of disease, therapy and recurrence in breast cancer


Tumor heterogeneity frequently develops through the course of disease,
therapy and metastasis. This molecular evolution is a major challenge in
the clinical setting and is the main reason for resistance to therapy.
Although metastatic disease is the cause of death in breast cancer, most
studies involve primary tumors compared to normal breast. An alternative
approach of serial assessments can add an informative value and highlight
important molecular players that may be otherwise underestimated.We
sought to explore alterations through the course of disease by profiling
serial samples from individual breast cancer cases followed from
diagnosis to recurrence. We have assembled a unique cohort of patients
having matched samples from pre-treatment, post-treatment and recurrent
events. We collected paraffin-embedded samples and profiled miRNA
expression across all samples for each patient using NanoString
analysis.We hypothesized that expression modulations in individual
patients through their course of disease can target miRNAs sets that
differentially function at the various stages of the disease. We
therefore used an innovative approach for analysis, identifying
modulation patterns as opposed to differential absolute expression. We
defined all the 8 possible patterns of expression modulations in 3 time
points across the course of disease. For each pattern, we identified a
set of miRNAs that are shared between patients by limiting the search
algorithm to find modulations of at least 1.5 fold in at least 3
patients. Each miRNA set was examined for enrichments in known miRNAs
datasets (METABRIC), for target predictions and for literature
evidences.We found an agreement between the predicted pattern of each
assigned miRNAs and the observed trend. For example, miRNAs assigned to a
pattern of an increased expression post-treatment and a decrease at
recurrence were found to be down-regulated in breast cancer and
negatively correlated with the cell cycle pathway. Interestingly, we
found that this miRNAs set can differentiate between individual patients,
based on their response to therapy. All patients sharing the same pattern
for its assigned set of miRNAs had a partial response to therapy. In
contrast, patients that showed the opposite pattern demonstrated a
minimal response to therapy. Finally, although this miRNA set were
identified by the pattern dynamics, we found a significant difference in
its average absolute expression level between patients having recurrence
and patients that are recurrence free, suggesting that the identified
miRNA set may have a prognostic value.In summary, examining serial
assessments enabled us to identify significant molecular signatures
characterizing breast cancer progression based on expression patterns
through the course of disease. This longitudinal approach of profiling
individual patients may have important consequences for personalized
medicine.

