Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is associated with increased expression
of DNA repair proteins and epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


Background: Proteomic profiling has elucidated several dysregulated
pathways in NSCLC. We sought to identify patterns of protein expression
that are enriched following neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients with
resected lung cancers.Methods: Tissue samples were selected from the
PROSPECT trial at MD Anderson Cancer Center, the goal of which was to
correlate molecular profiles with treatment response. Samples from 189
patients were analyzed, which included 26% squamous tumors; 27% with
neoadjuvant chemotherapy (n = 49); and predominantly localized disease
(distribution: I = 91, II = 35, III = 58, IV = 5). Reverse phase protein
array (RPPA) analysis was utilized to quantify 127 total or
phosphorylated proteins. Interactions between protein expression and the
receipt of neoadjuvant chemotherapy were assessed by analysis of variance
(ANOVA). Cox regression was performed to determine the relationship
between protein expression and recurrence-free survival (RFS).Results:
Twenty one of the 127 proteins (16%) were expressed at significantly
different levels in patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Specifically, patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy had higher
expression of multiple DNA repair proteins, including MSH2 (pBackground:
Proteomic profiling has elucidated several dysregulated pathways in
NSCLC. We sought to identify patterns of protein expression that are
enriched following neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients with resected
lung cancers.Methods: Tissue samples were selected from the PROSPECT
trial at MD Anderson Cancer Center, the goal of which was to correlate
molecular profiles with treatment response. Samples from 189 patients
were analyzed, which included 26% squamous tumors; 27% with neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (n = 49); and predominantly localized disease (distribution:
I = 91, II = 35, III = 58, IV = 5). Reverse phase protein array (RPPA)
analysis was utilized to quantify 127 total or phosphorylated proteins.
Interactions between protein expression and the receipt of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy were assessed by analysis of variance (ANOVA). Cox
regression was performed to determine the relationship between protein
expression and recurrence-free survival (RFS).Results: Twenty one of the
127 proteins (16%) were expressed at significantly different levels in
patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Specifically, patients
receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy had higher expression of multiple DNA
repair proteins, including MSH2 (p<0.001), 53BP1 (p = 0.01), and p-CHK1
(p = 0.02), as was Rb (p = 0.01), which regulates the expression of
several proteins involved in DNA repair. Thymidylate synthase (TS), a
target of the chemotherapeutic agent pemetrexed, also showed increased
expression (p = 0.02). In addition, there was lower expression of
phosphorylated proteins in the PI3K pathway, including p-70S6K (p =
0.008), p-mTOR (p = 0.02), and p-PDK (p = 0.02). Finally, we observed an
expression of proteins indicative of an epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT), with lower expression of E-cadherin (p = 0.007) and Met
(p = 0.03). Notably, there was also lower expression of COL6A, an
excreted extracellular protein involved in cellular adhesion
(pBackground: Proteomic profiling has elucidated several dysregulated
pathways in NSCLC. We sought to identify patterns of protein expression
that are enriched following neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients with
resected lung cancers.Methods: Tissue samples were selected from the
PROSPECT trial at MD Anderson Cancer Center, the goal of which was to
correlate molecular profiles with treatment response. Samples from 189
patients were analyzed, which included 26% squamous tumors; 27% with
neoadjuvant chemotherapy (n = 49); and predominantly localized disease
(distribution: I = 91, II = 35, III = 58, IV = 5). Reverse phase protein
array (RPPA) analysis was utilized to quantify 127 total or
phosphorylated proteins. Interactions between protein expression and the
receipt of neoadjuvant chemotherapy were assessed by analysis of variance
(ANOVA). Cox regression was performed to determine the relationship
between protein expression and recurrence-free survival (RFS).Results:
Twenty one of the 127 proteins (16%) were expressed at significantly
different levels in patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Specifically, patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy had higher
expression of multiple DNA repair proteins, including MSH2 (p<0.001),
53BP1 (p = 0.01), and p-CHK1 (p = 0.02), as was Rb (p = 0.01), which
regulates the expression of several proteins involved in DNA repair.
Thymidylate synthase (TS), a target of the chemotherapeutic agent
pemetrexed, also showed increased expression (p = 0.02). In addition,
there was lower expression of phosphorylated proteins in the PI3K
pathway, including p-70S6K (p = 0.008), p-mTOR (p = 0.02), and p-PDK (p =
0.02). Finally, we observed an expression of proteins indicative of an
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), with lower expression of
E-cadherin (p = 0.007) and Met (p = 0.03). Notably, there was also lower
expression of COL6A, an excreted extracellular protein involved in
cellular adhesion (p<0.001), and a trend towards significance in
increased expression of stathmin (p = 0.06), a microtubule destabilizer
that has previously been implicated in EMT. Finally, we found that higher
expression of multiple proteins involved in DNA repair were associated
with a reduction in RFS after induction chemotherapy, including p-Rb (p =
0.015), CHK1 (p = 0.027), and p-CHK1 (p = 0.049).Conclusions: The receipt
of neoadjuvant chemotherapy was associated with higher expression of DNA
repair proteins, suppression of the PI3K pathway, and an EMT shift.
Increased expression of DNA repair proteins was also associated with
reduced RFS. These findings suggest that higher expression of DNA repair
proteins may contribute to treatment resistance, and support the
combination of standard chemotherapy with targeted agents such as Chk
inhibitors or immunotherapy (to address EMT-mediated immune escape).

