Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic suppression of miRNA-203 promotes Ewing sarcoma
malignancy


Ewing sarcoma (ES), a malignancy of bone and soft tissue that affects
children and young adults, is characterized by early metastasis to lung
and bone and by oncogenic ews/ets translocations. We previously observed
the histone methyltransferase Enhancer of Zeste, Drosophila, Homolog 2
(EZH2) to be regulated by EWS-FLI1 and highly increased in ES. We
hypothesized non-coding RNAs to contribute to epigenetic processes and
malignancy of ES. Here we show by ChIP on chip analysis that EZH2
occupies promoter regions of putative tumor suppressor miRNAs, oncogenic
miRNAs and differentiation-associated miRNAs in ES and investigated their
functional relevance by miRNA mimic, RNA interference, and functional
assays. We show that hsa-miR-203a-3p (miR-203), a promoter of epidermal
differentiation and trigger to exit cell cycle, was found epigenetic
silenced in ES. We not only observed miR-203 up-regulation in different
ES lines after EZH2 knock down or treatment with the EZH2 inhibitors
GSK126 but also after histone de-acetylase inhibition (HDACi) via
Trichostatin A (TSA) as well as MS-275. Similarly, treatment of ES lines
with the DNA-methylation inhibitor 5-azacytidine resulted in a strong
up-regulation of miR-203 in ES. On the other hand, de-regulated
expression of miR-203 after transient transfection with a miR-203-mimic
identified a feed back loop resulting in a down-regulation of EWS-FLI1
and EZH2 in ES cell lines as compared to controls. In functional assays
we observed that an increased expression of miR-203 suppressed contact
dependent as well as independent growth in ES. In addition, in vitro
invasiveness was strongly impaired after over-expression of miR-203.
Taken together, we demonstrate the essential need for epigenetic
suppression of miR-203 expression in ES that otherwise would suppress
critical features of ES malignancy such as contact independent growth and
invasiveness of ES. These results further provide a rationale for
epigenetic combination therapy directed to reverse miR-203 suppression.

