Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Target mutation comparasion of WGA circulating tumor cell and
primary tumor in epithelial ovarian cancer cell line using NGS


IntroductionEpithelial ovarian cancer is the third most common
gynecologic cancer in the United States but a leading cause of
gynecologic cancer deaths. Previous finding that numbers of circulating
tumor cells (CTCs) in the blood of ovarian cancer patients are
prognostically significant. Moreover, comprehensive analyses of ovarian
cancer genomes may provide more information for precise cancer
treatments. Genomic analysis of circulating tumor cells (CTC) can provide
possible approach for EOC patients who lack primary tumor tissue or
present with un-resectable metastatic diseases. The discordance between
whole genome amplification of circulating tumors and primary tumor should
be validated firstly and so we conducted a pilot analysis of CTC capture
and targeted NGS in EOC cell lines.Methods and materialsUnder IRB
approval, EOC cell lines, different numbers of SKOV-3 (serous
adenocarcinoma) and ES-2 (clear cell carcinoma) were spiked in fresh
blood samples (20 ml) of healthy donor and captured by CytoQuestTM CR
system or negative enrichment method (Abnova, Taipei, Taiwan). CTCs were
identified by pan-CK, CD45 and DAPI expression and stained with CEP8 FISH
for aneuploidy. Spiked CTCs of two cell lines were captured and underwent
whole genome amplification by PicoPLEX WGA kit (Rubicon Genomic, MI,
USA). The WGA DNA product and DNA of two primary cell lines were prepared
libraries for TruSight(TM) Tumor sequencing panel (Illumina Inc.MI,USA)
according to manufacturer's instruction. Sequencing procedure were
performed on MiSEQ system(Illumina Inc.) by a local service
provider.ResultsSKOV-3 and ES-2 can be stained and captured with these
antibodies. Mean recovery of these cells were more than 80% by both
systems. However, ES-2 is less Pan-CK stained but still could be captured
by this system. WGA products of each one, three and five ES-2 cells and
one SKOV3 cell were prepared well for library. We choose one cell WGA
product and DNA extracted from primary SKOV-3 and ES2 were subjected to
targeted 26 genes mutational analysis composed in TruSight Tumor panel.
Average coverage depth for each amplicon is minimum 1000x with 7000x
means. We would like to show if any discordance appear due to the
acquisition of DNA WGA in the single cells, of which the analysis is
currently ongoing.DISCUSSIONOur study would like to demonstrate the
condition of variants calls of single tumor cells isolated from whole
blood samples and primary tumor in a targeted mutation analysis using NGS
after a highly automated isolation workflow. This approach provides a
pilot workflow for studying the heterogeneity within the CTC population
in blood samples of patients with tumor and their primary tumor and the
results can also document the possibility of WGA-induced bias of a
recently commercialized WGA kit.

