Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Facile fabrication of MRI-capable and NIR-resonant core-satellite
nanomediators for photothermal therapy


Although many techniques exist for fabricating near-infrared
(NIR)-resonant and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-capable nanomediators
for photothermal cancer therapy, preparing them in an efficient and
scalable process remains a significant challenge. In this report, we
develop two facile methods to fabricate both NIR-resonant and MRI-capable
nanomediators utilizing well developed polysiloxane-containing
polymer-coated iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs). One of the methods is to
attach multiple NIR-resonant nanoparticles onto a thiol-modified IONP
core through one-step mixing with gold sulfide nanoparticles (Au2S NPs)
to fabricate a core-satellite nanomediator. The other strategy is to
covalently attach a NIR organic dye onto intact polysiloxane-containing
polymer-coated IONPs through facile mixing with siloxane-modified IR820.
The successful decoration with either Au2S NPs or IR820 is demonstrated
for the resultant nanomediators by absorption spectra and transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) images. It is estimated that 10 Au2S NPs and
2104 dye molecules (loading capacity: 4.5 mg IR820/mg Fe) are attached
onto the polymer-coated IONPs, respectively. The hydrodynamic sizes of
these novel multifunctional nanomediators are 57.5 nm for IONP-Au2S NP
and 28.2 nm for IONP-IR820, which are much smaller than traditional gold
nanoshell-based designs. The photothermal efficiency of the IONP-Au2S NP
and IONP-IR820 nanocomposite solutions under the irradiation of 885 nm
NIR laser light is significantly enhanced compared to IONPs alone. The
enhancement in photothermal efficiency by the newly developed
nanomediators is also investigated in nude mice bearing SUM-159 tumor
xenografts. The biodistribution data measured by inductively coupled
plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) reveal that 1% injection
dose (ID) of IONP-Au2S NPs and 9% ID of IONP-IR820 accumulate into tumor
tissue 24 h post intravenous injection at a dose of 20 mg Fe/Kg mouse
body weight. The average tumor surface temperature recorded by an
infrared camera is increased by 10.8 1.2 C for the mice administered with
IONP-Au2S NPs and 25.7 3.6 C for the group injected with IONP-IR820,
compared to 4.8 0.5 C for the PBS-injected control mice after laser
irradiation with a power of 0.5 W for 10 min. Furthermore, our data
reveal that the fabrication will not compromise the IONP core capability
as an MRI contrast agent. Taken together, we demonstrate a facile
technique to generate NIR-resonant and MRI-capable nanomediators from a
polysiloxane-containing polymer-coated IONP platform. The as-developed
dual functional nanomediators hold great promise for translatable
MRI-guided photothermal cancer therapy.

