Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic ablation of Smoothened in tumor-associated fibroblasts
promotes pancreatic tumorigenesis


Purpose of StudyPancreatic cancer is an overwhelming fatal disease with
less than 5% of patients surviving beyond 5 years. The most prominent
histopathological hallmark of pancreatic cancer is its uniquely dense
stromal reaction as evidenced by recent reports that highlight the
significant role of stromal fibroblasts on pancreatic tumor cell biology.
We used novel mouse models to show that genetic inactivation of
Smoothened (Smo) in stromal fibroblasts accelerated Kras-initiated
tumorigenesis.Research MethodWe used a genetically engineered mouse model
of pancreatic cancer that relies on constitutive activation of the Kras
oncogene in the epithelium. We simultaneously employed cre-loxP
technology to conditionally delete Smo exclusively in the fibroblast
compartment of the pancreas, thus disrupting the crucial hedgehog
paracrine signaling loop between pancreatic tumor cells and
fibroblasts.Novel FindingsWe showed that deletion of Smo in stromal
fibroblasts accelerated pancreatic tumorigenesis through a mechanism
involving destabilization of fibroblast PTEN protein. An unbiased genetic
screen revealed the ubiquitin E2 conjugating enzyme UBE2K as a PTEN
destabilizer and knockdown of UBE2K blocked the degradation of PTEN
protein. Down-regulation of PTEN enhanced TGF- production in stromal
fibroblasts, and increased epithelial cell transformation and
proliferation through epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR). A
selective SMO inhibitor also decreased PTEN in a Kras mouse model as well
as in human primary pancreatic cancer associated fibroblasts.
Importantly, in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) patient samples,
low PTEN expression correlated with low SMO expression and with reduced
overall survival. These results define a pathway that reprograms stromal
fibroblasts from a tumor suppressive phenotype to a tumor promoting
phenotype, thus highlighting the dual functions of stromal fibroblasts in
pancreatic cancer and the molecular consequences of loss of the hedgehog
pathway. Thus, a more comprehensive understanding of tumor-stroma
interactions is required to assure effective implementation of targeted
therapies.Conclusions & ImplicationsRecent pre-clinical reports suggest
the pancreatic tumor microenvironment functions predominantly to inhibit
tumor growth, challenging the concept of tumor stroma as a therapeutic
target. Our results provide molecular insight into how the balance
between the opposing activities of tumor stromal fibroblasts is
maintained, and potentially identifies targets for restoring stromal
tumor suppressive functions. In summary, we demonstrate that ablation of
paracrine hedgehog signaling in SMA-positive fibroblasts leads to
proteasome-mediated degradation of the PTEN tumor suppressor protein and
subsequent activation of oncogenic pathways.

