Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tarextumab (Anti-NOTCH2/3) reverses NOTCH2 and NOTCH3-dependent
tumorigenicity and metastases in small cell lung cancer


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is marked by early metastatic spread and,
despite high initial response rates to therapy, long term survival is
poor. We have previously shown that inhibition of NOTCH2 and NOTCH3 using
a blocking antibody (OMP-59R5: Tarextumab) that inhibits both human and
murine receptor signaling suppresses the growth of patient-derived SCLC
tumor xenografts (PDXs) and delays tumor recurrence following
chemotherapy-induced tumor regression. We therefore reasoned that NOTCH2
and NOTCH3 might sustain a chemorefractory population of cells with high
tumorigenic potential and the capacity to seed distant metastases.In
order to directly evaluate the tumorigenic potential of NOTCH2 and NOTCH3
expressing cells, we isolated NOTCH2+,NOTCH3+, and NOTCH2&3+ cells from
treatment nave SCLC PDX tumors and transplanted them into secondary
recipient mice. Tumor incidence was 100% in each of the NOTCH2+, NOTCH3+
and NOTCH2&3+ groups. This decreased by half in the NOTCH2-, NOTCH3-, and
NOTCH2&3- groups, suggesting that expression of each of the two receptors
is associated with increased tumorigenicity in SCLC.We then evaluated the
effect of 59R5 treatment upon tumorigenic potential of SCLC PDX cells. We
first treated mice with either 59R5 or control antibody, with and without
cisplatin/irinotecan. Upon study termination, we harvested tumor cells,
serially transplanted them into treatment nave mice and assessed the
incidence of tumors in serially transplanted mice. We observed that
tumorigenic cell frequency was doubled in the chemotherapy-treated cohort
but was decreased more than 10-fold in the 59R5+chemotherapy treated
group relative to control antibody.Finally, we evaluated the effect of
59R5 treatment upon tumor cell dissemination and metastases in
therapeutic efficacy experiments. In one SCLC PDX model, 59R5 decreased
the frequency of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in the blood. In a second
SCLC PDX model, 59R5 reduced the frequency of disseminated tumor cells
(DTCs) as well as metastases to the adrenal glands, liver, lungs and
brain. The ability of 59R5 to decrease metastases was independent from
the effect on primary tumor volume, suggesting a mechanistically distinct
effect upon tumorigenicity and metastatic spread relative to that of
tumor growth.In summary, NOTCH2+ and NOTCH3+ cell populations are
enriched for cells with tumorigenic potential and NOTCH2/3 inhibition in
SCLC PDX models reduced tumorigenic cell frequency as well as the
incidence of CTCs, DTCs and metastases to distant organs. Taken together,
these data strongly implicate both NOTCH2 and NOTCH3 in the maintenance
of SCLC cells with high tumorigenic potential and the capacity to seed
and promote distant metastatic growth. A Phase 1b/2 clinical trial of
OMP-59R5 in Combination With Etoposide and Cisplatin in Subjects With
Untreated Extensive Stage Small Cell Lung Cancer (PINNACLE) is underway.

