Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting an undruggable RNA-binding protein: Discovery of small
molecule inhibitors of HuR for novel breast cancer therapy


Post-transcriptional gene regulation is essential for normal development,
but when dysregulated, has many implications in disease conditions,
including cancer. The RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are critical trans
factors that associate with specific cis elements present in mRNAs,
thereby regulating the fate of target mRNAs. Due to the lack of
well-defined binding pocket, RBPs have been considered undruggable
targets. The RBP Hu antigen R (HuR) is overexpressed in many types of
cancer, including breast cancer. Elevated cytoplasmic HuR level
correlates with high-grade malignancy and serves as a prognostic factor
of poor clinical outcome in breast cancer. HuR promotes tumorigenesis by
interacting with cancer-associated mRNAs, those mRNAs encode proteins
that are implicated in different tumor processes including cell
proliferation, cell survival, angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis. HuR
also modulates the sensitivity of breast cancer cells to chemotherapy.
Our hypothesis is that small molecule compounds that disrupt the HuR-mRNA
interaction will block HuR function, leading to the decay and reduced
translation of mRNAs of the target genes critical for breast cancer cell
growth and progression. High throughput screening (HTS) was carried out
in several chemical libraries (23,000 compounds) using fluorescence
polarization (FP) assay and identified a series of initial hits with
sub-micromolar inhibitory constants (Ki). Those potential disruptors were
then validated by ALPHA assay (Amplified Luminescent Proximity
Homogeneous Assay), confirmed by Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR). In
cell-based assays, top hit ST-3 and its optimized analogs, specifically
shortened HuR target mRNAs half-life and decreased the level of the
encoded proteins (Bcl-2, XIAP and Msi1/2). Moreover, those compounds
selectively inhibited breast cancer cell proliferation but not normal
cells. Knocking down HuR in breast cancer cells attenuated the activity
of those HuR-mRNA disruptors. More cell-based assays are carrying out to
delineate the mechanism of action. We are also testing the antitumor
efficacy of those HuR inhibitors in mouse xenograft models. In
conclusion, we identified potential small molecule disrupters of HuR-mRNA
interaction for potential novel cancer therapy that inhibited breast
cancer with HuR overexpression.

