Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RRx-001: A double action systemically non-toxic epigenetic agent
for cancer therapy


RRx-001 (also known as ABDNAZ, 1-bromoacetyl-3,3-dinitroazetidine) is a
novel aerospace-derived compound that demonstrated anticancer activity in
the absence of systemic toxicities in a recent phase I clinical trial and
is now in phase II studies. With a highly energetic heterocyclic
scaffold, RRx-001 generates reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric
oxide (NO), modulates intracellular redox status, and triggers
caspase-independent apoptosis in cancer cells. Here we showed that
RRx-001 as a single chemical entity regulates at least two epigenetic
processes, histone acetylation and DNA demethylation. Specifically,
RRx-001 at its therapeutic concentrations (0.5-5 M) significantly
decreased global DNA methylation, i.e., 5-methylcytosine levels, in SCC
VII tumor cells as determined by ELISA. Consistently, treatment of SCC
VII cells with 0.5-5 M RRx-001 significantly decreased Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a
protein expression in a dose- and time-dependent manner as determined by
Western blots. In addition, global methylation profiling using Illumina
Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip identified differentially
methylated genes in SCC VII cells treated with 0.5, 2, and 5 M RRx-001
compared to control cells. Of 111 genes demethylated by RRx-001
identified using GenomeStudio software, methylation levels of 3 genes
(FAM20C, STON1-GTF2A1L and TRIAP1) were decreased by at least 2-fold
across all three concentrations of RRx-001. Validation of these changes
by pyrosequencing is underway. Pathway enrichment analysis by IPA
suggested that RRx-001 demethylated genes involved in hepatic fibrosis, G
protein signaling, leucine degradation and remodeling of epithelial
adherens junctions. Moreover, RRx-001 at 2 M significantly increased
global acetylated histone H3 and H4 levels in SCC VII cells after 24 hour
treatment as determined by a fluorometric assay, suggesting that RRx-001
regulates global acetylation in cancer cells. Western blot analysis also
showed significant increases in acetylated histone H3 and H4 levels in
SCC VII cells in a dose and time-dependent manner after RRx-001
treatment. Taken together, our results demonstrated that, in contrast to
the traditional one drug one target paradigm, RRx-001 has
multi(epi)target features, which contribute to its anticancer activity.

