Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RUVBL1 and RUBVL2 are chromatin remodelers that represent
prognostic and novel therapeutic targets for a subset of non-small cell
lung cancers (NSCLCs)


RUVBL1 and RUVBL2 (collectively referred to as RUVBL1/2) are AAA+ ATPases
that function in various chromatin remodeling complexes. We found that
RUVBL1/2 are overexpressed (n = 224) and prognostic of patient outcome in
NSCLC patients (n = 697) who undergo surgical resection (combined TCGA,
KMPlot.com, and SPORE P50CA70907 dataset analyses). To assess the
importance and biological functions of RUVBL1/2 in NSCLC, we measured
cell growth following depletion of RUVBL1/2 in 24 NSCLC lines,
representing a spectrum of oncogenotypes and histologies, and 2 normal
human bronchial epithelial cell lines (HBECs) using two independent RNAi
reagents. Growth inhibitory phenotypes ranged from 19-87% and were
rescued by exogenous expression of an RNAi-resistant cDNA construct,
indicating on-target siRNA effects. Four of the 23 NSCLCs were very
sensitive (>75% growth inhibition), while 88% of NSCLCs were more growth
inhibited than HBECs, indicating a therapeutic window. To establish
molecular biomarkers of RUVBL1/2 dependency, we correlated whole exome
mutation status, whole transcriptome mRNA levels, and a number of other
parameters to sensitivity to RUVBL1/2 depletion. Sensitivity to RUVBL1/2
knockdown did not correlate with the mutation status or expression of any
genes. However, sensitivity to RUVBL1/2 depletion did correlate with
doubling time. Flow cytometry analysis in NSCLC lines sensitive to
RUVBL1/2 KD revealed that RUVBL1/2 depletion resulted in a G2/M arrest
(but not apoptosis), and a decrease in cell cycle related transcripts,
such as CDKN3, AURKA, CIT and CDC20, whereas resistant cell lines do not
exhibit these changes. Initial ChIP-seq analysis suggests that RUVBL1/2
preferentially occupies cell cycle related genes and are depleted in
nucleosome free regions (i.e. transcription start sites). These results,
combined with results from others demonstrating the necessity of ATP
hydrolysis for RUVBL1/2's function(s), indicate that the chromatin
remodelers RUVBL1/2 are potential therapeutic targets in a subset of
NSCLCs. (Supported by UTSW Green Center Fellowship, CPRIT RP120732, SPORE
P50CA70907)

