Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Compartmental flexibility in mammalian folate metabolism


Background: Folate metabolism occurs in parallel cytosolic and
mitochondrial pathways. Increased mitochondrial, but not cytosolic,
folate dependent serine catabolism is among the most consistent metabolic
alterations in human tumors. This study employs genetics coupled with
quantitative metabolic analysis to determine the respective requirements
for compartmentalized folate metabolism in proliferating human
cells.Methods: Using CRISPR-Cas9 technology, we created a library of
deletion mutant cell lines for enzymes in folate metabolism. Cellular
metabolites from these cells were quantified by liquid chromatography
mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Compartmental specific folate metabolic fluxes
were assayed by labeling experiments using isotopic tracers of serine,
glycine and formate.Results: We show that in HEK 293T cells, as well as
in many but not all human cancer cell lines, folate dependent serine
catabolism occurs predominantly in the mitochondria. In mutant cell lines
deficient for mitochondrial folate genes, the reversal of the direction
of cytosolic one-carbon flux enables cell growth, albeit at a reduced
rate and with metabolic hallmarks of 10-formyltetrahydrofolate
deficiency. Addition of exogenous formate rescued the
10-formyltetrahydrofolate deficiency in all mutants, but the growth
defect in only a subset. The growth defect persisted in cell lines mutant
for enzymes required for the generation of mitochondrial one-carbon units
and folate dependent generation of NAD(P)H but not for the production of
formate.Conclusions: This study finds that folate metabolism is flexible
with respect to compartmentalization. Cytosolic folate metabolism can
provide sufficient one-carbon flux to fuel cell growth even in the
complete absence of mitochondrial activity. High expression of
mitochondrial folate genes in cancer may function to meet biosynthetic
requirements under the stressful conditions of the tumor or to provide
necessary compartmentalized one-carbon units and/or reducing equivalents.

