Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exome sequencing of UKLS lung cancer CT screened early stage
cancers


INTRODUCTIONDevelopments in both low-dose CT-screening within populations
at high risk of lung cancer and sequencing analysis of lung tumours have
improved the prospects for early detection and clinical management of
lung cancer. Such approaches potentially could provide biological insight
into the early stages of lung cancer development, which until now have
been refractory to genomic analysis, since lung tumours are rarely
identified at a presymptomatic timepoint.BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF PERTINENT
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURESIndividuals with at least a 5% risk of developing
lung cancer within 5 years (according to the LLPv2 lung cancer risk
score) were recruited to the UK Lung low dose CT Screening (UKLS) trial.
Ten of the early stage NSCLC UKLS tumours were prepared for exome
sequencing. Tumour DNA was extracted from FFPE material and DNA was also
extracted from matched blood samples. Tumour and blood libraries were
prepared using an Agilent SureSelect exome-capture kit and sequenced to
100x and 50x, depth respectively, on the Illumina HiSeq platform (Oxford
Gene Technology, UK). Sequence data were aligned against the GRCh37 human
reference and matched samples were subject to local realignment in pairs.
Somatic variants were identified using a combination of EBCall, MuTect
and VarScan2 and were post-filtered to remove false positive variants
(alignment artifacts and FFPE-hypersensitive sites) by comparison between
samples.TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) lung adenocarcinoma and squamous
cell carcinoma samples from smokers and former smokers (who had complete
data for a minimal set of clinical and epidemiological variables) were
compared to the UKLS samples described above. To ensure comparable
genomic regions were studied, both the UKLS and TCGA somatic variants
were restricted to protein-coding regions covered by the Agilent
SureSelect array but disjoint from simple-repetitive regions.SUMMARY OF
THE NEW, UNPUBLISHED DATADespite detection at an early stage, somatic
mutations were identified in all CT-detected tumours, including
non-synonymous variants in known driver genes. Between 71 and 471
variants were detected within non-repetitive protein-coding regions,
which is comparable to, if somewhat lower than, the number of variants in
the same regions in the TCGA ever-smoker samples (p = 0.17;
Kruskal-Wallis). The results suggest that the majority of somatic
variants exist in lung tumours prior to the evolution of symptoms and are
consistent with recent studies of lung cancer heterogeneity wherein the
majority of mutations occur prior to subclonal branching.STATEMENT OF
CONCLUSIONSSomatic variations in the host genome are readily detected in
FFPE material from pre-symptomatic lung tumours. Mutational burden is
comparable to lung adenocarcinoma and squamous carcinoma from mature
symptomatic individuals providing further evidence for the long latency
of lung tumour development.

