Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel molecular targets for treatment of
castration-resistant prostate cancer


One of the major limitations of current therapies for treatment of
prostate cancer is the acquisition of castration-resistance by tumor
cells. Castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) proceeds through
multiple signaling pathways that utilize the PI3K/AKT axis to direct
anti-apoptotic and pro-survival responses in CRPC cells. We performed
in-depth genomic and phenotypic analysis which revealed that two
transcription factors, Cyclic AMP Response Element Binding protein (CREB)
and Forkhead Box O3 (FOXO3a), were inversely expressed in CRPC cells.
Specifically, an upregulation of CREB in stage-specific manner in CRPC
tumor cells was suggestive of its proliferative role in tumor growth.
Conversely, downregulation of FOXO3a expression suggested inhibition of
this transcription factor's pro-apoptotic function, which may also
facilitate tumor growth. In pre-clinical models of CRPC, both CREB and
FOXO3a transcriptionally regulated the function of prostate tumor
suppressor, Par-4 (prostate apoptotic response gene-4).Promoter bashing
studies identified consensus regulatory target binding sites of CREB and
FOXO3a on Par-4 promoter. The sequential deletion of three CREB binding
sites in the Par-4 promoter relieved CREB-mediated suppression of Par-4,
whereas sequential deletion of FOXO3a binding sites in Par-4 promoter
abrogated Par-4 promoter activity. We further dissected upstream events
of CREB and FOXO3a, which are regulated by protein kinase-B AKT using a
small-molecule AKT inhibitor (SMAI) drug. Overexpression of AKT in CRPC
(DU-145/AKT, C4-2B/AKT and PC-3/AKT) cells induced pro-survival machinery
by activating CREB and inhibiting pro-apoptotic function of FOXO3a and
resulting in resistance of cells to drug.The in vivo efficacy of our SMAI
drug was evaluated in DU-145/AKT and C4-2B/AKT tumor xenografts in nude
mouse model. AKT overexpressing tumors exhibited aggressive growth rates
and exhibited high vascularisation and angiogenesis as compared to
vector-transfected tumors. Daily oral administration of SMAI drug
significantly inhibited tumor growth in both DU-145 and C4-2B
AKT-overexpressing tumors. IHC analysis of these tumor tissues revealed
reduced FOXO3a expression and increased pCREB expression following
treatment with SMAI drug in AKT versus control tumors.The cooperative
effects of CREB and FOXO3a in AKT-mediated signaling suggests that the
development of small molecule inhibitors targeting AKT/CREB function
while simultaneously inducing FOXO3a/Par-4 activation in CRPC tumors,
represents an attractive target for drug development.

