Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous multi-omic measurement of nucleic-acids and proteins
at 800-plex using single-molecule optical barcodes: Application to cancer
immunotherapy


Both ENCODE and TCGA projects highlighted the value of quantifying
multiple biomarker classes (DNA, RNA, protein) from cancer tumor samples.
In the case of cancer immunotherapy, the importance of measuring non-DNA
markers (e.g., mRNA and proteins) becomes crucial, since cell-signaling,
tumor microenvironment, and protein-protein interactions dominate over
pure SNP-based (DNA) driver mutations in determining therapeutic
response. Combining multiple data types together into a single correlated
analysis, however, is adversely effected by the drastically different
methodologies utilized for measurement. For example, the fluorescence
signal intensity obtained from a camera imaging a protein array (e.g.,
RPPA) is very difficult to correlate directly with an RNA-Sequencing
count of a clonally amplified, cDNA-converted, mRNA molecule. New
developments in multiple biomarker-class optical barcode counting
significantly reduce this problem. Recent work from the Weissleder-lab
[1] has shown how optical barcode technology can be utilized for
multiplexed digital counting of proteins, and be combined with
simultaneous digital counting of nucleic-acids on a single platform.In
this study we describe single-molecule digital counting of mRNA and
proteins in a single simultaneous reaction using 50,000 cells as input (
1000 cells if only protein-targets). Since multiplexed digital protein
counting with barcodes is relatively new, a detailed comparison study
versus flow cytometry was performed. Short photo-cleavable 60-mer
single-stranded DNA-tags that index, and hybridize to, NanoString Optical
barcodes were covalently labeled on the following antibody targets: EGFR,
pEGFR, HistoneH3, CD45, FoxP3, pAKT, PCNA, GAPDH, Her3, PD-L1, pS6, Her2,
ERK, pERK, and a rabbit monoclonal control. Single-target flow cytometry
was performed on three cell-lines (A431, A565, H520) using the unlabeled
primary antibodies and detected using FITC-dye labeled goat anti-rabbit.
The flow-data were then compared to simultaneous 15-plex optical barcode
detection. In all cases, high correlation coefficients (> 0.9) were
obtained when comparing any single-target (flow vs. 15-plex optical
barcode) across all cell-lines (for above-background markers).
Additionally, post-translational modifications were both imaged (F-IHC)
and digitally counted, revealing a high correlation in response. These
multiplexed protein measurements can now be simultaneously combined with
the PanCancer Immune Profiling Panel, consisting of 770 mRNAs
representing 24 infiltrating immune cell-types, as well as a number of
antigen processing pathways, yielding an unprecedented multi-omics
measurement of tumor immune response.[1] Ullal et al. Science
Translational Medicine 6:219 (Jan 15 2014)

