Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole exome sequencing reveals heterogeneity within lobular
carcinoma in situ (LCIS) and clonal selection in the progression to
malignant lesions


INTRODUCTION: Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) is considered both a risk
factor and non-obligate precursor of low-grade estrogen receptor-positive
breast cancer. We sought to define the mutational repertoire, subclone
complexity and heterogeneity of LCIS, and whether invasive lobular
carcinomas (ILCs) would stem from specific subclones within a
LCIS.METHODS: Patients with a history of LCIS undergoing therapeutic or
prophylactic mastectomy were prospectively enrolled in an IRB approved
protocol. Frozen tissue blocks were collected, screened for lesions of
interest (LCIS, ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), ILC, invasive ductal
carcinoma (IDC)) and subject to microdissection and DNA extraction.
Matched germline DNA was available for all cases. Whole exome sequencing
was performed on a HiSeq2000 (Illumina) and data were aligned to the
reference human genome hg19 and processed using GATK. SNVs were called
using MuTect, and indels were called using a combination of Varscan and
Strelka. Purity and ploidy estimates were calculated by ABSOLUTE. Clonal
frequencies were estimated using Pyclone.RESULTS: 30 LCIS, 10 ILCs, 6
IDCs and 7 DCIS from 15 patients qualified for data analysis, resulting
in 18 LCIS-ILC pairs, 22 LCIS-LCIS pairs, 12 LCIS-DCIS pairs, and 14
LCIS-IDC pairs for comparison. 9/18 (50%) LCIS-ILC pairs and 8/22 (36%)
LCIS-LCIS pairs were clonally related, supported by several shared
mutations (median 18, range 7-81 for LCIS-ILC; median 14, range 5-22 for
LCIS-LCIS). All related LCIS-ILC pairs and 6/8 related LCIS-LCIS pairs
shared a pathogenic CDH1 mutation; 75% of related LCIS-ILC pairs also
shared a PIK3CA hotspot mutation. 7/12 (58%) LCIS-DCIS pairs were found
to be clonally related but the number of shared mutations was generally
lower than that found in LCIS-ILC pairs (median 9, range 2-11). No
evidence of a clonal relationship was found in any of the LCIS-IDC pairs
tested. Clonal composition analysis revealed that samples of LCIS display
intra-lesion genetic heterogeneity in the form of the presence of a minor
clone in 70% of cases. In one case, the LCIS minor subclone (15%)
constituted the major clone in the ILC and in another case the LCIS minor
subclone constituted the major clone in the associated DCIS. The majority
of the clonally related lesions were located in the same quadrant of the
breast, however evidence of clonality was found in 5 LCIS-LCIS and 3
LCIS-DCIS pairs located in separate quadrants of the breast.CONCLUSIONS:
Intra-lesion genetic heterogeneity is a common phenomenon in LCIS. The
dominant clone of a LCIS may not always be the clone directly involved in
the progression to malignancy. The spatial relationships of clonally
related lesions in this study suggest that anatomy does not always infer
clonality, as lesions located in separate quadrants of the breast may be
clonally related.

