Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational analysis of paired primary and relapse diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma


Recurrences of diffuse large b-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) represent a high
risk of worse outcome, however knowledge on the genetic mechanism of such
relapses is still lacking. In general, recurrences are considered to be
outgrowths of the original neoplasm, but this concept has been challenged
by rare demonstration of clonally unrelated. In our previous study we
analyzed chromosomal copy number aberrations in paired primary-relapse
DLBCL samples and demonstrated the existence of three different modes of
tumor evolution: (i) clonally unrelated relapses, (ii) clonally related
relapses via a putative common progenitor (branching evolution) and (iii)
clonally related relapses with linear progression. In the current
continuation study we aimed to validate our previous findings and to
expand the dataset by identifying mutations in genes reported to be
frequently mutated in lymphomas at primary and relapse stages of paired
DLBCL samples. In addition, we compare the obtained results to the
mutational profile of DLBCL that never relapsed.We designed and validated
a multiplex PCR-based target-enrichment panel for the 30 most frequently
affected genes in lymphomas. Target-enriched libraries were constructed
using the genomic DNA of 25 matched primary-relapse pairs as well as 20
non-relapsing DLBCL samples. Sequencing was performed with the IonTorrent
PGM sequencer.The data collection is currently in progress. Mutational
data of the paired primary and relapse samples of DLBCL will allow us to
identify DNA mutations which occur early at the primary stage and are
most probably associated with disease onset. Mutations that occur at
relapse will also be detected, allowing insight into genetic mechanisms
that lead to DLBCL recurrence. Chromosomal aberration data available for
the majority of those samples will assist the more precise interpretation
of mutated allelic fractions and a holistic approach to the analysis of
the affected regulatory pathways.Lack of knowledge on the genetic
mechanisms of DLBCL relapse exists despite the fact that these
recurrences are the main cause of morbidity and mortality in such
patients. Paired sample analysis gives a unique opportunity for an
insight in this field. Earlier, analyzing paired primary-relapse samples,
we provided clear evidence for the existence of clonally unrelated
relapses as well as different genetic patterns of DLBCL recurrence. The
current study will complete the characterization of the paired DLBCL
cohort at the base-pair resolution allowing identification of mutations
occurring early at the onset and relapse stages of the disease.

