Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel patient-derived xenograft model for evaluating the role of
TSLP in CRLF2 B-ALL


B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) with genetic alterations
leading to overexpression of CRLF2 (CRLF2 B-ALL) is associated with poor
outcomes. CRLF2 B-ALL is 5 times more common in Hispanic children than
others making it a significant biological component of pediatric cancer
health disparities. CRLF2 is a component of the receptor complex that is
activated by the cytokine, TSLP. Receptor signaling induces Jak/STAT5 and
PI3/AKT/mTOR pathway activation and plays a role in the proliferation and
differentiation B cell precursors. We found that primary human bone
marrow (BM) stroma express TSLP providing an in vivo source of TSLP to
stimulate CRLF2 B-ALL cells. Our goal was to develop patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) models of CRLF2 B-ALL for studies to understand disease
mechanisms and identify therapies to treat CRLF2 B-ALL and reduce the
health disparities for Hispanic children with this disease. PDX models
are possible because many cytokines produced in the mouse show cross
species activity on human cells. However, available data suggests that
mouse TSLP does not activate human CRLF2-mediated signals. Using phospho
flow cytometry we show that mouse TSLP was unable to induce increases in
pSTAT5, pAKT and pS6 observed in CRLF2 B-ALL cells stimulated with human
TSLP. We developed a human TSLP +/- PDX model system by transplanting
immune deficient NSG mice with HS-27 stroma transduced to express human
hTSLP (hTSLP+ mice) or with control vector (hTSLP- mice). Human TSLP was
present at normal human serum levels in hTSLP+ mice but undetectable in
hTSLP- mice. To identify genes targeted by TSLP in CRLF2 B-ALL and verify
pathway activation, we transplanted primary leukemia cells from a
Hispanic patient into hTSLP+ and hTSLP- mice. Whole genome microarray was
performed on CRLF2 B-ALL cells isolated from the BM of the hTSLP+ and
hTSLP- PDX mice. Microarray identified 280 genes that are upregulated and
281 genes that are downregulated in vivo in leukemia cells from hTSLP+ as
compared to hTSLP- PDX mice. Evaluation of microarray data by Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis showed that
genes downstream of mTOR pathway activation were upregulated in hTSLP+ as
compared to hTSLP- mice, confirming hTSLP activity in the hTSLP+ PDX
mice. Our next question was whether cells expanded in hTSLP+ vs. hTSLP-
mice would exhibit changes in their ability to respond to TSLP. When we
subjected PDX-expanded primary CRLF2 B-ALL cells to ex vivo TSLP
stimulation 1/3 fewer gene targets were up- and downregulated in the
leukemia cells expanded in hTSLP- mice as compared to cells from hTSLP+
mice. This suggests that CRLF2 B-ALL cells expanded in xenograft without
TSLP lose some of their ability to respond to TSLP. The hTSLP+ CRLF2
B-ALL PDX mice described here provide a novel preclinical model for
studying disease mechanisms and identifying therapies to target signaling
pathways activated by TSLP in CRLF2 B-ALL and reduce cancer health
disparities for this disease.

