Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low dose sorafenib delays hepatocellular cancer (HCC) development
in the woodchuck model of hepatitis B related HCC


Introduction: The eastern woodchuck is an established model of human
hepatitis B viral infection and spontaneously develops HCC in the context
of chronic woodchuck hepatitis viral infection (WHV) at a median age of
24 months. In this translational model of angiogenesis driven HCC, we
evaluated the impact of sorafenib on delaying HCC development.Methods:
Woodchucks were bred and inoculated at birth with titered infectious WHV
pools obtained from chronic WHV carriers. By 12 months of age, the rate
of chronic WHV infection was >60%. Animals were trained to receive drug
orally mixed in a liquid diet. After an initial single dose woodchuck PK
study it was predicted that sorafenib given orally M-F at 2.5 mg/kg once
daily or 5mg/kg daily would achieve exposure in woodchucks 2x IC50 and 5X
IC50 for all targets of sorafenib. This is within the exposure achieved
in humans where the starting dose achieves exposures that are 10-12X
IC50. We hypothesized that for both long term tolerability and delaying
of HCC development, lower doses maybe ideal. Viral titers of WHV DNA were
serially assessed, PK exposure of sorafenib and serial ultrasound (USG)
was done q2 weeks to assess HCC development. Six WHV+ animals of similar
age per arm were randomized to Placebo (P), low or high dose sorafenib.
Time to tumor development (TTD) was measured from start of therapy to
first occurrence of at least one 2 cm HCC was confirmed on 2 serial USGs.
Tumor volume of all tumors seen was assessed as tumor burden. Results:
Median TTD was 393 days, 490 and 498 days in the P, low and high dose
sorafenib groups respectively. No toxicity was seen and PK results showed
exposures as predicted in the two sorafenib groups. The tumor burden
adjusted for the duration of therapy was significantly lower in the low
dose group than the high dose and P groups. We evaluated three possible
mechansims for this delay in HCC. WHV titers decreased as tumor burden
increased as viral replication halts when malignant transformation
occurs. The delay in TTD was not secondary to an antiviral effect that is
known in this model and in humans to delay HCC occurrence.
Anti-angiogenic effect was measured on H/E following necropsy as tumor
necrosis and involved 7% of the total tumor volume in low dose and 13% of
total tumor volume in high dose animals and 0% in P animals. High dose
sorafenib inhibited the ex-vivo mixed lymphocyte reaction of woodchuck
PBMC whereas low dose sorafenib did not which mechanistically may explain
the difference seen in tumor burden with low compared to high dose
sorafenib. Conclusions: The delay in HCC by 100 days seen in woodchucks
would translate into a 3-9 years delay in HCC occurrence in humans. The
tolerability at low dose for over 2 years, lower tumor burden and
differential immune effects seen at low dose vs higher dose have great
translational significance in the light of the recently completed STORM
trial.Support: Sorafenib: Bayer. Funding: ACS- MSRG 08-096-01-CCE

