Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth inhibition of SCLC cell lines by treatment with LSD1
inhibitors is associated with modulation of neuroendocrine pathways


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive malignancy with a high
propensity for early metastasis. Response rates to first-line
chemotherapy are typically high, but short lived. We describe an
epigenetic-based mechanism for targeting SCLC using inhibitors for the
LSD1 histone lysine demethylase. Mechanistically reversible and
irreversible LSD1 inhibitors (GSK690 and OG-86) demonstrate induction of
either cell cycle arrest or apoptosis in 54% of SCLC cell lines (12/22)
that becomes apparent upon continuous treatment for 7-to-10 days. Maximal
rates of growth inhibition in sensitive cell lines vary from 50-to-95%
and plateaus between 18-to-21 days of LSD1 inhibitor treatment. Thus,
heterogeneous sensitivity to LSD1 inhibitors exists between cell line
models as well as within subpopulations of cells in the same cell line.To
understand the mechanisms underlying LSD1 inhibitor activity in SCLC we
have performed RNA-seq and ChIP-seq experiments coupled with
bioinformatic analysis of expression signatures in sensitive and
resistant models. Our data indicate that although LSD1 is over-expressed
in SCLC cell lines and patient samples relative to non-small cell lung
cancers, high LSD1 expression does not predict sensitivity to LSD1
inhibitors. Pathway analysis demonstrates that LSD1 inhibition modulates
the expression of genes involved in cell adhesion and axon guidance
including members of the Ephrin and Semaphorins families. At LSD1 target
genes, we demonstrate site-specific H3K4me2 histone methylation changes
overlapping LSD1 binding sites, however no global changes in H3K4me2 were
observed. Interestingly we find morphological and cell adhesion changes
in sensitive cell lines that coincide with expression changes in markers
of neuroendocrine differentiation of SCLC such as GRP, NCAM, and NEUROD1.
Based on these data, we propose a model that LSD1 inhibition modulates
the neuroendocrine differentiation program of SCLC cells promoting tumor
inhibition in sensitive SCLC models.

