Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Snm1B/Apollo DNA nuclease functions in resolution of
replication stress and maintenance of genome stability


A critical aspect of normal cellular processes is the maintenance of
genomic stability. Defects in cellular responses to DNA damage can lead
to an accumulation of unrepaired or misrepaired lesions and ultimately,
increased genome instability. Genomic DNA is constantly damaged through
exposure to exogenous agents as well as during endogenous processes,
including DNA replication. Progression of the replication fork can be
impaired by structural or physical blocks leading to fork stalling. If
stalled forks are not properly restarted or repaired, they can collapse,
leading to chromosomal damage including breaks, deletions, and
translocations. Therefore, replication stress associated DNA damage has
been hypothesized as one important source of genome instability
associated with cancer initiation and progression.Cells have evolved
intricate mechanisms to detect, signal, and resolve stalled replication
forks; however, the molecular events involved in these fundamental
processes have not been fully defined. My studies are focused on the DNA
nuclease SNM1B/Apollo which plays critical roles in repairing stalled or
blocked replication forks and also in telomere maintenance. We previously
reported that SNM1B functions within the Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway,
which is required for efficient stabilization of stalled replication
forks. Mutations in the 16 known FA genes cause Fanconi anemia, a human
genome instability disorder characterized by cancer predisposition,
progressive bone marrow failure, and developmental defects. It is
emerging that the SNM1B locus is genomically altered or mutated in a
variety of cancer types and has been mapped at a chromosomal breakpoint
associated with Wilms tumor. Thus, SNM1B likely plays important roles in
the prevention of potential oncogenic chromosomal anomalies; however, its
precise functions during DNA repair processes are not well understood.My
current research is focused on elucidating the importance of the nuclease
activity of SNM1B in stabilizing and repairing stalled replication forks
and how these functions are regulated. Interestingly, SNM1B possesses the
monoubiquitination consensus sequence, RKQL, found in the key FA protein,
FANCD2. I found that substituting arginine for lysine within the
consensus sequence results in defective localization of the mutant SNM1B
protein to stalled forks as well as impaired FANCD2 recruitment to sites
of damage, indicating that this residue has functional importance in the
repair of stalled forks. Using a siRNA knockdown approach in human cell
lines, I determined that SNM1B depletion significantly increases fork
stalling and single-stranded DNA regions, even in unperturbed cells.
Altogether, my recent studies led us to propose that functions of the
SNM1B nuclease during the repair of stalled replication forks ensures
successful replication of the genome and thus, prevents potentially
oncogenic chromosomal aberrations.

