Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microenvironmental influences on glioma stem cell migration


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive of the primary brain tumors and
carries a poor prognosis due to its highly infiltrative nature and
tendency to progress. Glioma stem cells are a small tumor-initiating
population in GBM whose properties are incompletely understood. Autocrine
and paracrine factors associated with specific microenvironmental niches,
such as the perivascular space and hypoxic regions, are thought to
attract and support this stem cell component. Precise mechanisms guiding
the homing to these niches have not been defined. Glioma stem cells
express the receptor CXCR4, which initiates cell migration in the
presence of the chemokine, stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1). Both
hypoxic and vascular regions in the brain express SDF-1. Therefore, we
hypothesize that glioma stem cells transplanted into the brain are driven
by SDF-1 chemoattraction towards vascular and hypoxic niches.Cells were
sorted for the stem cell marker CD133 using MACS for two explanted human
GBM cell lines grown as neurospheres (N08-74 and N08-30). Sorted cells
were compared to unsorted cells by Western blot for expression of CD133,
hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), CXCR4 and stem cell markers under
normoxia and hypoxia. Two million CD133-sorted cells suspended in PBS
were delivered into the nasal mucosa of NOD/SCID mice to test cellular
migration into the brain via intranasal transplantation. Coronal sections
of brain tissue were analyzed at 12 hours after intranasal cell
delivery.In both GBM cell lines (N08-30 and N08-74), we confirmed that
sorted cells expressed more CD133 than unsorted cells and that both cell
lines expressed CXCR4. Further, CXCR4 expression was significantly
greater in the CD133-sorted N08-30 cells with a trend in an increase of
c-Myc expression compared to unsorted cells. Hypoxic exposure of N08-74
CD133-sorted cells showed a trend of increased HIF-1 and c-Myc
expression. In mice, we demonstrated that CD133-sorted cells can migrate
into the brain when delivered intranasally. To show the potential for
migration towards the vasculature, we show that SDF-1 is expressed in the
brain vasculature in vivo.These data demonstrate that GBM cells can be
sorted for CD133-positive glioma stem cells, respond to hypoxia, and
express the SDF-1 receptor, CXCR4. In one cell line, CXCR4 expression
increased after CD133 cell sorting. With intranasal delivery,
CD133-sorted cells can migrate into the brain. Understanding the
migration behavior of glioma stem cells relative to the diverse
microenvironments has implications in treatment for targeting certain
migratory populations or microenvironments. These data prepare the
conditions to test the migratory potential of glioma stem cells in
hypoxic and vascular environments in the brain.

