Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NGF promotes gastrointestinal cancer development through
tumor-associated neurogenesis


The nervous system regulates epithelial homeostasis and tumorigenesis.
However, the precise mechanism of tumor-associated neurogenesis in gut is
still poorly understood. Here, we show that nerve growth factor (NGF), a
member of the neurotrophin family, is markedly upregulated in the tumor
microenvironment and plays a key role in tumor-associated neurogenesis
and carcinogenesis. We established Rosa26-LSL-NGF-IRES-eGFP knockin mice
to obtain conditional NGF overexpression in the gut, by mating to
epithelial-specific Cre-expressing mice. To obtain stomach-specific Cre
expression, we generated Tff2-Cre BAC transgenic mice which specifically
traces the entire gastric epithelium. Tff2-Cre; Rosa26-LSL-NGF-IRES-eGFP
(Tff2-NGF) mice show a marked increase in both neuronal and glial cells,
especially in the distal stomach. Similarly, in Villin-Cre;
Rosa26-LSL-NGF-IRES-eGFP (Villin-NGF) mice, the density of nerves and
glia is increased, especially in the rectum. Strikingly, Tff2-NGF mice
spontaneously develop high-grade dysplasia in the stomach after 8 months,
with an increase in proliferation and stem cell markers. Villin-NGF mice
also show dysplastic tumors in the rectum. When these NGF mice are
treated with chemical carcinogens such as N-nitroso-N-methylurea (MNU) or
azoxymethane (AOM), gastric or colon tumor formation is promoted by NGF
overexpression. Enhanced gastrointestinal tumor development in NGF
overexpression mice is also seen in genetic models such as
H/K-ATPase-IL-1 mice and ApcMin mice. In contrast, treatment with a
pan-Trk kinase inhibitor PLX7486 successfully suppresses the increased
innervation in tumors and inhibits stem cell expansion and tumor
progression. We have previously shown that cholinergic denervation by
vagotomy inhibited gastric tumor development. Although both the
cholinergic (parasympathetic) and adrenergic (sympathetic) nerve
densities are expanded in the NGF mice, sympathetic nerve ablation is not
effective for the prevention of gastric cancer development, suggesting
that cholinergic signal is more important in gastric cancer development.
In fact, Tff2-Cre; Rosa26-LSL-NGF; Chrm3flox/flox mice lacking the
muscarinic receptor 3 in the gastric epithelium are no longer responsive
to the tumor promoting effect of NGF overexpression, suggesting that the
effect is mediated through a cholinergic pathway. Taken together, our
findings highlight the novel interaction between neurogenesis and tumor
development, and suggest that inhibition of NGF/Trk axis, perhaps in
combination with chemical/surgical denervation, could be an effective
therapy against gastrointestinal cancers.

