Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The relationship between autophagy, senescence, and DNA repair


Radiotherapy is used along with other modalities such as surgery,
chemotherapy, and immunotherapy to either shrink tumors before surgery or
kill surviving tumor cells post surgery. Although radiation (and
chemotherapy) induce different modes of cell death, recurrence of cancer
may occur. It has been shown that DNA damage can induce cells to undergo
both autophagy and senescence where both responses can function either as
a pro-survival mechanism or in promoting loss of self-renewal capacity in
the tumor cell. The relationship between autophagy, senescence, and the
DNA repair system has not been well-characterized. The primary aims of
this work were to understand whether autophagy and senescence might be
permissive for DNA repair, thereby allowing the tumor cells to overcome
the persistent DNA damage and recover using HCT116 WT and HCT116 Ligase
IV (-/-) human colon carcinoma cells. Irradiation caused HCT116 Ligase IV
(-/-) cells to lose their capacity to proliferate followed by delayed
cell death, whereas HCT116 WT cells showed proliferative recovery 72
hours post-treatment, consistent with deficiencies in DNA repair in the
Ligase IV (-/-) cells. Irradiation of both cell lines resulted in
enlargement in cell size and accumulation of acidic vacuoles, indicative
of the induction of autophagy. Inhibition of autophagy by Bafilomycin and
Choroquine resulted in radio-sensitization in HCT116 WT cells but not in
HCT116 Ligase IV (-/-) cells, indicating that radiation-induced autophagy
in HCT116 WT cells is likely to be cytoprotective. Both repair competent
HCT116 colon carcinoma cells and Ligase IV deficient cells demonstrated
significant increases in senescent populations upon irradiation based on
-galactosidase staining and enlargement of treated cells. The PARP
inhibitor, Olaparib, enhanced the efficacy of radiation through
interference with DNA repair and the promotion of both autophagy and
senescence but not apoptosis. Taken together, it appears that both
autophagy and senescence may facilitate DNA repair during exposure to
genotoxic stress, and that autophagy and senescence are closely linked
responses in irradiated tumor cells.

