Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of inflammation-related genes that regulate
tumor-associated stemness using high-throughput siRNA screening


Cancer associated stem cells (CSCs) are considered to be responsible for
tumor recurrence, metastasis as well as chemoresistance. These properties
of tumor associated stemness are maintained by specialized
microenvironment, including inflammation which is a key component of the
tumor microenvironment. To study the relationship between inflammation
and stemness of CSCs, here, we established a robust high-throughput RNAi
screen platform for a global survey of inflammation-related genes
affecting CSCs identity via alteration of Oct4 expression. Consequently,
we found 72 novel genes from 1027 inflammation-related genes which could
significantly affect OCT4 expression. These genes are functionally
distinct including cytokines, adhesion molecules, apoptotic molecules,
kinase, metabolism-related enzymes and transcriptional factors. Further,
we carry out a functional validation of the 72 hits by mean of
ALDEFLUORTM assay and we demonstrate that silence genes expression of
IL-1A, IL-1B, ICAM3, CCL16, TRAF6, PRTN3, PDE3A, BCAR1, NFKB1 and IKK- by
siRNA would dramatically downregulate of the ALDH+ subpopulation cells.
Moreover, we studied the functional roles of these factors on different
kinds of tumor cell lines and mult-organ tumor tissue microarray. We
observed that knockdown TRAF6 (TNF- receptor associated factor 6) would
reduce the expression of stemness associated genes SOX2, OCT4, NANOG,
LIN28b, IKK- -catenin, and abate sphere-forming ability of breast cancer
MDA-MB-231 cells, lung cancer A549 cells, liver cancer HepG2 cells and
colon cancer SW-480 cells. It was also found that the expression of TRAF6
has a conspicuous relationship with multiple tumor occurrence and
malignancy on tissue microarray. Most importantly, we found that
knockdown the expression of TRAF6 could markedly suppressed tumor growth
and metastasis of MDA-MB-231 in NOD/SCID mice model. Together, we
uncovers a wealth of novel inflammatory regulators of CSCs by a
high-throughput siRNA screen and validated the cytokine TRAF6 could
govern tumor associated stemness in different tumors in vitro and in
vivo, which would be a potential therapeutical target.

