Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-122 is a potential regulator of DNA methylation partly by
affecting the global level profile of 5hmC


MicroRNA-122 is a liver specific microRNA. Previously, we demonstrated
that Mir122a-/- mice developed steatohepatitis, fibrosis and HCC which
recapitulates the multistep hepatocarcinogenesis found in human. In
addition, we detected a global change of gene expression involving
upregulation of 606 genes and downregulation of 280 genes. Among the
genes highly differentially expressed in Mir122a-/- livers are several
classic imprinted genes H19/Igf2, Meg3, Mirg, Gdf10 and Rian. Imprinting
of both H19/Igf2 and Mirg loci is controlled by CTCF, which is a direct
target of miR-122. These earlier findings imply that miR-122 may have a
role in epigenetic regulation.Recently, the active demethylation pathway
involving 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) and TET (tet methylcytosine
dioxygenase) enzymes are found to regulate the genome epigenetically.
5hmC epigenetic mark was found to associate with human cancer development
with frequent downregulation in cancers, including HCC.We detected a
progressive loss of 5hmC in liver, the tumor-adjacent tissues and liver
tumors of Mir122a-/- mice similar to that of human HCC. Loss of 5hmC is
accompanied with downregulation of DNA dioxygenase (Tet1 and Tet3), and
upregulation of DNA deaminases (Apobec1 and Apobec3) as well as DNA
glycosyalse (Smug1) in Mir122a-/- tumors.A genome-wide profiling of 5hmC
was performed to delineate the dynamic changes of DNA methylation. The
5hmC-containing genomic DNA fragments were collected and sequenced. Our
preliminary results showed that Mir122a-/- livers appear to have
significantly fewer 5hmC peaks and covered smaller portion of the genome
than that of WT. Even fewer 5hmC peaks covering small portion of the
genome were detected for the Mir122a-/- liver tumor samples. The number
of identified 5hmC peaks follows the order of WT > Mir122a-/- (2-month) >
tumor-adjacent liver tissue > tumor of Mir122a-/-, a trend that is in
agreement with quantification of 5hmC by both IHC and DNA dot
blotting.The preliminary finding that aberrant DNA demethylation was
initiated in young Mir122a-/- mice suggests that active demethylation is
likely an early event of hepatocarcinogenesis.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

