Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression patterns in pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasms


Background:Pancreatic cancer remains the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related death in the United States with a 5-year survival rate of
5%. This oppressively-low survival is owed largely to the fact that the
disease is rarely diagnosed before reaching an advanced stage. The broad
majority of pancreatic tumors are thought to arise from pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (PanINs). These may exist for many years in a
patient prior to diagnosis, but there remains no reliable, non-invasive
method to screen patients for PanINs. One of the main challenges in
identifying suitable biomarkers in the expression landscape of PanINs is
the difficulty in obtaining pure RNA of usable quality/quantity from such
small and RNAse-rich lesions. To this end, we have developed a sample
processing strategy for the preservation and isolation of PanIN RNA
through laser microdissection. Our aim is to sequence and compare these
samples of PanIN RNA in order to identify biomarkers for early
detection.Methods:Gross dissections of fresh patient pancreatic tissue
were mounted on activated PEN slides and processed for microdissection
through our rapid workflow. Total RNA was extracted from 13 laser
microdissected patient samples (1 normal, 2 PanIN1s, 3 PanIN2s, and 7
PanIN3s) and sequenced on a SOLiD v. 5500 Wildfire. Total RNA was
extracted from an additional 8 laser microdissected samples (2 normals, 2
PanIN1s, 2 PanIN2s, and 2 PanIN3s) and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq
2500. In both sets, a cutoff RIN score of 7.0 was used for RNA quality.
Data from the two sets of samples were combined using ComBat for batch
removal. Lists of differentially-expressed genes in comparisons between
the different stages of PanINs and normal epithelium were generated using
limma with an empirical Bayes method and fitted intensity
trend.Results:Using cutoffs of adjusted p-value 2.32, we find that a
number of genes in the limma-generated lists are significantly
upregulated in PanINs compared to normal epithelium: 33, 44, and 42 in
PanIN1s, 2s, and 3s respectively. Many of the highly overexpressed genes
in PanINs are previously-identified oncogenes in pancreatic cancer and
PanINs, including REG4, CLDN18, and PPARG. At least one of the most
highly overexpressed genes in PanIN3s is novel and has intriguing
biomarker and functional implications. We have confirmed its
overexpression in patient PanINs and tumors through IHC staining and are
in the process of functional studies.Conclusions/Future directions:In
this study, we describe a workflow for the isolation of pure,
high-quality RNA from PanIN lesions.We have identified a few novel
targets that we are in the process of validating in patient tumors and
conducting functional studies on. Additionally, we are beginning to
explore alternative transcription and gene fusion data in our samples for
the possibility of additional targets. It is our hope that one or more of
these may show promise as a screening or treatment target for pancreatic
cancer at its earliest stages.

