Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing combinations of FDA approved chemotherapy in malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) cell lines


Background: Malignant Peripheral Neural Sheath Tumors (MPNST) are a type
of sarcoma that arise spontaneously from a peripheral nerve or plexiform
neurofibroma. Approximately 1 in 10 people with a constitutional mutation
in the NF1 gene, a negative regulator of RAS function, develop MPNST with
a peak incidence in the adolescent and young adult years. Available
chemotherapy treatment for MPNST has low response rates, and the
prognosis for unresectable or metastatic tumors is poor. A clinically
relevant system to rapidly evaluate the efficacy of many agents and
combinations of agents on MPNSTs which can be translated into clinical
trials is needed.Methods: Here, we seek to identify promising single drug
and combination therapies using FDA approved and other agents of interest
via high-throughput screening platforms, based on established MPNST cell
line models (SNF02.2, SNF10.1, SNF94.3, and SNF96.2). Taking into
consideration past lessons learned from in vitro experiments, we designed
stringent screening conditions that assess the candidate compounds and
combinations at clinically-relevant concentrations and exposure times
that mimic the in vivo pharmacokinetics in an effort to maximize the
translational potential of these results. Fifty-four agents with roughly
inhibitors of the RAS downstream pathways, another kinase inhibitors, and
the remainder a representation of many classes of agents with diverse
mechanisms of action were screened across 4 cell lines with biological
replicates. The majority of the agents are FDA approved. Others are in
active clinical trials, demonstrate a promising mechanism of action, or
have published preclinical data in MPNST models. CellTiter Glo assays
were used to assess cell viability at the maximal achievable serum
concentration from phase I studies and at two lower concentrations.
Promising agents were then studied in two-drug combinations to evaluate
for synergy in addition to efficacy of the combination. The combinations
were selected with careful attention to known drug-drug interactions,
metabolism, schedule and non-overlapping toxicities.Results: Our
screening results indicate that a number of FDA approved chemotherapy
agents, evaluated at clinically relevant concentrations and exposure
times, significantly reduced cell viability across all cell lines tested.
These findings suggest promising opportunities for developing combination
clinical trials.

