Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LSD1 functions as a global androgen receptor coactivator and is a
therapeutic target in prostate cancer


Androgen receptor (AR) plays a pivotal role in prostate cancer (PCa) and
remains critical for more aggressive castration-resistant PCa (CRPC)
through transactivation of multiple genes. Although CRPC is generally
responsive to further CYP17A1 inhibition (abiraterone) or more potent AR
antagonist (enzalutamide) treatments, patients treated with these agents
still relapse within 1-2 years, and high levels of AR and AR regulated
genes in many of these relapsed tumors indicate that AR activity has
again been restored. Therefore, there remains a need for further novel AR
targeted therapies.Initially identified as a component in the REST
complex that functions as a transcriptional suppressor, Lysine Specific
Demethylase 1 (LSD1) removes the methyl group from histone 3 lysine 4
(H3K4me1 and 2), and turns off the marks of active transcription. Our
recent genome-wide integrated analysis of LSD1 and AR chromatin bindings
and gene expression profiles indicates that LSD1 is broadly associated
with AR regulated enhancers, and LSD1 functions as a coactivator on
AR-stimulated genes through demethylating novel histone or nonhistone
substrates in addition to H3K4me. LSD1 is also associated with FOXA1 at
AR regulated enhancer sites, and an LSD1-FOXA1 interaction enhances
binding of both proteins at these sites. These results clearly
demonstrated LSD1 as a therapeutic target in prostate cancer.We then
accessed if LSD1 enzymatic activity is required for its global AR
coactivator function. AR transcription activity is significantly impaired
in cells overexpressing a catalytic-deficient LSD1 mutant. In addition,
this mutant also decreased FOXA1 binding on AR-regulated enhancers. We
then selected of a panel of LSD1 inhibitors (a few of them have been used
in clinical trials for lung cancer and leukemia) to assess the effects on
AR activity and PCa cell growth. Inhibition of LSD1 consistently impaired
AR activity through abrogating acetylated H3K27 at AR-regulated
enhancers. LSD1 inhibitor also decreased FOXA1 binding prior to androgen
stimulation. While most of inhibitors showed relatively low efficacy in
PCa cells (>50M), LSD1-C12 is highly potent and specific at M range to
dramatically decrease AR activity and PCa cell growth. Overall, our study
suggests that the AR coactivator function of LSD1 depends on its
enzymatic activity and targeting LSD1 with more specific and potent
inhibitors is a promising therapeutic approach to treat PCa. Furthermore,
understanding the mechanism of LSD1 coactivator function will potentially
advance PCa therapy by targeting LSD1.

