Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NGS based microhaplotype counting for ultrasensitive human DNA
detection


Introduction: Fields of forensics, paternity, and hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT) require human identity testing. The polymorphic
nature of short tandem repeats (STRs) makes them most frequently used but
they are relatively insensitive. In 2000, we demonstrated
proof-of-principle for the use of SNPs for bone marrow engraftment
testing; however, due to the high error rate of NGS platforms, use of a
single SNP for this purpose is not possible. Here, we hypothesized that
using multiple SNPs on a short amplicon (microhaplotype) could overcome
the inherently high error rate of NGS, and use it for ultrasensitive
detection of human DNA mixes.Methods: As proof-of-principle, we
identified a 119 bp region on HLA-A Exon 3 that contains a cluster of 18
SNPs. Using cell lines with known HLA-A haplotypes, we made serial
dilutions from 1% to 0.001%. By sequencing each dilution at least twice
we were able to determine accuracy and limit of detection. Samples
collected from patients after BMT that tested as all donor were analyzed
using this approach. Sample preparation and sequencing was done per
manufacturer's protocol using the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine and
200 base chemistry. Additionally, we analyzed the 1000 Genomes database,
using 300 bp windows, and identified many other loci that contained
clusters of at least 9 SNPs.Results: Alignment and analysis of common
European HLA-A haplotypes of this region show mean number of differences
of 6 SNPs. Homozygous samples with known HLA-A genotypes that varied by
multiple SNPs were analyzed and demonstrated no cross-talk between them.
Analyzing serially diluted samples we were able to easily achieve a limit
of detection of 1 in 10,000 molecules (0.01%). In BMT samples that tested
as all donor by STR analysis, we were able to detect patient DNA of up to
1.5%. From 1000 Genomes data, we identified 4,349 loci that contained at
least 9 SNPs within a 300 bp window. Informativity of identified loci was
determined for 3 major ethnic groups using 1000 Genomes phased haplotype
data.Conclusions: Ultrasensitive detection of human DNA mixes can be
achieved using multiple SNPs within a short amplicon despite the high
error rates associated with NGS. This assay may be useful to detect early
relapse following bone marrow transplantation and other clinical
applications.

