Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Opposing effects of the Hippo-Yap pathway and c-Myc in phenotypic
determination of mouse hepatocytic tumors induced by myrAkt


Activation of the Hippo-Yap pathway and c-Myc is known to be involved in
human liver tumors, either hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and
cholangiocarcinoma (CC). In liver-specific mouse knockouts of negative
regulators of the Hippo-Yap pathway, such as Nf2 or Sav, both HCC and CC
could have been induced, while the activation of c-Myc has been suggested
to be involved in HCC development and activation of stem-like potential
of hepatocytic tumor cells. Although an interaction of the Hippo-Yap
pathway and c-Myc has been suggested in human HCC cell lines, the precise
nature of the interaction in hepatocarcinogenesis is not clear. In the
present study, we examined the roles of the Hippo-Yap pathway and c-Myc
in mouse liver tumor models, in which, along with the active Akt (myrAkt)
gene, the active Yap (YapS127A) gene and/or the c-Myc gene were
introduced into hepatocytes in vivo through hydrodynamic tail vein
injection and the Sleeping Beauty transposon-mediated somatic
integration. Introduction of myrAkt alone induced multinodular liver
tumors 9 months after transfection. The individual tumors showed various
histologic features: HCC with ductular differentiation, HCC, and CC in
order of frequency. Cotransfection of either YapS127A or Myc demonstrated
tumor promoting activities with macroscopically evident liver tumors
being developed after 6 to 8 weeks. The histology of tumors induced by
myrAkt/YapS127A was CK19-positive ductule-forming adenocarcinoma
reminiscent of CC. In contrast, the tumor induced by myrAkt/c-Myc showed
typical histology of moderately differentiated HCC without CK19
expression. When all (myrAkt/YapS127A/c-Myc) were simultaneously
introduced, marked hepatomegaly due to diffuse liver tumors was apparent
even after 2 to 3 weeks. Histologically, the livers were replaced by
poorly differentiated HCC or undifferentiated carcinoma. Although there
were scattered foci of CK19-positive tumor cells, no apparent tubular
structures were noted. RT-qPCR analyses revealed that the mRNA expression
of genes involved in Notch signaling (Jag1, Hes1, and Hes2), Ctgf, and
Tnf was significantly increased in myrAkt/YapS127A-induced tumors, but
not in tumors induced by myrAkt/c-Myc or myrAkt/YapS127A/Myc. In
conclusion, while both the Hippo-Yap pathway and c-Myc enhance
hepatocarcinogenesis, the activation of the former induces ductular
differentiation in hepatocytic tumors generating a CC-like phenotype,
whereas the latter suppresses the transdifferentiation and maintains
hepatocytic features.

