Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutations in SF3B1 lead to aberrant splicing through cryptic 3
splice site selection and impair hematopoietic cell differentiation


Heterozygous mutations in SF3B1, a component of the U2 complex involved
in the recognition of 3 splice sites (ss), have been reported with high
frequency in refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts (RARS, a subtype of
myelodysplastic syndrome, MDS) and have also been observed in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and several solid tumors. To study the impact
of SF3B1 mutations on splicing, RNAseq data obtained from breast cancer,
melanoma, CLL and MDS samples with mutant (SF3B1MUT) or wild-type SF3B1
(SF3B1WT) were compared. The majority of aberrant junctions identified in
the samples with mutant SF3B1 utilized an alternative 3ss, suggesting its
neomorphic function. Motif analysis of the sequences used by SF3B1MUT
revealed the usage of a cryptic AG with a shorter and weaker
polypyrimidine tract. Minigenes with modifications of these sites
revealed the importance of both intronic and exonic sequence features for
the recognition of the cryptic AG by SF3B1MUT. Of the aberrant junctions
identified, several were common across all hotspot mutations and
diseases; however, a unique aberrant splicing profile was found for each
disease suggesting lineage and disease specific effects. The majority of
splicing defects introduced a premature termination codon downstream of
the cryptic AG leading to nonsense mediated decay (NMD) of aberrant
transcripts and downregulation of gene expression, such as ABCB7.
Gene-set enrichment analysis of aberrantly spliced and differentially
expressed genes in SF3B1MUT MDS samples identified genes involved in cell
differentiation and epigenetic pathways which are known to be deregulated
in MDS. The impact on erythroid differentiation by SF3B1MUT was studied
in transduced TF-1 cells following erythropoietin (EPO) stimulation. As
expected, TF-1 SF3B1WT cells were able to differentiate normally after
EPO treatment; however, expression of SF3B1K700E (the most common hotspot
mutation found in RARS and CLL) induced a block in erythoid
differentiation. This differentiation block was not observed with the
expression of SF3B1G742D, a mutation found in CLL but not RARS,
suggesting a context dependent role for SF3B1 mutations. Interestingly,
the differentiation block observed in SF3B1K700E was associated with
cytokine independent growth. Initial mining of RNAseq data from SF3B1MUT
TF-1 cells highlighted several aberrantly spliced and NMD-downregulated
genes previously implicated in MDS. Finally, a xenograft model was
developed by subcutaneous implantation of transduced TF-1 cells. After
several passages, an enrichment of TF-1 SF3B1K700E cells was observed,
suggesting a growth advantage for SF3B1MUT cells over SF3B1WT cells. This
data suggests that the K700E SF3B1 mutation can lead to a block in
differentiation and competitive advantage as observed in human RARS.

