Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E7090: A potent and selective FGFR inhibitor with activity in
multiple FGFR-driven cancer models with distinct mechanisms of activation


The fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling pathway comprises 18 ligands
and 4 FGF receptor subtypes, FGFR1, 2, 3 and 4, which are known as
receptor-type tyrosine kinases corresponding to those ligands. Upon
ligand binding, FGFRs activate an array of downstream signaling pathways,
such as the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) and the
phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathways. Genetic abnormalities
(gene fusion, mutation and amplification) of FGFRs are known to cause
constitutive activation of their signaling pathways, which play an
important role in proliferation, survival and migration of cancer cells,
tumor angiogenesis, drug resistance, etc. These abnormalities have also
been reported to be involved in different cancer types including lung,
breast, endometrial, gastric, and bladder cancer so far. Therefore, FGFRs
are considered as one of potential targets for cancer therapy.E7090 is an
orally available, selective and potent inhibitor of FGFR1, 2 and 3
tyrosine kinase activities.E7090 displayed inhibition of FGFR1, 2, and 3
kinase activities with the IC50 values of approximately 1 nmol/L. E7090
also inhibited the growth of SNU-16, human gastric cancer cell line
harboring FGFR2 amplification with an IC50 value of 3 nmol/L. This
activity was about 60-fold stronger than that against VEGF-stimulated
HUVEC growth. Kinase profiling assay consisting of 93 kinases including
non-receptor and serine/threonine kinases, also demonstrated that E7090
inhibited limited kinases including FGFR-1, -2 and -3. In addition, E7090
inhibited proliferation of human cancer cell lines harboring various
types of FGFRs gene abnormalities such as amplification, mutation, or
translocation in vitro, which are confirmed by the inhibition of FGFR
signaling. E7090 also showed significant antitumor activities on various
human xenografts harboring FGFRs gene abnormalities in a dose dependent
manner and demonstrated tumor shrinkage at several doses in some models.
Furthermore, pharmacodynamics analysis revealed that E7090 inhibited
phosphorylation of FGFRs in SNU-16 xenograft tumors in a dose-dependent
manner. Overall, the in vitro and in vivo studies confirm that E7090 is a
potent and selective FGFRs inhibitor, showing promising antitumor
activities with wider therapeutic windows in preclinical cancer models
harboring FGFRs gene abnormalities. E7090 has been advanced through
preclinical development and we disclose here the first details of its
preclinical profile.

