Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathophysiological role of microRNA-29 in pancreatic cancer stroma


Dense fibrotic stroma associated with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC) has been a major obstacle for drug delivery to the tumor bed and
may impede attempts to slow down PDAC progression and metastasis.
However, current anti-stromal drugs have not improved tumor response to
chemotherapy or patient survival. Thus, a better understanding of the
molecular mechanisms associated with tumor-stromal interactions is
desperately needed to develop novel anti-stromal therapeutic approaches.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are an abundant class of highly conserved, small
non-coding RNAs that function as key regulators of eukaryotic gene
expression and cellular homeostasis. miR-29 is known to play a paramount
role in the fibrotic process of several organs by providing crucial
functions downstream of pro-fibrotic signaling pathways such as TGF-1 and
regulating the expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, a major
component in the PDAC stroma. Upregulation of TGF-1 is commonly
associated with PDAC pathogenesis and is known to activate stromal cells.
Furthermore, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) that stimulates
tumor angiogenesis is a predicted target of miR-29. We hypothesize that
miR-29 may be misregulated in TGF-1 activated PDAC stromal cells and lead
to excessive accumulation of ECM proteins and VEGF. Restored expression
of miR-29 could be therapeutically beneficial to modulate tumor-stromal
interactions.To understand the role of miR-29 in PDAC stroma, we examined
miR-29 expression patterns in TGF-1 activated stromal cells using
qPCR/northern blot analysis and determined ECM and VEGF protein
expression. In activated stromal cells, we observed loss of miR-29 in
correlation with a significant increase in ECM and VEGF protein
expression. In addition, in both murine and human PDAC samples, loss of
miR-29 expression is associated with an increase in stromal percentage
estimated by Sirius red stain. To evaluate the physiological role of
miR-29 in stroma, we performed gain and loss-of-function studies by
transfecting stromal cells with synthetic miR-29 mimics or locked nucleic
acid, a miR-29 inhibitor. Overexpression of miR-29 in stromal cells
suppressed matrix and VEGF protein expression, and conversely, depletion
of miR-29 lead to their significant increase. Finally, to evaluate the
effect of miR-29 overexpression in stromal cells on cancer colony growth,
we directly co-cultured miR-29 transfected stromal cells with pancreatic
cancer cells for 10 days, and subsequently, cancer colony number and
stromal deposition was determined by crystal violet and Sirius red stains
respectively. We observed a significant decrease in the number of cancer
colonies and stromal accumulation in co-cultures. In conclusion, our
results provide insight into the mechanistic role of miR-29 in PDAC
stroma and its potential use as a novel anti-stromal therapeutic agent.

