Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Brain-derived endothelial cells stimulate migration of different
human, mouse, and rat glioma cell lines in vivo and in vitro


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most lethal of the human brain
tumors. Despite intensive chemotherapy, radiotherapy and surgery,
patients usually die within 1-2 years of diagnosis. Glioma cells display
the remarkable capacity to infiltrate the brain. They diffusely invade
the brain by active cell migration either along blood vessels, white
matter tracts, interstitially, or surrounding the meninges. We identified
a number of glioma cells (including glioma stem cells) from mouse and
human which migrate primarily along the vasculature. Molecular
determinants that attract glioma cells to blood vessels remain poorly
understood; inhibition of glioma growth along blood vessels could be a
potential treatment strategy for GBM. In the present study, we studied
whether brain-derived endothelial cells alone, or in combination with
other brain cell types attract glioma cells. To do so we tested the
ability of human and mouse brain-derived endothelial cells to stimulate
the migration of human, mouse and rat-derived glioma cell lines in an in
vitro migration assay. We tested the migration of different primary human
glioma cell lines like HF2303, MGG8, MSP-12, IN859, IN2045 and U251 in
response to mouse brain-derived endothelial (MBVE) cells and mixed mouse
brain cells (MMB). Of these, HF2303, MSP-12 cells showed significant
migration but not MGG8, IN859, IN2045 and U251 cell lines. Further,
Gl26-cit, a mouse glioma and CNS1-cit a rat cell line also exhibited
significant migration towards MBVE as well as MMB cells. These results
are in line with our in vivo data showing that HF2303, and Gl26-cit, but
not MGG8 cells, invade along the blood vessels. Differential migration of
various human glioma cell lines in response to MBVE cells is probably due
to their heterogeneous growth patterns in vivo. Interestingly, our in
vitro data showed that the mouse endothelial cells together with mouse
astrocytes, another brain cell type, promote the migration of Gl26-cit
cells to a greater extent than the mouse endothelial cells alone.In
summary, the behavior of glioma cells in vitro is consistent with their
migration patterns in vivo. Further, other brain cell types like
astrocytes along with MBVE cells enhance migration of glioma cells.
Therefore, we are now using this in vitro model to discover the molecular
mechanisms responsible for glioma growth towards blood vessels.This work
was supported by NIH-NINDS, the Department of Neurosurgery, and very
generous support from Phil F. Jenkins.

