Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA expression in saliva in locally advanced oral and
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma


Background: Oral cavity/oropharynx squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is a
common cancer in the developing world. Most patients (pts) present with
inoperable locally advanced disease, which yields low cure and
disease-free survival rates. Concurrent high-dose cisplatin
chemoradiation (CRT) is the standard treatment for such pts in our
institution. Although this regimen provides high response rates, marked
toxicity is observed and relapses are frequent. In light of that,
candidate markers for appropriate patient selection are needed to improve
OSCC outcomes. There is evidence that miRNAs (miRs) play a key role in
resistance to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. However, the role of miRNAs
in chemoresistance in OSCC remains poorly elucidated. In the present
study we analyzed the expression of miRNAs in the saliva of unresectable
locally advanced OSCC pts either before or after CRT. Our goal was to
identify miRNAs related to long-term response to CRT with concurrent
cisplatin, and also to verify whether circulating miRs are contained
within exosomes or circulating free in the saliva. Patients/methods: A
total of 33 OSCC pts were included in three groups: (1) treatment-nave (N
= 16), (2) after treatment failure (disease progression after CRT - N =
7), and (3) disease-free pts for at least 2 years (N = 10). We also
studied saliva of eight healthy volunteers. Following a review of studies
in the literature that microRNAs associated with chemoradiotherapy in
squamous cell carcinoma, the miR-21-5p, miR-15a-5p, miR-200b-3p and
miR-296-5p were chosen to be analyzed by qRT-PCR, using LNA primers set
(Exiqon). The spike-in Sp6 miRNA was added to saliva samples to control
of variation in RNA recovery and the miR-16-5p was for normalization of
sample-to-sample RNA variation. The Mann-Whitney U and Kruskal Wallis
tests were used to compare the sample groups. Results: The miR-296-5p
expression was below the detection level in almost all saliva samples and
was excluded from further analyses. As compared to the healthy volunteers
group, both samples from pts in groups 1 and 3 showed an increased
expression of miR-21-5p, miR-15a-5p, miR-200b-3p. Significant reduction
of the expression of miR-21-5p and miR-200b-3p (p = 0.01 and 0.08) was
observed in group 2 patients, as compared to group 1. Furthermore, the
expression of these two miRNAs was higher in group 3 pts compared to
group 2 (p = 0.01). Transmission electron microscopic preliminary data of
isolated microvesicles exhibited round vesicles measuring 30-60 nm in
diameter, compatible with the size of exosomes. Conclusion: Changes in
the abundance of circulating miR-21-5p and miR-200b-3p, previously
reported as crucial modulators of stemness and Head and Neck SCC
progression, may be associated with long-term response to cisplatin-based
CRT. Supported by Fundao de Amparo a Pesquisa (FAPESP 2013/25397-0).

