Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effectiveness of autophagy inhibition in sensitizing
triple-negative breast cancer cells to chemotherapy


Introduction: High recurrence rates, drug resistance after initial
response to chemotherapy, and overall poor prognosis along with the
limited treatment options make triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) a
major clinical challenge. Autophagy, an evolutionary conserved
degradation and recycling process, has been shown to function as an
adaptive survival response to chemotherapy. Previous studies have
indicated higher expression of autophagy markers in TNBCs compared to
other breast cancer subtypes, as well as their dependence on autophagy
for survival. Our laboratory has also shown in xenograft models an
enhanced effectiveness of chemotherapy for the treatment of TNBC when
given in combination with autophagy inhibition (AI). These results
support TNBCs as a good candidate for AI to improve efficacy of existing
therapeutic regimens. However, currently available agents for AI in
cancer patients have limited effectiveness, and development of more
potent autophagy inhibitors (AIs) is underway.Objective: Develop and test
new tools for more potent AI in vivo.Experimental Design: We are
employing in vitro models using TNBC lines MDA-MB-231 and SUM159PT, as
well as their derivatives R8 and R75, resistant to Epirubicin (EPI) and
other anthracyclines. We are evaluating effects of various AIs, including
lysosomotropic agents HCQ and lys05, siRNAs and shRNAs targeting
autophagy-related (Atg) proteins, and small molecule inhibitors (under
development) of ATG4B protein. In vivo xenograft mouse models of
MDA-MB-231 and R8 are being used to evaluate the effects of combinatorial
therapy with EPI and AI.Methods: For the assessment of autophagy levels
before and after AI we used autophagy flux (degradative completion of
autophagy) assays. We evaluated the effects of chemotherapy alone and in
combination with AIs on parent and resistant sub-lines by assessing their
proliferation. For in vivo studies, TNBC cells are injected
subcutaneously in Rag2M mice. Treatment with EPI, AI, or their
combination is administered after tumor formation. Treatment efficacy is
evaluated by tumor volume measurements; tumors are also assessed for the
expression of autophagy markers.Results: Our in vitro experiments showed
enhanced cytotoxicity of lys05 compared to HCQ either alone or in
combination with EPI. However, the use of lys05 in vivo gives
contradictory results and requires further evaluation. AI targeting
ATG4B, using shRNA-inducible monoclonal cell lines derived from
MDA-MB-231 cells and novel small molecule inhibitors of ATG4B,
significantly affected cancer cell proliferation in vitro, and is
currently being investigated in vivo.Conclusion: Novel approaches to AI
may serve as useful tools to assess the effects of AI in vitro and in
vivo. Our preliminary results suggest that more potent AIs may improve
the effectiveness of treatment of TNBC.Supported by CIHR GPG102167 and
CIHR/AVON OBC127216.

