Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CRLX101, an investigational camptothecin-containing
nanoparticle-drug conjugate, reverses the HIF-1-mediated increase in
cancer stem cells caused by bevacizumab in a preclinical model of
triple-negative breast cancer


Antiangiogenic agents are designed to impede the development of new tumor
blood vessels, thereby starving tumors of oxygen and nutrients to
ultimately block tumor growth. Despite advances made in developing
antiangiogenic therapies, clinical and preclinical data suggest that
these drugs have limited efficacy in breast cancer patients. Tumors
inevitably develop resistance to antiangiogenic agents and patients
frequently fail to demonstrate significantly better overall survival.
Acquired resistance to antiangiogenic agents has been attributed in part
to the induction of intra-tumoral hypoxia and the concomitant
stabilization of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), a transcription
factor that promotes tumor angiogenesis, invasion, metastasis, and cancer
stem cell (CSC) self-renewal. In this preclinical model, we demonstrate
that CRLX101, an investigational nanoparticle-drug conjugate (NDC)
containing the payload camptothecin (CPT), can reverse the stimulatory
effects of hypoxia on the CSC population in an orthotopic triple-negative
xenograft model. The payload, camptothecin, a topoisomerase 1 inhibitor,
inhibits HIF-1 protein accumulation at concentrations below those that
were cytotoxic to tumor cells, and inhibits hypoxia-mediated CSC
induction at these low concentrations in vitro. In an orthotopic
triple-negative breast cancer model, CRLX101 is synergistic with
bevacizumab. Tumor reimplantation experiments confirm that the
combination therapy effectively targets both the bulk tumor cell and CSC
populations. Results generated from these preclinical studies support the
clinical research of combining antiangiogenic agents with CRLX101 to
increase patient survival. CRLX101 is currently in phase 2 clinical
trials in combination with bevacizumab in both recurrent ovarian cancer
and metastatic renal cell carcinoma.

