Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the PIM kinases in combination with BTK inhibition is
synergistic in preclinical models of B-cell malignancies


BTK inhibitors (e.g. ibrutinib) have significantly impacted the treatment
of B-cell malignancies in a positive way. Single agent response rates
with ibrutinib are 65% or higher in B-cell lymphomas and chronic
lymphocytic leukaemia with the majority of patients enjoying a prolonged
duration of response. Continued clinical development is needed, however,
as most patients achieve only a partial response from their treatment and
ultimately patients become refractory to ibrutinib leading to relapse and
disease progression. Targeted combinations with ibrutinib could
potentially increase the number of patients undergoing complete remission
and combat emergent resistant mechanisms. The PIM family (1, 2, and 3)
are serine/threonine kinases that have proven to be oncogenic in-part due
to their ability to suppress c-Myc induced apoptosis. The PIM kinases
have emerged as important regulators of drug resistance in multiple
cancer types. Tolero Pharmaceutical's second generation PIM Kinase
inhibitor, TP-3654 has exhibited favorable activity in preclinical models
of prostate cancer, AML, and lymphoma. Due to the signaling crosstalk
between BTK and PIM through the STAT transcription factors, we
hypothesized that synergies may arise through the simultaneous targeting
of both kinases. Here, we report a significant increase in drug activity
when a BTK inhibitor (ibrutinib) was combined with TP-3654 in various
lymphoma cell lines. In Granta-519 cells, the IC50 of ibrutinib decreased
3.5-fold, from 0.7 M to 0.2 M, when cultured in combination with a
subtoxic concentration of TP-3654 (300 nM). Similarly, the IC50 of
TP-3654 decreased 6-fold, from 2.4 M to 0.4 M, when cells were cultured
in combination with a subtoxic concentration of ibrutinib (100 nM). BTK
is known to attenuate the activity of the transcription factor STAT3, a
major regulator of PIM kinase levels in cells. Due to this, mechanistic
studies focused on analyzing the STAT3 pathway are ongoing to determine
the downstream effects of using ibrutinib and TP-3654 in combination.
Several lymphoma xenograft studies are also ongoing to further explore
this combination in vivo. These results provide a strong rationale that
inhibitors of PIM and BTK could be used in combination for the treatment
of B-cell malignancies and other B-cell mediated diseases.

