Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence that RARs interact with Src family kinases and that
inhibition of Src family kinase activity can affect the growth response
of SKOV3 ovarian cancer cell to atRA


Chemotherapy resistance is a major cause of ovarian cancer treatment
failure. All trans-retinoic acid (atRA) is a promising therapeutic agent
due to its growth suppressing activity however, not all ovarian
carcinomas are growth inhibited by atRA. Understanding the underlying
mechanisms of atRA action in ovarian cancer is crucial to overcome
chemotherapy resistance. Recent studies have reported novel nongenomic
actions of atRA and retinoic acid receptors (RARs). The main goal of this
work was to study nongenomic actions of RARs. A SH3 domain phage display
was performed to identify proteins that interact with the proline rich
region of RAR. Our results indicated that RAR proline rich region binds
to the SH3 domain of Src family kinase proteins (SFKs) Lyn, Src and Yes.
Immunofluorescence assays showed that RAR colocalizes in the cell
cytoplasm with Lyn, Src and Yes. Proximity ligation assays were performed
to determine whether RARs and Lyn, Src and Yes interact in vivo. Our
results showed that RAR and RAR but not RAR form a complex with both Lyn
and Src. No interaction was found between any of the RARs and Yes.
Interaction between RARs and SFKs was found to be directly correlated
with phosphorylation of Y419 in Src and Y397 in Lyn. We have previously
shown that the ovarian cancer cell line CAOV3 is sensitive to growth
inhibition by atRA while the ovarian cancer cell line SKOV3 is resistance
to atRA growth repression. Since SFKs such as Src and Lyn are known to
regulate cancer cell growth, we next investigated the effect of
inhibiting SFKs activity on the atRA regulated growth response of these
cell lines. CAOV3 and SKOV3 cells were treated with atRA (1M) alone or in
combination with varying doses of SFKs inhibitors PP1 and PP2 and
analyzed for cell growth inhibition. CAOV3 but not SKOV3 cells were
growth arrested by atRA. Both PP1 and PP2 caused growth inhibition in
both cell lines. Interestingly, when atRA was combined with either of the
SFKs inhibitors, SKOV3 but not CAOV3 cells exhibited growth inhibition
greater than that observed with PP1 or PP2 alone. These data demonstrate
that inhibition of SFKs activity converts the growth response of SKOV3
cells from atRA resistant to atRA sensitive. Analysis of cell cycle
regulators in atRA and PP1 treated CAOV3 cells showed that both p27 and
p130 are up-regulated while CDK6 is down-regulated. On the other hand, in
SKOV3 cells treated with atRA and PP1, p130 is unaffected while p27,
cyclin A, CDK1, CDK2 and CDK6 are down-regulated. In conclusion, we have
confirmed the interaction between RAR and Src and describe for the first
time the interaction between RAR and both Lyn and Src, and RAR and Lyn.
We also provide evidence that reduction of SFKs activity and atRA
treatment but not atRA treatment alone can inhibit the growth of SKOV3
cells. This suggests that SFKs activity must be reduced in order for atRA
to inhibit cell growth in at least some ovarian carcinomas.

