Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of immature colon carcinoma transcript 1 during c-myc
deregulation in fast-onset mouse plasmacytoma


Murine plasmacytoma (mPCT) models human blood cancers that involve the
deregulation of c-myc by a translocation that juxtaposes c-myc to one of
the immunoglobin loci. The fast-developing mPCT does not depend on c-myc
translocation; rather infection with v-abl/c-myc retrovirus produces
elevated c-myc levels. Chromosome 11 subcytoband E2 is always (100%)
found duplicated compared to slow-developing mPCT (7.1%). The gene,
immature colon carcinoma transcript1 (ict1) is located within 11E2 and
overexpressed as a result of 11E2 duplication. The effect of ict1
overexpression during c-myc deregulation may contribute to the aggressive
development of mPCT. Here we look at the tumorigenic potential of ict1 in
vitro.The ict1 gene has been cloned into an Ecdysone inducible vector and
transiently transfected (Nucleofection) into mouse PreB cells that also
have inducible c-myc expression activated by 4-hydroxytamoxifen. This
allows us to look at overexpression of ict1 along with c-myc
simultaneously or each separately. Immunofluorescence was used to confirm
overexpression of the target genes. Proliferation and apoptosis levels
were determined for each condition by Edu and TUNEL assay respectively.
Metaphase spreads were prepared before and after each experiment.We have
confirmed by immunofluorescence overexpression of ict1 using the
inducible vector system. A study in these cell lines shows that ict1
overexpression increases cell proliferation levels, and may reduce
apoptosis compared to cells that were not induced for ict1/c-myc
expression. Metaphase spreads show normal diploid chromosome number of 40
(at time 0, and every 24 hours). Further genetic analysis to identify any
chromosomal abnormalities that may account for these changes will be
performed (SKY).We have identified a potential role of ict1
overexpression in vitro. In order to further explore these results we
will try to restore proliferation and apoptotic levels relative to a
normal PreB cell phenotype in plasmacytoma cells in vitro in the MOPC
460D cell line, and ex vivo in plasmacytoma cells isolated from
PCT-carrying mice. 11E2 is syntenic to human chromosome 17q25, which has
chromosomal abnormalities in many other neoplasms, such as acute and
chronic myeloid leukemia, neuroblastoma, breast, ovarian, thyroid
cancers. If we can identify the role of overexpression of ict1 during
c-myc deregulation in fast-onset mPCT, we can gain insight into the
aggressiveness of the disease progression and determine if ict1 could
lead to a new therapeutic target for aggressive blood cancers with c-myc
deregulation.

