Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer/testis antigen expression pattern is a potential biomarker
for prostate cancer aggressiveness


Introduction: The prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test has improved the
early detection of PCa and also recurrence after radical prostatectomy
(RP). However, it is estimated that 35% of patients submitted to RP that
progress with detectable PSA levels will never present metastatic
disease. Thus, there is a need to distinguish localized curable disease
from a subset of patients at risk for progression. Currently, the DAmico
Stratification System defines high risk PCa as any combination of the
following factors: PSA >20ng/ml, a Gleason score (GS) of 8-10, or
clinical stage T2c or greater. As some aggressive PCa did not fit these
criteria, a more accurate test to classify high risk patients is
crucial.Objective: The objective of this study is to identify a
cancer/testis antigen (CTA)-based biomarker to discern PCa patients with
potentially aggressive disease. The CTAs are a unique group of genes
whose expression is normally confined to germ cells in normal testis and
placenta, but aberrantly expressed in several types of cancers.Methods
and results: Using Nanostring multiplex approach, we screened the
expression of 22 CTA genes in 20 localized (LPCa) and 20 metastatic
prostate cancer (MPCa) samples, obtained from University of Washington.
Using ROC curve analysis we ranked the CTAs capable of discriminating
LPCa and MPCa. We found one under-expressed CTA (PAGE4) and seven
over-expressed (CEP55, NUF2, PBK, RQCD1, SPAG4, SSX2 and TTK) in MPCa,
considering AUC>0.70. qRT-PCR was used to validate Nanostring results in
the same set of samples and to identify the candidate CTA biomarkers. The
eight CTAs selected showed significant expression changes and were also
capable of separating LPCa and MPCa cases (AUC>0.70). A multivariate
logistic regression model (MLR) showed that combined expression patterns
of CEP55, NUF2, PBK and TTK was capable of discriminating MPCa from LPCa
with AUC = 0.95 (pr = 0.15), sensitivity = 80%, specificity = 90%. Using
this model 85% of the PCa cases were correctly classified. We then
evaluated, by q-RT-PCR, if CTA expression profile is associated with GS
using the same 20 LPCa samples and a new set of 25 PCa samples. The PCa
cases were separated in two groups according to GS: (1) 3+3/3+4 and (2)
other GS. The expression pattern of the CTA panel CEP55, NUF2 and RQCD1
correctly separated 83% of the samples according to the GS with AUC =
0.89 (pr = 0.05), sensitivity = 88%, specificity 75%.Conclusion: The
results of the study are clinically and biologically relevant, since
little is known about the role of CTAs in PCa. The CTA expression pattern
was shown to be different between two extreme pathologic phenotypes and
also among samples of different GS. The CTA profile may be useful to
identify high risk LPCa patients and to stratify patients according to
GS, which may guide treatment strategies for the different groups of
patients.

