Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired differentiation and loss of malignancy of pulmonary
metastases in breast cancer


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) or tumor initiating cells (TICs) were
demonstrated in a leukemia transplant experiment in 1930s with a single
mouse leukemic cell as well as in recent studies of human leukemia and
solid tumors. Our work demonstrated that breast CSCs are able to mediate
spontaneous lung metastasis in patient-derived breast tumor xenografts
(PDXs) in vivo (PNAS, 2010). We further characterized the phenotypic and
molecular characteristics of spontaneous metastases versus primary breast
tumors. We collected the tumor cells from the lungs and conducted
orthotopic implantation back into the mouse mammary fat pads in order to
make a more metastatic tumor model. Surprisingly, relative to the
parental primary breast tumors, the lung metastasis (met)-derived mammary
tumors exhibited a slower growth rate and a reduced metastatic potential
with a more differentiated epithelial status based on gene array
analyses. The up-regulated genes in the met-derived tumors included
promoters of cell adhesion and differentiation as well as tumor
suppressors and cell cycle inhibitors, such as KRT19 (CK19), CEACAM1
(CD66a), and CDKN1A. Many of the down-regulated genes were promoters of
self-renewal, cell motility, and cell cycle, such as EZH2, SMAD2, and
CCNB1. Clinically, this signature correlated with breast tumor subtypes.
Consistently, the differentiation scores of the lung met-derived tumors
were significantly higher than the primary tumors (p = 0.007). We then
examined the functions of microRNA candidates in regulating CSC-mediated
metastasis and therapy resistance as well as their clinical relevance.By
miRNA analyses, thirty-two miRNAs were differentially expressed with
twenty-seven miRNAs being up-regulated in the met-derived tumors,
including miR-200 family members which induce epithelial phenotype and
inhibits self-renewal, miR-30 family members, miR-138, and others.
Further clinical studies demonstrated that miR-30c is independently
associated with favorable distant relapse free survival of breast tumor
patients (GSE22216 n = 210). Subsequent mechanistic work characterized
that miR-30c inhibits both CSC-mediated metastasis and chemotherapy
resistance by a direct targeting of cytoskeleton genes twinfilin TWF1 and
vimentin (VIM). We also identified miR-138 as a novel regulator of
invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer cells,
acting by directly targeting the polycomb epigenetic regulator EZH2.
Notably, based on the UNC breast tumor database analyses (n = 337), the
miR-138 activity signature served as a novel independent prognostic
marker for patient survival beyond traditional pathologic variables,
intrinsic subtypes or a proliferation gene signature. Both miR-30c and
miR-138 can be regulated by the transcription factor GATA3. Our results
highlight the loss of malignant character in some lung micro-metastatic
lesions and the epigenetic regulation of this phenotype.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

