Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor cell surface-associated vacuolar-ATPase a2 isoform promotes
invasion by regulating matrix metalloproteinase activity in ovarian cancer


In tumors, an acidic pH is an important feature of tumor microenvironment
and is a major determinant of tumor metastasis. Efforts are required to
identify novel molecular targets that alter this acidic microenvironment
to control tumor spread. The Vacuolar-H + ATPases (V-ATPases) are
multi-subunit enzyme complexes that acidify the extracellular space, and
activate matrix degrading proteases, thereby promoting tumor invasion.
Identifying specific V-ATPase subunit isoforms that are selectively
expressed on tumor cells will provide biomarkers and novel targets for
V-ATPase inhibition. The a subunit of V-ATPase V0 domain is the major pH
sensing unit and exists in four different isoforms. The present study
describes an elevated expression of V-ATPase a subunit isoforms in
ovarian cancer. Our findings indicate that among all the a subunit
isoforms, a2 is most prominently expressed on the ovarian tumor cell
surface. To understand the clinical relevance, the immuno-histochemistry
in human OVCA tissues revealed over-expression of V-ATPase-V0a2 compared
to control tissues (normal ovary and benign tumors). V-ATPase-V0a2 was
upto 4 fold up-regulated at the mRNA level in human OVCA cell lines
(A2780, SKOV-3 and TOV-112D) compared to normal ovary epithelia using
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR. This up-regulation was also
observed at the protein level by western blot and flow cytometry
analysis. Immunofluorescence analysis showed selective V0a2 distribution
only on tumor cell surface and not on normal ovarian epithelia. Confocal
microscopy analysis was performed for understanding the sub-cellular
distribution of V-ATPase-V0a2, which confirmed its localization on
plasma-membrane and early endosomes. Interestingly, the V0a2 isoform
exhibited co-association with cortactin, an F-actin stabilizing protein
at leading edges of cancer cells, that are the sites of focal protease
release. To understand the possible effect of V0a2 on protease
activation, an in vitro targeted inhibition of V-ATPase-V0a2 in OVCA
cells using monoclonal anti-V0a2 antibody assay was used. The antibody
reduced the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP-9 & MMP-2) activity by 2 fold.
Measurement of invasion using an in vitro wound healing assay revealed
that inhibition of V-ATPase-V0a2 reduced the invasion capacity and
therefore wound healing, in SKOV-3 cells. In conclusion, V-ATPase-V0a2
isoform is highly expressed on ovarian tumor cell surface and is
associated with invasion assembly related proteins, therefore playing a
critical role in tumor invasion by modulating the activity of
matrix-degrading proteases. Our data suggests that the V-ATPase-V0a2
isoform is a potential biomarker in OVCA and isoform specific inhibition
of V-ATPase-V0a2 may aid in better clinical outcome of OVCA.

