Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sox10 promotes both stem-like and EMT properties in mammary cells


Molecular pathways that guide cell proliferation and programming events
during embryonic development may be aberrantly re-activated in the cancer
state to drive tumor progression. To identify mechanisms that drive
progression of aggressive breast cancers, we identified molecules that
are present in the fetal mammary stem cells (fMaSCs) that drive early
development of the mammary gland. These analyses revealed that Sox10 is
one of the most highly expressed transcription factors within fMaSCs, and
prompted us to investigate the function of Sox10 in the mammary gland and
in subtypes of cancer originating from it. Our studies described here
indicate that Sox10 is specifically expressed in mammary cells that
exhibit higher levels of stem or progenitor cell functions using in vitro
or in vivo assays. This includes fetal and adult mammary cells in vivo,
as well as mammary cells cultured in vitro as organoids, and for the
first time, male fetal mammary stem cells. Sox10 appears to contribute to
these stem/progenitor behaviors, as the genetic deletion of Sox10 limits
stem/progenitor activities, while the overexpression of Sox10
significantly expands clonogenic behavior. Intriguingly, ectopic Sox10
expression is also able to elicit an EMT-like response in mammary
organoids. Sox10 thus represents a single molecule capable of directly
mediating both stem-like and EMT-like properties in mammary cells.
Furthermore, by modulating Sox10 levels in 3D mammary organoids, we are
able to induce cells into sequential motile and stem/progenitor states.
This provides a striking in vitro surrogate for metastatic behavior.
Consistent with these findings, we find that Sox10 is highly expressed in
basal-like and claudin-low subtypes of breast cancer, which are the most
stem-like and EMT-like manifestations of the disease, respectively.
Finally, we show that Sox10 expression is regulated through a feedback
loop involving FGF signaling, and that inhibition of FGF signaling can
block EMT-like cell behaviors mediated by Sox10. These findings have
important implications in how stem-like and metastatic properties may be
specified in mammary cells.

