Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effect of ibrutinib and inhibitors targeting TLR
signaling in ABC subtype of diffuse large B-Cell lymphoma


Introduction: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most prevalent
B-lymphocyte neoplasm (Morton, Blood 2006). The activated B-cell (ABC)
subtype is associated with poorer prognosis (Lenz, NEJM 2008). Over 20%
of ABC-DLBCL cases have mutations in the CD79B or CD79A subunits of the
B-cell receptor (BCR), generating chronically active BCR signaling
(Staudt, ASH 2012). Ibrutinib is a first-in-class, once-daily, oral,
covalent inhibitor of Bruton's tyrosine kinase, an essential BCR pathway
enzyme. Phase 2 trial results of single-agent ibrutinib in DLBCL showed
efficacy in the ABC subtype, with an overall response rate of 40% and 60%
in CD79B-mutant ABC-DLBCL (Wilson, ASH 2012). Identification of MYD88
L265P mutations in ABC-DLBCL revealed a link between Toll-like receptor
(TLR) signaling and ABC-DLBCL (Ngo, Nature 2011). The findings that a TLR
7/8/9 antagonist selectively inhibits cell survival of MYD88
L265P-mutated ABC-DLBCL cells (Bhagat, AACR 2014) emphasize the
importance of TLR signaling in ABC-DLBCL. We hypothesized that
TLR-related kinases/pathways important to ABC-DLBCL may be unknown and
tested for synergy between ibrutinib and inhibitors targeting these
pathways in ABC-DLBCL cells.Methods: Combination effects of ibrutinib and
TLR9 antagonists, a TAK1 inhibitor, or an endosomal TLR inhibitor were
tested in ABC-DLBCL cell lines with MYD88 mutations. TMD-8, HBL-1, and
OCI-LY10 cell lines were treated with inhibitors or antagonists alone or
in combination with ibrutinib for 3 days; cell growth effects were
determined by the CellTiter-Glo luminescent cell viability assay
(Promega). The combination index (C.I.), a drug interactivity
measurement, was calculated with CalcuSyn. Synergy scores were calculated
by the Chalice Analyzer (Horizon CombinatoRx).Results: We identified
synergistic inhibitory effects on ABC-DLBCL cell growth between ibrutinib
and TLR9 antagonists as well as the TAK1 inhibitor. Different TLR9
antagonist combinations significantly enhanced ibrutinib killing effects
in ABC-DLBCL cells in the presence or absence of class A, B, and C TLR9
agonists. Stimulation with TLR9 agonists increased resistance of
ABC-DLBCL cells. Strong synergy was also identified between ibrutinib and
an inhibitor of endocytic TLRs (TLR3, 7, 8, 9) with an average C.I. of
0.11 and synergy score of 4.22. Our assays demonstrated that an endosomal
TLR inhibitor possesses similar ibrutinib synergistic effects as other
TLR9 antagonists. Similar results were observed for inhibition of the
downstream TLR signaling molecule TAK1.Conclusions: We provide evidence
of strong synergistic effects between ibrutinib and inhibitors targeting
TLR signaling. Survival of ABC-DLBCL cell lines with MYD88 mutations
requires signals through both TLR and BCR. Combined, these results
provide rationale for targeting both pathways simultaneously in
MYD88-mutated ABC-DLBCL.

