Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD4 Th1 cytokines and HER-2/HER-3 blockade induces tumor apoptosis
in breast cancer


Background: The therapeutic benefit of blocking HER2/HER3 signaling in
breast cancer (BC) has been demonstrated by several studies. We have
previously shown that the pleiotropic T-helper type 1 (Th1) cytokines
IFN- and TNF- induce senescence in BC cells and that all BC cell lines
tested express IFN- and TNF- receptors by western blot analysis. We have
also demonstrated an inverse correlation between the HER2 expression
level and the senescence induced by the treatment with both cytokines.
Moreover, simultaneous HER-2/HER-3 blockade significantly enhanced
cytokine-induced senescence. Here, we studied whether these Th1 cytokines
induce apoptosis of HER-2 expressing BC cells and assessed the impact of
IFN- and TNF- with simultaneous HER-2 and HER-3 blockade on permanent
tumor abrogation.Results: To determine the Th1-mediated effects on
HER2high (SK-BR-3, BT-474), HER2intermediate (MCF-7, T-47D), and HER2low
(MDA-MB-231) human BC cell lines in vitro, we performed co-culture of
increasing number of HER2 Class II peptide-specific CD4+ T-cells
(generated by priming CD4+ T cells with HER2 peptide loaded type-1
polarized DCs) with BC cells using a transwell culture system. This
resulted in a cell number-dependent apoptosis of SK-BR-3 and MCF-7, but
not MDA-MB-231 cells compared with CD4+ T cells primed either with
immature dendritic cells (DC) or mature DC plus irrelevant (Class II
BRAF) peptide. In addition, SK-BR-3 cells incubated with supernatants
from the CD4+ T cells-immature DC or mature DC co-culture demonstrated
similar results. Compared with controls, HER2-specific Th1 cells
generated a 25-fold increase in SK-BR-3 apoptosis by DAPI staining.
Neutralizing antibodies against IFN- and TNF- significantly reduced
apoptosis induction. Also, IFN- and TNF- treatment resulted in
significant apoptosis of SK-BR-3 and MCF-7, but not MDA-MB-231 cells.
However, MDA-MB-231 cells transfected with a wild type HER2 plasmid, were
highly susceptible to cytokine-induced apoptosis. Treatment of
HER-2-depleted cells (by RNAi) with IFN- and TNF- resulted in an
increased apoptotic phenotype. Although the combined treatment of IFN-
and TNF- in HER3-depleted cells did not enhanced the apoptosis, the
double knock down with HER2 and HER3 RNAi strongly increased apoptosis
induction as observed by western blot analysis of active caspase-3 and
flow cytometric analysis of Anexin V-PI staining. Interestingly, the
double depleted cells treated with IFN- alone evidenced slightly higher
cleaved caspase-3 levels than TNF- alone but the combined treatment with
both cytokines had a strong synergistic effect.Conclusions: Our results
establish a role for IFN- and TNF- in inducing tumor apoptosis in BC. An
effective CD4 Th1 response, combined with HER-2 and HER-3 blockade can
significantly drive tumor apoptosis that can be explored as treatment to
effectively eliminate residual BC cells and prevent recurrence.

