Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: APC and DIAPH1 collaborate to suppress myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS) pathogenesis


Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are characterized by complex cytogenetic
abnormalities, including loss of all or part of the long arm of
chromosome 5 (5q). Known 5q tumor suppressors include APC1 and EGR1. APC
is associated with familial colon cancer where it functions to suppress
canonical Wnt signaling. Egr1 is a transcription factor that governs
expression of tumor suppressor genes ranging from the p53 family to
PTEN1. Adjacent to EGR1 is the DIAPH1 gene for the Rho GTPase effector
formin DIAPH1. Knockout of Diaph1, Egr, or Apc in mice creates a range of
MDS phenotypes. Likewise, mice with the multiple intestinal neoplasia
(min/Apcmin) allele develop anemia and MDS most similar to the Diaph1
knockout phenotype.DIAPH1 builds linear actin filaments and stabilizes
microtubule dynamics to establish and maintain cell polarity during
adhesion, migration, and asymmetric cell division when activated by Rho
GTPases, such as RhoB. Combinatorial deficiencies in RhoB (also a known
tumor susceptibility gene) with Diaph1 exacerbates the Diaph1 MDS
phenotype but not the rate of pathogenesis. RhoB-activated DIAPHs also
signal and activate new gene expression by the myocardin-related (MRTF)
and Mcm10/Agamous deficiens/ [serum response factor (SRF)] (MADS)-box
transcription factors. MRTF-MADS registers changes in actin dynamics
downstream of DIAPH1 to activate EGR1 expression through multiple serum
response elements (SREs; recognized by SRF) within the EGR1
promoter.DIAPH1 also collaborates with APC in cytoskeletal remodeling as
both proteins physically associate with and stabilize microtubules. APC
can also nucleate new actin filaments that become processively elongated
by DIAPH1. We examined interactions between APC and DIAPH1 signaling to
SRF and in suppressing MDS pathogenesis. First, we found that both DIAPH1
and APC activate SRF- regulated gene expression. Consistent with
biochemical data showing that DIAPH1 elongates APC-nucleated filaments,
activation of SRF by APC relies upon DIAPH1.We bred Apcmin mice to our
Diaph1 knockout mice and found that the MDS phenotype is significantly
accelerated in Apcmin/Diaph1 knockout mice when compared to either the
Apcmin or Diaph1 mutant phenotype. Pathological defects (dysplasia and
anemia in peripheral blood and myeloid organs (spleen/bone marrow)
requires at least 200 days to develop in either single mutant; combined
mutations create aberrant peripheral blood cell pathology by 100 days of
age. Consistent with early disease onset, mortality is accelerated in
Apcmin /Diaph1-deficient mice. These novel studies show that genetic
defects in Diaph1 and Apc synergize to effectively mimic 5q- MDS.
Further, the data supports the idea that RhoB - DIAPH1/APC and MRTF-MADS
comprise a novel tumor suppression pathway that is essential for
hematopoiesis. Apcmin/Diaph1-deficient mice may prove to be a useful
pre-clinical model for the development of more effective theranostic
tools to attack MDS.

