Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism-based scheduling of triple therapy
gemcitabine/CHK1i/WEE1i in pancreatic cancer at submaximal yet
synergistic concentrations


Sensitization of cancer cells to gemcitabine has been shown with
checkpoint kinase CHK1 and WEE1 inhibitors. To rationalize and optimize
the concomitant use of these three agents, we first performed growth
inhibition assays on MIA PaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells using gemcitabine
in combination with either CHIR-124 (CHK1 inhibitor) or MK-1775 (WEE1
inhibitor). In silico analysis with three mathematical models (Bliss
Independence, Loewe and Highest Single Agent) identified synergistic
growth inhibition at submaximal (i.e. 8000 individual cells undergoing
extensive fork collapse (compared to 0-1% with single agents) as
evidenced by co-staining of yH2AX and hyper-phosphorylated RPA32.
Conversely, submaximal gemcitabine+MK-1775 induced clear reduction of
inhibitory CDK1 Y15 level compared to single agents. Consistent with this
G2/M abrogation, in a Fucci-based CDT1/geminin-expressing MIA PaCa-2
stable cell line, gemcitabine+MK-1775 partially reversed the accumulation
of the geminin-expressing (S/G2) population induced by gemcitabine alone.
This was accompanied by an increase in the CDT1-expressing (G1)
population, alongside aberrant mitotic cells with features of perturbed
kinetochore-microtubule integrity. Based on these findings, we performed
a series of long-term, kinetic live-cell imaging assays to determine the
optimal scheduling for gemcitabine/CHK1i/WEE1i as a triplet at
synergistic concentrations. In contrast to the widely proposed scheduling
regimen, we found that delayed administration of CHK1i (at 24 hours),
relative to gemcitabine, did not lead to synergy. However, concurrent
administration yielded durable growth inhibition, even when the two
agents were removed after 24 hours. This inhibition was further enhanced
with the subsequent addition of WEE1i at 24 hours, but not continuation
of a CHK1i. Together, our results illustrate differential mechanistic
effects of CHK1 and WEE1 inhibitors with gemcitabine, when combined at
sub-GI50 concentrations, and propose a novel triple agent schedule that
will be evaluated in vivo.

