Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of BRCA1 expression as a preventative method for
BRCA1-associated breast cancer


Background: Women who inherited a BRCA1 mutation face a high lifetime
risk of developing breast cancer estimated at 80% vs. 11% in the general
population. Current prevention options are limited to prophylactic
surgery and chemoprevention with tamoxifen. It is believed that a
haploinsufficient state is responsible for the predisposition to cancer
among BRCA1 mutation carriers. BRCA1 helps maintain genomic integrity
through participating in the cellular response to DNA damage,
specifically in the repair of double-stranded DNA breaks. Thus, factors
which increase the physiologic expression of the normal gene and
normalize protein levels may mitigate the effect of the mutation and
decrease cancer risk.Objectives: The objectives of this study are: 1) to
determine whether BRCA1 mRNA expression from peripheral blood lymphocytes
(as well as the corresponding protein levels) differ in women with and
without a BRCA1 mutation; 2) to correlate BRCA1 mRNA and protein levels
with various factors, including reproductive, hormonal, and
anthropometric factors as well as mutation type; and 3) to identify a
minimal classifier gene set that predicts BRCA1 mutation status in the
general population.Methodology: We enrolled 14 women with and 36 without
a BRCA1 mutation. All participants completed a research questionnaire and
standardized procedures were used to collect anthropometric measurements.
Blood samples were collected for white blood cell isolation. BRCA1 mRNA
was quantified using the Nanostring nCounter Analysis System and the
Human Cancer Reference Kit, a panel of 230 cancer-associated genes. The
gene expression data set will be used to identify a minimal gene
classifier that predicts BRCA1 mutation status. BRCA1 protein levels will
be determined using Western blot.Results: Mean BRCA1 expression was
significantly lower for mutation carriers vs. non-carriers (139 vs. 157
counts; P = 0.02). Western blot experiments and analyses of predictors of
expression are underway.Conclusions and Significance: These results
provide important preliminary evidence that BRCA1 mutation carriers have
lower peripheral white blood cell BRCA1 mRNA expression compared to
non-carriers. Future studies can utilize peripheral blood samples from
BRCA1 mutation carriers to evaluate whether lifestyle factors, such as
diet and physical activity, may modulate BRCA1 levels and potentially
modify disease risk. Our findings contribute to a program of research
aimed at providing evidence-based lifestyle prevention strategies for
high-risk women.

