Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: B cells actively participate to the anti-cancer immune response in
high grade serous ovarian cancer metastases


Intra-tumor B cells and immunoglobulin signatures have been associated
with a better clinical prognosis in ovarian cancer (Iglesia et al, 2014;
Nielsen et al, 2012). However little is known about the mechanisms by
which B cells influence the anti-cancer immune response. The aim of our
research is to evaluate B cell dependent anti-cancer immune responses in
peritoneal metastases in high grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC)
patients.We have found that in these peritoneal metastases, B cells are
mainly located in lymphoid structures and a high proportion of these
(60%) display a CD27+ memory phenotype. HGSOC B cells are able to secrete
Th1 related cytokines as well as high levels of IL8, which is a
chemo-attractant for T cells, granulocytes and macrophages. Interestingly
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells express high levels of the IL8 receptor, CXCR1,
which suggests B cells help recruiting T cells to lymphoid
structures.Plasma cells were also detected in the peritoneal metastases
along with IgG deposits. Secreted IgGs were mainly located in stromal
areas suggesting that the associated matrix may prevent their
infiltration into tumour islets and/or that they target specific stromal
antigens.Interestingly, we observed that neoadjuvant chemotherapy and
residual disease after chemotherapy influence the type of IgG subclasses
expressed in the omentum of HGSOC patients. Chemotherapy enhances the
expression of IgG1, IgG2 and IgG3 immunoglobulins in omentum with
residual disease. This supports the notion that B cells are involved in
the anti-tumor immune response in HGSOC metastases.In conclusion, our
data suggest that B cells actively participate to the anti-tumor immune
response in HGSOC metastases. This response is preferentially Th1
oriented through the production of cytokines and dominant expression of
IgG1 immunoglobulins. Enhancing the B cell dependent anti-tumor immune
response could be a potential strategy for the treatment of HGSOC
patients.Iglesia MD, Vincent BG, Parker JS, Hoadley KA, Carey LA, Perou
CM, Serody JS (2014) Prognostic B-cell signatures using mRNA-seq in
patients with subtype-specific breast and ovarian cancer. Clin Cancer Res
20: 3818-3829Nielsen JS, Sahota RA, Milne K, Kost SE, Nesslinger NJ,
Watson PH, Nelson BH (2012) CD20+ tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes have an
atypical CD27- memory phenotype and together with CD8+ T cells promote
favorable prognosis in ovarian cancer. Clin Cancer Res 18: 3281-3292

