Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Towards precision functional genomics via next-generation
functional mapping of cancer variants


For the vast majority of cancer patients, existing knowledge of the
function(s) of the mutant genes harbored by their tumor and the
dependencies they induce is incomplete or non-existent since most cancer
mutations are exceedingly rare. As a result, we now have long lists of
candidate alleles but a paucity of targets whose biology is sufficiently
well understood to guide therapeutics. Here we present an interim
progress report on a pilot effort aiming to create a generalizable
framework to systematically map the molecular consequences of cancer
variants at scale (Target Accelerator). First, we created an efficient
pipeline to generate cancer variants and generated an initial library of
1300 mutant cDNA clones corresponding to variants in lung cancer and
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma as well as those nominated by pan-cancer
computational analyses. Second, we established an industry-scale,
next-generation pipeline to generate new cancer models (Cell Line
Factory) directly from patient samples. We have leveraged this pipeline
to process over 330 samples from 208 patients across 16 cancer types,
with over 60% growing through at least 5 population doublings. We show
that tumor genomics can be retained in such patient-derived models and
that drug testing within 3 months is feasible. In addition, we use
combinatorial molecular barcoding to rapidly generate a panel of
pathway-primed human tumorigenesis models that are suitable for massively
parallel multiplexed tumorigenesis assays in vivo (TumorPlex). We
hypothesized that this integrated framework could be utilized to generate
meaningful functional hypotheses in a high-throughput manner. To test
this hypothesis, we introduced over 1000 cancer mutations into cell
models and created gene expression signatures together with phenotypic
data. In lung cancer, we show that the mutational impact of mutant
alleles with known and unknown functions can be rapidly assessed by
comparing signatures of wild-type and mutant alleles. We show that this
generalizable approach, which does not require prior knowledge, can place
variants of unknown significance into dominant gain-of-function and
loss-of-function categories. As a complementary approach, we have used
TumorPlex assays to test the tumorigenic potential of 550 mutant alleles
nominated by Pan-Cancer computational analyses and discovered unexpected
variants in the KRAS, AKT1, MAP2K1, ERBB2, PIK3CB, NFE2L2, FAM200A and
POT1 genes as being potently tumorigenic. These proof-of-concept studies
demonstrate initial feasibility of mapping cancer variant function at
scale. Importantly, they demarcate a path by which mapping variant
function and predicting vulnerabilities might soon be possible on a
patient-by-patient basis, achieving the promise of precision functional
genomics.

