Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting lung cancer stem cells through fatty acid metabolism


Distinctive features of CSC are capacity of self renewal, increased
resistance to chemotherapy and the ability to form three dimensional non
adherent spheroids in appropriate conditions. We have recently
demonstrated that cell cultures derived from malignant pleural effusion
(MPEs) of patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung efficiently form
spheroids in non-adherent conditions supplemented with growth factors. By
expression profiling, we identified 18 genes whose expression is
significantly upregulated in lung tumor spheroids versus adherent
cultures. Among the upregulated genes we found five genes involved in
lipid metabolism. SCD1, the enzyme involved in the conversion of
saturated into monounsaturated fatty acids, was one of those strongly
upregulated. We demonstrated that SCD1 inhibition leads to lung cancer
spheroid collapse and to the selective apoptosis of ALDH+ cells, a marker
enriched in cells with stem like properties. In line with these results
we demonstrated by cell sorting that ALDH positive cells were more
sensitive to SCD1 inhibition than ALDH negative cells and that treatment
with an SCD1 inhibitor strongly enhanced sensitivity of spheroids cells
to Cisplatin. Furthermore, we observed that SCD1 inhibited spheroids were
strongly impaired in their in vivo tumorigenicity. Using public datasets
from lung cancer we conducted a bioinformatics analysis demonstrating
that the survival rate of patients expressing SCD1-high levels was
significantly lower than that of the patients expressing low level in
lung adenocarcinoma. Moreover, we found that the correlation of SCD1 and
stemness markers (nanog, CD44, CD24) selects the patients with bad
prognosis. These results overall, indicate that SCD1 could be considered
a prognostic markers for lung adenocarcinoma and a potential target for
therapeutic intervention. Our studies are currently directed to dissect
the mechanism pathways leading to SCD1 upregulation in lung cancer stem
cells.

