Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual targeting of VEGF and endoglin inhibits tumor angiogenesis
and metastatic spread


Endoglin, a co-receptor for TGF- and BMP-9, is highly expressed on
angiogenic endothelial cells and has been shown to be a predictive marker
for patient survival in various solid tumors. TRC105 is a neutralizing
antibody against endoglin which is currently being explored in clinical
trials as anti-angiogenic therapy. Previously we have observed
upregulation of the endoglin signaling pathway in endothelial cells upon
anti-VEGF therapy in rectal cancer patients. In this project we have
further explored the redundancy between VEGF and endoglin signaling in
endothelial cells and angiogenesis. In addition, we assessed the effect
of simultaneously targeting both pathways on breast cancer progression
and metastasis.In vitro, inhibition of endoglin signaling by TRC105
caused upregulation of VEGF signaling in human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVECs). Using in vitro angiogenesis assays we showed that
combined targeting with TRC105 and the VEGF receptor kinase inhibitor
SU5416 inhibited angiogenic capacity even further than targeting both
pathways separately. To determine the effect of combined targetingin
vivo, zebrafish embryos were treated with either TRC105, SU5416 or a
combination. Both single treatments resulted in abnormal subintestinal
vessel development, while treatment with TRC105 and SU5416 simultaneously
increased this effect. Next, we determined whether combined targeting of
the endoglin and VEGF pathway could affect tumor growth and metastasis.
In a syngeneic model for invasive lobular carcinomas, KEP1-11 breast
cancer cells were orthotopically transplanted in mice and tumor growth
and metastasis formation were followed over time.Although TRC105 and
SU5416 decreased tumor vascular density, tumor volume was not affected.
Strikingly, we observed a strong inhibition of metastases in mice treated
with TRC105 or a combination of TRC105 and SU5416. In a follow-up
experiment, we observed that after resection of the primary tumor, which
was accompanied by increased metastatic spread, TRC105 alone already
showed a marked decrease in the number of metastases. To further
establish the role of endoglin we assessed the effect of endoglin-Fc
expression by the tumor cells on tumor growth and metastasis. The
extracellular part of endoglin, coupled to the Fc tail of human IgG
functions as a ligand trap for endoglin ligands in the circulation.
Similar to treatment with TRC105, stable expression of endoglin-Fc
significantly decreased vessel density, but did not result in decreased
primary tumor formation. Resection of endoglin-Fc expressing tumors lead
to drastically less tumor relapse compared to the Fc control group and a
complete abrogation of distant metastases was observed.These results
imply that targeting endoglin signaling, either with a neutralizing
antibody or ligand trap, reduces tumor vessel density or, importantly,
inhibits the metastatic spread of breast cancer cellsin vivo.

