Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of S100P by caveolin-1 drives tumorigenesis and
metastasis in hepatocellular carcinoma under hypoxic stress


Hypoxia is a common feature of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) due to the
expansion of tumors and the inadequacy of their local vasculature and
facilitates tumor metastasis. Our previous study revealed that high level
of Caveolin-1 (Cav1) was exclusively expressed in primary HCC and
metastatic tissues and its level was further enhanced under hypoxic
stress. Suppression of Cav1 reduced HCC growth and metastasis. This
suggests that Cav1 may play an important role in the acquisition of
aggressiveness in cancer cells under hypoxic stress. To explore the
molecular mechanisms by which Cav1 mediates HCC cell motility and
invasiveness, a cDNA microarray analysis was employed to compare the gene
expression profiles between sh-Cav1 knockdown cells and the control
sh-Ctl cells. Among the differentially expressed genes, the expression of
S100P, a member of the S100 calcium-binding protein family showed a
4-fold reduction. S100P has been shown to be highly expressed in several
malignancies and to promote metastasis. However, the impact of S100P on
HCC tumorigenesis and metastasis remains unexplored and the potential
role of S100P in human cancers under hypoxic stress has never been
reported. Our present study aims to investigate the functional role of
Cav1-mediated S100P signaling cascade in HCC tumorigenesis and metastasis
under hypoxic condition. We showed that S100P expression was well
correlated with Cav1 expression in a panel of HCC cell lines by Western
Blot. Both proteins were undetectable in non-tumorigenic immortalized
liver cell and moderately expressed in non-metastatic HCC cell line but
pronouncedly expressed in metastatic HCC cell line. In addition, S100P
expression at protein and mRNA levels was largely suppressed in sh-Cav1
stable knockdown cell. Suppression of S100P expression largely inhibited
tumorigenesis in subcutaneous injection and orthotopic liver implantation
models. Furthermore, hypoxia significantly enhanced the migration and
invasion of control and such enhancement was not prominent when Cav1 was
suppressed in Cav1 knockdown stable clones. Same phenomenon was also
noticed in S100P knockdown stable clones. Taking together, Cav1 functions
as the upstream component of S100P and plays a critical role in
modulation of cell motility during hypoxia. Thereafter, we examined the
potential signaling underlying Cav1-modulatedS100P expression in HCC
development. Our data showed Cav1 was able to activate NF-B reporter.
Transient expression of Cav1 upregulated S100P in cells and the addition
of NF-B inhibitor, IMD-0354 abolished the upregulation of S100P by Cav1
suggests that Cav1 upregulates S100P via the activation of NF-B pathway.
In conclusion, Cav1 may upregulate S100P through the activation of NF-B
cascade to confer the enhanced aggressiveness of HCC cells under hypoxic
condition.

