Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating DNAPK as a biomarker and a novel therapeutic target
in aggressive prostate cancer


Background/purpose: Despite recent advances in the development of
androgen deprivation therapies (ADT), prostate cancer (PCa) remains the
second leading cause of cancer death in American men. Thus, there is a
critical need to improve treatment outcomes for men with aggressive PCa.
The purpose of this study was to identify and functionally characterize
kinases that can serve as both prognostic biomarkers and therapeutic
targets in PCa.Methods: To identify kinases associated with metastatic
progression of PCa, we utilized high-density oligonucleotide arrays to
interrogate the expression of all kinases in 545 prostatectomy samples,
obtained from high-risk patients with long-term clinical follow-up (>10
years). We ranked all kinases by their fold change in expression between
PCas that subsequently metastasized versus those that did not. We then
characterized the top ranked kinase in preclinical PCa models with in
vitro mechanistic experiments and in vivo therapeutic studies.Results: We
nominated DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNAPK) as the top kinase
associated with metastatic PCa progression. Interrogation of pathways
associated with DNAPK knockdown in PC3, DU145, VCaP and C4-2B, identified
canonical Wnt signaling as the top DNAPK-activated pathway. In PCa cells
(PC3, LNCaP C.S. {LNCaP grown under charcoal-stripped serum condition},
C4-2B and LNCaP-AR) DNAPK inhibition significantly abrogates Wnt
signaling and abolishes cell proliferation, migration and invasion.
Interestingly, we found that DNAPK directly modulates the Wnt signaling
independent of the androgen receptor (AR), highlighting the therapeutic
potential of DNAPK inhibition in cancers resistant to ADT. Indeed, in
VCaP xenograft models, pharmacologic inhibition of DNAPK with NU7441
demonstrated 3.4 fold (pBackground/purpose: Despite recent advances in
the development of androgen deprivation therapies (ADT), prostate cancer
(PCa) remains the second leading cause of cancer death in American men.
Thus, there is a critical need to improve treatment outcomes for men with
aggressive PCa. The purpose of this study was to identify and
functionally characterize kinases that can serve as both prognostic
biomarkers and therapeutic targets in PCa.Methods: To identify kinases
associated with metastatic progression of PCa, we utilized high-density
oligonucleotide arrays to interrogate the expression of all kinases in
545 prostatectomy samples, obtained from high-risk patients with
long-term clinical follow-up (>10 years). We ranked all kinases by their
fold change in expression between PCas that subsequently metastasized
versus those that did not. We then characterized the top ranked kinase in
preclinical PCa models with in vitro mechanistic experiments and in vivo
therapeutic studies.Results: We nominated DNA-dependent protein kinase
(DNAPK) as the top kinase associated with metastatic PCa progression.
Interrogation of pathways associated with DNAPK knockdown in PC3, DU145,
VCaP and C4-2B, identified canonical Wnt signaling as the top
DNAPK-activated pathway. In PCa cells (PC3, LNCaP C.S. {LNCaP grown under
charcoal-stripped serum condition}, C4-2B and LNCaP-AR) DNAPK inhibition
significantly abrogates Wnt signaling and abolishes cell proliferation,
migration and invasion. Interestingly, we found that DNAPK directly
modulates the Wnt signaling independent of the androgen receptor (AR),
highlighting the therapeutic potential of DNAPK inhibition in cancers
resistant to ADT. Indeed, in VCaP xenograft models, pharmacologic
inhibition of DNAPK with NU7441 demonstrated 3.4 fold (p<0.01) reduction
of tumor growth at non-toxic doses. Using an independent prostate cancer
tissue cohort, we validate DNAPK expression as a biomarker for metastatic
disease progression (p = 6.4 e06, hazard ratio = 2).Conclusion: In
summary, we nominate DNAPK as a potential biomarker of disease
progression and as a novel therapeutic target in aggressive prostate
cancer. Our data suggests that DNAPK mediates PCa progression by
upregulating Wnt signaling, and demonstrates that DNAPK inhibition
results in significant tumor responses in PCa xenografts.

