Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a whole body physiologically-based pharmacokinetic
(PBPK) model with individualized tumor compartment for topotecan (TPT) in
mice bearing neuroblastoma (NB)


Intratumoral pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) heterogeneity
contribute to variability in NB tumor response to chemotherapy and can be
responsible for tumor relapse. Herein we propose to develop a whole body
PBPK model with an individualized tumor compartment to derive individual
tumor specific concentration-time profiles for the NB standard of care
drug TPT. This model can then relate intratumoral heterogeneity in tumor
blood flow to PD response and antitumor effects. PK studies of TPT (0.6,
1.25, 5, and 20 mg/kg, IV bolus) will be performed in CD1 nude mice (n =
3 mice/time point) bearing orthotopic NB (NB5) xenograft. Blood samples
will be collected at predetermined time points using cardiac puncture,
and plasma separated and stored until analysis. Animals will be perfused
using saline solution to remove residual blood, and tissue samples
including tumor, muscle, adipose, bone, liver, gallbladder, kidney,
spleen, lungs, brain, heart, duodenum, and large intestine collected. TPT
concentrations in plasma and tissue homogenate samples will be quantified
using a validated HPLC fluorescence spectrophotometry method. Tumor
samples will be divided into two sections each, one for TPT
quantification and one for immunohistochemistry of PD markers for DNA
damage (-H2AX) and apoptosis (CASP3). A cohort of mice will be used to
quantify tumor blood flow using contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) using
MicroMarker microbubbles prior to dosing the mice for the PK study. TPT
plasma and tissue concentration-time data will be used to develop the
whole-body PBPK model with an individualized tumor compartment using
NONMEM. Individual tumor perfusion data obtained using CEUS will be
combined with the PBPK model to derive tumor specific concentration-time
profiles. A preliminary study conducted in non-tumor bearing mice
receiving TPT 5 mg/kg showed that TPT plasma and tissue
concentration-time data were reasonably described by our PBPK model. As
expected from our previous studies, the brain tissue was found to have
the lowest exposure to TPT with a brain to plasma partition coefficient
(Kp,brain 8%). We also observed high permeability of TPT (Kp > 1) into
the gallbladder, duodenum, large intestine, spleen, liver and kidney. In
future we will study the correlations between individual tumor
concentrations based on our comprehensive PBPK model and -H2AX and CASP3
activity.

