Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SiRNA therapy against novel lncRNA NRCP: shutting down the fuel
for cancer cells


Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) significantly influence the development and
genomic regulation of cells. Even though several lncRNAs have been
discovered using model systems such as yeast, few have been proven to be
involved in cancer-specific phenotypes. In this study, we report the role
of lncRNA NRCP in altering cancer cell metabolism and provide a strategy
to target cancer metabolism using siRNAs. Methodology and Results: Using
genomic profiling of ovarian tumors (n = 29) and normal ovarian tissues
(n = 11) and comparative analyses, we found that NRCP was highly
upregulated in ovarian tumors (>100 fold, pLong noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs)
significantly influence the development and genomic regulation of cells.
Even though several lncRNAs have been discovered using model systems such
as yeast, few have been proven to be involved in cancer-specific
phenotypes. In this study, we report the role of lncRNA NRCP in altering
cancer cell metabolism and provide a strategy to target cancer metabolism
using siRNAs. Methodology and Results: Using genomic profiling of ovarian
tumors (n = 29) and normal ovarian tissues (n = 11) and comparative
analyses, we found that NRCP was highly upregulated in ovarian tumors
(>100 fold, p<0.05). In another cohort of 218 patients with high-grade
serous ovarian cancer, NRCP expression in tumor tissues was negatively
correlated with overall survival (p6 fold, p40%). Additionally,
metabolites such as glutamate and acetate were also decreased
significantly in NRCP silenced cells compared to siControl treated cells.
NRCP knockdown in SKOV3 or A2780 ovarian cancer cells showed
significantly increased apoptosis and decreased cell proliferation
compared with control cancer cells.The cancer cells were more sensitive
to cisplatin-mediated apoptosis in vitro after treatment with siNRCP plus
cisplatin. In an orthotopic mouse model of ovarian cancer, siNRCP
delivered via a liposomal carrier DOPC, significantly reduced tumor
weight and number of distant metastatic nodules compared with control
treatment (>80%, p40%). Additionally, metabolites such as glutamate and
acetate were also decreased significantly in NRCP silenced cells compared
to siControl treated cells. NRCP knockdown in SKOV3 or A2780 ovarian
cancer cells showed significantly increased apoptosis and decreased cell
proliferation compared with control cancer cells.The cancer cells were
more sensitive to cisplatin-mediated apoptosis in vitro after treatment
with siNRCP plus cisplatin. In an orthotopic mouse model of ovarian
cancer, siNRCP delivered via a liposomal carrier DOPC, significantly
reduced tumor weight and number of distant metastatic nodules compared
with control treatment (>80%, p<0.01). The mice treated with siNRCP
showed enhanced cisplatin sensitivity in tumors when compared to mice
treated with the control siRNA. More importantly, metabolite analysis of
the in vivo samples revealed significant reduction in lactate levels in
the tumors treated with siNRCP.Significance: We report an unrecognized
role of the lncRNA NRCP in modulating metabolism in ovarian cancer. DOPC
nanoparticle-incorporated siRNA-mediated silencing of this lncRNA
combined with cisplatin in vivo demonstrates the first known preclinical
model indicating therapeutic potential of modulating lncRNAs in cancer.

