Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating cell-free DNA as a diagnostic marker for epithelial
ovarian cancer and an association with epithelial-mesenchymal transition


Objectives: Although technologies continue to develop, there are still
many limitations on detecting circulating tumor cells in blood. In
addition, the great genetic heterogeneity in ovarian cancer is one of the
major concerns. Therefore, we aimed to investigate the cell-free DNA
(cfDNA) as a diagnostic marker for epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) and
evaluate the cfDNA level of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
markers.Methods: Blood was preoperatively collected from women who were
assigned to surgery for pelvic mass. DNA was extracted using Qiagen DNA
Mini kit and quantification of total cfDNA was performed using real-time
PCR with TaqMan Assay with primers directed to the following genes:GAPDH,
-globin, -actin, E-cadherin, and fibronectin.Results: A total of 32
patients with EOC and 17 patients of benign ovarian disease (controls)
were included. The median cfDNA level of -globin was 0 (range,
0-0.35)GE/ml in EOC and 0.41 (range, 0-33.5)GE/ml in control (p =
0.04).The sensitivity of -globin cfDNA (>0.4 GE/ml) was 51.9%, which was
lower than that of CA-125 (96.3%, if CA-125 >35IU/ml). cfDNA was
significantly higher in advanced stage of EOC than early stage EOC (p =
0.02). Plasma E-cadherin level was significantly related with -globin
cfDNA (coefficient 0.886, pObjectives: Although technologies continue to
develop, there are still many limitations on detecting circulating tumor
cells in blood. In addition, the great genetic heterogeneity in ovarian
cancer is one of the major concerns. Therefore, we aimed to investigate
the cell-free DNA (cfDNA) as a diagnostic marker for epithelial ovarian
cancer (EOC) and evaluate the cfDNA level of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition markers.Methods: Blood was preoperatively collected from women
who were assigned to surgery for pelvic mass. DNA was extracted using
Qiagen DNA Mini kit and quantification of total cfDNA was performed using
real-time PCR with TaqMan Assay with primers directed to the following
genes:GAPDH, -globin, -actin, E-cadherin, and fibronectin.Results: A
total of 32 patients with EOC and 17 patients of benign ovarian disease
(controls) were included. The median cfDNA level of -globin was 0 (range,
0-0.35)GE/ml in EOC and 0.41 (range, 0-33.5)GE/ml in control (p =
0.04).The sensitivity of -globin cfDNA (>0.4 GE/ml) was 51.9%, which was
lower than that of CA-125 (96.3%, if CA-125 >35IU/ml). cfDNA was
significantly higher in advanced stage of EOC than early stage EOC (p =
0.02). Plasma E-cadherin level was significantly related with -globin
cfDNA (coefficient 0.886, p<0.001). However, there was no significant
association with cfDNA amount and survival outcomes.Conclusions:
Circulating cfDNA can be a promising target for early detection of EOC.
The levels of epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers showed a
different pattern in plasma and were associated with other cfDNA amounts.

