Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Opposing influence of activin and TGF on PI3K and MEK/ERK
signaling in colon cancer


Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second deadliest cancer in
the US. The overall number of new cases and deaths has decreased, most
likely due to increased screening. However, once CRC has metastasized,
survival rate drops dramatically. In early stage CRC, the Transforming
Growth Factor (TGF) super family is growth suppressive; in advanced
disease, high TGF serum levels are associated with poor prognosis.
Activin and TGF regulate cell growth, apoptosis, and cell migration
involving a poorly understood switch from growth suppressive to
proinvasive actions. Understanding the switch to metastatic behavior and
developing therapeutic strategies and biomarkers to target this process
are clinical challenges. We recently observed opposing effects of TGF and
activin on a downstream target, the cell cycle inhibitor p21. TGF induces
SMAD4-dependent upregulation of p21, while activin downregulation of p21
is SMAD4-independent. Here, we dissect the unique contributions of
mitogenic pathways to a TGF or activin-induced metastatic phenotype in
colon cancer.Methods: Colon cancer cell lines (+/- SMAD4) were assessed
for ligand-induced PI3K and MEK/ERK pathway activation.
Protein/phospho-isoform expression and association were determined
following knockdown and pharmacologic inhibition of pathway members. TGF
and activin influence on cell migration via mitogenic pathways was
assessed through use of small molecule inhibitors of signaling members.
Epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) was assessed by altered
expression of epithelial and mesenchymal markers. Pathway activation was
compared in intestinal tumors from AOM/DSS treated ACVR2 knockout and
ACVR2 wild type mice. Mitogenic signaling/growth factor status and p21
localization were correlated in primary colon cancers.Results: Activin,
but not TGF, led to PI3K activation via interaction of ACVR1 and p85
independent of SMAD4, resulting in p21 downregulation. In contrast, TGF
increased significantly p21 via MEK/ERK/SMAD4 synergy through a
SMAD4-dependent mechanism. While activin induced EMT via PI3K, TGF
induced EMT via MEK/ERK activation. In vivo, loss of ACVR2 resulted in
loss of pAkt, consistent with activin-dependent PI3Ksignaling. In primary
colon cancers, loss of nuclear p21 correlated with upstream activation of
activin/PI3K while nuclear p21 was associated with TGF/MEK/ERK pathway
activation.Conclusions: Activin and TGF diverge in their pro-migratory,
SMAD4-independent signaling in colon cancer and utilize distinct
mitogenic signaling to affect p21 localization. p21 localization in colon
cancer may warrant further validation as a therapeutic biomarker for
targeting TGF family receptors.

