Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antimetastatic effect of a Dializable Leucocyte Extract in a
murine model of prostate cancer


Prostate cancer remains the most common non-dermatological cancer in the
United States and the second leading cause of cancer death amongst men.
The majority of men with progressive prostate cancer develop metastases,
being the skeleton the most prevalent metastatic site. Dialyzable
leukocyte extracts (DLEs) are heterogeneous mixtures of
low-molecular-weight (Prostate cancer remains the most common
non-dermatological cancer in the United States and the second leading
cause of cancer death amongst men. The majority of men with progressive
prostate cancer develop metastases, being the skeleton the most prevalent
metastatic site. Dialyzable leukocyte extracts (DLEs) are heterogeneous
mixtures of low-molecular-weight (<10 kDa) peptides that improve clinical
responses in various diseases. Our group has shown that DLEs change
cytokine serum concentrations in patients and reduce experimental
metastasis in a melanoma model. In this work we analyzed the in vitro
effects of a human DLE produced under good manufacturing procedures and
facilities [1] and evaluated its possible antimetastatic effect in
vivo.We employed PC-3 cells and murine Src-transformed Prostate
Epithelial Cells (PEC-Src) to assess the direct effects of DLE in
prostate cancer cells. Both cell lines were exposed in vitro to the DLE
(1 pg/mL- 1 g/mL) in proliferating (+FBS) or non-proliferating (-FBS)
conditions, and cell number was estimated by MTS assays. The effects on
cell motility and cell invasion were evaluated by wound healing assays
and invasion from collagen-embedded spheroids, respectively. Since DLEs
are immunomodulators, we used an experimental metastasis model that
consistently produces bone and brain metastasis in inmunocompetent mice
[2]. PEC-Src expressing Luciferase2-RFP were intracardiacally injected to
FVB mice and metastatic growth in DLE-treated (1, 5, or 25 g/kg p.o.)
animals was quantified weekly by bioluminescence imaging.In vitro
exposure to a wide range of DLE concentrations did not alter
proliferation or survival in PC-3 or PEC-Src cells, indicating that the
evaluated DLE does not has direct antineoplastic effect. Similarly,
treatments did not alter prostate cancer cell motility or invasion. In
contrast, DLE (1 g/kg) reduced metastatic tumor burden in brain and bones
in inmunocompetent mice. The absence of direct effect on prostate cancer
cells suggests that DLE-treatment may be changing cellular or soluble
facilitators in the metastatic microenvironments. Supported by
PAPIIT-UNAM IN219613.[1] Medina-Rivero E, et al. J Pharma Biomed Anal 88:
289-294, 2014[2] Sicoli D, et al. Cancer Res 74: 7103-14, 2014

