Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Akt2 in cell survival and metastasis of colorectal cancer
(CRC) cells


Background: Colorectal Cancer (CRC) is the second highest cause of cancer
related deaths in United States. Metastatic dissemination of CRC cells to
distant organs (primarily to the liver and lungs) makes the disease more
lethal and incurable. Inappropriate cell survival signaling mechanisms
contribute to successful colonization of cells at metastatic sites. Akt
is a major cell survival-signaling node, which undergoes aberrant
activation in various types of cancer. The Akt family has three members:
Akt1, Akt2 and Akt3 which share structural homology and have similar
mechanism of activation; however, differences in the phenotype of Akt1,
Akt2 and Akt3 knock out mice suggest that they have non-redundant
functional characteristics. Recently Akt2 has been identified as a
significant contributor to colon cancer malignancy in addition to Akt1.
Earlier reports have shown that knockdown of Akt2 results in reduced
liver metastasis of CRC cells, however there are no studies related to
the mechanism responsible for the reduction in metastasis.We observed a
significant increase in the expression of Akt2 (microarray analysis) in
liver metastatic samples formed by highly metastatic IGF1R-dependent CRC
cells in comparison to the primary tumor. This was further confirmed by
western blot and immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis. Additionally,
correlative studies using human primary colon carcinoma and corresponding
liver metastatic samples showed a significant (pBackground: Colorectal
Cancer (CRC) is the second highest cause of cancer related deaths in
United States. Metastatic dissemination of CRC cells to distant organs
(primarily to the liver and lungs) makes the disease more lethal and
incurable. Inappropriate cell survival signaling mechanisms contribute to
successful colonization of cells at metastatic sites. Akt is a major cell
survival-signaling node, which undergoes aberrant activation in various
types of cancer. The Akt family has three members: Akt1, Akt2 and Akt3
which share structural homology and have similar mechanism of activation;
however, differences in the phenotype of Akt1, Akt2 and Akt3 knock out
mice suggest that they have non-redundant functional characteristics.
Recently Akt2 has been identified as a significant contributor to colon
cancer malignancy in addition to Akt1. Earlier reports have shown that
knockdown of Akt2 results in reduced liver metastasis of CRC cells,
however there are no studies related to the mechanism responsible for the
reduction in metastasis.We observed a significant increase in the
expression of Akt2 (microarray analysis) in liver metastatic samples
formed by highly metastatic IGF1R-dependent CRC cells in comparison to
the primary tumor. This was further confirmed by western blot and
immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis. Additionally, correlative studies
using human primary colon carcinoma and corresponding liver metastatic
samples showed a significant (p<0.001) increase in the expression of
Akt2. These preliminary data led us to hypothesize that Akt2 may be
playing a role in regulating cell survival and metastasis of CRC
cells.Materials and Methods: IGF1R-dependent CRC cells (GEO and CBS) were
used for the study. Two doxycycline inducible shRNAs for Akt2 were
introduced by lentiviral transfection. Non-Targeting shRNA was used as
control.Results: shRNA-mediated knockdown of Akt2 led to reduction in the
expression of XIAP and survivin. We and others have shown that these IAPs
(XIAP and survivin) are implicated to play an important role in cancer
cell survival and metastasis. Furthermore, loss of Akt2 resulted in loss
of pBad (S136), which is an essential cell survival marker. Loss of pBad
results in increased cell death by PARP activation. Akt2 knockdown also
affects cell survival by increasing p21 and decreasing the expression of
cyclin E. PCR array analysis for metastatic genes revealed that a
metastatic suppressor gene MTSS1 was 9 fold increased on knockdown of
Akt2. It has been shown that MTSS1 inhibits metastasis by affecting cell
junction assembly and stability.Conclusion: We have shown that loss of
Akt2 promotes cell death and inhibits cell proliferation. This is the
first study, which suggests the mechanism of Akt2 mediated cell death by
XIAP and survivin downregulation. These results suggest that Akt2
inhibits metastasis by increasing the expression of MTSS1.

