Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Feasibility of serum proteomic companion diagnostic (CDx) test
development on the microflex LT platform


Clinical oncology assays using mass spectrometry have exclusively been
run on instrument platforms designed for use in research laboratories.
Here, we report on the use of a bench-top MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer
(MS) to run a serum proteomic Laboratory Developed Test (LDT), VeriStrat.
A number of previous studies have shown that this assay measures a serum
proteomic fingerprint using MALDI-TOF MS which, following spectral
acquisition and data processing, classifies advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients into treatment categories. An extension of
VeriStrat, BDX004, is currently under development as part of a global,
randomized, double-blind Phase 2 clinical study, FOCAL. BDX004 will be
used prospectively to select previously untreated, EGFR mutation-positive
patients with advanced NSCLC to receive one of two treatments: (1) the
combination of ficlatuzumab (a humanized monoclonal antibody against
hepatocyte growth factor) and an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), or
(2) an EGFR TKI with placebo. For the development of BDX004 as a
companion diagnostic (CDx), we have included the microflex LT (LT), a
component of Bruker's MALDI Biotyper CA system, which was granted FDA
clearance for the identification of Gram negative bacteria. In the
present study, we evaluated the LT platform through comparative studies
with other MALDI-TOF instruments (autoflex III and autoflex SPEED)
utilizing samples from patients previously diagnosed with NSCLC. In
summary, we found that under common laboratory procedures the LT produces
results equivalent to research grade MALDI-TOF MS instrumentation. In
initial studies, the microflex LT showed similar resolution (R > 600 at
6632.1 m/z) and sensitivity (S/N 50 with 500 fmoles BSA in 100 laser
shots) performance parameters as the autoflex series research instruments
(R > 800 at 6632.1 m/z and S/N 50 with 500 fmoles BSA in 250 laser
shots). The LT was qualified with several independent sample sets [n = 4
(8 replicates; 2000 spectra/replicate); n = 67 (3 replicates; 2000
spectra/replicate) and n = 20 (3 replicates; 2000 spectra/replicate)]. In
these studies, the LT achieved 100%, >97%, and 100% concordance with
reference data sets previously acquired on the autoflex platforms. As
expected, due to the lower laser repetition rate of the LT's nitrogen
laser, the acquisition speed was slower on the LT as compared to the
autoflex instruments by a factor of two. However, the slower acquisition
speed is partially compensated for with increased sensitivity, which is
particularly evident in the reference sample mass spectra which have
signal-to-noise ratios 1.5 greater than those acquired on the autoflex
platform. Based on these results, the microflex LT appears to be suitable
for measurement of serum proteomic profiles in NSCLC and suggests that
the inclusion of the microflex LT in CDx test development has the
potential to expand the utility of MALDI-based testing in the clinic.

