Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nrf2 suppression results in growth inhibition and enhances
response to chemotherapy and radiation therapy in triple-negative breast
cancer cells


Nuclear factor-erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a key
transcriptional activator that specifically binds to the Antioxidant
Response Element (ARE) to initiate expression of various anti-oxidative
and anti-inflammation genes to protect cells from oxidative stress.
Recently, Nrf2 has been shown to redirect glucose and glutamine into
anabolic pathways to promote cell proliferation. Constitutive
stabilization of Nrf2 has been observed in many human cancers and confers
chemo- and radio-resistance of cancer cells. We examined Nrf2 expression
and function in triple negative breast cancer cells (TNBC). mRNA and
protein expression of Nrf2 were higher in the TNBC cell lines MDA-MB-231
and MDA-MB-436 compared to immortalized breast epithelial cell lines
(MCF10A and MCF12A) and estrogen receptor positive breast cancer cell
lines (MCF-7 and T47D). shRNA knock-down of Nrf2 in MDA-MB-231 and
MDA-MB-436 TNBC cells showed decreased mRNA expression of multiple Nrf2
regulated anti-oxidant (SLC7A11, NQO-1, GCLC, GCLM, SLC7A5, etc) and
pentose phosphate pathway genes (G6PD, PGD, ME-1, TKT, TALDO1, PPAT,
etc), enhanced basal levels of cellular reactive oxygen species, impaired
mitochondrial function as determined by measuring mitochondrial
potentials in living cells, and reduced S phase entry. Cells with
decreased Nrf2 had reduced cell growth in monolayer and anchorage
independent growth assays. In addition, Nrf2 suppression reduced cell
migration. Nrf2 down-regulated MDA-MB-231 cells also showed increased
response towards ionizing radiation and mitomycin C treatment in
clonogenic and soft agar assays. Furthermore, reduced Nrf2 expression
decreased the number of stem-like (CD44+/CD24-) cells in MDA-MB-231 cell
populations. Thus, Nrf2 regulated many aspects of the malignant phenotype
in TNBC and suggest that inhibition of Nrf2 might be a therapeutic target
for TNBC.

