Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Noninvasive diagnosis of actionable mutations by deep sequencing
of circulating tumor DNA in multiple myeloma


Background: Genome sequencing of multiple myeloma (MM) tumors has
revealed recurrent mutations that serve as a fertile ground for targeted
therapies. Indeed, activating mutations of KRAS, NRAS and BRAF have been
reported in approximately 27%, 24% and 4% of MM cases. Based on this
observation, we initiated a Phase II NCI-CTEP sponsored clinical trial of
trametinib in patients with MM (PHL-9460). Detection of mutations
currently require bone marrow aspirates that are invasive and can yield
suboptimal samples. Targeted, ultra-deep sequencing of circulating tumor
DNA (ctDNA) is a promising tool for accessing the tumor genome that has
not been well studied in MM. We set out to determine the feasibility of
detecting ctDNA in MM and of identifying actionable mutations and
mutational load using liquid biopsy through ctDNA analysis.Methods: MM
patients enrolled onto PHL-9460 or those with heavy tumor burden were
identified and consented to have their peripheral blood drawn for
analysis. Where possible, matched tumor DNA was also obtained. Cell-free
DNA was extracted from 7-15 mL of plasma isolated within 1 hour of blood
draw using the QIAamp Circulating Nucleic Acid Kit and tagged with
barcoded sequencing adapters for subsequent pooling. All exons of KRAS,
NRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA and EGFR genes were isolated using a custom hybrid
capture panel (IDT xGen Lockdown) and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq
2000. Reads were aligned to the human genome reference (hg19) using bwa
and somatic mutations were detected using muTect.Results: We have
collected 25 samples from 23 patients, 7 from patients on PHL-9460, 5
newly diagnosed, and 13 from relapsed patients having received 3.3 median
prior lines of therapy (range 1-7). To date, 11 samples from 10 patients
have been sequenced. The sample with the lowest DNA yield failed due to
low library complexity (range 16.6-3872 ng, median yield: 197 ng). From
the remaining 10 samples, the mean target coverage ranged from 31,500 to
32,500. Somatic mutations in KRAS, NRAS, or PIK3CA genes were present in
5 of 9 patients with mutant allele frequencies ranging from 1.1% to 32%
(3 KRAS and 2 NRAS of which 2 cases also had a low frequency PIK3CA
mutation). We did not uncover mutations in BRAF or EGFR. For patients
with matched tumor DNA, mutations in ctDNA concurred with those found in
tumor DNA sequencing (4 of 4 tumors with known genotypes). Two patients
with NRAS mutations enrolled onto PHL-9460 have responded to trametinib
(1 partial and 1 minor response) and remain on therapy.Conclusion: ctDNA
analysis in this cohort has identified key mutations in MM. The rate of
RAS or RAF mutations in ctDNA compared to matched tumors and correlation
to response to trametinib is ongoing and will be presented. Preliminary
data suggest that ctDNA may be a reliable method of detecting mutations
in MM and an alternative to bone marrow biopsy.

