Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Abscopal responses in patients with refractory metastatic NSCLC
treated with concurrent radiotherapy and CTLA-4 immune checkpoint
blockade: evidence for the in situ vaccination hypothesis of radiotherapy


Background: The current median survival for patients with metastatic
NSCLC is 7 mos. Novel approaches, such as immunotherapy, are warranted.
Recent success with immune checkpoint blockade in metastatic NSCLC has
been reported for blocking antibodies to PD-L1 and PD-1, but not to
CTLA-4. We demonstrated pre-clinically that radiotherapy (RT) incites
immunogenic cell death and enables cross-priming of tumor specific
effector T-cells by DCs to eliminate in field and abscopal (ab-scopus,
away from the target) metastases. We reported the 1st complete abscopal
response in a patient with metastatic NSCLC, treated with RT and
ipilimumab, who remains disease free >2.5 yrs. Thus, we initiated a
prospective clinical trial (NYU S14-00208) to test this regimen in
similar patients. We report the preliminary results on eight evaluable
patients, who completed treatment.Methods: Eligible patients had
chemo-resistant metastatic NSCLC, progressed on at least 1 chemotherapy
regimen, 2 measurable lesions, ECOG PS 1, life expectancy >3 mos,
non-steroid dependent, and no active intracranial disease. The first
cohort consisted of patients treated with 6Gy x5 plus ipilimumab (3mg/kg
x4 cycles). Patients were evaluated with pre and post-treatment (day 81
from treatment inception) PET/CTs.Results: Eight patients treated are
currently evaluable (Table). The median prior chemotherapy regimens was
2, prior RT courses was 1.5, and time from diagnosis of metastatic
disease was 6.75 mos.Conclusion: Metastatic NSCLC is only marginally
responsive to CTLA-4 blockade alone; yet, our preliminary data suggest
that with the addition of RT, objective responses are more common. This
novel approach to treating metastatic NSCLC holds tremendous promise. The
trial continues the planned accrual of 29 patients.Table: CR = complete
response, PR = partial response, SD = stable disease, POD = progression
of disease

