Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nucleolin phosphorylation by CK2 is important for its role in
regulating apoptosis


Nucleolar phosphoprotein nucleolin integrates critical cellular processes
including gene expression, ribosome biogenesis, proliferation and the
cellular response to stress. Elevated levels of nucleolin are found in a
variety of tumors. Nucleolin has distinct mechanisms in p53 regulation to
influence cell survival: In normal unstressed cells (with
hyper-proliferative signals but no obvious DNA damage), nucleolin
stabilizes p53 and induces apoptosis. Under DNA-damage however, nucleolin
can cause translational repression. The translational repression is
overcome upon DNA damage in part, possibly due to nucleolin translocation
to the nucleoplasm, altered interactions with ribosomal protein, RPL26
and/or p53-antagonist, HDM2. In contrast, nucleolin binding to AU rich
elements (AREs) of anti-apoptotic BCL2-mRNA stabilizes BCL2, leading to
cell survival. Importantly, increased nucleolin phosphorylation by the
interphase kinase CK2 is finely regulated in exponentially dividing
cells; however, role of nucleolin phosphorylation remains largely
unexplored in cell survival. We recently demonstrated that
phosphorylation deficient nucleolin mutant confers dominant negative
effect on cell proliferation. In this study, we dissect the role of
nucleolin phosphorylation in regulating p53-signaling pathway. Our
pathway specific qRT-PCR-array analyses indicate that expression of
phosphorylation-deficient nucleolin mutant resulted in an increased gene
expression in the apoptosis, DNA damage and repair pathways that are
downstream to p53 activation. We further elucidate that targeting
nucleolin phosphorylation by CK2 initiates an increased expression of
BH3-only proteins: p53-transcriptional targets e.g. BID and PUMA.
Interestingly, an increased expression of BIM, a p53-independent target
that is required during DNA damage induced cell death is evident with NCL
expression regardless of its phosphorylation status. This is the first
step in understanding nucleolin-phosphorylation mediated regulation of
gene expression in the p53-pathway to control cell proliferation. This
information will be useful in identifying new targets that can be either
directly (via RNA binding) or indirectly (through other proteins or gene
expression) regulated by nucleolin phosphorylation.

