Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TWIST1 is required for suppression of apoptosis in oncogene driven
non-small cell lung carcinoma


A large fraction of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) are dependent on
defined oncogenic driver mutations. The most common oncogene driver
mutation is mutant KRAS for which no effective therapies exist. In
addition, acquired resistance to currently available targeted therapies
for oncogene driver dependent disease is inevitable. Our lab has
demonstrated that inhibition of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor, TWIST1 in KRAS mutant, EGFR mutant, and MET amplified NSCLC can
induce either oncogene induced senescence or apoptosis. The fact that a
subset of oncogene dependent NSCLC undergo apoptosis following TWIST1
inhibition suggests that these cells are potentially addicted to TWIST1
and might be more vulnerable to TWIST1 inhibitors. Importantly, we have
identified the harmala alkaloid, harmine, as a novel TWIST1 inhibitor
which could inhibit growth in several oncogene driver defined NSCLC cell
lines and decrease TWIST1 levels via degradation. Given that TWIST1 is
rarely expressed post-natally, therapies targeting TWIST1 may have
minimal toxicities.In the current study, we examine the key TWIST1
functions, target genes and apoptotic pathways that are required for
suppression of apoptosis. We found that genetic or pharmacological
(harmine) inhibition of TWIST1 resulted in apoptosis in several oncogenic
driver dependent cell lines. TWIST1 inhibition resulted in cleavage of
caspase 3, 8, 9, and PARP. TWIST1 inhibition resulted in increased levels
of Bid, Bim, and TNFRSF10B, as well as, reduced c-FLIP and Bcl-2 levels.
Conversely, we demonstrated that TWIST1 overexpression leads to increased
levels of c-FLIP and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members as well as
decreased levels of Bid. Overexpression of Bcl-2 or c-FLIP resulted in
partial abrogation of apoptosis following TWIST1 silencing. These
findings suggest that the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways are important
for TWIST1 mediated suppression of apoptosis. Preliminary gene expression
analysis of NSCLC cells following TWIST1 silencing has identified
multiple candidate target genes in these apoptotic pathways. In addition,
structure/functional analysis of TWIST1 suggests that nuclear
localization, homo- and heterodimerization and proper phosphorylation of
TWIST1 are necessary for suppression of apoptosis. Remarkably, TWIST
inhibition with harmine treatment decreased tumor growth in our mouse
model of KrasG12D/Twist1 NSCLC as well as decreased TWIST1 expression and
induced apoptosis.In summary, we found that TWIST1 was required for
suppression of apoptosis in several oncogenic driver dependent cell
lines. Furthermore, the apoptosis observed after TWIST1 inhibition is
dependent on the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways possibly mediated
through c-FLIP and Bim. Our studies will establish the molecular pathways
that are required for suppression of apoptosis with the ultimate goal of
identifying predictive biomarkers of response to TWIST1 inhibitors.

