Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Flaxseed and its lignan component protect from asbestos-induced
inflammation in mice


Introduction/Background: Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is a highly lethal
form of thoracic cancer with high mortality and poor treatment options.
Development of MM has been linked directly to exposure to asbestos
fibers, but with a long latency period. Recent studies have indicated
that the pathogenesis of asbestos-induced cancers is due, in part, to
chronic inflammation and oxidative tissue damage caused by persistent
asbestos fibers. Whole grain flaxseed (FS) has known antioxidant,
anti-inflammatory and cancer chemopreventive properties. Rationale: As a
prelude to future chemoprevention studies, we tested the ability of oral
FS and its lignan component, FLC which is enriched in the lignan
secoisolariciresinol diglucoside (SDG), to prevent acute asbestos-induced
inflammation and inflammatory cytokine release in MM-prone
Nf2+/mut;Cdkn2a+/mut mice. Methods: Mice were given a single ip bolus of
400 mM of crocidolite asbestos. They were then placed on 10% FS or 10%
FLC supplemented diets 1 day prior (-1) to or after (+1) asbestos
instillation. All mice were evaluated 3 days after injection of asbestos
for abdominal inflammation and proinflammatory cytokine release. The
Nf2+/mut;Cdkn2a+/mut model was selected as it develops an accelerated
form of MM when exposed to asbestos. Results: Using liquid chromatography
and tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS), we showed that systemic levels
(plasma) of flaxseed lignan metabolites (such as the mammalian lignans
Enterolactone (EL) and Enterodiol (ED)) were comparable to those in other
mouse models where FS was shown to be an effective chemopreventive agent.
The numbers of macrophages (MF) and neutrophils (PMN) in peritoneal
lavage fluid indicated that both FS and FLC blunted acute abdominal
inflammation induced by asbestos. In addition, the levels of
pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF alpha and IL-1 beta in lavage fluid were
also decreased by the dietary agents. Conclusions: Our findings suggest
that the known chemopreventive properties of FS and its lignan component
appear to reduce short-term asbestos-induced inflammation and may thus
prove to be a promising dietary agent in the chemoprevention of
MM.Funding: This study was supported in part by Penn's SRP Center Grant
(P42 ES027320), Asbestos fate, exposure, remediation and adverse health
effects from the National Institute of Environmental Health (NIEHS) and
1R03CA180548-02 (MCS).

