Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of colorectal cancer-associated genetic and epigenetic
alterations in urine of patients with CRC


Colorectal cancer (CRC) has been the second leading cause of
cancer-related deaths due in part to a low compliance rate (Colorectal
cancer (CRC) has been the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths
due in part to a low compliance rate (<50%) of the current screening
method, an invasive colonoscopy, resulting in failure of detecting cancer
early in its curative stages. 20% of CRC cases are only detected once the
cancer has spread to a distant site, drastically reducing the 5-year
survival rate from 90% to 12%. In order to improve the success of early
detection methods of CRC, we have focused on developing non-invasive,
multi-biomarker detection assays designed to identify CRC-associated
genetic alterations. We have previously demonstrated that urine contains
circulation-derived low molecular weight (LMW) DNA (Colorectal cancer
(CRC) has been the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths due in
part to a low compliance rate (<50%) of the current screening method, an
invasive colonoscopy, resulting in failure of detecting cancer early in
its curative stages. 20% of CRC cases are only detected once the cancer
has spread to a distant site, drastically reducing the 5-year survival
rate from 90% to 12%. In order to improve the success of early detection
methods of CRC, we have focused on developing non-invasive,
multi-biomarker detection assays designed to identify CRC-associated
genetic alterations. We have previously demonstrated that urine contains
circulation-derived low molecular weight (LMW) DNA (<300 bp), which
suggests that LMW urine DNA could be used to detect CRC-associated
genetic alterations. Using previously identified stool and serum-based
biomarkers for CRC, we have developed a panel of potential CRC markers
for early detection for use in a non-invasive urine DNA test. Our panel
contains genetic mutations and epigenetic alterations of nine genes:
mutations of KRAS codons 12/13 and BRAF V600E and aberrant
hypermethylation of VIM, SEPT9, BMP3, NDRG4, CDKN2A, TFPI2, and MGMT. The
proof-of-concept of a CRC urine DNA test was demonstrated in a small
pilot study investigating mVIM as a biomarker for CRC in matched
tissue-urine samples. This led to the development of a PCR-based approach
to quantify these markers in a prevalidation study with blinded CRC
samples to identify the specificity and sensitivity of these genetic
mutations and epigenetic alterations. In a concordant study using this
blinded CRC sample set, our panel of markers was used in an amplicon
NGS-based study. Results from these two studies will be used to confirm
the sensitivity and specificity of each marker for early detection of CRC.

