Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential aggregation rates and therapeutic response of
pancreatic cancer cell lines to sigma-2 receptor activation in 3D culture


Pancreatic cancer is one of the most deadly forms of cancer, with overall
5-year survival rates under 20%. The only cure for this type of cancer is
surgical, however this option is rarely available due in part to
detection that is typically late in the progression of the disease. The
aim of this study was to understand the differences in progression
between L3.6, PANC-1, and M1A-PaCa-2 cells as representatives of varied
levels of metastatic character through aggregation analysis in 3D cell
culture. It is well established that 3D culture more closely mimics the
in vivo condition, as the cells adhere to each other forming microtumors
as opposed to being attached to a plastic substratum as is the case with
standard 2D cell culture. We also examined the effectiveness of a novel
target for chemotherapeutic intervention in these cell lines in 3D
culture. The sigma-2 receptor is highly upregulated in rapidly
proliferating cancer tissues as compared to non-cancerous tissue, and
induces apoptosis when activated. We previously reported the ability of
the sigma-2 receptor partial agonist CM572 (sigma-2 Ki = 14.7 nM) to
induce apoptosis in PANC-1 pancreatic carcinoma cells in standard 2D
culture (Nicholson et al., Proc. Amer. Assoc. Cancer Res. 74: #3237,
2014). Here, we measured the aggregation rate and sigma-2 agonist
sensitivity of L3.6, a highly metastatic cell line, in comparison to
M1A-PaCa-2 and PANC-1 cells, which are both significantly less
aggressive. The sigma-2 receptor agonist siramesine (Ki = 0.12nM) was
found to induce cell death in 3D tumor cell culture in all three
pancreatic cancer cell lines. However, the potency was 30-50% of the
potency observed in traditional 2D cultured cells. Interestingly, in 3D
culture, L3.6 and PANC-1 cells both exhibited 45% of the maximal cell
death that was achieved in 2D culture using the same dose of siramesine,
and M1A-PaCa-2 cells exhibited 25% of the maximal 2D toxicity at this
dose. Additionally, both siramesine and CM572 were able to slow
aggregation of the pancreatic cancer cells. This data indicates that the
sigma-2 receptor may provide a novel target for therapeutic intervention
in pancreatic cancer, both for slowing progression of the disease and as
a chemotherapeutic target. The data also indicate that cell-cell contact
in 3D culture either modifies the sigma-2 receptor signaling process or
that cells in 3D culture present more of a barrier for drug access to the
tumor cells. Further studies are needed to examine these possibilities.

