Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of HuR effectively suppresses ovarian tumor growth in
mice


Ovarian cancer is the most deadly gynecologic cancer. To address the
clinical need for a more effective therapy than currently exists, this
investigation focused on targeting a post-transcriptional (RNA to
protein) regulatory RNA-binding protein, HuR (Human antigen R, aka
ELAVL1). HuR regulates the expression of multiple genes known to function
in tumor cell survival and in drug resistance. It is abundant and
hyper-functional in ovarian cancer cells as compared to normal cells,
thus providing a therapeutic window. We investigated the effect of
inhibiting HuR expression in ovarian tumor cells in culture and in
ovarian tumors in mice. We generated A2780 and OVCAR5 cells that
constitutively express either shHuR or a control shRNA, and assayed cell
proliferation and the ability of these cells to produce colonies in a
soft agar. Cell proliferation in both shRNA-expressing cell lines was
significantly reduced compared to control shRNA-expressing cells (19% and
11% in A2780 and OVCAR5, respectively; pOvarian cancer is the most deadly
gynecologic cancer. To address the clinical need for a more effective
therapy than currently exists, this investigation focused on targeting a
post-transcriptional (RNA to protein) regulatory RNA-binding protein, HuR
(Human antigen R, aka ELAVL1). HuR regulates the expression of multiple
genes known to function in tumor cell survival and in drug resistance. It
is abundant and hyper-functional in ovarian cancer cells as compared to
normal cells, thus providing a therapeutic window. We investigated the
effect of inhibiting HuR expression in ovarian tumor cells in culture and
in ovarian tumors in mice. We generated A2780 and OVCAR5 cells that
constitutively express either shHuR or a control shRNA, and assayed cell
proliferation and the ability of these cells to produce colonies in a
soft agar. Cell proliferation in both shRNA-expressing cell lines was
significantly reduced compared to control shRNA-expressing cells (19% and
11% in A2780 and OVCAR5, respectively; p<0.005). A2780-shRNA cells
produced 65% fewer colonies in soft agar a compared to parental A2780
cells and control shRNA-expressing cells. To evaluate the effect of HuR
suppression on tumor growth, C57BL/6 female mice were injected
intraperitoneally with ID8-luc murine ovarian cancer cells; mice
developed tumors throughout the peritoneal cavity. Approximately 4 weeks
following cell injection, tumor-bearing mice were optically imaged to
establish baseline biolumiscence, an indicator of ID8-luc-derived tumor
load. A novel CpG-free DNA dendrimer vector, 3DNA, was derivatized with
folate, aiming for tumor-targeted siHuR delivery upon systemic
administration to mice. Mice were treated twice a week for four weeks
(retro-orbital injection) with one of three 3DNA formulations or with
0.9% saline (n = 5-6/group). The 3DNA formulations were: 1)
Folate-derivatized 3DNA/siHuR; 2) 3DNA/siHuR; and 3) Folate-derivatized
3DNA/control siRNA. Tumor response to treatment was assessed once a week
by optical imaging. Using baseline tumor load as the comparator, tumor
growth was suppressed 3-fold in mice treated for 4 weeks with
folate-derivatized 3DNA/siHuR, the highest suppression of all treatment
groups, including non-folate derivatized 3DNA/siHuR (p = 0.01),
folate-derivatized 3DNA/control siRNA (p = 0.05), and 0.9% saline (p =
0.04). No overt toxicity was observed. A biodistribution study in which
CY3-labeled folate-derivatized 3DNA was systemically administered
resulted in very high fluorescence in ovarian tumors with little to no
fluorescence in normal tissues, thus supporting the tumor-targeting
potential of folate and the enhanced therapeutic effect observed in
folate-derivatized 3DNA/siHuR treated mice. These results support further
pursuit of HuR-targeted therapy as a complementary approach to current,
active therapies for ovarian cancer for overcoming drug resistance and
inhibiting tumor growth.

