Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The glucose metabolism targeting therapies and withaferin A
eliminate epidermal growth factor tyrosine kinase inhibitor-induced
drug-tolerant persisters in non-small lung cancer cells


In pathway-targeted cancer drug therapies, the relatively rapid emergence
of drug-tolerant persisters (DTPs) substantially limits the overall
therapeutic benefit. However, little is known about the roles of DTPs in
drug resistance. The aim of this study is (1) to clarify the
subpopulations of DTPs in EGFR mutated non-small lung cancer (NSCLC)
cells that have different roles in the resistance to epidermal growth
factor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) and (2) to develop effective
treatments.In this study, we used two EGFR mutated lung adenocarcinoma
cell lines, PC9 and II-18. They were treated with 2 M gefitinib for 6,
12, or 24 days or 6 month. We analyzed the mRNA expression of the stem
cell related markers by qRT-PCR and the expression of the cellular
senescence associated proteins by Western blotting. Then, we sorted DTPs
according to the expression pattern of CD133 and analyzed the features of
sorted cells. Finally, we tried to ablate DTPs by the glucose metabolism
targeting therapies and a stem-like cell targeting drug, withaferin A.The
time-dependent upregulation of the stem cell-related markers was observed
until day 24. Western blot analysis revealed that the cellular senescence
associated proteins were upregulated in a similar time course. Senescent
cells secrete various inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, a phenomenon
known as SASP. Recently, SASP has been reported to contribute to the
emergence and maintenance of cancer stem-like cells. Using FACS analysis,
DTPs were divided into the two populations depending on the surface
expression of CD133. CD133high DTPs were characterized by the higher
expression of stem cell related markers. On the other hand, CD133low DTPs
were characterized by higher expression of the cellular senescence
associated proteins. Rapamycin is reported to suppress SASP. Gefitnib and
rapamycin effectively suppressed the emergence of CD133high DTPs. We
found CD133low DTPs showed higher glucose metabolic state, consistent
with the previous reports that show senescence-associated metabolic
reprogramming is induced by anticancer therapies. We targeted this
metabolic change using a glucose transporter inhibitor (phloretin) and a
glycolytic blocker (2DG). These agents successfully suppressed the
emergence of CD133high DTPs. Finally, withaferin A could inhibit the
emergence of CD133high DTPs.In conclusion, we found that the
EGFR-TKI-induced DTPs in EGFR mutated NSCLC cells were composed of at
least two distinct cell populations: CD133high DTPs with stem-like
characters and CD133low DTPs with cellular senescent characters. CD133low
DTPs supported CD133high DTPs via SASP and blocking SASP effectively
suppressed the emergence of CD133high DTPs. Furthermore, our results
suggest that the glucose metabolism targeting therapies and withaferin A
can be new therapeutic candidates to ablate DTPs.

