Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enrichment of CD44high stem-cell-like cells as a possible
mechanism of progestin-dependent progression of human breast cancer


Combined hormone replacement therapy (HRT) containing progestins (P) and
estrogens (E) has been shown to increase the risk of breast cancer in
post-menopausal women (JNCI, 2000, 92:328). We showed that the commonly
used P, medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), increases production of the
potent angiogenic growth factor VEGF in breast cancer cells (Int J
Cancer, 2001, 92:469). Furthermore, it has been established that P drives
tumor progression in an in-vivo xenograft model (Can Res 2007; 67:9929).
CD44 has recently been shown to be expressed by cancer stem cells (CSC)
(Nature Reviews Cancer 2011; 11:254), and has therefore been used as a
marker for detecting and enriching of tumor initiating cells. CD44 binds
potent growth factors such as VEGF and acts as a co-receptor that helps
mediate proliferative and migratory signaling for a variety of receptor
tyrosine kinases. Thus, we hypothesized that MPA increases CD44 levels in
breast cancer cells and promotes the emergence of self-renewing
stem-cell-like-cells, which support MPA-accelerated tumors in vivo. Human
T47-D human breast cancer cells were treated with MPA for 24h. Subsequent
FACS analysis showed that MPA caused a significant increase in CD44
protein; CD44 was induced 10-fold (Control 5.9%, MPA 60.7%). A less
robust, but significant increase also occurred in BT474 cells (Control
4.0%, MPA 11.2%). Further studies showed that MPA-induced CD44high cells
also had high levels of ALDH enzyme activity, a characteristic of stem
cells. CD44high cell induction was completely repressed by the
anti-progestin RU-486, indicating involvement of progesterone receptors.
Induction of CD44 protein occurred in a time-dependent manner, with a
significant increase 6h after MPA treatment and reaching a peak after
24h. Interestingly, CD44high expression remained elevated for at least
another 24 hours, even though MPA was removed from the treatment media,
indicating that once induced, CD44 may be a stable protein. Importantly,
various natural and synthetic P that are used widely in HRT prescriptions
(Progesterone, Norethindrone, Norgestrel), brought about a similar
increase in CD44high cells. Considering P has previously been linked to
increased VEGF secretion by hormone-responsive cancer cells, we tested
whether VEGF signaling plays a role in the elevation of CD44high cells.
However, this process was found to be VEGF-independent. Our results show
that natural and synthetic progestins induce a CD44high cell population
which is likely associated with development of MPA-induced tumors. Thus
targeted therapies against CD44 may be useful in controlling progression
of P-driven tumors.Supported in part by COR award from the College of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Missouri.

