Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pan-Cancer analysis of the effects of splice-altering variants on
mRNA splicing and stability


Sequences surrounding splice junctions function to recruit splicing
elements to promote and suppress the inclusion of an adjacent exon.
Mutations disrupting motifs around splice regions and the creation of de
novo splice sites have not been functionally characterized genome-wide.
Furthermore, many variants that alter the mRNA isoform have been shown to
introduce splicing defects, such as premature termination codons (PTCs),
which are degraded via nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). Using cancer
samples across multiple cancer types, we have the unique opportunity to
study the effects of somatic and germline events introduced throughout
the genome and with the large dataset provided by The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA), we have the power to identify significant events that are
influencing mRNA splicing and stability.In this study we aim to
characterize splice altering variants (SAVs) and nonsense mutations that
directly effect exon inclusion and mRNA degradation, respectively,
utilizing the TCGA dataset consisting of both DNA-Seq (whole genome
and/or exome sequencing) and RNA-seq from approximately 8,000 tumors
representing 24 major cancer types. We have identified 23,615 somatic
splice site mutations and 71,009 somatic nonsense mutations in 24 cancer
types. For each variant, we have collected the following expression data
derived from the RNA-seq: exon, splice junction, isoform, and gene;
defining the expression signature of each variant. Expression signatures
of known SAVs will facilitate the identification of novel and
mis-classified missense and silent mutations affecting splicing.
Exploring the distribution of mutations and their correlation with the
aforementioned expression data will allow us to establish commonalities
and differences that may be indicative of cancer type, molecular subtype,
or clinical characteristics. Furthermore our position dependent analysis
of nonsense mutations and their correlation with degradation will enhance
our ability to determine significant sites influencing mRNA isoform
presence. We hypothesize that some intronic/exonic variants outside the
canonical splice site will influence exon inclusion and alter the ratio
of mRNA isoforms present.Our analysis has identified a number of SAVs,
including variants that were mis-classified as missense mutations such as
c.190 in BRCA1. The germline coding mutation was found to strengthen a
cryptic splice site and discovered to have a higher variant allele
fraction in the tumor relative to the normal tissue in two ovarian
samples. In conclusion our findings and the continued development of our
project will contribute to improving current annotation methods and
broaden our understanding of variants that affect splicing and their
biological contribution to mRNA isoforms selection in the cell.

