Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Primary tumor subclones carry somatic mutation signatures of
metastasis


We, and others, have recently shown that the vast majority of primary
tumors are mosaics of clonal populations of varying sizes, different
genetic makeup and distinct phenotypes. If subsets of these clones evolve
the ability to migrate from the primary tumor and to survive in blood or
lymphatic circulation, these clones can seed distant metastasis. For this
study, we have two goals. First, we identify clones with metastatic
phenotypes and characterize the somatic mutations that distinguish them
from non-metastatic clones. Second, we use these mutation signatures to
learn to recognize metastatic clones and to calculate the likelihood that
a primary tumor will metastasize.The identification of clones with
metastatic phenotypes among heterogeneous tumor populations has so far
been limited due to the availability of only single samples from tumors.
We overcome this limitation using our previously published algorithm,
EXPANDS, to identify clones present at >10% cell frequency within single
tumor samples across eight different types of carcinomas. We use TCGA's
exome-sequencing data to characterize the size and genetic content of
clones in 453 primary and 23 metastatic tumors.To quantify the metastatic
potential of clones, we compare clone size between primary and metastatic
tumors. Next, we model the metastatic potential of clones as a function
of their specific point mutations and copy number variations and use
principal component analysis to select metastasis gene candidates.
Finally, we calculate the likelihood that a primary tumor will
metastasize, from the number and size of primary tumor clones with high
metastatic potential, further referred to as metastatic clones. We
validate the prognostic significance of metastatic clone presence in two
independent exome-sequencing datasets: a cross-sectional cohort,
consisting of 683 primary tumors and a longitudinal cohort, consisting of
six matched primary and metastatic tumors from three patients.We identify
102 metastatic driver gene candidates mutated in clonal populations that
demonstrate significantly larger expansion in metastatic as compared to
primary tumors. These candidates were enriched for genes associated with
cell junction, sympathetic nervous system development, cell adhesion and
fibronectin function. Metastatic clones were larger and more frequently
observed within stage IV primary tumors as compared to stage I-III
primary tumors (p-value = 3E-4). Validation in the independent dataset
confirmed increased prevalence and penetrance of metastatic clones in the
primary tumors of patients who had metastasis compared non-metastatic
patients (p-value = 2E-3). In a univariate Cox model, the presence of
metastatic clones was a significant risk factor, independent of cancer
type (p-value 1E-2).Overall, we identify gene candidates that may be
responsible for the metastatic phenotype of certain clones and the
potential utility of clonal quantitation as a biomarker of metastatic
progression.

