Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The detection of circulating tumor DNA using Quantstudio 3D
digital PCR


Purpose: The purpose of this study is to employ the Quantstudio 3D (Q3D)
system to detect circulating tumor DNA in cancer patients
plasma.Background: Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) as a non-invasive
biomarker plays roles in monitoring solid tumor progression, metastasis,
and therapeutic effects. The identification of ctDNA depends on mutant
determination. The digital PCR technology is a powerful tool to identify
ctDNA. The Q3D platform is a relatively new digital PCR systemwhcih has
not been extensively tested in the detection of ctDNA. In this study, we
tested the capacity of Q3D in detecting ctDNA.Methods: Genomic DNA was
extracted from tumor tissue of patients. Variants were identified in
tumor tissue DNA by Illumina's TruSeq Amplicon Cancer Panel. To detect
the circulating tumor DNA, DNA was extracted from the plasma of the
patient with known variants identified by targeted-sequencing. The
circulating DNA was isolated from 400l of plasma from 12 patients using
QIAamp DNA Blood kit. The DNA concentration was measured using the Qubit
2.0. The quality and size of the circulating DNA was determined using the
Agilent 2100. The circulating DNA size was approximately 170-180
nucleotides in length, as reported in literatures. The variant
determination by Q3D was tested with custom TagMan SNP Genotyping Assays.
The absolute copy number of variant was determined with QuantStudio 3D
AnalysisSuite Software.Results: We first tested several assays with
known-variant tumor tissue DNA samples in Q3D. The mutants identified by
assays are BRAF V600E, KRAS G12D, KRAS G12V, and PIK3CA E542K. The
results showed that data points of mutant call, wild type call were well
separated from non-signal data points. We examined the sensitivity of
these assays using serial dilution of tumor DNA sample in non-tumor human
tissue DNA. 0.1% to 1% of mutants were detectable depending specific
assays. We collected circulating DNA from XX Patients plasma. The DNA
concentrations ranged from 5 ng/ml to 30 ng/ml of plasma. KRAS G12D and
G12V was detected with circulating DNA from patients carrying KRAS
mutant. The mutant frequency of KRAS G12D and G12V determined by Q3D is
3.2% and 3.7%, respectively. The absolute mutant copy number for KRAS
G12D is 9 and for KRAS G12V is 8.Conclusions: Q3D with validated custom
TagMan SNP Genotyping Assays is applicable in detecting ctDNA. We will
expect to utilize the technique to evaluate ctDNA.

