Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kinase activity profiles distinguish papillary thyroid cancers
with and without BRAF V600E mutations


Background: Most differentiated non medullary thyroid cancers (DTC) are
curatively treated by surgery and radio-active iodine ablation therapy. A
subset of patients shows recurrence due to a loss of iodine transport.
Two main subgroups of recurrent DTC are seen: papillary thyroid cancers
(PTC) with somatic BRAF mutations (V600E) and oncocytic follicular
cancer. Recurrent DTC are clinically treated by multi-kinase inhibitors
such as sorafenib, with a low affinity for BRAF V600E. Vemurafenib and
dabrafenib were specifically designed against this mutant.The aim of this
study was twofold:- Can benign and malign DTC be classified based on
kinase activity profiles?- Do sorafenib (and regorafenib) show different
inhibition profiles than dabrafenib?Methods: Tissue cryosections from
fresh frozen thyroid tumors were lysed. All tumor specimens were analyzed
for BRAF mutations. Serine/threonine kinase (STK) activity profiles of
the lysates (0.5 g protein per array) were generated on PamChip peptide
microarrays, comprising peptide sequences from known human
phosphorylation sites. The ex vivo effect of BRAF inhibitors sorafenib,
regorafenib and dabrafenib on kinase activity profiles of 14 PTC's was
determined as well. Data were analysed with Bionavigator
software.Results: A classifier built on the STK kinase activity profiles
of 57 thyroid cancer samples was able to classify malignant and benign
tumors with a limited error rate. Leave One Out Cross Validation
classified 26/35 of malignant and 17/22 of benign samples correctly.
Kinase inhibition profiles of PTC's with sorafenib and regorafenib did
not discrimate V600E mutants from wild type tumors whereas with
dabrafenib 34/144 peptides were identified that potentially
differentiated the groups.Conclusions: Serine/threonine kinase activity
profiling appears to be able to differentiate benign and malignant
thyroid tumors. Ex vivo spiking in of kinase inhibitors shows
differential inhibition in tumors with a somatic BRAF mutation.
Potentially, an industrial prediction platform can be envisioned for
testing of novel drugs in tumor tissue. Whether individual patient
responses against registered kinase inhibitors can be predicted must be
investigated.

