Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endogenous p53 affinity tagging with CRISPR


Several antimetabolites used for cancer treatment, including hydroxyurea
(HU) and pemetrexed (PTX), stabilize tumor suppressor protein p53, but
fail to induce the transcription of p53 downstream target genes. To
understand the underlying mechanism for the deficiency of stabilized p53,
we are quantitatively characterizing p53 posttranslational modification
and its interaction partners with mass spectrometry (MS). To facilitate
the purification of endogenous p53, we established an HCT116 human colon
carcinoma cell line, in which one allele of endogenous p53 was tagged
with a classic Tandem Affinity Tag (TAP) at the C-terminus, using
adenovirus associated virus (AAV) mediated homologous recombination (HR).
The purification of p53 from this cell exhibited severe losses at each
step, compromising analysis by MS. Because of this limited yield from TAP
purification, we performed a systematic tagging of p53 with 3xFLAG,
Strep-II, and HALO tags, and their combinations, at both N- and
C-termini. The latest CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short
palindromic repeats)/cas9 nuclease system provides major advantages for
endogenous gene modification through HR. Efficient site-specific protein
tagging (or mutation) requires a DNA break point in the immediate
vicinity, limiting the choice of guide DNA (gDNA) positions possible. By
extending the complementary sequence between CRISPR targeting RNA (crRNA)
and trans-activating crRNA (tracrRNA) in the chimeric single guide RNA
(sgRNA), we expanded the essential Protospacer Adjacent Motif (PAM)
sequence of the S. pyogenes CRISPR II system from NGG to NAG with equal
targeting efficiency. Cas9 nickase (both D10A, and H840A-N854A-N863A)
generated more favorable HR rates compared to non-homologous end joining
(NHEJ), while mitigating off-target effects, in comparison to wild type
cas9. Utilizing our conditions, we achieved 2-8% (for different tags)
endogenous p53 tagging in the background of 10-60% NHEJ from wild type
cas9 and single sgRNA. With cas9 nickase and two sgRNA, we consistently
achieved 0.2-2% specific p53 tagging in the background of 0.01-8% NHEJ,
with higher efficiency for 5 than 3 single strand overhangs generated. We
are currently generating single cell clones, selecting those tags most
faithful to natural p53 expression levels, and testing p53 purification
efficiencies with different tags. In conclusion, we optimized the CRISPR
system, extensively characterized the individual steps in generating
single cell clones for endogenous gene tagging, and will apply the
optimal tag to purify p53 and its co-eluted binding partners for
quantitative MS analysis.

