Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Companion diagnostics-based telomerase-specific oncolytic
virotherapy: preclinical evaluation in human colorectal cancer cell lines
differentially affected in the RAS/RAF/MEK signaling pathway


Colorectal cancers harboring KRAS or BRAF mutations often show resistance
to anti-cancer drugs, and are poor prognostic disease that causes
metastasis and recurrence compared to those with wild type KRAS and BRAF.
KRAS/BRAF-wild type colorectal cancers are sensitive to both cetuximab
and panitumumab that are epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR)-targeting agents. However, KRAS/BRAF-mutant colorectal cancers are
resistant to EGFR-targeting agents because of constitutive activation of
the EGFR-downstream RAS/RAF/MEK signaling pathway. Therefore, the
development of novel therapeutic strategy is required to improve the
clinical outcome in patients with KRAS/BRAF-mutant colorectal cancers. We
developed two types of telomerase-specific replication-competent
oncolytic adenoviruses, OBP-301 and OBP-702 armed with the wild-type p53
tumor suppressor gene. In this study, we established the companion
diagnostics-based selection algorithm for our oncolytic viruses. We
compared the antitumor effects of OBP-301 and OBP-702 in human colorectal
cancer cells with wild type KRAS/BRAF (SW48, Colo320DM), mutated KRAS
(DLD-1, SW620) and mutated BRAF (RKO, HT29). We evaluated the antitumor
effect of OBP-301 and OBP-702 in human colorectal cancer cells using XTT
assay. Oncolytic adenovirus-mediated induction of apoptosis- and
autophagy-related cell death was analyzed by Western blot analysis.
KRAS-mutant colorectal cancer cells were sensitive to both OBP-301 and
OBP-702 as well as KRAS/BRAF-wild type cells. In contrast, BRAF-mutant
colorectal cancer cells were sensitive to OBP-702 rather than OBP-301.
Western blot analysis showed that OBP-301 induced autophagy, whereas
OBP-702 induced both autophagy and apoptosis. Taken together, our data
suggest that oncolytic viruses should be used according to the genetic
background of the RAS/RAF/MEK signaling pathway, especially in patients
with colorectal cancer.

