Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived xenograft models of breast cancer with human
immune components


Breast cancer is a major cause of death in women in the UK and worldwide.
It is now widely recognized that many cancers, including breast, elicit
immune cell engagement resulting in immune responses directed against
over-expressed or aberrantly presented antigens. A greater understanding
of these interactions has had significant effects in improving the
prognosis in other tumor types e.g. melanoma, but has not been
extensively studied in breast cancer. Here we aim to build
disease-relevant in vivo models of breast cancer that recapitulate the
immune-tumor microenvironment found in patient tumors.Patient-derived
xenografts (PDX) are in vivo pre-clinical models derived from
transplantation of patient tumor material into severely immunocompromised
hosts. These models recapitulate major clinicopathologic features of
patient tumors and represent the breadth of diversity in phenotype and
genotype found across breast cancer. These PDX models can be studied in
order to further our understanding of intrinsic tumor cell biology and
response to treatment. However, as these tumor models are maintained in
severely immunocompromised hosts, we cannot study the relevant
interactions between tumor and immune cells. In order to address this, we
have established humanized PDX models.We have developed a humanized
triple-negative breast PDX model in NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ
(NSG) mice. The experimental set-up is based on those successfully used
to identify novel antibody-based therapeutic strategies in melanoma
(Karagiannis et al 2013). The PDX tumor is established by orthotopic
transplantation into the inguinal mammary fat pad. The host is then
engrafted with human immune effector cells (peripheral blood lymphocytes
(PBL) isolated from healthy volunteers). Following tumor development,
host and tumor tissues are processed for flow cytometry and
immunohistochemistry (IHC). We observe a 40% engraftment of human immune
effector cells in host spleens following transplantation and tumor
development by flow analysis. We also observe human CD45+ leukocyte
populations in the tumor, blood and other organs. Tumor-infiltrated
lymphocytes expressed the immune checkpoint phenotype of patient cancers.
We are now investigating the subtypes of immune effector cells present
our model, whether novel antibody-based therapies can be used to block
tumor formation, and how immune checkpoint molecules are modulated. We
are currently testing new PDX models for their capacity for humanization
by immune effector cells.Our over-arching aim is to determine whether
these models can recapitulate immune responses directed against tumor
antigens in order to study the mechanisms of action and efficacy of novel
therapeutics to treat breast cancer. Humanized pre-clinical PDX models
could be a feasible approach to accelerate therapeutic discovery relevant
to impacting tumor and immune stromal interaction for patient benefit.

