Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGFR4 as a potential therapeutic target for monoclonal antibody
based intervention in rhabdomyosarcoma


Background: Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is most common soft tissue sarcoma in
childhood and adolescence. There are two major subtypes of RMS - alveolar
RMS (ARMS) and embryonal RMS (ERMS). With current treatment modalities
the 5 year survival rate of patients with metastatic disease is only
about 30%, thus necessitating development of novel targeted therapeutic
strategies. Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor 4 (FGFR4) is highly
differentially expressed gene and activating mutations in FGFR4 is
associated with increase in RMS metastasis. We hypothesize that FGFR4 can
be exploited as a potential therapeutic target in RMS. Monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) against specific cancer cell surface antigens, have
gained importance as therapeutic agents in other cancer types. Therefore,
mAbs against FGFR4 may be developed either alone or conjugated with a
chemotherapeutic agent for treatment of RMS.Methods: We have developed 15
mAbs that are of mouse, rabbit and human origin. The immunogen for rabbit
antibodies is human FGFR4 extracellular domain (ECD), while human
FGFR4-Fc chimeric protein or hFGFR4 transfected cells were used for mouse
antibodies and were produced using hybridoma technology. Using
recombinant DNA technology, human immunoglobulin library was selected
using FGFR4 ECD to derive human anti-FGFR4 mAbs. All mAbs were purified
using affinity chromatography and reactivity was confirmed by ELISA.
These mAbs were tested for their ability to bind cell surface FGFR4 and
internalization of mAb bound FGFR4 (upon incubation at 37C) by flow
cytometry using RMS cell lines. To further characterize these antibodies
we have performed immunohistochemistry (IHC) on tissue microarrays (TMA)
of normal tissue, xenografts of RMS cell lines, and primary tumor from
RMS patients. Finally, to select a potential mAb candidate as therapeutic
agent, we tested appropriate secondary antibody-drug conjugate (ADC)
using cell based cytotoxic assay.Results: We observed that tested mAbs
bind to both ARMS and ERMS cell lines. The level of FGFR4 expression is
variable in both subtypes. Internalization assays demonstrated mAbs bound
FGFR4 was internalized in RMS cell lines. Analysis by IHC on TMAs
suggests that FGFR4 protein is expressed at a considerably higher level
in RMS tumor tissue and xenografts compared to normal tissue. Based on
these findings, we are currently screening the mAbs for their ability to
elicit a cytotoxic response either alone or in conjunction with secondary
ADC.Conclusion: These results suggest anti-FGFR4 mAbs can be used as
therapeutic intervention for RMS. High expression of FGFR4 in other
cancers such as prostate, melanoma, lung, breast, colorectal, and gastric
cancers suggests the potential use of anti-FGFR4 mAbs and their
derivatives in these cancers.

