Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: T cells engineered to express a chimeric antigen receptor
targeting chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 4 (CSPG4) specifically kill
medulloblastoma and produce inflammatory cytokines


Human T-cells expressing chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) recognizing
common cancer antigens have shown great promise in the clinic with the
potential for significant anti-tumor responses. CSPG4 is a chondroitin
sulfate proteoglycan previously shown to be overexpressed in melanoma and
breast cancer, as well as glioblastoma stem cells. CARs directed against
CSPG4 have recently shown promising pre-clinical efficacy against these
tumors. We evaluated the feasibility of targeting CSPG4 using CAR T cell
therapy in medulloblastoma and neuroblastoma. Response to standard
therapies for advanced neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma is poor and
carries significant toxicities, which may be ameliorated by
immunotherapy. We found that multiple medulloblastoma and neuroblastoma
cell lines (DAOY, D283 Med, D425 Med, UW-228, and SKNAS) express CSPG4 at
high levels, as does 143b osteosarcoma as a positive control. By
contrast, CSPG4 in normal tissue is expressed only on pericytes and in
low levels on small bowel as previously assessed by protein array [Beard
et al, J Immunother Cancer 2014]. To evaluate therapeutic efficacy, a
second generation CAR with a CD3 signaling domain and CD28 co-stimulatory
domain containing the TP41.2 anti-CSPG4 scFv was transduced using a
-retrovirus into T cells. CAR T cells were found to specifically kill 20%
of DAOY, 50% of D283 Med, and 50% of 143b cancer cells at a 20:1
effector-to-target ratio in a 4-hour chromium release cytotoxicity assay,
while not affecting CSPG4 negative control SY5Y (neuroblastoma) and DND41
(T cell leukemia) cells. Both CD4 and CD8 CAR T cells were also shown to
produce IFN after exposure to 143b cells. Cytokine production in response
to other CSPG4+ lines is ongoing as are cytotoxicity studies with
neuroblastomas. For our in vivo model, we have begun to evaluate the
efficacy of CAR T cells delivered either intravenously or via
intratumoral injection against DAOY and D283 Med cells that have been
orthotopically implanted in the cerebellum of immunodeficient
NOD/SCID/IL2R-/- mice. These results, if successful, will inform the
development of a new clinical protocol for the treatment of children and
young adults with medulloblastoma and neuroblastoma.

