Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid deployment of statewide tobacco cessation program for cancer
patients


PurposeTobacco use is not only associated with the development of cancer,
but after a patient develops cancer, its continued use is associated with
poorer cancer treatment outcomes. Despite this fact, most oncologists do
not regularly provide tobacco cessation support. The purpose of this
study was to implement an expedited process of patient identification and
tobacco cessation for cancer patients.MethodsThe Michigan Oncology
Quality Consortium (MOQC) collaborated with the Michigan Department of
Community Health, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Michigan, and the
Michigan Cancer Consortium to enhance tobacco cessation support for
cancer patients. A statewide tobacco cessation demonstration project
using a lean engineering approach was developed to provide structured
tobacco assessments, referral to state quitline resources, and provide
tailored cessation support to cancer patients consisting of behavioral
counseling and free pharmacotherapy where appropriate. These steps were
rapidly deployed in over 30 locations including those in private oncology
practices and cancer centers in the first year. Data were analyzed to
evaluate participation, retention, and quit rates for cancer patients
enrolled in the program.ResultsPrevious reports have described high rates
of patient contact and participation in the cessation program. In the 690
patients with at least 12 months since program enrollment, 200 (29%)
participated in only 1 call, 313 (45%) participated in 1-2 follow-up
calls, and 177 (26%) participated in 3 or more follow-up calls. Follow-up
30 day quit rate data was obtained in 198, 138, and 199 patients at 3, 6,
and 12 months respectively. Self-reported quit rates remained largely
consistent with 29.8% at 3 months, 27.5% at 6 months, and 30.2% at 12
months.ConclusionsThe MOQC demonstration project represents a model
partnership between payors, clinicians, and statewide quitlines that
maintained consistent and moderate quit rates in cancer patients.
Large-scale deployment of this model program may provide a clinically
efficient and effective mechanism to enhance widespread tobacco cessation
efforts for cancer patients.

