Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-16 and microRNA-193b as serological predictors for
chemoradiation response in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma patients


Esophageal cancer is one of the most deadly malignancies along the
gastrointestinal tract. Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is the
most common cell type occurring at the upper and middle part of the
esophagus. Surgery remains the mainstay treatment for this malignancy,
however the long-term prognosis is modest with a 5-year overall survival
of approximately 30%. To improve the treatment outcome of this cancer,
multimodal treatment strategies including neoadjuvant chemoradiation have
been implemented. Such pre-surgery treatment indeed leads to better
clinical outcome and increases the chance for cure. Unfortunately
patients who do not respond may have to undergo prolonged, unnecessary
and potentially toxic treatments with no benefits. Currently, there is no
reliable method for chemoradiation response prediction. To address this
clinical limitation, we have established a non-invasive assay to stratify
chemoradiation responders from non-responders. This study is
systematically divided into three phases. In the discovery phase (phase
I), we found 23 human microRNAs (out of 742 human microRNAs) with more
than 2.5-fold elevation in serum from chemoradiation responders when
compared to non-responders. In the selection and small-scale validation
phase (phase II), small-scale validation in an independent cohort showed
that microRNA-16 and microRNA-193b were two most powerful candidates for
indicating chemoradiation responders. In the large-scale validation phase
(phase III), we have further validated and confirmed the feasibility of
microRNA-16 and miroRNA-193b as discriminators for chemoradiation
response in a large cohort of more than a hundred patients. Standard
curves were also constructed for these two microRNAs for copy number
quantitation. In all, we have newly established a highly sensitive and
specific blood-based assay with specific cut-offs for discriminating ESCC
patients who are responsive to chemoradiation. This assay works by
quantitating the serum level of microRNA-16 and microRNA-193b in ESCC
patients, such that patients would be advised to receive pre-surgery
chemoradiation if they have elevated levels of circulatory microRNA-16
and microRNA-193b. The development of this assay will benefit patient
care by formulating individualized treatment plans.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

