Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel role for drebrin in regulating progranulin bioactivity in
bladder cancer


Bladder cancer (BC) is one of the most common cancers in the United
States with 56,390 estimated new cases and 11,170 estimated deaths in
2014. The majority of deaths is due to metastatic spread. Understanding
the molecular mechanisms regulating bladder tumor cell invasion and
progression toward metastases is essential for developing better
therapies to treat bladder cancer patients.The growth factor progranulin
plays an important role in cell proliferation, wound healing and
transformation. We have recently established a critical role for
progranulin in bladder cancer insofar as progranulin promotes urothelial
cancer cell motility and contributes, as an autocrine growth factor, to
the transformed phenotype by modulating invasion and
anchorage-independent growth. In addition, progranulin expression is
upregulated in invasive bladder cancer tissues compared to normal
controls. However, the molecular mechanisms of progranulin action in
bladder cancer have not been fully elucidated.In this study, we searched
for novel progranulin-interacting proteins using pull-down assays with
recombinant progranulin and proteomics. We discovered that drebrin, an
F-actin binding protein, bound progranulin in urothelial cancer cells. We
characterized drebrin function in various urothelial cancer cell lines
and showed that drebrin is critical for progranulin-dependent activation
of the Akt and MAPK pathways and modulates F-actin remodeling, motility,
invasion and anchorage-independent growth. In addition, drebrin regulates
tumor formation in vivo and its expression is upregulated in bladder
cancer tissues compared to normal tissue controls.Our data are
translationally relevant as indicate that drebrin exerts an essential
functional role in the regulation of progranulin action and may
constitute a novel target for therapeutic intervention in bladder tumors.
In addition, drebrin may serve as novel biomarker for bladder cancer.This
work was supported by the Benjamin Perkins Bladder Cancer Fund, National
Institutes of Health Grants RO1 CA164462 (A.M., R.V.I.), and RO1 CA39481
and RO1 CA47282 (R.V.I.), Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro
(AIRC) (grant n. 10625/12), AIRC project Calabria 2014 and Fondazione
Cassa di Risparmio di Calabria e Lucania PON01_01078 (A.B.). Alaide
Morcavallo was supported in part by Fondazione Diabete Ricerca.

