Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNAs and other small RNA molecules expressed in metastatic
and non-metastatic oral squamous cell carcinoma


Small noncoding RNAs are regulatory molecules that play important roles
in several aspects of cellular biology. They vary from 18 to 30
nucleotides in length and often act through the inactivation of
complementary sequences. A variety of small RNA classes have been
identified to date and the list is constantly growing, owing to the
advent of new sequencing technologies. Among these molecules, microRNAs
are the most extensively studied. They are known to play important roles
in human diseases, including cancer. More recently, genome-wide analyses
have showed that changes in the expression levels of other small
noncoding RNAs are also associated with cancer, with correlations between
RNA abundance and disease status. Oral squamous cell carcinoma,
associated with chronic tobacco and alcohol consumption, is among the
leading cancers in the world. The presence of cervical lymph node
metastases is currently its strongest prognostic factor. The possibility
to evaluate its metastatic potential is relevant to the clinical and
molecular oncologist due to frequent asymptomatic development of such
cancer in its early stages. In this study small RNA libraries from 30
oral squamous cell carcinoma samples were sequenced for the
identification and quantification of known small RNAs. Samples were
divided in two groups: those presenting lymph node metastasis at the time
of diagnosis and those that did not present this characteristic.
Additionally, plasma of 30 patients was accessed for the presence of
microRNAs identified as differentially expressed between metastatic and
non-metastatic tumor samples as a means to identify circulating molecules
that could be considered potential biomarkers for lymph node metastasis.
Global expression patterns of small RNA molecules were not associated
with cervical metastases. MiR-21, miR-203 and miR-205 were highly
expressed throughout samples, in agreement with their role in epithelial
cell biology, but disagreeing with studies correlating these molecules
with cancer invasion. Nineteen microRNAs, but no other small RNA class,
varied consistently between metastatic and non-metastatic cancer samples,
some of which were also detected at corresponding levels in plasma.
MiR-31 and miR-130b, known to inhibit several steps in the metastatic
process, were over-expressed in non-metastatic samples and the expression
of miR-130b was confirmed in plasma of patients presenting non-metastatic
oral squamous cell carcinoma. MiR-181 and miR-296 were associated with
metastasis but were not detected in plasma. In conclusion, we identified
microRNAs linked to the metastatic status in a group of patients
diagnosed with oral squamous cell carcinoma, both in tissue and plasma
samples. We also demonstrate that other small RNA classes are expressed
and should, therefore, be involved and contribute to the metastatic
phenotype of this disease.

