Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multispectral optoacoustic tomography (MSOT) as a novel approach
for dynamic, noninvasive assessment of tumor therapy response and chronic
inflammation


Biomedical imaging has offered a dramatic leap forward in cancer research
by enabling non-invasive assessment of tumor biology in its native
environment. Multiple modalities are currently utilized for this purpose,
including molecular (e.g. PET, SPECT, optical imaging), functional (e.g.
Doppler ultrasound) or anatomical (e.g. ultrasound, MRI, CT) endpoints.
However, integrated multi-modality imaging can be impractical due to cost
or infrastructure requirements, while co-registration of sequential
imaging sessions can pose technical challenges. A single modality that
offers anatomical, functional and molecular contrast could therefore
provide the next leap forward in cancer research.Multispectral
Optoacoustic Imaging (MSOT) is an emerging modality that combines
ultrasound resolution of 150 m and acquisition times of a few
microseconds with optical contrast in the near infrared (NIR) spectral
region. Multispectral imaging allows the localization of injected
targeted fluorophores with NIR absorbance to offer molecular contrast,
while visualization of endogenous contrast such as deoxy-/oxy-hemoglobin
or melanin offers both functional and anatomical information. A core
imaging rate of 10 images/second allows the acquisition of a
multispectral image within a second or even less.In the present work,
MSOT was used to track the fate of injected monocytes, labeled with an
NIR chromophore, in a model of dss-induced colitis. Monocyte distribution
in lymphoid organs (e.g. spleen) and chronic sites of inflammation, often
a prerequisite for tumor development, in the gut was monitored over a 48
hour period. The axial image plane enables the discrimination of signal
origin throughout the entire depth of the mouse, while 3D renderings of
axial image stacks allow visualization of monocyte distribution
throughout the abdominal region.The functional response to an injection
of a vascular disrupting agent in the HT1090 fibrosarcoma model was
assessed by MSOT-mediated differentiation of oxygenated and deoxygenated
hemoglobin signals. Truncated tissue factor (tTF) fused to an NGR-peptide
(tTF-NGR) targets CD13, which is overexpressed in tumor endothelial
cells. After binding, it is known to cause vascular disruption, blood
pooling and vessel occlusions within the tumor vasculature. These
processes were associated with an increase in MSOT-associated
deoxyhemoblin signal in the tumor.In summary, MSOT offers an imaging
modality that can provide anatomical, functional, molecular and kinetic
information at high temporal and spatial resolution. When combined with
(molecular) imaging agents that possess appropriate targeting properties,
this modality can be leveraged for new biomarker imaging approaches in
cancer research.

