Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Propentofylline inhibits TROY/TNFRSF19 signaling to enhance
therapeutic efficacy in invasive glioblastoma cells


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common primary tumor of the CNS and
carries a dismal prognosis. The aggressive invasion of GBM cells into the
surrounding normal brain makes complete resection impossible,
significantly increases resistance to the standard therapy regimen, and
virtually assures tumor recurrence. Median survival for newly diagnosed
GBM is 14.6 months and declines to 8 months for patients with recurrent
GBM. New therapeutic strategies that target the molecular drivers of
invasion are required for improved clinical outcome. We have demonstrated
that TROY (TNFRSF19), a member of the TNFR super-family, plays an
important role in GBM invasion and resistance. TROY expression increases
with glial tumor grade and inversely correlates with patient survival.
TROY stimulates GBM cell invasion and increases resistance to
temozolomide (TMZ) and radiation treatment. Conversely, knockdown of TROY
expression inhibits GBM cell invasion, increases sensitivity to
temozolomide, and prolongs survival in an intracranial xenograft model.
Propentofylline (PPF), an atypical synthetic methylxanthine compound, has
been extensively studied in Phase II and Phase III clinical trials for
Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia where it has demonstrated
blood-brain permeability and minimal adverse side effects. In this study,
we demonstrated that PPF decreases TROY protein expression in glioma
cells, and subsequently suppress activation downstream signaling
effectors including AKT, NF-B, and Rac1. PPF treatment of glioma cells
also suppressed glioma cell migration and invasion, demonstrated by
transwell migration assay and reduced membrane ruffling. Finally, PPF
treatment increased vulnerability of glioma cells to Temozolomide (TMZ)
and radiation. In summary, this study demonstrates that PPF provides a
pharmacologic approach to target TROY to inhibit glioma cell invasion and
reduce therapeutic resistance to TMZ and radiation.

