Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of predictive drug resistance markers in
preclinical xenograft models (PDX) of soft tissue sarcomas


Soft tissue sarcomas are a rare and heterogeneous type of cancer.
Although targeted therapies have extended and improved treatment options
for many cancers, treatment of sarcomas is still mainly based on standard
chemotherapy with marginal improvements over the last years. As cell
cultures can hardly model the complex environment of the disease we
established a large panel of patient derived sarcoma xenografts (PDX). A
set of 11 new sarcoma PDX models was established from samples of 29
primary human soft tissue sarcomas patients which were obtained directly
from the clinic. The tumour samples were taken from representative
peripheral areas of the original tumour. Fragments from each tumour were
transplanted subcutaneously into immunodeficient mice. These models were
together with another panel of sarcoma PDX models (Hoffmann et al. 1999)
screened for sensitivity to a set of standard of care drugs (e.g.
ifosfamide, docetaxel, gemcitabine, doxorubicin, dacarbazin) and some new
investigational compounds (everolimus, imatinib).The main objective of
the study was to establish and characterise the soft tissue sarcomas PDX,
the evaluation of therapeutic options and the identification of
predictive markers. Conservation of the typical sarcoma morphology of the
PDX (pleomorphic-, ewing-, clear cell-, myxofibrosarcoma) was compared
with the original tumour by histological and immunohistochemical
staining. Heterogeneity of tumour cells in size and shape and nuclear
irregularities were observed. The models were further analyzed for common
oncogenic mutations using the Illumina TrueSeq Cancer Panel. Frequent
mutations were detected in KDR, MET, RB1 and TP53. However no typical
mutational profile was found within the panel as many of the sarcomas
showed individual profiles.Most of the PDX responded to docetaxel and
gemcitabine followed by doxorubicin and ifosfamide whereas only some were
sensitive to dacarbazine. Sensitivity to some targeted drug has been
evaluated in a subset of the PDX models. All PDX tested so fare did not
respond to everolimus or imatinib.Comparison of the chemosensitivity
profile of the PDX and the patient outcome was possible for 9 patients.
Analysis revealed that the prediction for a therapy resistance was
correct in 10 out of 13 cases.Further analysis for correlations between
mutation and gene expression profiles and drug response will be
performed.We have shown, that our set of established sarcoma PDX models
closely resemble the patient malignancy and particularly predict
treatment response in the clinic. Available pharmacological data on drug
response together with the molecular characterization will allow
comprehensive investigations of therapy-related response markers any may
help to introduce new targeted drugs in sarcoma therapy.

