Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stat3 and ErbB-2 interaction in breast cancer metastasis


Metastasis is a complex multistep process, responsible for as much as 90%
of cancer-related deaths, yet obtaining successful treatment for these
patients remains an elusive challenge. It has long been recognized that
the tyrosine kinase receptor ErbB-2 and the signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (Stat3), two major players in the breast
cancer (BC) scenario, are involved in BC metastatic dissemination through
a mechanism where Stat3 acts as a downstream effector of ErbB-2 action.
In addition, we and others have also disclosed the role of nuclear ErbB-2
(NErbB-2) in BC, whose presence we identified as a poor prognostic factor
in MErbB-2-positive tumors. On the other hand, microRNAs are short
non-coding endogenous RNAs with regulatory functions. In particular, high
levels of microRNA-21 (miR-21), a well-known oncomiR, have been reported
to actively promote invasion and metastasis in BC cell lines and tissues.
Here, we describe a novel hierarchical interaction between Stat3, ErbB-2
and miR-21, underlying the metastatic phenotype of ErbB-2-positive BC. We
disclosed that Stat3 acts as an upstream regulator of ErbB-2 expression
and function. In a panel of cell lines corresponding to different BC
subtypes we found that Stat3 induced ErbB-2 expression at the
transcriptional level through its recruitment to response elements
(called GAS) at the ErbB-2 promoter. Furthermore, we demonstrated that
Stat3 co-opted NErbB-2 function, recruiting it as a coactivator, to
assemble a transcriptional complex at the GAS sites of the miR-21
promoter, leading to miR-21 up-regulation. We showed that the increase in
miR-21 levels resulted in the downregulation of the metastasis suppressor
protein PDCD4, a well known miR-21 target. In order to assess the
physiological relevance of our molecular findings, we developed an in
vivo model of ErbB-2-overexpressing metastatic BC, in which Stat3
activation was inhibited by transfection with a Stat3 dominant negative
variant (Stat3Y705F) or its expression was silenced by siRNAs. We
demonstrated through reconstitution assays that ErbB-2 and miR-21 were
necessary downstream mediators of Stat3-induced metastases development.
Furthermore, we explored the clinical significance of our findings in a
cohort of ErbB-2-positive primary invasive BC patients and demonstrated
that Stat3 and ErbB-2 nuclear co-expression was associated with low PDCD4
expression levels, and that this correlated with the presence of nodal
metastases. Our present results in experimental models and in the clinic
shed light on the molecular mechanisms underlying BC metastasis and
highlight targeting either Stat3 or NErbB-2 as novel therapeutic
strategies for ErbB-2-positive BC patients.#: 15-A-2849-AACR

