Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suicidal autophagy induced by immunotherapy targeting folate
receptor in ovarian cancer


Objective Cancer cells depend on folate metabolism for DNA replication,
making folate receptor alpha (FR) an important therapeutic target.
Blocking FR with a humanized anti-FR monoclonal antibody, MORAB-003
offers a potent clinical opportunity; however, the mechanisms underlying
its efficacy were not well understood. We investigated the functional
mechanisms underlying MORAB-003 induced tumor inhibition in ovarian
cancer. Methods Using FACS analysis and real-time PCR, FR expression was
determined in an array of human ovarian cancer cells. Next, we examined
the effects of MORAB-003 monotherapy and combination with docetaxel in
tumor growth using the xenograft mouse models. In vitro, we analyzed
ovarian cancer cells with 3-dimensional (3-D) spheroid-like architecture.
We next performed systems-based analysis including reverse-phase protein
and genomic microarrays, and discovered an array of factors/genes
involved in autophagy was upregulated by MORAB-003. Functional assays
including FACS with AO staining, tandem mRFP/mGFP-LC3 fluorescence
microscopy, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and siRNAs knockdown
were performed to further investigate MORAB-003-induced autophagy in
tumor inhibition. Results IGROV1 and SKOV3ip1 cells express high-level FR
and A2780 cells express low-level FR. In vivo, MORAB-003 monotherapy or a
combination of MORAB-003 and docetaxel led to significantly decreased
tumor growth in IGROV1 and SKOV3ip1 models, but not in A2780 model.
Immunohistochemistry analysis on tumor sections indicated that MORAB-003
significantly reduced proliferative cancer cells, but had minimum effects
on tumor cell apoptosis or angiogenesis. Network analysis on protein and
gene expression profiles in IGROV1 and SKOV3ip1 tumors revealed that
MORAB-003 significantly upregulated a number of factors/genes involved in
autophagy, including LC3II, ATG3, ATG4B, S116-PEA-15 and BECN1.
Furthermore, S116-PEA-15 and Beclin-1 were required for
caspase-3-activated cell death in 3-D IGROV1 and SKOV3ip1 spheroids
treated with MORAB-003. Results from autophagic flux assays indicated
that MORAB-003 treatment led to an abundant accumulation of late-stage
autophagic vacuoles. Blocking the autophagic vacuolization or fusion
using bafilomycin A1 or hydroxychloroquine reversed the MORAB-003 induced
reduction of cell viability in 3-D IGROV1 and SKOV3ip1 spheroids.
Furthermore, queries from the Cancer Genome Atlas data (TCGA) revealed
that copy-number gains of the FOLR1 gene significantly correlated with
shorter disease-free survival in patients with the immunoreactive subtype
of ovarian serous carcinoma and uterine carcinoma. Conclusion MORAB-003
inhibits tumor growth via a non-canonical autophagy associated with
programmed cell death. This finding has substantial implications for
clinical development of anti-FR therapies, especially with regard to
novel combinations and predictive biomarkers.

