Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor microenvironment influences survival of mantle cell
lymphoma-initiating cells through FGF/FGFR1 signaling


IntroductionMantle cell lymphoma (MCL) represents an aggressive,
incurable form of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). The health complications
associated with advanced age of MCL patients restrict treatment with
intense chemotherapy. Translocation t(11;14), responsible for
overexpression of cyclin-D1, is the hallmark of MCL. More detailed
insight into MCL pathogenesis has been delayed until the recent
development of a tissue culture system, using human mesenchymal stromal
cells (hMSC), suitable for propagating primary MCL cells. We hypothesized
that tumor-initiating cells are responsible for MCL relapse and
chemoresistance and thus, identification of signals responsible for
survival and maintenance of MCL-initiating cells (MCL-ICs) is essential
for design of curative treatment strategies.MethodsIsolates of primary
MCL cells (n = 24) were co-cultured with human mesenchymal stem cells
(hMSCs) and the content of MCL-ICs was analyzed by flow-cytometry based
on marker expression profile; CD34-CD3-CD45+CD19-. Cytokine array was
used to identify the soluble factors enriched in the co-cultures and the
expression of these factors was confirmed by RT-PCR analysis. The
signaling pathways employed by the newly-identified factors were blocked
in 3 MCL cell lines (JVM2, Mino, Z138) to confirm their essential role in
survival of MCL cells and, more importantly, for
MCL-ICs.ResultsCo-cultures of primary MCL isolates with hMSCs supported
the growth of MCL cells for over 4 weeks with continued presence of
MCL-ICs (CD34-CD3-CD45+CD19-) representing about 1% of MCL cells. We
found that IL-6 produced by hMSCs triggered an FGF/FGFR autocrine loop in
MCL-ICs. The extent of FGFR expression correlated tightly with expression
of SOX11, a pathology related negative prognostic marker in MCL. MCL cell
survival and growth was regulated via the FGFR/mir101/ EZH2/ NF-B/XIAP
axis. Blocking of this signaling pathway with FGFR1 inhibitors
consistently induced early reduction in XIAP levels and subsequently MCL
cell death.ConclusionWe established that propagation of primary MCL in
co-cultures with hMSCs depends on an FGF/FGFR autocrine loop that
enhances XIAP protein expression and thus, supports survival of MCL
cells. We identified the factors essential for survival of MCL and
MCL-ICs that present new targets for improved MCL treatment strategies.

