Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSK3/ inhibition as a drug target in prostate cancer


Despite what its namesake suggests, Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 (GSK3) is
a kinase that is implicated in a myriad of signalling pathways and has
recently received considerable interest due to its conflicting roles
oncogenesis. Though GSK3 has classically been regarded as a tumour
suppressor due to in role in supressing WNT signalling, emerging evidence
suggests that GSK3 also functions as a tumor promoter by facilitating
tumor cell survival and conferring drug resistance in cancer. These tumor
promoting effects have been partly linked to the expression of certain
NFB target genes, whose expression in some cancers are influenced by
direct GSK3 phosphorylation of NFB's p65 subunit. Given the complex
interplay between GSK3 and the androgen receptor in prostate cancer
(PCa), and the inverse correlation between the androgen receptor status
and NFB, we investigate the potential of GSK3 inhibitors to treat and
overcome drug resistance in PCa.A kinase inhibitor screen for 80
compounds and additional chemical inhibitors for GSK3 was carried out
using the JANUS Automated Workstation at the robotics facility at NUI
Galway, Ireland. The cellular fractions for treated cells were separated
and assessed for differences in expression between the cytoplasmic and
nuclear compartments using western blotting. Flow cytometry and western
blotting using antibodies for markers of apoptosis were used to assess
for mode of cell death. Differences in gene expression of NFB target
genes were assessed using gene specific primers for SYBR green RT-PCR.
RNAi using siRNA directed against each of the GSK3 isoforms, and , was
utilised for target validationThe kinase inhibitor screen demonstrated
significant growth inhibition among all the tested PCa cell lines to the
GSK3 inhibitor, BIO. This result was validated using two additional
chemical GSK3 inhibitors, LiCl and CHIR99021. Expression analysis
demonstrated aberrant NFB and GSK3 expression in the cytoplasmic and
nuclear compartments of the cell lines that varied upon treatment with
GSK3 inhibitors. siRNA directed against GSK3 confirmed that the effects
of the inhibitors were GSK3 specific and demonstrated that both isoforms
distinguished between the effects of each of the two isoforms.Our results
suggest that GSK3 has a role in the pathogenesis of PCa. This notion is
supported by the findings that GSK3 inhibition reduces the viability of
PCa cells via a mechanism that is consistent with apoptosis. Furthermore,
both NFB and GSK3 are shown to be active and aberrantly co-expressed in
our PCa model. Collectively, these results suggest that GSK3 has an
effect on NFB that may be independent of WNT signalling.

