Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD8+T cell-mediated tumor-specific induction of the NKG2D ligands
to trigger NKG2D-dependent tumor cell death in vivo


Introduction: High profile studies have shown that restoring NKG2D ligand
expression greatly promotes antitumor immune surveillance and tumor
regression, but malignant tumor cells often down-regulate NKG2D ligands
to escape from immune surveillance. Previous studies showed that
engineering tumor cells with NKG2D ligand resulted in inhibition of tumor
progression. However, it is not feasible to engineer each tumor cell with
NKG2D ligand in clinical treatment. Therefore, a therapeutic treatment
that can restore NKG2D ligand on tumor cells is required to promote tumor
immune surveillance. In this regard, many therapeutic approaches were
discovered to induce NKG2D ligands on tumor cells in vitro.
Unfortunately, no effective in vivo approaches are available to restore
this ligand across different types of tumors because the classic in vitro
stress signal-dependent NKG2D ligand induction has rarely been duplicated
in solid tumors in vivo.Experimental procedure: This study reveals a
unique approach_two independent co-administration of immune stimulatory
signal interleukin-12 and doxorubicin_restores the NKG2D ligands in
multiple murine and human tumor types. The induction of NKG2D ligands was
determined using immunoblotting, flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry
staining. The comparison of Rae-1 induction in immune competent mice
versus immune deficient mice (nude, Rag2 -/- or Pfp -/-) implied that
mature CD8+T cells are the most critical immune subpopulation. The
concentration of interferon in tumors was measured using ELISA assay. The
accumulation of NKG2D positive immune cells in tumor sections was
examined using immunofluorescence straining, followed by TUNEL assay to
determine tumor cell death.Results: We showed for the first time that a
chemoimmunotherapy led to the tumor specific restoration of NKG2D ligands
in a variety of tumor models in vivo. Systemic delivery of interleukin-12
gene therapy plus doxorubicin effectively restored murine NKG2D ligand
Rae-1 in vivo in two subcutaneous tumor models (LLC and CT26), one
orthotopic tumor model (K7M3) and one spontaneous breast carcinoma model.
Significantly, such therapeutic approach can also stimulate human NKG2D
ligands in xenograft tumor models. Intriguingly, this tumor-specific
Rae-1 induction in vivo requires CD8+T cells. This NKG2D ligand-restoring
therapy itself can also attract endogenous NKG2D-positive cells to attack
tumor cells. Along with the tumor-specific NKG2D ligand induction, the
promoted immune surveillance leads to massive tumor cell
death.Conclusion: This study provides the first therapeutic treatment for
inducing immune surveillance ligand in tumors in vivo. Further, it
reveals a CD8+T cell-dependent novel mechanism for the restoration of
NKG2D ligand. The revealed in vivo NKG2D ligand restoring approach could
be translated for cancer prevention and treatment.

