Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intra-tumor heterogeneity and clonal changes in the progression of
DCIS to invasiveness: Combined tumor bulk and single cell analysis


INTRODUCTION: Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a clonal intraductal
proliferation of epithelial cells which acts as a non-obligate precursor
of invasive breast cancer (IBC), yet the genetic events leading to the
acquisition of invasive behavior remain unclear. We hypothesize that DCIS
is composed of mosaics of genetically diverse tumor cell clones, and that
the process of invasion is an evolutionary bottleneck. To test this
hypothesis we performed a detailed characterization of the repertoire of
genetic alterations and intra-tumor genetic heterogeneity in
synchronously diagnosed DCIS and IBC using NextGen sequencing of bulk
tumor and single cells.METHODS: DNA extracted from fresh frozen,
microdissected DCIS, IBC and adjacent normal tissue was subjected to
whole exome sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq2000. Reads were aligned to
the reference human genome hg19. Single nucleotide variants (SNVs) were
called by MuTect, and gene copy number alterations were determined using
VarScan2. Single nuclei were isolated from 100m serial sections
microdissected to separate DCIS and IBC. Individual nuclei were
FACS-sorted into a 96-well plate, lysed and whole genome amplified.
Amplified DNA samples were barcoded, pooled and sequenced on a HiSeq2000.
Single cell sequencing data were mapped to the reference genome and
uniquely mapped reads were allocated into bins, normalized, segmented and
CN values generated.RESULTS: In 6 cases of synchronous DCIS and IBC, a
median of 41 and 47 non-synonymous mutations were found in each
component, respectively. The somatic mutations identified in both DCIS
and adjacent IBC components affected known driver breast cancer genes,
including AKT1, PIK3CA, GATA3, MAP2K4 and TP53. Interestingly, we also
found mutations restricted to either DCIS or IBC: ATRX (IBC-3); ALK and
PKD2 (IBC-5); ESR1 (DCIS-5). The gene copy number profiles of matched
DCIS and IBC were similar in all 6 pairs, however we also identified gene
copy number alterations restricted either to DCIS or IBC: 1q gain
(IBC-5); 3p and 3q losses (DCIS-6); 12p homozygous deletion (DCIS-4).
Single cell sequencing of two cases (3 and 4) revealed that the majority
of cells from both DCIS and IBC were derived from a common precursor
lineage with shared copy number losses and gains. Both sets of DCIS-IBC
pairs in these cases displayed elements of a subclonal structure with
dominant clones alongside genetically diverse derivatives as well as
genetic heterogeneity reflected in variable copy number alterations and
non-modal clones.CONCLUSION: Synchronous DCIS and IBC share founder
genetic events, but also harbor somatic genetic alterations restricted to
either the DCIS or IBC components, demonstrating that although DCIS is a
precursor of IBC, intra-tumor genetic heterogeneity is present at the
DCIS stage. Changes in clonal composition likely take place in the
progression from DCIS to IBC.

