Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of CCL2 in the breast cancer tumor microenvironment and
metastasis


Background: Although many effective breast cancer treatments exist,
metastasis remains a major problem. Increasing evidence suggests that
leukocyte-associated chemokines may play an important role in tumor
growth and metastasis. For instance, recent data shows that reduction of
CCL2 diminishes the recruitment of inflammatory monocytes to the tumor
microenvironment (TME) and inhibits metastatic seeding to lung and bone
marrow. Therefore, our goal is to examine the impact of CCL2 on the TME
and pre-metastatic niche (i.e., lung).Methods: We are investigating how
delivery of this chemokine affects breast tumor growth and metastasis by
treating mice possessing highly metastatic and poorly metastatic tumors
with CCL2, a CCL2 receptor (CCR2) antagonist, or vehicle for two weeks.
Treatment will start 7 days after tumor implantation. On days 7, 14 or
21, tumors, lungs, and regional lymph nodes will be harvested and tumor
size, number of metastases, and leukocyte infiltrate in both the tumor
and the metastatic niche will be analyzed by FACS. This will allow us to
fully characterize how intranasal delivery of CCL2 will affect the
presence of mesenchymal stem cells (CD44+, CD73+, CD90+, CD146+/NOTCH3+,
CD19-, CD45-), subsets of T cells, and myeloid cells in the TME or
pre-metastatic niches. We will evaluate the intracellular cytokine and
enzymatic profile (IL-4, IL-13, IL-17, ARG1 or IFN, IL-12, iNOS2) of
Brefeldin-treated leukocytes to reveal whether they are pro- or
anti-tumorigenic, respectively.Results: Our preliminary studies
demonstrate that CCL2 enhances the release of hydrogen peroxide from
neutrophils, a mechanism utilized by these cells to kill tumors cells.
Furthermore, the addition of CCL2 to co-cultures of neutrophils and tumor
cells increases the ability of neutrophils to kill tumor
cells.Conclusions & Future Directions: Our data shows that delivery of
CCL2 in vitro enhances the activity of neutrophils and their ability to
kill tumor cells. Ongoing studies are examining the effects of in vivo
and ex-vivo delivery of CCL2 or a CCR2 antagonist on primary tumor growth
and metastasis. We will also investigate how administration of CCL2 or a
receptor antagonist will affect the presence or absence of leukocytes in
the TME. These findings will determine whether the addition of CCL2
during treatment of the primary tumor will provide a mechanism for
reducing the potential of future breast cancer metastases.

