Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro cellular inflammation caused by Caco2BBE and HepG2 cells
secreted exosomes


Background: In colon cancer, the majority of metastatic cells end up in
the liver. In order to elucidate metastasis migration, a possible road of
investigation may lie in exosomes, a biological nanoparticle. Usually,
exosomes range from 80-150 nm and medicate cell-to-cell communication.
Additionally, exosomes house up to hundred proteins, oligonucleotides,
lipids, and receptors that may contribute to affecting the inflammatory
response in cancer cell lines. The aim of the study is to show
preferential uptake of Caco2BBE exosomes by HepG2 cells under an
inflammatory stimulus. Whereas Caco2BBE cells prohibits HepG2 exosomes
uptake under an inflammatory stimulus. Methods: Exosomes was isolated by
differential centrifugation from Caco2BBE, HepG2, and Raw 264.7 cell
culture media stimulated with and without 10 ug/mL of LPS. Once
collected, exosomes were characterized for size and charge by dynamic
light scatter (DLS), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and transmission
electron microcopy (TEM). Additional characterization of exosomes
included toxicity as well as fluorescent microscopy to explore the
specificity of Coumarin-6 labelled exosomes (C-6 Exo). Finally, the
biological effects of exosomes on inflammatory markers in vitro were
examined by Western blot and RT-qPCR. Results: The different measurements
of exosomes size indicates an average diameter of 70-100 nm.
Additionally, the exosomes extracted from each cells were not toxic to
any cells. Interestingly, the uptake of C-6 Exo showed a striking find
that Caco2BBE cells uptake HepG2 extracted exosomes under normal
conditions. Whereas LPS stimulation of Caco2BBE cells prohibits the
uptake of HepG2 exosomes. Then conversely, HepG2 cells were taking up
Caco2BBE extracted exosomes when stimulated with LPS. These findings
correlate with Western blot and RT-qPCR data that shows up-regulation of
IL-6, TNF, and MMP9 by Caco2BBE exosomes on HepG2 cells. Again, the LPS
stimulation on HepG2 cells treated with Caco2BBE exosomes causes decrease
of IL-6, TNF, MMP9, and NF-B. Conclusions: The characterization of these
exosomes showed about 100 nm non-toxic particles that effect IL-6, TNF-,
MMP9, and NFB on HepG2 cells treated with Caco2BBE exosomes. These
effects on inflammatory markers mediate the uptake of these exosomes and
especially with an inflammatory stimulation such as LPS, which can either
prohibit or promote this process. Together, our data could lead to
understanding the role of exosomes on the translocation of metastatic
cells to the liver and could open a new therapeutics option.

