Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting p53 with Bak and Bax mitochondrial targeting signals for
the treatment of ovarian cancer


Although the main function of p53 is a nuclear transcription factor that
has important roles in cell cycle arrest, DNA repair, and apoptosis, p53
can directly trigger the intrinsic apoptotic pathway through the
mitochondria. p53 has been known to bind to mitochondrial anti-apoptotic
proteins (Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL) and pro-apoptotic proteins (Bak and Bax),
which will cause the oligomerization of Bak and Bax. The result is the
formation of permeable pores on the mitochondrial outer membrane, which
in turn cause the release of cytochrome c and activation of caspase-3.
Targeting p53 to the mitochondria is an attractive approach because it
can cause a rapid apoptotic response. We have introduced the
mitochondrial targeting signal (MTS) from Bak or Bax to the C-terminus of
p53 and have shown the superior efficacy of p53-BakMTS and p53-BaxMTS
over wtp53 in many human cancer cell lines. We have identified that the
DNA binding domain (DBD) of p53 may be the minimal domain of p53 required
for apoptosis. Our preliminary data in SKOV-3 ovarian cancer cells also
suggests that DBD-BakMTS may work just as well as full length p53-BakMTS.
Further in humans, the single nucleotide polymorphism at codon 72 from
Pro to Arg is known to enhance the mitochondrial targeting of p53. We
have recently made the P72R mutation in our p53 constructs. Our goal is
to use a novel version of p53 directed to the mitochondria as a direct
apoptogen to treat ovarian cancer, the most lethal gynecological
malignancy with 69% of patients succumbing to this disease. Our next step
will be to test these constructs in vitro in human ovarian cancer cell
lines and in vivo using the syngeneic ID8 mouse model. 7-AAD cell death
assay was performed in the mouse ovarian ID8 cells transfected with our
constructs. p53-Bax-MTS and p53-BakMTS appear to be the two most
effective constructs. Interestingly, full length p53 is required for its
apoptotic activity in this ID8 mouse cell line. In terms of the P72R
polymorphism, p53(72R)-BakMTS and p53(72R)-BaxMTS do not show enhanced
apoptotic potential in the ID8 mouse line, most likely due to the
sequence differences between human and mouse p53. However, it is possible
that the combination of 72R polymorphism with MTS from Bak and Bax may
produce a superior mitochondrial localization of p53 in human cell lines.
Our ultimate goal is to develop mitochondrially targeted p53 constructs
that directly induce apoptosis for the treatment of ovarian
cancer.Acknowledgements: NIH CA151847

