Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Honokiol prevents colonic tumorigenesis and affects stem cell
viability by affecting oncogenic YAP1 function


Background: Despite advances in early detection, colon cancer remains the
second leading cause of death in the United States. We are focused on
developing dietary prevention strategies. HNK (HNK) is a biphenolic
compound that is used in the traditional Chinese Medicine for treating
various ailments. The current study is designed to determine whether HNK
affected colon cancer stem cells and to identify a mechanism.Method:
Colon cancer (CRC) cell lines HCT116 and SW480 and normal colon
epithelial cells were used in the study. Cell growth was measured by
hexoseaminidase and clonogenicity assays. Apoptosis was determined by
measuring caspase 3/7 activities. Colosphere formation assay and FACS
sorting were used for stem cells. For in vivo effects, we used the
AOM/DSS-induced colonic tumorigenesis model. Immunohistochemistry was
determined for stem cell markers and Hippo signaling proteins.Results:
HNK induced a significant dose-dependent inhibition of proliferation and
colony formation of the two CRC lines, but induced apoptosis. HNK did not
affect the normal cells. To demonstrate HNK effects on stem cells, we
performed colosphere assays. HNK significantly reduced the number and
size of colospheres, suggesting effects on stem cells. In addition, colon
stem cell marker proteins DCLK1, LGR5, and CD44 were also decreased.
Further proof was obtained by flow cytometry analyses, where HNK reduced
the number of DCLK1+ cells. We next determined whether stem cell
signaling is affected. For this, we looked at the Hippo signaling
pathway, which is active in intestinal stem cells. The key effector
protein of this pathway, YAP1 is also oncogenic in many cancer types. In
the canonical Hippo signaling pathway, YAP1 function is inhibited. When
YAP1 is phosphorylated at Ser127 by the action of upstream Mst1/2 and
Lats1/2 kinases, it is sequestered in the cytoplasm where it is degraded,
thereby inhibiting downstream gene expression. HNK significantly reduced
YAP1 levels. Furthermore, HNK inhibited the expression of YAP interacting
proteins TEAD1, TEAD2, and TEAD4. On the other hand, ectopic expression
of the TEAD1 partially rescued the cells from HNK-mediated growth
suppression. To determine the in vivo effect of HNK on AOM/DSS induced
colonic tumorigenesis, HNK were oral gavaged at a dose of 5mg/kg bw for
24 weeks. HNK treatment significantly reduced the colonic tumor numbers
and size. Western blot and immunohistochemistry analyses demonstrated
significant inhibition in the expression of stem marker proteins,
oncogenic YAP1 phosphorylation and TEAD1 in the HNK-treated AOM/DSS
colonic tumor tissues.Conclusion: Together, these data suggest that HNK
prevents colonic tumorigenesis that targets stem cells by inhibiting
oncogenic YAP1 in Hippo signaling pathway.

