Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SSA, a novel sulindac derivative, inhibits breast cancer cell
invasion and migration


Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as sulindac, have
been reported for striking chemopreventive activity in various types of
human cancer, including breast cancer. However, few studies have reported
that sulindac is able to prevent tumor metastasis. In this study, we aim
to study anti-metastatic activity of sulindac in breast cancer and
explore the mechanistic basis responsible for this activity, which we
hypothesize may involve a cyclooxygenase (COX) independent mechanism.
Numerous studies have reported that the anticancer properties of sulindac
might involve, at least partially, a non-COX mediated mechanism, which
provides an insight into development of safer and more efficacious new
derivatives. We have previously described a chemical derivative of
sulindac, referred to as sulindac sulfide amide (SSA), which lacks
inhibitory effect on COX-1 or -2, yet shows greater potency to inhibit
tumor cell growth compared with sulindac sulfide (SS). Our results showed
that SSA treatment at a sub-cytotoxic concentration (4M) for 36 h
significantly inhibits both migration and invasion of highly aggressive
MDA-MB-231, BT-20 and SK-BR-3 breast tumor cells. When treating
non-invasive breast MCF-7 cells with TGF-1 to induce their motility, we
found that SSA could significantly counteract the induced motility of
these cells. These results indicate that SSA can suppress breast tumor
cell invasion by modulation of TGF-1 signaling. We further studied
Smad-2/3 that are important downstream components in the TGF-1 signaling
pathway and found that SSA could inhibit Smad-2/3 phosphorylation and
reduce their translocation to the nucleus. In addition, Smad-2/3
knockdown could mimic the anti-invasive effect of SSA in MDA-MB-231
cells, regardless of the presence of TGF-1. In summary, we demonstrate
that the non-COX inhibitory derivative, SSA can suppress breast cancer
cell invasion and migration. These observations suggest that inhibition
of TGF-1/Smad signaling is responsible for the inhibitory effect of SSA
on breast tumor cell invasion and migration.

