Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ash2L and p300 mediate histone H3 modifications at EGFR during its
developmental silencing and re-expression in gliomas


Gliomas are the most frequent and aggressive primary brain tumors, and
are universally fatal once they progress to glioblastomas. Glioma cells
commonly share abnormalities in pathways that normally control
proliferation, migration and differentiation of glial progenitors; one
such example is signaling through the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR). We show that EGFR is highly expressed in neural progenitors
during fetal brain development, and that it becomes silenced during
adulthood in most glia, except for those in the subventricular zone (SVZ)
where adult neural progenitors are thought to reside. Interestingly, most
low- and high-grade diffuse gliomas show strong re-expression of EGFR.
The mechanism of this pathological overexpression is not clearly
understood and cannot be accounted for by genomic abnormalities alone,
since less than half of primary glioblastomas and almost no low-grade
gliomas contain EGFR-activating gene amplification or mutations. We
hypothesized that EGFR silencing during normal glial differentiation and
its aberrant re-expression in gliomas is at least partly mediated via
local epigenetic mechanisms at its promoter. To test this hypothesis, we
have performed targeted epigenetic analyses at the EGFR promoter,
measuring both DNA methylation levels via bisulfite sequencing and
histone H3 methylation (me) and acetylation (ac) levels via chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) using primary human samples. Surprisingly, we
find that DNA methylation patterns at EGFR are conserved regardless of
the EGFR expression status in non-neoplastic glia and in gliomas. In
contrast, ChIP analysis reveals enrichment of the activating
modifications H3K27ac and H3K4me3 during fetal brain development when
EGFR is highly expressed, and their loss in adult white matter where EGFR
is silenced. In the SVZ, where some glial cells continue to express EGFR
at lower levels, these modifications are moderately enriched. The
repressing modification H3K27me3, in contrast, is low during fetal
development but becomes highly enriched in adult white matter.
Interestingly, we also observe robust enrichment of H3K27ac and H3K4me3
in adult glioma specimens. Furthermore, we find significant binding of
the histone methyltransferase complex Ash2L at EGFR only in fetal and
glioma samples that show high levels of H3K4me3, and of the histone
acetyltransferase p300 only in samples showing enrichment of H3K27ac,
implicating these two histone modifying enzymes in the dynamic epigenetic
regulation of EGFR expression during glial differentiation and glioma
formation.Our studies use endogenous human material and point to an
important, region-specific role for chromatin remodeling in EGFR
expression during gliomagenesis, which will undoubtedly open a broad
range of new potential therapeutic tumor targets.

