Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HPV16 immunity induced by immune responses to mutations in E6 and
E7 proteins


Human papillomavirus (HPV) causes 30% of cancers attributable to
infectious pathogens. HPV16 causes most cervical, anal, vaginal, vulvar,
and oropharyngeal cancers. Although preventive vaccines targeting HPV16
and 18 are available, rates of vaccination are uneven. The incidence of
HPV-associated cancers for which no screening algorithms have been
validated continues to increase.Development of squamous cervical cancer
and its precursor, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) 2/3 is
associated with integration of HPV genome into the host genome, and
expression of the HPV E6 and E7- gene products, which inactivate p53 and
pRb respectively. Since E6 and E7 are constitutively expressed in
cervical carcinomas and CIN, they present attractive immunotherapeutic
targets. Development of immunotherapies has been limited, in part, by
modest immunogenicity of vaccines tested to date. The purpose of this
study is to augment the immunogenicity of the E6 and E7 antigens through
mutational screening.A subset of CIN2/3 do undergo complete regression.
Our lab has carried out a series of prospective clinical studies,
including immunotherapeutic interventions, in subjects with CIN2/3.
Peripheral blood T cell responses to E6 and E7 are marginal, and do not
distinguish regressors in either vaccinated or unvaccinated subjects.
However, in vaccinated subjects, the lesion microenvironment is comprised
of new tertiary lymphoid structures, evidence of T cell proliferation
elicited by cognate antigen, and clonally expanded TCRs. Tissue T cells
in vaccinated subjects access dysplastic epithelium, in contrast to T
cells in persistent lesions, which were confined to the stromal
compartment. These findings suggest that T cells that could mediate
regression can be elicited by vaccination. However, strategies to enhance
immunogenicity would likely increase therapeutic effect. Here we present
an approach designed to determine the effect of mutations in E6 and E7 on
antigenicity. Mutations can enhance immune responses to antigens by
several mechanisms, including altering antigen processing, trafficking,
glycolsylation, and affinity to major histocompatibility complexes. Using
error prone PCR, we generated libraries containing random mutations in
the coding sequence of E6 and E7. Clones from each library are currently
being screened in vitro to identify immunogenic mutants, which could be
potentially used for multi-epitope vaccines.

