Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EWS/FLI1 transcription is modulated by the PI3K pathway via SP1 in
Ewing sarcoma


Ewing sarcoma (ES) is the second most frequent bone cancer in childhood
and it is characterized by the presence of the balanced t(11;22)(q24;q12)
translocation in more than 85% of cases, generating a dysregulated
transcription factor EWS/FLI1. ES belongs to small-round-blue-cell tumors
and it is a very aggressive osteolytic cancer with early tendency for
development of metastasis. Mostly it affects bones such as pelvis, femour
and ribs but can also arise in soft tissues, mainly in adults. EWS/FLI1
is an essential oncogenic component of ES development which is necessary
for tumor cell maintenance, through inappropriate regulation of target
genes that are crucial for the fully malignant phenotype. Therefore,
EWS/FLI1 represents an attractive therapeutic target. Screening of a
small library of 153 targeted compounds has identified inhibitors of the
PI3K pathway as main modulators of EWS/FLI1 activity and surprisingly
this was due to an effect of the compound on EWS/FLI1 transcription.
Indeed, treatment of four different ES cell lines with BEZ235 (PI3K-mTOR
inhibitor) resulted in downregulation of EWS/FLI1 by 50% expression with
subsequent modulation of target gene expression. Analysis of the EWS/FLI1
promoter region (-2239/+67) using various deletion constructs identified
two 14bp minimal elements, named Del2 and Del23 region, as being
important for EWS/FLI1 transcription. Based on in silico prediction and
on in vivo data, we were able to predict 4 transcription factor
candidates to bind this region and being responsive to PI3K regulation.
Among these, SP1 was identified as modulator of EWS/FLI1 gene expression
by siRNA. Various approches such as qRT-PCR, Western Blot and
Immunofluorescence confirmed a reduction of EWS/FLI1 in Ewing cells when
PI3K and SP1 were depleted; Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay (EMSA)
and Chromatine Immuno Precipitation (ChIP) both confirmed that the
transcription factor SP1 is indeed binding to Del23 region of the
EWS/FLI1 promoter. In summary, our results provide the very first
insights on the transcriptional regulation of EWS/FLI1, an area that has
not been investigated so far, and offer a molecular explanation for the
known sensitivity of ES cell lines to PI3K inhibition.

