Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody targeting soluble NKG2D ligand sMIC induces regression of
primary tumors and eliminates metastasis in multiple pre-clinical cancer
models


Expression of the MHC I-chain related molecules A and B (MICA/B) on
epithelial cell surface in response to transformation or DNA damage can
signal the immune system of the abnormality and thus initiate active
immune surveillance by Natural Killer (NK) cells and cytotoxicity T
cells. We and others have shown that malignant tumor cells can shed
MICA/B to down regulate NKG2D expression and negatively impact NK and CD8
T cell function in cancer patients. Increased tumor-specific shedding of
cell surface NKG2D ligand, MHC I chain related molecule (MIC), is
associated with advanced stage and metastasis in many types of epithelial
cancer. High serum levels of soluble MIC (sMIC) insults the immune system
not only by down-regulating NKG2D expression on natural killer (NK) cells
and effector T cells but also perturbing NK cell peripheral maintenance.
Whether sMIC is an effective cancer therapeutic target has not been
addressed due to the lack of specific sMIC-blocking reagent and
clinically relevant pre-clinical animal models. Using a humanized
clinically relevant spontaneous prostate carcinoma TRAMP/MIC
bi-transgenic mouse model and multiple engineered syngeneic
transplantable tumor models, we unprecedentedly show that therapy with a
sMIC-specific monoclonal antibody induced rapid regression of primary
tumors and metastasis without systemic toxicity. The therapy revamped a
myriad of anti-tumor immune responses including NK cell homeostatic
renewal and function, CD4 T cells to Th1 and Th17 responses. Using the
well-defined melanoma model, we further show that anti-sMIC therapy
augments Pmel-1 antigen-specific CD8 T cell responses. Notably, depletion
of NK cells mitigated the therapeutic effect of anti-sMIC antibody and
the effector function of both CD4 and CD8 T cells. We conclude that sMIC
is an effective therapeutic target to potentiate innate and adoptive
immune responses against MIC+ malignancies.

