Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Soluble EphA2 is a potential serum biomarker for lung cancer


EphA2 is a cell surface glycoprotein expresses in various tumor tissues
including lung, breast and pancreas carcinoma. As the patients with a
highly positive surface expression of EphA2 carcinomas have the poor
prognosis, therefore, preclinical and clinical studies using antibody
targeting to EphA2 are underlying. Previous study has reported that EphA2
fragment is also released in a soluble form by the proteolytic cleavage
from tumor cell surface. In this study, we tried to detect the soluble
form of EphA2 (sEphA2) in the serum specimens of lung cancer patients. By
using antibodies to EphA2, we developed a new sandwich ELISA system
detecting human sEphA2 with high sensitivity and specificity. With this
system, we measured the concentration of sEphA2 in the serum of normal
healthy donors and lung cancer patients. The concentration of sEphA2 was
significantly higher in sera of 15 lung cancer patients than 15 healthy
donors (pEphA2 is a cell surface glycoprotein expresses in various tumor
tissues including lung, breast and pancreas carcinoma. As the patients
with a highly positive surface expression of EphA2 carcinomas have the
poor prognosis, therefore, preclinical and clinical studies using
antibody targeting to EphA2 are underlying. Previous study has reported
that EphA2 fragment is also released in a soluble form by the proteolytic
cleavage from tumor cell surface. In this study, we tried to detect the
soluble form of EphA2 (sEphA2) in the serum specimens of lung cancer
patients. By using antibodies to EphA2, we developed a new sandwich ELISA
system detecting human sEphA2 with high sensitivity and specificity. With
this system, we measured the concentration of sEphA2 in the serum of
normal healthy donors and lung cancer patients. The concentration of
sEphA2 was significantly higher in sera of 15 lung cancer patients than
15 healthy donors (p<0.01). We also examined the other diagnostics
biomarkers such as CYFRA and CEA. The levels of sEphA2 in serum of lung
cancer patients are correlated with CYFRA and CEA. These data indicate
that the diagnosis of the lung cancer enabled by measuring the
concentration of sEphA2. However, detail clinicopathological
characteristics are necessary for the feasible diagnosis for sEphA2 as a
biomarker of lung cancer.

