Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncomine Cancer Panel: simultaneous detection of clinically
relevant hotspot mutations, CNVs, and gene fusions in solid tumors


Introduction: The Oncomine Cancer Panel (OCP) is designed to
simultaneously detect and report hotspot mutations, Copy Number Variants
(CNVs) and gene fusions in 143 genes with minimal DNA/RNA sample input.
The OCP utilizes the AmpliSeq library preparation chemistry for the Ion
Torrent Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) platform, in combination with
data annotations by the Oncomine Knowledgebase. Here we report analytical
validation of OCP.Methods: DNA and RNA, extracted from the FFPE processed
GM12878, was used as the negative control to evaluate the specificity of
OCP. A RNA sample containing multiple oncogenic gene fusions, and a DNA
sample containing multiple hotspot SNV and indels were used as the
positive control. Fresh DNA from cancer cell lines (HCC1143 or NCI-H2122)
along with DNA from matched normal cell lines, HorizonDx NGS standards
TruQ-1, TruQ-2, several engineered FFPE samples with gene fusions or copy
number changes, and 26 clinical FFPE samples of a variety of solid tumor
types (lung, breast, colon, ovary, stomach, uterus and larynx) were used
to evaluate the OCP performance. The analysis of the sequencing data was
primarily performed with the OCP pipeline integrated with Oncomine
Knowledgebase from Life Technologies, supplemented by the MolecularMD
proprietary pipeline. Only the genetic alterations with clinical utility
were selected as the final output from the data pipeline. Of these
detected by OCP, the SBS and indels were confirmed by the Illumina
TruSeq, Ion Torrent AmpliSeq commercial cancer panels, or by Sanger
sequencing. Any CNVs detected were confirmed by FISH, if possible, and
detected fusions were confirmed by RT-PCR or FISH.Results: No clinically
relevant genetic alterations were detected from the negative control
FFPE-GM12878, indicating the high specificity of the OCP. High
specificity was achieved, in part, using stringent filters, which removed
error prone regions from analysis. The LOD for SBS and short indel
detection was 5%, as assessed by TruQ-1 and TruQ-2, each containing 15
variants. While the exact LOD for gene fusion detection is currently
under evaluation, the 100%, 50% and 20% fusion were detected in the RNA
samples from serially diluted EML4-ALK or SL34A2-ROS1 fusion into the
FFPE-GM12878 RNA. Four known gene amplifications (MYC, CCND1, MDM2, AKT1)
with CNV from 5.4X to 14.5X in HCC1143, and a 15.7X MYC amplification in
NCI-H2122 were detected. In addition, an EML4-ALK.E13A20 fusion was
detected in a lung cancer FFPE sample, and confirmed by FISH. The
analytical sensitivity and the specificity of the OCP are currently
assessed with 26 clinical samples and three engineered FFPE
samples.Conclusions: These results demonstrate the high sensitivity and
specificity of OCP. With as little as 10 ng RNA and 20 ng DNA, OCP
provides comprehensive screening of patient FFPE tumor specimens for the
detection of a broad spectrum of clinically relevant genetic alterations.

