Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting of ETS factor ERG for the treatment of
prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the leading causes of cancer-related
death in men worldwide. The common treatment option for recurring and
advanced PCa focuses on inhibiting the androgen receptor (AR).
Unfortunately, despite an initial response to this treatment, drug
resistance occurs, and the cancer relapses to an incurable,
castration-resistant form; thus, there is a pressing need for new
therapeutics. Previous research has shown that in up to 50% of all
prostate cancer cases, the cause of the disease may be attributed to a
common genomic rearrangement, the fusion between TMPRSS2 and ERG
(ETS-related gene). ERG is a transcription factor mainly involved in
hematopoiesis regulation during embryonic development, and it is not
normally expressed in prostate cells in adults. However, its fusion with
the TMPRSS2 promoter puts ERG under the regulation of AR, and as a
consequence, ERG is one of the most commonly overexpressed genes in PCa.
ERG overexpression in prostate epithelium has been shown to induce
transformation and promote epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) that
gives cancer cells enhanced migratory and invasive characteristics.
Currently, there is no approved therapeutic targeting ERG or any other
member of the ETS family. While targeting transcription factors has been
challenging, our integrated research team is specialized in targeting
protein-DNA interaction sites. Using our established computer-aided drug
discovery pipeline, we have identified several small molecules that can
bind to and inhibit ERG. A total of 133 candidate compounds, pre-selected
from the in silico screening of millions of chemical structures, were
tested using a luciferase-based transcriptional reporter assay across two
cell lines: the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion positive VCaP cell line, and the human
prostate epithelial cell line (PNT1B) engineered to constitutively
express ERG. In addition to transcriptional inhibition, the most potent
compounds inhibited migration of PNT1B-ERG cells as demonstrated by a
Real-Time Cell Analyzer. Significantly, both compounds shifted the
binding spectra in protein NMR assays, indicating their direct
interactions with residues located in the DNA binding domain of the ERG
protein. We anticipate that results from this project will lead to the
development of new drugs that can be used alternatively or
synergistically with current anti-AR therapy to benefit patients with the
most deadly forms of prostate cancer. (Supported by a grant from Prostate
Cancer Canada)

