Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BKM120 and BYL719 (PI3K inhibitors) sensitize estrogen receptor
positive breast cancer cells to tamoxifen


Background: Tamoxifen is currently standard first line hormonal therapy
for premenopausal estrogen receptor (ER) positive metastatic breast
cancer women. However, the response rate is only around 30%
andprogression free survival is only around 6 months, which indicate both
intrinsic resistance and acquired resistance are clinical important
issues. One of the important mechanisms of hormonal therapy resistance is
collateral activation of PI3K/Akt pathway. This study sought to explore
whether NVP-BYL719 (a novel PI3 kinase alpha selective inhibitor) or
NVP-BKM120 (a novel pan-PI3K inhibitor) may enhance the efficacy of ER
positive breast cancer cells toward tamoxifen.Material and methods: Five
ER positive cell lines, MCF7, T47D (PIK3CA mutant), ZR75 (PIK3CA wild
type, PTEN lost), MB361 (PIK3CA mutant and HER2 amplified), and HCC1500
(PIK3CA wild type, PTEN intact) were studied. Cells and Balb/c nude mice
inoculated with MCF7 cells were treated with BYL719 alone, BKM120 alone,
tamoxifen alone, or either one of the PI3K inhibitors in combination with
tamoxifen. Their viability was measured at 6 days with MTT assay and the
combination effect was evaluated by median effect analysis. Signaling
targets were determined by immunoblotting analysis. The overall survival
and tumor size of the nude mice were analyzed.Results: Synergism,
indicated by a combination index (CI) value Background: Tamoxifen is
currently standard first line hormonal therapy for premenopausal estrogen
receptor (ER) positive metastatic breast cancer women. However, the
response rate is only around 30% andprogression free survival is only
around 6 months, which indicate both intrinsic resistance and acquired
resistance are clinical important issues. One of the important mechanisms
of hormonal therapy resistance is collateral activation of PI3K/Akt
pathway. This study sought to explore whether NVP-BYL719 (a novel PI3
kinase alpha selective inhibitor) or NVP-BKM120 (a novel pan-PI3K
inhibitor) may enhance the efficacy of ER positive breast cancer cells
toward tamoxifen.Material and methods: Five ER positive cell lines, MCF7,
T47D (PIK3CA mutant), ZR75 (PIK3CA wild type, PTEN lost), MB361 (PIK3CA
mutant and HER2 amplified), and HCC1500 (PIK3CA wild type, PTEN intact)
were studied. Cells and Balb/c nude mice inoculated with MCF7 cells were
treated with BYL719 alone, BKM120 alone, tamoxifen alone, or either one
of the PI3K inhibitors in combination with tamoxifen. Their viability was
measured at 6 days with MTT assay and the combination effect was
evaluated by median effect analysis. Signaling targets were determined by
immunoblotting analysis. The overall survival and tumor size of the nude
mice were analyzed.Results: Synergism, indicated by a combination index
(CI) value <1, were seen in all five cell lines treated with BYL719 or
BKM120 plus tamoxifen. By immunoblotting analysis, BYL719 alone, BKM120
alone, or either drugs in combination with tamoxifen resulted in
dowregulation of the PI3K signaling pathway downstream targets, including
p-AKT, p-GSK3beta, and p-p70s6k expression in MCF7 and T47D cells. When
MCF7 and T47D cells were treated with tamoxifen in combination with
BYL719 or BKM120, an additional increase in the subG1 population by flow
cytometry analysis and increase of PARP cleavage were observed by
immunoblotting analysis, indicating the increase of apoptosis cell death.
When MCF7 was transfected with constitutive active (myristoylated) Akt1
construct, the inhibitory effect of BYL719 and the synergistic effect
between BYL719 and tamoxifen was markedly abolished, indicating that the
mechanism is mainly through the inhibition of PI3K/Akt pathway. MCF7
tumor growth in Balb/c mice was successfully slowed down by the
combination of BYL719 or BKM120 with tamoxifen, as compared to that in
mice treated with tamoxifen alone or control.Conclusions: Our data
suggest that additional PI3K blockade might be an effective strategy to
enhance therapeutic effect of tamoxifen in wild type as well as in
acquired tamoxifen resistance ER positive breast cancer cell. Clinical
trials along this line are warranted.(The study was supported by National
Science Council grant NSC 101-2325-B-002 -059)

