Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of enzymes associated with glycine
metabolism in ovarian cancer stem like cell


OBJECTIVES: The recent advances in understanding the relation between
cancer and metabolism have highlighted the relevance of serine/glycine
biosynthesis and one-carbon metabolism. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the expression of enzymes associated with serine/glycine
metabolism in ovarian cancer stem like cells (CSCs) and discuss their
potential clinical implications.METHODS: We established primary ovarian
cancer cell cultures from dissected fresh tumor tissue. To isolate
CD117(+) and CD44(+) CSCs from primary ovarian cancer cultures, we have
modified and optimized the Magnetic-Activated Cell Sorting (MACS)
procedure from Miltenyi resulting in high sorting purity. In the present
study, we used Western blotting and immunohistochemistry to examine three
serine-/glycine-metabolism-associated proteins (PHGDH, SHMT, and GLDC) in
CSCs and ovarian cancer cases using tissue microarray (TMA). The
expression of stemness gene (Nanog, Oct3/4, Sox2 and ABCG2) mRNA was
determined by RT-PCR and protein expression was detected by Western blot
analysis.RESULTS: GLDC, PHGDH and SHMT, associated with serine/ glycine
metabolism, showed lower expression in the CSCs. TMA showed that the
different expressions of GLDC, PHGDH and SHMT in platinum-sensitive and
platinum-resistant ovarian cancer cases (pOBJECTIVES: The recent advances
in understanding the relation between cancer and metabolism have
highlighted the relevance of serine/glycine biosynthesis and one-carbon
metabolism. The aim of this study was to evaluate the expression of
enzymes associated with serine/glycine metabolism in ovarian cancer stem
like cells (CSCs) and discuss their potential clinical
implications.METHODS: We established primary ovarian cancer cell cultures
from dissected fresh tumor tissue. To isolate CD117(+) and CD44(+) CSCs
from primary ovarian cancer cultures, we have modified and optimized the
Magnetic-Activated Cell Sorting (MACS) procedure from Miltenyi resulting
in high sorting purity. In the present study, we used Western blotting
and immunohistochemistry to examine three
serine-/glycine-metabolism-associated proteins (PHGDH, SHMT, and GLDC) in
CSCs and ovarian cancer cases using tissue microarray (TMA). The
expression of stemness gene (Nanog, Oct3/4, Sox2 and ABCG2) mRNA was
determined by RT-PCR and protein expression was detected by Western blot
analysis.RESULTS: GLDC, PHGDH and SHMT, associated with serine/ glycine
metabolism, showed lower expression in the CSCs. TMA showed that the
different expressions of GLDC, PHGDH and SHMT in platinum-sensitive and
platinum-resistant ovarian cancer cases (p<0.004). GLDC mRNA was most
frequently expressed in primary ovarian cancer culture cells. By Cox
multivariate analysis, tumor SHMT1 negativity (HR: 2.132, 95% CI:
1.229-3.664, p = 0.007) was associated with short overall
survival.CONCLUSIONS: Based on our findings, we concluded that the
expression of serine-metabolism-associated proteins was related with
resistance of ovarian cancer cells and patient's survival.

