Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting acute myelogenous leukemia with novel combrestatin
analogs and development of predictors of response


Introduction: Most adult acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) patients
relapse and die of the disease. AML stem cells (AML-SCs) have been
postulated to resist standard chemotherapeutic agents and thus give rise
to relapse. Combretastatin A-4 (CA-4), a natural product isolated from
the South African tree Combretum caffrum, has been reported to possess
anti-leukemic activity in AML cell lines. To increase the repertoire of
combretastatin analogs with potent anti-leukemic activity, about 100 CA-4
analogs were tested in AML cells, and studied the mechanism that AML
cells resist to such microtubule (MT) inhibitors.Methods: Cell
viability/apoptosis was determined by annexin V and 7-AAD staining and
flow cytometry. Cellular ROS production was measured by CellROX. Cell
cycle was determined by DAPI staining and flow cytometry. Stem cell
function was evaluated by colony assay and mouse xenograft assays.
Tubulin depolymerization was measured by immunofluorescence or
immunoblotting for microtubule fraction. Interaction of tubulin with BTAN
or p38 MAPK was determined by pull down assays.Results: One of the most
potent analogs, BTAN, was further investigated in a panel of leukemic
cell lines and primary AML samples. Similar to CA-4, BTAN inhibited
tubulin polymerization in vitro and induced MT depolymerization and cell
cycle arrest at G2/M in AML cells. BTAN induced cell death of AML blast,
progenitor and stem cells via caspase activation regardless of their
proliferating status and level of intracellular reactive oxygen species
(ROS). In addition, BTAN impaired the physical contact of AML with
stromal cells. To further identify the mechanism of resistance to BTAN,
we investigated several signal transduction pathways including AKT,
JAK-STAT, ERK1/2, JNK and p38. p38 MAPK inhibitor sensitized leukemia
cells to BTAN treatment, and the sensitivity of AML cells to BTAN
correlated with the basal level of active/phosphorylated p38 MAPK,
suggesting p38 MAPK may interfere with the sensitivity to BTAN in AML. We
demonstrated that tubulin interacted with p38 MAPK, especially its
phosphorylated form, which was disrupted by treatment with a p38 MAPK
inhibitor. In addition, in the presence of p38 inhibitor, the
accumulation of BTAN was potentiated in AML cells, suggesting activated
p38 may interfere with the interaction between BTAN and its tubulin
targets.Conclusion: Our data demonstrated that BTAN is a newly identified
anti-AML-SC agent that works by disrupting the MT cytoskeleton and
inducing caspase activation. These data suggest that the MT network is
involved in the regulation of pro-survival signaling pathways even in
quiescent AML-SCs, and that p38 MAPK is a key modulator for the response
of AML blasts to microtubule inhibitors and that co-treatment with p38
MAPK inhibitors could be beneficial to microtubule destabilizing agents
in AML.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

