Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endothelial plasticity generates aberrant angiogenesis and therapy
resistance in glioblastoma


Overgrown, abnormal vasculature characterizes the microenvironment that
fuels cancer progression and induces therapeutic resistance. Here we
reveal that endothelial plasticity drives excessive and abnormal tumor
angiogenesis. Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is among the most lethal of
human malignancies, distinguished by prominent vascularity and extreme
vascular abnormality. We identify endothelial fibro-transformation
(Endo-FT) in GBM, contributing significantly to aberrant vascularization,
tumor progression, and therapeutic resistance. Utilizing human GBM
specimens and allograft and genetic murine GBM models driven by
RCAS/Ntv-a-mediated gene transfer of PDGF in Ink4a-Arf-/-PTEN-/- mice, we
reveal robust Endo-FT in the tumor vasculature, characterized by
endothelial cell (EC) expression of the fibroblast and mesenchymal cell
markers including FSP-1, -smooth muscle actin, N-cadherin. Moreover,
genetic lineage tracing shows a prominent population of GBM-associated
fibroblast-like cells with EC origin. Furthermore, glioma-conditioned
medium induces EC in vitro acquisition of the fibroblast signature with
decreased expression of EC-specific proteins including CD31, VE-cadherin,
Tie2, VEGFR2, leading to enhanced cell proliferation, motility, and
invasiveness, and vessel permeability. Interestingly, the fibroblast-like
ECs retain the key EC-specific functions including Ac-LDL absorption and
tube formation, suggesting Endo-FT without complete EC transition to
fibroblasts.Proteomic analysis identifies c-Met is a regulator of
Endo-FT, requisite for the vascular abnormality. Pharmacological
inhibition and siRNA-mediated knockdown of c-Met or neutralization with a
HGF antibody remarkably abrogate tumor-conditioned medium-induced Endo-FT
and EC malfunctions, suggesting a critical role of HGF/c-Met in Endo-FT.
Furthermore, c-Met activation induces ETS-1-dependent matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-14 expression, leading to VE-cadherin cleavage
and Endo-FT.Finally, we test the in vivo role of c-Met-mediated Endo-FT
in GBM progression by using mice with Tie2-Cre-driven, EC-specific Met
knockout. Met deletion in ECs significantly improves mouse survival and
inhibits GBM growth after temozolomide (TMZ) treatment. Moreover, Met
deletion in ECs abolishes Endo-FT and vascular abnormality, as shown by
remarkable decreases in CD31+FSP-1+ cell population and intratumor
hypoxia, and increases in vasculature-mediated perfusion and vascular
pericyte coverage, suggesting that c-Met-mediated Endo-FT is required for
vascular abnormality and GBM progression and therapeutic resistance.In
sum, these findings illustrate a novel mechanism controlling aberrant
vascularization and GBM progression, and suggest that targeting Endo-FT
may offer selective and efficient therapeutic strategies for the
treatment-resistant GBM, and possibly other malignant tumors.

