Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo fluorescence and spectral microscopy of the effects of
aerobic exercise on tumor oxygenation and perfusion in breast cancer


Abnormal tumor angiogenesis leads to inefficient blood flow and inhibited
delivery of oxygen, resulting in a hypoxic tumor microenvironment. In
radiation therapy the presence of oxygen is necessary to impart lasting
damage to cancer cells, therefore the modulation of tumor hypoxia has
been an important focus to improve radiation therapy outcome. While
strategies such as hyperbaric chambers and hypoxic cell radiosensitizers
or cytotoxins have shown merit, their success in the clinic has been
limited. A potential method to increase oxygenation and decrease hypoxia
in a tumor mass that is safe and well-tolerated is aerobic exercise. For
cancer patients, the benefits of exercise in a palliative setting are
well known, however the effects of exercise on tumor microvasculature and
blood flow have not been extensively characterized.In vivo microscopy of
microvessel function in preclinical models is a useful tool for the study
of tumor vascular structure and function. The combination of
hyperspectral imaging of hemoglobin (Hb) saturation and first-pass
fluorescence (FPF) imaging of blood transit time in the murine dorsal
skinfold window chamber has been previously used to characterize tumor
angiogenesis, wound healing and the response of tumor microvasculature to
vascular targeting agents. Hb saturation imaging reveals the oxygenation
of blood within microvessels while FPF imaging gives information
regarding blood flow and network connections by recording a fluorescent
contrast agent as it is injected into circulation. In the present study,
this combination imaging technique is used to evaluate the impact of
treadmill running on tumor blood flow and microvessel oxygenation in real
time. 4T1 mammary tumors were initiated in nude mice bearing titanium
window chambers. Once tumors reached a volume of 5mm3, mice were
subjected to daily treadmill running for 5-7 consecutive days (30 min,
15-18 m/min, 10 incline). As a sedentary control, mice were placed on a
stationary treadmill for equivalent periods of time. Combination imaging
was performed daily to monitor microvessel oxygenation and blood flow. On
the first day of exercise, imaging was performed both before and after
animals were exercised. Preliminary results indicate that following one
bout of exercise, tumor perfusion is increased, however there was no
significant correlation between exercise and tumor microvessel
oxygenation.

