Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of immortalized nasopharyngeal
epithelial cells with stable infection of Epstein-Barr virus


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), with a remarkably distinctive ethnic and
geographic distribution, has the highest incidence among Southern
Chinese. Unlike other types of head and neck cancers, a unique feature of
NPC is its close association with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). EBV infection
represents an early event during the pathogenesis of NPC. Latent EBV
infection is found in every cancer cell of virtually all cases of
undifferentiated NPC in endemic regions. Genetic alterations in the
premalignant epithelium may support the EBV latency. Although EBV-encoded
proteins in its latent infection, including LMP1, LMP2A, etc., have been
identified with crucial functions to initiate or promote oncogenesis, to
date the exact role of EBV infection in the malignant transformation of
nasopharyngeal epithelial (NPE) cells remains unclear. We have previously
generated a panel of immortalized NPE cells by ectopic overexpression of
hTert (catalytic unit of human telomerase). However, reliable in vitro
models of stable EBV infection are also necessary for further elucidating
the regulatory network supporting the persistent latency of EBV in NPE
cells, and also the potential roles of EBV in the pathogenesis of NPC. In
the present study, we established NP361hTert-EBV cells with stable EBV
infection via co-culture with Akata B cells harboring EBV, followed by
the effective enrichment of EBV-infected cells by FACS sorting. The loss
of EBV episome in NPE cells was fast initially upon infection, and
relatively stable maintenance of EBV could be achieved after enrichment
of EBV-positive cells for three times. Results of western blotting
analysis showed that the protein expression level of cyclin D1 was
increased in NP361hTert-EBV cells, as compared to the non-infected
NP361hTert cells. Meanwhile, we also observed increased expression of
phosphorylated protein kinase Akt (Ser473) in NP361hTert-EBV cells,
suggesting that the Akt signaling was activated, and such activation
might contribute to the persistence of EBV in NP361hTert cells. The
stable EBV-infected NPE cells will serve as a powerful in vitro model for
further study in elucidating the functional role of EBV in the
carcinogenesis of NPC.This work was partly supported by General Research
Fund (HKU 779713M, HKU780911M), and the AoE NPC grant (AoE/M-06/08) from
Hong Kong Research Grant Council; and Small Project Funding
(201309176242) from The University of Hong Kong.

