Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-proliferative and anti-invasive action of omega-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids in stomach cancer cells


The American Cancer Society has been reported that about 22,220 cases of
stomach cancer will be diagnosed and about 10,990 patients will die from
this type of cancer in 2014. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
(3-PUFA), including docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) have been suggested to
have anti-cancer effects by epidemiological and clinical studies.
However, their underlying anti-cancer mechanisms are still unclear in
stomach cancer. This study was designed to examine the impact of 3-PUFA
on stomach cancer and the molecular mechanism of their action. DHA
reduced cells viability in a dose- and time-dependent manner in human
stomach cancer cells including AGS cells. The DHA-induced cells death was
in part due to apoptosis, since the cells exhibited increases of
apoptotic markers including cleaved PARP and TUNEL-positive cells. DHA
also led to autophagic vesicle formation an increase levels of lipidated
form LC3B and stimulated the autophagic flux, indicating the involvement
of both apoptosis and autophagy in the cytotoxic effect of stomach cancer
cells by 3-PUFA. Moreover, AGS stable cell expressing the 3-desaturase
(fat-1) gene (AGS-fsc) or control vector stable cell (AGS-csc) were
eatablished, and the effect of endogenous high level of 3-PUFA was
investigated in AGS cells. The cell proliferation, invasion and
colony-formation were inhibited in AGS-fsc compared to AGS-csc. Taken
together, these results indicate that 3-PUFA induce anti-cancer action is
related to anti-proliferation and anti-invasive action in stomach cancer
cells. Thus, utilization of 3-PUFA may represent a promising therapeutic
approach for chemoprevention and treatment of human stomach cancer. [This
research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the
National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of
Education(2014R1A1A2008915) and by the Korea government(MSIP) (No.
2007-0054932)]

