Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and validation of novel prostate cancer biomarkers
using the Berg Interrogative Biology platform


Prostate cancer is the most frequent cancer diagnosis among men and the
second leading cause of cancer-related death. Despite the widespread use
of digital rectal exam (DRE) and blood-based screening of
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) for prostate cancer screening, there are
significant limitations in their specificity and prognostic value.
Biomarkers which distinguish i) PSA-low prostate cancer from benign
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), and ii) indolent versus aggressive disease
course represent unmet clinical needs. Experimentally, a panel of
prostate cancer cell lines and non-tumorigenic, human primary cells were
exposed to in vitro conditions designed to simulate poor oxygenation, low
pH, diminished nutrient microenvironments, and metabolic perturbations
(24-48 h) followed by iTRAQ proteomic analysis of cell lysates. Using the
Berg Interrogative Biology platform, proteomic data were then subjected
to Bayesian network learning to map molecular interactions, with
cytoskeletal and scaffolding proteins Filamin A (FLNA), Filamin B (FLNB),
and Keratin 19 (KRT19) identified as candidate prostate cancer
biomarkers. To validate biomarker expression, mRNA and protein was
quantified in panel of primary human prostate epithelial cells (HPrEC)
and androgen-sensitive (LnCAP) or refractory (DU145, PC-3) prostate
cancer cells, and each was differentially detected in one or more
prostate cancer cell lines compared to HPrEC. Using proteomic analysis,
peptides from FLNA, FLNB, and KRT19 were also detected cell culture media
conditioned by prostate cancer cells (24 h), indicating they can be
secreted. Importantly, unlike PSA expression, global regulation of FLNA,
FLNB, and KRT19 expression remained unaltered after treatment with
multiple prostate-cancer relevant stimuli (e.g., hypoxia, androgens, and
inflammatory stimuli). In vivo validation was next conducted in sera from
men (N = 447) with confirmed prostate cancer, benign prostate tumors, or
BPH using LDT ELISA assays in a CLIA-certified laboratory. To assess the
sensitivity and specificity of FLNA, FLNB, and KRT19 compared to PSA, ROC
curve analysis was performed. The individual predictive power of each
biomarker alone was comparable to that of PSA. However, the combination
of age, levels of FLNA, FLNB, and KRT19, and PSA out-performed PSA alone
in identification of patients with prostate cancer stratified compared to
benign status, gleason scores and incidence of BPH. Together, these data
validate the use of the Berg Interrogative Biology platform for biomarker
discovery and indicate that FLNA, FLNB, and KRT19 can be used in
conjunction with PSA for more sensitive and specific prostate cancer
screening, a critical unmet need in the field.

