Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hsp27 negatively affects Hippo tumor suppressor pathway to
regulate cell survival in cancer


Introduction: Heat shock protein 27 (Hsp27) is a molecular chaperone
highly and uniformly expressed in treatment resistant cancers like
castrate resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Hsp27 regulates activity of
several oncogenic pathways and its levels correlate with aggressive tumor
behaviour, drug resistance and tumor growth. Similarly, dysregulation of
the Hippo tumor suppressor pathway, which restricts organ size and cell
proliferation, occurs in many types of cancers. In healthy cells,
activation of the Hippo pathway results in phosphorylation and
cytoplasmic retention of two transcriptional co-activators YAP and TAZ,
whereas in cancer YAP/TAZ are free to translocate to the nucleus and
increase cell proliferation by promoting the activities of certain
transcriptional factors including TEAD1. Inactivation of the Hippo
pathway correlates with poor patient outcome and progression of tumors as
well as an increase in migration, invasion and metastatic potential of
cancer cells. Therefore it is of great importance to establish the
correlation between Hsp27 and the Hippo pathway to further discover
suitable targets in the treatment of metastatic malignancies.Methods:
Hsp27 gain and loss of function experiments were done on 3 different
cancer cell lines and the functional effects on every step of the pathway
were monitored via Western blots and Immunofluorescence. Activity of
YAP/TAZ after Hsp27 gain and loss of function was monitored by conducting
qRT-PCR on TEAD target genes. Transcriptional activity of TEAD1 was also
examined using a TEAD-dependent Luciferase reporter construct.
Co-immunoprecipitation assay was conducted to analyze protein
interactions in the absence/presence of Hsp27. Pathway activity in
prostate cancer will be assessed by immunohistochemistry staining of core
components of the pathway in patients tissue samples.Results: Our
preliminary findings indicate that Hsp27 negatively affects the Hippo
pathway. We found that targeting Hsp27 using siRNA in the PC3 (prostate
cancer), A549 (lung cancer) and MDA-MB-453 (triple negative breast
cancer) leads to increased cytoplasmic retention of p-YAP compared to
control siRNA treated cells. Moreover, using immunofluorescence, we
observed reduced nuclear translocation of the YAP/TAZ as well as
sequestration of these components with cytoplasmic 14-3-3 proteins in
siRNA treated PC3 cells. Furthermore inhibition of Hsp27 in prostate and
lung tumour cells resulted in suppression of TEAD transcriptional
activity analyzed by qRT-PCR and luciferase assay. Hsp27 over-expression
experiments yielded opposite results compared to knockdown.Conclusion:
Hsp27 overexpression contributes to inactivation of Hippo pathway.
Targeting Hsp27 leads to inactivation of YAP and TAZ onco-proteins
affecting cancer cell survival.Impact: Our data further supports the
significance of targeting Hsp27 as a treatment option in cancers,
especially metastatic malignancies like CRPC.

