Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving bioinformatic analysis pipelines for calling somatic
mutations in tumors and tumor derived cell lines


The use of massively parallel sequencing data (MPS) is a common technique
for identifying genetic alterations in disease. A number of tools and
resources have been developed to assist in variant identification, but
most are not specifically designed for somatic cancer studies. Tumor
samples often suffer from admixture and heterogeneity, and tumor DNA
often is derived from formalin fixed paraffin embedded samples rather
than fresh samples, which introduces artificial bias. These confounders
require adjustments to variant quality filtering to ensure a confident
call set, but no universal guidelines exist for bioinformatics analyses.
In addition, no single tool characterizes the spectrum of possible
DNA-based alterations in tumors, specifically single nucleotide variants,
small to medium sized indels, large genomic rearrangements and copy
number alterations. To address these issues, we compared several methods
of bioinformatic analysis using whole exome and targeted high-throughput
sequencing data from various tumor and tumor-derived cell line studies.
Using a data sets with known somatic alterations, we developed
modifications to best practices guidelines for the publically available
Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) for use in tumor and cell line variant
calling. The haplotype score annotation was removed from all filtering
consideration due to its expectance of no more than two segregating
haplotypes at a given site, which, for example, caused all known BRAF
V600 mutations to be removed. Scores from the read position rank sum test
required a reduced filter threshold due to presence of high alternate
allele fractions, which may contribute an artificial bias for this
annotation value. Where applicable, we combined GATK results with calls
from MuTect to increase specificity of the somatic changes identified as
well as further increase sensitivity to singleton mutations. Finally, we
have analyzed three methods to detect large genomic rearrangements and
copy number changes (Pindel, ngCGH, and Sequenza) from MPS data, and
found inconsistent results which require further scrutiny. In conclusion,
we have developed a somatic variant calling pipeline which includes
several modifications to the best practices in standard variant calling
algorithms to enhance the sensitivity and specificity for somatic variant
calling of the entire range of DNA-based alterations in tumors.

