Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subtype-specific DNA damage dependent and independent functions of
damage repair proteins confer chemo-resistance to leukemia


Resistance to chemotherapy is a major challenge in the field of leukemia.
Since, cancer cells can acquire resistance to DNA damage based therapy by
modulating DNA Damage Repair (DDR) pathways, an in-depth understanding of
DDR is important for novel drug discoveries. Hence, to understand
relation between DDR and resistance we used doxorubicin resistant
sub-line (K562-R) of K562 and Mitoxantrone resistant sub-line (HL60/MX)
of HL60 as a model system.We show that lethal doses of Mitoxantrone to
HL60 and HL60/MX do not induce DNA DSBs (double strand breaks) and
accordingly there is no activation of Chk2, although there is equal
uptake of drug in both, sensitive and resistant cell types. Since
Mitoxantrone produce DSBs by targeting TOP2B, we checked the expression
of TOPB2 and found significant decrease in the levels of topoisomerase 2
B (TOP2B). Moreover, negative regulator of TOPB2, mir 21-5P is
upregulation in untreated HL60/MX explaining the absence of DSBs in
HL-60/MX with Mitoxantrone treatment. Surprisingly, although there are no
DSBs induced, we find high levels of DNA-PKcs, MRE11 and Rad50 in
HL-60/MX. Furthermore, inhibition of DNA-PKcs re-sensitizes HL-60/MX
cells to Mitoxantrone, suggesting a DNA damage independent role for
DNA-PK in HL-60/MX cells. Recently DNA-PKcs is shown to play key role in
fat metabolism. Indeed we find significant differences in the metabolism
of HL60 and HL-60/MX where HL-60 cells use glucose but HL-60/MX cells
show reduced glucose and glutamine metabolism and an over expression of
fatty acid synthase. However link between DNA-PKcs over expression and
differential metabolism in these cells still need to be explored.
Interestingly, in contrast to HL60 model, Doxorubicin does induce equal
DSBs in K562 and K562-R cells. However K562-R cells hyperactivate ATM and
Chk2 to repair their DNA and survive. Importantly, we show that K562
start to show elevated activation of ATM and Chk-2 as early as two rounds
of drug treatment. Accordingly, ATM inhibition leads to induction of
apoptosis in resistant K562 cells.In conclusion, we show that K562 and
HL60 cells use the DNA double strand break repair proteins in DNA damage
dependent and independent pathways to acquire resistance to DSB inducing
chemo therapeutics. Our data also highlight the importance of considering
subtype specific therapeutics in leukemia.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

