Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent anti-tumor and metastatic breast cancer efficacy of
bevacizumab with CRLX101, an investigational chemotherapy
nanoparticle-drug conjugate that secondarily suppresses HIF-1


Despite the approval of seven different VEGF-pathway targeting agents,
such as bevacizumab, for ten different cancer types, VEGF inhibition has
shown only modest survival benefits - especially in breast cancer. One
hypothesis for this is the adaptive resistance that emerges, such as
increased tumor hypoxia and elevated hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1),
which up-regulates genes causing tumor angiogenesis, resistance and
metastasis. Here we evaluated bevacizumab paired with a potent cytotoxic
investigational drug called CRLX101, a nanoparticle-drug conjugate
containing the payload camptothecin that secondarily suppresses HIF-1. In
a preclinical mouse model of primary human breast tumor xenografts grown
in the mammary fat pad after cell-line implantation, CRLX101 monotherapy
was highly efficacious. More importantly, CRLX101 with bevacizumab
resulted in dramatic primary tumor shrinkages and greatly improved mice
survival, despite bevacizumab alone having no activity in this model.
This potent anti-tumor efficacy was further confirmed in a
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model, where again CRLX101 and
bevacizumab led to obvious shrinkage of established primary tumors. HIF-1
suppression was confirmed by immunohistochemistry while changes in tumor
hypoxia and perfusion were evaluated using photoacoustic imaging and
contrast-enhanced ultrasound, respectively. To better reflect the
clinical treatment setting, the combination was next evaluated in our
preclinical model of post-surgical, overt metastatic disease. Both
CRLX101 monotherapy and CRLX101 in combination with bevacizumab showed
shrinkage of existing metastatic masses and prevented the emergence of
new metastases. In conclusion, we showed that pairing an anti-angiogenic
agent with a potent chemotherapy backbone that is able to suppress HIF-1
up-regulation induced by anti-angiogenic therapy greatly improve efficacy
in both primary and metastatic breast cancer models. The data from these
preclinical experiments demonstrate that further research of the
combination of bevacizumab and other anti-angiogenic drugs with CRLX101
is warranted in solid tumors.

