Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Model osteosarcoma by Li-Fraumeni syndrome patient-specific
induced pluripotent stem cells


Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a genetically inherited autosomal dominant
cancer syndrome characterized by multiple tumors within an individual,
early tumor onset and multiple affected family members. Germline
mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene are responsible for LFS.
Although there has been extensive research on cancer cell lines and even
mouse models of LFS to study the role(s) of p53, these model systems do
not fully recapitulate the range of human tumors or their properties.
Therefore, while p53 is a promising target to treat tumors, the lack of
appropriate models limits the development of reliable therapeutics.In
vitro modeling of human disease has recently become feasible with the
adoption of induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology. Here, we
established patient-derived iPSCs from a LFS family and investigated the
role of mutant p53 in the development of osteosarcoma. The osteoblasts,
differentiated from LFS iPSC-derived mesenchymal stem cells, recapitulate
osteosarcoma features including defective osteoblastic differentiation
and tumorigenic ability, suggesting that our established LFS disease
model is a disease in a dish platform for elucidating p53 mutant-mediated
disease pathogenesis. The gene expression patterns of LFS osteoblasts are
similar to those of tumor samples obtained from osteosarcoma patients and
these tumorigenic features strongly correlate with shorter tumor
recurrence times and poorer patient survival rates. Importantly,
osteosarcoma is characterized by numerous chromosomal alterations and
rearrangements. The high levels of genomic instability present in both
osteosarcoma and in osteosarcoma cell lines make analyses of the initial
steps of tumor development particularly challenging; however, we found
that LFS-derived osteoblasts are free of cytogenetic rearrangements,
which provides particular value to the cancer community because they
permit the study of early oncogenic mechanisms prior to the accumulation
of secondary genomic alterations. Furthermore, the global transcriptome
by mRNA-seq to reveal that LFS OBs exhibit impaired expression of the
imprinted gene H19 during osteogenesis. Our functional studies implicate
the essential H19 gene in normal osteogenesis and inhibition of
tumorigenesis. In order to decipher the underlying mechanisms by which
H19 mediates osteogenesis and tumor suppression, we characterized and
analyzed the human imprinted gene network (IGN) and revealed the
unidentified role of p53 in regulating the IGN culminating in osteogenic
differentiation defects and tumorigenesis. In summary, these findings
demonstrate the feasibility of studying inherited human cancer syndromes
with iPSCs and also provide molecular insights into the role of the IGN
in p53 mutation-mediated tumorigenesis.

