Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of NRF1 leads to the generation of cancer stem-like
cells and resistance to anoikis _ pathways to anchorage-independent
growth during estrogen-induced malignant transformation


The actual role nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) plays in breast
cancer remains the least studied of all transcription factors. A growth
role for the NRF1 through regulation of cell cycle genes during
estrogen-induced malignant transformation has recently been reported by
us; however, the underlying mechanism of its contribution to
estrogen-induced breast carcinogenesis is undefined. In this study we
provide new mechanistic insight into the mode by which NRF1 may
contribute in estrogen-induced neoplastic conversion of cells by
suppressing anoikis; identified BNIP3 as a key transcriptional target of
NRF1; and survival signals conferred by NRF1 seems to impinge on the
hypoxia-inducible death factor BNIP3. ChIP, qPCR, mass spectrometry,
redox Western blot, colony formation, cell proliferation, ROS assay,
immunofluorescence microscopy were used to study the role of NRF-1. Our
data showed that higher expresion of NRF-1 in MCF10A produced large sizes
of spheroids with increased level of stem cell markers -CD44+CD24+CD49f+
compared to cells transfected with vector alone. E2-induced increase of
spheroid formation, suppression of cell death and cell survival were
amplified by expression of NRF1 and these effects were diminished by loss
of NRF1 function through expression of dominant negative NRF1. Breast
cancer cell lines - MCF7 and MDA-MB231 overexpressed both NRF1 and BNIP3,
and formed larger tumor spheroids compared to the MCF10A or
vector-transformed breast cancer cells. E2 treatment as well as
overexpression of NRF1 increased mRNA and protein levels of BNIP3. In
addition, we found the increased transcriptional interaction of NRF-1
transcription factor in the BNIP3 promoter region by ChIP-qPCR assay in
cells treated with E2. We also found the increased functional activity of
the BNIP3 promoter in cells treated with E2 and this was decreased with
co-treatment of ROS scavenger-Ebselen. NRF1 spheroids have the ability to
micro-invasion. In summary, overexpression of NRF1 altered the cell
morphology towards mesenchymal stem-like shape and promoted cancer stem
cell-like phenotype. Findings of this study unveiled the underlying
mechanism of NRF1 action through the activation of BNIP3 which is
regulated by NRF1 and is presumably responsible for the estrogen-induced
malignant transformation of MCF10A cells, including anoikis resistance,
anchorage-independent cell growth, and increased cell migration and
invasion. This work was in part supported by a VA MERIT Review (VA
BX001463) grant to DR.

