Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of tumor growth in vivo through neutralization of the
interaction of MCAM with laminin alpha 4


Melanoma cell adhesion molecule (MCAM/CD146) is highly expressed on a
subset of many tumor types including melanoma and glioblastoma, and
expression of MCAM correlates with enhanced cellular invasion, increased
metastasis, and poor patient prognosis. The expression of MCAM on tumor
cells confers unique migratory and adhesion capacity, which, if
specifically targeted, could result in interruption of multiple
biological processes required for tumor growth and spread. Although a
role for MCAM in tumor progression has long been appreciated, the
unidentified ligand for MCAM precluded the development of targeted
approaches to inhibit extracellular interactions mediated by MCAM.
Recently, we identified the MCAM ligand as laminin alpha 4. Laminin alpha
4 is present within the extracellular matrix of the tumor in addition to
the vasculature throughout the body, providing an adhesive substrate for
MCAM expressing tumor cells both within the tumor microenvironment and
the blood vessels. The presence of laminin alpha 4 within the tumor and
the vasculature may allow for a biological interaction by which MCAM
mediated adhesion could be involved in both the homotypic aggregation
required for tumor growth, in addition to the vascular adhesion required
for the processes of metastasis and angiotropism. We generated monoclonal
antibodies that bind to the epitope required for MCAM interactions with
laminin alpha 4. Such antibodies entirely abrogate interactions of the
tumor cell with laminin alpha 4 in vitro. Furthermore, we characterized
the inhibition of tumor growth in vivo mediated by neutralization of
MCAM/laminin alpha 4 interactions. Notably, tumor growth was delayed by
blockade of MCAM, but required inhibition of both the MCAM expressed by
the tumor, as well as vascular MCAM. We further characterize the unique
pattern of MCAM expression on tumor cells within the perivascular
extracellular matrix in human tumors, which suggest that these
interactions are involved in human disease pathogenesis. Thus, antibodies
neutralizing the interaction between MCAM and laminin alpha 4 have
potential to inhibit a critical molecular interaction used by myriad
tumor types.

