Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating a role for the translation initiation factor, eIF4G1,
in resistance to therapy in inflammatory breast cancer (IBC)


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is a highly invasive and aggressive
breast cancer with relatively low survival rates compared with other
locally advanced breast cancers. IBC is characterized by its rapid
development of resistance to radio- and chemotherapies, which may in part
be due to altered translational control driven by overexpression of the
translation initiation factor, eIF4G1. This protein has been shown to
enhance translation of eukaryotic mRNAs with internal ribosome entry
sites (IRES) and enhanced translation in IBC may play a role in the
survival of tumor cells during cellular stress, when translation would
normally be suppressed. Some inhibitors of apoptosis proteins have
5-untranslated regions (UTRs) that allow for IRES-mediated translation,
and inhibition of apoptosis is one mechanism by which IBC cells have
previously been shown to become resistant to therapy. Translational
up-regulation of an inhibitor of apoptosis protein in therapy-resistant
clones of IBC cell lines has been observed, which is of importance as the
5UTR of such proteins contain highly active IRES elements. Regulation of
such protein expression by eIF4G1-mediated IRES translation may be one
reason for this observed therapeutic resistance. We knocked down eIF4G1
in a resistant IBC cell line (rSUM149) and assessed cellular viability
after treatment with a powerful apoptosis inducer, TRAIL to evaluate the
effect of targeted eIF4G1 knockdown on drug resistance in IBC. We
observed that targeted knockdown of eIF4G1 sensitizes rSUM149 cells to
TRAIL, significantly decreasing cellular viability. Additionally, using a
novel culture system we show that inhibition of eIF4G1 expression
decreases both the number of size of tumor emboli, a characteristic
feature of IBC progression. These findings demonstrate a vital role for
eIF4G1 for the development of therapeutic resistance and ultimately the
aggressive pathobiology of IBC.

