Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated pipeline for detecting and characterizing structural
variation in cancer


Detection and characterization of somatic structural variants (SVs) and
copy-number variants (CNVs) from whole genome sequencing remains a
challenging part of cancer analysis. Many callers have been developed
that use different detection strategies, but most methods suffer from
high rates of false positives and false negatives, and agreement between
different callers is usually low.We have developed a flexible pipeline
that combines the results of multiple callers, filters calls to remove
likely artifacts, and functionally annotates the resulting variants. We
employ a diverse set of variant callers utilizing a combination of read
depth, read pair, and split read detection methods: NBIC-seq (Xi et al.,
2011), Crest (Wang et al., 2011), Delly (Rausch et al., 2012), and
BreakDancer (Chen et al., 2009). To remove artifact calls due to
mis-mapping, we apply filters that discard predicted SVs whose
breakpoints exhibit certain sequence features (e.g. extensive mapping
ambiguity, high repeat content). SVs corresponding to known germline
variants (1000G, DGV, in-house database) are marked and removed as
unlikely somatic variants: this greatly helps to prevent both sequencing
protocol- and caller-specific artifacts as well as false positive somatic
calls arising from missed calls in the matched germline sample. Finally,
we employ our sensitive split read mapper SplazerS to identify SV
breakpoints with base pair precision. In this step, we are also able to
remove remaining germline variants for which we find split read support
in the matched normal sample. The final predicted structural variants are
annotated for overlap with SVs in COSMIC, overlap with known cancer genes
and potential impact on gene structure.We use a public synthetic data set
(DREAM challenge; Boutros et al., 2014) to demonstrate that using our
selected ensemble of tools significantly improves sensitivity as compared
to any single caller and that our filters effectively remove artifacts.
Further, we show results from a set of colorectal cancer samples (Brannon
et al., 2014) in which highly similar primary and metastatic tumors show
excellent agreement in somatic SV calls in the absence of overlap between
unrelated samples. Results from testing our pipeline on TCGA glioblastoma
multiforme tumors, for which validated genomic rearrangements are
available, will also be presented.In conclusion, our pipeline improves
detection of SVs by integrating orthogonal calling methods and
facilitates identification of clinically relevant SVs through effective
filters and cancer-specific functional annotation.

