Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Embryonic rest hypothesis of cancer development revisited:
functional gonadotropic hormone receptors are expressed by normal and
malignant hematopoietic cells and functional erythropoietin receptor is
expressed by germline-derived tumors


Background: The existence in adult tissues of developmentally early stem
cells with broader specification potential may suggest the presence of
embryonic primordial germ cell (PGC) remnants in post-natal organs. To
support this small, quiescent stem cells (VSELs) that express several
markers of PGCs reside in adult murine bone marrow (BM) (Leukemia
2010;24:1450), and like PGCs, are kept quiescent by erasure of imprinting
on paternally imprinted genes (Leukemia 2009;23:2042). As reported
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) can become specified from a
population of migrating PGCs isolated from embryos (Blood 1995;86:463) as
well as from adult bone marrow VSELs (Leukemia 2011;25,1278). In support
of this intriguing possibility, HSPCs and PGCs are both highly migratory
populations of stem cells, and specification of the first primitive HSPCs
in yolk sac blood islands as well as the origin of definitive HSPCs in
the aorta-gonado-mesonephros region are chronologically and anatomically
correlated with the developmental migration of PGCs in extra- and
intra-embryonic tissues on their way to the genital ridges. Hypothesis:
Based on these observations, we have hypothesized that PGC-derived cells
as well as HSPCs share some common receptors, and we tested the
expression of gonadotropic hormone receptors (GHR) and erythropoietin
receptor (EpoR) on HSPCs and PGC-derived cells, respectively. Materials
and Methods. We employed RT-PCR studies to evaluate the expression of GHR
on normal and malignant HSPCs, whereas we evaluated the expression of
EpoR on teratocarcinoma and ovarian cancer cell lines. The functionality
of these receptors was tested by chemotaxis, adhesion, and proliferation
assays, and we performed signal transduction studies employing specific
ligands for gonadal receptors to stimulate HSPCs and erythropoietin (EPO)
to stimulate germline-derived cells. Results. We observed the expression
of functional FSH, LH, PRL, estrogen, and androgen receptors on normal
murine and human HSPCs and in leukemia cell lines. At the same time, we
observed the presence of functional EpoRs on murine and human
teratocarcinoma cells and ovarian cancer cell lines. Conclusions. Our
data provide further evidence for the existence of a developmental link
between germline and hematopoiesis and shed new light on the
developmental hierarchy of the stem cell compartment in adult tissues and
possibility that some malignancies may develop from embryonic remnants.
These observations also have important practical implications: i)
pituitary gonadal hormones could be employed in selected cases of BM
failure to stimulate hematopoiesis and ii) EPO treatment (e.g., because
of anemia after chemotherapy) should be avoided in patients with germline
malignancies.

