Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systemic Chromosome Instability (CIN) resulted in transcriptomic
changes in metabolic and proliferation regulators in colonic mucosal
tissue of Sgo1-/+ mice


(a) Colon cancer is the second most lethal cancer and is predicted to
claim 50,310 lives in 2014. Chromosome Instability (CIN) is observed in
80-90% of colon cancers and is thought to contribute to colon cancer
progression and recurrence. We developed animal models focusing on
mitotic error-induced CIN, Shugoshin-1 (Sgo1) haploinsufficient (-/+)
mice, to investigate the impact of CIN on colon cancer development.
Sgo1-/+ mice showed altered profiles in colonic lesions and cancer
development. In this study, we analyzed signature changes in the colonic
transcriptome of Sgo1-/+ mice to investigate underlying molecular events
in the altered carcinogenesis profiles.(b) We treated control and Sgo1-/+
mice with colonic carcinogen azoxymethane (AOM), and tracked colon cancer
development 12, 24, and 36 weeks after AOM treatments. We performed Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS)-based transcriptome analysis at 24 weeks.(c)
There were 349 hits with 2-fold expression difference threshold, P(a)
Colon cancer is the second most lethal cancer and is predicted to claim
50,310 lives in 2014. Chromosome Instability (CIN) is observed in 80-90%
of colon cancers and is thought to contribute to colon cancer progression
and recurrence. We developed animal models focusing on mitotic
error-induced CIN, Shugoshin-1 (Sgo1) haploinsufficient (-/+) mice, to
investigate the impact of CIN on colon cancer development. Sgo1-/+ mice
showed altered profiles in colonic lesions and cancer development. In
this study, we analyzed signature changes in the colonic transcriptome of
Sgo1-/+ mice to investigate underlying molecular events in the altered
carcinogenesis profiles.(b) We treated control and Sgo1-/+ mice with
colonic carcinogen azoxymethane (AOM), and tracked colon cancer
development 12, 24, and 36 weeks after AOM treatments. We performed Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS)-based transcriptome analysis at 24 weeks.(c)
There were 349 hits with 2-fold expression difference threshold, P<0.05
(217 upregulated genes, 132 downregulated genes). In normal-looking
colonic mucosal tissue from Sgo1 mice, we observed notable transcriptomic
changes in the lipid metabolism, Notch signaling, insulin signaling, and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) pathways. The profile
had partial overlap with the colon tumor transcriptome, consistent with
high prevalence of CIN in colon cancer. By applying secondary selection
criteria, we also identified cell surface markers that may be used to
selectively target colonic CIN cells with antibody-based or vaccine
approaches.(d) Systemic Chromosome Instability resulted in transcriptomic
changes in metabolic and proliferation regulators in the colon. We
propose that the CIN effect may be countered through manipulation of
these pathways.

