Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: QKI deletion enhances self-renewal of glioma stem cells and
promotes gliomagenesis


Glioma stem cells (GSCs) have higher self-renewal capacity than neural
stem cells (NSCs). However it is still not clear how GSCs enhance their
self-renewal and whether or not enhanced self-renewal alone without
affecting cell proliferation can promote gliomagenesis. Here we report
the generation of a novel conditional KO allele of QKI, a tumor
suppressor in GBM with RNA binding motif. When QKI was deleted in NSCs
isolated from subventricular zone of Nestin-CreERT2 QKIL/L mice, multiple
NSC markers were dramatically increased, including Notch1, Sox2,
beta-catenin, ID1 and BLBP. When QKI was deleted in adult Nestin-CreERT2
QKIL/L mice, the NSC population, which is characterized by long-term BrdU
retention and GFAP+/Nestin+ double positive staining, was greatly
increased, indicating that deletion of QKI enhances NSC self-renewal.
Surprisingly, we found that deletion of QKI also decreases cell
proliferation rate of NSCs/GSCs, suggesting that QKI deletion makes
NSCs/GSCs more quiescent. When QKI-/- NSCs were cultured in
differentiation medium, they were not able to differentiate like QKI+/+
NSCs, indicating that QKI is required for NSC lineage determination. To
determine whether QKI KO promotes gliomagenesis, we generated a
Nestin-CreERT2 QKIL/L PtenL/L P53L/L cohort, in which 92% of the mice
developed glioblastoma starting at 2 months. However, the Nestin-CreERT2
PtenL/L P53L/L cohort did not develop any glioma up to a year; therefore
QKI deletion greatly promotes gliomagenesis. Transcriptomic and proteomic
profiling coupled with PAR-CLIP (Photoactivatable-Ribonucleoside-Enhanced
Crosslinking and Immunoprecipitation) analyses revealed that genes
involved in receptor trafficking were greatly enriched by QKI deletion.
Specifically, 34% of the genes up-regulated by QKI deletion are involved
in receptor delivery, and 39% of the genes down-regulated by QKI deletion
are subunits of receptor degradation machineries such as endosomes and
lysosomes. High level of receptor delivery and low level of receptor
degradation concomitantly enrich receptors on the membrane and enhance
the activity of the receptors that are involved in maintaining stemness,
including RTK, Notch1 and Frizzled. Inhibition of the activity of
receptors such as EGFR can diminish the enhanced self-renewal and
decreased differentiation caused by QKI deletion. Taken together, our
data suggest that QKI deletion increases receptor delivery and decreases
endocytosis-mediated degradation, consequently enhancing the receptor
activity and self-renewal capacity. Therapeutically, because QKI deletion
greatly reduces lysosome level and protein degradation capacity, QKI-low
cells are under much higher ER-stress compared with QKI-high cells; hence
high level of ER-stress may provide an Achilles heel for QKI-low
glioblastoma, and pharmacologically inducing more ER-stress could render
cytotoxicity to QKI-low glioma cells while keep normal cells intact.

