Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing a lung metastasis gene signature using a lung tropism
model in melanoma


A patient with metastatic melanoma has a 5-year survival rate of only
15%. As with most cancers, approximately 90% of fatalities are caused by
metastatic spread of tumor cells to vital organs like the liver, lung,
brain, bone, etc. Lung is one of the leading metastatic sites of melanoma
at initial presentation, yet the mechanisms that lead to melanoma lung
metastases are not well understood. For our study we have developed an in
vivo spontaneous lung-metastasis model using two human melanoma cell
lines, UACC903 and C8161, with different genetic backgrounds. Parental
melanoma cells were injected subcutaneously into nude mice. After the
tumors reached the maximum allowable size of 1.5 cm, survival surgery was
performed to remove the subcutaneous tumors and the animals were observed
for an additional 4 weeks or until the animals appeared ill. The animals
were sacrificed and lung metastases were surgically removed and
re-cultured. The two new cell lines were designated as UACC903-LM and
C8161-LM. This process was repeated using these new cell lines to obtain
a second round of lung metastasizing lines we designated as UACC903-LMM
and C8161-LMM. Using the parental and metastasizing cell lines we have
been able to identify a lung metastasis gene signature using PCR array
analysis, validated by PCR and Western Blot. This lung metastasis gene
signature was further supported by the identification of increased
expression of the same set of genes in lung metastasis as compared to
primary tumors from patients with melanoma. We have also observed
increased migration in metastasizing cell lines as compared to the
parental lines using a trans-well migration assay with fetal bovine serum
as chemo-attractant. CXCR-4 was one of gene products up-regulated in the
metastasizing cell lines and the FDA-approved CXCR-4 antagonist,
AMD-3100, inhibited trans-well migration of the metastasizing cell lines
far more than parental cell lines. Our ongoing studies are examining the
potential of inhibiting CXCR-4, and other gene products from our
metastasis gene signature, as a therapeutic option in patients with
advanced melanoma.Funding: NIH RO1-563057Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

