Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Limited intra-tumor versus inter-tumor heterogeneity as assessed
by proteomic profiling of high-risk neuroblastoma


Introduction: Tumor heterogeneity at a histological and molecular level
has been previously described in neuroblastoma (NB) and therefore concern
exists about how representative the molecular profile of a single tissue
section can be of an entire tumor. We hypothesized that a single tissue
section would provide a representative proteomic signature of the whole
tumor.Methods: As part of our effort to assess differential protein
expression patterns from two maximally divergent groups with high-risk NB
(i.e.: patients with early death from disease versus long-term
survivors), we sampled multiple non-adjacent sections from blocks of 5
tumors within our larger cohort of 58 single section tumors.
De-identified samples were obtained from the Children's Oncology Group
biorepository. Using 5-10 thick formalin fixed paraffin embedded tumor
sections on a glass slide, we extracted 1 microgram of protein, performed
tryptic digestion and desalting, and loaded peptides onto a reverse-phase
column for separation by nanoflow chromatography. We performed peptide
tandem mass spectrometry and protein expression vectors were identified
using MaxQuant. The 1,495 most abundant proteins were evaluated across
samples. Data were normalized and imputed. Hierarchical clustering
analysis was performed using the pvclust R package between subjects with
multiple sections and between all samples. We used average clustering
criteria, correlation methods for distance, and pairwise covariance
measures. Confidence of clusters was measured using approximately
unbiased and bootstrap probability (1000 permutations) methods.Results:
Intra-tumor distance was significantly shorter than the inter-tumor
distance. When testing only subjects with multiple tumor samples, 4 out
of 5 samples from the same subject clustered with >95% confidence. The
samples from the remaining subject have a confidence >80% but seem to
have differing rates of missing data, suggesting experimental errors.
When using all samples available, tumor samples from the same subject
still clustered together and had a greater correlation than tumor samples
from different subjects. A validation cohort of 7 distinct sections from
separate blocks of tumors of 3 high-risk patients confirmed that tumors
cluster by protein expression.Conclusion and Future Directions:
Intra-tumor heterogeneity exists but is significantly less than
inter-tumor heterogeneity as assessed by proteomic profiling. We provide
rationale to use single tissue section proteomics in ongoing research to
define biologic drivers of primary refractory NB, a clinically important
subgroup of patients who have highly lethal disease.

