Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tank-binding kinase 1 associates with centrosomes and regulates
microtubule dynamics and mitosis


TANK Binding Kinase 1 (TBK1) regulates interferon signaling and NFB
function by acting as a non-canonical IB kinase. TBK1 also participates
in RalB-mediated inflammatory responses and contributes to the survival
of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) driven by oncogenic KRAS. In
addition, TBK1 could phosphorylate and activate Akt, modulate autophagy
and alter the autocrine cytokine network in cancer cells indicating
oncogenic roles in addition to its immune regulatory functions. Our
studies reveal that TBK1 plays a novel and direct role in promoting
mitotic progression of lung cancer cells by phosphorylating multiple
substrates during mitosis as well as by modulating microtubule dynamics.
Levels of active phospho-TBK1 are elevated in mitotic cells where it
localized to centrosomes, mitotic spindles and midbody as seen by
confocal microscopy. Inhibition of TBK1 by kinase inhibitors such as
BX795, Amlexanox, MRT67037 or depletion of TBK1 by shRNA resulted in
mitotic defects and decreased the number of mitotic cells. TBK1 could
interact with the centrosomal protein CEP170 and the nuclear mitotic
apparatus protein NuMA as seen by GST binding assays,
immunoprecipitation-western blot assays and proximity ligation assays. In
addition, TBK1 could phosphorylate CEP170 and NuMA in in vitro kinase
assays; mass spectrometry analysis revealed that TBK1 phosphorylated 12
serine residues and a threonine residue of CEP170 and five serine
residues of NuMA. Inhibition or depletion of TBK1 prevented the
centrosomal localization of CEP170 and the association of NuMA with the
spindle poles. TBK1 depletion in A549 and H1650 cells resulted in more
stable microtubules; further, depletion of TBK1 inhibited the interaction
of CEP170 with the microtubule depolymerase Kif2b and the binding of NuMA
to Dynein, resulting in mitotic abnormalities or mitotic arrest. In
addition, inhibition of specific interaction between TBK1 and CEP170
using a 13 amino acid peptide resulted in inhibition of mitosis, enhanced
microtubule stability and mitotic defects. These results are paradigm
shifting that suggest TBK1 plays a significant role in regulating
microtubule dynamics and mitotic progression of cells and this might have
significant relevance to cancer as well as innate immune response.

