Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pluronic micelle-encapsulated Disulfiram targets cancer stem-like
cells and reverses pan-resistance in acquired resistant breast cancer
cell lines


Background: Chemoresistance is the major obstacle for the success of
cancer treatment. The advanced breast cancer (BC) is commonly
pan-resistant to different anticancer drugs. BC contains a small
population of cancer stem cells (CSCs). CSCs express stem cell markers
(CD24low/CD44high, ALDH+, CD133+) and are resistant to a wide range of
anticancer drugs. Therefore, CSCs may be responsible for the
pan-chemoresistance in advanced BC. We have recently developed several
acquired chemoresistant BC cell lines. In this study, we investigated CSC
traits in these cell lines and examined the cross-resistance of these
cell lines to a panel of anticancer drugs.Disulfiram (DS), an
antialcoholism drug, shows high cytotoxicity in several different types
of cancer cell lines in vitro. It also targets CSCs and reverses
pan-chemoresistance. However, the clinical application of DS in cancer
treatment is limited by its very short half-life in the bloodstream. In
order to increase the bio-stability of DS in the bloodstream, we recently
developed a pluronic micelle-encapsulated DS (PM-DS). In this study, we
examined the cytotoxicity of a newly developed (PM-DS) in the resistant
cell lines. The effect of PM-DS on CSC traits in the resistant BC cell
lines was also examined.Cell lines and Methods: Cell lines: MDA-MB-231,
MCF7 and T47D and acquired resistant BC cell lines [gemcitabine
(MDA-MB-231GEM100), 5-fluouracil (MCF7FU10) and doxorubicin
(T47DDOX100nM)]; Methodologies: MTT assay, Western blot, CSC markers
detection (ALDH, CD24low/CD44high, CD133), embryonic stem cell markers
detection (Nanog, Sox2, Oct 4).Results: The resistant cell lines are
highly cross-resistant to 6 conventional anticancer drugs e.g
doxorubicin, gemcitabine, docetaxel, cisplatin, 5-fluouracil and
vincristine. In comparison with the parental cells, the resistant cell
lines have significantly longer doubling time. Significantly higher
population of resistant cells expresses high levels of CSC markers e.g.
ALDH+, CD24low/CD44high, and CD133+ and embryonic stem cell markers
(OCT4, Sox2 and Nanog).DS was successfully encapsulated in pluronic
micelles with a high entrapment efficiency of about 90% and our in vitro
release studies showed that DS was slowly released from the micelles. Our
formulation PM-DS has a relatively small size of about 200nm with high
drug loading content (90gDS/1mgPM). PM-DS was highly toxic to
chemoresistant cell lines. It also targeted CSC population and enhanced
cytotoxicity of anticancer drugs in the resistant cell lines.Conclusions:
The acquired resistant BC cell lines are highly cross-resistant to 6
different kinds of anticancer drugs. CSCs may be responsible for the
cross-chemoresistance. PM-DS targets CSC population and reverses the
acquired pan-chemoresistance in acquired resistant BC cell lines.Key
words: Disulfiram, micelles, breast cancer, stem-like cells.

