Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive Immunotherapy Models: Overcoming the challenge of T
cells gene transfer


The initiation of an appropriate T cell response is a key event in the
establishment of efficient anti-tumoral response. In a context of tumor
development, different T cell populations are mobilized and understanding
the pathways involved in their functions and in their interactions is a
major field of research in cancer immunotherapy. Thus, while the
activation of antigen-specific naive CD4+ T cells that can differentiate
into appropriate effector T cells and home to the tumor might be highly
beneficial, regulatory CD4+ T cells are considered as deleterious. Many
efforts are thus made to understand the behavior of both CD4+ T cells
subsets and to decipher their functions within the tumor
micro-environment. A key step to reach this goal is the development of
relevant predictive cancer models including genetic modifications of T
cell populations in vitro and in vivo, either for gene target studies, or
to create new tools for sensitive readouts.While human and activated
mouse T cells are easily transduced with lentiviral vectors, transduction
of naive and regulatory murine T cells is a technical challenge since
these target cells are poorly permissive to transfection or viral
transduction. Here, extensive in vitro transduction data show that the
use of highly concentrated (1E9 TU/mL) and pure (1E8 TU/mg of proteins)
lentiviral vectors increases significantly the transduction level of
naive and regulatory CD4+ T cells. Furthermore, transduced T cells
exhibit an original cell phenotype without any changes of T cells
specific markers expression (CD44, CD69, CD25, Ly-6C) attesting that the
composition of this pure batch of lentiviral vector does not have any
impact on T cells phenotype. Transduced T cells were then assessed for
their properties once adoptively transferred into recipient mice.
Analysis of these mice show that not only the genetically modified T
cells/regulatory cells can be easily followed thanks to the fluorescent
reporter but also their phenotype is not modified by the transduction, as
shown in vitro.Our data bring out that the composition of lentiviral
vectors in terms of titer, specific activities and purity are the success
keys to ensure transduction of murine T cells. This major technological
leap will allow to tightly control expression of various modifiers of
these cells and thus paves the way to design original tools and develop
cell-based cancer.

