Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RUNX2 modulates the angiogenic potential of human neuroblastoma
cells


Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial pediatric solid tumor with
an undifferentiated status and characterized by heterogeneous clinical
courses ranging from spontaneous regression to a very aggressive
malignant progression. The RUNX gene family comprises RUNX1, RUNX2, and
RUNX3 transcription factors and plays pivotal roles in development,
differentiation and tumorigenesis. Hypoxia is known to be a significant
physiological stress in the tumor microenvironment and is associated with
tumor malignant phenotype. In this study, we examined the effects of
hypoxia on the Runx2 expression in human neuroblastoma cells and the role
of RUNX2 on angiogenic potential of neuroblastoma cells. Runx2 has two
isoforms, Runx2-I and Runx2-II. Isoform I is controlled by the P2
proximal promoter whereas isoform II is transcribed from the P1 distal
promoter. Increased expression of mRNAs of isoform I and II as well as
intact isoform of RUNX2 was observed in NB1691 cells exposed to hypoxia.
Furthermore, hypoxia enhanced the activity of a luciferase reporter
containing Runx2 P1 promoter in NB1691 cells. Hypoxic exposure caused an
increase in protein levels of RUNX2 as well as survivin, a RUNX2
downstream target gene in NB1691 cells. Hypoxia also stabilized RUNX2
protein levels in NB1691 cells without altering the stability of RUNX2
mRNA. Hypoxia enhanced angiogenic potential of NB1691 cells. Knockdown of
Runx2 significantly decreased VEGF mRNA and protein in NB1691 cells
exposed to hypoxia. A decrease in angiogenesis was observed in
chorioallantoic membrane assay performed using conditioned medium
collected from RUNX2 siRNA treated hypoxic NB1691 cells compared with
control. Further, transcript levels were measured by PCR array of human
angiogenesis pathway and the analysis showed down regulation of EDN1,
FIGF, TEK and VEGF A mRNAs in hypoxic NB1691 cells treated with RUNX2
siRNA. In conclusion, our study suggests that hypoxia upregulates RUNX2
expression in NB1691 cells and knockdown of RUNX2 decreases the
angiogenic potential of hypoxic NB1691 cells.

