Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FTY720 suppressed CT26 murine colon cancer peritoneal
carcinomatosis progression by decreasing tumor associated macrophages and
TNF-alpha


Introduction:The median survival of colon cancer peritoneal
carcinomatosis (PC), the dissemination of cancer cells throughout the
abdominal cavity, is only 5-9 months, which is a reflection of lack of
effective treatment. The tumor microenvironment of solid cancers is
characterized by a reactive stroma with an abundance of inflammatory
mediators. Tumor associated macrophages (TAM), one of major players in
the connection between inflammation and cancer, control a number of
functions of the tumor microenvironment. including development and
progression of PC, since they produce TNF-alpha that promotes adhesion of
cancer cells to the peritoneum. In advanced cancer, TNF-alpha increases
the metabolic rate and reduces body weight, known as cachexia.
Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), a bioactive lipid mediator that is
produced by sphingosine kinase 1 (SphK1) plays important roles in cancer
progression through S1P receptor-1 (S1PR1). The aim of this study was to
elucidate the role of S1P signaling in TAMs and TNF-alpha production in
murine colon cancer PC model using FTY720, a pro-drug that is converted
in vivo to a functional antagonist of S1PR1 that disrupts S1P
signaling.Methods:A murine colon cancer PC model was generated by IP
injection of CT26-luc cells in immune intact BALB/c mice. FTY720 was
given by gavage 1mg/kg oral daily. Mice were sacrificed 13 days after
CT26-luc-cells injection. Expression of TNF-alpha, F4/80, CD86, and CD206
were determined by qPCR. TNF-alpha expression was determined by
immunohistochemistry.Results:FTY720 completely suppressed the progression
of CT26 PC, which is evaluated by the number and total weight of PC
nodules, and it preserved body weight loss in the statement of cachexia.
Also FTY720 significantly decreased F4/80 mRNA levels in the PC nodules.
However there were no significant differences in the CD86/CD206 ratios in
the tumors of the both FTY720 treated group and no treated group, which
suggests that there are no changes in M1/M2 composition of the macrophage
population. TNF-alpha mRNA in the tumors was also significantly decreased
by FTY720 treated group and FTY720 significantly decreased expression of
TNF-alpha.Conclusion:Our results suggest that FTY720 significantly
decreased numbers of TAMs and production of TNF-alpha in PC tumors, which
resulted in suppression of PC progression. Given its additional favorable
effect against cachexia, FTY720 may provide better quality of life in
advanced colon cancer PC patients.

