Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A preclinical PKPD modeling & simulation strategy: building a
predictive model of dose, schedule and therapeutic index for small
molecule targeted anticancer agents


All anti-cancer medicines must balance the benefits vs. the side effects
in choosing the right dose and schedule to deliver to patients. Exploring
dose and schedule options following an empirical approach in the clinic
can be a costly, time-consuming process with high probability that
cohorts of patients do not receive sufficient therapeutic benefit.
Pre-clinical in vivo models and PKPD modelling can be used to explore
therapeutic index (TI) and refine dose schedule options to prioritise in
clinical testing. Experimental strategies to articulate the framework for
a combination strategy are required to build a quantitative understanding
of the extent and duration of compound-target suppression and the
relationship to TI.These principals have been tailored to the small
molecule Oncology drug discovery setting with a focus on maximising the
knowledge and value derived from existing data packages typically
delivered for drug projects during the lead identification, optimisation
and candidate selection period. Datasets typically available include in
vivo PK, biomarker (PD) and mouse/rat xenograft tumour growth inhibition
(efficacy). Broad project analysis revealed a need to ensure that study
designs are built to explore both dose-response and exposure-time
(scheduling) relationships. This is because projects commonly need to
answer the following three fundamental questions. (1) What is the extent
and duration of target suppression required to deliver a biological
effect? (2) How do effects on the pathway correlate with efficacy and
effects on normal tissues and do these effects change with time? (3) How
does therapeutic margin change with alternative target suppression
profiles (scheduling)? Building this framework pre-clinically to answer
these key questions is critical to defining the clinical dose and
schedule in an effective way as differentiated dose and schedules are
difficult to explore broadly in the clinic.This framework is exemplified
with the following. (1) AKT inhibition has multiple MOA in both the
tumour cells and normal tissues. Efficacy can be achieved by delivering
the compound with different target inhibition profiles, which may
maximise benefit for patients, and pre-clinical modelling can be used to
prioritise the clinical intermittent schedules to be tested. (2)
Targeting PI3Kalpha signalling can have a narrow TI, due to effects on
glucose homeostasis, which can impair the combination potential.
Pre-clinical modelling has shown that this can be improved by using an
intermittent schedule for combination options. (3) DNA repair pathways
are critical for many tumour cells and normal cells. While these
inhibitors have significant impact on tumour cells they also impact
normal cells, particularly bone marrow. It has been possible to build a
scheduling model that retains efficacy but prevents neutropenia therefore
increasing TI.

