Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating estrogen receptor agonists for the treatment of breast
cancer


Breast cancer is the main cause of cancer-associated mortality in women
worldwide. The estrogen receptors play a critical role in normal mammary
gland development as well as breast cancer. Over two thirds of all breast
cancers express high levels of Estrogen Receptor (ER) and are depend on
estrogen for growth. Current endocrine therapies aim to decrease estrogen
levels with the use aromatase inhibitors or to inhibit ER signaling with
the use of anti-estrogens. Although these treatment options are initially
effective, a significant number of patients will present with recurrent
disease. Therefore, there is a critical need to identify targeted
therapies which will inhibit tumor progression and circumvent therapy
resistance. In addition to focusing on ER, emerging evidence has shed
light on the importance of Estrogen Receptor in breast cancer. Unlike ER,
ER has tumor suppressing activity, therefore targeting ER with selective
agonists may provide therapeutic benefit in the treatment of breast
cancer. The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of
selective ER agonists in distinct breast cancer models. Liquiritigenin
and S-Equol are selective plant-derived ER agonists currently in clinical
trials for the relief of symptoms associated with menopause, and for the
treatment of benign prostate hyperplasia. Additionally, LY500307, a
synthetic ER agonist is currently in clinical trials and has been shown
to be well tolerated. To test the effects of ER agonists on growth, we
carried out cell growth assays using various cell lines. MCF7aro and
ZR-75aro cells were used as models of post-menopausal breast cancer given
their ability to synthesize their own estrogens. A letrozole resistant
cell line was used to determine if ER agonists could inhibit the growth
of therapy resistant cells. Additionally, we used a syngeneic tumor mouse
model to investigate if ER agonist could inhibit tumor growth in a model
with an intact immune system. Our results demonstrate that both,
plant-derived and synthetic, ER agonists can inhibit the growth of breast
cancer cells, including those that over express aromatase, and are
resistant to letrozole. The synthetic ER agonist was able to inhibit
growth at much lower doses, overcoming a critical barrier presented by
the plant derived agonists. Our mechanistic studies show that ER agonists
can alter ER and ER levels, which shift the / ratio to a more tumor
suppressive state. We also found that these compounds affect cell cycle
through cyclin D1 and p27. Additionally, we also saw induction of
apoptosis and increased p53 levels. Our studies evaluated the effects of
ER agonists in various breast cancer cell lines, and our results suggest
that targeting ER may be a valuable therapeutic option for the treatment
of breast cancer.

