Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diagnostic serum markers for metastatic brain tumors identified by
cross-species hybridization of microarrays in animal models


Introduction: Cancer-related mortality of many tumors is due to
development of metastasis to the brain with limited response to
conventional therapies. Diagnosis of metastasis to the brain depends on
symptoms or imaging techniques, which often fail to detect small brain
lesions. Serologic markers enabling early diagnosis of metastatic brain
tumors would therefore significantly improve clinical outcome. Using the
cross-species hybridization of microarrays differentiating human from
mouse gene signatures, we identified proteins significantly increased in
brain metastases were detected in the sera of mice bearing human cancer
metastases to the brain and determined whether these can be potentially
diagnostic.Materials and Methods: Human breast cancer (MDA-MB-231), lung
cancer (PC-14), melanoma (A375), colon cancer (KM12), prostate cancer
(PC-3P) and renal cancer (SN12) cells were implanted into relative
primary and metastatic organs of nude mice. RNAs were extracted from
tumor tissues and processed for differential hybridization of microarray.
To identify genes differentially expressed in brain lesions, the random
variance t test or one-way ANOVA was performed for the two-group or
multi-group analysis, respectively. In the next set of experiments, we
determined whether coded proteins differentially expressed in brain
metastasis can be detected in the sera. MDA-MB-231 and PC-14 cells were
implanted into mammary fat pad, lung or brain. Tumor tissues and sera
were collected for immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses and antibody array
with 13 available antibodies detecting proteins coded by genes
differentially expressed in the brain metastases.Results: In the first
set of experiments, common 210 genes were identified to be differentially
expressed in metastatic brain tumors, as compared with tumors growing in
other organs such as mammary fat pad, lung, skin, cecum, prostate,
kidney, and bone. Among the proteins coded by the 210 genes, 13 with
commercially available antibodies were selected for validation. In the
second set of experiments, IHC revealed that all these 13 proteins were
expressed in metastasis produced by MDA-MB-231 and PC-14. Compared to
sera of mice bearing primary tumors, elevated level of 10 proteins was
detected in sera collected from mice with brain metastases.Conclusion:
These data demonstrated that cross-species differential hybridization of
microarray with class comparison of gene expression using orthotopic
animal is a novel approach to identify potential diagnostic serum markers
for brain metastases. Studies to detect these proteins in the sera of
patients with brain metastases are now planned.

