Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A polymorphism of VEGFA is associated with susceptibility to
extrathyroidal invasion of papillary thyroid cancer


Background: Vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) has pivotal
roles in angiogenesis, vascular permeability, vasculogenesis, cellular
growth, and cell migration. We investigated whether single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of the VEGFA gene are associated with the
development of papillary thyroid cancer (PTC). We also assessed the
relationships between VEGFA SNPs and the clinicopathologic
characteristics such as the size of cancers (Background: Vascular
endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) has pivotal roles in angiogenesis,
vascular permeability, vasculogenesis, cellular growth, and cell
migration. We investigated whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
of the VEGFA gene are associated with the development of papillary
thyroid cancer (PTC). We also assessed the relationships between VEGFA
SNPs and the clinicopathologic characteristics such as the size of
cancers (< 1 cm and 1 cm), numbers of cancers (unifocality and
multifocality), location of cancers (one lobe and both lobe),
extrathyroidal invasion (present and absent), and cervical lymph node
metastasis (present and absent).Methods: One promoter SNP (rs699947,
-2578A/C) and one 5-untranslation region (5UTR) SNP (rs2010963, +405C/G)
in VEGFA were genotyped using direct sequencing in 94 PTC patients and
213 healthy controls. SNPStats, SNPAnalyzer, Helixtree, and Haploview
version 4.2 were used to analyze genetic data. Multiple logistic
regression models (codominant, dominant, recessive, and log-additive)
were performed to evaluate odds ratios (ORs), 95% confidence intervals
(CIs), and p values.Results: Two SNPs of VEGFA were not associated with
the development of PTC. Also, haplotypes were not associated with PTC??.
However, we found a relationship between the 5UTR SNP rs2010963 and PTC
with the extrathyroidal invasion (p = 0.0060 in codominant model, p =
0.0258 in dominant model, p = 0.0057 in recessive model, and p = 0.0060
in log-additive model). Allele frequencies of rs2010963 were different
between the extrathyroidal invasion (-) and extrathyroidal invasion (+)
groups (p = 0.0050). In Bonferroni correction, these correlations were
also significant except the recessive model.Conclusion: Our results
suggest that the 5UTR SNP rs2010963 (+405C/G) of VEGFA may be associated
with susceptibility to extrathyroidal invasion of PTC in Korean
population.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

