Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Substituted monocyclic pyrimidines as potent tubulin inhibitors
that circumvent P-glycoprotein mediated resistance


Tubulin is involved in several critical cellular functions, including
cell division, cell motility and development and maintenance of cell
shape. Although microtubule disrupting agents like paclitaxel are highly
successful chemotherapeutic agents, these compounds are easily recognized
by P-glycoprotein (Pgp) and are pumped out of cancer cells, resulting in
resistance to the agent. Thus, these compounds have major limitations
against multidrug resistant tumors. Recently, we reported simple,
monocyclic pyrimidines with the N-methyl-4-methoxyaniline moiety at the
4-position. These compounds circumvent some of the important limitations
of paclitaxel while preserving its antimitotic activity. To further
evaluate the SAR at the 4-position of the pyrimidine scaffold, a series
of compounds were designed and synthesized that involved replacing the
chloro moiety of the 5-amino-4,6-dichloro-2-methylpyrimidine with various
anilines. The replacement of the N-methyl-4-methoxyaniline moiety of the
lead molecule with a conformationally restricted
6-methoxy-tetrahydroquinoline moiety resulted in potent tubulin assembly
inhibition (IC50 = 3.0 0.03 M) comparable to that observed with
combretastatin A-4 (CSA4, IC50 = 1.1 0.1 M), of which the phosphorylated
derivative is currently in clinical trials. It is a potent inhibitor of
[3H]colchicine binding (65% at 5 M concentration) indicating that it
binds at the colchicine binding site on tubulin similar to CSA4.
Similarly, the monocyclic pyrimidine with a conformationally restricted
4-N-methyl 2,3-dihydrobenzofuran moiety was also a potent inhibitor of
bovine tubulin assembly. Replacement of the 4-methoxy of the lead with a
4-thiomethyl retained potency against tubulin assembly (IC50 = 2.6 0.1
M). In Pgp overexpressing NCI/ADR-RES cell line, three of the newly
synthesized compounds were found to be 1.5-5-fold more potent (IC50 =
170-630 nM) than in the wild type OVCAR-8 cell line, thus, overcoming an
important mechanism associated with clinical resistance to paclitaxel.
These attributes of the 4-N-substituted monocyclic pyrimidines provide
the impetus for further preclinical development of these compounds.

