Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: APE1/Ref-1 promotes cell adhesion and migration in cervical cancer
cells


Apurinic and apyrimidinic endonuclease 1 (APE1)/redox effector factor-1
(Ref-1) is known to be involved in DNA base excision repair pathway and
redox-dependent regulation of a number of transcription factors, such as
AP1, p53, and Pax-8. It is expressed in numerous human cancers such as
pancreatic cancer, prostate cancer, breast cancer, cervical cancer, and
colon cancer. Our previous studies suggested APE1/Ref-1 can promote
cancer progression through its involvement in cell proliferation,
metastasis and angiogenesis; however, the molecular mechanism by which
APE1/Ref-1 functions in these processes has not been characterized. In
this study, we are the first to report that APE1/Ref-1 activates cell
adhesion-related proteins to trigger cell migration. To investigate
whether APE1/Ref-1 is involved in cell adhesion in normal fibroblasts, an
adhesion assay was performed using GM00637 human fibroblast cell lines
stably overexpressing APE1/Ref-1. Cell adhesion to vitronectin, a known
ligand of the adhesion molecules integrin 3 and integrin 5, was
significantly increased in APE1/Ref-1-overexpressing GM00637 cells
compared to control fibroblast cells. FACS analysis showed APE1/Ref-1
induces the expression and activation of adhesion molecules including
integrin and 3 in APE/Ref-1-overexpressing GM00637 cells. To evaluate
whether APE1/Ref-1-mediated regulation of integrin 3 is involved in cell
migration in cervical cancer cells, a migration assay was performed using
APE1/Ref-1-specific siRNA and an integrin 3-specific antibody. Cell
migration was significantly decreased in the absence of APE1/Ref-1
expression in cervical cancer cells, which was comparable with inhibition
of integrin 3. Consistent with these results, APE1/Ref-1 increased the
activation and expression of integrin 3 in both cervical cancer cells and
cervical cancer patient tissue. Combined, these studies suggest that
APE/Ref-1 can promote cell adhesion and migration through integrin 3
signaling and thereby this signaling mechanism could contribute to
cervical cancer progression.

