Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase 1 (TDP1) is critical for the repair
of DNA breaks induced by sapacitabine, a nucleoside antimetabolite in
clinical trials targeted to ATM- and BRCA-deficient tumors


2-C-cyano-2-deoxy-1--D-arabino-pentofuranosylcytosine (CNDAC) is a
nucleoside analogue and the active metabolite of the anticancer drug,
sapacitabine. The cytotoxic activity of CNDAC is achieved by
incorporation of its nucleoside triphosphate metabolite into genomic DNA
during replication, which subsequently undergoes beta-elimination that
generates a single-strand break with 3-end blocking DNA lesion.
Subsequent DNA replication converts the nick into a double strand break.
Earlier investigations demonstrated that cells lacking homologous
recombination function are sensitized 20- to 100-fold to CNDAC. Because
tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase 1 (TDP1) efficiently hydrolyzes 3-blocking
ends, we tested its role in the repair of CNDAC-induced DNA lesions and
the potential cellular tolerance to CNDAC. Here we show that cells
lacking TDP1 (TDP1-/- DT40 cells) exhibited marked hypersensitivity to
CNDAC indicating the importance of TDP1 for the repair of CNDAC-induced
DNA damage. Although the 3-end blocking DNA lesions caused by another
arabinosyl-nucleoside analog, cytosine arabinoside (cytarabine, AraC) and
the topoisomerase I inhibitor camptothecin (CPT) are also repaired by
TDP1, inactivation of homologous recombination, including BRCA1 and
BRCA2, rendered cells hypersensitive to CNDAC and CPT but not to AraC. On
the other hand, cells lacking PARP1/2 were hypersensitive to CPT only.
Consistent with earlier findings, DT40 cells deficient in BRCA1, BRCA2,
FANCD2, and ATM were sensitized to CNDAC. Thus, the present study has
identified TDP1 as an additional mechanism that contributes to the repair
of CNDAC-induced DNA lesions. It also demonstrates the differential
involvement of DNA repair pathways that underlie the resistance to CNDAC,
AraC and camptothecins, and provides a rationale for using sapacitabine
to treat various types of cancers with preexisting defects in DNA repair
pathways.

