Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteolytic processing pathways for topoisomerase covalent
complexes


DNA topoisomerase II (Top2) is the target of several important
anti-cancer agents, including doxorubicin and etoposide. Clinically
active Top2 agents, termed Top2 poisons, act by blocking the enzyme
reaction at a step where the protein is covalently bound to DNA. This
leads to the accumulation of Top2/DNA complexes that act as DNA damaging
agents that can trigger cell death. Surviving Top2-induced damage likely
requires the repair of the enzyme induced damage and has been
hypothesized to include pathways that proteolyze the protein bound to DNA
followed by nucleolytic removal of the remaining peptide that is bound to
DNA by a phosphotyrosyl linkage. This model of repair suggests that
inhibition of proteolysis would lead to elevated levels of intact
Top2/DNA complexes, and increased sensitivity to Top2 poisons such as
etoposide. We have tested this model using the proteasome inhibitor
carfilzomib in a pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma cell line (Rh30). We found
that carfilzomib enhanced cell killing by etoposide, and that
co-treatment of Rh30 cells with carfilzomib led to increases in both Top2
alpha and Top2 beta covalent complexes. These results suggest that
proteasomal degradation of both Top2 isoforms is important for repairing
DNA damage arising from etoposide. We are also interested in identifying
the determinants of Top2 degradation following treatment with etoposide,
especially proteins that recognize the trapped enzyme as DNA damage. We
used a yeast genetic model system to address this question. We showed
that the proteasome inhibitor MG132 greatly enhanced the sensitivity of
yeast cells to etoposide, and that co-treatment of MG132 and etoposide
led to elevated levels of Top2/DNA complexes compared to etoposide alone.
We found that deletion of the human RNF4 homolog Slx5/Slx8 (a SUMO
dependent ubiquitin ligase) also leads to an increase in Top2 covalent
complexes induced by etoposide. We found that deletion of the genes
encoding either Slx5 or Slx8 along with the repair protein Tdp1 led to
much higher levels of cell killing compared to single deletions. These
results suggest that there are at least two independent pathways for
repairing Top2 damage, one dependent on Slx5/Slx8 dependent protein
degradation and a second pathway dependent on nucleolytic removal of
Top2. We suggest that Slx5/Slx8 plays a role in targeting Top2 for
degradation following etoposide treatment. Our results also provide a
rationale for the combination of a proteasome inhibitor with etoposide as
an approach of increasing the efficacy of etoposide.

