Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lyn kinase promotes metastasis through EMT in cancers


Introduction: Metastasis is the most common cause of death from cancer
and occurs when malignant cells discard epithelial restraints and acquire
invasive abilities, facilitating their dissemination to permissive
micro-environments. This process is enhanced by tumor cell activation of
Epithelial Mesenchymal Transition (EMT), a (normally embryonic)
developmental program in which epithelial cells assume a mesenchymal
phenotype during gastrulation and organogenesis, allowing single cell
invasive movement away from the ectodermal layer. Recent evidence
strongly implicates EMT induction in malignant progression and treatment
resistance. For example, EMT regulatory transcription factors are
required for breast cancer metastasis. Several oncogenic pathways (growth
factors, Src family, MAPK, AKT) induce EMT. Lyn tyrosine kinase, a member
of Src family tyrosine kinase is up-regulated in advanced prostate cancer
and has been reported to correlate with aggressive breast cancer. Our
objective is to determine the role of Lyn tyrosine kinase in EMT.Methods:
LNCaP, BT-549, UC-13 cells were transfected with Lyn siRNA; EMT markers
were monitored by western blot and qRT-PCR and immunofluorescence,
migration by scratch assay, invasion by Boyden chamber and matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) activity by Zymography. Lyn specific Kinase
inhibitor Bafetinib will also be used along with over-expression
experiments with Lyn Kinase Dead and Constitutively active
mutants.Results: Here we report that Lyn expression is low in epithelial
cells and is up-regulated in mesenchymal cells. Targeting Lyn using siRNA
decreases EMT markers (Fibronectin, Vimentin) at both mRNA and protein
levels while increasing the epithelial marker (E-cadherin). Moreover, we
found that targeting Lyn by siRNA/shRNA and small molecule inhibitor
Bafetinib decreases cell migration, invasion and the activity of MMPs.
This decrease in mesenchymal phenotype can be attributed to the decrease
in the amount of Slug and Snail, transcriptional repressors of E-Cadherin
and activators of Vimentin. Consequently, we also found that
over-expressing Lyn in both as WT or constitutively active (CA) mutant
rescues expression of Slug and Snail, inducing EMT, increased cell
migration and invasion while Kinase Dead (KD) mutant has no
effect.Conclusion: Expression of Lyn kinase can be correlated to low
prognosis and aggressive/metastatic phenotype. We show that targeting Lyn
activity initiates a switch to a more epithelial phenotype reducing cell
migration and invasion.Impact: The data suggests that Lyn tyrosine kinase
plays a role in Epithelial Mesenchymal Transition and could be considered
as a target for metastatic disease; especially in the more aggressive
forms of cancer like Triple Negative Breast Cancer or Castration
Resistant Prostate Cancer. This could be a realistic therapeutic option,
as the Lyn small molecule inhibitor Bafetinib, is currently in clinical
trials for treatment of several cancers.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

