Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vaccination using epitopes with higher MHC class I affinity
elicits CD8+ T cells with increased PD-1 expression


We have been interested in DNA vaccines as treatments for human prostate
cancer, and have demonstrated that this approach can elicit
antigen-specific CD8+ T-cells in humans that can persist over years.
However, the persistence of antigen-expressing tumors demonstrates that
mechanisms of tumor escape are at play. Consequently, in preclinical
studies we have focused on mechanisms of resistance and efforts to
improve the immunological activity of DNA vaccines. As one model antigen,
we have used the synovial sarcoma, X breakpoint 2 (SSX2) protein, a
cancer-testis antigen expressed in metastatic prostate cancer. We have
previously demonstrated that SSX2 encodes two HLA-A2-restricted epitopes,
and we have utilized HHD-II mice, in which HLA-A2 and HLA-DR1 (but not
murine MHC class I and II) are expressed, as a means to study CD8+ T
cells generated by vaccination. We have shown in this system that
immunization with a DNA plasmid encoding SSX2 elicits robust CD8+ cells,
and anti-tumor responses to syngeneic tumors expressing SSX2. We have
recently identified that a DNA vaccine altered to encode peptide epitopes
with increased HLA-A2 binding elicited a greater frequency of CD8+ T
cells specific for SSX2 when compared to the native vaccine, however
these T cells were less effective against tumors due to higher expression
of PD-1. In the current study, we investigated the mechanisms underlying
this regulation of T-cells following vaccination. Altered peptide ligands
(APL) specific for one HLA-A2-restricted epitope were modified at anchor
residues to generate peptides of varying affinities for HLA-A2. Groups of
HHD-II mice were then immunized with one of five SSX2 APLs with varying
HLA-A2 affinity. After one week the resulting antigen-specific CD8+ T
cells were assessed for regulatory ligand expression and cytokine
expression as an indicator of function. We found that a single
immunization with high affinity APLs resulted in an increased percentage
of SSX2 tetramer positive T-cells that displayed persistent PD-1
expression compared with lower-affinity APL. Upon ex vivo re-encounter of
the native SSX2 peptide, T-cells from mice immunized with higher affinity
APLs showed an increased multifunctional Th1 response as evidenced by
increased IFN, IL2, and TNF expression when compared to mice immunized
with native or low affinity SSX2 peptides, but also higher PD-1
expression. Ongoing studies are further exploring the kinetics and
persistence of PD-1 expression following antigen presentation.
Notwithstanding, our results have implications for the design of
anti-tumor vaccines that seek to incorporate epitopes with altered
HLA-A2-binding ability as these may affect the persistence of PD-1
expression on CD8+ T cells following immunization.

