Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exome analysis of an exceptional responder uncovers an activating
GNAS mutation that may confer sensitivity to cytotoxic chemotherapy


Introduction:The molecular characterization of patients who exhibit a
unique response to treatments that are not effective in most patients, so
called exceptional responders, can shed light on the biological
underpinnings of the response and provide rationale for selection of
future patients for the same treatment. Here we present the genomic
characterization of a 22-year-old female patient who presented with an
unclassifiable kidney cancer and diffuse bilateral lung metastases. The
primary tumour was resected and platinum plus gemcitabine therapy
achieved a complete resolution of the lung metastases. Approximately 2
years later the patient again developed bilateral lung metastases and an
additional course of platinum plus gemcitabine once again achieved a
complete radiological response. To better understand the genomic
contributors to this dramatic and recurrent response, we performed whole
exome sequence analysis of the diagnostic formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tumor tissue and a matched blood sample.Methods and
Results:The patient provided informed consent and was profiled through
the Princess Margaret Cancer Centre Genomic Investigation of Unusual and
Spectacular responders (GENIUS) program. From tumour and matched blood
specimens, we isolated coding and untranslated regions followed by deep
sequencing (250X median coverage) on an Illumina HiSeq 2000. Copy-number
analysis using VarScan2 revealed 23 somatic copy-number alterations (12
gains, 11 losses) including loss of 9p and gains of 3q and 8q, consistent
with reports on clear cell renal cell carcinomas. Mutational analysis
using muTect found 60 somatic, coding mutations, consistent with mutation
rates seen in other kidney cancers. Of these variants, only one was a
previously reported hotspot mutation, GNAS p.R201H (NM_000516, also known
as p.R844H on transcript NM_080425). This mutation causes constitutive
activation of the G-protein complex and activates adenylate cyclase to
produce cyclic-AMP (cAMP) that can activate oncogenic pathways. However,
excess cellular cAMP levels have also been found to promote apoptosis.
Furthermore, a germline SNP in GNAS (rs7121), thought to increase GNAS
transcript stability, is associated with improved response to gemcitabine
plus platinum in non-small-cell lung cancer patients. The current patient
was found to be heterozygous for the rs7121 SNP, which may compound the
chemosensitivity phenotype observed.Conclusion:We have identified a
p.R201H mutation in GNAS that may both drive tumour progression and
confer exceptional chemo-sensitivity in a patient with an unclassified
kidney cancer. Further analysis is underway in vitro to validate the
hypothesis that this mutation confers sensitivity to chemotherapy.
Confirmation of this hypothesis may suggest that chemotherapy could be
considered for patients harbouring this mutation.

