Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A multiplexed immunohistochemistry test to screen for protein
overexpression of ROS1, TrkA, TrkB and TrkC in multiple tumor tissue types


Introduction: A consequence of precision medicine is the increased
challenge to identify small patient populations, while maintaining
testing efficiency and manageable costs. One area of focus is identifying
gene rearrangements in patients for targeted kinase inhibitor therapies,
where the prevalence in a patient population can be 1-10%. Diagnostic
detection of gene rearrangements is primarily accomplished by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), while next generation
sequencing (NGS) or immunohistochemistry (IHC) show promise. FISH does
not provide information regarding the gene fusion partner, while NGS is
expensive and labor intensive. IHC is both high throughput and cost
efficient, but not specific to rearrangements. To enable rapid screening
of large tissue populations for prevalence, we sought to develop a method
that could be broadly applied to multiple receptor tyrosine kinases
simultaneously to streamline screening for multi-targeted therapeutics.
To this end, we have developed a multiplexed IHC method that assesses
expression of the clinically promising markers: ROS1, TrkA, TrkB, and
TrkC in multiple tumor tissues. Specimens selected positive by this
pan-receptor IHC assay can then be reflexed to a method with higher
sensitivity and specificity for gene rearrangements (e.g. NGS).Methods:
Standard IHC was conducted as follows: Antigen retrieval was performed in
EDTA (pH 9) at 98C for 30 min. The primary antibody cocktail consists of
antibodies against ROS1 (D4D6, Cell Signaling) and a pan-Trk antibody
(C17F1, Cell Signaling). A signal amplification step was performed before
the secondary antibody conjugated to a dextran-HRP polymer (Envision
FLEX, Dako) step. Signal was developed using DAB and counterstained with
hematoxylin.Results: We have developed an assay for measuring expression
of multiple receptor tyrosine kinases in multiple tissue types using a
cocktail of antibodies that is sensitive, accurate, and with minimal
background or cross-reactive staining. This has been demonstrated using
characterized cell lines and human tissues with results confirmed by
testing individual IHC markers and alternative methods (e.g. FISH or
NGS). Since IHC measurements are assessing in-frame expression, we can
also identify false positive samples such as FISH detected rearrangements
which do not lead to active protein product.Conclusions: We have
demonstrated a simple, sensitive, multiplexed IHC assay to screen for
molecular alterations (ROS1, TrkA/B/C) that are currently not part of
standard tissue annotation. We have shown that the assay is able to
identify molecular alterations that have been confirmed by sequencing.
The test is expandable and can be adjusted to suit the needs of
researchers studying specific protein families.

