Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of PD-L1 mRNA and protein expression in non-small cell
lung and hepatocellular carcinoma


SJ and BHL contributed equally to this workBACKGROUND:Tumor immunotherapy
is a unique therapeutic modality against human cancers. The recent
success of PD1 antibody treatments highlight the value and potential of
this approach. While there is no definitive clinical biomarker that is
prognostic of PD1 antibody efficacy, the presence of PD-L1 protein
detected by immunohistochemistry has correlated positively to clinical
responses to anti-PD1 and PD-L1 therapies. To enable broad examination of
cancer indications for PD1/PD-L1 based therapies, we sought to evaluate
PD-L1 expression at both the protein and mRNA level in lung and hepatic
tumors.MATERIALS & METHODS:PD-L1 protein expression was evaluated in a
set of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded non-small cell lung (NSCLC)
adenocarcinoma (ACA), NSCLC squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tumors by immunohistochemistry (IHC).
PD-L1 expression was scored semi-quantitatively by a manual histo-score
(H-score) methodology based on staining intensity and percentage of
positive tumor cells. In our IHC analysis, PD-L1 positivity (PD-L1+) was
defined as an H-score 20. In parallel, PD-L1 mRNA expression data was
examined from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) in these same indications
(503 NSCLC ACA, 489 NSCLC SCC, and 191 HCC) and analyzed by comparing the
expression in matched normal tissues from TCGA.RESULTS:With RNAseq
analysis, data was calculated as log2 (RPKM+0.1) after RSEM
normalization, utilizing OmicSoft RNASeq pipelines across TCGA tumor
indications. The expression of PD-L1 is elevated in NSCLC ACA and SCC,
relative to that in HCC. By overlaying the distributions and comparing
the expression levels across all indications in TCGA, we ranked
overexpression profiles for PD-L1 and found the TCGA HCC cohort to have
much reduced PD-L1 mRNA levels, with a median level of -0.8 compared to
1.3 for ACA and 1.5 for SCC, which amounts to more than a 2-fold change
of median level expression. With RNAseq, our analysis defines 50% of
NSCLC adenocarcinoma, 54% of NSCLC squamous cell carcinoma, and 6% of HCC
as high expressers for PD-L1.Tumor cell PD-L1 protein expression was
measured in 45 lung adenocarcinoma, 47 lung squamous cell carcinoma, and
69 hepatocellular carcinoma. 16/45 (35.6%) lung ACA, 21/47 (44.7%) lung
SCC were PD-L1 positive. In contrast, PD-L1 positivity was seen in only
5/69 (7.2%) HCC samples.CONCLUSIONS:In summary, with IHC and RNAseq
analysis in large and independent human NSCLC and HCC sample sets, we
have found PD-L1 expression to be more enriched in NSCLC than in HCC.
Importantly, amongst the large number of samples (161 for IHC and 1183
for RNAseq) in the 3 indications, very good concordance is observed
between protein- and mRNA-based analyses. Our finding thus establishes
the basis for large scale mRNA-based data mining for indications and
patient segments enriched for responses to PD1/PD-L1-based immune
therapies.

