Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An orthotopic lung tumor model for image-guided microirradiation
in rats


Introduction:Studies have confirmed that a new lung cancer treatment
called stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) can cure certain
patients with early stage tumors situated peripherally in their lungs,
using a non-invasive, outpatient procedure. While nearly curative for
peripheral lung tumors, SBRT also may present life-threatening toxicity
for patients with centrally located lung tumors. Moreover, large, hypoxic
tumors are at a further risk of radiotherapy failure with SBRT. The
efficacy of SBRT application can be improved through the addition of
agents designed to sensitize the tumor and/or protect normal tissue. To
investigate and validate the response to SBRT, alone or in combination
with radiomodulating compounds, it is necessary to develop a tumor model
for image-guided high-dose irradiation of rodent tumors and normal
tissues in a manner that closely mimics delivery of SBRT in humans.
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to develop a rat orthotopic lung
tumor model with a solitary intrapulmonary nodule to study the effects of
high-dose radiation.Methods:Adult female athymic nude rats were
anesthetized, intubated and then placed on a ventilator (Inspira, Harvard
Apparatus, Holliston, MA) prior to surgery. A small incision (1.0 cm) was
made between ribs 5 and 6 on the right side. The right lung was captured
using a forceps, clamped with a carotid clamp and H460-luc/A549-luc NSCLC
cells (one million cells and matrigel in 20 l) were then injected into
the right lung. The tumor growth was monitored by in vivo bioluminescent
imaging (BLI) weekly. Other imaging modalities, including microCT, CBCT,
and MRI, were also performed. At the end of study, the rats were
sacrificed and lungs were harvested to confirm tumor location and
size.Results:We achieved 100% survival from this surgical orthotopic
implantation procedure. We also achieved >90% success in generating
solitary lung tumors in the rats, whereas percutaneous orthotopic
injection of tumor cells/chunks in our previous model met only 50 to 60%
success in producing solitary tumors.Conclusion:This study presents a
successful solitary lung tumor model in rodents which provides
investigators a useful model to apply conformal radiation treatment,
using a sophisticated treatment planning system and significantly
preventing normal tissue damage.

