Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RhoB expression is upregulated by androgen in thyroid cancer cells


The incidence of thyroid cancer has increased three-fold over the last
thirty years and the American Cancer Society estimates that there will be
62,980 new cases and 1,890 deaths due to the disease in the United States
in 2014. Papillary Thyroid Cancer (PTC) is the most common endocrine
malignancy and develops in premenopausal women, at a four-fold higher
incidence, than in men. However, PTC exhibits increased aggressiveness
with poor prognosis in men diagnosed with the disease. These observations
led us to explore the role of androgen and androgen receptor in this
disease. Preliminary data from our lab indicates that androgen receptor
(AR) acts as a negative regulator of growth as evidenced by a
statistically significant decrease in proliferation upon DHT addition to
8505c anaplastic/PTC cells stably transfected with AR. Transcriptional
profiling using RNA-Seq and gene ontology analysis, on a 48 hour DHT
treated 8505c-AR transfected clone, 84E7, revealed significant changes in
the expression of genes associated with proliferation (474 genes, p =
2.4E-24), cell cycle progression (129 genes, p = 6.54E-6) and migration
(301 genes, p = 3.77E-30). Amongst the genes which showed the highest
significant differential expression was RhoB, a Rho GTPase, with an
approximately 50-fold upregulation. Rho proteins are small molecules
belonging to the Ras superfamily, known to regulate cell morphology,
actin/microtubule cytoskeleton reorganization along with vesicle
trafficking. While RhoA and RhoC promote cancer progression and
metastasis, the functions of their structural homolog, RhoB, are largely
context dependent. Evidence has emerged that RhoB expression may support
malignancy in certain cancers, while exhibiting a tumor-suppressor gene
function in others. In our system, addition of DHT to 84E7 cells for
short time periods of 1, 3 and 6 hours resulted in rapid RhoB mRNA
upregulation by 2.5, 8, and 17 fold, respectively, compared to untreated
cells. This quick, time-dependent increase in androgen-responsive RhoB
may play an integral protective and reparative role which is possibly
lost during neoplasticity of thyrocytes. Investigations into various
pathways linking RhoB and effector proteins with carcinogenesis would be
crucial in assessing the potential of RhoB as a bio-marker for metastatic
PTC and thence opening avenues for development of viable therapies for
better management of the disease.

