Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TAS4464, a novel highly potent NEDD8 activating enzyme inhibitor,
demonstrates antitumor activity in multiple myeloma through the
inactivation of NF-B pathways


Background: NEDD8 activating enzyme E1 (NAE) regulates NEDD8 conjugation
in the ubiquitin-proteasome system. NAE activates cullin-RING ligases
(CRL) and controls the degradation of their substrates, which play key
roles in cell cycle progression, DNA replication and signal transduction
via various pathways. Through one such pathway, the constitutively active
nuclear factor B (NF-B) triggers the progression of multiple myeloma
(MM). MM is highly treatable but rarely curable, and patients with
refractory MM would benefit from additional therapeutic options. NF-B is
activated through two signaling cascades, canonical and non-canonical
pathways, which are regulated by the CRL substrates, phosphorylated IB
(p-IB) and phosphorylated p100 (p-p100), respectively. Here, we report on
the possible use of an NAE inhibitor that we discovered, TAS4464, to
treat MM.Materials and methods: TAS4464 was designed and synthesized at
Taiho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Human MM cell lines, KMS-11, KMS-12-BM,
KMS-26, KMS-34, and MM.1S were used to evaluate the biological activities
of TAS4464. Intracellular ATP levels were measured to assess in vitro
cell growth. Effects on the cell cycle were analyzed by using
fluorescence-activated cell sorting. The effects of TAS4464 on NEDD8
conjugation and the levels of CRL substrates were evaluated by means of
Western blotting. The transcription levels of NF-B-targeted genes were
assessed by using qRT-PCR. Activated p65 and RelB (subunits of NF-B) were
quantified by using commercial DNA-binding ELISA kits. The antitumor
activity of TAS4464 was evaluated in an MM.1S xenograft model.Results:
TAS4464 inhibited cullin neddylation, leading to cell-growth arrest and
apoptosis in MM cell lines in the nanomolar range. These effects were not
attenuated after stimulation with interleukin 6 or insulin-like growth
factor 1 or in co-culture with stroma cells. TAS4464 led to the
accumulation of p-IB and p-p100 with subsequent suppression both p65 and
RelB activity, whereas bortezomib suppressed only RelB activity.
Once-weekly intravenous administration of TAS4464 showed much stronger
antitumor activity than that of bortezomib in an MM.1S xenograft model,
with inhibited cullin neddylation and induced the cleaved forms of
caspases 3 and 8 in the tumors.Conclusion: TAS4464 demonstrated marked
antitumor activity in a human MM xenograft model. In addition, TAS4464
inhibited canonical as well as non-canonical pathways of NF-B, whereas
bortezomib inhibited only non-canonical pathway of NF-B. Therefore,
TAS4464 may be a valuable addition to current options for the
chemotherapy of MM.

