Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Label-free concentration of viable breast cancer CTCs for single
cell Western blotting


The isolation of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in blood can aid in
cancer prognosis, characterize genetic mutations for targeted therapies,
and elucidate the biological mechanisms of metastasis. While CTCs provide
clinical utility, there are still several technical difficulties with CTC
isolation and analysis. CTCs are very rare (1-10 cells/mL of blood) and
current isolation methods rely on immunocapture, require long sample
preparation, and fail to deliver viable cells. Further, recent advances
in single cell analysis of CTCs have been limited to genomic studies, in
which DNA/mRNA does not provide a complete picture of CTCs at the
functional level, as mRNA expression may only account for a portion of
protein expression. The ability to study and measure the protein
expression of CTCs could provide insight into the mechanisms driving
cancer progression and signaling dysregulation. Unfortunately,
conventional proteomic tools (e.g. immunocytochemistry and Western blot)
either do not provide sufficient specificity or sensitivity toward single
cell levels. Thus, there is a lack of tools that can provide quantitative
protein analysis for rare CTCs.To address this gap, we enable rare cell
Western blotting by combining isolation and proteomic technologies in a
unique workflow:(i) Label-free Vortex enrichment of rare larger cells
from blood samples. Larger cancer cells are trapped within an array of
microscale fluid vortices that form in simple rectangular reservoirs,
while smaller blood cells pass through. The cancer cells are stably
maintained in the vortices, allowing for solution exchange, followed by
release upon lowering the flow rate. With this device, we were able to
release a small volume (500 L) of concentrated, viable cancer cells
(MCF7) from healthy blood, at high throughput, capture efficiency (35%),
purity (>80%), and 10,000 fold enrichment. CTCs were also successfully
extracted and enumerated from the blood of patients with breast cancer (N
= 18, from 0.75 to 23.25 CTCs/mL).(ii) High-specificity and multiplexed
protein analysis of rare cancer cells with single cell Western blotting
(scWB). Enriched CTCs are placed into microwells patterned into a
polyacrylamide gel for the scWB assay (in-situ chemical lysis in the
microwells, electrophoresis into bulk gel layer, photo-immobilization,
and subsequent antibody-probing of immobilized proteins). Here, we
demonstrate scWB compatibility with rare cells by spiking MCF7s into
normal blood and performing protein separations. The scWB is multiplex
and can assay several target proteins simultaneously. Cells stained for
surface markers (anti-EpCAM) are also compatible, and the scWB can
resolve complete immunocomplexes without disrupting the location of the
intracellular targets (GAPDH, ERK).With the integration of these
technologies, we push the limits of quantitative protein analysis of
CTCs, an essential step to better understand these rare populations.

