Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diacylglycerol kinase alpha as a novel epigenetically regulated
risk marker for radiotherapy-induced fibrosis


Ionizing radiation is a common treatment option for cancer but its use is
limited by the unpredictable and highly heterogeneous onset of late side
effects, especially radiation-induced fibrosis. Clinically applicable
biomarkers and effective treatments for radiation fibrosis are currently
unavailable. In order to identify novel markers we ran a genome-wide DNA
methylation screen in primary dermal fibroblasts obtained from breast
cancer patients before intraoperative radiotherapy. Cells from patients
developing fibrosis within a three-year follow up were compared to those
without fibrosis (12 individuals per group). Illumina Infinium
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip analysis revealed differentially methylated
sites which are associated with fibrosis. Notably, we identified a
differentially methylated region (DMR) at the diacylglycerol kinase alpha
(DGKA) locus as a potential fibrosis marker. This DGKA DMR was confirmed
using quantitative MassARRAY technology in 75 patient fibroblast samples.
We first investigated whether high or low DNA methylation at this DGKA
DMR affects cellular radiation response. Functional in vitro analysis
showed that the methylation status of the DGKA DMR inversely correlated
with its radiation-induced mRNA and protein expression as well as with
its enzymatic activity. We next examined the DMR for its role as a
regulatory site. The intragenically located DMR was identified as a
potential enhancer sequence using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
for H3K4me1 and H3K27ac as well as luciferase reporter assays. Chromatin
conformation capture (3C) analysis revealed interaction of this enhancer
with the DGKA promoter in fibroblasts with low DNA methylation, and
further ChIP experiments showed a DNA methylation-dependent recruitment
of the profibrotic transcription factor Early Growth Response 1 (EGR1) to
this site. We finally asked how epigenetically altered DGKA expression
could impact on cellular processes relevant to fibrosis such as
fibroblast transactivation or stress response. Results in primary
fibroblasts showed that, in response to ionizing radiation and other
stress factors, DGKA affects global levels of its substrate
diacylglycerol, as well as expression of the fibroblast activation
markers Alpha Smooth Muscle Actin (ACTA2) and collagen 1 (COL1A1). Upon
overexpression of DGKA in HEK293T cells, a luciferase-based screening of
15 stress-responsive signaling reporters revealed functional consequences
on several response pathways. In summary, DGKA has emerged as a novel,
epigenetically regulated signaling protein that has a role in radiation
fibrosis and may serve as a new biomarker and therapeutic target.

