Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impaired taxane binding to MTs in intrinsically taxane resistant
gastric cancer cells without -tubulin mutation


The taxanes (i.e., paclitaxel, docetaxel (DTX) and cabazitaxel) are
microtubule (MT)-stabilizing drugs widely used to treat solid tumor
malignancies. Their success is limited by the presence of intrinsic or
acquired drug resistance. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of
taxane resistance is a key to significantly improve clinical outcomes of
taxane-based chemotherapy. In gastric cancer (GC), retrospective analysis
of the TAX-325 trial revealed that the addition of docetaxel (DTX) to
standard cisplatin/fluorouracil increased progression-free and overall
survival, primarily only in intestinal subtype (INT) GC, suggesting that
diffuse (DIF) GC may be intrinsically taxane resistant. In fact, our
previous data supported this hypothesis; DIF GC cell lines had higher
incidence (63%) of DTX resistance than INT GC cell lines (25%). Flow
cytometric analyses showed negligible P-glycoprotein expression on the
cell surface of all cell types, and accumulation of C14-labeled DTX in
cells was observed in both sensitive and resistant GC cell lines. These
results ruled out drug efflux as a possible mechanism that confers taxane
resistance in DIF GC cells.Next, we used fluorescein-conjugated
paclitaxel (Flutax) as a probe to investigate the affinity of taxanes to
MTs. Live cell imaging showed strong binding of Flutax to MTs in a
sensitive cell line at least for 60 minutes. In contrast, Flutax failed
to stay bound to MTs in resistant GC cell lines,. In addition,
discontinuous decoration of MTs with Flutax was seen in resistant but not
in sensitive cell lines. Our observation suggests that MTs of resistant
GC cell lines have lower affinity for taxanes, and there might be subtle
structural changes of MTs. We are currently conducting the competition of
Flutax/DTX to quantify the affinity of DTX in both types of GC cell
lines.Because tubulin mutations have been reported in many
taxane-resistant cell lines, we sequenced the different tubulin isotypes
in GC cell lines using both Sanger and next generation sequencing. No
mutations were identified. In addition, we did not see any significant
changes in the expression of III-tubulin or tubulin post-translational
modifications between the sensitive and resistant cell lines. Pathway
analyses on the RNA-Seq datasets derived from the panels of sensitive and
resistant cell lines before and after taxane treatment is ongoing to
identify the key molecular events underlying taxane resistance.Taken
together, our data indicate that new molecular pathway(s) or change of
overall MT structure and/or function may contribute to the impaired
taxane binding to MTs in resistant GC cells. Our study will lead us to
novel mechanistic insights in intrinsic drug resistance, and will
ultimately allow us to target key molecule(s) to overcome
chemo-resistance, the key determinant to improve overall survival of
patients.

