Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro drug sensitivity and genetic profile analysis from
primary culture obtained from brain cancer


The Cancer Genome Atlas effort subtyped gliomas in four molecular groups
based on gene expression, mutation and deletion and retrospectively
linked these subtypes to chemotherapy response. But up to now there is no
protocol to use this or other methods to predict chemotherapy response in
the clinic for gliomas. Patients are normally treated with ratiotherapy
and temozolomide (TMZ) in a protocol of 5 days of treatment and 23 days
of recovery. The goal of this study is to analyze gene expression and
drug sensitivity in a relevant time frame to prospectively contribute to
therapeutic decisions. For this, we prepared 19 cell cultures from 19
biopsies of brain tumors and treated them with a range of chemotherapy
agents (TMZ, carmustine, lomustine, cisplatin, etoposide, paclitaxel,
irinotecan, procarbazin, mebendazol, vincristin and vinblastin) at
plasmatic concentration. Cells were counted for at least 12 days after
treatment or tested for viability after 7 or 14 days and more that 60%
reduction was considered a positive response. From eleven cell cultures
tested with viability assay, only one responded to temozolomide (the
first line chemotherapy for this tumor) after a single administration.
The strongest effect was obtained using anti-microtubule agents. Cell
counting after 12 days of treatment confirmed the resistance to TMZ and
the sensitivity to antimicrotubule drugs, particularly paclitaxel.
Combination of procarbazin, lomustine and vincristine (PCV), previously
used to treat glioblastoma patients, killed very effectively cells of
only 1 patient. The cell cultures from three of five patients display
EGFR over-expression and four of five presented p53 and p21 expression.
At this time, we are not able to correlate gene expression, subtyping and
drug sensitivity. From these data we conclude that brain tumors can be
routinely grown and tested for drug sensitivity in a time frame that more
closely mimics the treatment of patients.Ethical protocol number UFRGS:
420.856; PUCRS: 429.849 Financial support: FAPERGS, CNPq e CAPES.

