Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor genotyping in the phase III GRID study of regorafenib vs
placebo in tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)-refractory GIST: Detection of
KIT mutations in circulating tumor DNA comparing digital PCR and massive
parallel sequencing


Background: The GRID study demonstrated that regorafenib provides a
significant improvement in progression-free survival (HR 0.27;
pBackground: The GRID study demonstrated that regorafenib provides a
significant improvement in progression-free survival (HR 0.27; p<0.0001)
compared with placebo in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stromal
tumors (GIST) following failure of at least imatinib and sunitinib.
Mutations in KIT play an important role in GIST and identification of the
specific KIT mutations that each GIST patient harbors could have
important therapeutic implications. However, determining tumor genotype
in TKI-refractory GIST has proven challenging due to intra and
inter-tumoral genetic heterogeneity and the difficulty associated with
obtaining fresh tumor biopsies. To overcome this limitation, tumor
genotyping in GRID was performed using baseline plasma as a source of
circulating tumor-derived DNA. We previously performed genotyping using
BEAMing (a mutation-specific technology) and have now extended this
analysis using Safe-SeqS (Kinde et al. 2011 PNAS 108:9530) a targeted
NGS-based platform aiming to detect previously undetectable cKIT
mutations.Methods: 91 plasma samples from patients enrolled in the Ph 3
study (GRID) for which BEAMing data (Jeffers et al 2013 JCO 31:10503)
were subjected to Safe-SeqS covering cKit Exon 8 to Exon 18.Results: In 6
of 32 samples reported to be cKIT wildtype by BEAMing, mutations were
identified by SafeSeqS. The detection of primary KIT exon 9 mutations
showed a high degree of concordance among the two mutation-detection
methods evaluated. Secondary / resistance hotspot mutations were also
readily detected by both methods, although a greater number of such
mutations were detected by Safe-SeqS than by BEAMing. The localization of
the additional mutations detected by Safe-SeqS in known mutational
hotspots supports their legitimacy. Safe-SeqS also detected KIT mutations
for which BEAMing assays had not been developed, whereas in 17 samples a
mutation for which a BEAMing assay was available was not detectable by
Safe SeqS. In 58% (10/17) of samples, the mutant allele frequency found
by BEAMing was close to the detection limit of this platform (Background:
The GRID study demonstrated that regorafenib provides a significant
improvement in progression-free survival (HR 0.27; p<0.0001) compared
with placebo in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumors
(GIST) following failure of at least imatinib and sunitinib. Mutations in
KIT play an important role in GIST and identification of the specific KIT
mutations that each GIST patient harbors could have important therapeutic
implications. However, determining tumor genotype in TKI-refractory GIST
has proven challenging due to intra and inter-tumoral genetic
heterogeneity and the difficulty associated with obtaining fresh tumor
biopsies. To overcome this limitation, tumor genotyping in GRID was
performed using baseline plasma as a source of circulating tumor-derived
DNA. We previously performed genotyping using BEAMing (a
mutation-specific technology) and have now extended this analysis using
Safe-SeqS (Kinde et al. 2011 PNAS 108:9530) a targeted NGS-based platform
aiming to detect previously undetectable cKIT mutations.Methods: 91
plasma samples from patients enrolled in the Ph 3 study (GRID) for which
BEAMing data (Jeffers et al 2013 JCO 31:10503) were subjected to
Safe-SeqS covering cKit Exon 8 to Exon 18.Results: In 6 of 32 samples
reported to be cKIT wildtype by BEAMing, mutations were identified by
SafeSeqS. The detection of primary KIT exon 9 mutations showed a high
degree of concordance among the two mutation-detection methods evaluated.
Secondary / resistance hotspot mutations were also readily detected by
both methods, although a greater number of such mutations were detected
by Safe-SeqS than by BEAMing. The localization of the additional
mutations detected by Safe-SeqS in known mutational hotspots supports
their legitimacy. Safe-SeqS also detected KIT mutations for which BEAMing
assays had not been developed, whereas in 17 samples a mutation for which
a BEAMing assay was available was not detectable by Safe SeqS. In 58%
(10/17) of samples, the mutant allele frequency found by BEAMing was
close to the detection limit of this platform (<0.05). The cKITM541L
mutation in Exon10 was found in 25% (23/91) of the samples.Conclusion:
Our data support the use of Safe-SeqS as a sensitive and specific liquid
biopsy method for non-invasive tumor genotyping of patients with GIST,
enabling the identification of known and novel tumor-associated mutations
using circulating DNA. These results confirm and extend the genotypic
heterogeneity that had previously been identified in GRID circulating DNA
samples by BEAMing. The comprehensive tumor mutational profiles generated
by Safe-SeqS will be used to evaluate potential correlations between
tumor genotype and clinical outcome.

