Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Baseline serum levels of osteopontin and thrombospondin-1 predict
shorter overall survival in primary resected non-small cell lung cancer


Background: Osteopontin and thrombospondin-1 are extracellular matrix
proteins secreted by both stromal and tumor cells. These proteins may
play a key role in the tumor microenvironment for cancer development and
metastasis. This study focused on the prognostic value of circulating
osteopontin and thrombospondin-1 in primary resected NSCLC
patients.Methods: Between January and December of 2012, serums were
collected from 171 patients prior to primary surgery and from age-matched
cancer-free individuals (n = 20). At baseline, circulating osteopontin
and thrombospondin-1 levels were measured by ELISA. Tissue protein
expression in primary tumor samples was determined by immunohistochemical
analysis.Results: High levels of serum osteopontin and thrombospondin-1
levels were found in the cohort study. The difference between patients
and healthy individuals was statistically significant (pBackground:
Osteopontin and thrombospondin-1 are extracellular matrix proteins
secreted by both stromal and tumor cells. These proteins may play a key
role in the tumor microenvironment for cancer development and metastasis.
This study focused on the prognostic value of circulating osteopontin and
thrombospondin-1 in primary resected NSCLC patients.Methods: Between
January and December of 2012, serums were collected from 171 patients
prior to primary surgery and from age-matched cancer-free individuals (n
= 20). At baseline, circulating osteopontin and thrombospondin-1 levels
were measured by ELISA. Tissue protein expression in primary tumor
samples was determined by immunohistochemical analysis.Results: High
levels of serum osteopontin and thrombospondin-1 levels were found in the
cohort study. The difference between patients and healthy individuals was
statistically significant (p<0.0001). Serum levels of osteopontin and
thrombospondin-1 were independent prognostic factors of overall survival
in multivariate analysis (HR 1.71, 95% CI 1.04-2.82, p = 0.04 for an
increase in osteopontin of 50 ng/mL; HR 0.18, 95% CI 0.04-0.87, p = 0.03
for an increase in thrombospondin-1 of 10 ng/mL) similarly to their
combination (HR is 1.31, 95% CI 1.03-1.67, p = 0.03 for an increase in
osteopontin/thrombospondin-1 ratio of 6 ng/mL). Osteopontin and
thrombospondin-1 levels were inversely correlated to survival
rates.Conclusions: Baseline osteopontin and thrombospondin-1 serum
levels, and even more importantly their combination, can serve as strong
independent prognostic factors to predict overall survival in primary
resected NSCLC patients, and therefore reflect the aggressiveness of the
tumor.

