Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glypican-3 is a predictive marker for recurrence of hepatocellular
carcinoma after surgical resection, especially in early stage


Background and Objective: Even in early stages, recurrence risk of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is high. Glypican-3 (GPC3) is specifically
overexpressed in HCC, and its overexpression is correlated with poor
prognosis in patients with HCC. Recent studies have shown the utility of
GPC3 as a serum and immunohistochemical marker for the diagnosis of HCC.
However, the diagnostic value of GPC3 as a predictive marker for
recurrence of early-stage HCC is not well understood. Thus, in the
present study, we evaluated the usefulness of GPC3 as a predictive marker
for recurrence after surgical resection, especially in early-stage
HCC.Methods: Plasma samples were collected from 27 patients with stageI
HCC who underwent for surgical resection during May 2008 to October 2010.
GPC3-expression of surgical specimens was analyzed by immunohistochemical
staining. The novel anti-GPC3 mouse monoclonal antibodies were generated
and the sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) system for
detection of plasma GPC3 levels was established. Plasma GPC3
concentrations were measured by the developed novel sandwich ELISA
system. Plasma samples of age-matched 39 non-liver disease patients were
used as control.Results: During follow-up period (median, 738 days),
recurrence was observed in 14 cases after surgical resection (51.8%).
GPC3 positive rate by the immunohistochemical staining of resected
specimen was 53% (13/23). There was a tendency towards a shorter
recurrence-free survival (RFS) in GPC3 positive cases than in GPC3
negative cases (p = 0.233). The mean standard deviation (SD) of plasma
GPC3 concentrations in control subjects was 110.12 37.70 ng/ml, and
cut-off value was determined to be 132 ng/ml (mean + 1.5 SD). In stageI
HCC, the sensitivity and specificity were 40.7% and 92%, respectively. In
the recurrence group, pre-operation plasma GPC3 levels were significantly
higher than in the non-recurrence group(median, 191.7 ng/ml vs 29.7
ng/ml, p = 0.029). There was a tendency of shorter RFS in the
pre-operation plasma GPC3 positive patients group compared with the
negative group (median RFS, 16 months vs not reached), although this
difference was not significant (p = 0.127). Among 11 cases remained
recurrence-free for over 4 years of follow-up, pre-operation plasma GPC3
positive was only one case. The recurrence rate of patients with
post-operation plasma GPC3 positive was significantly higher than GPC3
negative patients (p = 0.033).Conclusions: We have developed a novel
ELISA system for detecting plasma GPC3 levels and determined utility of
GPC3 as diagnostic marker of HCC. This study suggests GPC3 expression and
plasma GPC3 levels might help in identification of patients at high risk
of recurrence of HCC after surgical resection, especially in early stage.

