Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implementation of genetic sequencing in breast and ovarian cancer
patients: a cost analysis


Purpose: Genetic sequencing has the ability to identify and treat the
driving mechanisms of cancer. As a result, practitioners can
individualize treatment to each patient's tumor. A major concern with
genetic sequencing is the cost associated with targeted therapies. The
purpose of this analysis is to explore the financial impact of genetic
sequencing and targeted therapy in the treatment of breast and ovarian
cancer.Methods: A systematic search was conducted of patients that
underwent genetic sequencing. Five metastatic ovarian cancer patients and
five metastatic breast cancer patients were selected at random. One
breast cancer patient that underwent neoadjuvant sequencing was also
selected. The data analyzed included patients previous treatment
regimens, potential next line therapy based on the National Comprehensive
Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines, and genomic sequencing based treatment
regimens. The direct medication costs were calculated based on Cardinal
Health's average wholesale price. Non-drug related treatment (radiation,
surgery, etc.), outpatient costs, inpatient costs, and
non-chemotherapeutic medications were excluded from the analysis.Results:
The five metastatic breast cancer patients each spent an average of
$195,838.22 on chemotherapeutic agents during the course of their
treatment. This totals to an average of $5,287.56 per month of treatment.
The average cost of the potential next line therapy based on NCCN
guidelines was approximately $11,597.58 per month. The average cost of an
individualized genomic-based treatment regimen for each breast cancer
patient approximated at $19,202.90. The breast cancer patient who
underwent neoadjuvant genetic sequencing and treatment spent a total of
$57,196.38 that was approximately $11,439.38 per month. If the patient
had received the standard of care based on the NCCN guidelines the cost
would have been $17,283.95 or $3,456.79 per month. The average total cost
of the treatment regimens received by five metastatic ovarian cancer
patients was $155,050.99 and approximately $6,385.70 per month of
treatment. The cost per month of potential next line therapy in these
patients was about $11,704.98. The average cost of a genomic-based
treatment regimen for each patient would cost approximately $7,542.82 per
month.Discussion: It is evident that genomic-based treatment regimens are
more expensive on average than the traditional standard of care. However,
in the metastatic setting, patients are spending exponential amounts of
money over their lifetime. Often times, they are continuously cycling
through expensive treatments that are ineffective in treating the
cancer's driving mechanism. Overall, genomic-based treatment has the
potential for a high return on investment due to its ability to directly
target the mutations causing a patient's malignancy. Further research is
needed to assess the outcomes associated with genomic-based treatment.

