Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation and localization of the cleaved form of PAR-4 in
ovarian and endometrial cancers


Prostate Apoptosis Response-4 (PAR-4) is a tumor suppressor protein whose
expression level in cancer is frequently decreased; however, it is
neither mutated nor suppressed. A unique feature of PAR-4 is that it can
induce apoptosis selectively in cancer cells without destroying normal
cells, giving it an interest in anti-cancer targeted therapy. PAR-4 is
not only regulated at the expression level, but also post-translationally
by phosphorylation and protein cleavage. Most recently, the caspase-3
cleavage of PAR-4 has been demonstrated by our laboratory and this
cleaved fragment might be responsible for PARinduced apoptosis. In the
present study, we have investigated the mechanisms regulating PAR-4
expression/activity and its cleaved form in ovarian and endometrial
cancer cell lines.Briefly, we used chemo-sensitive and resistant cancer
cell lines in which we produced stable clones expressing the cleaved form
of PAR-4 (cl.PAR-4) using lentiviral particles. Using these models, we
studied the regulation of cl.PAR-4 at the protein and genomic
level.Treated with cisplatin, sensitive cancer cells showed a decrease of
PAR-4 and an important increase of endogenous cl.PAR-4. Using our stable
clones, we observed that upon cisplatin treatment, the normally
constitutively expressed cl.PAR-4 protein level was increased while the
cDNA transgene was constitutively expressed, indicating a possible
involvement of post-translational mechanisms. Our results indicate that
degradation of our protein by the proteasome could be implicated because
of the significant increase of cl.PAR-4 in the presence of a proteasome
inhibitor (MG-132). PI3k could also be linked to this regulation because
of an increase of cl.PAR-4 in the presence of PI3k inhibitors (LY294002,
Wortmannin and BEZ235). Conversely, when using MAPK inhibitors (U0126 and
PD98059), cl.PAR-4 was negatively regulated.We also investigated the
localization of cl.PAR-4 using cytoplasmic/nuclear fractionationnation
and immunofluorescence. The results indicated that cl.PAR-4 is mainly
localized to the cytoplasm while being weakly present in the nucleus.
Cisplatin treatment does not seem to influence its localization. This
nuclear localization of cl.PAR-4 may have a role in its ability to induce
apoptosis. Finally, bioinformatic analyses suggests possible
ubiquitination and phosphorylation sites responsible for the regulation
of cl.PAR-4.Further analyses of the post-translational mechanisms
involved in cl.PAR-4 activity are still needed to better understand the
regulation of this potential tumor suppressor. By better understanding
the mechanisms of PAR-4 and its cleaved form, we may be able to target
this protein to sensitize chemoresistant gynecological cancer cells to
chemotherapy.

