Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of survivin-targeted therapy on chemosensitivity in the
treatment of acute myeloid leukemia


Background: Survivin is a dual functional protein. It acts as a critical
inhibitor of apoptosis and a key cell cycle regulator. In general,
survivin expresses in embryonic tissues during development and is
undetectable in most terminally differentiated tissues. It plays a
pivotal role in normal hematopoiesis; however, overexpression of survivin
has been reported in various hematological malignancies, including acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). Studies with AML patients indicate that elevated
expression of survivin correlates with a worse clinical outcome. To date,
no study initiated to test the efficacy of survivin-targeted therapy in
AML patients; and it remains unclear whether downregulation/inactivation
of survivin may alter chemosensitivity against AML. Thus, we evaluate the
effects of specific knockdown of survivin expression on AML cells and the
AML cells responsiveness to chemotherapy. We have also investigated the
therapeutic potential of the survivin inhibitor YM155, which is under
clinical trials in a variety of human cancers, either alone or in
combination with the commonly used chemotherapeutic agents in the
treatment of AML.Material and Methods: Traditional PCR and real-time PCR
were used to measure mRNA levels in AML cell lines. Western blot analyses
were performed to determine protein expression and activation. Cell death
was quantified by a specific apoptotic ELISA (enzyme linked immunosorbent
assay). Flow cytometric analyses were used to explore cell cycle
progression. Cell Titer AQueous Non-Radioactive Cell Proliferation Assays
(MTS) were carried out to evaluate changes of cell proliferation.Results:
Kasumi-1 and HL-60 cells showed relatively higher expression levels of
survivin among all AML cell lines tested. Specific knockdown of survivin
expression in Kasumi-1 and HL-60 cells resulted in: inhibition of cell
proliferation; cell cycle G2/M arrest; upregulation of DNA damage
response and apoptotic-related proteins; and increased histone-associated
DNA fragmentation. Downregulation of survivin enhanced AML cells
sensitivity to etoposide- or doxorubicin-induced
anti-proliferative/anti-survival activity. The small inhibitor YM155
trigged dose- and time-dependent reduction of survivin and apoptosis in
both Kasumi-1 and HL-60 cells. The combinatorial effects of YM155 and
chemotherapeutics were either synergetic or antagonistic, depending on
the drugs used for combination and the type of cells being
treated.Conclusions: These data demonstrate that survivin is important
for the maintenance and proliferation of AML cells. Downregulation of
survivin in AML cells enhances chemosensitivity. The combinatorial
effects of YM155 and chemotherapeutics can be synergetic or antagonistic,
depending on the drugs and the AML cell types. Our findings provide a
rationale for further evaluation of survivin-targeted therapy in the
treatment of patients with AML.

