Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNA reference samples for interlaboratory study


The biomarkers of interest in this study are microRNA (miRNA), small
non-coding RNAs involved in the regulation of gene expression. Currently,
over 1000 human miRNAs have been identified. Several laboratories within
the Early Detection Research Network are currently profiling miRNA as
potential biomarkers. The reference sample paradigm presented and
evaluated here is designed to provide measurement assurance in the
earliest phases of a cancer biomarker development pipeline.Three
commercially available samples of human total RNA (brain, liver, and
placenta) were selected for detectable differences in miRNA expression
based upon previously reported miRNA microarray experiments. For each
round of this study, replicate samples of each tissue were aliquoted,
blinded, and distributed to participating laboratories. The samples were
then profiled using the standard workflows of each laboratory. This was
repeated over multiple rounds of measurement. Raw data were processed in
pair-wise comparisons between tissue types.Log2 transformed ratios were
calculated for each detectable miRNA. For each of these miRNA ratios, the
results among laboratories were compared to the consensus value to
provide a measure of concordance and help identify laboratories that
might need to make adjustments to their process. Results demonstrated
repeatability within labs and reproducibility among labs with respect to
direction and magnitude of differential miRNA expression between tissues
for a set of miRNAs of interest (MOI). For the first round, 79% of
reported results for all log2 ratio combinations and MOI were in
agreement with the consensus values.Subsequent rounds demonstrated
increased concordance, with 91 and 100% agreement, respectively. The data
from the nine neat tissue total RNA samples were also used for in silico
modeling to predict the values for two complex mixtures based on three
components. The two mixture designs provide a pair of reference samples
with designed-in reciprocal ratios of 2:1 for brain and placenta, as well
as a shared 1:1 liver component. For two brain-selective and two
placenta-selective MOI, 91% of reported values were in close agreement
with the target values. Overall, measurement results were harmonious for
a set of miRNAs of interest measured by all participants, both within
rounds and between rounds. The laboratories were also able to demonstrate
the ability to resolve the 2-fold differences created with complex
mixtures. These results suggest that endogenous miRNAs present within
total RNA may be suitable as QA/QC process controls.

