Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor cell plasticity with transition to a mesenchymal phenotype
is a mechanism of chemoresistance that is reversed by Notch pathway
inhibition in lung adenocarcinoma


Background: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the
world, mainly due to complex genetic events that characterize lung
cancer, tumor heterogeneity and resistance to traditional and targeted
treatments. Resistance may be explained by passive clonal selectivity,
however, the propensity and variability of resistance suggests an active
process of tumor plasticity. We hypothesize that tumor cells undergo an
epithelial to mesenchymal transition as a mechanism of resistance to
chemotherapy.Results: The lung adenocarcinoma cell lines NCI-H1299,
NCI-H358, and NCI-H441 were exposed to gradually increasing doses of
docetaxel over 12-16 weeks. Chemoresistance emerged with a 10-15X
increase in IC50 as compared to parental cells. With each treatment dose
increase more than 50% of cells remained alive, suggesting bulk cell
transformation. This resistance has been maintained for more than 20
generations after withdrawal of docetaxel. Morphologically, NCI-H358 and
NCI-H441 chemoresistant cell lines lost their cobblestone architecture
becoming more spindle-shaped. Using RT-PCR assays, there was increased
expression of mesenchymal-related genes, vimentin (2.5-3.5X), twist
(2-4X) and decreased expression of epithelial-related genes such as E-CAD
(2-5X). Our previous data suggested that Notch activity plays a
significant role in the EMT process, thus we evaluated Notch downstream
genes expression by RT-PCR. We detected increase expression of Hey2
(2.5-3.5X), in NCI-H358 and NCI-H441 resistant cell lines as compared to
parental cells. When chemoresistant cell lines were exposed to gamma
secretase inhibitor, a Notch inhibitor, they became less invasive,
epithelial-like and sensitive to docetaxel.Conclusion: These data suggest
that tumor cell plasticity with transition to a mesenchymal phenotype is
a mechanism of chemotherapy resistance that is controlled through the
Notch pathway. Inhibiting Notch activity induces mesenchymal to
epithelial transition and re-sensitizes cells to chemotherapy. Notch
inhibition in combination with standard chemotherapy represents a
potential approach to achieve better disease control.

