Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of TGF -IL6 axis mediates chemoresistance in non-small
cell lung cancer by increasing epithelial-mesenchymal transition signaling


The tumor microenvironment is composed of different types of stromal
cells that represent a key component of tumor progression, while it has
been speculated that stromal components are functionally organized to
promote cancer cell survival. A specific subset of stromal cells, termed
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), secretes factors that promote
tumorigenesis. We previously reported that CAFs increase the malignant
potential of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) via the TGF -IL6 axis.
The purpose of this study was to clarify the role of the TGF -IL6 axis in
communication between CAFs and NSCLC cells for chemoresistance.MethodsWe
used standard NSCLC cell lines (A549, NCI-H358), NSCLC cells obtained
using a cancer tissue-originated spheroid (CTOS) method, lung normal
fibroblasts (LNFs), and CAFs obtained from primary cultures of specimens
from NSCLC patients to evaluate phenotypic changes in the presence of
human IL-6, TGF-1, and conditioned medium (CM) from the cells.
Immunohistochemistry was also utilized to examine the distribution of
fibroblasts in 75 tumor specimens obtained from patients with NSCLC after
undergoing chemoradiotherapy.ResultsExpression levels of myofibroblast
markers were elevated in CAFs as compared to LNFs, while CM from
fibroblasts induced epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) in NSCLC
cells. CM also enhanced the expression of stem cell markers such as CD44,
and increased CD133 mRNA levels in cancer cells and resistance to
cisplatin in lung cancer cells as well as CTOS produced cells, indicating
that the CM from fibroblasts was biologically active. Furthermore, the
concentration of IL-6 was higher in CM from CAFs as compared to that from
LNFs, and CM-induced phenotypic changes of cancer cells were inhibited by
addition of the IL-6 receptor neutralizing antibody. Cancer cells
incubated with IL-6 and TGF-1 showed significantly increased EMT changes
and acquisition of cancer stemness as compared with those treated with
TGF-1 alone, suggesting that IL-6 enhances TGF- signaling. Cisplatin
treatment also increased TGF- expression in cancer cells, and TGF-1
activated LNFs and CAFs to increase IL-6 production. Immunohistochemistry
was used to examine EMT status, fibroblast distribution, and IL-6
expression in tumor specimens obtained from patients with NSCLC after
undergoing chemotherapy. EMT changes of cancer cells were correlated with
a diffuse distribution of SMA-stained fibroblasts and stromal IL-6
expression.ConclusionIL-6 from CAFs enhanced epithelial cell EMT and
acquisition of cancer stemness by enhancing TGF- signaling. IL-6 and TGF-
may play contributing roles in maintenance of the paracrine loop between
these two cytokines as part of the communication between CAFs and NSCLC
cells, resulting in chemoresistance.

