Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: hnRNPA2/B1 upregulates COX-2 expression and tumor growth and
predicts poor prognosis in human lung cancers


Constitutive high expression of COX-2 can promote tumor development and
has been regarded as a hallmarker for cancers. However, the excise
regulation mechanism of COX-2 and its role in lung tumoirgenesis remains
unknown. In this study, we discovered and identified hnRNPA2/B1 as a
novel regulator of COX-2 promoter in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
cells by a DNA probe-biotin-streptavidin-agarose pulldown and proteomic
technique. We showed that hnRNPA2/B1 specifically bound to COX-2 core
promoter region, activated COX-2 promoter activity and up-regulated COX-2
expression. Knockdown of hnRNPA2/B1 expression by siRNA significantly
suppressed tumor cell growth in NSCLC cell lines in vitro and in a animal
model in vivo by inhibiting COX-2 expression. In contrast, overexpression
of hnRNPA2/B1 promoted COX-2 expression and tumor cell growth in NSCLC
cells. Micro-tissue array and immunohistochemical assay showed that
hnRNPA2/B1 expression correlated with COX-2 expression and high
expression of hnRNPA2/B1 and COX-2 was associated with worse prognosis in
patients with NSCLCs. Mechanistically, hnRNPA2/B1 functions as a
regulator of COX-2 to control tumor growth through its interaction with
p300, a transcriptional co-activator, in NSCLC cells. Immunoprecipitation
and confocal immunofluorescence microscope analysis confirmed the direct
interaction of hnRNPA2/B1 with p300 proteins. Overexpression of p300, but
not its histon acetyltransferase domain deletion mutation, enhanced the
acetylation of hnRNPA2/B1, facilitated the binding of hnRNPA2/B1 to COX-2
promoter, thereby promoted COX-2 expression and tumor cell growth.
Therefore, these results indicate that hnRNPA2/B1 acts as an activator to
regulate COX-2 expression and tumor growth through the interaction with
p300 in NSCLC cells and suggest that the hnRNPA2/B1/COX-2 signaling is a
potential therapeutic target for lung cancers.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

