Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation dictates transcription factor binding and gene
activation in brain tumor


Dysregulation of DNA methylation is a hallmark in various types of
cancers including malignant brain tumors. Although genome-wide
methylation profiles (i.e., methylome) in brain tumors are increasingly
becoming available, the functional impact of DNA methylation on tumor
malignancy remains largely elusive. Classical dogma states that promoter
CpG island methylation (mCpG) influences tumor biology by silencing tumor
suppressor genes through interfering with transcription factor (TF)-DNA
binding. In this study, we challenge this view by showing that many TFs,
including krppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), preferentially bind to
mCpG-containing motifs and thereby transactivate gene expression. The
cancer driver KLF4 is up-regulated in high-grade gliomas. We found that
in addition to binding to conventional unmethylated DNA motifs, KLF4
bound to mCpG-containing motifs in a sequence-specific manner and thereby
transactivated gene expression. We further demonstrated that the
dual-binding activities of KLF4 were through distinct domains. Based on
the crystal structure of KLF4, we generated a KLF4 mutant (R458A) that no
longer bound to methylated DNA motif but retained KLF4 binding to
unmethylated motif. This KLF4R458A mutant allowed us to uncouple the
molecular and biological effects of KLF4-binding to methylated and
unmethylated motifs in biological relevant systems such as glioblastoma
(GBM) cells. We engineered GBM cell lines to express either doxycycline
(Dox)-inducible KLF4 wild type (KLF4-wt) or Dox-inducible KLF4R458A
mutant (KLF4-mut) transgenes. Neither KLF4-wt nor KLF4-mut had
appreciable effect on cell proliferation and cell viability. However,
compared with KLF4-mut expressing cells, KLF4-wt induced noticeable
morphology changes characterized by elongated, spindle-like phenotypes.
We further showed that KLF4-wt but not KLF4-mut promoted GBM cell
migration and adhesion by scratch and transwell assays. This cell
response was partially reversed by the DNA methytransferase inhibitor
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-Aza), confirming by alternate methods a DNA
methylation-dependent mechanism. We employed cell-motility q-PCR arrays
and found that 10 genes involved in the cell motility pathway were
up-regulated by KLF4-wt but not KLF4-mut. Furthermore, for one of these
genes, the small GTPase RhoC, ChIP-PCR demonstrated that KLF4 bound to
its promoter region via a mCpG-dependent mechanism. Our separate large
scale ChIP-sequencing revealed that KLF4 bound to 2733 DNA fragments
through a methylation-dependent manner in brain tumor cells. These data
reveal the novel mechanism by which DNA methylation at CpG sites
regulates cancer cell phenotype through transcription factor-dependent
gene transactivation. These findings are paradigm shifting and
substantially impact our understanding on how CpG methylation influences
tumor cell behavior such as migration and invasion.

