Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic characterization of brain metastases reveals divergent
evolution and metastasis specific mutations


Background: Brain metastases represent an unmet need in current oncologic
care. Approximately 8-10% of cancer patients will develop brain
metastases, and more than half of these patients will pass away within a
few months of their diagnosis. We have a limited understanding of how
brain metastases genetically evolve from their primary tumors. Our
objectives were to (1) elucidate the genomic evolutionary patterns
leading to brain metastases (2) identify whether brain metastases harbor
clinically significant genetic differences compared to their primary
tumors and other extracranial metastatic sites, and (3) examine the
extent of genetic heterogeneity across regionally separated and
anatomically distinct sites of brain metastasis. Methods: We subjected
104 matched primary tumor biopsies, brain metastases, and normal tissue
to whole exome sequencing, including 20 cases with regionally and
anatomically separated brain metastasis sites, regional lymph nodes, and
distal extracranial metastases. We performed an integrative analysis of
somatic single nucleotide variants and copy-number alterations to
reconstruct phylogenetic trees relating the subclones from each patient.
We analyzed evolutionary relationships between related cancer samples and
annotated phylogenetic trees with clinically significant genetic
alterations. Results: Every brain metastasis displayed branched
evolution: the brain metastasis and primary tumor shared a common
ancestor yet both the primary tumor and brain metastasis continued to
evolve independently. We found novel clinically actionable genetic
alterations that were exclusive to brain metastases in 56% of cases. The
brain metastases were also enriched for several pathways, some pathways
specific to a particular histology. Distal extracranial metastases and
regional lymph nodes were highly divergent from brain metastases, and in
no cases, did we observe an extracranial site that closely resembled the
brain metastasis. In contrast, regionally and anatomically separated
brain metastasis sites were genetically homogenous and shared nearly all
genetic alterations detected. Conclusions: Brain metastases are
genetically divergent from primary tumors. Clinically, these observations
demonstrate that biopsies of primary tumors fail to capture the
heterogeneity with patients with brain metastases, potentially missing
clinically actionable mutations in these life-threatening metastases.
Notably, regional lymph nodes and distal extracranial metastases were not
reliable genetic surrogates for brain metastases. When clinically
feasible, characterization of even a single brain metastasis lesion is
superior to that of a primary or lymph node biopsy for selection of a
targeted therapeutic agent.

