Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rottlerin induces ER stress-mediated cell death in pancreatic
stellate cells


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a deadly disease with a 5-year
survival rate under 5%. Whereas activated pancreatic stellate cells
(PaSC) are important players in PDAC stroma, simultaneously targeting
both cancer and stromal cells can be beneficial for cancer therapy. We
previously reported that the phytochemical rottlerin dose-dependently
reduces PaSC viability through dysregulation of autophagy and induction
of apoptosis, and attenuates tumor progression in PDAC experimental
models. Interestingly, both rottlerin and metformin have been shown to
affect mitochondrial function, and metformin has been demonstrated to
induce AMPK-dependent, CHOP-mediated cell death. Here we further studied
the mechanisms underlying cell death and autophagy in rottlerin-treated
mouse PaSC. Rottlerin rapidly depolarized mitochondrial membrane,
increased oxygen consumption and decreased cellular ATP levels and the
expression of the mitochondrial transmembrane protein TOM20, suggesting
mitochondrial damage. Rottlerin dysregulated autophagy as indicated by
rapid and prolonged increasing in LC3I-LC3II conversion and p62/SQSTM1
accumulation. However, rottlerin-induced LC3II did not further change in
the presence of inhibitors of autophagic flux, suggesting that rottlerin
blocks autophagy progression in PaSC. In addition, rottlerin induced
marked AMPK activation and inhibited mTOR signaling. In contrast to
metformin, AMPK1/2 knockdown had no effect on rottlerin-induced
inhibition of mTOR signaling and cell viability. Furthermore, rottlerin
induced ER stress as manifested by persistent activation of the PERK
pathway and upregulation of proapoptotic transcription factor CHOP.
Importantly, rottlerin-induced apoptosis was greatly reduced in PaSC
isolated from CHOP null mice. In summary, these data indicate that
rottlerin reduces PaSC viability through impairing mitochondrial
function, inhibiting mTOR signaling and inducing prolonged ER stress.
Specifically, CHOP induction plays an important role in determining
cell-fate in mitochondria-targeting agents, such as rottlerin and
metformin.

