Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fractionated but not single dose radiation is an optimal adjuvant
for in situ tumor vaccination


Local radiotherapy (RT) has the potential to generate an in situ tumor
vaccine by inducing an immunogenic cell death (ICD) of the cancer cells.
In vitro, generation of the signals that define ICD is radiation
dose-dependent. However, in vivo we have previously shown that radiation
doses of 8 and 6 Gy given in 3 to 5 consecutive days were more effective
at inducing anti-tumor T cell responses in combination with anti-CTLA-4
antibody than a single larger dose of 20 Gy (Dewan et al., Clin Cancer
Res 2009).To understand the mechanisms underlying the different outcome
obtained with fractionated versus single dose RT, TSA tumors growing in
syngeneic immunocompetent BALB/c mice were harvested at 4, 24 and 48 hrs
post irradiation with 8 Gy X 3 or 20 Gy X 1 for analysis of gene
expression using Agilent mouse mRNA Microarray Kit (V2). Subsequent data
were analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) and gene ontology
classification. Expression of key immune genes in TSA cells irradiated in
vitro was assessed by RT-qPCR. Tumor-infiltrating dendritic cells (TIDC)
were analyzed 5 days after the last radiation exposure by flow cytometry.
IFN production by irradiated TSA cells was measured by Procarta
immunoassay.Over 100 immune response genes were differentially expressed
in tumors irradiated with 8Gyx3 but not 20Gyx1, with a dominant type I
interferon (IFN) response at 4 and 24 hours, which was confirmed by
RT-qPCR. Tumor infiltration by CD8+ dendritic cells (DC), which are the
subset of DC cross-presenting tumor cell-derived antigens, was only
slightly increased by 20Gyx1 but markedly increased by 8Gyx3. Moreover,
DCs present in tumors treated with 8Gyx3 showed a significant
upregulation of activation markers CD40 and CD70. Importantly, the in
vitro setting (devoid of an immune infiltrate) demonstrated expression of
IFN and downstream immune genes, including chemokines CXCL9, CXCL10 and
CXCL11 by TSA cells irradiated with 8Gyx3 but not 20Gyx1. Production of
IFN by TSA cells was confirmed with an increased secretion of IFN in the
supernatant only after 8Gyx3 irradiation.Overall, data indicate that
fractionated RT can mimic, at least in part, a viral infection and
activate canonical defense pathways in neoplastic epithelial cells with
induction of type-I IFN. In vivo this leads to recruitment and activation
of DC cross-presenting tumor antigens. Thus, fractionated-RT acts as an
optimal immune adjuvant for in situ tumor vaccination. We propose that
repeated cycles of RT-induced cell death may better mimick cycles of
viral infection and are currently defining the molecular mechanisms
involved. Results are important for understanding the determinant of
response in patients currently treated wit RT and anti-CTLA-4 in clinical
trials at our institution.

