Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High dose intermittent scheduling of AZD8835, a novel potent and
selective inhibitor of PI3K and PI3K, identifies potential treatment
strategies for PIK3CA-dependent cancers


The PIK3CA gene, encoding the p110 catalytic unit of PI3K, is one of the
most frequently mutated oncogenes described in human cancer. Hence PI3K
is a target subject to intensive efforts in identifying inhibitors and
evaluating their therapeutic potential. To date most studies with PI3K
inhibitors have used a continuous (daily) dosing schedule and although
clinical responses have been reported the overall activity observed has
been moderate. This may in part be due to suboptimal pathway inhibition
which is capped by normal tissue toxicities such as rash, diarrhoea and
hyperglycaemia. Furthermore, additional dose reduction may be required
when such agents are used in combination with other therapies. Therefore
in our efforts to optimise inhibition of PI3K pathway signalling, we have
explored high dose intermittent scheduling as an alternative to
continuous dosing. Here we describe pre-clinical studies that exemplify
such concepts, centred around use of AZD8835, a PI3K inhibitor currently
in Phase 1 clinical evaluation. AZD8835 is a novel and potent inhibitor
of PI3K and PI3K, with selectivity vs. PI3K, PI3K(IC50s of 6nM, 6nM,
431nM and 90nM respectively in enzyme assays) and other kinases. AZD8835
preferentially displays activity in tumour models with a mutant PIK3CA
background, such as ER+ve breast cancer models. Such models were used in
our investigations, in both cell culture and in mouse xenograft contexts.
We demonstrate that a high dose intermittent schedule of single agent
AZD8835 achieves greater pathway inhibition yielding significant
anti-tumour responses. In the sensitive BT474 xenograft model, a dose of
100mg/kg AZD8835 BID on days 1 and 4 in a weekly schedule delivered -36%
tumour regression, accompanied by a strongly elevated rapid onset
apoptosis signal with 4-16% cells staining positively for
cleaved-caspase3. We also evaluated AZD8835 in combination with other
targeted therapeutic agents, in MCF7, BT474 and T47D breast models,
observing increased sensitivity relative to single agent AZD8835; firstly
with agents that target other nodes in the PI3K pathway; secondly with
agents targeting parallel but interconnected driver pathways in breast
disease (ER, CDK4/6). Overall the data indicate that high dose
intermittent scheduling can deliver strong anti-tumour efficacy in a
range of combination settings and provides a promising alternative to
continuous dosing. Such schedules merit clinical evaluation.

