Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Filling the void of Canadian T-cell lymphoma epidemiology: Data
from the canadian institute for health information discharge abstract
database


IntroductionEpidemiological data for rare malignancies can be difficult
to obtain; population-based data sets are often abridged to group
disparate rare malignancies into larger more manageable clusters. These
problems are acute in Canada, where such epidemiological data are often
estimated from second-hand US data (e.g. Surveillance, Epidemiology and
End-Results (SEER) data). Recently, the Canadian Institute of Health
Information (CIHI) has set out to make epidemiological data more readily
accessible, permitting University-affiliated researchers to access the
anonymized and codified CIHI Discharge Abstract Database (DAD).MethodsWe
undertook to estimate the incidence, demographics, and outcome data
relating to the various subtypes of peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs)
in Canada (excluding Quebec and British Columbia, for which data was not
collected). The CIHI DAD consists of a two fiscal-year anonymized 10%
random sample of all hospital discharge abstracts in Canada. The DAD is
indexed by a unique anonymous patient identifiers and includes relative
date metrics, by which all dates originally present on the abstract are
standardized to a unique but confidential CIHI DAD reference date. From
these data we were able to identify all hematolymphoid diagnoses, isolate
the PTCLs, separate new from historical diagnoses, and identify patient
age range, gender and disposition data. When the disposition data were
combined with the relative date metrics, a gross estimate of T-cell
lymphoma overall survival (relative to all other hematolymphoid
diagnoses) was generated. Population normalization was achieved using
inter-censal estimates obtained from Statistics Canada.ResultsPTCL
incidence was estimated at 0.72 cases per 100,000 per annum (comparable
to recently published SEER data). We also estimated a prevalence of 21
PTCLs per 100,000 healthcare encounters. Most cases of PTCL originated
from males (63%) and the distribution of age ranges was skewed toward
older adults (median age by number of cases = 60 years). The most
frequent diagnosis was PTCL, NOS (46%). By the Cox-proportional hazards
method, there was a statistically significant difference in survival
between the T-cell lymphomas and non T-cell hematolymphoid malignancies
(regression co-efficient for PTCL vs. non-PTCL diagnosis p = 0.003) in
favor of the latter; not surprisingly, age was also predictive of overall
survival, regardless of the subtype of malignancy (regression
co-efficient p = 0.004).ConclusionsTo our knowledge, the above is the
first attempt to estimate the epidemiology of PTCLs in Canada. In
addition, we present a unique approach to obtaining high-quality (albeit
geographically incomplete) Canadian epidemiological data via the CIHI DAD
database; this dataset may serve as a valuable resource in the context of
rare diseases whose epidemiological data may not be widely or publicly
available.

