Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of genetic concordance between primary tumor
cells, circulating tumor cells, and metastatic tumor cells from patients
with prostate cancer


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) which disseminate from the primary tumor
site have been found to be a major source of metastatic tumor. However,
CTCs are heterogeneous and most CTC DNA is fragmented due to apoptosis.
To better understand the molecular pathogenesis of metastasis, it is
imperative to obtain single, non-apoptotic CTCs and investigate the
genetic concordance between primary tumor cells, CTCs and metastatic
tumor cells. Due to the abundance of normal cells present in the blood
and in tumor tissue, isolation of single tumor cells or pure cell
populations of these cells is extremely difficult. The DEPArray platform
is designated to collect single CTCs after Cell-Search enrichment, and to
sort pure intact tumor cells from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) tissues. Taking advantage of this technology, we have isolated
single CTCs from prostate cancer patients. Whole genome amplification was
performed and genomes with high integrity were used to evaluate the
hotspot mutations in PIK3CA. For comparison, we also made single cell
suspensions from FFPE tissue blocks of primary tumors and metastatic
tumor in lymph nodes from the same patients. Immunofluorescence staining
for cytokeratin (CK) and vimentin (Vim) was performed, followed by
isolation of pure tumor cells (CK+), stromal cells (Vim+) and
double-positive cells (CK+/Vim+) from both primary tumor and lymph node
samples. We plan to do genetic analysis on these cells and compare the
results to determine the genetic concordance between primary tumor cells,
CTCs and metastatic tumor cells. By using the DEPArray, we have
successfully isolated single CTCs, and populations of tumor cells,
stromal cells and double-positive cells from primary and metastatic
tumors. We will present new data on the genetic concordance between these
cells, which will provide new insight into our understanding of
metastasis in prostate cancer.

