Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific mutant tumor DNA can be detected in ovarian cystic fluid
of an unknown ovarian tumor cyst


Can we detect rare mutations in ovarian cystic fluid of unknown severity
in order to develop a molecular genetic test for epithelial ovarian
cancer?Background: Benign and malignant ovarian cysts are difficult to
distinguish. Early diagnose is life saving, however 75% of ovarian
adenocarcinomas is found in late stage. Approx. one operated ovarian cyst
in 7-10 are found to be cancer and potentially life-threatening,
subjecting the woman to unnecessary oophorectomy and morbidity. A genetic
test of fine needle aspirated cystic fluid has to be very accurate to be
able to substitute the histopathologic examination following
surgery.Methods: DNA was purified from 78 ovarian cystic fluids
(collected at the time of operation) from serous adenomas/adenocarcinomas
and corresponding tumor tissues and subjected to state-of-the-art genetic
analysis. We evaluated 10,000 bp for subtle mutations (single base
substitutions, small insertions, small deletions). Under the conditions
used, mutations present in >0.1% of template molecules could be detected.
The analyses were carried out in a completely blind fashion. We then
evaluated the DNA of the primary tumor.Results: We detected zero, one, or
two mutations per cyst. The same mutations were identified in the
corresponding tumor tissue, and no others. This dramatically confirms the
specificity of the approach. 91% of the malignant cysts (n = 32) had at
least one mutation and 62% of these were in TP53; 17% in low (n = 12) and
90% in high (n = 20) grade serous adenocarcinoma regardless of stage. In
low-grade tumors mutations in KRAS dominated over PIK3C and PTEN. 65% of
the borderline type (LMP n = 20) tumors had a BRAF V600E mutation. The
mutant allelic fraction was much higher in malignant than benign tumors;
the DNA concentration was relatively low in 20 benign cysts and no
mutations were identified in this group consisting of 10 serous adenoma
and 10 simple cysts (healthy controls). Results will be correlated to
survival.Conclusion: Data proofs that we can detect mutant tumor DNA
corresponding to the primary ovarian tumor in the ovarian cystic fluid.
Data suggest that gene-testing of ovarian cystic fluid could aid in
diagnostics and further guide its management.

