Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triple negative breast cancer cells have higher dependence on
mitophagy for their survival as compared to hormone positive breast
cancer cells


Autophagy is a key pathway utilised by the cells to clear the
dysfunctional cellular components and maintain homeostasis. However
cancer cells having defective apoptosis, deploy autophagy as a survival
mechanism by limiting tumor necrosis and metabolic stress. Autophagy has
been reported to be upregulated in triple negative breast cancers which
are categorized as the most aggressive breast cancers with poor
prognosis. Nevertheless the exact mechanism of autophagic upregulation in
TNBC is still elusive. Therefore analyzing pathways specifically altered
in these tumors might provide better targets for therapeutic
intervention.Results:In the present study we observed higher basal
autophagy in TNBC cell line MDA MB 231 as compared to triple positive
MCF7 cells as analyzed by the presence of higher number of GFP-LC3 puncta
in the former. Treatment with 20M of autophagy inhibitor chloroquine for
48 hrs led to significant cell death in TNBC cell line as compared to
MCF7 whereas treatment with 20M of PI3K inhibitor wortamannin did not
significantly affected the survival of TNBC and MCF7 cells. Further the
analysis of autophagy markers revealed higher LC3B and Beclin1 levels as
compared to ATG5 and ATG7 levels in MDA MB 231 cells both at mRNA and
protein levels as analyzed by qPCR and western blot. Also the knockdown
of ATG7 by ATG7 shRNA did not significantly affected the survival of TNBC
cells.Conclusion:Thus in this study we aim to highlight the difference in
the expression of autophagy markers and the effect of autophagy
inhibitors wherein only late phase of autophagy seems to significantly
upregulated in TNBC. The difference can be attributed to the dependence
of TNBC cells upon late phase autophagy or particularly mitophagy that is
crucial for rapid clearance of misfolded proteins and dysfunctional
mitochondria as has been reported in TNBCs. Further study to dissect the
mechanism of selective upregulation of late phase autophagyor mitophagy
in TNBC might provide novel targets for treatment strategies in these
breast cancers.

