Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential levels of mutated Kras drive lung cancer cell
motility and morphology via a hypoxia-sensitive FAK/Erk/Myosin II
signaling pathway


Kras controls many cellular processes such as cell migration and
survival. Mutation of Kras to a constitutively active form is a common
alteration in lung cancer. Being constantly active results in a hyper
activation of downstream signaling cascades, which leads to enhanced
tumorigenicity and high metastatic potential. How constitutive Kras
activation translates into these different functions, however, remains
unclear. Using patient-derived lung cancer cell lines expressing
oncogenic KrasV12 we discovered that Kras expression, not transcription,
gets up-regulated under long-term culture in 1% O2. We confirmed the in
vivo relevance of this finding, staining mouse lung tumors for Kras and
Hif1, as an indicator for hypoxic areas, and found heterogeneous Kras
levels throughout the tumors with hot-spots that overlaid with Hif1
expression. Up-regulation of KrasV12 also correlated with a significant
increase in growth of tumor-like aggregates in soft-agar assays and a
morphological change from adherent single-cells into sphere-like
aggregates in cell culture. This morphology was reversible upon
knock-down of Kras. Separation of single clones confirmed the relation
between adherent and sphere-like morphologies and the level of KrasV12
expression. Interestingly, the expression level of Kras correlated with
clonal migration behavior. Low Kras expressers were highly motile whereas
high Kras expressers remained stationary in aggregates. In agreement,
exogenous expression of KrasV12 in motile, low Kras expressers converted
their morphology and migration behavior to sphere-like, stationary
aggregates. Using Western blot analysis we found that these changes are
due to differences in Erk activation down-stream of Kras. In high Kras
expressers Erk is highly phosphorylated which leads to higher Myosin II
activity and thus to a contractile, sphere-like morphology with low
mobility. Low Kras levels result in less Erk activation and therefore
lower Myosin II activity which leads to an adherent, motile phenotype.
Using a specific Erk inhibitor, we could convert high Kras expressers
into adherent, motile low Kras clones. At the same time we found an
adhesion-dependent feedback mechanism which regulates cellular Kras
levels. Protein analysis of cells cultured in low adhesion dishes formed
spheres and dramatically increased their Kras content. Most
interestingly, this increase was reversible by stimulation of adhesion.
Additionally, blocking FAK activation in low Kras expressers resulted in
up-regulation of Kras and Erk phosphorylation which went along with a
switch to sphere-like morphology. Based on these findings we propose a
novel mechanism for controlling cancer cell migration by a
hypoxia-sensitive, adhesion-dependent Kras switch which makes the cell
very adaptable to different environments during the whole process of
metastasis.

