Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of genetic variations in neuroblastoma using deep
targeted sequencing


Neuroblastoma tumors (NBs) show complex patterns of genetic
abnormalities, which may include amplification or oncogenic mutations of
ALK kinase in sporadic and familial cases.In analyzing genomic deviations
it is sometimes highly efficient to focus on deep sequencing of specific
parts of the genome with high clinical relevance to NB prognosis. This
can be achieved by studying specific regions using targeted or amplicon
sequencing, and thereby reducing the complexity of the analysis. The main
benefits of this approach are reduced costs and shorter analysis time,
due to the sequencing of fewer bases and the associated reduction in the
volume of data generated. Additional benefit comes from achieving higher
coverage that provides means for detection tumor specific variants
present at subclonal level.The HaloPlex method, the custom target
enrichment kit from Agilent, uses a different approach among enrichment
kits, namely the fragmentation of DNA by restriction enzymes in
conjunction with biotinylated probes designed to hybridize to both ends
of a targeted DNA restriction fragment. This will form circular DNA
strands that will be then closed by ligation
(http://www.genomics.agilent.com) and it requires only 250 ng of input
material. We targeted 35kb of genomic sequence including exons of related
genes, as well as 50 bp of flanking exon regions. Samples were sequenced
in a single MiSeq run (Illumina) using 2150 paired-end sequencing.We
compiled a gene panel for Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) comprising of
three genes, ALK, ATRX and PPM1D, where the two first are associated with
different subgroups of NBs. The Haloplex panel was evaluated on a pilot
cohort of 40 patients including four controls with known and defined
mutations (missense and indels), which produced a total of 4 Gb of data.
Data were analyzed using an in-house bioinformatics pipeline based on
mapping reads against hg19 using bwa, with realignment and recalibration
using GATK haplotype caller, and variant annotation using ANNOVAR. For
each position, the frequency for each base was calculated. The analysis
revealed that we were able to generate sufficient sequencing data with
very low background variability for mutation as well as deletion analysis
using our diagnostic panels. We identified all expected mutations in our
control samples. Sanger sequencing were used to validate the results and
for analyzing sensitivity and specificity of the detected
variants.Overall, the panel fulfills diagnostic criteria and will offer a
fast and reliable procedure that will be useful in clarifying molecular
genetic defects underlying NBs.

