Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome landscape of brain tumor progression at single-cell
resolution


BACKGROUND: Tumor progression within a brain is the process of acquiring
malignant genetic mutations from glial progenitor cells, dodging their
original developmental fate and deteriorating functional connectivity of
CNS. In order to devise effective targeted therapeutic strategies,
understanding distinct molecular and phenotypic evolutionary features of
cancer clones is eminent.METHODS: To examine molecular signatures
associated with malignant glioma progression, we analyzed transcriptome
dynamics of 311 single-cells derived from 3 patients showing distinct
disease patterns. Combined with single-cell level signatures, clonal
architecture of tumors was reconstructed based on Bayesian-model
clustering with integrated information of SSNVs and SCNAs identified from
bulk population-level using aCGH and WES.RESULTS: We found evidence of
branched evolutionary patterns within and across two histopathological
separated tumor regions. Both tumors have high clonal probable somatic
mutations, and evolutionary inference showed clonal lineage between two
tumor regions was divided at early time during tumor progression. For all
patients, the gene expression signatures within a tumor were
heterogeneous but converged towards mesenchymal phenotype in the
aggressive region. In the first case, the left tumor was self-limiting
and showed mixed proneural and classical gene expression signatures
whereas the right side tumor has expanded to the corpus callosum with
EGFR overexpression and mesenchymal gene expression. In a case of a
monocentric tumor with PDGFRA amplification, cancer cells disseminated
from the core mass with massive immune cell infiltration underwent
transcriptome switching from proneural to mesenchymal gene expression,
with a concomitant FGFR1 copy number gain and mutation. Lastly, in a
secondary glioblastoma with IDH1 mutation, GLIOLAN positive glioblastoma
was surrounded by grade III oligodendroglioma. The two tumor areas showed
intermingled heterogeneous gene expression signatures, with upregulation
of astrocytic/mesenchymal genes in the GLIOLAN positive tumor
cells.CONCLUSIONS: Our results show distinct genetic patterns of clonal
expansion across patients undergoing malignant glioma progression. We
also provide the transcriptome-wide view of gene expression signatures
directed by genomic alterations. Overall our study reveals heterogeneity
of individual tumor but elucidates common genomic features of
glioblastoma progression.

