Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ONC201/TIC10 is effective as a monoagent and synergizes with
chemotherapy to induce cell death in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma


Outcome for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) patients using conventional
treatment standards remains unsatisfactory, particularly in advanced
stage/ relapsed disease creating an imminent need for investigating novel
treatment strategies. ONC201/TIC10 is a small molecule (Allen et al,
2013) that induces p53-independent cell death in tumor cells while
sparing normal cells through inactivation of the prosurvival kinases Akt
and ERK. ONC201 is currently entering Phase I/II clinical trials as a
monoagent in adult advanced cancers. We have previously shown that ONC201
induces significant cytotoxicity in preclinical models of human lymphomas
(Talekar et al, ASPHO 2014). Here, we show that ONC201 is not only
effective as a monoagent across several NHL cell lines, but that it also
synergizes with several chemotherapeutic agents to cooperatively induce
cell death in vitro.We found that ONC201 induces significant apoptosis in
a diverse panel of human NHL cell lines at low micromolar concentrations
(1.3 to 5.06 uM). Increased surface TRAIL and surface DR5 expression was
noted in a dose-dependent manner across representative cell lines. The
increase in surface TRAIL correlated with increase in sub-G1 DNA content,
which suggests that TRAIL may serve as a potential biomarker of response
to ONC201. ONC201-induced apoptosis was inhibited using a pan-caspase
inhibitor and was blocked by an anti-TRAIL antibody RIK-2, which indicate
induction of TRAIL-dependent cell death. Western blot analysis of
ONC201-treated NHL cells suggests ERK inhibition and Foxo3a activation as
a potential mechanism of cytotoxicity via TRAIL induction. In agreement
with this notion, we also observed upregulation of PARP & DR5 and
caspase-3 activation in response to ONC201 treatment.We further found
that ONC201 synergizes to potentiate cytotoxicity with several
chemotherapeutic agents approved for NHL treatment, particularly
anthracyclines (doxorubicin), nitrogen mustard (bendamustine),
antimetabolite (cytarabine) and proteasome inhibitor (bortezomib) via
cell viability experiments that were corroborated by apoptosis assays.
Together these results suggest that ONC201 is a potent antitumor agent in
NHL as monoagent and in combination with several approved therapies that
may be explored in phase Ib/II trials.

