Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin inhibits the oncogenic potential and invasiveness of
pancreatic cancer cells targeting CCN1-CXCR4 axis : A new perspective for
an old antidiabetic drug


Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is among the most aggressive of
solid malignancies responsible for around 330,000 deaths globally and
accounts for the fourth most common cause of deaths due to cancer in USA.
There has been a little advancement in the treatment of PDAC patients and
the mortality rate has remained unchanged and may even be climbing up.
Metformin, an oral biguanide medication used to treat type-2 diabetes
mellitus, has demonstrated potential therapeutic effect against PDAC.
Recent meta-analysis and epidemiologic studies indicate that diabetic
patients treated with metformin were less likely to develop pancreatic
cancer exhibit longer overall survival than those using other oral
antidiabetic medications. Although there are several reports of the
possible mode of action of Metformin against PDAC, no direct cellular/
molecular target is till reported.The present study aims to identify the
direct molecular target of metformin in pancreatic cancer cells.
Previously, we have demonstrated that matricellular protein CCN1/ Cyr61
plays pivotal role in pancreatic cancer development, maintenance of
stemness, and induction of tumor angiogenesis. Hence the goal of this
study is to investigate whether CCN1/ Cyr61 signaling cascade acts as a
potential target for metformin. The encouraging results we have obtained
so far reveal that metformin, which reduces CCN1 expression,
significantly inhibits SDF-1 induced invasion, formation of tumor spheres
(pancospheres) and also results in the down regulation of CXCR4 receptor
in PC cell lines (Panc-1 and AsPC-1). Interestingly we observed that
CXCR4 expression is drastically down regulated in genetically engineered
CCN1-knock out Panc-1 (Panc-1 KO CCN1) cells, compared to the scrambled
shRNA transfected Panc-1 cells. Further, it is also observed that Panc-1
K. CCN1 cells are found to be more susceptible to metformin treatment,
whereas extracellular supplementation of recombinant CCN1 protein
significantly abrogates the effect of metformin on PC cells. Moreover,
tumor progression was found to be drastically inhibited in metformin
treated Panc-1 (CCN1+ve) tumor xenografts in nude mice model, while the
anti-tumorigenic effect of metformin was found to be more drastic in
Panc-1 KO CCN1 tumor xenografts. In this scenario, we conclude that CCN1
acts as a direct target for metformin in PC cells, and targeted knock
down of CCN1 increases the effectiveness of metformin.[This project is
funded by VA Merit Award grants (SB & SKB)]

