Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EZH2 D1 domain mutants confer acquired resistance to EZH2-targeted
inhibitors and reprogram B-cell transcription


Aberrant epigenetic changes play an important role in the onset and
progression of numerous tumor types, and targeting enzymes that regulate
these processes holds significant promise for cancer treatment. The
identification of Y641 and A677 oncogenic mutations in the histone
methyl-transferase EZH2 in hematological cancers and melanoma, has led to
a surge of interest in exploring the therapeutic potential of targeting
EZH2. Several potent and selective small-molecule inhibitors targeting
EZH2 (EZH2i) have recently been generated. The most advanced compounds,
EPZ-6438 (E7438) and GSK126 (GSK2816126), are currently tested in
lymphoma and advanced solid tumors, with EPZ-6438 exhibiting preliminary
evidence of efficacy (ENA, 2014). As observed with other targeted cancer
therapies, acquired resistance may pose a major clinical challenge to
EZH2i. However, at this early stage in clinical development, mechanisms
of acquired resistance to EZH2i remain unidentified. Nonetheless, it is
critical to anticipate future clinical resistance mechanisms in order to
develop effective patient treatment strategies.To explore EZH2i
resistance, we used an innovative forward genetic approach that combined
a mutagenesis screen with next-generation sequencing technologies. Using
this strategy, we identified a hotspot of EZH2 missense mutations (Y111
and I109) that conferred cross-resistance to both EPZ-6438 and GSK126.
Surprisingly, the mutation hotspot lies outside the EZH2 catalytic region
in its D1 domain, signifying a unique allosteric mechanism of drug
resistance. Importantly, to drive resistance, the EZH2 mutants still
required an active histone methyl-transferase catalytic domain and the
main components of the polycomb repressive complex 2. Furthermore, we
also uncovered an unexpected neomorphic role for these mutations in
controlling the expression of genes typically involved in B-cell
differentiation. This work describes the first evidence of acquired
resistance to EZH2i, and identifies potential clinically relevant
resistance mutations. Moreover, our findings provide new mechanistic
insights into the function of EZH2, and importantly, suggest that
acquired-resistance to EZH2i may arise in the clinic in a manner that
remains targetable by inhibitors, thus, providing a foundation for the
discovery of second-generation EZH2i to treat relapsed patients.

