Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlating the expression of protein kinase C isozymes with the
transformed phenotype in colorectal cancer


Protein Kinase C (PKC) is a family of serine/threonine kinases that are
involved in almost every signal transduction cascade in cells. PKC
enzymes are activated by second messangers and respond to specific
environmental cues. The development of PKC modulators with anti-cancer
therapeutic potential is a major target in cancer. However, this task is
made difficult because PKC has an important role to play in normal
processes and the PKC family consists of at least 9 different isozymes.
Our hypothesis is that PKC expression, activity and localisation are
altered as colon epithelial cells switch from normal to the transformed
state. We are confident that being able to recognise these changes has
the potential to be used as a biomarker and prognostic marker in the
early detection of colon cancer.Real Time PCR was utilised to compare the
gene expression profile of 9 PKC isozymes in matched normal and cancer
tissue samples. We found differential expression of the conventional
PKCs, with PRKCB (the gene coding for PKC Beta II) being significantly
downregulated in the cancer tissue of over 90% of patients (pProtein
Kinase C (PKC) is a family of serine/threonine kinases that are involved
in almost every signal transduction cascade in cells. PKC enzymes are
activated by second messangers and respond to specific environmental
cues. The development of PKC modulators with anti-cancer therapeutic
potential is a major target in cancer. However, this task is made
difficult because PKC has an important role to play in normal processes
and the PKC family consists of at least 9 different isozymes. Our
hypothesis is that PKC expression, activity and localisation are altered
as colon epithelial cells switch from normal to the transformed state. We
are confident that being able to recognise these changes has the
potential to be used as a biomarker and prognostic marker in the early
detection of colon cancer.Real Time PCR was utilised to compare the gene
expression profile of 9 PKC isozymes in matched normal and cancer tissue
samples. We found differential expression of the conventional PKCs, with
PRKCB (the gene coding for PKC Beta II) being significantly downregulated
in the cancer tissue of over 90% of patients (p<0.01,n = 22). This change
was closely linked to the progression of the disease. Using tissue
microarrays, we also demonstrated significant alterations in both
epithelial and stromal levels of PKC Beta II between the patients normal
and diseased tissue. The level of PKC Beta II in the diseased tissue was
significantly decreased across patients (pProtein Kinase C (PKC) is a
family of serine/threonine kinases that are involved in almost every
signal transduction cascade in cells. PKC enzymes are activated by second
messangers and respond to specific environmental cues. The development of
PKC modulators with anti-cancer therapeutic potential is a major target
in cancer. However, this task is made difficult because PKC has an
important role to play in normal processes and the PKC family consists of
at least 9 different isozymes. Our hypothesis is that PKC expression,
activity and localisation are altered as colon epithelial cells switch
from normal to the transformed state. We are confident that being able to
recognise these changes has the potential to be used as a biomarker and
prognostic marker in the early detection of colon cancer.Real Time PCR
was utilised to compare the gene expression profile of 9 PKC isozymes in
matched normal and cancer tissue samples. We found differential
expression of the conventional PKCs, with PRKCB (the gene coding for PKC
Beta II) being significantly downregulated in the cancer tissue of over
90% of patients (p<0.01,n = 22). This change was closely linked to the
progression of the disease. Using tissue microarrays, we also
demonstrated significant alterations in both epithelial and stromal
levels of PKC Beta II between the patients normal and diseased tissue.
The level of PKC Beta II in the diseased tissue was significantly
decreased across patients (p<0.01,n = 164) and we associate the decreased
expression with tumour stage. In conclusion we suggest that differential
expression of PKC Beta II may be an important mechanism regulating the
change to the transformed phenotype in colon cancer.

