Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mTORC2 mediates SDF-1/CXCL12-induced angiogenesis


Angiogenesis occurs when new blood vessels sprout from the existing
vasculature and mature into an organized and functional circulatory
system. Physiological angiogenesis is stringently regulated and occurs
transiently. Numerous disease states, including chronic inflammation and
cancer, induce pathological angiogenesis, which disrupts the stable
vascular network by altering both positive and negative angiogenic
regulators. The chemokine stromal-cell derived factor-1 (SDF-1, also
called CXCL12) and its receptor CXCR4 promote endothelial cell (EC)
migration and tube formation. PI3K is a key downstream regulator of
CXCR4-mediated chemotaxis and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is at
the center of PI3K-mediated signal transduction. mTOR exists in two
complexes: mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and 2 (mTORC2). Receptor induced
mTORC1 signal transduction has been widely studied. In contrast, the
signaling upstream of mTORC2 remains elusive. We hypothesized that the
SDF-1 /CXCR4/mTOR signaling axis contributes to the molecular mechanism
of tumor angiogenesis. This study illustrates that SDF-1 activates a
distinct molecular signaling cascade in EC that involves CXCR4, G
protein, PI3K and mTORC2, but not mTORC1. CXCR4 inhibition blocks
sprouting in a 3D in vitro angiogenesis model, and specific inhibition of
each of the mTOR complexes reveals that sprouting angiogenesis requires
mTORC2 signal transduction. In a mouse model, tumor angiogenesis is
significantly reduced only when mTORC2 is targeted. An analysis of
targets downstream of mTORC2 indicates that 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase
(PFKFB3), which is a key regulator of glycolytic flux and sprouting
angiogenesis, is reduced in vivo when mTORC2 is targeted and tumor
angiogenesis is inhibited. This study provides evidence that mTORC2 is an
important regulator of angiogenesis that is downstream of GPCR signaling
and upstream of metabolic regulation. In addition, these data present a
potential link between mTORC2, metabolism and angiogenesis.

