Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR4 pathways in CTCs: from bioinformatics to immunophenotype


Introduction: Bioinformatics analysis regarding gene expression in Normal
tissue vs cancer tissue, Normal blood vs cancer patients blood and Normal
blood vs cancer tissue revealed a subgroup of 24 genes which potentially
could be overexpressed in CTCs. Among these genes are: CXCR4, a chemokine
receptor which is involved in tumor metastasis and, JUNB a transcription
factor participating in CXCR4 pathway. The objective of this study was to
confirm the results of bioinformatics analysis in samples from breast
cancer patients and therefore to evaluate the expression of CXCR4 and
JUNB in CTCs.Methods: Triple staining immunofluoresence with
panytokeratin/CXCR4/JUNB antibodies were performed in SKBR3, MDA-MB231,
MCF7 and Hela cell lines. The same experiments were performed in PBMCs
from normal (n = 10.) subjects and in PBMCs (n = 55) from untreated
metastatic breast cancer patients.Results: Since CXCR4, as a chemokine
receptor is also expressed on hematopoietic cells, its expression on CTCs
was quantified using the ARIOL system. We used cell lines and both normal
vs patients PBMCs in order to establish an expression pattern of both
molecules. Quantification experiments among cell lines revealed that
CXCR4 was overexpressed in SKBR3 following the subsequent hierarchy
SKBR3>MCF7>MDA-MB231>Hela. Accordingly, the expression pattern of JUNB in
cell lines was SKBR3>Hela>MCF7>MDA-MB231 with higher expression in SKBR3
and lower in MDA-MB 231. Statistical analysis revealed significant
differences in the expression of both molecules between healthy donors
PBMCs and patient's PBMCs.Subsequently, CTCs were detected in 17 out of
55 screened patients (31%). Mean intensity of CTCs for CXCR4 was 34.38
and it was higher than Hela and lower than SKBR3. Patients with
CXCR4-positive CTCs (with mean expression higher than 95% of normal
PBMCs) were 53%. In addition 84% of the examined CTCs had expression
profile higher than normal PBMCs.JUNB expression in CTCs (above 95% of
normal PBMCs) was identified in 76.92% of patients. JUNB mean expression
in CTCs was 26.1 and it was lower than SKBR3 and higher than MCF7.
Furthermore 64.3% of the total CTCs have expression higher than Normal
PBMCs.Conclusion: CXCR4 and JUNB are highly expressed in CTCs derived
from breast cancer patients, in agreement to bioinformatics analysis.
Quantification of immunofluoresence potentially delineates a subgroup of
patients with high expression of CXCR4 and JUNB that could benefit from
target therapies.

