Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: WHSC1L1 as a therapeutic target in squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck


Background: Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) is a
common malignancy with high recurrence rates and poor survival, thus new
therapies are eagerly awaited. Protein lysine methyltransferases (PKMTs)
have recently become one of the most important targets for drug discovery
efforts, but only a few studies have explored their role in the
pathogenesis of SCCHN. WHSC1L1, a nuclear SET-Suppressor of variegation
3-9, Enhancer of zeste and Trithorax-domain (NSD) PKMT and chromatin
modifier, was reported to be amplified (8p11.23) in 6% of SCCHN tumors.
This study aims to elucidate the pathophysiological role of WHSC1L1 as an
oncogenic force in SCCHN and provide rationale for the development of
inhibitors targeting WHSC1L1.Methods: Cytotoxicity assays (MTTs) were
conducted in one HPV-positive and one HPV-negative SCCHN cell line with
WHSC1L1-specific siRNAs. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR)
and Western blotting were performed to examine WHSC1L1 expression levels
in 14 SCCHN cell lines in comparison to a normal keratinocyte cell line
(KGM). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for WHSC1L1 in 115 patients with SCCHN
and correlation of its expression with H3K36me2 was also performed. To
identify candidate substrates that are directly methylated by WHSC1L1, in
vitro methyltransferase assays using a recombinant protein library were
conducted.Results: siRNA-mediated knockdown of WHSC1L1 caused significant
cell death in 2 SCCHN cell lines. Approximately 30% of SCCHN cell lines
overexpressed WHSC1L1 compared to normal keratinocytes. WHSC1L1
expression as evaluated by IHC was significantly stronger in SCCHN
compared to normal epithelium (Kruskal-Wallis test, p = 0.002) and 24% of
SCCHN sections expressed high levels of WHSC1L1, compared to 6% of
dysplastic lesions and 0% of normal epithelium sections. Interestingly,
no association between WHSC1L1 expression levels and H3K36me2 was
observed.Conclusions: WHSC1L1 is genetically altered in multiple cancer
types. In SCCHN, it is significantly overexpressed in 24% of the tumors
and its knockdown caused significant growth suppression of both
HPV-positive and HPV-negative SCCHN cell lines. Taken together, WHSC1L1
merits further investigation as a potential therapeutic target in SCCHN.

