Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDK10 promotes tumour growth and chemoresistance in colorectal
cancer, and is a potential target for treatment


CDK10 is a novel and relatively poorly characterized member of the CDC2
family of kinases. CDK10 has been reported to be involved in the
regulation of the G2/M phase of the cell cycle. Its role in cancer is
unclear. A meta-analysis of gene expression profiling studies has
consistently demonstrated higher expression of this protein in colorectal
cancer (CRC) but its role is unknown.In this study, we were interested in
examining the role of CDK10 in growth, apoptosis, chemoresistance, and as
a therapeutic target in CRC.CRC cell lines stably overexpressing CDK10
wild type (WT) as well as a kinase defective/dominant negative (DN) form
of CDK10 were established in CRC cell lines RKO, HCT-15 and MIP101.
Knockdown of CDK10 was achieved via siRNA. MTS and colony-forming assays
were used to examine the response to 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU); TUNEL,
caspase 3/7 assays, for apoptosis; and signaling events by
immunoblotting. Cell growth in vivo was monitored after injection of cell
lines into the flanks of Nude mice. To examine CDK10's role as a
potential target, SCID mice implanted SC with patient-derived CRC were
injected with lentiviral siRNA targeting CDK10 and tumor growth was
examined.Overexpression of CDK10 WT in RKO cells resulted in greater in
vitro cell proliferation in comparison to either the DN or the control
cells. It also inhibited apoptosis by 32%, while overexpression of the
CDK10 DN protein was associated with an augmentation of apoptosis (>50%).
Knockdown of CDK10 via siRNA confirmed a significant decrease in cell
viability (20-60%) and a significant increase in apoptosis (>80%). This
was associated with a downregulation of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL expression.
Interestingly, inhibition of apoptosis in CDK10 WT RKO cells could be
achieved by inhibiting the expression of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL by siRNA. The
sensitivity of CRC cells to 5-FU was also dramatically reduced in cells
overexpressing CDK10, as demonstrated by the significant higher IC50 in
these cells. Colony-forming assay showed involvement of the kinase
activity in 5-FU resistance since CDK10 DN HCT-15 cells displayed higher
sensitivity and the CDK10 WT HCT-15 higher resistance to 5-FU. In line
with the in vitro results, in vivo studies revealed that HCT-15 tumor
xenografts expressing CDK10 WT have a significantly greater rate of
growth than tumors expressing basal levels of CDK10. Interestingly,
tumors of CDK10 DN cells had the slowest rate of growth. Furthermore, in
vivo knockdown of CDK10 significantly impaired the growth of human SC
implanted CRC tumors, as compared to control, with a T/C close to 0% by
26 days of treatment.CDK10 appears to be involved in the pathogenesis of
CRC by influencing cell growth, apoptosis and chemotherapy resistance, in
part, through its kinase active site. In addition, in vivo results using
patient-derived tumors showed a significant reduction in tumor growth,
following siRNA knockdown of CDK10, thereby demonstrating it to be a
potential target for therapy in CRC.

