Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of miR-301a regulates metastasis and act as a lethal
marker for prostate cancer


Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) screening contributes as a biomarker for
diagnosis of prostate cancer; however, PSA screening has been considered
an over diagnosis in some cases. This has lead to the identification of
novel invasive markers which could eventually differentiate patients with
lethal prostate cancer from those with indolent disease. Emerging
evidences suggest that a small set of microRNAs (miRNA) are linked to
prostate cancer pathogenesis leading to castration resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC).In our studies of genome wide miRNA profiling, we have
found that miR-301a is highly expressed in prostate cancer (CaP) cell
lines as compared to normal prostate epithelial cells. While analyzing
CaP samples, we found higher expression of miR-301a at specific stages.
Interestingly, the miR-301a induction varies from 10 to 250 fold in
aggressive tumors which clearly correlate with metastases. To confirm
these findings, we utilized metastatic lesions from transgenic mice model
of Trans Adenocarcinoma of Mouse Prostate (TRAMP) tissues, where higher
levels of miR301a expression were observed in prostate tumors in
comparison with normal prostate. Further, micro dissecting the tumors
(metastasis) from lung showed 15 fold induction of miR301a expression
compared to the normal lung components. Silencing specifically miR-301a
resulted in the inhibition of proliferation, colony forming abilities,
invasion, and migration and cell adhesion properties in CaP cell lines.
Our molecular studies also suggest that miR-301 regulates Rho GTPases
family proteins and transcriptionally activates
Epithelial-Mesenchymal-Transition (EMT) markers like slug and
-catenin.Our ongoing studies may not only reveal whether miR-301
regulates Rho-associated kinases (ROCK) but also the potential role of
EMT in CaP. Furthermore, we intend to perform a case control study by
screening an additional 100 CaP cases besides indolent controls. As
mentioned earlier, besides revealing the functional role in CaP
pathogenesis, results from these findings will also suggest whether
miR-301 expression distinguishes lethal CaP from indolent disease.

