Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exhaled breath as diagnostic tool for malignant pleural
mesothelioma


Background: Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma (MPM) is an asbestos-related
disease with a dismal prognosis due to its late detection at an advanced
stage. Hence, a diagnostic test is requisite that allows to screen
asbestos-exposed persons for earlier MPM detection. As blood biomarkers
have not shown to be clinically useful biomarkers for early non-invasive
diagnosis, breath is currently explored. Breath is easy to retrieve by
physicians in a clinical environment and contains volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) that arise from (patho)physiological processes. Since
asbestos causes oxidative stress and cancers are known to up regulate
their metabolism, we hypothesize that VOCs and, hence, the exhaled breath
of MPM patients will differ from healthy controls.Methods: We compared
the breath of 23 MPM patients, 10 asbestos-exposed and 12 non-exposed
healthy individuals using a multicapillary column/ion mobility
spectrometer (MCC/IMS, B&S Analytik, Dortmund, Germany). After subjects
refrained from eating, drinking and smoking for at least 2 hours, 10 ml
alveolar air was sampled via a CO2-controlled ultrasonic sensor and
subsequently analyzed. Per subject a background sample was taken.
Eighty-nine VOC peaks were visually selected via on-board VisualNow 3.7
software. Their intensity was compared between background and breath
samples. After calculating the VOCs alveolar gradient, we performed a
logistic LASSO regression in R (R-Foundation for Statistical Computing,
Vienna, Austria). We selected the optimal MPM diagnostic logistic LASSO
model by 10-fold cross-validation using age, gender and the alveolar
gradient of the peaks and estimated this models sensitivity, specificity,
AUCROC and positive (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV).Results: We
were able to discriminate MPM patients from the asbestos-exposed and
non-exposed controls with 96% sensitivity and 91% specificity. The AUCROC
was 0,94 and the PPV and NPV were resp. 92% and 95%. The VOCs P5, P3, and
P1 were the significant discriminators.Conclusions: Breath analysis in a
clinical setting by MCC/IMS allows to discriminate MPM patients from
asbestos-exposed and non-exposed healthy controls. It can help to screen
asbestos-exposed persons at risk, switching diagnosis to an early phase
and hence, better patient survival. Identification of the underlying VOCs
and a further validation in different patient cohorts is being undertaken.

