Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of long non-coding RNAs in ovarian
cancer-associated fibroblasts versus normal ovarian fibroblasts


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy in women.
Expression profiling of the high-grade serous subtype has revealed that
patients exhibiting a stromal expression signature demonstrate the
poorest prognosis1. However, genetic aberrations in ovarian
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are extremely rare2, raising the
possibility that alternative mechanisms that regulate gene expression,
such as long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), are present in CAFs. LncRNAs are
polyadenylated RNA transcripts that do not encode for protein, but have
been shown to correlate with cancer progression and outcome. Therefore,
our aim was to investigate the presence of differentially expressed
lncRNAs in ovarian CAFs versus normal ovarian fibroblasts.CAFs were
laser-capture microdissected from 51 advanced-stage high-grade serous
ovarian cancers and 10 normal ovaries removed from women for non-cancer
reasons. RNA was extracted from the microdissected samples and expression
analyzed using Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 Arrays. Probes previously
identified as lncRNAs were used in this analysis3. Samples were
normalized and background corrected using the robust multi-arrray average
(RMA) method and expression values were log2 transformed. Differentially
expressed probes between cancer versus normal samples were calculated
using linear models for microarray data (limma) package from Bioconductor
and a moderated t-statistic used to assess significance.Based on a
significance cutoff of fold-change > 2 and a p-value Ovarian cancer is
the most lethal gynecological malignancy in women. Expression profiling
of the high-grade serous subtype has revealed that patients exhibiting a
stromal expression signature demonstrate the poorest prognosis1. However,
genetic aberrations in ovarian cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are
extremely rare2, raising the possibility that alternative mechanisms that
regulate gene expression, such as long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), are
present in CAFs. LncRNAs are polyadenylated RNA transcripts that do not
encode for protein, but have been shown to correlate with cancer
progression and outcome. Therefore, our aim was to investigate the
presence of differentially expressed lncRNAs in ovarian CAFs versus
normal ovarian fibroblasts.CAFs were laser-capture microdissected from 51
advanced-stage high-grade serous ovarian cancers and 10 normal ovaries
removed from women for non-cancer reasons. RNA was extracted from the
microdissected samples and expression analyzed using Affymetrix U133 Plus
2.0 Arrays. Probes previously identified as lncRNAs were used in this
analysis3. Samples were normalized and background corrected using the
robust multi-arrray average (RMA) method and expression values were log2
transformed. Differentially expressed probes between cancer versus normal
samples were calculated using linear models for microarray data (limma)
package from Bioconductor and a moderated t-statistic used to assess
significance.Based on a significance cutoff of fold-change > 2 and a
p-value < 0.05, 54 lncRNAs were identified as differentially expressed in
cancer versus normal fibroblasts. These included lncRNAs previously
implicated in ovarian cancer such as XIST and H19, the p53-regulated
lncRNA TUG1, as well as several lncRNAs that are known to play a role in
other cancer types such as NEAT1, GAS5 and CASC2. In addition, 16 lncRNAs
were differentially expressed between patients with short (15 months)
overall survival. These included MALAT1, MEG3, TUG1, XIST and CRNDE.In
summary, we have identified lncRNAs that are differentially expressed in
ovarian CAFs compared to normal ovarian fibroblasts, as well as lncRNAs
that are differentially expressed based on survival. Given that CAFs are
known to promote tumor progression and metastasis, these lncRNAs present
suitable candidates for their role in the tumor-promoting function of
CAFs.References1.Tothill, R.W. et al. Novel molecular subtypes of serous
and endometrioid ovarian cancer linked to clinical outcome. Clin Cancer
Res 14, 5198-208 (2008).2.Qiu, W. et al. No evidence of clonal somatic
genetic alterations in cancer-associated fibroblasts from human breast
and ovarian carcinomas. Nat Genet 40, 650-5 (2008).3.Zhang, X. et al.
Long non-coding RNA expression profiles predict clinical phenotypes in
glioma. Neurobiol Dis 48, 1-8 (2012).

