Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determining the impact of CRPC-specific p53 mutation on
therapeutic response and prostate tumor progression


Prostatic adenocarcinoma (PCa) is the most frequently diagnosed
non-cutaneous malignancy and second leading cause of cancer death in men
in the US. Although organ-confined disease is manageable, treatment
options for disseminated PCa are limited. First-line therapy for
metastatic PCa targets the androgen receptor (AR) via androgen
deprivation therapy (ADT); however, tumors often recur, displaying
reactivation of AR signaling despite continued therapeutic targeting.
There is currently no durable treatment for this advanced disease stage,
termed castrate-resistant PCa (CRPC). While most localized PCa express
wild-type p53, recent high-profile, genome-wide studies identified
increased TP53 gene mutation rates in advanced disease (specifically
CRPC). Using these data, we noted that the patient-derived, CRPC-specific
p53 mutations observed are relatively unique to prostate cancer. These
mutations occur in hotspot clusters altered in other tumor types, but
represent distinct amino acid changes seemingly unique to prostate
cancer. While the underlying consequences of these CRPC-specific p53
mutations are unknown, it was hypothesized that their presence in the
DNA-binding domain of p53 protein may represent gain-of-function (GOF)
alterations that direct the transcription factor to alternative,
pro-tumorigenic gene targets. Our preliminary findings strongly support
this contention and reveal that these p53 mutations are major drivers of
CRPC phenotypes. Specifically, our findings demonstrate that mutant p53:
1. Selectively alter p53 activity, based on analyses of PCa-relevant p53
target genes; 2. Compromise DNA damage response; 3. Alter AR signaling
and response to AR-directed therapeutics; and 4. Promote transition to
castration-resistance. These data are further supported by recent
longitudinal studies of patient progression, wherein the R248Q mutation
was found to be a key genetic alteration identifying lethal disease.
While future investigation will be directed to better understand the
specific contribution of individual DDR mutations, it is clear that
deregulation of DNA damage repair and response pathways is likely to
underlie increased genomic instability that is observed among advanced
prostate cancers.

