Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of Sparc in p53-null astrocytes alters collagen deposition
and promotes macrophage activation and tumor phagocytosis


Both the induction of SPARC expression and the loss of the p53 tumor
suppressor gene are changes that occur early in glioma development.
Therefore, the upregulation of SPARC may cooperate with the loss of p53
to enhance cell survival and inhibit apoptosis during glioma formation.
This study determined whether the loss of Sparc in astrocytes that are
null for p53 (p53-null/Sparc-null) would result in reduced cell survival
and tumor formation and increased tumor immunogenicity in an in vivo
xenograft brain tumor model. In vitro, the loss of Sparc in p53-null
astrocytes resulted in an increase in cell proliferation (15-33%, pBoth
the induction of SPARC expression and the loss of the p53 tumor
suppressor gene are changes that occur early in glioma development.
Therefore, the upregulation of SPARC may cooperate with the loss of p53
to enhance cell survival and inhibit apoptosis during glioma formation.
This study determined whether the loss of Sparc in astrocytes that are
null for p53 (p53-null/Sparc-null) would result in reduced cell survival
and tumor formation and increased tumor immunogenicity in an in vivo
xenograft brain tumor model. In vitro, the loss of Sparc in p53-null
astrocytes resulted in an increase in cell proliferation (15-33%,
p<0.01); however, there was an inhibition of growth in soft agar.
Intracranial xenografts of p53-null/Sparc-wt and p53-null/Sparc-null
astrocytes were assessed for tumor size, proliferation rate, and SPARC
expression. At 7 days post-implantation, Sparc-null astrocytes produced
significantly smaller tumors (Wilcoxon rank-sum test p = 0.0091, median =
0.709mm2 for Sparc-wt and 0.240mm2 for Sparc-null) with a significantly
lower MIB-1 proliferation index (Wilcoxon rank-sum test p = 0.0345,
median = 8.6% for Sparc-wt and 0.4% for Sparc-null). By CD68 and periodic
acid Schiff +/- diastase staining of xenograft tumors, it was found that
Sparc-null tumors had a massive infiltration of microglia/macrophages
with a phagocytic appearance compared to the activated, but
non-phagocytic, microglia/macrophages present within the Sparc-wt tumors.
The loss of Sparc in astrocytes and the resulting increase in
microglia/macrophage activation lead to an alteration in the tumor
microenvironment with increased collagen deposition and altered collagen
structure at both 7 and 50 days post-implantation as assessed by
picrosirius red and polarized light microscopy. Sparc-null tumors had
increased collagen deposition with a long fiber structure compared to the
small bundles of collagen present in Sparc-wt tumors. Our results
indicate that the loss of p53 by deletion/mutation in the early stages of
glioma formation may cooperate with the induction of SPARC to potentiate
cancer cell survival and escape from immune surveillance.

