Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discoidin domain receptor 2 differentially controls HT-1080 cell
proliferation in young-adult and old type I collagen 3D matrices


Type I collagen plays a key role in tumor proliferation, adhesion and
migration. We have recently demonstrated that this fibrillar and
life-long protein undergoes detrimental changes in biochemical and
biomechanical properties during aging (1). In addition to a high Advanced
Glycation End-products (AGE) and cross-links content, old collagen
exhibits a significant loss in fibrillar properties.In this study, we
analyzed the effect of collagen aging on human HT-1080 fibrosarcoma cell
proliferation in 3D matrix model. For this, type I collagen was extracted
from tail tendons of young-adult (2 months) and old (2 years) rats. In 3D
matrix, the rate of HT-1080 cell growth was significantly lower in
young-adult collagen. This was accompanied by a down-regulation of ERK1/2
phosphorylation and an increase in the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p21 expression. Blocking antibodies and siRNA strategy against 1 integrin
and AGEs receptor (RAGE) did not increase cell growth in young-adult
collagen.Accumulating evidence suggest that Discoidin Domain Receptor 2
(DDR2) is a receptor tyrosine kinase with the unique ability to be
activated by fibrillar collagen. To determine whether differential DDR2
responses are elicited by the two collagens, DDR2 was immunoprecipitated
from cell lysates, and its phosphorylated form was detected by
immunoblotting. DDR2 phosphorylation level was increased in young-adult
collagen. This was accompanied by an increase in the tyrosine phosphatase
SHP2 phosphorylation, the primary target of DDR2. Interestingly, the DDR2
inhibitor nilotinib was able to restore cell proliferation in young-adult
collagen. In addition to an increase in ERK1/2 phosphorylation, nilotinib
decreased SHP2 phosphorylation and p21 expression.Taken together, these
data show that age-associated changes of type I collagen organization,
especially fibrillar properties, are critical for tumor cell
proliferation control by DDR2.References: (1) Wilson SL et al. FASEB J.
2014 28(11):14-25

