Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo molecular imaging of HIF-1 and septin 9 interaction by
bimolecular fluorescence complementation


Hypoxia is a common feature of many solid tumors that promotes tumor
progression and leads to radiation and chemotherapy resistance.
Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), as one of the major mediators of the
hypoxic response, has been shown to activate hypoxia-responsive genes,
which are involved in multiple aspects of tumorigenesis and cancer
progression.Previously, we have described an interaction between septin 9
isoform 1 (SEPT9_i1) protein and HIF-1, the oxygen regulated subunit of
HIF-1. SEPT9_i1 is a member of the conserved family of septins, which are
GTP-binding proteins that form cytoskeleton-like filaments essential for
many functions in eukaryotic organisms including neoplasia. The
interaction of SEPT9_i1 with HIF-1 increases protein stability and HIF-1
transcriptional activity in vitro and promotes proliferation, tumor
growth and angiogenesis in vivo. Recent data indicated that SEPT9_i1 was
also involved in the trafficking of cytoplasmic HIF-1 into the nucleus by
direct interaction to the nuclear transporter importin-. Herein, we
utilized split YFP bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC)
methodology in order to monitor HIF-1/SEPT9_i1 interactions in vivo.
First, we generated split YFP protein chimeras fused to HIF-1 and to
SEPT9_i1 on both their amino and carboxyl termini. Different pairs of
HIF-1 and SEPT9_i1 chimeras were tested to functional complementation of
the split YFP fragments using transient transfection in HEK293 cells. The
complemented proteins capable of fluorescence were identified as
SEPT9_i1-YN (the amino terminus of YFP fused to the carboxyl terminal of
SEPT9_i1) and YC-HIF-1 (the carboxyl terminus of YFP fused to the
N-terminal of HIF-1). This pair was selected for further studies in PC-3
human prostate cancer cells. YFP complementation fluorescence derived
from these chimeras was increased in the presence of hypoxia mimicking
agents, such as CoCl2 and the iron chelators deferoxamine (DFO) and
dibenzoylmethane (DBM). The chimera, YCHLH lacking the HLH domain that is
essential for the interaction with SEPT9_i1 gave a significant reduction
in YFP complementation fluorescence. Furthermore, expression of SEPT9_i1
252-379aa fragment, the domain essential for the interaction with HIF-1,
abolished almost completely the YFP complementation fluorescence. These
results reconfirm our previous studies on HIF-1/SEPT9_i1 interactions and
make this system attractive for identifying new compounds capable of
disrupting this complex in order to inhibit tumor growth and angiogenesis.

