Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of water-soluble pyrrolo[3,2-d]pyrimidines
as single agents with tubulin and multiple receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibition and as antitumor agents


Multiple classes of microtubule targeting agents have been identified and
these include the Vinca alkaloids and colchicine
(microtubule-destabilizers) and taxanes (microtubule-stabilizers).
Although tubulin targeting agents are some of the most successful drugs
used in the treatment of a wide range of malignancies, multidrug
resistance due to overexpression of P-glycoprotein (Pgp) and/or
III-tubulin can severely limit their clinical efficacy. Antitubulin
agents like paclitaxel and other taxanes, due to poor water solubility,
are formulated with polyethoxylated castor oil which can cause
hypersensitivity reactions and require prolonged administration time.
Recently, we reported water-soluble pyrrolo[3,2-d]pyrimidine analogs
acting as antitubulin agents that circumvent these drawbacks. These
analogs also exhibit potency comparable to erlotinib in cancer cell lines
overexpressing epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and to that of
sunitinib in cancer cell lines overexpressing vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor-2 (VEGFR2) and platelet derived growth factor receptor-
(PDGFR), in addition to inhibiting tubulin. Promising evidence for the
clinical success of combination chemotherapy using multiple RTK
inhibitors with antitubulin agents suggests that these dual acting
compounds would serve as a single entity with both these activities. To
explore the activity of these dual RTK/tubulin inhibitors, compound AG165
was evaluated in in vitro and in vivo xenograft models. In vitro AG165
inhibited the growth of MDA-MB-435 cells with an IC50 of 8.8 nM,
comparable to paclitaxel. The compound is also active in paclitaxel
resistant cancer cells overexpressing III-tubulin or Pgp, thus overcoming
two important mechanisms associated with clinical resistance to
paclitaxel. Compound AG165 (subcutaneous doses of 75 mg/kg x 7,
cumulative dose 525 mg) showed significant (pMultiple classes of
microtubule targeting agents have been identified and these include the
Vinca alkaloids and colchicine (microtubule-destabilizers) and taxanes
(microtubule-stabilizers). Although tubulin targeting agents are some of
the most successful drugs used in the treatment of a wide range of
malignancies, multidrug resistance due to overexpression of
P-glycoprotein (Pgp) and/or III-tubulin can severely limit their clinical
efficacy. Antitubulin agents like paclitaxel and other taxanes, due to
poor water solubility, are formulated with polyethoxylated castor oil
which can cause hypersensitivity reactions and require prolonged
administration time. Recently, we reported water-soluble
pyrrolo[3,2-d]pyrimidine analogs acting as antitubulin agents that
circumvent these drawbacks. These analogs also exhibit potency comparable
to erlotinib in cancer cell lines overexpressing epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) and to that of sunitinib in cancer cell lines
overexpressing vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR2) and
platelet derived growth factor receptor- (PDGFR), in addition to
inhibiting tubulin. Promising evidence for the clinical success of
combination chemotherapy using multiple RTK inhibitors with antitubulin
agents suggests that these dual acting compounds would serve as a single
entity with both these activities. To explore the activity of these dual
RTK/tubulin inhibitors, compound AG165 was evaluated in in vitro and in
vivo xenograft models. In vitro AG165 inhibited the growth of MDA-MB-435
cells with an IC50 of 8.8 nM, comparable to paclitaxel. The compound is
also active in paclitaxel resistant cancer cells overexpressing
III-tubulin or Pgp, thus overcoming two important mechanisms associated
with clinical resistance to paclitaxel. Compound AG165 (subcutaneous
doses of 75 mg/kg x 7, cumulative dose 525 mg) showed significant
(p<0.001) inhibition of tumor growth 15 days after treatment initiation.
AG165 caused recoverable weight loss without any evidence of adverse
effects. In this study, we have identified a water-soluble, dual acting
RTK/ tubulin inhibitory agent that address some critical limitations of
existing therapies and demonstrates in vivo antitumor effects with an
acceptable toxicity profile.

