Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smoking and HPV antibodies, a mediation analysis of HPV
re-infection


Background: Naturally acquired antibodies against human papillomavirus
(HPV) infection can protect against recurring infection. Smoking can
adversely affect a person's immune response, both adaptive and innate
systems; and it is also associated with increased risk of HPV-related
precancers. But, it is unclear whether smoking results in higher HPV
incidence because of an impaired immune response.Objective: We
investigated whether lowered HPV-16 antibody titers mediates the effect
of smoking on incident HPV-16 infection.Methods: We used a path analytic
model where smoking lowers a person's antibody titer, thereby resulting
in a higher risk of acquiring an incident re-infection. The model
estimated the indirect effect of smoking to infection, mediated by
antibodies; it also estimated the direct effect, which is not mediated.
The path model includes two logistic equations with effects and
confidence intervals estimated by parametric bootstrapping. Both
equations were adjusted for age, age at sexual initiation, lifetime
number of sexual partners, and ever diagnosis of a sexually transmitted
infection other than HPV.Study Population: A subset of women in the
Atypical Squamous Cells of Undetermined Significance/Low-Grade Squamous
Intraepithelial Lesion Triage Study provided blood samples at baseline.
The samples were assessed for HPV antibodies using a multiplex Luminex
assay. Smoking and sexual habits were assessed by a baseline
questionnaire. During two years of follow-up, bi-annual cervical
specimens were genotyped for HPV by PCR assays. The analytic population
(n = 1,978) were women without a cervical intraepithelial lesion grade 2
or more severe and HPV-16 DNA negative at baseline. Among those women,
131 tested HPV-16 DNA positive during follow-up.Results: Compared to
never smokers, current smokers had an increased risk of incident HPV-16
infection by the antibody mediated pathway (OR = 1.24, 95% CI: 1.08,
1.60); the direct effect was non-significant. For former smokers, neither
direct nor indirect effects were significant. The indirect effect of
current smoking increased for women who smoked at least half a pack of
cigarettes daily (OR = 1.47, 95% CI: 1.20, 2.02).Conclusions: This is the
first analytic model to suggest that current smoking increases the risk
of incident HPV-16 infection through a reduction of HPV-16 antibody
titers. The association appears dose-dependent, increasing for number of
cigarettes smoked per day. Because our follow-up time was limited, we
could not measure, and thus, extend these results to incident precancer
outcomes.

