Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-503 promotes tumor progression and acts as a novel
biomarker for prognosis in esophageal cancer


Background:MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small non-coding RNAs that
inhibit gene expression by binding to 3` untranslated regions of mRNAs
and inhibiting their translation. MiRNAs crucially affect cellular
processes such as development, proliferation, differentiation and
apoptosis, which are deregulated in cancer. MiR-503 is located at Xq26.3
and belongs to an extended miR-16 family of miRNAs. MiR-503 is
down-regulated in several types of cancer, including oral,
hepatocellular, gastric, and endometrial cancer, suggesting that it plays
a tumour-suppressor role in carcinogenesis. In contrast, other recent
reports have demonstrated up-regulation of miR-503 in adrenocortical
carcinoma, parathyroid and retinoblastoma, compared with adjacent normal
tissue. These results suggest that miR-503 shows tissue- or
disease-specific expression patterns. However, miR-503 expression
patterns in esophageal cancer (EC) and normal esophageal tissue have not
been compared and the correlation of miR-503 expression with the clinical
features of EC has not been studied.Materials and Methods:A total of 61
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples including 49 EC
tissues and 12 adjacent normal esophageal tissues who underwent surgical
resection at Mie University Hospital were collected from 2003 to 2013.
Tagman qRT-PCR assay was performed to quantify the miR-503 expression in
EC and adjacent normal tissues. We analyzed the association between
miR-503 expression and clinico-pathological factors in patients with
EC.Results:The median age of the patients was 66.2 years (41 - 90). The
median follow up time was 24.6 months (3.8 - 80.0). There were 3 patients
with stage 0, 16 with stage I, 12 with stage II, 11 with stage III, 3
with stage IVa and 4 with stage IVb by using the criteria of the Japanese
Classification of Esophageal Cancer, 10th edition. Forty-four patients
had esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), five patients had
esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAD). MiR-503 was remarkably up-regulated in
EC tissues compared to adjacent normal tissue. High miR-503 expression in
EC was significantly associated with male sex and large tumor size.
Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that patients with high miR-503 expression
had significantly poorer disease free and overall survival than those
with low expression. Furthermore, high miR-503 expression was an
independent predictor for prognosis in EC patients according to
multivariate analysis.Conclusions:The results of this study provide novel
evidence for associations between miR-503 expression and progression,
early recurrence, and poor prognosis in EC, suggesting that it acts as an
oncomiR in this type of cancer. MiR-503 may thus be a promising
predictive marker for prognosis after surgery in patients with EC.

