Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The frequency of gene amplifications in cancer revealed by a
droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) based pan-cancer gene panel test


The development of molecular assays designed to detect gene
amplifications has largely been hampered by technical challenges such as
limited DNA quantity and tumor heterogeneity, which demand methods of
very high precision and sensitivity. The recent introduction of
affordable digital PCR platforms, such as droplet digital PCR (ddPCR),
that are capable of providing single molecule resolution of target
abundances thus provides a unique opportunity to address this gap in
molecular diagnostics. A ddPCR-based test was therefore developed under
CLIA-CAP guidelines to determine the amplification status of 12 commonly
amplified genes targeted by FDA approved drugs. Termed the Amplinome
Test, this test was applied to 49 clinical samples received over a period
of 6 months and compared to the results obtained from a commercially
available clinical sequencing test applied that also reports copy number
alterations (CNAs). An overall concordance rate of 90% (532/588 calls)
was observed between the two tests across the entire gene set, 5 of which
were identified as amplified. There were 56 discordant copy number
amplifications between the two testing modalities. The vast majority
(55/56) of discordant calls arose from gene amplifications identified by
the Amplinome test, but not detected by sequencing, indicating an 11-fold
increase in sensitivity in detecting amplifications. One discordant call
(HER3) was identified as amplified via sequencing, but confirmed to be
unamplified via FISH. At the patient level, the Amplinome test identified
5-fold more patients as having actionable amplifications in at least one
of the 12 assayed genes versus clinical sequencing (29 vs. 6). Clinical
management was altered in 14 of the 29 patients with an actionable CNA
identified on the Amplinome test; those patients received targeted
therapy directed against the amplified gene. The ddPCR-based Amplinome
test thus provides a highly sensitive method for measuring gene
amplifications in cancer that alters patient management, and suggests
that the prevalence of actionable amplifications may be significantly
underestimated by standard clinical next-generation sequencing tests.

