Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of tumor beta-1 integrin in the tumor cell extravasation
cascade


It has been shown that the tumor beta-1 integrin subunit plays an
important role in primary tumor growth and metastasis. However, the
specific role of beta-1 in the tumor cell extravasation cascade has not
yet been clearly elucidated. This is partly due to the lack of
extravasation models that possess high throughput and spatio-temporal
resolution of each step in the cascade, which consists of
tumor-endothelium arrest, transendothelial migration, and migration into
the sub-endothelial matrix. To address this question, we employ multiple
in vitro microfluidic platforms to recapitulate the extravasation
microenvironment, allowing us to decipher in high spatio-temporal
resolution, the specific extravasation defects associated with shRNA
mediated beta-1 integrin knockdown in MDA-MB-231, MA2 and SUM 159 cell
lines. These models include perfusable HUVEC microvascular networks
embedded in a fibrin-collagen hydrogel and an upright HUVEC monolayer on
a collagen gel that allows for detailed in-plane observation of 3D
extravasation events. We first show that beta-1 knockdown drastically
decreases extravasation efficiency in both assays, and further validated
the defect in an in vivo mouse lung metastasis model. To explain the
overall decreased ability to extravasate, we employed our assays to
visualize and quantify each step in the extravasation cascade. First, we
show that the retention rate of beta-1 knockdowns is significantly
decreased under flow in microvascular networks. This suggests that beta-1
mediates adhesion to the endothelium, which was confirmed by a reduced
adhesion rate under shear flow on a planar monolayer. Next, using the
upright monolayer assay, we observed via time-lapse confocal microscopy
that while beta-1 knockdowns assume a rounded morphology and extends
nearly no protrusions past the endothelial barrier, their ability to open
the endothelium was not significantly affected. However, beta-1
knockdowns were unable to fully invade past the endothelium and remained
intercalated between endothelial cells. Further analysis revealed that
extravasated beta-1 knockdown cells remained closely associated with the
endothelium, while control cells migrated farther out into the
sub-endothelial matrix. Immunostaining of the basement membrane protein
collagen IV showed that transmigrated beta-1 knockdown cells were found
trapped between the endothelial and col IV layers, suggesting that the
close association with the endothelium is partly due to the inability to
breach the basement membrane. Taken together, our results indicate that
beta-1 is required for tumor cell extravasation by mediating
tumor-endothelial adhesion and invasion into the subendothelial matrix,
post-endothelial breaching.

