Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hampering the crosstalk between fibroblasts and tumor cells
reveals the need for blocking both canonical and non-canonical TGF
pathways


Background: Since fibroblasts are the predominant stromal cell type in
colorectal carcinomas (CRC), it is reasonable to assume that
fibroblast-tumor cell crosstalk play an important role in the production
and maintenance of the malignant phenotype. Thus, it is very relevant to
abort the supply of such factors responsible for this crosstalk in order
to hamper tumor growth.In this work, we studied the crosstalk between
Normal Colonic Fibroblasts (NCF) and tumor cells, its relation with de
novo chemoresistance and fibroblast activation, providing hints for the
treatment of CRC.Methods: After 5 days of Transwell coculture between
fibroblasts and tumor cells we obtained mRNA of each cell type to obtain
differentially expressed genes compared to monocultures (Affymetrix
GeneChip Human Gene 1.0 ST Array). From genes with fold change>2, we
selected those codifying for secreted or membrane proteins in both tumor
cells and fibroblast. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis was
carried out by means of BIANA software searching for fibroblast secreted
proteins with receptors in tumor cells plasma membrane and viceversa. We
also studied the main pathways involved in such crosstalk in control
conditions or pharmacologically disrupted. In addition we performed
functional assays (proliferation, migration and citotoxicity against
Oxaliplatin and 5FU). We also performed a cytokine array (Raybiotech) to
characterise products mediating such crosstalk.Results: After integrating
our transcriptomic/PPI data with information obtained by means of GSEA we
stated our working hypothesis as: cytokines released by NCF stimulate
tumor cells to secrete IL1 and TGF1. These two soluble factors are
responsible for the NCF activation. Activated fibroblasts in turn began
to produce large amounts of IL1/TGF1 targets, mainly chemokines,
cytokines, EGFR-ligands and PAI-1, signalling basically through IL6R,
CCR2 (JAK-STAT pathway), CCR6, EGFR and CXCR3 (PI3K-AKT pathway),
pathways involved in chemoresistance in CRC. Hampering the crosstalk by
means of a blocking IL1 antibody and TGFBR1 inhibitor sensitizes tumor
cells to Oxaliplatin and 5FU and induces a change in the cytokines
mediating the crosstalk. Cell signalling reveals an activation of
non-canonical TGF1 evidenced by TAK1 phosphorilation and NFk
activation.Conclusions: Disrupting the crosstalk between fibroblasts and
tumor cells with TGFBR1 inhibitor and a blocking IL1 antibody induces a
change in the cytokine repertoire of both cells that activates NFk
pathway in fibroblasts and a sustained activation of AKT in tumor cells.
We can avoid such activation inhibiting non-canonical TGF pathway with a
TAK1 inhibitor. The combined use of canonical and non-canonical TGF
inhibitors could an interesting approach to overcome
microenvironment-mediated drug resistance.

