Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Azacitidine pretreatment sensitizes NSCLC cells to interferon-


Epigenetic treatment and immune checkpoint blockade are novel therapeutic
approaches being investigated in NSCLC. Our previous studies showed that
DNA methyltransferase inhibitor azacitidine (AZA) treatment in NSCLC cell
lines led to up-regulation of genes related to the response to interferon
and adaptive immune attack. We hypothesize that Interferon-(IFN-), an
immune effecter made primarily by activated T cells and NK cells, has a
direct tumor suppression effect in NSCLC cells, which can be enhanced by
the DNA hypomethylation agent.To test this hypothesis, NSCLC cells (H838
and/or H1299) were first treated with or without 500nM AZA for 3 days,
and then received IFN-. The samples were subsequently tested for cell
viability, apoptosis, cell cycle, and gene expression assays. This
preclinical study is part of the collective efforts to investigate the
efficacy of combined epigenetic and immune therapy in NSCLC.IFN- causes
moderate direct growth inhibition in H838 and H1299 cells, which was
enhanced, using cell viability assays as a readout, by pretreatment with
AZA. The AZA sensitizing effect lasted at least 3 weeks and was not
detectable 8 weeks after stopping treatment. This timing is consistent
with initial reprogramming of the cells and eventual waning of this
effect. Flow cytometry studies showed that AZA enhances lung cell
apoptosis induced by IFN-. However, no significant change in cell cycle
was observed. To examine the mechanisms behind these effects on cell
growth, we further determined how AZA altered IFN- induced gene
expression in H1299 cells, first using Agilent expression arrays, and
then validating specific changes in key IFN and cell death pathway genes
with RT-PCR based methods. IFN- significantly up-regulated a group of
known IFN targeted genes, including IFI27, IFITM1, ISG20, ICAM1, CCL5,
CXCL10, MX1 and others, and this upregulation was further enhanced by AZA
pretreatment. AZA also enhanced IFN- induced expression of CASP1, CASP4,
TNFSF 10, and BCL2A. These AZA enhanced IFN- induced genes are important
in tumor immune response and evasion, cell death, cytokine response and
other critical cellular process.Our studies demonstrated that AZA
enhanced lung cancer cell response to the immune effecter IFN-. This
supports the clinical exploration of epigenetic priming and its
combination with subsequent immune therapy in NSCLC treatment. It may
also provide mechanistically derived biomarkers that can be used to
monitor and predict epigenetic and immune response in NSCLC.

