Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential regulation of estrogen metabolizing CYP1A1 and CYP1B1
enzymes by novel resveratrol analogs in breast cancer cells


Evidence from epidemiological and experimental studies suggest an
association between diets rich in phytoestrogens and reduced risk of
breast cancer. Resveratrol, a bioflavonoid, found naturally in grapes,
fruits and nuts, has been shown to be a potent chemopreventive agent in
vitro. However, poor bioavailability, rapid metabolism and poor
specificity limit its use as the preferred anticancer agent. In an
attempt to improve the anticancer properties of resveratrol, we
synthesized several analogs of resveratrol with appropriate chemical
modifications. Of the compounds that were screened for anticancer
activity towards breast cancer cells, two analogs, namely, HPIMBD and
TIMBD showed better potency and selectivity in inhibiting the growth of
breast cancer cell lines while they did not significantly affect the
growth of non-neoplastic breast epithelial cell lines. In this study, we
investigated the ability of resveratrol and resveratrol analogs in the
regulation of estrogen metabolizing genes, cytochrome P450 (Cyp) 1A1, 1B1
and their upstream regulator AhR in breast cancer and non-neoplastic
breast epithelial cells.Non-neoplastic breast epithelial cell line
MCF-10A and breast cancer cell lines T47D and MDA-MB-231 were treated
with resveratrol, HPIMBD or TIMBD. From cells in culture, mRNA and
protein was isolated and expression analyses of CYP1A1, CYP1B1 and AhR
carried out by PCR and western blot analyses. Unlike resveratrol, HPIMBD
and TIMBD significantly induced the mRNA and protein expression levels of
CYP1A1 and AhR while they inhibited that of CYP1B1. Also, HPIMBD and
TIMBD induced the expression of CYP1A1 in an AhR-dependent fashion while
they inhibited CYP1B1 expression of CYP1B1 by a proteosomal degradation
pathway. Cyp1A1 preferentially metabolizes estradiol to
2-hydroxyestradiol and Cyp1B1 to 4-hydroxyestradiol. While,
2-hydroxyestradiol and its methylated product are suggested to be
chemo-protective, 4-hydroxyestradiol is regarded as a carcinogenic
metabolite of estradiol. Taken together, our findings indicate that novel
resveratrol analogs HPIMBD and TIMBD differentially regulate the
expressions of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 in breast cancer cells that may have
implications in chemoprevention of breast cancer by these analogs.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

