Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 4-1BB costimulation ameliorates exhaustion and prolongs in vivo
persistence of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) expressing T cells


Published reports have demonstrated high response rates of CD19 chimeric
antigen receptor (CAR) modified T cells against acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. CARs incorporating either CD28 or 4-1BB costimulatory domains
mediated significant anti-leukemic effects. However CD19-41BBz CAR T
cells could be detected for months and induced prolonged B cell
depletion, whereas most patients treated with CD19-28z CAR T cells had no
detectable CAR+ T cells by day 28, and B cell recovery was routinely
observed. We report that CAR T cells incorporating the CD28 versus 4-1BB
costimulatory domains show differential susceptibilities to T cell
exhaustion. Using the tonically signaling 14g2a-based GD2 CAR as a model
system, we identify that GD2-28z CARs rapidly acquire an exhaustion
phenotype, characterized by high level expression of PD1, TIM3 and LAG3,
high expression of exhaustion related transcription factors Blimp1 and
T-bet, poor proliferative capacity, poor cytokine production, and poor
anti-tumor efficacy in vivo. Interestingly, second generation GD2-28z
CARs induce greater exhaustion than first generation GD2-z CARs,
implicating CD28 costimulation in the induction of exhaustion. In
contrast, GD2-41BBz CARs express lower levels of PD1 and TIM3, show
increased cytokine production, improved persistence in vivo, and improved
anti-tumor efficacy against both osteosarcoma and neuroblastoma
xenografts. Similarly, CD19-41BBz CARs have improved persistence and
lower expression of exhaustion markers compared to CD19-28z CARs
following leukemia challenge. Finally, CD22-BBz CARs show lower
exhaustion marker expression, improved persistence, and improved
anti-leukemia efficacy in immunodeficient mice compared to CD22-28z CARs.
Gene expression experiments are underway to further delineate the
mechanism by which 4-1BB signaling ameliorates exhaustion in the setting
of chronic CAR signaling. Together, this data demonstrates that
exhaustion is a critical factor limiting the efficacy of CAR expressing T
cells. CD28 and 4-1BB have opposing effects on exhaustion in CAR T cells,
with CD28 signaling augmenting the phenotype while 4-1BB signaling
mitigating exhaustion. This data is the first to demonstrate differential
effects of costimulatory pathways on T cell exhaustion, likely explains
differential persistence observed in the clinical trials of CAR
therapeutics, and provides important insights for CAR design for future
clinical applications.

