Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and validation of novel candidate circulating
biomarkers in high-grade soft tissue sarcoma


Soft Tissue Sarcoma (STS) are rare mesenchymal tumors, accounting for
less than 1% of adult and 7-10% of pediatric cancers respectively. They
are very complex and approximately include 50 different benign and
malignant histotypes.Identification of circulating cancer biomarkers
improves early detection and is important in determining patient risk
stratification, in monitoring tumor progression and therapy response, and
in planning new treatment. However, at present there are no laboratory
tests that allow reliable early STS diagnosis and consequent prognosis.
Discovery of new serum protein biomarkers is especially needed for
patients with advanced/metastatic STS for whom the outcome remains
strongly unfavorable.Proteomic technologies are used for global profiling
and identification of disease-associated markers in biological fluids,
such as serum. The low-molecular-weight (LMW) proteome (Soft Tissue
Sarcoma (STS) are rare mesenchymal tumors, accounting for less than 1% of
adult and 7-10% of pediatric cancers respectively. They are very complex
and approximately include 50 different benign and malignant
histotypes.Identification of circulating cancer biomarkers improves early
detection and is important in determining patient risk stratification, in
monitoring tumor progression and therapy response, and in planning new
treatment. However, at present there are no laboratory tests that allow
reliable early STS diagnosis and consequent prognosis. Discovery of new
serum protein biomarkers is especially needed for patients with
advanced/metastatic STS for whom the outcome remains strongly
unfavorable.Proteomic technologies are used for global profiling and
identification of disease-associated markers in biological fluids, such
as serum. The low-molecular-weight (LMW) proteome (<30 kDa) is considered
a rich source of new potential biomarkers, that are often masked by the
presence of abundant proteins in serum.In order to determine whether
low-abundant serum proteins/peptides can be indicative of advanced
disease, we analyzed 53 high-grade STS sera divided in discovery (34
sera) and validation (19 sera) subsets by using
poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-vinylsulfonic acid) hydrogel core-shell
nanoparticles with incorporated Cibacron Blue F3G-A. These nanoparticles
selectively entrap LMW proteins/peptides on the bases of size exclusion
and affinity chromatography. These nanoparticles protect the analytes
from enzymatic degradation and amplify the concentration for mass
spectrometry detection. 13 benign STS and 20 healthy sera were used as
control.The most significant protein, IGFBP7, was then validated in a
wider series of cases including 59 high-grade STS sera by ELISA assay and
86 paraffin-embedded high-grade primary STS by immunohistochemistry.Mass
spectrometry data revealed 17 proteins/peptides common to discovery and
validation subsets with significance differences in abundance when
compared to benign and/or normal sera. The function of selected
biomarkers was predominantly related to calcium-binding proteins (MGP),
immune response (Ceruloplasmin, Lactotransferrin), coagulation process
(Serpin C1) and metabolism (TGFBI).Moreover, as confirmed by ELISA assay,
expression of insulin-like growth factor binding protein 7 (IGFBP7)
involved in cell signaling pathway progressively increased in healthy,
benign and malignant tumors. With immunohistochemistry, tissue IGFBP7 had
a significantly higher expression in metastatic than in non metastatic
STS.Our data suggest that proteomic technology is able to identify
circulating biomarkers associated to STS malignant phenotype and IGFBP7
in paired primary specimens may discriminate STS patients with increased
risk of metastatic progression.

