Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Porcupine reduces Wnt-dependent colony formation
and/or proliferation in both autocrine and paracrine cell models


Aberrant activation of the pro-survival Wnt signalling pathway is a key
determinant in numerous cancers (Nusse and Varmus, 2012) and therefore
constituents of this pathway are potentially promising therapeutic
targets.The membrane-bound o-acyltransferase porcupine (PORCN) is
required for post-translational modification of all Wnts, and is vital
for Wnt secretion (Herr et. al., 2012). Due to the complex and varied
oncogenic roles of the known Wnt ligands, prevention of active ligand
secretion provides an effective mechanism for inhibiting canonical and
non-canonical Wnt signalling in both paracrine and autocrine systems.Here
we show that a novel inhibitor of porcupine potently inhibits both
autocrine and paracrine models of Wnt/-catenin signalling. Treatment of
the pancreatic cancer cell line CAPAN-2 with REDX05562 resulted in a
significant decrease of axin 2 mRNA expression by qPCR (10.4 fold, 10nM).
This reduction in expression was partially reversed by the addition of
recombinant human Wnt-3A (100ng.ml1). The decrease in axin 2 expression
was concomitant with an inhibition of CAPAN-2 proliferation (IC50 1.4nM
+/- 0.8nM).Conversely treatment of MCF-7 mammospheres with REDX05562 did
not inhibit sphere forming efficiency (SFE). However, when stimulated
with recombinant Wnt-3A an increase in anoikis resistance was observed
suggesting a potential paracrine influence. In vivo the presence of
cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are a likely source of paracrine Wnt
(Green et. al., 2013). Indeed, conditioned media taken from primary CAFs
(isolated from fresh mastectomies) increased anoikis resistance in MCF-7
cells without any discernible effect on CAF proliferation. This effect
was significantly inhibited when MCF-7 cells were incubated with
conditioned media taken from primary CAFs treated with REDX05562.
Moreover, immunofluorescent labelling of PORCN revealed that PORCN
expression is markedly higher in CAFs than in MCF-7s. This is consistent
with the hypothesis that different mechanisms underpin Wnt-signalling in
breast and pancreatic cancer.The above data show that the novel PORCN
inhibitor REDX05562 effectively reduces the impact of pro-survival Wnt
ligand-mediated signalling in both paracrine and autocrine models. This
further emphasises the broad therapeutic potential of PORCN inhibition in
Wnt-dependent cancers.

