Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole genome sequencing analysis of multiple liver cancer nodules
for determination of causal events for multi-occurrence


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of
cancer-related death worldwide. Despite the recent progress in diagnostic
accuracy and therapeutic efficacy, its five-year survival rate is still
low. Characteristically, HCC shows a high rate of intrahepatic metastasis
(IM) or multi-centric (MC) occurrence within the liver, and
discrimination of IM/MC is difficult and important for therapeutic
decision. Previously we reported that there were no common somatic
mutations between whole genomes of MC tumors, indicating that MC tumors
independently developed in their genetic aspect (Nat Genet, 44: 760-764,
2012). Here we performed whole genome sequencing (WGS) analysis on 43
multiple liver cancer nodules derived from 20 patients, which were
clinically defined as IM or MC occurrence. We first analyzed common and
unique somatic mutations in each individual and divided the cases into IM
or MC by using the information of common somatic mutations between the
multiple nodules. Interestingly, the clinical and pathological diagnoses
of MC/IM in five of 20 cases were not concordant with the judgments from
WGS, indicating the usefulness of WGS for a precise IM/MC judgment.
Analysis of common somatic alterations in IM tumors enabled to extract
early and late event in hepatocarcinogenesis among a large number of
somatic events in each cases, while MC pairs shared only a few numbers of
common alterations, including false positives. Importantly, one somatic
mutation in non-coding region was exceptionally detected commonly among
MC tumor pairs from three cases. Sanger sequencing confirmed that this
mutation was also commonly detected in 10.9% (35/321) of liver cancer
samples somatically. These results indicate the significance of this
function-unknown and recurrent mutation in liver cancer development. To
illuminate common driver events in MC tumors, we analyzed all detectable
genetic alterations, including copy number alterations and
rearrangements, on multi-time point or MC tumors derived from same
individuals and extracted significant genetic alterations from them,
which can help the understanding of driver genetic alterations in liver
cancers.

