Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NanoPARPi inhibitors for ovarian and prostate cancer therapy


Introduction: Poly ADP Ribose Polymerase (PARP) inhibitor therapy
exploits a synthetic lethality strategy in cancers specifically endowed
with inherent damage in DNA repair or transcription pathways. Olaparib
and BMN-673 are potent PARP inhibitors that are currently indicated for
chronic therapy in several clinical trials for a variety of cancers. Here
we report novel and well characterized nanoformulations customized for
olaparib (NanoOlaparib) and BMN-673 (NanoBMN-673), thus enabling a
platform which provides a safe vehicle for intravenous delivery
specifically targeted to the tumor, thereby increasing the
bioavailability while reducing systemic toxicity. Our nanoplatform is
also tailored for the combinatorial chemotherapy and radio-sensitization
in several cancers including prostate, ovarian and breast cancer cell
lines with and without the BRCA mutations.Methods: Two nanoparticle
formulations, NanoOlaparib and NanoBMN-673 have been successfully
formulated and tested invitro on several cancer cell lines. The initial
combination studies were performed with Cisplatin and each of the PARP
inhibitors and the nanoformulation is defined by nanoparticles 120 nm
diameter, zeta potential +30mV, and loaded with Olaparib (18mM) or
BMN-673 (200M) and Cisplatin (3.3mM). Dose response curves over a dynamic
range of nanoPARPi therapy on several cell lines were generated using
various customized assays and EC50's were determined. The synergism due
to radiosensitization was studied for both therapies using isobolograms.
The efficacy of combination PARPi and Pt therapy with nanoparticle
platform was determined on GEMM models of endometrial cancers. The
functionality of nanoPARPi formulations, reflected by inhibition of
PARylation, and cleaved PARP was determined by immunoflourescence
assays.Results: NanoPARPi inhibitors were assayed on atleast 8 ovarian
cancer cells using various cell based assays. NanoBMN was the most potent
PARP inhibitor which is not functionally dependent on BRCA sensitive
cells lines whereas nanoOlaparib, seems to be sensitive towards triple
negative GEMM derived Ovarian cells (403, 404). PTEN deficient prostate
cancer cells were more susceptible to radiosensitization with both
nanoPARPi inhibitors (Olaparib, BMN-673), achieving significant long-term
cell kill. In all studies NanoBMN-673 showed better efficacy in
combination with radiation than NanoOlaparib. In vivo studies with
irradiation are underway.Conclusions: Robust nanoformulations,
NanoOlaparib and nanoBMN-673 have been successfully demonstrated. We
observed a significant enhancement in the efficacy with both
nanoformulations. Strong radiosensitization was observed after several
days. These results imply an important role for the nanoOlaparib and
nanoBMN-673 as chemo and radio-sensitizers enabling several combination
therapeutic approaches.

