Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of novel monoclonal antibodies for a cyclic DNA adduct
derived from oxidation of -6 polyunsaturated fatty acids


Dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids (-3 and -6 PUFAs) play a role in
certain human cancers. The oxidation of PUFAs produces reactive
,-unsaturated aldehydes (enals) that can modify DNA producing mutagenic
lesions. Of particular interest, 7-(1,2-dihydroxyheptyl)-1,N6-
ethenodeoxyadenosine (DHHdA) is a novel DNA adduct in vitro and in vivo
derived from lipid peroxidation of -6 PUFAs. Despite its recent
identification in vivo, the role of DHHdA in tumorigenesis is not yet
known. Previously, the endogenously formed DHHdA was detected by liquid
chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Due to its low levels
in vivo (1-30 adducts/109 DNA bases), a relatively high quantity of DNA
is needed for its detection and quantification. In this study we
developed a monoclonal antibody against DHHdA in order to detect and
quantify this adduct in cells and tissues. Two antigens were synthesized
by conjugating activated hapten: 5-carboxy-7-(1,2-dihydroxyheptyl)
adenosine (5-carboxy DHHA) to BSA and KLH carrier proteins.
KLH-conjugated hapten was used for mice immunization, whereas BSA-based
hapten was used to test for an immune response. After immunization and
several screenings, 6 monoclonal cell lines were chosen for further
tests. Normal and competitive ELISA was performed to characterize the
antibodies from all cell lines. Competitive ELISA revealed no
cross-reactivity towards normal nucleosides and - and -OHPdG, the cyclic
1,N2-propano adduct derived from acrolein, and 8-oxo-dG for all of the
tested antibodies. However, we observed a weak (Dietary polyunsaturated
fatty acids (-3 and -6 PUFAs) play a role in certain human cancers. The
oxidation of PUFAs produces reactive ,-unsaturated aldehydes (enals) that
can modify DNA producing mutagenic lesions. Of particular interest,
7-(1,2-dihydroxyheptyl)-1,N6- ethenodeoxyadenosine (DHHdA) is a novel DNA
adduct in vitro and in vivo derived from lipid peroxidation of -6 PUFAs.
Despite its recent identification in vivo, the role of DHHdA in
tumorigenesis is not yet known. Previously, the endogenously formed DHHdA
was detected by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry
(LC-MS/MS). Due to its low levels in vivo (1-30 adducts/109 DNA bases), a
relatively high quantity of DNA is needed for its detection and
quantification. In this study we developed a monoclonal antibody against
DHHdA in order to detect and quantify this adduct in cells and tissues.
Two antigens were synthesized by conjugating activated hapten:
5-carboxy-7-(1,2-dihydroxyheptyl) adenosine (5-carboxy DHHA) to BSA and
KLH carrier proteins. KLH-conjugated hapten was used for mice
immunization, whereas BSA-based hapten was used to test for an immune
response. After immunization and several screenings, 6 monoclonal cell
lines were chosen for further tests. Normal and competitive ELISA was
performed to characterize the antibodies from all cell lines. Competitive
ELISA revealed no cross-reactivity towards normal nucleosides and - and
-OHPdG, the cyclic 1,N2-propano adduct derived from acrolein, and
8-oxo-dG for all of the tested antibodies. However, we observed a weak (<
1:100) specificity for HNE-dG, an adduct derived from
(E)-4-hydroxy-2-nonenal produced from oxidized -6 PUFAs. Because of the
relatively low level of endogenous HNE-dG compared to DHHdA, this weak
cross-reactivity should not affect the specificity of the developed
antibody to detect DHHdA. Two cell lines were discarded after antibodies
from them showed moderate competitive effects against
1,N6-etheno-2-deoxyadenosine (dA). From the remaining 4 cell lines the
best one was chosen to produce purified antibody. We believe that this
antibody will be a useful tool in the studies of the role of DHHdA as an
endogenous DNA lesion in cancer development associated with -6 PUFAs.
This work was supported by the NCI grant CA134892.

