Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2-targeted gold nanoparticles produce potent antitumor effects
on human gastric cancer cells


Background: Antibody-targeted therapy for malignant tumors has been
increasingly developed and applied to clinical practice in recent years.
Trastuzumab (Tmab) is a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds to the
human epidermal growth receptor 2 (HER2) and interferes with its signal
transduction leading to tumor progression, and is currently used for
patients with breast cancer and gastric cancer. In inoperable recurrent
or metastatic gastric cancers, HER2 is reportedly overexpressed in
approximately 20% of cases, and Tmab contributes to prolongation of
survival for these patients at some level. However, there still remain
some issues to be overcome such as limited application of Tmab (only 20%)
and limited treatment options for these advanced gastric cancers. Recent
progress in nanotechnology is remarkable and various nanomaterials have
been developed for medical applications. Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) have
been tested as therapeutic and contrast agents in the medical field,
which are stable in vivo and easy to conjugate antibodies, proteins or
peptides to the surface. Moreover, reportedly AuNPs show antitumor effect
by induction to autophagy and apoptosis. These characteristics make AuNPs
more attractive as molecular targeted agents. In this study, we created
HER2-targeted AuNPs by conjugating Tmab on the surface of AuNPs, and
examined antitumor effects on HER2-positive or negative gastric cancer
cells in vitro.Methods: HER2-positive human gastric cancer cell lines
(MKN7, NBI-N87), HER2-negative human gastric cancer cell lines (MKN45,
MKN74) and normal human lung fibroblast (NHLF) were used in this study.
The antitumor effects of Tmab-conjugated AuNPs (Tmab-AuNPs), PEGylated
AuNPs (PEG-AuNPs), Tmab only (antibody amount is presumably equivalent to
antibody attached on the surface of Tmab-AuNPs), mixture of PEG-AuNPs and
Tmab (PEG-AuNPs + Tmab), and PBS were evaluated by XTT assay. Cellular
uptake of AuNPs was observed on dark field microscopy and electron
microscopy. HER2 expression was examined by western blotting and flow
cytometry.Results: Dark field microscopy and electron microscopy showed
that Tmab-AuNPs were taken up into cells more effectively on MKN7 and
NBI-N87 cells (HER2-positive) than PEG-AuNPs and PEG-AuNPs + Tmab. XTT
assay showed that Tmab-AuNPs exhibited a stronger antitumor effect on
MKN7 and NBI-N87 cells (HER2-positive) than the other control treatments,
but not such a strong effect on MKN45 and MKN74 cells (HER2-negative) and
NHLF. The antitumor effect of Tmab-AuNPs on NBI-N87 cells was achieved by
more than twice as much as Tmab, which means that Tmab-AuNPs enables to
reduce the amount of Tmab to less than half.Conclusions: Tmab-AuNPs
proved potent and HER2-dependent antitumor effects on human gastric
cancer cells in vitro. Tmab-AuNPs could have the potential to provide
more effective and less toxic treatment option for HER2-positive gastric
cancer patients.

