Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostaglandin E2 receptor EP1 suppresses breast cancer metastasis


Cyclooxygenases (COX-1 and COX-2) catalyze the formation of
prostaglandins and play a role in the pathogenesis of breast cancer.
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), the chief COX product in tumors, is the
predominant protumorigenic prostanoid and mediates biological effects by
binding to each of four EP receptors (EP1-4). Each receptor is coupled to
different intracellular signaling pathways; and EP1 is coupled to calcium
mobilization and PKC activation. Our published studies indicate that EP1
was detected in the cytoplasm and nucleus of benign ducts and malignant
cells in invasive ductal carcinomas, and overall survival for women with
tumors negative for nuclear EP1 was significantly worse than for women
with any nuclear EP1 expression. Pharmacologic antagonism or reduction of
EP1 expression increased metastatic capacity in a murine model of
metastatic breast cancer. These data support our hypothesis that EP1
functions as a metastasis suppressor.We now report that murine metastatic
mammary tumor cell lines 410.4 and 66.1 have decreased EP1 mRNA
expression compared to the non-metastatic cell line 410. Western blot
analysis of total and subcellular fractions of EpH4 (normal, immortalized
mammary epithelial) and malignant 410, 410.4 and 66.1 cell lines
demonstrates that EP1 protein is present in the total and cytoplasmic
fractions for all cell lines examined. Nuclear EP1 is detected in EpH4
and non-metastatic 410 cells; however, very little to no nuclear protein
is detected in metastatic cell lines 410.4 and 66.1. The absence of
nuclear EP1 in metastatic cell lines is consistent with the prognostic
data that overall survival for women with tumors negative for nuclear EP1
was significantly worse.Previously, we determined that reduction of EP1
expression leads to increased metastatic capacity; therefore, we
investigated the effect of EP1 overexpression on lung colonization in
410.4 and 66.1 cells via tail vein injection in a syngeneic murine model
of breast cancer. In 410.4 cells, EP1 overexpression leads to a 57%-97%
decrease in metastasis, and in 66.1 cells EP1 overexpression resulted in
a 10% - 38% decrease in lung tumor burden compared to vector control
mice. The inverse correlation between EP1 expression and metastatic
capacity supports our hypothesis that EP1 functions as a metastasis
suppressor. We explored potential mechanisms leading to the alteration in
the metastatic behavior in response to manipulation of the expression of
EP1. We previously published that an EP1 antagonist altered adhesion to
laminin in 410.4 cells. Overexpression of EP1 altered the expression of
several integrin receptors in 410.4 and 66.1 cell lines including
integrins alpha-V, alpha-6 and alpha-3. Also, overexpression of EP1 led
to altered adhesion of these cells to several extracellular matrices
including fibronectin, collagen, laminin and fibrinogen. Alteration of
the adhesive properties of these cells by EP1 could contribute to the
metastasis suppressor function of the EP1 receptor.

