Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delayed tumor growth in breast cancer is associated with reduced
activity of the a2 isoform of vacuolar ATPase


In cancer cells, vacuolar ATPase (V-ATPase), a multi-subunit enzyme, is
expressed on the plasma as well as vesicular membranes and critically
influences metastatic behavior. The soluble, cleaved N-terminal domain of
a2 isoform of V-ATPase (a2NTD) is associated with in vitro induction of
both tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) phenotype and activity in
macrophages. This activity caused us to further investigate the role of
a2NTD in cancer progression. We evaluated the effects of the knock down
of a2 isoform (a2V) in tumor cells and the concomitant tumor
microenvironment in the 4T-1 mouse breast cancer model. In vitro
experiments showed that macrophages co-cultivated with a2V knocked down
(sh-a2) tumor cells produced lower amounts of tumorigenic factors and
have a reduced ability to suppress T cell activation and proliferation
compared to control tumor cells. Furthermore, sh-a2 4T1 or control 4T-1
cells were inoculated into female Balb/c mice to generate mammary tumors.
Data analysis showed that tumor growth in mice inoculated with sh-a2 4T-1
cells was delayed up to ten fold compared to control (meanSD: 1.3 1.15 vs
13.96 4.06, P>0.01) at day 8 after inoculation. The expression of TAM
associated molecules like mannose receptor-1 or CD206, IL-10, Arginase-1,
matrix metalloproteinase and vascular endothelial growth factor were
significantly down regulated in tumors from sh-a2 inoculated mice
compared to control (PIn cancer cells, vacuolar ATPase (V-ATPase), a
multi-subunit enzyme, is expressed on the plasma as well as vesicular
membranes and critically influences metastatic behavior. The soluble,
cleaved N-terminal domain of a2 isoform of V-ATPase (a2NTD) is associated
with in vitro induction of both tumor associated macrophages (TAMs)
phenotype and activity in macrophages. This activity caused us to further
investigate the role of a2NTD in cancer progression. We evaluated the
effects of the knock down of a2 isoform (a2V) in tumor cells and the
concomitant tumor microenvironment in the 4T-1 mouse breast cancer model.
In vitro experiments showed that macrophages co-cultivated with a2V
knocked down (sh-a2) tumor cells produced lower amounts of tumorigenic
factors and have a reduced ability to suppress T cell activation and
proliferation compared to control tumor cells. Furthermore, sh-a2 4T1 or
control 4T-1 cells were inoculated into female Balb/c mice to generate
mammary tumors. Data analysis showed that tumor growth in mice inoculated
with sh-a2 4T-1 cells was delayed up to ten fold compared to control
(meanSD: 1.3 1.15 vs 13.96 4.06, P>0.01) at day 8 after inoculation. The
expression of TAM associated molecules like mannose receptor-1 or CD206,
IL-10, Arginase-1, matrix metalloproteinase and vascular endothelial
growth factor were significantly down regulated in tumors from sh-a2
inoculated mice compared to control (P<0.01). Additionally, a significant
reduction in the number of TAMs (F4/80+CD206+: mean = 6) and increase in
macrophage with anti-tumor activity (F4/80+CD11c+: mean = 10.4) was also
observed in these tumors which contributed towards delay in tumor growth.
Further, we successfully deleted a2V gene in mice and its effect on tumor
generation and microenvironment is evaluated. These findings demonstrated
that in the absence of a2V in tumor cells, the resident TAM population in
the tumor microenvironment is altered, which affected in vivo tumor
growth. The data show that by involving the host innate immune system,
tumor growth can be control through targeting of a2V and other related
factors in tumor cells.

