Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The clinical significance of APOBEC3B in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma


Backgrounds:APOBEC3B is one of the cytidine deaminase apolipoprotein B
mRNA-editing enzyme catalytic polypeptide-like (APOBEC3) family, and
APOBEC3B can induce transitions into target DNA through cytidine
deamination. To date, APOBEC attracts attention due to its functioning as
part of the innate immune system by protecting against retrovirus and
retrotransposon propagation. And, recent studies revealed that APOBEC3B
might contribute to several mutations in various types of cancers,
including cervical, breast, head and neck, lung, bladder cancers, and
APOBEC3B may have a crucial role in carcinogenesis and cancer
development. Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) reportedly has
several molecular features, and we recently reported that long
interspersed nucleotide element 1 (LINE-1) hypomethylation might
contribute to poor prognosis and PIK3CA mutation to good prognosis in
ESCC. However, there is no report which investigates the relationship
between APOBEC3B expression, clinical and pathological features in
ESCC.Methods:We compared the expression of APOBEC3B mRNA between cancer
tissues and noncancerous esophageal mucosae by using GEO profiles and
ESCC frozen tissues. In addition, we investigated the relationships
between the APOBEC3B immunohistochemical expression levels, clinical and
pathological features, and molecular features including p53 expression,
global DNA methylation level and PIK3CA mutation. We quantified LINE-1
retrotransposons, of which a substantial portion of the human genome
consists, to assess global DNA methylation.Results:APOBEC3B expression at
mRNA level was significantly higher in cancer tissues than in
noncancerous esophageal mucosae (P = 0.050). In the immunohistochemical
study, the APOBEC3B expression of ESCC was stronger than that of
noncancerous esophageal mucosa. We found no significant correlation of
APOBEC3B expression with tumor size, T stage, N stage and pStage (P =
0.74, P = 0.32, P = 0.19, P = 0.23, respectively). There were no
correlation between APOBEC3B expression and prognosis. There was no
correlation between APOBEC3B expression and p53 expression (P = 0.23),
but, interestingly, a high expression of APOBEC3B was significantly
associated with LINE-1 hypomethyaltion and PIK3CA mutation (P = 0.029, P
= 0.020).Conclusions:APOBEC3B high expression had significant
relationships with LINE-1 hypomethylation and PIK3CA mutation, supporting
that APOBEC3B might contribute to malignant behavior through the
molecular features in ESCC.

