Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevalent loss of BRCA1 and BRCA2 expression in African TNBC
suggests their prominent role in sporadic carcinogenesis


BRCAness is a property shared by breast tumors with sporadic BRCA1
mutations or arising in patients with germline BRCA1 mutations, or tumors
which down-regulate BRCA1 expression by other mechanisms. Women with
African ancestry have been shown to have breast tumors that have
characteristics similar to BRCA mutated tumors, but there is scant data
on the signaling and regulation of the BRCA1 and BRCA 2 pathways in
theses tumors.We have hypothesized that defective expression of key
players in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 pathways may contribute to the BRCAness
observed in sporadic breast cancers in women with African
ancestry.Method:1. Genomic and transcriptomic studies using Next
Generation Sequencing technologies of normal DNA extracted from saliva
and tumor DNA and RNA, extracted from frozen tumors were performed on
four triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) specimens from Ghanaian women.
Whole exome sequencing and RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) were completed on all
patients.2. Immunohistochemistry staining for BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB2
protein was completed for 49 Ghanaian TNBC tumor samples. IHC staining
was also performed on some of the tumors that were sequenced. IHC
staining was performed on PDX tumors derived from Ghanaian TNBC.3.
Generation of patient derived xenografts (PDX) models of TNBC from
Ghanaian breast cancer patients for sequencing, q and standard PCR, and
Western blot to determine the signaling of BRCA1 and BRCA2 pathway in
Ghanaian TNBCs.Results:We discovered novel BRCA2 nonsense variant that
will likely result in truncation or no expression. This tumor did not
show BRCA2 expression on IHC. All the patients who had previously
reported BRCA1 and BCRA2 variants had no expression of the proteins on
IHC. Of the 49 Ghanaian TNBC tumors that were stained for BRCA1 and
BRCA2, half did not express either BRCA1 or BRCA2, 10% had no expression
of BRCA1 alone and none had loss of BRCA2 expression alone.Studies are
ongoing on the PDX models to identify the expression of members of the
BRCA1 and BRCA2 pathways in TNBC of women with African
ancestry.Conclusion:A large proportion of TNBCs from African women have
loss of expression of BRCA1 and BRCA2. Identifying the signaling
alterations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 pathways may help to identify novel
drug targets for TNBC or may help predict response to PARP inhibitors or
related drugs.IHC is an important and relatively inexpensive method for
determining patients with BRCA pathway alteration who my benefit from DNA
repair targeted therapy. This will be very beneficial for women in Africa
who do not have access to BCRA germline testing.

