Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR and Dock180 activate MLK3 to drive invasion of glioblastoma
cells


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and deadly form of brain tumor in
adults, with an average post-diagnosis survival time of 15 months. While
GBMs rarely metastasize to distant organs, they readily invade into
surrounding brain tissue, leading to incomplete surgical resection and
subsequent tumor recurrence. Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR)
signaling is aberrantly activated in a majority of GBM tumors, and is
clearly implicated in multiple malignant phenotypes, including migration
and invasion. However, direct targeting of EGFR has been largely
unsuccessful, for multiple reasons, including compensatory upregulation
of other RTKs. Thus, identifying and targeting key signaling nodes that
are downstream of multiple RTKs is of therapeutic importance. Several
guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), including Dock180, a Rac1
GEF, are implicated in GBM invasion through activation of small GTPases,
Rac and Cdc42. The Mixed Lineage Kinases (MLKs) are a family of cytosolic
MAP3Ks that activate multiple MAPK pathways, including the c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK), ERK, and p38 pathways. MLK3 is activated through
the binding of activated, GTP-bound Rac and/or Cdc42 to induce
dimerization and activation. Herein, the role of MLK signaling on GBM
cell migration is investigated using an ATP-competitive pan-MLK inhibitor
(previously in phase II/III clinical trials for Parkinson's disease), as
well as siRNA targeting MLK3. Data from this study demonstrate that both
MLK inhibition and silencing of MLK3 dramatically reduce the migration
and invasion of GBM cells. EGF-induced activation of JNK in multiple GBM
cell lines is blocked by a pan-MLK inhibitor, as well as an MLK3-specific
siRNA. Furthermore, the MLK inhibitor blocks EGF-induced migration in a
2D wound healing assay. Mutant EGFRvIII-induced JNK activation is blocked
by MLK inhibition, and invasion of primary GBM6 cells (express EGFRvIII)
is blocked in a 3D invasion assay. Dock180, a Rac GEF has been shown to
be critical for multiple malignant phenotypes in GBM cells, including
migration and invasion. Based upon Drosophila genetics, the Dock180
homolog (MBC), a Rac GEF, acts upstream of Rac, the MLK homolog (slipper)
and JNK. Therefore we hypothesized that Dock180 might be an upstream
activator of MLK3. Our data demonstrate that Dock180 complexes with MLK3,
and that ectopic expression of Dock180 activates MLK3 activation in a
Rac-dependent manner. Furthermore, siRNA-mediated silencing of Dock 180
and of MLK3 reduce EGF-induced JNK activation to similar extents,
consistent with the idea that they act in the same signaling axis leading
to JNK activation. Finally, ectopic expression of MLK3 (which leads to
its auto-activation) is sufficient to rescue the defect in migration due
to Dock180 silencing. Based upon these data, we propose that an
EGFR-Dock180-Rac-MLK-JNK signaling axis drives GBM migration and 3D
invasion, and that targeting MLKs may be a useful therapeutic approach
for treating patients with GBM.

