Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated molecular characterization of mast cell leukemia
reveals recurrent inactivation of the SETD2 tumor suppressor gene


Systemic mastocytosis (SM) includes a heterogeneous group of disorders
ranging from indolent SM to the rare and aggressive mast cell leukemia
(MCL). Somatic mutations in the KIT receptor kinase (most frequently,
D816V) can be detected in >90% of patients and are thought to play an
important pathogenetic role. Nevertheless, morphological and clinical
diversity, as well as the fact that some patients are negative for KIT
mutations, suggest that the underlying molecular picture is far from
being fully elucidated. To shed further light on this issue, we undertook
an integrated molecular genetic study of a KIT gene mutation-negative MCL
case who came to our attention in 2012. After having obtained written
informed consent, we extracted genomic DNA and total RNA from purified
mast cells (MCs) isolated from bone marrow at diagnosis and at
progression, as well as DNA from saliva, and performed whole exome
sequencing (WES) and RNA-seq on an HiSeq1000 (Illumina, San Diego CA).
High resolution karyotyping was also performed with Cytoscan HD arrays
(Affymetrix, Santa Clara CA). Among the mutated genes detected in MCs but
not in saliva by WES, SETD2 stood out among others because two
loss-of-function mutations (a nonsense and a frameshift mutation)
inactivating both alleles of the gene were identified. Western Blotting
(WB) confirmed the expression of the truncated SETD2 isoform resulting
from the nonsense mutation. The SETD2 gene encodes a histone
methyltransferase responsible for trimethylation of Lysine 36 of histone
H3 (H3K36Me3), a key hystone mark associated not only with active
chromatin but also with transcriptional elongation, alternative splicing,
DNA replication and repair. Loss of the highly conserved WW and SRI
domains was predicted to impair SETD2 binding with RNA polymeraseII and
hNRNP L, as confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation. Accordingly, RNA-seq
showed evidence of spurious transcripts initiated from cryptic
promoter-like sequences within genes as well as non-canonical splice
isoforms. More importantly, WB confirmed that H3K36Me3 was completely
abrogated. In line with the role of SETD2-dependent H3K36Me3 in DNA
repair and genome stability, Cytoscan HD arrays and WES showed that
several losses at many chromosomal loci, together with more than 70
additional point mutations, undetectable at diagnosis, were acquired at
the time of progression. Absence of SETD2 protein expression and/or
reduced H3K36Me3 were detected in 3/3 additional MCLs and in 6/8
aggressive SMs so far screened. Our data point to epigenetic regulation
and/or DNA repair as candidate pathways deserving further investigation
in SM - in an attempt to elucidate the mechanisms underlying enhanced
clinical aggressiveness and to identify more effective treatment
modalities. Molecular characterization of 10 additional MCLs and
aggressive SMs is ongoing. Supported by FP7 NGS-PTL project and Progetto
Regione-Universit 2010-12(L. Bolondi)

