Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance mechanisms to ALK inhibitors


Purpose: ALK-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) was first
reported in 2007. Approximately 3-5% of NSCLCs harbor an ALK gene
rearrangement. The first-generation ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
crizotinib is a standard therapy for patients with advanced
ALK-rearranged NSCLC. Several next-generation ALK-TKIs have entered the
clinic and have shown promising antitumor activity in
crizotinib-resistant patients. As patients still relapse even on these
next-generation ALK-TKIs, we examined mechanisms of resistance to one
next-generation ALK-TKI - alectinib - and potential strategies to
overcome this resistance.Experimental Procedure: We established a cell
line model of alectinib resistance, and analyzed resistant tumor
specimens from patients who had relapsed on alectinib. Cell lines were
also established under an IRB-approved protocol when there was sufficient
fresh tumor tissue. We established Ba/F3 cells expressing EML4-ALK and
performed ENU mutagenesis to compare potential crizotinib or
alectinib-resistance mutations. In addition, we developed Ba/F3 models
harboring ALK resistance mutations and evaluated the potency of multiple
next-generation ALK-TKIs including 3rd generation ALK inhibitor in these
models and in vivo. To elucidate structure-activity-relationships of ALK
resistance mutations, we performed computational thermodynamic simulation
with MP-CAFEE.Results: We identified multiple resistance mutations,
including ALK I1171N, I1171S, and V1180L, from the ENU mutagenesis screen
and the cell line model. In addition we found secondary mutations at the
I1171 residue from the Japanese patients who developed resistance to
alectinib or crizotinib. Both ALK mutations (V1180L and I1171 mutations)
conferred resistance to alectinib as well as to crizotinib, but were
sensitive to ceritinib and other next-generation ALK-TKIs. Based on
thermodynamics simulation, each resistance mutation is predicted to lead
to distinct structural alterations that decrease the binding affinity of
ALK-TKIs for ALK.Conclusions: We have identified multiple
alectinib-resistance mutations from the cell line model, patient derived
cell lines, and tumor tissues, and ENU mutagenesis. ALK secondary
mutations arising after alectinib exposure are sensitive to other next
generation ALK-TKIs. These findings suggest a potential role for
sequential therapy with multiple next-generation ALK-TKIs in patients
with advanced, ALK-rearranged cancers.

