Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization of a PEGylated glucuronide-auristatin linker for
antibody-drug conjugates


The clinical success of antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) brentuximab
vedotin and ado-trastuzumab emtansine has led to an increased effort to
identify new antibody payloads and develop improved linker technologies.
Most antibody payloads impart significant hydrophobicity to the ADC
resulting in accelerated plasma clearance and diminished in vivo
activity, particularly for conjugates with high drug to antibody ratios
(DAR). Consequently, drug-linkers have been designed to minimize or mask
hydrophobicity, enabling a higher DAR and improved pharmacokinetic
properties, translating to enhanced in vivo potency. We recently reported
on the incorporation of a discrete PEG polymer as a side chain in the
-glucuronide-monomethylauristatin E (MMAE) linker to provide homogeneous
DAR 8 conjugates with decreased plasma clearance and increased antitumor
activity in xenograft models relative to a non-PEGylated control. The
PEG-glucuronide-MMAE lead has now been optimized by minimizing the size
of the PEG side chain and incorporating a self-stabilizing maleimide to
prevent payload de-conjugation in vivo. Multiple PEG-glucuronide-MMAE
linker constructs were prepared with PEG size varying from 0 to 24
ethylene oxide units, and uniform DAR 8 ADCs were evaluated. PEG size had
small but variable effects in vitro, with diminished activity observed in
some cell lines. In contrast, a clear relationship was observed between
PEG length and plasma pharmacokinetics. Longer PEG chains resulted in
slower clearance, with a threshold length beyond which clearance was not
impacted. Conjugates bearing PEG of sufficient length to minimize ADC
plasma clearance provided a wider therapeutic window relative to
conjugates bearing shorter PEGs. Thus, sufficient masking of drug
hydrophobicity is a viable strategy to provide uniform DAR 8 ADCs that
preserve ADC pharmacokinetics and increase potency through higher drug
loading.

