Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGFR2 amplification is predictive of sensitivity to regorafenib in
gastric and colorectal cancers


Purpose Regorafenib is an orally bioavailable, small molecular
multikinase inhibitor of VEGFR, PDGFR, FGFR, KIT, RET, BRAF, BRAFV600E,
CRAF, and TIE2. Although regorafenib has demonstrated survival benefits
in patients with metastatic colorectal and gastrointestinal stromal
tumors, there is no proven biomarker predicting sensitivity to
regorafenib. We investigated preclinical activity of regorafenib in
gastric and colorectal cancer cell-lines to identify genetic alterations
associated with sensitivity to regorafenib.Methods Fourteen gastric
cancer cell lines and 18 colorectal cancer cell lines were screened for
regorafenib sensitivity with cell proliferation assays. We performed
targeted exome and transcriptome sequencing of the cell lines to identify
genetic alterations associated with sensitivity to regorafenib.
Mechanisms of regorafenib sensitivity were investigated in regorafenib
sensitive cell lines with immunoblotting and flow cytometry.Results Two
gastric (SNU-16, KATO-III) and 1 colorectal (NCI-H716) cancer cells were
sensitive to regorafenib with GI50 values of less than 1 M. Mutation
profiles and mRNA expression levels of regorafenib target molecules in
regorafenib sensitive and insensitive cell lines demonstrated that
amplification of FGFR2 was the only genetic alteration associated with in
vitro sensitivity to regorafenib. FGFR2 amplified gastric (SNU-16,
KATO-III) and colorectal (NCI-H716) cancer cell lines revealed activated
signaling through FGFR2 pathway, and knock-down of FGFR2 with siRNA
significantly repressed cellular growth rate and decreased sensitivity to
regorafenib. Regorafenib effectively inhibited phosphorylation of FGFR2
and its downstream signaling molecules in dose-dependent manner
selectively in FGFR2 amplified cells. In cell cycle analysis, regorafenib
induced G1/S arrest (SNU-16, KATO-III) and apoptosis (NCI-H716), however
no significant changes were seen in cell lines without FGFR2
amplification.Conclusions Signaling through FGFR2 pathway plays a key
role in cellular growth and survival in FGFR2 amplified cancers.
Regorafenib effectively abrogates activated FGFR2 signaling in FGFR2
amplified gastric and colorectal cancer cells, and therefore should be
considered for integration into treatment in patients with FGFR2
amplified gastric and colorectal cancers.

