Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-specific regulation of receptor tyrosine kinases by Grp94


The Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) HSP90 paralog, Glucose Regulated Protein
94 (Grp94) is a molecular chaperone often overexpressed in tumors.
Clinically, expression of Grp94 correlates with advanced stage and poor
survival in a variety of cancers, and is closely linked to cancer growth
and metastasis. The majority of the cancer-related studies on Grp94 have
focused narrowly on the immunogenic activity of Grp94/peptide complexes
and the involvement of this protein in the secretion of IGF-I and IGF-II
and the regulation of Toll-like receptors and integrins. Recently
however, novel mechanistic understanding emerged regarding the cancer
specific roles of Grp94: the important and unexpected tumor specific
translocation of Grp94 from ER to plasma membrane to regulate the altered
expression and function of plasma membrane associated cancer-proteins and
its role in sustaining their transforming ability. In this respect, we
found that the high density HER2 formations at the plasma membrane of
HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells necessitate Grp94 (Nat Chem Biol
2013 9(11):677-84). Inhibition of Grp94 in these cells was sufficient to
destabilize plasma membrane HER2, inhibit its signaling properties,
target HER2 towards a degradative pathway and as a result kill the cancer
cell.We here use a chemical biology approach combined with classical
methods to produce preliminary evidence for an unanticipated oncogenic
role for Grp94 in maintaining high density receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTKs) at the plasma membrane, particularly in cancer cells where RTKs
are required to channel an amplified signaling. Our data indicate that
under conditions in which stress is imposed on the cell by proteome
alterations (i.e. RTK overexpression), the chaperoning function of Grp94
is vital for proper functioning of RTKs. In these cells Grp94
translocates to the plasma membrane where it functions to maintain an
active conformation of RTKs and to stabilize downstream signaling through
the receptor. In contrast, we find no effect of Grp94 inhibition in cells
with normal or physiological RTK function/expression.Our findings provide
a strong rationale for the use of chemical tools in the investigation of
Grp94 associated oncogenic mechanisms and support the development of
Grp94 inhibitors as a novel targeted therapy for the treatment of cancers
dependent on increased signaling through plasma membrane RTKs, many of
which tend to have an aggressive presentation.

