Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin and everolimus act synergistically with paclitaxel
against ovarian cancer


Background: Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the most lethal
gynecological malignancy, mostly due to the diagnosis of the disease at
advanced stages and to chemoresistance to platinum- and taxane-based
standard therapy. EOC comprises a heterogeneous group of diseases
classified based on morphologic and molecular-genetic features. High
grade serous ovarian cancer is the most prevalent EOC subtype, being
followed by the clear cell subtype. Both EOC subtypes are vastly
aggressive and frequently acquire the chemoresistant phenotype, thus
challenging researchers and clinicians. Notably, hyperactivation of PI3K
and MAPK pathways are frequently related to resistance to standard
therapies in EOC, thus, metformin (MET) and everolimus (EVE) have emerged
as novel therapeutic options against EOC. The present work aimed to
investigate the action of MET and EVE, in vitro, in ES-2 (clear cell) and
A2780 (serous) cell lines. Methods: Metabolic cell viability (MCV) assays
were conducted after the treatment of the cells with MET or EVE in
monotherapy and in association with paclitaxel (PAC) by the MTT method.
Cell cycle progression was evaluated by flow cytometry/propidium iodide.
Apoptosis was analyzed by the annexin V-FITC assay. Western blot was
performed to investigate MEK/ERK and PI3K/AKT pathways. Findings: MCV of
EOC lineages was reduced by MET and EVE in different concentrations. The
combination of MET, at low and safe concentration (10uM), with PAC 100nM
reduced the MCV in 56.55% for ES-2, and 71.38% for A2780. Similarly, EVE
0.06 nM and PAC 100 nM decreased the VCM in 66.4% and 73.38% for ES-2 and
A2780, respectively. MET 10m and EVE 0.06nM associated with PAC 12.5nM
kept the MCV at levels comparable to PAC 100nM. These findings are of
extreme clinical relevance as they reveal that the synergism between MET
and EVE with PAC likely maintains the drug citotoxicity at lower
concentrations than those associated to its severe and limiting side
effects, as neurotoxicity. Annexin-FITC assay was conducted in ES-2
lineage treated with PAC alone and combined with MET or EVE. Low
percentage of apoptotic/necrotic cells was observed, which suggests the
occurrence of additional processes, such as autophagic cell death. EVE
induced ES-2 cell cycle arrest; however, MET, at low concentration, did
not cause the same effect. There were no significant cell cycle changes
due to the combined treatment of ES-2 with PAC and MET or EVE. Western
blot analysis demonstrated that the combination of EVE and PAC increased,
whereas MET alone or in combination with PAC decreased the
phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and AKT in ES2 cells. Conclusions: Our data
suggest that MET or EVE exerts synergistic effect with PAC against EOC,
thus opening an avenue to explore novel strategies against this highly
lethal disease. Ongoing experiments are sought to elucidate the cellular
pathways modulated by MET and EVE alone or in combination with PAC in EOC
lineages, as well as the elicited cellular events and mechanisms.

