Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pretreatment and serial plasma assessments of EGFR mutations in
NSCLC patients treated with rociletinib (CO-1686)


Background:EGFR mutation testing is required to identify patients who may
respond to TKI therapy. However, tumor biopsies from NSCLC patients can
pose challenges for molecular analyses due to inadequate sample material,
the inability to biopsy patients due to poor health status or
inaccessible lesions, and tumor heterogeneity. We examined the detection
of EGFR mutations in circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) from plasma and
the concordance of EGFR mutation status with contemporaneously matched
tumor tissue in TIGER-X, a Phase 1/2 clinical study of rociletinib
(CO-1686) in previously treated advanced NSCLC patients harboring EGFR
mutations in their tumors. Rociletinib is an oral, potent, small-molecule
irreversible tyrosine kinase inhibitor that selectively targets mutant
forms of EGFR, including T790M, L858R and Del(19), while sparing
wild-type EGFR.Methods:Pretreatment matched tumor tissue and plasma from
139 Stage IIIB/IV NSCLC patients enrolled in TIGER-X were evaluated for
EGFR status. Tumor tissue was processed as FFPE and tested by
allele-specific PCR. Plasma was tested as a two mL aliquot using BEAMing,
a quantitative and sensitive detection technology based on digital
PCR.Results:Using tissue as the reference, the positive percent agreement
between tumor and BEAMing plasma test results was 86% (102/119) for
activating mutations and 77% (78/101) for T790M. Four plasma samples of
the 23 tumor T790M+/plasma T790M- cases were also tested by three
independent plasma testing platforms with claimed analytical
sensitivities of Background:EGFR mutation testing is required to identify
patients who may respond to TKI therapy. However, tumor biopsies from
NSCLC patients can pose challenges for molecular analyses due to
inadequate sample material, the inability to biopsy patients due to poor
health status or inaccessible lesions, and tumor heterogeneity. We
examined the detection of EGFR mutations in circulating cell-free DNA
(cfDNA) from plasma and the concordance of EGFR mutation status with
contemporaneously matched tumor tissue in TIGER-X, a Phase 1/2 clinical
study of rociletinib (CO-1686) in previously treated advanced NSCLC
patients harboring EGFR mutations in their tumors. Rociletinib is an
oral, potent, small-molecule irreversible tyrosine kinase inhibitor that
selectively targets mutant forms of EGFR, including T790M, L858R and
Del(19), while sparing wild-type EGFR.Methods:Pretreatment matched tumor
tissue and plasma from 139 Stage IIIB/IV NSCLC patients enrolled in
TIGER-X were evaluated for EGFR status. Tumor tissue was processed as
FFPE and tested by allele-specific PCR. Plasma was tested as a two mL
aliquot using BEAMing, a quantitative and sensitive detection technology
based on digital PCR.Results:Using tissue as the reference, the positive
percent agreement between tumor and BEAMing plasma test results was 86%
(102/119) for activating mutations and 77% (78/101) for T790M. Four
plasma samples of the 23 tumor T790M+/plasma T790M- cases were also
tested by three independent plasma testing platforms with claimed
analytical sensitivities of <10 molecules/mL. All four plasma cases were
T790M- by each test method. Of the 139 patients evaluated, there were 14
cases that were tumor T790M-/plasma T790M+. Seven of these were retested
by a second plasma test platform, and five were confirmed as positive.
The remaining two were near the limit of detection by BEAMing. Nine tumor
samples from the plasma T790M+ cases could not be analyzed due to
insufficient material. Clinical characteristics positively associated
with the ability to identify EGFR mutations in plasma included M1b
disease and higher tumor burden. Serial plasma assessments were performed
on a subset of patients. A drop in plasma mutant EGFR levels to 10
molecules/mL was seen by Day 21 of treatment in 7 of 8 patients assessed
who eventually experienced a PR. Re-emergence of the EGFR activating
mutation in plasma, consistent with development of acquired resistance to
rociletinib, was observed as early as 12 weeks prior to clinical
progression by RECIST.Conclusions:The BEAMing plasma test identified EGFR
mutations detected in tumor with high sensitivity. In addition, plasma
testing identified T790M+ patients that were determined T790M- by the
tumor test, which may be in part explained by tumor heterogeneity and/or
inadequate biopsy. These findings demonstrate that BEAMing can be a
useful tool for the non-invasive assessment of EGFR mutations in NSCLC.

