Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase I as a therapeutic target: lessons
from yeast functional studies


Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase I (Tdp1) resolves various 3phospho-adducts
within DNA breaks induced by numerous chemotherapeutics. This includes
Tdp1 ability to repair DNA topoisomerase I (Topo1)-DNA covalent complexes
reversibly stabilized by camptothecins (CPTs) such as the FDA approved
CPT derivatives topotecan and irinotecan. Tdp1 uses a two-step catalytic
cycle that requires the formation of a Tdp1-DNA covalent intermediate
through its nucleophilic histidine (Hisnuc) resulting in dissociation of
the adduct, while the general acid/base histidine (Hisgab) mediates Tdp1
dissociation. A Tdp1Hisgab to Arg mutant stabilizes the Tdp1-DNA
intermediate and is associated with autosomal recessive ataxia SCAN1.
Alternative substitutions of Hisgab transforms yeast Tdp1 into a potent
Topo1-depended toxin via stabilization of enzyme-DNA intermediates. We
propose that stabilization of the Tdp1-DNA complex is a potential novel
therapeutic anti-cancer strategy. As proof-of-concept, we analyzed two
different catalytic human Tdp1 mutants in HEK293 cells without additional
stress. Expression of hTdp1HisnucAla and hTdp1HisgabAsn mutants induced
cytotoxicity, which correlates with stabilization of their enzyme-DNA
intermediates. Serendipitously, we discovered that Tdp1's N-terminal
residues are critical for Tdp1HisnucAla catalytic activity but not for
wild type Tdp1. In addition, analyzing the effect of the N-terminal
domain of other Tdp1 catalytic mutants revealed that these residues
influence the formation of covalent Tdp1-DNA intermediates in vitro,
which is conserved from yeast to human. To better understand the
interaction between Tdp1 and its substrates, we examined the cellular
role of the poorly conserved N-terminal domain (80aa yTdp1 and 140aa
hTdp1). This domain is not essential for catalytic activity per se,
however, we observed that it is critical for Tdp1 cellular function in
yeast and human cells. Comparison of the full-length and N-terminal
truncated Tdp1 mutants showed similar cellular distribution, but a
converse toxicity. This suggests that the N-terminal domain is a critical
determinant of Tdp1 cellular function and this function is conserved from
yeast to human. Thus, understanding the mechanism of interaction between
Tdp1 and Topo1-DNA intermediate is important for the development of Tdp1
as a therapeutic target. Overall, these results support our concept that
stabilization of Tdp1-DNA covalent intermediates converting this DNA
repair enzyme into a cellular toxin is a potential novel anti-cancer
therapeutic strategy, which is different from the intuitive strategy of
inhibiting (preventing) Tdp1 catalytic activity.This work is in part
supported by the ADDA.

