Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The NLRC4 inflammasome promotes breast cancer progression in
diet-induced obese mice


Obesity is not only a known risk factor for the development of ER+ breast
cancer in postmenopausal woman, but is also associated with a poor
clinical outcome across all subtypes of breast cancer. Obesity is also
one of the only known risk factors for the development of invasive ductal
carcinoma (IDC) versus ductal carcinoma in-situ (DCIS; non-invasive). A
number of hypotheses have been proposed to explain the association
between obesity and breast cancer progression. One such hypothesis is
that the chronic inflammation in adipose tissue associated with obesity,
especially adipose tissue in the mammary glands, creates a
microenvironment that promotes breast cancer progression by acting as a
reservoir of pro-inflammatory cytokines (including interleukin IL-1 and
IL-6). One source of pro-inflammatory cytokines in adipose tissue is
activated inflammasomes in infiltrating macrophages. Inflammasomes are
multiprotein complexes whose main function is the activation of IL-1 and
IL-18 during inflammation via Caspase 1-mediated proteolytic cleavage.
Chronic inflammation, NLRP3 inflammasome activation and IL-1 are thought
to be a major cause of obesity-associated insulin resistance and are
involved in many human diseases including type-2 diabetes and cancer.
However, the mechanism linking obesity and breast cancer progression
remains unknown. We hypothesize that obesity-induced inflammasome
activation in mammary adipose tissue results in active IL-1 which in turn
promotes breast cancer progression. Using a syngeneic orthotopic
transplant model of breast cancer in C57Bl/6 mice (Py8119 cells and E0771
cells) we have shown that diet-induced obese (DIO) mice (mice fed a high
fat diet) have increased tumor growth and metastasis compared to control
mice (mice fed normal chow). Tumors from DIO mice have increased
macrophage infiltration and caspase-1 activation compared to tumors from
control mice. Additional studies have shown that treating DIO mice with
an IL1R1 (the receptor for IL-1) blocking antibody reduces tumor growth
to that observed in control mice. Furthermore, NLRC4 deficient DIO mice
had reduced tumor growth (compared to wild-type DIO) mice, while there
was no decrease in tumor growth in NLRP3 deficient DIO mice, indicating
that NLRC4 inflammasome activation promotes breast cancer growth in obese
mice. Finally, tumors from DIO mice had increased vascularization (as
evidenced by an increase in CD31+ cells) compared to control mice, which
was decreased in NLRC4 deficient mice or mice treated with the anti-IL1R1
antibody. This data indicates that obesity induced NLRC4 inflammasome
activation in infiltrating macrophages in the mammary gland promotes
breast cancer progression possibly through increased angiogenesis in the
tumor microenvironment. Thus, targeting inflammasome activation or the
IL-1/IL1R1 axis represents a rational target for the treatment of breast
cancer in obese patients.

