Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular evidence for a parent of origin effect in pediatric
insulinomas


Insulinomas are well-differentiated pancreatic endocrine tumors that
cause abnormal beta cell proliferation and hyperinsulinimic hypoglycemia.
With an incidence of 2-4 cases per million per year, insulinomas are rare
in adults and even less common in children. Since congenital focal
hyperinsulinism, another developmental lesion, is associated with
paternal isodisomy for the imprinted 11p15 locus, we sought to
characterize the role of this region and of mutations in MEN1 on 11q13 in
pediatric insulinoma cases.We identified 13 pediatric insulinoma cases,
which is the largest pediatric series reported, and performed
immunohistochemical analysis for the maternally expressed tumor
suppressor marker p57 located in 11p15. Using blood and tumor DNA, we
tested 9 candidate genes associated with congenital hyperinsulinism
including ABCC8, KCNJ11 and the MEN1 tumor suppressor. We performed
methylation analysis of imprint control regions (ICR) that included the
paternally expressed IGF2 (ICR1) and maternally expressed CDKN1C (ICR2)
located on 11p15 and genome-wide SNP array analysis with tumor DNA.MEN1
mutations were found in 4 cases and suspected in one (MEN1 group); all 5
tumors stained negative for p57 and were hypermethylated at ICR1 and
hypomethylated at ICR2 indicating loss of the maternal allele. SNP arrays
confirmed loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of entire chromosome 11 in 4
cases. Four out of the 6 remaining non-MEN1 cases also stained negative
for p57; in confirmation, 2 of the 4 cases carried mosaic copy number
abnormality of chromosome 11. SNP array data demonstrated extensive
genome-wide aneuploidy in MEN1 and non-MEN1 cases; however interstitial
changes were not present in any of the cases. Notably, MEN1 cases carried
only entire chromosome changes, while non-MEN1 cases carried whole arm
changes in addition whole chromosome changes.In conclusion, MEN1
mutations are more common in pediatric insulinomas than in adult
insulinoma cases (40% in this study vs. 8% in adults). Compared to adult
cases, our pediatric insulinoma cases had smaller sized tumors and a
shorter median duration of symptoms, suggesting that these tumors are
rapidly growing and that the most common chromosome gains and losses very
likely represent early events in insulinoma development. Mechanistically,
our data suggest that loss of p57 expression, in conjunction with loss of
either MEN1 and/or additional imprinted genes on 11p, play a role in the
pathogenesis of most insulinomas. In cases with a germ-line MEN1
mutation, we identified a previously unreported paternal parent-of-origin
effect that is unique to pediatric insulinomas but not to other MEN1
endocrine tumors (e.g., prolactinoma, parathyroid adenoma). Since a
congenital focal hyperinsulinism has a similar parent of origin effect
this suggests a broader role for the imprinted locus, 11p15, in not just
the pathogenesis of pediatric insulinomas but also in beta-cell
replication.

