Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fisetin enhances the efficacy of cabazitaxel: an in vitro and in
vivo study in prostate cancer


Despite advances in screening and treatment, prostate cancer (PCa)
remains a leading cause of death among American men. A wide range of
novel therapies have been introduced for treatment of PCa which lead to
dramatic regression of the primary tumor. However, responses are often
short-lived due to the development of resistant cancer cells.
Cabazitaxel, a microtubule targeting agent, is approved for treatment of
metastatic hormone-refractory PCa in patients pretreated with docetaxel.
However, toxicity and resistance are associated with cabazitaxel
treatment. Therefore, an effective approach that can achieve long-term
improvement is urgently needed for the management of PCa. One of the
strategies proposed for overcoming resistance is combination therapy.
Natural dietary substances have received considerable attention as
chemoprevention and chemotherapeutic agents because of their unique
property that allows them to interact with multiple targets in cancer
cells. Fisetin, a small molecule, has emerged as one of the natural agent
with enormous potential in cancer chemoprevention and chemotherapy. This
study was designed to investigate the effect of a combination of fisetin
and cabazitaxel to achieve maximum therapeutic benefits, reduce dose and
toxicity, and to minimize or delay the induction of drug resistance. We
observed that treatment of PCa cells with fisetin (20-80 M) for 24-48
hours and then cabazitaxel (20-80 nM) for 24 hours significantly retarded
the growth of PCa cells when compared to cabazitaxel or fisetin alone.
The combination resulted in 80% inhibition of cell growth when compared
to cabazitaxel (30%) or fisetin alone (18%). In addition, the combination
(fisein, 20M, cabazitaxel 5 nM) treatment significantly inhibited colony
formation compared to each agent alone. We next implanted 22R1 cells for
determining the effects of fisetin, cabazitaxel and their combination. A
total of 24 athymic nude male mice (6-8) weeks of age were injected
subcutaneously with 1106 22R1 cells. Two weeks later, tumor bearing mice
were randomly divided into four groups (n = 6) and treated with fisetin
(20 mg/kg; 3 times/week), cabazitaxel (5 mg/kg; once/week), and
combination of fisetin (20 mg/kg; 3 times/week) and cabazitaxel (5 mg/kg;
once/week), or vehicle (control) via intraperitoneal route. We observed
that treatment with fisetin alone resulted in 14% inhibition of tumor
growth; cabazitaxel treatment alone resulted in 36% inhibition whereas
combination treatment with fisetin and cabazitaxel resulted in 53%
inhibition of tumor growth compared with the control group. Tissue
staining with proliferation marker Ki67 confirmed the in-vivo effect of
fisetin and cabazitzxel on inhibition of cell proliferation. This study
potentiates the benefit of combination of fisetin and cabazitaxel that
could eliminate rapidly proliferating and resistant cells in PCa and
possibly other cancer types.

