Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of a novel ormeloxifene nanoparticle formulation for
pancreatic cancer treatment


Pancreatic cancer (PanCa) is the fourth leading cancer with 85% mortality
rate in the United States. Therefore, there is an utmost need to discover
new modalities that can result in enhanced therapeutic efficacy with low
to minimal side effects. Ormeloxifene (ORM) is a synthetic molecule which
is widely used as an oral contraceptive in humans. Numerous studies
indicate that ORM exhibits potent anti-cancer effects through inhibition
of important oncogenic signaling events in several cancers. Our studies
also demonstrate the anticancer effects of ORM in various cancer cells.
However, the ORM effects can be improved by encapsulating in a
nanoformulation which provides targeted delivery of ORM to the tumors.
Therefore, in order to increase the therapeutic efficacy of ORM, we have
developed a novel ORM encapsulated poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
formulation (PLGA-ORM NPs). This formulation has been characterized for
particle size, zeta potential, chemical composition, drug loading
efficiency using various physico-chemical methods such as DLS, TEM,
FT-IR, DSC, and TGA. Because of its facile composition (PLGA core, PVA,
PLL and PEG-linker) this novel formulation is compatible for
antibody/aptamer conjugation to achieve tumor specific targeting. The
PLGA-ORM formulations indicate efficient encapsulation of ORM. The
particle size of PLGA-ORM formulation ( 100 nm) indicates that this
formulation can preferentially reach and accumulate in tumors by the
Enhanced Permeation and Retention (EPR) effect. The uptake and
internalization studies demonstrate that PLGA-ORM NPs escape lysosomal
degradation providing its efficient endosomal release to cytosol in PanCa
cells. PLGA-ORM NPs showed superior anti-cancer potential in various
pancreatic cancer cells (HPAF-II, BXPC-3, Panc-1, MiaPaca) and in BXPC-3
xenograft mice. PLGA-ORM NPs suppressed pancreatic xenograft tumor growth
and improved the mice survival. In addition, PLGA-ORM NPs also reduce the
metastasis potential. PLGA-ORM NPs inhibit tumorigenic and metastatic
phenotypes via suppression of AKT phosphorylation and inhibition of key
oncogenes involved in pancreatic progression such as MUC1, HER2 and CD31.
Additionally, PLGA-ORM NPs treated xenograft tumors showed reduced
staining of the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), cytokeratin-19
(CK19), MUC1, HER2 and CD31 in immunohistochemical analysis. In
conclusion, this study suggests that PLGA-ORM formulation is highly
efficient for the inhibition of pancreatic tumor growth and can be
valuable for the treatment of pancreatic cancer in future.

