Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Localization of estrogen receptor (ER) at the centrosome and its
regulation by protein kinases in breast cancer cells


The centrosome plays a key role in the regulation of cell cycle
progression. Centrosome amplification or defects are directly linked to
aneuploidy and chromosomal instability, which are frequently observed in
numerous human cancers. In breast tumors, cancer cells which undergo
unrestricted divisions have both structurally and functionally abnormal
centrosomes. Estrogen receptor- (ER) is known as a nuclear
transcriptional factor, which is expressed in two thirds of primary
breast cancers. ER modulates cell proliferation in breast cancer cells by
influencing the expression of target genes. Measuring ER status is of
clinical importance in breast cancer diagnostics and determination of
treatment response to hormone therapy. Despite extensive studies on its
function and mode of regulation on transcription, the exact roles of ER
in cell cycle regulation and centrosome function in breast cancer cells
are largely unknown.In this study, we use immunofluorescence assay (IF),
biochemical analysis of isolated centrosomes and proximity ligation assay
(PLA) to show, for the first time, that ER is a novel centrosomal protein
in the breast tumor cell line MCF7. To search for kinases possibly
involved in the regulation of ER in the centrosome, we focus on three
mitotic serine/threonine kinases: Aurora A kinase, Aurora B kinase and
Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1). Aurora A is recruited to centrosomes at G2/M
phase and it is required for centrosome maturation and separation, as
well as G2/M transition. It was previously shown that Aurora A can
phosphorylate ER at S167 and S305. Aurora B is a chromosome passenger
protein which is localized at the midbody and involved in cytokinesis.
PLK1 can regulate ER transcriptional activity during interphase, but it's
more widely known functions include driving G2/M transition, and it
localizes to centrosomes during metaphase and to the midbody during
cytokinesis. By using co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assays, we show that
ER interacts with Aurora A, Aurora B and PLK1 in ER+ MCF7 and T47D cells,
and the interactions are increased for Aurora A and PLK1 in the presence
of nocodazole which arrested cells at prometaphase. Moreover, PLA showed
that ER interacts with Aurora A mainly in the centrosome region in
mitotic MCF7 cells. IF data confirmed that phosphorylated ER pS118
colocalizes with Aurora A at centrosomes, Aurora B at midzone/midbody,
and with PLK1 at centrosome and midbody in mitotic MCF7 and T47D cells.
These data suggested that ER might be directly involved in centrosome
function in breast cancer cells, and its dysregulation might play a role
in tumor initiation and progression. As a whole, this study reveals a
novel and previously unrecognized function for ER, a finding that could
have further implications for finding more accurate biomarkers of
prognosis, and providing an alternative treatment strategy against
certain types of ER+ breast cancers.

