Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating methyl-CpG DNA recognition in cancer


DNA methylation is an essential epigenetic modification in eukaryotes
required for genomic stability, control of gene expression and regulation
of chromatin structure. Consequently, abhorrent alterations in methyl-CpG
modifications across the genome, leading to inappropriate transcription,
are associated with many diseases including cancer. Thus, an interest in
discerning the regulatory mechanisms linking DNA methylation with gene
expression in the disease state has emerged. The ZBTB methyl-CpG binding
proteins (MBPs) are specialized transcription factors that mediate
transcription by specifically targeting both methylated and
sequence-specific DNA sites through a conserved set of Cys2His2 zinc
fingers. While ZBTB MBP expression has become increasingly associated
with higher grade tumors, we have only begun to understand the underlying
complexities by which this family mediates gene expression. Here we
combine interdisciplinary in cell genomic with in vitro biophysical
approaches to begin to delineate the mechanisms by which this family of
MBPs recognize DNA and regulate transcription in cancer. Specifically,
for the founding member of this MBP family we utilized multiple
genome-wide methodologies to identify its genomic targets, the
methylation status at these sites and the transcriptional effect of this
protein in cancer cell lines. We observed that protein expression levels,
gene occupations and transcriptional responses were variable between
cancer phenotypes. Additionally, ZBTB depletion results in variable
phenotypic alterations between cell types indicating that protein
presence may provide a means for defining these pathological states.
Further, we have designed multiple protein constructs around the zinc
finger domains of the ZBTB MBPs. Biophysical characterization of the
binding interactions of these protein regions with various epigenetically
modified DNAs has provided preliminary understanding for the differential
mode of DNA recognition exhibited by the ZBTB MBP family members.
Together, these findings provide initial insights into the molecular
basis by which these proteins preferentially recognize, interpret and
translate epigenetic signals into transcriptional responses in cancer
cells.

