Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of receptor and non receptor tyrosine kinases in the
culture filtrates of astrocytes and cancer cells


As demonstrated in our previous work, meningioma cells shed their
membrane receptors and these receptors function in a cell-free
environment. The purpose of this study was to determine if receptor and
non-receptor kinases were similarly being released in different cancers.
Using antibody arrays, cell culture filtrates from glioma and prostate
cancer cell lines were assessed to determine if solubilized receptors and
kinases were present. Supernatants from cells treated with Brefeldin-A
were analyzed similarly. Further, culture filtrates concentrated by
ultrafiltration were subjected to luminescence based kinase assays and
western blotting to assess the active forms. Cell viability was measured
with Trypan blue staining in all the experiments. Our results demonstrate
that an array of receptors are solubilized into culture filtrates of
brain and prostate cancer cell lines within the first 24 hours.
Simultaneously, soluble receptors in the culture filtrates of astrocytes
within 48 hours of culture were also detected. Compared to astrocytes,
cancer cells showed elevated levels of receptors and kinases released at
48 hours. As many as 15 receptor or non-receptor tyrosine kinases
including Src family of kinases were found in the culture filtrates of
the brain and prostate cancer cell lines. Treatment with Brefeldin-A
inhibited the release of receptors and kinases partially, but markedly,
within first 24 hours suggesting a secretory pathway for their release.
Additionally, phosphorylation of tyrosine kinases was detected in the
western blots within 24 hours. Kinase assays further confirmed active
nature of the extracellular kinases, particularly, when checked for the
active form of Lyn kinase in the culture filtrates, phosphorylation on
Tyrosine-507 was detected along with the total forms. Cell viability
assays on the cultured cells revealed more than 98% viability, thus
eliminating the possibility of the release of detected kinases from dead
cells. In light of this study, we propose a new niche for solubilized
receptor and tyrosine kinase functioning that might have a role in
intercellular signaling in cell-free conditions both in disease and
physiological statuses.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

