Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Second cancers following Waldenstrm
macroglobulinemia/lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma in the United States:
analysis of Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) registry
data, 1992 - 2011


Waldenstrm macroglobulinemia (WM) is a subtype of lymphoplasmacytic
lymphoma (LPL) that features secretion of monoclonal immunoglobulin type
M (IgM) in the blood. WM/LPL occurs most commonly in elderly (median, 73
years) white males and is characterized by an indolent course and
relatively long survival. Thus, WM/LPL patients may be at risk for
development of subsequent cancers. We used data from the National Cancer
Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program to
evaluate the risk of subsequent primary cancer in more than 3800 patients
diagnosed with WM or LPL during the 20-year period, 1992 - 2011. We
calculated observed-to-expected (O/E) standardized incidence ratios,
together with 95% confidence intervals (95%CI), for invasive cancers
occurring in these individuals. We found that the overall risk for second
cancers was significantly increased among survivors of WM/LPL (O/E =
1.49; 95%CI 1.37-1.62) and risk increased with time since diagnosis.
Increased risk was observed for both solid tumors (O/E = 1.21; 95%CI
1.09-1.33) and hematolymphoid cancers (O/E = 4.20; 95%CI 3.54-4.95).
Significantly increased site-specific risks were seen for cancers of the
lung and bronchus, melanoma, non-epithelial skin, and thyroid as well as
for Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma, multiple myeloma, and acute myeloid
leukemia. Sample size limited subset analysis; however, overall increased
risk was observed in all race (white, black, Asian/Pacific Islanders) and
gender categories except for Asians/Pacific Islanders. Risk for second
cancers appeared greater in younger patients (Waldenstrm
macroglobulinemia (WM) is a subtype of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (LPL)
that features secretion of monoclonal immunoglobulin type M (IgM) in the
blood. WM/LPL occurs most commonly in elderly (median, 73 years) white
males and is characterized by an indolent course and relatively long
survival. Thus, WM/LPL patients may be at risk for development of
subsequent cancers. We used data from the National Cancer Institute
Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program to evaluate the
risk of subsequent primary cancer in more than 3800 patients diagnosed
with WM or LPL during the 20-year period, 1992 - 2011. We calculated
observed-to-expected (O/E) standardized incidence ratios, together with
95% confidence intervals (95%CI), for invasive cancers occurring in these
individuals. We found that the overall risk for second cancers was
significantly increased among survivors of WM/LPL (O/E = 1.49; 95%CI
1.37-1.62) and risk increased with time since diagnosis. Increased risk
was observed for both solid tumors (O/E = 1.21; 95%CI 1.09-1.33) and
hematolymphoid cancers (O/E = 4.20; 95%CI 3.54-4.95). Significantly
increased site-specific risks were seen for cancers of the lung and
bronchus, melanoma, non-epithelial skin, and thyroid as well as for
Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma, multiple myeloma, and acute myeloid
leukemia. Sample size limited subset analysis; however, overall increased
risk was observed in all race (white, black, Asian/Pacific Islanders) and
gender categories except for Asians/Pacific Islanders. Risk for second
cancers appeared greater in younger patients (<65 vs. 65+) as well as in
those diagnosed more recently, which may reflect changes in treatment
regimens over time. We conclude that host factors, shared exposures and
treatment effects may play a role in these observations.

