Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 enhances progression of
hepatocellular carcinoma


Purpose of the study. To provide mechanistic evidence that fibroblast
growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) and its two splice variants, FGFR3-IIIb
and -IIIc, impact considerably on the malignant phenotype of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).Experimental procedures. The occurrence of
FGFR3 and its two isoforms was analyzed in human HCC samples by qRT-PCR
and immunostaining. In hepatoma/hepatocarcinoma cell lines FGFR3-isoforms
were overexpressed by lentiviral constructs or were down-modulated by
siRNA or an adenoviral kinase-dead FGFR3 (kdFGFR3) construct. Cell lines
were tested for anchorage-independent growth, proliferation at
low-densities and their cell-cycle distribution, as well as their ability
to form tumors after subcutaneous injection into the flanks of
SCID-mice.Results. Upregulated FGFR3 was found in almost 50% of HCC
patients, which was often due to the enhanced expression of FGFR3-IIIb.
Furthermore, patients with FGFR3-IIIb overexpression showed early tumor
recurrence indicating that this isoform may be a major player in tumor
progression. In hepatoma/hepatocarcinoma cells, upregulated FGFR3-IIIb or
FGFR3-IIIc conferred an enhanced capability for proliferation and tumor
growth. Both isoforms enhanced downstream signaling and increased the
cells ability to grow at low densities. The tumorigenicity of cells in
SCID-mice was augmented more by variant IIIb than by IIIc. This stronger
impact of FGFR-IIIb on cell proliferation could also be seen in analysis
of the cell cycle distribution, which was shifted to the S-phase.
Conversely, siFGFR3 and kdFGFR3 affected both receptor-variants and
strongly reduced clonogenic growth at low density and
anchorage-independent growth. Furthermore, kdFGFR3 arrested the cells in
G2/M and strongly attenuated tumor formation in vivo.Conclusions:
Upregulated FGFR3 is associated with development and progression of
hepatocellular carcinoma. Accordingly, blockade of FGFR3-mediated
signaling may be a promising therapeutic approach to antagonize growth
and malignant behavior of HCC cells.

