Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low educational level is associated with a reduced DNA repair
capacity and higher risk of breast cancer


BACKGROUND: Breast Cancer (BC) is the leading cause of cancer deaths
among females in Puerto Rico. Educational level is well established as a
modifier of cancer risk. We have undertaken a large population study and
have shown that a low DNA Repair Capacity (DRC) is an important risk
factor for BC. It is well established that DRC is regulated by genetic,
epigenetic and environmental factors. We have investigated the
relationship between educational level and DRC.The purpose of this study
was to evaluate the role of educational level as a modifier of the
association between DRC and risk of BC in Puerto Rican women. METHODS: A
total of 488 women with histopathologically confirmed BC and 607 controls
were selected for the analysis. DRC was measured in lymphocytes using a
host cell reactivation assay. Pathology reports were used to obtain tumor
size. DRC levels were divided into low, medium and high using tertiles.
Multiple logistic regression was used to assess the association among
educational level and BC risk factors adjusted by DRC. For the analysis
of tumor size and DRC, educational levels were divided into primary
education, high school, and associate or more. Analysis of variance was
performed using the Kruskal-Wallis test. RESULTS: Women with lower
educational level (elementary education) had significantly higher risk of
BC (OR: 5.9, 95%CI: 2.3, 14.9) followed by high school (OR: 1.4, 95%CI:
1.1, 2.1) and associate degree (OR: 1.4, 95%CI: 0.9, 2.2) using
bachelor's degree as a referent. Women with low education had 8.9 times
the odds of having low DRC (95%CI: 5.2, 15.2), while women with high
educational level had 11.7 times the odds for a low DRC (95%CI: 7.7,
17.7). The association and tumor size (cm) and educational level showed
that as educational level increased, women had smaller tumor sizes
(Kruskal-Wallis test p = 0.031). CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that
women with the lowest levels of education, in general, had a lower DRC
and significantly higher risk of BC and of having larger breast tumors
when compared to controls. This study provides new insights as to how
educational level can influence BC risk. This association is
controversial because some studies attribute a high educational level to
high risk of BC while others present the opposite. Because our study uses
a biological variable (DNA repair) to measure risk, it reduces ambiguity
in terms of the criterion to estimate risk. Those with the highest levels
of education had smaller tumors; therefore consequently better chances
for early treatment and increased chances of survival. Because education
is a modifiable lifestyle factor, this study provides data that can be
utilized to identify women with a higher risk of developing BC in order
to design more effective BC screening, and diagnosing BC an earlier
stage. Supported by grants from the NCI Diversity Training Branch through
the NIH-MBRS Program grants S06 GM008239-20, 9SC1CA182846-04 to PSMHS
through JM and MBRS-RISE GM082406 through CO.

