Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Helicobacter pylori infection via miR-328 suppression and CD44
expression in gastric mucosa causes gastric cancer initiation and
progression


Backgrounds: We previously revealed that CD44, cancer stem-like marker,
interacts with xCT, a glutamate-cystine transporter, and controls the
intracellular level of reduced glutathione. Helicobacter pylori (HP)
infection is known to be a major cause of gastric cancer and be
associated with increased expression of CD44 on gastric epithelial cells,
but precise mechanism of CD44 up-regulation still has uncertain. On the
other hand, microRNAs (miRNAs) are noncoding RNAs that regulate molecular
pathways in cancer by targeting various genes. The aim of the current
study was to identify the miRNA regulating CD44 expression in H.
pylori-infected gastric mucosa during the development of preneoplastic
lesions.Methods and Results: To investigate the regulation of CD44
through miRNA, we performed 384 miRNA quantitative RT-PCR array analyses
in six human gastrointestinal cancer cell lines that differ in CD44
expression status. We identified miR-328 which is predicted as
CD44-targeted and established the functional relationship between miR-328
and CD44. MiR-328 overexpression decreased CD44 expression and led to
inhibition of cancer cell growth and impairing chemo- and ROS (reactive
oxygen species) - resistance. We performed luciferase assay using vectors
containing CD44 3- UTR, which might be directly bound by miR-328, using
the miRanda algorithm, and the results indicated that miR-328 regulated
CD44 expression by directly targeting its 3-UTR. We polarized THP-1 that
human monocytic leukemia cell line to M1- and M2 macrophages, and
detected ROS production of its by using 2,7-dichlorofluorescein
diacetate, and ROS induced miR-328 down-regulation and CD44 up-regulation
by co-culture gastric cancer cell lines with M1- and M2-polarized THP-1
macrophages. We further analyzed the association between miR-328-CD44
pathway and HP infection in human gastric mucosa. We identified that HP
infection correlated with miR-328 down-regulation and CD44 up-regulation.
Lastly, we examined the DNA methylation of the miR-328 5-flanking region
by bisulfite pyrosequencing in human gastric mucosa, but HP infection
were not related with the DNA methylation level in this
region.Conclusions: We show that inflammatory response with HP infection
causes CD44 expression via miR-328 suppression, resulting in cancer
initiation and progression, but HP infection was unrelated to the DNA
methylation in the miR-328 5-flanking region.

