Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neovascularization in brain metastasis is through both
angiogenesis and vasculogenesis


Metastatic brain tumors are the most common brain tumor in adults with an
incidence 10 times greater than primary brain tumors. A variety of
malignancies eventually spread to the brain, with a majority arising from
cancers of the lung, breast, kidney, and skin. Experimental studies using
breast and melanoma cell lines have recently shown that growth of
metastatic brain tumors may occur by utilizing pre-existing blood vessel,
or by co-opting rather than inducing new vessel formation. Whether the
same mechanisms of vascular utilization and expansion play a role in
human metastatic brain tumors is unknown and is the focus of the present
study.We examined the immuno-phenotype of blood vessels in primary and
metastatic human brain tumors to determine the presence of new blood
vessels formation. Glioblastoma multiforme (n = 12) and secondary tumors
from melanoma (n = 10), breast (n = 10), kidney (n = 5), and lung (n =
13) all showed extensive immunoreactivity for endothelial marker CD31. We
also found a significant number of endothelial cells expressing Ki-67,
most notably among breast carcinoma, glioblastoma multiforme and melanoma
cases, indicating microvessel proliferation and angiogenesis.
Interestingly, both primary and secondary metastatic tumors also showed
vascular endothelial cells concomitantly expressing stem cell markers,
such as Oct4, suggesting that some of these microvessels are derived
through vasculogenesis. These findings show that both proliferation of
endothelial cells and de novo endothelial differentiation may underlie
metastatic tumor growth to different degrees depending on their site of
primary origin. Currently, our laboratory is determining the exact
contribution of angiogenesis and vasculogenesis in brain metastasis.Our
findings show that neo-vessels are evident in brain metastasis.
Elucidating the source of these vessels may uncover new treatment targets
for patients with brain metastasis.

