Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leucine-rich 2 glycoprotein modulates the effect of TGF1 on the
growth of lewis lung carcinoma cells


Background:Leucine-rich 2 glycoprotein (LRG) is an approximately 50 kDa
serum glycoprotein. It has been reported that the expression levels of
LRG were elevated in the sera and tissues in several cancers. While it
has been demonstrated that LRG modulated TGF1 signaling in endothelial
cells and resulted in the promotion of pathogenic angiogenesis, the
precise function of LRG in cancer remains unclear. The aim of this study
was to investigate the role of LRG on the cellular response by TGF1 in
Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) cells.Methods:Parental LLC,
mLRG-overexpressing LLC or control vector transfected LLC cells were
subcutaneously transplanted into LRG knockout (KO) or Wild-type (WT)
C57BL/6J mice and tumor growth was monitored. Cell proliferation treated
with TGF1 was evaluated by WST-8 assay. Caspase activity was measured
with Caspase-GloTM assay kit, protein expression levels were analyzed by
western blotting and gene expression was analyzed with quantitative
real-time PCR. LLC tumor growth were monitored in LRG KO or WT mice
treated with TGFRI inhibitor (SB431542) or vehicle. Apoptosis of LLC
tumor was evaluated by TUNEL staining.Result:In LRG KO mice, LLC tumor
growth was significantly increased compared with that in WT mice. In
contrast, overexpression of mLRG significantly inhibited the growth of
LLC tumors in WT mice. Treatment of TGF1 inhibited the proliferation of
LLC cells in vitro. Addition of TGF1 strongly inhibited the proliferation
of mLRG-overexpressing LLC cells than control vector LLC cells by
induction of apoptosis. By TGF1 stimulation, induction of apoptosis via
activation of smad2 and downstream signaling pathway was significantly
increased in mLRG overexpressing LLC compared with control LLC cells in
vitro. Treatment of TGFRI inhibitor significantly enhanced growth and
inhibited apoptosis of LLC tumor in WT mice compared with LRG KO
mice.Conclusion:We found that LRG promoted TGF1-induced apoptosis in LLC,
in vitro and in vivo. LRG is involved in the enhancement of TGF1-smad
signal transduction.

