Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The phenotypic and signaling consequences of a novel aberrantly
spliced transcript of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 in
hepatocellular carcinoma


Aims: To identify the phenotypic and signaling consequences of a novel
aberrantly spliced transcript of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3
(FGFR3) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).Methods: The nested RT-PCR was
employed to analyze the splicing of FGFR3 from 35 HCC cases and 11 cell
lines. The bridging method was utilized to construct the sequence of
FGFR3 7-9 (deleting exon7, 8, and 9 from the full length of FGFR3 ORF).
Based on the establishment of the FGFR37-9 lentiviral overexpress and
knockdown models, the influence on bio-characters of HCC cell lines was
inspected in vitro. The changes of tumorigenicity and metastases were
examined quantitatively in vivo on nude mice using pathological study and
Micro-PET/CT. Co-immunoprecipitation and surface plasmon resonance (SPR)
binding analysis were employed to understand the ligand affinities
between FGFR37-9 and FGFs. Interacting proteins and signal transduction
pathway were detected by mass spectrometry and dual luciferase reporter
assay.Results:FGFR37-9, lacking exons encoding the immunoglobulin-like
domain III, was identified with high frequency in HCC. FGFR37-9 can
apparently promote the proliferation, migration, and metastases of HCC
cells both in vitro and in vivo. In contrast, knockdown of FGFR37-9 can
restrict the abnormal malignancies of HCC cells. Co-immumoprecipation and
SPR assay showed the binding affinity of FGFR37-9 to FGFs was
significantly higher than that of wild type FGFR3 (PAims: To identify the
phenotypic and signaling consequences of a novel aberrantly spliced
transcript of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).Methods: The nested RT-PCR was employed to
analyze the splicing of FGFR3 from 35 HCC cases and 11 cell lines. The
bridging method was utilized to construct the sequence of FGFR3 7-9
(deleting exon7, 8, and 9 from the full length of FGFR3 ORF). Based on
the establishment of the FGFR37-9 lentiviral overexpress and knockdown
models, the influence on bio-characters of HCC cell lines was inspected
in vitro. The changes of tumorigenicity and metastases were examined
quantitatively in vivo on nude mice using pathological study and
Micro-PET/CT. Co-immunoprecipitation and surface plasmon resonance (SPR)
binding analysis were employed to understand the ligand affinities
between FGFR37-9 and FGFs. Interacting proteins and signal transduction
pathway were detected by mass spectrometry and dual luciferase reporter
assay.Results:FGFR37-9, lacking exons encoding the immunoglobulin-like
domain III, was identified with high frequency in HCC. FGFR37-9 can
apparently promote the proliferation, migration, and metastases of HCC
cells both in vitro and in vivo. In contrast, knockdown of FGFR37-9 can
restrict the abnormal malignancies of HCC cells. Co-immumoprecipation and
SPR assay showed the binding affinity of FGFR37-9 to FGFs was
significantly higher than that of wild type FGFR3 (P<0.01). More
importantly, FGFR37-9 can be self-activated by self-dimerization and
autophosphorylation even in the absence of ligand (FGFs). Consistent to
the ligand-independence characteristic, FGFR37-9 demonstrated a stronger
effect on inducing phosphorylation of ERK and AKT than wild type FGFR3,
which may lead to abnormal down-stream PI3K/AKT/mTOR and ERK signal
transductions. Furthermore, evidenced by tandem mass spectrum assay and
Western blot, FGFR37-9 can up-regulate certain metastasis-related
molecules: Snail and MMP-9. As a newly confirmed interaction protein to
FGFR37-9, E-cadherin can be degraded via tyrosine phosphorylation, which
may cause the abnormal cellular proliferation and migration
consequently.Discussion/Conclusion:Dysregulation of mRNA splicing may
generate an abnormal aberrant FGFR3 transcript, FGFR37-9. The joining of
exon 6 to exon 10 in FGFR37-9 is in-frame, leading to the expression of a
novel transmembrane form of FGFR3 containing an intact intracellular TK
domain. As a ligand-independence or lowly ligand-dependent receptor,
FGFR37-9 may function importantly in HCC tumorigenesis, proliferation,
invasion and distant lung metastases. Altogether, our research strongly
supports the idea that the dysregulation of FGFR3 expression by aberrant
splicing of mRNA in a significant subset of HCC is an alternative pathway
to neoplastic transformation.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

