Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine epigenetic modification on
G-quadruplex and i-motif structure and stability within the VEGF promoter


CpG islands are prone to epigenetic cytosine modification via methylation
(5mC) or 5-hydroxymethylation (5hmC). Although their potential sequences
and regions for occurrence in G/C-rich DNA overlap, throughout the genome
5mC and 5hmC, and 5mC and G-quadruplex (G4) and i-motif (iM) structures,
are found to not be co-existent. Moreover, in some regions of DNA, 5hmCs
and G4/iM forming regions have high potential to form in concurrence.
However, minimal research has been done examining the effect of 5hmC
incorporation into G4 and iMs in order to determine the effect of
cytosine modification on non-B-DNA structures. These higher order
secondary DNA formations have been described within the VEGF promoter and
have great potential to silence its transcription and prevent subsequent
angiogenesis. In addition, there are three cytosines in the promoter on
both the guanine- and the cytosine-rich strands found in CpG sequences
that have the potential for 5mhC modification. Therefore, the current
study was undertaken to examine the whether there is an effect of 5hmC
incorporation into G4 loops and iM stems on structure formation and
stabilization. Significant changes in structure or stability in buffers
with varying pHs, cationic strength, and molecular crowding conditions
were examined by circular dichroism and confirmed by UV-monitored
melting. Electromobility shift assays differentiated inter- and
intra-molecular structures, further identifying the number of isoforms.
Notable changes in G4 dynamics were seen with two of the three loop
modifications, which decreased overall stability and increased
intermolecular structures. Much less marked effects were discovered for
the iM structures. Ongoing studies examining the role of G4 and iM 5hmC
incorporation in regulation by endogenous proteins are part of a global
effort to best understand the physiological conditions regulating G4 and
iM stability and function. These VEGF promoter higher order structures
are promising therapeutic targets for anti-angiogenic therapy, and a
comprehensive understanding of the physiological principles governing
their formation will best inform future drug discovery efforts.Brooks Lab
startup funds, R15, University of Mississippi School of Pharmacy

