Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of gene rearrangements using OncoPanel: a targeted
next-generation sequencing assay


Identification of structural gene rearrangements is vital for cancer
patients as these events can provide definitive diagnoses, prognostic
value, and influence the course of treatment. While FISH, karyotype
analysis and aCGH array have traditionally been used to identify and
confirm the presence of structural variants, the advent of next
generation sequencing has enabled genetic testing including detection of
multiple structural variants (SVs) from genomic DNA. To this end, we have
developed and validated Oncopanel, a cancer-specific targeted next
generation sequencing (NGS) assay designed to detect SNVs, indels, and
copy number alterations across 300 genes, and 35 clinically actionable or
informative SVs. Each rearrangement was specifically targeted by baiting
genomic locations frequently identified to contain breakpoints reported
in the literature and publicly available databases. Using BreaKmer, an
internally developed SV detection tool (Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Nov 26,
doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1211), rearrangements, including the exact breakpoint
coordinates and the genes involved in or adjacent to the breakpoint(s),
were identified. Here we examine the utility of Oncopanel using genomic
DNA to identify structural variants.We report the results of 3,291 cancer
patients tested in our personalized cancer medicine program (Profile), a
joint venture between Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, and Boston Children's Hospital. As compared to conventional
cytogenetics, FISH analysis, and molecular detection by PCR methods,
Oncopanel's overall sensitivity and specificity for SVs was 81.4% and
100%, respectively. Most discordant results were identified in (1) tumors
with SVs involving the IGH enhancer regions (60% of discordant results),
or (2) in samples with Identification of structural gene rearrangements
is vital for cancer patients as these events can provide definitive
diagnoses, prognostic value, and influence the course of treatment. While
FISH, karyotype analysis and aCGH array have traditionally been used to
identify and confirm the presence of structural variants, the advent of
next generation sequencing has enabled genetic testing including
detection of multiple structural variants (SVs) from genomic DNA. To this
end, we have developed and validated Oncopanel, a cancer-specific
targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) assay designed to detect SNVs,
indels, and copy number alterations across 300 genes, and 35 clinically
actionable or informative SVs. Each rearrangement was specifically
targeted by baiting genomic locations frequently identified to contain
breakpoints reported in the literature and publicly available databases.
Using BreaKmer, an internally developed SV detection tool (Nucleic Acids
Res. 2014 Nov 26, doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1211), rearrangements, including
the exact breakpoint coordinates and the genes involved in or adjacent to
the breakpoint(s), were identified. Here we examine the utility of
Oncopanel using genomic DNA to identify structural variants.We report the
results of 3,291 cancer patients tested in our personalized cancer
medicine program (Profile), a joint venture between Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and Boston Children's Hospital.
As compared to conventional cytogenetics, FISH analysis, and molecular
detection by PCR methods, Oncopanel's overall sensitivity and specificity
for SVs was 81.4% and 100%, respectively. Most discordant results were
identified in (1) tumors with SVs involving the IGH enhancer regions (60%
of discordant results), or (2) in samples with < 20% tumor (25% of
discordant results). Several SVs involving the IGH enhancer regions were
missed likely due to lack of Oncopanel coverage. Oncopanel was designed
to target a finite sequence pool, but due to IGH enhancer region's large
size (1.2Mb), only a small portion of this region was specifically
interrogated. Inclusion of all possible IGH enhancer sequences would have
hampered the effectiveness of SNV, indel and copy number alteration
detection for other cancer critical genes. Discrepant Oncopanel and
cytogenetic results were also observed in samples with low tumor purity
likely due to masking of variant sequences by stromal contamination.In
conclusion, we find that Oncopanel has utility to detect structural
variants with a sensitivity of 92%, barring detection of rearrangements
involving IGH, and a specificity of 100%. Based on the baiting strategy,
detection of many rearrangements can also be interrogated in parallel
with SNV, indel and CNV detection resulting in reduced sample input
requirements and the inclusion of precise information regarding the
breakpoints and the class of rearrangement identified.

