Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of anti-tumor enone-based bioactive compounds as
specific thioredoxin reductase inhibitors


The thioredoxin system is a promising anti-cancer therapeutic target. It
is one of the main cellular thiol antioxidant systems and comprises of
thioredoxin, thioredoxin reductase and NADPH. In particular, thioredoxin
reductase is an attractive target with susceptibility to inhibition by
electrophilic compounds due to its nucleophilic selenocysteine residue in
the C-terminal active center. In our laboratory, a series of enone-based
compounds were synthesized and evaluated for their possible selectivity
to inhibit thioredoxin reductase. To this end, the compounds were first
screened for their in vitro thioredoxin reductase and glutathione
reductase inhibitory activities, and their anti-proliferative activities
were assessed by the MTT cell viability assay. The effects of selected
analogs on the activities of thioredoxin reductase, thioredoxin and
glutathione reductase were next studied. Finally, the molecular events
linking thioredoxin reductase inhibition to apoptosis induction were
elucidated. A number of the enone-based structural analogs were
identified to posses anti-proliferative activities against HCT116
colorectal and MCF7 breast carcinoma cells at GI50 values in the low
micromolar range, as well as inhibit activity of rat thioredoxin
reductase with half-maximal inhibitory concentrations in the nanomolar
range. Furthermore, these compounds displayed relatively weaker in vitro
glutathione reductase inhibitory activities with half-maximal inhibitory
concentrations in the micromolar range. In corroboration with results
obtained from the in vitro enzyme activity assays, the identified lead
analogs exhibited significant dose-dependent cellular thioredoxin
reductase inhibition accompanied by a near negligible lack of effect on
cellular thioredoxin and glutathione reductase activity. Conversely, the
parent compound was found to not only inhibit cellular thioredoxin
reductase activity, but also caused an inhibition of cellular thioredoxin
and glutathione reductase activities. Finally, at a molecular level, the
identified lead analogs that exhibited selective inhibition against
thioredoxin reductase were found to induce apoptosis through activation
of JNK and p38 MAPK pathways. In conclusion, this study had evaluated and
identified enone-based bioactive compounds that display selective and
dose-dependent inhibition of thioredoxin reductase activity in
susceptible cell lines, which led to activation of p38 and JNK MAPK
signaling pathways that at least in part triggered the apoptotic cascade.
Taken together, the findings have indicated the potential of designing
and developing these compounds that exert their anti-tumor effects
through selective inhibition of thioredoxin reductase.

