Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of host methylome on cervical cancer pathogenesis


Identification of episomal HPV16 in cervical cancers (CaCx) besides the
integrated forms, prompted us to investigate the global CpG methylation
signatures among the different categories of CaCx samples, since
alterations of CpG methylation in host genomes, common in many cancers,
are likely to influence host pathogen interactions and the disease
pathogenesis. We determined global DNA methylation patterns of the host
genomes, in HPV16 (+) CaCx cases (11 episomal and 12 integrated) and
controls (12 HPV16 (-) and 12 HPV16 (+), employing the Illumina Infinium
450K Bead Chip assay. Using Genome Studio software, we extracted the raw
signal intensities of each probe. With statistical methods developed
in-house, we performed color adjustment and normalization of the data
using control probes. Differentially methylated CpG loci were identified
by comparing methylation estimates (M-values) using a two-sample t-test
followed by adjustment of p-values based on False Discovery Rate
threshold of 0.01 among (i) CaCx cases, irrespective of HPV16 physical
status, (ii) CaCx cases with episomal HPV16 and (iii) CaCx cases with
integrated HPV16, compared to controls irrespective of HPV, since no
difference was recorded among these two groups. Differentially methylated
CpGs were identified and mapped using Illumina annotation to various
genic regions (TSS1500, TSS200, 1st Exon, Gene Body, 5 UTR and 3 UTR).
Irrespective of viral physical status, hypermethylation was more
prominent across all genic regions than hypomethylation, albeit
hypermethylation being lower in Gene Body and 3-UTR regions only.
Subsequently employing a threshold of 0.3 i.e. difference of between two
groups as 30%, differentially methylated CpGs mapped to 2536, 3222 and
3003 genes among total CaCx set, episomal and integrated CaCx cases,
respectively. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis revealed a number of pathways
that were significantly enriched among total CaCx cases, episomal or
integrated, while some enriched pathways were recorded exclusively among
episomal (Gap Junction Signaling, FGF Signaling, Huntington's Disease
Signaling) and integrated (Chemokine Signaling etc.) CaCx cases.
Expression of FGF2 gene (FGF Signaling pathway), PIK3R1 gene (Gap
Junction Signaling pathway) and CXCL12 gene (Chemokine Signaling pathway)
was found to be down regulated, based on Illumina -HT12_V4 array analysis
on same set of samples. Significant negative correlation between
hypermethylation in the promoter region, involving 5 CpGs of FGF and 1
CpG of CXCL12, were recorded (Pearson Correlation p-valueIdentification
of episomal HPV16 in cervical cancers (CaCx) besides the integrated
forms, prompted us to investigate the global CpG methylation signatures
among the different categories of CaCx samples, since alterations of CpG
methylation in host genomes, common in many cancers, are likely to
influence host pathogen interactions and the disease pathogenesis. We
determined global DNA methylation patterns of the host genomes, in HPV16
(+) CaCx cases (11 episomal and 12 integrated) and controls (12 HPV16 (-)
and 12 HPV16 (+), employing the Illumina Infinium 450K Bead Chip assay.
Using Genome Studio software, we extracted the raw signal intensities of
each probe. With statistical methods developed in-house, we performed
color adjustment and normalization of the data using control probes.
Differentially methylated CpG loci were identified by comparing
methylation estimates (M-values) using a two-sample t-test followed by
adjustment of p-values based on False Discovery Rate threshold of 0.01
among (i) CaCx cases, irrespective of HPV16 physical status, (ii) CaCx
cases with episomal HPV16 and (iii) CaCx cases with integrated HPV16,
compared to controls irrespective of HPV, since no difference was
recorded among these two groups. Differentially methylated CpGs were
identified and mapped using Illumina annotation to various genic regions
(TSS1500, TSS200, 1st Exon, Gene Body, 5 UTR and 3 UTR). Irrespective of
viral physical status, hypermethylation was more prominent across all
genic regions than hypomethylation, albeit hypermethylation being lower
in Gene Body and 3-UTR regions only. Subsequently employing a threshold
of 0.3 i.e. difference of between two groups as 30%, differentially
methylated CpGs mapped to 2536, 3222 and 3003 genes among total CaCx set,
episomal and integrated CaCx cases, respectively. Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis revealed a number of pathways that were significantly enriched
among total CaCx cases, episomal or integrated, while some enriched
pathways were recorded exclusively among episomal (Gap Junction
Signaling, FGF Signaling, Huntington's Disease Signaling) and integrated
(Chemokine Signaling etc.) CaCx cases. Expression of FGF2 gene (FGF
Signaling pathway), PIK3R1 gene (Gap Junction Signaling pathway) and
CXCL12 gene (Chemokine Signaling pathway) was found to be down regulated,
based on Illumina -HT12_V4 array analysis on same set of samples.
Significant negative correlation between hypermethylation in the promoter
region, involving 5 CpGs of FGF and 1 CpG of CXCL12, were recorded
(Pearson Correlation p-value<0.001). In case of PIK3R1, downregulated
expression was negatively correlated with hypermethylation of 2 CpGs in
the Gene Body. The study highlights the relevance of host methylation in
cervical cancer pathogenesis involving Gene Body methylation in addition
to promoters, and provides novel insights into HPV16 related CaCx
pathogenesis involving episomal and integrated viral genomes.

