Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diet-induced obesity is associated with increased levels of IL-4
and IL-13, macrophage infiltration, fibrosis, and pancreatic neoplasia in
the conditional KrasG12D mouse model


Background: Obesity is a well known risk factor for the development of
several cancers including pancreatic cancer (PaCa). The formation of an
inflammatory microenvironment with a complex communication between
(pre)-neoplastic cells and stromal cells, including fibroblasts and
inflammatory cells, is thought to promote tumor development during
obesity. However, the exact molecular signals that are critical in this
process are unknown. Recently, there has been interest in understanding
the role of interleukins (IL)-4 and -13 in mediating the crosstalk
between several cell types in cancer. E.g. they have been shown to
promote the conversion of anti-tumorigenic M1 macrophages to
pro-tumorigenic M2 macrophages.Aim: In this study we sought to
investigate whether diet-induced obesity in the conditional KrasG12D
mouse model of PaCa is associated with enhanced fibrosis and inflammation
in the pancreas and to determine a possible role of IL-4 and -13.Methods
and Results: Conditional KrasG12D mice and wildtype controls were fed a
high fat, high calorie diet (HFCD) or control diet (CD) for 3 months.
Mice fed the HFCD gained significantly more weight with a substantial
enlargement of the visceral adipose tissue. Mutant mice fed the HFCD had
more advanced pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia lesions (PanINs).
Compared to CD, mice fed the HFCD had a significant increase in
pancreatic fibrosis (3.00.7 fold) and enhanced activation of pancreatic
stellate cells (1.90.2) as assessed by immunohistochemical staining for
fibronectin and -smooth muscle actin, respectively. Flow cytometry
demonstrated increased infiltration of Gr-CD11b+ macrophages (2.00.4
fold) into the pancreas in mice fed the HFCD. In addition, compared to
the CD the HFCD was associated with increased tissue levels of IL-4
(435%) and IL-13 (6520%) in the pancreas.Conclusion: Our results
demonstrate that diet-induced obesity was associated with enhanced
pancreatic neoplasia, inflammation, and fibrosis in the conditional
KrasG12D mouse model. Our data further show that IL-4 and IL-13 are
elevated in the pancreas of obese mice suggesting that these cytokines
play a role, possibly in conversion of macrophages to the pro-tumorigenic
M2 phenotype thereby promoting inflammation and tumor development.

