Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pro-apoptotic Bid preserves hematopoietic stem cell function
through restraint of necrosis: implications for myelodysplastic syndrome


Multicellular organisms remove damaged or superfluous cells through a
highly regulated cellular process known as programmed cell death. There
are two main forms of programmed cell death, apoptosis and necrosis. In
apoptotic cell death, caspases digest the cell. In necroptotic cell
death, increased Rip kinase signaling effects plasma membrane rupture,
and activation of an inflammatory response.Death receptors, such as the
TNF receptor, can activate either apoptotic or necroptotic death. The
upstream activators and transducers including Caspase-8, Rip1, and Fadd,
are common to both forms of cell death. Interestingly, Caspase-8 and
c-FlipL, were recently shown to inhibit the necrotic pathway through the
formation of a catalytically active complex. The BH3-only Bcl-2 family
member, Bid is a substrate of Caspase-8, and is thus in position to
mediate cell death fate.We developed a mouse model of unrestrained bone
marrow necroptosis in which apoptosis is prevented by the deletion of the
pro-apoptotic effectors Bax and Bak. We further deleted the upstream
activator Bid (VavBaxBakBid TKO mice). These mice die of bone marrow
failure with myeloid dysplasia between 3 and 12 months, and some develop
leukemia, closely resembling MDS. TKO bone marrow displays necroptotic
cells by electron microscopy, and markedly increased Rip1 expression by
immunofluorescence. TKO SLAM-HSCs display increased BrdU incorporation,
consistent with compensatory HSC proliferation in response to bone marrow
cell death. TKO bone marrow outcompetes WT bone marrow in competitive
reconstitution experiments, but the mice succumb to bone marrow failure
at 5 months. Thus, increased necroptosis results in a cell autonomous
stem cell defect. In addition, necroptotic bone marrow kills normal HSCs
by feed-forward TNF signaling.Myeloid progenitor cell lines (MPCs)
derived from the bone marrow of BaxBakBid TKO mice, display increased
activation (phosphorylation) and increased levels of Rip1 in the
pronecrotic complex (Complex II) following LPS treatment. This
association is abrogated by reintroduction of Bid by retrovirus into TKO
MPCs, demonstrating that Bid inhibits Rip1 association with complex II,
to determine cell death fate.Finally, we found increased RIP1 expression,
but not activated caspase 3 in bone marrow samples from patients with the
RCMD, RAEB-1, and RAEB-2 subtypes of MDS. We thus demonstrate that
increased necroptosis signaling can result in bone marrow failure with
dysplasia, and that necroptotic cell death signaling is increased in bone
marrow from MDS patients, highlighting the potential importance of this
targetable signaling pathway in bone marrow failure disorders such as MDS.

