Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA repair processes involved with the hypoxia-activated prodrug
TH-302: comparison to cisplatin and temozolomide


Therapeutic regimens which include platinum compounds (Pt) or
temozolomide (Tmz) can be affected by the presence or acquisition of
specific DNA repair processes conferring relative resistance to these
agents. TH-302 is a hypoxia-activated prodrug that is reduced at its
nitroimidazole group and selectively, under hypoxic conditions, releases
Br-IPM, a DNA cross-linker. TH-302 is currently being investigated in
multiple clinical trials for the treatment of cancer including
indications and settings where resistance to Pt (2nd line non-small cell
lung cancer; NCT01403610) or Tmz (recurrent glioblastoma; NCT02093962) is
an important consideration. Here we investigate potential DNA damage
response and repair pathways of the three agents. Two complementary
approaches were employed: (1) paired isogenic cell lines in which
specific DNA repair factors were deficient in one of the lines; and (2)
the use of pharmacological inhibitors of specific DNA repair factors. The
cytotoxicity of TH-302 and cisplatin (CisPt) was enhanced in the CHO cell
line deficient in the HDR gene XRCC3 and the nucleotide excision repair
(NER) factors that are also involved in HDR (ERCC1 and ERCC4). For CisPt,
but not TH-302, enhanced cytotoxicity was also observed in cell lines
deficient in factors specifically involved in NER (ERCC2 and ERCC5). An
increase of cytotoxicity for both TH-302 and CisPt was also observed in
cells deficient in the specific non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) factor
Ku80. The cytotoxicity of TH-302 and CisPt was unchanged in cells
deficient in the specific base excision repair (BER) factor XRCC1,
whereas the cytotoxicity of Tmz was enhanced. Tmz cytotoxicity was not
affected by deficiency of HDR or NER. The role of
O6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT) repair was investigated
using its specific inhibitor, O6-benzylguanine (OBG). OBG enhanced the
cytotoxicity of Tmz in cell lines expressing MGMT but had no effect on
TH-302 or CisPt cytotoxicity. Involvement of mismatch repair (MMR) was
tested using a MSH6 deficient cell line. Neither TH-302 nor CisPt was
affected by MMR deficiency, whereas Tmz activity was. Single-strand break
(SSB) repair pathway mediated by poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) was
assessed using PARP inhibitors. Tmz cytotoxicity, but not TH-302 or
CisPt, was enhanced by the addition of the PARP inhibitors. In
conclusion, TH-302-induced lesions are repaired by HDR or NHEJ.
Cisplatin-induced lesions are repaired by the same HDR and NHEJ pathways
as TH-302 but can additionally be repaired by NER. Thus,
cisplatin-induces a more complex spectrum of DNA lesions than TH-302.
TMZ-induced lesions are repaired by BER, MGMT, MMR and PARP. In
consequence, since MGMT-expressing gliomas are resistant to TMZ and since
TH-302-induced lesions are repaired by different mechanisms, TH-302 or
cisplatin may be effective in this subset of gliomas.

