Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FANCA protein is involved in the homologous recombination repair
of sapacitabine-induced DNA damage


Fanconi anemia (FA) is an autosomal disorder characterized by
developmental abnormalities, early-onset bone marrow failure, and a
predisposition to cancer. FA cells are defective in DNA repair, and
exhibit hypersensitivity to DNA interstrand cross-links (ICLs) and a high
degree of chromosomal aberrations. A majority of the FA proteins have
been shown to act as signal transducers and scaffolding proteins to
employ other pathways to repair DNA. Specifically the FA group A (FANCA)
protein has been indicated as an integral component in the early step of
homologous recombination (HR) of double strand breaks (DSB).
Sapacitabine, the orally bioavailable prodrug of the nucleoside analog
CNDAC, has presented favorable clinical activity in advanced acute
leukemias and myelodysplastic syndromes. CNDAC kills cells by a unique
mechanism of action. Incorporation of CNDAC triphosphate into DNA results
in a beta elimination reaction that causes single-strand break (SSB) that
is terminated by the analogue. DNA replication over this nick converts
the nick to a one-ended double-strand break (DSB) upon collapse of the
DNA replication fork. The CNDAC-induced DSBs, which are potentially
lethal, are repaired predominantly through homologous recombination (HR),
relative to other repair pathways, such as base excision repair,
transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair and non-homologous
end-joining. CNDAC greatly sensitizes cells lacking HR components, such
as ATM, RAD51D, XRCC3 and BRCA2. Based on the evidence that FANCA
associates with proteins involved with HR, we hypothesize that loss of
FANCA may also sensitize cells to CNDAC.FANCA-deficient cells from an
individual with Fanconi anemia as well FANCA repleted cells were utilized
to investigate the role of the FANCA protein in the repair of damage
caused by CNDAC. Cells were treated with CNDAC or mitomycin C (MMC), a
crosslinking agent. We found that FANCA deficient cells were sensitized
to CNDAC about 5-fold as compared with FANCA repleted cells, while they
were sensitized by 6-fold when treated with MMC. Cells were treated with
1 M CNDAC for either 24 or 48 hr before chromosome spread samples were
collected to examine the genome integrity. Chromosome aberrations were
increased in response to CNDAC treatment, and cells lacking FANCA protein
exhibited more chromosomal abnormalities compared with FANCA repleted
cells. Rad51 foci, diagnostic indicators of active HR, were present in
both lines after 24 or 48 hr of CNDAC treatment; however, FANCA deficient
cells displayed attenuated accumulation of Rad51 foci in response to
CNDAC as compared with the FANCA repleted cells. These findings indicate
that FANCA is involved in the HR repair of CNDAC-induced DNA lesions.
Because FANCA is one component of the core complex of the Fanconi repair
pathway, other proteins in this group may confer similar sensitization.

