Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence that long non-coding RNA variants associate with
epithelial ovarian cancer risk


Background: Genome wide association studies (GWAS) have identified 20
loci associated with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) risk. Additional EOC
risk loci await identification, and biological approaches may represent a
useful strategy for overcoming sample size limitations. The ENCODE
project recently concluded that only 1.2% of the genome encodes proteins,
but at least 20% exhibits biological function and over 80% exhibits
biochemical indices of function. Post-GWAS follow-up studies have firmly
established that some associations are due to inter-individual
differences in non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs). To estimate the magnitude of
impact of variants in long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), we assessed
enrichment of EOC-associated SNPs in lncRNA regions by comparing the
density of EOC-associated loci between lncRNA regions, non-lncRNA
regions, and the whole genome.Methods: The study population included
18,000 invasive EOC cases and 34,000 healthy controls of European
ancestry from the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium with GWAS data
imputed to 1000 Genomes Project (1KGP) density. Density was compared with
two measures: average chromosome length required for one EOC-associated
SNP (kb/locus) and average number of tested SNPs containing one
EOC-associated SNP (SNPs/locus). Coordinates and annotation for 13,870
lncRNA genes were downloaded from the publicly available GENCODE (v19)
database and were used to annotate SNPs from the 1KGP imputed GWAS data,
yielding 13,192 lncRNA genes with biallelic variants imputed at rsquare
0.25. A SNP was considered EOC-associated if it reached a significance
level of PBackground: Genome wide association studies (GWAS) have
identified 20 loci associated with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) risk.
Additional EOC risk loci await identification, and biological approaches
may represent a useful strategy for overcoming sample size limitations.
The ENCODE project recently concluded that only 1.2% of the genome
encodes proteins, but at least 20% exhibits biological function and over
80% exhibits biochemical indices of function. Post-GWAS follow-up studies
have firmly established that some associations are due to
inter-individual differences in non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs). To estimate the
magnitude of impact of variants in long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), we
assessed enrichment of EOC-associated SNPs in lncRNA regions by comparing
the density of EOC-associated loci between lncRNA regions, non-lncRNA
regions, and the whole genome.Methods: The study population included
18,000 invasive EOC cases and 34,000 healthy controls of European
ancestry from the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium with GWAS data
imputed to 1000 Genomes Project (1KGP) density. Density was compared with
two measures: average chromosome length required for one EOC-associated
SNP (kb/locus) and average number of tested SNPs containing one
EOC-associated SNP (SNPs/locus). Coordinates and annotation for 13,870
lncRNA genes were downloaded from the publicly available GENCODE (v19)
database and were used to annotate SNPs from the 1KGP imputed GWAS data,
yielding 13,192 lncRNA genes with biallelic variants imputed at rsquare
0.25. A SNP was considered EOC-associated if it reached a significance
level of P<105.Results: Genome-wide, 11.6% of the 15,123,646 tested SNPs
fell within lncRNA regions. Of 5,294 EOC-associated SNPs that were
identified, 27.7% were located within lncRNAs, a higher frequency than
expected ( = 9.351022). Additionally, EOC-associated SNPs were located on
average every 237.6 kb (or 1204 tested SNPs) in lncRNA regions versus
every 657.7 kb (or 3489 SNPS) in non-lncRNA regions and every 541.5 kb
(or 2857 SNPs) in the whole genome, clearly demonstrating an enrichment
of EOC-associated loci in lncRNA regions. A total of 1,464 lncRNA SNPs
from 53 unique lncRNAs associated with EOC risk (P 500kb
apart.Conclusions: These results justify efforts to integrate functional
and population level genetic data on lncRNA regions to explore a new
paradigm that addresses the problem of the missing heritability for
cancer where restrictions in sample size and statistical power limit the
ability to discover additional risk loci.

