Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin D deficiency regulates TLR7 to promote hepatocellular
cancer in TGF-/Smad3 heterozygous mice


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common tumor and the
third leading cause of cancer-related deaths. Loss of TGF- signaling has
been associated with development of HCC. Cancer preventive effects of
Vitamin D (VD) have been implicated in multiple cancers, however a clear
role for Vitamin D in specific high risk populations remains undefined
for HCC. Therefore, we examined for a potential chemopreventive role of
VD in HCC in the context of TGF- inactivation.Methods: (1) We screened
for somatic mutation of the TGF- pathway and VD related genes in 202 HCCs
from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). (2) Wild type, Sptbn1+/- and
Smad3+/- mice were fed with low VD (200 IU VD/kg) or high VD diet (10,000
IU VD/kg) for 9 weeks. Liver tissues were subjected to microarray
analyses and further evaluation by quantitative PCR. (3) Wild type,
Sptbn1+/- and Smad3+/- mice were injected Diethylnitrosamine (DEN) and at
8 month, 26 mice receiving low VD (200 IU VD/kg) and 26 mice receiving
high VD (10,000 IU VD/kg) chow. HCC development was assessed at 4 months
after VD treatment. (4) Reverse Phase Protein Array (RPPA) was performed
to analyze expression profiles of 164 proteins of mouse liver tumors. (5)
Liver samples from patients with HCV cirrhosis receiving VD supplements
were examined to evaluate expression of TGF-, Wnt and VD pathway
molecules by immunohistochemistry.Results: (1) We observed a high rate of
somatic mutation in TGF- and VD pathway related genes in the TCGA genomic
analysis. (2) None of the VD treated mice developed HCC but high VD
treatment increased TLR7 mRNA expression about 3-fold in liver from
Smad3+/- mice compared with livers from WT mice. (3) Smad3+/- mice with
low VD showed 3-fold larger HCC formation, compared to the high VD group
(Smad3+/-) that did not develop significant tumors. However, correction
of VD in the Chow after 10 months did not reverse HCC formation. (4) RPPA
data revealed that the tumor suppressor protein PDCD4 was reduced in
Smad3+/- mice with low VD treatment. However, oncoproteins such as
-catenin, Stat5A and Bcl2-XL were induced in the same sample. (5)
Expression of 2SP and TRII were higher in HCV cirrhosis patients
receiving VD supplementation compared to non-treated group.Conclusions:
Loss of TGF- signaling pathway developed HCC and VD deficiency promotes
tumor growth in the context of Smad3 disruption potentially through
regulation of TLR7 expression. However, after 10 months restoring VD does
not have any significant effect on altering tumors. Therefore VD could be
a potential candidate for prevention in early identified HCC high risk
individuals who has inactivation of TGF-/Smad3 signaling.

