Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptomic signatures associated with the efficacy of Angelica
gigas (AGN) ethanol extract and its pyranocoumarins on two lineages of
carcinogenesis in TRAMP mice


Angelica gigas Nakai (AGN) ethanol extract and its major components
decursin (D) and decursinol angelate (DA) have been reported to have
anti-cancer activities. Currently, the C57BL/6 transgenic adenocarcinoma
of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) model is believed to represent at least two
distinct lineages of carcinogenesis: androgen receptor (AR)-dependent
glandular epithelial lesions usually arise from the dorsal-lateral
prostate (DLP) lobes and AR-independent neuroendorine-like poorly
differentiated carcinomas (NECa) usually from the ventral prostate lobe.
Our team has shown that daily treatment with D/DA or AGN (providing
equimolar D/DA) by gavage from 8 weeks of age was able to suppress the
two lineages of carcinogenesis in the TRAMP (Proc AACR, 2013, #LB-184)
with differential efficacy.To gain insights into the potential in vivo
targets, here we used both targeted and unbiased approaches to analyze
banked DLP tissues (pooled) and NECa (individual) for mRNA expression
patterns. In NECa, RT-PCR confirmed most of the gene signatures related
to tumor microenvironment action of AGN that we have recently reported
(Zhang Mol Carcinog 2014). Microarray transcriptomics profiling revealed
that D/DA vs. AGN extract (equimolar D/DA) suppressed the expression of
proliferation related biomarkers such as PCNA and p16 at mRNA level in
the two lineages of carcinogenesis, congruent with pathological grade
modulations. AGN and D/DA down-regulated vimentin in both DLP and NECa,
while only AGN up-regulated E-cadherin in NECa, consistent with differing
anti-EMT action. In NECa, the effect of AGN on tumor microenvironment
biomarkers was more substantial than that of D/DA (e.g., STAT3, VEGF,
Rela, Twist 1, etc), consistent with their efficacy difference. Since
plasma and tumor levels of D, DA and their major metabolite DOH were
similar between D/DA and AGN groups, phytochemicals other than D/DA are
likely to contribute to the effect on tumor microenvironments. In DLP,
D/DA and AGN had similar effect on the expression of most genes,
indicating that D/DA or DOH were responsible for the anti-epithelial
efficacy. Further supporting lineage-specific carcinogenesis and
differential targeting action of D/DA vs. other components in AGN, Muc13,
a transmembrane mucin highly expressed in cancerous tissue, was
suppressed by D/DA and AGN for more than 10 folds in DLP, but was not
affected by AGN in NECa. Genes related to tumor microenvironments such as
Stat3, Rela and Sox5 were significantly suppressed by AGN and to a less
extent by D/DA in NECa but were not affected by AGN or D/DA in DLP at
all. Bioinformatics analysis also indicated that different pathways were
affected by AGN in DLP and NECa. The data provided molecular signatures
of anti-epithelial action of D/DA and important clues on potential in
vivo targets in NE-Ca of D/DA vs. additional AGN components.

