Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Desmoplastic stroma affects growth and invasion of progressively
mutated human pancreatic cancer cells in vitro


Desmoplastic (desmo) stroma is a prognostic marker for pancreatic cancer,
yet mechanisms behind its tumorigenic effects remain poorly understood.
Tumor stroma, known to act permissive to nave cells, may exacerbate tumor
progression in mutated cells, whereas normal stroma acts restrictive to
even aggressively mutated cells. The mechanistic details of these
responses remain unclear. Previous studies suggested that a 3D
microenvironment (i.e. Matrigel) is necessary for the manifestation of
the metastatic phenotype in vitro in aggressively K-Ras mutated
pancreatic cancer cells. Here we describe a new 3D in vitro model to
study how human pancreatic stromal extracellular matrices (ECMs) interact
with pancreatic epithelial cells, how these interactions activate
specific integrins and downstream signaling pathways such as PI3K and
ERK1/2, and how these signaling pathways may synergize with intrinsic
mutational cues to enhance progression of pancreatic cancer. Our model is
comprised of physiologically relevant desmo and normal 3D cell-derived
matrices as well as polyacrylamide gel-based bioengineered ECMs. The
influences of cell-derived and bioengineered ECMs were tested using a
series of isogenic pancreatic ductal epithelial cells (PDEC) displaying
different aggressive behavior.In preliminary studies, we established that
physiological desmo ECMs are tumor permissive (i.e. induce growth and/or
invasion) for all PDEC cells (especially kRas mutated cells) when
compared with matched restrictive/normal ECMs. In addition, K-Ras cells
cultured on stromal activated (i.e. desmo) myofibroblast-derived 3D ECMs
resulted in enhanced ERK1/2 activity, similar to what had been previously
observed with Matrigel based system. In order to discern distinct
cellular and signal responses mediated by cell-derived ECM in the various
PDEC cells, we independently modulated microenvironmental cues such as
stiffness, topography, and biochemical composition in the bioengineered
ECMs. Our initial data suggests that the various PDEC cells
differentially respond to alterations in microenvironmental cues. We
anticipate that our studies will lead to better understanding of ECM-PDEC
interactions in more detail, and help in identification of novel
biomarker for early detection or prevention of pancreatic cancer.

