Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PU.1 inhibition confers resistance to TRAIL- and
anthracycline-mediated apoptosis through NF-B activation and TRAIL
receptor downregulation in acute myeloid leukemia cells


Earlier studies found that acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells show
resistance to TRAIL, but did not reveal the exact mechanism. The myeloid
master regulator PU.1 is a key molecule for myeloid and B-cell
development. Its inactivation results in a differentiation block and
contributes to the pathogenesis AML. On the other hand, several reports
directly linked PU.1 to cell death. We now aimed at analyzing the role of
PU.1 in TRAIL-mediated apoptosis of AML cells. We found that inhibiting
PU.1 significantly increased resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis in
several AML cell lines (NB4, HL60, MOLM13) as seen by significantly
decreased AnnexinV/PI staining and caspase-3/7 activation. Interestingly,
this resistance was specific to TRAIL-induced apoptosis since TNF induced
similar levels of cell death in control and PU.1 knockdown AML cells. AML
PU.1 knockdown cells were further characterized by increased expression
of anti-apoptotic genes such as FLIPShort, XIAP, Bcl-2 and Mcl-1 upon
TRAIL treatment. Given that some of these genes are regulated by NF-B we
investigated if knocking down PU.1 activates this transcription factor.
Indeed, PU.1 knockdown AML cells showed increased nuclear translocation
of the NF-B subunit p65 and increased activity of NF-B specific reporters
possibly accounting for FLIP, XIAP and Bcl-2 induction. In line with
these findings, blocking the NF-B pathway with the pharmacological NF-B
inhibitors JSH-23 and BAY 11-7085 or co-depleting FLIP restored TRAIL
sensitivity in AML PU.1 knockdown cells. As a possible mechanism we found
that PU.1 interacts with and inactivates the p65 protein directly. As an
alternative mechanism of TRAIL-resistance in AML PU.1 knockdown cells, we
observed a significant down-regulation of TRAIL receptor 1 (-R1) and -R2
levels as well as increased expression of the NF-B-activating TRAIL
decoy-receptor 2 (DcR2). To extend our study to a more clinical setting,
we tested if AML PU.1 knockdown cells are resistant to anthracyclines
currently used in AML therapy. As with TRAIL treatment AML PU.1 knockdown
cells displayed significantly less cell death than control cells upon
anthracycline treatment. This resistance was paralleled by increased
expression of the above-listed anti-apoptotic factors. In summary, our
results reveal a novel function of PU.1 that is keeping NF-B in check and
modulating TRAIL receptor expression. Our data suggest that PU.1
functions in resistance mechanisms not only against TRAIL- but also
against anthracycline-based therapies in AML.

