Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Honokiol radiosensitizes squamous cells carcinoma of head and neck
by down-regulation of survivin


Background: Overexpression of survivin is associated with resistance to
radiotherapy and poor survival in many cancer types. However, in squamous
cells carcinoma of head and neck (SCCHN), previous studies have revealed
diverging results regarding survivin's role in clinical outcome. In this
study, we aim to 1) evaluate the clinical significance of survivin
expression in SCCHN; 2) identify the function of survivin on DNA damage
repair following ionizing radiation (IR) in SCCHN cells; 3) investigate
the potential of using honokiol, a nature compound, to enhance radiation
therapy through down regulation of survivin. Methods: Protein expression
of survivin in SCCHN patient primary tissues (n = 99) was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry and correlated with clinical parameters.
IR-sensitive (JHU-022), IR -insensitive (PCI-15A, Tu212), and IR acquired
resistance (PCI-15A-R) SCCHN cell lines were used to evaluate the role of
survivin in DNA double strain break repairer following RT. The in vitro
effects of and potential molecular targets of honokiol were also
evaluated using those cell lines. Results: Overexpression of survivin is
significantly associated with lymph node metastasis, worse overall
survival and worse disease free survival in patients receiving radiation
therapy (n = 65) and in all patients with SCCHN (n = 99). In SCCHN cells,
depletion of survivin by siRNA inhibited, whereas overexpression of
survivin increased, clonogenic survival following IR. IR induces nuclear
accumulation of survivin and complexation with -H2X, and DNA-PKCs,
suggesting survivin is involved in DNA damage response and repair induced
by IR. Further, honokiol significantly reduces survivin expression and
increases DNA damage induced by IR, as demonstrated by higher amount of
DNA breaks and an increased amount of -H2X foci post IR. Conclusions:
Survivin is a negative prognostic factor in SCCHN, and is involved in DNA
damage response and repair induced by IR in SCCHN cells. Down regulation
of survivin by honokiol enhances the efficacy of IR, and may provide a
novel therapeutic approach to improve the efficacy of radiotherapy in
SCCHN. (This research was supported by the National Cancer Institute
award P50 CA128613, and GCC Distinguished Cancer Scholar to Dong M. Shin,
Zhuo (Georgia) Chen, and Jonathan J Beitler)

