Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation-induced translational control of gene expression in
glioblastoma stem-like cells


Radiation-induced gene expression has long been assumed to comprise a
protective response against radiation-induced cell death. However,
whereas radiation-induced changes in total cellular mRNA (i.e., the
transcriptome) have been studied extensively, the vast majority of mRNA
changes detected do not correlate with changes in the corresponding
protein, a situation that has made it difficult to assign functional
significance to radiation-induced gene expression. In contrast, analysis
of polysome-bound RNA in established cell lines indicates that radiation
selectively regulates gene translation, a process that operates
independently from changes in the transcriptome. Moreover,
characteristics of the radiation-induced translatome include a
correlation between the genes whose translational activity is affected by
radiation and the expression of their corresponding protein. To
investigate the role of the translational control of gene expression in
the radioresponse of glioblastoma (GBM), we have focused on a series of
human glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs). Radiation-induced translatomes
and transcriptomes were defined using microarray analysis of
polysome-bound RNA and total RNA, respectively, for 4 GSCs and 2 normal
cell types (astrocytes and pericytes). For each cell type, there was
little overlap between the radiation-induced translatomes and
transcriptomes. Subsequent analyses focused on those genes whose
expression was only modified in the translatome, i.e., those subject to
radiation-induced translational control. Hierarchical clustering of
radiation-induced changes in KEGG Pathways showed that while the
radiation-induced changes in the GSC lines were more similar to each
other than to the normal CNS cells, there were also cell line-dependent
changes. Rather than screen individual proteins, Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis (IPA) was used to identify potential functional consequences of
radiation-induced translational control. A significant network activated
in all GSC translatomes was Response to DNA Damage. Consistent with
activation of this pathway, post- irradiation addition of the mTOR
inhibitor INK128, which inhibits translational control, slowed the
dispersal of H2AX foci. Among the radiation-induced translatome networks
activated in a cell line specific manner was Mitochondrial Function. This
was validated by the detection of radiation-induced changes in
mitochondrial DNA and mass, which were prevented by addition of INK128
after irradiation. These results suggest that analysis of
radiation-induced translatomes may provide novel insight into the general
as well as cell specific mechanisms mediating radioresponse. In addition,
they suggest that the translational control of gene expression may
provide a source of molecular targets for GBM radiosensitization.

