Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic chromatin modification by tumor secreted Hsp90 modulates
EMT and tumor invasion


Tumor metastasis is the main cause of prostate cancer lethality.
Pathological reactivation of the developmental genetic program epithelial
to mesenchymal (EMT) is associated with increased tumorigenesis and
invasion, and is considered a primary culprit for tumor dissemination.
Hallmarks of EMT include upregulation of the core transcription factors
Zeb and Snail, concomitant with suppression of the junctional protein
E-cadherin. Overexpression of the epigenetic repressor EZH2, a histone
methyltransferase, is also implicated in EMT activation. Although these
molecular events are well known to trend with cancer progression, a
paucity of knowledge exists regarding identification of the
clinically-relevant upstream triggers capable of setting these events
into motion. We recently demonstrated that tumor secreted extracellular
heat shock protein 90 (eHsp90) initiates EMT events in prostate cancer
cells. Moreover, we reported the presence of surface Hsp90 in human
prostatectomy specimens, an event highly correlated with elevated
expression of a subset of EMT transcripts. The present study reveals
novel mechanistic aspects of eHsp90 action. We define an epigenetic
function for eHsp90 as a significant regulator of EZH2 expression and
activity. This eHsp90-EZH2 axis was found to govern a majority of
eHsp90's pro-EMT activity in vitro, and was essential for E-cadherin
suppression and tumor invasion in vivo. Upon further investigation, it
was revealed that eHsp90 sustained ERK activation. This eHsp90-ERK
pathway was required for the increased expression of EZH2, as well as for
its directed recruitment to the E-cadherin promoter. Moreover, eHsp90-ERK
signaling augmented the epigenetic landscape of Zeb and Snail towards a
profile permissive for transcriptional activation. Hence, our findings
indicate that eHsp90-ERK signaling has profound effects upon key drivers
of cancer progression via the concerted action of epigenetic modulation
of EMT effectors and increased EZH2 expression. Collectively, these data
support a model wherein tumor eHsp90 functions as an upstream rheostat
for EZH2 expression and activity to orchestrate mesenchymal properties
and coincident aggressive behavior. Importantly, our findings suggest
that eHsp90 may be a clinically relevant instigator in the transition
from localized to invasive disease.

