Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative TCGA analyses identify Basonuclin1 (BNC1) as a key
mediator for platinum resistance


Objective. We have previously shown that platinum-resistant (disease
progression within 6 months of diagnosis) high-grade serous ovarian
cancer (HGSOC) expresses higher levels of basonuclin1 (BNC1) compared to
platinum-sensitive tumors (no disease progression for more than 2 years).
Here, we aim to systematically examine the functional effects of BNC1
silencing on tumor sensitivity to platinum and other commonly used
chemotherapeutic agents in multiple cancer models. Methods. An
integrative analysis was performed using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
dataset to systematically identify genes associated with
platinum-resistance in patients with HGSOC. The biological effects of
BNC1, one of the lead candidates identified, were studied in HGSOC
(HeyA8-MDR, PEO4), endometrioid ovarian (A2780-CP20), clear cell ovarian
(ES2), and squamous cell lung (H1299) cancer models both in vitro and in
vivo. The effects of BNC1 silencing or overexpression on the sensitivity
of cancer cells to paclitaxel, gemcitabine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin
treatments were assessed. Results. BNC1 expression was increased by more
than two-fold in platinum-resistant tumors in the TCGA ovarian cancer
dataset. BNC1 silencing increased the sensitivity of A2780-CP20,
HeyA8-MDR, PEO4, ES2, and H1299 cells to cisplatin and doxorubicin
treatments, but not to gemcitabine or taxane-based therapies.
BNC1-silenced cells showed a 3-fold average increase in the percentage of
apoptotic cells following cisplatin treatment, when compared to cells
treated with control siRNA. Importantly, combination treatment of siBNC1
and cisplatin resulted in a 90% reduction in tumor burden in
platinum-resistant A2780-CP20 and HeyA8-MDR orthotopic ovarian cancer
mouse models when compared to control siRNA plus cisplatin treatment
group. Overexpression of BNC1 in platinum-sensitive A2780 cells led to a
2.5-fold reduction in cisplatin sensitivity in vivo as measured by total
tumor burden 4 weeks after therapy. Conclusion. Collectively, BNC1
represents an important target for enhancing platinum-sensitivity in
ovarian and lung cancer. Targeting BNC1 in platinum-resistant
malignancies may improve patient survival.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

