Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediction and response evaluation of EGFR blockade for colorectal
cancer by using circulating cell-free DNA


Aim: In 10% of metastatic colorectal cancer patients, discordance of KRAS
mutational status between primary tumor and metastatic tumor is observed.
However biopsy of liver or lung metastasis is invasive and risky. Liquid
biopsy (LB) is a new method of molecular diagnosis using circulating
tumor DNA in peripheral blood. Here, we evaluated KRAS mutations using LB
as a biomarker to predict the efficacy of EGFR blockade and observed
concentration variability of ccfDNA by chemotherapy.Methods: We enrolled
44 colorectal cancer patients (14 KRAS mutant and 30 KRAS wild in primary
tumors) with distant metastases. Circulating cell-free DNA (ccfDNA) was
purified from 1 mL serum using the QIAamp Circulating Nucleic Acid Kit.
We quantitated the concentration of ccfDNA and detected nine KRAS (G12A,
G12R, G12D, G12C, G12S, G12V, G13D, Q61H, and Q61R) mutations. We
administered EGFR blockade to 13 patients with KRAS wild in their primary
tumor as the first line chemotherapy, and used computed tomography 3
months after starting EGFR blockade therapy to evaluate its effect. The
study protocol was approved by the Ethics Review Committee of our
institution. Written informed consent was obtained from each
patient.Results: KRAS mutations in ccfDNA were detected in 85% (12/14) of
patients with KRAS mutation in their primary tumor but in 10% (3/30) of
patients without KRAS mutations in their primary tumors. In one of the 3
patients, primary tumor had wild KRAS but metastatic liver tumor and
ccfDNA was mutated KRAS. We administered EGFR blockade to 13 patients.
Twelve patients with KRAS wild in ccfDNA had a good clinical response
(1CR and 12PR). One patient with KRAS mutation (G13D) in ccfDNA had no
response. In majority of metastatic colorectal cancer patients,
concentration of ccfDNA is more than 1000ng/ml. After curative resection,
concentration of ccfDNA is less than 100ng/ml in non-metastatic
colorectal cancer patients. In chemotherapy effective cases, the
concentration of ccfDNA decreased immediately after administration, but
the concentration of ccfDNA did not decrease in non-effective case. In
our CR case, ccfDNA did not disappear (minimum 180ng/ml) while CR was
continuing and new metastatic liver tumor appeared 28 weeks after
detection of ccfDNA marked increasing.Conclusions: LB detection of KRAS
mutations is less-invasive and repeatable compared with current
techniques and may be useful for prediction of EGFR blockade. The
concentration of ccfDNA decreased immediately in objective response case
that is administered EGFR blockade. Conversely, the concentration of
ccfDNA increased before imaging detection of disease progression.

