Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of INCB053914, a novel pan-PIM kinase inhibitor


The PIM (Proviral Integration sites for Moloney virus) family of
constitutively active serine/threonine kinases consists of three members
(PIM1, PIM2 and PIM3) that phosphorylate substrates involved in both
apoptosis and cellular metabolism. As downstream targets of the JAK/STAT
pathway and by having overlapping substrates with the PI3K/AKT pathway,
PIM kinases integrate signals from multiple pathways important for the
survival and proliferation of malignant cells. Overexpression of PIM
kinases has been reported in human hematological cancers with each
isoform showing a distinct expression pattern among the various
malignancy subtypes, including MM, AML, ALL and NHL. Although the three
family members possess overlapping functions that are mutually
compensatory, mice deficient for all three PIM kinases exhibit minor
phenotypic abnormalities, with smaller overall size at maturity and
decreased cellular responses to cytokines. These data suggest that
pan-inhibition of the PIM kinase family will have a favorable toxicity
profile and may be required for therapeutic benefit in hematological
malignancies.INCB053914 is a novel, ATP-competitive, small molecule,
pan-inhibitor of PIM kinases. In biochemical assays, INCB053914 is potent
against PIM1, PIM2 and PIM3 and highly selective. In cell proliferation
assays, INCB053914 is active as a single agent in the majority of cell
lines derived from different hematological malignancies, including MM,
AML, DLBCL, MCL and T-ALL, with IC50 values ranging from 3 - 300 nM.
INCB053914 synergizes with a variety of cytotoxic and targeted agents,
reducing the viability of a panel of hematological tumor cell lines. In
pharmacodynamic assays, INCB053914 inhibits phosphorylation of S6RP,
P70S6K, 4E-BP-1 and BAD, known PIM kinase targets. Following treatment
with INCB053914, induction of PIM kinase protein levels was noted in
human cancer cell lines. Importantly, this compensatory response does not
reduce the activity of the molecule, as effects on downstream signaling
and efficacy remain intact when PIM kinase levels are elevated. Induction
of PIM kinases after INCB53914 treatment was also evident in whole blood
from healthy volunteers and in primary blast cells isolated from patients
diagnosed with AML, further supporting the need for pan-PIM kinase
inhibition. Taken together, these results indicate that INCB053914 has
potent and selective activity against PIM kinases and may be useful as
monotherapy or in combination with other agents for treating hematologic
malignancies that are dependent on PIM kinase activity for growth and
survival.

