Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BreastDefend enhances the effects of tamoxifen in estrogen
receptor-positive human breast cancer in vitro and animal models in vivo


In this study we evaluated the combined effects of the natural
product/dietary supplement BreastDefend (BD) and tamoxifen (TAM) on MCF-7
estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) human breast cancer cells in vitro and
an orthotopic mouse model in vivo. BD has been studied previously in
preclinical models, and shown to exert significant effects on MDA-MB-231
triple-negative breast cancer cells. The proliferation of MCF-7 cells was
evaluated using MTT assays, whereas the expression of genes involved in
the molecular mechanisms of cancer was evaluated using DNA microarrays.
MCF-7 cells were stimulated with estradiol (10 nM) and treated with TAM
(1 M), BD (10 g/ml), and the combination of TAM and BD for 3 days and 6
days. Compared with control, BD enhanced the anti-proliferative activity
of TAM significantly (P In this study we evaluated the combined effects
of the natural product/dietary supplement BreastDefend (BD) and tamoxifen
(TAM) on MCF-7 estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) human breast cancer cells
in vitro and an orthotopic mouse model in vivo. BD has been studied
previously in preclinical models, and shown to exert significant effects
on MDA-MB-231 triple-negative breast cancer cells. The proliferation of
MCF-7 cells was evaluated using MTT assays, whereas the expression of
genes involved in the molecular mechanisms of cancer was evaluated using
DNA microarrays. MCF-7 cells were stimulated with estradiol (10 nM) and
treated with TAM (1 M), BD (10 g/ml), and the combination of TAM and BD
for 3 days and 6 days. Compared with control, BD enhanced the
anti-proliferative activity of TAM significantly (P < 0.05), and the
combination of BD and TAM induced apoptosis. The results of DNA
microarray analyses suggested that the pro-apoptotic activity of BD and
TAM in MCF-7 cells was associated with the significant upregulation of
BRAF (an oncogene that can block proliferation and induce apoptosis) and
downregulation of BCL2 (an apoptosis inhibitor) and FN1 (fibronectin, a
glycoprotein involved in tumorigenesis and metastasis) expression. In the
orthotopic model MCF-7 cells were implanted into the mammary fat pads of
female ovariectomized nude mice (n = 12-13). The mice received
subcutaneous pellets that released estradiol and TAM, whereas BD was
administered orally via intragastric gavage. All groups, including
control, received estradiol. The combination of BD and TAM suppressed
tumor size in vivo markedly compared with the BD and TAM alone groups.
The inhibition of tumor growth was associated with the induction of the
cell cycle inhibitor protein p21 in MCF-7-generated breast tumors. In
summary, this study suggests that BD could be considered for use in
clinical studies as an adjuvant therapy in conjunction with TAM for the
treatment of ER+ human breast cancer.

