Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The senescence-associated secretory phenotype requires the histone
variant macroH2A1 and is antagonized by ATM in a novel ER stress response


Oncogene induced senescence (OIS) is an important tumor suppressive
mechanism typified by permanent proliferative arrest, a persistent DNA
damage response and the senescent-associated secretory phenotype (SASP).
MacroH2A1, a histone variant that plays tumor suppressive roles in a
several cancer types is upregulated during OIS. Our ChIP-seq data
demonstrate that SASP genes are found in macroH2A1-containing chromatin.
Additionally, we found that macroH2A1 is a critical positive regulator of
both the transcriptional upregulation of SASP genes and the persistent
ATM activation seen during senescence. SASP factors participate in a
positive feedback loop to maintain senescence through autocrine signaling
and can also induce paracrine senescence in bystander cells. Strikingly,
we find that cells depleted of macroH2A1 are immune to paracrine
senescence triggered by SASP factors, indicating that macroH2A1 is a
critical regulator of SASP positive feedback. Additionally, ectopic
expression of macroH2A1.1, the macroH2A1 splice variant that is typically
lost in cancer cells, is sufficient to trigger senescence in normal cells
complete with a robust SASP response and persistent activation of ATM.Due
to the increased expression of secreted factors, endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress is a feature of OIS. ER stress has been shown to lead to the
generation of reactive oxygen species which can cause DNA damage and ATM
activation. We determined that ER stress, as assayed by the activation of
the unfolded protein response, is reduced during OIS in cells depleted of
macroH2A1. Furthermore, activated ATM participates in a novel negative
feedback loop reducing SASP expression in response to ER stress by
triggering the removal of macroH2A1 from SASP genes. Overall, our results
demonstrate that SASP gene expression is regulated by the combined
actions of a positive feedback loop that requires macroH2A1 and a
negative feedback loop where ER stress leads to ATM activation critical
for the removal of macroH2A1 from SASP genes and consequently their
repression.

