Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin inhibits salivary gland tumor growth through cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis


Human salivary gland cancer (SGC) is one of the common malignancies found
in the head and neck area. The limitation of the treatment and poor
prognosis are calling for more investigations into novel intervention to
improve the treatment modality in SGCs. Metformin as a widely used
anti-type-2 diabetes medicine had demonstrated its anti-tumor potential
in many different types of cancers. Our previous work demonstrated that
metformin effectively targeted c-Myc oncogene to prevent the initiation
and progression of prostate cancer. Interestingly, the overexpression of
c-Myc has also been shown in some SGCs, such as salivary gland adenoid
cystic carcinoma. Therefore, it is intriguing to explore metformin's
anti-neoplastic efficacy of metformin in SGC. In this study, we used a
human salivary adenocarcinoma cell line, HSY cell line as a model for
salivary gland tumor. Our in vitro results show metformin prominently
suppresses the growth of HSY cell through stimulation of cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis. Meanwhile, metformin significantly down-regulates
cMyc expression and rescues p53 tumor suppressor gene expression.
Considering that mTOR inhibitors resistance could occur when tumors
over-express cMYC. PP242, a novel and potent mTOR inhibitor was used in
combination with metformin to inhibit HSY cell growth. As expected,
metformin enhanced the inhibitory effects of PP242 associated with
reduced c-MYC levels in vitro. Further in HSY xenograft tumors, massive
necrotic areas were observed inside the tumors from metformin treated
mice while only limited necrotic area in the core of tumors from PBS
treated mice. Staining of proliferation marker Ki-67 confirmed lower
proliferation rate in tumors from metformin treated group compare to that
from the PBS group. In conclusion, our novel finding of metformin
efficacy in SGC not only proves metformin plays a pivotal role in
suppressing SGCs through cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, but also
suggest that a combination treatment using metformin and mTOR inhibitors
together may yield better inhibitory efficacy.

