Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of highly selective DUB inhibitors with in vivo
pre-clinical anti-tumor activity


Ubiquitin proteasome pathways are emerging as a growing source for novel
anti-cancer therapeutics. In this respect, by depleting a number of
deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs) through a combination of synthetic
lethality screens and isogenic cell line models, MISSION has identified
several novel DUBs essential for a range of different tumor types,
including platinum-resistant ovarian cancers, DNA damage response (DDR)
pathway deficient tumors (e.g. ATM, ATR or BRCA2 defective) and
haematological tumors such as multiple myeloma. Illustrating the
diversity of DUBs as oncology targets we identified USP11 and UCHL1 using
our target validation platform. USP11 was identified as essential for
proliferation of platinum-resistant cells but not platinum-sensitive
tumor cells in an isogenic model derived from patient tumors before and
after development of resistance. In addition, USP11 depletion displayed
synthetic lethality in isogenic models of BRCA2 or ATR loss, supporting
USP11's previously identified association with homologous recombination
proteins as well as the importance such processes in platinum resistance
mechanisms. UCHL1 on the other hand is a prototypical oncogene target
that selectively drives proliferation in many tumor types, such as
multiple myeloma and lung cancer. UCHL1 depletion leads to selective
killing of a number of tumors whose proliferation is driven by UCHL1.
Validation of targets like USP11 or UCHL1 for the selective treatment of
cancer bearing genetic deficiencies or resistant to standard-of-care
supports the rationale of developing DUB inhibitors for cancers with
unmet medical need. A broad drug discovery platform combining unique
biochemical, cellular, biophysical and structural assays was designed by
MISSION to identify and optimise potent and selective DUB inhibitors.
Early selective DUB hits, developed for USP11 and UCHL1, are successfully
recapitulating target validation biology, including synthetic lethality
in matched isogenic backgrounds. Lead optimisation of chemical series has
recently been translated into compounds with adequate properties for in
vivo proof-of-concept studies. The challenges and advances in
demonstrating in vivo DUB target engagement will be discussed. MISSION's
integrated drug discovery methodologies exemplify the tractability of
DUBs to pharmacologic intervention and the potential scope for DUB
inhibitors in a number of cancer types, including those characterised by
DDR deficiencies.

