Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inactivation of the tumor suppressor DLC1 by the oncogenes SRC and
ERK1 in lung adenocarcinoma


The oncogenes SRC and ERK1 are frequently activated in a wide variety of
human cancer, while the tumor suppressor DLC1, which encodes a Rho-GAP
(GTPase activating protein) essential for its tumor suppressor functions,
is frequently down-regulated. However, no prior research has
mechanistically linked SRC and ERK1 to DLC1. In this study, we report
that SRC and ERK1 cooperate to attenuate the Rho-GAP and tumor suppressor
functions of DLC1 by a previously undescribed mechanism. We determined
the direct phosphorylation of Y701 of DLC1, which lies in the Rho-GAP
domain, by the SRC kinase reduces the binding of Rho-GTP (active Rho) to
the Rho-GAP domain of DLC1 and abolishes its Rho-GAP activity. In
untransformed and lung adenocarcinoma cell lines, endogenous active SRC
and DLC1 co-localized at focal adhesions and formed a protein complex in
vivo, implying this interaction is physiologically relevant. The
phosphorylation of S129 of DLC1, which lies N-terminal to the Rho-GAP
domain, by ERK1 enhanced the binding of the SRC SH3 domain to this region
of DLC1 and increased the phosphorylation of Y701 by SRC. These changes
reduced the Rho-GAP activity of DLC1, increased Rho-GTP in the cell, and
attenuated the DLC1 tumor suppressor functions, as measured by cell
migration rate, anchorage-independent growth, and tumor formation in nude
mice. Consistent with these observations, mutation of Y701 to F701
increased the Rho-GAP and tumor suppressor activities of DLC1 and
decreased Rho-GTP and Rho/ROCK/MRLC signaling. Conversely, mutation of
Y701 to the phosphomimetic D701 produced a mutant DLC1 with the opposite
phenotype, similar to a GAP-dead DLC1 mutant. The Rho-GAP domain of DLC1
was necessary and sufficient for the attenuated Rho-GAP activity
attributable to Y701 phosphorylation, as the isolated Rho-GAP domain
(residues 609-878) with the Y701F and Y701D mutants displayed,
respectively, high and low Rho-GAP activities, as in full-length DLC1. In
considering the potential relevance of these findings to human tumors, it
is important to recognize that while the Rho-GAP activity of DLC1 is
necessary for its full tumor suppressor activity, it is not sufficient,
as DLC1 binds several ligands that contribute to this function without
attenuating its Rho-GAP activity. Thus, it would be predicted that there
would be selective pressure for down-regulation of DLC1 expression even
in the presence of high SRC activity. Consistent with this hypothesis,
the combination high SRC expression and low DLC1 expression was
associated with a poor prognosis in lung adenocarcinomas (p = 0.005) in
the TCGA cohort. In summary, the cooperation between the SRC and ERK1
pathways contribute to phosphorylation of Y701, which directly
inactivates the Rho-GAP function of DLC1 and attenuates its tumor
suppressor activity. These findings are relevant to normal physiology and
human cancer.

