Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of potential biomarkers and novel therapeutic
candidates for neuroendocrine cancer


Neuroendocrine (NE) cancers originate from secretory cells of the body's
various endocrine structures. Surgical resection is the primary treatment
for these tumors. However, the majority of NE cancers are metastatic at
the time of detection and no effective adjuvant therapies exist for
primary NE tumors or their metastases. Patients often develop two or more
NE cancers, a syndrome termed multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN). DNA
sequencing has lead to breakthroughs in the identification of the causes
of familial forms of the four types of MEN syndromes. Mutations in a
protein of unknown function, menin, are associated with MEN1. Mutations
in the receptor tyrosine kinase RET are linked to MEN2 and MEN3. The
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, CDNK1B, is mutated in MEN4.
Unfortunately, a large percentage of NE cancers are sporadic, resulting
from somatic mutations, and a high percentage of these do not harbor
menin, RET, or CDNK1B mutations. Due to the lack of development of
successful adjuvant therapies there has been little improvement in
survival rates of NE cancer patients in the past several decades. Thus,
there is a great need for the elucidation of signaling molecules that
promote NE tumorigenesis in order to guide the development of novel and
effective treatments for this family of cancers.Our laboratory has found
that cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) is an important tumorigenic
signaling molecule in sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), a type
of NE cancer that originates from calcitonin-producing C cells in the
thyroid. New data supports a role for Cdk5 in multiple types of NE cancer
and provides a new prospective from which to explore their causes. Cdk5
is expressed in many NE cancers and inhibition of Cdk5 activity blocks
growth of NE cancer cell lines. Phosphoproteomic analysis of growing
versus arrested MTC tumors, induced by expression of the Cdk5 activator
p25 in our transgenic mouse model of MTC, revealed elevation of over 200
phosphorylation sites. We have used short interfering peptides (SIPs) to
selectively target a set of these phosphorylation sites and found that 15
of these SIPs blocked growth of NE cancer cell lines. Phosphorylation
state specific antibodies were generated to several of these sites and
phosphorylation levels were confirmed to be decreased in arrested MTC
tumors. In conclusion, 1) multiple types of NE cancer cells are dependent
on Cdk5 activity for growth, 2) phosphorylation of multiple signaling
proteins is elevated downstream of Cdk5, and 3) select inhibition of
these pathways blocks growth of NE cancer cells.Future studies will focus
on analysis of these phosphoproteins in human NE tumors to validate of
them as biomarkers for targeted cancer therapies as well as exploration
of these phosphoproteins as direct targets for developing new
therapeutics that are effective against NE cancers.

