Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effective treatment of cancer associated cachexia by AV-380, a
GDF15 inhibitory antibody


Background:One of the most lethal and debilitating effects of cancer is
the development of cancer-related anorexia-cachexia syndrome (CACS). It
affects the majority of advanced cancer patients and is thought to be
responsible for up to 30% of all cancer deaths. CACS is a complex
metabolic syndrome associated with malnutrition and severe involuntary
weight loss due to the loss of muscle and fat tissue, as well as the
clinical manifestation of anemia, inflammation and suppression of immune
functions. The precise molecular mechanisms responsible for cancer
cachexia are poorly understood, thus limiting the development of
effective therapeutics. Current evidence suggests that a pro-inflammatory
state may be responsible for many of the symptoms associated with CACS.
Growth Differentiation Factor 15 (GDF15) is a pro-inflammatory cytokine
whose circulating levels are significantly increased in cachectic cancer
patients and several animal models of cancer cachexia. Here we
demonstrate that the inhibition of GDF15 function results in the compete
reversion of the phenotypic and metabolic changes associated with
CASC.Methods:Mice bearing HT-1080 human fibrosarcoma xenografts have
increased plasma GDF15 levels and develop cachexia were used in this
study. Tumor bearing animals were treated either with AV-380, a GDF15
neutralizing antibody or IgG1 control. The effect on body weight,
muscle/fat mass and organ sizes were assessed. Metabolic changes induced
by the treatment were measured by a comprehensive laboratory animal
monitoring system (CLAMS).Results:Treatment with AV-380 restored body
weight, muscle and fat mass as well as normal organ sizes. Analyses of
the CLAMS data demonstrated that mice receiving AV-380 reversed the
phenotypic and metabolic changes associated with the cachexia induced by
this tumor model. Moreover, AV-380 treated mice showed an increase in
locomotor activity and energy expenditure, achieving levels similar to
non tumor bearing control animals.Conclusions:Inhibition of GDF15
function completely reverted body weight loss, restored normal body
composition and triggered a catabolic to anabolic metabolic switch in
this cancer cachexia model. The data highlights the therapeutic potential
of the GDF15 inhibitory antibody AV-380 for the treatment for CACS.

