Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein kinase C alpha (PKC) is a novel regulator of FOXC2 and
p120-catenin in triple negative and endocrine resistant breast cancer


Loss of E-cadherin, a core member of the epithelial adherens junction
(AJ), leads to the induction of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), a phenomenon where epithelial cells de-differentiate towards a
more motile and invasive mesenchymal cell type. Because of its
stabilizing function in the AJ, p120-catenin has caught attention in the
context of tumor development and progression. We previously reported that
expression of protein kinase C alpha (PKC) imparts a hormone-independent,
and tamoxifen-resistant phenotype in T47D:A18/PKC breast cancer cells.
Our preliminary data strongly indicate a positive relationship between
PKC and FOXC2, a forkhead transcription factor shown to be a central
mediator of the EMT program and tumor metastasis. Data mining from
Oncomine database revealed a strong correlation between PRKCA and FOXC2
in basal A triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines. In this
study, two representative cell lines, HCC1937 and HCC1143, were chosen to
investigate the relationship between PKC, FOXC2, and p120-catenin, and
how their interplay alters migration and invasion of TNBC and endocrine
resistant breast cancer.Cell lines (T47D:A18/PKC, HCC1143, HCC1937) were
maintained as previously described and according to ATCC guidelines.
Expression of PKC and FOXC2 were manipulated using siRNA targeting PKC
and FOXC2 respectively. Transcripts level of FOXC2 (FOXC2) and
CTNND1(p120-catenin) were measured using quantitative PCR. PKC, FOXC2,
and p120-catenin protein expression was measured by Western blot using
PKC (GE-Healthcare, 1:200), FOXC2 (Abcam, 1:500), and p120-catenin (Cell
Signaling, 1:500) antibodies respectively.All three cell lines were found
to co-express high level of PKC and FOXC2. Knockdown of PKC resulted in a
down-regulation of FOXC2 transcripts and protein. However, knockdown of
FOXC2 did not alter expression of PKC, indicating PKC is an upstream
regulator of FOXC2, and not vice versa. Downregulation of either PKC or
FOXC2 led to a rescue of p120-catenin, and not E-cadherin, transcripts.
Re-expression of p120-catenin transcripts also resulted in re-expression
of the protein. Knockdown of FOXC2 in T47D:A18/ PKC cells led to a
significant reduction in migratory and invasive potential of these cells,
to the same extent as knockdown of PKC For the first time, we are
reporting PKC as a novel regulator of FOXC2 in TNBC and
endocrine-resistant breast cancer. We also identified p120-catenin as a
potential target of PKC and FOXC2. Down-regulation of p120-catenin by
either PKC or FOXC2 may be a critical event in the dissolution of the AJ,
which facilitates migration of breast cancer cells.

