Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Experimental investigations on the effects of specific berry
phytochemicals and metabolites in esophageal cancer prevention in vitro


In our previous studies, we found that both lyophilized strawberries and
black raspberries exhibit significant and similar potential in prevention
of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Berry phytochemicals are
considered to be responsible, at least in part, for their health benefits
that have been observed in other diseases. The current study was designed
to provide leads for the development of specific phytochemicals or
metabolites as chemopreventive agents using the principles of
pharmacognosy. Lyophilized strawberries (Fragaria ananassa) were obtained
from the California Strawberry Commission. Lyophilized black raspberries
(Jewel variety) were obtained from the Stokes Raspberry Farm (Wilmington,
OH). Sample (100 mg) of lyophilized berries was firstly extracted with
acidified acetone. Berry phytochemicals were then identified with a
combination of high performance liquid chromatography/tandem mass
spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS), accessible standards, UV-vis and reported
mass. The identified compounds were classified into three main
categories: anthocyanins (ACN), ellagitannin/ellagic acid/ellagic acid
derivatives (EAs) and flavonols. By HPLC-MS/MS analysis, we found that
ACN, EAs and flavonols account for 84.2%, 12.2% and 3.6% by dry weight in
lyophilized black raspberries, respectively; and 58.4%, 32.8% and 8.8% by
dry weight, respectively, in lyophilized strawberries.
Cyanidin-3-rutinoside (58.2%) and cyaniding-3-xylorutinoside (18.2%) are
the most and second abundant anthocyanins in black raspberries. While in
strawberries, pelargonidin-3-glucoside accounts for 41.1%, most
individual anthocyanin by dry weight. Pelargonidin-3-rutinoside is the
only anthocyanin identified in both black raspberries and strawberries.
There are more EAs in strawberries (32.8%) compared to them in black
raspberries (12.2%). We also identified agrimoniin, a main ellagitannin,
as the second most abundant phenolic by dry weight (16.2%) in
strawberries. We treated esophageal SCC KYSE cell lines with
cyanidin-3-rutinoside, pelargonidin-3-rutinoside and their metabolites
including protocatechuic acid and 4-hydroxybenzoic acid. Our data showed
that major berry anthocyanins and their metabolites can significantly
inhibit esophageal SCC cell proliferation in vitro. Further research
efforts are needed to test their abilities to modulate oncogenic
signaling in esophageal SCC, many of which are currently underway.

