Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined targeting of DNA and histone methylation improves the
efficacy and specificity of epigenetic therapy


Simultaneous treatment of cancer cells with DNA methyltransferase and
HDAC inhibitors leads to synergistic increases of gene expression,
indicating that certain genes require targeting of multiple modes of
epigenetic regulation to be fully reactivated. However, a major obstacle
facing the use of epigenetic therapies such as HDAC inhibitors in cancer
is the lack of specificity in reactivating gene expression. Combined
targeting of DNA and histone methylation is an unexplored and promising
alternative to current therapies due to the role of both modifications in
silencing of various tumor suppressor genes in cancer.To address this
possibility, we performed a genome wide gene expression study of a DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor (DAC) in combination with a LSD1 inhibitor
(S2101), G9a inhibitor (UNC0638), EZH2 inhibitor (GSK343) or a HDAC
inhibitor (Depsipeptide) in colon cancer (SW48) and breast cancer (MCF7)
models. The trends of gene expression changes in response to the
inhibitors were similar in both cancer models. S2101, UNC0638, and GSK343
treatment by themselves induced limited gene upregulation in comparison
to DAC and especially Depsipeptide. Interestingly, UNC0638 along with DAC
had a strong preference to upregulate genes that had high levels of DNA
methylation in their promoters. DAC in combination with S2101, UNC0638,
or GSK343 was able to synergistically or additively upregulate many DAC
target genes compared to levels achieved by DAC alone, demonstrated
limited overlap between the upregulated genes (only 4.42% of genes
commonly upregulated in SW48, 0.32% in MCF7), and formed distinct
clusters in a hierarchical cluster analysis. Each DAC+inhibitor
combination also induced a significant number of novel genes that were
only upregulated with the combination therapy and not with DAC or
inhibitor alone (>490 genes for each inhibitor combination in both cancer
models), and there was again limited overlap between the upregulated
genes (only 7.64% of genes commonly upregulated in SW48, 7.31% in MCF7).
IPA analysis demonstrated that genes induced uniquely by the inhibitor
combinations are enriched in critical cancer regulation pathways such as
cell proliferation, cell death, and cell movement.Overall, these results
demonstrate that effectiveness of combined targeting of DNA and histone
methylation is achieved through two mechanisms: 1) Increase effectiveness
of DAC by further upregulation of DAC target genes, and 2) Reactivate
novel target genes unable to be induced by DAC or the inhibitors alone.
These results also demonstrate a promising ability to target specific,
non-overlapping sets of genes through different inhibitor combinations,
contrary to the nonspecific effect observed with traditional epigenetic
therapies. Combined targeting of DNA and histone methylation is a
promising novel epigenetic therapy that may allow for the targeting of
specific tumor types based on their gene expression profiles.

