Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and validation of an NGS-based assay to detect all
classes of genomic alterations in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from
patients with solid tumors


PurposeWith increased use of targeted therapeutics, the ability to
perform a liquid biopsy on circulating tumor cells (CTCs) holds potential
to address the need for a more representative and longitudinal means to
monitor tumor burden in patients. However, the analytic and clinical
validity of such an assay has proved difficult to establish, as the cell
population in circulation is complex, and the CTC portion is
heterogeneous, evolving, and highly dependent on clinical factors as well
as CTC isolation methods. No studies to date have characterized CTCs for
the full range of relevant genomic alterations in the context of
patient-matched primary and metastatic tissue biopsies. We set out to
develop a method to perform comprehensive NGS-based genomic profiling on
phenotypically-isolated CTCs, and to compare CTC analysis with a
comprehensive tissue-based assessment of paired primary and metastatic
tissue in patients.MethodsAn integrated platform (VERSA) was employed for
capture of EpCAM CTCs, enumeration and DNA extraction. Extracted DNA was
amplified using a modified version of MDA-based whole genome
amplification (WGA), followed by standard adaptor-ligated library
construction and solution hybridization using a custom DNA baitset before
sequencing on Illumina HiSeq. Data was analyzed using a computational
workflow developed to detect base substitutions, indels, high-level copy
number alterations, and select gene rearrangements. We performed
extensive analytic validation of the assay using over 65 cell line
mixtures, constructed to contain all classes of known variants across all
allele frequencies (0-100%). We used the assay to analyze CTC DNA from 20
lung cancer patients, paired with analysis of temporally-matched primary
and/or metastatic FFPE samples analyzed by FoundationOne, an FFPE
tissue-based assay.ResultsValidation experiments showed that for samples
meeting minimum acceptance criteria (50 cells at 50% purity), assay
sensitivity exceeded 95% for detections of base substitutions, 85% for
indels and rearrangements, and 80% for high-level copy number
alterations, while maintaining tight specificity control. WGA-induced
coverage bias limited sensitivity to low-level copy number alterations.
Comparison of driver alterations across CTC samples and paired
primary/metastatic tissue for 20 patients with lung cancer is
ongoing.ConclusionsA comprehensive NGS-based approach to genomic
profiling is feasible on CTCs isolated from lung cancer patients, and
demonstrated accuracy sufficient to characterize actionable targets for
clinical decision-making. However, more extensive tumor-type specific
studies with a similar matched-tissue approach must be performed in order
to establish full analytic and clinical validation, and assay
specifications will need to be optimized to enable use on broader patient
populations.

