Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual targeting of MEK/MAPK1/2 and pro-survival autophagy to
optimize antiestrogen treatment toward the eradication of antiestrogen
resistant breast cancer


In past studies, we showed that pro-survival autophagy mediates
resistance to antiestrogen-induced apoptosis and facilitates the
emergence of antiestrogen resistant breast cancer cells (Sammadar et al.,
Molecular Cancer Ther. 9, 2008). We also identified the pro-apoptotic
BimEL protein as a key death effector of antiestrogen treatment and
determined that BimEL pro-apoptotic activity is abrogated by a
MEK1/MAPK1/2-dependent phosphorylation (Periyasamy-Thandavan et al.,
Breast Cancer Res. 14, 2012). In this study, we tested the hypothesis
that the MEK1/MAPK1/2/BimEL signaling node simultaneously regulates
antiestrogen- induced pro-survival autophagy and apoptosis in ER+ breast
cancer cells. In our approach, we utilized T47-D and MCF-7 breast cancer
cells and modulated the activity of MEK1/MAPK1/2/ BimEL expression with
U0126, a small molecule inhibitor of MEK1, BimEL cDNA over-expression, or
siRNA targeting under a variety of endocrine treatments. We also
conducted studies in the presence or absence of the pan-caspase inhibitor
ZVAD-fmk so that autophagy levels/function could be analyzed independent
of effects mediated by BimEL-dependent caspase activation. Autophagic
flux was measured by comparing the levels of lipidated LC3II in cell
populations undergoing the different treatments in the presence or
absence of chloroquine (CQ), a lysosomotropic agent that prevents
autolysosomal turnover. These studies determined that: 1)
dephosphorylated BimEL significantly attenuates autophagic flux, but
primarily as a consequence of BimEL-induced caspase-activation; (2)
BimEL-dependent apoptotic death induced in antiestrogen-treated ER+
breast cancer cells by MEK1 inhibition is not dependent on autophagy; and
(3) agents that selectively target autophagy (i.e. CQ and spautin)
enhance apoptosis induced by MEK1 blockade in breast cancer cells
undergoing endocrine treatment. Based on these pre-clinical in vitro
studies, we postulate that the eradication of antiestrogen resistant
breast cancer will require the targeting of MEK1/MAPK1/2 to activate
BimEL and pro-survival autophagy to eradicate cells surviving
BimEL-dependent apoptosis.

