Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Lrig1 signaling in mammary gland development and
tumorigenesis


Lrig1 is a transmembrane leucine-rich repeat protein and a negative
regulator of oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) such as the ErbB
family members. The Sweeney lab recently demonstrated that
under-expression of Lrig1 predicts poor prognosis in breast cancer.
Breast cancer patients with high Lrig1 expression show significantly
longer relapse-free survival, identifying Lrig1 as a new prognostic
marker. Recently, Lrig1 was found to be a tumor suppressor in intestinal
tissue. It was shown that Lrig1 null mice develop ErbB receptor-dependent
duodenal adenomas. Based on Lrig1's function as a negative regulator of
RTKs and its reported tumor suppressor activity in intestinal epithelium,
we hypothesized that Lrig1 null mice would be susceptible to mammary
tumorigenesis. To characterize the function of Lrig1 in the mammary
gland, we compared mammary development in Lrig1 wild type (+/+) and null
(-/-) mice at regular intervals from 4 to 12 weeks. Mice were screened
for evidence of hyperplasia, pre-malignant lesions or tumors by whole
mount analysis across age and the intensity of specific proteins was
surveyed by western blot. Organotypic growth of the mammary epithelial
cells from wild type and null mice was examined in three-dimensional cell
culture to examine whether any phenotypes are inherent to the epithelium.
Since Lrig1 has been defined as a stem cell marker in the intestine, its
role in stem cell maintenance was determined by examining the impact of
Lrig1 loss on mammary stem cells. Although these studies are ongoing,
early results indicate an increase in the amount of Lrig1-target proteins
by western blot in the Lrig1-/- mice as opposed to the Lrig1+/+ mice
mammary gland tissue. Epithelium from Lrig1-/- mice present an
exaggerated branching response when stimulated with TGF in comparison to
Lrig1+/+ epithelium. Our studies also indicate that Lrig1-/- mammary
glands are enriched in stem cells when compared to Lrig1+/+ mammary
glands. In addition, a number of proliferative lesions were encountered
in the mammary gland whole mounts of the Lrig1-/- mice, but not that of
the Lrig1+/+ mice, which strongly suggests that Lrig1 plays a growth
suppressor role in the mammary gland.

