Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liquid biopsies to prospectively select patients with KRAS or NRAS
mutant hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in two phase II studies with
Refametinib


Background: In a retrospective analysis performed in a phase II study
evaluating efficacy and safety of the MEK-inhibitor refametinib plus
sorafenib in Asian patients with HCC (Lim et al., Clin Cancer Res, in
press), patients with mutant RAS appeared to exhibit a particularly
robust clinical response to refametinib plus sorafenib compared to
patients with wild-type RAS. To further investigate clinical activity of
refametinib as monotherapy or in combination with sorafenib in HCC
patients with mutant RAS, two Ph II studies for patients with
unresectable HCC have been initiated; refametinib monotherapy
(NCT01915589) and refametinib plus sorafenib combination therapy
(NCT01915602). Since RAS mutations are very rare events in HCC and
biopsies are not routinely taken in patients with underlying liver
cirrhosis, only liquid biopsies seemed feasible for prospective patient
selection. Therefore, Sysmex Inostics BEAMing (Beads, Emulsions,
Amplification, and Magnetics) technology based on cell-free circulating
DNA in plasma is used to select patients for KRAS/NRAS Mutation status
prior to enrollment. Patients are eligible if they exhibit any one or
multiple of 13 KRAS/NRAS mutations.Results: Between Sep 2013 and Nov 2014
more than 1000 plasma samples from patients with unresectable HCC
enrolled in the refametinib monotherapy study or the refametinib plus
sorafenib combination study, have been tested at a CLIA certified
laboratory in Baltimore, MD. The turnaround time from shipping the plasma
sample from the clinical trial site to the results reporting was 6-10
days. Out of 1004 samples from 116 trial sites in 18 countries, 47 (4.7%)
have been reported to harbor a KRAS and / or a NRAS mut. The following
mutations have been reported: KRAS_G12A, KRAS_G12C, KRAS_G12D, KRAS_G12R,
KRAS_ G12S, KRAS_G12V, KRAS_G13D, NRAS_Q61K, NRAS_Q61L, NRAS_Q61H,
NRAS_Q61R. The frequency of the mutant allele ranged from 0.02% to 9.75%.
No obvious differences in the incidence of any of the mutations with
regards to geography, demographic factors are other baseline
characteristics have been observed.Conclusion: To our knowledge this is
the largest dataset of KRAS and NRAS mutations in HCC. The observed
prevalence of RAS mutations of approximately 5% across both trials is
well in line with published data including the COSMIC database. Our data
support that prospective selection of patients with HCC for KRAS or NRAS
mutation is feasible with a turn-around time of 1-2 weeks depending on
geographical region. These data further support the broad utility of such
approaches for large randomized prospective studies in patients with
specific tumor genetic profiles. The clinical outcome of the 2 clinical
studies will help understand whether KRAS or NRAS can potentially be a
predictive marker for response to refametinib in patients with HCC.

