Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of membrane binding of K-Ras4B farnesylated
hypervariable region


K-Ras4B belongs to a family of small GTPases that regulates cell growth,
differentiation and survival. Kras is frequently mutated in cancer.
K-Ras4B modulates downstream signaling at different lipid microdomains.
K-Ras4B association with the plasma membrane through its farnesylated and
positively charged C-terminal hypervariable region (HVR) is critical to
its oncogenic function. HVR farnesylation plays an important role in Ras
signaling, but the structural mechanisms and consequences of
farnesyl-induced membrane binding are poorly understood and the basis for
Ras localization to certain parts of plasma membrane is unknown.
Application of confocal microscopy, surface plasmon resonance, and
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations revealed that K-Ras4B is distributed
between rigid lipid rafts and disordered non-raft regions of the plasma
membrane. Its membrane binding domain interaction with phospholipids is
driven by membrane fluidity. The farnesyl group spontaneously inserts
into the disordered lipid microdomains containing unsaturated
phospholipids, while the rigid microdomains composed of tightly packed
saturated lipids restrict the farnesyl group penetration. We speculate
that the resulting farnesyl protrusion towards the cell interior allows
oligomerization of K-Ras4B membrane binding domain in rigid microdomains.
Unlike other Ras isoforms, K-Ras4B HVR contains a single farnesyl
modification and positively charged polylysine sequence. The high
positive charge not only modulates specific HVR binding to anionic
phospholipids, but the farnesyl's membrane orientation. Phosphorylation
of Ser181 prohibits spontaneous farnesyl membrane insertion. We speculate
that if the farnesyl group is not inserted into the membrane, it may
serve in cooperative binding of other K-Ras4B molecules, thus leading to
dimerization. In this case, the protein binds the membrane using
electrostatic interaction between its positively charged HVR and the
negatively charged membrane phospholipids. In the case of disordered
phospholipid domains, the farnesyl group burial in the phospholipids
tends to hinder its interactions. The mechanism illuminates the roles of
HVR modifications in K-Ras4B targeting to microdomains of the plasma
membrane and suggests an additional function for HVR in regulation of Ras
signaling. Elucidating the mechanism for K-Ras4B localization at
different membrane microdomains is important for in-depth understanding
of Ras-effector interactions mediating signaling pathways. Funded by
Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, National Institutes of
Health, under contract HHSN261200800001E.

