Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro kynurenine modulation by novel dual-acting and selective
tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO) and indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO)
inhibitors


Introduction: TDO (tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase) and IDO (indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase) are structurally distinct enzymes that catalyse the
oxidation of tryptophan (Trp) leading to local Trp depletion and
formation of immunesuppressive kynurenine pathway (KP) metabolites and
dampening of the immune response in the tumour environment. IDO is known
to be up-regulated in numerous cancers. Recently, TDO was shown to be
up-regulated in various tumour types. Hence, selective IDO inhibitors may
have a limited effect in cancers harbouring both TDO and IDO. To test
this hypothesis we utilised recently identified proprietary dual-active
and highly selective TDO/IDO inhibitors to modulate kynurenine (Kyn)
levels in glioma cancer cells expressing either TDO alone or expressing
both TDO and IDO. In addition, we measured Kyn modulation in human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) following exposure to dual and
selective inhibitors.Methods: Assays were established to measure the
effects of dual-active and highly selective TDO/IDO inhibitors on Kyn
production in 1) human A172 glioma cells naturally expressing TDO alone
or expressing both TDO and IDO following IDO induction using Interferon
(IFN) and in 2) freshly isolated human PBMCs treated with IFN.Results:
Dual-active and selective TDO/IDO inhibitors demonstrated distinct Kyn
modulating activities in A172 glioma cells expressing either TDO alone or
both TDO and IDO. Dual-active molecules fully ablated Kyn levels in both
TDO-expressing and TDO/IDO-expressing cells. Crucially, selective
inhibitors were unable to fully block Kyn in A172 cells co-expressing
both enzymes. As expected TDO-selective inhibitors were highly active in
A172 cells expressing TDO alone. IDO-selective inhibitors were largely
inactive in A172 cells naturally expressing TDO alone. However, they
gained significant activity upon induction of IDO in these cells
following IFN exposure. Interestingly, TDO-selective inhibitors were
unable to modulate Kyn levels in PBMCs whereas IDO-selective and
dual-active molecules were able to potently block Kyn
production.Discussion: These data demonstrate that dual-active TDO/IDO
inhibitors are most effective at reducing Kyn levels in cancer cells
co-expressing TDO and IDO. In addition, the data suggest that IFN-treated
PBMCs primarily express IDO with no measurable Kyn production from TDO.
This study demonstrates the utility of applying highly selective and dual
active inhibitors of these Trp-catabolizing enzymes as probes for
defining the Kyn-producing component from PBMCs. In summary, blocking
both TDO and IDO activity with dual-active inhibitors maybe complementary
rather than redundant in cancers harbouring both of these enzymes; and
IDO appears to be the primary enzyme driving Trp metabolism in PBMCs.

