Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computational-driven metronomics: application to gemcitabine in
neuroblastoma-bearing mice


Metronomics (i.e., repeated administration of small doses of drugs over a
long period of time) is an attractive strategy to reduce
treatment-related toxicities while possibly offering unexpected novel
mechanisms of action such as anti-angiogenesis or immuno-stimulatory
properties. Defining an optimal metronomic schedule remains uneasy
because of the variety of possible combinations between dosing, frequency
and duration. Our group has developed innovative modeling tools to
optimize metronomic schedules. Here, we have used this computational
approach to test whether metronomics gemcitabine would make better than
standard gemcitabine in mice bearing human neuroblastoma. In silico
simulation suggested that shifting from standard 100 mg/kg/w over 4
consecutive weeks to the metronomic 1 mg/kg/d schedule for 28 consecutive
days would achieve higher antitumoral efficacy while being well
tolerated. To test this hypothesis, 100 000 human GI-ME-N neuroblastoma
cells stably transfected with luciferase were subcutaneously grafted in
40 nude mice. Mice were next split in 3 groups: control, 100 mg/kg/w
gemcitabine (STD-GEM) and 1 mg/kg/d gemcitabine (MetroGem-1). An
additional satellite group was treated with 0.5 mg/kg/d (MetroGem-0.5).
Metro-Gem was administrated using an osmotic pump implanted
subcutaneously. Efficacy (i.e., comparison in tumor growth) was the main
endpoint. Pharmacokinetics, tumor inflammation, and vascular density were
the secondary endpoints. Gemcitabine assay showed that whereas Cmax up to
80 g/ml were reached in mice treated with STD-GEM, steady-state
concentrations of 0.1 g/ml only were observed in animals undergoing
MetroGem-1. Measuring cathepsin expression by fluorescence imaging
suggested reduced inflammation in mice treated with the metronomic
schedule. Similarly, fluorescence imaging showed smaller vascular density
in mice treated with MetroGem-1 or -0.5 as compared with control or
STD-GEM animals. To further check a possible anti-angiogenic effect,
tumor perfusion rate was measuring next using luciferine, and fully
confirmed that mice treated with Metro-Gem exhibited reduced blood flow
as compared with other groups. Finally, bioluminescence monitoring of
tumor growth showed that whereas STD-GEM was totally ineffective, both
MetroGem-1 and MetroGem-0.5 achieved 60% reduction in tumor mass at the
end of the treatment (pMetronomics (i.e., repeated administration of
small doses of drugs over a long period of time) is an attractive
strategy to reduce treatment-related toxicities while possibly offering
unexpected novel mechanisms of action such as anti-angiogenesis or
immuno-stimulatory properties. Defining an optimal metronomic schedule
remains uneasy because of the variety of possible combinations between
dosing, frequency and duration. Our group has developed innovative
modeling tools to optimize metronomic schedules. Here, we have used this
computational approach to test whether metronomics gemcitabine would make
better than standard gemcitabine in mice bearing human neuroblastoma. In
silico simulation suggested that shifting from standard 100 mg/kg/w over
4 consecutive weeks to the metronomic 1 mg/kg/d schedule for 28
consecutive days would achieve higher antitumoral efficacy while being
well tolerated. To test this hypothesis, 100 000 human GI-ME-N
neuroblastoma cells stably transfected with luciferase were
subcutaneously grafted in 40 nude mice. Mice were next split in 3 groups:
control, 100 mg/kg/w gemcitabine (STD-GEM) and 1 mg/kg/d gemcitabine
(MetroGem-1). An additional satellite group was treated with 0.5 mg/kg/d
(MetroGem-0.5). Metro-Gem was administrated using an osmotic pump
implanted subcutaneously. Efficacy (i.e., comparison in tumor growth) was
the main endpoint. Pharmacokinetics, tumor inflammation, and vascular
density were the secondary endpoints. Gemcitabine assay showed that
whereas Cmax up to 80 g/ml were reached in mice treated with STD-GEM,
steady-state concentrations of 0.1 g/ml only were observed in animals
undergoing MetroGem-1. Measuring cathepsin expression by fluorescence
imaging suggested reduced inflammation in mice treated with the
metronomic schedule. Similarly, fluorescence imaging showed smaller
vascular density in mice treated with MetroGem-1 or -0.5 as compared with
control or STD-GEM animals. To further check a possible anti-angiogenic
effect, tumor perfusion rate was measuring next using luciferine, and
fully confirmed that mice treated with Metro-Gem exhibited reduced blood
flow as compared with other groups. Finally, bioluminescence monitoring
of tumor growth showed that whereas STD-GEM was totally ineffective, both
MetroGem-1 and MetroGem-0.5 achieved 60% reduction in tumor mass at the
end of the treatment (p<0.05, Anova). Much interestingly, tumor growth
with metronomics was kept under control for up to 40 days after stopping
treatment. Overall, this study shows how computational approaches can
help to refine and to rationalize metronomic dosing. Here, higher
efficacy and long-lasting stabilization was achieved with metronomics.
Impact on tumor angiogenesis could explain, at least partly, this
increase in efficacy in a chemo-resistant model.

