Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New potent AMPK activators against colorectal cancer stem cells


Colorectal (CRC) cancer is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in
the United States in 2014. Patients often die due to metastasis of CRC
rather than from the primary disease, and it is thought that cancer stem
cells play a major role in the survival and metastasis of cancer cells
after treatment. A new class of small molecules, fluorinated
N,N-diarylureas (FNDs), have been formulated and shown to reduce
viability of CRC cells through AMPK activation. The purpose of the
present study was to evaluate whether FNDs inhibit growth and induce
apoptosis of CRC metastatic cell lines and CRC stem cells in vitro and to
identify an FND for development as a potential chemotherapeutic
agent.METHODS. FNDs were identified in a high-throughput screen and
selected for study based on their relative induction of AMPK activity.
Compounds are arbitrarily designated as 4a, 4b, 4h, 4j, 4k, 4z, 4aa, 4bb.
Metastatic CRC cell lines HT29, HTC116, and KM20, were purchased from
American Type Culture Collection. Two CRC stem cell lines were purchased
from Celprogen. Cell viability and IC50 concentrations were measured
using a sulforhodamine B colorimetric (SRB) cytotoxicity assay. Western
blots were analyzed with antibodies: PARP for apoptosis, cyclin D1 for
cell cycle progression, pAMPK to confirm AMPK activation, and -actin as a
loading control.RESULTS. AMPK activation after FND treatment was
confirmed by western blot in metastatic CRC and stem cells with a peak
activation at 12 h. Furthermore, AMPK activation was noted at
concentrations as low as 5 M, compared to metformin (an AMPK activator
drug for DMII) which is typically dosed at 5-20 mM for metastatic cell
lines. CRC stem cells were more resistant to FND treatment than regular
metastatic CRC cell lines, with an IC50 concentration of 50 M for stem
cells as compared to 10-25 M for metastatic cell lines. Cyclin D1
expression was undetectable with FND drug treatments at IC50
concentrations in CRC stem cell lines. FND 4b stood out as the strongest
inducer of apoptosis, but all of the FND compounds increased apoptosis
compared to control.CONCLUSIONS. AMPK is a key regulator of energy
metabolism in cells, and cancer cells effectively make use of this
pathway for their unregulated proliferation. Activation of AMPK by all
FND compounds successfully inhibited the cell cycle, inhibited subsequent
cellular proliferation, and induced a remarkable level of apoptosis in
select FNDs in CRC metastatic and stem cells. Additionally, these effects
were observed at much lower doses than other AMPK activators such as
metformin and AICAR. Therefore, FNDs have considerable promise in the
treatment of metastatic colon cancer, especially by preventing
progression and metastasis as a result of their inhibition of CRC stem
cells.

