Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo inhibition of GRP78 potentiates antiestrogen therapy
effectiveness in ER+ breast tumors


Over 232,000 new cases of invasive breast cancer are diagnosed annually
within the United States; 70% express the estrogen receptor- (ER) and may
be treated with therapies targeting ER, such as tamoxifen (TAM). While
initially effective, over 50% of patients treated with these therapies
will develop or not respond, thereby making understanding the molecular
mechanism of antiestrogen resistance critical component of breast cancer
biology. We have previously determined that the unfolded protein response
protein chaperone, glucose regulated protein 78 (GRP78), mediates
antiestrogen resistance in ER+ breast cancer cells. Mice bearing LCC1
(TAM sensitive) or LCC9 (TAM resistant) xenografts were treated with 30M
1x weekly IP injection of human GRP78-targeting morpholino and/or a diet
containing 400 ppm tamoxifen citrate for 4-6 weeks. Tumor area was
measured using calipers and tumor wet weight measured at sacrifice.
Combination of GRP78 knockdown and tamoxifen treatment significantly
reduced LCC9 tumor area and tumor wet weight, suggesting inhibition of
GRP78 restores antiestrogen sensitivity in vivo. TAM and GRP78
morpholino+TAM treatments both reduced LCC1 tumor growth, however the
combination of GRP78 inhibition and TAM significantly reduced tumor area
and tumor wet weight when compared to TAM treatment alone. These data
suggest that inhibiting GRP78 in combination with antiestrogens is more
effective for the treatment of breast cancer than single agent endocrine
therapy. Metabolic analysis of LCC1 and LCC9 breast cancer cells indicate
that inhibition of GRP78 through RNAi results in an increase in the
intracellular concentrations of the n-3 and n-6 essential polyunsaturated
fats (PUFA) linoleic and linolenic acid. We further show that the
accumulation of essential fatty acids is due to an inhibition of
mitochondrial fatty acid transport resulting from a reduction in
SREBP1/SREBP2 transcription and CPT1A protein expression. The reduced
mitochondrial fatty acid transport is also associated with an inhibition
of fatty acid oxidation, suggesting a novel role of GRP78 mediating
cellular metabolism. We validated the effect of the GRP78-regulated
metabolites by treating mice bearing LCC9 xenografts with TAM, 0.25
mg/day linoleic acid by oral gavage, or linoleic acid+TAM for 6 weeks.
LCC9 tumors treated with linoleic acid+TAM demonstrated reduced tumor
area and tumor weight when compared with TAM or linoleic acid treatment
alone. These data suggest that the in vivo effect of GRP78 inhibition is
mediated, in part, by increased linoleic acid concentrations. Moreover,
the novel role of GRP78 controlling fatty acid oxidation may represent a
new homeostatic ability of GRP78 to modify fatty acid metabolism and
demonstrates the importance of targeting GRP78 in breast cancer treatment.

