Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CEA TCB, a novel T-cell bispecific antibody with potent in vitro
and in vivo antitumor activity against solid tumors


T cell bispecific antibodies (TCBs) are potent molecules that upon
simultaneous binding to tumor cells and T cells trigger strong T cell
activation resulting in the killing of tumor cells. CEA TCB (RG7813) is a
novel bispecific antibody targeting carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), often
overexpressed on solid tumors (e.g. colorectal, gastric, pancreatic, lung
carcinoma etc.), and the CD3 epsilon chain present on T cells.CEA TCB
bears several innovative technological features that distinguish it from
other bispecific antibodies currently in (pre-)clinical development: (a)
bivalency for tumor antigen translating into higher avidity, superior
potency and better differentiation between high and low
antigen-expressing cells; (b) head-to-tail fusion geometry for anti-tumor
and CD3-binding domains, resulting in higher potency compared to
conventional IgG-based TCBs; (c) extended half-life compared to
non-Fc-based TCBs; (d) fully silent Fc ensuring lower risk of
FcgR-mediated infusion reactions; and (e) robust production using
standard manufacturing processes (enabled by CrossMAb and knob-into-hole
bispecific antibody technologies).In vitro, CEA TCB mediates potent
target-dependent T cell cytotoxicity, T cell activation, proliferation,
and cytokine release in killing assays, exclusively in the presence of
CEA-expressing target-cells. CEA TCB activity correlates with CEA
expression level, showing higher potency against tumor cells with high
expression of CEA. In vivo, CEA TCB induces dose- and time-dependent
regression of CEA-expressing tumors with variable amounts of immune cell
infiltrate. In fully humanized NOG mice, CEA TCB is efficacious in
poorly-infiltrated tumors and converts non-inflamed into highly-inflamed
tumors. Histological and FACS analyses revealed that CEA TCB recruits new
T cells into tumors and/or expands pre-existing ones and is able to
induce T cell re-localization from the tumor periphery into the tumor
bed. Surprisingly, CEA TCB treatment also qualitatively alters the
composition of intratumoral T cells resulting in an increased frequency
of activated (CD69, CD25), proliferating (Ki67) and differentiated T
cells (having effector memory phenotype) that are ready to kill (express
high levels of Granzyme B).Taken together, these preclinical data show
that CEA TCB is a novel tumor-targeted T cell bispecific antibody with
promising anti-tumor activity and the novel ability to modify the tumor
microenvironment. Phase 1 clinical trials with CEA TCB are currently
ongoing. Future studies will focus on identification of combination
partners that inhibit T cell suppression and unleash the full potential
of T cell activity.

