Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of miR-124 suppresses spermine oxidase-associated H2O2
generation in human gastric adenocarcinoma cells: Implications for
infection/inflammation-induced carcinogenesis


Chronic inflammation contributes to the development of various forms of
cancer. The polyamine catabolic enzyme spermine oxidase (SMOX) is induced
in chronic inflammatory conditions such as Helicobacter pylori-associated
gastritis and colitis-associated colon cancer. As a generator of H2O2,
elevated SMOX contributes to the DNA damage and subsequent tumorigenesis
associated with chronic inflammation. MicroRNA expression levels are also
altered in inflammatory conditions. Specifically, the expression of
miR-124, a potential negative regulator of SMOX, is silenced by DNA
methylation in cases of ulcerative colitis and H. pylori-associated
gastric cancer. We therefore sought to determine if the repressed levels
of miR-124 expression that occur with inflammation are associated with
the elevated levels of SMOX observed under these same conditions.In the
current study, a miRNA mimic was used to overexpress miR-124-3p in AGS
human gastric adenocarcinoma cells. Expression of SMOX mRNA and protein
levels were then measured by qRT-PCR and Western blot analysis, and
changes in SMOX activity were detected using a luminol-based assay to
measure the production of H2O2. The resultant changes in intracellular
polyamine levels were measured by HPLC. A bioinformatics analysis
predicted the presence of a miR-124 recognition element in the 3UTR of
SMOX. To verify if miR-124 directly regulates SMOX mRNA, this portion of
the SMOX 3UTR was cloned downstream from the luciferase reporter gene,
the resultant plasmid was cotransfected into AGS cells with the miR-124
mimic or a negative control, and luciferase activity was measured.
Finally, the role of miR-124 expression in the regulation of SMOX
induction resulting from H. pylori infection was investigated by
infecting AGS cells with H. pylori in the presence or absence miR-124.The
results of these experiments clearly indicate that miR-124 is a negative
regulator of ROS-generating SMOX that is induced in chronic
inflammation-associated tumorigenesis. In the AGS gastric cancer cell
line, which harbors a highly methylated and silenced endogenous miR-124
gene, transfection with a miR-124-3p mimic repressed SMOX mRNA and
protein expression as well as H2O2 production by >50% within 24 hours.
Furthermore, this decreased SMOX activity in the presence of miR-124
resulted an increased level of intracellular spermine, the substrate of
SMOX, which also serves as an important free-radical scavenger. It has
become evident that elevated SMOX activity resulting from infectious
agents and/or pro-inflammatory cytokines is likely a contributing factor
in the development of inflammation-associated cancer; the results
reported here indicate that this elevation is correlated with, and may
result from, the loss of miR-124 expression that occurs during the
progression from inflammation to cancer.

