Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineered toxin bodies: A next-generation immunotoxin scaffold
with novel immuno-oncology functionality


The potential of immunotoxins in oncology has been largely limited due to
problems with immunogenicity as well as a limited number of appropriate
targets. Advances in genetic engineering and molecular biology have been
applied to overcome these limitations. Molecular Templates has developed
engineered toxin bodies (ETBs), a next-generation recombinant immunotoxin
scaffold based on the Shiga-like toxin A subunit specifically directed to
cancer cells via antibody fragment binding domains. ETBs have been
de-immunogenized through the systematic and comprehensive removal of B-
and T-cell epitopes. Data from the repeat administration of ETBs in
animal models demonstrates the dramatically reduced immunogenicity of
these ETBs and supports the potential for their use in solid tumor
settings.The ETB scaffold was also engineered to force the
internalization of receptors that typically do not internalize. This
property of forced internalization expands the universe of possible
targets; the company's lead compound, MT-3724, is the first immunotoxin
to CD20 to enter the clinic and is currently in a phase I study for
refractory NHL. MT-3724 rapidly internalizes and potently kills CD20+
lymphoma cells.Additionally, we have taken advantage of the immunotoxin's
localization to the cytosol to engineer in a novel immuno-oncology
mechanism of action: MHC class I antigens derived from human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) have been genetically fused to the immunotoxin
scaffold in order to mark these cells as targets for cytotoxic T
lymphocyte (CTL) mediated cell lysis. We have detected these foreign
protein derived antigens displayed on the surface of ETB-intoxicated
cancer cells in context with MHC class I molecules. Because antigen
presentation does not require de novo protein synthesis, this mechanism
of action is complementary to the inactivation of ribosomal function by
ETBs. Since a large portion of the populace has a robust population of
high-affinity effector T-cells targeting HCMV, the presentation of these
antigens on ETB-intoxicated cancer cells may recruit a CTL response to
tumor cells that is not dependent on genetically engineering host T-cells
or blocking checkpoint inhibitors. The recruitment of a CTL response has
the potential to act additively or synergistically to the direct cell
kill activity of the ETB and may expand the potential efficacy of these
immunotoxins.

