Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Study of a synthetic peptide probe for apoptosis imaging


Chemotherapy and radiotherapy can cause a great many apoptosis in the
tumor mass. Thus, direct and fast observation for the therapy-induced
apoptosis is important and valuable to evaluate the effectiveness of
anti-tumor treatments. In this work, a peptide (named as P17) labeling
apoptotic cells was designed and chemically synthesized. To validate the
labeling function, different tumor cells (Jurkat, THP-1, K562, Hela and
MDA-MB-231) were treated with TRAIL (the TNF-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand) to induce apoptosis, followed by incubation with FITC-conjugated
P17 and then co-stained with annexin v. Flow cytometry results indicate
that P17 binding to the cells was markedly increased with apoptosis rates
rising. Confocal microscopy observations show that only cells with
annexin v staining were labeled by P17, while live cells were not. By
pull-down assay and mass spectrometry, P17-binding protein was identified
to be heat shock protein 60 (HSP60), a mitochondrial chaperoninm with
accumulation in the cytoplasm during apoptosis. And this result is
further confirmed by confocal microscopy with anti-hsp60 antibody and a
native-gel-based analysis to investigate FITC-P17 binding to HSP60. To
evaluate the apoptosis-binding ability of the peptide in vivo, BALB/c
mice bearing 4T1 tumor were treated with cyclophosphamide (CTX) to induce
apoptosis in the tumor mass, followed by intravenously injection of
fluorescent P17 prior to sacrifice. The tumor was removed for ex vivo
imaging immediately. It was observed that P17 accumulated in CTX-treated
tumors. The tumor tissue was further stained with TUNEL assay, confirming
that the fluorescent signal observed was resulted from the labeling of
apoptotic cells in tumor, because of the colocalization of P17 and TUNEL.
In conclusion, this study demonstrates that P17 is a promising probe for
the apoptosis imaging for uses in the evaluation of cancer therapy, drug
screening and monitoring the cytotoxicity of therapeutics. (This work is
supported by National Key Basic Research Program of China (2011CB933504)
and Key project of the Major Research Plan from National Natural Science
Foundation of China (91127043).)

