Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microsatellite instability status in endometrioid endometrial
carcinomas is associated with distinct types and patterns of PI3K pathway
mutations


Background: Endometrioid endometrial carcinomas (EECs) frequently harbor
mutations in the PI3K pathway. In contrast with other cancer types (e.g.
breast cancer) where PIK3CA mutations are generally mutually exclusive
with PTEN mutations, in EECs mutations affecting these genes often
co-occur. Here we sought to determine whether the type and pattern of
mutations targeting different components of the PI3K pathway are distinct
between microsatellite stable (MSS) and high-level microsatellite
instable (MSI-H) EECs, and to define the mutational signatures in MSI-H
and MSS EECs.Methods: Whole exome massively parallel sequencing-based
mutation data from EECs of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project were
used to define the number, type and pattern of mutations affecting PI3K
pathway-related genes (i.e., AKT1, INPP4B, MTOR, PIK3CA, PIK3R1 and
PTEN). Based on seven MSI markers assessed by TCGA, EECs were classified
as MSI-H (n = 70) and MSS (n = 109). POLE ultramutated cases were
excluded. Mutational signatures were defined using EMu, a method based
upon the expectation-maximization algorithm.Results: Although the
mutation rates of MSS and MSI-H EECs were significantly different, the
prevalence of mutations affecting PI3K pathway genes was similar between
these two groups (all p>0.05), with the exception of PTEN mutations,
which were more prevalent in MSI-H (87%) than in MSS EECs (72%; p =
0.017). The PIK3CA hotspot mutations E542K, E545K, and H1047R were found
to be significantly more prevalent in PIK3CA-mutant MSS EECs (36%) than
in PIK3CA-mutant MSI-H EECs (13.5%; p = 0.019). In both MSI-H and MSS
EECs a mutational signature related to age was identified, characterized
by C>T transitions at NpCpG trinucleotides; in MSS tumors a C>T and C>G
at TpCpN trinucleotides mutational signature, attributed to the APOBEC
family of cytidine deaminases, was identified, whereas in MSI-H tumors, a
DNA-MMR deficiency-like signature was found.Conclusion: Although the
prevalence of mutations targeting different components of the PI3K
pathway is similar between MSS and MSI-H EECs, PIK3CA hotspot mutations,
which result in constitutive kinase activation, are significantly more
prevalent in MSS than in MSI-H EECs. We have observed that the mutational
processes operating in MSI-H and MSS EECs are distinct, and that the
landscape of mutations affecting PI3K pathway-related genes might be
shaped by multiple mutational processes in these cancers. Our findings
warrant further investigation of the role of different types of PIK3CA
mutations in and their predictive impact on distinct subtypes of EECs.

