Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nonsense-mediated decay regulates the expression of tumor
suppressor transcripts and cancer pathways in non-small cell lung cancer
cell lines


Background: Nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) is an RNA surveillance pathway
that selectively degrades mRNAs bearing premature translation termination
codons (PTCs). In addition, NMD also regulates the expression of a subset
of physiological mRNAs containing upstream open reading frames (uORFs),
spliceable introns in the 3 untranslated region (3-UTR) and those that
undergo aberrant alternative splicing. Cancer cells produce many mRNAs
harboring PTCs because of high frequency of mutations either in the
coding region or in the splice sites that result in aberrant splicing.
Thus, cancer cells may depend on NMD for survival. Inhibiting NMD
provides an attractive cancer therapeutic strategy as it rescues mRNAs
bearing NMD features, some of which may produce functional proteins.
Therefore, it is important to identify NMD targets and their NMD-inducing
features in cancer cells. In the current study, by using NMD inhibition
approach, we identified mRNA transcripts and pathways that are regulated
by NMD in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines.Methods: To
identify NMD targets, UPF1, a key component of NMD pathway was depleted
by RNAi in NSCLC cell lines. mRNAs regulated by NMD were identified by
micro array and RNAseq approaches and selected NMD targets were confirmed
by real-time PCR. Reverse phase protein array (RPPA) was performed to
identify cancer pathways affected by NMD inhibition. Migration,
proliferation and clonogenic assays were performed to assess the effect
of NMD inhibition on cancer phenotype.Results: Our microarray and RNAseq
analysis results indicated that in NSCLC cell lines, NMD regulates the
expression of a number of physiological transcripts derived from
non-mutant genes. These include transcripts involved in integrated stress
response, apoptotic pathways and tumor suppressor activity. We showed
that tumor suppressors DMTF1, and p53 undergo NMD-susceptible alternative
splicing in NSCLC cell lines and that NMD-regulated p53 isoforms are
partially functional. Our results also demonstrated that mRNA transcripts
derived from TSC1 and GADD45A, tumor suppressors that negatively regulate
mTOR pathway, are also upregulated upon NMD inhibition in NSCLC cell
lines. Concomitantly, RPPA analysis revealed that NMD inhibition resulted
in downregulation of components involved in mTOR pathway. NMD inhibition
also resulted in reduced cell viability and migration.Conclusions: NMD
regulates the expression of physiological transcripts involved in
integrated stress response, apoptosis and tumor suppressor activity and
impacts cancer phenotype in NSCLC cell line models. Our findings suggest
that NMD could serve as an attractive therapeutic target.

