Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selinexor, a selective inhibitor of nuclear export (SINE), acts
through NF-B deactivation and combines with proteasome inhibitors to
synergistically induce tumor cell death


Background: The primary nuclear export protein, Exportin 1 (XPO1/CRM1) is
overexpressed in most cancers, which frequently correlates with poor
prognosis. SINE compounds are a family of small-molecule bioavailable
drugs that bind covalently to XPO1 leading to nuclear retention of major
tumor suppressor proteins such as p53 and IB, resulting in selective
tumor cell death. Selinexor is the most advanced SINE with >500
hematological and solid tumor cancer patients treated to date in Phase
I/II clinical trials. Here we investigated the role of NF-B
transcriptional deactivation in SINE induced anti tumor activity by
nuclear retention of IB. We report the results of combining selinexor or
related SINE compounds with proteasome inhibitors, for which inhibition
of NF-B has also been shown to be an important mechanism for cancer cell
killing.Methods: Whole protein cell lysates from solid and hematological
cancer cell lines treated with selinexor with or without proteasome
inhibitors were analyzed by immunoblots. IB localization was evaluated by
immunofluorescence. Cytotoxic effects of SINE compounds were evaluated in
the presence or absence of proteasome inhibitors. NF-B transcriptional
activity was analyzed using an ELISA assay. H929 multiple myeloma
xenografts in NOD-SCID mice were treated with selinexor alone or in
combination with carfilzomib to determine effects on tumor
growth.Results: NF-B transcriptional activity was upregulated in SINE
resistant sarcoma cell lines HT1080R (IC50 = 2.4 M versus HT1080 parental
IC50 = 0.03 M) and ASPS-KY (IC50>10M). In those resistant lines,
combination of the proteasome inhibitors bortezomib or carfilzomib with
SINE compound showed dramatic synergistic cytotoxic potency of more than
10 folds. Also, the combination of bortezomib with selinexor led to
synergistic nuclear retention of IB. Furthermore, IB silencing by siRNA
led to reduced selinexor cytotoxic potency, increasing IC50 from 58 nM to
830 nM (9-fold) in IM-9 multiple myeloma cells and from 27 nM to 1.9 M
(66-fold) in U2OS osteosarcoma cells. Finally, the combination of
selinexor with carfilzomib was synergistic in reducing tumor growth in
the H929 multiple myeloma xenograft model.Conclusion: Inhibition of NF-B
transcriptional activity through forced nuclear retention of IB appears
to be an important mechanism in the selective tumor cell cytotoxicity of
selinexor and related SINE compounds. Furthermore, the combination of
selinexor and proteasome inhibitors, which are also known to act at least
in part through inhibition of NF-B, leads to synergistic activity in
vitro and in vivo, suggesting that such combinations may provide
clinically more effective than the single agents. A Phase 1 trial to
study the safety and efficacy of selinexor in combination with
carfilzomib in multiple myeloma is ongoing (NCT02199665).

