Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of tumor targeting activity by elastin like polypeptide
containing cell penetrating peptide and IL-4 receptor targeting peptide


The tumor specific internalization of therapeutics drug is been a great
importance for cancer therapy. Targeted macromolecular carrier has been
used as drug cargos since it improve the cellular uptake of cytotoxic
drug in the tumor, while preventing cellular uptake by healthy tissues.
Because of favorable pharmokinetic profile, elastin like polypeptide
(ELPs) has been used as macromolecular drug carrier for cancer therapy.
Fusion with cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) such as TAT, assist easy
penetration and internalization of macromolecular drug conjugates into
wide variety of tumor types. For therapeutic peptide to be more
penetrable and more effective towards specific tumor tissue, here we have
designed a chimeric polypeptide cargo, TAT-AP1-ELP containing TAT, IL-4
receptor (IL4R) targeting peptide AP-1and thermal sensitive elastin-like
polypeptides (ELPs). Then it was successfully expressed and purified from
E coli using inverse temperature cycling method. Cellular uptake and
intracellular localization of TAT-AP1-ELP was monitored through flow
cytometry and confocal microscopy. Flow cytometry analysis data shown
that both TAT-AP1-ELP and TAT-ELP showed various extends of penetration
ability to different cancer cells but not to normal cells. Further a
greater cellular uptake was observed in IL4R highly expressing cancer
cells when treated with TAT-AP1-ELP compared to TAT-ELP at 37C in
dose-dependent manner. Confocal imaging verified the better cellular
accumulation of TAT-AP1-ELP than TAT-ELP in IL4R highly expressing cancer
cells. Importantly, the FNR 675-labeled TAT-AP1-ELP polymer showed better
tumor accumulation in MDA-MB 231 xenograft mouse model. Thus in this
study we demonstrate the improved activity of CPP, fused with targeting
modalities in order to enhance intra tumor accumulation of therapeutic
peptides.

