Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and genomic characterization of enteroid cultures
from human colonic adenomas and adenocarcinomas


Introduction Characterized enteroid cultures of human colon cancer can
more precisely model the diversity of colonic neoplasia for the study of
cancer initiation, progression and potentially prevention. Using tissue
from colon resections and endoscopic biopsies, we have successfully
isolated and cultured 14 colorectal adenomas and 2 adenocarcinomas to
date. We have maintained these enteroid cultures for up to 2 years and
established a working cryorepository. Specific epithelial cell lineage
markers and the stem cell marker Lgr5 can be detected throughout the
culture period.Methods Enteroid cultures have been initiated and
maintained in a serum-free medium containing EGF and pituitary extract.
However, approximately half of all neoplasms do not establish in this
reduced medium. In contrast, most neoplasms develop and expand in an
enriched culture medium containing serum, Wnt, R-spondin, Noggin, and
EGF. We have also created a mouse xenograft from an adenoma expanded in
the reduced media; this graft was then successfully reintroduced into
culture. Using whole exome sequencing, we are investigating how the
genetic background of individual patients contributes to 1) variability
in the establishment and expansion of enteroid cultures 2) tumor
heterogeneity in neoplasms and xenografts, and 3) the stability of
genomic signatures in enteroids over time in culture.Results Twenty-two
damaging somatic variants identified in a single colon tumor were
preserved in enteroid culture after 2 months in reduced medium. Variants
included a frameshift mutation in APC and missense mutations in KRAS and
TP53. The allele frequency of most variants increased in enteroid
culture, suggesting that cells lacking these mutations failed to
propagate (including stromal/immune cells), or cells carrying these
mutations expanded at a faster rate. Ten mutations not present in the
original tumor were acquired over time in enteroid culture. These
mutations included a missense variant of TRPS1, a putative prognosticator
of colon cancer. The mutations acquired in enteroid culture may reflect
genetic instability in the source neoplastic tissue, or the emergence of
subpopulations that were below level of detection in the source tissue.
Three mutations were present in the tumor and lost in enteroid culture;
this presumably reflects the loss of a subset of cells expressing these
variants.Conclusion Changes in allele frequencies suggest that neoplasms
are heterogeneous, with shifting cell populations that are differentially
affected by culture conditions. This heterogeneity can be further
interrogated by comparing allele frequencies in the original tumor with
those in enteroids established in reduced or enriched media. This
platform can provide further understanding of genetic determinants that
underlie the risk for colorectal cancer, as well as strategic insights
into the enteroid model as a sophisticated system for the study of tumor
biology.

