Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FANCF, a Fanconi anemia core protein, functions outside of
monoubiquitinating FANCD2 in DNA interstrand crosslink repair


Genomic instability is a hallmark of the genetic disorder, Fanconi anemia
(FA), which is characterized by bone marrow failure, an increased
incidence of cancer, congenital abnormalities and a defect in ability to
repair DNA interstrand cross-links (ICLs). We have previously shown that
FA cells have a deficiency in the structural protein, nonerythroid A
spectrin (ASpII), which is critical for repair of DNA ICLs and binds to
cross-linked DNA. Eight FA proteins, FANC -A, B, C, E, F, G, L, and M,
form a core complex which is essential for monoubiquitination of FANCD2,
an important step in ICL repair. However, whether any of these core
proteins play additional roles in the ICL repair process is not clearly
known. The present study was undertaken to address this question and to
examine whether one of these proteins, FANCF, is involved in the ICL
repair process with ASpII. Immunofluorescence microscopy was used to
determine whether these two proteins co-localize in nuclear foci after
normal human cells are damaged with an ICL agent, 8-methylpsoralen plus
UVA light (8-MOP). Time course measurements showed that, in normal human
cells, FANCF nuclear foci formed over a similar time course as did those
of ASpII. This time course was also similar to that of FANCA and the ICL
repair protein, XPF. FANCF foci, as well as ASpII, FANCA and XPF foci,
were visible 10 hours after damage, peaked at 16 hours and by 24 hours
were no longer observed. FANCF foci, over this time course, co-localized
with ASpII foci, indicating that FANCF is associated with ASpII during
ICL repair. This association was corroborated by co-immunoprecipitation
studies which demonstrated that FANCF has enhanced binding to ASpII after
ICL damage. This indicates that FANCF is involved in the same steps in
the repair process as ASpII. In FA-A cells, FANCF is present as in normal
cells, but does not form nuclear foci after ICL damage. Transfection of
FA-A cells with a cDNA expressing FANCA, however, led to restoration of
ASpII levels to normal and to formation of FANCF nuclear foci, which
colocalized with ASpII foci. Our studies indicate that this is due to
restoration of ASpII levels to normal. These studies support a model we
have proposed in which ASpII acts as a scaffold in the recruitment of
proteins (i.e., FANCF, FANCA, and XPF) to sites of ICL damage and that FA
proteins, such as FANCA, are needed for maintenance of ASpII stability in
the cell. In the transfected FA-A cells, expression of FANCA leads to
enhanced stability of ASpII, which then participates in the ICL repair
process. These studies indicate that the FA core complex protein, FANCF,
has an additional function in ICL repair, besides monoubiquitination of
FANCD2, and is involved with ASpII in its role in the repair process and
in maintaining genomic stability after DNA ICL damage.

