Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survival prediction model with long non-coding RNA profile in lung
adenocarcinoma cancer


Long non-coding RNAs (LncRNA) are over 200 nucleotides bases
non-protein-transcript RNA. Recently, there is a rapid growing literature
about LncRNA. LncRNAs are considered as regulator of mRNA, structure
components and precursor to small RNAs. However, the mechanism of LncRNA
in tumor progression is still not clear yet. Previous studies has
validated several LncRNA are associated with prostate cancer and breast
cancer (e.g. MATAT-1, PCA3). Here, we investigate the LncRNA expression
profile in lung adenocarcinoma cancer and predict patient survival with
cox regression model.We download the dataset GSE30219 on Gene Expression
Omnibus, microarray data on Affymetrix U133-plus2 platform. With the
LncRNA probes selection pipeline on U133-plus2 investigated by Du et al.,
total 2,427 probes are associated with LncRNA, and every LncRNA is
targeted by at least four probes. It is believed that LncRNAs are subtype
specific due to previous studies, so we first defined the differential
expression LncRNA probes between Adenocarcinoma and Squamous cancer with
student t-test, and selected the top 50 p-value probes. Next, with the
profile of these 50 probes and the clinical data, we focus on survival
analysis of Adenocarcinoma and cox regression was used to identify the
survival related probes in the 50 probes, P-value Long non-coding RNAs
(LncRNA) are over 200 nucleotides bases non-protein-transcript RNA.
Recently, there is a rapid growing literature about LncRNA. LncRNAs are
considered as regulator of mRNA, structure components and precursor to
small RNAs. However, the mechanism of LncRNA in tumor progression is
still not clear yet. Previous studies has validated several LncRNA are
associated with prostate cancer and breast cancer (e.g. MATAT-1, PCA3).
Here, we investigate the LncRNA expression profile in lung adenocarcinoma
cancer and predict patient survival with cox regression model.We download
the dataset GSE30219 on Gene Expression Omnibus, microarray data on
Affymetrix U133-plus2 platform. With the LncRNA probes selection pipeline
on U133-plus2 investigated by Du et al., total 2,427 probes are
associated with LncRNA, and every LncRNA is targeted by at least four
probes. It is believed that LncRNAs are subtype specific due to previous
studies, so we first defined the differential expression LncRNA probes
between Adenocarcinoma and Squamous cancer with student t-test, and
selected the top 50 p-value probes. Next, with the profile of these 50
probes and the clinical data, we focus on survival analysis of
Adenocarcinoma and cox regression was used to identify the survival
related probes in the 50 probes, P-value < 0.05. Finally, the expression
profiles of survival related probes were trained with cox regression
again to build up a prediction model.With score given by the prediction
model, samples are divided into two groups: high-risk and low-risk when
score higher than 0 or score under 0, respectively. The Kaplan-Meier
curve was used to illustrate the relationship between two groups. By
using GSE30219 as training model set, GSE30219 was used as
internal-validation and GSE8894 was used as external validation. The
result of internal-validation shows significantly different. The
difference of two groups on external- validation shows, although not
greatly as internal- validation, there is still exists a slightly
differences.To sum up, LncRNA profiles in Lung Adenocarcinoma might play
a role in survival rate. However, further improvement of prediction model
is needed since the risk ratio of each sample should be reported, not
only the cox scores. Also the Adenocarcinoma specific LncRNA probes
should be investigated to enhance the confidence of prediction model.

