Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of adipocyte-derived factors on lung cells: Exploring
the protective nature of excess weight on lung cancer risk


Lung cancer is the second most common cancer in men and in women (not
including skin cancer) and the most common cause of cancer mortality.
According to several epidemiologic papers, excess weight, identified as
the BMI categories of overweight and obese, lowers lung cancer risk.
Despite the numerous studies describing this anomaly, the underlying
mechanisms for the protective effects are still unknown. Adipose tissue
is known to secrete inflammatory molecules such as IL6, IL1, and IL12.
Activated IL6- and IL1-associated inflammatory pathways are known to
promote tumorigenesis, while the activated IL12-associated pathway
inhibits tumorigenesis. We hypothesize that adipocytes create an
environment that prevents lung carcinogenesis through activating
inflammatory pathways that inhibit tumor growth and through blocking
inflammatory pathways that promote tumor growth.To study the effect of
adipocyte-derived factors on lung cells, alveolar fibroblasts (MRC5) and
lung carcinoma (A549) cells were cultured in standard medium and in a
50:50 standard: adipocyte-conditioned medium (CM). In addition, cells
were treated with benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P), a known lung carcinogen. After
48 hours, mRNA expression levels of inflammatory genes were determined by
RT-PCR. The data demonstrate that B[a]P treatment induced expression of
IL1, IL6 and IL12 in both cell lines. CM treatment decreased expression
of IL1 and IL6 in MRC5 cells and increased their expression in A549
cells. In contrast, CM treatment decreased expression of IL12 in both
cells lines. Cells treated with B[a]P plus CM had increased expression of
IL12 in both cell lines, and reduced expression of IL1 and IL6 in MRC5
(2.3-fold and 6.5-fold, respectively) and A549 cells (40-fold and
11.5-fold, respectively) over B[a]P-treated cells. It was demonstrated
that combined treatment increased NFB (a transcription factor for IL1,
IL6 and IL12) mRNA expression 4-fold over control. The data suggest that
conditioned medium inhibits B[a]P-induced and NFB-mediated expression of
IL1 and IL6 but increases NFB-mediated expression IL12. This suggests
that excreted factors from an adipocyte-rich environment may lead to the
activation of growth-prohibiting inflammatory pathways, as opposed to
growth-promoting pathways. Understanding these mechanisms and the
possible discovery of biomarkers can be the foundation for new preventive
techniques and treatments for lung cancer.

