Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: How to develop ACC1 inhibitors targeting lipid metabolism and
oncogenic signaling pathways effectively and safely


Although targeting lipogenesis for cancer treatment appears to have a
strong rationale, drug discovery in this field has not been fully
explored due to the lack of understanding the mode of action as well as
the therapeutic window. We reported previously on a class of novel ACC
inhibitors with potent and selective activity against human ACC1, an
isoform overexpressed in many cancer types. These ACC inhibitors revealed
strong anti-tumor activity, including induction of tumor cell apoptosis
in vitro and tumor regression in vivo in a sub-set of tumor models. To
further demonstrate the therapeutic potential of ACC inhibitors, we
conducted a series of studies in xenograft mice and rat to evaluate the
anti-tumor efficacy of ACC inhibitors and to characterize their safety
profile. We report that breast, prostate, and pancreatic cancers are
among the most sensitive tumors to ACC inhibition. Interestingly, the
anti-tumor kinetics correlated with reduction in palmitate levels without
substantial changes in structural lipid components. In addition, a
sub-type of KRAS mutation and activation of the Wnt pathway correlates
with the sensitivity of tumors to ACC inhibitors. Treatment with ACC
inhibitors at high doses caused an immediate decrease in food intake and
followed with body weight loss. A clear correlation between the reduction
of food intake and exposure of ACC inhibitor was observed. Upon
withdrawing drug, the effect on food intake is restored. Therefore, we
investigated intermittent dosing schedules and food effects on the
tolerability and anti-tumor efficacy of ACC inhibitors. We could
demonstrate that the tolerability was improved without compromising the
efficacy compared to continuous treatment. Furthermore, feeding animals a
high fat diet prevented body weight loss and meanwhile maintained the
antitumor activity. These results indicate that strong reduction of food
intake seems the cause of intolerability, which can be prevented and
reversed either by intermittent dosing, or by exogenously supplementing
with a high fat diet. Furthermore, for the first time we provided in vivo
evidence that exogenous lipids could complement de novo lipogenesis
inhibition in normal cells, while tumor growth requires lipogenesis
irrespective of existing circulating lipids. In summary, these
assessments provide scientific insights and strategy on how to best
target tumor lipid metabolism and lipid signaling effectively and safely
for cancer therapy.

