Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer preventive effect of antioxidants for spontaneous liver
cancer in XPA(-/-) mice


-Hydroxy-1, N2-propanodeoxyguanosine (-OHPdG), a widely studied
acrolein-derived cyclic adduct arisen from oxidized -3 and -6
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), is a mutagenic lesion that is
repaired by nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway. C3H/HeN xeroderma
pigmentosum group A (XPA) knockout mice which are deficient on NER
pathway showed a significant elevation in liver tumors. We hypothesized
that accumulation of -OHPdG is playing a role in liver tumorigenesis of
XPA(-/-) mice; suppressing the formation of -OHPdG by dietary
antioxidants should result in the prevention of liver cancer in this
model. In this work, we investigated the chemoprotective efficacy of
three antioxidants: -lipoic acid, polyphenon E and vitamin E against
liver tumorigenesis in XPA(-/-) mice. Autopsy at 19 months of age
revealed that all the antioxidants exhibited significant inhibition
effects on the development of liver tumors. Polyphenon E showed the most
potent effects with 80% of the mice showing complete protection. The
formation -OHPdG was measured in the livers of XPA(-/-) mice. An
age-dependent increase of -OHPdG was found in the liver DNA of XPA(-/-)
mice, but not in lungs (a non-target tissue). All the antioxidants
decreased the formation of -OHPdG. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for Ki-67
(proliferation index marker) was performed on all the liver samples, and
the results showed that dietary antioxidants significantly decrease the
proliferation in the liver tumors. -Lipoic acid and vitamin E showed
significant inhibitory effect, although to a lesser extent than
Polyphenon E, against the spontaneous liver carcinogenesis in XPA
gene-deficient mice model. A correlation between the cancer preventive
efficacy and suppression of -OHPdG adduct level is observed, indicating a
possible role of -OHPdG in the liver cancer development in this model. We
also explored the feasibility of next-generation sequencing (NGS) to
validate the mutation frequency changes as a result of feeding the
antioxidant diets. This work was supported by the NCI grant:
RO1-CA-134892. Y.F. thanks the Prevent Cancer Foundation for his
fellowship (Marcia and Frank Carlucci Charitable Foundation Award in
Cancer Prevention and Early Detection)Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

