Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential efficacy of immune checkpoint inhibitors on bone
metastasis and its associated immune dysfunction


Purposes:We previously demonstrated that Snail expression in tumor cells
promotes bone metastasis not only by enhancing motility and bone polarity
of tumor cells, but also by hindering anti-tumor immunity via increase of
immunoregulatory cells including CD4(+)Foxp3(+) Tregs, CD11c(+)MHC
II(-/low)PDL1(+) DCregs and CD45(-)ALCAM(+) mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs), and the consequent CD8(low)Tim3(+)PD1(+) exhausted/impaired T
cells. In this study, we examined whether immune checkpoint inhibitors
targeting CTLA4, PD1 or PDL1 would rescue from the bone
metastasis-associated immune dysfunction using a bone metastasis tumor
model that we previously established.Results:C57BL/6 mice are implanted
with snail-transduced B16-F10 melanoma cells both subcutaneously and
intravenously, and were intraperitoneally injected with anti-CTLA4,
anti-PD1, or anti-PDL1 mAb, or the isotype IgG as a control (10 mg/kg) on
days 5 and 8 after tumor implantation. Treatment with any immune
checkpoint inhibitors significantly inhibited increase of CD4(+)Foxp3(+)
Tregs followed by increase of tumor-specific CD8(+) T cells in the
subcutaneous tumors, resulting in significant suppression of the tumor
growth as compared to that of the control group. Unexpectedly, however,
bone metastasis was rather promoted in these treated mice. Nevertheless,
anti-PDL1-treated mice survived in good condition for a long time,
although anti-CTLA4 or anti-PD1-treated emaciated mice died earlier than
the control mice. In the mice receiving anti-CTLA4 or anti-PD1 mAb,
although CD4(+)Foxp3(+) Tregs systemically decreased, other
immunoregulatory cells such as CD45(-)ALCAM(+) MSCs, CD11b(+)Gr1(+) MDSCs
and CD8(+)Foxp3(+) Tregs, and impaired CD8(low)Tim3(+)PD1(+) T cells
systemically increased more than those in the control group. In addition,
tumor cells isolated from the bone marrow (BM) formed a lot of larger
sphere colonies in the matrigel culture than those of the control group,
and were resistant to chemotherapeutics and CTLs, indicating cancer
stem-like features. In contrast, in the anti-PDL1-treated mice,
tumor-specific CD8(+) T cells were systemically induced, although
immunoregulatory or impaired cells still increased. Interestingly, the
BM-isolated tumor cells were quite different from those of other groups:
high adhesive and chemo/CTL-sensitive, suggesting tumor transition into a
less malignant epithelial type. The molecular mechanisms underlying these
effects are now being investigated in detail.Conclusions:These results
suggest that anti-PDL1 mAb is effective in treating bone metastasis by
modulating both host immunity and tumor cells. Our study, at least using
this tumor model, also gives a caution in the application of anti-CTLA4
and anti-PD1 mAb for cancer patients with bone metastasis.

