Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of genes related to autoimmunity and
metabolism in Stage I NSCLC from patients with COPD


Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease increases lung cancer risk 3-fold,
but individuals with COPD may not qualify for lung cancer screening if
their age or smoking histories do not meet eligibility criteria. Genomics
might reveal genes differentially active in lung tumors from COPD
patients, identifying pathways associated with lung cancer in the COPD
setting. We used mRNA profiling to identify differences in Stage I
non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) from patients with and without COPD.
COPD was determined by pre-surgery Pulmonary Function Tests (PFTs); the
GOLD score was calculated from FEV1 and FVC measurements. Stage I cases
were chosen to minimize effect of tumor burden on PFTs. After extraction
of mRNA from frozen tumor specimens (71 adenocarcinoma and 24 squamous
cell carcinoma), the Illumina HT-12 v4 BeadChip was used to measure mRNA
expression. All cases passed RNA quality checks, had not received
neo-adjuvant therapy, and had pre-surgical PFT results. 44% of cases were
GOLD II-IV (COPD positive) and 56% were GOLD 0-I (COPD negative). In an
unbiased examination using the limma R package, 5,789 probes showed
expression above background and variation in expression. These probes
were compared in COPD positive and negative tumors; no probes were
significantly different after multiple comparisons adjustment. In an
examination of KEGG pathways by gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) using
a t-test or a linear model that adjusted for age, race, sex and smoking
status, 31 pathways (17 in squamous cell and 14 in adenocarcinoma) were
identified that were differentially expressed between COPD positive and
negative tumors (p value Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease increases
lung cancer risk 3-fold, but individuals with COPD may not qualify for
lung cancer screening if their age or smoking histories do not meet
eligibility criteria. Genomics might reveal genes differentially active
in lung tumors from COPD patients, identifying pathways associated with
lung cancer in the COPD setting. We used mRNA profiling to identify
differences in Stage I non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) from patients
with and without COPD. COPD was determined by pre-surgery Pulmonary
Function Tests (PFTs); the GOLD score was calculated from FEV1 and FVC
measurements. Stage I cases were chosen to minimize effect of tumor
burden on PFTs. After extraction of mRNA from frozen tumor specimens (71
adenocarcinoma and 24 squamous cell carcinoma), the Illumina HT-12 v4
BeadChip was used to measure mRNA expression. All cases passed RNA
quality checks, had not received neo-adjuvant therapy, and had
pre-surgical PFT results. 44% of cases were GOLD II-IV (COPD positive)
and 56% were GOLD 0-I (COPD negative). In an unbiased examination using
the limma R package, 5,789 probes showed expression above background and
variation in expression. These probes were compared in COPD positive and
negative tumors; no probes were significantly different after multiple
comparisons adjustment. In an examination of KEGG pathways by gene set
enrichment analysis (GSEA) using a t-test or a linear model that adjusted
for age, race, sex and smoking status, 31 pathways (17 in squamous cell
and 14 in adenocarcinoma) were identified that were differentially
expressed between COPD positive and negative tumors (p value < 0.025 in a
2-tailed test). There was no overlap in significant KEGG Pathways between
the two histologies. In squamous cell carcinoma, DNA Replication and
Mismatch Repair were repressed in COPD positive tumors, while many
Autoimmunity and Infection pathways were activated. In adenocarcinoma,
COPD positive tumors showed repression of metabolic pathways including
P450, fatty acid, and pentose metabolism. Ingenuity pathway analysis
predicted upstream regulators that are reported to control differentially
expressed genes contained in the significant KEGG pathways. In squamous
cell lung carcinoma, IL27 (p = 2.96 E-36, activation score 3.00),
interferon gamma (p = 1.65 E-58, activation score 5.57), and tumor
necrosis factor (p = 2.01 E-44, activation score 3.92) were the three top
upstream regulators. In adenocarcinoma, PPAR alpha/RXRA (p = 4.83 E -15,
inhibition score -2.84), TP53 (p = 3.63 E-08, inhibition score -2.06),
and HNF1A (p = 3.88 -08, inhibition score -2.59) were the top three
upstream regulators. Results show that distinct pathways are affected by
COPD in lung squamous cell and adenocarcinoma, and identify potential
biomarkers such as IL27 that may drive squamous cell carcinoma
development, while loss of PPAR activity may drive adenocarcinoma, in
smokers with COPD. Supported by P50 CA090440.

