Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate cancer bone metastases acquire resistance to androgen
deprivation via WNT5A-mediated BMP6 induction


Prostate cancer (CaP) is the second leading cause of cancer death in
American men. Traditional androgen ablation is a first-line therapy in
relapsed or metastatic prostate cancer cases, but it is eventually
rendered ineffective by the development of castration-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC). Once CRPC develops, treament options include taxol-based
chemotherapy and second-line hormonal agents, but these have limited
effectiveness. In the present study, we have investigated the role of
Bone Morphogenetic Protein-6 (BMP6) in the development of castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) in the context of bone metastases. We
initially investigated the clinical course of 158 men with advanced CaP
who were treated with primary androgen deprivation therapy. To elucidate
the underlying mechanism of CRPC in the context of bone metastases, we
examined the impact of bone stromal cells on CaP in the absence of
androgens using a co-culture model.In these patients, we found that the
median time to PSA progression was significantly shorter when bone
metastases were present (14 months [95% CI, 10.2-17.8 months] vs. 57
months [95% CI, 19.4-94.6 months]). These results suggest that bone-tumor
interactions may accelerate castration resistance. Mechanistically, gene
expression analysis using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR)
arrays showed a dramatic induction of BMP6 by CaP cell lines in the
presence of bone stromal cells. Further studies revealed that WNT5A
derived from bone stromal cells induced the expression of BMP6 by CaP
cells; BMP6 in turn stimulated cellular proliferation of CaP cells in an
androgen-deprived media via a physical interaction between Smad5 and
-catenin. Intracellularly, WNT5A increased BMP6 expression via PKC/NF-B
pathway in CaP cell lines. Taken together, these observations suggest
that bone-CaP interaction leads to castration resistance via WNT5A/BMP6
loop. We have herein demonstrated that the bone-CaP interaction promotes
resistance to androgen deprivation. At the cellular and molecular level,
this castration-resistance is mediated by bone stroma-derived WNT5A that
leads to the induction of BMP6; BMP6, in turn, permits CaP cells to
proliferate in the absence of androgens by interacting with -catenin.
Targeting WNT5A/BMP6/-catenin may be a viable therapeutic option in men
with CaP skeletal metastases and CRPC.

