Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deorphanizing TLX: Implications for treatment of glioblastomas


Nuclear receptors (NRs) are important ligand-dependent transcriptional
factors. Presently, no natural or synthetic ligand has been identified
for a large group of so- called orphan NRs. The orphan NR tailless (TLX,
NR2E1), a transcriptional repressor, is a major player in neurogenesis
and emerging evidence indicates that it is an excellent target to treat
Neural Stem Cell (NSC) derived brain tumors and glioblastomas. Indeed,
several groups hypothesized that small molecules de-repressing TLX
activity in glioblastoma cells should slow tumor progression and
invasiveness by inducing the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 and
the tumor suppressor pten. Until recently, no chemical probes to modulate
TLX activity to test this hypothesis were available, and it was not clear
whether TLX was druggable. Our homology models of the TLX ligand binding
domain (LBD) suggest that TLX belongs to an emerging class of NRs that
lack two LBD helices and fold into an auto-repressed conformation. While
our models suggests that TLX could harbor a ligand binding pocket, the
consequences of its unusual organization for small molecule development
were unknown. We used a medium throughput screening strategy to assess
TLX ligand binding capacity. We investigated direct binding of 20,000
compounds to purified human TLX protein and verified interactions with a
secondary (orthogonal) assay. We then assessed effects of verified
binders on TLX activity. As a result, we reported three compounds that
bind to TLX with affinities in the high nanomolar to low micromolar range
and enhance TLX transcriptional repressive activity. Based on this study,
we could conclude that TLX is druggable. We are now investigating how to
de-repress TLX transcriptional activity using derivatives of these small
molecules. We are imaging the mode of binding of the three identified
ligands and discovering surfaces which bind coregulators of TLX in
glioblastomas. This knowledge will allow us to devise strategies to
chemically modify novel TLX ligands to disrupt coregulator interactions
and to obtain the desirable biological activities. A first generation of
novel analogues is currently being tested. In this presentation we will
describe ongoing Structure-Activity Relationship studies to identify new
specific TLX ligands able to de-repress TLX transcriptional activity.

