Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted agents and chemotherapeutic treatments of genetically
engineered Basal-like breast cancer mouse model


Background: Genomic characterization of human breast tumors has resulted
in the identification of at least five distinct tumor subtypes (Luminal A
and B, HER2-enriched, Claudin-low, and Basal-like). These subtypes each
show their own unique biology, which correlates with distinct patient
outcomes. Basal-like Breast Cancer (BLBC) is associated with high grade,
BRCA1 mutation status, younger patient age, and increased frequency in
African Americans. In order to identify novel therapeutic strategies for
BLBC, we developed a genetically engineered mouse model based upon two
common human BLBC genetic events, namely BRCA1 and TP53 loss.Results: We
developed a genetically engineered mouse (GEM) model of breast cancer by
inactivating TP53 and BRCA1 genes using Cre-LOX technology in the mammary
gland (K14-cre / TP53 L/L / BRCA1 L/L). As part of the characterization
of this GEM model, we performed gene expression profiling and DNA copy
number analysis using aCGH arrays on the Basal-like tumors from this
model (25/27 total tumors were Basal-like). We found a number of
chromosomal regions that were similarly altered and found to be specific
to mouse and human BLBC including gains of mouse chromosome 1q and 12q
and losses in chromosomes 3F1 and 15q. Subsequently two tumors from the
murine Basal-like group were taken and expanded into an orthotopic
syngeneic model where they passaged in wild type FVB mice. These two
tumors lines were then tested extensively with chemotherapeutics
(Doxorubicin, Carboplatin, Cytoxan, Paclitaxel) and biologically targeted
agents (MEK inhibitor/AZD6244, PI3K Inhibitor/BEZ235, PARP
Inhibitor/ABT888 and mTOR Inhibitor/Everolimus). The DNA damaging agents
exhibited exceptional efficacy (i.e. ABT888, Cytoxan, and Carboplatin),
whereas the biologically targeted agents tended to at best, only slow
tumor growth, even in combination.Conclusions: Genetic engineering of
mice using TP53 and BRCA1 loss results in tumors of predominantly the
Basal-like subtype phenotype. As expected, these tumors were exquisitely
sensitive to DNA damaging chemotherapeutics including cytoxan and
carboplatin, yet generally insensitive to the 3 tested kinase inhibitors.
Novel combinations of targeted agents and chemotherapeutics are now being
tested.

