Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplexed chemoproteomic profiling as a tool to decipher the
intracellular interactions between proteins and small molecules


Chemoproteomic profiling is the qualitative and quantitative study of
small molecule protein interactions using mass spectrometry.
Chemoproteomics approaches typically involve four steps 1) modification
of the bait drug molecules with the addition of an affinity tag, e.g.
biotin, 2) incubation of the bait molecule with cells, cell lysates or
tissue homogenates, 3) recovery of the bait molecule using the added
affinity mechanism, e.g. streptavidin and 4) identification of proteins
interacting with the bait molecule by liquid chromatography and tandem
mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). To obtain value from chemoproteomics
experiments any identified small molecule protein interactions need to be
representative of the underlying biology and not artifacts of the
chemoproteomics process.Chemoproteomic workflows offer a relatively
simple method to generate a large volume of extremely valuable data about
the behavior of a molecule, its analogs and its competitors. As such the
number of samples generated for analysis can be significant. One method
for maintaining throughput in chemoproteomics workflows is multiplexed
proteomics with chemical labeling. This approach enables the pooling of
multiple experimental conditions for analysis in a single LC-MS/MS
experiment thus helping to reduce potential bottle necks associated with
instrument capacity.Here we report a multiplexed chemoproteomics workflow
based on a novel chloroalkane (CA) ligand that minimally affects compound
potency and cell permeability using a p38 MAPKinase inhibitor. We show
changes in protein interaction profiles by titrating cells with different
mixtures of parent inhibitor + modified inhibitor-CA compound at varying
relative concentrations. These changes in profiles can be monitored using
cells transfected with NanoLuc fusion proteins of known inhibitor targets
and show increasing capture correlated with increasing concentrations of
modified inhibitor CA-compound. Overall interactions profiles can be more
thoroughly analyzed by chemical labeling and combing this approach with
8plex iTRAQ labeling techniques. This multiplexing approach allows for
many titrations points to be studies at once, yielding information about
the dynamics of interactions between small molecules and their protein
targets. The ability to study these differences after treatment of live
cells aids in the understanding of the differing interaction targets of
many given small molecule inhibitor.

