Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct nuclear translocation mechanism of androgen receptor
variant ARv7


Next generation androgen receptor (AR) inhibitors (abiraterone,
enzalutamide) are used to treat metastatic prostate cancer (mCRPC)
patients with a response rate of 2040%. The presence of androgen receptor
variants has emerged as one of the mechanisms of resistance to these
drugs. Specifically, the ARv7 and Arv567 splice variants lacking the
ligand-binding domain are constitutively active in the nucleus, and have
been identified in mCRPC patients. Recently, ARv7 expression in
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from mCRPC patients was correlated with
resistance to abiraterone and enzalutamide. Following androgen
deprivation therapy (ADT), CRPC patients receive taxane chemotherapy as
first and second line of treatment. We have recently shown that AR
utilizes microtubules and the dynein motor protein as transportation
system for its nuclear translocation and activity and that taxanes
inhibit AR signaling downstream of microtubule stabilization.
Furthermore, we identified that the AR hinge region mediates binding to
MTs; this region is present in ARv567, but missing from ARv7. Thus, the
ARv7 does not bind MTs, its nuclear localization is not affected by
taxane treatment or dynein motor complex disruption while its expression
confers taxane resistance in vivo. Collectively these data suggest that
ARv7 confers resistance to both ADT and taxanes, which represent the most
important therapeutic modalities in CRPC. To this end, elucidation of the
molecular mechanism of ARv7 nuclear translocation is extremely critical
for the design of new targeted therapies to treat more than 60% of mCRPC
patients who do not respond to current treatment options. To monitor the
dynamics of ARv nuclear localization, we used fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching (FRAP) assay and measured the time kinetics of ARv nuclear
translocation. Our results indicated that ARv7 translocates to the
nucleus significantly faster as compared to AR-wt and ARv567. In
addition, since AR-wt utilizes the importin-/ to translocate to the
nucleus we used importazole, a tool compound blocking importin- activity,
and measured the dynamics of ARv translocation. We found that importazole
was effective in inhibiting AR-wt and ARv567 nuclear import, but had no
such effect on ARv7 nuclear accumulation. Currently, we are investigating
the novel molecular mechanism of ARv7 nuclear translocation including the
involvement of Ran-GTPase and the identification of the putative
non-canonical nuclear localization signal. Overall, our data demonstrate
that ARv7 utilizes a different nuclear translocation mechanism as
compared with AR-wt and ARv567. Elucidation of this mechanism will be
invaluable in order to design an alternative therapeutic modality to halt
AR signaling which eventually will open new avenues to treat large subset
of mCRPC patients who show resistance to current treatments.

