Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RhoA activation in diffuse type gastric adenocarcinoma promotes
cancer stem cell phenotypes including chemotherapy resistance


Introduction: The diffuse type of gastric adenocarcinoma (GA) was
recently found to frequently harbor activating mutations in RHOA. RhoA is
a member of the small GTPase-Ras-like proteins which are involved in cell
signaling for cell migration and cell cycle.Methods: RhoA activity and
inhibition was examined in diffuse GA cell lines grown as spheroids (i.e.
cancer stem cell conditions) and as monolayers in various in vitro
assays. RhoA knockdown combined with chemotherapy was examined in a mouse
xenograft model.Results: RhoA activity was much higher in diffuse GA cell
lines MKN-45 and SNU-668 compared to intestinal GA cell lines NCI-N87 and
AGS. RhoA activity was further increased in diffuse GA cells when grown
as spheroids rather than as monolayers. RhoA inhibition with shRNA or the
RhoA inhibitor Rhosin decreased spheroid formation and deceased
expression of the stem cell transcription factor, Sox2. Diffuse GA cells
when grown as spheroids had significantly greater migration, invasion,
and anchorage-independent growth, and these properties could all be
blocked with RhoA shRNA or Rhosin. Diffuse GA spheroid cells (compared to
monolayer cells) were resistant to 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin
chemotherapy, and this chemotherapy resistance could be reversed with
RhoA inhibition. In the MKN-45 xenograft model, cisplatin inhibited tumor
growth by 50%, RhoA shRNA by 60%, and the combination by 83%. Clinical
tumor samples of diffuse GA are currently being analyzed for RhoA
expression and correlated with extent of disease and response to
chemotherapy.Conclusions: RhoA signaling is upregulated in diffuse GA
cells grown as spheroids and promotes malignant transformation phenotypes
such as migration and invasion. RhoA inhibition can reverse chemotherapy
resistance in GC spheroid cells and in tumor xenografts, and thus the
RhoA pathway is a promising new target of therapy for diffuse GA.

