Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reversal of chemoresistance in ovarian cancer cells by the
liposomal co-delivery of MDR inhibitors and paclitaxel


Ovarian cancer is one of the most lethal gynaecologic malignancies. This
can be attributed to the emergence of multidrug resistance in the clinic
due to the over-expression of drug-efflux pumps such as P-gp. To overcome
this, we have developed a liposomal platform for the the co-delivery of
potent P-gp inhibitors with chemotherapeutic drugs.Purpose: To allow for
the effective reversal of chemo-resistance in ovarian cancer cells using
liposomes co-loaded with tariquidar and paclitaxel.Methods: PEGylated
liposomes composed of eggphosphatidylcholine, cholesterol and DOTAP
loaded with equimolar amounts of tariquidar (XR) and paclitaxel (PCT)
were prepared by the thin film hydration method followed by extrusion.
Evaluation of drug resistance of ovarian cancer lines SKOV3, HeyA8 and
Tynku was carried out by quantifying MDR1 and MRP1 receptor expression
followed by a rhodamine123 exclusion assay. The cytotoxicity of the
formulations on the above cancer cell lines was evaluated using the
Promega cell viability assay. The effects of the formulations were
evaluated in fluorescently stained cells using the iCyte imaging
cytometer (Thorlabs, USA). Long-term kinetic analysis of unstained live
cultures was perfomed by holographic imaging cytometer Holomonitor M4
(Phase Holographic Imaging, Sweden) and fluorescence microscopy.Results:
The liposomes had a particle size distribution of about 200 nm with a
zeta potential of 30 mV. As compared to MRP1, a 2.4 fold, 1.9-fold and
1.6-fold higher expression of MDR1 was seen in the HeyA8-MDR, SKOV3-TR
and Tynku-R cells respectively over their drug-sensitive counterparts.
Using the rhodamine exclusion assay, 14 nM of liposomal XR showed better
rhodamine inclusion than 140 nM free XR. In vitro cytotoxicity
experiments showed that the drug co-loaded formulation was able to
effectively overcome resistance to PCT even at low PCT doses. Using
live-cell imaging, paclitaxel-induced arrest of cell cycle progression
and onset of apoptosis following this mitotic catastrophe was visible
from 1.5 M to 50 nM only with the co-loaded liposomes. The cell cycle
arrest was further visualized using time-lapse Holomonitor M4 which
showed the increasing incidence of cells arrested in mitosis over time.
Using fluorescence microscopy, we were able to clearly visualize the
presence of polymerized microtubules around the cell nucleus as a result
of the paclitaxel-mediated microtubule dysfunction. Conclusions: Uniform
liposomes co-loaded with tariquidar and paclitaxel were prepared and
characterized. The co-loaded liposomes were able to effectively reverse
chemoresistance and induce cytotoxicity in a variety of drug-resistant
ovarian cancers. The formulations were shown to arrest cell cycle,
preventing its progression to the G1 phase. This arrest of cell cycle was
shown to be due to the paclitaxel-mediated micro-tubule dysfunction.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

