Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of C-phycocyanin on the anticancer properties of taxol and
topotecan in lung cancer implanted athymic nude mice


The biodiversity of marine environment and the associated chemical
multiplicity offers unlimited resource for discovering new antitumor
agents. For the first time we have tested the anticancer properties of
C-phycocyanin (C-PC) isolated from a unique cyanobacterial strain named
Limnothrix sp., which is found in Florida's Everglades. Our preliminary
studies originally confirmed antiproliferative activity of C-PC against
LNCaP prostate cancer cells and subsequently against A549 lung cancer
cells also. Therefore, we speculated that C-PC could potentiate the
anticancer effects of certain therapeutic agents when used in combination
treatments. For this purpose the cytotoxic effects of C-PC and topotecan
were confirmed using cell viability assays in A549 lung cancer cells.
Subsequently, our in vivo experiments confirmed the efficacy of C-PC in
potentiating the anticancer effects of taxol and topotecan in athymic
nude mice that were sub-cutaneously implanted with the xenograft tumors
established from A549 lung cancer cells. During the treatment period the
experimental mice had free access to C-PC that was dissolved in drinking
water at a dose of 100 mg/kg body weight. The anticancer drugs were given
as intraperitoneal injections at a dose of 1.0 mg/kg body weight twice a
week for a period of 60 days. The tumor growth was assessed once in every
two weeks using caliper measurements. At the end of the treatment period
the levels of lung tumor biomarkers CYFRA 21-1 (Cytokeratin 19 fragments)
and CEA (Carcino Embryonic Antigen) in serum were analyzed. As a result
of the treatment, the tumor growth was found to be 54% and 46% less in
taxol and topotecan treated groups compared to the control group.
Interestingly C-PC + taxol combination showed 75% inhibition of tumor
growth. Thus, the mice treated with the C-PC + taxol combination showed
an additional 21% tumor growth inhibition when compared to the group
treated with taxol alone. Furthermore, the levels of the tumor biomarkers
CYFRA 21-1 and CEA in serum were significantly reduced by the treatment
showing a good correlation with the inhibition of tumor growth in C-PC +
taxol treated animals. The C-PC + taxol combination treated animals
showed 91% decrease while C-PC alone was able to reduce the levels of
CYFRA 21-1 by 85%. Similarly, the CEA levels were reduced by 97%
following the C-PC + taxol combination treatment. It was further
determined that C-PC treatment could significantly down regulate the
levels of anti-apoptotic protein such as Bcl-2 to trigger apoptosis in
lung cancer cells. Thus, results from our study confirm that C-PC from
Limnothrix sp., can significantly enhance the anticancer activity of
taxol against the A549 lung tumor in athymic nude mice possibly by
decreasing the levels of Bcl-2. (Project was supported by the PFRDG grant
of NSU, James & Esther King Biomedical Research Program of the State of
Florida and The Royal Dames of Cancer Research Inc., Ft. Lauderdale,
Florida).

