Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nonsense MED12 mutation in a patient with T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia


Mediator complex subunit 12 (MED12) is part of a Mediator, which is a
large, highly conserved protein complex that participates in the
regulation of general as well as gene-specific transcription. First
somatic MED12 mutations were identified when exome sequencing revealed
highly specific mutations in exon 2 in 70% of uterine leiomyomas studied.
Additional mutations have subsequently been observed in exon 1, which
further highlight the role of MED12 in these tumors. Functional analyses
have indicated that exon 1 and exon 2 mutations lead to a diminished
interaction between MED12 and other components of the Mediator kinase
module, reduced Mediator-associated CDK kinase activity, and a unique
global gene expression pattern. Recently, we observed similar mutations
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Mutations were observed in 5% of
the patients and the positive mutation status was associated with
well-known poor prognosis markers in CLL. All the observed mutations both
in uterine leiomyomas and CLL have been missense mutations or small
insertions or deletions leading to an in-frame transcript.Interestingly,
the first MED12 mutation in a patient with T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL) was recently identified through exome sequencing. This
is a nonsense mutation affecting the mutation hotspot observed in CLL. It
is also the first nonsense mutation identified in the MED12 N-terminal
mutation hotspot area in any tumor type. The patient has received bone
marrow transplantation and is now in complete remission, but small
amounts of cancer cells were collected before the treatment. RNA was
extracted from the cells, and cDNA sequencing revealed that only the
mutant allele is expressed. We have now generated a construct with the
MED12 specific mutation and transfected it into HEK293 Flp-In cells.
Wild-type MED12 is being used as a control. Western blotting with N- and
C-terminal MED12 antibodies indicates that the mutant protein is being
produced but that the N-terminal part is lacking.We now aim to further
characterize the function of this highly unusual mutation. Mutant and
wild type protein will be produced for proteome-wide mass spectrometry
analyses to detect possible effects on protein-protein interactions and
also to gain more information on the translation start site. Also
transcriptome-wide expression data will be produced to study the effect
of the mutation on global gene expression profile. Overall, a mutation
affecting the 5 terminus of MED12 has now been identified in yet another
cancer type, T-ALL. Our preliminary analyses indicate that the observed
nonsense mutation escapes nonsense-mediated RNA decay and leads to a
truncated protein product. Besides providing additional knowledge on the
role of MED12 mutations in cancer, this exceptional mutation has
potential to produce novel information on the normal MED12 function.

