Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-clinical evaluation of ceritinib in anaplastic large cell
lymphoma


Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) is an aggressive CD30+ T-Cell
lymphoma that accounts for 2-8% and 10-15% non-Hodgkin lymphomas in
adults and children, respectively. The currently used standard therapy
for anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK, a member of insulin receptor
superfamily) positive ALCL has limited effectiveness, resulting in a
substantial percentage of cases with poor outcome, either failing to
enter remission or relapsing within a few months after starting the
treatment. Thus, there is a clear unmet clinical need for developing
novel, effective and safer therapeutic strategies for ALCL. Nucleophosmin
1 (NPM1) is a nucleolar phosphoprotein, which functions as a molecular
chaperone for proteins and nucleic acids. Approximately 50% of ALCL cases
are positive for the NPM-ALK fusion chimera generated by the t(2;5)
chromosomal translocation. The oligomerization domain of NPM1 in the
fusion protein NPM-ALK, mediates the ligand-independent dimerization of
chimeric protein, which results in constitutive activation of the
chimeric tyrosine kinase activity leading to downstream signaling
pathways responsible for the oncogenicity. Ceritinib is a second
generation FDA approved ALK inhibitor for the treatment of ALK-positive
metastatic non-small cell lung cancer. Here we report the first
preclinical evaluation of ceritinib growth inhibitory effects on
ALK-positive ALCL cells. The NPM-ALK expressing ALCL model cell line
SUDHL-1 used in our studies. Treatment with ceritinib significantly
induced apoptosis dose dependently (10-50nM) in ALCL cells associated
with poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage. Mechanistically, ceritinib
blocked phosphorylation of ALK and its downstream signaling effectors
STAT3, AKT and ERK1/2. Cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry showed that
ceritinib induced G0/G1 arrest with concomitant decrease in the
percentage of cells in S and G2/M phases which was associated with
decreased cyclin D1 and increased p21 expression. ALCL is also
characterized by strong expression of the cytokine receptor CD30 (a
member of the TNF receptor family). CD30 stimulation leads to NF-kB
activation and the induction of anti-apoptotic mechanisms. In response to
ceritinib treatment, flow cytometry data showed that reduced CD30
expression in a dose dependent manner. Altogether, these pre-clinical
results demonstrate that ceritinib induces apoptosis in ALCL cells by
inhibiting ALK downstream signaling cascade and support the rational for
in vivo testing of ceritinib for the treatment of ALK positive lymphomas.

