Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel polyisoprenylated cysteinyl amide inhibitor, NSL-BA-055,
selectively inhibits proliferation of hepatocellular carcinoma cells


The monomeric GTP-ase, Ras, is mutated in over 30% of cancers where it
promotes uncontrolled proliferation of cancer cells. Ras signaling is one
of many pathophysiological pathways implicated in hepatocellular
carcinoma that results in cell survival, differentiation, proliferation,
and angiogenesis. Ras is bound to the cytoplasmic face of the plasma
membrane where it relays intracellular signals. Polyisoprenylated
cysteinyl amide inhibitors (PCAIs) effectively disrupt the functions of
polyisoprenylated proteins such as Ras. Many hepatocellular carcinomas
(HCCs) have dysregulated Ras signaling. However, the effects of PCAIs on
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are unknown. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effect of a novel PCAI, NSL-BA-055, on HCC.
Concentrations of NSL-BA-055 ranging from 0 to 10 M were used for
experimentation. Effects on proliferation of BNL CL.2 (non-tumorigenic
mouse hepatocytes) and BNL 1ME A.7R.1 (mouse HCC cells derived from BNL
CL.2 hepatocytes) were analyzed. Next, the effects of NSL-BA-055 on Akt
protein expression, a downstream component of Ras signaling, were
examined by western blotting. NSL-BA-055 significantly inhibited the
proliferation of BNL 1ME A. 7R.1 HCC cells, but not the non-tumorigenic
BNL CL.2 hepatocytes. Also, concentrations of the NSL-BA-055 compound as
low as 4 M significantly inhibited the proliferation of BNL 1ME A.7R.1
HCC cells. Western blotting revealed that NSL-BA-055 inhibited Akt
protein expression at 4M. Therefore PCAIs such as NSL-BA-055 is a novel
class of agents that selectively inhibit the proliferation of HCC cells,
but not normal hepatocytes. This effect may be via inhibition of Akt, a
downstream intermediate of Ras signaling. Consequently, NSL-BA-055 is a
novel candidate agent for HCC therapy.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

