Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic signaling in amphiregulin- and EGFR-expressing PTEN-null
human breast cancer


A subset of triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by
overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and loss of
PTEN, and patients with these factors have a poor prognosis. In addition,
approximately half of all basal breast cancers show autocrine activation
of EGFR by amphiregulin (AREG), resulting in altered receptor trafficking
and downstream signaling. However, despite the strong rationale for
targeting EGFR in the treatment of TNBC, EGFR inhibitors have performed
poorly in clinical trials. To further analyze the signaling processes
active in this subset of TNBC, we performed reverse-phase protein array
(RPPA) analysis on SUM149 cells, a highly tumorigenic and metastatic
PTEN-null cell line that expresses high levels of AREG and EGFR, and
MCF10A cells, a non-transformed mammary epithelial cell line cultured in
the presence of either EGF or AREG. This analysis identified a number of
signaling components mediated specifically by amphiregulin, including
marked changes in integrin expression and increased levels of
fibronectin, which is known to be a mediator of invasive capacity via
interaction with integrin 1. RPPA analysis also revealed elevated AKT
activity in SUM-149 cells, which was not surprising given the lack of
PTEN expression. Interestingly, this AKT activity is not abrogated by
treatment with the EGFR inhibitor gefitinib, nor by treatment with PI3K
inhibitors. These findings and the results of preliminary experiments in
SUM149 cells re-expressing PTEN suggest that AKT activity in these cells
is, at least partly, independent of EGFR and PI3K activity. In addition,
expression profiling demonstrated that AREG-activated EGFR regulates gene
expression differently than EGF-activated EGFR, and functional analysis
via genome-scale shRNA screening identified a set of genes, including
PLK1 and BIRC5, that are regulated by EGFR in MCF10A cells but uncoupled
from EGFR signaling in SUM149 cells, although they are essential for the
survival of SUM-149 cells. Thus, our results demonstrate that in cells
with constitutive EGFR activation and PTEN loss, critical survival genes
are uncoupled from regulation by EGFR, a mechanism that is likely to
mediate resistance to EGFR inhibitors.

