Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic control of signature gene expression in the inducible
differentiation of acute promyelocytic leukemia cells


[Background] Epigenetic changes in DNA and chromatin are regarded as
emerging major players for hematopoietic stem cells development and
lineage differentiation. Epigenetic deregulation of gene expression leads
to leukemia and reversibility of epigenetic modifications makes DNA and
chromatin changes attractive targets for therapeutic intervention. The
promyelocytic leukemia HL-60 cell can differentiate into microphage,
granulocyte and monocyte with stimulation of phorbol myristic acid (PMA),
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) or dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), and Vitamin
D3, respectively, by affecting the gene expression on cell cycle and cell
differentiation. However, how epigenetic regulation on gene expression in
the inducible differentiation is still not well determined. [Methods and
Results] We did the microarray analysis to identify the genome-wide gene
expression profile of HL-60 cells in various time points(0h, 6h, 1d,2d,4d
and 6d) under the treatment of PMA, ATRA/DMSO and D3 and found that
around 3000 genes are significantly altered commonly under those
treatments in the process. The percentage of down-regulated genes in the
all commonly altered genes is significantly higher than that of
up-regulated genes, and the significantly altered genes showed
significantly physical clustering on chromosome loci, indicating the
epigenetic regulation involved in the regulation of the gene expression.
We did observed the expression changes of epigenetic enzymes in the
process and further did the ChIP-on-ChIP analysis by using the customer
array tiling the selected changed genes and 5 genomic loci hybridizing
with ChIPd DNA of histone markers (H3K4me3, H3K9me3 and H3K27me3). We
found that the obvious decrease of H3K4me3 binding and increase of
H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 are observed in the promoter of common
down-regulated genes. These data indicated histone H3K4, H3K9 and H3K27
marker play important roles in shaping the chromatin state and regulating
gene expression. [Conclusion] We identified the signature genes
controlling the inducible differentiation of promyelocytic leukemia cells
and found the epigenetic mechanism regulating the gene expression in the
process.

