Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HOXA5 inhibits cell plasticity and stemness in breast cancer cells
by reinforcing epithelial traits


Members of the Retinoic acid receptor (RAR) and HOX gene families are
known to be associated with cellular differentiation. Nonetheless, how
HOX genes drive differentiation in mammalian cells is poorly understood.
HOX genes are transcription factors that orchestrate body segmentation
during embryogenesis. But the continued expression of several members in
adulthood indicates the necessity of their biological functions in
specifying cell fate in adulthood. The mammary gland is an organ that
continues to go through multiple cycles of development during life. Here,
loss of specific HOX genes could be detrimental to normal development.We
have previously shown that expression of HOXA5, a downstream target of
the retinoic acid signaling pathway, is often lost in breast cancer. Loss
of HOXA5 expression correlates with increasing pathological grades of
breast cancer. Expression array analysis of HOXA5-depleted MCF10A
(immortalized line of human breast epithelium) revealed its potential
role in regulating several traits of the epithelial lineage, including
expression of E-cadherin and CD24. Depleting HOXA5 in MCF10A enhanced
cell motility, invasiveness and increased stem-cell population
(CD24lo/CD44hi). Using an inducible HOXA5-depletion system,
differentiation of the stem cells in MCF10A was shown to be mediated by
HOXA5. Conversely, ectopic expression of HOXA5 in SUM149 breast cancer
cells significantly reduced plasticity and stem cell population,
confirmed by in vivo limiting dilution assays in mice. MCF10A-KRAS-HOXA5
depleted cells formed invasive structures in 3D matrigel cultures, and
formed larger tumors, implanted orthotopically in mice.
MCF10A-KRAS-tumors were histologically dedifferentiated and lost
expression of luminal cell markers such as E-cadherin and cytokeratin 18.
Collectively, our findings demonstrate the role of HOXA5 in
retinoid-induced cell differentiation by regulating cell fate specific
surface adhesion molecules.

