Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoparticle-encapsulated piperine and piperlongumine inhibit
breast cancer cell growth and metastatic activity


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths among
women in Canada and the United States. Metastatic disease is the primary
cause of death, despite recent advances in breast cancer treatment
strategies and personalized medicine. Novel anti-cancer therapeutics are
therefore urgently needed to increase the lifespan of breast cancer
patients and prevent metastasis. Piperine (PIP) and piperlongumine (PL),
two of the major alkaloids in pepper spices, show inhibitory effects on
breast cancer cell growth in vivo and in vitro; however, their
lipophilicity has restricted possible clinical application. The
encapsulation of these phytochemicals in biodegradable nanoparticles is
predicted to increase their water solubility and bioavailability. The
goal of this study was first, to optimize a method for the preparation of
PIP- and PL-containing polymeric nanoparticles, and second, to explore
the inhibitory effects of nanoparticle-encapsulated PIP and PL on breast
cancer cell growth and metastatic activity. In contrast to the single
oil-in-water emulsion method, PIP- and PL-nanoparticles prepared by the
thin-film hydration method were more spherical and showed a uniform size
distribution. PIP- and PL- containing nanoparticles decreased the
viability of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 triple-negative breast cancer
cells to the same extend as free PIP and PL. In addition, a noncytotoxic
concentration of PIP- and PL-containing nanoparticles inhibited the in
vitro migration and invasion of triple-negative breast cancer cells.
These findings demonstrate that the encapsulation of PIP and PL within
polymeric nanoparticles is possible without compromising the bioactivity
of these phytochemicals. PIP- and PL-nanoparticles therefore warrant
further investigation in mouse models of breast cancer to establish their
utility in the treatment of breast cancer.

