Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methods for accurate reporting of confidence intervals in clinical
applications of next generation sequencing (NGS)


BACKGROUND: A challenge to clinical implementation of Next-Generation
Sequencing (NGS) is lack of appropriate quality control including control
for: a) adequate sample loading, b) variation in target amplification
efficiency, and c) variation in loading of prepared NGS specimen onto
sequencing platform. Polymerase chain reaction steps used in preparation
for NGS can yield a large number of sequencing reads from a small number
of starting nucleic acid molecules (e.g. small and/or degraded samples
from FNA specimens or FFPE tissue), resulting in large stochastic
sampling variation. At present, methods to quantify the analyzable
fraction of target nucleic acid are not available or are not suitable for
small specimens. As a result, current practice is to rely on sequencing
coverage data that may provide false assurance of adequate specimen
sampling during molecular analysis, and this has potential to negatively
impact patient care. We hypothesize that coefficient of variation (CV)
for amplicon-based NGS assay measurements is largely predicted by Poisson
(i.e. stochastic) sampling effects for a nucleic acid target at two key
points: 1) input molarity (i.e. number of intact molecules) and 2)
sequencing coverage (i.e. read counts). METHODS: To test this hypothesis
we developed three working models using Monte Carlo simulation and
derived equations to predict expected CV based on sequence read count
and/or intact molecules mesaured for a given nucleic acid target. These
expectation models were tested against empirically derived data from
cross-mixtures of two cell lines (H23 and H520) known to be homozygous
for opposite alleles at four polymorphic sites (rs769217, rs1042522,
rs735482 and rs2298881). Cell lines were mixed to produce limiting inputs
of one allele relative to the other, then prepared for NGS such that a
broad range of combinations of limiting allelic molecule inputs and/or
sequence read counts were observed (46 sets of allelic measurement at all
4 loci). Intra-assay measurement of intact and amplifiable molecules was
accomplished using recently described competitive multiplex-PCR
amplicon-based NGS specimen preparation (Blomquist, et. al. 2013).
RESULTS: Observed CV for measurement at varying input copies and
sequencing read counts were compared to expected CV. Actual measured CV
was on average 13- and 1.5-fold higher than expected CV based on
sequencing reads or molecule input measurements alone, respectively. For
the model derived from both sequencing reads and molecule input
measurements, expected CV was very close to measured (average [measured
CV/expected CV] = 1.01) and explained 74% of observed assay variance.
CONCLUSIONS: NGS-based diagnostic tests that do not take into account
both input concentration of intact target nucleic acid material and
associated sequencing read coverage may not provide accurate reporting of
confidence intervals in specimens with limited or degraded material.

