Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the Nanog transcription factor in tumor immune escape


The emergence of cancer stem cells and escape from immune surveillance
play major roles in the progression of many cancer types. We recently
established a link between these two hallmarks of cancer by demonstrating
that they are both driven by overexpression of Nanog, a pivotal
transcription factor in the self-renewal of pluripotent stem cells. In
particular, we found that tumor cells acquire Nanog expression in the
course of immune selection, and that Nanog confers a stem-like and
immune-resistant phenotype to these cells. However, the way in which
Nanog causes this to occur remains largely unknown. We reasoned that
Nanog-driven immune escape may be in part due to the effect of this
transcription factor on the tumor microenvironment. Therefore, here we
investigated the relationship between Nanog, immune selection, and the
properties of the tumor microenvironment.We found that mice bearing tumor
cells that underwent immune selection, compared to those bearing parental
tumor cells (without immune selection), had markedly elevated levels of
the cytokine IL-6 as well as of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs)
in the tumor microenvironment; both IL-6 and MDSCs have been
well-documented to promote cancer immune escape. We further investigated
the role of Nanog in setting up this microenvironment. To this end, we
have devised an in vivo system that enables us to examine the
relationship between Nanog expression in the tumor microenvironment and
tumor growth in real-time.Taken together, we infer from these data that
not only is Nanog induction a consequence of immune selection, but Nanog
also plays an essential role in tumor immune escape. In fact, we found in
multiple mouse and human tumor models that Nanog is necessary and
sufficient for immune escape. Additionally, these results suggest that
Nanog mediates immune escape by converting the tumor microenvironment
into an immune-inhibitory site, through the induction of IL-6 and MDSCs.
These studies authenticate the role of Nanog in cancer progression as a
central instigator of tumor immune escape, and demonstrate its potential
both as an important diagnostic/prognostic index and as a therapeutic
target.

