Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical efficacy of Sym004, novel anti-EGFR antibody, in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cell lines


Background: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a well-validated
oncology target molecule for monoclonal antibody therapies. Sym004 is a
novel anti-EGFR antibody mixture that consists of two recombinant IgG1
antibodies against domain III of the EGFR. The primary mechanism of
action of Sym004 is thought to be EGFR cross-linking, internalization and
degradation of the EGFR from the cell surface. EGFR is highly expressed
in the overwhelming majority of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC). We, therefore, investigated the effect of Sym004 in human ESCC
cell lines in the present study.Method: In this preclinical study,
approximately 50 ESCC cell lines and 3 kinds of anti-EGFR antibodies
(Sym004, cetuximab, and panitumumab) were used. According to protein
expression status and gene mutation status analyzed by Western blotting
and next generation sequencing, these ESCC cell lines were classified
into several groups. High EGFR-expressing cell lines were used for
further investigations. Internalization of anti-EGFR antibodies into ESCC
cells and inhibition of the EGFR signaling cascade by anti-EGFR
antibodies were studied in in vitro experiments. Growth inhibitions by
anti-EGFR antibody treatment were investigated in in vitro and in vivo
experiments. The present preclinical studies were conducted at the
National Cancer Center East Japan as collaborative studies with Merck
Serono.Result: Even though protein expression of EGFR was detected in all
ESCC cell lines, a variety of the expression levels were seen among the
cell lines consistent with the previous data of clinical specimens. In
addition, following gene alterations were found: EGFR amplification, Ras
mutation, and PIK3CA mutation, and their frequency was 17% (8/48), 6.3%
(3/48) and 8.3% (4/48), respectively. More effective internalization of
Sym004 was observed than cetuximab and panitumumab in the high
EGFR-expression cell lines. In a growth inhibition assay, more potent
anti-proliferative activity of Sym004 was observed than those of other
anti-EGFR antibodies in some cell lines. No obvious correlation between
EGFR expression and the anti-proliferative activity was observed,
although cell lines with higher EGFR expression showed a trend toward
higher sensitivity to Sym004. In vivo xenograft studies of Sym004 using
human ESCC cell lines are currently underway and will be presented in the
annual meeting.Conclusions: These studies showed that Sym004 exhibited
antitumor activity in some ESCC cell lines in preclinical settings, and
are expected to provide a scientific rationale along with a possible
clinical indication of ESCC in clinical setting.

