Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MAD2, a new MAD2 isoform, is ubiquitously expressed in distinct
cell lines, reduces mitotic arrest, and associates with resistance to
cisplatin-based chemotherapy in testicular germ cell tumors


The mitotic spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) signaling has been emerging
as an important promising mechanism in cancer therapy. A prolonged
mitotic arrest in response to cancer chemotherapy induces apoptosis,
mitotic catastrophe, mitotic slippage and senescence, depending on what
cell line and/or inhibitor is studied. In consequence, a weakened or
disturbed SAC signaling in human cancers might contribute to drug
resistance both to spindle inhibitors and to DNA damaging agents. In
several studies the mitotic arrest deficient 2 (MAD2) has been implicated
in the association between failure in the SAC signaling and chemotherapy
response. In this study, we identified a novel splicing variant of MAD2,
designated as MAD2. This isoform was ubiquitously expressed in several
cancer cell lines and non-cancerous primary foreskin fibroblasts. When it
was ectopically expressed, MAD2 localized in the nucleus. Its
overexpression in a fully functional SAC-competent cancer cell line,
HCT116, reduced the mitotic index, suggesting SAC impairment.
Furthermore, the endogenous overexpression of MAD2 in testicular germ
cell tumor patients was associated with a resistant response to
cisplatin-based chemotherapy, whereas expression of MAD2 was not
significantly different between resistant and sensitive patients. In
addition, HCT116 raised significantly its endogenous expression of MAD2
only in response to cisplatin, but not that of MAD2. Our data suggest
that MAD2 may have an opposing role to MAD2 in the activation of the SAC
signaling, and that its expression is associated to a resistant response
to DNA-damaging agents, such as cisplatin-based chemotherapy. This
highlight the importance to study alternative splicing that may
compromise the SAC function, which has been regarded as a promise for
cancer therapy.

