Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer cell quiescence in bone is modulated by Osteo-TAFs


Breast cancer frequently metastasizes to bone. Upon entry to a secondary
site, disseminated breast cancer cells (BCCs) can undergo a period of
proliferative quiescence for 25 years where they remain clinically
undetectable and untreatable.We propose that disseminated BCCs educate
osteoblasts (OBs) into a tumor-associated fibroblast (TAF)-like cell
that, in turn, orchestrates the proliferative quiescence BCC phenotype in
bone. To test this, differentiated MC3T3-E1 murine osteoblasts (OBs) were
incubated for 21 days with conditioned medium (CM) from metastatic BCC
variants (MDA-231 or metastasis-suppressed MDA-231). OB cell lysates were
analyzed for TAF proteins. Importantly, OBs reduced their expression of
alkaline phosphatase, F4/80, CD31, and alpha SMA, with the largest change
seen in 41-day-old conditioned OBs. These results are consistent with the
described aggressive matrix-remodeling TAF. On the other hand,
metastasis-suppressed BC CM treated OBs increased their expression of
IL-6, suggestive of an OB inflammatory response to disseminated BCCs.
TAF-OBs also exhibited altered morphology in the form of a thin,
spindle-like shape, as opposed to cobblestone appearance.As a way to
better understand how TAF-OBs can induce proliferative quiescence in BCC
we sought to examine the roles of gap junctions and exchange of miRs as
modulators to this process. Briefly, OBs were differentiated and ad-mixed
with 1) GFP-MDA-231 human BCCs, or 2) GFP-MDA-231 BCCs double-labeled
with CellTracker Orange CMTMR. Forty-eight hours later, these co-cultures
were assessed for the presence of gap junction protein expression (Cx43,
representative gap junction), and whether they functioned to exchange
information using a cellular CMTMR dye transfer assay. Cx43 expression
was localized specifically between OBs and BCCs. Interestingly, we
observed direct cell-cell dye transfer occurring between BCCs that
distributed dye to OBs several cell distances away.Next, we assayed
supernatants of OBs and BCCs for the presence of exosomes and exosomal
miRs, both known mediators of cell-to-cell communication. Both OBs and
BCCs produced exosomes as characterized by transmission electron
microscopy and a Nanosight 500 System. OB-derived exosomes were
visualized in co-culture assays using a CD63-RFP immunolabel. Late
differentiated OBs produced over twice the amount of exosomes than did
OBs in their growth phase. Given this, we interrogated the contents of
the exosomes for miRs that might induce proliferative quiescence in BCCs.
miR arrays demonstrated the presence of miRs involved in cell cycle
control (miR 193) and cellular dormancy (miR 320a) as produced by
TAF-OBs.Combined, these data suggest that there is extensive crosstalk
between OBs and disseminated BCCs in bone. This work highlights the
importance of investigating OBs as key players in BCC dormancy in bone.
Supported by NIH 1RC1 CA146381, 1R01NS06994, P50 CA083639 for FCM; (NRSA)
T32 CA079448, NIH 1 K99 CA178177 for KMB.

