Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SPOP mutation leads to genomic instability in prostate cancer


Background:Genomic instability is a fundamental feature of human cancer,
and DNA repair defects resulting in impaired genome maintenance promote
pathogenesis of many types of cancers. In prostate cancer, structural
genomic rearrangements, including translocations and copy number
aberrations, are a key mechanism driving tumorigenesis. Recently, whole
genome sequencing revealed a striking abundance, complexity, and
heterogeneity of genomic rearrangements, potentially suggesting distinct
mechanisms of instability in different molecular classes of prostate
cancer. However, the somatic alterations underlying these phenomena
remain largely undefined.Recurrent mutations in SPOP, the
substrate-recognition component of an E3-ubiquitin ligase, represent the
most common point mutations in primary prostate cancer, occurring in
about 10% of tumors. SPOP mutations define a distinct molecular class of
prostate cancer; they are mutually exclusive with TMPRSS2-ERG fusions,
but harbor distinct patterns of copy number aberrations. Here, we report
that SPOP mutant prostate cancers also harbor increased numbers of
genomic rearrangements, and functional data suggest that SPOP mutation
alters repair of DNA double strand breaks (DSB).Methods:We systematically
investigated somatic alterations associated with genomic rearrangements,
using a composite data set of 402 clinically localized prostate cancers.
Functional analyses in vitro and in vivo were used to define pathways
affected, and interrogate DNA repair phenotypes.Results:In human prostate
cancers, SPOP mutation is an early event specifically associated with
increased intrachromosomal genomic rearrangements. Using a zebrafish
model, SPOP mutation results in a transcriptional response consistent
with BRCA1 inactivation, implicating altered repair of DSB. In vitro data
suggest that SPOP participates in repair of DSB, and SPOP mutation
impairs homology-directed repair (HDR), instead promoting error-prone
non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). Finally, SPOP mutation sensitizes
prostate cancer cells to DNA damaging therapeutic agents such as PARP
inhibitors.Conclusions:These results implicate SPOP as a novel
participant in DSB repair, suggest that SPOP mutation drives prostate
tumorigenesis in part through genomic instability, and indicate that SPOP
mutant prostate cancer may be selectively responsive to DNA damaging
therapeutics.

