Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Geranyloxy-ifosfamide: A pre-activated ifosfamide analogue showing
an increased therapeutic index


Ifosfamide (IFO) is an alkylating agent used in routine clinical
practices for treatment of cancer for many years. As a prodrug it
requires cytochrome P450 bio-activation (Giraud et al. Expert Opin.Drug
Metab. Toxicol. 2010, 6, 919-938) oxidising the position C-4 leading to
the formation of the 4-HO-IFO (10%) which releases of the active compound
(isophosphoramide mustard) responsible for the DNA cross links. However,
during high dose protocols, this bio-activation leads to the release of
two toxic metabolites: i) acrolein, an urotoxic compound, concomitantly
generated with the active isophosphoramide mustard and, ii)
chloroacetaldehyde, a neurotoxic and nephrotoxic compound, arising from
the oxidation of the side chains (Kerbusch et al. Clin Pharmacokinet.
2001, 40, 41-62) responsible for limiting side-effects.To circumvent
these toxic side-effects, we have designed several pre-activated
compounds by covalent binding of several O- and S-alkyl moieties on the
carbon C-4 to avoid cytochrome bio-activation favoring the release of the
4-HO-IFO, control this release by the physico-chemical properties of the
engrafted moiety and limit the chloroacetaldehyde release. Among these
designed compounds, some showed a self assembling property leading to
nano-assemblies formulation. Moreover, the in vitro evaluation of these
compounds in absence of cytochrome has revealed that one of them: the
geranyloxy-ifosfamide showed a greater activity under nano-assemblies
(600nM) compared to the bulk form (15M) on rhabdomyosarcoma. This
interesting finding has led us to deepen our investigation of this
compound to understand and explain the meaning of this increased
activity. We present here the latest results obtained for this compound
from additional in vitro evaluation on a wide panel of cancer cell line,
internalization studies within the cell. Moreover, transmission electron
microscopy imaging of this formulation allows the determination of the
shape of these nano-assemblies. Previous studies regarding the release
kinetic profile of 4-HO-IFO of this compound in vitro in mice plasma at
37C showed an interesting release profile which was increased when tested
as nano-assemblies compared to the bulk form. To validate this finding, a
pharmacokinetic study has also been investigated compared to IFO, showing
a higher release of 4-HO-IFO compound suggesting that this compound might
have an increased therapeutic index. Also, in vivo studies are being
carried out at different dose to evaluate the efficacy of this compound
(as bulk and nano-assemblies) on rhabdomyosarcoma xenografted mice
compared to IFO. These results increase acknowledge of this compound
which could become a promising candidate for both oral and IV
administration in a wide panel of tumors.

