Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biological coupling: Drug synergy, cross-resistance, and schedule
effects in combination therapy


IntroductionCombination therapy promises to enhance and extend benefit to
oncology patients, but development of drug combinations engenders
challenges beyond those of single agents. In this work, we use
theoretical models of combination efficacy to demonstrate a potential
link between drug interactions, cross-resistance, and dosing schedule
effects.MethodsFirst, we investigated the relationship between efficacy
interaction and schedule effects by building a dynamic pharmacokinetic
(PK)/efficacy (E) model to generate theoretical tumor volume trajectories
in response to exposure to two drugs. We used a single compartment PK
model to simulate the plasma exposure to each drug following various
dosing schedules, and exponential tumor growth was inhibited by a drug
effect model consisting of the sum of single agent effects and their
product with an interaction coefficient. Simulations of this PK/E model
for 1000 pairs of drugs with randomized properties and interaction
strengths were compared for dosing schedules with high or low
concomitance, respectively. Next, we used a Moran simulation to study the
effect of interaction strength on sensitivity loss in a heterogeneous
population. For a tumor initially comprising 1000 subclones (either
doubly sensitive, singly resistant to either drug, or doubly resistant),
we simulate based on relative subclone fitnesses the time steps until
fixation of a resistant population. We then apply the PK/E model assuming
a multi-clone tumor to elucidate the relationship between synergy, dosing
schedule, and the rise of cross-resistance by comparing response to
in-phase and off-phase combination dosing and across a range of
interaction strengths.ResultsSimulation of the PK/E model demonstrates
that tumor growth inhibition of in-phase and off-phase dosing schedules
diverges in a linear relationship with the interaction strength. Moran
simulations show synergistic compounds are more likely to lead to
fixation of a doubly resistant subclone within a population of tumor
cells, and that it will happen faster than with nonsynergistic
combinations. Comparing the tumor volume and sensitive fraction
trajectories in response to either in-phase or off-phase dosing of a
synergistic combination revealed prolonged sensitivity and reduced tumor
load when dosing out of phase to avoid the synergistic interaction.
Sweeping the interaction strength shows a minimum in long-term tumor
growth rate when the combination exerts its effect
additively.ConclusionsWhile synergistic drug combinations may provide
increased efficacy beyond additive effects of the drugs, this theoretical
framework predicts that positive interactions will lead to scheduling
challenges and faster resistance emergence. Counter-intuitively, it
suggests the best strategy for long-term patient benefit is to use drugs
with additive efficacy or non-concomitant dosing to avoid synergistic
interactions.

