Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of antioxidants on myeloperoxidase (MPO)-dependent DNA
damage and genotoxicity induced by etoposide (VP-16):implications for
therapy-induced second malignancies


Previous work (Mol. Pharm. 79: 479-87, 2011) demonstrated that MPO, found
in myeloid progenitor cells, oxidized the anticancer agent VP-16 to its
phenoxyl radical (VP-O) and led to enhanced topoisomerase II-mediated
strand cleavage through redox cycling resulting in MLL translocations,
implicating MPO in VP-16 leukemogenesis. Utilizing shRNA MPO in myeloid
leukemia HL60 cells, MPO dependency for VP-16 activity was further
established (PAACR 55: 826, 2014). In the present study, we examined the
effects of dehydroascorbate (DHA) and trolox on MPO-dependent effects of
VP-16, VP-16 catechol (VP-OH) and VP-16 ortho-quinone (VP-oQ, fully
oxidized VP-16). In addition, the role of GSH as a mediator of the pro-
or anti-oxidant effects of VP-16, its metabolites and several other
phenolic agents was evaluated. Using Comet assays, VP-16-induced DNA
strand breaks in MPO+ HL60 cells were significantly reduced when cells
were pre-incubated with 1 mM DHA; known to act as a reductant of MPO
generated VP-O. In MPO knockdowns, VP-16-induced DNA damage was
diminished compared to MPO+ cells. In these MPO knockdowns, DHA did not
perturb VP-16-induced DNA damage. Similar results were demonstrated with
VP-OH, consistent with MPO-mediated generation of VP-O and DHA
reduction/protection against DNA damage. For VP-oQ, 1,4-benzoquinone, and
camptothecin, DNA damage was similar in MPO+ and knockdown cells with no
attenuation in the presence of DHA. VP-16 and VP-OH also induced
oxidative DNA damage in MPO+ cells which was reduced by DHA. This DNA
damage was attenuated in MPO knockdowns with no further effect by DHA.
The phenolic vitamin E analog trolox, a known MPO substrate, also reduced
oxidative DNA damage induced by VP-16 and VP-OH but not by VP-oQ. Using
3-(p-hydroxyphenyl) fluorescein (HPF), pro-oxidant activity of VP-16 was
demonstrated in MPO+ cells which converted to anti-oxidant effects in MPO
knockdowns. Both DHA and trolox protected cells against VP-16-induced
pro-oxidant effects in MPO+ cells. When GSH levels were reduced by
incubation with buthionine sulfoximine, the pro-oxidant effects of VP-16
in MPO+ cells were eliminated. N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) restored
VP-16-induced pro-oxidant activity. In contrast, the pro-oxidant effects
of the phenolic agents quercetin and EGCG were found to be independent of
MPO and were diminished by addition of NAC. Together, results strongly
suggest that MPO-catalyzed oxidation of VP-16 to redox active species
leads to enhanced genotoxic events linked to the known leukemogenic
action of this anticancer agent. These MPO dependent effects are also
dependent on GSH likely through thiyl radical formation and cycling. The
protective effects of DHA and trolox further suggest that reduction of
MPO-catalyzed VP-16 free radicals may be an effective strategy to prevent
drug-induced second malignancies. Support: NIH R01 CA090787.

