Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-skin tumor promoting effects of pentacyclic triterpenes found
in Perilla frutescens


In this study, we conducted a comprehensive examination of a series of
pentacyclic tritperpenes found in P. frutescens, including ursolic acid
(UA) oleanolic acid (OA), augustic acid (AA), corosolic acid (CA),
3-epi-corosolic acid (3-epiCA), maslinic acid (MA), and 3-epi-maslinic
acid (3-epiMA) for their effects on epidermal cell signaling,
proliferation, and skin inflammation in relation to their ability to
inhibit skin tumor promotion by TPA. For these experiments, female ICR
mice (7-9 weeks of age) were treated with either acetone or 2 mol of UA,
OA, AA, CA, 3-epiCA, MA, or 3-epiMA 30 min prior to TPA (6.8 nmol)
treatment The treatment protocol involved twice weekly treatments over a
two week period. Mouse epidermis (6 hr time point) and whole skin (48 hr
time point) were collected for Western blot analysis and histological
analysis, respectively. Pretreatment with these compounds inhibited the
activation of JNK1/2, Src, and Stat3 as well as the induction of Cox-2
protein. Pretreatment with the compounds also reversed the effect of TPA
on PDCD4 and p27, and increased the activation of AMPK and LKB1. We also
examined the effect of the compounds on TPA-induced epidermal
hyperproliferation as assessed by epidermal thickness and epidermal
labeling index (LI). All of the compounds examined significantly
inhibited TPA-induced epidermal hyperproliferation (significant
reductions in both epidermal thickness and LI). In addition, the effect
of the triterpenes on TPA-induced infiltration of mast cells in dermis
was evaluated. UA significantly inhibited the infiltration of dermal mast
cells induced by TPA. Notably, OA, AA, CA, 3-epiCA, MA, and 3-epiMA
produced a greater inhibitory effect than that seen with UA on the number
of infiltrated mast cells. Thus, UA and a series of related triterpenes
differentially inhibited multiple signaling pathways, epidermal
hyperproliferation, and a marker of skin inflammation (infiltrated mast
cells) induced by TPA. Several of the compounds including CA, 3-epiCA,
MA, and 3-epiMA were particularly effective in these experiments. We are
currently testing the ability of this group of compounds to inhibit skin
tumor promotion by TPA in a two-stage skin carcinogenesis experiment.
Collectively, the current data suggest that several pentacyclic
triterpenes, in addition to UA, may have potent chemopreventive activity.
Research supported by CA164159.

