Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased sensitivity of III tubulin-containing microtubules to
cabazitaxel compared with docetaxel: A possible role of III tubulin in
specifying good efficacy of cabazitaxel for docetaxel-resistant tumors


Tumor progression and resistance to taxane-based therapies have been
shown to correlate with overexpression of the class III -tubulin isotype
(III tubulin). Elevated expression of III tubulin is often associated
with tumor aggressiveness in patients with metastatic docetaxel-resistant
prostate cancer. Cabazitaxel is a novel taxane recently approved for the
treatment of metastatic prostate cancer that failed docetaxel therapy. To
understand the mechanistic distinctions between cabazitaxel and
docetaxel, we analyzed the effects of both drugs on bovine brain
microtubules consisting of unfractionated tubulin, which contains 25% III
tubulin, and with microtubules depleted of III tubulin. BetaIII tubulin
was depleted using immunoaffinity chromatography purification technique.
Both cabazitaxel and docetaxel enhanced polymerization of unfractionated
tubulin to similar extents. The stoichiometry of 14C-cabazitaxel and
14C-docetaxel binding to microtubules composed of unfractionated tubulin
were similar at very low concentrations ( 10 M). The Kds for binding were
8.4 M and 7.5 M for 14C-cabazitaxel and 14C-docetaxel, respectively.
However, at higher concentrations (10 - 40 M) significantly more
14C-cabazitaxel bound to the microtubules than 14C-docetaxel, with an
apparent higher affinity. We also analyzed the effects of cabazitaxel and
docetaxel on in vitro dynamic instability of microtubules assembled from
unfractionated and III-depleted tubulin. We found that 100 nM cabazitaxel
or docetaxel stabilized the dynamics of microtubules assembled from
unfractionated tubulin similarly. However, cabazitaxel suppressed the
dynamics of microtubules containing III tubulin more strongly than
docetaxel. For example, 100 nM cabazitaxel suppressed the shortening rate
of unfractionated microtubules by 49% and the shortening rate of
III-depleted microtubules by only 31%. The overall suppression of
dynamicity of microtubules assembled from unfractionated III-rich tubulin
was 49% vs. 33% for III-depleted microtubules. In contrast with
cabazitaxel, 100 nM docetaxel suppressed the shortening rate of
microtubules assembled from unfractionated and III-depleted tubulin by
48% and 52%, respectively. The overall suppression of dynamicity of
microtubules assembled from unfractionated III-rich tubulin was 56% vs.
50% for III-depleted microtubules. Experiments to examine the binding of
cabazitaxel and docetaxel to microtubules assembled from III-depleted
tubulin are ongoing. Our results indicate that the more potent activity
of cabazitaxel for microtubules containing III tubulin may contribute to
its superior efficacy in prostate tumors overexpressing III tubulin as
compared with that of docetaxel. Supported by a research award from
Sanofi Oncology.

