Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The RNA-binding protein HuR radiosensitizes human TNBC cells by
modulating the cellular response to DNA damage and oxidative stress


The RNA-binding protein human antigen R (HuR) associates with U-/AU-rich
mRNAs encoding proteins that control cell proliferation, metabolism and
the stress response. HuR is overexpressed in several human cancers and
its overexpression is associated with poor prognosis and resistance to
therapy. While the role of HuR in drug resistance has been studied, its
contribution to radiation resistance has not been examined. Therefore, we
investigated the role of HuR in radiation resistance of triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC) cells: MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468 and Hs578t. Reduction
of HuR expression using small interfering (si) RNA decreased cell
proliferation and sensitized TNBC cells to ionizing radiation. Clonogenic
assays indicated that silencing HuR suppressed the clonogenic survival of
all three TNBC cell lines with survival at 2 Gy (SF2) reduced from 59%,
49%, 65% in control cells to 40%, 33%, and 46% in siHuR-treated
MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468 and Hs578t cells, respectively. To delineate the
underlying mechanism of radiosensitization and to identify candidate
mRNAs showing altered levels after silencing HuR, we undertook a
ribonomic approach. First, since ionizing radiation enhances the
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), causing DNA damage, we
investigated the possible involvement of ROS in siHuR-mediated
radiosensitization. ROS production in control or HuR-silenced cells
treated with or without radiation was measured using the fluorescent dye
2-7-Dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCFDA). Radiation significantly
increased ROS generation in HuR knockdown cells compared to control
cells. To further test the involvement of ROS in radiosensitivity,
control and HuR-silenced cells were pre-treated with N-Acetyl-L- cysteine
(NAC), an ROS scavenger, prior to radiation. The presence of NAC
completely prevented radiation sensitivity and ROS production, indicating
the involvement of ROS in HuR-mediated radiation sensitivity. Second, we
directly tested the involvement of the DNA damage response (DDR) pathway
in radiosensitivity after silencing HuR by evaluating the number of -H2AX
foci (a common indicator of DNA damage) in control and HuR-silenced cells
following irradiation. Our results showed that the number of -H2AX foci
was significantly greater in HuR-silenced cells than in control cells at
1 h, 2 h and 24 h after irradiation. The persistence of -H2AX foci
suggests that radiosensitization by HuR silencing involves inhibition of
the repair of damaged DNA. This hypothesis was supported by the comet
assay, which showed that HuR-silenced cells had larger and longer-lasting
tails than control cells, in keeping with the higher levels of DNA damage
seen after silencing HuR. Our studies indicate that radiosensitization
upon HuR knockdown is linked to suppression of the cellular response to
genotoxic and oxidative damage.

