Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidation of signaling pathways that mediate gastrin-induced JNK
activation and pGSK3/Snail induction in gastric cancer cells


The gastrointestinal peptide hormone gastrin is known to regulate various
cellular processes including proliferation, migration and metastasis in
gastrointestinal cells. Our previous studies indicated that amidated
gastrin (G-17) induced gastric cancer cell migration through two separate
signaling axes. These revealed that inhibition of Glycogen Synthase
Kinase-3 (GSK3) was necessary to activate G17-induced migratory pathways
in gastric cancer cells. Incubation of AGSE gastric cancer cells
overexpressing CCK2 receptor (CCK2R) with G17 resulted in a dose and time
dependent increase of GSK3Ser9 phosphorylation, indicative of an
inhibition of the kinase. Treatment with G-17 was also associated with
increased Snail expression, a downstream target of GSK3 and p21-activated
protein kinases (PAKs). In a second pathway, G-17 also induced JNK
phosphorylation through activation of Mixed Lineage Kinase 3 (MLK3). This
axis also promotes gastric cancer cell migration via CCK2R. In the
present study our goal was to determine whether PAKs, which are effectors
for the Rho GTPases Cdc42 and Rac and are central players in cell
proliferation, survival and motility, are involved in the G-17 effects on
gastric cancer cells. Our studies showed that in AGSE cells when
pretreated with a commercially available PAK4 inhibitor PF 3758309, G-17
was unable to phosphorylate GSK3 and G-17-induced Snail expression was
markedly inhibited. G17-induced p-JNK expression was also significantly
attenuated with PAK4 inhibitor pretreatment. The inhibitory effect was
stronger when PAK4 inhibitor was used in combination with a pan-MLK
inhibitor CEP11004. The involvement of PAK4 in G17-induced events were
also confirmed by using the PAK4 siRNA. Knockdown of PAK4 inhibited
G17-induced p-JNK expression which was more pronounced when both PAK4 and
MLK3 were knocked down in AGSE gastric cancer cells. However, knocking
down PAK4 alone does-not seem to inhibit G-17-induced p-GSK3 expression
completely, which suggest the potential involvement of other PAK family
members. Studies are currently underway to determine which PAK(s) is
involved in mediating G17-pGSK3-Snail axis and also to elucidate any
crosstalk of PAK4 and MLK3 in this pathway. Elucidation of the signaling
pathways that mediate G17-induced cellular events will be very important
in designing therapeutic approaches in the future to restrict gastric
cancer cell migration and metastasis.

