Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CoMEt: A statistical approach to identify combinations of mutually
exclusive alterations in cancer


Identifying driver mutations in cancer genomes is a significant challenge
due to the mutational heterogeneity of tumors: different combinations of
somatic mutations drive different tumors, even those of the same cancer
type. This mutational heterogeneity arises because driver mutations
target genes in signaling and regulatory pathways, each of which can be
perturbed in numerous ways.We introduce CoMEt, an algorithm to identify
combinations of candidate driver mutations de novo, without any prior
biological knowledge (e.g. pathways or protein interactions). CoMEt
searches for combinations of mutations that exhibit mutual exclusivity, a
pattern expected for mutations in pathways. CoMEt uses an exact
statistical test for mutual exclusivity that is less biased toward high
frequency alterations than previous approaches and more sensitive in
detecting combinations of lower frequency alterations. We compute the
exact test using a novel tail enumeration procedure and also derive a
binomial approximation. CoMEt simultaneously identifies collections of
one or more combinations of mutually exclusive alterations, consistent
with the observation of multiple hallmarks of cancer, and also performs
simultaneous analysis of subtype-specific mutations. Finally, CoMEt uses
an MCMC algorithm to sample from collections in proportion to their
significance, summarizing the distribution in a marginal probability
graph. We show that CoMEt outperforms other mutual exclusivity approaches
on simulated and real data.We apply CoMEt to hundreds of samples from
four different TCGA cancer types: gastric cancer (STAD), glioblastoma
(GBM) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and breast cancer (BRCA). We
identify multiple mutually exclusive sets within each cancer type. These
include the RTK/RAS pathway in gastric cancer, the Rb and p53 signaling
pathways in glioblastoma, and a collection containing multiple kinases,
including FLT3, as well as the RAS genes in AML. In addition, we analyze
subtype-specific mutations using CoMEt by encoding the subtype of each
sample and computing exclusivity between and within subtypes. We apply
this approach using four gene expression subtypes of breast cancer and
identify several pathways that are enriched for mutations in specific
subtypes including the PI(3)K/AKT signaling pathway in the Luminal A
subtype. Many of these overlap known pathways, but others reveal novel
putative cancer genes. These findings provide testable hypotheses for
experimental validation.

