Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical characteristics of NP137, a first-in-class monoclonal
antibody directed against netrin-1 and inducing dependence
receptors-mediated cell death


Background: Some receptors are active in the absence of ligand and
actively trigger cell death through apoptosis. These receptors are called
dependence receptors (DRs) as their expression at the cell surface
renders cells critically dependent for their survival on ligand
availability. Deleted in Colorectal Carcinoma (DCC) and UNC5H are
prototypic DRs which induce apoptosis unless their ligand netrin-1 is
present. It has been shown that netrin-1 is up-regulated in a large
fraction of tumors and that interference with netrin-1/receptors
interaction is associated with inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis
in various preclinical models. We have generated the first humanized
netrin-1 antibody, NP137, and characterized its antitumor
activity.Preclinical results: NP137 is a humanized monoclonal IgG1
antibody, which binds netrin-1 in the nanomolar range affinity and
efficiently inhibits the binding of netrin-1 to its receptor UNC5H2
(IC50: 0.5 nM). NP137 recognizes a netrin-1 specific epitope located in
the second laminin-type EGF-like repeat. A crystal structure analysis
shows that this region is crucial for the binding of netrin-1 to its
receptor, providing a structural basis for the biological activity of
NP137. In vitro, NP137 induced apoptosis in netrin-1-dependent cell lines
as assessed by cell density measurement and caspase 3 activation. Ex vivo
analysis performed on fresh human breast tumor slices (3D cultures)
showed a specific and significant induction of apoptosis in tumor cells
in approximately half of cases. In vivo, NP137 exhibited a significant
anti-tumor effect associated with good pharmacokinetic properties in
models of both solid tumors and hematologic malignancies. A dose-effect
relationship was observed with an optimal pharmacologically active dose
established at 10 mg/kg twice a week. We also showed that NP137
potentiates cancer cell death induced by cytotoxic drugs like doxorubicin
or platinum derivatives as well as demethylating agents, which induce
upregulation of netrin-1 and its receptors. In this context, a strong
synergy with doxorubicin was shown in a rat syngeneic model of
osteosarcoma, reversing its chemoresistant phenotype. Toxicological
studies are ongoing with first results suggesting a high therapeutic
margin.Conclusion: We are developing the first therapeutic antibody
targeting netrin-1 and inducing dependence receptors-mediated tumor cell
death. Preclinical results suggest a therapeutic potential both in solid
tumors and hematological malignancies. A high therapeutic margin is
expected, which may accelerate combination strategies. Based on these
encouraging results, a first-in-human trial is planned at the end of
2015, with the support of EORTC.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

