Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytotoxic genes from traditional Chinese medicine inhibit tumor
growth both in vitro and in vivo


Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) has held, and still holds, an
important position in primary health care in China, especially in the
rural areas. However, scientific evidence of its mechanism is, for the
most part, limited and additional better-designed laboratory research is
needed. To date, numerous leading chemical compounds from TCM drugs have
been identified and evaluated for their anti-tumor effects. However,
little effort has been made on the protein-encoding genes isolated from
TCM drugs, and the delivery of these genes into malignant cells through
recombinant adeno-associated viral (rAAV) vectors has not been attempted.
For example, Trichosanthin (TCS), an antiviral plant defense protein
found in the root tuber of a TCM herb, Trichosanthes kirilowii, has been
used in anti-HIV clinical trials in the USA. Its enzymatic activities
were recognized as type I ribosome-inactivating protein. Although the
nucleotide sequence of the TCS gene was determined more than 20 years
ago, to date, there was little report to deliver TCS-encoding gene into
malignant cells. In the present studies, we synthesized the cDNAs of five
known cytotoxic proteins isolated from TCM drugs and the FLAG
epitope-tagged cDNAs were subcloned into a rAAV plasmid vector. The
expression of mRNA was confirmed by RT-PCR and protein expression by
Western blot assays against the FLAG tag, respectively. Among these
genes, TCS gene yielded the most promising results for the inhibition of
cancer cell growth in vitro. The over-expressed TCS functioned as a type
I ribosome inactivating protein, followed by inducing apoptosis that is
associated with the Bcl-PARP signaling pathway. Next, rAAV vectors
containing the TCS gene driven by a liver cancer specific promoter,
-fetoprotein promoter (AFPp) were generated and tested. The results
indicated that rAAV-AFPp-TCS vectors significantly inhibited the growth
of hHCC cell lines in vitro as well as hHCC tumor growth in vivo
following intra-tumor injections in a murine xenograft model. These
studies suggest that the use of TCM cytotoxic genes may prove to be a
useful therapeutic strategy for treating human cancers in general, and
liver tumors in particular.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

