Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential oncogenic function of Rad51C splice variant in
colorectal tumors


Rad51c is a tumor suppressor gene and known for its function in
homologous recombination and DNA repair in early and late stages of HR
(Homologous Recombination). Studies from breast and ovarian cancer
patients reveled a bi-allelic homozygous germline missense mutation in
the codon 773 and 258 of Rad51C gene. At the cellular level the effects
include chromosomal instability (increased chromosomal breakage)
associated with hypersensitivity to DNA damaging agents, and defective
DNA damage repair. Mutations, which include base insertions and missense,
have been reported in the Rad51C gene. Alternatively spliced
transcriptomes have been shown to play a different or antagonistic
biological role compared to the full length wild type mRNA. Some of the
important diseases caused by cis acting or trans acting protein splicing
factors include cystic fibrosis, dementia, premature aging and cancer. In
addition, promoter methylation has been associated with gene silencing,
while DNA methylation at both intronic and exonic regions are shown to
correlate with isoform-specific transcription by alternative splicing or
by utilizing alternate promoters. DNA methylation at the cytosine
residues (5-methylcytosine) of the CpG di-nucleotides is carried out by
DNA methyltransferases (DNMT) and is generally considered to be a
repressive epigenetic modification. By RT-PCR, we identified splice
variants of Rad51C gene that include variant-1 (without exon-7),
variant-2 (without exon-6, 7) and variant-3 (without exon-7, 8) in
colorectal tumors. Of the 38 colorectal tumors, 18 contained variant 1,
12 contained variant 2, 14 contained variant 3, and eight had no
expression of any of the variants. Bisulfate DNA sequencing and
Methylation Specific PCR (MS-PCR) showed promoter methylation of Rad51C
in tumor cells. 5-Azacytidine treatment of LS-174T cells caused a 14 fold
increase in variant 1, a 4.8 fold increase for variant 3 and 3.4 fold for
variant 2 compared to no treatment. Real time PCR analysis of 9
pair-matched colorectal tumors and non-tumors showed that variant 1 was
overexpressed in tumors comparing to matched non-tumors. Expression of
Rad51C variants in these tumors was associated with microsatellite
stability and with maintenance of functionality of the fanconi anemia
repair pathway. In vitro transient overexpression of Rad51C variant-1 in
colorectal tumor cells over the wild type Rad51C caused a 1.8 fold
increase in the cell proliferation as analyzed by BrdU immunofluorescence
staining and FACS. Given that the Rad51C splice variant-1 is
overexpressed in colorectal tumors and has a role in promoting cell
proliferation, further investigation regarding its potential role in
oncogenesis in colorectal tumor cells is warranted.

