Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HSF1: Essential for myeloma cell survival and a promising
therapeutic target


Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), a transcription factor known as the master
regulator of the heat shock response (HSR), is emerging as an exciting
therapeutic target in cancer due to its role in regulating cellular
responses to proteotoxic stress as well as various oncogenic processes.
Myeloma is hypothesized to be susceptible to therapies targeting protein
homeostasis as it is characterised by the overproduction of
immunoglobulin which is linked to significant ER stress. However,
clinical responses to inhibitors of HSP90, a molecular chaperone
overexpressed in myeloma patients, have been modest. This is partly due
to HSF1-mediated transcriptional upregulation of anti-apoptotic HSP72. We
are seeking to determine whether targeting the HSR through HSF1 may be an
effective therapeutic strategy.HSF1 knockdown using shRNA downregulated
levels of anti-apoptotic HSP72 and HSP27 and significantly reduced
viability in human myeloma cell lines. This was associated with apoptosis
as evidenced by increases in caspase 3/7 activity and PARP cleavage which
were rescued by treatment with z-VAD-FMK, a pan-caspase inhibitor. We
next treated human myeloma cell lines with KRIBB-11, a direct small
molecule inhibitor of HSF1, and observed growth inhibition with GI50s of
between 3.0 - 8.5 M. Notably, KRIBB-11 was cytotoxic to myeloma cell
lines but not to peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy
donors.To shed light on the mechanisms by which myeloma cells rely on
HSF1 for survival, we carried out microarray analysis on HSF1 knockdown
cells and found that XIAP-associated factor 1 (XAF1), a pro-apoptotic
tumour suppressor gene known to be transcriptionally repressed by HSF1,
was upregulated (>2.63 log-fold increase, pHeat shock factor 1 (HSF1), a
transcription factor known as the master regulator of the heat shock
response (HSR), is emerging as an exciting therapeutic target in cancer
due to its role in regulating cellular responses to proteotoxic stress as
well as various oncogenic processes. Myeloma is hypothesized to be
susceptible to therapies targeting protein homeostasis as it is
characterised by the overproduction of immunoglobulin which is linked to
significant ER stress. However, clinical responses to inhibitors of
HSP90, a molecular chaperone overexpressed in myeloma patients, have been
modest. This is partly due to HSF1-mediated transcriptional upregulation
of anti-apoptotic HSP72. We are seeking to determine whether targeting
the HSR through HSF1 may be an effective therapeutic strategy.HSF1
knockdown using shRNA downregulated levels of anti-apoptotic HSP72 and
HSP27 and significantly reduced viability in human myeloma cell lines.
This was associated with apoptosis as evidenced by increases in caspase
3/7 activity and PARP cleavage which were rescued by treatment with
z-VAD-FMK, a pan-caspase inhibitor. We next treated human myeloma cell
lines with KRIBB-11, a direct small molecule inhibitor of HSF1, and
observed growth inhibition with GI50s of between 3.0 - 8.5 M. Notably,
KRIBB-11 was cytotoxic to myeloma cell lines but not to peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from healthy donors.To shed light on the mechanisms by
which myeloma cells rely on HSF1 for survival, we carried out microarray
analysis on HSF1 knockdown cells and found that XIAP-associated factor 1
(XAF1), a pro-apoptotic tumour suppressor gene known to be
transcriptionally repressed by HSF1, was upregulated (>2.63 log-fold
increase, p<0.0001). qRT-PCR and Western blotting confirmed XAF1
upregulation with HSF1 knockdown. An increase in XAF1, PARP cleavage and
decrease in HSP72 and HSP27 levels were also observed with KRIBB-11
treatment, confirming that the loss or inhibition of HSF1 in myeloma
modulates its downstream target genes and leads to caspase-mediated cell
death.These results suggest a mechanism whereby HSF1 overexpression in
myeloma cells represses XAF1 expression to evade apoptotic stresses and
suggest XAF1 as a possible biomarker for HSF1 inhibition in myeloma.
Interestingly, unlike HSP90 inhibition, HSF1 knockdown in myeloma cell
lines did not modulate other key myeloma protein handling mechanisms such
as aggresome formation, autophagy, the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway or ER
stress. Efficacy testing and biomarker analyses of HSF1 inhibitors in
s.c. human myeloma xenograft models are underway and early results are
promising.To summarise, using both genetic and pharmacological
inhibition, our data demonstrate that HSF1 maintains myeloma cell
survival during proteotoxic stress by protecting cells from apoptosis via
XAF1. More importantly, we demonstrate the potential efficacy and
therapeutic window in targeting HSF1 for myeloma treatment.

