Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of Fatty Acid Synthase is associated with
inhibition of autophagy under conditions of metabolic stress in
colorectal cancer cells


Fatty Acid Synthase (FASN), a key enzyme of de novo lipid synthesis, is
significantly up regulated in colorectal cancer (CRC) and its activity is
associated with poor prognosis. Recent studies suggest that FASN plays a
crucial role in the survival of cancer cells by reprogramming metabolic
pathways to maintain energy homeostasis under conditions of metabolic
stress. However, the mechanisms of metabolic adaptation of cancer cells
regulated by FASN to promote their survival are not yet fully understood.
Cancer cells use autophagy as one of the survival strategies under
metabolic stress. The purpose of our study was to determine the role of
aberrant activation of FASN in regulation of autophagy in vitro and in
human CRC.METHODS. Expression of p62 and LC3 (autophagy markers), pAMPK,
and Cyclin D was assessed in CRC cell lines with altered expression of
FASN cultured in normal, serum free medium and/or detached conditions by
Western blot and confocal microscopy. Human specimens, including matching
cancer, normal colon and liver metastasis tissues from 19 patients were
analyzed for expression of FASN, p62, and pAMPK by immunohistochemistry
(IHC).RESULTS. We demonstrated that under metabolic stress conditions
overexpression of FASN is associated with a decrease in autophagy as
shown by accumulation of p62, a marker of inhibition of autophagy, and a
decrease in LC3A, an autophagosome marker, in CRC cell lines. Under
energy stress conditions, overexpression of FASN is also associated with
an increase in Cyclin D and a decrease in activation of pAMPK.
Statistical analysis of IHC staining showed that expression of FASN, p62,
and pAMPK is significantly higher in cancer and metastatic tissues as
compared to normal colon tissues. Using Spearman's rank correlation, we
determined moderate correlation between expression of FASN and p62 in
human primary CRC and liver metastasis. Similar results were obtained
using Western blot analysis on human normal colon and matching cancer
tissues.CONCLUSIONS. Our data suggest that overexpression of FASN is
protective during metabolic stress conditions by shifting metabolism
towards higher energy production as indicated by activity of pAMPK.
Furthermore, we have identified a novel link between FASN and p62, and
showed that, under metabolic stress conditions, overexpression of FASN is
associated with inhibition of autophagy. However, further studies are
require to understand how FASN-mediated up regulation of p62 contributes
to tumorigenesis.The differential expression of FASN in normal versus
cancer cells makes de novo lipogenesis a desirable target for therapeutic
intervention. Understanding the role of FASN in regulation of survival
and aggressive behavior of cancer cells will uncover new therapeutic
approaches in CRC.

