Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Merlin/NF2 is associated with elevated aromatase expression and
estrogen formation in human liver tissues and liver cancer cells: An
unifying model for hepatocellular carcinoma development and progression


It is recognized that the product of neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) tumor
suppressor gene, also referred to as Merlin/neurofibromin, is implicated
in the homeostatic regulation of the liver stem cell niche through the
control of abundance and signaling of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), with a mechanism independent of the Mst/Lats/Yap Hippo pathway
[1]. We have previously reported that locally elevated estrogen
formation, driven by abnormally high expression and function of the
aromatase enzyme, may be implicated in both development and progression
of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) through the activation of a rapid
signaling pathway mediated by amphiregulin (AREG) and EGFR [2]. In this
framework, we have recently presented a model by which the
aromatase-estrogen-amphiregulin-EGFR axis is activated in response to
tissue injury and/or inflammatory disease, with its alteration eventually
leading to development not only of major human tumors (liver, breast,
prostate), but also to other non-neoplastic diseases, including type 2
diabetes, obesity, Alzheimer's disease, heart disease and stroke [3]. In
the present work, we have investigated the expression of
merlin/neurofibromin (NF2) in different liver cancer cells and liver
tissues in relation to aromatase expression/function, estrogen receptor
(ER) status, amphiregulin and EGFR. Our data indicate that NF2 expression
is strictly associated to aromatase, AREG and EGFR expression, being
elevated in HCC tissues and HepG2 cells, intermediate in cirrhotic
tissues and Huh7 liver cancer cells, and lower in nontumoral liver and
HA22T cells. In addition, NF2 expression is inversely related to that of
wild type hER66 and proportional to the expression of the
membrane-associated hER36 splice variant, as measured by exon-specific
RT-PCR analysis, both in vivo and in vitro. Furthermore, incubation with
1 nM estradiol induced a significant decrease of NF2 expression in both
HA22T and Huh7 cells (over 54% and 22%, respectively), while no change
could be observed in HepG2 cells, this effect being inversely related to
aromatase expression and activity in these HCC cell lines.Based on this
combined evidence, we propose here that NF2 may behave as a protein
sensing tissue damage and, at least in human liver, increasing, via a
Hippo-independent mechanism, aromatase-driven local estrogen formation,
eventually leading to regulation of oval stem cells differentiation and
tissue repair. An alteration of this putative NF2-aromatase-estrogen axis
or a deficiency in NF2 may therefore be implicated in HCC development
and/or progression.[1] Drvarov O & Cubero FJ 2011. Hepatology 53(5):
1767-70[2] Carruba G et al. 2011. Horm Mol Biol Clin Invest 5(3):
153-160.[3] Carruba G. 2011. Gordon Research Conference, Invited
Paper.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

