Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Replicating GWAS SNPs for breast cancer in Indian population


Background: There have been large Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS)
on breast cancer in most developed countries showing low to modest
associations between common polymorphisms and breast cancer risk. In
India, however, there have been no GWAS studies and few properly designed
retrospective studies with smaller sample size on genetic susceptibility
to study this risk.Methodology: DNA was extracted from buffy coat samples
in 1204 cases and 1212 control. A customized panel of 384 SNPs was
designed using a mixture of 3 strategies such as SNPs selected from GWAS,
SNPs selected from Candidate Studies and SNPs selected using
Bioinformatics tool. Genotyping was performed on the Illumina Hi-Scan
using GoldenGate Genotyping (GGGT) Custom SNP Panel assay on all DNA
samples extracted. The reproducibility rate of all the replicate samples
(n = 160) for all the assays was 99% and above. Unconditional logistic
regression (additive model) was used to estimate OR and corresponding 95%
CI between genotypes and case status. This abstract focuses on
replicating SNPs in Indian population which have shown to be associated
in already conducted GWAS mostly in developed nations.Results: Seven SNPs
were replicated from previous studies on BC GWAS. Prevalence of certain
SNPs in the present study varied with that observed in GWAS. Out of 40
SNPs which did not show an association with BC, 15 SNPs had a MAF below
20% and 25 SNPs had prevalence of 20% and above.The risk of SNPs which
were significantly identified in BC GWAS and in present study were also
studied in BCs stratified on hormone receptor status. The SNP rs2046210
in ESR1 showed an increased risk for BCs which were ER-/PR- and triple
negative but not ER+/PR+. The SNPs rs10411161 in Zinc Finger Protein 577
(ZNF577) gene showed significant protection in the development of only
ER+/PR+ BCs whereas SNPs in FGFR2 (rs2981575, rs2981582),
Mitogen-Activated Kinase Kinase Kinase 1 (MAP3K1) (rs889312) and 9q31.2
(rs865686) increased the risk of hormone receptor positive BC.Discussion:
SNPs selected from FGFR2 gene were positively associated with BC. 25 SNPs
which were identified as a risk factor for BC in the GWAS conducted in
other populations did not replicate in the Indian population, even though
their prevalence was high ( 20%) indicating that they may not be a risk
factor in Indian population. The 3 SNPs which were highly prevalent in
GWAS population could not be replicated even if they were associated the
attributable risk of the SNPs remains low due to their low prevalence in
the present study population. The SNPs associated with ER+/PR+ and
ER-/PR- BCs were observed to be different suggesting that the cancer
stratified on hormone receptor status may differ due to different
biological pathways.

