Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation in circulating free DNA as a new biomarker for
pancreatic cancer


Despite the clinical advancement, pancreatic cancer remains one of the
most deadly cancers. Pancreatic cancers are often difficult to diagnose
and there is no reliable screening biomarker for early detection of this
cancer. Epigenetic alterations have emerged as a common hallmark of many
types of human cancers as well as pancreatic cancers. Studies have shown
that epigenetic dysregulation is associated with multiple steps during
carcinogenesis. Therefore, detection of aberrant DNA methylation from
blood samples may be a promising diagnostic tool for pancreatic
cancers.First, we analyzed KRAS mutation status of 100 samples obtained
by Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (EUS-FNA), which
is a safe and accurate technique to perform the pancreatic tissue biopsy,
and found that more than 80% of the cells in the samples harbors KRAS
mutation indicating high amount of cancer cells in the specimens. Next,
we performed genome-wide DNA methylation analysis of 38 EUS-FNA specimens
using Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. We further analyzed
the deposited DNA methylation profiles of other tumor types in the public
databases, such as TCGA, and identified 8 marker genes with high
frequency and specificity of DNA methylation in pancreatic cancers. We
validated the DNA methylation status of these genes by bisulfite
pyrosequencing and quantitative methylation specific PCR. These markers
were frequently methylated in EUS-FNA samples (95% of samples are
methylation positive in at least one marker gene). Now we are analyzing
the DNA methylation status in pancreatic cancers and corresponding blood
samples in order to identify the most effective set of markers for
diagnose pancreatic cancers. Our results suggest that analysis of DNA
methylation in the circulating free DNA might be a safe and potent tool
for evaluating and staging pancreatic cancers.

