Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor transcriptionally represses genes mediating DNA
synthesis and repair in prostate cancer


In the U.S., prostate cancer (PCa) ranked second for cancer related
deaths for men. It has been well established that androgen receptor (AR)
plays an essential role in the development of primary PCa and its
activity is restored in castration resistant prostate cancers (CRPC).
While AR has been extensively characterized as a transcriptional
activator, it can also function by direct or indirect mechanisms to
suppress gene expression. Despite the critical role AR plays in PCa,
mechanisms by which it functions as a transcriptional repressor are
poorly understood. Using VCaP and VCaP derived CRPC cell lines, we have
reported that androgen-repressed genes were functionally enriched for DNA
synthesis and repair, while AR stimulated genes were associated with
lipid/sterol synthesis and other aspects of cellular metabolism.
Significantly, a subset of the genes that were androgen-repressed in VCaP
cells were consistently increased in CRPC clinical samples, and this
53-gene subset was also highly enriched for genes mediating DNA synthesis
and repair. Using AR ChIP-seq and transcriptome profiling in VCaP cells,
we found that the majority of this AR-suppressed gene subset (39/53) have
one or more AR binding sites within the gene locus. The expression level
of these direct AR-suppressed genes is associated with poor survival of
disease in clinical cohorts. Interestingly, although the suppression
activity of AR on this subset of genes is direct, in other PCa cell lines
such as LNCaP, there is a secondary mechanism that allows AR to
indirectly stimulate the expression of these genes. Importantly, the
direct AR mediated repression of these genes is enhanced in PCa cells
expressing higher levels of AR, and overexpression of AR in LNCaP cells
resulted in increased and more persistent AR binding to these genes, and
also enhanced the direct AR repression of this gene
subset.Mechanistically, we found that the indirect activation of these
DNA synthesis genes by AR is mediated through transcriptionally
stimulating lipid synthesis, which could subsequently drive the G1/S cell
cycle progression and RB1 phosphorylation. Indeed, this indirect
stimulatory effect of AR on these genes could be suppressed by cyclin
dependent kinase inhibition or by preventing the AR stimulation of mTOR
(rapamycin) or sterol synthesis (statins). Taken together, these findings
indicate that the ability of AR to repress this gene set mediating DNA
synthesis may persist in CRPC, and may be exploited therapeutically by
combination therapies that stimulate AR while repressing its metabolic
functions.

