Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo magnetic resonance elastography in pediatric brain tumor
models


Refined imaging strategies that could improve diagnosis and management of
children with brain malignancies are urgently required. Pediatric brain
malignancies possess distinct underlying biologies that discriminate them
from adult tumors, even within a common neuropathological diagnosis such
as glioblastoma (GBM). Magnetic resonance elastography (MRE) exploits the
ability of MRI to visualize the propagation of shear waves resulting from
vibrations applied to the cranium to map and quantify (kPa) brain tissue
elasticity (Gd) and viscosity (Gl) in vivo. The altered viscoelastic
properties of tumors, combined with the sensitivity of MRE for
differences in tumor microstructure, establishes MRE as an attractive
modality for the detection and differential diagnosis of brain
malignancies. Here we aimed to determine whether the potential of MRE in
the neuroradiological management of patients with brain malignancies
could be extended to the pediatric population.The viscoelastic properties
of two pediatric brain tumor models that faithfully emulate high risk
childhood disease were investigated: i) Orthotopic D-212 MG pediatric
supratentorial giant cell GBM (H3F3A wildtype, 11 year old patient)
xenografts propagated in NCr nu/nu mice and ii) GTML/Trp53KI/KI
transgenic mice that spontaneously develop aggressive, MYCN driven, p53
depleted, medulloblastomas.D-212 MG and GTML/Trp53KI/KI tumors were less
elastic (lower Gd) and viscous (lower Gl), and therefore softer, than the
surrounding brain tissue. Both tumor types were also significantly less
elastic (D-212 MG Gd = 3.90.2; GTML/Trp53KI/KI Gd = 3.50.1) than the soft
thalamic parenchyma in non-tumor-bearing mice (Gd = 5.90.2; p = 0.001 and
p = 0.02, respectively, Mann-Whitney), in addition to being less viscous.
Interestingly, GTML/Trp53KI/KI tumors demonstrated a bimodal distribution
of Gd, which reflected the more marked transition between their
relatively stiffer rim and the softer core compared with D-212 MG
tumors.We demonstrate that two representative models of major high risk
pediatric brain malignancies share the unique softness previously
observed in adult brain tumor models, allowing their detection by MRE.
This supports observations that pediatric GBMs are morphologically
indistinguishable from adult GBMs. Although median Gd values were not
sufficient to discriminate between the tumor types, the marked bimodal
distribution of Gd in the GTML/Trp53KI/KI tumors was not apparent in
D-212 MG GBM tumors. Whilst ongoing histopathological investigation into
growth patterns, vascular, cellular and extracellular networks will aid
elucidation of the pathological determinants of the bimodal signature, to
date unique to GTML/Trp53KI/KI, these data reinforce the potential of MRE
for the detection and differential diagnosis of pediatric brain
malignancies based on their mechanical properties.

