Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non small cell lung cancer and circulating tumor cell: A different
expression of EpCam and cytokeratins


Non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) is a major cause of cancer-related
death in both men and women globally
(http://www.cancer.org/cancer/lungcancer-nonsmallcell/detailedguide/nonsmal
l-cell-lung-cancer-key-statistics), (Ferlay, Steliarova-Foucher et al.
2013). Despite recent advances in early tumor detection, surgical
treatment, radio-chemotherapy, and targeted therapy, the NSCLC-related
high mortality rate remains a daunting challenge (Jemal, Bray et al.
2011). Although targeted therapy, especially against epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), has greatly advanced, only 15% of NSCLC patients
experience therapeutic benefits (Keedy, Temin et al. 2011).Since
predictive biomarkers are lacking so far, Circulating Tumor Cell (CTC)
assays have gained interest to assist clinicians in patient management.In
NSCLC, CTCs show a slightly different cytokeratin (CK) pattern and a
lower expression of full-length Epithelial Cell Adhesion Molecule (EpCAM)
compared to other carcinomas (Fong, Seeber et al. 2014). Indeed, 80% of
patients were CTC-positive by the EpCAM-independent ISET compared to only
23% by standard CellSearch assay (Krebs, Sloane et al. 2011).We
questioned whether we could detect a higher number of CTCs by
implementing the standard CellSearch assay with an expanded CK pattern,
and by using an Autoprep Sample Collection Device (ASCD), designed in the
7PQ CTCtrap project, to collect cells actually discarded by the
CellSearch platform (EpCAM low/negative cells).Methods: We evaluated 65
patients at baseline; 2 blood draws were collected and analyzed by the
standard and the implemented (including CK: 5, 6, 7, 14, 17) CTC assays.
In three cases, we evaluated CTCs by using ASDC in conjunction with
CellSearch platform.Results: At baseline, CTCs as detected with expanded
CK panel were associated with a poorer prognosis. Indeed, CTC-positive
patients had a significant lower median PFS (108 days) than CTC-negative
patients (254 days; Kaplan-Meyer, Log-Rank test p = 0.017). Furthermore,
by ASDC we were able to detected EpCAM low/negative epithelial cells, as
confirmed by CK expression. Curiously, we observed an inverse association
between the number of CTCs as detected by CellSearch assay and the one in
ASDC fraction.Conclusions: The expanded CK panel improves CTC detection
and potentially discloses a more aggressive disease. Accrual is ongoing;
further analysis will investigate the prognostic impact of EpCAM
low/negative epithelial cells on NSCLC patients.

