Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: B-Raf activation loop phosphorylation is crucial for efficient
MAPK signalling in vivo


Raf proteins are evolutionary conserved protein serine/threonine kinases
and represent the MAPKKKs of the ERK-pathway. This pathway plays a
crucial role in embryogenesis and is deregulated in multiple diseases.
B-Raf represents the most potent MEK kinase of the Raf family and
mutations in B-Raf or its upstream activators (e.g. Ras) are
well-described in malignancies. So far, targeting the kinase function
directly is flawed by paradoxical ERK activation in presence of oncogenic
Ras. Therefore, a better understanding of its activation and finding an
alternative targeting strategy is crucial. Phosphorylation of the
T599VKS602-motif within the B-Raf activation loop is essential for full
in vitro kinase activity stimulated by oncogenic Ras and is mimicked by
oncogenic mutations such as V600E. To validate the importance of
activation loop phosphorylation in vivo, we established a novel
conditional BrafAVKA knock-in mouse that, upon Cre-mediated
recombination, expresses the B-RafAVKA protein in which T599 and S602 are
replaced by alanine residues.Strikingly and in strong contrast to Braf
knock-out mice, homozygous BrafAVKA mice are viable and show no early
developmental defects suggesting that kinase impairment but not loss of
the protein can be tolerated during embryogenesis. Additionally, these
findings suggest that the B-RafAVKA mutant protein does not provoke a
paradoxical ERK activation like the kinase dead B-RafD594A. However,
neurological abnormalities such as ataxia or aberrant locomotion occur in
older animals. This phenotype correlates with decreased MEK/ERK
phosphorylation in total brain lysates. Also, signalling capacity of the
ERK MAPK module, immediate early gene induction and proliferation are
impaired in B-RafAVKA expressing MEFs.Our findings support the concept
that T599VKS602-motif phosphorylation is necessary for full B-Raf kinase
activity in vivo. Therefore, blocking activation loop phosphorylation
could be used to suppress aberrant ERK-pathway activity, e.g. by
oncogenic Ras or RTKs, and circumventing paradoxical ERK activation in
vivo.

