Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Environmental factors (heavy metal, alcohol) enhance tumor
malignant behaviors


Global cancer incidence and mortality increases dramatically word wild,
epically in China, even though significant progress has been made against
cancer. Cancer will account for the first most common cause of
disease-related death in China. Abundant evidences demonstrated both
genetic and environmental factors might contribute to human cancer
initiation and progression. In our lab, we focus on role of
gain-of-function mutant SHP-2 (genetic factor) and heavy mental
contamination or alcohol drinking (environmental factors) on tumor
progression. Here, we reported environmental factors like heavy mental
arsenic and alcohol consumption promote digestive tumor and breast cancer
malignant behaviors. The first, clinic data showed that an increasing
arsenic concentration in III/IV TNM stage gastric cancer patient, then an
enhanced cancer cell malignant behaviors (proliferation/ motility/
metastasis, etc) were found in gastric cancer or colon cancer cell lines
chronic treated with 5-15 nm arsenic in vitro and in vivo. EMT might
contribute to this promotion process induced by arsenic.The second: a
positive correlation between alcohol consumption and advanced
Tumor-Node-Metastasis (TNM) stages, higher vessel invasion and poorer
prognosis in Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) were found. In vitro and in
vivo experiments further indicated that alcohol promoted the progression
and migration/invasion of HCC, breast cancer and lewis lung carcinoma
(LLC). Specifically, we found that alcohol enhanced the
migration/invasion of tumor cells and increased tumor angiogenesis.
Consistently, higher expression of VEGF, MCP-1, activated NF-B and more
infiltrated M2 macrophage was observed in tumor tissues of
alcohol-drinkers. Alcohol induced the accumulation of intracellular
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the activation of NF-B signaling in
HepG2 cells. Conversely, blockage of alcohol-mediated ROS accumulation
and NF-B signaling inhibited alcohol-induced expression of VEGF and
MCP-1, the tumor growth, angiogenesis and metastasis. These results
suggested that chronic moderate alcohol consumption may promote the
progression and metastasis of tumor; the oncogenic effect may be at least
partially mediated by the ROS accumulation and NF-B-dependent VEGF and
MCP-1 up-regulation. Even more, an increasing cancer stem cell population
was found in tumor cell lines under low dose alcohol induction.Our
results make us presume chronic stress induced by environmental factors
like alcohol, heavy mental, etc might activate cell signal and enhance
tumor progression in a universal way. Those studies will be benefited to
tumor prevention.This study was supported by a grant from the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (codes: 30873046, 30973424, and
81072663).Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

