Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-associated stromal cells increase malignancy of human
colorectal cancers triggering the induction of Epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition


During tumor formation, normal tissue microenvironment is transformed in
an altered niche, composed of non-malignant supporting cells, which
influence the homeostasis of cancer cells via paracrine regulators.
Tumor-associated stromal cells (TASC) are the prominent stromal elements
in most types of human carcinomas including colorectal cancer (CRC). The
differentiation of TASC from other cell types, such as resident stromal
cells or bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSC) is mainly
mediated by factors produced during the crosstalk with malignant cells.
TASC produce various extracellular matrix proteins, chemokines, and other
tumor-promoting factors which affect vascularization, proliferation,
tumor cell invasiveness and survival. Emerging data suggests that they
also play a critical role in determining response to therapy. For
instance TASC-derived factors may contribute to the development of a
protective milieu by influencing cell-cell/cell-matrix interactions,
cancer cell survival, and suppression of anti-tumor immune responses.
Moreover, physical contact between TASC and malignant cells supports
tumor cell survival via activation of anti-apoptotic pathways or inducing
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We previously showed that
BM-MSC are capable of triggering EMT in CRC cells, leading to increased
tumor cell aggressiveness in vitro and in vivo. However, the role played
by the stromal component and the processes induced on CRC cells remain to
be fully elucidated. For this purpose we have addressed phenotypic and
functional characterization of TASC in vitro and we have analyzed
TASC-mediated effects on CRC development and progression in vivo.TASC
were characterized for phenotype and differentiation capacity. Human CRC
cells were cultured in the presence or absence of TASC for five days.
After co-culture tumor cells were sorted by flow cytometry and evaluated
for the expression of EMT-related genes by Real Time PCR and for in vitro
invasiveness by chemoinvasion assay. Furthermore, their tumorigenicity
was assessed upon injection in NOD/SCID mice and developing tumors were
analyzed.Our results indicate that TASC resemble BM-MSC in morphology and
phenotype. They comprise a multipotent subpopulation that is able to
differentiate into adipogenic and osteogenic lineage. After co-culture
with CRC cells they express membrane-bound TGF-, through which they are
capable to initiate EMT in tumor cells. Moreover CRC cells acquire a more
invasive phenotype after co-culture with TASC. Upon subcutaneous
injection in NOD/SCID mice, tumor cells co-cultured with TASC show a
significantly faster growth kinetic and develop significantly larger
tumor masses as compared to tumor cells alone.Thus our data show that the
stromal component of CRC increases the tumor cells malignancy triggering
EMT induction.

