Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-L1 regulates cisplatin chemoresistance in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma


PD-L1 has been known to play a major role in suppressing the immune
system. The effect of PD-L1 has been clinically studied by inhibiting
PD-L1 in tumor and tumor-infiltrating immune cells, thereby activating
anti-tumor T cells and re-establishing anti-tumor immune responses.
Little is known about a unique role of PD-L1 in cisplatin chemoresistance
of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). The aim of the current
study is to investigate a novel finding that PD-L1 regulates DNA double
strand break (DSB) repairs via the MRE11-RAD50-NBS1 (MRN) complex and
contributes to cisplatin chemoresistance in HNSCC.Well-characterized
HNSCC tumor cell lines were used for this study. JHU 006 tumor cell line
has a cisplatin resistant phenotype whereas JHU 020 is cisplatin
sensitive. PD-L1 expression was determined by quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR) and western blot before and after cisplatin
treatment. The interactions between PD-L1 and MRN in DNA DSB mediated
chemoresistant pathway were studied. PD-L1 siRNA was used to induce
chemosensitization of HNSCC cells to cisplatin.Our study demonstrates
that treatment of HNSCC cells with cisplatin resulted in increased
expression of PD-L1 in cisplatin resistant tumor cells, whereas
chemosensitive tumor cells showed no change in PD-L1 expression.
Additionally, knockdown of PD-L1 using siRNA resulted in downregulation
of NBS1, a key protein of the MRN DNA DSB repair complex. However, NBS1
was able to modulate the levels of PD-L1 expression as the use of either
NBS1 siRNA or cells that had been transfected with a dominant negative
NBS1 mutant resulted in increased PD-L1 expression. The experimental data
suggest that PD-L1 may act as an upstream regulator of NBS1 and may
facilitate formation of the MRN complex, enhancing repair of cisplatin
induced DNA damage, thereby increasing the cell's resistance to
chemotherapeutics. Decreasing expression of PD-L1 via siRNA leads to
increased sensitivity of HNSCC cells to cisplatin. This highlights the
importance of PD-L1 in the development of chemoresitance and suggests a
potential therapeutic strategy for patients with cisplatin-resistant
HNSCC.In conclusion, we have identified a novel role for PD-L1 in the
development of chemoresistance through its interaction with the MRN
complex, which plays a major role in the repair of chemo-induced DNA DSB.
Therapies aimed at blocking PD-L1 show great promise because of their
ability to enhance both chemotherapeutics and the anti-tumor immune
response.

