Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Palmitoylated Ras-driven MAPK signaling, transformation and
tumorigenesis, but not tumor progression, are spatially regulated by
plasma membrane microdomains


In this study, we assessed the contributions of plasma membrane (PM)
microdomain targeting to the functions of H-Ras and paralogue R-Ras.
Activated H-Ras is a mitogen which can drive tumorigenesis through Raf
activation, while R-Ras is weakly mitogenic and does not induce the MAPK
pathway in cells, despite binding Raf in vitro. These paralogues have
identical effector-binding regions, but variant C-terminal targeting
domains (tDs). Ras tDs are responsible for lateral distribution within PM
microdomains as a result of distinct lipid modifications: activated H-Ras
targets to lipid ordered/disordered (Lo/Ld) domain borders, whereas
active R-Ras is sequestered in Lo domains (rafts). We hypothesize that PM
segregation regulates effector interactions and downstream signaling. We
used tD swap mutants, and assessed effects on MAPK pathway activation,
cell proliferation, transformation, and tumorigenesis. Activated R-Ras
harboring the H-Ras tD (R-Ras-tH), stably expressed in NIH3T3
fibroblasts, interacted with Raf and induced MEK and ERK phosphorylation.
Furthermore, R-Ras-tH stimulated cell growth, and supported
anchorage-independent growth in soft agar, indicating induction of a
transformed phenotype in vitro. Conversely, stable transfectants of H-Ras
harboring the R-Ras tD (H-Ras-tR) had reduced MEK and ERK
phosphorylation, cell growth, and colony formation in soft agar compared
with H-Ras cells. Thus, Ras access to Raf at the PM is a critical step
for Ras mitogenic signaling. However, tumor progression driven by these
cells in xenografts in mice did not match in vitro phenotypes.
R-Ras-expressing cells produced few solid tumors, while R-Ras-tH cells
produced relatively larger, but size-limited, avascular tumors with a
higher frequency per xenograft. Surprisingly, both H-Ras and H-Ras-tR
xenografts produced large and heavily vascularized tumors, implicating an
important role of Ras in modulating tumor angiogenesis in this model.
Indeed, the conditioned media (secretome) of R-Ras-expressing cells did
not support endothelial cell cord formation in growth factor-reduced
Matrigel, while the secretome from H-Ras cells robustly induced cord
formation; these effects were independent of Ras microdomain
localization. Thus, targeting Ras to the Lo/Ld border is sufficient to
initiate tumor formation, however, a tD-independent angiogenic effect is
required for progression of Ras-induced tumors.

