Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selinexor (KPT-330) radio-sensitizes non-small cell lung cancer
cells in vitro and in vivo


The primary nuclear export protein, Exportin 1 (XPO1/CRM1), is
overexpressed in most cancers and this overexpression is frequently
correlated with poor prognosis. Selective Inhibitors of Nuclear Export
(SINE) compounds are a family of small-molecule bioavailable drugs that
bind covalently to XPO1 to inhibit nuclear export. This results in
nuclear retention of major tumor suppressor proteins, such as p53, pRB,
FOXO3A and other critical proteins in cancer biology, which leads to
selective cancer cell death. Selinexor is the most advanced SINE with
>500 hematological and solid tumor cancer patients treated to date in a
number of Phase I/II clinical trials. Blocking XPO1 function also blocks
nuclear transport of key DNA damage repair (DDR) proteins and we
therefore hypothesized that combination of selinexor with radiation
therapy (RT) would lead to synergistic anti-tumor activity.
Radiation-chemotherapy combination is an established therapeutic option
for patients with medically inoperable non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), but its use is limited due to tolerability and adverse effects.
Moreover, this treatment strategy typically has short-term benefits and
the patients relapse with progressive disease. Here we report on studies
designed to test whether selinexor could interfere with DDR and synergize
with radiation to enhance anti-tumor potency relative to either treatment
alone.Cell cycle analysis and clonogenic assays were conducted in the
presence or absence of selinexor in combination with escalating doses of
RT on the radiation-sensitive and radiation-insensitive H1299 and A549
cell lines, respectively.Interestingly, Selinexor-treatment induced G1
cell cycle arrest in the p53-deficient cell line H1299 and a prominent G2
cell cycle arrest in p53-wild type A549 cells 24 hrs post treatment.
Furthermore, clonogenic assays revealed that selinexor + RT treatment act
synergistically to produce a dose-dependent growth inhibition in both
cell lines. In vivo combination treatment in the A549 NSCLC xenograft
model with low doses of selinexor and RT displayed a strong synergistic
effect for reduction of tumor volume. In addition, microscopic and
immunohistochemical analysis of the resected tumors showed an overall
reduction in tumor cell numbers, increased fibrosis and induction of
apoptosis in the selinexor-RT treated tumors compared to controls.
Finally, mechanistic studies revealed that selinexor does not induce DNA
damage like RT, but downregulates CHK1, RAD51 and other DDR proteins.
Together, our results suggest that selinexor treatment sensitizes cells
to RT by preventing single-stranded DNA break repair via downregulation
of DDR protein expression. In contrast, selinexor induces cell cycle
arrest at G1 in p53 deficient H1299 cells, allowing DNA damage
accumulation and induction of apoptosis. These results provide a
rationale basis for combining selinexor with RT in clinical trials
studies.

