Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of B-cell lymphoma 6 as a novel therapeutic target
in glioblastoma


BackgroundGlioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is one of the most aggressive
cancers in humans. Identification and characterization of the
GBM-promoting factors is imperative for the development of novel and
effective clinical interventions. We recently discovered that the
expression of B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6), a gene involved in the
development of B cell lymphoma, is up-regulated in GBM. This study aims
to explore the functional implications of BCL6 in this disease.MethodsWe
analysed the transcriptional level of BCL6 in primary glioma samples, and
screened the protein expression in a panel of human GBM cell lines as
well as primary GBM explants. cDNA microarray analysis was conducted to
identify the potential downstream targets of BCL6 in GBM.
Small-interfering RNA (siRNA), small hairpin RNA (shRNA), and
CRISPR-mediated gene silencing strategies were applied to examine the
biological function of BCL6. Finally, inhibitors targeting BCL6 were
tested in glioma cells.ResultsIn silico analysis revealed elevated BCL6
mRNA levels in both primary GBM samples and cell lines when compared with
neural stem cell or non-tumor brain tissues. Western blot confirmed the
prevalent expression of BCL6 in GBM cell lines as well as primary GBM
explants. Functional studies showed that BCL6 played an important role in
promoting cell growth. Depletion of endogenous BCL6 through siRNA, shRNA
or CRISPR in GBM cells led to marked inhibition of cell proliferation
both in vitro and in vivo.Transcriptome analysis showed that BCL6 is an
important regulator of TP53 signaling pathway. Knockdown of BCL6
increased the expression of p53, p21CIP and p27KIP. CHIP-qPCR further
confirmed that BCL6 interacted directly to the TP53 promoter and
suppressed its expression.Moreover, BCL6 negatively regulated MEK-ERK
activation in GBM cells. BCL6 depletion reduced the phosphorylation
levels of both MEK1/2 and ERK1/2, but had little effect on AKT
phosphorylation. Our further investigations uncovered that BCL6 modulated
the expression of several key regulators of MEK-ERK pathway, such as
SPRY1, SPRY2 and AXL. Finally, BCL6 inhibitor showed marked
anti-proliferation activity in GBM cells, suggesting that targeting BCL6
may serve as a new strategy to treat GBM.ConclusionOur data suggest that
BCL6 is involved in glioma tumorigenesis through regulating both the TP53
and MEK-ERK pathways, and that BCL6 is a potential therapeutic target for
glioma treatment.

