Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting ETS factor ETV4 as a novel therapeutic for the
management of breast and prostate cancer


Despite the development of several successful targeted therapies, drug
resistance and metastasis remain a significant challenge in the treatment
of both breast (BCa) and prostate (PCa) cancers. For these reasons, there
is an immediate need to identify a novel class of therapeutics targeting
alternative factors, such as those that promote the metastatic capacity
of tumour cells. ETS translocation variant 4 (ETV4) is a member of the
ETS transcription factor family and is a significant mediator of
tumorigenesis through its activation of several downstream pathways that
are associated with migration and invasion. ETV4 is overexpressed in
breast tumours and is associated with distant metastasis and poor
prognosis particularly in triple negative BCa, which still lacks an
approved targeted therapy. Similarly in PCa, overexpression of ETV4 is
associated with the deregulation of the PI3K and Ras signalling pathways
that are commonly implicated in metastatic disease. Like other ETS
factors such as ERG and ETV1, fusion of the ETV4 gene can be found in a
subtype of PCa cases and is associated with the disease progression.
Thus, ETV4 is an important therapeutic candidate with potential
applications in both advanced BCa and PCa. Drug development against ETV4
is made even more significant due to the lack of any approved therapy
that directly targets it or any other members of the ETS family. Using a
combination of in silico screening and in vitro assays, we have
identified several small molecules with strong binding affinities and
selectivity toward the DNA binding domain of ETV4. The prostate cell
line, PC3, and the triple negative breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231,
were used for in vitro studies as they endogenously express moderate to
high levels of ETV4. Over 100 candidate compounds, which were selected
from virtual screening against millions of small-molecular structures,
were tested across the two cell lines using a luciferase-based
transcriptional reporter assay. From this assay approximately 30
compounds were identified with significant inhibition on the
transcriptional activity of ETV4 without a cytotoxic effect. The most
potent of these compounds was shown by protein nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) to directly interact with specific residues within the DNA binding
domain. These compounds were also able to inhibit the migratory capacity
of cancer cells. This data provides evidence for the direct targeting of
ETV4 by small molecules, and future work will aim to further characterize
their mechanism of action and effects on downstream targets in an effort
to create a novel therapeutic strategy to treat metastatic breast and
prostate cancers. (Supported by grants from the Canadian Cancer Society
Research Initiative and Prostate Cancer Canada)

