Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recurrent IL4R mutations in primary mediastinal large B cell
lymphoma


Introduction: Primary mediastinal large B cell lymphoma (PMBCL) is a
distinct subtype of aggressive B cell lymphoma that arises from thymic
medullary B cells and characteristically presents as a mass in the
anterior mediastinum. A proportion of PMBCL patients suffer from
refractory or relapsing disease, and subsequent salvage therapies are
frequently ineffective. Development of targeted therapies is impeded by
the lack of knowledge about the mutational landscape in the lymphoma
genomes and mutation-associated phenotypes. We recently reported somatic
mutations in the transcriptome of 7 PMBCL patients and 3 cell lines by
next-generation sequencing and found a hotspot mutation in exon 8 of IL4R
(Gunawardana et al, Nat Genet, 2014). Interleukin (IL)-4 is a type II
cytokine that regulates immune responses through binding to a receptor
complex consisting of the IL4 receptor alpha (IL4R) chain and IL13R or
the common gamma chain (c). Activation of IL4R by IL-4 and/or IL-13
initiates intracellular signal transduction mediated by the
phosphorylation of JAnus Kinase-Signal Transducer and Activation of
Transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway. We hypothesize that constitutively
active JAK-STAT observed in PMBCL is in part due to gain-of-function IL4R
mutations signaling through this oncogenic pathway.Methods and samples: A
sequencing cohort consisting of fresh-frozen pretreatment lymph node
biopsies from 62 PMBCL cases were selected from the BCCA tissue archive.
DNA from PMBCL tumors and 3 PMBCL-derived cell lines were extracted for
IL4R exonic PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing or high-throughput
sequencing on an Illumina MiSeq instrument. WT and mutant (I242N) IL4R
cDNA were cloned into mammalian expression vectors and expressed in the
lymphoma cell line DEV and in engineered HEK293 cells expressing STAT6.
Supernatant from cultured cells were used to measure the activity of
STAT6-dependent expression of secreted embryonic alkaline phosphatase
(SEAP). Extracted RNA and protein from transfected cells were used for
qRT-PCR and Western blotting, respectively.Results: Somatic IL4R
mutations were found in 18 of 65 (28%) cases confirming a hotspot
mutation (I242N) in exon 8 in 11 of 18 (61%) mutated cases. Ectopic
expression of the mutant in HEK293 cells showed increased SEAP levels
compared to WT (534% vs. 100%) indicating STAT6 activation independent of
cytokine stimulation. Introduction of the mutant into DEV cells showed
IL4 independent hyperphosphorylation of JAK2, STAT5 and STAT6 proteins
and upregulation of the B cell activation marker CD23 (963% vs. 100% in
WT).Conclusions: IL4R is frequently mutated in PMBCL with a recurrent
hotspot affecting the transmembrane domain of the protein. Functional
analyses characterize these mutations as gain-of-function leading to
constitutive activation of the JAK-STAT pathway and downstream target
genes. These data suggest IL4R mutations as novel driver alterations in
PMBCL and may provide a rational therapeutic target.

