Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor Cabozantinib as a
therapeutic agent in MET-overexpressing gastric cancer


Introduction: MET overexpression has been shown to correlate with
clinical outcomes in gastric cancer. The objective of this study was to
evaluate MET expression and its downstream signaling mediators, STAT3,
ERK, and AKT, as potential therapeutic targets in human gastric cancer.
We evaluated cabozantinib, a multi-targeted receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor with potent activity against MET and VEGFR2, in MET-expressing
(MET(+)) gastric cancer cells.Methods: Surgical gastric cancer specimens
were evaluated for expression of MET, phospho-ERK and phospho-STAT3 by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Cabozantinib was tested alone and in
combination with a MEK inhibitor (U0126) and a JAK1/2 inhibitor
(ruxolitinib). Half maximal inhibitory concentrations (IC50) for each
drug were determined by MTS assay to determine appropriate treatment
concentrations in two MET(+) human gastric cancer cell lines (Hs746T and
SNU5). Protein phosphorylation levels of MET, STAT3, ERK, and AKT were
determined by Western blot to assess downstream activation before and
after drug treatment.Results: MET protein expression by IHC was detected
in 18/47 (38.3%) gastric cancer specimens. One-half of MET(+) specimens
stained with moderate or strong intensity, and 15/18 (83.3%) showed 25%
membrane staining. In the MET(+) specimens, 9/18 (50.0%) samples
expressed phospho-ERK and 3/18 (16.7%) expressed phospho-STAT3. Next,
gastric cancer cell lines were examined by Western blot showing elevated
levels of baseline phosphorylation of MET, STAT3 and ERK in Hs746T and
SNU5 cells. Treatment of SNU5 (IC50 0.37 M) and Hs746T (IC50 2.3 M) with
cabozantinib (0.1 M) completely blocked downstream phosphorylation of
MET, STAT3, AKT and ERK. Addition of MET's ligand hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF, 25 ng/ml) overcame this observed inhibition at a lower
cabozantinib concentration (0.01 M), as evidenced by phosphorylation of
STAT3 and ERK. Combining U0126 or ruxolitinib with cabozantinib (0.01 M)
effectively blocked ERK and STAT3 phosphorylation, respectively, even in
the presence of HGF. This demonstrates that downstream signaling in
MET(+) lines can be effectively and synergistically blocked by two
targeted drug therapies.Conclusion: MET, ERK and STAT3 signaling are
activated in gastric cancer cell lines, suggesting that ERK and STAT3 may
serve as additional points of therapeutic intervention in MET(+) gastric
cancer. Combining cabozantinib with a MEK or STAT3 inhibitor was
necessary to inhibit phosphorylation of their respective targets in the
presence of HGF, suggesting that drug synergy may be effective in
blocking multiple activated downstream pathways.

