Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of radiation by autophagic modulator


Introduction: On account of limited therapeutic options for advanced and
recurrent cervical cancer, novel therapeutic modalities are being
investigated based on translational research. Among the promising topics
is autophagy. Autophagy can be refered to as a double edged sword in a
way that it is known to play a role in both tumor cell suppression and
survival. This study was carried out to determine the effect of autophagy
in treatment of cervical cancer cells with radiation alone and with
autophagy inducer or inhibitor.Methods: Human cervical cancer cells, Hela
and Caski were used. Western blot was implemented to detect protein
expression. Fluorescence microscopy and inverted microscopy guided
inspection confimed autophagy. Hela and Caski cells were irradiated with
r-rays (2 Gy / min) and again each time after treatment with autophagy
inducer (Rapamycin) and inhibitor (3-MA). Expression of LC3 and cell
deaths in two cell preparations were examined.Results: Notable increment
of LC3 expression were detected after radiation in both cell lines by
western blot and microscope analyses. Radiation of pre-Rapamycin treated
cells showed further increased LC3 expression and pre-3-MA treated cells,
less increased LC3 expression than radiation alone compared to
non-treated, not radiated cells. Cell viability decreased to 75% in Hela
cells and 79% in Caski cells after radiation. When treated with
Rapamycin, cell viabilities were 59% and 65%, and with 3-MA, 65% and 70%
in each cell lines.Discussion: Radiation induces autophagy in cervical
cancer cell lines. Autophagy induced by radiation could be modified when
treated with Rapamycin / 3-MA which leads to more cell deaths. Further
investigations are needed to identify the specific pathways mediating
post-IR induced autophagy in order to confirm the functional link between
autophagy and radiation treatment. Inhibition of autophagy seems to
promote more cells to undergo apoptosis, however, the relationship
between autophagy and apoptosis with IR treatment in cervical cancer
cells remain to be enlightened. Induction of autophagy may interfere with
the mechanism of homeostasis that is originally preserved by autophagy
itself, and leads to cell death possibly altogether with apoptosis. The
pathway via which this process conducts also waits to be distinguished.

