Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computational analysis predicts unbalanced IDH1/IDH2 expression
associate with 2-HG-inactivating beta-oxygenation pathway in colorectal
cancer


Bioinformatics and computational modeling offer innovative approaches to
investigate cancer metabolism and predict the secondary and tertiary
cellular responses. Dysregulation of metabolism has also been implicated
in the pathophysiology of cancer. A significant proportion of patients
with glioblastoma and hematological malignancies harbor the mutated forms
of the oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos) enzymes, isocitrate
dehydrogenase (IDH) 1 or 2. The mutated forms of IDH1 and IDH2 produce an
oncogenic metabolite, D-2-hydroxyglutarate (D2HG). A recent study of
breast cancer patients showed that D2HG can also be produced in the
absence of mutated IDH, through an alternative route involving
over-activated MYC signaling. We developed a novel methodology to
computationally analyze gene expression in colorectal cancer, and
identified novel sets of genes that are associated with patient survival.
The study of OxPhos-related genes revealed that an imbalance between the
expression of IDH1 and IDH2, defined as overexpression of one isoform in
relation to the other, was associated with worse prognosis in colorectal
cancer patients. This effect was further accentuated by reduced
expression of the beta-oxygenation enzyme, 3-D-hydroxyacyl-CoA
dehydratase (HCDH) 4, which has been reported to contribute to metabolism
of intracellular D2HG. The present computational analysis revealed a
novel and potential mechanism of colorectal cancer development, through
over-production of D2HG when there is an imbalance between IDH1 and IDH2
expression, resulting in decreased clearance of D2HG when the
beta-oxidization pathway is diminished. Additional validation analysis
with other gene expression dataset has resulted in that IDH1/2 imbalanced
expression had a shorter DFS compared with balanced expression.
Altogether, these findings provide a strong rationale for studying this
mechanism further in order to discover novel therapeutic targets for the
treatment of colorectal cancer.

