Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C8-linked pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD)-benzofused hybrids as
transcription factor inhibitors


The pyrrolo[2,1-c][1,4]benzodiazepines (PBDs) have been extensively
investigated as DNA-interactive agents since their discovery in 1963. The
significant cytotoxicity of the naturally derived PBDs has led to the
search for synthetic analogues that retain the cytotoxicity of the parent
structure while providing an enhanced therapeutic index. There is growing
evidence that PBD monomers inhibit the binding of transcription factors
to gene promoter regions, blocking their effects on gene expression. For
example, GWL-78, a C8-linked PBD-Py-Py (Py = pyrrole) conjugate, has been
shown to block interaction of the transcription factor NF-Y, and
KMR-28-39, a C8-linked PBD-MPB conjugate inhibits the activity of the
transcription factor NF-B. As up-regulation of NF-B has long been
implicated in the development and progression of several cancer types,
this may account for the femtomolar potency observed for PBD monomers
such as KMR-28-39.The initial synthesis of a small library of C8-PBD
conjugates with benzofused C8-substituents provided notable activity
against a panel of leukaemia cell lines. In addition to exhibiting low
picomolar IC50 values in a number of cell lines, these compounds also
showed selectivity for binding to NF-B consensus sequences. This small
library was used as the starting point for the synthesis of three
analogous libraries of PBD C8-conjugates designed to explore the SARs of
such structures, with a view to selecting a candidate for pre-clinical
development. The design rationale for the novel conjugates involved
modification of the shape of the C8-linked substituent with the
introduction of specific functional groups in an effort to induce
sequence-selective DNA interactivity.The sequence selectivity of the
novel benzofused PBD conjugates was investigated using a FRET-based assay
in which ligand binding to several different transcription factor binding
sequences implicated in cancer was explored (i.e., AP-1, NF-B1, NF-B2,
STAT3 and EGR). Differential DNA stabilisation compared to control was
observed for all analogues, with Tm values between 23.4 and 3.4oC at 1 M
ligand concentration (Ligand:DNA = 1:5) for these sequences, indicating
the molecules had preferential binding to certain transcription factor
binding sequences. Stabilisation was especially pronounced for the AP-1
consensus sequence with two lead compounds (DC-3-28-33 and DC-1-113)
providing a high degree of stabilisation (23.9oC and 26oC, respectively).
Preliminary cytotoxicity screening studies were carried out in Primary
CLL and a Myeloma cell line (JJN3), and low nanomolar IC50 values were
observed in the CLL cells for several of the synthesised compounds. These
included DC-1-92 (9.7nM), DC-1-115 (14nM), DC-1-36 (16nM), DC-1-170
(17nM), and DC-1-113 (18nM). Control screening in normal lymphocytes is
currently underway in order to establish the selective toxicity profiles
of these compounds.

