Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Torin2 suppresses ionizing radiation induced DNA damage repair


The phosphatidylinositol 3- kinase like kinase (PIKK) family of signaling
proteins play a central role in stress response, DNA damage signaling,
and sensing growth factor and nutrient levels to regulate cellular
metabolism. In tumor cells, the PIKK signaling is often hyperactivated
making it an attractive therapeutic target. In this study, we have
focused our efforts on an ATP-competitive mTOR/PIKK inhibitor Torin2
which has been previously reported to exhibit potent activity against the
DNA repair-associated proteins ATM, ATR and DNA-PK in addition to mTOR in
biochemical profiling studies. Based on this profiling data, we
hypothesized that Torin2 would have synergistic effects with agents or
biological processes that cause DNA damage, especially in cases where
high levels of replicative stress and non-oncogenic addiction to DNA
repair factors are present. In order to understand the practical clinical
implications, we evaluated how Torin2 modulates the effects of ionizing
radiation (IR) induced DNA damage responses. With a defined set of
biochemical and cytogenetic studies along with DNA repair reporter
system, we established the role for Torin2 in double strand break repair
responses in human tumor cell lines. Torin2 enhances ionizing
radiation-induced cell killing in cancer cell lines independent of ATM
status, suggesting that Torin2 simultaneously influences multiple PIKK
targets. Moreover, Torin2 pre-treatment did not alter the appearance of
H2AX foci post irradiation but significantly delayed the disappearance of
IR-induced H2AX foci indicating a defective DNA repair processes.
Pre-treatment of this drug decreased the number of IR-induced G2/S-phase
specific chromosomal aberrations, and also reduces the frequency of the
foci formation of IR-induced homologous recombination (HR) repair
proteins, such as CtIP and Rad51, suggesting that the drug works by
blocking HR, a repair process that predominantly works in S/G2 phase of
the cell cycle. Consistent with these results, a HR reporter assay showed
that Torin2 treatment reduces repair of I-SceI restriction enzyme induced
DNA damage. Torin2 also influences DNA replicative stress through
inhibition of ATR-Chk1 activation, and contributes to fork stalling
during replication. With the above set of studies, we have identified key
DNA damage signaling events by which Torin2 affects HR mediated double
strand break repair after ionizing radiation treatment. This enhanced
radiosensitizing effect of Torin2 merits further pre-clinical evaluation
in combination with various radiotherapy modalities.

