Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth inhibition of cancer cells by 5-aminolevulinic acid


Introduction: 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) is intracellularly metabolized
to protoporphyrin IX (PpIX) in heme synthetic pathway. As PpIX is a
fluorescent photosensitizer and has been shown to accumulate
preferentially in cancer cells, exogenously administered ALA is used for
photodynamic diagnosis (PDD) and photodynamic therapy (PDT). However, the
influence of exogenously administered ALA on cellular proliferation is
not elucidated. Overproduction of heme owing to exogenously administered
ALA may induce an upregulation of heme oxygenase (HO-1), which is a
potential inhibitor of cellular proliferation via a generation of carbon
monoxide (CO) and an induction of P21. We therefore examined cytotoxicity
when I was administered.Methods and Materials: Human cancer cell lines
(10 types) and human normal cell lines (2 types) were incubated with ALA
(1.0 mM) for 24 hrs. A fluorometric measurement for PpIX (ex. 405 nm. em.
630 nm) and a proliferation assay using WST-8 were carried out. The
expression of HO-1 was evaluated using Western blotting.Results: In 8 out
of 10 cancer cell lines, an amount of intracellularly synthesized PpIX
after the administration of ALA was highly correlated with a decrease in
number of cells (cell death) (R = 0.73), and two out of the eight cell
lines (HepG2 and Caki-1) showed a significant reduction in number of
cells (> 15%) accompanied with a significant increase in PpIX generation
(> 90 a.u.). On the other hand, normal cell lines (HUVEC, SMC) showed
less changes in cell count (within 1.5%) accompanied with less PpIX
generation (within 35 a.u.). The HO-1 production rate, defined by HO-1
expression level in ALA-treated cells / HO-1 expression level in
non-treated cells was highly correlated with the cell death (R =
0.67).Conclusion: In some types of cancer cell lines, an exogenously
administered ALA leads to cell death, probably due to the upregulation of
HO-1 that is produced by the accumulation of PpIX. Meanwhile, in normal
cell lines, the exogenously administered ALA is less likely to induce
cell death.

