Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel IRAK-4 inhibitors exhibit highly potent anti-proliferative
activity in DLBCL cell lines with activating MYD88 L265P mutation


Interleukin-1 Receptor Associated Kinase-4 (IRAK-4) is a serine/threonine
protein kinase belonging to tyrosine like kinase (TLK) family. IRAK-4 is
one of the important signalling components downstream of IL-1/Toll family
of receptors (IL-1R, IL-18R, IL-33R, Toll-like receptors). Recent studies
have reported occurrence of oncogenic mutations in MYD88 in 30% of ABC
diffuse large B cell lymphomas (ABC DLBCL) and 90% of Waldenstrom's
macroglobulinemia (WM). Most of ABC DLBCLs have a single amino acid
substitution of proline for the leucine at position 265 (L265P) in the
TIR domain of MYD88 protein resulting in constitutive activation of
IRAK-4. Thus, IRAK4 is an attractive therapeutic target for the treatment
of B-cell lymphomas with activating MYD88 L265P mutation. We have
designed, synthesized and tested small molecule IRAK-4 inhibitors based
on hits originating from Aurigene s compound library. These novel
compounds were profiled for IRAK4 kinase inhibition, anti-proliferative
activity, kinase selectivity, and drug-like properties. Furthermore,
selected compounds were tested in a proliferation assay and pIRAK1
mechanistic assay using ABC-DLBCL cell lines with activating MYD88 L265P
mutation, OCI-lLy10 and OCI-lLy3. We have identified a series of novel
bicyclic heterocycles as potent inhibitors of IRAK-4. Aurigene Lead
compound exhibited potent inhibitory activity for IRAK-4 with an IC50 of
3nM in biochemical assay. Aurigene Lead compound inhibited pIRAK1 levels,
and proliferation of OCI-Ly3 and OCI-Ly10 cells with an IC501of 132nM and
52nM respectively. To the best of our knowledge, Aurigene Lead compound
represents the most potent IRAK4 inhibitor reported for target modulation
and anti-proliferative activity in DLBCL cell lines with activating MYD88
L265P mutation. Aurigene Lead compound has good oral pharmacokinetic
profile in mice and has demonstrated excellent pharmacodynamic effect in
an in vivo LPS induced TNF- model with an ED50 of 3.8 mg/Kg in mice.
Preliminary in vitro tox studies indicated clean safety profile.
Demonstration of efficacy in OCI-lLy10 mouse tumor model is ongoing. In
summary, a series of potent IRAK-4 inhibitors belonging to 3 different
chemical series have been discovered and are being evaluated for
treatment of B-cell lymphomas.

