Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphodeficient NRF1 mutant suppresses the susceptibility of the
breast epithelial cells to develop tumors when exposed to estrogen - a
major breast cancer risk factor


Although several nuclear regulatory proteins may be targeted by estrogen,
our efforts have focused on the redox nuclear respiratory factor-1
(NRF-1), because our recent study showed that NRF-1 gene expression
significantly increases with the progression of breast tumor grades.
NRF-1 overexpression supported in vitro tumor formation. To determine if
NRF-1 is required for 17 beta estradiol (E2)-induced neoplastic
phenotype, we have generated NRF-1 mutants by site directed mutagenesis.
We have generated stable clones that express NRF-1 mutant. The in vitro
tumor formation was detected by anchorage independent growth and 3D
spheroid assays. NRF-1 overexpression enhanced in vitro tumor spheroid
formation, cell migration and cell invasion. Our flow cytometry analysis
showed that overexpression of wild-type NRF-1 increased the percent of
transformed MCF-10A cells in S phase compared to vector alone. Dominant
negative NRF-1 protein showed reduction in the tumor formation. In
addition, shRNA targeting NRF-1 resulted in the inhibition of anchorage
independent growth of MCF-10A cells in both vehicle control and
E2-treated cells. Since NRF-1 is a substrate of the kinase AKT, we
determined whether NRF-1 phosphorylation was increased in MCF-10A cells
after treatment with a carcinogenic regimen of E2. We observed more than
a 2-fold increase in phospho-NRF-1 in E2 treated (100pg/ml for 30 min)
MCF-10A cells and phosphorylation of NRF-1 was inhibited by co-treatment
with either biological (CAT or MnSOD) or chemical (20M ebselen) ROS
modifiers. These results suggest that E2-induced phosphorylation of NRF-1
is influenced by ROS signaling messengers. We found that E2 treated
MCF-10A cells showed increased NRF-1 binding to the promoters of Cdc2,
PRC1, PCNA, Cyclin B1, and CDC25C genes. NRF-1 binding induced by E2
treatment was inhibited by the overexpression of CAT and MnSOD. NRF-1
phosphorylation site specific to kinase AKT, Thr-109, was mutated to Asp
(D) or Ala (A), and the NRF-1 acetylation site specific to
acetyl-transferase PCAF, Lys- 89, was mutated to Gln (glutamine)-Q or Ala
(A). We examine the effect of one of the NRF-1 mutants on E2-induced in
vitro tumor formation. We observed that the expression of NRF-1 (T109A)
phosphodeficient mutant (NRF-1PMT) significantly inhibited E2-induced
cell transformation, whereas empty vector did not influence E2-induced
colony formation. Together these findings support the idea that NRF-1 may
play an important role in E2-induced malignant transformation of breast
epithelial cells. Thus, our data is consistent with the hypothesis that
in addition to the estrogen receptor activity, NRF-1 activation
contributes to the susceptibility to develop malignant phenotype in
response to exposure to estrogen. This work was in part supported by a VA
MERIT Review (VA BX001463) grant to DR

