Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the function of NONO, a novel double strand break
repair factor, and exploring its potential role as a biomarker for
melanoma


We investigated the in vivo function of NONO, a protein that has been
shown to promote a distinct sub-pathway of nonhomologous end joining
(NHEJ) repair in vitro and in cultured cells. We used a gene trap
strategy to create a null mutant for Nono, the mouse homolog of the human
NONO gene. We investigated hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), which are
known to be sensitive to deficiencies in other DNA repair proteins.
Nono-deficient mice showed reduced bone marrow and spleen cellularity.
HSCs from Nono-deficient mice showed severe impairment in competitive
repopulation assays in primary and secondary recipients. HSCs from
Nono-deficient mice also displayed significantly higher levels of
reactive oxygen species, bromodeoxyuridine incorporation, and Ki-67
positivity, consistent with hyperproliferation in response to chronic
genotoxic stress. To investigate DNA repair competence more directly, we
exposed HSCs ex vivo to the DNA crosslinking agent, mitomycin C (MMC), or
to ionizing radiation. HSCs from Nono-deficient and wild type mice showed
increased sensitivity to both of these agents in colony forming cell
assays, that NONO protein is induced after X-ray treatment, and that
Nono-deficient HSCs show delayed resolution of -H2AX foci and increased
apoptosis. Separately, we evaluated changes in the testes, another organ
that is frequently affected by DNA repair gene mutations. Testes of
Nono-deficient mice showed growth retardation, which became apparent
between 18 and 26 days of postnatal development, as well as reduced sperm
count. X-irradiation of Nono-deficient mice at 4 Gy led to increased
apoptosis in the seminiferous tubules after 24 h, as determined in a
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end-labeling assay. There
was also nearly complete depletion of germ cells at 48 h. Significantly
less effects were seen at the same time points in wild type control mice.
Similar to the results in HSCs, NONO was up regulated in the testes
following X-ray exposure. Taken together, results are consistent with an
in vivo defect in DNA repair. Notably, the co-occurrence of hematopoietic
and germ cell phenotypes is reminiscent of other DNA repair gene
mutations, including Fanconi anemia.Although DNA repair contributes to
genomic stability in normal tissues, heightened repair activity can be a
cause of treatment resistance in cancer. In this respect, it is
interesting that NONO has been reported to be highly expressed in
melanoma specimens and cell lines. We confirmed that NONO is expressed in
melanoma cell lines and showed that it is additionally upregulated in
melanoma cell lines following irradiation. Moreover, siRNA-mediated
attenuation of NONO expression led to inhibition of melanoma cell
proliferation. We are currently investigating NONO expression patterns of
human melanoma specimens (stage I to IV) in order to explore NONO
potential role as a useful prognostic biomarker for melanoma.

