Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An ICAM-1-targeted, Lcn2 siRNA-encapsulating liposome as a potent
anti-angiogenic agent for triple-negative breast cancer


Introduction: The significant growth and metastasis of triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC) tumors, coupled with limited treatment options, have
made TNBC a clinically challenging disease. We have previously shown that
the intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) is highly overexpressed in
human TNBC tissues and cell lines, suggesting that ICAM-1 could be a
potential TNBC molecular target. Lipocalin 2 (Lcn2), a 25-kDa protein
belonging to the lipocalin protein superfamily. We have recently reported
that Lcn2 is a regulator of angiogenesis. We have also found that
down-regulation of TNBC-secreted Lcn2 is associated with reduced tumor
angiogenesis in preclinical studies of breast cancer, making it a
promising TNBC anti-angiogenic target. Here, we describe a novel
liposomal drug delivery system that integrates TNBC targeting via ICAM-1,
with Lcn2 siRNA silencing, to synergistically inhibit TNBC angiogenesis
in vitro and in vivo, representing a novel anti-angiogenic therapeutic
approach for the treatment of TNBC.Materials and Methods: ICAM-1
antibody, or non-targeted IgG conjugated, Lcn2 siRNA encapsulating
liposomes (ICAM-Lcn2-LPs or IgG-Lcn2-LPs (non-targeting control)) were
prepared by the extrusion method. Lcn2 siRNA silencing in TNBC cells was
determined by qRT-PCR, and the anti-angiogenic functions of ICAM-Lcn2-LP
were evaluated via a series of in vitro angiogenic assays including:
endothelial cell proliferation, endothelial cell migration, and
endothelial cell tube formation. These in vitro anti-angiogenic results
were further confirmed in vivo using the chick chorioallantoic membrane
(CAM) assay.Results: We have engineered a liposomal siRNA delivery system
to target triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) via a novel molecular
target, ICAM-1, and selectively silenced a TNBC-overexpressing angiogenic
mediator, Lcn2 using siRNA. This ICAM-1 targeted, Lcn2 siRNA delivery
liposome binds human TNBC MDA-MB-231 cells 3.1-fold greater than
non-neoplastic MCF-10A cells. Potent Lcn2 knockdown by ICAM-Lcn2-LP led
to a significant reduction in VEGF secretion by MDA-MB-231 cells, which
led to reduced TNBC-induced angiogenesis both in vitro and in
vivo.Conclusions: We have successfully engineered an immunoliposome that
synergistically couples TNBC-targeting with Lcn2 siRNA silencing.
Synthesized ICAM-Lcn2-LPs can significantly suppress in vitro and in vivo
angiogenic activities of TNBC cells by regulating VEGF secretion. The
modular design introduced here provides a basis for future TNBC-targeted
therapeutics.Acknowledgements: This research is supported by NIH(NCI
1DP2CA174495) and the Breast Cancer Research Foundation.

