Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-Myc and Frizzled 8 play a major role in the regulation of cancer
stem cells and drug resistance in triple-negative breast cancer


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) studies have shown that neoadjuvant
chemotherapy before surgery was effective in the minority of women,
whereas the majority that had a residual tumor had a relatively poor
outcome. We have previously shown that cisplatin plus TRAIL treatment was
most effective compared to PARP -inhibitors, pacliotaxol, dacelotaxol or
cisplatin alone in TNBC cells. To identify the mechanism by which
residual cancer cells survive chemotherapy, we initially performed gene
expression profiling using the CRL2335 and MDA-MB-468 TNBC cells before
and after treatment with cisplatin plus TRAIL. Gene expression prolife
revealed that cisplatin plus TRAIL significantly inhibited major
signaling pathways related with cancer stem cells (CSCs) such as Notch,
Hedgehog, TGF and most of the Wnt/-catenin signaling when compared with
untreated control group. However, residual cells after cisplatin plus
TRAIL treatment showed a significant increase in the expression of
Frizzled 8 (FZD8 -one of the Wnt receptors) and c-Myc. In vivo, animal
studies indicate that cisplatin plus TRAIL treatments predominantly
eliminated non-cancer stem cells (non-CSCs), as demonstrated by
whole-body fluorescent imaging of mice injected with mammosphere-forming
CRL2335 cells that were stably transfected with dsRed. This led to CSCs
enrichment in residual tumors, as confirmed by immunostaining for CSC
markers. Increase in FZD8 and c-Myc expression was also observed in
residual tumors following treatment with cisplatin and TRAIL. In this
study, we have found that c-Myc overexpression increased FZD8 expression,
and its downstream signaling and together protect the cells from drug
mediated cell death compared to vector transfected cells. c-Myc
over-expressing cells do not show increased mammosphere formation; the
numbers of CSCs per mammosphere are much higher compared to vector
transfected controls. CDK inhibitor (dinaciclib) enhanced the cell death
in c-Myc over expressing non-CSCs with minimal effect on CSCs. Inhibition
of c-Myc using siRNA reduced c-Myc, FZD-8 and CSCs and enhanced
sensitivity of cells to cisplatin plus TRAIL. Taken together, our
findings suggest that c-Myc may play a major role in mediating CSC
survival and resistance to chemotherapy, making it a potential target to
enhance chemotherapeutic efficacy in patients with TNBC.

