Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer immunotherapeutic potential of NKTT320, a novel human
invariant natural killer T-cell activating monoclonal antibody


Invariant natural killer T cells (iNKTs) directly kill tumor cells and
trans-activate the anti-tumor functions of dendritic cells (DC), natural
killer (NK), T and B cells. As such, iNKTs serve as a powerful tool for
use in cell-based cancer immunotherapy. iNKT cell activation commonly
requires engagement of the invariant T cell receptor (iTCR) by CD1d
presenting glycolipid antigen. However, transformed cells often
down-regulate CD1d expression, which results in a reduction of iNKT cell
anti-tumor functions. One approach to circumvent this critical barrier to
iNKT cell activation is to develop an agonistic antibody that binds
directly to the iTCR without the requirement for CD1d-mediated antigen
presentation. Towards this end, we characterized the iNKT cell
stimulatory properties of NKTT320, a novel recombinant humanized
monoclonal antibody that binds selectively and with high affinity to the
human iTCR. Strikingly, both soluble and immobilized NKTT320 induced a
dose-dependent iNKT cell activation (upregulation of activation markers
[CD25, CD69]), proliferation (by measuring CFSE dilution), degranulation
(measured by exposure of CD107 on the cell surface) and activation of
bystander immune cells. Additionally, iNKT cells stimulated by
plate-bound NKTT320 also robustly secreted Th1 (IL-1, IFN-, TNF-, IL-2,
IL-6) and Th2-type (IL-4, IL-5, IL-10) cytokines as well as chemokines.
Our in vitro studies are consistent with in vivo data in V24 transgenic
mice, which express the human iTCR alpha chain. Dosing of NKTT320 in
these animals led to iNKT cell activation and IFN- production, as well as
incorporation of BRDU indicating in vivo iNKT cell proliferation.
Similarly, NKT14m (a murine iNKT-agonistic antibody) induced murine iNKT
cell activation, cytokine production, and degranulation in vitro.
Consistently, treatment of C57BL/6 (B6) mice with NKT14m led to rapid and
robust iNKT cell activation and IFN- production. Furthermore, in vivo
injection of NKT 14m in B6 mice induced robust T, B, and NK cell
activation as well as DC maturation (as assessed by increased expression
of MHC class II and co-stimulatory molecules [CD80 and CD86]).
Importantly, treatment of T-lymphoma-bearing B6 mice with a single dose
of NKT14m substantially repressed the growth of subcutaneous tumors.
Taken together, these data suggest that iNKT-activating antibodies hold
great potential for use in cell-based cancer immunotherapy. Studies are
underway to examine whether treatment with NKT14m in combination with
interleukin-12 (a potent iNKT and NK cell activating cytokine) can
further augment iNKT cell activation in vivo. These studies are
significant, as they provide a framework by which iNKT cell anti-cancer
functions could be enhanced for therapeutic purposes.

