Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancerous inhibitor of PP2A is a novel molecular target and
resistance factor of Lapatinib


Deregulation of erbB-2 and EGFR is frequently detected in breast cancer,
which has been associated with poor prognosis. Lapatinib, an orally
active small molecule acting as a dual inhibitor of erbB-2 and EGFR, has
been used for the treatment of patients with advanced or metastatic
erbB-2+ breast cancer. Lapatinib resistance, however, is emerging as a
clinical challenge. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of
Lapatinib-mediated anti-cancer activities and identifying relevant
resistance factors are of pivotal significance in breast cancer
treatment. Cancerous inhibitor of PP2A (CIP2A) is a recently identified
oncoprotein that is overexpressed in breast and other types of cancers.
Through interacting with protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), CIP2A regulates
c-Myc and factors involved in cell proliferation and survival. This study
aimed to investigate the role of CIP2A in Lapatinib-mediated inhibition
of erbB-2 overexpressing breast cancer cells. Our data showed that
Lapatinib downregulated CIP2A in erbB-2 overexpressing SK-BR-3 and 78617
cells, which was correlated with concurrent inactivation of erbB-2, EGFR,
Akt, Erk1/2 and mTOR. Overexpression of CIP2A rendered the cells
resistant to Lapatinib induced apoptosis and growth inhibition.
Conversely, CIP2A knockdown via siRNA sensitized the cells to
Lapatinib-mediated effects. We also demonstrated that Lapatinib-induced
downregulation of CIP2A can be abolished by LY294002, suggesting that
CIP2A downregulation was regulated by Akt. Analysis with cycloheximide
(CHX) and MG132 indicated that Lapatinib modulates CIP2A protein
stability and promotes its degradation through prosteasome pathway. More
importantly, we found that Lapatinib induced differential downregulation
of CIP2A between the parental and Lapatinib-resistant (LR) BT-474 cells.
Decrease in CIP2A downregulation in BT-474-LR cells suggests its
association with Lapatinib resistance. Knockdown of CIP2A via lentiviral
siRNA system significantly sensitized Lapatinib induced growth inhibition
and apoptosis. Taken together, our results demonstrate that CIP2A is a
molecular target of Lapatinib, which plays a critical role in
Lapatinib-induced cellular responses. Lapatinib-induced downregulation of
CIP2A involves the inhibition of the Akt-CIP2A feedback loop. Correlation
between Lapatinib resistance and decreased CIP2A downregulation, as well
as CIP2A knockdown-mediated sensitization of BT-474-LR cells indicate
that CIP2A is a resistance factor of Lapatinib. Further investigation on
Lapatinib-mediated regulation of CIP2A will advance our understanding of
Lapatinib-associated antitumor activities and drug resistance.

