Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor activation inhibits papillary thyroid carcinoma
cell cycle progression


The American Cancer Society predicts 62,980 new cases of thyroid cancer
and 1,890 deaths due to the disease in 2014, making thyroid cancer the
most prevalent endocrine malignancy. This is particularly concerning for
women who have an approximately three-fold higher incidence of thyroid
cancer than men. Significant research has been done to elucidate the role
of estrogen as a driver of thyroid cancer. Taking the reverse approach,
that men have a much lower incidence of thyroid cancer, led us to
hypothesize that androgens and/or androgen receptors play a protective
role and that PTC represents the escape from androgen-mediated cell
regulation. Analysis of AR expression in 24 PTC patient tissue samples
indicated a 2.7 fold reduction in AR expression compared to matched
normal tissue (PThe American Cancer Society predicts 62,980 new cases of
thyroid cancer and 1,890 deaths due to the disease in 2014, making
thyroid cancer the most prevalent endocrine malignancy. This is
particularly concerning for women who have an approximately three-fold
higher incidence of thyroid cancer than men. Significant research has
been done to elucidate the role of estrogen as a driver of thyroid
cancer. Taking the reverse approach, that men have a much lower incidence
of thyroid cancer, led us to hypothesize that androgens and/or androgen
receptors play a protective role and that PTC represents the escape from
androgen-mediated cell regulation. Analysis of AR expression in 24 PTC
patient tissue samples indicated a 2.7 fold reduction in AR expression
compared to matched normal tissue (P<0.005). This suggests that the
reduction of AR levels in the neoplastic process of thyroid tissue may be
one mechanism of escape from androgen regulation. To more fully
understand the function of androgen/AR in thyroid cells, the AR was
stably transfected into 8505C anaplastic/PTC cells. Addition of DHT to
the 8505C-transfected clone, 84E7, resulted in AR translocation into the
nucleus and a 70% reduction in proliferation, as well as a shift in the
cell cycle toward G1 arrest. Transcription profiling using RNA-Seq and
gene ontology analysis revealed significant changes in genes associated
with proliferation, cell cycle, and cell cycle regulation confirming the
proliferation assay and cell cycle analysis above. Further, when we
examined G1 associated cell cycle proteins, we found significant
decreases in cell cycle progression proteins cdc25a, CDK6, CDK4, and CDK2
as well as significant increases in the inhibitors p27 and p21. Thus,
protein, RNA and cell cycle analysis data are concordant and demonstrate
an accumulation of cells in G1 when treated with DHT. Together these data
demonstrate that expression of androgen/AR in normal thyroid cells may
play a protective, anti-proliferative role that is lost in PTC resulting
in dysregulation of genes normally under AR control. The differential
expression of androgen/AR in males verses females may provide new insight
into the different clinical presentations and outcomes between women and
men.

