Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The normal brain microenvironment reduces the radiosensitivity of
glioblastoma stem-like cells and identifies additional targets for
radiosensitization


Towards developing a model system for investigating the role of the
microenvironment in the radioresistance of glioblastoma (GBM), human
glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) were grown in co-culture with human
astrocytes. Using a trans-well assay, survival analyses showed that
astrocytes significantly decreased the radiosensitivity of GSCs compared
to standard culture conditions, yet had no effect on the established cell
line U251. The critical lesion mediating radiation-induced cell death is
the DNA double-strand break (DSB). Because H2AX nuclear foci correspond
to radiation-induced DSBs and their dispersal correlates with DSB repair,
we determined the initial level of radiation-induced H2AX foci in GSCs
cultured with or without astrocytes. In irradiated co-cultures, the
initial level of radiation-induced H2AX foci was reduced and foci
dispersal was enhanced suggesting that the presence of astrocytes
influenced the induction and repair of DNA DSBs. These findings indicate
that astrocytes can decrease the radiosensitivity of GSCs in vitro via a
paracrine based mechanism and further support a role for the
microenvironment as a determinant of GBM radioresponse. Chemokine
profiling of co-culture media identified a number of bioactive molecules
not present under standard culture conditions, including IL-6. The gene
expression profiles of GSCs grown in co-culture were also significantly
different as compared to GSCs grown alone. For the GSC transcripts
increased after co-culture with astrocytes 6 biological functions
(containing at least 45 molecules) were identified including Cell Death
and Survival, which contained signaling molecules previously associated
with radioresponse. Further, pathway analysis identified multiple
upstream regulators of affected transcripts that were significantly
increased in co-culture. The top regulator molecule was IL-6, which was
consistent with elevated levels of this cytokine in co-culture media.
Additional upstream regulators included cytokines and growth factors,
consistent with a paracrine based effect of astrocytes on GSC gene
expression, as well as the transcription factors NFB and STAT3, which are
subject to regulation by cytokines/growth factors. These analyses were
consistent with an astrocyte mediated modification in GSC phenotype and
moreover, suggested a number of potential targets for GSC
radiosensitization that were unique to co-culture conditions. Along these
lines, STAT3 was activated in GSCs grown with astrocytes; the JAK/STAT3
inhibitor WP1066 enhanced the radiosensitivity of GSCs under co-culture
conditions and when grown as orthotopic xenografts. These data further
suggest that this co-culture system may also provide an approach for
identifying additional targets for GBM radiosensitization.

