Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altered inflammatory and death pathways in head and neck cell
lines model genomic and expression signatures identified in The Cancer
Genome Atlas


The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project has investigated 279 HNSCC tissue
specimens, and uncovered significant genomic alterations of key molecules
involved in inflammation, NF-KB, and death pathways. These genetic
alterations include amplification of FADD (11q13) and BIRC2/3 (11q22),
mutations of caspase 8 and RIPKs in HPV(-), or deletion of TRAF3 in
HPV(+) HNSCC tissues. Using bioinformatic analyses and protein structural
and interactive tools, we identified 60 proteins that may potentially
interact with these genetically altered molecules involved in the
inflammation and death pathways. More than 90% HNSCC tissues studied in
TCGA exhibited expression or genetic alterations of these genes, with
FADD amplification and/or overexpression ranking first with 37%. We also
searched this group of genes among more than 20 major cancer types
investigated by TCGA, among which HNSCC ranked the highest for the
alterations. To further investigate and identify experimental models for
functional studies of these genetic and phenotypic alterations, we have
performed whole transcriptome (RNA-seq) and genome-wide exome DNA
sequencing (exome DNA-seq) in 15 HPV(-) and 11 HPV(+) HNSCC lines, and
compared them with three normal human oral mucosa lines and 8 matched
blood samples. We have identified gene amplifications and overexpression
among many of the molecules involved in inflammation, NF-KB and death
pathways in cell lines, which were observed in the HNSCC TCGA project.
Among the top 22 genes identified from TCGA with the alteration rate
greater than 8% in cancer tissues, we found consistent expression
patterns of 77% molecules in our cell lines. To further test the function
of these molecules, we established HNSCC cell lines stably transfected
with a vector that contains NF-B transcription factor response elements
upstream of the -lactamase reporter gene, to measure a fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET) substrate cleaved by -lactamase, that
results in blue fluorescence. Using these NF-KB reporter cell lines,
large RNAi screening assays have been performed to assess the regulatory
and signaling molecules involve in NF-B and death pathways to model the
findings from TCGA. The function and mechanistic validation of these
molecules are under the way, which could provide precise molecular
targets of diagnosis and prognosis for further preclinical and clinical
investigation in HNSCC.Supported by NIDCD intramural projects
ZIA-DC-000016, 73 and 74; and funded under contract HHSN261200800001E

