Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical activity of hLL2-PBD, a novel anti-CD22
antibody-pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD) conjugate in models of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma


CD22 is a type I transmembrane sialoglycoprotein, which expression is
restricted to the B-cell lineage. CD22 is also found highly expressed on
most malignant mature B cells, including follicular non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(NHL), marginal zone lymphoma (MZL), mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL) and
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).The differential and favorable
expression profile of CD22 in normal and tumor tissues, together with its
rapid internalization upon binding with a ligand or antibody, make CD22
an attractive target for an antibody drug conjugate (ADC) mediated
treatment of B-cell malignancies. hLL2-PBD is an ADC composed of the
humanized monoclonal antibody epratuzumab (hLL2) against human CD22
stochastically conjugated via a valine-alanine cleavable, maleimide
linker to a PBD dimer. PBD dimers represent a novel class of payloads,
which bind in the DNA minor groove and form highly cytotoxic DNA
interstrand cross-links. The average drug to antibody ratio (DAR) of
hLL2-PBD is 2.In vitro, hLL2-PBD showed potent and specific cytotoxicity,
as assessed by the MTS assay, in the CD22-positive human Burkitt's
lymphoma-derived cell lines Ramos and Daudi and the human diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma-derived cell line WSU-DLCL2.In vivo, hLL2-PBD
demonstrated potent anti-tumor efficacy in subcutaneously (s.c.)
implanted Daudi and Ramos xenograft models. In the Daudi model, hLL2-PBD,
administered as a single dose at either 0.1 or 0.3 mg/kg, achieved
dose-dependent anti-tumor activity, resulting in significant increase in
survival. At 0.3 mg/kg, hLL2-PBD induced complete tumor regression in all
treated animals. In the Ramos xenograft model, a single dose of 1 mg/kg
of hLL2-PBD achieved strong tumor regression. Moreover, hLL2-PBD achieved
a superior anti-tumor activity compared to Hu10F4-vcMMAE, a
CD22-targeting ADC with the auristatin payload vcMMAE and a DAR of 4
(Genentech Inc.), when tested at 1 mg/kg, single dose. Pharmacokinetic
(PK) analysis of hLL2-PBD in CB.17 SCID mice showed a favorable PK
profile, with a half-life of approximately 12 days.In conclusion, these
data demonstrate the potent in vitro and in vivo anti-tumor activity of
hLL2-PBD against CD22-positive hematological tumors and warrant further
development of this ADC into the clinic.

