Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vav2 oncoprotein up regulation may predict the aggressive subtype
of ductal carcinoma in situ


Background: A subset of patients with ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)
will develop invasive breast cancer (IBC). To date, there are no
effective predictive biomarkers for identifying this subset with worse
prognosis whose lesions are essentially indistinguishable histologically
from those with favorable outcomes. We hypothesized that measurable
parameters that discriminate DCIS from DCIS with concurrent invasion may
serve as diagnostic biomarkers (BM) of progressive cancer in situ
(CIS).Methods: Using a novel imaging-based method of tissue testing, we
measured the relative expression levels of three candidate BM proteins
specifically implicated in IBC progression - the insulin-like growth
factor I receptor (IGF-IR), Ras-related protein 1 (Rap1), and Vav2
oncoprotein. Protein profiles were compared in 42 histologically normal
mammary epithelial samples, 71 CIS (35 without/36 with invasion either on
diagnostic biopsy or final surgical excision), and 98 IBC of known
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status. Groups were compared using
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by pair-wise t-tests with
Tukey's correction for multiple testing. Receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curves were constructed to evaluate how well each BM
can predict tumor type.Results: The levels of the IGF-IR and Rap1 protein
expression were significantly elevated in ER-positive (ER+/PR+/-/HER2 -)
DCIS relative to normal epithelium (PBackground: A subset of patients
with ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) will develop invasive breast cancer
(IBC). To date, there are no effective predictive biomarkers for
identifying this subset with worse prognosis whose lesions are
essentially indistinguishable histologically from those with favorable
outcomes. We hypothesized that measurable parameters that discriminate
DCIS from DCIS with concurrent invasion may serve as diagnostic
biomarkers (BM) of progressive cancer in situ (CIS).Methods: Using a
novel imaging-based method of tissue testing, we measured the relative
expression levels of three candidate BM proteins specifically implicated
in IBC progression - the insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR),
Ras-related protein 1 (Rap1), and Vav2 oncoprotein. Protein profiles were
compared in 42 histologically normal mammary epithelial samples, 71 CIS
(35 without/36 with invasion either on diagnostic biopsy or final
surgical excision), and 98 IBC of known estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2) status. Groups were compared using one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) followed by pair-wise t-tests with Tukey's correction for
multiple testing. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were
constructed to evaluate how well each BM can predict tumor type.Results:
The levels of the IGF-IR and Rap1 protein expression were significantly
elevated in ER-positive (ER+/PR+/-/HER2 -) DCIS relative to normal
epithelium (P<0.0001). The IGF-IR protein expression was also
significantly up regulated in HER2-positive (ER+/-/PR+/-/HER2+) DCIS
relative to normal epithelium (P = 0.0002). IGF-IR and Rap1 protein
expression levels were similar among DCIS patients without or with
concurrent invasion. Vav2 up regulation in DCIS relative to normal group
was not associated with steroid hormone receptor and HER2 status, but was
associated with the presence of concurrent invasion, including
microinvasion (invasive foci of less than 1 mm). DCIS with high Vav2 were
more than twice as likely to progress to invasive cancers as DCIS with
low Vav2 (odds ratio, 2.42; 95% CI, 1.26-4-65; P = 0.008). Furthermore, a
ROC curve analysis revealed moderate ability of Vav2 protein expression
measurements in DCIS to predict the existence of invasion concurrent with
DCIS (area under the curve, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.59- 0.84).Conclusions: This
study describes the use of a novel imaging method for archival tissue
testing, which may inform the status of protein BM in archived tissue and
may help to stratify a women's individual risk for tumor invasiveness to
avoid potential over- or under-treatment. Despite the apparent limitation
of our study DCIS cohort size, our novel findings hold promise for
utilizing Vav2 as a predictive BM of progressive DCIS and a target for
cancer therapy.

