Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SSX-2 expression and function in metastatic prostate cancer


Background: The SSX family of proteins, whose function and aberrant
expression in prostate cancer isn't fully understood, may lead to disease
progression from localized to metastatic disease.Cancer-testis antigens
(CTAs) are a group of proteins whose expression is restricted to germline
cells among normal somatic cells. CTAs have been found to be aberrantly
expressed in many different cancers. Due to their restricted expression
to tumor cells among MHC class I-expressing cells, there has been
interest in CTAs as tumor-specific targets for CD8+ T cell-directed
therapies. Amongst the CTA genes is the Synovial Sarcoma X chromosome
breakpoint (SSX) gene family. The SSX family consists of ten highly
homologous members, several of which have been detected in a wide variety
of cancers. We have previously shown that SSX expression is confined to
metastatic prostate tissue, and is not detected in primary prostate
tumors. The function of the SSX family is largely unknown, and further
insights into its function may reveal avenues for future directed
therapies.Methods: We determined the identity and prevalence of SSX
family members in metastatic prostate cancer tissues and in peripheral
blood samples of patients with prostate cancer. Specifically, cDNA from
metastatic prostate tissues was examined by PCR with primers specific for
each SSX family member; SSX family member expression was detected in
peripheral blood samples using rt-PCR. To further understand SSX-2
function, prostate cell lines with SSX-2 expression knocked down or
overexpressed were evaluated in vitro for morphological changes,
tumorigenicity (soft agar colony formation), proliferation, and invasion
(scratch test). Finally using qPCR, expression levels of markers of the
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) were examined in the knocked
down and overexpressed cell lines.Results: SSX-2 was found to be the
dominant family member expressed in prostate cancer, with 47% (7/15) of
metastatic cDNA samples expressing SSX-2. SSX-1 was detected in one
sample (1/15), and no additional family members were detected. SSX-2 mRNA
was similarly detectable in the peripheral blood of 17 of 33 (51%)
patients with recurrent prostate cancer and 0% (0 of 10) control blood
donors without prostate cancer. In in vitro functional studies, SSX-2
knockdown of the 22Rv1 cell line led to cell morphology changes,
increased cell proliferation, and a decrease in soft agar colony
formation. Knockdown was also accompanied by altered expression of genes
involved in EMT (Twist-1, ZEB1/2, Slug, vimentin). Complementary changes
were observed in the RWPE-1 normal prostate epithelial cell line
transfected to overexpress SSX-2.Conclusions: Due to the preferential
expression of SSX-2 in disseminated prostate cancer, as well as the
effects of SSX knockdown and overexpression on EMT-related genes, we
believe that SSX-2 is involved in the EMT process, and potentially in the
progression of prostate cancer to metastatic disease.

