Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovering therapeutic epigenetic targets using whole genome
siRNA screening


Background and aims: In the past decade, epigenetic mechanisms involved
in the regulation of tumor-specific gene expression have been elucidated
partially, prompting the development of therapeutic approaches in cancer
cells. In this study, we used an unbiased screen to investigate
therapeutic targets which might be effective combination with DNMT
inhibitors in reactivating hypermethylated genes. Methods: We screened a
whole genome siRNA library targeting 21360 genes using a colon cancer
cell line that harbors a cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter driven GFP stably
integrated and silenced by hypermethylation. GFP-positive cell
percentages were measured using Guava EasyCyte Plus flow analyzer
software and normalized by Z-score. The primary siRNA library contained
SMART pools (Dharmacon) of 4 siRNA duplexes per gene. To validate hits,
transfections using individual siRNA were performed, followed by FACS
analysis and qRT-PCR. DNA methylation status was evaluated by
pyrosequencing analysis and Digital Restriction Enzyme Analysis of
Methylation (DREAM), based on next generation sequencing analysis.
Results: The screen was conducted in combination with low dose
decitabine. Of the 21,630 genes tested, 37 (0.2%) were positive (Z-score
> sample mean + 5SD) and proceeded to validation studies. We successfully
confirmed top hits by flow cytometry and qRT-PCR. Among them, some genes
are known epigenetic regulators such as chromodomain helicase DNA-binding
protein 4 (CHD4), activating transcription factor 7 interacting protein
(ATF7IP) and DNMT1 itself. Interestingly well-known epigenetic regulators
such as other DNMTs, histone deacetylases and histone methylases were
generally absent among the top hits. CHD4 depletion in combination with
DNMT inhibition synergistically reactivated expression of endogenously
methylated genes and inhibited cell growth of colon cancer cell lines
with minimal effects on the cell growth of non-cancerous cell lines.
Depletion of CHD4 alone also inhibited cell growth of colon cancer cell
line but not of non-cancerous cell lines. ATF7IP was previously reported
to synergize with DNA methylation to maintain X chromosome inactivation,
and here we show that it also plays a role in autosomal gene silencing.
Other genes which were not previously known as epigenetic regulators are
now under investigation. Conclusions: A whole genome siRNA screen in
combination with the DNMT inhibitor decitabine identified many new target
genes that might be epigenetic regulators and potential targets for drug
development.

