Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo and in vitro characterization of genomic diversity and
clonal evolution in glioblastoma


IntroductionGlioblastoma (GBM) is the most prevalent and aggressive
primary central nervous system tumor. The molecular heterogeneity among
and within GBM tumors may contribute to therapy failure. Comprehensive
panels of well characterized patient-derived xenograft models for
pre-clinical studies is critical to development of novel GBM
therapies.MethodsWe established neurosphere models (NSM) from twelve
freshly resected primary and one recurrent GBM and intracranially
implanted these in immunocompromised mice. Exome, low pass whole genome
and whole transcriptome sequencing was performed on tumors, low passage
NSM and macrodissected xenografts in biological triplicates (total nr of
samples: 65).ResultsGBM transcriptional subtypes were conserved between
tumor samples and matched NSM in 42% of cases, suggesting a role for the
tumor microenvironment in expression classification. Filtering of mouse
sequence reads from xenograft RNAseq data allowed us to limit subtype
classification to the tumor cell only transcriptome and as a result,
expression subtype was consistent in 83% of NSM and derived xenografts.
The majority (>95%) of driver gene mutations and copy number changes were
preserved across all five instances of each parental tumor. Of all
somatic mutations detected in parental tumor samples, 80% could be
recovered in the NSM after correcting for LOH status and base coverage.
Surprisingly, the percentage of recovered tumor sample mutations
increased to 85% in xenografts which was robust in validation and
suggested subclonal selection in vitro, but not elimination of the
subclones. The microenvironment provided by NSM culture medium and nude
mice cranium may provide variable proliferative advantages resulting in
specific tumor subclones to become dominant. Homozygous deletions and
fusion transcripts found in tumor samples and xenografts but not NSM
corroborated these observations. While xenografts retained a higher
number of tumor sample mutations, a median number of 14 mutations were
acquired relative to NSM suggesting a more susceptible environment to
novel somatic events. Biological xenograft triplicates showed remarkable
overlap in mutational content, suggesting that clonal evolution of NSM in
vivo is not stochastic but a controlled Darwinian process.To determine
whether serial passaging of NSM affects the heterogeneity, we performed
genomic profiling of four matching late passage NSM and found that these
retained all mutations detected in their early passage progenitors, but
acquired as many as 50 novel of mutations during the culturing
process.DiscussionOur study shows that neurosphere cultures and first
generation xenografts closely mimic their parental tumor. NSM showed a
remarkable heterogeneity and selective pressures from the tumor
microenviroment resulted in reproducible subclonal evolution. Our
findings provide critical new insights in our understanding of tumor
model development.

