Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemopotentiation by low dose fractionated radiation therapy in
colon cancer cells


Response rates for patients with primary and metastatic colorectal cancer
treated with modern chemotherapy regimens such as 5-FU, leucovorin,
oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) have routinely exceeded 50% and are frequently as
high as 60-70%. However, as in most chemotherapy regimens, toxicity to
normal cells is often a significant limitation. Tumors of the
gastrointestinal (GI) track are also sensitive to radiation but the
inability to combine radiation therapy (RT) with full-dose chemotherapy
can be detrimental to patients, particularly those that may have
disseminated micrometastatic disease. Therefore, new treatment strategies
that incorporate chemotherapy that could increase tumor response without
increasing toxicity are highly desirable. Laboratory and clinical data
suggest that using low-dose fractionated radiation therapy (LDFRT) as a
chemopotentiator may allow for full-dose chemotherapy with improved
efficacy without adding to the toxicity of the systemic treatment. Here
we show that twice daily radiation doses as low as 0.15 Gy for three
consecutive days can significantly increase FOLFOX killing efficiency in
human colon cancer RKO cells. In addition, our data indicate that the
chemopotentiation by LDFRT may be mediated by the stress inducible hnRNP
A18 protein. Down regulation of hnRNP A18 sensitizes RKO cells to LDFRT
and FOLFOX independently and increases further the chemopotentiation by
LDFRT. Moreover, overexpression of hnRNP A18 increases radio-resistance
and chemo-resistance to FOLFOX. hnRNP A18 is a new regulator of protein
translation in cancer cells that specifically targets transcripts devoted
to confer growth advantages. This data suggest that hnRNP A18 could be
targeted to increase further the systemic effect of chemopotentation by
LDFRT. The identification of hnNRP A18 as a new cellular pathway
responsive to low dose radiation and its contribution to
chemopotentiation provide a novel opportunity for better measurement of
the therapeutic response and could contribute to the rationale designs of
new mechanism based clinical trials.

