Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehesive RNA-sequencing pipeline of cancer xenograft models


Since a solid pipeline for massively parallel sequencing in cancer
xenograft model has not been built yet, it is necessary to establish a
precise analysis pipeline. Massively parallel sequencing on xenograft
samples result in mixed sequencing reads from the engrafted human tumor
cells and murine tissue. It is necessary to accurately distinguish
between these reads for subsequent data analysis. In the present study,
we constructed an integrated RNA-Seq pipeline including genomic
variation, expression profiling, and fusion gene analysis. To distinguish
these reads into individual species, we used the merged reference that
incorporates the two genome reference from human (hg19) and mouse (mm10).
We tested our pipeline using 6 Primary and 4 metastatic gastric tumor of
6 patients and their derivative xenografts sequencing data. There were
almost same amount of ambiguous reads when we aligned sequencing reads to
merged reference or separate reference genome. Using merged reference, we
efficiently distinguished compound sequencing reads between human and
mouse without repetitive alignment processes. The proportion of
sequencing reads from mouse in xenograft samples widely ranged from 2.64%
to 49.25% per each sample. For expression profiling, we used HTSeq-count
for measuring expression level of each sample. As expected,
human-specific reads of ECM-receptor and focal adhesion related genes
were specifically down-regulated in the xenograft tumors compared to
primary tumor and normal tissues suggesting the depletion of human cells
from the microenvironment of engrafted tumor tissues. Mouse-specific
reads of those genes were highly expressed in the engrafted tissue.
Differentially expressed genes between engraft tumor and paired normal
tissue were shown to be enriched in the cell cycle and p53 signaling
pathway and these showed that engrafted tumor tissues well represent
characteristics of cancer cells.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

