Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A preclinical study for miR181b as therapeutic in Eu-TCL1FL-tg
mouse model for CLL


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a malignancy of B cells with
immunophenotype of memory cells. Downstream pathways to BCR, like NFkB,
AKT and ERK, and anti-apoptotic proteins such as Bcl2 and Mcl1, are
thought to contribute to expansion and survival of the malignant cells.
CLL patients show different clinical course: tumor clones having no
V-gene mutations, many CD38+ or ZAP-70+ B cells, chromosome 11q deletion
and high expression of TCL1, had an aggressive, usually fatal course,
whereas patients with mutated clones, few CD38+ or ZAP-70+ B cells and
low TCL1 expression, had an indolent course. Recent studies identified a
microRNA signature associated with prognosis and progression in B-CLL.
Particularly, miR181b is down-regulated in aggressive forms of CLL and
its expression is inversely correlated to Tcl1 levels.An increasing
number of studies are considering microRNAs as potentially useful
therapeutic agents. Given that MCL-1, BCL-2 and TCL1 are proved targets
for miR181b, that Akt activation is enhanced by Tcl1 and a crosstalk
between Akt and ERK or NFkB exists, we performed a preclinical evaluation
of miR181b therapeutic efficacy in a mouse model of CLL, the Eu-TCL1
transgenic mouse, previously generated by us.In vitro enforced expression
of miR-181b mimics induced a significant apoptotic effect in human B-cell
line EHEB, as well as in mouse E-TCL1 leukemic splenocytes. Molecular
analyses revealed that miR-181b not only affected the expression of Tcl1,
Bcl2 and Mcl1 anti-apoptotic proteins, but also increased the expression
level of the NFkB inhibitor protein IkB-alpha and reduced the
phosphorylation levels of Akt and Erk1/2. Notably, an anti-TCL1 siRNA
could similarly down-modulate Tcl1 but exhibited a reduced or absent
activity on other relevant proteins, as well as a reduced effect on cell
apoptosis and viability. In vivo studies indicated a significant
capability of miR-181b in reducing leukemic cells expansion and
increasing survival of treated mice. These data indicate that miR-181b
exerts a broad range of actions, affecting proliferative, survival and
apoptotic pathways, both in mice and human, and can potentially be
employed to reduce expansion of B-CLL leukemic cells.

