Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galectin-4, a key regulator of inflammation and cancer of the
intestine


The inflammatory bowel diseases including ulcerative colitis and Crohn's
disease are chronic inflammatory disorders of the intestine. It is well
recognized that a serious long-term complication of chronic inflammation
is the development of colorectal cancer (CRC). Although various
mechanisms underlying different chronic inflammation conditions are
known, it is increasing clear that proinflammatory cytokines produced
during immune responses are the key contributing factors to the above
disease states. On the other hand, genetic alterations inducing CRC also
promote inflammatory responses in the gastrointestinal microenvironment.
This interdependent relationship between oncogenesis and inflammation
suggests that it is possible to identify a regulatory molecule that links
these two cellular processes. The long-term interest of our efforts is to
determine the mechanisms of galectin-4 (gal-4) in the normal and disease
physiology of the human gastrointestinal tract. Gal-4 is expressed
predominantly by the gastrointestinal epithelia. It is secreted and binds
to specific oligosaccharide moiety in glycoproteins on the cell surface.
We have recently demonstrated that gal-4 down-regulates cell
proliferation and its loss of expression coincides with CRC onset and
progression, and suggested that gal-4 functions as a tumor suppressor.
The purpose of this study is to determine whether gal-4 regulates
inflammatory responses in colorectal cells.In this study, we used gal-4
+ve CRC cells, HT-29 and LS-180 and neutralized their surface-bound gal-4
with gal-4 antibodies. Such cells proliferated profusely with concomitant
up-regulation of transcription of 47 genes of which 17 are known
partners/gene targets of multiple inflammation signaling pathways.
Extracellular (spent) media obtained from these experiments were found to
contain unique cytokines that are known to be pro-tumorigenic. In
converse experiments, exposure of gal-4 -ve HCT116 cells to purified
gal-4 resulted in decreased cell proliferation. Concomitantly, there was
increased expression of p27, decreased expressions of cyclin D1 and
c-Myc. These data suggested that binding of gal-4 to cell surface arrests
cell cycle.Finally, analysis of rat colon tissue sections obtained from
dextran sulfate-sodium (DSS) induced chronic colitis (kindly given by Dr.
Daniel W. Rosenberg, Univ. of Connecticut CT) suggested that the
epithelial cells at the colitis regions exhibited loss of gal-4
expression.These data together suggested that surface gal-4
down-regulates inflammatory response pathways, cell proliferation and
oncogenic events. These data also suggested that gal-4 protein therapy
and re-expression of gal-4 in lesions of chronic inflammation and CRC are
potentially attractive methods of controlling these diseases.*A part of
this study was carried out by the authors while working at the Texas Tech
University Health Sciences CenterNote: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

