Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assembling test points for quantitative proteomics to elucidate
RAS signaling


RAS mutation is a critical player in cancer development, particularly in
lung, colon, and pancreas. However, mutant RAS phenotypes have not
produced viable therapeutic options. Therefore, additional reagents and
techniques are required to study the functionality of RAS pathway
components in model systems and patient specimens. Liquid
chromatography-multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (LC-MRM)
has been applied to study cancer signaling by quantification of protein
expression, mutation status, and post-translational modification in a
variety of sample types. LC-MRM with immunoaffinity enrichment
(ImmunoMRM) enables multiplexed analysis of target peptides with little
background interference. Here, we describe the selection of 100 targets
for assay development and provide insight into the utility of the
immunoMRM platform as part of the NCI's RAS Initiative.Provided with
biologically relevant proteins, several approaches were used for peptide
selection. Complementary contributions were obtained from analysis of
individual proteins, targeted LC-MRM screening, phosphoproteomics, and
global discovery proteomics datasets (both in-house and publically
available). For phosphorylation and mutation sites, the ability to
quantify those molecular endpoints is directly limited by the primary
amino acid sequence produced by trypsin digestion. Peptides selected for
assay development quantify biological endpoints indicating the expression
levels of wild-type and mutant proteins and signaling of RAS pathway
components. Literature reviews show the prospective value of each assay
in their specific biological context.Assays are developed for RAS
signaling proteins in three categories: upstream proteins, RAS isoforms,
and downstream effectors. As an example of upstream proteins, EGFR
expression and tyrosine phosphorylation will be quantified, which enables
comparison of ImmunoMRM to prior techniques. Extensive characterization
is planned for RAS isoforms, particularly to monitor the expression of
wild-type and mutant proteins. Measurements focused on downstream
proteins include Erk and pErk to examine the activation of that MAPK
pathway as well as disparate processes, like epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (N-Cad/E-Cad). A comprehensive circuit diagram is prepared to
illustrate the assembled test points for discussion with the cancer
biology community.Development of these immunoMRM assays enables
evaluation of multiple RAS signaling events and downstream outcomes in
one sample. The emerging paradigm of peptide enrichment for protein
biomarker measurement provides a novel platform for the study of critical
processes in cancer. Although currently early in development, the
implementation of this platform can ultimately demonstrate the utility of
ImmunoMRM reagent development and be a first step for understanding RAS
biology in human tumors and developing novel treatment options for
patients.

