Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activated glucocorticoid signaling in pancreatitis contributes to
acinar-to-ductal metaplasia and KrasG12D-driven tumorigenesis


Acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM), an inflammatory lesion associated with
replacement of acinar cells by tubular complexes, is thought to represent
a condition with increased risk of neoplasia. However, the direct
evidence linking acinar-to-ductal metaplasia and development of
pancreatic neoplasm is still lacking. Glucocorticoid-mediated signaling
pathway is known to be a part of the feedback control machinery of immune
system that acts to suppress excessive immune activity. In the present
study, we explored the role of GR in development of ADM and pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) in mice with pancreatitis. We initially
identified that evaluated levels of activated glucocorticoid receptors
(GR) were observed in patients of chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC). Utilizing mice conditionally expressed
KrasG12D in acinar cell with or without loss of GR, we demonstrated that
GR activation was required for generation of metaplastic ductal lesion
and development of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) in mice
with experimental pancreatitis. Administration of dexamethasone, a potent
synthetic glucocorticoid, was sufficient to induce development of PanINs
and PDACs in KrasG12D mice that harbored single-allele deletion of p53.
We further revealed that non-genomic activation of GR was a key action
that led to evaluate c-Src signaling and trigger a pathological threshold
of Ras activity necessary for neoplastic transformation. In contrast,
treatment of dasatinib, a Src kinase inhibitor, suppressed development of
PanINs and PDACs induced by dexamethasone. Importantly, Cre-lox based
lineage-tracing mice was applied and identified that GR activation
directly transformed GFP-tagged KrasG12D-expressing acinar cells to
tumorigenic cells. The findings explained why inflammatory ductal
reprogramming predisposes to development of pancreatic neoplasm.

