Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive profiling of immunoglobulin sequences using hybrid
capture-based next generation sequencing in B-cell hematologic
malignancies


Background:Sequencing the genes encoding immunoglobulins is critical in
detecting clonal cell populations as well as determining prognosis and
therapeutic decisions in patients with lymphoid malignancies including
B-cell leukemias, lymphomas and multiple myeloma. Current assays for
identifying the rearranged immunoglobulin sequence in B-cell malignancies
rely on sequence specific PCR based amplification of conserved
immunoglobulin (IG) regions. We have developed a novel, hybrid
capture-based approach to sequencing the immunoglobulin chains that
enables identification of the heavy and light chain variable domains,
complementarity-determining region (CDR) sequences and somatic
hypermutation (SHM) status.Method:RNA and DNA were successfully extracted
from 60 specimens, including 7 mantle cell lymphoma cell (MCL) lines and
53 clinical chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) bone marrow aspirates.
Adaptor-ligated DNA and cDNA sequencing libraries were captured by
solution hybridization using custom bait-sets targeting the
immunoglobulin variable, joining and class segments. All captured
libraries were sequenced to high depth (Illumina HiSeq) in a
CLIA-certified laboratory (Foundation Medicine).Results:The capture-based
approach was validated using 7 MCL cell lines and 53 CLL samples profiled
using a CLIA-certified commercial PCR-based assay (Invivoscribe). The
immunoglobulin sequences derived from the 7 MCL cell lines were 100%
concordant with identifying the published heavy and light chain variable
domain and percent SHM. Comparison to 53 previously clinically tested
samples showed 98% (52/53) concordance for identifying the presence of a
clonal population, and 100% (39/39) concordance for identifying the IGHV
domain. Comparison to 50 CLL samples previously tested for SHM resulted
in 96% (48/50) overall concordance with 94% (31/33) concordant for no SHM
and 100% (17/17) concordant for the presence of SHM. Additionally,
secondary clones were identified in 11 samples.Conclusions:We have
demonstrated that hybrid capture-based targeted DNA and RNA sequencing
can be used to comprehensively characterize the immunoglobulin sequence
of clonal tumor B cell populations. This capability enables
quantification of SHM and identification of the variable domain, CDR3
sequence and class restriction. Integration of this methodology with
comprehensive genomic profiling approaches will expand the clinical
utility of such assays in patients with hematological malignancies and
may provide important insights in immune oncology and response of
patients to immunotherapies, including patients with solid tumors.

