Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vorinostat enhances anti-tumor effects of cisplatin in head and
neck cancer cells by targeting cancer stem cells


Objective: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) remains a major
health care problem worldwide, comprising almost 50% of all malignancies
in some developing nations. Even with extensive surgery and full course
chemoradiation treatment the survival rates of HNSCC patients have not
significantly improved over the last two decades. Acquisition of
chemoresistance, locoregional recurrence and metastatic phenotype are the
major causes of treatment failure and mortality in these patients. It is
therefore imperative that we gain a better understanding of the molecular
mechanisms that contribute to the aggressive tumor phenotype in order to
develop novel and effective strategies for the treatment of head and neck
cancer patients. Recent studies have highlighted the role of histone
deacetylases (HDACs) in regulating a number of genes that are involved in
cell cycle control, proliferation, survival, DNA repair and
differentiation. In this study, we examined if treatment with a HDAC
inhibitor, Vorinostat could reverse chemoresistance in head and neck
cancer cells and enhance the therapeutic efficacy of cisplatin
treatment.Methodology: HDACs expression in tumor samples from HNSCC
patients was examined by real time PCR. Cell growth was examined by MTT
assay and colony formation assay. Western blot analysis was used to
measure changes in protein levels. Cancer stem cell phenotype was
assessed by tumorsphere formation. A SCID mouse xenograft model was used
to access the in vivo efficacy of Vorinostat.Results: Our results show
that HDAC1, 2, and 6 levels are markedly increased in the head and neck
cancer cell lines as compared to normal human oral keratinocytes. We took
two cisplatin sensitive cell lines and grew them in increasing
concentrations of cisplatin to mimic acquired resistance in patients.
Both of these cisplatin resistant cell lines (cisR) showed further
increase in HDAC1 and 2 expressions as compared to the cispaltin
sensitive parental cells. Depletion of HDAC1 and 2 in these cisR cell
lines by siRNA significantly enhanced cisplatin sensitivity. Next, we
used an HDAC inhibitor, Vorinostat on these cell lines and observed a
dose dependent inhibition of cell proliferation (MTT). In addition,
Vorinostat treatment significantly decreased tumorsphere formation and
the expression of stem cell marker, Nanog. Vorinostat in combination with
cisplatin showed a synergistic effect on the inhibition of cell
proliferation and tumorsphere formation. We then assessed the efficacy of
Vorinostat treatment as a single agent or in combination with cispaltin
in SCID mouse xenograft model. Similar to the in vitro results,
combination treatment was most effective in reducing the tumor burden in
the mice.Conclusions: Taken together, our results suggest that targeting
of HDACs with Vorinostat could be an effective treatment strategy for the
treatment of HNSCC patients that do not respond to currently used
treatment regimens.

