Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL dual inhibitor, ABT-737, circumvents JNK mediated
upregulation of anti-apoptotic molecules in cisplatin treated non-small
cell lung cancer models


Introduction; Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), which does not have
druggable driver oncogene, is treated with cytotoxic chemotherapy, but
clinical outcome is suboptimal. Cisplatin is still one of the most
commonly used drugs for the treatment of NSCLC, and, however, there are
limitations of the therapeutic effect because of the multiple resistance
mechanisms. In particular, elevated level of anti-apoptotic proteins
(Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, Mcl-1) triggered by cisplatin-induced DNA damage response
correlate with the drug resistance. In this study, we investigated
synergic effects of combined treatment with cisplatin and dual inhibitor
of Bcl-2/Bcl-xL, ABT-737, in NSCLC models.Materials and Methods; H460 and
A549 NSCLC cells, and LSL K-Ras G12D mouse model were used. Protein
expression was evaluated by immunoblotting and cytotoxicity was measured
by FACS followed by annexin-V and PI staining. LSL Kras G12D mouse were
inhaled 5 107 PFU AdCre virus at 8 weeks after birth and, in 24 weeks
after inhalation, were taken microCT, randomized into 4 groups, and then
treated with ABT-737 (50mg/kg, i.p., daily) and/or cisplatin (5 mg/kg,
i.p., weekly) for two weeks.Results; There was a dose dependent
phosphorylation of JNK, which is most prominent between 6 to 24hr after
cisplatin treatment. Expression of anti-apoptotic molecules, Bcl-2,
Bcl-w, Bcl-xL, and Mcl-1 were increased by cisplatin treatment in a dose
and time dependent manner. JNK specific activator, anisomycin, increased
mRNA level of anti-apoptotic molecules. ABT-737 displaced BCL-xL to the
cytoplasm and aggregated Bak. Furthermore, ABT-737 released cytochrome C
from mitochondria to the cytoplasm. ABT-737 itself showed cytotoxic
effects and combination of ABT-737 potentiates cytotoxic effects of
cisplatin with strong synergism. Combination of ABT-737 with cisplatin
treatment induced significant tumor regression in 2 weeks in LSL K-ras
G12D mouse model when compared those treated with single agents or
vehicle.Conclusion; Combination of ABT-737 with cisplatin showed
synergistic cytotoxic effects and anti-tumor activities in NSCLC
preclinical models. These findings suggest that clinical trials using
combination with ABT-737 and cisplatin may be beneficial in advanced
NSCLC patients.

