Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical relevance of circulating tumor DNA in plasma from
pancreatic cancer patients


Background: Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) may originate from necrotic or
apoptotic tumor cells in the primary tumor, metastatic lesions or in the
circulation. There is evidence that the ctDNA level may reflect the total
tumor burden in a patient. We wanted to investigate whether changes in
the ctDNA level might be used to monitor disease progression in
pancreatic cancer patients with locally or advanced disease. Methods:
Blood samples (9 mL in EDTA tubes) were collected from 15 prospectively
recruited patients with locally advanced and/or metastatic pancreatic
cancer before initiation of treatment, and subsequently every month
during chemotherapy. The samples were processed by LymphoprepTM (Axis
Shield) density centrifugation before plasma DNA isolation using the
QIAamp Circulating Nucleic Acid kit (Qiagen). A high-fidelity
polymerase-based PNA clamp PCR method (Gilje et al., 2008, Oltedal et
al., 2010) was then used for the detection of KRAS mutations in exon 12
and 13, as a surrogate marker for ctDNA. KRAS mutations have previously
been reported to be present in >90% of the pancreatic cancers. Plasma
samples from 29 healthy individuals were also analysed as a reference
group for the PNA clamp PCR method. The results were compared with
conventional biochemical and radiological monitoring measures. Results:
The majority of the patients (80%) had metastatic disease and they were
treated either by gemcitabine or FOLFORINOX. Nine (60%) patients had a
positive KRAS status in the plasma samples obtained before initiation of
chemotherapy, indicating presence of ctDNA. Moreover, 11 of the 15
included patients had 2 follow-up samples, and in several of these
patients the ctDNA level changed substantially during the course of
chemotherapy. In total, 17/38 (44.7%) patient samples were positive for
plasma DNA KRAS mutations during chemotherapy. Changes in the ctDNA level
seemed to correspond both to radiological follow-up data and changes in
CA19-9 for several patients. Analyses of the total plasma DNA fraction
with regard to disease monitoring, gave more inconclusive results in this
small pilot study. Conclusion: Our pilot study gives support to the
hypothesis that ctDNA may be used as a marker for monitoring treatment
efficacy and disease progression in pancreatic cancer patients. This will
be further investigated.

