Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathogenic oral bacteria and risk of incident cancer in
postmenopausal women: The Buffalo OsteoPerio Study


Background: Periodontal disease (PD) has been found to be associated with
increased cancer risk, including among participants in the Women's Health
Initiative (WHI). Microbial colonization of the subgingival area is a
necessary causal factor for the development of PD. Previous findings of
positive relationships between PD and cancer risk may be partially
explained by extra-oral translocation of oral bacteria. We investigated
the associations between the presence of three early-colonizing
periodontal pathogens (Fusobacterium nucleatum, Prevotella intermedia,
and Campylobacter rectus, i.e., orange complex bacteria moderately
associated with PD), two late-colonizing periodontal pathogens
(Porphyromonas gingivalis, Tannerella forsythia, i.e., red complex
bacteria strongly associated with PD) and cancer risk in a subset of the
WHI.Methods: We prospectively followed 1,252 postmenopausal women
enrolled in the Buffalo OsteoPerio Study, an ancillary study of the WHI.
Subgingival plaque samples were obtained during baseline oral examination
from 1997 to 2000. Presence of periodontal pathogens was assessed using
indirect immunofluorescence. Incident cancer cases through 2013 were
identified via annual health updates and were confirmed using medical
records by physician adjudicators. Cox proportional hazard regression was
used to calculate hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI)
for the associations of periodontal pathogens with total and
site-specific cancer risk in crude and multivariate-adjusted models
(adjusting for age and smoking status).Results: There were 171 confirmed
incident cancer cases (invasive breast = 67, colorectal = 17, lung = 17)
during an average follow-up of 11.8 years (SD = 3.8). When analyzed
separately, individual pathogens were not associated with total or
site-specific cancer. Presence of any pathogen was associated with
increased lung cancer risk, although not statistically significant
(adjusted HR = 3.97, 95% CI: 0.90-17.45). Presence of any late-colonizing
pathogens was not statistically associated with total or site-specific
cancer risks. After multivariate adjustment, there were borderline
associations between presence of any early-colonizing pathogens and
increased risk of total cancer (HR = 1.35, 95% CI: 1.00-1.84) and lung
cancer (HR = 3.02, 95% CI: 0.98-9.29). Associations were not seen with
invasive breast or colorectal cancer.Conclusions: We did not find
consistent associations between presence of subgingival periodontal
pathogens and risk of several cancers, but suggestion of associations
with early colonizing pathogens for total and lung cancer. These
conclusions are restricted by the small numbers of events and of bacteria
evaluated. To clarify the present findings, further research is needed
utilizing larger cohorts and more comprehensive assessment of presence
and quantity of oral bacteria.

