Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular basis of interaction between ERG and microtubule
inhibitors in CRPC patients


Microtubules (MTs) are cytoskeletal polymer of / tubulin heterodimers
that are involved in several cellular functions including mitosis, cell
shape and intracellular trafficking. Due to their fundamental role in the
maintenance of cell homeostasis, MTs are the target of several
chemotherapeutic drugs that act by either stabilizing (taxanes,
epothilones) or destabilizing (vinca alkaloids, Eribulin) the MT
network.Taxanes (docetaxel and cabazitaxel) are currently used for first
or second line treatment of patients with metastatic castration-resistant
prostate caner (CRPC) and are the only class of chemotherapy drugs that
improve survival. Despite taxane clinical success, there is significant
heterogeneity in how patients respond to taxane therapy and most of CRPC
patients eventually become refractory and develop resistance to the
treatment. The molecular basis underlying this heterogeneity in treatment
response is still to be determined.ERG (ETS-related gene) is
over-expressed by 30-80 fold in at least 50% of prostate cancers as a
result of gene fusion with the 5 promoter of the AR-induced TMPRSS2 gene.
ERG rearrangement is an early event in prostate cancer tumorigenesis and
represents the most frequent recurrent genetic alteration in prostate
cancer. We recently showed that ERG over-expression is associated with
decreased taxane sensitivity in prostate cancer cell lines, in vivo
xenograft models, and in ERG-positive CRPC patients. Mechanistically, we
demonstrated that ERG contributes to taxane resistance by binding tubulin
in the cytoplasm, altering MT dynamics towards increased catastrophe rate
thereby shifting the dynamic equilibrium between MT polymers (preferred
taxane substrate) and soluble tubulin dimers (preferred substrate for
MT-depolymerizing drugs) towards soluble tubulin. Tiling mutant
co-immunoprecipitation showed that ERG-tubulin physical interaction is
mediated by ERG PNT domain, which has been also implicated with ERG
homo-oligomerization and heterodimerization. Moreover, MT-cosedimentation
assay elucidated that ERG predominantly interacts with tubulin dimers
instead of MT-polymers. Finally, we demonstrated that treatment with the
MT-depolymerizing drugs nocodazole or Eribulin is associated with lack of
resistance or even enhanced sensitivity in ERG-positive cells.We are
currently investigating the molecular basis of the interaction between
Eribulin and ERG in CRPC models, in order to elucidate the potential role
of Eribulin in the treatment of ERG+ CRPC patients.Overall, our data
strongly suggest a new role for ERG as MT-destabilizing MAP, with
significant therapeutic implications in CRPC patients. ERG status could
emerge as biomarker predictive of response to MT-inhibitors, driving
clinical decisions for patient selection to appropriate therapies.

