Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The RNA-binding protein tristetraprolin controls intestinal cell
differentiation and tumorigenesis through the Notch signaling pathway


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the 2nd leading cause of cancer death in U.S.
With lifetime incidence rates as high as 1 in 20, it is critical to
better define the molecular events controlling intestinal homeostasis and
tumor initiation/progression. In normal intestinal homeostasis, the Notch
pathway plays a fundamental role in controlling epithelial cell fate
through juxtacrine signaling between membrane-bound ligands to the Notch
receptor present on contacting cells. This complex promotes intestinal
epithelial cell fate through transcription factors Hes1 and Atoh1/Math1,
allowing for differentiation of absorptive enterocyte lineage by Hes1 or
secretory (goblet, enteroendocrine and Paneth) cell lineage controlled by
Atoh1. In CRC however, constitutive Notch activation is observed allowing
for enhanced Hes1 expression associated with tumor progression and
self-renewal of tumor-initiating cells. Yet, a clear mechanism for the
constitutive activation of this pathway in CRC is not known. Here, we
investigated the regulation of Notch signaling by the mRNA decay factor
Tristetraprolin (TTP) in CRC and TTP knockout mice. TTP is a member of
the TIS11 family of RNA-binding proteins, and the major factor promoting
decay of mRNAs bearing AU-rich element (ARE) motifs in their 3UTR. TTP
plays an essential role in controlling pro-inflammatory and oncogenic
gene expression in the GI tract, however during CRC progression, TTP
expression is silenced in tumors. In this study, TTP-inducible CRC cells
were used to show that expression of TTP suppresses proliferation and
anchorage-independent growth, impacts cell cycle, and reduces xenograft
tumor growth. Interestingly, TTP expression altered CRC cells such that
cells now displayed a secretory cell-like morphology, consistent with
studies showing effects of Notch signaling attenuation. Alcian blue
staining of acidic mucins was significantly increased in TTP-expressing
CRC cells and in xenograft tumors, suggesting a role for TTP in directing
secretory cell differentiation. Furthermore, gene expression arrays and
reporter gene assays showed that levels of Notch signaling genes were
significantly impacted by TTP and TTP preferentially promoted a 3-fold
downregulation of Notch1 receptor as compared to Notch2-4. The ability of
TTP to target Notch1 mRNA for rapid decay occurred through its
ARE-containing 3UTR as observed using 3UTR reporter and RNA-binding
assays. To determine if these effects were specific to tumor cells,
intestinal cell lineage was examined in TTP knockout mice with a
remarkable reduction in goblet cell number observed as compared to
wild-type mice. These findings demonstrate a novel role for TTP in
controlling intestinal cell differentiation via post-transcriptional
regulation of Notch1 and provide mechanistic insights into constitutive
Notch activation observed in CRC occurring through loss of TTP expression.

