Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lymphocyte-specific protein tyrosine kinase (Lck) interacts with
CR6-interacting factor 1 (CRIF1) in mitochondria to repress oxidative
phosphorylation


The purpose of our study is to determine whether and how
lymphocyte-specific protein tyrosine kinase (Lck) may exhibit novel
functions in cancer cell mitochondria. Mitochondria are responsible for
producing cellular energy via oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) of
glucose and fatty acids. Compared to normal differentiated cells, cancer
cells rely more on aerobic glycosis than mitochondrial OXPHOS. This shift
in energy metabolism allows more resources to be converted into biomass
for cancer cell's uncontrolled growth and proliferation. Numerous
mechanisms contribute to altered mitochondrial activity, including
phosphorylation of mitochondrial proteins. Recent studies showed that
cytoplasmic protein tyrosine kinases (PTK) also translocate to the
mitochondria and regulate mitochondrial functions. It represents an
important non-canonical pathway of how PTK modulates mitochondrial
activity.As a Src-family PTK, Lck is essential for T cell activation by
transmitting signals downstream of cell surface receptors. Overexpression
and aberrant activity of Lck have been reported in both blood
malignancies and solid tumors. We showed previously that Lck exhibited
additional oncogenic property when translocated to the nucleus (BBRC
417:1058). To explore the possibility that Lck may also translocate to
mitochondria, we examined human Jurkat T cell leukemia and its
Lck-deficient derivative Jcam cell line. Subcellular fractionation and
microscopy both confirmed the presence of Lck in Jurkat mitochondria.
Compared to Jcam, Jurkat cells exhibit high levels of mitochondrial
protein tyrosine phosphorylation, disrupted mitochondrial morphology, and
reduced OXPHOS.Subsequent mass spectrometry and in situ proximity
ligation assay identified CR6-interacting factor 1 (CRIF1) as a novel
Lck-interacting partner in mitochondria. CRIF1 interacts with
mitoribosome and Tid1 to facilitate translation and membrane insertion of
mitochondrion-encoded proteins, respectively. Compared to Jcam, Jurkat
cells express less mitochondrial proteins and show reduced CRIF1-Tid1
interaction. Knocking down CRIF1 in Jcam also results in decreased
mitochondrial protein level and mitochondrial dysfunction. Interestingly,
CRIF1 is not phosphorylated on tyrosine by Lck, suggesting the presence
of other Lck substrates in mitochondria. All together, these results
support the role of mitochondrial Lck as a negative regulator of CRIF1
through competitive binding and independent of its kinase activity.
Disrupted mitochondrial protein translation and membrane insertion then
lead to reduced OXPHOS and abnormal morphology. These findings raise the
possibility of targeting mitochondrial Lck to redirect the metabolic
shift in cancer cells.

