Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Precise characterization of macrophage secretory exosomes can lead
to novel therapeutic approaches


Multiple cell types interact within the tumor microenvironment (TME)
through crosstalk events that are mediated by many biomolecules including
cytokines, mRNA, and miRNA-containing exosomes that can influence cancer
progression as well as suppression. Inflammation within the TME is a
major determinant in tumor progression. Since tumor associated
macrophages (TAMs) are a major cellular factor in tumor inflammation, we
hypothesized that crosstalk events initiated by macrophage secreted
factors such as cytokines and exosomes will modulate breast cancer
phenotype. We evaluated the cytokine profile of a human monocytic cell
line, THP-1, following stimulation with a phorbol ester TPA
(12-O-Tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate) in vitro. Activated THP-1 cells
exhibited an M1 macrophage phenotype. In addition, we assessed the
morphological and cellular growth changes of luminal (T47D, MCF-7) and
basal-like (MDA-MB 231) breast cancer cell lines in vitro following
treatment with activated THP-1 conditioned medium (CM). Each cell line
displayed mesenchymal-like features and decreased cellular growth
following activated THP-1 CM treatment. MCF-7 and MDA-MB 231 displayed
increased MEK/ERK signaling, while all three cell lines showed increased
p-AKT expression. Furthermore, epithelial-like T47D and MCF-7 cells
exhibited an increase in EMT transcription factor expression. Moreover,
although T47D and MCF-7 did not show drastic changes in E-cadherin
expression via western blot analysis, immunofluorescence examination
showed a decrease in E-cadherin following activated THP-1 CM treatments
emphasizing a possible partial EMT event. Lastly, activated THP-1
exosomes were isolated and used to treat MDA-MB 231 to determine the
effects on breast cancer cell proliferation and senescence. MDA-MB 231
exhibited significantly decreased cellular growth and increased
senescence following incubation with activated THP-1 exosomes. The
variety of secretory factors within the TME as a result of inflammation
may contribute to tumor suppression as well as tumor progression via a
secretion of cytokines and exosomes.

