Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of dihydro-isoxazole derivatives as novel inhibitors of
NAMPT for the treatment of multiple myeloma


Nicotinamide phosphoribosyl transferase (NAMPT) is the enzyme that
catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the salvage pathway of Nicotinamide
Adenine Dinucleotide (NAD) biosynthesis. NAMPT is overexpressed in a
number of cancers, and inhibition of NAMPT has been shown to result in
anti-tumor efficacy in preclinical models. Clinical development to first
generation NAMPT inhibitors has been hindered because of their poor
pharmacological profile, high cytochrome inhibition and possibly
mechanism-based toxicities. Therefore, we sought to develop NAMPT
inhibitors with the best-in-class profile for overcoming mechanism-based
toxicities and/or resistance to current therapies. Utilizing
structure-guided drug design including determination of co-crystal
structures and SAR-based approaches, we have identified a novel chemical
series of inhibitors of NAMPT. Optimization of the series for transient
target inhibition as a result of reduced binding strength coupled with
desirable pharmacokinetic profile to minimize mechanism based toxicity
resulted in identification of AU-4869 as the Lead compound.AU-4869 showed
potent cross-species activity and reduced strength of binding in
comparison with first generation NAMPT inhibitors. Anti-proliferative
activity of AU-4869 correlated well with NAD depletion in multiple cell
lines derived from multiple myeloma and Pancreatic cancers. The
anti-proliferative activities were rescued in NAPRT-proficient cell lines
with the addition of NA due to the NAMPT independent salvage pathway for
biosynthesis of NAD, confirming the mechanism of action through NAD
depletion. AU-4869 exhibited desirable drug-like properties including
solubility, permeability, metabolic stability, lack of CYP & hERG
inhibition and pharmacokinetic exposure upon oral dosing. At
well-tolerated doses, AU-4869 exhibited superior efficacy at MTD doses in
mice xenograft models (pancreatic cancer and multiple myeloma) as
compared to FK866 and GNE-617.In view of the ability of NAMPT inhibitors
to enhance sensitivity to a number of targeted agents and overcome
resistance to available therapies such as bortezomib in multiple myeloma,
further pre-clinical development of AU-4869 for multiple myeloma is
ongoing.

