Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptin drives mammary stem cell self-renewal via the mTOR pathway


Normal tissue stem cells exist in either a quiescent or
proliferating/self-renewing phenotypic state with different patterns of
gene expression. In the breast, the CD44+/CD24 cells are retained in a
quiescent state, while the ALDH+ stem cells are actively self-renewing
cells; the quiescent CD44+/CD24 cells must transition through a
self-renewing ALDH+ state in order to differentiate into mature mammary
cells. The adipose-rich stroma that makes up the stem cell niche in the
human breast is a source of leptin that may alter stem cell phenotype in
a paracrine manner. A larger population of proliferating breast stem
cells could, in turn, increase the risk of breast cancer. We previously
demonstrated that the increased local leptin/adiponectin ratio that
commonly occurs in breast tissue of obese women promotes increased breast
stem cell self-renewal leading to a larger population of stem cells in
vivo, and that the mTOR pathway is activated in normal human mammary stem
cells by physiologic concentrations of adipokines, including leptin.
There was a physiologic dose response, with a measurable increase in mTOR
activity over baseline with 31.25 ng/ml leptin, and a near maximal effect
with 125 ng/ml. Here, we isolated the quiescent and proliferating stem
cell fractions from human reduction mammoplasty samples and measured
basal mTOR activity by ELISA for phosphorylated S6 ribosomal protein
(pS6/tS6 ratio), which was greater in the proliferating ALDH+ cells. The
quiescent stem cell fraction was treated with physiologic concentrations
of leptin prior to resorting with FACS to measure a transition from a
CD44+/CD24 to an ALDH+ proliferating phenotype. Parallel quiescent stem
cells treated with the mTOR inhibitor everolimus simultaneously with
leptin demonstrated that mTOR activity is necessary for this phenotypic
switch. If inflammatory adipokines promote stem cell symmetric
self-renewal by activating mTOR, targeted interventions may maintain
potential tumor-initiating cells in a quiescent state and reduce cancer
incidence.

