Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capsazepine attenuates JAK/STAT3 signaling pathway, proliferation,
survival of prostate carcinoma DU145 cells through induction of the
protein tyrosine phosphatase epsilon (PTP-epsilon)


Constitutive activation of signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT) 3 is a major distinguishing feature of various human
cancer cells and its activation leads to survival, proliferation, and
metastasis of tumor cells. Whether the anti-proliferative, pro-apoptotic,
and anti-invasive effects of capsazepine (Capz), a synthetic analog of
capsaicin, are linked to its capability to inhibit STAT3 activation was
investigated. We found that Capz suppressed both constitutive and
IL-6-inducible STAT3 activation in human prostate carcinoma cells. Capz
also suppressed nuclear translocation and DNA binding activity of STAT3.
The suppression was mediated through the inhibition of activation of the
upstream kinases JAK1/2 and c-Src. Treatment with the protein tyrosine
phosphatase (PTP) inhibitor pervanadate treatment reversed the
Capz-induced down-regulation of STAT3, thereby suggesting the involvement
of a PTP. Capz induced the expression of PTP protein and mRNA. Moreover,
knockdown of PTP by small interfering RNA suppressed the induction of
PTP, reversed the inhibition of STAT3 activation, suggesting the critical
role of PTP in its possible mechanism of action. Capz downregulated the
expression of STAT3-regulated proliferative, antiapoptotic, angiogenetic,
and metastatic gene products; and this correlated with suppression of
cell proliferation and invasion, the accumulation of cells in sub-G1
phase of cell cycle, and induction of apoptosis. Overexpression of
phosphorylated STAT3 led to the attenuation of Capz-mediated cleavage of
PARP as compared to the control. Thus, overall, our results suggest that
Capz is a novel inhibitor of STAT3 activation and thus may have a
potential in negative regulation of growth, metastasis, and angiogenesis
of tumor cells.

