Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A flexible mouse model of malignant pleural mesothelioma


Patients with advanced malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) have
extremely limited treatment options. To develop targeted therapies
necessary to radically alter the clinical course of MPM, it is important
to identify oncogenic mutations and signaling pathways that drive its
development and progression. About 75% of MPMs carry inactivating
mutations at the NF2 locus, which encodes the FERM domain protein Merlin,
and often also have deletions of the CDKN2A locus, encoding the CDK
inhibitor p16 and the p53 activator ARF. Since traditional cancer
therapies target dysregulated oncogenes, it is important to elucidate the
pathogenically relevant proteins that are dysregulated downstream of MPM
tumor suppressors. We have developed a flexible and rapid mouse model
that can be used to dissect genetics of MPM, to evaluate the preclinical
efficacy of novel therapies, and to provide a platform for MPM shRNA
genetic screens. We injected into the pleural cavity of mice lentivirus
encoding Cre recombinase and miR30-based shRNA cassettes to
simultaneously deplete four of the most commonly lost proteins in
mesothelioma - Nf2, p16INK4a/ARF, and BAP1. Cre recombinase deletes the
Nf2 conditional allele and simultaneously activates a Luciferase reporter
gene in the pleural mesothelium, allowing for bioluminescent imaging of
infected cells that develop MPM tumors. Lentiviral miR30-based shRNA
cassettes simultaneously deplete Ink4a/ARF and Bap1, helping to drive
tumorigenesis. To evaluate MPM genetics, mice with conditional alleles
for putative drivers of MPM pathogenesis (i.e. Dcaf1 and Ptk2) in
addition to the Nf2 conditional allele can be injected with the virus to
determine whether these genes are necessary and sufficient for MPM
development or progression. Moreover, knockdown of putative MPM drivers
can be easily carried out by adding corresponding shRNA cassettes to the
lentiviral vector. Using these methods, we have developed a rapid
genetically engineered mouse model that recapitulates human MPM and can
be used to explore MPM genetics. This flexible MPM mouse model will allow
us to unravel MPM genetics and help to identify novel therapeutic targets
as well as provide an efficient preclinical test of these therapies.

