Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Classification of colorectal PDX into transcriptomic subtypes
associated with distinct genomic alteration profiles and in vivo response
patterns to therapies


Recently, unsupervised gene expression-based signatures with prognostic
and potential predictive implications were proposed for colorectal cancer
(CRC) classification. The challenge is now to characterize the genomic
alterations of CRC subtypes and their sensitivity to therapies. Patient
derived xenograft models (PDX) may be a valuable tool for this purpose,
as they retain the molecular features and drug response patterns of their
parental patient tumors. In this study, we classified our collection of
colon PDX into transcriptomic subtypes and investigated the associations
with genomic alterations and in vivo responses to cetuximab (CTX),
oxaliplatin (OXT) and irinotecan (IR). We determined expression profiles
of 67 PDX models using Affymetrix HGU133 Plus2.0 arrays and applied the
CRC assigner-786 gene expression signature reported by Sadanandam et al.
to classify our PDX into 5 subtypes. We identified 34 (51%)
transit-amplifying (TA), 15 (22%) goblet-like (GL), 10 (15%) inflammatory
(IF), 7 (10%) enterocyte (ET) and 1 (1%) stem-like (SL) PDX models. TA
showed a gene signature of WNT pathway activation whereas GL, ET and IF
PDX subtypes harbored gene signatures of KRAS pathway activation. As
analyzed by whole exome sequencing and Affymetrix SNP6.0 array, the GL,
ET and IF subtypes were found to display different signatures of
mutational processes, mutations and chromosomal rearrangement patterns
than TA and SL. Of particular note, mutations in BRAF, PIK3CA/PTEN,
TGFBR2/SMAD4 or NOTCH1 were mainly found in GL, ET or IF while mutations
in APC, TP53 and KRAS were not associated with a given subtype. Regarding
PDX drug sensitivity, 10/11 TA/SL PDX with unaltered
KRAS/PIK3CA/PTEN/HER2 status were sensitive to CTX whereas 9/12 models
with alterations were resistant. TA and SL PDX were also frequently
sensitive to IR and OXT (6/10 and 4/10, respectively). In the IF subtype,
6/6 PDX showing KRAS, PIK3CA or PTEN alterations were resistant to CTX.
Of interest, 5/5 IF PDX were sensitive to IR treatment. As in IF PDX, GL
and ET often had alterations in KRAS/PIK3CA/PTEN/HER2 and were resistant
to CTX. Moreover, these subtypes were resistant to both IR and OXT.
Furthermore, the frequent KRAS pathway activation and the presence of
actionable mutations in GL, ET and IF would advocate the testing of
inhibitors (as monotherapy or in combination) of BRAF, PI3K or MEK in
tumors of these subtypes while WNT inhibitors should be tested in TA
models.Molecular classification of our colon PDX collection confirmed
their similarities with patient tumors. Investigation of drug sensitivity
resulted in the identification of PDX subtypes which respond poorly to
standard therapies and which require different treatment options. Testing
alternative and combined therapies in PDX may be a valuable approach to
optimize personalized medicine.

