Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Studies of co-expression of cancer stem cell markers and growth
factor receptors in human ovarian cancer cells and their responses to
treatment with various tyrosine kinase inhibitors


Ovarian cancer remains one of the most lethal types of gynaecological
cancer. There is an urgent need for the identification of biomarkers for
use in the early detection of such cancers and for predicting the
response to therapy. Here, we investigated the sensitivity in vitro of a
panel of human ovarian cancer cell lines to treatment with several small
molecules tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) including reversible EGFR
(Gefitinib), reversible dual EGFR/HER-2 (Lapatinib), reversible pan-ErbB
family (Sapatinib), irreversible dual EGFR/HER-2 (Canertinib, Neratinib),
the irreversible ErbB family blocker (Afatinib), as well as
v-abl/src/C-kit (Dasatinib) and v-abl/C-kit/PDGFR TKI (Imatinib). We also
determined the expression of putative ovarian cancer stem cell (CSC)
markers (e.g. CD24, CD44, CD117), P-Glycoprotein (Pgp), and HER family
members on this panel of cancer cells by FACS analysis and whether there
was any correlation between the expression of these biomarkers and
response to treatment with these agents. Of the CSC markers, the
expression of CD24 was high in five of the ten ovarian cancer cell lines
examined, and with MFI values ranging from of 450 (SKOV3) to 24 (SW626).
In contrast, the CD24 negative ES2 cells had the highest level of
expression of CD44 (MFI = 977). The MFI values for other CD44 positive
tumours ranged from 139.51 (PA1) to 46.38 (Caov3). All ovarian cancer
cells used in this study were negative for the expression of both CD117
and Pgp and overexpression of HER-2 (MFI = 368) was only detected in the
EGFR positive SKOV3 cells. Of the pan-HER family TKIs, afatinib inhibited
the growth of ovarian cancer cells with IC50 values ranging from 83nM
(Caov3) to 1.40M (ES2) and sapatinib inhibited the growth with IC50
values ranging from 24nM (Caov3) to 4.41M (PA1) respectively. Of the two
irreversible dual EGFR/HER-2 TKIs, neratinib was more effective than
canertinib at inhibiting the growth of ovarian cancer cells. In contrast,
Gefitinib and Lapatinib were the most effective drugs at inhibiting the
growth of CaoV3 and SKOV3 cells, with IC50 values of 1.8nM and 1.4nM
respectively. Interestingly, the majority of ovarian cancer cells were
highly sensitive to treatment with dasatinib with IC50 values of below
3.0nM but were relatively resistant to treatment with imatinib (i.e.
IC50>10M). With the exceptions of correlation between the CD24/HER-2
co-expression and response to gefitinib and lapatinib, there was no
statistically significant correlation between the expression of CD24,
CD44, EGFR, HER-2 or other combinations of these markers and response to
other agents. Our results support the need for further investigation of
the predictive value of CD24/HER-2 co-expression, and the therapeutic
potential of dasatinib when used in combination with the HER inhibitors
in ovarian cancer.

