Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting binding function-3 site on the androgen receptor to
treat Enzalutamide-resistant prostate cancer


Interest in developing androgen receptor (AR) inhibitors with novel
mechanism of action is on the rise since the commercial anti-androgens
(including recently approved drug, Enzalutamide) face clinical
limitations. The current therapies fail over a period of time because
they all target mutation-prone hormone binding pocket on AR to which the
receptor has already developed effective resistance mechanisms. Hence,
there is a pressing need for novel therapeutics that inhibit the AR
through alternative modes of action. Recent studies have identified a
novel binding pocket on the surface of AR called binding function-3 (BF3)
that is critical for the AR transcriptional activity. In order to develop
promising drug-like candidates, we performed structural optimization of
our lead AR BF3 inhibitor, followed by a series of experimental
validation of the synthetic analogues. As a result, we have discovered a
chemical series of quinoline as new lead BF3 inhibitors. One of the most
potent inhibitors identified, VPC-13566, demonstrated an IC50 of 0.071M
in AR eGFP transcriptional assay. Confirming it as a true BF3 binder,
VPC-13566 displaced Bag-1L peptide, a co-regulator protein that binds to
AR BF3 pocket. Additionally, the Biolayer Interferometry assay detected
direct reversible interactions between the AR ligand binding domain and
the inhibitor. To confirm VPC-13566 binding to the BF3 pocket, a
mutagenesis study was performed. Results with mutants F673E, E837A and
N833W confirmed that compound did not show any binding to the protein
compared with the wild type in a BLI assay. VPC-13566 demonstrated strong
anti-proliferative activity against LNCaP and Enzalutamide-resistant
prostate cancer cell lines (MR49F) whereas it did not affect the growth
of AR independent PC3 cell line. It also reduced prostate specific
antigen (PSA) in both LNCaP and MR49F and reduced expression of AR target
genes, PSA and TMPRSS2. These findings suggest that VPC-13566 exhibits AR
BF3 specific mechanism of action. Furthermore, VPC-13566 significantly
reduced AR-dependent growth of tumors and PSA levels in LNCaP and MR49F
xenograft models. Based on these outcomes, it can be anticipated that
such drug prototypes will lay a foundation for the development of
alternative or supplementary small-molecule therapies capable of
combating PCa even in its drug resistant forms. Because the emergence of
castration resistance is the lethal end stage of the disease, we
anticipate that the proposed research will eventually have a substantial
impact on patient survival.

