Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of synthetic heparan sulfate oligosaccharides as
anti-angiogenic agents


Angiogenesis has been validated as a target in multiple randomised trials
in ovarian cancer, in which addition of VEGF pathway inhibitors to
conventional cytotoxic treatment resulted in increased progression-free
and in some trials overall survival. However, the benefit from VEGF
pathway inhibitors is still modest and the redundancy of angiogenic
cytokines might be one of the underlying mechanisms. The majority of
angiogenic cytokines, such as FGFs, HGF, VEGF165, IL-8, SDF-1, HB-EGF
that are also linked to ovarian cancer, critically depend on the linear
glycosaminoglycan, heparan sulfate (HS), for their biological activity.
HS is composed of repeating disaccharides that consist of N-substituted
glucosamine and a hexuronic acid residue and is bound to core proteins
which support signaling complex formation. The critical importance of
glucosamine-6-O-sulfate (6S) moieties in assembling the growth
factor/receptor signaling complex implies that reduced 6S content in HS
will impact angiogenesis and thereby tumor growth.We used chemical
synthesis to produce three differentially sulfated dodecasaccharides
(12-mers). All three 12-mers were homogeneously sulfated at the 2-O
position of iduronate (IS) and the N-position of glucosamine (NS). The
first 12-mer lacked 6S moieties ([NSIS]6), the second 12-mer had a single
6S introduced at the non-reducing end of the molecule ([NS6SIS]1-[NSIS]5)
and the third 12-mer was uniformly 6-O-sulfated ([NS6SIS]6). Comparison
of anti-angiogenic properties of these 12-mers revealed differential
inhibitory activities against angiogenic cytokines. While a single 6S at
the non-reducing end slightly improved inhibition of FGF2- and
VEGF165-induced angiogenic responses when compared to non-6S-sulfated
12-mer, it produced striking changes in the biological effects on
IL-8/SDF-1. Addition of one 6S abolished inhibitory activity of [NSIS]6
against IL-8, but conferred superior activity in inhibition of SDF-1, in
vitro and in vivo. These dramatic differential effects were absent if all
glucosamine residues were 6-O-sulfated.NSIS 12-mer with a single 6S
inhibited FGF-2-dependent microvessel formation in tumor xenografts, FGFR
signaling in tumor blood vessels, but was insufficient in inhibiting
tumor growth, most likely due to the dominant role of VEGF.We demonstrate
unique structure-activity relationships for inhibition of SDF-1 and IL-8
which opens new opportunities in the development of glycotherapeutics. We
show that oligosaccharides can be designed to target multiple or specific
angiogenic cytokines, thus demonstrating the feasibility in generating
agents that overcome resistance to VEGF inhibitors.

