Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insight into the mechanisms of anti-angiogenesis mediated by
phosphaplatins


Phosphaplatins are a new class of monomeric Pt(II) and Pt(IV)-
pyrophosphato complexes that contain amine ligands. These complexes
containing 1, 2-cyclohexanediamine exhibit excellent in vitro and in vivo
efficacy against both cisplatin- and carboplatin-sensitive and -resistant
human cancer cells without exhibiting severe toxicities commonly
associated with platinum therapies. We report here unique anti-angiogenic
properties of phosphaplatins through several experiments in HUVEC and
human ovarian cancer (A 2780) cells as described below.Inhibition of
vascularization. As cell migration is necessary for endothelial cells in
angiogenesis and for cancer growth and metastasis, wound healing
migration assay was performed. The data obtained from these experiments
indicate that phosphaplatins strongly inhibited the migration of HUVECs
while cisplatin did not. The ability of endothelial cells forming
tube-like structures was also investigated. Remarkably, phosphaplatins
resulted in a significantly reduced tubule length. These morphological
changes suggested that phosphaplatins inhibited the HUVECs migration at
low concentrations.RNA and Protein expression of VEGFR-2 Inhibition. To
understand the inhibitory effects of phosphaplatins on cell migration and
tube formation, angiogenesis PCR array was applied to determine changes
in gene expression before and after 24 hours treatment. VEGFR-2 and
VEGF-A were decreased by 50 - 80% in their mRNA levels of A2780s. Protein
expression by Western blot showed that VEGFR-2 was typically decreased
after 12 hours during the treatment with phosphaplatins. These results
are consistent with RT-PCR data suggesting that VEGFR-2 was
down-regulated by phosphaplatins, which probably lead to anti-angiogenic
property.Kinase Inhibition and Enzyme kinetics. To investigate whether
phosphaplatins directly inhibited the activation of VEGFR-2 or not,
kinase inhibition assay was performed. These results also confirmed that
phosphorylation of VEGFR-2 was inhibited, indicating that phosphaplatins
are indeed inhibitors of VEGFR-2. These data also suggest that
phosphaplatins might be directly bound to VEGFR-2.LC-MS/MS and protein
mapping. To understand the mode of interactions between phosphaplatins
and VEGFR-2, comparison between treated and untreated VERGF-2 was subject
to mass spectroscopy analysis after trypsin digestion. Data indicated
deamidations in some amino acids, such as Glutamine 847, Asparagine 1216,
Glutamine 1222, indicating that phosphaplatins establish ionic
interactions or hydrogen binding with VEGFR-2, rather than covalent
binding.In summary, our results show phosphaplatins functions as an
inhibitor of VEGFR-2, leading to the inhibition of angiogenesis and
tumorigenesis. The data suggest a new mode of action for phosphaplatins
which is not known for other platinum therapies.

