Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vatalanib targets ABCG2-overexpressing multidrug resistant colon
cancer cells under hypoxia


Cancer microenvironment is characterized by significantly lower oxygen
concentration. This hypoxic condition is known to reduce drug
responsiveness to cancer chemotherapy via multiple mechanisms, among
which the upregulation of an efflux transporter ABCG2 confers resistance
to a wide variety of structurally unrelated anticancer drugs. Vatalanib
(PTK787) is a multitargeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor for VEGFR2, Flt and
c-Kit, which exhibit potent anticancer activity in vitro and in vivo. We
investigated the potentiation effect of vatalanib on the anticancer
activity of conventional cytotoxic drugs in colon cancer cell lines under
both normoxic and hypoxic growth conditions. More significant synergistic
anticancer activity was observed under hypoxic condition.
Mechanistically, vatalanib was found to inhibit ABCG2 and P-gp efflux
activity, probably by acting as an uncompetitive inhibitor and
interfering with their ATPase activity. Under hypoxic growth condition,
ABCG2-overexpressing cells sorted out by FACS technique as side
population cells (SP) were found to be significantly more responsive to
irinotecan (an ABCG2 substrate anticancer drug) in the presence of
vatalanib. The colony formation capactiy of these SP cells was remarkably
reduced upon treatment with a combination of irinotecan and vatalanib,
compared to irinotecan alone. However, vatalanib, at concentrations that
produced the circumvention of ABCG2-mediated resistance, did not
appreciably alter ABCG2 mRNA or protein expression levels or the
phosphorylation of Akt and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
(ERK1/2). Vatalanib was also evaluated for potential interference with
the cytochrome P450 metabolic enzymes by a rapid N-in-one in vitro
interaction screening assay. The result indicates that vatalanib is only
a mild inhibitor of both CYP34A and CYP2D, two major drug-metabolizing
P450 enzymes, which presumably may avoid the undesirable drug-drug
interactions in combination therapy. Our study thus advocates the further
investigation of vatalanib for use in combination chemotherapy to
circumvent hypoxia-mediated drug resistance.

