Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bystander effect and genomic instability in human cells and their
progeny after irradiation with X rays, protons or carbon ions: role of
gap junction communication


Purpose: Ionizing Radiation (IR)-induced bystander effects and genomic
instability have important implication in radiotherapy and
radioprotection. Their persistence in the progeny of normal cells may
contribute to risk of long-term radiation-related health effect in human,
including cancer. Hence, this study investigates the role of gap junction
intercellular communication (GJIC) and the quality of radiation in the
propagation of stressful effects in the unirradiated bystander cells and
their progeny.Material and methods: Human skin fibroblasts in the
confluent state were exposed to microbeam irradiations with different
linear energy transfer (LET) at mean absorbed dose of 0.4 Gy, in the
presence or absence of GJIC inhibitor (AGA) by which 0.036-0.4% of cells
were directly targeted by IR. After 4 h irradiation or following 20
population doublings, the cells were harvested and assayed for
micronucleus (MN) formation, gene mutation and protein oxidation.Results:
Our results showed that high-LET carbon microbeams (LET 103 keV/m) and
high-LET proton microbeams (LET 11 keV/m) were more effective than
low-LET X ray microbeam (LET 6 keV/m) in the induction of DNA damage (MN
formation) in bystander cells. Interestingly, significant attenuation of
MN formation occurred in bystander cells in the presence of AGA after
proton and carbon microbeams. In contrast, incubation of the cells with
AGA did not significantly affect the induction of MN formation in
bystander cells during confluent holding after X irradiation. Further,
the progeny of bystander cells exposed to X rays or protons showed
persistent oxidative stress which correlated MN formation and mutation
frequency. Such effects were not observed after irradiation by carbon
ions. Importantly, the progeny of bystander cells from cultures exposed
to protons or carbon ions under conditions where GJIC was inhibited
harbored reduced oxidative and genetic damage. This mitigating effect was
not detected when the cultured were exposed to X rays. Taken together,
the overall results show the expression of stressful effects in the
bystander cells and their progeny are dependent on the radiation quality
or LET.Conclusions: Our findings suggest that the involvement of
GJIC-dependent of radiation quality in the propagation of radiation
induces stressful effects to bystander cells and their progeny. In
addition, this work provides a strong support to the fact that carbon
ions can significantly reduce the risk of cancer and have potential
implications in the therapeutic outcome of radiotherapy compared to X
rays or protons.

