Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation and comparison of two commercially available targeted
NGS platforms to assist oncology decision making


Background: It is widely acknowledged that there is value in examining
cancers for genomic aberrations via Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) on
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor tissue. How commercially
available NGS platforms compare with each other and the clinical utility
of the reported actionable results is not well known. During the course
of the study, the Foundation One (F1) test generated data on a
combination of somatic mutations, indels, chromosomal abnormalities, and
DNA copy number changes at 250X coverage, while the PCDx test generated
the same type of data at >5,000X coverage plus provided mRNA expression
levels. We sought to compare and evaluate paired FFPE tumor using these
two platforms.Methods: Paired FFPE blocks from patients were submitted to
both vendors for NGS analysis. Samples were from patients with advanced
solid tumors. Patients either had a cancer type for which no standard of
care exists or had progression on >1 line of systemic therapy. Turnaround
time (TAT) was calculated (calendar days between the date sample received
at the vendor to time of first NGS report). A biomarker was considered
actionable if it has a published association with treatment response in
humans. The assay report was assigned the highest of the following
categories based on the list of actionable biomarker(s): commercially
available drug (CA) (highest), clinical trial drug (CT), or neither
option (NO) (lowest).Results: There were 10M:11F; median age was 56
(range 35-65). The most common cancer types were 7 thoracic, 4 GI, and 3
GU. Paired F1 and PCDx results for 21 unique patient tumors submitted
between 3/2014 and 9/2014 were available. Due to insufficient archival
tissue from the same collection period, 1 case used samples from
different collections. PCDx reported first results faster than F1 in 20
cases. When received at both vendors on the same day, PCDX reported first
results for 14 of 15 cases, with a median TAT of 9 days earlier than F1
(range -7 to 14 days). PCDx and F1 reported a CA 6 and 5 times, CT 4 and
4 times, and NO 11 and 12 times; respectively. PCDx provided higher
ranking actionable targets for 5 cases vs. 3 cases for F1; the rest had
equivalent ranking.Conclusions: In this analysis, commercially available
NGS platforms provided clinically relevant actionable targets (CA or CT)
in 45% of diverse cancer types. PCDx outperformed F1 in TAT and
clinically relevant higher ranking of actionable targets.

