Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: R-ketorolac targets Cdc42 and Rac1 GTPases and alters ovarian
tumor cell behaviors critical for invasion and metastasis


Ovarian cancer (OvCa) is the 5th leading cause of cancer death in women
in the US with a 5-year survival rate of 44.6%. About 70% patients are
diagnosed at advanced stages with intraperitoneal dissemination,
therefore identifying intracellular targets and developing effective
molecules to reduce tumor metastasis have great significance for ovarian
cancer therapy. Cdc42 and Rac1 are small Rho GTPase and function as
molecular switches of actin reorganization which are crucial to tumor
cell adhesion, migration and invasion. In previous work, our group found
Cdc42 and the constitutively active Rac1b are overexpressed in primary
ovarian tumor tissues and ovarian cancer cell lines. Lead identification
through a high-throughput screen combined with a computational shape
homology approach, identified R-ketorolac as a Cdc42 and Rac1 regulator,
an activity that is distinct from the anti-inflammatory, cyclooxygenase
inhibitory activity of S-ketorolac. RhoA was unaffected by R-ketorolac. A
bead-based flow cytometry assay identified R-ketorolac reduced Cdc42 and
Rac1 GTPase nucleotide binding in vitro and inhibition was an allosteric
mechanism of action. In cell-based assays, using Skov3ip cells, and in
ascites-derived ovarian tumor cells, R-ketorolac was found to inhibit the
activities of Cdc42 and Rac1 and their direct downstream effectors, the
phosphorylation of p21-activated kinases (PAKs). R-ketorolac, but not
S-ketorolac impeded Cdc42 mediated filopodia formation, measured based on
both the length and numbers of filopodia in Skov3ip and primary OvCa
cells. Cell behavior assays showed that R-ketorolac but not S-ketorolac
strikingly inhibited cell adhesion, migration and invasion. In a
xenograft mouse model a 50% reduction in tumor cell number and decreased
total tumor burden was observed with R-ketorolac as compared to
S-ketorolac treatment. Finally, in a phase 0 clinical study we found
Cdc42 and Rac1 activities were reduced in a time-dependent manner after a
single IV dose of racemic ketorolac treatment. In sum, we established
R-ketorolac inhibition on Cdc42 and Rac1 activities and subsequent
physiological consequences which are critical to tumor metastasis. Our
findings provide the first demonstration of selective inhibition of Cdc42
and Rac1 GTPases by an FDA approved drug in humans.

