Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of c-MET/HGF signaling as a critical mediator of an
invasive and resistant phenotype in colorectal cancer


The c-MET proto-oncogene is frequently overexpressed (50-60%), amplified
(5-10%), and mutated (5%) in colorectal cancer (CRC). Hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF)-induced c-MET activation has been linked with migration,
survival, invasion, and resistance to targeted therapy, and has been
suggested as a possible prognostic biomarker for CRC. We are currently
investigating the role of c-MET and microenvironment derived HGF in the
acquisition of an invasive and migratory phenotype, and resistance to
targeted therapy in CRC.In order to model CRC tumour cell invasion and
metastasis, we have generated invasive subpopulations from CRC cells
using Boyden Invasion chambers. Invasive cell lines were characterised
for protein expression/activity by Western blotting, and analysed for
migratory and invasive potential using the xCELLigence System (Roche). To
model the CRC microenvironment, we have utilised a range of co-culture
techniques with CRC cell lines and colon fibroblasts. c-MET expression in
FFPE tissues was measured using IHC in a tissue microarray (TMA) derived
from early stage CRC patients.HCT116 and LoVo invasive subpopulations
showed an EMT-like, mesenchymal, migratory/invasive phenotype. In
addition, increased expression and activation levels of c-MET were found
in these sublines, which was determined to be ligand independent.
Inhibition of c-MET using RNAi abrogated both basal and HGF-induced
migration and invasion in CRC cell lines. Co-culture of CRC cells with
HGF-expressing colon-derived fibroblasts leads to activation of c-MET,
inducing CRC migration, invasion, and resistance to MEK inhibition, and
this phenotype could be diminished using a HGF neutralising antibody.
Significant increased expression levels of c-MET were also found in a CRC
TMA compared to matched normal tissues, and also at the invasive edge of
some CRC tumours, where it may be driving invasive biology.The
identification of key pathways driving metastasis has a huge potential to
change treatment strategies in CRC. We intend to further investigate the
role of c-MET in regulation of migration, invasion, and resistance to
therapy in CRC. We hypothesise that patients with high tumoural c-MET at
the invasive front may benefit in particular from anti- c-MET therapies.

