Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spontaneous mammary cancer development in genetically engineered
mice with only one copy of Brca1 disrupted in combination with Trp53
haploinsufficiency


Background: Women carrying one mutated copy of BRCA1 are disposed to
developing breast cancer. BRCA1-mutation-related cancers often harbor
TRP53 mutations. Previously established genetically engineered mouse
(GEM) models with spontaneous mammary cancer development have both copies
of Brca1 disrupted in combination with Trp53 haploinsufficiency. Here we
characterized cancer development in GEM with only one copy of Brca1
disrupted in mammary epithelial cells using Cre-Lox technology in
combination with germ-line Trp53 haploinsufficiency. Methods: From our
Brca1f11fT11/MMTV-Cre/Trp53+/ breeding program we noted mammary cancer
development in female Brca1f11/WT11/MMTV-Cre/Trp53+/ mice. The
time-course of mammary hyperplasia and cancer development was
characterized in these mice. Mice were euthanized at age 6 months (n = 9)
or when the largest tumor reached 1 cm3 or at 12 months if no tumor
developed (n = 12). Cancers were resected, inguinal mammary glands
processed for histology and thoracic mammary glands flash frozen or
processed for primary cell culture. Hyperplastic alveolar nodules (HANs)
and branching patterns were detected using inguinal mammary gland whole
mounts. Histology was read on H&E stained slides and immunohistochemistry
(IHC) performed for ER, PGR and HER2 on cancer specimens. Results:
Thirty-three percent of the mice developed palpable mammary tumors by age
12 months. Forty-four percent of the mice exhibited HANs at age 6 months
and 56% at age 12 months. One mouse developed a female reproductive tract
cancer. Three mice developed single palpable mammary adenocarcinomas. One
mouse developed two cancers, one palpable spindloid and one non-palpable
anaplastic carcinoma. Two adenocarcinomas have completed IHC studies and
are ER/PGR/HER2 negative. Multilayered ductal hyperplasia was present
only in 12-month-old mice (89%). Two-layered lobular-type hyperplasia was
found in 33% of 6-month-old and 100% of 12-month-old mice. Primary cell
cultures were established from both cancers attempted. Conclusions: Here
we report development of a Brca1 insufficiency mouse model more
representative of disease development in women who carry only one allele
with a BRCA1-mutation. Similar to models with both Brca1 copies
disrupted, Trp53 haploinsufficiency was required for cancer progression.
The spectrum of mammary cancer histology was similar to that previously
reported when both Brca1 alleles were disrupted. This model represents a
tool for investigation of preventive strategies in the face of Brca1 and
Trp53 haploinsufficiency and study of possible interactions between this
genetic background and genetic and environmental factors that may promote
cancer development.

