Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The NF-B/MDM2 pathway is engaged in activin/ PI3 kinase induced
degradation of p21 in colon cancer cells


Introduction: The signaling pathways for activin and TGF are frequently
disrupted in colorectal cancers (CRC) and these mutations are associated
with metastatic disease. Understanding the cellular consequences wrought
by mutations to these signaling pathways may provide opportunities for
the development of new therapeutic approaches. Our lab has previously
shown opposing effects on a downstream target of TGF and activin, namely
the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor p21. TGF induces
SMAD4-dependent upregulation of p21, while activin downregulates p21 in a
SMAD4-independent mechanism via ubiquitination and degradation allowing
for enhanced cell migration. However, the mode of regulation leading to
p21 degradation is not completely known. We hypothesize that regulation
of the E3 ubiquitin ligase MDM2 by NF-B is involved in p21 degradation.
Here we explore the role of MDM2 in the regulation of p21 in response to
activin and TGF treatment in FET CRC cells.Methods: Colon cancer cell
lines were assessed for ligand-induced PI3K/NF-B/MDM2/p21 pathway
engagement. FET cells were transfected with increasing concentrations of
either wild type p65 or a dominant-negative mutant of p65 and treated
with activin or TGF prior to immunoblot analysis for IB-alpha, MDM2 and
p21. DNA-binding activity of NF-B was assessed by electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA). The requirement for NF-B activation was
determined through use of the selective inhibitor peptide NBD
(NEMO-binding domain), and PI3 kinase activity was confirmed by
inhibition with LY294002.Results: Because activin induces ubiquitination
of p21, we investigated the potential involvement of MDM2 and further the
regulation of MDM2 by NF-B. NF-B has been reported to regulate MDM2
through direct binding to an NF-B binding site in the promoter of MDM2.
Activin induced activation of NF-B as measured by increased DNA binding
activity to an NF-B consensus-binding site as well as by a reduction in
IB-alpha protein. Furthermore, we found this regulation to be dependent
on activation of PI3 kinase. Overexpression of wild type p65 plasmid but
not dominant negative p65 was found to increase MDM2 expression while the
NF-B specific inhibitor NBD blocked the activin-induced increase in MDM2.
By contrast, TGF treatment did not contribute to an increase in MDM2
levels via NF-B pathway.Conclusions: Here, we provide evidence to
indicate that in colon cancer cells, activin may be working through NF-B
to promote MDM2 activity leading to the degradation of p21 in a PI3
kinase dependent mechanism. Future experiments will explore if
pharmaceutical intervention in this pathway can inhibit the metastatic
activity of activin as a therapeutic approach for advanced colon cancer.

