Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profiling of sequential biopsies in patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer identifies genomic alterations that evolve
during first-line therapy and could have therapeutic implications: A
prospective study to identify molecular mechanisms of clinical resistance
(QCROC-01: NCT00984048).


Therapeutic resistance remains a major obstacle in metastatic colorectal
cancer (mCRC) and biomarkers to guide treatment are essential to
improving survival and quality of life in mCRC patients. A biopsy-driven
prospective study was designed to identify biomarkers and mechanisms of
resistance to a standard first-line therapy in patients with mCRC which
could be useful in guiding treatment selection (QCROC-01; NCT00984048).
We also hoped to recognize molecular changes over time, or resulting from
the selection pressure of treatment, which could have implications for
subsequent therapy.This study is ongoing and approved at thirteen sites
with one-hundred patients enrolled so far. Patients with mCRC receiving
FOLFOX (5-fluorouracil, leucovorin and oxaliplatin) with bevacizumab
consented to three needle core tumour biopsies at pre-treatment and at
the time of resistance. The rate of both patient and physician acceptance
of biopsies has steadily risen with time and experience. Serial bloods
were also collected for proteomic analysis and circulating tumor DNA.
Twenty-five biopsy samples were profiled using exome sequencing (tumor
and germ line), RNAseq, low pass genome sequencing and miRNA analysis.
Differential gene expression analysis revealed signatures associated with
clinical response and resistance when comparing tumours obtained pre- and
post-treatment. We detect changes in variant allele fraction including
both depletion and enrichment of individual somatic mutations over the
course of treatment, the latter of which may indicate subclonal and
acquired driver mutations that confer therapeutic resistance. A small
number of genes show recurrent evidence for changes in clonal enrichment
at the time of relapse across multiple patients. These could also
represent therapeutic targets for subsequent therapy for these patients,
and as such, represent new treatment opportunities. Our findings provide
insights into tumor evolution during first-line chemotherapy of mCRC that
may hold clues to optimize current first-line therapeutic decision making
and identifies potential target pathways for second-line stratification
of patients. This study is part of the Canadian Colorectal Cancer
Consortium which is a multi-site collaboration funded by the Terry Fox
Research Institute and le fonds de recherche du qubec - sant.

