Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting PD-1, TIM-3 and LAG-3 in combination for improved
immunotherapy combinations


Antibodies that inhibit the CTLA-4 and PD-1 checkpoint pathways have
shown significant activity as either single agents or in combination in
both mouse models and clinical studies. TIM-3 and LAG-3 have been
reported to function as additional immune checkpoints which limit
anti-tumor T cell responses and represent an opportunity for additional
combination approaches to improve patient response to immunotherapy. To
explore the potential for targeting other immune checkpoints in
combination with anti-PD-1, studies were conducted in syngeneic mouse
models and in human in vitro assays.A series of surrogate mouse specific
reagents targeting TIM-3, LAG-3 and PD-1 have been generated to improve
understanding of combination checkpoint therapy in several syngeneic
models. Mouse tumor models were characterized by IHC and FACS for
relevant markers including PD-L1, Foxp3, TIM3and LAG3, to identify those
most likely to be subject to immunosuppressive mechanisms contributing to
tumor growth and immune evasion. Initial syngeneic studies in MC38 and
Colon 26 demonstrated that combinations of antibodies to murine PD-1,
TIM-3 and LAG-3 improved efficacy over single agent therapy, suggesting
that combinations of these checkpoint inhibitors might have therapeutic
potential in the clinic. The results of ongoing studies to evaluate the
dose response of the combinations as well as the contribution of the
antibody isotype will be reported.Potent anti-human PD-1, -TIM-3 and
LAG-3 clinical candidates have been identified using SHM-XEL, which
combines mammalian cell display of human IgG with somatic hypermutation
in vitro to select and mature antibodies with desired biological
activities. In a DC/T cell MLR assay, combination of the anti-LAG-3
antibody with a novel anti-PD-1 antibody could further increase T cell
secretion of IL-2 up to 30-fold compared to anti-LAG-3 alone. Anti-TIM-3
in combination with anti-PD-1 also improved the EC50 up to 6-fold.
Staining of activated purified CD4+ or CD8+ T-cells demonstrate that
co-expression of PD-1 and LAG-3 increases upon activation compared to
nave T-cells, suggesting combination therapy may be particularly
effective against activated or exhausted T-cells. These in vitro data and
in vivo pre-clinical model results support evaluating combination
immunotherapy with anti-LAG-3, anti-TIM-3, and anti-PD-1 in cancer
patients.

