Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of label-free microfluidic technologies for the
enrichment, expansion and characterization of circulating tumor cells in
pancreatic cancer


Introduction and Objective: Pancreatic cancer is a devastating disease
with a 5-year survival rate of less than 6%. By the time of diagnosis,
less than 15% of patients have surgically resectable tumors, which is one
reason why it has the highest mortality rate among all cancer types.
Emerging evidence has pointed the importance of circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) in the spread of cancers and metastasis. CTCs are believed to be
the most promising cancer biomarkers available in blood. Recent reports
also show that these cells could be a good surrogate biomarker for not
only prognosis, but also for cancer detection and development of
personalized treatment. We have developed an inertial microfluidic-based
separation technique for high throughput and label-free isolation of
CTCs.Methods: To investigate the isolation efficiency of our technology
before running cancer patients samples, PANC-1 cells labeled with cell
tracker dye were spiked into 1 mL of whole blood. Using this optimized
platform we isolate CTCs from pancreatic cancer patients, followed by
downstream analysis. CTCs are characterized using immunocytochemistry for
heterogeneity studies among CTC population.Results: Our microfluidic
device consists of a size based separation platform in which CTCs are
separated from other blood components. This high throughput label free
separation device was designed and developed by our lab. After more than
20 generations of device revision, an optimized flow rate of 2.5 ml/min
for PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cell line has yielded a 95% recovery of
these cells from whole blood, with cancer cells traveling to the second
outlet and 80% of the White Blood Cells (WBC) to the first outlet. We
have successfully isolated CTCs from over 100 pancreatic cancer patients.
Among several patients we were able to characterize different
subpopulations using the epithelial marker CK-19 and EpCAM, and the
EMT-like marker ZEB1.Conclusion: The implementation of our engineering
technology to the study of pancreatic cancer can present novel ways to
confront major hurdles in cancer research, such as early detection and
the lack of effective therapeutics. The isolation and expansion of CTCs,
the heterogeneous population of cells that promote metastasis, can
provide meaningful information to elucidate the process of pancreatic
tumorigenesis to preempt its fatal result.

