Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer cell adhesion and degradome interact to drive
metastasis


Although primary breast tumors are detected early in most cases, it is
inevitable that many patients remain at risk for future recurrence and
death due to micrometastases. We investigated the metastatic process with
a focus on matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) within the degradome and on
integrins and E-cadherin within the adhesome. We have performed
comparative studies with a set of non-metastatic (BT-474, T47D, MCF7)
versus metastatic (MDA-MB-231, SUM149, SUM159) human breast cancer cell
lines and xenografts. Experiments were performed to measure growth rate,
migration, invasion, and colony formation. Immunoblotting and
immunohistochemistry revealed a higher expression of MMPs and
heterophilic cell adhesion molecules integrin 1 and lower expression of
homophilic cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin in the metastatic tumor
cells and xenografts. Using zymography and activatable fluorescent probes
for noninvasive imaging of MMPs, we demonstrated that metastatic breast
cancer cells and tumors displayed an elevated degradome activity as
compared to non-metastatic cells and tumors. Cell adhesion and cell
aggregation assays showed an increased heterophilic and decreased
homophilic adhesion in the metastatic models. Inhibiting MMPs reduced the
expression of integrin 1, and stimulating integrin 1 resulted in higher
MMP activities in metastatic cells. Re-expression of E-cadherin in
metastatic cells led to a reduced expression of active integrin 1.
Finally, circulating breast cancer cells and cells from lung metastatic
nodules generated from metastatic tdTomato-fluorescing breast cancer
cells displayed a reduced expression of active integrin 1 and less
epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) marker protein S100A4. Our
results indicate that proteolytic ECM remodeling by MMPs and cell
adhesion by integrin 1 and E-cadherin are interdependent processes that
control transformation from benign to invasive carcinoma and are critical
for metastasis.

