Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COSMIC: Combining the world's knowledge of somatic mutation in
human cancer


COSMIC, the Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer
(http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk) is the world's largest and most
comprehensive online resource for exploring the impact of somatic
mutations in human cancer. Live since 2004, the 71st release (Nov 2014)
describes over 2 million mutations in more than 1 million tumour samples
across most human genes. To emphasise depth of knowledge on known cancer
genes, mutation information is curated manually from the scientific
literature, allowing very precise definitions of disease types and
clinically relevant patient details. Combination of over 20,000 published
studies gives substantial resolution of how mutations and phenotypes
relate in human cancer, providing insights into the stratification of
populations and new diseases behind known biomarkers. Conversely, our
curation of over 15,000 cancer genome studies emphasises knowledge
breadth, driving discovery of new unrecognised cancer-driving hotspots
and molecular targets. Our high-resolution curation approach is globally
unique, giving substantial insight into molecular biomarkers in human
oncology. For example, BRAF is well characterized in skin melanoma,
transiently treatable with inhibitors such as Vemurafenib. It is also
well known in colorectal cancer, which is largely non-responsive to BRAF
inhibitors. COSMIC's unique approach demonstrates the impact of BRAF
mutations in much less well-known cancers, for instance, Hairy Cell
Leukaemia (89% of samples mutated) and Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis
(49%), both of which respond remarkably well to BRAF inhibitors. Converse
to skin melanoma, our curations suggest BRAF has a minimal role in Uveal
melanoma (6% of Uveal tumors mutated for BRAF), with higher mutation
rates in other genes (particularly GNA11, BAP1 and GNAQ), suggesting
different mechanisms behind this disease.In addition to describing over
two million coding point mutations across cancer, COSMIC also details
more than six million non-coding mutations, 10,567 gene fusions, 61,232
genome rearrangements, 702,652 abnormal copy number segments, and more
than 6 million abnormal expression variants. All these types of somatic
mutation are annotated to both the human genome and each affected coding
gene, then correlated across disease and mutation types. As increasing
amounts of genetic data are gathered into COSMIC across human cancer, our
annotations are beginning to emphasise events with a higher impact in
cancer, highlighting the more functional coding mutations and major
amplifications and deletions. This concept of high-impact data is being
extended across the entire COSMIC system, much more strongly defining
genes and mutations which drive oncogenesis.

