Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Are cancer cells redefining macrophages aggressiveness


Breast cancer is one of the deadliest diseases in the United States. One
in 5 women will be diagnosed with breast cancer during their lifetime and
about 1 in 8 will develop invasive breast cancer. It has been shown that
breast tumor's microenvironment contains large amounts of immune cells.
In some cases macrophages account for up to 50% of the tumor mass.
Macrophages belong to the innate immune response, and are mainly
responsible for initiating the inflammatory response and engulfing
foreign particles and cellular debris. They respond to multiple signals,
which means they can perform a variety of functions ranging from
phagocytosis to tissue repair. Classically-activated macrophages,
referred as M1, are responsible for a pro-inflammatory response.
Alternatively activated macrophages or M2 macrophages secrete
anti-inflammatory cytokines, help in tissue repair, and are often
involved in angiogenesis. In this project, we studied the effects of
MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines on macrophages. We
stimulated U937 cells with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) for 24
hours. We checked for differentiation, morphology changes, and adhesion
at 24 hours. We incubated 500,000 differentiated U937 cells with 500,000
cells (either MCF-7 or MDA-MB-231) or 500uL spent media from either MCF-7
or MDA-MB-231 cells for 48 hours. After the 48 hour incubation period,
fluorescent microspheres were added to the macrophages and incubated for
1 hour to allow for phagocytosis. Macrophages were ran in a flow
cytometer to quantify microsphere engulfment. We found about 50% decrease
in engulfment activity in macrophages exposed to MCF-7 or MDA-MB-231
cells or media. When we analyzed the population of macrophages that
engulfed 3+ beads, for MDA-MB-231 treatment, we found a 57% and 79%
engulfment reduction in macrophages for media and cells respectively. For
the MCF-7 treatment, the population of macrophages that engulfed 3+ beads
was reduced 54% and 65.4% for media and cells respectively. We also
studied gene expression of these macrophages to account for macrophage
phenotype (M1 or M2). We found up-regulation on IL-10, down-regulation on
TNF-, and down-regulation on IL-12 suggesting that macrophages show a
M2-like phenotype. This proposes that the tumor microenvironment
(including cells, cytokines, cell vesicles, etc.) may be influencing the
decrease in macrophage aggressiveness. Further studies will allows us to
learn more in depth all of the interaction of cancer cells, their
microenvironment, and macrophages.

