Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Possible later age of breast cancer onset for Hispanic BRCA1
carriers with the protective rs140068132-G allele


Hispanic women in the U.S. have lower incidence of breast cancer compared
to Non-Hispanic Whites (NHW). A genome-wide association study (GWAS) of
breast cancer in Hispanics reported a relatively strong protective
variant near the ESR1 gene, only observed among women with Indigenous
American ancestry (rs140068132-A/G). The study also reported lower
mammographic density among women who were homozygous for the Indigenous
American variant (G) and a stronger protective effect for estrogen
receptor negative (ER-) breast cancer. In the present study, we assessed
if this variant had an effect on age at breast cancer diagnosis among
Hispanic BRCA1 carriers, who commonly present with ER- disease. We
combined data from four studies of Hispanic BRCA1 mutation carriers with
breast cancer: the Clinical Cancer Genetics Community Research Network
(CCGCRN; N = 152), Northern California Breast Cancer Family Registry
(NC-BCFR, N = 27), and two studies in Latin America, one from Colombia (N
= 33) and one from Chile (N = 27). We genotyped the rs140068132 variant
using a Taqman assay following the recommended protocol. We used a
non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis equality-of-populations rank test to
evaluate if the age of breast cancer diagnosis was associated with the
rs140068132 polymorphism among BRCA1 carriers. We conducted separate
analyses of Hispanic women from California and women from Colombia and
Chile. For the California studies, we also had information on ovarian
cancer status and were able to conduct stratified analyses. Among 239
BRCA1 carriers, we observed 201 homozygous AA, 36 heterozygous AG, and 2
missing genotypes, with an overall allele frequency of the G allele of
7.6%. We did not find a statistically significant effect of rs140068132
on age at diagnosis among Hispanic BRCA1 carriers overall. However, we
found a suggestion of later age at diagnosis, with median age at
diagnosis of 39.8 years (33-46 years) in AA homozygous compared to 44
years (34-50 years) in heterozygous (p value = 0.1) women from
California. Among women without ovarian cancer either before or after the
breast cancer diagnosis, the difference in age at breast cancer diagnosis
by genotype was slightly stronger (p value 0.06). We did not observe an
association among the patients from Colombia and Chile. Studies of BRCA
mutation carriers are often limited by selection for breast cancer cases,
thus there may be a bias against enrollment of BRCA carriers with the
protective allele in the present analysis. The observed suggestion of a
difference in age at diagnosis in the samples from California, similar to
genome-wide identified variants that have been shown to have an effect
among BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers, warrants further investigation.

