Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct expression of PMEPA1 and its isoform, STAG1 in prostate
cancer


Introduction and Objectives: We have defined a feedback loop model for
the regulation of androgen receptor (AR) degradation by the hormone
inducible PMEPA1 through NEDD4 E3 ubiquitin ligase in prostate cancer
(CaP). The characterization of PMEPA1 at the mRNA levels indicated five
isoforms transcribed from distinct promoters within the PMEPA1 locus.
Analysis of the amino acid sequences of all PMEPA1 isoforms indicated
variations at the N- and/or C- termini of the protein. Based on the
prediction algorithms, PMEPA1 is classified as a type 1b transmembrane
protein. In order to better understand the role of PMEPA1 in CaP, this
study focuses on comparative analyses of the two most abundant isoforms
of PMEPA1 in human CaPs.Methods: Androgen responsive LNCaP and VCaP cells
were used to evaluate the expression levels of annotated PMEPA1 isoforms
by quantitative RT-PCR and by RNA-Seq. For validating of the two most
abundant forms, the isoform 1 (Solid Tumor Associated Gene 1, STAG1) and
the isoform 2 (PMEPA1), prostate tumor and benign epithelial cells were
laser capture microdissected (LCM) from frozen OCT embedded prostate
tissue. Total RNA was isolated from the LCM samples of 117 matched normal
and prostate tumor specimens (N = 234) and were analyzed by TaqMan-based
QRT-PCR for PMEPA1 isoform-1(STAG1) and isoform 2 (PMEPA1), AR and PSA.
Correlation of the gene expression data with clinical and pathological
characteristics, including biochemical recurrence (BCR) were examined by
Kaplan-Meier survival and Cox proportional hazard model analyses.Results:
We have identified four mRNAs transcribed from the PMEPA1 locus in VCaP
and LNCaP transcriptomes. Among these, STAG1 was highly expressed
followed by PMEPA1 in both VCaP and LNCaP cells. In CaP patients tumor
(T) over normal (N) mRNA expression of STAG1 did not have significant
correlation with transcript levels of PMEPA1, AR or PSA. Patients with
increased STAG1 mRNA level had a shorter time to BCR in a Kaplan-Meier
analysis (P = 0.018). The correlation of increased STAG1 expression in
tumor cells with increased chance for BCR was supported by multivariable
Cox proportional hazard model (P = 0.0015; HR = 4.3).Conclusions: As
expected from the distinct transcription initiation origin, there were no
significant correlation between the T/N expression of PMEPA1 (isofom 2)
and STAG1 in human CaP specimens. Intriguingly, STAG1 (isoform 1)
expression was an independent predictor of BCR after radical
prostatectomy that warrants further investigations.Keywords: PMEPA1,
STAG1, AR, prostate cancer, biochemical recurrenceFunding: This study was
supported by NIH grant, CA106653 to SS and AD and CPDR, USUHS,
HU0001-10-2-0002 to DGM.

