Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic characterization of follicular lymphoma transformation


Follicular lymphoma (FL), a form of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, is the second
most common form of B-cell lymphoma and remains incurable in the majority
of cases despite recent advances in therapy. Following an indolent phase,
50% of patients suffer disease transformation to an aggressive form of
lymphoma (transformed FL; tFL). This dramatic switch in disease behavior
typically culminates in rapid deterioration and patient demise.
Accordingly, much effort has been focused on understanding the genetics
of transformation and has resulted in the identification of key genetic
lesions (e.g. MYC activation, loss of p53, cell cycle controls,
activation of NFKB (TNFAIp3/A20)). However, exactly how tumor metabolism,
which is altered by these genetic lesions, contributes to disease
aggressiveness is not known and therefore the metabolic changes that
occur upon FL transformation are poorly understood. We have developed a
murine model of FL transformation that recapitulates key genetic and
pathological aspects of human FL (Oricchio et al, 2011). This model
allows us to study the genetics and metabolism of FL transformation.
Specifically, we will systematically define the metabolic profiles of
genetically defined murine lymphomas that represent different stages of
transformation and cross-compare metabolic changes to primary patient
samples. This ensures focus on clinically relevant changes and provides
metabolic annotation of distinct tumor genotypes. This study builds on
the complementary strengths of the Le lab (Johns Hopkins) in cancer
metabolism and the Wendel lab (MSKCC) in modeling FL genetics. Our study
shows that MYC transformed FL exhibits a distinct metabolic profile as
compared to indolent follicular lymphoma or normal spleen. The most
altered pathways examined thus far are glycolysis and amino acid
metabolism. We believe that the transformed lymphoma is more reliant upon
glycolysis and may be exhibiting aerobic glycolysis, also known as the
Warburg Effect. This is substantiated from previous experiments in which
a Burkitt lymphoma line, also overexpressing MYC, was found to have
altered glycolytic intermediates levels. We next plan to examine the
metabolic profile of other transformed follicular lymphoma models of
known genetic backgrounds. We will also cross validate the transformed
mouse models with follicular lymphoma patient samples of known genetic
backgrounds to identify potential metabolic markers.

