Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA located in frequently deleted locus 8p21 regulates
prostate cancer EMT, progression and metastasis


Background The most frequent alteration in the prostate oncogenome is the
loss of chromosome (chr) 8p21 that has been traditionally associated with
the loss of homeodomain protein, NKX3.1, that plays important role in
prostate carcinogenesis. Genomic deletions of this region increase
significantly with tumor grade and are associated with poor prognosis in
prostate cancer (PCa) suggesting the critical involvement of this region
in PCa progression. Recent genomic studies suggest that this region
harbors alternative tumor suppressor genes apart from NKX3.1. However,
the identity of these tumor suppressors has largely remained elusive.
Here we propose a novel, paradigm shifting hypothesis that this
frequently deleted locus is associated with a microRNA (miRNA) gene-
miR-3622a- that is lost in prostate cancer and play an important
mechanistic role in PCa progression and metastasis by regulating
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).Methods miRNA expression
profiling was performed in microdissected PCa tissues and matched
adjacent normal regions by real-time PCR. To understand the functional
significance of miR-3622a in PCa, we performed knockdown studies using
non-transformed prostate epithelial cell line and overexpression studies
employing PCa cell lines. We also examined the role of miR-3622a in vivo
in an orthotopic mouse model of PCa. Further, we explored the regulatory
mechanisms underlying the loss of this miRNA in prostate cancer by
performing methylation analysis and copy number analysis on PCa tissues
and cell lines.Results Expression analyses in a cohort of clinical
specimens showed that miR-3622a expression is widely attenuated in
prostate cancer and is significantly correlated with poor survival
outcome and tumor progression. Functional studies showed that this miRNA
inhibits PCa EMT, progression and metastasis by repression of TFs of
SNAIL and ZEB family. In vivo studies demonstrated that miR-3622a
overexpression reduces tumor progression significantly. Analyses of the
regulatory mechanisms underlying low miR-3622a expression in clinical
tissues and prostate cell lines suggested that apart from genomic
deletions of this locus, epigenetic events such as DNA methylation
regulate its expression coordinately.Conclusions Here we provide the
first direct evidence that a miRNA gene located in a frequented deleted
region of prostate cancer inhibits prostate cancer EMT, progression and
metastasis. We propose that frequent loss of miR-3622a at chr8p21 region
by genetic and epigenetic mechanisms leads to induction of EMT that in
turn, promote PCa progression and metastasis. This study has potentially
significant implications in prostate cancer field as it supports a novel
concept that seeks to connect a long standing observation of frequent
loss of a chromosomal region with a novel miRNA in prostate cancer.

