Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The p16/ARF intron 2 imbedded long non-coding RNA CAI2 is highly
expressed in tumor cells and modulates chromatin structure


Over the last several years it has become apparent that the majority of
the genome is transcribed with the number of non-coding RNA (ncRNA) genes
significantly higher than the number of protein-encoding genes. The 9p21
locus harbors a number of tumor suppressor genes including p15, p10, ARF,
chARF, p16, p16, p12 and p16-ACT, and the long ncRNAs ANRIL and p15AS.
The abundance of regulatory genes in such a short span perhaps accounts
for why this region is frequently inactivated in many cancers. We report
on the novel lncRNA CAI2, a non-conserved gene imbedded in p16/ARF intron
2 with homology that is limited to the upper primates. CAI2 is a single
exon, RNA pol II regulated gene with a poly A signal localized in p16/ARF
exon 3, yet independent of the p16/ARF poly A signal. The expression
levels of CAI2, p16 and ARF genes are highly correlated, being low in
normal tissue but high in most tumor cell lines with an intact 9p21
locus. Notably, high levels of CAI2 expression are associated with
advanced-stage of neuroblastoma, one of the few tumor types where 9p21
alterations are infrequent and where p16 is paradoxically overexpressed.
CAI2 expression was associated with a poor outcome in neuroblastoma,
suggesting value as a biomarker of tumor cell stage and patient outcome.
Despite the strong correlation between CAI2 and p16 expression, CAI2 is
independently regulated and is expressed in cell lines deleted or
epigenetically silenced for p16, ARF and even p15. In response to serum
deprivation, CAI2 levels rise rapidly in normal mononuclear cells, but
slowly in tumor cell lines, suggesting that CAI2 is also a
stress-response gene. CAI2 levels also rise in response to
chemotherapeutic insult such as etoposide treatment. The NMB7
neuroblastoma cell line is one of very few neuroblastoma cell lines to
express CAI2 at low levels. During passage, this cell line undergoes
morphological changes, proliferates faster and exhibits an increase of
more than 100-fold in CAI2 expression, though a concomitant decrease in
Tyrosine Hydroxylase expression suggests the changes are not due to
differentiation. Consistent with this, Retinoic Acid treatment, part of
standard neuroblastoma therapeutic regimen known to induce neuroblastoma
cell differentiation, slightly decreased CAI2 expression. As many lncRNAs
regulate chromatin states, we considered epigenetic roles for CAI2 in
gene regulation. RNA Immunoprecipitation revealed that CAI2 interacts
with H3K27me3, a recruiter of Polycomb Repressive Complex 1 (PRC1) that
modulates chromatin structure and gene expression. As many advanced stage
neuroblastomas and neuroblastoma cell lines highly express p16, we
speculate that CAI2 binding to H3K27me3 may modulate chromatin structure
and regulate expression at the 9p21 locus.

