Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular imaging of tumor energy metabolism as an early indicator
of anticancer drug efficacy in small animal models


Targeted cancer therapy aims to block key signaling pathways that are
critical for tumor cell growth and survival. The blockage eventually
results in cell death via apoptosis and eventual tumor growth
suppression. This strategy has proven to be safe and efficacious, and the
FDA has approved several targeted therapeutics in the past decade.
Encouraged by the success in clinical development, many academic and
pharmaceutical researchers are in active pursuit for the improvement of
next generation targeted anti-cancer drugs. As a result, many new
chemical and biological entities are emerging from initial screening of
in vitro, in vitro and/or in silico selection processes. From the
perspective of drug development, it poses a great challenge on the next
stage of in vivo validation and demands a robust, accurate, and efficient
method for assessment of these candidates in living animal models.Cancer
cells are known to have abnormally increased cellular metabolism, and in
the early stages of effective drug treatment, cancer cells show decreased
metabolism and proliferation. These events occur prior to overt signs of
cell destruction. Bioluminescence imaging technology can be used to
detect changes in tumor viability in response to targeted therapy when
using luciferase-expressing tumor cell lines. However, with many
therapeutic treatments, particularly high-dose treatments, these early
changes in tumor viability cannot be seen by bioluminescence imaging. We
applied non-invasive near infrared (NIR) fluorescence imaging to address
this challenge, using PerkinElmer's imaging agents; highly metabolic
cancer cells have accompanying elevations in receptors for bombesin and
transferrin on their surface that can be readily imaged using our
fluorescent bombesin- and transferrin-targeted imaging agents
(BombesinRSense 680 [BR680] and Transferrin-Vivo 750 [TV750]). In this
report, we demonstrate the synergistic use of fluorescence (FLI) and
bioluminescence imaging (BLI) to profile tumor metabolism and vitality,
respectively, in response to a targeted anti-cancer drug, sorafenib.
Sorafenib is a clinical approved tyrosine kinase inhibitor effectively
blocking VEGFR, PDGFR and Raf signaling in cancer. At a higher daily dose
of 110 mg/kg, the drug effective decrease viability of HCT116-luc human
colon xenograft tumors within 48 hours, coinciding with the loss of both
BR680 and TV750 fluorescent signals in tumor. Interestingly, at a lower
dose of 40 mg/kg, BR680 signal reduction can still be observed early
within 48 hours, but no significant reduction of tumor viability was
observed until a week later. These results suggest the potential use of
metabolic fluorescent imaging agents as robust, efficient and early
biomarkers for pre-clinical development of targeted cancer drugs.

