Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dosing schedule effects on combination activity from first
principles


IntroductionFinding the ideal dosing schedule to optimize efficacy while
balancing toxicity is a challenge for single agent clinical development,
and takes on added complexity for combinations. In this work, we use
theoretical modeling to investigate the role of schedule in determining
combination activity, and propose a novel method of using dosing schedule
to identify the in vivo interaction strength pre-clinically.MethodsTo
evaluate the effect of schedule on tumor growth inhibition, we built a
dynamic pharmacokinetic (PK)/effect (E) model to simulate tumor volume as
a function of plasma concentration of a drug combination. The PK of each
single agent was simulated using a one compartment model, and the
inhibition of tumor growth rate was modeled as the sum of single agent
effects and their product scaled by an interaction coefficient. We first
simulated this model for various relative dosing frequencies and offsets
between the two drugs to understand the relationship between schedule and
activity for a synergistic combination. We next assessed the accuracy of
estimating the interaction parameter using the activity discrepancy
between in- and off-phase dosing schedules versus a traditional
isobologram analysis. Using Fourier analysis of single agent PK profiles,
we then identified an efficient study design to identify both the
interaction parameter and optimal relative dosing schedule of the two
drugs.ResultsSimulation of the PK/E model with parameter sweeps of dosing
frequency and offsets led to a phase plot for combination activity
showing peaks and valleys related to the concomitant exposure of the two
drugs. From this, we surmised the interaction could be estimated based on
the difference in tumor growth inhibition between schedules, and a
comparison of in- and off-phase schedules performed well compared to
isobologram analysis. Fourier analysis of simulated PK profiles of the
two drugs revealed the concomitance as a function of dosing offset, and
the pattern was maintained in the simulated activity. Using a study
design with only four dose groups with different dosing offsets, we show
it is possible to determine both the interaction coefficient (comparing
one group at the peak and one at the valley of concomitance) and any
effect of dose-ordering (two groups at different offsets but with the
same predicted concomitance). Additionally, we demonstrate the difference
in activity between synergistic and additive combinations manifests as
beat frequencies present in the frequency spectrum, another possibility
to identify synergy.ConclusionsWhile combination development offers
unique challenges, building an understanding of the PK/E relationship
from first principles provides a framework to investigate drug
interaction effects. The insights gained from studying combinations in
vivo with a pre-clinical scheduling study may provide translational
guidance on clinical questions around concomitance and dose-ordering.

