Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultrasound-stimulated microbubble based biomechanical enhancement
of radiation cell death: Role of acid sphingomyelinase and ceramide


We have recently demonstrated that mechanical perturbation of endothelial
cells from ultrasound-stimulated microbubbles (USMB) results in enhanced
tumour radiosensitivity. When exposed to high-power ultrasound,
microbubbles release energy in the form of local mechanical forces on the
membranes of surrounding endothelial cells. Upon irradiation, rapid
vascular shutdown occurs followed by extensive secondary tumour cell
death. Our hypothesis is that USMB-based endothelial membrane
perturbations produce ceramide via a sphingomyelinase (ASMase) pathway,
and act synergistically with radiation to enhance overall tumour
response. Here we investigate the role of the SMase-ceramide pathway on
USMB-based endothelial radiosensitization.Experiments were carried out in
wild type (C57BL/6) and ASMase knockout mice, implanted with a
fibrosarcoma line (MCA-129). Animals were treated with radiation doses
varying from 0-8 Gy alone, or in combination with USMB. In addition, we
pre-treated a subset of animals with sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P).
Treatments with USMB consisted of a 16-cycle tone burst at a 500 kHz
center frequency and 570 kPa using a 2.86 cm element diameter ultrasound
transducer. The total insonification time was 750 ms over 5 minutes.
Microbubbles (Lantheus Medical) were injected through the tail-vein
resulting in a blood volume concentration of 1% or 3% (v/v). Treatment
response was assessed with Doppler ultrasound acquired at 3, 24 and 72
hrs using a VEVO770 preclinical ultrasound system. The vascularity index
(VI) was used to quantify power Doppler data. Staining using ISEL,
ceramide and CD31 immunohistochemistry of tumour sections was used to
complement ultrasound images, and to confirm results.Results suggest a
link between USMB-based radiosensitization and ASMase. We observed an
average decrease of 30% in the VI by 3 hrs in wild type tumours receiving
8 Gy radiation alone. In contrast, those receiving 8 Gy and USMB resulted
in a VI decrease of up to 50%. Similarly, while 2 Gy alone induced
minimal effects on the tumour vasculature, combining it with USMB
resulted in up to 40% decrease in the VI by 24 hrs. Vascular effects were
significant (p We have recently demonstrated that mechanical perturbation
of endothelial cells from ultrasound-stimulated microbubbles (USMB)
results in enhanced tumour radiosensitivity. When exposed to high-power
ultrasound, microbubbles release energy in the form of local mechanical
forces on the membranes of surrounding endothelial cells. Upon
irradiation, rapid vascular shutdown occurs followed by extensive
secondary tumour cell death. Our hypothesis is that USMB-based
endothelial membrane perturbations produce ceramide via a
sphingomyelinase (ASMase) pathway, and act synergistically with radiation
to enhance overall tumour response. Here we investigate the role of the
SMase-ceramide pathway on USMB-based endothelial
radiosensitization.Experiments were carried out in wild type (C57BL/6)
and ASMase knockout mice, implanted with a fibrosarcoma line (MCA-129).
Animals were treated with radiation doses varying from 0-8 Gy alone, or
in combination with USMB. In addition, we pre-treated a subset of animals
with sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P). Treatments with USMB consisted of a
16-cycle tone burst at a 500 kHz center frequency and 570 kPa using a
2.86 cm element diameter ultrasound transducer. The total insonification
time was 750 ms over 5 minutes. Microbubbles (Lantheus Medical) were
injected through the tail-vein resulting in a blood volume concentration
of 1% or 3% (v/v). Treatment response was assessed with Doppler
ultrasound acquired at 3, 24 and 72 hrs using a VEVO770 preclinical
ultrasound system. The vascularity index (VI) was used to quantify power
Doppler data. Staining using ISEL, ceramide and CD31 immunohistochemistry
of tumour sections was used to complement ultrasound images, and to
confirm results.Results suggest a link between USMB-based
radiosensitization and ASMase. We observed an average decrease of 30% in
the VI by 3 hrs in wild type tumours receiving 8 Gy radiation alone. In
contrast, those receiving 8 Gy and USMB resulted in a VI decrease of up
to 50%. Similarly, while 2 Gy alone induced minimal effects on the tumour
vasculature, combining it with USMB resulted in up to 40% decrease in the
VI by 24 hrs. Vascular effects were significant (p < 0.05) and sustained
for up to 72 hrs after combined treatments. These resulted in significant
cell death. In contrast to wild type animals, ASMase knockout mice, or
wild-type mice receiving S1P, were found to be generally resistant to the
anti-vascular effects of radiation and USMB. We noted minimal cell death
and no vascular shutdown following any of the treatments in those
experimental groups. Overall conclusions drawn from this work point to a
mechanotransduction-like effect that results in endothelial
radiosensitization.

