Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The involvement of EMT in heparanase promoted bone-metastasis in
multiple myeloma


Multiple myeloma (MM), a hematologic malignancy, preferentially grows in
bone marrow and frequently metastasizes between bones. Our previous
studies have demonstrated that heparanase (HPSE), an enzyme overexpressed
in MM cells, promotes MM bone-metastasis and progression. However, the
mechanism of HPSE action is unclear. Epithelial-mesenchymal-transition
(EMT) is a process giving epithelial cells the features of mesenchymal
cells which has been shown to be critical in the metastatic process of
epithelial-origin tumors. Although MM is not an epithelial-derived
malignancy, MM cells indeed express epithelial marker E-cadherin and
mesenchymal marker Vimentin, and have the ability to adhere to and
interact with the extracellular matrix (ECM). In the present study, we
determined the role of EMT in HPSE-induced MM bone metastasis via: (1)
Using Western blot to evaluate the expression of EMT markers E-cadherin,
Vimentin and Fibronectin in MM cells that were transfected with empty
vector (HPSE-low) or HPSE cDNA (HPSE-high), as well as MM cells treated
with recombinant human HPSE (rHPSE) for 48hrs; (2) staining HPSE and EMT
markers on tumors established by HPSE-low or HPSE-high cells in SCID mice
(n = 10), and on bone marrow biopsies of 35 MM patients; (3) knocking
down Vimentin in HPSE-high-luc MM cells by Vimentin shRNA (VIM k/d-luc
cells) and testing bone homing of VIM k/d-luc cells in SCID mice by i.v.
and s.c. injection of these cells. Tumor growth and bone-metastasis was
determined by measuring human kappa levels (a soluble marker of MM cells)
in mouse sera and weekly bioluminescent imaging.Western blots
demonstrated HPSE-high and rHPSE treated MM cells expressed significantly
higher levels of the mesenchymal markers Vimentin and Fibronectin, and
lower levels of the epithelial marker E-cadherin, compared to HPSE-low or
PBS treated MM cells. Significantly increased expression of Vimentin and
decreased expression of E-cadherin was revealed in tumors formed by
HPSE-high cells compared with the tumors formed by HPSE-low cells.
Immunostaining of bone marrow biopsies of MM patients indicated HPSE and
Vimentin expression in MM cells have a significant positive correlation
(rs = 0.414, p = 0.014). Finally, both SCID-i.v. injection and SCID-s.c.
injection models showed that knocking down mesenchymal marker Vimentin in
HPSE-high MM cells successfully blocked HPSE-induced bone metastasis and
inhibited tumor growth, compared with mice bearing shRNA control
HPSE-high MM cells.In conclusion, our studies demonstrated (1) EMT-like
features are a novel biomarker of poor prognosis in MM; (2) HPSE promotes
MM metastasis to bone and disease progression, at least in part, through
inducing EMT-like features in MM cells; (3) Inhibition of Vimentin
expression in MM cells impairs HPSE-induced tumor growth and bone
metastasis.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

