Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of exportin 1 (XPO1) by selinexor (KPT-330)
synergistically suppresses growth of neuroblastoma in combination with
doxorubicin or bromodomain inhibition


Background: Neuroblastoma is a childhood malignancy of the peripheral
nervous system, and most patients with high-risk disease are not cured.
Exportin 1 (XPO1; Chromosome Region Maintenance 1 Protein Homolog, CRM1)
is the sole nuclear exporter of TP53, FOXO1, RB1, CDKN1A, and other
critical tumor suppressor proteins (TSPs) and is abundantly expressed in
high-risk neuroblastoma. In addition, these major tumor suppressor
proteins are rarely mutated in neuroblastoma, and thus inhibition of XPO1
is a rational anti-neuroblastoma strategy. The orally bioavailable drug
selinexor (KPT-330) is a selective inhibitor of nuclear export that forms
a slowly reversible covalent bond to XPO1 and inhibits XPO1-mediated
nuclear export. We previously showed that selinexor showed cytotoxicity
with sensitivity independent of MYCN amplification status resulting in
decreased Myc family protein levels and activation of apoptotic pathways.
In addition, flank xenograft models and mouse models of metastatic
disease showed significant tumor growth inhibition across multiple
neuroblastoma cell lines.Methods: A time course microarray experiment was
performed to discover temporal effects across four neuroblastoma cell
lines following exposure to selinexor. Models were selected at the
extremes of drug sensitivity and expression profiles were generated after
8 and 24 hours of selinexor exposure.Results: The intersection of linear
and K-clustering methods revealed genes that followed a consecutively
increasing or decreasing profile with respect to time. There were 4 genes
in common to all cell lines, 29 genes across 3 cell lines, and 88 between
the two most sensitive cell lines. Based off these observations, MAST3,
GPRIN1, SMACRD2, and SENP5 were further explored in a larger cohort of
neuroblastoma cell lines. In addition, gene set enrichment analysis
revealed a doxorubicin-sensitivity expression profile in more resistant
lines after exposure to selinexor. The combination of selinexor and
doxorubicin resulted in synergistic increases in cell death. Chromatin
remodeling genes were significantly disrupted by selinexor across all
models, and the combination of selinexor and the bromodomain inhibitor
JQ1 resulted in decreased MYCN protein levels and also showed evidence of
synergy in vitro.Conclusions: Expression profiling of neuroblastoma cell
lines following selinexor exposure has uncovered candidate biomarkers of
activity and sensitivity. The potent synergy with other chemotherapeutic
agents provides evidence for rational drug combinations. Selinexor is
currently in pediatric phase 1 trials and has the potential to be rapidly
translated into a novel therapeutic approach for children with
neuroblastoma.

