Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of microRNAs from exosomes of bulk and stem cells
from prostate cancer by next generation sequencing


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are related with cancer initiation, metastasis,
resistance and recurrence, by regulating their environment in different
ways, including the release of exosomes that modify surrounding and
distant cells. Exosomes contain, among other molecules, miRNAs. By
identifying the entire spectrum of miRNAs included in exosomes from
prostate cancer (PCa) cells by next generation sequencing (NGS), is
possible to identify miRNAs specifically released by CSCs, and those
related with microenvironment regulation.We stablished adherent primary
cell cultures (bulk cells) from PCa tissue from 5 patients. Later, from
these cells we obtained CSCs enriched prostatospheres. From bulk and CSCs
cultures we purified exosomes by precipitation (ExoQuick-TC, SBI) for
miRNAs extraction (mirVana, Ambion). Quality of miRNAs was assessed by
Bioanalizer (Agilent Technologies). NGS was performed in the Illumina
platform (MiSeq, Illumina) according to manufacturer instructions.
Bioinformatic analyses were carried out by Sistemas Genmicos.
Overexpressed miRNAs were detected in plasma exosomes by TaqMan miRNA
Assays (Lifetechnologies).We identified 1839 miRNAs in exosomes, and 223
species were differentially expressed between bulk and CSCs, but only 26
significantly. Nineteen of them were known species including 6 that were
overexpressed in CSCs respect to bulk cells. These miRNAs target genes
related with cell differentiation, matrix remodeling and genic
expression. From all miRNA detected, 3 were highly overexpressed among
all, and were detected in exosomes isolated from plasma of men with
prostatic disease.Our study extensively characterizes the miRNA from
exosomes of PCa cells. Exosomes contain high diversity of miRNAs,
different in CSCs and bulk cells, suggesting differential regulation of
their microenvironment. From these, CSCs exosome-related miRNAs could be
released to bloodstream and play a role in PCa progression and metastasis
(FONDECYT 11121525/1140417).

