Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computational characterization of microRNA-mediated association
between obesity and cancer


MicroRNAs control gene expression in many fundamental cellular processes
that are associated with pathogenesis of human cancer and obesity.
However, the microRNA-mediated association between cancer and obesity is
largely under-investigated, in spite of the emerging evidences indicating
1) a higher risk of pancreatic cancer and breast cancer in obese people
2) a novel mechanism to understand the links, e.g. upregulation of
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) in overweight individuals may
promote pancreatic cancer 3) IGF-1 regulation of tumor suppressive miRNAs
such as miR-15b, miR-98, miR-195, miR-200b, let-7c and let-7g. Based on
limited knowledge of the relationship between obesity and cancer, we have
applied an omics-driven integrative approach to systematically study the
regulatory role of microRNA in cancer and obesity and to elucidate the
association between these two types of diseases from the microRNA
regulation perspective. Specifically, we have collected large-scale
genomics data on obesity and three types of cancer, namely, pancreatic
cancer, gastric cancer and ovarian cancer in this analysis. Given the
fact that most of current methodologies for microRNA target prediction
are largely dependent on computational identification of the static
binding sites on mRNAs according to the sequence and structural features,
they often produce a considerable number of false positive results. To
tackle this problem, we have developed a new approach for identifying
microRNA-mRNA interactions using sophisticated bioinformatics techniques
in cooperation with genomics information. The dynamic binding feature has
been taken into consideration, which integrates both cooperative and
competitive manners of microRNA-mRNA binding in human. Our analysis has
identified a list of obesity-associated microRNAs, part of which shows
strong association with cancers under investigation. Through our new
target prediction, a few such disease-related microRNAs are found to
participate in various metabolic processes, such as cellular acetyl-CoA
and lipid metabolism pathway (e.g. miR-103, miR-200a, miR-30c and
miR-107) and cancer pathways (e.g. miR-519, miR-27a/b, miR-96 and
miR-143) through regulating their targets. Moreover, we have discovered
alterations of the microRNA-mRNA interaction network across cancer
progression through dynamic modeling. Overall, we demonstrates such
integrative study using computational modeling and omics information can
effectively facilitate the discovery of disease-related microRNA
regulation network and bring new insights into understanding of the
association between obesity and cancer.

