Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome sequencing reveals the multicentric nature of multiple
synchronous lung adenocarcinomas


Background: Genomic heterogeneity of lung cancers from different patients
has been well documented, reflecting distinct genetic background and
different carcinogen exposures. On the other hand, our recent study has
demonstrated limited heterogeneity between different regions within the
same tumor (Zhang, et al. Science, 2014: 346:256-9). Multiple synchronous
lung cancer (MSLC) is a unique set of lung cancers with multiple tumors
arising in the context of identical constitutional genetic background and
shared carcinogen exposures. MSLC presents a clinical dilemma as to
whether they are intrapulmonary metastasis or true multicentric primary
tumors. Methods: We applied whole-genome/exome sequencing to 15 tumors
plus one metastatic regional lymph node from six patients with multiple
synchronous lung adenocarcinomas. All nonsynonymous mutations were
subjected to mass spectrometry or Sanger sequencing for validation.
Results: A total of 876 nonsynonymous mutations were detected and
validated. With the exception of a metastatic lymph node that shared 52
mutations with the primary tumor suspected as its origin by
clinicopathological assessment, all tumors, including one highly
suspicious for intrapulmonary metastasis, showed distinct genomic
profiles, indicating that all MSLC in this study are consistent with true
multicentric primary lung adenocarcinomas. When compared to TCGA study,
these synchronous multifocal tumors are no more similar than similarly
staged lung adenocarcinomas from unrelated patients. Although similar
mutational spectra were observed between different tumors from some
patients, at least three patients showed significantly different
mutational spectra in different tumors indicating multiple mutational
processes in play during the development of individual, independent
tumors within the same lung subjected to common exposures on the same
constitutional genetic background. Interestingly, the same known cancer
genes including EGFR, KRAS and STK11/LKB1 demonstrated distinct
mutational patterns in different tumors from the same patients suggesting
that even on the identical genetic background and common exposures,
development of multicentric lung adenocarcinomas can be driven by
distinct molecular events in different tumors, but there may be
constraint around certain genes/pathways critical for carcinogenesis in
specific patients. Conclusions: The dramatic genomic heterogeneity in
multiple synchronous lung adenocarcinomas within the same patients with
identical constitutional genetic background and environmental exposures
indicates the complexity of lung adenocarcinoma carcinogenesis. These
data suggest that detailed molecular profiling up to genome-scale
analyses of all lesions may be necessary for MSLC to distinguishing
multiple primary lung cancers from true intrapulmonary metastasis and
accurately exploit biomarker-driven management.

