Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro analysis of T cells effector vs regulatory function in
patients with metastatic melanoma and its correlation to patient outcome


Back ground: Metastatic melanoma is an aggressive tumor of the epidermal
melanocytes with high mortality rates in patients. The anti- melanoma
immune response has been extensively studied while immune based treatment
strategies are showing promising activity in melanoma patients. A number
of immune characteristics are evaluated as predictive and prognostic
biomarker.Methods: With approval from Institution's regulatory board, we
analyzed T cells from peripheral blood of 12 metastatic melanoma patients
for baseline frequency of T cells reacting against melanoma related
Mart-1 27-35 epitope. We expanded CD 8+ T lymphocytes by exposing them to
the Mart-127-35 epitope pulsed on autologous mononuclear cell derived
antigen presenting cells ex vivo. Using magnetic bead separation
techniques, we also isolated from the peripheral blood CD4+CD25+
(naturally occurring Treg) and CD4+CD25- cells and analyzed in vitro
proliferation of CD4+CD25- T cells in response to anti CD3 antibody and
PHA and analyzed the effects of CD4+CD25+ cells on their proliferation.
Finally, we induced CD4+ T cells into Th1 or Th2 type responses and
analyzed their function in vitro.Results: There was variable degrees of
CD8+effector T lymphocytes responses to the antigens in in vitro cultures
from all the patients studied and their cytokine profile noted. The
percentage of nTreg activity in the PBL averaged about 5% that
demonstrated suppression of the CD4+CD25- T cells proliferation in
response to anti CD3 antibody in about 50% of patients, but lacked
suppression activity in about 50% of the patients. It was possible to
generate Th1 type cells from all the patients but generation of the Th2
type cells was limited to 50%. Favorable immune characteristics were
observed in majority of the patients who are responding to the
treatment.Conclusion: Our findings suggest that in vitro functional T
cell immune characteristics could be examined in patients diagnosed with
metastatic melanoma. Examination of these characteristics in larger
number of patients diagnosed with melanoma might provide predictive
marker for immune intervention.

