Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the impact of hypoxia-induced changes in splicing on
tumor microenvironment


Hypoxia is a cellular stress that influences both normal and tumor
development. For many types of cancer, including head and neck
carcinomas, tumor hypoxia shows a strong positive correlation with poor
patient outcome. In order to gain a deeper understanding of the biology
of the tumor microenvironment, we are investigating how transcription is
differentially regulated in hypoxic compared to normoxic regions of
tumors. Previously, we reported that the expression of over 500 genes
differs between hypoxic and normoxic tumors. However, there has not yet
been a global sequencing analysis of tumors to characterize
hypoxia-induced differences in transcriptional regulation at base-pair
resolution. To achieve this, we developed a method to isolate RNA from
hypoxic regions of tumors in vivo and used this method to carry out deep
RNA-sequencing of normoxic and hypoxic regions of human head and neck
tumors grown in mice. Corresponding in vitro samples from cells cultured
in 0.5% oxygen conditions (in which the only stress was hypoxia) were
also sequenced. We used these data to examine which genes showed changes
in isoform-level expression and to define hypoxia-mediated changes in
splicing. The data revealed more than 1,000 hypoxia-responsive mRNA
isoforms. Using a combined informatics approach to analyze both
differential expression of alternatively spliced exons and entire
isoforms, we observed that many hypoxia-induced isoforms showed changes
in alternate last exons, retained introns and 3 untranslated regions
compared to the isoforms expressed in normoxic cells. Moreover, we
observed global repression of genes involved in RNA processing and
splicing, which may represent one mechanism to shift patterns in splicing
and lead to expression of stress-induced isoforms. Differentially
expressed isoforms include genes that play critical roles in fundamental
processes involved in hypoxic adaptation, such as the translation,
glycolysis and cell cycle. Therefore, we propose that alternative
splicing plays a role in mediating tumor growth and survival in hypoxic
conditions by regulating stress-responsive pathways.

