Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significance of SPARC expression as the predict factor of the
therapeutic effect of nab-PTX in gastric cancer


Background:Gastric cancer is the most frequent cancer-related cause of
death second only to lung cancer. Despite recent advances in chemotherapy
and surgical techniques, 5-year survival for advanced or metastatic
gastric cancer is around 5-20%. Chemotherapy is the standard palliative
treatment in patients with an acceptable clinical status because it
provides better survival and quality of life than supportive care. In
Japan, paclitaxel (PTX) is commonly used as second-line chemotherapy for
gastric cancer patients in practice, based on experiences with breast
cancer and non-small-cell lung cancer. Nanoparticle albumin-bound
paclitaxel (nab-PTX) is an intravenously administered microtubule
inhibitor. Recently, nab-paclitaxel has become an option for patients
with unresectable or recurrent gastric cancer who experienced progression
despite 1st line chemotherapy. Secreted protein, acidic and rich in
cysteine (SPARC) has the ability to bind albumin with a high affinity,
therefore patients with SPARC expressing tumors could benefit from
nab-paclitaxel treatment as the drug can be transported to the tumor in a
targeted way and accumulates within at the tissue. SPARC was reported to
be overexpressed in a variety of human malignancies, including glioma,
colorectal, breast, esophageal, prostate, bladder, and thyroid
carcinomas. SPARC plays multi-faceted contextual roles depending on the
cancer type and whether it is produced by cancer cells or surrounding
stromal cells. It has been reported that immunostaining of SPARC in these
tumors revealed increased frequency and intensity of SPARC expression in
fibroblasts rather than in tumor cells. Overexpression of the SPARC gene
was observed in human gastric cancer, too.It has been suggested that this
might lead to a higher effectivity and a better tolerance for the drug
with less side effects. The aim of this study is to clarify the role of
SPARC in gastric cancer.Method: The SPARC expression was assessed in 15
gastric cancer samples following surgical resection or biopsy used by
immunohistochemistry.Result: The progression-free survival was longer in
the SPARC high expression group than in the SPARC low expression group (p
= 0.013). Overall survival was not significantly different in
experimental groups. The incidences of grade 3 or 4 adverse effects were
not different in both experimental groups.We also compared the expression
of SPARC between biopsy samples before chemotherapy and resected sample
after chemotherapy of the same cases. It was no difference in the SPARC
expression of the samples before and after the chemotherapy.Conclusion:
The expression of SPARC has been suggested to be a useful indicator for
predicting the therapeutic effect of nab-PTX in gastric cancer.

