Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A primary cell-based assay to identify initiating oncogenic events
in neuroblastoma


The pediatric cancer neuroblastoma (NBL) forms from immature cells of the
sympathetic nervous system (SNS). A prominent category of high-risk NBL
is MYCN amplification with loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at 1p36. This LOH
includes the chromatin remodeling factor, CHD5, a proposed tumor
suppressor of NBL and can include ARID1A, a component of the SWI/SNF
chromatin remodeling complex.To identify genetic changes that cooperate
with MYCN amplification in initiating NBL we developed an assay based on
oncogenic transformation of neural crest cells (NCCs), the progenitors of
the SNS. Isolation of NCCs from E9.5 mouse embryos resulted in a
population that was 90% positive for the NCC markers p75, Sox10, and
Ascl1, suggesting a highly enriched population.Next, we tested the
ability of N-Myc infected NCCs to form tumors in vivo. In pilot
experiments using NCCs with compromised p53, we obtained subcutaneous
tumors following injection of NCCs in nude mice. Resulting tumors were
diffusely positive for neuronal markers such as synaptophysin, MAP2, and
Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH). Tumors also contained focal areas of divergent
differentiation characteristic of melanoma, Schwannoma, and osteosarcoma,
all cancers that can arise from NCC lineages. To our knowledge, this is
the first report of cancer from transformed primary neural crest cells.To
more closely model NBL genetics, we replaced loss of p53 with shRNA to
knockdown CHD5 and ARID1A prior to N-Myc infection. Injection of the
resulting NCCs also resulted in tumor formation in nude mice. Tumors were
uniformly positive for neuronal markers including TH and Ascl1, as well
as Phox2B, a marker of undifferentiated NBL, and with no evidence of
other cancers. Future studies in understanding the interactions of N-Myc
overexpression with loss of these chromatin remodeling factors should
further increase our understanding of NBL development.

