Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biodistribution and therapeutic effects of a monoclonal antibody
against Eph receptor A10 in a breast cancer xenograft model


IntroductionHER2-targeting antibodies and anti-hormone drugs are
effective agents for breast cancer patients. However, such treatments are
not applicable to triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) which don't
express HER2, estrogen, and progesterone receptors. Thus, effective
molecular targets for TNBC are urgently needed. In this respect, we
searched for new targets using a proteomics approach and identified Eph
receptor A10 (EphA10) to be highly expressed in breast cancer including
TNBCs, compared with normal breast tissues. Moreover, we previously found
that EphA10 is expressed in testis but not in other normal tissues, thus
suggesting that EphA10 could become a promising therapeutic target in
breast cancer patients. Here, we developed a novel monoclonal antibody
(mAb) against EphA10 and showed that it accumulates in the tumor and has
anti-tumor properties in a breast cancer xenograft model.Materials and
MethodsCharacterization of the anti-EphA10 mAb; Specificity of the mAb
was evaluated by mAb binding to EphA family proteins (EphA1-A8, A10).
Affinity of the mAb was analyzed by surface plasmon resonance
method.Tumor accumulation analysis of anti-EphA10 mAb;
Alexa647-conjugated anti-EphA10 mAb or control mAb were administrated
intravenously and observed daily using an in vivo imaging
system.Anti-EphA10 mAb treatment in a mouse xenograft model; A mouse
model was generated by orthotopic transplantation of EphA10 expressing
MDA-MB-435 (TNBC) cells. When the tumor size reached approximately a
volume of 100 mm3, anti-EphA10 mAb and control mAb were administrated
intraperitoneally twice a week.Results and DiscussionThe results showed
that the anti-EphA10 mAb had an affinity for EphA10 in the nanomolar
range. Moreover, the mAb specifically bound to EphA10 but not to the
other EphA family proteins; therefore, our mAb had the same specificity
and affinity for EphA10 as other existing antibody drugs. Furthermore,
the mAb also displayed cross-reactivity with mouse EphA10, suggesting
that we could evaluate the mAb in a mouse model. The administration of
the fluorescein-labeled mAb to the mice bearing EphA10-positive breast
tumors showed that the anti-EphA10 mAb accumulated in the tumors to a
greater extent than the control mAb and tended to be restricted to the
tumor. Furthermore, tumor growth was significantly suppressed in the
mAb-treated mice in a dose-dependent manner. On the other hand, body
weight and biochemical markers of tissue damage did not change between
the mAb or control mAb-treated groups. These data indicate that our mAb
might become a promising therapeutic tool for treating EphA10-positive
breast cancers.ConclusionOur anti-EphA10 mAb mainly accumulated in
EphA10-positive tumor cells and showed anti-tumor effects. We believe
that these findings will contribute to the development of a novel drug in
the treatment of breast cancer patients refractory to traditional
therapies.

