Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cdk1 coordinates telomere replication by regulating the temporal
recruitment of telomerase and the CST complex


Telomeres are nucleoprotein structures that cap the ends of linear
chromosomes. They ensure genomic stability and complete replication of
the genome. The enzyme telomerase mediates telomere elongation.
Considering that telomerase is up-regulated in about 90% of human cancers
and telomerase-mediated telomere elongation is significantly deregulated
in cancers, insights from our study can be used to target the telomere
replication machinery for therapeutic intervention in cancer. In our
study, we use budding yeast to understand the mechanism of telomere
maintenance. In budding yeast, Cdk1 coordinates the cell cycle-dependent
elongation of telomere by telomerase. Cdk1 phosphorylates the
telomere-specific ssDNA binding protein, Cdc13, which promotes the
recruitment of telomerase to the telomere and thereby, telomere
elongation. Cdc13 is also an integral part of the CST (Cdc13-Stn1-Ten1)
complex, which provides the protective cap at the telomere and inhibits
telomere elongation by telomerase. Therefore, the telomere length
homeostasis is balanced between these two telomerase-extendable and
CST-unextendable states. However, the cellular signaling that regulates
the switch between these two states is largely unknown. Here we show that
Cdk1 phosphorylates Stn1 sequentially to that of Cdc13. Cdk1-dependant
phosphorylation of Stn1 is essential for telomere maintenance in vivo,
CST stability and the inhibition of telomerase at the telomeres. By
controlling the timing of Cdc13 and Stn1 phosphorylation during cell
cycle progression, Cdk1 coordinates the recruitment of telomerase
holoenzyme and CST complex to the telomeres respectively and hence the
switch between the telomerase-extendable and CST-unextendable states of
the telomeres in budding yeast. With increasing evidence of human CST
complex being involved in telomere length maintenance, the results from
my study will provide insights into telomere homeostasis in humans and
its disruption in cancers.

