Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-6 signaling modulates cisplatin resistance in non-small cell
lung cancer via up-regulations of anti-apoptotic and DNA repair
associated molecules


Background: Tumors often demonstrate initial responses to cisplatin-based
chemotherapy in treating non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but
eventually develop resistance and limit the success of therapy. We
investigated whether IL-6 signaling is important in developing
cisplatin-resistance of NSCLC and explore if targeting IL-6 signaling may
increase tumor sensitivity to cisplatin.Methods: We performed in vitro
cytotoxicity test using the IL-6 knocked down and scramble (sc) control
A549 and H157 NSCLC cell lines (A549IL-6si/sc and H157IL-6si/sc). We also
performed in vivo mice studies by establishing xenografts using the
A549IL-6si/sc cell set. We next examined the mechanism by which IL-6
mediates cisplatin resistance by performing studies of qPCR, Western
analyses, and applying inhibitors of intracellular signaling molecules.
Finally, we independently developed the cisplatin resistant A549
(A549CisR) and H157(H157CisR) cell lines and investigated whether
targeting IL-6 signaling using a neutralizing antibody of IL-6 could
prime these cicplatin-resistant cells to increase the sensitivity to
cisplatin.Results: The in vitro survival tests revealed that cisplatin
was more cytotoxic to the IL-6 knocked down A549IL-6si and H157IL-6si
cells than sc control cells. In in vivo mice studies, we consistently
observed more effective tumor regression in A549IL-6si cells-derived
xenografts than sc cells-derived tumors (control) after cisplatin
treatments. In mechanistic studies, we found that expressions of the
anti-apoptotic proteins (Bcl-2 and Mcl-1) and the molecules associated
with DNA repair (ATM, CHK1, TP73, p53, and ERCC1) were significantly
increased upon cisplatin treatment in A549sc and H157sc cells, but not in
IL-6si cells of A549 and H157. The molecular inhibitor studies further
revealed that the activation of signaling pathways, such as Stat3, Akt,
MAPK, and Erk, was responsible for the up-regulation of these molecules.
Further, when we treated cisplatin resistant-A549 and H157 cell lines
(A549CisR and H157CisR) with a neutralizing antibody of IL-6, we observed
increased cell cytotoxicity.Conclusions and Impact: Our data support that
the IL-6 signaling may be critical in conferring NSCLC cell resistance to
cisplatin. In addition, we demonstrated that targeting IL-6 signaling
could overcome the established acquired cisplatin resistance. Our
observation supports a possible strategy to overcome cisplatin resistance
through targeting IL-6 signaling or its downstream molecule(s) in
treating NSCLC.

