Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RUNX3 knockdown inhibited oral cancer-induced bone destruction via
reducing TGF--dependent responses


Oral cancer ranks among the top 10 commonly diagnosed cancers. It easily
invades underlying jaw bones and causes severe psychological and physical
problems. When oral cancer cells infiltrate into jaw bones, survival rate
of the patient is significantly decreased. Therefore, attention has been
focused on molecular diagnostics and targeted therapy for oral
cancer-induced bone destruction. However, there remains a lack of
reliable biomarkers that can distinguish between bone-invasive and
non-invasive oral cancers despite the recent advances in the field. The
Runt domain transcription factor, RUNX3, has been found to be a tumor
suppressor in many cancers through promoting transforming growth factor-
(TGF-)-induced growth inhibition. However, the role of RUNX3 in oral
cancer remains controversial. Here, we investigated whether RUNX3 has a
critical role in oral cancer-induced bone destruction. In mice inoculated
with RUNX3 knockdown oral cancer cells, tumor growth and bone destruction
were significantly reduced. In oral cancer cells, RUNX3 knockdown
significantly reduced cell viability in TGF--stimulated cells compared to
unstimulated cells. Cell cycle analysis revealed that RUNX3 knockdown
induced G1-specific cell-cycle arrest in the cancer cells without TGF-
treatment but G2-specific cell-cycle arrest in response to TGF-
treatment. RUNX3 knockdown inhibited cell migration and invasion in the
absence or presence of TGF- by changing both basal and TGF--induced level
of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition-related proteins. Furthermore,
RUNX3 knockdown reduced parathyroid hormone-like protein expression, a
major osteolytic factor, in oral cancer cells with or without TGF-. We
confirmed that RUNX3 knockdown in cancer cells decreased receptor
activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand/osteoprotegerin ratio in
osteoblastic hFOB1.19 cells treated with cancer cell-derived conditioned
media. In summary, RUNX3 promotes oral cancer-induced bone destruction by
enhancing interactions between cancer cells and bone cells as well as
promoting malignant behavior of cancer cells. Therefore, RUNX3 may be a
useful biomarker and potential therapeutic target for bone invasion of
oral cancer.

