Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Balance shift between error-free and error prone DNA double-strand
break repair as a novel mechanism of radiosensitization by nucleoside
analogs


Nucleoside analogs (NAs) represent a large group of anticancer drugs,
several members of which have been shown to sensitize cells to ionizing
radiation (IR). Among the lesions induced in cells by IR, the DNA
double-strand break (DSB) is considered to be the most detrimental.
Therefore we focused on interactions between NAs and pathways of DSB
repair.We opted for post-irradiation treatment with NAs to avoid
complications arising from redistribution of cells throughout the cycle
prior to IR exposure. We compared the effects of 4h treatments post-IR
with vidarabine (ara-A), fludarabine (F-ara-A) or gemcitabine (dFdC) on
the survival of A549 lung carcinoma cells. We found that post-irradiation
treatment with ara-A and F-ara-A, but not dFdC, resulted in cell
radiosensitization to killing. Radiosensitization by ara-A was superior
to that by F-ara-A. We employed immunofluorescence detection of
IR-induced foci and I-SceI-based reporter cell lines to identify the
pathways of DSB repair that are inhibited by ara-A and cause the observed
radiosensitization. We found that the formation of IR-induced Rad51-foci
was compromised by ara-A suggesting inhibition of homologous
recombination repair (HRR). Repair of I-SceI-induced DSBs by HRR was also
suppressed by ara-A. Furthermore, A549 cells deprived of Rad51 by RNAi
could not be efficiently radiosensitized by ara-A. On the other hand, we
could not detect impairment by ara-A of non-homologous end-joining
(NHEJ), as measured by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) at high
doses of IR (20 Gy). Notably, we observed an increase in the frequency of
mutagenic NHEJ events in several I-SceI-based repair reporter systems,
indicative of processing by error-prone repair pathways such as
alternative/backup NHEJ (B-NHEJ). In addition, we could show that
treatment with ara-A induces a dramatic increase in B-NHEJ in plateau
phase Lig4-/- MEFs. Treatment with F-ara-A also inhibited HRR, but was
less proficient in promoting mutagenic NHEJ.We conclude that inhibition
of HRR and promotion of B-NHEJ represent two important mechanisms of
radiosensitization by NAs. The strong impact of ara-A on both of these
repair pathways underpins its superior radiosensitizing potential.
Targeting of both HRR and B-NHEJ may provide a promising new strategy for
radiosensitization.

