Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGM-2 mediated downregulation of fibronectin during TGFb-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in lung cancer NCI-H358 cells


The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), which converts epithelial
cells into an elongated, motile, and invasive phenotype, is considered to
be a critical step in the dissemination of tumor cells. During EMT, the
loss of E-cadherin (ECad) and upregulation of N-cadherin (NCad) or
fibronectin (FN) have been most frequently described. FN binds integrin
Alpha5 and is known for its upregulation in aggressive tumor cells. In
addition, FN binds tissue transglutaminase (TGM-2) with high affinity (in
nM) and plays a role in TGM-2 secretion. TGM-2, a multifunctional enzyme
with transamidation or crosslinking, and GTP/ATP binding activities, is
up-regulated in various malignant diseases, including lung cancer. In
breast, cervical and ovarian cancers, TGM-2 has been shown to play a role
in chemotherapy resistance and tumor metastasis during induction of EMT.
TGM-2 overexpression results in the loss of epithelial features,
up-regulation of mesenchymal markers, increased migration and invasion,
and up-regulation of transcriptional repressors (e.g., ZEB1/2, Snail)
known to mediate the EMT process. However, most of these studies were
performed in aggressive tumor cells. In this study, we investigated the
role of TGM-2 in TGFbeta-induced EMT process using NSCLC H358 cells. H358
cells express high levels of epithelial genes and are relatively
resistant to TGFbeta induced EMT when compared to A549 cells.
Particularly, H358 expresses barely detectable TGM-2 and FN. To
investigate the role of TGM-2 during TGFbeta induced EMT, we constructed
three isogenic cell lines with doxycycline (Dox)-inducible TGM-2 or C277A
(an inactive mutant of TGM-2 with no transamidating activity) using
InVitrogen's Flp-in TRex system. We found continuing treatment of 10
ng/ml TGFbeta for 6 days inducing H358 flp-in (vector control) cells to
mescenchymal phenotype as demonstrated by the disappearance of Ecad, and
the increased expression of NCad and FN. Under the same condition, Dox
inducible TGM-2 and C277A facilitate the disappearance of Ecad, and
Occludin and the appearance of Ncad. However, the expression of FN was
undetectable in H358/TGM-2 and H358/C277A cells. As a result, H358/TGM-2
and H358/C277A remained localized and failed to migrate as demonstrated
by a scratch wound healing assay. Seahorse mitochondria stress assay also
demonstrated H358/TGM-2 and H358/C277A utilize more oxidative
phosphorylation pathway than glycolytic pathway when compared with
H358/flp-in, an indication of shifting cells to more normal phenotype. In
summary, overexpression of TGM-2 (or inactive C277A mutant) inhibited the
expression of FN and resulted in a less migratory H358 cells. Our results
demonstrated that the role of TGM-2 during EMT in less aggressive
epithelial cells such as H358 is different from its role in promoting EMT
in other aggressive tumor cell; the suppression of FN might be a critical
factor.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

