Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of the pre-cancer genome atlas (PCGA) for squamous
cell lung carcinoma


Squamous cell cancer (SCC) of the lung is a leading cause of cancer
mortality in the US, due to late stage diagnosis and lack of effective
treatments. Lung SCC arises in the epithelial layer of the bronchial
airways and is often preceded by the development of premalignant lesions
(PMLs). The molecular events involved in the progression of PMLs to lung
SCC are not clearly understood and not all PMLs go on to form carcinoma.
By molecularly characterizing PMLs and non-lesion areas in the airway of
individuals with PMLs we hypothesize that we will be able to identify
early events in the process of lung carcinogenesis that lead to SCC. We
used next-generation sequencing to profile bronchial brushings and
biopsies obtained from high-risk smokers undergoing lung cancer screening
by auto-fluorescence bronchoscopy and CT at the Roswell Park Cancer
Institute in Buffalo, NY. For each subject (n = 26), we sampled the
PML(s) and the mainstem bronchus repeatedly over time (394 +/- 170 days)
with serial bronchoscopies (5 +/- 3 biopsies/subject) as the PML
progressed towards or regressed away from frank malignancy. mRNA-Seq (n =
192) and miRNA-Seq (n = 183) were performed on the endobronchial biopsies
and brushings and exome-Seq was performed on blood DNA from these
subjects. RNA-seq data was aligned to the hg19 and gene/transcript levels
were summarized using RSEM/Ensembl 74 or Bedtools/ mirBase 18. Single
nucleotide variants were quantified using a modified PRADA pipeline and
GATK. We identified gene and miRNA expression changes as well as pathways
that are associated with biopsy histological grade as well as
progressive/stable disease. H&E stains of PMLs clustering with lesions of
dissimilar grades were examined to show that molecular classification
provides complementary information to pathological grading. Genes altered
in the normal airway in the presence of a PML were significantly
concordantly enriched with genes identified in the biopsies demonstrating
a strong relationship between the PMLs and the field of injury. In
addition, cancer-associated missense and loss-of-function mutations were
detected in PMLs. One individual had cancer-associated mutations at the
initial time point in a single moderate dysplastic PML. Upon resampling
40 months later, the PML had progressed to an in situ carcinoma while
gaining additional mutations. Furthermore, an adjacent PML at this second
time point, also in situ carcinoma, had a significantly overlapping set
of mutations with the original lesion suggesting that clonal expansion
and invasion occurred between temporal samplings. The multiomic
characterization of PMLs reveals gene and miRNA expression changes and
somatic mutations that are associated with the lesion severity and
progressive disease. These studies provide insights into the early
molecular events in the process of lung carcinogenesis and may be
predictors of lung cancer risk and lesion progression as well as novel
candidates for targeted or preventive therapy.

