Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The butyrate transporter SLC5A8 is a tumor suppressor in colon
linked to dietary fiber content


Dietary fiber has long been known to protect against colonic inflammation
and colon cancer. Short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) such as butyrate
generated in colonic lumen by bacterial fermentation of dietary fiber
mediate most of these protective effects, but the underlying molecular
mechanisms are poorly understood. We examined the role of the plasma
membrane transporter Slc5a8 in the beneficial effects of these bacterial
metabolites against colitis and colon cancer. Slc5a8 is expressed on the
luminal membrane of colonic epithelial cells and also in mucosal immune
cells including the antigen-presenting dendritic cells. The transporter
mediates the entry of SCFAs into colonic epithelium from the lumen and
also into dendritic cells in the lamina propria. We interrogated the role
of the transporter in colon by comparing the function of dendritic cells
and progression of experimentally induced colitis and colon cancer
between wild type mice and Slc5a8-null mice. Since the amount of SCFAs
generated in colonic lumen depends on the fiber content in the diet, we
used two different diets, one with optimal fiber content (FC diet) and
the other with no fiber (FF diet). These studies have shown that Slc5a8
is obligatory for butyrate-dependent inhibition of histone deacetylases
in colonic epithelium and dendritic cells and also for the maintenance of
the intestinal barrier function; but this obligatory need for the
transporter is evident only when the mice are fed FF diet. The
transporter is dispensable with FC diet. Compared to wild type mice,
Slc5a8-null mice exhibit increased susceptibility to dextran sulfate
sodium-induced colitis and azoxymethane/dextran sulfate sodium-induced
colon cancer, again only with FF diet and not with FC diet. Butyrate
induces the immunosuppressive enzymes indoleamine dioxygenase 1 (IDO1)
and aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A2 (Aldh1A2) in dendritic cells in an
Slc5a8-dependent manner. This is corroborated by the decreased expression
of these two enzymes in the colon of germ-free mice compared to
conventional mice. IDO1 and Aldh1A2 play a critical role in dendritic
cells to maintain an immunosuppressive phenotype. Butyrate, which induces
the expression of both enzymes, promotes the ability of dendritic cells
to convert naive T cells into FoxP3-positive immunosuppressive Tregs and
also their ability to suppress interferon-gamma-secreting
pro-inflammatory T cells. As such, Slc5a8-null mice have decreased Tregs
and increased IFN-gamma-positive T cells in colon. We conclude that
Slc5a8 may be dispensable in colon under dietary conditions associated
with high fiber content when the luminal concentrations of SCFAs are
high, but the transporter is indispensable for protection against colonic
inflammation and colon cancer with a diet containing suboptimal fiber
which results in decreased concentrations of SCFAs in the lumen. Thus,
Slc5a8 is a conditional tumor suppressor in colon linked to dietary fiber
content.

