Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A combination of cisplatin and 2-deoxy-d-glucose results in
synergistic cell death in both normoxia and hypoxia by the attenuation of
autophagy


Background and objectivesHypoxia contributes markedly to the drug
resistance of glial tumors which in themselves are highly refractory to
therapy. 2-Deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) has been tried in several tumors
including glioma, and is known to induce autophagy as a protective
response. Cisplatin (CP) has been earlier used as a second line drug and
is a prototype DNA damaging agent. Since these drugs are well studied as
single agents and are known to have a limited value, we studied the
efficacy and mechanism of action of their combination in glial cell lines
(p53 wild type A172 and p53 mutant type LN229) under both normoxia and
hypoxia.MethodsThe cell lines A172 and LN229 (which vary in p53 function)
were used in the study. Cell viability was determined by MTT assay for
the combination of 2-DG and CP and combination index was determined.
Caspase assay as well as Propidium Iodide (PI) staining was performed to
determine the efficacy of the synergistic combination. Autophagic and
apoptotic markers were analyzed by Real time PCR and confirmed through
western blotting. Effect on cellular metabolism was confirmed through ATP
assay. Cell survival after exposure to the combination of 2-DG and AKT
inhibitor (LY294002) which is known to reverse autophagy was also
studied.ResultsThe combination of 2-DG with CP was synergistic under both
normoxia and hypoxia in A172 and LN229 cell lines with combination index
less than 1. Reduction of autophagy induced by 2-DG and induction of
apoptosis by the combination in both normoxia and hypoxia was further
confirmed by caspase activity and PI staining. Autophaghic markers
(Beclin1 and conversion of LC3 I to II form) were reduced and apoptotic
markers (Bax, caspase 3 and cytochrome c) were upregulated in the
combination of CP and 2-DG in both normoxic and hypoxic conditions. ATP
activity was further reduced in the combination of CP and 2-DG as
compared to single agent. Combination of LY294002 (which is known to
inhibit autophagy) with 2-DG also reduced cell survival in both normoxia
and hypoxia in both the cell lines. The critical role of autophagy was
confirmed by the analysis of appropriate markers.Interpretation and
ConclusionsThis in vitro study has been able to identify a combination of
known drugs which is more effective than either single agent alone in
cell lines of different genetic backgrounds under varying degrees of
tissue oxygenation. The mechanism of a reduction in autophagy resulting
from this combination could be further generalized to identify other
rational drug combinations.

