Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cis-mediated regulation of mRNA translation initiation of p53
family members


The p53 family of transcription factors comprises several proteins
produced by three genes, TP63, TP63 and TP73, through alternative
promoters and splicing, that exhibit critical functions for cell
homeostasis and act as prominent tumor suppressors. The p53 pathway is
often activated in stress conditions during which the global
cap-dependent translation is inhibited. Although p53 protein is highly
regulated at post-translational level, cells maintain continuous p53
protein synthesis also taking advantage of the presence of two Internal
Ribosome Entry Sites (IRESs) elements residing within the p53 mRNA. The
first IRES is located in the 5UTR of the full-length isoform, the second
is located into the protein-coding region and mediates the translation of
a N-p53 isoform. IRES elements are complex RNA structural elements in
5UTRs that can mediate cap-independent initiation of translation under
stress conditions. Even though an IRES activity has been already
established for p53, no studies are available for p63 and p73
transcripts. This work is mainly focused on the regulation of translation
initiation efficiency for the p53 family members p63 and p73. For this
purpose, we have cloned the 5UTR from human full-length p53 (as positive
control), TA-p63, TA*-p63, TA-p73 and N-p63 and N-p73 transcript isoforms
in a bicistronic reporter construct (named pRuF, where R stands for
Renilla reniformis luciferase cDNA, u for 5UTR tested and F for Firefly
luciferase cDNA). The c-Myc and p16 or -globin and -actin 5UTRs were
included as positive or negative controls. We performed gene reporter
assays in MCF7 and HCT116 p53 wild-type cancer cell lines and in their
derivative clones with reduced (shp53) or null (p53-/-) p53 expression.
It has been previously demonstrated that p53, through transcriptional
repression of fibrillarin (FBL) is able to negatively impact on rRNA
methylation pattern and IRES-dependent translation, hence p53 status can
be an important factor to unmask cap-independent translation initiation.
Results showed that TA*-p63, TA-p73 and N-p73 can potentially contain an
IRES-like sequence in their 5UTR. Translation stimulation was increased
in MCF7 cells with p53 was knocked-down. Treatment with the mTOR
inhibitors Rapamycin and Torin1, that inhibit cap-dependent translation,
led to an enhanced relative activity of the putative IRES contained in
TA-p73. Interestingly, differences in responses of the various 5UTRs
between the two cell lines were observed. Based on these initial
observations, the identification of different and tissue specific RNA
binding proteins targeting the distinct p63 and p73 5UTRs will be pursued
with the aim to dissect a mechanism regulating mRNA translation
initiation that could play an important role in development as well as in
cancer progression.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

