Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOX4 interacts with EZH2 and HDAC3 to suppress microRNA-31 in
invasive esophageal cancer cells


Tumor metastasis is responsible for 90% of cancer-related deaths. A
strong link between microRNA dysregulation and human cancers has recently
been established. However, the molecular mechanisms through which
microRNAs regulate metastasis and cancer progression remain unclear. We
analyzed the reciprocal expression regulation of miR-31 and SOX4 in
esophageal squamous and adenocarcinoma cell lines by qRT-PCR and Western
Blotting using overexpression and shRNA knock-down approaches. Here we
report that SOX4 promotes esophageal tumor cell proliferation and
invasion by silencing miR-31 via activation and stabilization of a
co-repressor complex with EZH2 and HDAC3. We demonstrate that miR-31 is
significantly decreased in invasive esophageal cancer cells compared to
non-invasive cell lines, while upregulation of miR-31 inhibits growth,
migration and invasion of esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) and squamous
cell carcinoma (ESCC) cell lines. miR-31, in turn, targets SOX4 for
degradation by directly binding to its 3-UTR. Additionally, miR-31
regulates EZH2 and HDAC3 indirectly. SOX4, EZH2 and HDAC3 levels
inversely correlate with miR-31 expression in ESCC cell lines. Ectopic
expression of miR-31 in ESCC and EAC cell lines leads to down regulation
of SOX4, EZH2 and HDAC3. Conversely, pharmacologic and genetic inhibition
of SOX4 and EZH2 restore miR-31 expression. We show that SOX4, EZH2 and
HDAC3 form a co-repressor complex that binds to the miR-31 promoter,
repressing miR-31 through an epigenetic mark by H3K27me3 and by histone
acetylation. Clinically, when compared to normal adjacent tissues,
esophageal tumor samples show upregulation of SOX4, EZH2, and HDAC3, and
EZH2 expression is significantly increased in metastatic ESCC tissues.
Thus, we identified a novel molecular mechanism by which the SOX4, EZH2
and miR-31 circuit promotes tumor progression and potential therapeutic
targets for invasive esophageal carcinomas.

