Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microtubule-regulated mRNA translation signaling and therapeutic
implications in cancer


Drugs that affect microtubule dynamics and function, both those that
stabilize microtubules (e.g. taxanes) and those that depolymerize them
(e.g. vincas, Eribulin) are widely used in cancer chemotherapy. However,
their mechanism of action at the molecular level and the signaling
pathways regulated by microtubule dynamics are not fully understood,
precluding chemotherapy customization to the individuals. Previously, we
have reported that microtubule dynamics control the translation of HIF-1
mRNA. We showed that treatment with microtubule-targeting drugs (MTDs)
shifts HIF-1 mRNA from actively translating polysomes to non-translating
ribosomes resulting in inhibition of HIF-1 transcriptional activity.
Using cell lines with acquired mutations at different MTD binding sites
we conclusively showed that microtubule disruption was required for the
inhibition of HIF translation. However, additional mRNAs susceptible to
MTD treatment or the exact signaling pathway that senses microtubule
disruption and leads to inhibition of translation are not known. Polysome
RNA-Seq analyses of untreated and drug treated cells has identified
additional mRNAs whose polysome association is shifted towards inactive
translation similar to HIF-1 mRNA. We are using bioinformatics analyses
to identify a common microtubule-susceptibility motif in addition to
validation experiments at the protein and pathway level. The polysome
analysis showed that protein synthesis is inhibited at the stage of
translation initiation. In an effort to better understand the underlying
mechanism of translation inhibition of HIF-1 mRNA and additional
microtubule-dependent mRNAs, we assessed 4E-BP1 protein as its
phosphorylation is a key regulator of cap dependent mRNA translation. We
observed that taxanes or Eribulin treatment hyper-phosphorylates 4E-BP1
without affecting ribosomal protein S6 (rpS6) phosphorylation. Using the
taxane-resistant breast cancer cell line MB-231/K20T which harbors an
acquired mutation at the taxane binding site of -tubulin we showed that
Taxol treatment has no effect on 4E-BP1 hyper- phosphorylation,
consistent with its lack of microtubule activity. In contrast, Eribulin,
which has a distinct binding site on tubulin, is able to overcome
taxol-resistance by fully engaging the microtubule-4E-BP1 axis.
Interestingly, in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) cells, for which treatment
with microtubule inhibitors has no clinical benefit, we didn't observe
4E-BP1 hyper-phosphorylation after taxane or Eribulin treatment, even
though microtubules were affected. These results suggest that the
microtubule-4E-BP1 axis is compromised in RCC and that there is a link
between 4E-BP1 phosphorylation and MTD efficacy. Hence, we propose that
identifying the link of 4E-BP1 dependent signaling with microtubules will
have important therapeutic implications in MTD chemotherapy.

