Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant TET1 methylation closely associated with CpG island
methylator phenotype in colorectal cancer


Inactivation of methylcytosine dioxygenase, ten-eleven translocation
(TET) is known to be associated with aberrant DNA methylation in cancers.
Tumors with a CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP), a distinct subgroup
with extensive DNA methylation, show characteristic features in the case
of colorectal cancer (CRC). The relationship between TET inactivation and
CIMP in CRCs is not well understood. The expression level of TET family
genes was compared between CIMP-positive (CIMP-P) and CIMP-negative
(CIMP-N) CRCs. Furthermore, DNA methylation profiling, including
assessment of the TET1 gene, was assessed in CRCs, as well as colon
polyps. The TET1 was silenced by DNA methylation in a subset of CRCs as
well as cell lines, expression of which was reactivated by demethylating
agent. TET1 methylation was more frequent in CIMP-P (24/55, 44%) than
CIMP-N (3/113, 3%, PInactivation of methylcytosine dioxygenase,
ten-eleven translocation (TET) is known to be associated with aberrant
DNA methylation in cancers. Tumors with a CpG island methylator phenotype
(CIMP), a distinct subgroup with extensive DNA methylation, show
characteristic features in the case of colorectal cancer (CRC). The
relationship between TET inactivation and CIMP in CRCs is not well
understood. The expression level of TET family genes was compared between
CIMP-positive (CIMP-P) and CIMP-negative (CIMP-N) CRCs. Furthermore, DNA
methylation profiling, including assessment of the TET1 gene, was
assessed in CRCs, as well as colon polyps. The TET1 was silenced by DNA
methylation in a subset of CRCs as well as cell lines, expression of
which was reactivated by demethylating agent. TET1 methylation was more
frequent in CIMP-P (24/55, 44%) than CIMP-N (3/113, 3%, P<0.0001) CRCs.
This trend was also observed in colon polyps (CIMP-P, 18/40, 45%; CIMP-N,
2/24, 8%; P = 0.002), suggesting that TET1 methylation is an early event
in CIMP tumorigenesis. TET1 methylation was significantly associated with
BRAF mutation but not with hMLH1 methylation in the CIMP-P CRCs. CRCs
with TET1 methylation have a significantly greater number of DNA
methylated genes and less pathological metastasis compared to those
without TET1 methylation (P = 0.007 and P = 0.045, respectively). Our
data suggest that TET1 methylation may contribute to the establishment of
a unique pathway in respect to CIMP-mediated tumorigenesis, which may be
incidental to hMLH1 methylation. In addition, our findings provide
evidence that TET1 methylation may be a good biomarker for the prediction
of metastasis in CRC.

