Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancer and normal pancreas water content and its impact
in metabolite quantification


The absence of early symptoms in pancreatic cancer creates a critical
need for identifying new noninvasive biomarkers. Magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (MRS) and spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) are being evaluated
in the diagnosis of several solid malignancies. A hallmark of most solid
tumors is the detection of elevated phosphocholine (PC) and total choline
(tCho). We previously observed elevated levels of tCho in several
pancreatic cancer cell lines and tumor xenografts (1). Initial single
voxel studies performed in humans suggest that the tCho signal normalized
to water may be relatively high in normal pancreas compared to pancreatic
tumor (2). Since metabolites are normalized to the water signal it is
important to determine differences in its content for accurate
quantification. Here, we quantified tCho in orthotopic and subcutaneous
Panc1 pancreatic xenografts, and in normal pancreas. 1H MRSI acquired on
a 9.4T spectrometer showed heterogeneous tCho signal in orthotopic
tumors. To further determine differences in tCho, tumor tissues and
pancreas were embedded in agarose and imaged ex vivo with 1H MRSI.
Concentration of tCho was 3.38 0.95 mM in orthotopic tumors, 1.32 0.59 mM
in subcutaneous tumors, and 1.27 0.52 mM in normal pancreas (n = 2), when
using the uncorrected water signal for normalization. Despite a much
higher tCho signal in the subcutaneous tumors, tCho concentrations were
comparable to the pancreas.We next estimated the water content of the
tumors and the pancreas as a ratio of wet weight to dry weight (measured
after 72h of lyophilization) and confirmed a significantly higher water
content in tumors compared to the pancreas (wet to dry weight ratio of 6
vs 4). A separate set of tumors were freeze-clamped and used for
high-resolution 1H MRS. Tumor and pancreas extracts were obtained using a
dual-phase extraction method and 1H MR spectra were acquired as
previously described (3). To determine the tCho concentration, peak
integrations from spectra for choline, PC and glycerophosphocholine were
compared to an internal standard. Integrals of the metabolites of
interest were determined and normalized first to the tissue wet weight.
Once the tCho concentration in tumors and pancreas was corrected for
differences in water content, a two-fold higher tCho concentration was
observed in tumor tissue compared to normal pancreas. These data support
the use of 1H MRSI that provides a tCho map rather than the placement of
single voxels to address heterogeneities in the pancreas and in
pancreatic cancers. The results highlight the importance of quantifying
water content in the calculation of metabolite concentration when
comparing different tissues.Work supported by NIH P50CA103175. (1) Penet
et al., Clin Cancer Res (2014). (2) Ma et al., Journal of computer
assisted tomography (2011). (3) Shah et al., NMR Biomed (2012).

