Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin decreases cellular ceramides in MCF-7 and MDA-MB 231
breast cancer cell lines by inhibition of ceramide synthetic enzymes


Metformin, an anti-diabetic biguanide, has been shown to have cytotoxic
and chemopreventive properties in in vitro and epidemiological studies,
respectively. Metformin's predominant cytotoxic functions may be through
activation of 5 adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK)
with subsequent cell apoptosis. Ceramides, a group of waxy lipids found
in the cellular membrane, are key players in many elements of cell
signaling, including the regulation of cell differentiation,
proliferation, and apoptosis. While traditionally thought of as being
pro-apoptotic, this notion has been questioned with the discovery of
pro-survival ceramides, as well as the demonstration that certain species
of ceramides are increased in breast cancer cells. Metformin reduces
ceramides in insulin-resistant mouse myoblasts and may reduce the
vascular complications of diabetes mellitus.MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cell lines were treated with increasing concentrations of
metformin and cytotoxicity was determined by MTT cell culture experiments
after 72 hours of drug exposure. Metformin induces cytotoxicity in these
breast cancer cells at a lowest concentration of 1.25 mM, and percentage
cytotoxicity increases in a dose-dependent manner. We then determined the
effect of metformin on cell ceramide synthesis by analyzing key ceramide
synthetic enzymes. Using western immunoblot and polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) analysis, we determined that metformin induces a reduction in
serine palmitoyl transferase, ceramide synthase, dihydroceramide
desaturase, and neutral sphingomyelinase in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells. We also analyzed the distribution of ceramides in treated
breast cancer cells using polyclonal antibodies against ceramides. By
confocal microscopy, ceramides are globally decreased in MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 cells treated with metformin.This data suggests that the
pro-apoptotic effect of metformin may be partly mediated through its
disruption of the balance of ceramides and/or through the reduction of
pro-survival ceramides within breast cancer cells. It is also possible
that the predominant ceramides in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells are pro-survival and metformin suppresses these ceramides. Further
work is necessary to characterize the ceramide content of MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 cancer cells before and after metformin treatment.

