Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HLA class I expression in a tumor is higher than that out of a
tumor: Promising new findings for antigen-specific cancer immunotherapy


Background: We have demonstrated that intratumoral peptide injection is
an attractive strategy that enhances tumor cell antigenicity by means of
additional peptide loading onto HLA class I molecules (Nobuoka D, et al.
Cancer Immunol Immunother, 62: 639-652, 2013). However, HLA class I
expression has been reported to be down-regulated in various
malignancies, which may explain why most studies on antigen-specific
cancer immunotherapy did not demonstrate a remarkable benefit.Methods:
The tissue samples of histologically confirmed hepatocellular carcinoma
were obtained from 20 patients who underwent hepatectomy. The
paraffin-embedded blocks of tumor area and nontumorous liver were
analyzed using monoclonal anti-HLA class I antibody, EMR 8-5. The fresh
tissue samples were analyzed using another monoclonal anti-HLA class I
antibody, W6/32. Moreover, HLA class I expression in a tumor and that out
of a tumor were compared in various types of cancer.Results: Among 20
patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, 14 (70%) were graded as having
high expression (++) of HLA class I molecules using EMR 8-5 in cancer
cells, whereas 15 patients (75%) were graded as having negative
expression (-) in nontumorous hepatocytes. The immunoreactivity level in
cancer cells was significantly higher than that in nontumorous
hepatocytes (P Background: We have demonstrated that intratumoral peptide
injection is an attractive strategy that enhances tumor cell antigenicity
by means of additional peptide loading onto HLA class I molecules
(Nobuoka D, et al. Cancer Immunol Immunother, 62: 639-652, 2013).
However, HLA class I expression has been reported to be down-regulated in
various malignancies, which may explain why most studies on
antigen-specific cancer immunotherapy did not demonstrate a remarkable
benefit.Methods: The tissue samples of histologically confirmed
hepatocellular carcinoma were obtained from 20 patients who underwent
hepatectomy. The paraffin-embedded blocks of tumor area and nontumorous
liver were analyzed using monoclonal anti-HLA class I antibody, EMR 8-5.
The fresh tissue samples were analyzed using another monoclonal anti-HLA
class I antibody, W6/32. Moreover, HLA class I expression in a tumor and
that out of a tumor were compared in various types of cancer.Results:
Among 20 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, 14 (70%) were graded as
having high expression (++) of HLA class I molecules using EMR 8-5 in
cancer cells, whereas 15 patients (75%) were graded as having negative
expression (-) in nontumorous hepatocytes. The immunoreactivity level in
cancer cells was significantly higher than that in nontumorous
hepatocytes (P < 0.05). Moreover, similar observations were obtained
using W6/32. In other types of cancer including intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma, ampullary carcinoma, gallbladder carcinoma,
pancreatic carcinoma, esophageal carcinoma, colon carcinoma, and breast
carcinoma, most cancer cells has higher expression of HLA class I than
surrounding normal cells.Conclusions: HLA class I expression is not so
down-regulated as previously reported. Intratumoral peptide injection is
applicable in various malignancies.

