Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting of KRAS mutation-driven tumor progression in
colorectal cancer


KRAS is the most frequently altered gene in colorectal cancer (CRC), with
mutations occurring in 30-40% of colorectal cancer. Although KRAS
mutation is associated with poor prognosis and resistance to
anti-epidermal growth factor receptor therapy, the mechanism by which it
promotes tumor metastasis remains undefined. Our study explored a new
hypothesis that targeting the Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1)-insulin-like
growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) signaling axis which is downstream of
KRAS, with a novel integrin-linked kinase inhibitor, T315, represents a
therapeutically relevant strategy to block KRAS mutation-driven tumor
progression. In liver metastases from CRC patients, we observed that
there was a preponderance (79/108) of over-expression in both YB-1 and
IGF-1R by immunohistochemistry. In colon cancer cell lines HCT-116 and
SW480, knockdown and over-expression of KRAS affected the protein and
mRNA levels of IGF-1R in a dose-dependent manner. But KRAS only affected
the protein level and not mRNA of YB-1, thus suggesting that KRAS
regulated YB-1 expression at the post-transcriptional level. Manipulation
of YB-1 via plasmid overexpression and siRNA affected IGF-1R protein and
mRNA levels in a dose-dependent manner, and YB-1 and IGF-1R promoter
binding was confirmed via ChIP assay. There was a dose-dependent decrease
in YB-1 and IGF-1R protein levels with MEK162, a MEK inhibitor, but not
with LY294002m a PI3K inhibitor. This demonstrated that the KRAS
regulation of the YB-1- IGFR-1R signaling axis to be via the MEK
signaling pathway and not PI3K/Akt. Our novel drug T315 targets YB-1, and
was shown to inhibit cell viability and cell migration in a
dose-dependent manner. T315 treatment of the colon cancer cells also
decreased protein levels of YB-1 and IGF-1R and affected epidermal
mesenchymal transition markers such as E-cadherin, vimentin, and snail.
These results suggest that a combination of a MEK inhibitor and T315 may
be an effective therapeutic strategy to target KRAS mutation driven CRC.

