Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PEDF modulatory action on macrophages: A new way to curb prostate
cancer development


Macrophages have been described as one of the main inflammatory
components involved in prostate cancer (PCa) initiation, progression, and
metastasis. PEDF (Pigment Epithelium-Derived Factor) is an
anti-angiogenic factor with differentiation activities and was recently
suggested as an immune-modulating factor. PEDF expression has been shown
to be down-regulated in PCa compared to normal tissues. In previous
studies we have demonstrated that PEDF re-expression in PCa cells curbs
tumor growth in vivo and significantly prolongs the survival of
tumor-bearing mice. Others have shown that PEDF expression increased the
recruitment of tumor-cytotoxic macrophages into orthotopic MatLyLu rat
prostate tumors suggesting a link between PEDF and inflammation in PCa.
While PEDF's role in inflammation has been suggested, the precise modes
of action of PEDF on macrophages still remain unknown and necessitate
further investigation. Our preliminary data have showed that PEDF
stimulates the migration of monocytes/macrophages using in vitro
chemotaxis boyden chamber assay and towards tumor 3D spheroids. We showed
that PEDF expression levels positively correlate with macrophage density
in human prostate. In both cell lines and prostate specimens, we have
demonstrated that PEDF directly induces the polarization of macrophages
and bone marrow derived macrophages (BMDMs) towards a M1/tumor-cytotoxic
pathway. As a result of their differentiation, we have found that PEDF
stimulates the phagocytosis of tumor cells, which suggest another
mechanism by which PCa growth is halted. We are currently investigating
the molecular mechanisms by which PEDF induces migration, differentiation
and phagocytic activity in macrophages. PEDF mechanisms are being
investigated by expression levels of PEDF receptors (ATP5B, PNPLA2, LRP6)
in macrophage cell lines and BMDMs. So far we have been identified ATP5B
and PNPLA2 as the two main receptors expressed in both cell types. While
all three receptors in cell lines increased, only ATP5B and PNPLA2
receptors increased in BMDMs in response to PEDF. To map the functional
region involved in PEDF's inflammatory action, we are investigating the
PEDF-derivative synthetic 18-mer peptide (residues 39-57). P18 has been
shown to block endothelial cell chemotaxis and induces apoptosis in
vitro, and to be more effective than its parental 34-mer peptide
(residues 24-57) in blocking growth and angiogenesis in PCa. We were able
to demonstrate that macrophages treated with P18 in comparison to PEDF,
show a higher efficacy for macrophages differentiation. Using confocal
microscopy we demonstrated a larger rate of phagocytosis of PCa cells by
macrophages than compared to PEDF. The results of our study are of
importance as they suggest that macrophages may play a key role in PEDF
anti-tumor effects. A better understanding of PEDF may lead to further
development of PEDF-based anticancer therapy or improvement of
alternatives to chemotherapy for PCa.

