Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic mechanisms of oncolytic reovirus with bortezomib in
overcoming therapy resistance of multiple myeloma


Introduction: Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable hematologic
malignancy that accounts for 10% of hematopoietic neoplasms. The
potential of reovirus (RV) as a novel therapeutic agent for MM under in
vitro, in vivo and ex vivo conditions has been demonstrated by us and a
phase I clinical trial of MM with RV therapy has shown indications of
efficacy. Recently we have shown that RV could synergize with several MM
drugs such as bortezomib (Bort), cafilzomib, dexamethasone and perifosine
and importantly, enhance its therapeutic potential in therapy resistant
MM. Here we show that RV/Bort synergy in MM is mediated via enhanced
apoptosis than augmented viral progeny production.Methods: MM cell lines
RPMI 8226, U266, NCIH929, U266, INA-6, KMS11 and OPM2 were incubated with
live or dead RV at a MOI of 40 for 24, 48, and 72 hours respectively and
cell death was assessed via the WST assay. RV resistant OPM2 and
moderately resistant KMS-11 were used in combination therapy and treated
with RV and drugs at various concentrations to evaluate Effective Dose
50% (ED50) values and synergism was determined by the Chou-Talalay
method. To assess viral progeny production, MM cells were treated with
RV+/- drugs and harvested at various time points and frozen. Following 3
freeze thaw cycles viral progeny was assessed via plaque titration on
L929 cells. To assess apoptosis, cells treated with RV or Bort singly or
in combination were harvested 48 hours and stained with AnnexinV/FITC and
7AAD and analyzed by flow cytometry.Results: RV sensitive RPMI8226 cells
demonstrated the maximal viral progeny production. Log-fold increases in
viral plaques forming units (PFU)/ml detected at 72h was 3.04 for RV+Bort
treated cells and 3.58 for RV alone treated cells indicating productive
virus replication in both treatments. RV resistant OPM2 cells
demonstrated the least amounts of virus progeny (0.99-1.28 PFU/ml fold
increase) in RV+Bort treated or RV alone treated cells respectively.
KMS11 cells treated with RV alone showed a log-fold increase in virus
progeny of 2.32PFU/ml at 72h. Interestingly, when KMS11 cells were
treated with RV+Bort no significant increase in RV progeny was seem at
72h indicating minimal RV replication in these cells in the presence of
Bort.The synergistic cytotoxicity observed with RV+Bort in all 3 cell
lines was due to enhanced apoptosis where significantly augmented
apoptosis was seen in combination treatment than in single agent
treatment.Conclusion: Not all MM cell lines are amenable to RV mediated
cell death. This has important implications for the future use of RV as a
therapeutic agent. Mechanisms such as autophagy and necroptosis that may
contribute to RV/drug mediated cytotoxicity is currently been
investigated and experimentation in animal models is also underway.
Understanding the signalling pathways of resistant tumour will help
develop a more personalized approach of RV therapy for MM patients in the
future.

