Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An analysis on the usefulness of ALDH in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma


(Background)Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is a highly
malignant cancer with a poor prognosis. In recent years, the existence of
tumor-initiating cells (TICs) and their treatment-resistance have been
noted in gastrointestinal cancer. It is thought that TICs are major
contributors to cancer relapse, and removing the TICs might improve the
radical cure rate. However, there have been only a few reports on the
TICs of ESCC. Theoretically, the TICs can be treated by either actively
removing them or making them differentiate into cells that are sensitive
to chemotherapy. However, no such strategies have been established
yet.(Methods)As a pre-planning stage for novel treatment strategies
focused on TICs of ESCC, we identified the TIC fraction and then
elucidated their characteristics, using ESCC cell lines (T.Tn and TE
series).(Results)During the sphere formation assay, spheres were formed
in cultures of the ESCC cell lines T.Tn, TE1 and TE2. We dissociated the
spheres and cultured the resulting cells under non-adherent conditions.
The spheres were formed again, so the capacity of the cells for
self-renewal was confirmed. Furthermore we examined the sensitivity of
the cells making up the spheres to an anticancer agent using the MTT
assay. The cells showed resistance to CDDP. It is believed that the cells
making up the spheres included cells with TICs properties, so we analyzed
these cells for their expression of CD24, 44, 133 and EpCAM, which were
reported to be TIC markers in other cancers, by flow cytometry. Compared
to the ratio in the total cells, the proportion of positive cells in the
cells making up the spheres was similar or lower. Therefore, we examined
the expression of CD90, which has been reported to be a marker of liver
cancer, in the same way. The percentage of positive cells in the cells
making up the spheres was slightly increased compared to the overall cell
population, but few CD90-positive cells were detected in the spheres by
immunohistochemistry. It was thought that separation by cell surface
markers, such as CD24, 44, 90, 133 and EpCAM was difficult, so we focused
on the ALDH, which was one of functional markers. It was revealed that
about 30% of total cells were positive, but almost all of the sphere
cells were positive by ALDEFLUOR and immunohistochemistry.(Discussion)The
ESCC cell lines T.Tn, TE1 and TE2 form spheres, so these were considered
to be useful in the present experimental system. However, separation by
cell surface markers was difficult, so we are currently considering
separation by functional markers, including ALDH enzyme activity. We will
analyze the TIC markers continuously and identify the TIC fraction of
ESCC.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

