Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD99 functional analysis in glioblastoma by RNAseq


CD99 is a membrane protein expressed in a wide variety of normal tissues
and implicated in several cellular physiologic processes, including
haematopoietic cell differentiation, proliferation, diapedesis, cell-cell
adhesion, migration, apoptosis induction, cellular architecture
maintenance and transmembrane protein transport. Additionally, aberrant
CD99 expression has been associated with numerous malignancies, including
astrocytomas. Amongst astrocytomas of different malignant grades,
glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive and common of central nervous
system tumors. Despite current multimodal therapies, including surgery,
chemotherapy and radiotherapy, the median survival duration of patients
is 17 months. We have previously demonstrated increased CD99 expression
at mRNA and protein levels in astroctyoma of all malignant grades, with
GBM showing the highest levels. Knocking down CD99 expression by siRNA
efficiently decreased CD99 at mRNA and protein levels and concurrently
decreased the migratory property of two GBM cell lines, U87MG and A172.
We subsequently analysed the transcriptoma of both cell lines by RNA-seq
in Illumina platform after transfection with siRNA for CD99 and compared
to non-target control (NTC). CD99 gene and protein silencing was
confirmed in both cell lines. A total of 413 and 340 genes for U87MG and
A172, respectively, with expression 1.3 (pCD99 is a membrane protein
expressed in a wide variety of normal tissues and implicated in several
cellular physiologic processes, including haematopoietic cell
differentiation, proliferation, diapedesis, cell-cell adhesion,
migration, apoptosis induction, cellular architecture maintenance and
transmembrane protein transport. Additionally, aberrant CD99 expression
has been associated with numerous malignancies, including astrocytomas.
Amongst astrocytomas of different malignant grades, glioblastoma (GBM) is
the most aggressive and common of central nervous system tumors. Despite
current multimodal therapies, including surgery, chemotherapy and
radiotherapy, the median survival duration of patients is 17 months. We
have previously demonstrated increased CD99 expression at mRNA and
protein levels in astroctyoma of all malignant grades, with GBM showing
the highest levels. Knocking down CD99 expression by siRNA efficiently
decreased CD99 at mRNA and protein levels and concurrently decreased the
migratory property of two GBM cell lines, U87MG and A172. We subsequently
analysed the transcriptoma of both cell lines by RNA-seq in Illumina
platform after transfection with siRNA for CD99 and compared to
non-target control (NTC). CD99 gene and protein silencing was confirmed
in both cell lines. A total of 413 and 340 genes for U87MG and A172,
respectively, with expression 1.3 (p<0.01, Bejamiini-Hochberg test) in
knockdown condition in relation to NTC were detected, and they were
analysed according to process networks using Metacore. A total of 129
genes had the expression diminished with CD99 in both cell lines, among
them genes coding for proteins involved in migration and cytoskeletal
remodelling, as expected. Also, we observed a decreased expression of
genes involved in molecular mechanisms of translation control and protein
folding regulation, as genes encoding for: subunits of the elongation
factor-1 complex (EEF1A and EEF1A1), GTP-binding translation elongation
factor (EEF2), several ribosomal proteins (PRPL4, RPL8, RPL15, RPL28,
RPL32, RPL37A, RPS2, RPS3, RPS4, RPS6, RPS11 and RPS20), tRNA synthetase
proteins (VARS and YARS), and heat shock proteins (HSC70, HSP70, HYOU1
and VCP). Furthermore, expression of MTOR, which encodes a common subunit
protein of mTORC1 and mTORC2 complexes, is also downregulated with CD99
knockdown. Altogether, these results open insights for new roles of CD99
in GBM in controlling the regulation of translation, a crucial control of
cell growth and proliferation. CD99 could thus be targeted to prevent
protein translation in cancer cells.

