Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sustained adrenergic signaling activates pro-inflammatory
prostaglandin network in ovarian carcinoma


Purpose: Catecholamine mediated stress effects are known to induce
production of various pro-inflammatory cytokines. However, the mechanism
and functional effect of adrenergic signaling in driving inflammation via
pro-inflammatory metabolites is currently unknown. Here we address the
functional and biological consequences of adrenergic-induced Cox2/PGE2
axis activation in ovarian cancer metastasis.Methods: We first analyzed
global metabolic changes in tumors isolated from patients with known
Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D; depressive)
scores and tumoral norepinephrine (NE) levels. Beta-adrenergic receptor
(ADRB) positive cells (Skov3 and HeyA8) were used to study gene and
protein levels of PTGS2 (cyclooxygenase2), PTGES (prostaglandin E
synthase) and metabolite PGE2 in vitro and in vivo. To study
tumor-specific effects on catecholamine-derived expression of PTGS2, we
used a novel DOPC delivery system of PTGS2 siRNA.Results: Our results
revealed that levels of PGs were significantly increased in patients with
high depressive scores (>16). PGE2 was upregulated by 2.38 fold when
compared to the low CES-D scores. A similar trend was also observed with
other pro-inflammatory eicosanoids, such as 6-keto prostaglandin F1 Alpha
(2.03), prostaglandin A2 (1.39) and prostaglandin E1 (1.39). Exposure to
NE resulted in increased PTGS2 and PTGES (prostaglandin E2 synthase) gene
expression and protein levels in Skov3 and HeyA8. PGE2 ELISA confirmed
that upon treatment with NE, PGE2 levels were increased in conditioned
medium from Skov3 and HeyA8 cells. Treatment with a broad ADRB agonist
(isoproterenol) or ADRB2 specific agonist (terbutaline) led to increases
in expression of PTGS2 and PTGES as well as PGE2 levels in supernatant.
Conversely, treatment with a broad antagonist (propranolol) or an ADRB2
specific antagonist (butoxamine) in the presence of NE abrogated gene
expression changes of PTGS2 and PTGES. ChIP analysis showed enrichment of
Nf-kB binding to the promoter region of PTGS2 and PTGES by 2.4 and 4.0
fold respectively when Skov3ip1 cells were treated with NE. Silencing
PTGS2 resulted in significantly decreased migration (40%) and invasion
(25%) of Skov3 cells in the presence of NE. Importantly, in the Skov3-ip1
restraint stress orthotopic model, silencing PTGS2 abrogated stress
mediated effects and decreased tumor burden by 70% compared to control
siRNA with restraint stress.Conclusion Increased adrenergic stimulation
results in a pro-inflammatory milieu mediated by prostaglandins that
drives tumor progression and metastasis in ovarian cancer.

