Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bias-corrected next generation sequencing of cell free DNA for
detection of actionable mutations and rearrangements in advanced
non-small cell lung cancer


Genotype-directed targeted therapies are transforming the care of
advanced cancer. However, having adequate tumor tissue for comprehensive
genotyping remains a challenge for many patients. We recently reported on
a new assay for noninvasive plasma genotyping using droplet digital PCR
(ddPCR) of cell free DNA (cfDNA) (Oxnard et al., CCR, 2014). While
appealing in its simplicity, ddPCR assays cannot detect complex genomic
alterations such as chromosomal rearrangements and cannot be massively
multiplexed; a key requirement for efficiently testing for the increasing
number of rare but targetable genomic alterations in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC).Here we report on a novel, targeted, bias-corrected, and
quantitative Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) solution for analyses of
cfDNA. Our plasma NGS assay is focused on targetable driver mutations and
rearrangements in lung cancer targeting 23 exons, 9 introns covering 17kb
for 10 driver genes. Rather than using traditional hybrid capture, our
assay integrates efficient fragment cloning, guided target retrieval, and
molecular annotation of library sequences, which reduces off-target reads
and improves signal-to-noise ratio. Performance of this assay panel was
optimized in two iterations of probe design using targeted sequencing
results of fifteen annotated NSCLC-derived cell lines. We were able to
detect hotspot base changes and indels with 100% sensitivity and
specificity at mutant allele frequencies of 1% and with 92.3% specificity
at allele frequencies less than 0.1%. An automated pipeline for mutation
calling correctly identified rare alleles with a sensitivity and
specificity for point mutations and indels of >90% at allele frequencies
of 0.2%. We then piloted the technology using cfDNA from a patient with
newly diagnosed advanced ALK-rearranged NSCLC and two NSCLC patients with
micro-duplication/insertions in Her2neu. Blinded to the true tumor
sequences, our NGS platform detected the correct ALK rearrangement
(EML4-ALK v2) in 2 separate reads as well as the correct Her2neu
insertions (2311-2322dup and 2332-2340 dup) in circulating DNA. We
further show clinical translation to plasma from a cohort of 20 lung
cancer patients that harbored rare driver genetic events, including ALK,
ROS1 and RET rearrangements by tissue sequencing.We are the first to
sequence chromosomal rearrangements in plasma without prior knowledge of
tissue genotyping results. The potential for this NGS-based plasma
genotyping assay to allow for the noninvasive, multiplexed detection of
complex, targetable genomic alterations including rearrangements and rare
mutations represents a significant improvement over existing methods.

