Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic alterations in ductal carcinoma in situ compared with
Invasive breast cancer: a quantitative real-time PCR study


Introduction: Several molecular markers have been investigated as
possible prognostic factors for ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)
progression to invasive ductal cancer (IDC). DCIS is regarded as a
non-obligate precursor of IDC as it is frequently found adjacent to or
surrounded by invasive breast cancer. Previously, we carried out genomic
analyses that demonstrated that DCIS has specific genetic alterations
that were conserved in invasive disease. Nevertheless, it is still
unknown whether DCIS is merely a marker of increased risk, or actually a
driver of the progression to IDC.Thus, it is crucial to better understand
the genetic aberrations that underlie DCIS progression to
IDC.Methodology: We conducted array chromosomal genomic hybridization on
pure DCIS, IDC and DCIS paired with IDC, with 30 cases each (all were
microdissected). Three chromosomal regions were selected based on the
rate of their detection, which was significantly different
(pIntroduction: Several molecular markers have been investigated as
possible prognostic factors for ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)
progression to invasive ductal cancer (IDC). DCIS is regarded as a
non-obligate precursor of IDC as it is frequently found adjacent to or
surrounded by invasive breast cancer. Previously, we carried out genomic
analyses that demonstrated that DCIS has specific genetic alterations
that were conserved in invasive disease. Nevertheless, it is still
unknown whether DCIS is merely a marker of increased risk, or actually a
driver of the progression to IDC.Thus, it is crucial to better understand
the genetic aberrations that underlie DCIS progression to
IDC.Methodology: We conducted array chromosomal genomic hybridization on
pure DCIS, IDC and DCIS paired with IDC, with 30 cases each (all were
microdissected). Three chromosomal regions were selected based on the
rate of their detection, which was significantly different (p<0.05)
between tumors of different receptor status, whether in combination, or
single parameter; ER, PgR, HER2. In total, 9 genes were chosen for
further validation, spanning Chromosome 4p15.33, Chromosome 5q11.2 and
Chromosome 5q31.3. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(Q-RT-PCR) was used to study the copy number state of the 9 genes in
different pure cases, including 22 DCIS, 29 IDC and 10 DCIS paired with
IDC (all were microdissected). All areas contained more than 90%
carcinoma or control cells. By normalizing values to the housekeeping
gene, human albumin, and normal control DNA samples, we obtained Ct
values for each sample.Results: 61 samples were analyzed by comparing
DCIS and IDC copy numbers of genes within the selected chromosomal
regions. The median relative gene quantities were 1.66(4p15.33),
1.34(5q11.2) and 1.25(5q31.3). In all regions, IDC showed higher levels
of amplification than DCIS with varying degrees of significance. Not all
differences between DCIS and IDC in individual genes were significant.
This observation may be attributed to focal variations in gene copy
numbers and noise from Q-RT-PCR methods. 4p15.33 and 5q31.3 regions
demonstrated significant gain in IDC compared to DCIS (p = 0.021). Genes
within these regions include miRNA 572 (MIR572) and integrin alpha 2
(ITGA2). MIR572 is known to be involved in post-transcriptional
regulation of gene expression, whereas ITGA2 encodes the alpha subunit of
a transmembrane receptor for collagens. In the Chromosome 5q31.3 region,
paired samples of DCIS and IDC also showed a trend in gene copy numbers,
with IDC having a higher value than DCIS.Conclusions: Our findings
demonstrate that there are specific genetic alterations associated with
DCIS progression to IDC. In particular, MIR572 within Chromosome 4p15.33
and ITGA2 within Chromosome 5q31.3 may serve as candidate regions to
predict the progression of DCIS to IDC.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

