Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reliability of medical records in diagnosing inflammatory breast
cancer in Egypt


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is a rare and aggressive form of breast
cancer characterized by diffuse erythema and edema (peau dorange) of the
skin of the breast. It does not include neglected locally advanced cancer
of the breast presenting late in the course of the disease. IBC is
primarily a clinical diagnosis, but also requires pathologic confirmation
of breast cancer. The purpose of this study was to examine the
reliability of medical records for diagnosing IBC in patients at two
centers in Tanta, Egypt (Gharbiah Cancer Society and Tanta Cancer Center)
which participated in an epidemiologic case-case study of IBC and non-IBC
in 2009-2010. IBC patients were recruited to the case-case study at
diagnosis based on clinical examination; detailed information on the
extent and duration of signs used for the diagnosis of IBC was recorded.
Information on signs of IBC similar to those collected in the case-case
study was abstracted from the medical records of the hospitals where
case-case study patients were recruited during the same time period, then
linked and compared to the signs observed from clinical examination for
the case-case study.A total of 40 IBC cases were recruited into the
case-case study during 2009-2010. Medical record information was
available for 31 of these cases. Twenty-eight of these 31 cases were
reported to have erythema and 28 edema/peau dorange based on the clinical
examination for the case-case study. Of those with erythema, 16 (57.1%)
also had erythema/inflammation listed in the medical record; of those
with edema/peau dorange, 23 (82.1%) had this mentioned in the medical
record. Erythema was noted on the medical record but not recorded in the
case-case study for 2 cases; there were no cases in which edema/peau
dorange was present in the medical record and not in the case-case study.
Our analysis indicates that medical records at these cancer centers often
have missing information regarding the presence of signs that are
necessary to the diagnosis of IBC. Overall, this study suggests that
medical record review is not sufficient to identify IBC cases for an
epidemiologic study.

