Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Contributions of novel nuclear nucleoside transporters, HNP36 and
HNP32, to DNA synthesis during cell cycle


Nucleosides are multi-functional and essential compounds in cells, acting
as signalling molecules extracellularly and as the fundamental building
blocks of nucleic acids intracellularly. Nucleosides are hydrophilic
molecules and require nucleoside transporters (NTs) for translocation
across membranes (Young et al. 2013). NTs are also the route of entry of
a large class of clinically important nucleoside analog drugs used in
anti-cancer treatments. Despite their clinical importance, NTs are poorly
understood in terms of regulation, role and contribution to drug efficacy
and nucleoside physiology. The SLC29 family of NTs possesses 4 isoforms
including equilibrative nucleoside transporter 2 (ENT2; SLC29A2), which,
in humans, is observed as a full length protein at the plasma membrane
and intracellularly as splice variants (William & Lanahan 1995;
Mangravite et al. 2003). The physiological relevance of these splice
variants is not known but a correlation between mitogenic signalling and
their presence in proximity to the nucleus suggested a novel cellular
role for hENT2 at the nuclear envelope. Therefore, we hypothesized that
increased expression of the nuclear isoforms of ENT2 under proliferative
conditions contributes to translocation of nucleosides required for DNA
synthesis into the nucleus during cell cycle. To investigate this
hypothesis, we confirmed the presence of novel human ENT2 spliced
variants (HNP36/HNP32) at the nuclear envelope and determined that these
proteins were functional nucleoside and nucleobase transporters by
heterologous expression of variants in oocytes. Human tissues and cell
lines possess ubiquitous expression of ENT2 isoforms (based on qPCR) and
we observed that there is increase in expression of the nuclear variants
in proliferative cancer cells compared to healthy tissues confirming a
correlation between proliferation and presence of the isoforms.
Furthermore, HNP36/HNP32 appear to recruit full-length ENT2 to the
nuclear envelope to form functional heteromers based on
co-immunoprecipitation and confocal microscopy. Finally, we demonstrate
that knockdown of HNP36/32 leads to a striking decrease in cell
proliferation and a dysregulation of cell cycle such that cells are
arrested on S phase which confirms that nuclear ENT2 isoforms are
critically important during cell proliferation and needed for effective
DNA synthesis. In conclusion, we show here that two novel ENT2 splice
variants play a role in supporting cellular proliferation through a
mechanism that involves the recruitment and formation of oligomers
including the full-length ENT2 at the nuclear envelope. We propose a
novel model for nuclear trafficking of nucleosides during DNA synthesis
in cell proliferation, in which nuclear isoforms of ENT2 play a
significant role and, therefore, may be a potential new target in cancer
therapeutics.

