Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA profiles in metastatic versus non-metastatic salivary
mucoepidermoid carcinoma


Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC) is the most common malignant tumor of the
salivary glands, especially affecting the parotids. MEC derives from the
main duct segment and is composed of mucous, intermediate, and epidermoid
cells in varying combinations. Histological grading (low, intermediate,
and high) is of recognized prognostic importance. This is based on the
architectural formation, cytological features, perineural invasion, and
the presence of necrosis. Metastatic spread occurs in up to 80% of
high-grade tumors and it is a strong predictor of poor outcome, however,
the mechanisms underlying this process are largely unknown. Large-scale
microRNA expression profiling studies of human cancers have demonstrated
that dysregulation of miRNA is frequently associated with many cancer
types. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are approximately 22 nucleotide non-coding RNA
molecules that regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally and are
involved in various biological processes. The aim of this study was to
investigate the microRNA profile in metastatic versus non-metastatic
MECs. Using Real Time RT-PCR we have analyzed the expression of 762
miRNAs and controls using the TaqMan Array Human MicroRNA A+B Cards in
FFPE samples from 2 metastatic MEC, 2 non-metastatic MEC and 2
non-neoplastic human salivary gland. For the identification of
differentially expressed microRNAs between tumor samples versus normal
samples and between metastatic versus non-metastatic samples,
bioinformatics analysis was performed using hierarchical cluster analysis
and the t test with Bonferroni correction was applied. Among the 762
microRNAs and controls contained in the array panel, 353 showed an
expression level below the detection limit (Ct >38) and were excluded
from downstream analyses. The microRNA profile was able to discriminate
between normal and tumor samples and between metastatic and
non-metastatic tumors. Considering tumor and normal samples, 29 microRNAs
were differentially expressed. The metastatic versus non-metastatic
analysis demonstrated that 62 microRNAs were differentially expressed.
Among the differentially expressed microRNAs, some have already been
described as associated with the metastatic process (hsa-miR-9,
hsa-miR-125, hsa-miR-145, hsa-miR-494, hsa-miR-140, hsa-miR-212,
hsa-miR-146, hsa-miR-183, hsa-miR-21, hsa-miR-200, hsa-miR-638, and
hsa-miR-141). Our results suggest that microRNA profiles could
discriminate the metastatic potential of salivary MECs and might be
helpful in diagnostic and prognostic evaluation of patients. Financial
Support: FAPESP 11/02051-6

