Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultrasensitive detection of genomic alterations in cell-free DNA
by Droplet Digital PCR


As cancer cells die, they release small pieces of DNA into the
bloodstream. These molecules of DNA are called circulating tumor DNA
(ctDNA). ctDNA carry somatic aberrations that are found in the
originating tumor tissue and can serve as excellent biomarkers. They can
be extremely valuable as tools for disease monitoring, and samples for
predictive and prognostic biomarkers. However, limited quality and
quantity of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues and
circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) samples available from patients pose a
big challenge to performing DNA quantification, mutation profiling and
copy number variation analysis.We explored the feasibility of using
Droplet Digital PCR (ddPCR) technology to address this challenge. Using
ddPCR, we studied the ability to perform high-sensitivity mutation
analysis and accurate quantification of allele frequencies, and compared
this approach to alternate methods such as next-generation sequencing
(NGS). For mutation profiling, we examined a total of 22 mutation
detection ddPCR assays across 7 oncogenes - KRAS, PIK3CA, EGFR, BRAF,
NRAS, cKIT and AKT1. The assay sensitivity for the majority of mutation
detection assays was found to be approximately 0.03%. We have
identified/reconfirmed various mutations using matching FFPE/plasma
samples from patients in various cancer types. Moreover, we have adapted
the previously published HER2 CNV ddPCR assay to detect HER2 copy number
variation in cfDNA.We will present data showing validation of this
platform using commercially available DNA control, archival FFPE tissue
and cfDNA samples and demonstrate improved sensitivity and specificity.
The platform is being routinely used in our labs to analyze samples from
multiple clinical trials. These efforts enable the development of a
non-invasive method to overcome existing challenges to provide molecular
understanding of patient's tumor evolution, and aid in the development of
personalized therapies for cancer patients.

