Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual targeting of Delta-like ligand 4 (DLL4) and programmed death
1(PD1) inhibits tumor growth and generates enhanced long-term
immunological memory


Blocking DLL4, a Notch ligand, effectively inhibits tumor growth by
increasing non-functional angiogenesis and decreasing the cancer stem
cells (CSC) population. We are currently testing an anti-DLL4 antibody,
demcizumab, in Phase1B trials in NSCLC, pancreatic, and ovarian cancer.
DLL4 is also known to modulate immune responses. In the current study we
examine the impact of anti-DLL4 on anti-tumor immune responses as a
single agent and in combination with the key immune checkpoint inhibitor
Programmed Cell Death Protein 1 (PD1). While the recent clinical success
of PD1 inhibitors represents a new and promising cancer immunotherapeutic
approach, high initial response rates are often associated by a lack of
long-term, durable effects in a significant number of patients.
Therefore, we hypothesized that dual blockade of DLL4 and PD1 might
further impact tumor growth by further enhancing anti-tumor immune
immunity. Our data demonstrates that dual blockade of DLL4 and PD1 using
antibodies not only reduces tumor growth, but also led to tumor rejection
in 50% in CT26WT tumor-bearing mice, similar to those treated with
anti-PD1 alone (no tumor rejection was observed with anti-DLL4 alone).
Anti-PD1 increased specific CD8+ T cell-mediated IFN- production while
decreasing IL6. Anti-DLL4 treatment reduced IL17 production.
Interestingly, only the dual blockage led to increased production of IL2
by splenocytes. Since IL2 is required for secondary population expansion
of CD8+ memory T cells, increased IL2 in the combination group suggests
potential for increased T cell activation, maintenance and memory T cell
function, as compared to single agent anti-DLL4 and anti-PD1. While
anti-PD1 reduced inhibition of CD4+ T cell proliferation by Tregs, the
dual blockade significantly reduced Treg-mediated CD8+ T cell
suppression. Furthermore, both effector and memory CD8+ T cell
frequencies were increased within the total CD8+ T cell population.
Interestingly, anti-PD1 decreased granulocytic MDSCs, while anti-DLL4
reduced monocytic MDSCs. Mice cured with single-agent anti-PD1 and
anti-DLL4/anti-PD1 combination treatments were protected from series of
re-challenge with tumor cells, suggesting the existence of immunologic
memory. Interestingly, more mice were protected from tumor re-challenge
when both DLL4 and PD1 were blocked, as compared to PD1 alone.
Surprisingly, mice previously treated with the anti-DLL4/anti-PD1
combination produced more IL2, clearly indicating the role of DLL4
blockade in enhancing anti-tumor immunity. Therefore, these results show
that dual targeting of DLL4 and PD1 may be an effective and durable
cancer therapy by increasing anti-tumor immune response and promoting
long-term immunological memory.

