Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of mitochondrial complex I enhances the therapeutic
benefit of BRAF inhibition in mutant melanoma cell lines


Metabolic reprogramming is considered to be one of the major hallmarks of
cancer. Selective inhibitors of mutant BRAFV600E, are a widely used
targeted therapy for melanoma. Unfortunately, acquired drug resistance,
which commonly occurs, represents a major limitation to clinical
efficacy. Recent studies have highlighted the role of BRAF inhibition in
promoting oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), over glycolysis, in
BRAFV600E melanomas, a switch commonly seen in conjunction with
development of drug resistance. This metabolic switch occurs at the
transcriptional level, indicated by the up-regulation of PGC1 through the
lineage-specific transcription factor MITF. Based on these data, we
propose that increased OXPHOS is required for melanoma cells to acquire
resistance against the BRAF inhibition, which supports our investigation
of the therapeutic benefit of combining BRAF and OXPHOS inhibitors. For
the latter, respiratory Complex I, an essential enzyme in the
mitochondrial respiratory chain, is a logical target for OXPHOS
inhibition.We investigated the molecular, metabolic and bioenergetic
effects of a selective mutant BRAF inhibitor (Vemurafenib/PLX4032) and
BAY 87-2243, a small molecule inhibiting respiratory Complex I, in vitro
using various BRAF-mutant melanoma cell lines. First, our study revealed
that BRAF inhibition increased the expression of mitochondrial genes and
mitochondrial respiration, which is associated with elevated
mitochondrial oxidative stress, independent of the expression of PGC1.
Furthermore, BAY 87-2243 inhibited OXPHOS, down-regulated the expression
of mitochondrial genes and increased reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production. We also demonstrated that inhibition of BRAF increased the
OXPHOS phenotype and therefore enhanced the effect of BAY 87-2243 on
mitochondrial metabolism; the combination of both inhibitors showed
synergistic effects in vitro.Interestingly, long term BRAF inhibition
resulted in BRAFV600E melanoma cells to become resistant to BAY 87-2243.
Preliminary studies suggest that melanoma cells pretreated with a BRAF
inhibitor, with higher rates of mitochondrial respiration and elevated
ROS levels, are prone to cell death when targeted by pro-oxidants.
Further studies are currently ongoing to understand this resistance
phenotype as well as the underlying mechanism which drives the
synergistic drug effect.

