Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying the minimal region of the ING1 tumor suppressor
capable of efficiently killing cancer cells


ING1b is a type II tumor suppressor and a stoichiometric member of
HDAC-containing protein complexes. ING1b overexpression promotes
apoptosis, and decreased levels of ING1b are frequently observed in human
tumors and cancer cell lines. Previously, we reported the identification
of the regions of ING1b protein required for its pro-apoptotic function.
Using deletion mutant analysis and transient expression in HEK293 cells
we have determined that ING1b-derived peptides comprised of the NLS/NTS
domain and the third alpha helix (A3H) of ING1b including the N-terminal
portion of Lamin Interaction Domain (LID) are able to induce apoptosis at
levels comparable to those of the full length ING1b, despite their
lacking the PHD domain through which they affect the histone epigenetic
code. Here, we report that adenoviral delivery of the A3H-NLS/NTS peptide
led to a significant decrease in cell survival and induced apoptosis in a
majority of tested cancer cell lines. The list of sensitive cancer cell
lines was broad and included lines derived from both primary and
metastatic tumor sources. As shown using an Annexin V binding assay,
decreased survival of cells infected with adenovirus expressing
A3H-NLS/NTS peptide was due to a large number of infected cells
undergoing apoptosis. In fact, infecting triple negative tumorigenic
MDA-MB-468 breast cancer line with 30 MOI of the Ad-A3H-NLS/NTS virus
triggered rapid apoptosis in nearly 70% of infected cells. Importantly,
these effects were time and dose dependent. Also, using a cell line
carrying an inducible p53-expression system, we established that the
ability of Ad-A3H-NLS/NTS to induce apoptosis is p53-independent. Next,
we evaluated the cell death inducing properties of Ad-A3H-NLS/NTS using
10 breast cancer cell lines that were chosen based on their sensitivity
to common HDAC inhibitors. While the overall sensitivity to
Ad-A3H-NLS/NTS induced cell death varied among these lines, we observed
no obvious correlation between the sensitivity to Ad-A3H-NLS/NTS and
sensitivity/resistance to HDAC inhibitors. These findings suggest that
Ad-A3H-NLS/NTS may have a broad application, including in those cancer
cells lines that are normally resistant to conventional chemotherapy.
Furthermore, combined application of Ad-A3H-NLS/NTS with either
Trichostatin A (TSA) or Panobinostat (LBH-589) resulted in a strong
additive, and possibly synergistic killing effect. Using the virus with
either TSA or LBH-589 increased efficacy by nearly 3.5-fold as compared
to the treatment with either TSA or LBH-589 along. Currently, the synergy
between the Ad-A3H-NLS/NTS and common chemotherapeutics is being closely
evaluated. Our long-term goal is to develop ING1b-based therapeutics that
can be used as an adjuvant therapy in combination with existing cancer
treatments.

