Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A serum protein test for improved prognostic stratification of
patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)


While existing scoring systems provide physicians with methods of
assessing prognosis of patients with MDS and help with the choice of
appropriate treatment regimens, some patients defined as lower risk still
have poor outcomes and tests which can refine current stratifications are
of clinical interest.Serum samples, clinical and survival data were
available from 106 MDS patients with refractory anemia (RA) (n = 46), RA
with excess blasts (n = 29), RA with ring sideroblasts (n = 14), and
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (n = 17). The international prognostic
scoring system (IPSS) score distribution 0/0.5/1/>1 was n = 36/23/24/12.
Matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass spectra were
acquired from the samples using the deep MALDI method1, allowing a deep
probing of the proteome. The spectra were preprocessed and spectral
features defined. The integrated intensities of these features were
combined with the survival data using deep learning based machine
learning techniques to create classifiers able to stratify patients into
groups with better and worse survival.Patients in the good prognosis
group had median survival of 52 months, compared with 23 months in the
poor prognosis group (hazard ratio = 0.37, p While existing scoring
systems provide physicians with methods of assessing prognosis of
patients with MDS and help with the choice of appropriate treatment
regimens, some patients defined as lower risk still have poor outcomes
and tests which can refine current stratifications are of clinical
interest.Serum samples, clinical and survival data were available from
106 MDS patients with refractory anemia (RA) (n = 46), RA with excess
blasts (n = 29), RA with ring sideroblasts (n = 14), and chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia (n = 17). The international prognostic scoring
system (IPSS) score distribution 0/0.5/1/>1 was n = 36/23/24/12. Matrix
assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass spectra were acquired
from the samples using the deep MALDI method1, allowing a deep probing of
the proteome. The spectra were preprocessed and spectral features
defined. The integrated intensities of these features were combined with
the survival data using deep learning based machine learning techniques
to create classifiers able to stratify patients into groups with better
and worse survival.Patients in the good prognosis group had median
survival of 52 months, compared with 23 months in the poor prognosis
group (hazard ratio = 0.37, p < 0.001). Within the subgroup of patients
with refractory anemia (n = 46) it was possible to identify a group of
patients with no death events before 30 months, while median survival in
the other patients was only 25 months. Multivariate analysis stratified
by MDS subtype found that the mass spectral (MS) classification was a
significant independent predictor of survival even when adjusted for
international prognostic scoring system (IPSS) score and cytogenetic
status. MS classification was able to separate low to intermediate risk
(IPSS 0-1) and good karyotype subgroups into groups with significantly
better and worse survival.If validated in an independent dataset, this
serum test would provide complementary information for physicians to
consider in addition to existing scoring systems to aid in planning
treatment for MDS patients.1. M Duncan et al, Proceedings of the 61st
ASMS Conference on Mass Spectrometry and Allied Topics. Minneapolis, MN
June 8-9, 2013 MP 181.

