Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioluminescence imaging enhances analysis of drug response in a
patient-derived xenograft model of pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia


Despite the success of current therapy, 15-20% of pediatric acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) patients fail treatment. Since the number of
new agents for testing outweighs the availability of patients for
clinical trials, robust preclinical models are required to prioritize
effective drugs. Patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) of ALL in
immune-deficient mice are a clinically relevant testing model as they
recapitulate original disease characteristics and allow monitoring of
engraftment and drug response by flow cytometric enumeration of the%
human vs mouse CD45+ cells in the mouse peripheral blood (PB). However,
factors such as leukemic harbor and relapse sites are overlooked, and
this model may be biased towards drugs that clear circulating
lymphocytes. This study aimed to overcome these shortfalls by introducing
a bioluminescence imaging (BLI) capability into a pediatric ALL PDX to
enhance monitoring of leukemia burden. Firefly luciferase was
incorporated via lentiviral transduction, and BLI and PB measures used to
track engraftment and response to an induction-type drug regimen;
vincristine (0.15 mg/kg weekly x 4), dexamethasone (5 mg/kg daily x 5 4)
and L-asparaginase (1,000 KU/kg daily x 5 4) (VXL). Additional groups
received 0.5, 0.25 and 0.125x this dose for 2 weeks. Engraftment by BLI
and PB correlated strongly (R2 = 0.8, p = 2,000-fold decrease in the 1x
group. Autopsy of mice at Day 28 revealed a median of 0.8% blasts in the
bone marrow (BM) in the 1x group compared to 35% in the 0.5x group. Since
the clinical definition of a CR is 2000-fold decrease in BM
bioluminescence in the 1x group relative to Day 0, and a 1.3-fold
increase in the 0.5x group. These results show that BLI enhances the
sensitivity of drug efficacy testing in this PDX model, and allows
quantification of efficacy in discreet leukemic harbor sites such as the
BM. This work suggests BLI can increase the stringency of preclinical
drug testing to accurately prioritize agents for clinical trials.

