Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutrophils in the bone marrow niche promote multiple myeloma
chemoresistance


Purpose: The bone marrow (BM) niche provides a sanctuary for multiple
myeloma (MM) cells, allowing them to escape chemotherapy. Previous in
vitro studies have implicated some BM cell populations, including stromal
cells, macrophages, osteoclasts and plasmacytoid dendritic cells, in MM
chemoresistance. However, the role of the major cellular component of BM
represented by immature and mature neutrophils (polymorphonuclear cells,
PMNs) in MM survival from chemotherapy remains unknown. We therefore
evaluated the role of PMNs in MM cell chemoresistance within the BM
niche. Methods: We employed in vivo mouse models to modulate the number
of myeloid cells in the BM of MM-bearing mice. To deplete CD11b+ myeloid
cells, we generated CD11b-DTR BM chimeras and injected diphtheria toxin
(DT) or a control toxin every 4 days after MM cell injection. To expand
CD11b+ cells we overexpressed GM-CSF by hydrodynamic transfection of a
GM-CSF expression plasmid 2 days before MM cell injection. Mice were then
treated with doxorubicin or vehicle control and their survival was
evaluated. For in vitro studies, Gr-1+CD11b+ mouse PMNs and PMN-myeloid
derived suppressor cells (PMN-MDSCs) were isolated from the BM of
tumor-free or MM-bearing mice respectively. CD33+CD14-CD11b+ human PMNs
and PMN-MDSCs were FACS sorted from the BM of healthy individuals or MM
patients, respectively. Results: Depletion of myeloid CD11b-expressing
cells led to a significant reduction of MM tumor growth in these mice and
improved antitumor effect of doxorubicin. Conversely, GM-CSF-induced
expansion of myeloid cells in the BM of MM-bearing mice resulted in
reduced survival and increased resistance to chemotherapy. Both mouse and
human PMNs and PMN-MDSCs were able to protect mouse and human MM cells,
respectively, from doxorubicin and melphalan-induced apoptosis in vitro.
The addition of supernatant collected from these myeloid cells to MM
cells was sufficient to provide tumor cell chemoprotection. In vitro,
mouse MM cells induced PMNs to release DNA in the form of neutrophil
extracellular traps (NETs). These NETs were efficiently taken up by tumor
cells and contributed to PMN-induced chemoresistance in vitro, as
addition of DNAse I cancelled this effect. No other myeloid cells,
stromal cells or MM tumor cells were able to release DNA. In vivo, we
observed a significant increase in circulating cell-free DNA in the blood
plasma and BM plasma of MM-bearing mice, and in the BM plasma of MM
patients compared to healthy individuals. Coculture of MM cells with PMNs
or PMN-derived DNA induced the expression of the survival factor sXBP-1.
Knockdown of sXBP-1 was sufficient to block the chemoprotective effect of
DNA on MM cells. Conclusion: Our data demonstrate that PMNs contribute to
MM chemoresistance by releasing their DNA, resulting in induction of
sXBP-1 in tumor cells. Thus, targeting cell free DNA or sXBP-1 induction
in conjunction with chemotherapy is a promising strategy for overcoming
MM chemoresistance.

