Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel tumor-specific oncolytic biological therapy against
invasive pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer is one of the worst prognosis disease all over the
world and has an overall 5-year survival rate of less than 5%. At the
time of diagnosis, more than 80% of patients are not eligible for
curative surgical resection due to extensive local tumor invasion and
early systemic metastasis. Moreover, even after curative surgery,
pancreatic cancers still show poor prognosis due to local recurrence and
systemic metastasis. Gemcitabine is the standard chemotherapeutic agent
to treat advanced pancreatic cancers, but median overall survival ranged
from 5.0 to 7.2 months, suggesting that standard chemotherapy is less
effective to most of pancreatic cancer patients. Therefore, the
development of novel therapeutic strategy is needed for the treatment of
pancreatic cancers. We developed a novel oncolytic adenovirus, OBP-702,
in which a human telomerase reverse transcriptase gene promoter drives
viral E1 gene for virus replication, and armed with the wild-type tumor
suppressor p53 gene. Precise antitumor effects of OBP-702 have been
evaluated in human pancreatic cancer cells. We used four pancreatic
cancer cell lines with different invasion ability, including non-invasive
type (MIA PaCa-2, Panc-1) and invasive type (BxPC-3, Capan-1). The
antitumor effect of OBP-702 for each cell line was assessed using XTT
assay. OBP-702 induced profound anti-tumor effect in all human pancreatic
cancer cells, whereas OBP-301 lacking the p53 tumor suppressor gene
showed differential effects among the cell types. OBP-301 induced
moderate anti-tumor effect in MIA Paca-2, BxPC-3 and Capan-1 cells and
strong anti-tumor effect in Panc-1 cells in a dose-dependent manner,
suggesting the broad spectrum of OBP-702's efficacy. The molecular
mechanism of anti-tumor effect was assessed by Western blot analysis.
OBP-301 induced autophagy-related cell death, whereas OBP-702 induced
autophagy- and apoptosis-related cell deaths. These results suggest that
an oncolytic adenovirus, OBP-702, is a promising antitumor agent to
induce profound cell death in invasive human pancreatic cancer cells. The
clinical trial of intratumoral administration of OBP-702 in patients with
invasive pancreatic cancer is warranted.

