Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel G-quadruplex formed in the proximal P1 promoter of bcl-2
gene is a gene suppressor


Deregulation of bcl-2, an anti-apoptotic protein, is associated with
several human diseases such as tumorigenesis, neurodegeneration, and
autoimmune deficiencies. DNA G-quadruplex secondary structures that form
in the G-rich proximal promoter regions have been found to play an
important role in gene transcriptional regulation. We discovered a novel
GC-rich sequence in the immediate proximal P1 promoter of the bcl-2 gene
(bcl2P1Pu29), which forms a thermodynamically stable, intramolecular
G-quadruplex (bcl2P1G4) that represses bcl-2 gene transcription. Dimethyl
sulfate footprinting studies indicated that this bcl2 P1 promoter G-rich
region forms G-quadruplexes under physiologically relevant ionic
conditions. This was shown by clear DMS protection of guanine N7, which
is characteristic of G-quadruplex formation. NMR spectroscopic study of
bcl2P1Pu29 showed the formation of a well-defined major G-quadruplex
structure under physiologically relevant ionic conditions, as evident by
sharp peaks in the imino proton region. Interestingly, NMR data also
indicated the presence of Watson-Crick base-pairing, suggesting a
potential unique loop conformation. Circular dichroism (CD) studies
suggested that bcl2P1G4 adopts parallel-stranded folding. Both NMR and CD
data indicated a monomeric structure of bcl2P1G4 with high
thermo-stability. Using a luciferase assay, we have shown that TMPyP4, a
planar cationic G-quadruplex-interactive compound, significantly inhibits
the promoter activity through this G-rich bcl-2 P1 promoter region, while
TMPyP2, a positional isomer of TMPyP4 which is a poor
G-quadruplex-interactive compound, did not show a significant effect. Our
results suggest that this novel intramolecular G-quadruplex formed in the
bcl-2 proximal promoter region appears to be a suppressor of gene
transcription, which could be a potential molecular target for small
molecules to modulate bcl-2 gene transcription.

