Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid identification and targeting of chemotherapy resistant tumor
stem cell clones in ovarian high-grade serous carcinoma


The problem of drug resistance has been the bane of cancer management
since the advent of chemotherapy. High-grade ovarian cancer is a paradigm
of the problem. Although most patients present with advanced disease and,
remarkably, show little or no residual tumor after initial reductive
surgery and chemotherapy, resistance, emerges over the next six to twelve
months in a form that is largely inured to previously effective regimens
of carboplatin and paclitaxel. Until now, ovarian cancer researchers
remain uncertain about the actual degree of tumor cell heterogeneity
before treatment, and whether resistant cells defy chemotherapy by
pre-existing genetic difference or acquired mutations. The key technical
barrier to addressing these critical questions has been the inability of
researchers to generate discrete clones of tumor cells for genomic
analysis. Thus, despite the aggressive nature of ovarian cancers, we have
only a handful of established cell lines to study. Further, it is often
unclear how well these cell lines actually represent their primary tumor
of origin. Here we developed and validated a novel technology for the
cloning of normal human stem cells from epithelial tissues and have used
it to clone tumor stem cells from high-grade ovarian cancer. Using this
unique stem cell-cloning technology, we tested the hypothesis that the
drug-resistant variants pre-exist in primary tumors. Validation of this
hypothesis will indicate that effective anti-HGOC therapies must take
into account the genetics of the diverse tumor-cell populations within a
tumor and target the pre-existing drug-resistant variants. Most
importantly, our technology is so robust that it can clone many thousands
of individual tumor stem cells from a single tumor. Production of
sizeable tumor stem cell libraries is critical for our goal to delineate
tumor heterogeneity and uncover pre-existing drug-resistant variants that
survive the treatment and reemerge as recurrent disease. In preliminary
studies, we have shown that we can recapitulate this resistance
phenomenon in a tissue-culture dish. For the first time, we can identify
these resistant tumor stem cell clones, grow them to large numbers, and
fully assess their gene expression and genetic alterations. This gives us
a first look at the molecular features of the resistant clones that
almost certainly cause cancer patients to relapse after apparently
successful therapy. The first-ever availability of these tumor stem cell
libraries will provide a powerful tool for the discovery of new drugs
targeting lethal cells. We believe that it ultimately will alter the way
cancer patients are treated and greatly accelerate the rate at which
better cancer therapies evolve.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

