Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction of the protein kinase C-related kinases with the TP
and TP isoforms of the T prostanoid receptor: role in thromboxane-induced
neoplastic responses


Compelling epidemiological evidence concurs that long-term use of aspirin
lowers the risk of many prevalent cancers. While such studies do not
specify which cyclooxygenase-1/2 metabolite(s) are lowered by aspirin
accounting for its prophylactic benefits, many reports show that some of
its anti-cancer effects are due to its ability to inhibit thromboxane
(TX)A2 generation, a substance more typically known for its role in
hemostasis/thrombosis. In humans, TXA2 signals through the TP and TP
isoforms of the T prostanoid receptor (TP). There is increasing evidence
supporting roles for the TXA2 axis in several neoplasms including
prostate cancer, potentially due to the ability of TP/TP to regulate key
RhoA- and ERK-mediated signalling cascades that contribute to tumor
growth & metastasis. Mechanistically, we recently identified protein
kinase C-related kinase (PRK) 1 as a direct interacting partner of TP/TP,
a functional interaction essential for TXA2-induced prostate cancer (PCa)
cell migration. Moreover, agonist-activation of TP/TP induced
phosphorylation of histone H3 at Thr11 (H3Thr11), a PRK1-catalysed marker
of androgen-induced chromatin remodelling and transcriptional activation.
This was the first demonstration that the TXA2/TP axis can lead to
epigenetic changes previously only associated with androgens. As
PRK1/PKN1 is a member of a wider subfamily that also includes PRK2/PKN
and PRK3/PKN which, like PRK1, are widely implicated in cancers, we
sought to investigate if PRK2 and PRK3 may interact with TP/TP. Both PRK2
and PRK3 were found to interact with TP and TP, interactions dynamically
regulated following TP-agonist activation. Activation of the TPs also led
to phosphorylation and catalytic activation of all three kinases.
Furthermore, PRK1 and PRK2, but not PRK3, interacted with TP and TP in
PC-3 cells, while targeted disruption of PRK1 and PRK2, but not PRK3,
impaired TP-mediated H3Thr11 phosphorylation, cell proliferation and
migration of PC-3 cells. Considering the critical roles of TP/TP and of
the PRKs in cancer progression, the discovery of these distinct, yet
regulated, interactions is functionally significant, not least in
prostate cancer but also in other pathophysiologies where aberrant PRK1-3
&/or TP/TP expression and function are implicated.Funded by the Irish
Cancer Society, Health Research Board Ireland and the Movember Foundation
(# PCI12KIN, MRCG/2012/3).

