Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic combination therapy with molecular targeted drugs in
glioma stem-like cells


[Introduction] The prognosis of patients with malignant gliomas is poor
despite multimodality therapies underscoring the need for novel
therapeutic strategies. The majority of glioblastomas have aberrant
receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)/RAS/phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3K)
signaling pathways and malignant glioma cells are thought to be addicted
to these aberrant signaling pathways for their survival and
proliferation. However, a large number of clinical trials have
demonstrated that monotherapies have limited efficacy. Tumor
heterogeneities and signaling redundancy and crosstalk in intracellular
signaling network may imply necessity of combination treatments. Recent
studies also suggested that effective methods to personalize antitumor
therapy are required. However, drug sensitivity testing using tumor cells
from each patient, which is one of the potent methods for personalized
tumor therapy, has been unsuccessful. One possible reason of this is a
technical issue regarding evaluation of clonogenicity of glioma stem-like
cells (GSCs) that are thought to be key players in gliomagenesis and the
disease progression and recurrence and thus targets of glioma therapy. We
previously presented an effective method to evaluate clonogenicity of
GSCs by using agarose-based culture system. In this study, we tested the
therapeutic effects of combination treatments on GSCs using targeted
drugs that affect the signaling pathways to which most glioma cells are
thought to be addicted.[Materials and Methods] Human GSCs were cultured
in agarose and treated with inhibitors of RTKs, non-receptor kinase or
transcription factor. The colony number and volume were analyzed using
GelCountTM colony counter system (Oxford Optronix Inc., UK) and
Chou-Talalay combination index was analyzed. Phosphorylation of proteins
was evaluated by reverse phase protein array and immunoblotting.[Results]
While GSCs showed diverse sensitivity to targeted therapies even in the
cells of the same glioma subtype, combinations of EGFR inhibitors with
sorafenib, EGFR inhibitors with MEK inhibitors, Sorafenib with U0126, and
erlotinib with BKM120 showed synergy in different GSC lines, indicating
effectiveness of suppressing RTK and its downstream molecule. Combination
of erlotinib with sorafenib, synergistic in the GSC11 cells, induced
apoptosis and autophagic cell death associated with synergistic
suppression of Akt and ERK signaling pathways and with decreased nuclear
PKM2 and beta-catenin in vitro, and significantly improved survival of
nude mice bearing GSC11 brain tumors compared with control and
monotherapy groups.[Conclusions] Inhibition of RTK and its downstream
molecule induced synergistic antitumor effects but sensitivity of GSC
lines to therapies was diverse. Examining colonies initiated by GSCs
obtained from individual patients may be useful for drug sensitivity
testing in personalized cancer therapy.

