Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A MYC-driven medulloblastoma model derived from human induced
pluripotent stem cells


Brain tumors are the most common cause of childhood oncological death,
and medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain
tumor. Current MB treatments yield five-year survival rates of 60-70%,
but usually result in significant neurological, intellectual and physical
disabilities. Recent gene expression studies have identified four MB
subgroups, many of which have unique clinical and histopathological
features. Patients with Group 3 MB are more likely to have aggressive and
invasive tumors with large cell/anaplastic histology, and have the worst
prognosis. Group 3 MB is characterized by amplification and
overexpression oncogenic transcription factor MYC, herein referred to as
MYC-driven MB. Modeling MYC-driven MB is critical for developing and
testing potential therapies for this highly aggressive MB. Recently,
murine MYC-driven MB models have been developed using mouse neural stem
cells (NSCs) or neuronal precursor cells (NPCs). But human MB models
derived from individual-specific cells are still lacking. Human induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) can be differentiated into various types
of cells and hold great promise for developing individual-specific
disease models. It is valuable to develop MB models using human iPSCs
from both MB patients and unaffected persons. In comparison with
mouse-cell-derived MB models, human-iPSC-derived MB models will provide a
unique and high-impact platform not only for personalized drug discovery
but also for studying the role of individual's distinctive genetic
background in carcinogen sensitivity and MB susceptibility. Transcription
factor Atoh1 governs the development of cerebellar granule neurons and is
essential for MB formation. Here, we induced Atoh1 in human iPSCs to
differentiate these cells into NPCs. We further infected these
Atoh1-induced NPCs with lentiviruses encoding a stabilized form of MYC
(MYCT58A) and dominant-negative p53 (DNp53). These NPCs generated
aggressive tumors after being transplanted into mouse cerebellum. NPCs
infected by DNp53 alone did not form tumors after 90 days. These
MYC-driven tumors were comprised of poorly differentiated, medium to
large size cells which showed nuclear molding, prominent nucleoli and
numerous mitotic (Ki67+) and apoptotic (Cleaved-Caspase-3+) cells. These
tumors also expressed early neuronal lineage marker (-tubulin III). All
these features closely mimic human Group 3 MB. Moreover, we also
established neurosphere cultures from these MYC-driven tumors to enrich
cancer stem-like cells that have the capability for long-term
self-renewal and tumor initiation upon serial transplantations. In
summary, we established a novel human-iPSC-drived cancer model for
modeling MYC-driven MB. Our results support the feasibility to
recapitulate human cancers using progenies derived from human iPSCs. The
iPSC-derived MB model we established will facilitate mechanistic studies
and drug testing for human aggressive MB.

