Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostaglandin E2 activates the mTORC1 pathway through an
EP4/cAMP/PKA and EP1/calcium-mediated mechanisms in human pancreatic
carcinoma cells


Obesity, a known risk factor for pancreatic cancer, is associated with
inflammation and insulin resistance. The pro-inflammatory prostaglandin
E2 (PGE2) that signals via EP receptors and cAMP, and insulin-like growth
factor 1 (IGF-1) that is elevated in insulin resistant states and
activates the Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1)
signaling module, are both shown to play critical roles in pancreatic
cancer progression. We aimed at exploring the potential signaling
crosstalk between the PGE2/EP/cAMP and IGF-1/Akt/mTORC1 pathways in
pancreatic cancer, which may be a key to unraveling the obesity-cancer
link. In multiple human pancreatic cancer cell lines, PGE2 exposure
increased intracellular cAMP levels, indicating the activation of
Gs-coupled receptors EP2 and/or EP4. In PANC-1 cells, which showed the
greatest cAMP response, PGE2 dose- and time-dependently increased the
phosphorylation of mTORC1 downstream targets p70S6 kinase (p70S6K) and S6
ribosomal protein (S6rp), suggesting a crosstalk between PGE2/cAMP and
mTORC1. Accordingly, the mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin suppressed
PGE2-induced p70S6K and S6rp phosphorylation (Ser235/236 and Ser240/244).
Also, the effect of PGE2 on p-S6rp was mimicked by forskolin, a cAMP
stimulator. Interestingly, PGE2 and forskolin had no effect on p-Akt,
suggesting a link downstream of Akt. Subsequent analysis using EP2 and
EP4 antagonists/ agonists revealed that the PGE2-induced responses are
mainly mediated by EP4. Further, PGE2-induced mTORC1 activation
paralleled an increase in the phosphorylation of cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB), a substrate of protein kinase A (PKA).
Pharmacological and genetic inhibition of PKA reduced baseline and
PGE2-activated p-S6rp, indicating a role of PKA in the crosstalk.
Additionally, calcium signaling seemed to be also involved in
PGE2-induced mTORC1 activation, as p-S6rp (Ser235/236 and Ser240/244) was
significantly decreased in cells pre-incubated with BAPTA-AM, a cell
permeable Ca2+ chelator. Moreover, knockdown of EP1, a receptor known to
mediate PGE2-induced Ca2+ response, attenuated PGE2-stimulated mTORC1
activation. Importantly, PGE2 enhanced the effect of IGF-1 on mTORC1
activation, suggesting a positive reinforcement by the interaction
between the two pathways. Together, our data reveal a previously
unrecognized mechanism of PGE2-stimulated mTORC1 activation mediated by
EP4/cAMP/PKA and EP1/Ca2+ signaling in pancreatic cancer cells, which may
be of great importance in elucidating the promoting effects of obesity in
pancreatic cancer. Ultimately, a precise understanding of these molecular
links may provide novel targets for efficacious interventions devoid of
adverse effects.

