Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cost analysis of genomic-directed therapy in patients with
metastatic lung and colorectal cancers


PurposeCancer represents a significant burden on the economy. The NCI
estimated that this cost will exceed $158 billion in 2020. As
cancer-related costs increase, it is pertinent to explore alternative
treatment strategies. The advent of cancer genome sequencing has had a
profound effect on the perception of the current treatment standards.
Recent findings suggest a transition to a new treatment paradigm in which
targeted therapies are chosen based upon unique genetic alterations
regardless of cancer type. The purpose of this cost analysis is to assess
the impact of genomic-directed treatment on the direct cost of
therapy.MethodologyA systematic search was conducted in a database that
consisted of 64 patients that had undergone genetic sequencing. The study
included patients that had a molecular genomics profile completed and
excluded patients without any treatable genetic mutations. The data
analyzed included patient's previous treatment and its costs. Standard
doses were assumed in the cost analysis if no dose was provided in the
chart. The genomic directed treatment was determined by the genomic
oncology team based upon the findings from the molecular genomic profile
report. The standard next line therapy was determined from progress notes
in the patient chart before they were referred to genomic sequencing, or
chosen using the NCCN guidelines. All costs were calculated using
wholesale acquisition costs from REDBOOK Online.ResultsTen patients were
analyzed. All patients received adjuvant systemic chemotherapy that
followed current treatment standards reflected by the NCCN guidelines.
Before being referred to the genomic sequencing service, the number of
previous regimens ranged from 1 to 10 lines of therapy over durations
that varied from 18 - 76 months. The total cost of treatment before
sequencing ranged from $12,722.59 - $396,197.19 with the treatment cost/
month ranging from $978.66 - $12,381.16. Potential standard next -line
therapy ranged from $4403.09 - $12,370.06/month and the genomic-directed
therapy ranged from $7,231.46 - $22,469.87/month. As expected, most of
the genomic-directed therapy regimens were more expensive than the
potential standard next-line therapy. In 1 patient, the genomic-directed
therapy was less expensive than the potential standard next-line
therapy.ConclusionGenomic-directed therapy is more expensive than current
treatment standards due to the use of newer and more expensive biologic
agents. However, current standard therapies focus on the location of the
disease and do not target the specific driving feature of the malignancy.
The current approach often results in the use of multiple agents in
multiple lines of therapy, consequently driving up the cost of therapy.
Genomic-directed therapy may result in better outcomes that translate to
less treatment being needed and a decrease in the total cost of
treatment. Further studies are needed to assess the benefit of
genomic-directed therapy.

