Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TORK/DNA-PK inhibitor CC-115 is effective as a single agent in a
subset of glioblastoma patient-derived cancer stem cells and xenografts
and potentiates temozolomide therapy


Glioblastoma (GBM) cells are highly invasive and respond poorly to
radiation and chemotherapy. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a
serine/threonine protein kinase signals through protein complexes mTORC1
and mTORC2 to regulate several essential processes such as cell growth,
proliferation, metabolism, survival, and autophagy. mTOR is activated by
oncogenic signaling, including PI3K which is frequently deregulated in
high grade glioma. Using GBM patient-derived neurospheres and xenograft
tumors (PDX), we have tested CC-223 (Celgene), an ATP-competitive TOR
kinase inhibitor (TORKi), and CC-115 (Celgene), a dual TORK/ DNA-PK
inhibitor. The latter is also an attractive drug target because of its
role in the repair of double stranded DNA breaks, conferring resistance
to radiation and temozolomide (TMZ), used in the standard of care for
GBMs.Neurospheres enriched in cancer stem cells (CSCs) were cultured from
freshly resected GBM tumors. Dose-response curves for both compounds were
obtained for nine GBM neurosphere lines, resulting in stratification into
sensitive and resistant groups. CC-115 single agent presented higher
efficacy than CC-223 for all GBM CSC lines. Sensitivity to TORKi was not
correlated with PTEN status in this sample set. To investigate the
changes in CSC signaling pathways in response to TORK/DNA-PK inhibition,
CC-115 dose-dependent changes in the levels of 70 proteins and
phosphoproteins in 4 CSC lines presenting variable sensitivities were
determined by reverse phase protein arrays (RPPA) The levels of p-mTOR,
several downstream targets of both mTORC1 (e.g. p-S6K, p-4EBP1, p-RPS6K)
and mTORC2 (p-AKT), and cyclin B1 were decreased in response to CC-115
IC30 dose in all CSC lines.Four CSC lines from the CC-115 sensitive group
were implanted intracranially in nude mice. PDXs were administered CC-115
(2.5 - 5mg/kg) and CC-223 (10mg/kg), or vehicle control 5 days/week by
oral gavage (n>7/group) for a minimum of 4 weeks. CC-115 monotherapy
significantly increased survival of one PDX line. Combination therapy
significantly increased survival of GBM PDX lines that did not respond to
either CC-115 or TMZ monotherapy. Toxicity associated with CC-115
treatment in nude mice prevented a dose-escalation study. We conclude
that the TORK/DNA-PK inhibitor CC-115 is a promising targeted therapy for
GBMs, particularly in combination with DNA-targeting treatments. Our
results underline the molecular diversity in GBMs reflected in the
variable chemosensitivity, and the need to stratify patients for targeted
therapies to increase the chance of success.

