Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of small interfering RNA targeting HPV E6/E7 gene on the
regulation of TP53/Rb dynamic behaviour in cervical cancer cells


Human papillomavirus (HPV) E6 and E7 viral oncogenes are very well known
to cause cervical cancer, because E6 degrades TP53 tumor suppressor
protein, and E7 inactivates the tumor suppressor retinoblastoma (pRb)
protein. Thus E6 and E7 oncogenes of HPV are supposed to be promising
targets of gene therapy against HPV mediated cervical cancer. Here, we
attempted to study the regulation of TP53/pRb proteins dynamic behaviour
after HPV E6/E7 small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection in cervical
cancer cells. HPV positive (HeLa and Caski) cell lines were selected for
these experiments. Herein, we also validated the dynamics of TP53 in
response to antiviral siRNA targeting the E6 and E7 oncogenes. At first,
we analyzed the effect of HPV E6/E7 siRNA on TP53/pRb reporter gene
activity by using pathway profiling luciferase system. Our result clearly
indicates that when compared with E6/E7 siRNA pool alone, siRNA pool in
combination cisplatin dramatically increases the TP53/pRb and decreases
E2F response elements regulating luciferase reporter gene activity. TP53
protein and its target gene expression were also confirmed by western
blot and qRT-PCR analysis in a time dependent manner. In our TP53
reporter gene (pGreenFire1 GFP reporter vector with EF1-puro) assay by
using live imaging analysis shows that combination of HPVE6/E7 siRNA pool
with cisplatin, induces the TP53 expression within 10h and sustained that
leads to cell death. Our imaging results also suggested that combining
cisplatin with inhibition of HPV E6/E7 oncogene would synergize to
stimulate a sustained GFP-TP53 expression can trigger either cell cycle
arrest or apoptosis in response to DNA damage. In addition, we generated
GFP-TP53 reporter stable HeLa cell line (pGreenFire1 GFP reporter vector
with EF1-puro), in order to find the specificity of HPV E6/E7 siRNA
induced TP53 expression in in vitro and in vivo. Similar GFP-TP53 dynamic
pattern was observed in E6/E7 siRNA transfected GFP-TP53 reporter stable
HeLa cell line. Furthermore to analyze the dynamic behaviour of pRb/E2F
in live cells, reporter vector containing luciferase gene was
recombinantly engineered to replace with RFP gene. Taken together, our
results suggest that increase of TP53/Rb expression by silencing E6/E7 is
associated with its chemo-sensitizing effect in cervical cancer cells.
Overall, stabilization and maximal activation of the TP53/pRb signaling
network can facilitate determination of the optimal therapeutic strategy
for human cervical carcinoma..

