Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF sensitizes hepatocellular carcinoma cells to growth factors,
preventing sorafenib-induced apoptosis


Many hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients have a poor prognosis due to
an acquired resistance of tumors to chemotherapeutic treatment.
Transforming growth factor (TGF) has important roles in the control of
cell differentiation, cell cycle progression, and apoptosis. An
upregulation in the TGF signalling pathway is associated with poor
prognosis in HCC patients. In this study, we aim to investigate the
mechanisms by which TGF contributes to HCC tumor progression. We found
that TGF significantly increases mRNA and protein levels of several
mitogenic receptor tyrosine kinases, including insulin-like growth factor
1 receptor (IGF1R) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in both
time-dependent and dose-dependent manners in PLC/PRF/5 cells.
Furthermore, TGF pretreatment significantly increases the acute cellular
response to IGF1, IGF2, and EGF treatment, as measured by levels of pAKT
and pERK also in both time-dependent and dose-dependent manners. We
hypothesized that this increase in growth factor sensitivity would render
cells resistant to sorafenib, the only approved targeted HCC
chemotherapeutic agent. To test this, we pretreated PLC/PRF/5 cells with
TGF for 48 hours then incubated the cells with sorafenib for up to 24
hours. We found that TGF pretreatment led to a reduction of cleaved
caspases 3, 7, 9, and PARP, which are cleaved as cells undergo apoptosis.
We confirmed an increase in cell viability via WST-1 assays and by
counting viable cells. Lastly, we found that the TGFRI kinase inhibitor,
LY2157299, synergized with sorafenib to promote apoptosis. Taken
together, our data suggests that TGF can enhance the survival of HCC
cells by upregulating cell sensitivity to pro-survival growth factors.
Furthermore, the use of both sorafenib and an inhibitor of the TGF
signalling pathway may one day prove to be a more effective therapy for
patients with advanced HCC.

