Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphoserine aminotransferase 1 (PSAT1) as a novel anti-tumor
target in hepatocellular carcinoma


With an estimated 700,000 new cases per year, hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) represents the fifth commonest cancer and is the third leading
cause of cancer death worldwide. Its 5-year survival rate after surgery
is only 5-6%. Although HCC cases occur predominantly in the East and
Southeast Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa, the incidence is rising in the
West, largely due to an increasing incidence of Hepatitis C virus
infection, alcoholic liver disease, and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
related to obesity and type II diabetes. Besides sorafenib, an oral
multikinase inhibitor approved for the treatment of HCC, there is no
other pharmacological agent in the treatment of HCC.Cancer cells undergo
dramatic metabolic reprogramming to sustain uncontrolled proliferation.
Accumulating evidence supports abnormal metabolic pathways as an emerging
hallmark of cancer. To identify metabolic genes required for HCC
tumorigenesis, we compared gene expression profiles of a rat orthotopic
and a mouse DEN (Diethylnitrosamine)-induced HCC model to a liver
regeneration model and to normal liver by PCR arrays, transcriptomic
analysis, and metabolomic profiling. Serine and glycine levels were
increased in tumors of the HCC models as determined by NMR spectroscopy.
PSAT1 (phosphoserine aminotransferase 1), an enzyme in the serine
biosynthesis pathway, was identified as one of the top up-regulated genes
in the HCC models. An increase in PSAT1 protein levels in tumor samples
versus normal liver tissue was confirmed by Western blot. Knockdown of
PSAT1 in rat hepatoma cells (MH3924a) led to a dramatic reduction in cell
proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, a doxycycline-inducible
knockdown approach confirmed the anti-proliferation effect of PSAT1
depletion. Interestingly, depletion of PSAT1 showed a variable effect on
other HCC cells (e.g. Hep3B and Huh-7), suggesting the involvement of
other genetic and metabolic factors. Detailed analysis of PSAT1 as a
potential drug target for HCC is currently being addressed in in vivo
studies.

