Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined MEK1/2 and PI3K inhibition induces synergistic
caspase-dependent apoptosis in neuroblastoma


Background: Neuroblastoma is a pediatric cancer of the developing
sympathetic nervous system that is often widely metastatic at diagnosis.
Despite the intensive multimodal therapy patients receive including
surgery, chemoradiotherapy, stem cell transplantation and immunotherapy,
cure rates remain less than 40% for patients with high-risk disease. The
identification of MAPK pathway genomic aberrations (NRAS mutations, loss
of NF1) in primary and relapsed disease lends relevance to the use of
MEK1/2 inhibitors in the treatment of neuroblastoma. Although PI3K and
PTEN mutations are rarely detected in neuroblastoma, activation of the
PI3K/Akt axis is described in primary tumors and is a well-defined
mechanism of resistance to MEK inhibition in other solid tumors. We
hypothesize that combined inhibition of MEK and PI3K will synergize to
reduce neuroblastoma cell survival and proliferation.Methods: A panel of
human-derived neuroblastoma cell lines (N = 15) was used to analyze the
effect of combined binimetinib (MEK162, MEK1/2 inhibitor) and alpelisib
(BYL719, alpha-specific PI3K inhibitor) treatment. Effects on cell
survival were assayed with CellTiter-Glo and pathway (MAPK, PI3K/Akt,
mTOR) inhibition was analyzed following both single agent and combination
treatments. Synergy was determined using the Chou-Talalay method.
Additional cell death analysis included flow cytometry (sub-G1, Annexin
V) and immunoblotting (BIM, cleaved-PARP). In vivo efficacy testing is
ongoing in neuroblastoma xenograft models (N = 3) with defined MAPK
aberrations.Results: Treatment with both binimetinib and alpelisib in 15
neuroblastoma cell line models induced a synergistic (N = 14; CI value
range 0.098-0.637) or additive (N = 1; CI = 0.951) anti-proliferative
response. The mechanism for the additive cytotoxicity was the conversion
of binimetinib-induced cell cycle arrest to the induction of programmed
cell death, as measured by morphology, sub-G1 analysis and PARP cleavage.
Furthermore, the cell death response was rescued by treatment with the
caspase inhibitory peptide, QVD-OPh. By immunoblot analysis, combination
treatment decreased the levels of phospho-ERK, phospho-Akt, phospho-S6K,
beyond that observed with ether single agent. Neuroblastoma xenograft
studies are ongoing with models selected based on the presence of MAPK
pathway aberrations, including NRAS mutations and copy number loss of
NF1, and in vitro sensitivity to the combination.Conclusions: Synergistic
activity of combined MEK1/2 and PI3K inhibition in human neuroblastoma
cell lines via the induction of apoptosis was observed. Combined
binimetinib and alpelisib treatment suppresses the activation of MAPK,
PI3K/Akt and mTOR. The in vitro studies and preclinical in vivo models
are expected to form the basis of testing binimetinib-alpelisib in
neuroblastoma clinical trials designed to enrich for subjects with
canonical MAPK activating lesions.

