Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving the effectiveness of chemotherapy by combining compounds
that suppress drug-induced microsatellite instability


Many chemotherapeutic agents damage DNA and induce DNA damage response
(DDR) signaling, resulting in growth arrest or apoptosis. DNA mismatch
repair (MMR) system not only maintains genomic stability but also
participates in DDR signaling. MMR deficiency leads to genetic
hypermutability, manifested as microsatellite instability (MSI), and
contributes to cancer pathogenesis and drug resistance. MSI has been
linked to chemotherapy and therapy-related secondary cancer. Therefore,
it is important to prevent drug-induced MSI to increase the effectiveness
of chemotherapy while reducing cancer mortality. The purpose of this
study is to characterize the MSI-inducing ability of individual
chemotherapeutic agents and identify small compounds that suppress
drug-induced MSI. In a human colorectal cancer cell model, all tested
drugs individually induced the instability of reporter and endogenous
microsatellites while reducing steady-state levels of certain MMR
proteins. Relatively, oxaliplatin induced a higher MSI frequency than
many tested drugs such as 5-FU. It is known that MMR-deficient tumors are
resistant to 5-FU and not oxaliplatin. We then screened a commercially
available library for small compounds that suppress oxaliplatin-induced
MSI using a dual-fluorescent MSI reporter. We found that the majority of
compounds were capable of reducing oxaliplatin-induced MSI. However, they
also undesirably decreased the cytotoxicity of oxaliplatin. On the other
hand, a small number of compounds such as I-6 and II-13 suppressed
oxaliplatin-induced MSI with or without an improvement of drug
cytotoxicity. Relative to oxaliplatin alone, co-treatment of 1 M
oxaliplatin with 6-10 M compound II-13 decreased drug-induced MSI
frequency by 45-70% without significantly affecting the cytotoxicity of
oxaliplatin. Co-treatment of oxaliplatin with 4-10 M compound I-6,
however, decreased both drug-induced MSI and cell numbers by 50-78% in a
dose-dependent manner. To our surprise, compounds such as II-13
suppressed MSI induced by oxaliplatin but not by 5-FU. In conclusion,
individual drugs displayed different MSI-inducing abilities whereas
MSI-suppressing compounds appear to be drug-specific. Further
identification and validation of MSI-suppressing compounds specific for
5-FU or leucovorin, for example, would improve the effectiveness of
combination chemotherapy such as FOLFOX.

