Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histologic and whole slide quantitative image analysis of lung
metastases in a mouse breast cancer model using carboplatin and Nutlin 3A
alone and in combination


Breast cancer will affect 1 in 8 women in their lifetime. Approximately
20-30% of all breast cancer cases become metastatic. This study was
designed to evaluate the effect of tumor met knockdown with individual
and combination drug therapy. In this mouse model, with 3 per group, we
used the following chemotherapeutic agents: a vehicle control,
carboplatin (20mg/kg i.p.), Nutlin-3a (200mg/kg p.o.) and a combination
group with the same doses. Nutlin-3 is a small-molecule inhibitor that
binds to the p53-binding pocket of MDM2, and activates the p53 pathway.
This has been shown to be effective in mouse models of cancer that have a
wild-type p53, including prostate, leukemia and multiple myeloma.The
lungs were removed and examined for metastatic lung lesions, fixed in 10%
neutral buffered formalin (NBF), processed into a paraffin block,
microtomed, and slides were stained with H&E. Ki67 immunostain was
performed to clearly define the met lesions and the whole slide was
imaged with an Aperio Digital Imaging System. The Image Scope positive
pixel algorithm was used to quantitate the met lesions in the lungs. The
data revealed upon drug treatment the number of mets in the lungs were
unchanged in the carboplatin and nutlin-3a individual treatment groups
compared to the vehicle group. The lungs in the combination group had the
lowest number of tumors with both visual and quantitative image analysis
compared to the vehicle control group.The Aperio automated positive pixel
count for Ki67 immunostain was consistent with the H&E pathology read.
The values decreased with combination treatment (control vs. combination
20mg/kg carboplatin, 200mg/kg nutlin 3a) and were 6% and 1.7%
respectively.It was concluded that mice treated with carboplatin and
Nutlin-3a combination therapy had fewer metastatic breast cancer mets in
the lungs. The individual drug doses were low compared to previous
studies and did not have an effect as was expected. This finding suggests
that the combination of a traditional chemotherapy with a small protein
inhibitor could inhibit the spread of metastatic breast cancer.

