Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the temporal effects of TGF inhibition on the cellular
heterogeneity of the bone metastatic prostate cancer microenvironment


Introduction. Bone metastatic prostate cancer is currently incurable.
Traditional in vivo experimentation has provided insight into the
circuitry driving the osteolytic and osteogenic nature of the disease but
is limited in its ability to interrogate multiple simultaneous
interactions occurring in the tumor-bone microenvironment. We hypothesize
that this limitation can be overcome by combining the power of predictive
computational modeling with biological approaches. To this end, we
developed a clinically relevant hybrid cellular automaton model of bone
metastatic prostate cancer to test the impact of putative targeted
therapies. Herein, we examined the impact of inhibiting transforming
growth factor beta (TGF) because of its well-described pleiotropic
effects on the tumor-bone microenvironment.Results. In silico,
simulations of 250 days (n = 27) were performed for five different levels
of TGF inhibition (0-100%), applied either pre- or post- metastatic
seeding. The computational outputs predicted that TGF inhibition will
only work if administered as a pre-treatment. In this scenario, TGF
inhibition (at 80% inhibition); 1) reduced tumor cell number by 25%, 2)
prevented osteoclast precursor infiltration and maturation by 40% and
surprisingly, 3) reduced tumor-induced osteogenesis by 14%; all data were
significant with pIntroduction. Bone metastatic prostate cancer is
currently incurable. Traditional in vivo experimentation has provided
insight into the circuitry driving the osteolytic and osteogenic nature
of the disease but is limited in its ability to interrogate multiple
simultaneous interactions occurring in the tumor-bone microenvironment.
We hypothesize that this limitation can be overcome by combining the
power of predictive computational modeling with biological approaches. To
this end, we developed a clinically relevant hybrid cellular automaton
model of bone metastatic prostate cancer to test the impact of putative
targeted therapies. Herein, we examined the impact of inhibiting
transforming growth factor beta (TGF) because of its well-described
pleiotropic effects on the tumor-bone microenvironment.Results. In
silico, simulations of 250 days (n = 27) were performed for five
different levels of TGF inhibition (0-100%), applied either pre- or post-
metastatic seeding. The computational outputs predicted that TGF
inhibition will only work if administered as a pre-treatment. In this
scenario, TGF inhibition (at 80% inhibition); 1) reduced tumor cell
number by 25%, 2) prevented osteoclast precursor infiltration and
maturation by 40% and surprisingly, 3) reduced tumor-induced osteogenesis
by 14%; all data were significant with p<0.0001. Next we tested these
predictions in vivo with an osteogenic and TGF responsive model of bone
metastatic prostate cancer (PAIII). Pre-treatment of mice (n = 9/group)
with a TGF inhibitor (1D11) prior to intratibial inoculation of
luciferase expressing PAIII cells remarkably validated computational
model predictions while post-treatment (n = 7/group) with 1D11 had little
or no effect. Unlike our homogeneous in vivo model, analysis of human
clinical specimens (n = 20) of bone metastatic prostate cancer revealed
heterogeneous expression of TGF ligand and receptor in prostate cancer
cells. Again, computational modeling is a powerful way to address the
issue of heterogeneity and using TGF as an example, the computational
model was seeded with equal ratios of TRP (ligand and
receptor-producing), TR (receptor-expressing), and TN (neutral) cells. In
silico control simulations (n = 30) reveal that TR cancer cells are the
dominant population. However, application of a TGF inhibitor in silico
results in the eventual emergence (100 days later) of the TN population.
These data suggest that adaptive application of an inhibitor such as TGF
could prevent the emergence of resistant populations over
time.Conclusions. Integration of computational and biological approaches
can be a powerful tactic in determining the temporal impact of putative
therapies on heterogeneous tumor microenvironments. Further, the
computational model can be of major benefit in optimizing treatments for
the eradication of bone metastatic prostate cancer.

