Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-199a-5p confers tumor suppressive role by inhibiting stenmness
characteristics in triple-negative breast cancers


Objectives: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is defined by lack of
expression in estrogen (ER) and progesterone receptors (PR) as well as
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), which accounts for
10-15% of all breast cancers. TNBC is a more aggressive histological
subtype with worse prognosis when compared to other subtypes due to
limited therapeutic targets for hormonal and HER2 receptors. With limited
treatment options and ineffective targeted therapy, there is an urgent
need for the development of novel therapeutic targets to treat this
malignant form of breast cancer. Methods: Focused on the previously
identified TNBC biomarker miR-199a-5p by our group, cells were
transfected with 199a-5p mimic for functional studies. MTT and wound
healing assay were performed to investigate the cell proliferation and
migration ability. Immunofluorescence staining was introduced to study
TWIST1 and E-cadherin expression in miR199a-5p stable transfected cells.
Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) expression level was compared between
breast cancers and normal control cases plasma by using real-time RT-PCR.
We further used ALDH activity assay to evaluate the stem cell population.
In vivo study was also carried out in nude mice to study tumorigenicity.
Results: Cell proliferation assay showed that overexpression of
miR-199a-5p significantly inhibited cell growth (p = 0.0008). Wound
healing assay indicated the ectopic expression of miR-199a-5p can inhibit
cell migration compared to control group. In miR-199a-5p stable
transfected MDA-MB-231 cell line, increased translocation of Twist 1
protein from nucleus to cytoplasm and increased expression of E-cadherin
was detected by immunofluorescence staining. ALDH activity assay result
indicated that the proportion of ALDH(BR+) cells decreased significantly
from 17.21% to 8.95% in the miR-199a-5p transfected cells when compared
to the control group (p = 0.0279). Consistent with in vitro study, the
well-recognized breast cancer stem-cell marker, ALDH1A, was significantly
upregulated in the plasma of breast cancer patients than in healthy
controls. Moreover, in vivo study also revealed that stable MDA-MB-231
cell line with ectopic miR199a-5p expression resulted in smaller volume
of tumors in nude mice.Conclusions: Our data implicate that miR-199a-5p
plays a tumor suppressive role in the pathogenesis of TNBC, which may due
to the inhibition of stemness characteristics in breast cancer cells.
These findings suggest that miR-199a-5p involved in TNBC stemness-related
features and thus provide insights in development of the novel
therapeutic strategies for this highly malignant breast cancer.

