Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fatty acid synthase, cycloxygenase-2 (COX-2) and osteoprotegerin
(OPG) expression in invasive breast cancer: Implications in carcinogenesis


Breast cancer, the leading cause of death among women with an onset
frequency of one in eight, is the most common type of cancer among women.
However, despite the advancement in therapy, the mortality rate in breast
cancer patients still remains high. The role of various different genes,
directly or indirectly, regulating these processes have tremendously
added to our knowledge of the complex process of proliferation, which has
remained the most important prognostic factor so far. In our previous
study, we established Osteoprotegerin (OPG)'s role in aneuploidy, cell
proliferation and angiogenesis in breast cancer. We demonstrated that OPG
is expressed and secreted at very high levels from the highly invasive
breast cancer cell lines SUM149PT and SUM1315MO2 as compared to human
normal mammary epithelial cells (HMEC). Here, we demonstrated by mass
spectrometry that OPG pulls down fatty acid synthase (FASN), a key enzyme
of the fatty acid biosynthetic pathway in breast cancer cells. We
observed large number of lipid droplets in SUM149PT and SUM1315MO2 cells
in comparison to HMEC by electron microscopy. Human breast cancer tissue
samples showed high expression of FASN. Treatment with FASN inhibitor C75
decreased the number of lipid droplets/cell, altered expression of genes
involved in cell proliferation, cell signaling (Akt/PI3K, ERK, GSK3)
apoptosis (caspase-3 and caspapse-9) and cell cycle. Treatment with C75
lowered the inflammatory pathway enzyme cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
expression and reduced secretion of its inflammatory metabolite
prosataglandin E2 (PGE2). We reasoned that there might be crosstalk
between OPG, FASN, and COX-2, that sustains the inflammatory pathways,
and drives the progression of breast cancer. Here, we identified
cis-acting elements involved in the transcriptional regulation of COX-2
by recombinant human OPG. Collectively, our study indicates the crosstalk
between FASN, COX-2 and OPG. Combinatorial drug treatment of these main
players of carcinogenesis can be used as a potential therapeutic target
to treat highly invasive breast cancer.

