Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of Neutrophil elastase uptake in breast cancer:
implications for immunotherapy


Neutrophil Elastase (NE)_a serine protease released by neutrophils in the
tumor microenvironment_induces invasion and metastasis. We demonstrated
that while NE is not endogenously expressed in breast cancer cells,
breast cancer cells (BrCA) take up exogenous NE derived from
tumor-associated neutrophils. NE uptake results in the expression of the
HLA-A2-restricted peptides CCNE1 and PR1, derived from cyclin E and NE,
respectively, on the surface of triple-negative (TN) BrCA cells
(MDA-MB-231). Expression of these peptides/HLA-A2 molecules induces BrCA
cell susceptibility to cytolysis by CCNE1- and PR1-specific cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs), and to 8F4, a monoclonal antibody that binds
specifically to the PR1/HLA-A2 complex. We hypothesize that NE uptake is
a receptor-mediated process that results in cross-presentation of
NE-derived peptides on HLA molecules of BrCA cells.In this study, we
found that NE uptake in BrCA is specific, time and dose-dependent, and
become saturated, suggesting a receptor-mediated uptake mechanism. We
showed that MDA-MB-231 did not take up cathepsin G, a related serine
protease, suggesting specificity of NE receptor uptake. NE
internalization was partially blocked by chlorpromazine and by
wortmannin, implicating clathrin-dependent uptake and
PI3Kinase-dependence, respectively. Confocal microscopy showed that NE
was co-localized with the early endosome marker, EEA-1, as early as 10
minutes after uptake. Flow cytometry indicated that surface-bound NE on
MDA-MB-231 cells decreased after five minutes, and Western blot showed a
simultaneous decrease of MAPKinases phosphorylation (p-Erk, p-p38) and
loss of IRS-1 signaling. Inhibition of NE enzyme activity by serine
proteases inhibitors, such as elafin or PMSF, potentiated NE uptake in
BrCA cells, indicating that enzyme activity is not required for uptake.
Conclusion: The results support a novel mechanism of rapid
receptor-mediated uptake of soluble exogenous NE by TN BrCA. NE uptake is
efficient, PI3 kinase-dependent, sensitive to clathrin inhibition, and
associated with down-regulation of Erk phosphorylation and IRS-1. In
addition, uptake does not require NE enzyme activity. Following uptake,
NE co-localizes to an early endosomal compartment, an organelle
associated with HLA class I peptide loading. Since we previously linked
NE uptake to CCNE1 and PR1 peptide presentation on MDA-MB-231 cells,
which enhanced BrCA susceptibility to immunotherapies that target CCNE1
and PR1, our results here strongly suggest receptor-mediated NE uptake
that could regulate HLA class I peptide presentation. Understanding the
mechanisms that regulate NE uptake and peptide presentation on the
surface of BrCA will help us develop new strategies to enhance peptide
presentation by BrCA, potentially improving the response of BrCA and
other tumor types to antigen-specific immunotherapies.

