Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyperthermia and chemotherapy mediated effects on tumor cell
proliferation and heat shock protein expression in human colon cancer


In patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis (PC) of gastrointestinal
cancer hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) represents a
promising treatment option integrated into multimodal concepts. Heat
shock proteins (HSP) play a major role in cellular stress response
conferring increased resistance in tumor cells. Therefore we analyzed HSP
expression profiles in tumor cells exposed to hyperthermic and
chemotherapeutic stress. To mimic HIPEC-like conditions HT29 colon cancer
cells were exposed to varying hyperthermic conditions for 60 min with
additional 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) treatment. HSP expression was analyzed
30 min, 24 h, 48 h and 72 h after treatment using Western Blot and
RT-qPCR. Untreated cells cultivated at 37C served as controls.
Additionally, effects on tumor cell proliferation were determined 24 h,
48 h and 72 h after treatment by MTS-assay. Hyperthermia caused
temperature dependent upregulation of HSP27, HSP70, HSP72, and HSP90 gene
and protein expression that was further increased by additional cytotoxic
5-FU treatment. 5-FU initiated progressive rise in HSP gene expression up
to 72 h after 1 h exposure at normothermia as well as under hyperthermia.
After isolated hyperthermia tumor cell proliferation was recovered at 72
h. Antiproliferative effects of 5-FU could not be enhanced by further
increased hyperthermia. Antiproliferative effects of hyperthermia induced
during HIPEC therapy seem to be negatively influenced by highly conserved
HSP mechanisms. Our findings suggest that HSP27, HSP70/72, and HSP90 are
significantly involved in hyperthermia and chemotoxicity mediated cell
stress repair mechanisms. While initial increase in HSP expression can
counteract cytotoxic effects during HIPEC therapy long-term elevated
expression levels may cause lasting resistance to cellular stress.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

