Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inflamed and wound recovered tumor microenvironment contributions
to lymphatic-mediated metastasis


Despite the clinical importance of lymph node status in cancer staging,
treatment decisions, and patient outcomes, little is known about the
earliest events of lymphatic-mediated metastasis of tumor cells.
Lymphatic vessels remodel dramatically in response to changes in the
inflammatory status of a tissue. Inflammation induces lymphangiogenesis
and the resolution of inflammation stimulates lymphatic vessel
regression. This study addresses one of the fundamental questions in
metastasis biology and places it in the context of a specific
microenvironmental state: how does a tumor cell gain entrance to a
lymphatic vessel to migrate to a regional lymph node and what is the
contribution of inflammation to this process? We sought to better
understand lymphatic-mediated metastasis of tumor cells during
inflammatory lymphangiogenesis or the resolution of inflammation. We
hypothesized that manipulating the inflammatory status of the tumor
microenvironment would alter tumor cell and lymphatic endothelium biology
to influence lymphatic-mediated metastasis. We have previously
established a corneal model of sutured-induced inflammatory
lymphangiogenesis and a complimentary experimental arm of inflammation
resolution. We transitioned this platform into real-time live imaging
studies by using this corneal model in our novel transgenic mouse model
background that inducibly expresses fluorescent tdTomato protein in the
lymphatic endothelium (LyveCreERT2tdT). CFSE-labeled syngeneic tumor
cells were introduced systemically via tail vein injection or locally
into a corneal micropocket. Two-color intravital fluorescent
stereomicroscopy allowed us to simultaneously track the fate of CFSE+
tumor cells at single-cell resolution and the morphologic changes in the
tdTomato+ corneal lymphatic vessels during inflammatory lymphangiogenesis
and lymphatic vessel regression. One major finding was the low frequency
of lymphatic-mediated metastasis during both inflammation and resolution.
Ongoing work continues to explore the contributions of specific cytokines
to tumor-lymphatic endothelium interactions and the unique properties of
a wound-recovered tumor microenvironment.

