Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel and selective inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDAC) 1
and 2 significantly enhance the activity of the DNA methyltransferase
inhibitor azacitidine in acute myeloid leukemia (AML)


AML is a heterogeneous group of hematopoietic stem cell disorders
characterized by defects in myeloid differentiation and increased
proliferation of neoplastic hematopoietic precursor cells. There is a
great need for novel approaches to treat AML due to limited improvements
in the treatment of patients over the past several decades since the
development of cytarabine and daunorubicin combination therapy. Aberrant
epigenetic regulation plays an important role in the pathogenesis of AML,
and the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor azacitidine is approved for the
treatment of myelodysplastic (MDS) which frequently progresses to AML.
Numerous clinical studies are ongoing to investigate the benefit of
combining azacitidine with other investigational agents in AML.HDAC
inhibitors are emerging as promising agents for the treatment of AML.
Selective HDAC inhibitors are predicted to reduce the combination drug
toxicity and other side effects observed with non-selective HDAC
inhibitors, while also realizing beneficial therapeutic effects. One
example is ricolinostat (ACY-1215), a first-in-class orally available
HDAC inhibitor that is 11-fold selective for HDAC6, synergizes with
proteasome inhibitors (Santo, et al, Blood, 2012) and immunomodulatory
agents (Quayle, et al, ASH, 2013) in preclinical models of B-cell
malignancies, which has thus far demonstrated an improved safety and
tolerability profile in Phase I trials in multiple myeloma (Raje,
Haematological, 2014, Suppl 1). In this work, we evaluated the efficacy
of azacitidine in combination with selective inhibitors of either
HDAC1/2, HDAC3 or HDAC6 on AML cells. Comparison of the panel of
selective HDAC inhibitors demonstrated that HDAC1/2 inhibition is
sufficient to reduce cell viability, induce differentiation, arrest cell
cycle progression and initiate apoptosis in multiple AML cell lines.
Selective inhibition of HDAC3 induced differentiation yet had no effect
on cell cycle progression or apoptosis, while selective inhibition of
HDAC6 had no effect on differentiation, cell cycle arrest or apoptosis in
these cells. Furthermore, combining HDAC1/2 inhibition with azacitidine
led to significantly enhanced induction of differentiation and apoptosis,
and decreases in AML cell viability compared to either agent alone.
Ongoing studies exploring the molecular mechanism underlying the activity
of selective HDAC1/2 inhibitors, as well as the activity of combination
treatment with azacitidine in primary AML cells and animal models of AML,
will be discussed. Together, these findings provide support for the
clinical evaluation of selective HDAC1/2 inhibitors in combination with
azacitidine in AML and potentially MDS patients.

