Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel candidate genes associated with sorafenib
cytotoxicity


Background: Sorafenib is an oral multikinase inhibitor that decreases
tumor angiogenesis and proliferation. The antitumor efficacy and toxicity
profiles of sorafenib vary among patients. Novel pathways and targets of
sorafenib activity remain to be identified, and no predictive biomarkers
of sorafenib activity exist to help guide clinicians. We aimed to
identify novel genes associated with sorafenib activity by using an in
vitro methodology based upon mouse genomics.Methods: We profiled primary
mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from 32 inbred strains for sorafenib
cytotoxicity utilizing high content imaging and simultaneous evaluation
of cell health parameters. The 32 strains were genomically characterized
previously (PMID: 21623374). MEFs were treated with ten concentrations
(0-300 M) of sorafenib, incubated for 72 h, and then fixed and stained.
Cytochrome C was immunolabeled in the fixed cells and imaged using an
automated fluorescence microscope. An image analysis software assessed
sorafenib-induced cytochrome C release from mitochondria. Dose response
curves were generated from data, and EC50 values for each strain were
identified using a Brain-Cousens model. Genome-wide association mapping,
using the EMMA algorithm, was performed on cytochrome C EC50 values to
identify quantitative trait loci (QTLs) associated with sorafenib
cytotoxicity. Approximately 277,000 single nucleotide polymorphisms were
tested, and genomic loci with p-values 1.0107 were selected for
additional analyses.Results: Interstrain EC50 variability among the 32
MEF strains was observed after 72 h (17.2-44.5 M) sorafenib incubations.
We identified one peak (chromosome 9 from 51-52 Mb; p = 1.0108), which
reached genome-wide significance and significantly associated with
cytochrome C release. From this peak, we have identified candidate genes
that may underlie variability in sorafenib-induced cytochrome C release
from mitochondria. A total of nine genes expressed in MEF cells at mRNA
level are present in this QTL. Of particular interest, the identified
locus contains Rdx, a gene that encodes radixin. Radixin is a component
of the ezrin-radixin-moesin-binding phosphoprotein-50 (EBP50) complex,
and is conserved between humans and mice. In humans, radixin, as part of
the EBP50 complex, has been shown to act as a tumor suppressor and to
promote apoptosis in hepatocellular carcinoma by modulating
-catenin/E-cadherin (PMID: 23483729). It has also been shown to
potentially enhance the metastatic potential of renal cell carcinoma
(PMID: 20395446).Conclusions: Our high-throughput cellular genetics
approach has detected robust interstrain cellular differences in
sorafenib activity, and identified one region, which reached genome-wide
significance, that potentially associates with sorafenib-induced
cytochrome C release from mitochondria. Functional validation of Rdx and
other promising candidates is currently ongoing.

