Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bifunctional integrated molecules with combined retinoic acid
receptor agonist/protein deacetylase inhibitory activities as therapeutic
agents for breast cancer and neuroblastoma


All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), the oxidized form of Vitamin A, is a
potent antiproliferative and differentiating agent that acts as an
agonist of the retinoic acid receptors (RARs). Both 13-cis or all-trans
retinoic acid are clinically used in differentiation or maintenance
therapies for APL and neuroblastoma respectively. Their efficacy is
however limited by resistance mechanisms. The use of small molecule
inhibitors of HDACs (HDACi) for cancer treatment has been clinically
validated for pan-HDAC inhibitors like SAHA (Vorinostat) or Romidepsin
(Istodax) that are approved for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma. The use of pan-HDAC inhibitors is restricted by dose-limiting
toxicities at pharmacologically relevant doses, highlighting the need for
alternative strategies such as use in combined therapies. Notably,
synergistic activity was observed between retinoids and HDACs, which both
induce cell differentiation, in a number of cancer models. Using
molecular design we engineered a series of integrated hybrid small
molecules that incorporates a deacetylase inhibitory activity and
retinoic acid receptor (RAR) agonist. We show that these hybrid molecules
inhibit the growth and survival of a wide range of cancer cell lines.In
breast cancer cell lines, hybrids were shown to induce the recruitment of
co-activators to RAR to the same extent as retinoic acid (RA) and to
induce the release of co-repressors from RARs. Regulation of
RAR-dependent transcription was shown in breast cancer and neuroblastoma
cell lines using RAR reporter assays. Compounds displayed EC50 in the
10-500 nM range and an efficacy comparable to 13 cis-RA. In addition, the
ability of compounds to regulate the expression of RAR target genes was
confirmed in cells of both breast and neuroblastoma origin. Biochemical
enzymatic assays show that HR- hybrids differentially inhibit HDAC
activities with a two-log selectivity toward HDAC6 and HDAC. This
inhibitory profile translated in both increased cellular acetylation of
target proteins and in the down-regulation of anti-apoptotic target
genes.Cytotoxicity toward breast or neuroblastoma cells correlated
positively with targets activities. Strikingly, under conditions where 13
cis RA, SAHA or their combination had a modest or no effect on basal
breast carcinoma cells viability, compounds with dual activity displayed
a pronounced cytotoxic effect in the sub-uM range. Compounds were also
active in the sub-micromolar range in N-Myc-amplified neuroblastoma lines
IMR-32 or BE2C. In contrast compounds did not display significant
cytotoxicity in non-tumorigenic primary cell lines under conditions where
SAHA strongly inhibited the survival, proliferation or differentiation of
these cells. Preliminary pharmacodynamic (PK) show that compounds were
orally bioavailable and displayed favorable PK characteristics.

