Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bexarotene increases tumor CD8+ T cells and improves response to
conventional breast chemotherapy in the transgenic mouse mammary tumor
model TgMMTV-neu


In breast cancer, increased immune infiltrate prior to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy predicts improved pathologic complete response (pCR) and
improved survival, however almost half of breast tumors have no CD8+ T
cell infiltrate. Evidence has emerged that conventional breast cancer
chemotherapy can increase CD8+ T cells (doxorubicin) and decrease the
immunosuppressive regulatory CD4+ T cells (paclitaxel and
cyclophosphamide); therefore discovering well tolerated agents that
further enhance the anti-tumor immune function of these chemotherapies
may further improve response in breast cancer patients. The oral agent
bexarotene (a retinoic receptor agonist) showed a 20% disease response as
a single agent in metastatic breast cancer and has been shown to increase
CD8+ T cell tumor infiltration and decrease CD8+ T cell apoptosis in
vitro. The goal of this study is to demonstrate whether this well
tolerated oral agent can enhance the anti-tumor response of conventional
chemotherapy through increasing intratumoral CD8+ T cells in TgMMTV-neu
transgenic mice that are immunologically competent and genetically
similar to human luminal B breast cancer.Two of the most active
chemotherapies in human breast cancer, doxorubicin and paclitaxel, each
could inhibit tumor growth by 70-80% and increase CD8+ T cell tumor
infiltrate by approximately 40% in tumor bearing TgMMTV-neu mice, a third
breast cancer chemotherapy cyclophosphamide increased CD8+ tumor
infiltrate by 45% (p = 0.011) but did not show a statistically
significant decrease in tumor volume. When TgMMTV-neu mice with 100 mm3
tumors were treated with 50 mg/m2 bexarotene for four weeks they
demonstrated a 44% increase in CD8+ tumor infiltrate (p = 0.05) and 60%
decrease in mean tumor growth (p = 0.03) compared to control. However,
the addition of bexarotene to chemotherapy was superior to chemotherapy
alone, and significantly more effective than bexarotene alone. This
enhanced anti-tumor function was even seen with cyclophosphamide that by
itself had not inhibited tumor growth. Adding bexarotene to weekly
doxorubicin decreased tumor growth by 98% (p = 0.008 compared to
doxorubicin alone), adding bexarotene to weekly paclitaxel decreased
tumor growth by 86% (p = 0.02 compared to paclitaxel alone), and adding
bexarotene to weekly cyclophosphamide inhibited tumor growth by 82% (p =
0.04 compared to cyclophosphamide alone). Further studies are now ongoing
to identify the anti-tumor role of bexarotene particularly its immune
modulatory role. These results suggest that the addition of bexarotene, a
relatively well-tolerated oral agent, may modify the immune environment
and improve tumor response to chemotherapy in breast cancer possibly
improving response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

