Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Personalized oncogenomics in advanced stage breast cancer


BackgroundBreast cancer is a complex disease with clinical, pathological,
and molecular heterogeneity. Recent studies have identified several
subtypes of breast cancers driven by specific molecular pathways that can
be inhibited by targeted drugs. We studied the feasibility of using
molecular data from whole genome and transcriptome sequencing of breast
cancers to guide treatment.MethodsPatients were consented as part of the
Personalized Onco-Genomics (POG) study at the British Columbia Cancer
Agency. Fresh tumor, blood for normal DNA, and archival tumor were
collected. Tissue and blood samples were sequenced using the Ion Torrent
AmpliSeq panel, followed by comprehensive DNA and RNA sequencing.
In-depth bioinformatic analyses were performed. Somatic mutations, copy
number changes, structural variants and gene expression were
characterized. Results from genomic analyses were reviewed in a
multi-disciplinary team.ResultsFrom August 2012 to October 2014, tissue
samples from 30 patients with advanced stage breast cancer were analyzed.
The median age at diagnosis was 53 years (range 32-75). The median number
of lines of cytotoxic therapy prior to sequencing was 2 (range 0-10). All
cases were invasive ductal carcinoma; 63% were ER+ and HER2-; 27% triple
negative; 7% ER+ and HER2+; and 3% ER- and HER2+. The most frequently
mutated genes were TP53 (67%), PI3KCA (23%), ESR1 (20%), ATM (10%),
ARID1A (10%), and BRCA1/2 (10%). Somatic mutations in other genes of
interest including HER2, PARP1, NF1, BAP1, PTEN, NOTCH1, were also
identified. Molecular data were informative for patient care and/or
actionable to guide treatment in 57% (17/30) of cases.ConclusionThe use
of whole genome sequencing technology to identify valuable molecular
information to guide personalized breast cancer treatment is feasible.
Further studies are warranted to evaluate the usefulness of genome-wide
sequencing of breast cancers in clinical practice.

