Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intracellular bacterial delivery of a NIPP1-peptide kills tumor
cells


Protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) is a cancer target because it is involved in
many cell signaling pathways. Its activity is tightly regulated by its
interaction partners, mainly via the RVxF-binding motif. RVxF-containing
peptides deregulate PP1 and have therapeutic potential as antagonists of
increased cancer kinase signaling. Because PP1 is responsible for more
than half of the dephosphorylations on Ser/Thr sites, it is essential in
all eukaryotic cells and it is difficult to target systemically.
Moreover, delivering peptides to cells extracellularly is inefficient
because of poor cell permeability and proteolytic instability.To
specifically transport therapeutic peptides into cancer cells, we
engineered bacteria to be intracellular delivery vectors. A bacterial
delivery system (BDS) was designed by creating a strain that lyses after
cell invasion and releases its contents into the cytoplasm of cancer
cells. A BDS strain was then manipulated to express a peptide containing
the RVxF motif of Nuclear Inhibitor of PP1 (NIPP1; AA 142-224). The
therapeutic potential of this strain was tested on MCF-7 cell monolayers
and on 3D tumor tissue.The BDS was cloned by inserting the bacterial
phage lysis gene E under the control of the sseJ promoter, a Salmonella
promoter that is activated after cell invasion. The specificity of the
sseJ promoter was tested by inserting GFP under its control and infecting
MCF-7 cancer cells with Salmonella containing the plasmid. All
intracellular bacteria expressed GPF after 4 hours of infection, while no
fluorescence was measured in the bacteria outside the mammalian cells.
After infection, the created BDS lysed in 78% of invaded cells. BDS
delivery of the NIPP1-peptide to MCF-7 cancer cells killed 41% of
infected cells while infection with control, empty BDS did not result in
any death. When treating tumor tissue with BDS expressing NIPP1-peptide,
39% of tumor tissue was killed after 9.5 hours, compared to 8% when
treated with BDS alone. These results indicate that targeting
phosphatases with intracellular peptide delivery by bacteria is feasible
and reduces tumor tissue viability.

