Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the microenvironment and vasculature of tumors to
improve response to radiation administered using a dose and schedule
equivalent to those of a stereotactic radiation treatment


Purpose: The vasculature and microenvironment of tumors play significant
roles in influencing tumor response to radiation. Applying approaches
that target these tumor parameters can effectively enhance radiation
response when using large single doses or a conventional fractionated
schedule. This pre-clinical study was designed to use such vascular and
microenvironmental modifiers to improve tumor response to radiation
administered in a schedule equivalent to a stereotactic radiation
treatment.Materials and methods: C3H mammary carcinomas, grown in the
right rear foot of female CFD1 mice, were treated when at 200 cubic mm in
size. Tumors were locally irradiated in restrained, non-anesthetized mice
with 315 Gy during a 1-week period, followed 3-days later by a clamped
top-up dose to produce a dose-response curve; the endpoint being tumor
control at 90 days. Following logit analysis of the radiation
dose-response curve, the TCD50 values (radiation dose that controlled 50%
of tumors) were calculated. Statistical analysis was achieved using a
Chi-squared test (pPurpose: The vasculature and microenvironment of
tumors play significant roles in influencing tumor response to radiation.
Applying approaches that target these tumor parameters can effectively
enhance radiation response when using large single doses or a
conventional fractionated schedule. This pre-clinical study was designed
to use such vascular and microenvironmental modifiers to improve tumor
response to radiation administered in a schedule equivalent to a
stereotactic radiation treatment.Materials and methods: C3H mammary
carcinomas, grown in the right rear foot of female CFD1 mice, were
treated when at 200 cubic mm in size. Tumors were locally irradiated in
restrained, non-anesthetized mice with 315 Gy during a 1-week period,
followed 3-days later by a clamped top-up dose to produce a dose-response
curve; the endpoint being tumor control at 90 days. Following logit
analysis of the radiation dose-response curve, the TCD50 values
(radiation dose that controlled 50% of tumors) were calculated.
Statistical analysis was achieved using a Chi-squared test (p<0.05). The
radiation modifiers were nimorazole (200 mg/kg), injected
intraperitoneally (i.p.) 30 minutes before irradiating; nicotinamide (120
mg/kg; injected i.p. 20 minutes before irradiation) and carbogen (95%
oxygen + 5% carbon dioxide) breathing (started 5 minutes before and
continued during the irradiation period); OXi4503 (10 mg/kg; injected
i.p. 1-hour after irradiating); and hyperthermia (41.5 degrees C for
1-hour started 4-hours after irradiating).Results: The clamped TCD50 dose
following 315 Gy was 30 Gy. Giving nimorazole or nicotinamide+carbogen
prior to the final 15 Gy irradiation non-significantly reduced this TCD50
to 20-23 Gy; when administered with each 315 Gy irradiation these values
were significantly reduced to 2.5 Gy or below. Injecting OXi4503 or
heating significantly reduced the TCD50 to 9-12 Gy regardless of whether
administered with one or all three 15 Gy treatments. Combining OXi4503
and heat with the final 15 Gy irradiation had a significantly larger
effect (TCD50 = 2 Gy).Conclusions: Clinically relevant modifiers of the
vasculature or microenvironment of a tumor effectively enhanced radiation
given in a stereotactic equivalent schedule. But, different effects were
obtained with the various agents, which may be related to the different
mechanisms of action. This latter issue is under investigation.Supported
by grants from the Danish Cancer Society and the Danish Council for
Independent Research: Medical Sciences.

