Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneity of vascular endothelial growth factor receptors 1,
2, and 3 in human non-small cell lung carcinomas


The Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) pathway plays a prominent
role in the growth and progression of human cancers, including non-small
cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). The key mediators of VEGF signaling are a
family of related receptor tyrosine kinases that include VEGFR1, VEGFR2,
and VEGFR3. The relative expression levels, activity and cross-talk among
these receptors may contribute to clinical response of NSCLC patients to
anti-angiogenic therapies. Using a well-annotated tissue microarray (TMA)
and robust immunohistochemical (IHC) assays developed, standardized and
implemented in our laboratory, we comparatively evaluated expression of
the three VEGFRs in archival primary NSCLC tissues (n = 97). VEGFR1 and
VEGFR2 were localized both in tumor vessels and cells, while VEGFR3 was
only localized in tumor vessels. VEGFR1 immunoreactivity was reported as
negative/low, medium, or high, based on intensity and proportion of
stained tumor cell by an experienced solid tumor immunopathologist (AN),
who was blinded to clinico-pathologic details. VEGFR2 and VEGFR3 positive
vessels were counted by manual assessment of each core by the same
immunopathologist. For systematic comparative analysis of VEGFR data, IHC
expression thresholds were selected based on the 25% and 75% quartiles
around the median of the range of counts for VEGFR2 and VEGFR3: 0-2, 3-10
and >10 (VEGFR2+ vascular count) respectively; and 0-1, 2-9 and >9
(VEGFR3+ vascular count) respectively. Based on VEGFR (1,2 and3)
expression levels defined above, a set of eight VEGFR staining profiles
were identified: Triple VEGFR positive (n = 11, 11.3%), VEGFR1
predominant (22, 22.7%), VEGFR2 predominant (9, 9.3%), VEGFR3 predominant
(3, 3.1%), VEGFR1/2 predominant (13, 13.4%), VEGFR1/3 predominant (2,
2.1%), VEGFR2/3 predominant (9, 9.3%), and triple VEGFR negative (28,
28.9%). These new data provide original insights on the tissue
distribution, subcellular localization and heterogeneity of expression of
VEGFRs in human NSCLC cells and stromal vessels. The proposed human NSCLC
sub-classification, based on the observed differential VEGFR 1, 2, 3
expression profiles, has identified various subsets of human NSCLC,
especially triple VEGFR +, triple VEGFR -, VEGFR1 predominant and VEGFR 1
/ 2 predominant. These profiles are distinct from the VEGF receptor
profiles that we reported in a prior study on colorectal carcinomas
(Holzer, Nasir et al., AACR 2014), of which VEGFR1/2 predominant subset
was 50% and triple VEGFR-negative subset was only 4%. This work suggests
distinct patterns of heterogeneity of VEGF receptor profiles in human
NSCLC and CRCs. These data also support further evaluation of whether the
reported VEGFR profiles correlate with differential sensitivity to
therapeutic VEGF/VEGFR pathway inhibition.

