Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient preferences for disclosure of incidental genetic
information discovered through high-throughput sequencing


INTRODUCTION: Several high throughput next generation sequencing
platforms that search for targetable genetic alterations in cancer are
now available in the clinic. However, a large number of germline variants
may also be detected during testing, some of which may predispose a
patient to diseases other than cancer. If, and how, to disclose these
incidental genetic findings is controversial. The purpose of this study
was to assess patient preferences regarding disclosure of incidental
genetic findings.METHODS: We developed a cross-sectional questionnaire
study of ambulatory breast oncology patients. Patients completed a 45
item questionnaire, including their disclosure preferences about various
hypothetical scenarios of incidental genetic findings found during tumor
profiling. Basic descriptive statistics and the proportional odds
logistic regression were used for analysis. RESULTS: Of 351 patients
approached between February-May 2014, 199 (56%) responded. Participants
had a mean age of 55 (29-80), and most were Caucasian (75%), had Stage
0-III disease (61%), were college-educated (53%) and comfortable with
basic genetic information (69%). Sixty-eight percent of respondents
desired tumor profiling even if they were found to carry a mutation that
could cause a disease other than cancer. While 74% initially indicated
they would want to know all genetic information found, only 47% of
respondents wanted to know about variants of uncertain significance when
specifically questioned. Only 12% expressed preference not to learn about
a mutation that was potentially heritable. Most patients (82%) preferred
to know if they had a mutation that increased their risk of a serious but
preventable illness (eg heart disease), but only 57% desired information
for mutations that always caused a serious and unpreventable illness (eg
Alzheimers dementia). Interestingly, 62% of patients desired tumor
profiling even if there was only a 1% chance it would help their
treatment, yet 54% endorsed significant concern about the potential risk
of incidental findings impacting their ability to obtain health
insurance. Ultimately, 59% of respondents indicated that they would agree
to undergo tumor profiling if offered by their doctor; Caucasians (OR
4.1, CI 2-8.3) and those with prior knowledge of tumor profiling (OR 2.6,
CI 1.3-5.1) were more likely to agree, while cancer stage, treatment,
marital status, education, income, family history and other demographic
factors were not significant.CONCLUSIONS: A majority of breast cancer
patients express interest in pursuing tumor profiling. The potential for
incidental genetic findings does not appear to significantly dissuade
patients from pursuing this technology, nor does the potential for
learning about germline traits that could impact family members. However,
there is remarkable variability in disclosure preferences of specific
types of incidental findings.

