Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A small molecule glycomimetic antagonist of E-selectin and CXCR4
(GMI-1359) prevents pancreatic tumor metastasis and improves chemotherapy


The tumor microenvironment's cellular and molecular composition includes
a complex matrix that encases tumor cells and presents a conundrum in
respect to pancreatic tumor therapy. On one hand, the dense desmoplastic
reaction that accompanies growth of well differentiated pancreatic tumors
reduces blood flow to tumors and creates an environment in which it is
difficult to deliver therapies. On the other hand, elimination of certain
stromal elements enhances the aggressiveness and metastatic potential of
pancreatic cancer cells. Several current studies are attempting to target
stroma in an effort to enhance delivery and efficacy of therapeutic
agents and to block metastasis. We have investigated the activity of
GMI-1359, a potent dual antagonist that targets both E-selectin and
CXCR4. Adhesion protein E-selectin plays an important role in the tumor
microenvironment by regulating cell contacts, including tumor cell
binding to vascular and lymphatic endothelial cells during extravasation.
Chemokine receptor CXCR4's role in the chemoattraction of tumor cells
toward endothelial cells (ECs) contributes to tumor microenvironment
remodeling by influencing lymphangiogenesis/angiogenesis, tumor cell
survival/proliferation, and tumor stem cell mobilization. Our in vitro
studies show that pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells do not
attract growth of lymphatic nor vascular ECs toward themselves. However,
tumor associated fibroblasts, a major component of the PDAC tumor
microenvironment, significantly increase EC directional migration.
GMI-1359 completely blocked lymphatic and vascular EC migration toward
fibroblast cells and disrupted these cell-cell interactions. In addition,
GMI-1359 inhibited the capacity of invasive PDAC cell lines S2.013 and
Colo357 to bind and migrate across EC barriers. The dual antagonist was
more effective than an independent small molecule E-selectin inhibitor.
We evaluated the capacity of GMI-1359 to inhibit growth and metastasis of
orthotopically implanted S2.013 cells with and without administration of
Gemcitabine. Two weeks post implantation, mice were treated by
intraperitoneal injection for 4 weeks with either PBS once daily; 40
mg/kg GMI-1359 once daily; 100 mg/kg Gemcitabine every 4 days; or a
combination of GMI-1359 and Gemcitabine. GMI-1359 treatment slightly, but
not significantly, decreased primary tumor size as compared to the
vehicle control. However, GMI-1359 in combination with Gemcitabine
significantly reduced metastasis of this tumor to liver and diaphragm as
compared to mice that received only Gemcitabine. Further studies of
GMI-1359 are warranted to understand its potential for disrupting
cellular contacts and blocking pancreatic tumor dissemination through the
vascular and lymphatic systems, and for enhancing the efficacy of
chemotherapeutic approaches to pancreatic cancer.

