Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive analyses of serum biomarkers associating with the
increase of pro-angiogenic Tie2-expressing monocytes in patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma


Background/Aim: Tie2, a receptor for angiopoietins (ANGs), is expressed
on a specialized types of monocytes. We reported that Tie2-expressing
monocytes (TEMs) are increased in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), the frequency of which is well correlated with the degree of
angiogenesis in the HCC liver (Hepatology, 2013). A possibility has been
raised that the dampening a genesis of TEMs could be of therapeutic value
for HCC. However, the precise mechanisms of in vivo generation of TEMs
are largely unknown. We aimed to identify the factors involving in the
increase of TEMs in patients with HCC in order to gain insights in the
establishment of anti-angiogenesis therapy for HCC.Method: We enrolled 71
chronically HCV-infected patients and 7 healthy volunteers (HVs),
including 54 patients with HCC, 9 with liver cirrhosis (LC) and, 8 with
chronic hepatitis (CH). We measured the frequency of TEMs
(CD14+CD16+Tie2+) in CD14+ monocytes by FACS as reported previously. We
assayed 39 humoral factors by means of a multiplexed system and ELISA,
such as cytokines, chemokines and growth factors simultaneously in serum
samples of the subjects (Bio-Plex 3D system, Cancer biomarker and
Cytokine assay panels) (Bio-Rad). The correlation of the results,
clinical parameters and the frequency of TEMs was analyzed.Results: The
frequency of TEMs were higher in patients with HCC than those in the LC
or CH patients or the HV group. In HCC patients, the levels of HGF, IL-8,
or IP-10 were significantly higher than those in the HVs (HGF; P = 0.02,
IL-8; P = 0.004, IP-10; P = 0.01). By the ROC analysis, we had set a
cut-off value of TEM frequency defining the HCC from LC group as 2.75%.
In HCC patients with high TEM frequency (>2.75%), the levels of HGF,
Osteopontin (OPN), Follistatin (FSN) were significantly higher than those
in patients with low TEM frequency (Background/Aim: Tie2, a receptor for
angiopoietins (ANGs), is expressed on a specialized types of monocytes.
We reported that Tie2-expressing monocytes (TEMs) are increased in
patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the frequency of which is
well correlated with the degree of angiogenesis in the HCC liver
(Hepatology, 2013). A possibility has been raised that the dampening a
genesis of TEMs could be of therapeutic value for HCC. However, the
precise mechanisms of in vivo generation of TEMs are largely unknown. We
aimed to identify the factors involving in the increase of TEMs in
patients with HCC in order to gain insights in the establishment of
anti-angiogenesis therapy for HCC.Method: We enrolled 71 chronically
HCV-infected patients and 7 healthy volunteers (HVs), including 54
patients with HCC, 9 with liver cirrhosis (LC) and, 8 with chronic
hepatitis (CH). We measured the frequency of TEMs (CD14+CD16+Tie2+) in
CD14+ monocytes by FACS as reported previously. We assayed 39 humoral
factors by means of a multiplexed system and ELISA, such as cytokines,
chemokines and growth factors simultaneously in serum samples of the
subjects (Bio-Plex 3D system, Cancer biomarker and Cytokine assay panels)
(Bio-Rad). The correlation of the results, clinical parameters and the
frequency of TEMs was analyzed.Results: The frequency of TEMs were higher
in patients with HCC than those in the LC or CH patients or the HV group.
In HCC patients, the levels of HGF, IL-8, or IP-10 were significantly
higher than those in the HVs (HGF; P = 0.02, IL-8; P = 0.004, IP-10; P =
0.01). By the ROC analysis, we had set a cut-off value of TEM frequency
defining the HCC from LC group as 2.75%. In HCC patients with high TEM
frequency (>2.75%), the levels of HGF, Osteopontin (OPN), Follistatin
(FSN) were significantly higher than those in patients with low TEM
frequency (<2.75%) (HGF; P = 0.02, OPN; P = 0.02, FSN; P = 0.04). In
addition, higher trend in VEGF level was observed in the TEM high group
than those in the TEM low group (P = 0.05). In clinical parameters, we
found that HCC patients in the TEM high group displayed a more advanced
Child-Pugh grade, a higher model for end-stage liver disease (MELD)
score, lower plasma prothrombin time and albumin level, suggesting that
the TEM high group had more advanced liver disease. No correlation was
found among HGF, OPN, FSN and VEGF with any of clinical
parameters.Conclusion: In patients with HCC, HGF, Osteopontin and
Follistatin are associated with the increase of TEMs, suggesting the
plausibility of these as molecular targets for anti-angiogenesis therapy
for HCC.

