Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CHIP functions as tumor suppressor in prostate cancer through
suppression of ROS-inflammasome in a chaperone-dependent mechanism


Prostate Cancer (PCa) is a disease closely associated with aging. Normal
aging is driven by oxidative stress, resulting in accumulation of markers
of protein and lipid/phospholipid damage with subsequent activation of
inflammatory/oncogenic transcription factors NFB and AP-1. Indeed, the
tumor milieu characterized by ROS signaling, and NFB- and AP1-activation
is thought to be important in fueling cancer progression and metastasis.
CHIP is a U-box-type E3-ubiquitin ligase that exerts a protective role
against oxidative stress by targeting damaged proteins for proteasomal
degradation to maintain tissue homeostasis. CHIP induces ubiquitylation
and degradation of substrates, including oncogenes and oxidatively
damaged, and misfolded proteins. We hypothesized that CHIP suppresses
prostate tumor progression by inhibiting ROS generation and downstream
oncogenic pathways. CHIP depletion in PCa cells significantly increased
their anchorage-independent growth, migration and invasiveness. PCa cells
depleted of CHIP exhibited increased ROS generation (H2O2) and expression
of markers of oxidative stress 8-isoprostane, NOQ1, NNMT and sulfiredoxin
with subsequent activation NFB and AP-1. The increased activation of NFB
and AP-1 in CHIP-depleted cells was ROS-induced as it was inhibited by
N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) or knockdown of NOQ1. Pharmacologic inhibition of
Hsp90 inhibited basal and ROS-induced NFB and AP-1 activation as well as
their invasive phenotype suggesting that the effect of CHIP is in part
chaperone-dependent. Furthermore, in subcutaneous and orthotopic
xenografts, PCa cells depleted of CHIP exhibited significantly
accelerated growth compared to controls. Molecular characterization of
CHIP-depleted tumors revealed significantly increased proliferation,
increased oxidative stress and inflammation with increased nuclear
localization of NFB and AP-1. Collectively, our data suggest a novel
tumor suppressor role of CHIP in PCa mediated through inhibition of
ROS-induced inflammation.

