Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevention of breast tumor growth by an extract from the muscadine
grape


Grape extracts have garnered attention as chemopreventive agents due
their anti-proliferative, anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant properties.
The muscadine grape (Vitis rotundifolia) has a distinct phytochemical
composition compared to other grape varieties. The current study examines
the preventive effects of a proprietary muscadine grape extract (MGE) on
breast cancer formation. The proliferation of actively growing human ER+
or triple negative breast cancer cells was significantly reduced by MGE
from grape seeds or skins with an associated decrease in phospho-ERK,
suggesting that MGE inhibits breast cancer cell proliferation through a
reduction in activation of growth-promoting kinases. Female
FVB-Tg(MMTV)NKAMul/J transgenic mice with an activated rat Erbb2 oncogene
expressed specifically in the mammary gland (c-neu mice) form mammary
tumors by 6-8 months of age. c-Neu mice were treated with MGE in the
drinking water (approximately 1.0 mg phenolics/25 g mouse) beginning at
weaning and were sacrificed at 7 months of age. No changes were observed
in eating or drinking habits or in gross body, heart or kidney weight,
suggesting that the MGE was well tolerated. Although all of the mice
developed breast tumors, MGE significantly reduce tumor burden compared
to the tumor tissue in mice drinking regular water (9.21.2 g versus
3.61.4 g, p = 0.001, n = 8-10). A group of c-Neu mice were also
sacrificed at 4 months of age, once tumors were palpable, to assess tumor
multiplicity. Both tumor burden (1.4.3 g versus 0.30.1 g, p = 0.007) and
tumor multiplicity (11.82.1 versus 5.10.9, p = 0.013, n = 6-11) were
reduced in mice treated with MGE. Tumor tissue sections from mice
administered MGE had a significant decrease in the proliferation marker
Ki67 compared to tumors from control animals [31092 versus 16670
immunoreactive cells/field, p = 0.002], in agreement with the reduction
in proliferation observed in vitro. Tumor sections from c-neu mice were
incubated with an antibody to the endothelial cell marker, CD34, and
vessels were identified by a combination of morphology and positive CD34
immunoreactivity; MGE significantly reduced blood vessel density in
breast tumor tissue compared to tumors from mice drinking regular water
[5.70.6 versus 3.60.9, p = 0.022], suggesting that the grape extract
attenuates tumor angiogenesis. Interstitial tumoral fibrosis was
quantified in breast tumor tissue sections using picrosirius red, a
nonspecific collagen stain. MGE treatment markedly decreased interstitial
fibrosis as compared to the tumors from control animals [2.790.70% versus
0.140.04%, p = 0.0005], indicating that the extract reduces
cancer-associated fibrosis in breast tumors. Taken together, these
studies suggest that MGE reduces both breast tumor burden and
multiplicity, through decreasing proliferation, angiogenesis and
fibrosis, suggesting that extracts from muscadine grapes may represent a
novel nutraceutical for the prevention of breast cancer.

