Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early-in-life dietary zinc supplementation or deficiency and
susceptibility to mammary carcinogenesis in female Sprague-Dawley rat


Zinc deficiency during pregnancy and early postnatal life can adversely
affect the health and predispose to an increased risk of developing
chronic diseases at adulthood. The present study was designed to evaluate
whether exposure to the dietary zinc supplementation or deficiency during
the pregnancy, lactation and juvenile stages interferes with the
development of mammary gland and susceptibility to the mammary
carcinogenesis induced by 7,12-dimethylbenzanthracene (DMBA) in female
Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats. Pregnant females were allocated into three
groups (n = 15 each): dams received diets containing normal levels
(35mg/Kg), deficient (3mg/Kg) or with supplementation (180mg/Kg) of zinc
during gestational day 10 (GD 10) until the weaning of litters. After
weaning, the females offspring were allocated into three groups and
received the same diets as their dams until postnatal day PND 51 or 53.
On PND 51, females SD (n = 10, 1 pulp/litter) were euthanized for removal
of the abdominal mammary tissue for whole mount analysis or received a
single dose of DMBA (50mg/kg, ig) for initiation of mammary
carcinogenesis and euthanized on PND 53 (n = 10, 1 pulp/litter) or PND
180 (n = 16, 1 pulp/litter). On PND 53, mammary glands were collected for
cell proliferation, apoptosis and estrogen receptor alpha (ER-)
immunohistochemistry analyzes, as well as evaluation the expression of
genes related to DNA damage and repair, apoptosis, cell cycle and
signaling related to estrogen receptor and p53 by TaqMan Low-density
Array (TLDA).Tumors collected at PND 180 were processed for histological
evaluation. Male and female offspring from dams receiving dietary zinc
deficiency presented a significant reduction in body weight on PND 0, 10,
21 e 51. The mean number of the terminal buds (TEBs), ducts terminal
(TEDs) and alveolar buds (ABs) in mammary gland did not differ among the
groups. Dietary zinc supplementation significantly increased the indexes
of cell proliferation in the mammary glands in relation to the control
group while the indexes of apoptosis and ER- did not differ among the
groups. Also, dietary zinc supplementation significantly led downstream
of Api5 and Ercc1 target genes related to apoptosis inhibitor and DNA
repair, respectively. Also, dietary zinc supplementation or deficiency
did not significantly change the histological pattern, volume, latency,
incidence or multiplicity of mammary tumors in relation to the control
group. However, dietary zinc supplementation increased the tumors number
in 72%. The present findings suggest that the treatment with zinc
suplementation during the stages of pregnancy, lactation and juvenile
could have increased the susceptibility to development of mammary tumors
induced by DMBA.

