Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYC and HIF-2alpha cooperates in oral squamous carcinoma cell
self-renewal during hypoxia


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is a global health challenge. The
overall survival rate of this devastating disease has not significantly
changed, and the biology of this type of cancer also remain largely
unexplored. To enhance the understanding of this disease through global
heath cancer research collaborative effort, we have set up an
international collaboration between Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, and
KaviKrishna laboratory, which is located in Kamrup district of Assam,
having highest incidence of oral cancer in the world. Through this
collaborative effort we intend to explore the role of hypoxia in oral
cancer progression, metastasis and therapy resistance. Method: We used an
oral squamous cell carcinoma cell line SSC25 for this purpose, and
performed several experiments using a well-described in vitro assay of
CSC self-renewal under hypoxia. Results: We identified a rare ABCG2+
expressing, highly tumorigenic cell population in SSC-25 having cancer
stem cell (CSC) like characteristics in the in vivo serial
transplantation assay, as well as high metastatic activity to bone marrow
of NOD/SCID mice. The ABCG2+ cells, when exposed to hypoxia (Oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is a global health challenge. The overall
survival rate of this devastating disease has not significantly changed,
and the biology of this type of cancer also remain largely unexplored. To
enhance the understanding of this disease through global heath cancer
research collaborative effort, we have set up an international
collaboration between Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, and KaviKrishna
laboratory, which is located in Kamrup district of Assam, having highest
incidence of oral cancer in the world. Through this collaborative effort
we intend to explore the role of hypoxia in oral cancer progression,
metastasis and therapy resistance. Method: We used an oral squamous cell
carcinoma cell line SSC25 for this purpose, and performed several
experiments using a well-described in vitro assay of CSC self-renewal
under hypoxia. Results: We identified a rare ABCG2+ expressing, highly
tumorigenic cell population in SSC-25 having cancer stem cell (CSC) like
characteristics in the in vivo serial transplantation assay, as well as
high metastatic activity to bone marrow of NOD/SCID mice. The ABCG2+
cells, when exposed to hypoxia (<0.1% O2, 24 hours), exhibited enhanced
expression and transcriptional activity of MYC, and HIF-2alpha. ChIP
assay revealed that HIF-2alpha directly binds to MYC in ABCG2+ cells.
siRNA inhibition of HIF-2alpha significantly reduced hypoxia-induced MYC
expression and transcriptional activity in ABCG2+ cells. Finally, in
clinical OSCC specimens, we confirmed the expression of MYC, HIF-2alpha
and ABCG2 expression by immunohistochemistry. Conclusion: These data
indicate that MYC oncogene play important role in the self-renewal of
oral cancer cells during hypoxia.

