Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypermethylation of BARHL2 gene is useful as a molecular marker in
early stage of gastric cancer


Aim: Although minimal invasive treatment is accepted for gastric cancer,
we still do not have any appropriate risk markers to detect residual
neoplasia and recurrence. We previously reported that aberrant DNA
methylation is an early and frequent process in gastric carcinogenesis
and could be useful for detection of neoplasia. Our goal is to find some
candidate genes as a treatment marker using genome wide DNA methylation
analysis for early gastric cancer (EGC). Methods and Results: We studied
Methylated CpG Island Amplification Microarray (MCAM) analysis using 12
gastric washes (each 6 before (Pre) and after (Post) endoscopic treatment
in same patients). One of them is BARHL2. We examined the DNA methylation
status of BARHL2 in a validation set consisting of 128 washes samples
(Pre, 64: Post, 64) at EGC. We next identified functional studies about
BARHL2 as a putative tumor suppressor gene. Treating GCa cells that
lacked BARHL2 expression with a methyltransferase inhibitor,
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine, restored the gene's expression. Introduction of
exogenous BARHL2 into silenced cells suppressed colony formation.
Moreover, BARHL2 showed significantly differential methylation between
before and after treatment in EGC patient (BARHL2, pAim: Although minimal
invasive treatment is accepted for gastric cancer, we still do not have
any appropriate risk markers to detect residual neoplasia and recurrence.
We previously reported that aberrant DNA methylation is an early and
frequent process in gastric carcinogenesis and could be useful for
detection of neoplasia. Our goal is to find some candidate genes as a
treatment marker using genome wide DNA methylation analysis for early
gastric cancer (EGC). Methods and Results: We studied Methylated CpG
Island Amplification Microarray (MCAM) analysis using 12 gastric washes
(each 6 before (Pre) and after (Post) endoscopic treatment in same
patients). One of them is BARHL2. We examined the DNA methylation status
of BARHL2 in a validation set consisting of 128 washes samples (Pre, 64:
Post, 64) at EGC. We next identified functional studies about BARHL2 as a
putative tumor suppressor gene. Treating GCa cells that lacked BARHL2
expression with a methyltransferase inhibitor, 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine,
restored the gene's expression. Introduction of exogenous BARHL2 into
silenced cells suppressed colony formation. Moreover, BARHL2 showed
significantly differential methylation between before and after treatment
in EGC patient (BARHL2, p<0.0001). Discussion: Our data suggest that
silencing of BARHL2 occurs frequently in EGC and may play a key role in
development and progression of the disease.

