Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progranulin (GP88) expression in thoracic maligancies


Background: GP88 (progranulin) is a growth and survival factor implicated
in tumorigenesis and drug resistance for various cancers. GP88 tissue
expression measured by IHC is inversely correlated with survival. We now
evaluate GP88 tissue lung cancer small cell carcinoma (SCLC), non-small
cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) and mesothelioma.Methods: GP88 expression was
determined by immunohistochemistry on tissue sections from normal lung,
pleura, benign mesothelial proliferation, SCLC, NSCLC and mesothelioma.
In the case of NSCLC, GP88 expression in tumor tissues from patients with
localized (stage I-II) and locally advanced disease (IIIa-IIIb) was
determined and correlated with clinical outcome disease-free survival
(DFS) and overall survival (OS). Serum GP88 levels from patients with
metastatic NSCLC was quantified by EIA and compared to GP88 levels from
patients with COPD and from healthy individuals.Results: GP88 was
significantly expressed in NSCLC (adenocarcinoma and squamous cell) and
mesothelioma (epitheloid, sarcomatoid and biphasic subtypes) tumors. In
contrast, normal lung tissue, benign lung disease, pleura, benign
mesothelial proliferations and SCLC were negative. There was a
significant increased risk of recurrence and death for patients with
resected NSCLC (stage I,II) with high expression (GP88 IHC score 3+)
compared to patients with GP88IHC score Background: GP88 (progranulin) is
a growth and survival factor implicated in tumorigenesis and drug
resistance for various cancers. GP88 tissue expression measured by IHC is
inversely correlated with survival. We now evaluate GP88 tissue lung
cancer small cell carcinoma (SCLC), non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC)
and mesothelioma.Methods: GP88 expression was determined by
immunohistochemistry on tissue sections from normal lung, pleura, benign
mesothelial proliferation, SCLC, NSCLC and mesothelioma. In the case of
NSCLC, GP88 expression in tumor tissues from patients with localized
(stage I-II) and locally advanced disease (IIIa-IIIb) was determined and
correlated with clinical outcome disease-free survival (DFS) and overall
survival (OS). Serum GP88 levels from patients with metastatic NSCLC was
quantified by EIA and compared to GP88 levels from patients with COPD and
from healthy individuals.Results: GP88 was significantly expressed in
NSCLC (adenocarcinoma and squamous cell) and mesothelioma (epitheloid,
sarcomatoid and biphasic subtypes) tumors. In contrast, normal lung
tissue, benign lung disease, pleura, benign mesothelial proliferations
and SCLC were negative. There was a significant increased risk of
recurrence and death for patients with resected NSCLC (stage I,II) with
high expression (GP88 IHC score 3+) compared to patients with GP88IHC
score <3+, with HR = 2.28 (p = 0.0076) for DFS and HR = 2.17 (p = 0.014)
for OS In locally advanced disease progression-free survival after
chemoradiotherapy was inferior (HR = 2.9, p = 0.022) for GP88 scores of
3+ vs. Background: GP88 (progranulin) is a growth and survival factor
implicated in tumorigenesis and drug resistance for various cancers. GP88
tissue expression measured by IHC is inversely correlated with survival.
We now evaluate GP88 tissue lung cancer small cell carcinoma (SCLC),
non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) and mesothelioma.Methods: GP88
expression was determined by immunohistochemistry on tissue sections from
normal lung, pleura, benign mesothelial proliferation, SCLC, NSCLC and
mesothelioma. In the case of NSCLC, GP88 expression in tumor tissues from
patients with localized (stage I-II) and locally advanced disease
(IIIa-IIIb) was determined and correlated with clinical outcome
disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS). Serum GP88 levels
from patients with metastatic NSCLC was quantified by EIA and compared to
GP88 levels from patients with COPD and from healthy individuals.Results:
GP88 was significantly expressed in NSCLC (adenocarcinoma and squamous
cell) and mesothelioma (epitheloid, sarcomatoid and biphasic subtypes)
tumors. In contrast, normal lung tissue, benign lung disease, pleura,
benign mesothelial proliferations and SCLC were negative. There was a
significant increased risk of recurrence and death for patients with
resected NSCLC (stage I,II) with high expression (GP88 IHC score 3+)
compared to patients with GP88IHC score <3+, with HR = 2.28 (p = 0.0076)
for DFS and HR = 2.17 (p = 0.014) for OS In locally advanced disease
progression-free survival after chemoradiotherapy was inferior (HR = 2.9,
p = 0.022) for GP88 scores of 3+ vs. <3+ In addition, patients with stage
IIIb/IV NSCLC had a significantly elevated serum GP88 when compared to
control subjects (49.9ng/ml vs. 28.4ng/ml, pBackground: GP88
(progranulin) is a growth and survival factor implicated in tumorigenesis
and drug resistance for various cancers. GP88 tissue expression measured
by IHC is inversely correlated with survival. We now evaluate GP88 tissue
lung cancer small cell carcinoma (SCLC), non-small cell lung carcinoma
(NSCLC) and mesothelioma.Methods: GP88 expression was determined by
immunohistochemistry on tissue sections from normal lung, pleura, benign
mesothelial proliferation, SCLC, NSCLC and mesothelioma. In the case of
NSCLC, GP88 expression in tumor tissues from patients with localized
(stage I-II) and locally advanced disease (IIIa-IIIb) was determined and
correlated with clinical outcome disease-free survival (DFS) and overall
survival (OS). Serum GP88 levels from patients with metastatic NSCLC was
quantified by EIA and compared to GP88 levels from patients with COPD and
from healthy individuals.Results: GP88 was significantly expressed in
NSCLC (adenocarcinoma and squamous cell) and mesothelioma (epitheloid,
sarcomatoid and biphasic subtypes) tumors. In contrast, normal lung
tissue, benign lung disease, pleura, benign mesothelial proliferations
and SCLC were negative. There was a significant increased risk of
recurrence and death for patients with resected NSCLC (stage I,II) with
high expression (GP88 IHC score 3+) compared to patients with GP88IHC
score <3+, with HR = 2.28 (p = 0.0076) for DFS and HR = 2.17 (p = 0.014)
for OS In locally advanced disease progression-free survival after
chemoradiotherapy was inferior (HR = 2.9, p = 0.022) for GP88 scores of
3+ vs. <3+ In addition, patients with stage IIIb/IV NSCLC had a
significantly elevated serum GP88 when compared to control subjects
(49.9ng/ml vs. 28.4ng/ml, p<0.0001). 67% of mesothelioma tumors (stage
I-III) scored positive for GP88 with 23% of tissue examined showing a
GP88 score of 3+.Conclusions: This is the first study investigating GP88
expression in various thoracic malignancies. Differences of GP88
expression were observed in different lung tumor types with NSCLC and
mesothelioma being positive. Correlation with clinical outcomes in NSCLC
demonstrates that measuring the GP88/Progranulin IHC tumor tissue
expression using the anti-GP88/PGRN 6B3 antibody provides information on
the risk of recurrence and death of patients with stages I-III NSCLC and
that serum GP88 levels are elevated in advanced disease. Future research
will focus on investigating the prognostic potential of GP88 tissue
expression and serum levels for mesothelioma patients.

