Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A complete workflow for high throughput isolation of serum
microRNAs and downstream analysis by qRT-PCR: application to cancer
biomarker discovery


Biomarkers have become invaluable tools in the clinical space for cancer
detection, diagnosis, patient prognosis and treatment selection. An ideal
biomarker should be easily assayed with minimally invasive medical
procedures but possess high sensitivity and specificity. Although many
candidate biomarkers for various diseases have been proposed in the
literature, very few have made their way to clinical use, and for certain
types of cancer there are no reliable biomarker options.The use of
prostate specific antigen (PSA) has led to a dramatic increase in the
diagnosis of prostate cancer - over 230,000 new cases in 2014. However,
most of these cases are of low risk disease that is unlikely to cause
significant morbidity and mortality, leading to the accepted notion that
prostate cancer is overdiagnosed. On the other hand, while it is a
sensitive test, less than of patients undergoing a prostate biopsy based
on PSA testing are actually found to have the disease. The identification
of biomarkers that are more senstitive and specific predictors for the
presence of prostate cancer, as well as for the aggressiveness of the
disease, could decrease the complications and morbidity related to
prostate biopsies and definitive treatment.The circulating miRNA in blood
could potentially fill this void, providing biomarkers suitable for
real-time detection and application to the management of prostate cancer
patients. The main advantages of miRNAs versus longer molecules (mRNA,
lncRNA) include: (i) smaller number of sequences Biomarkers have become
invaluable tools in the clinical space for cancer detection, diagnosis,
patient prognosis and treatment selection. An ideal biomarker should be
easily assayed with minimally invasive medical procedures but possess
high sensitivity and specificity. Although many candidate biomarkers for
various diseases have been proposed in the literature, very few have made
their way to clinical use, and for certain types of cancer there are no
reliable biomarker options.The use of prostate specific antigen (PSA) has
led to a dramatic increase in the diagnosis of prostate cancer - over
230,000 new cases in 2014. However, most of these cases are of low risk
disease that is unlikely to cause significant morbidity and mortality,
leading to the accepted notion that prostate cancer is overdiagnosed. On
the other hand, while it is a sensitive test, less than of patients
undergoing a prostate biopsy based on PSA testing are actually found to
have the disease. The identification of biomarkers that are more
senstitive and specific predictors for the presence of prostate cancer,
as well as for the aggressiveness of the disease, could decrease the
complications and morbidity related to prostate biopsies and definitive
treatment.The circulating miRNA in blood could potentially fill this
void, providing biomarkers suitable for real-time detection and
application to the management of prostate cancer patients. The main
advantages of miRNAs versus longer molecules (mRNA, lncRNA) include: (i)
smaller number of sequences <2000 and thus ease of analysis (ii)
stability due to small size 16-27 nt and thus robustness of detection.The
objective of this project was to develop a set of reagents and tools for
efficient recovery and analysis of circulating miRNAs. Our team has built
a complete workflow to provide: (1) high throughput isolation of total
serum RNA using a new MagMaxTM mirVanaTM reagent kit for the KingFisherTM
Flex and Duo instruments, and (2) downstream analysis of microRNA
profiles by qRT-PCR using next generation TaqMan microRNA assays.The
effectiveness of this workflow is exemplified by analysis of a panel of
miRNAs in samples derived from serum of patients with metastatic prostate
cancer versus control groups. Following this fast and easy workflow
suitable for serum and other body fluids, disease-specific RNA signatures
can be identified and used as biomarkers.TaqMan is a registered Trademark
of Roche Molecular Systems, Inc. used under permission and license.

