Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel adjuvant therapeutic agent for obesity
related pancreatic cancer


PURPOSE: Pancreatic cancer (PC) is an aggressive disease that develops in
a symptom-free manner and is usually advanced at the time of diagnosis;
the overall 5 year survival rate is less than 5%. Obesity is pandemic in
the US and strongly linked to higher incidence of many cancer types.
Obese people are 20% more likely to develop PC. We hypothesize that high
level of leptin shown by obese PC patients could increase tumor
progression and drug resistance. METHODS: A panel of PC cell lines
(Panc-1, BxPC-3 and MiaPaCa-2) was challenged with leptin, a specific
leptin inhibitor coupled with nanoparticles (IONP-LPrA2) and various
chemotherapeutic agents (Gemcitabine, Cisplatin, Paclitaxel and
Sunitinib). Cell viability, proliferation and the expression levels of
molecular markers were analyzed. Further, we investigated the ability of
PC cells to form tumorspheres when treated with leptin and IONP-LPrA2.
The number of colonies was counted and pancreatic cancer stem cells
(PCSC) markers (ALDH1, CD44, CD24, ESA) and OB-R expression was assessed.
PCSC markers were determined in PC tissue arrays. RESULTS: PCSC markers
were expressed in obese PC patients. Leptin induced S phase progression,
overexpression of Notch and PCSC markers and increased stemness and
tumorigenesis of PC cells. In addition, leptin impaired the efficacy of
chemotherapeutic agents on PC cells and derived tumorspheres. The
inhibition of leptin signaling via IONP-LPrA2 abrogated PC growth,
reduced PCSC markers expression and enhanced chemotherapeutic action by
inducing apoptosis. Our data suggests that leptin signaling is essential
for PC cells proliferation and survival and reduces chemotherapeutic
effects. These findings are of great importance for obese PC patients
which show the highest level of leptin, poor prognosis and chemotherapy
outcome. LPrA2 has no toxicity and it has been shown that it does not
affect health status, appetite, body weight or energy balance in mice.
IONP-LPrA2 could be a novel adjuvant for PC treatment, especially for
obese PC patients. Acknowledgements: this work was supported by NIH/NCI
5SC1CA138658-05 and the DOD Breast Cancer Idea Award (W81XWH13-1-0382) to
RRGP; NIH/2G12RR003034-26 and U54 MSM/UAB Cancer Center Partnership. This
research was also supported by facilities and support services at
Morehouse School of Medicine (NIH 1C06 RR18386).

