Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumor heterogeneity and the detection of potential driver
mutations in cfDNA in a NSCLC cohort using UltraSEEKTM


IntroductionIncreasing evidence supports the heterogeneous clonal
composition and branched evolution of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
tumors. Circulating biomarkers, such as circulating cell-free tumor DNA
(cfDNA), may potentially be used to track the evolution of such tumors in
order to detect minimal residual disease, monitor treatment response,
detect the emergence of resistance, and subsequent disease
relapse.Experimental proceduresIn a cohort of 14 primary NSCLC tumors,
DNA was extracted from fresh frozen tissue and multi-region whole-exome
sequencing (mean depth of 219x) was performed on a total of 44 tumor
regions. Single nucleotide variants, indels and copy number data were
identified using VarScan2 (v2.3.6). Non-silent mutations were validated
using ultra-deep amplicon sequencing (mean depth 1220x). The subclonal
composition of each tumor was used to construct phylogenetic trees.
Candidate driver genes were selected by referencing large-scale lung
cancer or pan-cancer sequencing studies, and the COSMIC gene census. To
validate the identified driver mutations and to further screen all tumor
regions for additional low-level heterogeneity, we developed
patient-specific UltraSEEK panels. The UltraSEEK technology utilizes
mutation-specific single base extension and MassARRAY MALDI-TOF Mass
Spectrometry to identify low frequency mutated alleles down to 0.1%. This
method was used to determine if potential driver mutations could be
detected in cfDNA extracted at the time of diagnosis in a subset of
patients.Summary of dataIntratumor heterogeneity was evident in all
tumors, with a median of 25% heterogeneous mutations (range 5-61%).
Phylogenetic tree analysis revealed branched tumor evolution, with
mutations in potential driver genes occurring both early (trunk) and late
(branch). The UltraSEEK method identified truncal and branch mutations in
tumor DNA, as well as truncal mutations in the EGFR, TP53, BRAF, RB1 and
MLL2 genes in two out of six patients. These mutations are predicted to
have deleterious functional consequences and may therefore play a role in
disease pathogenesis.ConclusionsSpatial and temporal heterogeneity of
driver mutations was evident in all NSCLC tumors. The use of liquid
biopsies, such as cfDNA, has the potential to aid early detection and
guide treatment initiation in cancer patients. They may also avoid the
need for repeated tissue sampling, and be of value in cases where disease
sites, such as brain or bone, are not easily accessible to biopsy.

