Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FoxP1 increases nucleotide excision repair capacity through
activating xeroderma pigmentosum group C in human breast cancer


Breast cancer is the most common cancer in the women. Recent study
revealed that nucleotide excision repair (NER) deficiency might play an
important role in the cause of sporadic breast cancer, showing
significant reduction of five NER gene products including xeroderma
pigmentosum group C (XPC) in human breast cancer tissue. Thus, XPC
inactivation might be related to occurrence and progression of breast
cancer.FoxP1 is a member of the forkhead O family of transcription
factors which have a broad range of functions. FoxP1 is considered as a
putative tumor suppressor in breast cancer because of its ability to
cause apoptosis. The relationship between FoxP1 and XPC has been yet to
be known in breast cancer.In our data, Western blot analysis of 8 human
primary tumors showed that the high expression of FoxP1 was correlated
with the high level of XPC. In three established mammary epithelial cell
lines (MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, 4T1), FoxP1 expression in MCF-7 was higher than
in MDA-MB-231 and 4T1. Similar to the result of primary tumors, the
expression of XPC was also high in MCF-7 and low in MDA-MB-231 and 4T1.
Next, we found that the level of XPC decreased with the knockdown of
FoxP1 compared to control in MCF-7. On the other hand, the ectopic
expression of FoxP1 in MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 elevated XPC expression for
protein level. In real time RT-PCR, the level of XPC mRNA was the same as
in Western blot analysis. We tested whether NER activity is dependent on
FoxP1. In vitro NER activity increased by overexpression of FoxP1 in
MB-231. Sh-FoxP1 transfected MCF-7 cell shows reduced in vitro NER
activity. In addition, immunostaining assay showed that XPC expression
was much accumulated in the nucleus of MDA-MB-231 with overexpression of
FoxP1 than in control.Taken together, these data suggested FoxP1 could
up-regulate NER activity by activating XPC in breast cancer. However, the
way how FoxP1 can regulate XPC remained to be cleared. To clarify the
mechanism, we are performing biological interaction between FoxP1 and XPC
in both breast cancer cell lines and human primary breast tumors.

