Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Hippo signaling pathway mediates BMP inhibition of cancer stem
cells


Multiple developmental signaling pathways cooperatively regulate cancer
stem cell (CSC) function. Among them, the BMP pathway has been implicated
in brain CSC tumorigenicity. To examine whether BMP is a general
regulator of CSCs across diverse organ systems we utilized
lentivirus-mediated BMP4 expression in patient-derived xenograft models
in NOD/SCID mice. The prevention of tumor growth was observed in breast,
colon, ovarian, and melanoma models. Similarly, adenovirus-mediated
systemic delivery of BMP4 inhibited tumor growth, dramatically affected
CSC-specific cell surface markers and decreased CSC frequency. Microarray
analysis of BMP4-treated tumors showed that a set of genes encoding for
components of the actin cytoskeleton was significantly enriched amongst
regulated genes and identified Hippo pathway genes as potential mediators
of the BMP4 anti-tumor response with up-regulation of SAV1 and LATS2 and
down-regulation of BIRC5. Hippo signaling regulates organ size, stem cell
biology and cancer through a protein kinase complex including MST1/2,
SAV1, and LATS1/2, which phosphorylates the downstream nuclear effector
YAP/TAZ. Phosphorylated YAP/TAZ is unable to induce the expression of
cell proliferation and anti-apoptotic genes through interaction with
transcriptional co-activators such as TEAD. The Hippo pathway, known to
cross-talk with BMP signaling at multiple levels, recently emerged as a
cellular sensor of the physical environment through the actin
cytoskeleton. We thus asked whether modulating Hippo signaling affected
tumor growth. YAP1 overexpression resulted in tumor growth decrease. A
deletion variant of YAP, YAP1-291, possessing a deletion of the
transactivation domain has been shown to act as a dominant-negative
through binding to TEAD. Intriguingly YAP1-291 was also sufficient to
strongly attenuate growth of diverse BMP4-sensitive and BMP4-insensitive
tumor models suggesting that transactivation through TEAD is not the only
route by which YAP modulates tumor growth. YAP anti-proliferative
properties were reported before. In order to reconcile the dual function
of YAP in cancer, we propose that the transcriptional co-activator's
TEAD-mediated oncogenic function may be counter-balanced by its
potentiation of SMAD signaling in response to BMP.

