Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CAF-derived MFAP5 promotes tumor angiogenesis and confers
paclitaxel resistance in high-grade serous ovarian cancer


High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is the most lethal gynecologic
malignancy. Although most patients respond to chemotherapy, relapse often
occurs as chemoresistance disease. We previously reported the
tumor-promoting role of Microfibrillar-Associated Protein 5 (MFAP5) in
ovarian cancer. Follow up studies suggested a pro-angiogenic and
chemo-protective role of MFAP5. Based on these findings, the present
study aims at delineating the mechanism by which stromal MFAP5 modulates
tumor angiogenesis and chemoresistance, and evaluating the potential of
targeting MFAP5 as therapy for ovarian cancer.Immunostaining of HGSOC
tissue sections revealed a significant correlation between stromal MFAP5
expression and intratumoral microvessel density. Further endothelial cell
motility and tube formation assays on human endothelial cells
demonstrated the pro-angiogenic roles of exogenous MFAP5. Furthermore,
anti-V3 integrin antibody and cell permeant calcium chelator, BAPTA,
attenuated MFAP5's effects, suggesting that MFAP5 exerts its biological
activity on endothelial cells through the V3 integrin receptor and
calcium signaling. In vivo studies showed that extensive tubular network
was formed in the matrigel mixed with MFAP5 injected into mice
(pHigh-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is the most lethal gynecologic
malignancy. Although most patients respond to chemotherapy, relapse often
occurs as chemoresistance disease. We previously reported the
tumor-promoting role of Microfibrillar-Associated Protein 5 (MFAP5) in
ovarian cancer. Follow up studies suggested a pro-angiogenic and
chemo-protective role of MFAP5. Based on these findings, the present
study aims at delineating the mechanism by which stromal MFAP5 modulates
tumor angiogenesis and chemoresistance, and evaluating the potential of
targeting MFAP5 as therapy for ovarian cancer.Immunostaining of HGSOC
tissue sections revealed a significant correlation between stromal MFAP5
expression and intratumoral microvessel density. Further endothelial cell
motility and tube formation assays on human endothelial cells
demonstrated the pro-angiogenic roles of exogenous MFAP5. Furthermore,
anti-V3 integrin antibody and cell permeant calcium chelator, BAPTA,
attenuated MFAP5's effects, suggesting that MFAP5 exerts its biological
activity on endothelial cells through the V3 integrin receptor and
calcium signaling. In vivo studies showed that extensive tubular network
was formed in the matrigel mixed with MFAP5 injected into mice (p<0.01).
Co-injection of MFAP5 overexpressing fibroblasts and cancer cells
subcutaneously into mice led to increased tumor size and number of CD34
positive intratumor microvessels. Microarray analysis on endothelial
cells invaded into Matrigel plug identified a set of motility promoting
genes that were associated with calcium signaling. Among them,
upregulation of Lipoma-Peferred Partner (LPP), an actin cytoskeleton
protein, was validated by qRT-PCR and western blot analyses. Silencing
LPP by siRNA abolished MFAP5 stimulated motility in both HMEC-1 and TIME.
Further western blot analyses showed that MFAP5 modulated endothelial
cell motility and invasion potential through calcium dependent
ERK/CREB/LPP signaling pathways. In an orthotopic mouse model, silencing
of stromal MFAP5 by siRNA delivered by nanoparticles demonstrated a
significant reduction in tumor weight (pHigh-grade serous ovarian cancer
(HGSOC) is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy. Although most patients
respond to chemotherapy, relapse often occurs as chemoresistance disease.
We previously reported the tumor-promoting role of
Microfibrillar-Associated Protein 5 (MFAP5) in ovarian cancer. Follow up
studies suggested a pro-angiogenic and chemo-protective role of MFAP5.
Based on these findings, the present study aims at delineating the
mechanism by which stromal MFAP5 modulates tumor angiogenesis and
chemoresistance, and evaluating the potential of targeting MFAP5 as
therapy for ovarian cancer.Immunostaining of HGSOC tissue sections
revealed a significant correlation between stromal MFAP5 expression and
intratumoral microvessel density. Further endothelial cell motility and
tube formation assays on human endothelial cells demonstrated the
pro-angiogenic roles of exogenous MFAP5. Furthermore, anti-V3 integrin
antibody and cell permeant calcium chelator, BAPTA, attenuated MFAP5's
effects, suggesting that MFAP5 exerts its biological activity on
endothelial cells through the V3 integrin receptor and calcium signaling.
In vivo studies showed that extensive tubular network was formed in the
matrigel mixed with MFAP5 injected into mice (p<0.01). Co-injection of
MFAP5 overexpressing fibroblasts and cancer cells subcutaneously into
mice led to increased tumor size and number of CD34 positive intratumor
microvessels. Microarray analysis on endothelial cells invaded into
Matrigel plug identified a set of motility promoting genes that were
associated with calcium signaling. Among them, upregulation of
Lipoma-Peferred Partner (LPP), an actin cytoskeleton protein, was
validated by qRT-PCR and western blot analyses. Silencing LPP by siRNA
abolished MFAP5 stimulated motility in both HMEC-1 and TIME. Further
western blot analyses showed that MFAP5 modulated endothelial cell
motility and invasion potential through calcium dependent ERK/CREB/LPP
signaling pathways. In an orthotopic mouse model, silencing of stromal
MFAP5 by siRNA delivered by nanoparticles demonstrated a significant
reduction in tumor weight (p<0.001) and intratumor microvessel
densities.In addition, analysis on stromal gene expression profiles
revealed that stromal MFAP5 expression is significantly increased in the
group of patients with shorter progression-free survival when compared to
those with longer progression-free survival. Further cell survival assays
showed that pretreating to HGSOC cell lines with recombinant MFAP5
confers resistance to ovarian cancer cells towards paclitaxel treatment.
RNA-Seq analysis was performed to delineate the underlying mechanism of
such induced chemoresistance.To conclude, stromal MFAP5 contributes to
ovarian tumor angiogenesis and chemoresistance. Hence, targeting stromal
MFAP5 could be a potential therapy for ovarian cancer treatment.

