Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The long non-coding RNA HOTAIR affects exosome-mediated bladder
cancer progression


Exosomes are 30-100nM membrane-bound vesicles that participate in
intercellular communication and facilitate tumor microenvironments. The
mechanisms by which exosomes modify tumor niches are not fully
understood. One possibility is that exosomes deliver biologically active
molecules like mRNA, protein, miRNA and long non coding RNA (lncRNA) that
alter the metabolism of recipient cells to produce pathological
phenotypes. Exosomes may also activate the expression of genes involved
in tumor progression in recipient cells. Overexpression of the lncRNA
HOTAIR is associated with poor prognosis and affects tumor progression,
in part, by recruiting PRC2 and LSD1 chromatin modifying complexes to
thousands of target genes involved in tumor progression processes such as
epithelial-to-mesenchyme transition (EMT). We show that HOTAIR is
enriched in bladder cancer (BC) patient tumors and urinary exosomes. BC
cell lines also express elevated levels of HOTAIR. Knockdown of HOTAIR in
BC cell lines significantly reduces migration and invasion in trans-well
and 3D culture, which correlates with EMT gene expression changes in
these cells. Exosomes isolated from shHOTAIR vs shScramble cells fail to
facilitate migration and invasion in 3D culture of a recipient BC cell
line. Selected bands were isolated from a coomassie gel of shHOTAIR and
shScramble exosomes and sent for mass spectrometry. Hundreds of putative
proteins were identified including proteins involved in RNA binding,
apoptosis, vesicle trafficking and integrins. These data support HOTAIR
as an important player in exosome-mediated BC tumor progression possibly
through affects on gene expression in exosome producer cells. For
example, in shHOTAIR cells the loss of PRC2 and/or LSD1 complexes from
key genes may ultimately affect the proteins available for packaging into
exosomes. Exosomes have important roles in the tumor microenvironment and
these data support a role for HOTAIR in the modulation of
exosome-mediated tumor progression.

