Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The ketogenic diet enhances immunity in a mouse model of malignant
glioma


Every year 14,000 new cases of malignant glioma are diagnosed in the
United States. Brain tumors are also the second leading cause of cancer
deaths among children and young adults. Indeed, patients with newly
diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most aggressive grade of
glioma, have an average life expectancy of 12 to 18 months, and less than
10% survive five years, despite the current standard of care, which
consists of aggressive surgery followed by radiation and chemotherapy.
Advances in the survival of brain cancer patients require the design of
new therapeutic approaches that take advantage of common phenotypes such
as the altered metabolism found in cancer cells. It has therefore been
postulated that the high-fat, low-carbohydrate, adequate protein
ketogenic diet (KD) may be useful in the treatment of brain tumors. We
have demonstrated that the KD enhances survival and potentiates standard
therapy in a mouse model of malignant glioma. Our mechanistic data
suggests that the KD affects multiple aspects of tumor growth including
hypoxia, angiogenesis, invasive potential and inflammation. Given the
importance of the immune system in the tumor microenvironment and the
increased interest in developing anti-cancer immunotherapeutics, the
current study sought to explore the KD in the context of infiltration and
the functionality of glioma-reactive immune cells.We used the syngeneic
GL261-Luc2 mouse model of malignant glioma and fed mice KetoCal (KC; 4:1
fat:protein/carbohydrates) ad libitum or a standard rodent diet (SD).
Tumor-specific immune cells were isolated from these tumors and tested
for functionality via cytokine production, capacity for cytotoxicity, and
amount of infiltration. We found that tumor-infiltrating T cells from
animals fed KC showed significantly decreased expression of the
inhibitory receptors CTLA-4 and PD-1, which coincided with a reduction in
expression of the inhibitory ligand on the tumor cells. Moreover, this
reduced T cell tolerance at the tumor site allowed CD8+ T cells to
produce IFN and IL-2, and regain cytotoxic functions. Additionally, the
KC caused a reduction in immunosuppressive cytokine production in
regulatory T cells. Innate immune responses to the tumor were also
altered in mice maintained on KC, as tumor-infiltrating natural killer
cells in these animals were able to produce more IFN and TNF in response
to GL261-luc2 cells in vitro when compared to mice maintained on SD.
Overall, the ketogenic diet may be an attractive adjuvant therapy to
overcome several immune escape mechanisms in gliomas by decreasing
regulatory T cell suppression of effector T cells and increasing CD8+ T
cell killing and cytokine production, ultimately leading to increased
tumor immune mediated rejection. A greater understanding of the effects
of the ketogenic diet as an adjuvant therapy will allow for a more
rational approach to its clinical use.

