Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarkers in residual disease after neoadjuvant chemotherapy of
breast cancer predict long-term outcome


Aim: to assess the prognostic value of 24 candidate genes in residual
breast cancers following neoadjuvant chemotherapy.BackgroundPatients who
do not achieve pathological complete response after neoadjuvant
chemotherapy have increased risk of recurrence and represent a challenge
for clinical management. Expression profiling of residual disease may
identify genes related to chemoresitance that allow the development of a
profile related to long-term outcome. We sought to assess this by
evaluating the expression of ESR1, ERBB2 and genes playing a role in
stemcellness (ALDHA1, CD44, STAT3), proliferation (TOP2A, MKI67, AURKA),
apoptosis (BCL2, BCL2L1, PAWR), immunological response (CD3D, CXCL13,
STAT1), epithelial to mesenchymal transition (SNAI1, SNAI2, SOX9, TWIST),
stromal activation (DECORIN, SPARC, PLAU), energy metabolism (ACACB,
LDHB), and ERK/Ras activation (DUSP4).Patients and MethodsA total of 126
primary breast cancer patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy were
included, with a median follow up of 4.1 years. Overall, 66% were ER+,
52% PgR+, 12% Her2+; 3% grade 1, 49% grade 2, 48% grade 3; 52% node -ve
and 48% node +ve. Gene expression profiles were done using the NanoString
nCounter system from 126 post-treatment and 56 matched pre-treatment
tumour samples. Differential gene expression changes were tested by
paired t-test. The association of the biomarkers in residual disease with
time to relapse was assessed by Cox regression analysis. Penalised
Elastic Net Cox regression was used to identify independent prognostic
gene signatures. Benjamini-Hochberg methodology was used for multiple
comparison correction for survival analysis; threshold of q-value was set
to have Aim: to assess the prognostic value of 24 candidate genes in
residual breast cancers following neoadjuvant
chemotherapy.BackgroundPatients who do not achieve pathological complete
response after neoadjuvant chemotherapy have increased risk of recurrence
and represent a challenge for clinical management. Expression profiling
of residual disease may identify genes related to chemoresitance that
allow the development of a profile related to long-term outcome. We
sought to assess this by evaluating the expression of ESR1, ERBB2 and
genes playing a role in stemcellness (ALDHA1, CD44, STAT3), proliferation
(TOP2A, MKI67, AURKA), apoptosis (BCL2, BCL2L1, PAWR), immunological
response (CD3D, CXCL13, STAT1), epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(SNAI1, SNAI2, SOX9, TWIST), stromal activation (DECORIN, SPARC, PLAU),
energy metabolism (ACACB, LDHB), and ERK/Ras activation (DUSP4).Patients
and MethodsA total of 126 primary breast cancer patients treated with
neoadjuvant chemotherapy were included, with a median follow up of 4.1
years. Overall, 66% were ER+, 52% PgR+, 12% Her2+; 3% grade 1, 49% grade
2, 48% grade 3; 52% node -ve and 48% node +ve. Gene expression profiles
were done using the NanoString nCounter system from 126 post-treatment
and 56 matched pre-treatment tumour samples. Differential gene expression
changes were tested by paired t-test. The association of the biomarkers
in residual disease with time to relapse was assessed by Cox regression
analysis. Penalised Elastic Net Cox regression was used to identify
independent prognostic gene signatures. Benjamini-Hochberg methodology
was used for multiple comparison correction for survival analysis;
threshold of q-value was set to have < 1 false positive.ResultsFifteen
genes were found to be up- and 9 downregulated following chemotherapy.
Overall 20 genes changed significantly and 17 of these changed in the
ER+/Her2- subgroup. Among those, ALDH1A1, STAT1 and TWIST1 were most
significant. 14 genes were prognostic in unvariable analysis of all 126
residual samples. In 118 patients with complete clinico-pathological data
available, ACACB, CD3D, MKI67 and TOP2A were informative independent of
ER, PgR and Her2 status. PAWR was positively correlated with good outcome
in ER+ but negatively in ER- patients (interaction test pAim: to assess
the prognostic value of 24 candidate genes in residual breast cancers
following neoadjuvant chemotherapy.BackgroundPatients who do not achieve
pathological complete response after neoadjuvant chemotherapy have
increased risk of recurrence and represent a challenge for clinical
management. Expression profiling of residual disease may identify genes
related to chemoresitance that allow the development of a profile related
to long-term outcome. We sought to assess this by evaluating the
expression of ESR1, ERBB2 and genes playing a role in stemcellness
(ALDHA1, CD44, STAT3), proliferation (TOP2A, MKI67, AURKA), apoptosis
(BCL2, BCL2L1, PAWR), immunological response (CD3D, CXCL13, STAT1),
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (SNAI1, SNAI2, SOX9, TWIST), stromal
activation (DECORIN, SPARC, PLAU), energy metabolism (ACACB, LDHB), and
ERK/Ras activation (DUSP4).Patients and MethodsA total of 126 primary
breast cancer patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy were
included, with a median follow up of 4.1 years. Overall, 66% were ER+,
52% PgR+, 12% Her2+; 3% grade 1, 49% grade 2, 48% grade 3; 52% node -ve
and 48% node +ve. Gene expression profiles were done using the NanoString
nCounter system from 126 post-treatment and 56 matched pre-treatment
tumour samples. Differential gene expression changes were tested by
paired t-test. The association of the biomarkers in residual disease with
time to relapse was assessed by Cox regression analysis. Penalised
Elastic Net Cox regression was used to identify independent prognostic
gene signatures. Benjamini-Hochberg methodology was used for multiple
comparison correction for survival analysis; threshold of q-value was set
to have < 1 false positive.ResultsFifteen genes were found to be up- and
9 downregulated following chemotherapy. Overall 20 genes changed
significantly and 17 of these changed in the ER+/Her2- subgroup. Among
those, ALDH1A1, STAT1 and TWIST1 were most significant. 14 genes were
prognostic in unvariable analysis of all 126 residual samples. In 118
patients with complete clinico-pathological data available, ACACB, CD3D,
MKI67 and TOP2A were informative independent of ER, PgR and Her2 status.
PAWR was positively correlated with good outcome in ER+ but negatively in
ER- patients (interaction test p<0.001). From the Elastic Net regression
analysis in all 126 patients, 6 genes were identified (ACACB, CD3D,
DECORIN, ESR1, MKI67, PLAU) to provide significant prognostic information
independent of ER, PgR and Her2 status. In 78 ER+/Her2- samples 4 genes
(ACACB, ERBB2, MKI67, PAWR) were similarly informative.ConclusionsOur
findings demonstrate that gene expression of diverse biological functions
is affected by chemotherapy and for some is prognostic in residual
disease. If validated, our multivariable gene models may potentially
identify patients who may need additional post-neoadjuvant treatment to
improve prognosis.

