Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Wnt5a and STAT3 pathways for the treatment of prostate
cancer


Background and AimsWnt5a protein levels are upregulated in prostate
cancer (PCa) compared to benign tissue and patients with high Wnt5a
protein levels have a better outcome after radical prostatectomy compared
to patients with low Wnt5a levels (Syed Khaja AS, 2011; 2012). Thus, the
reconstitution of the Wnt5a signaling pathway could be a promising
therapeutic approach in PCa, as already shown in breast cancer (Sfholm A,
2008). Constitutively active STAT3 (pSTAT3) has been correlated to PCa
progression and disruption of its signaling pathway could represent a
promising strategy for the treatment of patients with advanced PCa
(Hellsten R, 2008). We have analyzed the expression of Wnt5a and pSTAT3
in a cohort of patients with metastatic Castration Resistant Prostate
Cancer (mCRPC). Using in vitro and in vivo techniques we have explored
the effect of the Wnt5a-mimicking peptide FOXY5 for the reconstitution of
the Wnt5a pathway in PCa, and we have studied the effect of the STAT3
inhibitor Galiellalactone (GL) on PCa cell viability, apoptosis,
invasion, tumor growth and metastases.MethodsWnt5a and pSTAT3 protein
expression was analyzed by IHC on a TMA construct with duplicate cores of
malignant tissues from 38 patients with mCRPC. Statistical and
correlation analyses were performed using the SPSS version 21. Cell
viability was determined by MTT assay; apoptotic cells were visualized
with M30 CytoDeath antibody 24h after treatment with FOXY5 or GL. Cell
invasion was analyzed using matrigel pre-coated cell culture inserts in
the presence or absence of FOXY5 or GL. For the animal study, NMRI nude
mice were injected orthotopically with 1106 DU145-Luc cells, and treated
IP with GL every day or with FOXY5 every second day. Primary tumor growth
and metastatic spread were evaluated weekly by in vivo luminescence using
the IVIS Lumina II system. 9 weeks after injection animals were
sacrificed and organs were analyzed for the presence of
metastases.ResultsIHC analyses of TMA showed high pSTAT3 and low Wnt5a
expression in CRPC patients, with a small but significant correlation (r
= 0.4646; p = 0.0038). Our results show that GL inhibits viability and
induces apoptosis of DU145-Luc cells in vitro, and that it reduces tumor
growth and metastatic spread to lymph nodes in vivo. FOXY5 treatment has
no effects on cell viability or on primary tumor growth, but it
significantly reduces cell invasion in vitro and metastatic spread to
lymph nodes in vivo.ConclusionsOur results confirm that the
reconstitution of the Wnt5a pathway and the inhibition of the STAT3
pathway are a promising therapeutic approach for the treatment of mCRPC.
We found that GL and FOXY5 are good candidates for the treatment of
mCRPC, as they inhibit tumor growth and metastatic spread to lymph nodes.
Since these two compounds act through different mechanisms, our future
studies will explore the possibility of a combination of GL and FOXY5 for
the treatment of PCa.

