Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor stem cell marker doublecortin-like kinase (DCLK1)
activates inflammatory and carcinogenic signals in hepatocellular
carcinoma


Introduction: Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC) is the third most common
cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Chronic viral hepatitis,
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis and cirrhosis are considered to be major
risk factors for the development of HCC. The risk of HCC increases
significantly in patients with chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection
and metabolic diseases. Thus, HCC represents a wide-ranging public health
issue worldwide. Our recent studies have revealed a positive correlation
between expression of the tumor stem cell (TSC) marker, doublecortin-like
kinase (DCLK1) and cancer growth in liver, colon and pancreas. However,
the molecular mechanism by which its overexpression impacts key signaling
pathways during hepatocarcinogenesis is largely unknown. We have
previously shown a dynamic relationship between active HCV replication
and expression of a few TSC markers including DCLK1. Our published
reports further suggest that DCLK1 positively affects the viral
replication and transcription factors that promote epithelial-mesenchymal
transition. These observations prompted us to investigate a possible
DCLK1-controlled signaling network in HCC.Methods: We used transcriptome
analysis of DCLK1-overexpressing and HCV replicon co-expressing cell
lines, RNA interference, Huh7 hepatoma cells-derived tumor xenografts,
patient's liver tissues and normal human hepatocytes-derived
hepatospheroids to investigate DCLK1-regulated signaling pathways in the
liver. Immunohistochemical staining, real-time PCR and Western blot were
used to validate our observations. The siRNAs and shRNAs against DCLK1
were used to monitor inhibition of cell migration and tumor
growth.Results: Although normal human liver lacks detectable DCLK1,
extensive DCLK1 expression was observed in lymphoid aggregates,
epithelial and stromal cells, lymphocytes, and bile ducts in HCV-positive
patients with cirrhosis and HCC. The DCLK1 expression correlated with
pro-inflammatory S100A9 levels and activation of NFB. Normal human
hepatocytes-derived spheroids acquired DCLK1 expression, and
differentiated into stem/progenitor-like and neuron-like cells upon
stimulation with serum. Silencing of DCLK1 inhibited S100A9 expression
and hepatoma cell migration. Based on transcriptome data and validation
at protein levels, we found a novel DCLK1-controlled feed-forward-like
signaling network that potentially drives inflammation and tumorigenesis
in the liver. DCLK1 was also found to regulate SMARCA2 (hBRM) protein
that participates in the formation of tumor-associated SW1/SNF1 chromatin
remodeling complexes.Conclusions: The TCS marker, DCLK1, appears to be a
master regulator of inflammatory, oncogenic and chromatic remodeling
networks. It is possible to target this signal regulator for preventing
hepatic inflammation and liver neoplasia.

