Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a novel tumor suppressor PRSS8 in colorectal
cancer


PRSS8, a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored epithelial extracellular
membrane serine protease prostasin, is expressed in normal epithelia and
is involved in terminal epithelial differentiation. Aberrantly expression
of PRSS8 was observed in human prostate, breast and gastric cancers, and
the reduction might be linked to promoter hypermethylation in vitro.
However, the expression of PRSS8 in colorectal cancer and its
significance in colorectal carcinogenesis and progression are largely
unknown. In this study, the expression levels of PRSS8 were firstly
determined in four human colorectal cancer cell lines and in 47 paired
human colorectal cancer tissues (cancers and their adjacent non-cancer
tissues) by real-time PCR, Western blotting and immunohistochemistry. We
found that PRSS8 was significantly reduced in colorectal cancer tissues,
compared to adjacent non-cancer tissues, and was in very low levels in
the colorectal cancer cell lines. Interestingly, the reduced PRSS8 was
associated with histopathological stages and differentiation: PRSS8 was
lower in poor differentiated cancers and was higher in well
differentiated cancers. In addition, the expression levels of PRSS8 were
also determined in esophageal cancer, prostate cancer, breast cancer,
liver cancer and lung cancer using tissue microarray (TMA) by
immunohistochemical staining. Consistent with those in colorectal cancer,
PRSS8 protein levels were reduced in all the five cancers and the
reduction was associated with cancer differentiation. Further analysis
revealed that the patients with lower expression of PRSS8 in esophageal
cancer were likely to have a shorter survival time. Functional studies by
gain- and loss-expression of PRSS8 showed that increased PRSS8 expression
inhibited colon cancer cell proliferation, promoted apoptosis, attenuated
cell migration and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Mechanistic
study showed tumor suppression of PRSS8 was linked to Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling pathways. Moreover, PRSS8 interacted with Sphk1 to target S1P
and affect EMT/metastasis. Lastly, PRSS8 inhibited colorectal cancer cell
growth in tumor-bearing mice, and purified PRSS8 protein showed
therapeutic effects in vitro and nude mice. Taken together, this study
has identified PRSS8 as a tumor suppressor in colorectal cancer and acts
as a key regulator in colorectal cancer formation, progression and
outcomes. Therefore, PRSS8 could be a useful biomarker for monitoring
colorectal carcinogenesis and progression, and also could have a
therapeutic potential for cancers.Note: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

