Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human papillomavirus (HPV) type distribution in multi-ethnic
cohort of women: Implications for vaccination programs


Introduction: HPV is linked to many genital and oropharyngeal cancers,
and current HPV vaccines target 2 oncogenic HPV types (16 and 18), which
are estimated to account for 70% of cervical cancer cases. We sought to
determine type distributions among a multi-ethnic cohort of women to
understand what proportion of infections are covered by current and
proposed vaccines.Methods: We analyzed cervical specimens from a cohort
of 536 non-pregnant women from four clinical centers in the United States
and Canada. HPV genotyping was performed using the Linear Array HPV
Genotyping Test (Roche), which detects 37 HPV types. We calculated
prevalence of HPV types (individually and grouped by those types included
in the currently approved bivalent and quadrivalent vaccines and the
nonavalent vaccine currently being developed) by age, race/ethnicity, and
histology.Results: Overall the prevalence of any HPV type in the entire
cohort was 57%. More than a quarter of all specimens showed infection
with multiple HPV infections with 6 types being the most detected in a
single specimen. The prevalence of oncogenic types on the array ranged
from 36% among women with normal histology to 88% and 92% among those
with low-grade and high-grade lesions, respectively. Among women with
high-grade lesions the prevalence of types 16/18 was only 45% while the
prevalence of types in the nonavalent vaccine was 85%. Prevalence of
oncogenic types decreased by age group with women less than 30 having a
prevalence of 63%, while in those over age 50 it was 34%. HPV16 was the
most prevalent type among non-Hispanic white women (19%), but not among
African-American (0%) or Hispanic (2%) women. HPV58 and HPV58/59 were the
most common types among African-American and Hispanic women,
respectively. Among non-Hispanic whites, 50% of prevalent oncogenic types
were covered by current vaccines, while 81% would be covered by the
nonavalent vaccine. In comparison, only 32% of infections among
African-American and 29% among Hispanic women were covered by current
vaccines, compared to 86% and 75%, respectively, for the nonavalent
vaccine. In fact, African American women had 2.5-fold higher prevalence
of HPV 58 compared to non-Hispanic white women. Of note, Asian women were
more than four-times as likely to be infected with multiple HPV genotypes
compared to non-Hispanic white women.Conclusions: Our findings suggest
that a nonavalent vaccine would cover more of the prevalent HPV genotypes
present across racial/ethnic groups when compared to current vaccines.
These results also suggest that even though more infections occur among
younger women (50) are also infected. Further, 14-25% of currently
prevalent HPV types would still not be covered by next generation
vaccines.

