Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive Pan-Genomic characterization of adrenocortical
carcinoma


Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a rare neoplasm with a heterogeneous
outcome and limited treatment options. To understand its molecular and
genomic landscape as a part of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project, we
performed the genomic, transcriptomic, epigenomic and proteomic profiling
of 91 ACCs.We identified potential driving alterations including
amplifications (TERT, TERF2 and CDK4), deletions (ZNRF3, CDKN2A and RB1)
and point mutations in genes unknown to participate in adrenal disease
(RPL22) and genes known to initiate familial syndromes that occasionally
include adrenocortical neoplasms (TP53, CTNNB1, PRKAR1A, MEN1). The
finding of PRKAR1A expands the catalogue of pathogenic pathways
underlying ACC, suggesting of the protein kinase alpha signaling pathway
as a potential target for molecular interventions. Novel transcript
fusions potentially leading to overactive kinases included EXOSC10-MTOR
and PPP1CB-BRE.DNA copy number analysis unveiled prevalent DNA losses
leading to hypodiploidy as well as whole genome doubling (WGD) in 51% of
ACC. The similar penetrance of loss of heterozygosity before and after
WGD suggests a sequential development from hypodiploidy to polyploidy
along the doubling in a subset of ACCs, which was endorsed by the worse
outcome for WGD samples relative to nonWGD ACCs. An association between
TERT expression and WGD was observed, suggesting a role for telomere
regulation. These findings present ACC as a model disease for studies of
WGD which is a frequent event in many tumor types.Unsupervised clustering
of DNA methylation, copy number, gene expression, miRNA expression and
protein abundance converged into three classes with specific biological
characteristics and a respective median event free survival of 8, 38 and
>100 months (p-value 1.7e-13). Comparison of the subtypes suggested
additional drivers such as protein kinase C (PKC) phosphorylation and
upregulation of a miRNA cluster at chromosome Xq27.3, which complemented
the genomic alterations identified in these subtypes.To gain more
insights into this rare cancer type, we placed ACC in a broader context
of cancer genomic profiles including an array of other cancer types.
These analyses revealed interesting shared features, including
beta-catenin activation with a subset of endometroid cancer, DNA mismatch
repair gene mutational signature with gastrointestinal cancers and a
smoking signature with lung cancer. These findings highlight the
commonalities between ACC and other lineages of cancer.Taken together, we
found Wnt signaling pathway and p53/Rb signaling pathway were the most
frequently altered pathways in ACC. Meanwhile, new players surfaced from
our analyses including the PKA and PKC pathways. Our results present a
comprehensive genomic landscape and refined molecular classification of
ACC improve our understanding of its pathogenesis, and will ultimately
improve the care of patients.

