Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD4 T cells targeting citrullinated vimentin reject advanced tumors


CD4 cells are potent effectors but CD4 responses to tumour associated
antigens are attenuated. Cellular stress induces autophagy which leads to
modification of proteins recognised by the immune system. In the absence
of inflammation, immunity is regulated, whereas in its presence CD4
responses to modified self-antigens are stimulated. T cells commonly
target modified self-antigens and have been shown to play a role in the
pathophysiology of several autoimmune diseases. In this study the ability
of these CD4 cells to target cancer has been explored. One modification
is conversion of arginine to citrulline. Peptidylarginine deiminases
(PADs), are a family of calcium dependent enzymes found in a variety of
tissues, where their role is post translation citrullination of proteins.
Citrullination is conversion of the positively charge aldimine group ( =
NH) group of arginine to the neutrally charged ketone group ( = O) of
citrulline. Immunisation with citrullinated vimentin peptides induced IFN
and granzyme B secreting CD4 T cells in response to autophagic tumour
targets. The induced CD4 responses to citrullinated self-peptide epitopes
show minimal reactivity to the unmodified sequence. A single immunization
with modified peptide, up to 14 days after tumour implant, resulted in
long term survival in 60-90% of animals with no associated toxicity. The
anti-tumour responses were dependent upon CD4 but not on CD8 T cells.
This study provides the first evidence that tumours can present
citrullinated peptides that can be targets for CD4 cells. This
presentation is dependent upon autophagy and PAD enzymes. The CD4 T cells
release IFN and show direct cytotoxicity which results in potent
anti-tumour responses in vivo. This approach is being fast tracked into
the clinic in patient's whose tumours express vimentin. This could be
patients with mesenchymal tumours or in patients whose tumours undergo
epithelial to mesenchymal transition as vimentin is one of the first
proteins to be expressed in this transition.

