Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymorphisms in vitamin D-related genes and risk of breast cancer


Vitamin D is hypothesized to decrease breast cancer risk by controlling
cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis, and estrogen synthesis
and signalling in breast tissue. Transport of circulating vitamin D to
sites of action is facilitated by vitamin D binding protein, encoded by
the GC gene, whereupon it binds to the vitamin D receptor, encoded by the
VDR gene. Given that polymorphisms in the GC and VDR gene have not been
consistently associated with breast cancer risk, our objective was to
assess the associations of vitamin D-related genes with breast cancer
risk, accounting for ethnicity and menopausal status, and to determine
these associations according to tumour receptor status defined by
expression of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and
human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2). A case-control study of
1,037 breast cancer cases and 1,050 controls age-frequency matched in
Vancouver, British Columbia and Kingston, Ontario was used. The
distribution and associations of 21 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) of the GC and VDR gene with breast cancer risk and breast tumour
subtypes were investigated among premenopausal and postmenopausal
European and Asian women in stratified analyses. Following false
discovery rate adjustment, no SNP was associated with breast cancer risk
among any subgroup. However, among European women, two SNPs in the VDR
gene, rs1544410 (OR = 0.38, 95% CI: 0.21 - 0.70) and rs7967152 (OR =
2.80, 95% CI: 1.62 - 4.85) were associated with risk of ER-/PR-/HER2+
breast tumour subtype, but not with other breast tumour subtypes. Breast
tumour subtypes are proposed to be etiologically distinct disease states,
with different risk factors and prognostic outcomes. Interactions between
variations in vitamin D-related genes and breast tumour subtypes are
biologically plausible given our current understanding of
anticarcinogenic properties of vitamin D elicited through the regulation
of cell growth and reproductive hormone synthesis. These findings provide
additional insight into the etiologic differences among breast tumour
subtypes.

