Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch inhibitors and chemoradiation in an orthotopic glioblastoma
model


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and malignant brain
tumor in adults. Aggressive multimodal treatment using surgery followed
by radiotherapy and chemotherapy extends the median survival of GBM
patients to approximately one year after diagnosis. Treatment is not
curative because of the intrinsic and acquired radiation resistance of a
subpopulation of tumor cells. Notch inhibition has been shown to impair
the tumorigenic capacity of these cells as well as enhance their
sensitivity towards radiation. Therefore, we investigated if a highly
potent and clinically approved Notch pathway inhibitor (g-secretase
inhibitor) improves tumor control when combined with radiotherapy and
chemotherapy in an orthotopic GBM mouse model.To investigate the
treatment efficacy of combinations treatments between standard of care
treatment (radiotherapy and temozolomide) and Notch inhibitors, we used a
three dimensional spheroid growth assay using both established and
primary human glioma cell lines in which spheroid volume growth delay was
quantitatively monitored. In addition, we assessed the expression of the
putative glioma stem cell marker CD133 using flow cytometry. Furthermore,
therapeutic efficacy of these combination treatments was als assessed in
vivo in an orthotopic glioma tumor model (U87-luc) wherein tumor
progression was evaluated using bioluminescence (BLI) and
contrast-enhanced micro-computed tomography (CT) imaging. A small animal
precision irradiation platform (PXI, XRAD 225Cx, CT, USA) was used for
micro-CT imaging and irradiation delivery of conformal doses between 2-
10 Gy to intracranial tumors in mice receiving single or combination
treatments with Notch inhibitors and chemotherapy.Results: Notch blockade
alone did not affect the sphere volume compared to control, whereas
combination treatment with radiation and / or temozolomide resulted in a
substantial spheroid growth delay (p = 0.004). Irradiation enhanced the
expression of the stem cell marker CD133, while Notch blockade reduced
CD133 expression. In intracranial tumours we found a strong correlation
between CT and BLI imaging of tumor growth (Pearson coefficient (r) =
0.85, p = 0.001). The potential of Notch inhibition combined with
precision radiotherapy and chemotherapy in our orthotopic GBM model is
currently being determined and the outcome of this study will be
presented.

