Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2 specific adoptive T cells shown to localize and infiltrate
all sites of disease using combined SPECT and PET imaging


Adoptive T cell therapy has been shown to stimulate anti-tumor response
in multiple cancers, however these responses have not been robust or
durable. In previous studies, indium-111 labeled T cells have functioned
normally but were either not present at all sites of metastatic disease
or not able to infiltrate the sites of disease. In breast cancer,
adoptive HER2 targeted T cells were unable to penetrate visceral
metastases. Previous work in our laboratory has demonstrated that HER2
vaccine-primed autologous adoptive T cells were safe and well tolerated.
In this phase I study, HER2 positive breast cancer patients received
three HER2 peptide vaccines before plasmapheresis and ex-vivo expansion
of HER2 specific autologous T cells to evaluate the immune and clinical
response to adoptive T cell therapy in breast cancer. In one patient, the
trafficking of indium-111 labeled T cells was also evaluated using SPECT
and PET imaging.An aliquot of 1107 expanded T cells were labeled with 300
uCi of indium-111 and given with the third T cell infusion. Prior in
vitro studies had demonstrated that labeled HER2 expanded T had similar
viability (at 24 hours 971% viability with unlabeled cells and 90.91.1%
viability with 480 uCI labeled cells) and interferon gamma release (2638
pg/mL released in unlabeled cells and 208.511 released in 480 uCi labeled
cells) as unlabeled HER2 expanded T cells when stimulated by IL2. SPECT
imaging demonstrated that the T cells trafficked to all the metastatic
sites of disease by 24 hours and completely infiltrated the tumor. The
patient studied had metastases to her skull, left axilla, sternum,
bilateral proximal humeri, and sacrum. The corrected indium-111 uptake at
24 hours varied from 2.27 counts per pixel in the R proximal humerus to
6.28 counts per pixel in the R sacrum and remained elevated at 48 hours
(for example a continued 6.9 counts/pixel signal at the R sacrum).
Concurrent PET CT imaging demonstrated FDG flare at 48 hours at all sites
of metastatic disease including a 1.3 fold increase in the R proximal
humerus and a 1.3 fold increase in the L proximal humerus signal over
baseline scans. This increased FDG uptake had resolved 1 month after
therapy. After this study, the patient had stable disease for 18 months.
She had a robust response to each T cell infusion and the booster
vaccines, including fevers, headaches, and increased pain at the sites of
metastatic disease. These symptoms have been associated with a disease
specific T cell response. This study demonstrates by a novel method of
concurrent SPECT and PET imaging that the ex-vivo expanded HER2 specific
T cells were able to traffic to and fully infiltrate all sites of
metastatic disease causing an acute FDG-PET flare and prolonged stable
disease in a HER2 positive breast cancer patient with bone-only
metastatic disease. Further studies are now needed to confirm if this
imaging method can be used universally in adoptive T cell studies.

