Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transfection of connexin 43 enhances sunitinib-induced apoptosis
in malignant mesothelioma cells possibly via its interaction with Bax


Introduction: Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is an aggressive tumor arising
from mesothelial cells. MM is an increasing tumor worldwide with poor
prognosis due to its chemo and radioresistant characteristics. We are
aiming to enhance chemosensitivity of MM, and focus our attention on
connexin (Cx), which is a component of intercellular channel called gap
junction (GJ). Various evidences suggest that cellular physiology is
maintained via GJ function. However, in cancer cells, GJ function is
often aberrant, associating with the decreased Cx expression. Previously,
we have shown that the sensitivity of MM cells to cisplatin was enhanced
by increasing expression of Cx43, which is the major Cx subtype in
mesothelial cells. Recently, it is suggested that MM is a highly
angiogenic tumor and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling
pathway plays a key role in pathogenesis of MM. Therefore, tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are thought to be new prominent therapeutic
agents for this tumor; however, they displayed a limited therapeutic
activity in MM patients. Hence, the restoration of Cx expression would be
beneficial to treatments with sunitinib (SU), a representative TKI, to
exert an antiproliferative effect in MM patients. The present study aims
to evaluate the effect of Cx43 transfection on the cytotoxicity of SU in
MM cells.Methods: We used H28, a human MM cell line, to transfect Cx43
gene. The transfected cell was named H28-T. Cell viability was assessed
by MTT assay. SubG1 population (suggested apoptotic cell population) was
measured by flow cytometry. Protein interaction and expression level were
analyzed by western blotting after immunoprecipitation.Results: At first,
sensitivity to SU was compared between H28 and H28-T. Cell viability of
H28-T was significantly lower than that of H28 in the presence of 0.38-10
M SU. Moreover, the rate of SubG1 population was significantly higher in
H28-T than in H28 in the presence of 10 M SU. Next, the mechanism of
enhanced cytotoxicity of SU was investigated using H28-T. To examine the
involvement of GJ function, the combined treatment with SU and
18-glycyrrhetinic acid, a GJ inhibitor, was performed; however, cell
viability was not altered as compared to SU treatment alone. The
interaction between Cx43 and Bax, a proapoptotic factor, was then
investigated. It was shown that Bax was immunoprecipitated with an
anti-Cx43 antibody. Protein expression of Bax was higher in H28-T than in
H28. Furthermore, a cleaved (active) form of Bax was detected by
treatment with 10 M SU only in H28-T.Conclusion: These findings indicate
that Cx43 directly interacts with Bax, and this interaction may be
involved in enhancement of SU-induced apoptosis in MM cells through a GJ
function-independent mechanism.

