Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The selective ERK inhibitor BVD-523 is active in models of MAPK
pathway-dependent cancers, including those with intrinsic and acquired
drug resistance


The MAPK (RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK) pathway is activated in many cancers, and the
clinical efficacy of BRAF and MEK inhibitors in melanoma confirms that
targeting the MAPK pathway has therapeutic potential. Unfortunately,
intrinsic and acquired drug resistance limits use of MAPK-directed
therapies, and resistance is often associated with activated ERK
signaling. Here, we report characterization of BVD-523 (ulixertinib), a
novel small-molecule ERK1/2 kinase inhibitor currently under
investigation in Phase 1 clinical trials. BVD-523 potently and
selectively inhibits ERK1 and ERK2 kinases in a reversible,
ATP-competitive fashion. Consistent with its mechanism of action, BVD-523
inhibits signal transduction, cell proliferation, and cell survival, most
potently in cell lines bearing mutations that activate MAPK pathway
signaling. Similarly, single-agent BVD-523 inhibits tumor growth in vivo
in BRAF-mutant melanoma and colorectal xenografts as well as in
KRAS-mutant colorectal and pancreatic models. Combination treatment with
BVD-523 and dabrafenib inhibits tumor growth in a BRAF-mutant melanoma
model.Importantly, BVD-523 is effective in several models that show
intrinsic or acquired resistance to other MAPK pathway inhibitors.
BVD-523 inhibits with equivalent potency the growth of parental cells or
those cultured for resistance to dabrafenib, trametinib, or the
combination of both drugs. Additionally, BVD-523 inhibits growth in
wild-type cells and a RAF/MEK cross-resistant cell line bearing a MEK1
Q56P mutation with similar potency. Lastly, single-agent BVD-523 inhibits
the growth of a patient-derived tumor xenograft harboring
cross-resistance to dabrafenib, trametinib, and the combination treatment
following clinical progression on a MEK inhibitor.Phase 1 trials of
BVD-523 are currently recruiting patients with advanced solid tumors
(NCT0178429) or hematologic malignancies (NCT02296242). Eligibility
criteria include diagnosis according to certain genetic features, and
treatment in backgrounds including progression following prior MAPK
targeted therapy. The primary objective of these studies is to identify
the recommended Phase 2 dose(s) for single-agent BVD-523 treatment.
Additional objectives include pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
assessments, and preliminary measures of efficacy. The solid tumor
protocol has met its study objectives in Part 1 (defining the safety
profile and maximum tolerated dose), and will be reported separately;
findings appear consistent with the activity profile defined in
preclinical studies.In total, preclinical and clinical studies will help
elucidate how BVD-523 (ulixertinib) may be used as a novel agent in
MAPK-directed therapeutic strategies, including for patients that have
failed treatment due to intrinsic or acquired resistance and active
signaling through ERK.

