Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of IGF1 on cancer and stromal cells of human pancreatic
tumors


Background: Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) exerts a broad
anti-apoptotic function, and IGF1/IGF1-receptor (IGF-1R) signaling
pathway plays a crucial role in human cancer development and progression.
Stromal cells associated with cancer cells are considered an important
component of tumor microenvironment, including pancreatic cancers.
Previously we have shown an increased expression of IGF1 in pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma stroma. The goal of our study was to investigate
the effect of IGF1 on expression of important for tumor progression genes
that regulate epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cancer and
stromal cells of pancreatic tumors. Methods: The effect of IGF1 was
tested on five pancreatic cancer cell lines (AsPC-1, BxPC-3, Capan-2,
MiaPaCa-2 and Panc1), all cultivated on cell medium with reduced levels
of serum. Also, we used primary cultures of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma stromal cells on early passages. Gene expression was
analyzed via Western Blotting and qRT-PCR. Results: In reduced serum
medium IGF1 has been shown to stimulate proliferation in all cell lines
and primary cultures. In cancer cell lines MiaPaCa-2 and Panc1 incubation
with IGF1 lead to an increase in levels of SNAIL and Zeb1 proteins after
120 hours of incubation. There was an elevation in expression of Twist
protein in all cancer cell lines after 120 hours of incubation. However,
we have not detected a decrease in levels of epithelial differentiation
marker E-cadherin, nor a notable increase in levels of mesenchymal
differentiation markers N-cadherin and Vimentin in IGF1-treated cancer
cell lines. Only a slight decrease in E-cadherin expression was shown in
IGF1-treated AsPC-1 and Panc1 cells. Treatment of primary stromal cells
of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma with IGF1 results in a slight
elevation of N-cadherin and Vimentin expression, as well as a significant
increase in anti-apoptotic protein survivin levels. Incubation of stromal
cells with specific low-molecular weight inhibitor of IGF-1R was shown to
significantly increase levels of SNAI1 gene expression and increase SNAIL
protein levels. Conclusions: Analysis of EMT markers and transcription
factors in pancreatic cancer cell lines does not allow us to draw
conclusions about the ability of IGF1 to cause EMT. Despite increased
levels of SNAIL, Zeb1 and Twist proteins, epithelial cancer cells
retained stable expression of E-cadherin and did not show an increase in
mesenchymal marker expression. In pancreatic tumor stromal cultures IGF1
increases mesenchymal cell phenotype and, evidently, increases cell
survival rate by stimulating survivin expression. The effect of IGF-1R
inhibitor on the activation of SNAIL expression, as we assume, was caused
by interactions between signaling pathways of IGF1 and SHH in stromal
cell cultures.The work is supported by grant of Russian Foundation of
Basic Research 13-04-40171-KOMFINote: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

