Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-targeting ROS and CLU-mediated stress response using SMIP004 (a
novel inducer of ROS and cancer cell selective apoptosis) and OGX-011 in
MDV3100-resistant, castrate-resistant prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is the most common male carcinoma in North America and
the second leading cause of cancer related death in men. While new drugs
targeting Androgen Receptor (AR), like abiraterone and MDV3100,
significantly increase survival of patients with castration resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC), many patients still die of metastatic resistant
disease. Continued therapeutic improvements towards prolonging the
chronicity of CRPC will require characterization of innate and
stress-activated survival responses, and rational combinatorial
co-targeting strategies designed to abrogate them. OGX-011 is a second
generation antisense oligonucleotide targeting Clusterin (CLU) currently
under evaluation in phase III clinical trials. CLU is a molecular
chaperone involved in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, protein
homeostasis and in many signaling and transcriptional survival networks.
It is cytoprotective under stress conditions and correlated with
treatment resistance in prostate and other cancers. SMIP004 is a novel
drug that modulates cell cycle and ER stress and unfolded protein
responses (UPR). Some of its fuctions have been correlated to Reactive
Oxygen Species (ROS) modulation. However, the exact mechanisms of action
of SMIP004 are not completely understood.Cell survival of LNCaP
(castration sensitive), C-42 (castration resistant), M42D, M49F (MDV3100
resistant) and PC3 (AR negative) human prostate cancer cell lines was
assessed by crystal violet assay. CLU silencing was obtained by
transfecting cells with short interference RNA or OGX011. Western
blotting analysis was used to detect proteins expression and RT-QPCR for
mRNA levels. ROS were evaluated in live cells after incubation with
2,7-DCFDA by FACS Canto II.Consistent with induction of proteotoxic
stress, SMIP004 significantly up-regulated CLU mRNA and protein levels in
prostate cancer cell lines sensitive and resistant to MDV3100. SMIP004 as
well as MDV3100 were able to increase ROS production. Interestingly CLU
silencing, through siRNA or OGX011, inhibited ROS while CLU
overexpression, after SMIP004 and/or MDV3100, significantly induced ROS
production in MDV3100 sensitive and resistant cells. Moreover SMIP004
efficiently controlled cell survival of MDV3100 sensitive and resistant
prostate cancer cells but the combination with clusterin inhibitors had a
synergistic effect in these cells. Interestingly, SMIP004 reduced AR
variant-7, a AR splicing variant associated with abiraterone and MDV3100
resistance, in both MDV3100 sensitive and resistant cells.Clusterin plays
a central role in ROS tolerance in prostate cancer cells. Clusterin
inhibition in combination with SMIP004 is able to control cell survival
of MDV-3100 sensitive and resistant cells also trough a modulation of
oxydative stress.

