Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulatory role of lactate dehydrogenase A during head and neck
carcinogenesis


Background: Head and Neck (H&N) cancer is one of the most prevalent
neoplasms worldwide. It is well accepted that H&N cancer development is a
multistep process resulting from internal and external cellular/molecular
and physiological challenges leading to a number of genetic, epigenetic
and metabolic abnormalities. In comparison with mitochondrial energy
production in normal cells, previous studies have shown that cancer cells
preferentially utilize the by-products of glycolysis, regardless of
oxygen status, as an energy source. In view of this physiological
variance, many investigations demonstrated that manipulations of
glycolytic enzymes could potentially modulate cell malignancy of various
cancers. Lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), one of the glycolytic enzymes
essential for conversion of pyruvate into lactate, has been previously
emphasized for its potential cancer-promoting effect; nevertheless,
LDHA-mediated regulation for cellular malignancy and its underlying
molecular mechanisms during H&N carcinogenesis is still poorly
understood. Methods: Current experimental scheme was two-folds. It was
initiated by histological analysis for LDHA expression in normal and
tumorous tongue epithelium from animals treated with oral carcinogen
4-Nitroquinoline 1-oxide (4-NQO) to define potential role of LDHA between
normal and cancerous oral tissues. Further in vitro establishment of
genetic (shRNA) and chemical (oxamate) induced LDHA deficient H&N cancer
cells were carried out and multifaceted cancer phenotypes including cell
growth/survival, cell motility, cell differentiation and sensitivity to
chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin were examined in LDHA deficient cells.
Results: 4-NQO treatment stimulated tongue epithelial hyperplasia as
histological analysis showed progressive dysplasia/carcinoma correlated
with longer (12-week) 4-NQO treatment. LDHA expression was detected in
basal layer of normal mouse tongue epithelium and enriched in suprabasal
layer in 4-NQO induced hyperplastic/dysplastic tongue precancerous
epithelium as well as aggressive tongue carcinoma suggesting that LDHA
plays an important role during tongue carcinogenesis. In agreement with
in vivo data, LDHA is highly expressed in H&N cancer cells from different
origins (tongue, oropharyngeal or oral squamous cells). LDHA deficient
head and neck H&N cancer cells were successfully established and showed
(1) decreased cell growth; (2) downregulated cell migration, invasion and
anchorage-independent growth; (3) greater expression of differentiation
marker involucrin and (4) increased cisplatin sensitivity in comparison
with control cells revealing LDHA-mediated tumorigenic regulations.
Conclusions: Present study confirmed that suppression of glycolytic
enzymes LDHA could downregulate cell malignancy in H&N cancer cells. The
outcomes are of great potential to develop the metabolism mediated
anti-cancer treatment for H&N cancer patients.

