Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PEGPH20 enhances chemotherapy in patient-derived and traditional
cell-derived xenograft NSCLC models


Hyaluronan (HA) accumulates in the tumor microenvironment (TME) of many
solid tumors, including prostate, colon, breast, stomach, ovary, pancreas
and lung, and HA accumulation is associated with tumor progression and a
negative clinical outcome. Accordingly, the HA degrading enzyme pegylated
recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) was developed to allow
systemic therapy and enable treatment of HA-high tumors. Preclinical
studies have demonstrated that PEGPH20-mediated HA removal from HA-rich
xenograft tumors in mice decreases tumor interstitial fluid pressure and
water content; resulting in decompression of tumor vasculature, increased
tumor perfusion and enhanced chemotherapeutic (CTX) activity. As
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most common cancer worldwide
and is characterized by high levels of HA (30%), we aimed to evaluate
PEGPH20 enhancement of anti-tumor activity of NSCLC CTXs. Specifically,
using both cell derived xenograft (CDX) models, peritibial H2170/HAS3
human NSCLC xenografts, and patient derived xenograft (PDX) models, we
investigated CTX tumor growth inhibition (TGI)+/- PEGPH20. Nude mice were
inoculated with either H2170/HAS3 cells adjacent to the tibial periosteum
or patient derived tumor fragments of human NSCLCs implanted
subcutaneously, and tumor growth was monitored via ultrasonography or
caliper, respectively. When tumors reached 400 mm3, mice were staged into
four groups: (1) vehicle; (2) PEGPH20, (3) CTX(s), or (4) PEGPH20 +
CTX(s). PEGPH20 alone depleted tumor HA in both CDX and PDX models. In
CDX studies, PEGPH20 increased tumor perfusion, reduced hypoxia and
decreased HIF-1 expression (pHyaluronan (HA) accumulates in the tumor
microenvironment (TME) of many solid tumors, including prostate, colon,
breast, stomach, ovary, pancreas and lung, and HA accumulation is
associated with tumor progression and a negative clinical outcome.
Accordingly, the HA degrading enzyme pegylated recombinant human
hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) was developed to allow systemic therapy and
enable treatment of HA-high tumors. Preclinical studies have demonstrated
that PEGPH20-mediated HA removal from HA-rich xenograft tumors in mice
decreases tumor interstitial fluid pressure and water content; resulting
in decompression of tumor vasculature, increased tumor perfusion and
enhanced chemotherapeutic (CTX) activity. As non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) is the most common cancer worldwide and is characterized by high
levels of HA (30%), we aimed to evaluate PEGPH20 enhancement of
anti-tumor activity of NSCLC CTXs. Specifically, using both cell derived
xenograft (CDX) models, peritibial H2170/HAS3 human NSCLC xenografts, and
patient derived xenograft (PDX) models, we investigated CTX tumor growth
inhibition (TGI)+/- PEGPH20. Nude mice were inoculated with either
H2170/HAS3 cells adjacent to the tibial periosteum or patient derived
tumor fragments of human NSCLCs implanted subcutaneously, and tumor
growth was monitored via ultrasonography or caliper, respectively. When
tumors reached 400 mm3, mice were staged into four groups: (1) vehicle;
(2) PEGPH20, (3) CTX(s), or (4) PEGPH20 + CTX(s). PEGPH20 alone depleted
tumor HA in both CDX and PDX models. In CDX studies, PEGPH20 increased
tumor perfusion, reduced hypoxia and decreased HIF-1 expression (p<0.05).
A summary table of the TGI data is shown below. The average TGI for
PEGPH20 plus CTX(s) was superior to all CTX(s) alone, suggesting that
enzymatic depletion of TME HA increases tumor sensitivity to NSCLC CTXs,
likely due to increased CTX access into the TME. PEGPH20 clinical trials
in NSCLC are currently in development.

