Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lysyl oxidase-like 2 (LOXL2) from cancer-associated fibroblasts
stimulates the progression of gastric carcinoma


Purpose: Lysyl oxidase families are involved in a variety of pathological
processes, including cancer progression. Lysyl oxidase-like 2 (LOXL2) in
the tumor stroma was mainly expressed in fibroblasts, which are a major
stromal compartment of gastric cancer. Significance of LOXL2 remains
unclear in gastric carcinoma. The aim of this study was to clarify the
role of fibroblast-derived LOXL2 in the development of gastric
cancer.Methods: Two gastric cancer cell lines, OCUM-12 and NUGC-3, and
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) were used in this in vitro study. The
effect of fibroblast-derived LOXL2 on the motility of gastric cancer
cells was analyzed by wound-healing assay, double-chamber invasion assay,
and western blot. The correlation between LOXL2 expression and the
clinicopathological features of 548 primary gastric carcinomas was
examined by immunohistochemistry.Results: LOXL2 mRNA expression of CAF,
was significantly higher than that of normal fibroblasts. CAF
significantly stimulated the migration and invasion of OCUM-12 and NUGC-3
cells. This motility-stimulating ability of CAF was inhibited by LOXL2
siRNA. Western blot analysis indicated that phosphorylation of focal
adhesion kinase (FAK) in cancer cells was increased by the conditioned
medium from CAF, and was not affected by the conditioned medium from
LOXL2 siRNA-treated CAF. Immunohistochemical study indicated that LOXL2
expression in stromal cells was significantly associated with tumor
invasion depth, lymph node metastasis, lymphatic invasion, venous
invasion, and peritoneal dissemination. The overall survival of all
patients with LOXL2-positive stromal cells was significantly poorer than
those with LOXL2-negative stromal cells. Multivariable logistic
regression analysis revealed that LOXL2 expression in stromal cells was
an independent predictive parameter for the overall survival of patients
with gastric cancer.Conclusion: LOXL2 from CAF may stimulate the motility
of gastric cancer cells. LOXL2 expression in stromal cells may be a
useful prognostic factor for patients with gastric cancer.

