Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilizing cell surface markers to define osteosarcoma and the
stages of osteoblast differentiation


BackgroundOsteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary malignant bone
tumor in children. Despite advances in OS treatment, survival rates have
remained stagnant over the past three decades. This may in part be
reflective of the complex nature of OSalthough all OS are pleomorphic,
spindle shaped cells that are capable of producing osteoid, this is often
where the similarities between tumors ends. Tumor phenotypes can be used
to classify OS into multiple groups including the most common form,
conventional, which can be further subdivided into osteoblastic,
chondroblastic, or fibroblastic OS. Although these tumors display unique
phenotypes, they have similar response rates to standard treatments such
as chemotherapy and surgery suggesting that they may have a common
progenitor, which we seek to identify.MethodsIn order to determine the OS
cell of origin, we first performed flow cytometry analysis using cell
surface markers that are differentially expressed on mesenchymal stem
cells (MSC) and osteoblasts (OB)CD44, CD105, CD54, CD49b, CD325, and GD2.
MSCs were differentiated into OBs using induction media and cells were
collected for analysis at multiple time points in differentiation; day
(d)0, d3, d5, d10, d15, and d20. MSCs became fully differentiated OBs by
d20, as determined by alizarin red staining. Similar flow cytometry
analysis was performed on four OS standard cell lines, SaOS, U2OS, HOS,
and HOS-143B, and marker profiles were compared to MSC to OB
differentiation.ResultsCD44 and CD105 expression, both of which are known
MSC markers, was high in MSCs and immediately dropped off during
differentiation, while decrease in CD325 expression was more gradual.
CD49b expression increased over time and GD2 expression varied greatly.
CD54 expression peaked at d10 and decreased as differentiation continued.
Expression of these markers was varied in the OS standard cell lines.
These markers can be used to sort out specific populations of cells at
different time points during differentiation.Conclusions and Future
DirectionsIn this study we have identified potential markers of OB
progenitor populations and compared their expression to OS standard cell
lines. We will use these prospective makers to sort progenitor
populations and drive their differentiation into OBs, chondroblasts, and
fibroblasts in order to determine branch points in MSC differentiation.
Finally, in order to assess the potential of these cells to form OS, we
plan to transform candidate progenitor cells with human telomerase
reverse transcriptase, simian virus 40 large T antigen, and lentivirus
containing oncogenic H-Ras serially.

