Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteome signatures distinguish lung cancer subtypes, define
metabolism states, and have prognostic impact


Lung cancer is one of the most common cancers worldwide, and is the
number one cause of cancer death in both men and women. Non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 85% of lung cancers and is subdivided
into two major histological subtypes: adenocarcinoma (ADC) and squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC). There is an unmet need to better understand and
stratify NSCLC according to distinctive molecular features that may help
develop diagnostic and therapeutic strategies to improve patient
outcomes. The proteome is expected to have a pronounced and direct effect
on cancer phenotypes. Therefore, proteomic approaches hold promise as
superior methods to characterize cancers, with the ultimate goal to
translate research results into clinical utilities. Mass spectrometry
(MS)-based quantitative comprehensive proteome analysis resolved the
proteomes of human lung ADC and SCC primary tumor-derived xenografts. A
multi-protein signature able to distinguish between ADC and SCC was
identified and validated in an independent cohort of samples. The
signature is comprised of various components of the epithelial barrier
and metabolism enzymes. Signatures composed of metabolism proteins were
found to be highly recapitulated between primary and matched xenograft
tumors, and when extrapolated to DNA alterations in the encoding genes,
to have prognostic impact for overall patient survival. The ability of
NSCLC primary tumors to engraft in severely immune deficient mice is an
independent predictor of shorter disease-free survival in early-stage
NSCLC patients. Therefore, we sought to identify proteome signatures of
engraftment, which would then be tested for prognostic impact. The
proteomes of a series of >50 NSCLC primary tumors that engrafted or not
were quantitatively compared by using the so-called super-SILAC method,
in which a mixture of metabolically-labeled, stable-isotope-encoded
NSCLC-derived cell lines were used as an internal standard. ADC and SCC
tumors were analyzed, and a signature of proteins including enzymes
involved in central carbon metabolism were identified as differentially
expressed between engrafting and non-engrafting tumors. These results
highlight the significance of metabolic remodeling as a feature that
might be a determinant of more aggressive cancer phenotypes. These
results support the further development of proteome signatures to
diagnose, stratify, and precisely treat NSCLC.

