Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic profiling reveals novel targets for combination
treatment with lanreotide in neuroendocrine tumors


Somatostatin analogues (SSAs) are well established in the treatment of
neuroendocrine tumors (NETs), including small intestinal NET (SI-NET) due
to their tumor growth arrest and symptom relieving characteristics. Here
we determined the direct effects of lanreotide treatment on NET cell
lines and a primary SI-NET culture. The cell lines HC45 and H727 were
treated with a pharmacological concentration of 10 nM lanreotide for
different time periods and the proteome, analyzed by in-depth HiRIEF
LC-MS/MS, was compared with the proteome of non-treated cells. We
quantified 6 451 and 7 801 proteins in HC45 and H727. Differential
expression of the candidate proteins APC, BIRC5/survivin, BMPER,
C14orf142, FYN, INSM1 and SPAG16 was confirmed by Western blotting. The
possible direct anti-proliferative effect of lanreotide was evaluated in
the primary SI-NET culture and the HC45, H727 and BON1 cell lines, which
showed only a slight inhibition of proliferation. However, based on
proteomics driven pathway analysis a significant synergy in
anti-proliferative effect of lanreotide was observed when the small
molecule IGF1R inhibitor, NVP-AEW541, was combined with lanreotide .This
effective combination also represents an indirect model of suppressed
IGF1 activity in the NET patients treated with SSA. Targeting of survivin
with the small molecule YM155 dramatically reduced the proliferation of
HC45. We also studied the effect of lanreotide alone or in combination
with IGF-1R inhibitor on signaling pathways PI3K/Akt, Erk1/2 and P38.
P38, Erk1/2 and GSK3 phosphorylation was equally increased by lanreotide
and/or NVP-AEW541, however, lanreotide-induced AktS473 dephosphorylation
was reversed after6 hours, unlike consistent AktS473 dephosphorylation
after treating with NVP-AEW451 alone or in combination. In conclusion, we
report growth inhibitory and potential feedback pro-growth signaling of
the SSA lanreotide on NET cells, highlighting the role of SSAs in
modulation of IGF1 in NET cell growth arrest and propose combination
treatment candidate targets for improved efficacy of this agent.

