Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of the spatial interrelations among multiple types
of immune and immune related cells in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma


Cancer immunotherapy is rapidly changing the landscape of medical
oncology and research. The rise of immunomodulatory therapies such as
CTLA-4 inhibitors and the durable effects seen in many tumor types are
exciting. Despite huge success in this area, positive effects are only
observed in a percentage of treated subjects, and it is still not clear
why this is the case or how to differentiate responder from non-responder
a priori. To this end, a great deal of research is being directed towards
the development of in-situ immune profile analyses of tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs) in solid tumors that includes investigation of
interdistributions of multiple immune cells and other markers important
for immunotherapy (e.g., PD-1 and PD-L1). We present a combined method
for the simultaneous IHC staining of up to 7 antigens, multispectral
imaging (MSI), a per-cell quantitative analysis, cellular phenotyping and
multivariate hypothesized interaction distribution (HID) analysis of the
spatial interrelations among the cells within sections of standard
clinical biopsies to search for patterns correlated with clinical outcome
and therapeutic response. Whole sections of FFPE archival head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) biopsies from 130 subjects (96 male, 34
female, median 58 years, median follow up 60 months) were stained
simultaneously for CD3, CD8, CD68, FOXP3, PD-1, PD-L1 using
tyramide-conjugated fluorophores based on an Opal multiplexed IHC method.
Each section was imaged in its entirety at 4x. Using an automated region
selection method, approximately 20 multispectral images were acquired
from regions of tumor and tumor margin at 20x. Each image was segmented
into tumor, stromal and blank compartments. Cellular locations were found
using the DAPI staining. The multimarker stain intensities of each cell
were used to delineate each cell's phenotype. Patients are stratified
based on human papillomavirus (HPV) status (P16 IHC, HPV DNA PCR, HPV DNA
ISH). The phenotype, staining intensity pattern and spatial location for
each TIL was then used as input into the HID analysis for an exploration
of cellular patterns associated with good and poor clinical outcome in
HPV positive or negative HNSCC. The complexity of tumor-immune
interactions is driving the requirement for highly multiplexed in-situ
cellular analyses. It is therefore even more relevant that a method such
as exhibited here, capable of defining and measuring the effect on
patient outcome of the spatial patterns of multiple cellular phenotypes
in the tumor microenvironment is available.

