Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer activity of novel cucurbitacin analogue in pancreatic
cancer


Background: Human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth
leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States. Accumulating
studies have witnessed the malfunction of many chemotherapeutic regimens
and the current standard-of-care therapy, gemcitabine (GEM), enhances
patient survival by only few months. Cucurbitacins, naturally occurring
dietary tetracyclic triterpenoid compounds, have shown promising
anti-cancer activities. Herein, we investigated the potency and
anti-cancer efficacy of a novel analogue of cucurbitacin (Cuc D) in
pancreatic cancer cell lines and in a xenograft mouse model.
Additionally, we determined efficacy of this analogue on MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) which are important regulators of genes that have crucial roles
in pancreatic tumorigenesis.Methods: The effect of Cuc D on the growth of
pancreatic cancer cells was determined by cell proliferation assay using
six pancreatic cancer (MiaPaCa-2, CaPan-1, HPAF-II, Panc-1, BxPC-3 and
AsPc-1) cells. Cell growth kinetic assay was carried out at 24, 48, 72
and 96 h. The clonogenic potential of cancer cells was also studied using
the colony formation assay. Tumor suppressor miR-145, which is
downregulated in pancreatic cancer, directly target MUC13. Thus the
effect of Cuc D was also investigated on the expression of miR-145
through qPCR analysis. Immunoblotting techniques were performed to study
the known direct targets of miRNA-145 and its associated proteins. The
anti-cancer potential of Cuc D in pancreatic cancer was also evaluated in
vivo using a xenograft mouse model.Results: Our results demonstrate
potent anticancer effects of Cuc D on pancreatic cancer cells. Cuc D
induces dose and time dependent inhibition of cell proliferation in a
panel of gemcitabine sensitive/resistant pancreatic cancer cell line
models at nanomolar concentrations (100-500 nM). It also inhibits colony
formation and invasiveness of pancreatic cancer cells. Furthermore, Cuc D
blocks the cell cycle progression in G2/M phase and decreases the
mitochondrial membrane potential in pancreatic cancer cells. Notably, Cuc
D significantly increases the expression of tumor suppressor miR-145 in
HPAF-II cells as observed by qPCR. Furthermore, Cuc D decreases the
expression of MUC13 and its associated proteins including pAKT and HER2.
In addition, it restores the expression of p53 level as studied by
immunofluorescence technique. The expression of key oncogenic proteins
including NF-B, STAT3 (Tyr-705) and Mcl-1 were also downregulated. The
levels of PTEN and p27 (Kip1) tumor suppressor genes were increased after
Cuc D treatment. Additionally, in vivo administration of Cuc D
effectively inhibited pancreatic tumor growth in xenograft mouse
model.Conclusion: Overall, this study suggests that Cuc D modulates the
expression of key oncogenes and tumor suppressors, thus it can be a
promising therapeutic modality for pancreatic cancer prevention and
treatment.

