Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular mechanisms of regulation of cytochrome P4501A enzymes by
3-methylcholanthrene (MC) in mice in vivo


3-Methylcholanthrene (MC) is one of the most potent polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) present in cigarette smoke, diesel exhausts, and
charcoal broiled meats, etc. Cytochrome P450 (CYP)1A enzymes play key
roles in the activation of PAHs to carcinogenic metabolites. We
previously showed persistent induction of CYP1A enzymes by MC in vivo. In
this study, we tested the hypothesis that MC elicits persistent induction
of CYP1A1 in vivo by sustained transcriptional activation of the CYP1A1
promoter. Thirty two C57B6 (WT) mice were divided into two groups. Group
I was treated with vehicle corn oil (CO) (8ml/kg) and group II was
treated with a single dose of MC (100 mol/kg), i.p. Four animals from
each group were sacrificed at 6, 12, 24, and 48 h after MC withdrawal.
The mRNA levels, protein content and enzyme activities of CYP1A1 were
determined by real-time PCR, Western blotting, and fluorimetry,
respectively at different time points. In addition, the binding of
MC-AHR-AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) to the AHREs on the CYP1A1
promoter region were determined by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assay. The translocation of AHR was also analyzed by immunofluorescence.
The ChIP experiments indicated that transcriptional activation of CYP1A1
was most pronounced at 6 h, followed by 12 h, but declined at later time
points. On the other hand, the expression of CYP1A1 at the mRNA, protein
and enzyme levels persisted for up to 48 h both in lung and liver
tissues. These results suggest that transcriptional activation of CYP1A1
at 6-12 h is sufficient to result in sustained induction of CYP1A mRNA
and protein expression for up to 48 h. Isolation of the
immunoprecipitated promoter fragment (containing the xenobiotic response
elements), which binds to the MC-AHR complex, followed by
32P-postlabeling revealed the formation of MC-DNA adducts, suggesting
that DNA adducts are sequence-specific and target the CYP1A1 promoter.
Our results suggest that DNA adducts might play a role in regulation of
CYP1A1 by MC, a phenomenon that may be of relevance to PAH-mediated
carcinogenesis.

