Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Soy isoflavones and their metabolites modulate IL-12-induced NK
cell IFN- production


Soybeans and foods derived from them are a rich source of phytochemcials
that have gained attention due to their ability to affect obesity,
metabolism, cancer, and inflammation. Soy isoflavones (genistein and
daidzein) have also been shown to be differentially metabolized between
individuals. This is presumably due to differences in gut microbiota, and
can lead to production of terminal isoflavone metabolites such as
O-desmethylangolensin (ODMA) and equol. In a prior phase-I clinical study
conducted by our group, patients with prostate cancer received a novel
soy-enriched bread product. Analysis of blood and urine following soy
intervention revealed that men clustered into distinct groups based on
their ability to metabolize daidizein into either ODMA or equol. Reduced
pro-inflammatory cytokines and percentages of Tregs and MDSC were also
observed in the blood of patients after 8 weeks of soy bread intervention
as compared to baseline. Given these differences, we hypothesized that
individual isoflavones and metabolites would have unique immunomodulatory
effects upon human natural killer (NK) cell function. Although a limited
number of prior studies have evaluated how soy isoflavones or their
metabolites modulate inflammation and different immune subsets
(monocytes, macrophages, DCs), their role in NK cell biology remains
poorly defined. Understanding the role of soy isoflavones and their
metabolites in regulating NK cell activity is critical due to NK cells
importance in the anti-tumor response and immunosurveillance. We found
that the soy isoflavones and their metabolites did not affect the
viability of healthy donor PBMC (n = 3) at concentrations as high as 25M.
However, pre-treatment of healthy donor PBMC (n = 3) with genistein (mean
7.1 ng/ml 1.3) or equol (mean 6.7 ng/ml 1.8) for 4 hours and then
stimulated with IL-12/18 for 72 hours decreased IFN- production compared
to unstimulated controls (mean 26.7 ng/ml 16.1). In contrast, daidzein
and ODMA had no effect. We next utilized intracellular flow cytometry to
determine the cellular subset(s) that were modulated by soy isoflavones
or their metabolites. These data revealed that only genistein and equol
decreased the percentage of IL-12/18 induced IFN- producing NK cells
(CD56+CD3-) by 30% and 53%, respectively. There was no observed
difference in other IFN- producing immune subsets (T and NKT cells) when
cultured with the soy isoflavones or metabolites. Furthermore, we found
soy isoflavones and metabolites altered in vitro cytotoxicity of human
IL-12 stimulated NK cells. Ongoing studies in our laboratory are
elucidating the precise signaling pathways downstream of IL-12 in human
NK cells that are modulated in response to soy isoflavones and their
bioactive metabolites. This study provides critical insight regarding the
impact of dietary soy on NK cell mediated responses potentially informing
the use of soy during chemopreventive or immune based therapies.

