Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inactivation of neogenin promotes castration resistance and bone
metastasis in prostate cancer models


Increasing evidence suggests that exposure to new generation agents
targeting the AR promotes the emergence of castration-resistant stem-like
clones ultimately leading to treatment failure. In order to develop
improved therapies for castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), it is
important to understand the origin and biology of these stem-like clones.
We have observed significantly diminished levels of Neogenin (encoded by
NEO1) in CRPC. Neogenin functions as a neuronal guidance receptor but has
also been implicated in epithelial branching morphogenesis and is
homologous to DCC, which functions as a suppressor of tumor progression
in breast and colorectal cancer. We found that silencing of neogenin
induces androgen receptor (AR) dependent prostate cancer cells to undergo
an epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and acquire neuroendocrine
(NE) differentiation features. In addition, the neogenin-silenced cells
expressed high levels of the stem cell markers 4 integrin and CD44 and
formed rapidly growing tumor spheres in vitro. Intriguingly, these cells
had become castration resistant due to loss of AR expression and were
able to efficiently colonize the bone upon intracardiac injection in
immunodeficient mice. Genomic and molecular pathology studies indicated
that NEO1 expression is lost in CRPC and NEPC. To examine the
relationship between the acquisition of the castration resistant
phenotype and loss of neogenin, we have generated a series of casodex-
and enzalutamide-resistant clones from LNCaP cells. Interestingly, we
observed that a significant fraction of these clones have lost expression
of neogenin and acquired expression of the 4 integrin and are highly
metastatic in immunodeficient mice, similar to the characteristics of
CRPC observed in the clinic. To validate these results, we sought to
identify a population of 4-positive cells in the peripheral blood of
patients with CRPC. By using immunofluorescent staining and FACS
analysis, we were able to identify 4-positive circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) from the peripheral blood of CRPC patients. These cells were not
detected in the blood of healthy normal donors but their numbers
increased with disease progression. These findings identify a novel tumor
progression pathway that is likely to operate in at least a fraction of
CRPC cases.

