Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Germline genetic variation modulates tumor latency and response to
therapy in a mouse model of basal-like breast cancer


An important outcome from gene expression profiling studies of human
cancers is the identification of a molecular taxonomy of breast cancer,
and in particular, description of the basal-like breast cancer (BBC)
subtype. BBC is an aggressive subtype with frequent and early relapse and
poor survival. Unfortunately, the mechanisms underlying the poor
prognosis associated with BBC are unclear. The over-arching goal of this
project was to employ mouse strains generated through the Collaborative
Cross (CC), a large panel of recombinant inbred mice strains which can be
converted to outbred strains with reproducible genomes through the
generation of recombinant inbred intercrosses (RIX). Female C3(1)/SV40 T
antigen transgenic mice (C3-TAgs; FVB background), a model determined by
genomic analysis to reflect the BBC subtype, were bred to recombinant
inbred CC males, creating a cohort of 500+ F1 experimental mice in 20 RIX
lines to examine various phenotypic and genotypic changes. Mice were
weighed weekly and were palpated twice weekly to determine tumor latency.
Tumor-bearing mice were observed for tumor progression ([21 day tumor
volume - initial volume/initial volume] x 100) and multiplicity (number
of tumors at 21 days). Subsequent cohorts of selected RIX lines were
treated with trametinib (MEK1/2 inhibitor), BKM120 (panPI3K inhibitor) or
everolimus (mTOR inhibitor), and after three weeks of treatment, the
percent change in tumor volume was used to assess the objective response
rate of the therapies. The average tumor latency of all RIX mice was 22.8
weeks; however 4 RIX lines (1566, 2014, 5155 and 5156) had significantly
longer latencies (average 34.1-44.5 wks), while 3 RIX lines (1515, 5066,
and 3067) were observed to develop palpable tumors significantly earlier.
Line 3067 also had significantly increased body mass relative to parental
C3Tag mice. Two lines (559 and 3140) were noted to have increased tumor
multiplicity. Efficacy trials showed all of the RIX lines (relative to
parental C3TAgs), demonstrated increased resistance to each
chemotherapeutic agent studied, with three exceptions: line 559 was
sensitive to trametinib; line 1515 was sensitive to BKM120; and line 8005
was sensitive to everolimus. These findings suggest the introduction of
germline variation (by breeding C3TAg mice with CC lines) modulates host
characteristics as well as BBC development and therapeutic responses.
Genetic and genomic analyses (including sequencing of candidate gene
regions and microarray analyses) are underway to identify dominant
genetic modifiers and associated molecular targets underlying the
observed differential phenotypes. We conclude that these RIX strains
represent useful model systems for identifying genetic modifiers and host
characteristics that influence the development and/or chemotherapeutic
response of BBC.

