Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genetic and epigenetic analysis defines novel molecular
clusters in rhabdomyosarcoma


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma in
childhood. Recent sequencing studies have revealed a number of recurrent
mutational targets of RMS including multiple components of the
FGFR4/RAS/AKT pathway. However, due to the limited number of the
mutational targets, our knowledge about molecular mechanisms of RMS is
still incomplete. Moreover, relatively low mutation numbers in RMS
suggests involvement of other mechanisms, such as epigenetic alterations,
which have not been addressed in the previous studies. To address these
issues, we conducted an integrated genetic/epigenetic study using whole
exome sequencing (WES) and transcriptome sequencing (WTS), SNP array and
methylation array.We first performed WES of 16 paired tumors, of which 8
tumors were analyzed by WTS. We first sequenced the exome of 16 paired
tumors/normal samples, of which 3 were also analyzed for 2 relapsed and
one metastatic samples. Among 690 candidate somatic changes detected by
our pipeline, 604 in 531 genes (88%) were validated by deep sequencing
and included 512 missense, 31 nonsense, and 21 splice site single
nucleotide variants (SNVs) as well as 32 frameshift and 8 in-frame
indels. Although novel recurrent fusion genes were not detected by WTS,
we identified 18 recurrent mutated genes by whole exome sequencing. Among
these, 14 putative driver genes were selected for subsequently targeted
deep sequencing in the entire cohort of 60 RMS cases. Most frequently
mutated genes were TP53, followed by NRAS, FGFR4, BCOR, and ARID1A.
FGFR4/RAS/AKT pathway genes were mutated as many as 40% of RMS cases. In
addition, CN changes involving FGFR4/RAS/AKT pathway genes as well as
cell cycle regulators, such as CN gains in 2p24.3 (MYCN), 12q15 (FRS2),
loss of 9p21 (CDKN2A/B) and 17p13.2 (TP53) were also recurrently
detected. Most of these FGFR4/RAS/AKT pathway alterations, except for
GAB1, were predominantly found in ERMS, suggesting that deregulated
FGFR4/RAS/AKT signaling plays an important role in ERMS pathogenesis.We
also performed methylation array in 50 cases. Based on the DNA
methylation patterns, we identified 2 sample clusters, that exhibit
remarkable correlation with histological phenotypes (named as cluster E
and A). Cluster E was composed almost exclusively of ERMS, whereas all
ARMS cases were grouped into cluster A. Accordingly, all tumors positive
for PAX3 or 7-FOXO1 fusions were grouped into cluster A. Cluster E has
been divided into 2 distinct signatures (named as E1 and E2),
characterized by high frequencies of multiple chromosomal copy number
changes, compared to cluster A, including gains of chromosomes 2, 8, and
12, and a higher frequency of FGFR4/RAS/AKT pathway mutations, the latter
being especially prominent in the E2 cluster (46% in E1 and 73% in E2 vs.
18% in A). Our integrated analyses provide a framework for the
identification of genetic/epigenetic alterations underlying pathogenesis
of RMS.

