Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of the mutation rate in T lymphoblastic leukemia cell
lines


To account for the high number of somatic mutations in cancer, it has
been hypothesized that genomic instability is necessary for malignant
transformation. We previously demonstrated that PIG-A is a useful
reporter gene for quantitating somatic mutations. PIG-A encodes an enzyme
that is essential for the biosynthesis of the
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor, by which a set of membrane
proteins are covalently linked to the cell surface. PIG-A is X-linked,
and a broad spectrum of mutations occurring in only one allele can
produce the GPI (-) phenotype. We have demonstrated occult populations of
spontaneously arising blood cells with PIG-A mutations in normal
individuals, and shown that among ex vivo blasts from patients with ALL,
the frequency (f) of GPI(-) cells appeared trimodal, with some samples
overlapping the normal range, whereas others were orders of magnitude
higher. f values in T cell leukemias generally fell in the middle group.
Here, we have studied a panel of cell lines derived from patients with T
cell ALL and measured the mutation rate per cell division () as an
assessment of genomic instability. First, cells were stained with
anti-CD59-FITC and sorted by collecting the upper 50th percentile, to
eliminate pre-existing mutants. This purified GPI(+) population was
counted and expanded in culture for 18 days, and then recounted to
estimate cell divisions (d) in vitro. To estimate the frequency of new
mutants arising in culture, the cells were first incubated with the FLAER
reagent conjugated to Alexa 488, then a mixture of anti-CD55 and
anti-CD59 antibodies, then a rabbit anti-mouse FITC secondary conjugate,
followed by PE conjugated antibodies specific for transmembrane
proteins(CD45 or HLA). Cells were gated based on light scatter, exclusion
of propidium iodide, and expression of the transmembrane proteins; GPI(-)
negative cells were defined as having To account for the high number of
somatic mutations in cancer, it has been hypothesized that genomic
instability is necessary for malignant transformation. We previously
demonstrated that PIG-A is a useful reporter gene for quantitating
somatic mutations. PIG-A encodes an enzyme that is essential for the
biosynthesis of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor, by which a
set of membrane proteins are covalently linked to the cell surface. PIG-A
is X-linked, and a broad spectrum of mutations occurring in only one
allele can produce the GPI (-) phenotype. We have demonstrated occult
populations of spontaneously arising blood cells with PIG-A mutations in
normal individuals, and shown that among ex vivo blasts from patients
with ALL, the frequency (f) of GPI(-) cells appeared trimodal, with some
samples overlapping the normal range, whereas others were orders of
magnitude higher. f values in T cell leukemias generally fell in the
middle group. Here, we have studied a panel of cell lines derived from
patients with T cell ALL and measured the mutation rate per cell division
() as an assessment of genomic instability. First, cells were stained
with anti-CD59-FITC and sorted by collecting the upper 50th percentile,
to eliminate pre-existing mutants. This purified GPI(+) population was
counted and expanded in culture for 18 days, and then recounted to
estimate cell divisions (d) in vitro. To estimate the frequency of new
mutants arising in culture, the cells were first incubated with the FLAER
reagent conjugated to Alexa 488, then a mixture of anti-CD55 and
anti-CD59 antibodies, then a rabbit anti-mouse FITC secondary conjugate,
followed by PE conjugated antibodies specific for transmembrane
proteins(CD45 or HLA). Cells were gated based on light scatter, exclusion
of propidium iodide, and expression of the transmembrane proteins; GPI(-)
negative cells were defined as having <4% of the FITC/Alexa fluorescence
as the population overall. Mutation rate was calculated by the formula =
f divided by d. We found that one sample, derived from the cell line P12,
demonstrated a mutation rate of 17.5 107 per cell division, whereas for
the cell lines CEM, CUTTL, LOUCY, and HPBALL, ranged from 50 to 60 107.
For comparison, we sorted, expanded, and analyzed cultures of T cells
derived from 4 normal donors, stimulated with PHA, cytokines, and
bead-immobilized antibodies, and here was generally lower, ranging from
1.5 107 to 18 107 (p 200 107(3 samples, p = 0.01, Fisher's exact test).
We conclude that T cell ALL samples may demonstrate a more mild form of
genomic instability than in Burkitt's lymphoma, and that genomic
instability, as determined by this assay, is not absolutely required for
leukemogenesis.

