Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of genomic alteration which affects resistance to
induction chemotherapy in patients with locally-advanced head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma


Background: As induction chemotherapy (IC) has been introduced for
purpose of organ preservation in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC), survival benefit of IC was not definite in unselected patients.
Although previous studies showed that patients with bulky nodal stage had
more benefit from IC, distinct genomic profile of patients with good or
poor responder to IC has not been evaluated. Purpose of this study is to
find out candidates of genomic alterations which affect response to IC as
well as clinical outcomes.Methods: Targeted gene sequencing (TGS) for 486
COSMIC alterations of 37 genes including TP53, EGFR, KRAS, NRAS, and TP63
was designed for identification of genomic alterations to predict
outcomes of IC. Pretreated tissues of 45 patients who treated with IC
underwent to TGS. Alterations with total coverage less than 500 were
excluded, and the cutoff of significant altered frequency was > 0.01.
Patients were divided into 2 groups. Poor responders were defined as best
response to IC was progressive disease or stable disease by RECIST 1.1
with progression-free survival Background: As induction chemotherapy (IC)
has been introduced for purpose of organ preservation in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), survival benefit of IC was not definite
in unselected patients. Although previous studies showed that patients
with bulky nodal stage had more benefit from IC, distinct genomic profile
of patients with good or poor responder to IC has not been evaluated.
Purpose of this study is to find out candidates of genomic alterations
which affect response to IC as well as clinical outcomes.Methods:
Targeted gene sequencing (TGS) for 486 COSMIC alterations of 37 genes
including TP53, EGFR, KRAS, NRAS, and TP63 was designed for
identification of genomic alterations to predict outcomes of IC.
Pretreated tissues of 45 patients who treated with IC underwent to TGS.
Alterations with total coverage less than 500 were excluded, and the
cutoff of significant altered frequency was > 0.01. Patients were divided
into 2 groups. Poor responders were defined as best response to IC was
progressive disease or stable disease by RECIST 1.1 with progression-free
survival < 18 months. Otherwise, patients were classified as good
responder. Cox regression for survival analysis and chi-square for
comparing alteration frequencies were used. Two-sided P value was
considered significant if 5% and significantly affected to survival
outcomes were selected. Thirteen alterations including EGFR R831H, A840T,
E866K were associated with poor survival outcomes. Patients who had any
of 13 significant alterations (N = 10, 22.2%) had poorer survival
outcomes (3-year OS rate 84.5% vs 20.0%, P 5% and significantly affected
to survival outcomes were selected. Thirteen alterations including EGFR
R831H, A840T, E866K were associated with poor survival outcomes. Patients
who had any of 13 significant alterations (N = 10, 22.2%) had poorer
survival outcomes (3-year OS rate 84.5% vs 20.0%, P < 0.001). Among them,
patients who had any of EGFR R831H, EGFR A840T, EGFR E866K (N = 5, 11.1%)
had poorer survival after IC. EGFR alterations, which might be
underestimated in previous low-depth sequencing data, were found in deep
sequencing analysis, and these alterations significantly affect response
to IC and survival outcomes.Conclusion: Targeted deep sequencing of HNSCC
treated with IC was useful to predict response to IC. Validation of
significant alteration in separate cohort should be warranted.

