Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NF-B inhibition by DMAPT radiosensitizes non-small cell lung
carcinoma by impairing DNA double strand break repair


Background: Despite optimal radiation therapy (RT), chemotherapy and/or
surgery, non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) remains the leading cause
of cancer-related death in the United States. Previously, we demonstrated
that proteasome inhibition blocks the expression of Fanconi
anemia/homologous recombination (FA/HR) genes via inhibition of the NF-B
pathway. Dimethylaminoparthenolide (DMAPT) is a water-soluble analog of
parthenolide that has been shown to decrease p65/p50 heterodimer DNA
binding. We hypothesized that DMAPT may radiosensitize NSCLC cells by
impairing NF-B-mediated expression of DNA double strand break (DSB)
repair genes.Materials and Methods: Cytotoxicity and radiosensitivity
were assessed using clonogenic assays. IB kinase (IKK) activity was
measured using a substrate phosphorylation assay. HR and canonical
non-homologous end joining (cNHEJ) were measured using A549 cells stably
expressing reporter constructs that express GFP upon repair of
I-SceI-induced DNA DSBs. DNA damage and DSB repair biomarker foci were
assessed by immunofluorescence. For in vivo studies, 1106 A549 cells were
injected subcutaneously into the flanks of NCr nude mice. Once tumors
reached an average size of 200 mm3, mice were treated concurrently with
vehicle or DMAPT (100 mg/kg) focal ionizing radiation (4 Gy x 5) using a
small animal radiation research platform (SAARP). Tumor growth was
followed for three months following treatment.Results: Radiation and NF-B
inhibition with DMAPT showed synergistic cytotoxicity. Treatment of A549
cells with DMAPT resulted in a decrease in constitutive IB
phosphorylation by IKK. NF-B inhibition via DMAPT resulted in a 60-70%
decrease in HR. In addition, treatment with DMAPT resulted in 80% loss of
IR-induced BRCA1, FANCD2, and RAD51 foci. NF-B inhibition with either
DMAPT or overexpression of the NF-B super-repressor IB(S32A, S36A)
resulted in a 50-70% decrease in cNHEJ. Treatment with DMAPT resulted in
the loss of IR-induced phosphoDNA-PKS2056 foci. Further, treatment with
DMAPT resulted in the persistence of radiation-induced H2AX foci over a
24 hour period (100% of DMAPT treated cells showing foci compared to 30%
of vehicle treated cells). Compared to either single agent DMAPT or IR
alone, combined treatment of A549 xenografts with DMAPT and IR prevented
tumor growth over three months (p Background: Despite optimal radiation
therapy (RT), chemotherapy and/or surgery, non-small cell lung carcinoma
(NSCLC) remains the leading cause of cancer-related death in the United
States. Previously, we demonstrated that proteasome inhibition blocks the
expression of Fanconi anemia/homologous recombination (FA/HR) genes via
inhibition of the NF-B pathway. Dimethylaminoparthenolide (DMAPT) is a
water-soluble analog of parthenolide that has been shown to decrease
p65/p50 heterodimer DNA binding. We hypothesized that DMAPT may
radiosensitize NSCLC cells by impairing NF-B-mediated expression of DNA
double strand break (DSB) repair genes.Materials and Methods:
Cytotoxicity and radiosensitivity were assessed using clonogenic assays.
IB kinase (IKK) activity was measured using a substrate phosphorylation
assay. HR and canonical non-homologous end joining (cNHEJ) were measured
using A549 cells stably expressing reporter constructs that express GFP
upon repair of I-SceI-induced DNA DSBs. DNA damage and DSB repair
biomarker foci were assessed by immunofluorescence. For in vivo studies,
1106 A549 cells were injected subcutaneously into the flanks of NCr nude
mice. Once tumors reached an average size of 200 mm3, mice were treated
concurrently with vehicle or DMAPT (100 mg/kg) focal ionizing radiation
(4 Gy x 5) using a small animal radiation research platform (SAARP).
Tumor growth was followed for three months following treatment.Results:
Radiation and NF-B inhibition with DMAPT showed synergistic cytotoxicity.
Treatment of A549 cells with DMAPT resulted in a decrease in constitutive
IB phosphorylation by IKK. NF-B inhibition via DMAPT resulted in a 60-70%
decrease in HR. In addition, treatment with DMAPT resulted in 80% loss of
IR-induced BRCA1, FANCD2, and RAD51 foci. NF-B inhibition with either
DMAPT or overexpression of the NF-B super-repressor IB(S32A, S36A)
resulted in a 50-70% decrease in cNHEJ. Treatment with DMAPT resulted in
the loss of IR-induced phosphoDNA-PKS2056 foci. Further, treatment with
DMAPT resulted in the persistence of radiation-induced H2AX foci over a
24 hour period (100% of DMAPT treated cells showing foci compared to 30%
of vehicle treated cells). Compared to either single agent DMAPT or IR
alone, combined treatment of A549 xenografts with DMAPT and IR prevented
tumor growth over three months (p < 0.0001).Conclusions: DMAPT inhibits
NF-B signaling by inhibiting IKK. This in turn inhibits HR and cNHEJ by
preventing the recruitment of DNA repair proteins to sites of IR-induced
DNA damage. Both in vitro and in vivo experiments show support for
further evaluation of DMAPT as a NSCLC radiosensitizer.

