Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGFBP7 eradicates leukemic stem and progenitor cells in acute
myeloid leukemia


Despite high complete remission rates after chemotherapy treatment, only
30-40% of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients (Despite high complete
remission rates after chemotherapy treatment, only 30-40% of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) patients (< 60 years) survive five years after
diagnosis. This poor prognosis is mainly due to relapse which is thought
to be initiated by a subpopulation of leukemic cells with stem cell-like
features that survived the treatment, often referred to as leukemic stem
cells (LSC). The development of novel alternative therapies, specifically
targeting these LSC, are needed to prevent relapse and improve AML
outcome. To develop these anti-LSC therapies, identification of genes
differentially expressed between LSC and the AML bulk and the normal HSC,
still residing within the AML bone marrow, is critical. Studying these
differences is most relevant in cell fractions obtained from the same AML
bone marrow, taking into account the effects of the leukemic
microenvironment on these cell compartments.Since LSC and HSC share the
same immunophenotype (CD34+CD38-), we and others identified markers
including CLL-1 as well as scatter properties, to distinguish leukemic
from normal stem cells. By these properties we purified LSC, HSC and
progenitors fractions from AML bone marrow. Gene expression profiling
revealed the insulin-like growth factor binding-protein-7 (IGFBP7) as
differentially expressed between LSC and HSC and between LSC and the AML
bulk. IGFBP7 is a secreted tumor suppressor and based on our expression
data we hypothesized that IGFBP7 might induce the eradication of
LSC.Using a knockdown strategy, we show that decreased levels of IGFBP7
in AML cell lines result in decreased sensitivity to chemotherapy.
Moreover, we show that both IGFBP7 overexpression and recombinant human
IGFBP7 (rhIGFBP7) reduces the survival of leukemic stem and progenitor
cells from AML patients. Incubation with rhIGFBP7 showed decreased
survival of leukemic blasts while sparing healthy cells. Most
importantly, IGFBP7 significantly reduces human leukemic engraftment of
primary AML cells in immune-deficient NOD/SCID-IL2 knockout (NSG)
mice.Altogether, LSC have reduced levels of IGFBP7 which might be
responsible for their decreased sensitivity to chemotherapy. The
eradication of LSC and leukemic progenitors can be accomplished by
enhancing IGFBP7 levels, suggesting that AML patients might benefit from
a combination of rhIGFBP7 and chemotherapy. This combination therapy
might prevent relapse and improve AML outcome.

