Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Possible involvement of senescence bypass in mesenchymal stem
cells for sarcomagenesis identified through a comparative gene expression
profiling in rat sarcoma model


INTRODUCTION. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) exist in a variety of tissues
such as bone marrow and adipose tissue contributing tissue repair and
maintenance, and have been used in clinical cell transplantation therapy.
On the other hand, MSCs are also believed to be one of the cell of
origins for certain sarcomas including osteosarcoma and malignant fibrous
histiocytoma/undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (MFH/UPS). To identify
the signaling pathways that are involved in sarcoma pathogenesis, we
compared gene expression profiles in rat osteosarcoma and MFH cells with
those in syngeneic rat MSCs.MATERIALS & METHODS. Rat osteosarcoma cell
line COS1NR and MFH cell line MFH1NR, that were established in our
laboratory from chemically induced tumors by 4-hydroxy(amino)-quinolin
1-oxide, and syngeneic rat MSCs isolated from rat femur bone marrow were
used in this study. To investigate the difference of gene expression
between sarcoma cells and MSCs, gene expression profiling was performed
by Agilent array analysis. Data analysis was carried out using Agilent
Feature Extraction software, analyzing pathways that were differentially
expressed in sarcoma cells compared to MSCs.RESULTS & DISCUSSION.
Analysis of genes that characterize MSCs such as CD44, CD105, CD73 and
CD90 showed higher expression in MSCs compared to sarcomas. Pathways
involved in focal adhesion, cytokines, extracellular matrix-receptors and
Wnt signaling were down-regulated in both sarcomas. In those factors, the
genes involved in senescence acceleration in MSCs including Wnt4 and 5a,
Lef1/tcf, -catenin, p21Cip1, lysophosphatidic acid receptor 1 (LPAR1) are
significantly down-regulated in both sarcomas. Meanwhile, DNA
replication, cell cycle, mismatch repair, hedgehog signaling and
metabolic pathways were up-regulated in both sarcomas and those include
the genes involved in inhibiting senescence of MSCs such as DKK1, SOD1,
FOXO4 and SIRT1. These results indicated that senescence factors for
MSCs, which several previous reports suggested, such as Wnt pathways,
p21Cip1 and CDKs-cyclins expression are mal-functionally regulated in
sarcomas, and those have been suggested the involvement of cellular
senescence in MSCs as the responses to oxidative stress and DNA damages.
Taken together, acquiring the ability to bypassing senescence in MSCs is
possibly involved in sarcomagenesis.CONCLUSIONS. The current study
suggests that the loss of senescence mechanism in MSCs might be involved
in sarcomagenesis. Further study will clarify the critical pathways
containing the driver genes in sarcoma development upon the data that
current results indicated and targeting those genes and pathways will be
beneficial to develop novel treatment for sarcomas.

