Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of the BET inhibitor INCB054329 in models of multiple
myeloma


Multiple myeloma (MM) is a disease of plasma cell transformation. Current
therapy for MM is initially effective, but nearly all tumors relapse,
making new therapeutic options a necessity. Due to their efficacy in MM
models, small molecule inhibitors of Bromodomain and Extra Terminal (BET)
proteins have generated much interest as potential therapeutic agents for
MM. Efficacy from BET inhibitors in MM is thought to be driven by their
ability to reduce transcript levels of the c-myc oncogene. Current MM
standard of care (SoC) therapeutics include lenalidomide (Revlimid,
Celgene), bortezomib (Velcade, Takeda), and Melphalan (Alkeran,
GlaxoSmithKline). In preparation for potential clinical studies, these MM
SoC agents were each combined with a potent pan-BET inhibitor,
INCB054329, for in vitro and in vivo studies. In vitro, treatment of MM
cell lines with INCB054329 inhibited expression of c-MYC, induced HEXIM1
levels and inhibited cell growth with potencies less than 200 nM.
Combination of INCB054329 with SoC therapeutics showed synergistic
effects in blocking MM cell proliferation. INA-6 and MM1.S mouse
xenograft models of MM were utilized to study the effects of the
combination of INCB054329 with the MM SoC agents in vivo. In each
instance (INCB054329/lenalidomide, INCB054329/bortezomib,
INCB054329/melphalan), additive to synergistic effects, as measured by
inhibition of subcutaneous tumor growth, were seen in both models of MM.
Since lenalidomide has recently been shown to bind the ubiquitin ligase
cereblon (CRBN), leading to the degradation of two Ikaros family members,
IKZF1 and IKZF3, that are essential to B cell fate and survival, we
examined whether there could be functional overlap between BET inhibition
and the downstream effects of lenalidomide. From MM1.S xenograft
pharmacodynamic assays, we found a synergistic repression of c-MYC
protein levels at 3hr post dose for the combination of INCB054329 and
lenalidomide. Interestingly, the sharp decline in c-MYC protein levels in
the MM1.S model appears to be independent of the IRF4 pathway, as IRF4
protein levels do not decrease until 24 hrs post dose of lenalidomide.
Overall, our data indicate that INCB054329 may provide a novel
combination partner with current standard of care therapies for MM, and
support the clinical evaluation of the compound within the anti-myeloma
treatment landscape.

