Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation study on quantitative analysis method of
interrelationships between immune cells and prostate epithelial and
cancer cells


Context based image analysis of immunohistochemically stained sections
has become a topic after several studies have demonstrated that T-cell
infiltration is important for survival and of prognostic value. Software
algorithms for CD3 detection, epithelial gland detection and location
analysis were validated using CD3 stained prostate biopsies.Prostate
biopsies (n = 96, 38 with and 58 without tumor areas) were stained with
anti-CD3-antibody (DAKO) and hematoxylin and were scanned. For
validation, epithelial cell (EC) structures were manually annotated in
StrataQuest 5.0 (TissueGnostics) using virtual biopsies. Automated
enumeration of CD3 positive cells was controlled visually. For image
processing, StrataQuests Easy Gland detection algorithm (SQ-GD) was used
as provided. Briefly, hematoxylin shade was used for EC nuclei detection.
EC structures were segmented using nuclei compactness and area. EC
density was used to detect glands. To determine the relationships,
distance transform from EC was added as virtual channel. EC proximity for
CD3 distribution analysis were grouped into (i) within EC, (ii) 0-20 m,
(iii) 20-40 m, (iv) 40-60 m or (v) more from the EC border.Comparison of
automated EC detection by SQ-GD with manually annotated EC showed a
significant correlation of both methods (Pearson r = 0.74) although SQ-GD
detects significantly more EC. The reason for that was that SQ-GD had to
be adjusted so that missing EC areas were below 5%.In conclusion, SQ-GD
algorithm detects EC in more than 95% of EC-glands and tumor areas. EC,
tumor EC and CD3+ cells detection was highly sensitive to staining
artifacts at biopsy borders and to tissue folding, both of which had to
be manually excluded. Interestingly, we observed no differences between
the biopsies negative for prostate cancer and the positive ones. It is
noteworthy that the T-cell numbers gradually decrease in correlation with
the distance to the epithelium suggesting a certain immunogenicity of
EC.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

