Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Met degradation by SAIT301, a Met monoclonal antibody, reduces the
invasion and migration of nasopharyngeal cancer cells via inhibition of
EGR-1 expression


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a common malignant tumor with high
invasive and metastatic potential. The hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)-Met
signaling pathway has a critical role in mediating the invasive growth of
many different types of cancer, including head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma. HGF also stimulates NPC cell growth and invasion in the cell
line model.In this study, we determined the inhibitory effect of Met,
using a Met-targeting monoclonal antibody (SAIT301), on the invasive and
growth potential of NPC cell lines. Met inhibition by SAIT301 resulted in
highly significant inhibition of cell migration and invasion in both the
HONE1 and HNE1 cell lines. In addition, we also found that co-treatment
of SAIT301 and HGF decreased the anchorage-independent growth induced by
HGF in HNE1 cell lines. After SAIT301 treatment, Met, together with its
downstream signaling proteins, showed downregulation of p-Met and p-ERK,
but not p-AKT, in both HONE1 and HNE1 cell lines. Interestingly, we found
that HGF treatment of NPC cell lines induced early growth response
protein (EGR-1) expression, which is involved in cell migration and
invasion. In addition, co-treatment with SAIT301 and HGF inhibited the
HGF-induced expression of EGR-1. Next, knockdown of EGR-1 using
small-interfering RNA inhibited HGF-induced cell invasion in NPC cell
lines, suggesting that the expression level of EGR-1 is important in
HGF-induced cell invasion of NPC cells. Therefore, the results support
that SAIT301 inhibited Met activation as well as the downstream EGR-1
expression and could have therapeutic potential in NPC. Taken together,
we suggest that Met is an anticancer therapeutic target for NPC that
warrants further investigation and clinical trials and SAIT301 may be a
promising tool for NPC therapy.

