Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dielectrophoretic microwell array system for detection circulating
tumor cells in patients with solid tumors and single cell analysis of
detected circulating tumor cells


BackgroundDetection and analysis of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) is
expected to be a non-invasive real-time monitoring of response to therapy
and tumor cell status, however it remains technically challenging.
Besides, biological feature of CTCs is still unclear. We have developed a
capture system for detection and molecular characterization of single
CTCs based on a high-density dielectrophoretic microwell array
technology.Material and methodsCTC enrichment was performed by density
gradient centrifugation with RosetteSep. After CTC enrichment, samples
were loaded into the cell entrapment chamber, followed by application of
20 Vp-p AC voltage (1 MHz for 3 minutes), so as to entrap cells in the
microwells using the dielectrophoretic force. Then samples were fixed and
labeled with DAPI, FITC-anti-cytokeratin (CK), PE-anti-CD45 antibodies,
and detected by image-based analysis using a fluorescence microscope. The
results of the CTC enumeration were compared with those by CellSearch
system. In this study, we investigated the DAPI+, CK-, CD45- cells with
tumor cell morphology in addition to cells with classical definition of
CTCs (DAPI+, CK+, CD45-). Those cells were picked up by micropipette, and
isolated single cells were subjected to whole genome amplification
followed by sequencing in 50 cancer-related genes on the Ion Torrent PGM
platform. Fifteen patients with metastatic breast cancer and 6 patients
with metastatic non-small lung cancer were examined in this
study.ResultsThe number of CK-positive(+) and CK-negative(-) cells
(DAPI+, CD45-) detected by our system ranged from 1 - 38 CTCs (median: 11
/ 3 mL), and 100% (21 / 21) of the samples were above the threshold level
( 1 / 3 mL). On the other hand, with CellSearch system, 57.9% of the
samples had a 2 / 7.5 mL threshold level (median: 2 / 3 mL). In 2 blood
samples from the healthy donors, both systems detected 0 CTC. Single cell
sequencing was performed on 9 of the 21 samples. All analyzed samples
contained cells with at least one mutation in 50 cancer-related
mutations, indicating that those isolated single cells were possible CTCs
including CK-negative(-) cells.DiscussionWe established a platform enable
us to capture and characterize CTCs at the single-cell level. The results
of the present study show that single cells isolated by our system are
useful for further genomic analysis. In addition, the results of mutation
analysis of isolated single CTCs suggested that CTCs have mutational
heterogeneity in cancer-related genes. Further investigation is going to
be conducted to evaluate the capability of capture and characterize CTCs
in other types of cancer.

