Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FOXO1/Sprouty2 pathway regulates vascular tumor growth


Vascular tumors are endothelial cell neoplasms with a wide spectrum of
clinical presentations, ranging from benign infantile hemangiomas in
children to low-grade malignant hemangioendotheliomas and highly
aggressive angiosarcomas in adults. To date, the molecular basis of
vascular tumor pathogenesis is poorly understood and standard therapy for
these tumors have limited clinical efficacy.Forkhead box protein O1
(FOXO1) is a transcription factor with tumor suppressor function and is
dysregulated in human cancer. In this study, we showed that FOXO1
suppressed vascular tumor growth, and mechanistically, the inhibitory
effects of FOXO1 were mediated by Sprouty2. FOXO1 expression was reduced
in a variety of human vascular tumors examined (infantile hemangioma,
hemangioendothelioma and angiosarcoma) as compared with normal blood
vessels as determined by western blotting and immunohistochemical stains.
Knockdown of FOXO1 gene expression with short hairpin RNA resulted in
increased vascular tumor cell migration and proliferation in vitro and in
vivo. Conversely, over-expression of constitutively active FOXO1 in these
cells suppressed cell growth. We observed that FOXO1 interacted with
Sprouty2 promoter in situ in chromatin immunoprecipitation assay and
increased Sprouty2 gene expression in tumor cells. Similar to FOXO1,
Sprouty2 expression was reduced in vascular tumors. Over-expression of
Sprouty2 decreased tumor cell growth and migration. Conversely, knockdown
of Sprouty2 increased tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. Knockdown of
Sprouty2 in cells with over-expression of constitutively active FOXO1
resulted in reduced tumor growth and rescued the FOXO1 phenotype,
indicating that Sprouty2 is an important mediator of the biological
effects of FOXO1. Microarray gene expression profiling of human
angiosarcoma cells with Sprouty2 knockdown together with network data
integration using bioinformatics analysis and validated by quantitative
PCR revealed important Sprouty2-regulated genes that are involved in
angiogenesis, apoptosis and growth signal transduction pathways,
including the collagen gene family, Notch signaling pathway and the
GTPase IMAP family members.In summary, these findings demonstrate
important growth regulatory role of the FOXO1/Sprouty2 pathway in
vascular tumors and highlight the potential roles of novel pathways
downstream of Sprouty2 in these tumors.

