Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The detection of viable human circulating tumor cells (v-hCTCs) in
resectable pancreatic cancer induced by neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy
(NACRT) using gemcitabine, S-1 and intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT)


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are thought to be metastatic
intermediates. Recently, we reported encouraging survival rates following
neoadjuvant therapy using gemcitabine (Gem) and S-1 concurrently with
radiotherapy (NACRT) in patients (pts) with resectable pancreatic cancer
(PC). However, NACRT may have disadvantages. We hypothesized that NACRT
in PC may induce epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is
associated with metastasis followed by the increase of CTCs. To extend
our assessment of EMT during NACRT, we investigate the results of the
v-hCTC detection in the pts treated with NACRT. This study was a single
institution trial, approved by the Kure Medical Center IRB. Pts with
resectable cytologically or histologically proven ductal adenocarcinoma
of the pancreas were enrolled. Treatment consisted of an intervenous
infusion of Gem 800 mg/m2 on day 1, 8, 22, and 29; and S-1 80 mg/m2
orally on day 1-5, 8-12, 22-26, and 29-33 given concurrently with IMRT to
60 Gy (2 Gy/day, 5 times per week, 30 fractions). Surgical exploration
was scheduled 4-7 weeks after the final radiation fraction. To detect
v-hCTCs, we employed a telomerase-specific replication-selective
adenovirous expressing GFP (TelomeScan F35). 7.5 ml of blood samples were
obtained from the pts included in this clinical study before NACRT, after
1 month of NACRT, and after 2 months of surgical resection. To
distinguish between leucocyte and cells with epithelial origin, cells
were stained with anti-CD45 and anti-Cytokeratin Abs. To distinguish
cells with mesenchymal origin, cells were labeled with anti-Vimentin Ab.
GFP-positive and CD45-negative cells were counted as v-hCTC. 12 pts aged
44-77 years (2 males and 10 females) were enrolled. No treatment-related
deaths occurred. CA19-9 was reduced to Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are
thought to be metastatic intermediates. Recently, we reported encouraging
survival rates following neoadjuvant therapy using gemcitabine (Gem) and
S-1 concurrently with radiotherapy (NACRT) in patients (pts) with
resectable pancreatic cancer (PC). However, NACRT may have disadvantages.
We hypothesized that NACRT in PC may induce epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT), which is associated with metastasis followed by the
increase of CTCs. To extend our assessment of EMT during NACRT, we
investigate the results of the v-hCTC detection in the pts treated with
NACRT. This study was a single institution trial, approved by the Kure
Medical Center IRB. Pts with resectable cytologically or histologically
proven ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas were enrolled. Treatment
consisted of an intervenous infusion of Gem 800 mg/m2 on day 1, 8, 22,
and 29; and S-1 80 mg/m2 orally on day 1-5, 8-12, 22-26, and 29-33 given
concurrently with IMRT to 60 Gy (2 Gy/day, 5 times per week, 30
fractions). Surgical exploration was scheduled 4-7 weeks after the final
radiation fraction. To detect v-hCTCs, we employed a telomerase-specific
replication-selective adenovirous expressing GFP (TelomeScan F35). 7.5 ml
of blood samples were obtained from the pts included in this clinical
study before NACRT, after 1 month of NACRT, and after 2 months of
surgical resection. To distinguish between leucocyte and cells with
epithelial origin, cells were stained with anti-CD45 and anti-Cytokeratin
Abs. To distinguish cells with mesenchymal origin, cells were labeled
with anti-Vimentin Ab. GFP-positive and CD45-negative cells were counted
as v-hCTC. 12 pts aged 44-77 years (2 males and 10 females) were
enrolled. No treatment-related deaths occurred. CA19-9 was reduced to
<50% of baseline values in 7 of 9 measureable pts. 11 of 12 enrolled pts
successfully underwent surgical resection. Only 4 out of 12 pts had one
or two v-hCTCs detected before NACRT. After NACRT, 6 of 12 pts without
tumor progression had v-hCTCs detected, which expressed Vimentin (1-56
CTCs). Among them, 3 pts had v-hCTCs detected at baseline. These 3
CTC-positive pts still had two or more Vimentin-positive CTCs detected
(2-27 CTCs) after surgery, whereas remaining 9 pts had no detectable
v-hCTCs. 1 of these 3 CTC-positive pts early developed liver metastasis
and died, despite R0 resection. For the remaining 2 CTC-positive pts
after surgery, one pt with postoperative therapy had no detectable CTCs
at 1 year after surgery, however another pt without postoperative therapy
still had 7 v-hCTCs detected (Vimentin[+]). We believe that our NACRT is
feasible. However, we may consider surgery first for CTC-positive PC pts
at baseline. In conclusion, v-hCTCs may become useful for prognosis
assessment or stratification, especially when radiotherapy is considered.

