Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of radiotherapy in combination with
radio-sensitizing telomerase-specific oncolytic virus for human bone and
soft tissue sarcomas


Background: Despite major advances in the treatment of bone and soft
tissue sarcomas, including surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation, some
sarcoma patients show poor prognosis due to resistance to conventional
therapy. Therefore, the development of a novel therapeutic strategy for
sarcoma patients is needed. We recently revealed that a
telomerase-specific, replication-competent oncolytic adenovirus OBP-301
efficiently killed human sarcoma cells. Moreover, combination therapy
with OBP-301 and radiation has been confirmed to show synergistic
antitumor effect in epithelial malignant tumor cells; however, its effect
in human sarcoma cells remains elusive. In this study, we investigated
the antitumor effect of OBP-301 in combination with radiation against
human sarcoma cells.Methods: We used five human sarcoma cell lines,
SK-ES-1 (Ewing sarcoma), RD-ES (Ewing sarcoma) SYO-1 (synovial sarcoma),
U2OS (osteosarcoma) and HOS (osteosarcoma). Cells were irradiated 24 h
after infection with OBP-301, and cell viability was assessed by XTT
assay 4 days after irradiation. Combined effect of radiation with OBP-301
was analyzed with the CalcuSyn software (BioSoft). These cells were
analyzed for apoptosis using western blot analysis. To analyze the effect
of OBP-301 in DNA repair process, immunofluorescence staining was
performed after treatment of irradiation with or without OBP-301
infection on SK-ES-1 cell. We further investigated the in vivo combined
effect of OBP-301 and radiation. The SK-ES-1 tumor-bearing mice were
irradiated at a dosage of 1 Gy/tumor once per week for three cycles, and
OBP-301 (1 108 plaque-forming units per tumor), or PBS was injected into
the tumor 3 times per week for three cycles.Results: Combination
treatment with OBP-301 and radiation showed synergistic or additive
antitumor effect in all human sarcoma cells. Western blot analysis showed
that combination treatment increased the expression of cleaved-PARP, and
prolonged the level of H2AX protein than radiation treatment. Combination
therapy of OBP-301 with radiation showed antitumor effect more
significantly than monotherapy in SK-ES-1 xenograft tumor
model.Conclusions: These results suggest that combination therapy of
OBP-301 with radiation is a promising antitumor strategy for bone and
soft tissue sarcomas.

