Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure-guided de novo design of selective Mcl-1 Inhibitors:
Synthesis, structural and biochemical characterization


Myeloid cell leukemia-1 (Mcl-1) is a potent anti-apoptotic protein,
member of the prosurvival Bcl-2 family. Amplification of the gene
encoding the Mcl-1 protein is a common genetic aberration in human
cancer. Overexpression of Mcl-1 is associated with high tumor grade,
resistance to chemotherapy and poor prognosis in many types of cancers.
Thus Mcl-1 is emerging as a critical survival factor in a broad range of
human cancers and represents an attractive molecular target for
development of a new class of cancer therapy. There is still need for
developing BH3 mimetics that can efficiently and selectively target Mcl-1
protein.Employing de-novo structure-based drug-design, we have designed a
new class of potent small-molecule Mcl-1 inhibitors based on the initial
lead compound discovered by high-throughput screening. Analyzing the
binding model of this compound with Mcl-1 through computational docking
supported by HSQC NMR studies, and using the structural information, we
have designed and optimized a class of small-molecule inhibitors of Mcl-1
using a 2-(phenylsulfonamido) benzoic acid as a scaffold to reproduce the
key interactions with Mcl-1 such as the conserved hydrogen bond between
the aspartate in pro-apoptotic proteins and Arg263 in Mcl-1. Several
co-crystal structures of this class inhibitors in complex with Mcl-1 have
provided a basis for their further optimization which ultimately led to
the discovery of ligands with low-nanomolar potency (Ki = 8 nM) and
selectivity for Mcl-1. These compounds bind in the canonical BH3 binding
groove. Interestingly, depending on the particular substitution pattern
in the core scaffold, a flip binding mode was observed where the
substituents bind in a reverse orientation. These findings were confirmed
by X-ray crystallography. The most potent compounds were further
biologically characterized with a series of complementary biochemical and
functional assays.

