Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and validation of sandwich ELISA to quantify
circulating GRP78 as a cancer biomarker


Glucose regulated protein 78 kDa (GRP78), also referred to as
immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein (BiP), is a chaperone protein
belonging to HSP70 protein family. GRP78 resides primarily in the lumen
of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and plays an important role in protein
folding, by targeting misfolded proteins, controlling the activation of
transmembrane ER stress sensor and Ca2+ homeostasis. It contains the KDEL
sequence (Lys-Asp-Glu-Leu) on its C-terminus, which is responsible for
its retention in the ER through binding onto KDEL receptor. Some ER
proteins escape the ER retention when they associate with other proteins
and thus block the KDEL domains. Several in vitro studies have shown that
GRP78 is found on the cancer cell surface. In clinical studies, increased
expression of GRP78 has been correlated with chemoresistance in breast,
colon, lung, prostate and endometrial cancers. However, quantification of
GRP78 in the circulation has not been described as a diagnostic marker in
cancer patients. Although circulating autoantibodies against GRP78 have
been detected at high levels in the sera from cancer patients, these
assays are difficult to perform by ELISA due to presence of immune
complex bounded GRP78 in sera.We have developed and validated an
ELISA-based assay able to quantify the free levels of GRP78 with a lower
level quantification (LLQ) of 25 ng/mL. Since GRP78 is highly protein
bound, acid dissociation using glycine demonstrated a linear range from
12.5 to 1600 ng/mL.The actual amounts of GRP 78 in plasma were measured
using sandwich ELISA using TMB substrate, where the absorbance was
measured at 450 nm. Acid dissociated plasma at pH 3.0 was able to
liberated GRP78 where with no interfering protein was detected. Standard
curve with a range 25-1600 ng/mL of GRP78 was linear (R2>0.98). To
validate this ELISA method, interday and intraday variability testing
were performed and demonstrated that the assays were linear, robust, and
reproducible, over their respective concentration ranges and R20.96.To
determine the utility of this assay, circulating GRP78 in plasma was
determined in breast cancer and compared to non-cancer volunteers. Breast
cancer patients had significantly higher circulating GRP78 when compared
to healthy volunteers, where the circulating levels correlated with
disease staging. To further confirm the utility of this assay,
circulating levels of GRP78 was also evaluated in patients with recurrent
cervical cancer undergoing chemotherapy. This study showed a correlation
with chemotherapy responsiveness. These studies demonstrated that a new
technique to accurately and precisely quantify GRP78 in plasma may be a
potential biomarker for the presence of tumor and tumor burden, and thus
may be used to monitor for treatment effectiveness. This finding
represents a new approach to quantify GRP78 levels in plasma that can be
used in the clinic as a biomarker to guide cancer diagnosis.

