Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of NF-B translocation induces G0/G1 arrest and
downregulates thymidylate synthase in colorectal cancer


Purpose Objectives: Cell cycle progression and DNA synthesis are
essential steps in cancer cell growth and resistance. Thymidylate
synthase (TS) is a therapeutic target for 5FU. Curcumin is a potent
inhibitor of NF-B. We tested the hypothesis that NF-B translocation
inhibition by curcumin and its analogs can inhibit cell cycle progression
and downregulate TS levels in colorectal cell lines.Methods: Two
colorectal cancer cell lines were usedHCT-116 and HT-29. Cells were
either untreated (control) or treated with curcumin (20M), EF31 (7.5M for
HCT-116 and 2.5M for HT-29) and UBS109 (620nM for HCT-116 and 1.25M for
HT-29) for 24 hours. Western blot and RT-PCR analyses were carried out to
determine the effect of curcumin and its analogues EF31 and UBS109 on
different signal molecules involved in cell cycle arrest and DNA
synthesis. Electromobility shift assay (EMSA) was performed in colon
cancer cells to evaluate the effects of curcumin and its analogues on
NF-B activity. A subcutaneous xenograft mouse model was used to evaluate
the in vivo effects of curcumin analogues.Results: Treatment with
curcumin and its analogues inhibited cyclin D1, pRb and E2F-1 at the
transcriptional and translational level and induced p21, leading to G0/G1
cell cycle arrest. NF-B over-expression induced E2F-1 and TS protein and
mRNA levels in both cell lines. Arrest in the G0/G1 phase was associated
with downregulation of the transcription factor E2F-1 and its target gene
TS. Similar effects were observed in tumors from animals treated with
EF31 and UBS109. Further, EF31 and UBS109 treatment significantly
decreased the tumor growth compared to untreated tumors.Conclusion: In
this study, we present in vitro and in vivo data to support the use of
curcumin analogs in colorectal cancer based on their ability to reduce
expression of proteins important for DNA repair and cell cycle
progression leading to cell cycle arrest and tumor shrinkage.
Accordingly, combining curcumin analogs with chemotherapy is a rational
approach for future drug development in colorectal cancer.

