Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and validation of new kinase targets for therapy in
ovarian clear cell cancer


Introduction: Ovarian clear cell carcinoma is less responsive to
chemotherapy and has a worse prognosis than other ovarian cancer
subtypes. The most frequently mutated genes in ovarian clear cell
carcinoma have been characterized in recent years. Mutations include
deleterious mutations in the tumor suppressor gene ARID1A, epigenetic
silencing and deleterious mutations in the PI3K antagonist PTEN, as well
as activating mutations in the PI3K catalytic subunit PIK3CA. Yet,
therapeutic strategies that utilize these genetic aberrations are
lacking. In the present study, we aimed to identify and validate new
kinase targets in ovarian clear cell carcinoma.Methods: To determine new
mutations, kinome sequencing (SureSelect Human Kinome Kit, Agilent
Technologies) was performed on DNA isolated from tumor samples (n = 124)
and matched controls (n = 46) for 571 kinases, 6 PI3K regulatory
components and 46 other cancer related genes. In addition, to identify
gene copy number gains and losses, high-throughput SNP analysis
(HumanOmniExpressExome-8 Illumina SNP array) were analyzed in 109 ovarian
clear cell carcinoma tumor samples.Results: Preliminary results revealed
mutations in PIK3CA (43.5%), PTEN (6.5%), KRAS (15.3%) and TP53 (11.3%),
which correspond to frequencies found in literature. Most mutations were
found in genes encoding PI3K/Akt and MAPK signal transduction pathway,
DNA repair pathway, and receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathway
components. Mutations in these pathways were present in 75% of ovarian
clear cell carcinomas, while 42% of the patients had mutations in 2 of
these pathways. Profiles of copy number gains and losses matched previous
studies. Most interestingly, however, we also discovered multiple novel
kinase mutations and identified new chromosomal regions of copy number
gains and losses.Conclusion: Combining high-throughput SNP analysis and
kinome sequencing allowed us to identify novel mutations, copy number
gains and losses in kinases and other cancer related genes. Currently we
are re-sequencing the most interesting kinase mutations using Sanger
sequencing. Subsequent validation of the therapeutic value of new targets
will be assessed in vitro using a large ovarian clear cell carcinoma cell
line panel followed by in vivo validations.Supported by a grant from the
Dutch Cancer Foundation: RUG 2012-5477

