Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Medicinal plants show anticancer splicing activity of apoptotic
genes


Oncogenesis is associated with splicing switches and a disruption of
splicing regulation being specific for cancer formation and tumour
progression. An association between differential expression of splicing
isoforms and tumour progression has been shown for several proteins, such
as MDM2 and survivin. Currently the analysis of cancer-specific
alternative splicing is a promising step forward in basic and
translational molecular biology. Traditional medicine has a long history
and is still the major source of medicine in developing countries.
Approximately 70% of the South African population consults traditional
healers, perpetuating the need for scientific appraisal of traditional
medicine as a means to establish its efficiency and safety Also,
pharmacological and phytochemical insights into several plants have led
to the discovery of novel chemicals and therefore novel drugs.
Alternatively, such novel chemical structures can serve as lead
compounds/templates for the design of new drugs. The aim was to ascertain
if the South African medicinal plants have anticancer splicing activity.
10c cells were treated with Tulbhaghia violacea and Cotyledon orbiculata,
followed by mRNA extraction and RT-PCR. The results showed that
Tulbhaghia violacea and Cotyledon orbiculata extracts have anti-cancer
splicing activity on the BCLX and the AXL apoptosis genes. Additionally
Cotyledon orbiculata extract has an anticancer splicing activity of the
angiogenesis gene VEGF165. VEGF Elisa also confirmed the VEGF165 VEGF165b
splicing switch. We have shown that South African medicinal plants have
anti-cancer splicing activity. The anti-cancer splicing activity of the
VEGF gene by Cotyledon orbiculata could mean that this extract has both
angiostatic and apoptotic anti-cancer activities. We are continuing to
screen more medicinal plants and will select those extracts with
anti-cancer splicing activity for further studies. These further studies
should identify numerous splicing pathways and completely elucidate the
splicing target compounds that may serve as novel anti-cancer drugs or
lead compounds.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

