Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming TGF--related immunosuppression for cancer immunotherapy
by oncolytic adenovirus co-expressing Interleukin-12 and decorin


Interleukin (IL)-12 has been shown to be one of the most promising
antitumor cytokines. The major antitumor activities of IL-12 rely on its
ability to promote T helper type 1 (Th1) immune responses and CTL
responses. However, immune suppression-dominated microenvironments in
advanced tumors hinder the effect of IL-12 gene therapy for cancer. Most
tumor cells produce large amounts of transforming growth factor- (TGF-),
which plays crucial roles of tumor-induced immune suppression. The TGF-
inhibits proliferation of immune cells such as T, NK, and dendritic
cells, resulting in suppression of antitumor immunity. Moreover, TGF- is
also known to regulate the maintenance and induction of regulatory T
(Treg) cells. Thus, it has been hypothesized that inhibiting TGF- might
be an apt strategy for generating more effective cancer immunotherapy.
Therefore, to enhance the efficiency of IL-12-mediated cancer
immunotherapy, we generated oncolytic adenovirus co-expressing IL-12 and
Decorin (hDCN) (RdB/IL12/hDCN) as suitable therapeutic adjuvant to
overcome immune suppression by down-regulation of TGF- through hDCN.
Intratumoral administration of RdB/IL12/hDCN promoted enhanced antitumor
effects compared with an oncolytic adenovirus expressing IL-12 or hDCN
alone (RdB/IL12 or RdB/hDCN, respectively). We showed markedly elevated
levels of interferon- (IFN-), tumor necrosis factor- (TNF- and IFN-
secreting cells in RdB/IL12/hDCN-treated tumors. Moreover, Treg in
draining lymph nodes (DLNs) dramatically decreased in mice treated with
RdB/IL12/hDCN, suggesting an association with the down-regulation of TGF-
in tumor treated with RdB/IL12/hDCN. Consistent with these data, tumor
tissue injected with RdB/IL12/hDCN showed increased infiltration of CD4+
T and CD8+ T cells infiltration. Furthermore, hDCN enhanced viral
distribution and tumor penetration, leading to improved virus-mediated
cancer gene therapy by overcoming the extracellular matrix barrier within
tumor masses. Together, these results provide new insight into the
ability of hDCN to eliminate immune suppression and demonstrate that
adenovirus co-expressing IL-12 and hDCN is a promising therapeutic tool
for cancer treatment than adenovirus expressing IL-12 alone.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

