Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer effect of platinum(IV) complex against
cisplatin-resistant human ovarian cancer


Background: Platinum(IV) [Pt(IV)] complexes are one of the attractive
next-generation anticancer drugs. Beside Pt(II)-based drugs such as
cisplatin, carboplatin, and oxaliplatin, Pt(IV) complexes show less
adverse effects and can be administrated orally. In addition, because
Pt(IV) complexes adopt octahedral coordination geometry, it also have an
advantage that can be coordinated with more functional ligands than
Pt(II) complexes. These different features prompted us to investigate the
effectiveness of Pt(IV) complexes on cisplatin-resistant cancer cells
with its mechanisms. This study aims to elucidate the anti-cancer effects
of Pt(IV) complexes. Materials and Methods: The cytotoxicity of
cis-diammine-tetrachloro-Pt(IV) [cis-Pt(IV)] and cisplatin was determined
using human ovarian cancer cell lines (A2780), and its
cisplatin-resistant subline (A2780cis), with their influx/efflux patterns
using ICP-MS. Pt-DNA-crosslink formation was also determined by agarose
gel electrophoresis, in which the crosslink was quantified by decrease of
ethidium bromide staining of DNA. Results and Discussion: Cisplatin
completely failed to decrease the survival of A2780cis cells at a
concentration that killed A2780, whereas cis-Pt(IV) exerted cytotoxicity
in both cell lines. Pt-DNA-crosslink formation assay showed cis-Pt(IV)
bound to DNA only in the presence of reductant such as glutathione (GSH)
or ascorbic acid, indicating cisplatin production. However, it is also
known excess amount of GSH suppress DNA binding of cisplatin. Indeed,
intracellular GSH level in A2780cis cells was about 3 times higher as
compared with A2780 cells; therefore cisplatin would be inactivated in
A2780cis cells. These findings suggest that cis-Pt(IV) is actually
reduced to cisplatin in GSH-rich environment and then induce cytotoxicity
by somehow escaping from GSH-dependent inactivation. Pt(IV)-specific
subcellular distribution might contribute this paradoxical advantageous
effect of GSH on cis-Pt(IV). Intracellular accumulation of Pt was reduced
by competing a related transporter CTR1 by copper in cis-Pt(IV)
treatment, whereas cytotoxicity was not suppressed. Therefore CTR1 is
involved in the intake of Pt complexes including cis-Pt(IV), but the
alternative pathway(s) could be responsible for anti-cancer effect of
Pt(IV) complexes.

