Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decreasing omega-6 to omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid dietary
ratios inhibit tumorigenesis in prostate cancer cells in vitro and in vivo


Epidemiological studies have established that dietary ratios rich in
omega-3 (n-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) and low in omega-6
(n-6) PUFAs correlate with lower incidences of cancer. Despite its proven
efficacy, controversy has surrounded the therapeutic use of n-3 PUFAs for
prostate cancer, with some studies even suggesting that they may increase
its risk. Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths, and is the second most prevalent cancer among American men.
Previous studies from our laboratory have shown that n-3 PUFAs,
particularly docosahexaenoic acid (DHA; C22:6), initiate a wide-range of
anti-tumorigenic responses in lung, breast and colon cancer. The current
study examined the consequence of altering the dietary ratio of n-6:n-3
PUFAs in prostate cancer cells in vitro and in vivo, and we propose that
by lowering the n-6:n-3 ratio, tumor growth will be inhibited. The
antiproliferative activity of PC-3 human prostate adenocarcinoma cells
was assessed in response to multiple dietary ratios of n-6 to n-3 PUFAs,
using linoleic acid (LA; C18:2 n-6) and DHA at ratios of: 8:1, 4:1, 2:1,
1:1, 3:4 and 1:2, respectively. In vitro analysis revealed a
dose-dependent decrease in cancer cell viability as the n-6:n-3 ratio was
lowered. This suggests that the dietary ratio of n-6:n-3 PUFAs play an
important role in prostate cancer cell viability. Consistent with these
findings, in vivo analysis of PC-3 cells implanted into athymic nude mice
displayed dose-dependent inhibition of tumor growth and final tumor
weight. This may indicate an optimal dietary ratio range for prostate
tumor prevention and treatment. Next, we studied the in vivo effects of
diet in combination with the chemotherapeutic drug, Taxotere. Taxotere is
highly lipophilic and classified as a plant alkaloid with proven
effectiveness in treating a variety of cancers, including metastatic
prostate cancer. After a fourteen day inoculation period, mice were
distributed into groups of equal mean tumor weight and size and assigned
to specific diets and treatments: high corn oil, high Menhaden oil, high
DHASCO oil, each diet in combination with Taxotere, and Taxotere alone.
Surprisingly, diets rich in fat, regardless of PUFA type, enhanced the
effects of Taxotere. As expected, high n-3 PUFA diets increased Taxotere
efficacy and reduced tumor size three-fold compared to Taxotere alone.
However, the same effect was observed in high n-6 PUFA diets as well.
These findings suggest that long-chain PUFAs may increase plasma protein
binding and enhance the bioavailability of Taxotere. Overall, these data
demonstrate that the ratio of n-6:n-3 is important for treatment of
prostate cancer, and although DHA is extremely potent as a single
anti-cancer agent, combining it with other chemotherapies, like Taxotere,
is an effective strategy to synergistically inhibit prostate cancer
growth.

