Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel photoimmunotherapy targeting cancer-associated fibroblasts
(CAFs) overcomes therapeutic resistance in human esophageal cancer


Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are thought to play an essential
role in cancer invasion, migration, metastasis and resistance to
anticancer drugs. CAFs were originally defined as fibroblasts expressing
-SMA in cancer tissue; however, fibroblast activation protein (FAP) has
been recently identified as a more functional and specific surface
protein of CAFs. The photoimmunotherapy (PIT) is a new molecular targeted
therapy, which is based on a near-infrared (NIR) photosensitizer IR700,
conjugated to monoclonal antibody (mAb) targeting particular molecules.
PIT induces the selective destruction of targeted cells. The aim of this
study is to analyze the influence of CAFs on human esophageal cancer and
to develop a novel therapeutic strategy to eliminate CAFs by using
FAP-targeting PIT. We produced the IR700-FAP antibody for this study.
Human esophageal cancer cell lines (TE-4 and OE-19) and FEF3 human
fibroblasts were used in this study. TE-4 and OE-19 cells stimulated with
conditioned medium (CM) of CAFs exhibited malignant phenotypes confirmed
by invasion assay, migration assay, and colony formation assay. Tumor
cells were significantly more malignant when directly co-cultured with
CAFs. We further examined whether tumor cells stimulated by CM (CAFs)
could acquire the resistance to chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Cell
viability assay showed that tumor cells stimulated with CAFs was more
resistant to conventional chemotherapy or radiation than unstimulated
tumor cells. Western blot analysis demonstrated that E-cadherin
expression was decreased and that of vimentin was increased in
CAF-stimulated tumor cells, indicating the epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT) induction. Moreover, OE-19 cells stimulated with CAFs
contained more CD133-positive cancer stem-like cells. In vivo experiments
demonstrated that subcutaneous TE4 tumors were more refractory to
chemotherapy in the presence of co-inoculated CAFs as observed in vitro.
Finally, we investigated whether elimination of CAFs by FAP-targeting PIT
could affect the resistance to chemotherapy in vitro and in vivo. In vivo
PIT following intratumoral anti-FAP mAb-conjugated IR700 suppressed the
growth of subcutaneous tumors co-inoculated with CAFs. These results
demonstrated that human tumor cells became more malignant and resistant
in the presence of CAFs, which could be reversed by using CAF-specific
PIT. Targeting fibroblast itself is a unique strategy and can be
clinically promising as combination targeting cancer cells and their
fundamental microenvironment.

