Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AMPK promotes survival of breast cancer cells by modulating
metabolic stress


Breast cancer cells can respond to microenvironmental stressors by
becoming dormant, that is inhibiting cell proliferation until the
environment becomes growth-permissive. One of the survival pathways
implicated in dormant cancer cells is the p38MAPK pathway. Modulation of
signaling to combat metabolic stressors could provide survival benefits
to dormant breast cancer cells. AMPK (AMP-activated protein kinase) is
the central metabolic regulator of the cell, and its expression is
altered in breast cancer. Moreover, there are two isoforms of the
catalytic subunit (1 and 2), and differential functionality of these
isoforms has been reported. Using estrogen-receptor positive human breast
cancer cell lines, we investigated the effect of differential AMPK
isoform expression on breast cancer survival. We found that
over-expression of AMPK2 in MCF-7 cells resulted in stronger p38MAPK
activation in response to chemical AMPK activation or metabolic stress.
Moreover, the same signaling was observed in HCC1500 cells, which
endogenously express AMPK2. Additionally, we cultured our cell lines as
spheroids in order to mimic a tumor microenvironment. MCF-7 AMPK2 cells
formed larger, more viable spheres than control cells. In addition, the
expression of AMPK2 facilitated spheroid survival under hypoxic
conditions. Finally, activation of p38MAPK was seen most abundantly in
the MCF-7 AMPK2 spheres. Our in vitro studies indicate an AMPK2-dependent
regulation of p38MAPK in response to metabolic stress in order to promote
cancer cell survival. To evaluate cancer dormancy in vivo, MCF-7 cells
expressing either GFP or AMPK2 were injected into athymic nude mice
previously implanted with slow-release estradiol pellets. After one week,
the estradiol pellets were removed to induce cellular dormancy for thirty
days. Analysis of tumors at this time indicated that more of the AMPK2
expressing cells survived estradiol deprivation than did the control
cells. Analysis of proliferation by Ki67 staining indicated that the GFP
cells maintained proliferation during deprivation, while AMPK2 cells were
largely negative for proliferation. ApoTag staining revealed a similar
trend for apoptotic cells. This suggests an inability to control cell
cycle resulted in a decreased survival of the GFP cells under estradiol
deprivation. Consistent with our observed in vitro cell signaling, AMPK2
expressing tumors expressed higher levels of phospho-p38MAPK than GFP
expressing tumors. Following the deprivation period, estradiol pellets
were re-implanted and residual dormant tumors resumed growth. AMPK2
tumors grew to roughly double the size of GFP tumors. Interestingly,
AMPK2 tumors had a higher number of mitotic events than did GFP tumors as
visualized by Ki67 staining. This could be due to more viable cells being
present following estradiol deprivation. We conclude that the expression
of AMPK2 promotes long-term breast cancer survival in estrogen-sensitive
cells.

