Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel delivery system to bring immune checkpoint antibodies to
tumor microenvironment


Introduction: Cancer immunotherapy by blocking immune checkpoint (ICP)
pathways with antibodies, such as anti PD-1 antibodies (Nivolumab,
Pembrolizumab) and anti CTLA-4 antibody (Ipilimumab), has been reported
to be clinically effective for several solid tumors. However, when the
antibodies are systemically administered, they exhibit immune-related
adverse events (ir-AE), that is, serious autoimmune toxicities, probably
because their immunosuppressive function through binding to ICP molecules
cannot discriminate normal tissues from solid cancers. If it is possible
to selectively block immune-suppressive pathways only at the tumor site,
both more anti-tumor effects and less ir-AE will be expected. In this
context, we have been trying to establish engineered Bifidobacterium,
which is nonpathogenic anaerobic bacteria and selectively colonizes in
the hypoxic tumors, to express and secrete scFvs for antibodies against
ICP molecules.Materials and Methods: We transformed Bifidobacterium with
expression vector encoding a single chain fragment of the variable region
(scFv) for anti-murine PD-1 (mPD-1) antibody. The biological activity of
the product was examined by binding ELISA, competitive ELISA and cell
binding by FACS. The anti-tumor activity was assessed by i.v.
administration with the engineered Bifidobactrerium to mice bearing
murine colorectal tumor (CT-26).Results: First, we succeeded in
establishing a Bifidobactrerium strain producing and secreting anti-mPD-1
scFv. Binding of the recombinant scFv to mPD-1 was observed by ELISA and
FACS, and its inhibition ability against mPD-1/mPD-L1 interaction was
also confirmed in the system of ELISA. Furthermore, tumor growth of CT-26
formed in the syngenic mice was markedly suppressed by i.v. treatment
with the engineered Bifidobactrerium producing anti-mPD-1 scFv. The
antitumor effect was comparable with that obtained by a commercially
available anti-mPD-1 antibody that was i.t. injected. As expected, both
the scFv and the recombinant bacteria were specifically detected at the
tumor sites by immunohistochemistry and colony plating assay,
respectively, 7 days after i.v. injection of the recombinant
Bifidobacterium to tumor bearing mice.Conclusion: Thus, the engineered
Bifidobacterium modified to produce and secrete scFv against ICP
molecules will provide a new promising immune-therapeutic modality to
target hypoxic solid tumors. The clinical application of the present
study will be prospectively expected by referring the ongoing clinical
trial of APS001F, a recombinant Bifidobacterium modified to express
cytosine deaminase that converts 5-FC, a pro-drug to 5-FU specifically in
tumor lesions.

