Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of REGN2810, a fully human anti-PD-1 monoclonal
antibody, against MC38.Ova tumors grown in immune-competent humanized
PD-1 mice


Programmed Cell Death Protein 1 (PD-1), is an inhibitory checkpoint
receptor, expressed in an activation-induced manner on T cells. PD-1
signals upon binding to its ligands PD-L1 and PD-L2, expressed on APCs
and some types of cancer cells, and delivers inhibitory signals to T
cells, promoting T-cells functional exhaustion in a tumor
microenvironment. Clinically, antibodies (Abs) that block the interaction
between PD-1 and PD-L1 can release the cytotoxic function of
tumor-specific T cells, yielding durable objective responses in multiple
cancer types. REGN2810 is a fully human hinge-stabilized IgG4P monoclonal
Ab that binds to the extracellular domain of human PD-1 with high
affinity and specificity. REGN2810 was selected using a combination of
binding studies (Surface Plasmon Resonance [SPR]-Biacore), enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISA), novel engineered cell-based bioassays, and
preclinical studies in mouse models. REGN2810 was investigated in PD-1
humanized mice, an approach that allows direct testing of clinical PD-1
Ab that does not cross-react with mouse PD-1. Humanized PD-1 mice were
created by Velocigene technology to express a humanized hybrid PD-1
protein comprising the extracellular portion of human PD-1 and the
transmembrane and intracellular portion of mouse PD-1. Humanized PD-1
mice were validated for inducible cell surface expression of hybrid PD-1
protein on activated T-cells, intact PD-1/PD-L1 signaling and immune
responses. A weakly immunogenic murine colorectal cancer cell line MC38
was engineered to express ovalbumin (MC38.Ova) in order to increase tumor
immunogenicity and allow monitoring of T-cell immune responses to
well-defined antigenic ovalbumin peptides. Prophylactic treatment with
REGN2810 PD-1 Ab significantly suppressed growth of subcutaneous
syngeneic MC38.Ova tumors in humanized PD-1 mice in a dose dependent
manner, and improved mouse survival. Therapeutic treatment with REGN2810
also promoted dose dependent regression of established MC38.Ova tumors in
humanized PD-1 mice. Treatment with REGN2810 induced CD8 T cells
proliferation and cytokine production in spleens of tumor bearing huPD-1
mice. The mechanism of action and robust anti-tumor efficacy of REGN2810
support its clinical development for the treatment of human cancers.

