Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced inhibition of PC-3 xenograft prostate tumor growth by
combination of green tea and quercetin with docetaxel


Chemotherapy with docetaxel (Doc) is a standard treatment for metastatic
and castration-resistant prostate cancer. However, the development of
chemoresistance and its side effects limit the clinical success of Doc.
Previously we demonstrated that the combined use of natural products
green tea (GT) and quercertin (Q) with Doc synergistically enhanced the
anti-proliferative effect in androgen-independent prostate cancer PC-3
cells. The objective of the present study was to confirm the combined
effect of GT, Q and Doc in xenograft prostate cancer mouse models and
determine underlying mechanisms. Male severe combined immunodeficiency
(SCID) mice (n = 10 per group) were inoculated with 5105 PC-3 cells
subcutaneously. When tumors reached a size of about 100mm3 the
intervention started. Mice were administered with GT+Q, Doc 5mg/kg (LD),
GT+Q+LD Doc, Doc 10mg/kg (HD) or control. The concentration of GT
polyphenols in brewed tea administered as drinking water was 0.07% and Q
was supplemented in diet at 0.4%. Doc was given through tail vein once a
week for 4 weeks. There was a nonsignificant inhibition of tumor growth
by GT+Q or LD Doc alone compared to control. However the combination
treatment with GT+Q+LD Doc significantly inhibited the tumor growth by
62% compared to LD Doc alone after 7 weeks intervention. The combined
effect was comparable to that by HD Doc treatment. Western blot analysis
demonstrated a significantly increased ratio of Bax to Bcl-2 protein
expression by GT+Q+LD Doc treatment compared to GT+Q or LD Doc. ELISA
analysis of blood samples demonstrated that the combination treatment
significantly decreased the blood concentrations of several growth
factors, including VEGF, EGF, TGF-, FGF-, and TNF- compared to GT+Q or LD
Doc alone. A liver toxicity evaluation revealed that the blood alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) level was significantly elevated with HD Doc
treatment compared to control, while not changed by other groups. Further
mechanistic investigations using protein array and tissue microarray
assays are ongoing. This study provides a promising regimen by combining
GT and Q with Doc to enhance chemotherapeutic effect in advanced prostate
cancer in a less toxic manner. The results warrant future clinical trials
to confirm the combined effect of the mixture in humans.

