Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low asparagine synthetase expression and in vitro sensitivity
highlights L-asparaginase potential for the treatment of aggressive
lymphomas


L-asparaginase (L-ASPA) is included in current chemotherapy regimen for
the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). The sensitivity of
ALL to L-ASPA has been linked to the incapacity of leukemic cells to
produce their own asparagine, since they are deficient in a specific
enzyme, asparagine synthetase (ASNS). Thus, ASNS-negative leukemic cells
rely on plasmatic asparagine and can be starved to death by L-ASPA
treatment.Several studies evidenced the potential of asparagine depletion
to treat lymphomas. Indeed, L-ASPA is routinely administered to treat
canine lymphomas and its adjunction in chemotherapy regimens
significantly improves the outcome of patients with NK/T cell lymphoma.
Some studies suggest its benefit for the treatment of B and T-cell
non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL).In this study, we assessed the in vitro
sensitivity to L-ASPA of 11 lymphoma cell lines, including diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) and other NHL
cell lines. We analyzed ASNS expression in tissue microarrays and
biopsies from 226 cases of lymphomas, including 158 DLBCL, 15 PTCL, as
well as other NHL and Hodgkin lymphomas. Sensitivity to L-ASPA (expressed
as an IC50) was assessed by measuring the cell viability in the presence
of various concentrations of L-ASPA. ASNS expression was assessed with a
validated immunohistochemistry method attributing a score based on
labeling intensity from 0 (no expression) to 3 (strong expression).
Tumors expressing no/low ASNS (scores 0 and 1) were considered
potentially sensitive to asparagine depletion.All lymphoma cell lines
were proved to be sensitive to L-ASPA. Their in vitro sensitivity usually
exceeded well-known sensitive cell lines (MOLT-4 and HL-60)
representative of acute leukemia.ASNS expression was null/low in 171/226
(76%) total cases of lymphomas. 118/158 (75%) DLBCL cases expressed
no/low ASNS, whereas ASNS expression was low/null in 2/15 (13%) PTCL
cases. Globally, B-cell NHL displayed a lower expression of ASNS than
T-cell NHL, Hodgkin lymphoma and non tumoral lymph nodes.The in vitro
sensitivity to L-ASPA of all lymphoma cell lines and the low/null
expression of ASNS in the majority of the lymphoma tissues tested suggest
that L-ASPA may be effective for the treatment of various lymphomas. As
suggested by ASNS expression, L-ASPA treatment may be particularly
effective in DLBCL and others B-cell NHL, whereas its efficacy in T-cell
NHL is probably more limited.However, L-ASPA has only been used scarcely
in the treatment of lymphomas despite promising clinical responses. Its
well known serious side-effects (hypersensitivity, coagulation disorders,
pancreatitis) render its use particularly hazardous in older or frail
patients. The development of a new formulation of L-ASPA with better
safety profile must be considered in order to allow the clinical
development of L-ASPA in the treatment of aggressive lymphomas.

