Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro efficacy profiling of ONC201 in cancer cells reveals
sensitivity pattern that is consistent with ER stress response


ONC201 is a small molecule with optimal preclinical characteristics that
led to the initiation of several ongoing clinical trials in advanced
cancers. The preclinical efficacy of this novel agent has been
demonstrated in a broad range of solid and liquid tumors and appears
independent of many oncogene mutations or resistance mechanisms. To
better characterize the differential sensitivity of tumor cells to ONC201
we performed in vitro efficacy across a large panel of cancer cell lines
(>1,000 cell lines) representing a diverse landscape in addition to
profiling in the NCI60 panel. These efforts included a dose range of up
to 20uM and 48-72 hour time points. An interim analysis of 482 cancer
cell lines revealed that among the 72 hour readouts, non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma, leukemia, and multiple myeloma appear to be the most sensitive
tumor types to ONC201 among the available dataset. Similar results were
obtained from cell viability assays at 48 hours post-treatment, revealing
a multiple myeloma cell line as the most responsive at this earlier time
point. Among solid tumors, glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) was among the
most sensitive tumor types. This result along with available ONC201
preclinical data supports further investigation of GBM, which is an
ER-stress sensitive tumor type that has not been addressed due to
blood-brain barrier limitations that do not impede ONC201.Recent
mechanistic studies have implicated the ER stress response in the early
stage mechanism of ONC201 that triggers its downstream antitumor effects.
This mechanism is consistent with the in vitro efficacy profiling that
point to non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and multiple myeloma as sensitive
outliers, which are both ER stress-sensitive tumor types and approved
indications for proteasome inhibitors. The switch from the adaptive to
the maladaptive ER stress response is thought to be a function of time
and severity of the stress. In accordance with this model, the kinetics
of ONC201-induced cytotoxic are more rapid in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma,
leuekemia, and multiple myeloma relative to other tumor types.These
interim sensitivity profile results support the involvement of the ER
stress response in the mechanism of action of ONC201 that explains its
kinetics of response. Furthermore, these results bode well for the active
clinical trials that are assessing the antitumor activity of ONC201 in ER
stress-sensitive tumors. Ongoing studies continuing to complete the in
vitro assessment of the cancer cell lines panel and conduct genetic
correlations to derive biomarkers or confirm its mutation-agnostic
profile.

