Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential mechanism for mitochondrial uncoupling protein 2
promotes skin carcinogenesis


Mitochondrial uncoupling has recently been proposed as a novel survival
mechanism for cancer cells, However, there is no direct evidence
supporting that uncoupling proteins promote carcinogenesis. Herein, we
examined whether mitochondrial uncoupling affects mouse skin
carcinogenesis using uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) homozygous knockout
mice, and explored the mechanisms of tumor promotion by mitochondrial
uncoupling by overexpressing UCP2 in JB6 P+ cells, which are the only
characterized skin cell model to study tumor promotion. The vivo results
indicate that the rates of oxygen consumption were only decreased in the
carcinogen-treated UCP2 knockout mice whereas glycolysis was only
increased in the carcinogen-treated wild-type mice. The levels of
metabolites pyruvate, malate and succinate showed different trends after
carcinogen treatments between the wild-type and UCP2 knockout mice. In
addition, UCP2 knockout decreases
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase (PFKFB2, especially
on the regulation of the key enzyme in glycolysis), CyclinB1 and the
oncoprotein Fra-1 expression during skin carcinogenesis. The vitro
results indicate that overexpression of UCP2 enhanced colony formation in
response to tumor promoter treatment. In addition, overexpression of UCP2
induced the upregulation of Fra-1 and PFKFB2 expression. Although UCP2
overexpression could suppress apoptosis in vitro, But UCP2 Knockout did
not cause increase in apoptosis. This study provides the first in vivo
evidence using UCP2 mice supporting that UCP2 promotes carcinogenesis.
Although the current data are unable to answer the question of how UCP2
knockout suppresses skin cancer formation, an interesting and important
finding is the adverse changes of the three metabolites and especially on
the regulation of the key enzyme in glycolysis pathway during
carcinogenesis, which provides a clue for future studies. Together with
early studies showing that UCP2 is overexpressed in a number of human
cancers and knockout of UCP2 significantly reduced the formation of both
benign (papilloma) and malignant (squamous cell carcinoma) tumors in
mice, UCP2 could be a potential target for cancer prevention and/or
therapy.

