Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced recruitment of tumor microenvironment components in A549
xenografts with acquired resistance to sorafenib


Acquired drug resistance represents a major obstacle to effective cancer
treatment. Sorafenib is an oral multikinase inhibitor with proven
efficacy for various types of advanced solid tumors, including non-small
cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC). However, its clinical response is often
short lived due to the emergence of acquired resistance. The objective of
our ongoing project is to identify potential mechanisms underlying the
acquisition of sorafenib resistance using in vivo models of A549 human
NSCLC xenograft in athymic nude mice. The in vivo sorafenib-resistant
tumor model was established by exposing A549 xenografts to once daily
treatment with 40 mg/kg of sorafenib for 4 months. Cells isolated from
fresh sorafenib-resistant A549 tumors were propagated in vitro and then
reimplanted into the same strain of mice. Tumor tissues obtained from the
primary and secondary A549 xenografts were subjected to Western blot and
immunohistrochemistry analyses. The in vitro study demonstrated that
there was no statistically significant difference in the sensitivity to
sorafenib treatment between A549 parental cells and tumor cells derived
from sorafenib-resistant A549 xenografts. In the in vivo study,
relatively accelerated tumor growth rate was observed in 4 out of 10
sorafenib-treated animals bearing the primary A549 xenografts.
Re-implantation of tumor cells derived from the sorafenib-resistant A549
xenografts into the secondary mice showed relatively rapid tumor growth
in 6 out of 7 sorafenib-treated tumor bearing animals. Preliminary
results from the immunofluorescence analysis of frozen tumor sections
revealed that the expression of CD31 and -smooth muscle actin (-SMA) in
sorafenib-resistant primary A549 tumors was significantly reduced
compared with the untreated A549 tumors. In contrast, the expression of
-SMA in the secondary sorafenib-resistant A549 tumors was upregulated as
compared with that in the primary A549 tumors, while the CD31 expression
in the secondary tumors was similar to that in the primary control
tumors. Moreover, in the primary A549 tumors, -SMA immunofluorescence was
often observed immediately adjacent to tumor microvessels; whereas in the
secondary sorafenib-resistant tumors, -SMA immunofluorescence mainly
appeared in the stromal cells that were involved in the fibrous sheaths
surrounding tumor cell nests. Overall, observations from the preliminary
study suggest that the secondary sorafenib-resistant tumors have an
increased ability to recruit stromal cells, which in turn promote
resistance to sorafenib treatment. Further studies are currently underway
to explore the potential mechanism associated with the enhanced
recruitment of stromal cells in secondary sorafenib-resistant tumors.

