Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel hepatocyte growth factor and macrophage stimulating protein
antagonists for the treatment of castration-resistant prostate cancer


Castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is an advanced form of
prostate cancer that is refractory to androgen deprivation therapy and
characterized by aggressive growth, extensive metastasis formation, and
poor prognosis. CRPC is temporarily manageable by the first-line
chemotherapeutic docetaxel, but will eventually progress as a
chemoresistant cancer, prompting a need for additional therapeutics to
either replace docetaxel or to be used in combination therapies that
increase the effectiveness of chemotherapy. The aberrant activation of
the tyrosine kinase receptor c-Met by the active, dimeric form of
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and the tyrosine kinase receptor RON by
macrophage stimulating protein (MSP) results in the overactivation of
signaling pathways that encourage cell proliferation, migration, and
survival, contributing to the malignant behavior and chemoresistance of
many cancers. The onset of metastatic prostate cancer is associated with
both increased serum levels of HGF and expression of c-Met and RON in
metastatic growths. Our laboratory has developed small molecules that
inhibit HGF dimerization, c-Met activation, and malignant cell behaviors
in several cancer cell types. Considering the high degree of homology
between HGF and MSP, we predict that our strategy for inhibiting the
activation of HGF can be extended to develop compounds that dually
inhibit HGF and MSP. We hypothesize that inhibiting HGF and MSP with our
antagonists will correspondingly reduce activation of c-Met and RON and
suppress tumor growth and metastasis in CRPC. We further anticipate a
therapy that combines our antagonists and docetaxel will increase the
efficacy of chemotherapy by blunting the pro-survival properties of the
HGF/c-Met and MSP/RON systems. Preliminary results indicate that our HGF
dimerization antagonist Norleual [Nle-Tyr-Ile--(CH2-NH2)3-4-His-Pro-Phe]
significantly inhibits the migration of CRPC cells and increases their
susceptibility to docetaxel treatment in vitro. The primary objective of
this study is to investigate the feasibility of HGF, MSP, and HGF/MSP
dual antagonists as a therapy for CRPC either alone or in combination
with docetaxel.

