Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hallmark of immune responses to multiple tumor-associated antigens
(TAAs) in immunodiagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and other
solid tumors


The immune system of the patient with cancer is a sensitive sensor of
alterations in structure and/or function of participants in tumorigenesis
pathways and is capable of making immune responses in the form of
autoantibodies to tumor-associated antigens (TAAs). A hallmark of this
immune response is the production of autoantibodies of multiple
specificities indicating the activation of more than one tumorigenesis
pathway. Novel autoantibodies appear prior to or coincident with clinical
detection of transformation to cancer. Activation of more than one
tumorigenesis pathway expressed as multiple autoantibodies to TAAs is a
finding consistent with the synthetic lethality paradigm where mutation
of more than one gene or in the case of cancer, more than one
tumorigenesis pathway is required for malignant transformation. After
analyzing 321 sera from patients with different type of cancer for
autoantibodies to seven selected TAAs including p53, c-myc, cyclin B1,
p62, KOC, IMP1 and Survivin, 34% of the sera had autoantibody to one TAA
and 20% had two to six autoantibodies simultaneously. In a recent study,
we have used a mini-array of 14 selected TAAs as an approach in the
immunodiagnosis of HCC, and found that 68% of the sera contained one or
more than one antibodies against these TAAs. In addition, this TAA array
can identify 43.8% of HCC patients who had normal AFP levels in serum.
Some autoantibodies appeared de-novo concurrent with conversion to
malignancy. Many novel target antigens besides the above have been
identified and shown to be participants in tumorigenesis. The immune
system response to TAAs is a repository of information on partners in the
synthetic lethality paradigm. Our study can also support the hypothesis
that a customized TAA array used for detecting anti-TAA autoantibodies
can constitute a promising and powerful tool for immunodiagnosis of HCC
and other solid tumors.

