Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MnSOD polymorphism is associated with ototoxicity in pediatric
medulloblastoma patients


Purpose: The SOD2 gene encodes manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) and
is critical for superoxide anion detoxification. Variants in SOD2 have
been associated with noise-induced hearing loss, and animal models
suggest MnSOD expression is up-regulated in the cochlea after treatment
with platinum-based chemotherapeutic agents. Therefore, we examined the
role of SOD2 variants on ototoxicity among cisplatin-treated childhood
medulloblastoma patients.Methods: Peripheral blood samples were obtained
from 100 patients treated for pediatric medulloblastoma or supratentorial
primitive neuroectodermal tumor at Texas Children's Cancer Center or MD
Anderson Cancer Center between 1982 and 2009. Demographic, clinical, and
treatment information was abstracted from patient medical records. A
diagnosis of ototoxicity was assigned to patients whose medical records
indicated they had received cisplatin chemotherapy and required the use
of a hearing aid 1 year following the completion of primary therapy. DNA
was genotyped on the Illumina HumanOmni-1 Quad BeadChip (San Diego, CA).
A linkage disequilibrium-based single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
selection strategy was used to identify a minimal set of informative
common variants (minor allele frequency 5%). The association between each
SNP and ototoxicity was assessed using multivariable logistic regression,
assuming a log-additive model. Adjusted models included confounders (age
at diagnosis, gender, craniospinal radiotherapy dose, cisplatin dose,
amifostine therapy, and ethnicity) selected using a change in estimate
approach.Results: Study participants were primarily male (73.2%) and
non-Hispanic white (42.3%) with a mean age at diagnosis of 7.3 years. Of
the 71 eligible patients with available information, 26 (36.6%) suffered
from cisplatin-related ototoxicity. Five SOD2 variants (rs7855,
rs5746151, rs5746136, rs2758331, rs4880) identified by the LD-based
selection strategy were available in the genotyped data. After correcting
for multiple comparisons, the C allele of the rs4880 variant was
significantly associated with ototoxicity (OR = 3.00; 95% CI: 1.32-6.82)
in adjusted models.Conclusions: In this study, the SOD2 rs4880 variant
was associated with ototoxicity. The rs4880 T>C substitution results in a
Val>Ala amino acid change at position 16 of the MnSOD mitochondrial
targeting sequence. Specifically, the Ala-variant, which has been
associated with increased MnSOD activity, was associated with hearing
damage in this study. Platinum-based therapies increase the expression of
MnSOD, which may result in an abundance of hydrogen peroxide, a reactive
oxygen species. Therefore oxidative stress may be an important mechanism
in therapy-related cochlear damage. Characterizing genetic predictors of
ototoxicity susceptibility may aid in prevention strategies and
potentially identify novel antioxidant therapeutic targets.

