Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct evolutionary and mutational patterns in oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes


Oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes play different roles in
carcinogenesis and tumor progression. However, very little attention has
been paid to compare their mutational and evolutionary patterns. As such,
these two groups of genes are often mingled together in computational
modeling and analysis. To bridge this gap, we examined the evolutionary
profiles of 150 oncogenes and 102 tumor suppressor genes and their
somatic mutations recorded in the COSMIC database. We found that these
two groups of genes display distinct evolutionary and mutational
patterns. In general, oncogenes are more conserved than tumor suppressor
genes, as revealed by multiple-species comparisons. The stronger
purifying selection on oncogenes is also reflected at positions harboring
somatic missense mutations. Thus, somatic mutations disrupting oncogenes
tend to have higher functional impact than those disrupting tumor
suppressor genes. However, the mutational landscape of oncogenes is often
dominated by one or very few hotspots, while multiple hotspots and
frequent sporadic mutations are found in tumor suppressor genes.
Furthermore, CpG hypermutations contribute to 58% of highly recurrent
mutations in tumor suppressor genes, but only 4% to those in oncogenes.
These patterns indicate that most random somatic mutations in oncogenes
are also under stronger purifying selection as compared to those in tumor
suppressor genes. However, once an advantageous mutation in an oncogene
arises, it tends to increase the fitness significantly such that a hard
sweep pursues, which eventually reduces the mutational diversity of the
tumor. On the contrary, the relatively mild selection on tumor suppressor
genes allows more neutral mutations to accumulate. When eventually the
deactivation of both copies of a tumor suppressor gene triggers positive
selection, the mutational diversity of the tumor has increased
significantly. These distinct evolutionary and mutational patterns
warrant independent modeling of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in
studies that incorporate these features in the analysis, such as
prediction of driver mutations or inference of evolutionary paths for
cancers.

