Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PPAR function is attenuated by full length androgen receptor and
the AR-V7 variant in human prostate cancer cells


The peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma (PPAR) is a
ligand-activated transcription factor that regulates in vitro and in vivo
growth of castration-resistant human prostate cancer (PCa) cells.
However, the factors that control expression of PPAR within human PCa
have not been characterized. We have previously shown that the androgen
dihydrotestosterone decreases PPAR levels and transcriptional activity in
human PCa cells. Dihydrotestosterone serves as a high affinity ligand for
the 110 kD form of the androgen receptor (AR-FL). Recent studies have
shown the development of castration-resistant forms of prostate cancer is
not only due to reactivation of AR-FL but also results from the
expression of androgen receptor splice variants (ARVs) that lack the
ligand-binding domain of the receptor. The goal of this study is to
define the extent to which AR-FL and an ARV found in castration-resistant
prostate cancer, AR-V7, regulate PPAR expression and function. We first
examined the role of AR-FL in the AR-positive C4-2 cell line.
siRNA-mediated knockdown of endogenous AR-FL within C4-2 cells increased
PPAR protein and transcriptional activity. We next used reporter assays
to further define the role of AR-FL and AR-V7 in PPAR function. In these
experiments, we first transfected plasmid vectors that express the AR-V7
or AR-FL into the AR null PC-3 prostate cancer cell line. A
luciferase-based reporter assay was then used to measure alterations in
PPAR transcriptional activity within transfected cells. The addition of
AR-FL to PC-3 cells resulted in reduced basal PPAR luciferase activity.
The ability of the ligand rosiglitazone to increase PPAR activation was
also suppressed in AR-FL positive PC-3 cells. A comparable decrease in
ligand-induced PPAR activation was detected in PC-3 cells that expressed
AR-V7. The reduction in PPAR activity produced by AR-FL and AR-V7 was
likely not due to alterations in PPAR gamma expression, for we did not
detect a consistent reduction in PPAR mRNA and protein in transfected
cells. Overall these data suggest that both AR-FL and AR-V7 are negative
regulators of PPAR function. Moreover, the AR-V7 stimulated reduction in
PPAR activity does not require the presence of AR-FL. Studies currently
are underway to define the effect of endogenous AR-V7 on PPAR expression
and activity. This project was supported by NIGMS RISE grant
(2R25GM059994-13), a NCI Mentored Career Development Award (K01CA114253),
and the Vanderbilt CTSA grant UL1 RR024975-01 from NCRR/NIH.

