Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P-glycoprotein attenuates Src activation and DNA repair activity
via increased C-terminal Src kinase-binding protein, a negative regulator
of Src, in multidrug-resistant cells


Multidrug resistance (MDR) remains a significant obstacle to the success
of cancer chemotherapy. MDR is often associated with increased expression
of ATP-binding cassette transporter family members, which extrude
anticancer drugs out of cells. The MDR1 gene product, P-glycoprotein
(P-gp) is one of the most well-known ABC transporters and expels a broad
range of anticancer drugs, such as vinblastine, vincristine, doxorubicin
and paclitaxel. Overexpression of P-gp in tumor tissues is thus a
prognostic indicator associated with poor response to chemotherapy and
poor clinical outcome. Our previous study has shown that P-gp
overexpression attenuates the repair activity of DNA interstrand
crosslinks (ICLs) and hence contributes the susceptibility of MDR cells
to DNA ICL agents [1]. In the present study, we explored the molecular
mechanisms underlying which P-gp interferes with Src-activated DNA repair
activity. We first confirmed that ectopic expression of P-gp attenuates
DNA ICL repair activity and becomes more susceptible to DNA ICL agents
than vector control cells. Our present results showed that the C-terminal
Src kinase-binding protein (Cbp), a negative regulator of Src, is
significantly enhanced in MDR cells. Cbp silencing by siRNA technique
apparently enhances cisplatin-induced Src activation and DNA repair
activity, and hence increases the resistance of MDR cells to ICL agents.
By aid of immuneprecipitation and immunofluorescence staining techniques,
we demonstrated that P-gp not only interacts with Cbp and Src but also
enhances the formation of inhibitory Csk-Cbp complex that reduces
phosphorylation of Src activation residue Tyr416 and increases
phosphorylation of Src negative regulatory Tyr527 residue. Taken
together, the current results indicate that P-gp overexpression in MDR
cells attenuates DNA repair activity by mediating Cbp dependent mechanism
to interfere with Src activation. These results implicate that increasing
the expression of Cbp is potentially a therapeutic strategy to increase
the susceptibility of cancer cells to chemotherapeutic agents.1. Lee PC,
Lee HJ, Kakadiya R, Sanjiv K, Su TL, Lee TC: Multidrug-resistant cells
overexpressing P-glycoprotein are susceptible to DNA crosslinking agents
due to attenuated Src/nuclear EGFR cascade-activated DNA repair activity.
Oncogene 2013, 32:1144-1154.

