Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of reversible BTK inhibitors in cell lines with
clinically relevant Ibrutinib resistance mutations


BackgroundIbrutinib, a small molecule inhibitor that covalently binds
Cys481 of Bruton's Tyrosine Kinase (BTK), has recently been approved in
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) and Mantle Cell Lymphoma (MCL).
Although the majority of patients respond to this drug, eventually
resistance develops. Known causes for resistance include the outgrowth of
cancer cells with mutations in either the drug binding pocket of BTK or
activating mutations in the downstream effector, PLC2.ObjectiveTo explore
mechanisms of resistance to ibrutinib and evaluate the potential of next
generation BTK inhibitors on ibrutinib resistant cancer, we selected for
resistance in cultured lymphoma cells. We chose TMD8, a cell line model
of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) that has constitutive B-cell
receptor signaling, and REC-1, an ibrutinib sensitive MCL line, to model
resistance.MethodsTMD8 and REC-1 were cultured in increasing
concentrations of ibrutinib to generate resistant cell lines. Genetic
changes that may account for resistance were evaluated using whole exome
sequencing. Resistant cell lines were evaluated for sensitivity to a
small panel of BTK inhibitors.ResultsWe generated a TMD8 derived cell
line that is 1000-fold resistant to ibrutinib. Whole exome sequencing
revealed a C481Y mutation in BTK. Reversible inhibitors that are not
reliant on this site may function as alternative inhibitors of C481
mutant BTK. Ibrutinib-resistant TMD8 cells were tested for response to
novel, reversible BTK inhibitors. The potency was similar to or modestly
reduced (3 to 10 fold) on the ibrutinib-resistant cells compared to the
parental line. In addition, we generated ibrutinib-resistant cells
derived from the REC-1 line. Unlike resistance generated in TMD8, REC-1
resistant cells harbor a L527W mutation in BTK and are resistant to all
BTK inhibitors that we evaluated.ConclusionsC481Y and L527W BTK mutations
have been identified in CLL patients that have relapsed after response to
ibrutinib, and C481S mutations have been identified in ibrutinib relapsed
CLL and MCL patients. Our data suggest that reversible, next generation
BTK inhibitors have the potential to be efficacious on ibrutinib relapsed
patients that harbor mutations at C481 of BTK.

