Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adding pericyte inhibition to combined anti-angiogenesis and
irradiation slows tumor growth but increases metastasis in mice model


Increased pericyte coverage has been suggested to be one of the resistant
mechanisms of anti-angiogenic treatment (AAT), but targeting pericytes
disrupts tumor vascular normalization and abolishes the benefit of
oxygenation for the combination of irradiation (IR) with AAT. This raises
the question of whether pericyte inhibition should be added to the
combination of AAT and IR. We and others have shown that Endostar (Endo),
a humanized endostatin, induces a normalization window starting from D5,
characterized by decreased tumor hypoxia and increased pericyte coverage
of vessels. In this study, we tried to utilize the reduced hypoxia in
vascular normalization window to radiosensitize tumor and attempted to
test whether inhibiting pericytes after the window may result in optimal
anti-tumor effect. Subcutaneous Lewis lung carcinoma was used as the
tumor model. Pericyte inhibition was achieved by administering CP673451
(CP) at a dose of 20mg/kg, a platelet-derived growth factor receptor
(PDGFR) inhibitor. Endo was given daily for 10 days. 12Gy/1f IR was
administered on D5 post-endostar initiation. CP was given from D6 to D10
in order not to interfere with the hypoxia alleviation by Endo when IR
was given. We found that percentage of pericyte-covered endothelial cells
was the lowest in IR+Endo+CP group compared to IR alone and IR+Endo.
IR+Endo+CP significantly reduced tumor growth rate compared to the other
two groups. However, the local growth retardation was not translated to
mice survival benefits, without even any trend could be suggested. We
next found that trimodality treatment resulted in significantly more
metastasis in mice lungs. This might be due to increased tumor hypoxia in
RT+Endo+CP group, which was found to be the highest among the three.
Thus, we hereby conclude that adding pericytes inhibition to the
combination of IR and AAT even without interfering vascular normalization
when IR is administered confers benefit to local tumor control but not to
mice survival, due to increased hypoxia and distant metastasis.

