Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of MEK confers hypersensitivity to X-radiation in the
context of BRAF mutation in a model of childhood astrocytoma


Patients with recurrent low-grade brain tumors or anaplastic astrocytoma
may receive radiation treatment, however, the long-term sequellae from
radiation treatment can be severe. For pediatric astrocytomas, low-grade
tumors are associated with activation of BRAF through a tandem
duplication that results in the KIAA1549-BRAF fusion (Grade 1) or through
an activating point mutation of BRAF (predominantly V600E; Grade 2-4) and
is the most common lesion in low- and intermediate-grade astrocytoma.
Previous studies have indicated synergy between MEK inhibition and
ionizing radiation therapy (XRT), although the proposed mechanisms for
synergy differ. We have explored the combination of ionizing radiation
with MEK inhibition in a model of BRAF-mutant anaplastic childhood
astrocytoma. The regulation of TORC1 signaling by BRAF was examined in
BT-40 (BRAF mutant) and BT-35 (BRAF wild type) xenografts, in a cell line
derived from the BT-40 xenograft and two adult BRAF mutant (V600E)
glioblastoma cell lines (DBTRG-05MG, AM380c1). The effect of MEK
inhibition (selumetinib, AZD6244, ARRY-142886), XRT (2 Gy daily
fractionated doses), or the combination of selumetinib and XRT was
evaluated in subcutaneous BT-40 xenografts. Inhibition of MEK signaling
by selumetinib, suppressed TORC1 signaling only in the context of the
BRAF-mutant both in vitro and in vivo. Inhibition of MEK signaling in
BT-40 cells or in xenografts lead to a complete suppression of TORC1
signaling and decreased levels of FANCD2 protein, whereas inhibition of
TORC1 signaling was less in DBTRG-05MG cells and even less in AM380c1
cells. The level of TORC1 inhibition by selumetinib was associated with
loss of clonogenic survival, and suppression of FANCD2 in vitro. In vivo
we examined the sensitivity of BT-40 xenografts to selumetinib (75 mg/kg
BID x 42 days, PO), XRT (10 Gy delivered as 2 Gy daily fractions), or
selumetinib combined with XRT. For control tumors, median time to event
was 17 days, whereas for XRT alone it was 80 days (PPatients with
recurrent low-grade brain tumors or anaplastic astrocytoma may receive
radiation treatment, however, the long-term sequellae from radiation
treatment can be severe. For pediatric astrocytomas, low-grade tumors are
associated with activation of BRAF through a tandem duplication that
results in the KIAA1549-BRAF fusion (Grade 1) or through an activating
point mutation of BRAF (predominantly V600E; Grade 2-4) and is the most
common lesion in low- and intermediate-grade astrocytoma. Previous
studies have indicated synergy between MEK inhibition and ionizing
radiation therapy (XRT), although the proposed mechanisms for synergy
differ. We have explored the combination of ionizing radiation with MEK
inhibition in a model of BRAF-mutant anaplastic childhood astrocytoma.
The regulation of TORC1 signaling by BRAF was examined in BT-40 (BRAF
mutant) and BT-35 (BRAF wild type) xenografts, in a cell line derived
from the BT-40 xenograft and two adult BRAF mutant (V600E) glioblastoma
cell lines (DBTRG-05MG, AM380c1). The effect of MEK inhibition
(selumetinib, AZD6244, ARRY-142886), XRT (2 Gy daily fractionated doses),
or the combination of selumetinib and XRT was evaluated in subcutaneous
BT-40 xenografts. Inhibition of MEK signaling by selumetinib, suppressed
TORC1 signaling only in the context of the BRAF-mutant both in vitro and
in vivo. Inhibition of MEK signaling in BT-40 cells or in xenografts lead
to a complete suppression of TORC1 signaling and decreased levels of
FANCD2 protein, whereas inhibition of TORC1 signaling was less in
DBTRG-05MG cells and even less in AM380c1 cells. The level of TORC1
inhibition by selumetinib was associated with loss of clonogenic
survival, and suppression of FANCD2 in vitro. In vivo we examined the
sensitivity of BT-40 xenografts to selumetinib (75 mg/kg BID x 42 days,
PO), XRT (10 Gy delivered as 2 Gy daily fractions), or selumetinib
combined with XRT. For control tumors, median time to event was 17 days,
whereas for XRT alone it was 80 days (P<0.0001). Selumetinib treatment
induced complete regression of most tumors with progression starting
around week 5 of the 6-week treatment period, consistent with previous
data, with median time to event being 51 days (PPatients with recurrent
low-grade brain tumors or anaplastic astrocytoma may receive radiation
treatment, however, the long-term sequellae from radiation treatment can
be severe. For pediatric astrocytomas, low-grade tumors are associated
with activation of BRAF through a tandem duplication that results in the
KIAA1549-BRAF fusion (Grade 1) or through an activating point mutation of
BRAF (predominantly V600E; Grade 2-4) and is the most common lesion in
low- and intermediate-grade astrocytoma. Previous studies have indicated
synergy between MEK inhibition and ionizing radiation therapy (XRT),
although the proposed mechanisms for synergy differ. We have explored the
combination of ionizing radiation with MEK inhibition in a model of
BRAF-mutant anaplastic childhood astrocytoma. The regulation of TORC1
signaling by BRAF was examined in BT-40 (BRAF mutant) and BT-35 (BRAF
wild type) xenografts, in a cell line derived from the BT-40 xenograft
and two adult BRAF mutant (V600E) glioblastoma cell lines (DBTRG-05MG,
AM380c1). The effect of MEK inhibition (selumetinib, AZD6244,
ARRY-142886), XRT (2 Gy daily fractionated doses), or the combination of
selumetinib and XRT was evaluated in subcutaneous BT-40 xenografts.
Inhibition of MEK signaling by selumetinib, suppressed TORC1 signaling
only in the context of the BRAF-mutant both in vitro and in vivo.
Inhibition of MEK signaling in BT-40 cells or in xenografts lead to a
complete suppression of TORC1 signaling and decreased levels of FANCD2
protein, whereas inhibition of TORC1 signaling was less in DBTRG-05MG
cells and even less in AM380c1 cells. The level of TORC1 inhibition by
selumetinib was associated with loss of clonogenic survival, and
suppression of FANCD2 in vitro. In vivo we examined the sensitivity of
BT-40 xenografts to selumetinib (75 mg/kg BID x 42 days, PO), XRT (10 Gy
delivered as 2 Gy daily fractions), or selumetinib combined with XRT. For
control tumors, median time to event was 17 days, whereas for XRT alone
it was 80 days (P<0.0001). Selumetinib treatment induced complete
regression of most tumors with progression starting around week 5 of the
6-week treatment period, consistent with previous data, with median time
to event being 51 days (P<0.0001 vs control). In contrast to XRT or
selumetinib as single agents, the combination caused complete regression
of all tumors, with only 4 of 10 (40%) recurrent tumors within the 24
weeks observation period, and significantly better than radiation or
selumetinib alone (PPatients with recurrent low-grade brain tumors or
anaplastic astrocytoma may receive radiation treatment, however, the
long-term sequellae from radiation treatment can be severe. For pediatric
astrocytomas, low-grade tumors are associated with activation of BRAF
through a tandem duplication that results in the KIAA1549-BRAF fusion
(Grade 1) or through an activating point mutation of BRAF (predominantly
V600E; Grade 2-4) and is the most common lesion in low- and
intermediate-grade astrocytoma. Previous studies have indicated synergy
between MEK inhibition and ionizing radiation therapy (XRT), although the
proposed mechanisms for synergy differ. We have explored the combination
of ionizing radiation with MEK inhibition in a model of BRAF-mutant
anaplastic childhood astrocytoma. The regulation of TORC1 signaling by
BRAF was examined in BT-40 (BRAF mutant) and BT-35 (BRAF wild type)
xenografts, in a cell line derived from the BT-40 xenograft and two adult
BRAF mutant (V600E) glioblastoma cell lines (DBTRG-05MG, AM380c1). The
effect of MEK inhibition (selumetinib, AZD6244, ARRY-142886), XRT (2 Gy
daily fractionated doses), or the combination of selumetinib and XRT was
evaluated in subcutaneous BT-40 xenografts. Inhibition of MEK signaling
by selumetinib, suppressed TORC1 signaling only in the context of the
BRAF-mutant both in vitro and in vivo. Inhibition of MEK signaling in
BT-40 cells or in xenografts lead to a complete suppression of TORC1
signaling and decreased levels of FANCD2 protein, whereas inhibition of
TORC1 signaling was less in DBTRG-05MG cells and even less in AM380c1
cells. The level of TORC1 inhibition by selumetinib was associated with
loss of clonogenic survival, and suppression of FANCD2 in vitro. In vivo
we examined the sensitivity of BT-40 xenografts to selumetinib (75 mg/kg
BID x 42 days, PO), XRT (10 Gy delivered as 2 Gy daily fractions), or
selumetinib combined with XRT. For control tumors, median time to event
was 17 days, whereas for XRT alone it was 80 days (P<0.0001). Selumetinib
treatment induced complete regression of most tumors with progression
starting around week 5 of the 6-week treatment period, consistent with
previous data, with median time to event being 51 days (P<0.0001 vs
control). In contrast to XRT or selumetinib as single agents, the
combination caused complete regression of all tumors, with only 4 of 10
(40%) recurrent tumors within the 24 weeks observation period, and
significantly better than radiation or selumetinib alone (P<0.0001 for
both comparisons). These data add to studies that indicate synergy
between XRT and MEK inhibitors, and suggest the possibility of
potentiating the effect of XRT selectively in tumor cells by MEK
inhibition in the context of mutant BRAF. Combining MEK inhibition with
XRT may allow maintenance of tumor control at lower doses of XRT that
would decrease long-term sequellae for children with BRAF-mutant brain
tumors.

