Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PAX3-FOXO1 is essential for initiation but not for recurrence
during rhabdomyosarcoma tumorigenesis


The PAX3-FOXO1 fusion gene, which is generated by a 2; 13 chromosomal
translocation, is a characteristic feature of fusion-positive
rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), a major RMS subtype associated with aggressive
behavior and poor prognosis. This study utilizes a novel inducible
expression system in human myoblasts to dissect the molecular mechanism
and contribution of PAX3-FOXO1 in RMS tumorigenesis.A human myoblast cell
line (immortalized by BMI1 and TERT expression) was transduced with a
retroviral construct that constitutively expresses MYCN and a lentiviral
based- doxycycline inducible construct that variably and reversibly
expresses PAX3-FOXO1. Focus formation and animal xenograft experiments
were performed to study transformation in vitro and tumorigenesis in
vivo, respectively. Myogenic differentiation was assessed by light
microscopy and by western blot or immunohistochemical assays of
muscle-specific protein expression.PAX3-FOXO1-transduced myoblasts
treated with doxycycline demonstrated a time- and dose-dependent increase
in expression of PAX3-FOXO1 mRNA and protein and its downstream targets
genes; doxycycline withdrawal led to cessation of fusion protein
expression. Though myoblasts expressing PAX3-FOXO1 or MYCN alone did not
show any evidence of transformation in culture, combined PAX3-FOXO1 and
MYCN expression resulted in myoblast transformation. Under
differentiation-promoting culture conditions, combined PAX3-FOXO1 and
MYCN expression inhibited myogenic differentiation. Intramuscular
injection of myoblasts with MYCN and PAX3-FOXO1 resulted in rapid RMS
tumor formation in NOD-SCID mice when fusion protein expression was
induced by feeding mice a doxycycline-containing diet. Myoblasts with
MYCN expression alone did not form any tumors while PAX3-FOXO1 induction
without MYCN expression resulted in RMS tumors only after a much longer
latency period. After tumors formed from myoblasts expressing PAX3-FOXO1
with or without MYCN, down-regulation of PAX3-FOXO1 expression by
doxycycline withdrawal resulted in tumor regression associated with
widespread myogenic differentiation. However, the regressed tumors slowly
grew back in the absence of doxycycline induction demonstrating a
PAX3-FOXO1-independent oncogenic mechanism for recurrence.The PAX3-FOXO1
fusion protein collaborated with MYCN in the initial stage of RMS
tumorigenesis to promote dysregulated cell proliferation and inhibit
myogenic differentiation. Though most cells in the initial tumor were
dependent on the fusion protein, recurrent tumors formed in which the
fusion protein was not required to maintain the tumorigenic phenotype.

