Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting MCL1-dependent cancers through RNA splicing modulation


Myeloid cell leukemia 1 (MCL1) is a member of the BCL2-family of proteins
governing the apoptosis pathway and is one of the most frequently
amplified genes in cancer. MCL1 overexpression often results in
dependence on MCL1 for survival and is linked to resistance to anticancer
therapies. However, the development of direct MCL1 inhibitors has proven
challenging and thus far has been unsuccessful. Alternative splicing of
MCL1 converts the anti-apoptotic MCL1 long (MCL1-L) isoform to the
BH3-only containing MCL1 short (MCL1-S) isoform. As a potential approach
for targeting MCL1-dependent cancers, we explored the use of MCL1
splicing modulators.We screened a unique chemical library of compounds
that span a range of splicing activities on various substrates in an in
vitro assay. Interestingly, we found a subset of general splicing
modulators, as well as a subset of SF3B1 inhibitors, that are capable of
driving the distinctive alterations in MCL1 splicing that in turn can
trigger preferential killing of MCL1-dependent cell lines. The best
modulators induce a prominent down-regulation of MCL1-L, up-regulation of
MCL1-S, and accumulation of intron-retained MCL1 transcript.Somewhat
surprisingly, several additional avenues of investigation pointed to
MCL1-L down-regulation rather than MCL1-S up-regulation as the driver of
preferential killing of MCL1-dependent cells. This includes the fact that
compound-induced cytotoxicity can be rescued by expression of a MCL1-L
cDNA and MCL1-L specific shRNA knockdown is sufficient to kill
MCL1-dependent cells. On the other hand, overexpression of MCL1-S cDNA
had no significant effect on cells and splicing modulators that induced
very high levels of MCL1-S mRNA in the absence potent MCL1-L
down-regulation exhibit minimal cytotoxicity. Biochemical
characterization and understanding of these MCL1 splicing modulators has
enabled further optimization of compounds that can induce potent and
preferential killing of MCL1-dependent cancer cell lines in vitro.
Preliminary studies in mice bearing MCL1-dependent NSCLC xenografts
confirmed current lead compounds can indeed induce rapid down-regulation
of MCL1-L, induction of apoptosis, and antitumor activity.Collectively
these data yield insight into mechanisms of MCL1 splicing modulation that
can trigger acute apoptosis in MCL1-dependent cancers and provides
support for the idea of using splicing modulators to target
difficult-to-drug oncogenic drivers such as MCL1.

