Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lower T-lymphocyte mitochondrial DNA copy number is associated
with graft versus host disease in patients undergoing hematopoietic cell
transplantation


Background: Graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) continues to be a major
cause of transplant related mortality, morbidity and decreased quality of
life post allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT). Despite
extensive use of histocompatibility antigen (HLA) matching between
patients and donors and a variety of prophylactic regimens, the rates of
GvHD have not declined substantially over the last decade. Recent studies
have shown mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) plays an important
role in T lymphocyte activation and initiation of the inflammatory
response and represents a novel biological pathway that influences GvHD
risk. We hypothesized that lower mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number
that increases ROS related oxidative damage will be associated with acute
and chronic GvHD.Methods: In a cohort of 201 patients who underwent
allogeneic HCT for treatment of hematologic malignancies at the
University of Minnesota between 2009 and 2012, we evaluated the
association between donor post HCT mtDNA copy number at 7 time points
(days 21, 28, 60, 100, 180, 365 and 730) and acute and chronic GvHD.
Recipient blood was separated into CD3+ (T-lymphocytes) and CD15+
(neutrophil) fractions at each time point using magnetic bead separation.
All recipients had 100% donor engraftment at the various time points for
inclusion in the study. We used a quantitative real time PCR method,
comparing the number of copies of the mitochondria- specific gene (ND1)
to the number of copies of a nuclear gene (18s) to estimate mtDNA copy
number. We used a linear mixed model adjusting for fixed effects of donor
type (sibling, unrelated and cord blood donors), donor age, the
interaction of GVHD status with time, and random effects for subject and
assay run number. The outcome (CD3+/CD15+ mtDNA copy number) was
log-transformed to improve model fit and normalize residual
variance.Results: Overall CD3+ mtDNA copy number was lower among patients
with grade II-IV acute GvHD (n = 90) as compared to those without acute
GvHD (n = 79) (2.03 vs. 2.18, respectively; p = 0.02), while there were
no significant differences in CD15+ mtDNA copy number between the two
groups (p = 0.49). Similarly, CD3+ mtDNA copy number was lower among
patients with chronic GvHD (n = 43) as compared to those without chronic
GvHD (n = 79) (1.82 vs. 2.24, respectively; p = 0.01) while there were no
significant differences in CD15+ mtDNA copy number between the two groups
(p = 0.47).Conclusion: Our study shows that mtDNA is decreased in acute
and chronic GVHD compared to transplant recipients without this
complication, providing preliminary evidence that mtDNA copy number may
serve as a biomarker for early detection and monitoring of GvHD. Future
studies that evaluate the significance of altered mtDNA copy number on T
lymphocyte function and ROS are needed to evaluate the utility of novel
mt-based interventions for treatment of GvHD.

