Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting EZH2 in neuroendocrine prostate cancer


Background and aim of the studyEZH2 is the catalytic subunit of the
Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and it is involved in controlling
gene expression through trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27
(H3K27me3), a key mechanism that regulates chromatin structure and gene
silencing. EZH2 is overexpressed in a wide range of cancers including
prostate. Recent findings show that EZH2 can form a complex with the
androgen receptor (AR), enhancing its transcriptional activity. However
the role of EZH2 in AR low/negative prostate cancer has not been
previously investigated. Long-term exposure to AR targeted therapies can
cause an adaptive response mechanism in a subset of advanced prostate
cancers. Often this adaptation is associated with loss of AR expression,
clinical aggressiveness, and pathologic features of small cell or
neuroendocrine carcinoma. This AR independent resistant phenotype is
broadly termed neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC). Initial studies
from our lab have highlighted a landscape of genomic alterations that
characterize NEPC. In this study we explore the hypothesis that the
epigenetic modifier, EZH2, can lead the adaptive response towards an
androgen-independent phenotype and towards NEPC.ResultsUsing Next
Generation RNA-sequencing, we profiled tumors from a cohort of patients
including 20 NEPC, 68 Prostate Adenocarcinoma (PCa), and 19 castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) and we discovered that EZH2 is highly
expressed in NEPC (characterized by low or absent AR and morphologic
changes). These findings were also confirmed at protein level by
immunohistochemistry. Based on the driving role of EZH2 in other tumor
types and significant overexpression in NEPC tumors, we evaluated the
effects of the EZH2 inhibitor, GSK343, in NEPC cells (NCI-H660) and PCa
cells (LNCaP and DU145) in 3D Matrigel cultures. GSK343 effectively
inhibited H3K27me3 and resulted in a significant reduction of NCI-H660
viability, measured with an ATP-based assay, whereas LNCaP and DU145
cells were minimally affected after 7 or 14 days of treatment. Using a
custom designed Nanostring assay, we also demonstrated a significant
increase in the expression of AR signaling genes (e.g. PSA, PSMA) and
decrease in NEPC-associated genes (e.g. chromogranin A, AURKA, ENO2) when
NEPC cells were treated with GSK343. These data suggest a modulation of
the neuroendocrine phenotype via EZH2. We therefore extended these drug
studies to patient-derived organoid models including both CRPC and NEPC
organoids and we observed similar results with preferential sensitivity
of the AR-negative NEPC organoids compared to AR-positive CRPC organoids
and similar reversion of downstream AR/NEPC gene
expression.ConclusionsAltogether, these data suggest that EZH2-mediated
epigenetic changes contribute to the AR-independent NEPC resistant
phenotype, and this effect can be reverted or delayed by targeting EZH2
activity. EZH2 represents a promising drug target and a potential
modulator of the NEPC phenotype.

