Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CEACAM6 is upregulated by the H Pylori CAG-A oncoprotein, and is a
candidate biomarker for the diagnosis of early gastric cancer


Early detection of gastric cancers confers a significant mortality
benefit, but remains a diagnostic challenge. We aim to identify and
develop novel cell-surface biomarkers to improve the efficiency of
gastric cancer detection by fluorescent endoscopy. Traditional approaches
for surface biomarker discovery compare normal and malignant cell lines,
but are prone to artifacts of cell line derivation and evolution. Our
strategy exploits the dependence of gastric cancers on CAG-A, the
Helicobacter Pylori oncoprotein. CAG-A incorporation is necessary and
sufficient for gastric cancer pathogenesis, and is accordingly observed
in early cancer specimens, but is intracellular and not expressed at high
enough levels to be an applicable biomarker for cancer diagnosis. We
therefore designed a strategy to screen for cell surface alterations
induced by CAG-A overexpression, which may be retained in gastric cancers
through oncogenic addiction.We used an inducible system for CAG-A
expression in gastric MKN28 cells to compare the gene expression profile
of cells with and without CAG-A overexpression, on the Affymetrix Gene
1.0 platform. We focused on putative membrane protein transcripts, to
identify differentially upregulated candidates in CAG-A overexpressing
cells. The top 10 hits from our screen were then analyzed in gene
expression and RNAseq datasets from the Singapore Gastric Cancer
Consortium, comparing the transcriptome of gastric cancer with adjacent
normal tissue.Amongst our top hits in the in-vitro CAG-A screen, we noted
a significant enrichment of the cell adhesion molecule CEACAM6 in gastric
cancer samples when compared to normal tissue (8 fold increase in gene
expression by microarray analysis (n = 100 normals, 200 cancers), and 200
fold increase in matched RNAseq analysis (n = 10 each)). We confirmed
CEACAM6 to be upregulatd by CAG-A using RT-PCR on the inducible CAG-A
system, and also in other gastric cell lines infected with H Pylori.
Finally, we compared CEACAM6 protein expression on a gastric tissue
microarray, using quantitative immunohistochemistry through automated
spectral microscopy on the Vectra 2 platform. We confirm a 10-fold
increase in CEACAM6 protein in gastric cancers as compared to normal
tissue (n = 63 cancer, 52 normal). Fluorescently conjugated antibodies to
these cell surface markers bind avidly to freshly resected xenografts (n
= 3) of gastric cancer, without fixation. Together, these results suggest
that CEACAM6 upregulation is a cell surface response to the introduction
of H Pylori CAG-A in gastric epithelial cells, and is retained in a
significant fraction of gastric cancers. It appears to be a promising
candidate for a fluorescently conjugated biomarker to aid with the
endoscopic diagnosis of early gastric cancer.

