Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of cdc2 is linked to PMA-induced cell differentiation


The critical role of cdc2 (CDK1) in G2-M transition of the cell cycle
control in mammalian cells has been well documented. Recent studies have
also demonstrated that cdc2 is capable of driving G1 progress and G1-S
transition via association with multiple interphase cyclins and through
the interactions with Rb proteins. However, whether this pluripotent CDK
regulates cell differentiation is unclear. Thus, the effect of phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) on cell differentiation and the expression
of cdc2 in a human myeloid leukemia cell line, TF-1a, was investigated.
When TF-1a cells were treated with 105, 106, and 107 PMA for 48 and 72h,
they showed marked (50%) macrophage-like changes, evidenced by
significant decrease in nucleus/cytoplasm ratio and increase (1-3 folds)
in the expression of IL-1, a macrophage marker. PMA treatment also caused
time-dependent inhibition of cdc2 in both cytosol and nucleus of the
cells, with a maximal inhibition being observed by 48 and 72h, which
paralleled with the cell differentiation course. In contrast, there was
no significant cell differentiation and inhibition of cdc2 being observed
in control human myeloid leukemia TF-1 cells treated with PMA. Previous
studies suggest that prolonged activation of MAPK pathway is linked to
cell differentiation. PMA treatment also rapidly induced phosphorylation
of MAPK kinases (MEK and ERK), which persisted for 24h, after which
phosphorylated MEK and ERK were returned to base level, while the
expression of cdc2 was still significantly downregulated, as compared
with the control cells treated with DMSO. Pretreatment of TF-1a cells
with sense cdc2 oligo nucleotides partially inhibited PMA-induced
differentiation and upregulation of IL-1. Taken together, our data
suggest that MAPK pathway may be responsible for initiation of cell
differentiation whereas inhibition of cdc2 is required for late
differentiation of TF-1a cells in response to PMA stimulation. Whether
activation of the MAPK pathway inhibits expression of cdc2 is currently
under investigation (Supported by Faculty Incentive Grant and NIH-NIGMS
MBRS RISE: R25 GM059244-13, Barry University).Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

