Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic changes observed in colon cancer tumors by label-free
differential profiling of paired tumor versus normal FFPE samples


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer and if caught
early enough has a good prognosis. Mass screening of the adult population
is advisable to reduce CRC mortality rate as well as reduce the cost of
treating advanced CRC cases. A blood-based biomarker panel with the
ability to diagnose CRC as well as determine prognosis and predict the
response to drug therapy is desired. However, blood biomarker discovery
is hampered by problems of complexity and dynamic range of protein
abundance.Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue is an ideal
sample type for cancer biomarker analysis due to its ubiquitous use in
cancer diagnosis in the clinic and consequent availability in oncology
hospitals and clinics as well as biobanks. Biomarker discovery to date
using FFPE have used only very few patient samples, making clinically
relevant biomarker discovery difficult due to large patient-to-patient
variation. As a part of our Biospecimen Research Network (BRN) program we
funded a proteomic biomarker study of a large number of colorectal cancer
and adjacent normal tissue samples. The investigators employed two
platforms for biomarker discovery: label-free intensity based discovery
using high resolution tandem mass spectrometry and targeted quantitation
using multiple reaction monitoring. These two techniques allowed them to
dig deeper into the proteome and to profile phosphopeptides. Paired
tissue from 40 patients was profiled and of the 2875 proteins quantified,
367 proteins changed significantly in patients whose tumor size was
greater than 50%. Large changes in secreted proteins were observed and
many of these proteins were also observed in blood, offering promise for
a potential blood-based biomarker for colorectal cancer. A blood-based
biomarker assay for colorectal cancer could ultimately reduce the number
of colonoscopies required, reducing cost and discomfort.

