Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic transcriptome analysis of DNA damage pathways under hypoxia


During the outgrowth of tumor, gradients of hypoxic regions develop due
to reduced oxygen diffusion. Intratumoral hypoxia is a prognostic factor
associated with decreased disease-free survival and increased resistance
to radiotherapy and chemotherapy in different solid cancers. We have
previously shown that chronic hypoxia suppresses DNA damage repair
pathways partly through decreased protein translation efficiency. The RNA
levels of repair pathway genes have also been shown to be downregulated
in hypoxia; however, most of the RNA studies do not distinguish between
RNA synthesis and degradation. Here, we use novel metabolic labeling of
newly synthesized RNA to investigate the dynamic changes in transcription
rates of DNA damage repair pathways under hypoxia.4-thiouridine (4sU), a
uridine analogue, was added to the media of DU145 cells (prostate cancer
cell line) that have been cultured in 21% or 0.2% oxygen concentrations
for 72 hours. Total RNA was extracted and 4sU-tagged RNA was biotinylated
and separated from untagged pre-existing RNA using streptavidin coated
magnetic beads. Real-time RT-PCR was used to quantify the expression of
repair pathways in three RNA subsets (total, pre-existing, and newly
synthesized). Parallel experiments were performed in RNA harvested from
the cytoplasmic and nuclear factions of cells.We found that with
30-minute 4sU incubation, most 4sU-tagged RNA is still in the nucleus,
and is subjected to little degradation, thus reflecting the average
transcription rate. The percentage of newly synthesized RNA is lower in
hypoxic than in normoxic cells. Importantly, the transcript levels of
homologous recombination (HR) repair pathway regulators, RAD51, BRCA1 and
BRCA2, are decreased in both total and newly-synthesized RNA of hypoxic
cells. Our results demonstrate that in addition to translational
regulation, hypoxia may also downregulate repair pathways through
suppression of transcription. This 4sU assay provides opportunities for
further analysis of differential RNA synthesis and decay of DNA damage
repair pathways between hypoxia and normoxia.

