Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methioninase-loaded erythrocytes: a promising drug for
L-methionine restriction therapy in cancer


Several studies reported a complete dependence of different tumor cells
on L-methionine (Met), an essential amino acid, for maintaining their
high proliferation rate while normal cells keep their ability to grow on
Met-deprived medium (Cavuoto and Fenech, 2012).Met restriction appearing
as an important strategy for cancer treatment, different therapeutic
approaches using either Met restricted regimens or Met-catabolizing
enzymes were investigated.Phase I and II clinical trials associating
dietary Met restriction with chemotherapy were conducted with cancer
patients (Thivat et al., 2009; Durando et al, 2010). A 40% reduction of
plasmatic methionine was achieved with a 1-day Met-free diet per month.
Interesting long-duration of disease stabilization was observed in some
patients. However this diet is extremely difficult to maintain.In order
to obtain longer Met depletion in plasma, enzyme therapy using Methionine
gamma-lyase (MGL), a pyridoxal-dependent enzyme that specifically
degrades Met into alpha-ketobutyrate, ammonia and thiols, was explored.
MGL enzyme isolated from Pseudomonas putida was selected as preferred
candidate for the development of therapy. However, preclinical studies
conducted in primates showed a very short half-life of the active form of
MGL enzyme (2h) due to a rapid in vivo dissociation of the pyridoxal
(PLP) cofactor (Yang et al., 2004).To overcome this problem of
PLP-dissociation, we encapsulated the active MGL into erythrocytes,
natural pool of PLP in the body and evaluated PK-PD parameters of product
over a 5-day period in a mouse model. Once entrapped into erythrocytes,
the MGL enzyme maintained more than 30% of its specific activity after 5
days in circulation. A 60-70% Met depletion was achieved 15 min
post-injection and then depletion was stabilized at 40% over the 5
day-period of the study. In comparison, administration of the free MGL at
similar doses led to a rapid loss of the active form in several hours.
Met was totally deprived 15 min post-injection but plasmatic Met level
returned to baseline by 24h. Increasing two-fold the concentration of
free methioninase did not improved the in vivo Met depletion.In
conclusion, we report that methioninase-loaded-erythrocytes can lower Met
concentration in mouse plasma for at least 5 days and may be an
innovative strategy to kill tumors by met-starvation.

