Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imprime PGG decreases regulatory T cell suppression and enhances T
cell proliferation and differentiation revealing additional mechanisms
for its anti-tumor activity


Imprime PGG is a soluble yeast-derived -glucan immunomodulator being
developed for treatment of cancer in combination with anti-tumor
antibodies (Abs). Imprime PGG binds to complement receptor (CR)3 on
innate immune cells (neutrophils and monocytes), and primes them to exert
anti-tumor activity against Ab-targeted, complement opsonized tumor
cells. Numerous studies in syngeneic and human xenogeneic tumor models in
mice have demonstrated that administration of Imprime PGG in combination
with anti-tumor Ab treatment reduces tumor growth and prolongs survival
beyond that observed with either agent alone. In clinical trials, Imprime
PGG in combination with tumor-targeting Abs has also been associated with
improvements in objective tumor response and survival.Imprime PGG's
mechanism of action has been extensively studied in the context of the
innate immune system. Whether Imprime PGG may also play a role in the
modulation of adaptive immune responses and the cross-talk that exists
between the innate immune system and T-cell responses was unclear. Recent
work has revealed that Imprime PGG is capable of activating not only the
innate immune system but also has the potential of inhibiting the
polarization of macrophages into the immunosuppressive M2 phenotype.
Since considerable cross-talk exists between the innate and adaptive
immune cells in the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment, we
investigated whether Imprime PGG may also play a role in direct or
indirect modulation of one of the adaptive immunosuppressive cell types,
regulatory T cells (Tregs). We demonstrated that plasma from Imprime PGG
treated whole blood (WB) was able to decrease the suppressive capability
of Tregs on conventional CD4+ T cells. We also determined that plasma
from Imprime PGG treated WB was able to enhance the proliferation of both
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in response to CD3/28 beads and to peptide
stimulation in vitro. This enhanced proliferation was accompanied by
upregulation of the transcription factor Tbet and increased IFN-
production suggesting Imprime PGG may drive polarization of T cells to a
Th1, anti-tumor phenotype. Interestingly, these effects were greatest
when Imprime PGG was added to WB and not to isolated plasma, indicating
that the effects of Imprime PGG on the T cell compartment are indirect
and may involve cross-talk from the innate immune system. These data are
the first to show that Imprime PGG may exert anti-tumor activity not only
by re-directing the innate immune system against opsonized tumor cells,
but also by re-orienting the adaptive immune compartment toward a Th1,
anti-tumor phenotype.

