Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Managing cervical cancer using multifunctional gold nanorods


Introduction: Treatment of, cervical cancer, the third most prevalent
cancer in women, is challenged by resistance to chemo and radio therapy,
organ toxicities and disease relapse which is mainly due to undiagnosed
small metastases and failure in monitoring the course of treatment.
Imaging is therefore another critical aspect in overall cancer
management. We designed a triple combination treatment modality involving
photo thermal therapy, EGFR mAb and GW627368X, an EP4 prostanoid receptor
antagonist in a single nanoprobe which also serves as an efficient X-ray
CT contrast agents.Methodology: Stimuli responsive, GW627368X loaded,
EGFR mAb tagged gold nanorods(GNRs) were prepared by seed mediated method
and characterized by TEM, NMR, IR and UV absorption spectroscopy.
Cellular uptake of nanoparticles was studied by flow cytometry and
fluorescent imaging. Drug release kinetics was studied prior to in vitro
study. Cervical cancer cells, SiHa and ME180, were incubated with GNRs
for 45mins, irradiated with cw-NIR laser (808nm) for various time periods
and incubated for 12 hours. Cellular effects were studied by viability
assays, flow cytometry, florescent staining, SEM, ELISA and western blot
analysis. The X-ray attenuation property of nanoprobe was demonstrated by
CT imaging of GNR incubated cervical cancer cells compared with untreated
cells.Results: Due to surface plasmone resonance of GNRs, energy from
incident NIR rays are converted into heat inducing apoptosis evident in
viability assays further confirmed by flow cytometry, microscopy and
western blot. Accumulation of the GNRs around the EGFR overexpressing
transformed cells and subsequent uptake was confirmed microscopically and
by increase in SSC of cells. EGFR blockade disrupts ligand receptor
interaction down regulating survival pathways like Ras/MAPK, PI3K/Akt and
JAK/STAT. Stimuli dependent drug release inhibits EP4 receptor in turn
down regulating COX-2, PI3K/Akt and angiogenesis. Reduced VEGF, EGF and
PGE-2 production was confirmed by ELISA and down regulation of pAkt,
pMAPK, pEGFR, COX-2 and EP4 proteins was confirmed by western blot
analysis. Prominently distinguishable CT attenuation was obtained with
gold nanoprobes compared to untreated cells.Conclusion: EGFR mAb tagged,
GW627368X loaded GNRs is novel therapeutic approach merging multiple
strategies in single nanoprobe. Besides targeted accumulation, EGFR mAb
disrupts EGFR signaling which along with stimuli dependent drug release
block multiple downstream pathways. Photothermal therapy is highly
efficient, selective approach as NIR has high tissue permeability but is
harmless to normal tissue. Moreover, high X-ray atteneuation of gold
makes it suitable a CT contrast agent for both diagnosis and monitoring
the course of treatment. The proposed modality would thus prove to be
highly efficient in overall management of cervical cancer.

