Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence that the translational initiation factor DAP5 plays a
critical role in breast cancer metastasis


The metastatic process is highly inefficient. Among the thousands cells
that escape daily from the primary tumor only a few survive and posses
the ability of developing overt metastases in a distant organ. Yet,
metastasis is the cause of 90% of cancer-related deaths. Despite its
clinical importance, little is known about genetic and biochemical
determinants of metastasis and new therapeutic targets are desperately
needed.During their journey to colonize a distant organ, cancer cells
undergo a wide variety of stresses (hypoxia, anoikis or colonization)
that down-regulate global cap-dependent protein synthesis. In order to
produce the proteins needed to overcome these stresses cancer cells rely
on alternative mechanisms for translation initiation, typically through
non-cap-dependent means such as internal ribosome entry (IRES).DAP5 is a
poorly studied translation initiation factor known to mediate IRES-driven
translation of cellular mRNAs that include anti-apoptotic factors and
others factors likely involved in stress responses. Therefore, we
hypothesized that DAP5 is crucial for the expression of the disseminated
cancer cell proteome and cell survival during metastasis.We engineered
highly metastatic murine 4T1 cancer cells to express a doxycycline (dox)
inducible system shRNA silencing of DAP5 (4T1 shDAP5). These cells or the
non silencing (NS) shRNA control cells were grown s.c. in immunocompetent
syngeneic BALB-c mice. Dox induction was started by drinking water
addition 12 days post cell injection and tumors measured twice weekly.
Animals were sacrificed 18 days later, lungs collected and fixed in 4%
PFA.While no significant effect was observed on cell proliferation in
vitro, silencing DAP5 significantly decreased primary tumor growth and
lung metastatic colonization. Importantly, when the same tumor study was
performed in immunodeficient animals (NOD SCID ) the inhibition of tumor
growth with DAP5 silencing was completely abolished. These data suggest
that DAP5 likely enables cancer cells to elude the immune response.
However in this model, DAP5 silencing impaired the metastatic process and
significantly decreased the number of lung metastases observed, implying
that at least one of the mechanisms by which DAP5 prevents metastasis is
immune system-independent.These results have been preliminarily confirmed
in human metastatic breast cancer cells that efficiently disseminate to
lungs. We engineered them with the same dox inducible system. When tested
on NOD SCID mice, a significant decrease in the metastatic burden was
also observed upon DAP5 silencing.Our results suggest that the
translation initiation factor DAP5 likely plays a critical role in breast
cancer metastasis and provides new concepts for therapeutic strategies
involving translational regulation and immunotherapeutics. Indeed,
inhibiting DAP5 might be a powerful approach, as it impacts the whole
proteome of the disseminated cancer cell.

