Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein phosphatase 2A activity is a major determinant of therapy
response in cancer cells


Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) dephosphorylates majority of Ser/Thr
phosphorylated proteins. Consequently, PP2A is an antagonist of multiple
oncogenic pathways and PP2A reactivation may provide an alternative route
to target these pathways. Importantly, because PP2A reactivation would
result in simultaneous dephosphorylation of both collateral and
downstream effectors of kinase pathways, it might circumvent commonly
encountered kinase inhibitor resistance mechanisms.To systematically
study the role of PP2A in cancer therapy response we used RNAi targeting
against PP2A inhibitor proteins CIP2A, PME-1 and SET (PP2A reactivation),
and PP2A structural subunits (PP2A inhibition), together with high
throughput drug sensitivity screen covering 300 clinical cancer drugs and
investigational compounds. Changes in phosphorylation status of PP2A
targets in response to RNAi perturbation, was studied by LC-MS/MS-based
label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis. Importantly, we show
that cancer cell drug sensitivity across 300 compounds correlates with
PP2A activity profile so that PP2A inhibition made cells on average
resistant to therapies, whereas their sensitization by PP2A inhibitor
protein siRNAs correlated with changes in phosphoprotein regulation. In
particular, cancer cell response to kinase inhibitors followed very
closely PP2A activity regulation and PP2A reactivation resulted in
increased average sensitivity to 105 kinase inhibitors. Furthermore, we
show that PP2A reactivation results in convergent phosphorylation
patterns with targeting of kinase pathways by RAS inhibition. We also
identify novel PP2A regulated phosphorylation sites in target proteins of
these kinases. As a validation study, we demonstrate that PP2A inhibitor
protein PME-1 mediates resistance of glioma cells to various types of
survival pathway kinase inhibitors, as well as to temozolomide.
Co-treatment with PME-1 siRNA and kinase inhibitors eradicates several
GBM cell lines, and glioma stem cells, in vitro, and this combination
strategy shows pronounced efficacy also in in vivo models. The
PME-1-elicited resistance mechanism is mediated by reactivation of
specific PP2A complexes and involves regulation of PP2A target
HDAC4.Together our data combines 4500 drug response profiles, and more
than 5000 quantitative phosphopeptide idenitifications to draw first
systemic map of relevance of PP2A biology in cancer therapy responses. In
particular the data reveals an unprecedented importance of PP2A activity
for kinase inhibitor responses. Based on these data we propose that in
order to efficiently inhibit phosphorylation-dependent signaling in
cancer cells, and thus provide better therapeutic index for the kinase
inhibitors, they should be combined with emerging small molecule PP2A
reactivating compounds.

