Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Production of interleukin-17 is increased in patients with
gastrointestinal cancer and correlates with immune suppression involving
MDSC, nutritional impairment, and poor prognosis


Although a causal relationship between inflammation and innate immunity
of cancer is more widely accepted today, many of the precise cellular
mechanisms mediating this relationship remain unclear. Th17 cells, which
produce the proinflammatory cytokine IL-17, have been recognized as one
of the key factors in regulation of inflammatory bowel disease and
rheumatoid arthritis. IL-17 also has recently been reported to play an
important role in induction of MDSC (myeloid-derived suppressor cells).
This study demonstrated that, in patients with gastric and colorectal
cancers, IL-17 production was correlated with MDSC level and with markers
for nutritional impairment, immune suppression and chronic inflammation.
IL-17 was significantly higher in patients with gastrointestinal cancer
than in normal volunteers. In addition, IL-17 levels were significantly
correlated with neutrophil counts and the neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio,
and significantly inversely correlated with cell mediated immune response
indicators (lymphocyte PHA-blastogenesis and IL-12 induction) and
patients nutritional status (prealbumin levels). These patients were
separated into two groups with the production of IL-17 and the overall
survival of the patients with higher production of IL-17 was
significantly worse than those with lower production of it. These results
suggest that, in human gastrointestinal cancers, chronic inflammation
involving IL-17 may be an important mechanism for disease progression
through enhancement of induction of MDSC resulting immune suppression, or
cachexia. The production of IL-17 was also demonstrated as one of the
effective prognostic indicators in these patients. Controlling activation
of Th17 cells may prove to be a valuable strategy for treatment of
patients with gastrointestinal cancer. Further studies are warranted to
explore this possibility.

