Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular acidosis alters polarization of macrophages


Deficits in tumor perfusion and elevated glycolysis combine to reduce the
pH of the tumor microenvironment. In poorly perfused volumes, oxygen and
nutrient deprivation may also elicit necrotic areas that trigger
infiltration of immune cells, including tumor-associated macrophages
(TAMs). Inside tumors, TAMs are biased towards an M2 phenotype with
anti-inflammatory and tumor-promoting characteristics, rather than an M1
phenotype known to be essential for host defense and tumor cell killing.
We aimed to test whether low pH as a common stress factor in the tumor
microenvironment could independently change the phenotypic
characteristics and functional activity of macrophages. Accordingly, we
stimulated macrophages into M1, M2 and prostate cancer-associated
macrophages (Pr-TAMs) at pH 7.4 or pH 6.8 using IFN-+LPS, IL-4 or 30%
TRAMP-C2-conditioned medium, respectively. 120 h after initiation of
activation, M2 macrophages showed higher viability at pH 6.8 compared to
pH 7.4, suggesting a better fitness of M2 macrophages in an acidic
microenvironment. Extracellular acidosis also decreased gene expression
of common pro-inflammatory M1 markers (iNOS, MCP1 and IL-6) in M1
macrophages; while it increased gene expression of M2 markers (MRC1, ARG1
and Chi313) in M2 macrophages. In Pr-TAMs, low pH decreased iNOS/ARG1
mRNA ratio indicating a shift towards the tumor promoting M2 phenotype.
Using a cytokine array, release of inflammatory cytokines into media was
also decreased when M1 macrophages were activated at acidic pH.
Interestingly, when macrophages were incubated at neutral or low pH for
24 h then co-cultured with the prostate cancer cell lines TRAMP-C2 or
-C3, the low pH- treated macrophages showed a higher mannose receptor
expression compared to neutral pH-treated macrophages, suggesting a
shifting towards M2 phenotype. Furthermore, TRAMP-C2 cells co-cultured
with macrophages in acidic medium had a higher proliferation rate than
tumor cells co-cultured at neutral pH. Notably, treating TRAMP mice with
200 mM sodium bicarbonate to raise microenvironmental pH, strongly
inhibited both tumor progression and macrophage infiltration. In
conclusion, extracellular acidosis induced a macrophage phenotypic switch
on both gene expression and cytokine profile levels, which would lead to
a promotion of tumor growth. Also, intervention of microenvironmental
tumor acidity using buffer therapy in TRAMP mice decreased the number of
tumor associated macrophages, coincident with retardation of tumor
progression.

