Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-8 mRNA gene expression up-regulated level in both primary
culture cell and tissue biopsy from gastric cancer patient without
Helicobacter pylori infection and down- regulated level predict clinical
response after chemo


Background: There is some recent in vitro study reported that IL-8 mRNA
gene had over expression when Helicobacter pylori was co- infected. In
the Northern Thai population, we found independently IL-8 mRNA gene
expression significantly rising level in gastric tissue biopsies when
comparing to AGS cell line, and mainly in non-cag A H. pylori infection
or without H. pylori infection.Aim: The author aim to demonstrate the
IL-8 mRNA gene expression level in vitro and in vivo study in the same
host in order to see the change of its level in primary culture cell in
same host gastric cancer patients, tissue biopsy, and AGS cell line. The
comparative level before and after chemotherapy treatment were targeted
for clinical response prediction.Material and Methods: The control
background of corpus normal epithelial and gastric adenocarcinoma biopsy
tissues were treated for primary cell culture with single cell isolation
technique. The histopathology, background atrophy, and H. pylori
infection was confirmed. Biopsy tissues from tumor site also were
collected at the same time before and after chemotherapy treatment in
patient who received neo-adjuvant chemotherapy by FOLFOX IV regimen due
to locally advance stage and unresectable tumor. The IL-8 mRNA gene
expression was tested by relative quantitation real time RT-PCR.Results:
IL-8 mRNA gene expression can be significantly higher up-regulated level
to 1.5-2.2 folds in gastric cancer tissue biopsy comparing to from
0.35-1.16 fold of primary culture cell without H. pylori infection when
comparing to normal background of gastric epithelial tissue, and AGS cell
line. The IL-8 mRNA gene expression down-regulated level is also remark
decreased and/or undetected after chemotherapy treatment in correlation
with patients who had well clinical response as a preliminary
result.Conclusion: We first demonstrated that the IL-8 mRNA gene
expression is detected in primary gastric adenocarcinoma cell and its
up-regulated level in tissue biopsies independently related to H. pylori
infection in the same gastric cancer host background. The pilot sample
size is needed to confirm in further clinical trial on chemotherapy as a
new biomarker for advance gastric cancer treatment.

