Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of the permeation and retention of biocompatible
low-retention superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoclusters in tumors with
magnetic resonance imaging


Superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO) nanoclusters assembled with
poly-L-lysine (PLL) and hydroxyl starch show a unique bioclearance
property with low retention in the liver and spleen and effective renal
excretion. In the orthotopic liver tumor model, the assembled low
retention biocompatible SPIO nanoclusters exhibit a high contrast
enhancing capability in T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at a
low dose. For the orthotopic liver tumor, the T2-weighted MRI with SPIO
nanoclusters is a negative imaging method to reduce the signal intensity
of the normal liver tissue, whereas the potential of the retention and
permeability of SPIO nanoclusters in tumors was not fully assessed. The
latter becomes critically important for diagnosis and prognosis of
pancreatic and prostate tumors in the non-reticuloendothelial system. Two
approaches of tumor targeting were investigated and compared in this
study including the passive targeting via the EPR effect of nanoparticles
and the active targeting by the tumor-specific ligands such as TAT, iRGD
and pH sensitive peptides. The accumulation of SPIO nanoclusters in
tumors was assessed in the subcutaneous pancreatic and prostate tumor
models with MRI over times, iron levels and pathological assessment. Our
results showed that the retention and permeation of SPIO nanoclusters
varied with multiple factors of tumors. For example, well developed
tumors with large necrosis core tended to have a high level of SPIO
accumulation. In contrast, the early stage solid tumor had minimal
retention of SPIOs. Similar effects have been observed in both passive
and active tumor targeting by SPIO nanoclusters. Moreover, the
accumulation of SPIOs in tumor was achieved over a longer time period
over 24 to 48 h with long retention as compared with those in the normal
liver, lung, and spleen tissue (between 30 min to 3 h) with rapid
clearance. Our data suggested that with well-designed tumor targeting,
the biocompatible low-retention SPIO nanoclusters could be an effective
MRI contrast agent for MRI of pancreatic and prostate tumors.

