Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exogenous HGF bypasses ErbB inhibition on tumor cell viability in
medulloblastoma cell lines


Recent clinical trials investigating receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
inhibitors showed limited clinical responses in medulloblastoma. An
emerging concept is the role of the tumor microenvironment in bypassing
targeted therapies by producing ligands that can compensate for the
drug-inhibited RTK via alternative routes of pathway activation. The aim
of this study is to investigate the role of well-known CNS expressed
growth factors in relation to the effects of hepatocyte growth factor
receptor (MET) and epidermal growth factor receptor family (EGFR,
ErbB2-4) inhibition on tumor cell viability and downstream signaling in
medulloblastoma cell lines.Five different medulloblastoma cell lines
(DAOY, RES256, UW402, UW426, and UW473) were treated with crizotinib or
canertinib, targeting MET or EGFR, ErbB2-4, respectively. Upon treatment,
cells were stimulated with the CNS expressed growth factor VEGF-A
PDGF-AB, HGF, FGF-2 or EGF basic. Subsequently, a cell viability assay
was used to measure cell viability upon growth factor stimulation,
compared to non-growth factor stimulated cells. Expression levels of
respective receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and growth factors were
analyzed using flow cytometry and human growth factor antibody arrays.
Phosphorylation status of RTK's and downstream signaling effectors was
visualized using western blot analysis and human phospho-kinase antibody
arrays.We observed high MET and EGFR cell surface expression levels.
Addition of HGF or EGF phosphorylated MET or EGFR, respectively, and
resulted in downstream phosphorylation of Akt and ERK1/2 as well as
increased tumor cell viability. Whereas crizotinib and canertinib
inhibited cell viability and phosphorylation of Akt and ERK1/2, addition
of HGF to canertinib significantly enhanced cell viability and
phosphorylation of Akt and ERK1/2. The HGF induced bypass of canertinib
was reversed by the addition of crizotinib. HGF protein was hardly
released by medulloblastoma cell lines. This suggests that MET activation
is mainly dependent on paracrine HGF contribution. In conclusion, these
data point to the bypassing capacity of well-known CNS expressed
paracrine growth factors (e.g. HGF) in medulloblastoma cell lines and
provides a potential explanation for the limited clinical response of
single RTK inhibitors in medulloblastoma clinical trials. It might be of
great interest to anticipate on these results in developing novel
clinical trials with a combination of tyrosine kinase inhibitors,
targeting for example MET and EGFR in medulloblastoma.

