Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implications of resistance patterns with NSCLC targeted agents


Introduction: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) can give regression of
NSCLCs with mutations of EGFR, HER2 & BRAF and fusion genes for ALK, ROS1
& RET, but resistance develops in most patients.Methods: We reviewed
available clinical data for insights on potential approaches to delay
resistance.Results: Target absence is a major cause of intrinsic
resistance. Most NSCLCs with target undergo at least some regression
although the degree varies between patients due to largely unexplored
factors. Many mechanisms of acquired resistance have been defined,
including outgrowth of subclones with secondary mutations or alternative
pathways, and pharmacological effects & sanctuaries. Available data
suggest that resistant cells are present in small numbers in the initial
tumor but that their growth is suppressed by the more rapidly growing
parent tumor cells until this parent population is itself suppressed by
TKI initiation. If TKI is stopped due to progression, there can be tumor
flare as the initial parent cell population regrows rapidly. Exponential
decay nonlinear regression analysis of patient survival curves suggests
that TKI discontinuation at time of progression may partially synchronize
patient deaths. Initial tumor progression may occur in a single site.
Available data indicate that focal treatment (eg, radiation) to that site
combined with continuation of initial TKI may give optimal control and
reduce tumor flare. Of interest, progression may occur in many sites
concurrently. Since there are many potential resistance mechanisms one
might expect substantial discordance of resistance mechanisms between
these sites, but preliminary data with 2nd line agents (eg, anti-T790M
agents in EGFR-mutant patients and 2nd generation anti-ALK agents for
acquired resistance to crizotinib) indicate response in most sites if any
are sensitive, suggesting that all or most sites have a common resistance
mechanism. This raises the possibility that an initial resistant site is
seeding other distant tumor sites with resistant cells, in keeping with
animal data. The probability of a resistant cell being present in an
individual tumor deposit is proportional to the total number of tumor
cells in that deposit. If 1 area of resistant tumor can seed other tumor
areas with resistant cells, then (particularly in oligometastatic
disease) we should consider clinical trials exploring: 1) at initiation
of TKI therapy treating as many tumor sites as possible (particularly
large tumors) with a modality (eg radiation) that is indifferent to the
factors giving TKI resistance; 2) treating any progressing lesions as
early as possible with intensive focal therapy, if feasible, rather than
waiting until symptomatic or rather than treating only with low
palliative doses.Conclusion: Extrapolation from available data suggests
we should explore trials using multifocal radiation at initiation of TKIs
for advanced NSCLC and early, intense treatment of areas of isolated
progression.

