Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of patient-derived bladder cancer xenografts:
role of xCT in response to cisplatin


Background: A major challenge in cancer drug development has been largely
attributed to the inability of cell lines to recapitulate the
heterogeneity of human tumors. Patient derived xenografts (PDX) represent
a major advance as they are more representative of the clinical setting.
However, appropriate characterization of PDXs is necessary to guide
biomarker driven drug discovery research. Methods: H&E staining was used
to compare the original patient tumors with PDX developed from cystectomy
specimens to validate morphological similarity. Immunohistochemical (IHC)
staining for cytokeratins (CK) 5/6 & 20 and EMT markers E cadherin and
vimentin were used to identify whether these tumors represent a basal or
a luminal subtype. In addition, Western blot and RT-PCR analysis were
performed to assess markers of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Therapeutic response to cisplatin was evaluated both in vitro and
in vivo. Furthermore, expression of xCT (cystine transporter), one of the
known cisplatin resistance markers, was determined by RT-PCR, Western
blot and IHC in PDXs and cells. Results: Morphologically, we observed
that our PDX models (RP-B-01 and RP-B-02) did not drift from the original
patient tumors and they still retained their characteristic stromal
features. Based on cytokeratin (CK) staining, we found both models to be
CK 5/6 positive and CK 20 negative, suggesting a basal subtype of bladder
cancer. Both PDXs, similarly to the original tumors, were E cadherin
positive. However, cells derived from these tumors and cultured in vitro
lost E cadherin and acquired vimentin expression, suggesting an EMT
phenotype. When cells from PDX were transplanted back into mice they
re-expressed E cadherin and lost vimentin expression, suggesting a
reversion to MET. Despite no difference in cytokeratins and EMT markers
between the two models, both PDX and cells isolated from PDXs had
differential expression of xCT and possessed differential response to
cisplatin treatment. RP-B01 expressed higher levels of xCT and was less
responsive to cisplatin as compared to RP-B-02 which expressed lower
levels of xCT. Conclusion: Differential expression of xCT in bladder
cancer PDXs and cells correlated with cisplatin response, suggesting that
pharmacological targeting of xCT in combination therapies will enhance
cisplatin efficacy in bladder cancer.

