Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor T-cell receptor (TCR) diversity elucidates the immune
response to genetic alterations of muscle-invasive bladder cancer


Background: Muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC), unlike the more
favorable low-grade papillary form, has a dismal prognosis with a
significant risk of recurrence after surgical resection. Previous
whole-exome sequencing of MIBC tumors performed by our lab demonstrated
that carriers of mutations in any of six DNA mismatch repair genes (ATM,
ERCC2, FANCD2, PALB2, BRCA1 or BRCA2) not only had a high somatic
mutation burden, but also had enhanced recurrence-free survival compared
to non-carriers of these mutations. We hypothesize that a high somatic
mutation burden may generate a higher number of tumor-specific antigens
that induce clonal expansion of tumor-infiltrating T-lymphocytes (TILs)
to reduce a risk of recurrence and improve the survival. To investigate
this hypothesis, we have sequenced the TCR cDNAs of TILs.Methods: Tumor
and adjacent normal tissue (verified by a pathologist) were collected
from patients whose tumors had previously been whole-exome sequenced.
Library preparation was performed using previously described methods.
Next-generation sequencing of TCRs was conducted on the Illumina platform
(San Diego, CA) and CDR3 sequences were identified using a published
algorithm. The diversity index of the TCR and TCR chains was calculated
using Simpson's diversity index, an ecological formula for calculating
biodiversity based on evenness and richness. CD4+, CD8+, and FOXP3 gene
expression levels were also examined with TaqMan Gene Expression Assays
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA).Results: TCR sequencing of ten
tumors (5 non-recurrent (NR) with at least two years follow-up, 5
recurrent) has been performed. The average TCR DI of five recurrent
patients is 9756.5 (SEM) compared to 23 12.7 for five NR patients. In
addition, we found an average DI of 13.80.77 in tumors with a high
somatic mutation burden (average number of mutations 221), while it was
71.436.8 for tumors with a low somatic mutation burden (avg mutations
31). In samples with a relatively high DI, the three most abundant TCR
clones represent less than 15% of the total TCR population, while in
samples with a low DI, the top three clones comprise 35-90% of the total
population. Finally, the CD8+/FOXP3 ratios were 10.12.1(SEM) and 5.62.9
for tumors with a low DI and those with a high DI, respectively (low vs.
high defined by the average).Conclusions: We have elicited a correlating
pattern where MIBC tumors with a higher number of somatic mutations have
a lower TCR DI, indicating an oligoclonal expansion. Furthermore, in
patients with recurrence, the TCR DI is higher, suggesting a lack of
anti-tumor immune responses and non-specific T-cell expansion. The higher
CD8+/FOXP3 ratio observed in tumors with low DI suggests that the clonal
expansion is of CD8+ cells in tumors, which have been shown to be
associated with favorable prognosis.

