Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systemic delivery of CTNNB1 Dicer-substrate siRNAs (DsiRNAs) leads
to efficient oncogene silencing in diverse tumor types of extra hepatic
origin


The -catenin/Wnt pathway is consistently activated in human tumors,
including >50% of hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) and >80% of colorectal
cancers (CRC). This is often caused directly by tumorigenic mutations in
the CTNNB1 gene, which encodes -catenin protein. Preclinical evidence in
genetic cancer models strongly suggests that inhibiting -catenin function
would yield therapeutic benefit to many cancer patients. Since -catenin
is very challenging to target via conventional modalities, no efficacious
therapy targeting -catenin has emerged despite decades of research. RNA
interference (RNAi) technology has enabled the inhibition of previously
undruggable targets at the mRNA level and has advanced to late-stage
clinical development for several indications. However, the clinical
application of RNAi has proven to be most successful for targeting mRNAs
in the normal liver, and challenges remain with developing formulations
that efficiently deliver to extra-hepatic tumors. Here we describe the
development and characterization of a platform to treat tumors of diverse
primary tissue origin and metastatic location with CTNNB1-targeting
DsiRNA. Tumor types tested included xenograft tumors of colorectal origin
(CRC), experimental melanoma lung metastases, and difficult-to-transfect
leukemia cells which have infiltrated the spleen. In addition to strong
silencing of CTNNB1 mRNA, >75% inhibition of tumor growth was observed
for a CRC xenograft model. This was achieved by formulating the DisRNA
payload in a lipid nanoparticle (LNP) platform termed EnCore (because of
its specific Envelope and Core lipid components). EnCore activity against
multiple tumors was further improved by optimizing critical cationic
lipid and PEG-lipid components. Importantly, studies in knockout mice
demonstrate that in vivo tumor activity is independent of Apolipoprotein
E, which has been widely described as an essential endogenous ligand for
internalization of LNPs into hepatocytes. This strongly suggests that
Encore-mediated delivery to tumors in vivo is independent of the
ApoE/LDLR system. DCR-MYC, an EnCore-delivered DsiRNA targeting MYC mRNA,
is currently in Phase I clinical trials. Further evaluation of
LNP-delivered DsiRNAs in PK/PD and efficacy models, including PDX and
GEMM will guide a clinical development strategy for CTNNB1 DsiRNA.

