Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotypic and functional evaluation of peripheral blood cell
subsets in children at the completion of induction therapy for acute
lymphoblastic leukemia


Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common malignancy in
children, accounting for more than one quarter of the new cases of
pediatric cancer each year. Despite significant improvements in cure
rates, recurrent ALL causes 10% of childhood cancer deaths and the need
for new treatment strategies has not diminished. Although ALL has long
been viewed as a poor target for immune therapy, it has recently been
reported that the peripheral blood absolute lymphocyte count (ALC) at
completion of induction chemotherapy is prognostic for outcome. This
finding suggests that the immune environment during therapy may play a
role in protecting against disease progression. It is currently unknown,
however, whether ALC is simply a marker of bone marrow recovery or
whether particular immune cell subsets at this early time-point confer a
beneficial effect. To address this question, we have initiated a
flow-cytometric study of 20 peripheral blood leukocyte populations,
obtained at Day 29 from children undergoing therapy for precursor B cell
ALL. The goal of this study is to correlate the size and responsiveness
of the cell subsets with ALC in order to identify potential
immune-mediators of the high ALC-associated favorable outcome. To date we
have evaluated 8 patients for T cells (5 subsets), B cells (6 subsets),
NK cells (3 subsets), NKT cells (2 subsets), dendritic cells (2 subsets),
monocytes, and granulocytes. In addition to this extensive phenotypic
characterization, all Day 29 blood samples have been stimulated with a
panel of Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands to evaluate functional
responsiveness. Although we have not yet identified a single lymphocyte
population that significantly correlates with ALC, clear trends, most
notably with myeloid dendritic cells, have emerged that suggest that ALC
may be indicative of specific immune activity. TLR-induced cytokine
production is currently being quantified to determine whether higher ALC
correlates with a specific pattern of response. While a large-scale
prospective study to validate prognostic significance of ALC in children
with high-risk ALL is underway, to our knowledge our ongoing study is the
first to investigate the specific leukocyte composition of Day 29
peripheral blood for significant links with ALC. The identification of
the mechanism(s) underlying ALC-associated outcomes may reveal novel
strategies for enhanced immune-mediated control of ALL after chemotherapy.

