Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A 13 mer LNA miR-221 inhibitor restores drug sensitivity in
melphalan-refractory multiple myeloma cells


The onset of resistance to melphalan (MF) in Multiple Myeloma (MM)
patients adversely affects disease outcome. Presently there is increasing
evidence on the pivotal role of microRNA (miRNAs) in mediating
drug-resistance. We here investigated the effect of an original LNA
inhibitor of microRNA-221 (LNA-i-miR-221), in restoring sensitivity to MF
in MM cells. LNA-i-miR-221 has been previously demonstrated as anti-tumor
agent in preclinical models of MM. We studied the MF-sensitizing effect
of LNA-i-miR-221 on MM cells in vitro and in vivo. MiR-221/222 expression
inversely correlated with MF-sensitivity in a panel of 6 MM cell lines.
Noteworthy, LNA-i-miR-221 overcame MF-resistance in vitro significantly
enhancing apoptotic cell death as demonstrated by activation/cleavage of
caspase-8, caspase-9 and caspase-3, as well as by PARP cleavage and by
histone H2AX (-H2AX) phosphorylation. Importantly, the synergistic
activity of LNA-i-miR-221 with MF affected cell survival even in the
presence of bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs). Gene expression profiling
(GEP) comparing treated and untreated MF-sensitive and -resistant MM cell
lines was performed to investigate genes and pathways significantly
affected by combinatory treatment. Based on the GEP findings, we
confirmed by Western Blot that the growth impairment occurred together
with up-regulation of pro-apoptotic BBC3/PUMA protein, a target of
miR-221/222 which we validated by luciferase assay in our system.
Moreover, GEP analysis showed modulation of drug-influx -efflux
transporters such as L-type amino acid transporter 1 (LAT1) and multidrug
resistance associated protein 1 (MRP1/ABCC1) which was confirmed by
Western Blot analysis. Indeed, LNA-i-miR-222 led to a reduction of the
Side Population in MF-resistant cells as assessed by Hoechst dye
exclusion assay. Finally, treatment of human MM xenografts in SCID/NOD
mice with LNA-i-miR-221 plus MF induced a marked antitumor effect, which
again occurred together with BBC3/PUMA and MRP1/ABCC1 proteins modulation
in retrieved tumors. Taken together, our findings provide
proof-of-concept that LNA-i-miR-221 overcomes MF-resistance of MM cells,
providing the rationale for clinical translation of LNA-i-miR-221/MF
combination in MM patients.

