Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of potential molecular targets related to
radioresistance in human oral cancers


In India, oral cancer is the most common cancer in males and ranks third
among females, attributed predominantly to the use of smokeless tobacco.
Radiotherapy is an integral part of oral cancer treatment either alone or
in combination with surgery and chemotherapy. However the development of
radioresistance creates a hurdle in the efficacy of radiotherapy.
Therefore, exploring the differential molecular profile of established
radioresistant versus parental oral cancer cells may help in predicting
the clinical effectiveness of radiotherapy.The present study aims to
profile the radioresistant cell lines established by low dose radiation
from their parental oral cancer cell lines, to identify the molecules and
the possible mechanisms associated with radioresistance in oral cancer.We
have established three radioresistant oral cancer cell lines i.e.
70Gy-AW13516, 70Gy-AW8507 and 70Gy-SCC029B derived from their parental
AW13516, AW8507 and SCC029B cell lines respectively using in-vitro
fractionated ionizing radiation (FIR). A clinically admissible 2Gy
radiation dose was given using a 60Co- linear accelerator (Bhabhatron-2,
ACTREC) upto 70Gy totally for each of the cell lines. The radioresistant
character was determined by clonogenic cell survival assay and proteomic
profiling of parental versus radioresistant cells was done by
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Gels were analysed by PD-Quest
software (Bio-Rad) and differential spot identities were revealed by
MALDI-TOF/TOF (Bruker Ultra flex-II). To explore changes at transcript
level; cDNA microarray was performed by Affymetirx Gene Chip array and
analysed by Gene Spring GX-12.5 software.Mass spectrometry (MS)
identified a total of 106 differentially expressed proteins among the
three replicate sets of each parental and radioresistant 2-D gels with
significant MS/MS score. Some of the differentially expressed proteins
like Prohibitin, Moesin, PCNA, Keratin-8, Vimentin, HSP-70 and 14-3-3
sigma were validated by western blotting. We further, transiently knocked
down Moesin expression by siRNA strategies and demonstrated a significant
decrease in the radioresistant character of 70Gy-AW13516 cells as
compared to control siRNA treated cells, indicating a role for Moesin in
acquired radioresistance of oral cancer cells. Also differentially
expressed genes (>3 fold) of radioresistant cells, were mapped by David
(NIH) & Panther (USC) functional tools. The pathway analysis revealed
genes related to cell survival (PI3K, P38), Wnt and Apoptosis
signalling.The proteomic and transcriptomic profiling of radioresistant
oral cancer cell lines have revealed several radioresistance associated
molecules that may be utilised in predicting cellular response to
radiotherapy and the pathways identified may provide new insights in
understanding the mechanism underlying clinical radioresistance in oral
cancers.

