Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel role for Olig2 in the regulation of glioma invasion


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) are highly infiltrative, aggressive and
lethal primary brain tumors in adults that are resistant to conventional
treatments. A major clinical obstacle in the treatment of GBMs is the
ability of glioma cells to invade the surrounding brain parenchyma,
preventing their complete surgical resection. Several studies have shown
that invasive glioma stem cells (GSCs) extend beyond the surgically
resected regions. These invasive cells are the cause for tumor recurrence
and poor prognosis in GBM patients. The molecular and cellular mechanism
involved in the regulation of the switch from proliferation to
invasion/migration in GBM is poorly understood. We investigated the role
of Olig2, a Central Nervous System (CNS) specific transcription factor,
in promoting the switch from proliferating to invading glioma cell.
Genetically relevant murine glioma model as well as patient-derived
glioma stem cells (GSCs) were utilized to identify the effect of Olig2 on
glioma invasion. Functionally, Olig2-mediated invasion was assessed by
3D-transwell invasion assays, organotypic slice cultures as well as PDX
tumors in immunocompromised mice. In addition, murine and patient-derived
GSCs were utilized to identify direct genetic targets of Olig2 involved
in glioma invasion by ChIP-seq and RNA-seq.Our data demonstrate that
Olig2-expressing murine glioma stem/progenitor-like cells are highly
invasive as compared to Olig2 knockout cells. We further corroborated the
requirement of Olig2 for glioma invasion in patient-derived GSCs by
utilizing shRNA-mediated knockdown of Olig2. Olig2 depletion resulted in
reduced glioma cell invasion in at least four independent human GSCs.
Recent studies have shown that activation of transcription factors such
as Zeb1 and Twist1 occurs in invasive high grade gliomas. We show that
knockdown of Olig2 in murine as well as human GSCs leads to a significant
decrease in the expression of invasion genes such as Zeb1, Vimentin,
Twist1, and Stat3 as compared to control cells. In conclusion, our
studies highlight a novel role for the Olig2 signalling network in
promoting the switch from proliferation to invasion in GBM, and provide a
plausible target for inhibiting glioma invasion.

