Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC16/CA125, TNF and IFN are co-expressed in malignant gynecologic
neoplasms


MUC16 is a very large, heavily glycosylated cell surface mucin that
carries the CA125 epitope, a well-known molecular marker for human
epithelial ovarian cancer. MUC16 is primarily found at the apical surface
of normal simple epithelia serving various functions including
lubrication and protection against pathogenic infections. MUC16 is
aberrantly over-expressed in many diseases including cancers of the
ovary, uterus, breast, and pancreas. MUC16 also may support disease
progression and ectopic cell colonization in cancer and endometriosis via
binding to cell surface proteins including mesothelin and Siglec-9. We
demonstrate that MUC16 expression is highly stimulated by the
proinflammatory cytokines, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interferon
(IFN), in multiple cell lines of various origins, an effect mediated by
NFB. MUC16 mRNA and protein expression is mildly stimulated by low
concentrations of TNF (2.5ng/ml) or IFN (20 IU/ml) alone. Interestingly,
combined treatment with both cytokines at these concentrations resulted
in a moderate to large stimulation of MUC16 mRNA and protein expression
in a variety of cell contexts indicating that this may be a general
response. To further confirm our in vitro results, the multi-cancer
tissue-microarrays were used to perform immunohistochemistry testing with
anti-Ca125, anti-TNF and anti-IFN antibodies, respectively. Our results
demonstrated that MUC16 expression is positively correlated with the TNF
and IFN expressions in multiple human cancers, however the most
significant positive correlations between MUC16 expression with the TNF
and IFN expressions were observed in ovarian and breast cancer. Of the 94
tumors stained, 64 (70.3%) were positive for TNF, IFN, and MUC16
expression. Only 8 cases (8.8%) were negative for all three protein
markers, while 18 cases (19.8%) were MUC16 negative but positive for the
proinflammatory cytokines, and 1 case (1.1%) was MUC16 positive but
negative for both TNF and IFN cytokines. These studies provide in vivo
documentation of the synergistic effect tumor necrosis factor and
interferon have on MUC16 expression across several disease sites
demonstrating that MUC16 is a target of proinflammatory cytokines, which
may contribute to mucosal defense, and progression of MUC16-expressing
tumors. Altogether, our data for first time provides an explanation for
elevated CA 125 expression in various cancers. (Supported by Rice
Institute of Biosciences and Bioengineering Medical Innovation Award to
DDC, RCB, and PEC, in part by the M.D. Anderson SPORE in Ovarian Cancer
NCI P50 CA83639, National Cancer Institute R01 CA135354).

