Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological inhibition of MRK/ZAK kinase for the treatment of
medulloblastoma


Medulloblastoma is a cerebellar tumor and the most common pediatric brain
malignancy. Radiation therapy is part of the standard care for this
tumor, but its effectiveness is accompanied by significant neurocognitive
sequelae due to the deleterious effects of radiation on the developing
brain.We have previously shown that the protein kinase MRK/ZAK protects
tumor cells from radiation-induced cell death by regulating cell cycle
arrest after ionizing radiation. Here we show that siRNA-mediated MRK
depletion sensitizes medulloblastoma primary cells to radiation. We have,
therefore, designed and tested a small molecule inhibitor of MRK, M443,
which binds to MRK in an irreversible fashion and inhibits its activity.
We found that M443 strongly radio-sensitizes UW228 medulloblastoma cells
as well as IMB226 patient-derived primary cells. M443 also inhibits
radiation-induced activation of both p38 and Chk2, two proteins that act
downstream of MRK and are involved in DNA damage-induced cell cycle
arrest. We also tested the effect of M443 in an animal model of
medulloblastoma that employs orthotopic implantation of IMB226
medulloblastoma cells in nude mice. Intra-tumoral delivery of M443 alone
significantly extended animal survival by 5 days compared to vehicle
treatment. Combination treatment of M443 with radiation at 2 3 Gy, that
is not effective on its own (1 day of additional survival over control),
achieved a synergistic increase in survival (15 days over the control
survival time). Western blotting of tumor lysates demonstrated strong
inhibition of MRK activity.In conclusion, we have developed a new small
molecule inhibitor of MRK/ZAK that radio-sensitizes medulloblastoma
cells. We hypothesize that combining radio-therapy with M443 will allow
us to lower the radiation dose while maintaining therapeutic efficacy,
thereby minimizing radiation-induced side effects.

