Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quercetin inhibited starvation-induced autophagy to increase
apoptosis in CD133+ neuroblastoma stem cells in vitro and in vivo


Malignant neuroblastoma is the most common extra cranial solid tumor in
children and many pediatric patients with this tumor still face poor
prognosis due to therapy resistance and relapse. Malignant neuroblastoma
usually occurs in one of the adrenal glands but it may also appear in
neck, chest, abdomen, or pelvis. Most of the chemotherapeutic drugs for
treating malignant neuroblastoma are used at higher doses that cause
severe long-term organ toxicity in the patients. So, it is imperative to
find out the most suitable natural compounds as promising therapeutic
agents to improve therapeutic outcomes and enhance the survival rate of
malignant neuroblastoma patients. Human malignant neuroblastoma SK-N-SH
and SK-N-DZ cell lines contain a population of cells that express the
stemness marker CD133+. The CD133+ neuroblastoma stem cells (NSC) may
represent the underlying mechanism for resistance to conventional therapy
and recurrence of this deadly malignancy in the patients. So, it is
important to demonstrate that an experimental therapeutic agent is fully
capable of inhibiting the growth of CD133+ NSC in vitro and in vivo. Some
earlier studies indicated that the natural flavonoid quercetin (QCT)
could inhibit autophagy, a potential survival strategy in solid tumors,
through upregulation of cytosolic p53 and activation of caspase mediated
apoptotic death. In current investigation, we isolated CD133+ NSC cell
lines from the parental malignant neuroblastoma SK-N-SH and SK-N-DZ cell
lines and tested therapeutic efficacy of QCT at different doses for
inhibition of starvation-induced autophagy and promotion of apoptosis in
CD133+ NSC in vitro and in vivo. Our results indicated that CD133+ NSC
cell lines were more resistant to QCT than the parental malignant
neuroblastoma SK-N-SH and SK-N-DZ cell lines. We observed inhibition of
starvation-induced autophagy due to upregulation of cytosolic p53,
inhibition of AMP activated protein kinase (AMPK), decreases in the
autophagy promoting markers Beclin-1 and LC3 II, and increase in the
autophagy inhibiting marker mTOR. Our results also indicated inhibition
of the key molecular markers of cell proliferation (Cdk2 and pRb),
unlimited growth (hTERT), and angiogenesis (VEGF) in both CD133+ NSC cell
lines. We also found a decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential (m)
and enhancement of pro-apoptotic signaling in cell culture and animal
models of CD133+ NSC following QCT treatment. Thus, our current results
indicated for the first time that QCT suppressed the proliferation of
CD133+ NSC by inhibiting autophagic flux and augmenting molecular
mechanism of apoptotic death. Notably, QCT at a higher dose very
efficiently blocked starvation-induced autophagy and enhanced apoptotic
death in CD133+ NSC in vitro and in vivo. In conclusion, our current
investigation clearly showed significant anti-cancer effects of QCT for
controlling growth of CD133+ NSC in vitro and in vivo.

