Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enrichment of IGF1R-AKT-mTOR pathway proteins using
immunoprecipitation and proteomic analysis by mass spectrometry


Background: A major bottleneck in the proteomic characterization of
signaling pathway targets is the lack of methods/reagents to quantify
medium to low levels of proteins of interest in human samples.
Immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry (IP-MS) enables the
simultaneous analysis of protein expression, protein-protein interactions
and post-translational modifications (PTMs). Immunoprecipitation provides
both enrichment and increased sensitivity while the MS provides specific
identification, high selectivity and multiplex possibility. Dysregulation
of IGF1R -PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling is a pivotal driver for many cancers
making this pathway an attractive therapeutic target for cancer therapy.
The quantitative evaluation of protein expression and PTM status of these
signal transduction proteins will aid in the precise characterization of
the disease at the diagnostic or prognostic level and to monitor its
progression and treatment response.Methods: To investigate the
IGF1R-PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling pathway, we used stable isotopic amino
acids in cell culture (SILAC) to differentially label proteins for
quantification in insulin growth factor (IGF) stimulated versus
unstimulated A549 and HCT116 cells. Targets were immunoprecipitated from
the cell lysates, captured on streptavidin or Protein A/G magnetic beads,
and eluted from the beads for direct in-solution tryptic digestion.
Quantitative changes in total and phosphorylated forms of AKT-mTOR
pathway targets were evaluated by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry
(LC-MS) on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion platform.Results: The
optimized IP-MS protocol resulted in the identification of low copy
number proteins that could not be detected by LC-MS analysis without
enrichment. Some of the low abundance targets observed after enrichment
included PI3K, PTEN, and AKT isoforms present at low to sub nanogram
levels. Interacting proteins including the catalytic and regulatory
subunits of PI3K were also identified indicating that the workflow
supports co-immunoprecipitation of protein complexes. Enrichment of
several IGF1R-PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway targets (IGF1R, PI3KCA, PIK3R2, AKT,
and PTEN) from two cell lysates facilitated the relative quantification
of total and phosphorylated forms of these proteins by LC-MS
analysis.Conclusion: SILAC combined with the improved IP-MS method
permits relative quantification of specific and functional
protein-protein interactions and PTMs in the IGF1R-PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway,
which can ultimately lead to better cancer characterization and
monitoring.

