Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A role for the free beta subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin
in sensitivity of epithelial ovarian cancer cells to platinum-based
chemotherapeutics


Introduction: The beta-subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG-) is
elevated in the serum of women with a range of malignant cancers,
including epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). Elevated levels of hCG- have
also been associated with poor response to radiotherapy and chemotherapy
in a number of cancers. Women with EOC frequently respond to first line
treatment with the platinum based chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin, but
relapse with tumors developing chemoresistance. This study aimed to
characterise the levels of hCG- in EOC cell lines and to determine
whether hCG- has a role in the responsiveness of these cell lines to
treatment with cisplatin.Methods: qRT-PCR and ELISA were used to
determine endogenous levels of hCG- in seven EOC cell lines: A2780,
A2780cis (cisplatin resistant), HEY, SKOV-3, OVCAR-3, PEO-1 and OV202.
hCG- was down-regulated using siRNA in HEY and A2780cis cells.
Sensitivity to cisplatin and taxol in these cells was measured using a
clonogenic assay. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry using isobaric
tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) was used to determine
the mechanism(s) by which hCG may be involved in the sensitivity of EOC
cells to cisplatin. Specifically, protein was harvested from A2780cis
cells with and without hCG downregulation plus or minus treatment with
cisplatin at IC50 levels (2g/ml) for 24h. Protein extracts were then
iTRAQ-labeled and global protein changes determined.Results: All cell
lines expressed hCG- transcript and protein. SKOV-3 and HEY cells
secreted the highest levels, 14 ng/ml and 3 ng/ml, respectively. OV202,
PEO-1, CaOV-3, A2780 and A2780cis cells expressed levels between 0.14-1.4
ng/ml. Down-regulation of hCG- in HEY and A2780cis increased their
sensitivity to cisplatin with the IC50 decreased up to 75% in knockdown
compared to control cells. No change in sensitivity was observed with
taxol treatment. Down-regulation of hCG- also increased the sensitivity
of these cells to the platinum drugs carboplatin and oxaliplatin. iTRAQ
results showed differences in proteins associated with the cell cycle,
death and survival pathways, as well as DNA replication, damage and
repair. Candidate proteins are currently being validated by western
blotting.Conclusions: These findings suggest that hCG- may be involved in
modulating the sensitivity of some EOCs to platinum based chemotherapy.
Suppression of hCG- may be a strategy to increase the responsiveness of
primary EOCs to platinum-based chemotherapeutics.

