Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting CA125 negative high grade serous ovarian cancer stem
cells can result in a dramatic reduction in tumor burden


High-grade serous ovarian cancers (HGSOC) are deadly gynecologic
malignancies that are often metastatic at presentation with a 5 year
survival rate of 30-40%. While first-line treatment with carboplatin is
often efficacious, disease usually recurs within 6-16 months. With
successive rounds of chemotherapy a carboplatin resistant phenotype
dominates. Emergence of carboplatin resistance is often thought to be an
acquired property of HGSOC but we have recently demonstrated that
carboplatin resistance is an innate property of all HGSOCs and inherent
to a population of CA125 negative tumor cells with stem properties. The
CA125 negative tumor cells comprise a minor population of HGSOCs but
evade carboplatin therapy based on in vitro and in vivo drug assays and
analysis of primary patient specimens obtained pre and post chemotherapy.
We think that targeting the CA125 negative carboplatin resistant serous
cancer stem cells (SCSC) will be essential for achieving long-term
remissions in this disease. To explore mechanisms of therapy resistance
in these cells, the transcriptome of SCSC isolated from 10 primary
chemo-nave HGSOCs was analyzed. An increase in the message levels of
inhibitor of apoptosis proteins cIAP1 and cIAP2 was detected in the SCSC.
Here we examine the efficacy of the drug Birinapant, a SMAC mimetic that
targets cIAPs, in sensitizing human HGSOC to carboplatin therapy. In
vitro analysis of 9 primary chemo-naive human HGSOC specimens
demonstrated that combined therapy with Birinapant and carboplatin
eliminated the chemo-resistant SCSC in 6 specimens, all of which had high
levels of cIAP in their SCSC. Next, subcutaneous xenografts were
established from 3 independent low-passaged cell lines derived from
primary chemo-naive human HGSOCs. In vivo co-treatment of these tumors
with Birinapant and carboplatin resulted in significantly diminished
tumor burden and a durable response to treatment compared to either
therapy alone. These results were further confirmed in a more physiologic
intra-peritoneal tumor model. The combination of Birinapant and
carboplatin was then tested in targeting in vivo xenografts derived
directly from two chemo-resistant human HGSOCs. This co-therapy was
efficacious in significantly decreasing tumor burden in the
chemo-resistant HGSOC with high cIAP in its SCSC but ineffective in
eliminating the tumor where a lower level of cIAP (the Birinapant target)
was found in its cancer stem population. Collectively, these results
provide proof-of-principle that pharmacologic targeting of the SCSC can
be an effective strategy for sensitizing them to carboplatin resulting in
a potentially durable therapeutic response in primary and recurrent
HGSOC. We think these pre-clinical findings merit testing the efficacy of
this combination therapy in clinical trials treating patients with HGSOC
with high levels of cIAP in their tumor stem cells.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

