Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular nucleotides and purinergic signaling as novel,
underappreciated, pro-metastatic factors for human lung cancer cells


Background: One of the challenging problems of current radio-chemotherapy
is recurrence and metastasis of cancer cells that survive initial
treatment. We have proposed that one of the unwanted effects of
radio-chemotherapy is release of phospho-sphingolipids in response to
treatment and thus induction of pro-metastatic microenvironment in
several organs (Mol Cancer Res 2013; 11:793). However, at the same time
also intracellular nucleotides such as ATP and UTP are released from
damaged (leaky) cells exerting chemotactic functions. Hypothesis: Based
on these observations that, in addition to phospho-sphingolipids, also
nucleotides (e.g., ATP and UTP) are released from damaged cells we
hypothesized that these molecules if released into extracellular
microenvironment may also direct chemotaxis and metastasis of cancer
cells - alone or in synergy with phospho-sphingolipids. Materials and
Methods: Several complementary in vitro and in vivo approaches were
employed to demonstrate a novel role of extracellular nucleotides (EXN)
in a model of metastasis of lung cancer cells. In our studies we employed
four large cell and two small cell lung cancer cell lines and a set of
nucleotides including ATP, ADP, AMP, UTP, TTP, CTP, and GTP. Real time
RT-PCR analysis of the expression of purinergic P1 and P2 receptors as
well as chemotaxis, adhesion, proliferation, intracellular calcium flux
and cell signaling studies in response to EXN stimulation were performed.
Concentrations of ATP and UTP in several organs before and after
radio-chemotherapy were measured by colorimetric kits. Purinergic
receptor agonists and antagonists, inhibiting all or selected subtypes,
were assayed in vitro and in vivo in pro-metastatic assays. Results: We
observed that EXN accumulate in in several organs in response to
radio-chemotherapy. RT-PCR analysis indicated that most of the P2X, P2Y
and adenosine receptor subtypes are expressed in tested lung cancer cell
lines. By employing in vitro migration assays, we found that, out of all
the nucleotides tested, ATP, AMP and UTP have the strongest chemotactic
activity for most of the human lung cancer cell lines correlating with
phosphorylation of MAPKp42/44 and AKT. We also observed increased
adhesion to fibronectin after stimulation with tested EXN, whereas
proliferation was not affected by of EXN. More important, metastasis of
lung cancer cells could be inhibited in immune-deficient mice in a
presence of specific small molecule inhibitors of nucleotide receptors.
Conclusions: Both systemic and local radio-chemotherapy leads to
upregulation of EXN release in damaged tissues, and the side effect of
such treatment is induction of an unwanted pro-metastatic
microenvironment in different organs. Based on this data, EXN are novel
pro-metastatic factors and inhibition of their pro-metastatic effects
could become an important part of anti-metastatic treatment.

