Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial profiling in AML patients treated with an Alvocidib
containing regimen reveals MCL1 dependency in responder bone marrow


Background. Molecular profiles may provide insights into the likelihood
of responding to traditional cytotoxic chemotherapy as well as important
clues to the success of novel targeted agents. The anti-apoptotic BCL-2
family proteins have previously been shown to facilitate pro-survival and
resistance to chemotherapy in AML, multiple myeloma, as well as in other
types of cancer. Measuring the function of these proteins using BH3
profiling has proven to provide useful information in predicting AML
treatment response with traditional ara-c based treatment. Here, we
sought to determine if such an approach might detect response with the
addition of Alvocidib to ara-c-based chemotherapy. Mitochrondrial
apoptosis signaling was assessed in AML patients treated with Alvocidib,
ara-c and mitoxantrone (FLAM). Methods. Pretreatment peripheral blood
mononuclear cell and bone marrow specimens from 63 patients treated with
FLAM were measured for mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization
following incubation with BH3 peptides as a surrogate for BCL-2 protein
family function. Results. Analysis of the priming states (mitochondrial
depolarization) in the patients who underwent complete remission (CR),
compared with those who did not (NR), revealed that NOXA priming was
significantly higher in CR bone marrow samples (median 44.5%) compared
with NR samples (median 5.2%, p = 0.006). NOXA is known to interact most
directly with MCL1, suggesting that these cancer cells may be MCL1
dependent. An additional multi-peptide algorithm using three BH3 members
was also identified (involving BAD, PUMA, and BIM), which may also
indirectly support MCL1 dependency. These BH3 priming profiles were both
additive to known risk factors associated with clinical response to
chemotherapy, including cytogenetic risk factors. Receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve analysis of NOXA priming plus cytogenetics and
MDS history indicated that these variables were highly predictive of
response to FLAM (AUC-0.92, p = 0.0002). This correlation is distinct
from our previous work which showed that the priming due to the BIM
peptide predicts response to traditional ara-c based treatment. This work
provides a basis for further studies into the MCL1 dependent action of
Alvocidib, as well as a potential biomarker for identification of
patients likely to respond to FLAM.

