Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrating RNA/DNA analysis with a comprehensive cancer panel to
improve interpretations of stage four metastatic renal cell carcinoma


Next-generation sequencing is now commonly applied to measure genomic
modifications, providing the opportunity for a more accurate view of
cancer progression. That being said, several challenges including tumor
purity, heterogeneity and the broad set of cancer associated cellular
functions, increase the difficulty of interpreting cancer genomes and
make analyzing them distinct from analysis of germline diseases. The
ability to detect low allelic mutations in the broad set of
cancer-associated genes is critically important. To address these issues,
we developed an extended cancer panel, a targeted enrichment sequencing
platform that includes over 1,300 cancer genes and 200 miRNAs that
improves coverage in traditionally difficult to sequence NGS regions. In
this study, we apply an integrated RNA/DNA analysis approach as well as
our extended cancer panel to explore mutations in metastatic renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) tissue samples before and after treatment.Our goal with
this study was to test the importance of integrating DNA and RNA
analysis, which allows for detection of mutational events that cannot be
observed by either method alone. With RNA analysis it is possible to
detect gene fusion events, expression of small variants (SNVs/indels),
and gene expression levels while DNA analysis allows for detection of
loss of heterozygosity (LOH), copy number variants (CNVs), and small
variants. By integrating both the RNA and DNA analysis, it is possible to
identify unique variant classes, such as unexpressed variants, allele
specific expression (ASE), effects of CNVs on gene expression levels, and
how fusion gene integration sites affect CNVs. In our study, each variant
class was interpreted pre- and post-treatment, allowing for optimal
analysis of treatment effectiveness.By applying both our RNA/DNA
integration approach and our extended cancer panel to investigate
metastatic RCC samples, we were able to classify many genomic alterations
that drive cancer progression. For example, we found that anywhere from
5% to 30% of small variant mutations in driver genes called in the DNA
reside in genes that are unexpressed in the RNA. Likewise, we noted
multiple cases of ASE, where high profile variants observed in DNA were
entirely absent in the RNA despite high expression levels. Strong
correlations between CNVs observed in DNA and gene expression changes
found in RNA were also detected. We also observed that about half of the
RCC samples we tested were biallelic for VHL mutations, suggesting
inherited predisposition combined with second hit somatic mutations,
facilitating cancer progression.This analysis demonstrates how combining
an integrated RNA/DNA approach with a cancer focused augmented enrichment
panel allows for detection of both low allelic representation variants
and unique variant classes, both of which are critical for accurate
interpretation of cancer samples.

