Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational landscapes of oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma
reveal recurrent mutations in genes of therapeutic and prognostic
relevance


Carcinoma of the oral tongue (OTSCC) is the most common malignancy of the
oral cavity, characterized by frequent recurrence and poor survival. The
last three decades has witnessed a change in the OTSCC epidemiological
profile, with increasing incidence in younger patients, females and
never-smokers. This study aims to characterize the OTSCC genomic
landscape and to determine factors that may delineate the genetic basis
of this disease, inform prognosis and identify targets for therapeutic
intervention. Seventy-eight Asian OTSCC cases were subjected to
whole-exome and targeted deep sequencing. While the most common mutation
seen was in TP53, the OTSCC genetic landscape differed from previously
described cohorts of patients with head and neck squamous cell cancers:
OTSCCs demonstrated frequent mutations in DST, FSIP2 and RNF213 while
alterations in CDKN2A and NOTCH1 were significantly less frequent than
previously reported. Despite a lack of previously-known NOTCH1 mutations,
integrated analysis showed enrichments of alterations affecting Notch
signaling, more commonly seen in women. Importantly, Notch pathway
alterations were prognostic on uni- and multivariate analyses.
Furthermore, a high proportion of OTSCCs presented with alterations in
drug targetable genes and chromatin remodeling genes. Mutations in these
groups were also prognostic, where patients harboring mutations in these
actionable pathways more likely to succumb from recurrent disease
compared to those who did not, suggesting that these patients should
indeed be considered for treatment with targeted compounds in future
trial designs. In conclusion, these findings define the mutational
landscape of OTSCC, highlight the key role of the Notch signaling pathway
in oral tongue tumorigenesis and uncover somatic mutations in
therapeutically relevant genes which may represent candidate drug targets.

