Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential efficacy of metformin versus everolimus in the
setting of obesity in a mouse model of serous ovarian cancer


Objectives: The anti-diabetic drug, metformin, is an AMPK activator with
anti-tumorigenic effects. Indirectly, metformin improves insulin
resistance and decreases insulin and glucose levels. Directly, metformin
activates AMPK, leading to inhibition of the mTOR pathway. Everolimus is
a traditional mTOR inhibitor, and its common toxicities include
hyperglycemia and insulin resistance. Thus, we compared the efficacy of
metformin versus everolimus in a genetically engineered mouse model of
serous ovarian cancer (OC) under obese and non-obese conditions.Methods:
We utilized the K18-gT121+/-; p53fl/fl;Brca1fl/fl (KpB) OC mouse model.
KpB mice were subjected to 60% calories derived from fat in a high fat
diet (HFD) to mimic diet-induced obesity versus 10% calories from fat in
a low fat diet (LFD). Mice were treated with placebo, metformin orally
(200 mg/kg/day) or everolimus intraperitoneally (3 mg/kg/day) following
tumor onset for 4 weeks (N = 8-10 mice/group). Tumor size and volume were
recorded weekly. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on the
ovarian tumors after treatment with placebo, metformin or everolimus to
assess for effects on proliferation, apoptosis and downstream targets of
the mTOR pathway. Individual slides were digitized using the Aperio
ScanScope (Aperio Technologies, Vista, CA), and digital images were
analyzed using Aperio ImageScope software.Results: Metformin inhibited
tumor growth in the KpB mice fed a LFD (non-obese) and a HFD (obese),
after one month of treatment. In the mice fed a HFD, metformin decreased
tumor growth by 60% compared to control animals. Tumor growth was only
decreased by 32% in the mice fed a LFD. A comparison of the
anti-tumorigenic effects of metformin in mice fed a LFD versus a HFD
demonstrated that metformin was more efficacious in those mice on the HFD
(p = 0.003). Everolimus inhibited tumor growth by 39% and 38% in mice fed
a HFD versus LFD, respectively. As compared to placebo-treated mice,
metformin and everolimus decreased Ki-67, a marker of cell proliferation,
and increased caspase-3, a marker of apoptosis, in the ovarian tumors
from obese and non-obese KpB mice. In addition, metformin increased
phosphorylation of AMPK, and both metformin and everolimus decreased
phosphorylation of S6, a downstream target of the mTOR
pathway.Conclusions: Metformin, an AMPK activator, was found to be more
efficacious in the inhibition of ovarian tumor growth in the obese versus
non-obese KpB mice, suggesting that obesity may be a biomarker for
response to this agent. In contrast, everolimus, a mTOR inhibitor, was
found to be equally efficacious in obese and non-obese mice. Further
studies are underway to assess the potential differential effects of an
AMPK activator versus a mTOR inhibitor on the interrelationship between
the metabolic milieu and ovarian tumor growth.

