Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA expression associated with response grade in gastric
cancer patients tumors


Background: Many chemotherapy schemes have been used in neoadjuvant
treatment scenario to improve the overall and disease-free survival of
gastric cancer (GC) patients treated with surgery alone. However, in some
cases, the objective clinical response is not achieved, and this lack of
response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy may delay curative surgery and
increase surgical complications. Therefore, a major challenge for
improving clinical outcomes is to understand the molecular mechanisms
that may play essential roles in patients responses of GC treatments. The
expression levels of several miRNAs have been found to be correlated with
GC prognosis and could determine the clinical response for neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. Therefore, our goal was to analyze the relation between
miRNA profile and the pathological response grade of GC patients tumors
treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy or surgery alone. Methods: We
selected 34 biopsy tumor samples of patients treated with neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (collected before the treatment) and 23 tumor samples of
patients submitted to surgery without adjuvant treatment. All patients
treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy received ECF, DCF or ECX prior the
surgery, and subsequently they were submitted to a complete resection.
The identification of differentially expressed miRNAs was done by TLDA
Quantitative Real Time PCR. Results: After categorizing neoadjuvant
chemotherapy patients according to percentage of viable tumor cells
present in gastric resection and the surgical patients according to their
5 years of follow up status we could segregate those with and without
response for both treatments. The comparison between response grade
versus miRNAs showed 9 and 14 downregulated miRNAs in samples of patients
without response for neoadjuvant chemotherapy and surgery alone,
respectively. We also could observe 3 common downregulated miRNAs between
patients without response in both groups. Conclusion: We identified some
downregulated miRNAs involved in gastric cancer pathways and mechanisms
of drug resistance that should manage to determine a predictable miRNA
signature to perform a correct patient selection for GC treatments.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

