Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug repurposing: Sulfasalazine sensitizes gliomas to gamma knife
surgery by blocking cystine uptake through System XC, leading to
gluthatione depletion


Glioblastomas (GBMs) are lethal cancers and inherently resistant to
radiotherapy. Established treatments including surgery, radio- and
chemotherapy have a limited efficacy, and the median survival is
approximately 14.6 months. Thus, treatment resistance represents a major
challenge in the clinical management of these patients, and new therapies
are urgently needed.We hypothesized that the Xc-inhibitor sulfasalazine
(SAS) could potentiate the efficacy of radiotherapy against gliomas.
Expression of the catalytic subunit of system Xc, xCT, was found in a
panel of 30 human GBM biopsies. Sections from normal brain tissue
displayed only weak immunopositivity, thus our findings therefore suggest
that xCT expression is common to most GBMs, which together with its low
expression in normal brain tissue could provide a therapeutic window. SAS
treatment dramatically reduced cysteine-uptake and glutathione (GSH)
levels in glioma cells in vitro and markedly increased the levels of
reactive oxygen species (ROS). Furthermore, SAS and radiation
synergistically increased DNA double-strand breaks and increased glioma
cell death, whereas adding the antioxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC)
reversed cell death. Moreover, SAS and gamma knife radiosurgery (GKRS)
synergistically prolonged survival in nude rats harboring human GBM
xenografts, compared to controls or either treatment alone. In
conclusion, SAS effectively blocks cystine uptake in glioma cells in
vitro, leading to GSH depletion and increased ROS levels, DNA damage and
cell death. Moreover, it potentiates the anti-tumor efficacy of GKRS in
rats with human GBM xenografts, providing a survival benefit. Thus, SAS
may have a role as a radiosensitizer to enhance the efficacy of current
radiotherapies for glioma patients. We are currently preparing a clinical
trial for patients with GBM recurrences combining pre-treatment with SAS
and GKRS.

