Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploration of the human peptidome for cancer-specific peptide-MHC
targets


IntroductionMHC class-I molecules display peptide fragments of
intracellular proteins on the cell surface. Peptide-MHC (pMHC) complexes
containing peptide fragments derived from antigenic proteins lead to a
T-cell mediated immune response. We are interested in cancer-specific
pMHC complexes that are targetable by therapeutic molecules, e.g.,
bispecific antibodies. A significant concern is off-target toxicity of
the therapeutic molecules due to pMHC complexes similar to the target
complex in essential, normal tissues. Thus we performed a comprehensive
exploration of the 9-mer human intracellular peptidome to computationally
identify potential breast cancer-specific pMHC class I targets and
evaluate the likelihood of cross-reactivity.MethodsOur method has four
steps: 1. We first identified amino acid sequences of all intracellular
proteins and 9-mers from a human protein database (UniprotKB). 2. Next,
we use a computational program to predict binding affinities and
half-lives of all possible combinations of 9-mers and 13 HLA-A and HLA-B
alleles encompassing major HLA supertypes; combinations passing affinity
and half-life criteria are classified as potential complexes. 3. For each
potential pMHC complex, we identify potential similar complexes; two
complexes are considered similar if they have the same HLA allele and 5
or more identical amino acids at identical positions. 4. We classify a
complex as a potential target if combined mRNA expression of the complex,
and similar complexes is higher in breast cancer tissues (TCGA data)
compared to normal essential tissues (GTEx data) in at least 5% of the
cancer samples.ResultsWe extracted all intracellular protein sequences
available in the UniprotKB, from which all 9-mer peptides were derived.
Hundreds of thousands of potential pMHC complexes using binding
predictions for 13 HLA A and B alleles were identified. For each
potential MHC binding peptide, similar amino acid sequences were
identified. Combined mRNA expression analysis resulted in the discovery
of potential targets, which we further prioritized on the basis of
likelihood of off-target effects and breast cancer expression levels of
the peptide's gene(s) of origin. While we identified several thousand
potential breast cancer specific targets, the number of targets with low
likelihood of cross-reactivity is incredibly small.ConclusionsWe have
developed a method to identify potential cancer-specific pMHC complexes
and to predict potential off-targets of the drugs targeting them, which
is essential to the development of safe drugs. Using this method, we
examined the landscape of potential breast cancer specific targets
derived from the human peptidome. Our examination showed that finding
targets with low likelihood of cross-reactivity may be extremely
difficult. Nonetheless, our method could help in prioritizing pMHC
targets based on the evaluation of the potential cross-reactivity risk.

