Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RAGE-ligand signaling drives breast cancer invasion and metastasis


Background: Breast cancer is most common malignant state in women and 20%
of these patients will develop metastasis during the course of their
disease. Further understanding is needed of the process and mechanisms of
metastasis. Our lab and others have been shown that Receptor of
Advanced-Glycation End-products (RAGE) plays a role in tumorigenesis and
metastasis. RAGE is highly expressed in various cancers including breast
cancer and its protein levels correlate with poor patient outcome in
breast cancer and other cancers. Activation of RAGE results in increased
proliferation, migration and invasion of cancer cells. Further studies in
mice have shown its blockade may be a therapeutic target to reduce tumor
growth and the resulting metastasis.Methods: Using the breast cancer cell
model (MDA-MB-231) and its organotropic sister cells lines selected in
vivo for increased metastasis to lung (4175) and bone (1833), we tested
the role of RAGE in driving mechanisms of metastasis in vitro and in
vivo.Results: First, we demonstrated that the highly metastatic variant
of 231 cells (4175 and 1833) have increased expression level of RAGE
compared to MDA-MB-231 parental cells. Moreover, RAGE knockdown by shRNA
in 4175 and 231 parental cells showed decreased cell invasion in
transwell assays compared to control scramble shRNA. Ectopic
over-expression of RAGE in parental 231 cells led to increased migratory
and invasive properties compared to vector control cells, without
affecting cell proliferation or viability. To explore the underlying
mechanisms we probed for differences in RAGE signaling pathways including
MEK/ERK, p38, AKT and SAPK/JNK; with MEK/ERK and Akt showing activation.
Using chemical inhibitors of these pathways we demonstrated that the
MEK/ERK, but not other pathways inhibited RAGE-driven cell invasion in
transwell assays. To validate our data in vivo, we performed mammary fat
pad injection of 4175 cells (RAGE and scr shRNA) in NSG mice. Tumor
growth and weight was impaired in RAGE gene knockdown 4175 cells compared
to scramble (scr) controls. Analysis of lung tissue retrieved from mice
revealed RAGE knockdown in 4175 cells resulted in less metastasis
compared to 4175 scr control cells.Conclusion: We have shown that higher
RAGE levels are seen in metastatic human breast cancer BC cells. RAGE
gene knockdown in metastatic BC cells reduces their invasive properties
in vitro and reduces tumor progression and metastasis in vivo in NSG
mice.These data highlight RAGE as a novel therapeutic target for
metastatic disease in breast and other cancers.

