Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimisation of EGFR TKI efficiency wild-type EGFR lung cancer


Background : Lung cancer is the first cause of cancer death worldwide.
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) have improved the survival of
patient harboring EGFR activating mutations. Besides, EGFR-TKIs have
shown clinical activity for patients with wild type EGFR (wtEGFR) tumors
as maintenance treatment and for a fraction of them as second line
treatment. These observations impel us to objective and document the
mechanisms implicated in order to optimize the use of EGFR-TKI in the
treatment of wtEGFR lung cancer.Methods : In vitro experiments rely on
lung cancer cell lines expressing either wtEGFR or mutated EGFR. Their
sensitivity to erlotinib in control conditions or short after a sublethal
cisplatin treatment was studied. In vitro results were validated on lung
patients-derived xenografts (PDX) with four wtEGFR human
adenocarcinomas.Results : Cisplatin pretreatment enhances erlotinib
toxicity in wtEGFR cells (providing its robust expression) but not in
EGFR-mutated cells. Cisplatin priming increases erlotinib toxicity either
through apoptosis or autophagy depending on the cell line. This
sensitization correlates with an increase in EGFR expression and
phosphorylation and a raise in AKT and Erk phosphorylation. The
sensitization is also observed during long-term cisplatin treatment in a
cisplatin-resistant subpopulation, together with concomitant EGFR pathway
activation.The in vivo experiments conducted in PDX confirm that
cisplatin pretreatment potentiates erlotinib in three of the four wtEGFR
lung tumors models.Of note, the sensitization to erlotinib occured
independently from KRas status.Conclusion : The sensitivity of the wtEGFR
lung cancer cells and lung cancer xenografts to erlotinib is enhanced by
cisplatin pretreatment, whatever the type of induced cell death.
Cisplatin induces activation of EGFR and his downstream kinases AKT and
Erk. This sensitization is independent from the tumor K-Ras status. EGFR
phosphorylation could be a potential marker of this sensitization and
might be predicitive of the optimal efficiency of EGFR TKI. In vivo
validation of this marker is still ongoing.This study was supported by
Roche laboratory and by the foundation for medical research.

