Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variants in epigenetic pathways and risk of multiple
cancer types in the GAME-ON consortium


IntroductionEpigenetic changes are reversible features of the genome that
regulate gene transcription and protein expression on several levels
including DNA methylation, histone modification or miRNA expression. We
investigated the association between inherited variation in genes of key
epigenetic processes and risk of multiple cancers within the GAME-ON
consortium.MethodsWe performed a pathway based meta-analysis using
genotypes from more than 50,000 cases of breast, lung, prostate, ovarian
and colorectal cancer cases and more than 60,000 controls from various
genome wide association studies participating in the GAME-ON consortium
to estimate associations with cancer risk. Using the 1000GenomeProject
database, we selected 505,702 genotyped and imputed single nucleotide
polymorphisms in 551 genes (flanking region +/- 250kb) related to DNA
methylation, histone modification or chromatin remodeling based on GO and
GeneCard databases. In order to allow variants to be associated with only
a subset of traits we used subset based meta-analysis. False-discovery
rate (FDR) corrected p-values (q-values) lower than 0.05 were considered
significant.Results and Discussion 582 SNPs were significantly associated
with risk of at least one cancer. We identified nine major regions that
showed significant associations with more than one cancer type.Among the
most interesting regions was the region around PHC3 (3q36), which showed
associations with prostate and colorectal cancer and clear cell ovarian
carcinomas. PHC3 is involved in chromatin remodeling and plays a role in
epithelial neoplasms. Significant Odds ratios (ORs) ranged from 0.80 to
1.31. The number of risk and protective alleles in this region was
similarly distributed (19 and 18, respectively). One of the strongest
associations was observed for rs76925190 (intronic in PRKC1), which
increased the risk of colorectal and prostate cancer (q-value
4.28*10-10). Variants in this region were previously associated with
prostate cancer.Polymorphisms in the region (19q13) around BABAM1 (RISC
and BRCA1 A complex member 1), were associated with lung, breast, ovarian
and prostate cancer. BABAM1 is associated with the BRCA1-complex. Its
function in histone modification and DNA repair emphasizes its importance
in carcinogenesis. Significant ORs ranged from 0.88 to 1.14 with similar
distribution of risk and protective alleles in this region (19 and 17,
respectively). The strongest association was observed for rs4808076
(intronic in ANKLE1), which increased the risk of squamous lung, serous
ovarian and ER- -breast cancer (q-value 2.40*10-6). Variants in this
region were previously associated with risk of breast and ovarian
cancer.ConclusionsThis study emphasizes the importance of variants in
genes of epigenetic processes on cancer risk and further provides
insights into novel, pleiotropic epigenetic mechanisms of cancer
development.

