Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CRP induction in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer cells


Breast cancer is one of the most common cancer types among
post-menopausal women. Tamoxifen has been known as the most effective
therapeutic option for estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. One of
the main issues of breast cancer is acquisition of tamoxifen resistance,
and if it does, the way to treat tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer has
not been discovered. It has been recently suggested that c-reactive
protein (CRP), inflammatory marker found in many diseases may be related
to breast cancer progression. Here, we found that tamoxifen-resistant
breast cancer (TAMR-MCF-7) cells expresses much higher protein and mRNA
level of CRP compared to parent breast cancer (MCF-7) cells. CRP
knock-down by lentiviral shRNA did not affect cell proliferation rate of
TAMR-MCF-7 cells. One of the main characteristics of tamoxifen-resistant
breast cancer is higher migratory ability. Through trans-well migration
assay, we have discovered that CRP alone increases migratory function of
MCF-7 cells. Moreover, CRP knock-down significantly reduced cell
migration of TAMR-MCF-7 cells. It has been recently reported that
sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) induces CRP in mammary epithelial cells and
ultimately causes cancer cell transformation. S1P treatment increased CRP
expression in MCF-7 cells. Protein expression of sphingosine kinase
(Sphk) 1 and 2, which catalyzes conversion of sphingosine to S1P, was
also increased in TAMR-MCF-7 cells. Among five S1P receptors, we also
discovered that S1P receptor 3 (S1Pr3) is related with CRP induction in
TAMR-MCF-7 cells. Taken together, tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer
expresses high level of CRP and S1P-S1Pr3 plays a key role in CRP
induction in TAMR-MCF-7 cells. Higher levels of CRP increases migratory
function of tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer cells. CRP may be an
important therapeutic target for the treatment of tamoxifen-resistant
breast cancer.

