Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Probing the tumorigenic properties of two pore potassium channels
using inhibitory anti-KCNK9 mAbs


Ion channels are important portals that facilitate ionic passage across
membranes in all organisms. KCNK9, a member of the family of two-pore
domain potassium K+ channels, mediates leak currents critical to
maintaining cell resting membrane potentials. Since its identification,
KCNK9 has been implicated in various human disorders including cancer.
KCNK9 overexpression has been observed in melanoma, colorectal, breast
and lung tumors and KCNK9 has been found to promote tumor survival and
growth, by increasing resistance to hypoxia and apoptosis. However,
KCNK9's underlying pathophysiologic mechanisms have been elusive due to
the absence of specific inhibitors. Here, we describe the development of
novel monoclonal antibodies directed against the KCNK9 extracellular
domain and their molecular/cellular effects on KCNK9-expressing
cells.Murine monoclonal IgG1 antibodies were raised against recombinant
KCNK9 extracellular domains expressed in a mammalian system. 40
monoclonal antibodies were generated and demonstrated channel
subtype-specific recognition of human KCNK9. Among them, 1 antibody
designated Y4-mAb displayed sub-nanomolar binding affinity and inhibited
KCNK9 channel conductance by up to 30% when tested in a fluorescent
ion-influx assay. Through confocal microscopic analysis, channel
inhibition was found to result from antibody-induced internalization and
endocytosis of cell-surface channels. Y4-mAb induced up to 3040%
reduction in cell viability and increased cell death in BEN non-small
cell lung carcinoma cells and BT-549 and 410.4 breast cancer cells. In
addition to direct cell killing, this antibody activated complement,
resulting in complement-dependent cancer cell cytotoxicity in vitro.
Initial experiments in vivo showed that systemic Y4-mAb inhibited the
capacity of BEN non-small cell lung carcinoma cells to propagate
subcutaneous tumor xenografts in nude mice (pIon channels are important
portals that facilitate ionic passage across membranes in all organisms.
KCNK9, a member of the family of two-pore domain potassium K+ channels,
mediates leak currents critical to maintaining cell resting membrane
potentials. Since its identification, KCNK9 has been implicated in
various human disorders including cancer. KCNK9 overexpression has been
observed in melanoma, colorectal, breast and lung tumors and KCNK9 has
been found to promote tumor survival and growth, by increasing resistance
to hypoxia and apoptosis. However, KCNK9's underlying pathophysiologic
mechanisms have been elusive due to the absence of specific inhibitors.
Here, we describe the development of novel monoclonal antibodies directed
against the KCNK9 extracellular domain and their molecular/cellular
effects on KCNK9-expressing cells.Murine monoclonal IgG1 antibodies were
raised against recombinant KCNK9 extracellular domains expressed in a
mammalian system. 40 monoclonal antibodies were generated and
demonstrated channel subtype-specific recognition of human KCNK9. Among
them, 1 antibody designated Y4-mAb displayed sub-nanomolar binding
affinity and inhibited KCNK9 channel conductance by up to 30% when tested
in a fluorescent ion-influx assay. Through confocal microscopic analysis,
channel inhibition was found to result from antibody-induced
internalization and endocytosis of cell-surface channels. Y4-mAb induced
up to 3040% reduction in cell viability and increased cell death in BEN
non-small cell lung carcinoma cells and BT-549 and 410.4 breast cancer
cells. In addition to direct cell killing, this antibody activated
complement, resulting in complement-dependent cancer cell cytotoxicity in
vitro. Initial experiments in vivo showed that systemic Y4-mAb inhibited
the capacity of BEN non-small cell lung carcinoma cells to propagate
subcutaneous tumor xenografts in nude mice (p<0.05).In conclusion, we
have generated a high affinity KCNK9-specific monoclonal antibody that
perturbs KCNK9 function and inhibits tumor cell survival and xenograft
formation. Anti-KCNK9 antibodies have the potential to be valuable
research tools and may lead to novel therapeutics. Moreover, our
strategies should be generally applicable to studying the functions of
other ion channels in cancer.

