Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of deubiquitinating enzyme USP19 as a regulator of
EWS/FLI1 protein turnover in Ewing sarcoma


Ewing sarcoma belongs to the family of pediatric tumors which arise most
commonly in bone. The majority of Ewing sarcoma is characterized by a
balanced translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 which encodes for
the uniquely expressed fusion protein EWS/FLI1. Tumor cells are crucially
dependent on expression of the fusion protein. Protein degradation is an
important and highly regulated process in all cells and novel insights
are beginning to be applied for cancer therapy. We aim to investigate the
mechanism of turnover with the goal to diminish EWS/FLI1 protein and
thereby identify novel targets for Ewing sarcoma treatment.Here, we show
first that EWS/FLI1 protein stabilizes upon proteasome inhibition.
Co-immunoprecipitation of EWS/FLI1 with ubiquitin shows a characteristic
ubiquitination smear indicating that EWS/FLI1 is ubiquitinated and a
substrate of the ubiquitin-proteasome system. We characterized the
turnover itself as rather slow. Interestingly, the half-life time of the
fusion protein is increased by four-fold compared to the full length
protein FLI1. This increased stability possibly contributes to the
oncogenic and resistant features of the fusion protein.To identify a
deubiquitinating enzyme capable of regulating EWS/FLI1 turnover, we
selected 20 deubiquitinating enzymes based on their expression in Ewing
cell lines and tumors in-silico. Then, we established a screening
approach directly measuring EWS/FLI1 protein levels as a read-out by an
ELISA-like assay, allowing us to monitor the amount of 3x flag-tagged
EWS/FLI1 protein. After transient knocked down of the 20 candidates, the
screening revealed ubiquitin specific protease 19 (USP19) as a promising
candidate. Depletion of USP19 via siRNA or shRNA was capable to diminish
endogenous EWS/FLI1 protein level which led to modulation of its target
gene levels. Vice versa, USP19 overexpression stabilized EWS/FLI1 protein
level by twofold. Most importantly, stable knockdown of USP19 in Ewing
cell lines led to a 40% reduction of cell growth and proliferation.
Currently, we further characterize the influence of USP19 on EWS/FLI1
turnover and Ewing cell viability in vivo to identify novel possibilities
for therapeutic interventions.

