Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional genomics reveals genetic dependencies in gastric cancer


Gastric cancer is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in the world.
The genomics of gastric cancers is unique in that they harbor
significantly more copy number alterations compared to point mutations,
yet the functional importance of these genetic alterations in tumor
maintenance is not known. To better understand oncogenic drivers of
gastric cancer and identify potential therapeutic targets we performed
negative selection RNAi screens in ten well annotated gastric cancer cell
lines. Screens were performed using two different but overlapping shRNA
libraries. The first library was the Decipher Human Module I pool from
Cellecta composed of 27500 shRNAs targeting 5043 genes. The second
library was a custom designed focused pool with 6500 shRNAs targeting 608
genes. In addition to screening the two shRNA libraries in vitro, the
focused pool was also screened in subcutaneous xenograft tumor models in
eight of the gastric cancer cell lines. The screens revealed distinct
genetic vulnerabilities that correlated with the corresponding genomic
alteration in the specific cell lines. In particular we found that KRAS
amplifications confer dependency to the same degree as activating KRAS
mutations. This KRAS dependency was further validated with additional
shRNAs in KRAS amplified and mutated cell lines. Furthermore, we
identified AMPK which is focally amplified in 9% of gastric cancer as a
critical oncogenic driver. Multiple subunits of the AMPK holoenzyme
scored in the screen and dependency on AMPK alpha and beta subunits was
demonstrated with independent shRNAs in two cell lines from the primary
screen. Consistent with the screen results we find that LMSU, a gastric
cancer cell line not part of the primary screen but annotated as
amplified for the AMPK alpha subunit shows elevated expression levels and
is sensitive to knockdown of AMPK. These observations have identified
AMPK as a novel oncogenic driver in gastric cancer with therapeutic
potential.

