Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia-related microRNA, miR-199a-3p, displays tumor suppressor
function in ovarian cancer


Purpose:Ovarian cancer has the fifth leading cause of death in women in
the Western world. At diagnosis, over 60% of all ovarian cancer patients
have advanced disease with peritoneal dissemination. During the
transcoelomic metastasis of ovarian cancer cells, cells are floating in
the peritoneal cavity without vascular supply and exposed in hypoxic
conditions, suggesting that hypoxic stimuli affect cancer cell behavior
and the cells acquire more aggressive malignancy potential. In this
study, we screened miRNAs which expression were altered under hypoxic
condition and investigated their function in vitro and in
vivo.Methods:miRNA PCR arrays were performed on two ovarian cancer cells
(CaOV3 and RMUG-S) cultured under 20% or 1% O2, revealing that
miR-199a-3p was one of miRNAs, which expression drastically declined
under hypoxia. In order to clarify the relationship between HIF-1 and
miR-199a-3p, ovarian cancer cells were transfected with HIF-1A expression
vector and the level of miR-199a-3p was determined by RT-real-time PCR.
In silico analyses indicated that MET is one of target genes of
miR-199a-3p. Thus, miR-199a-3p expression in ovarian cancer cell lines
and clinical cancer tissues was assessed by RT-real-time PCR and compared
with c-Met expression of those by Western blotting (cell lines) and
immunohistochemistry (tissues). To analyze whether miR-199a-3p directly
targets the 3-UTR of MET mRNA, a luciferase reporter assay was performed.
The effect of miR-199a-3p on c-Met expression as well as its downstream
signaling was examined by the transfection of precursor miR-199a-3p. The
inhibitory effect of miR-199a-3p on ovarian cancer cells was analyzed
through in vitro anchorage-independent cell proliferation, adhesion and
invasion assay. Using an ovarian cancer xenograft model, the therapeutic
effect of miR-199a-3p against peritoneal dissemination of cancer cells
was investigated.Results:miR-199a-3p expression was not altered by HIF-1A
overexpression, suggesting that hypoxia-driven miR-199a-3p change was
related to HIF-independent pathway. miR-199a-3p expression was inversely
correlated with c-Met expression in both ovarian cancer cell lines and
clinical samples. Transfection of precursor miR-199a-3p into SKOV3ip1
cells attenuated c-Met expression followed by the inhibition of
phosphorylation of c-Met, ERK and AKT. In luciferase reporter assay,
miR-199a-3p directly suppressed MET transcriptional activity.
Furthermore, the proliferation, adhesion and invasion of cancer cells
were inhibited by the transfection of miR-199a-3p. In an ovarian cancer
xenograft model, the enforced expression of miR-199a-3p in SKOV3-13 cells
significantly suppressed peritoneal
dissemination.Conclusion:Hypoxia-decreased microRNA, miR-199a-3p,
remarkably inhibited ovarian cancer progression through the suppression
of c-Met. Thus, miR-199a-3p can be suggested as a potential target for
new treatment of ovarian cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

