Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergism from combination of targeted therapy with tumor active
phytochemicals in ovarian tumor models and changes in protein expression


IntroductionOvarian cancer is most lethal cause of gynecological types of
cancer mainly because of acquired drug resistance and poor diagnosisis.
In majority of cases it is detected at an advanced stage when it is
likely to have spread beyond ovaries. Combination of platinum drugs with
paclitaxel is the current mode of treatment. Although cancer cells
respond well to the drug combination, relapse often occurs for which
drugs fail to function. We have designed a number of novel platinums
aimed to overcome platinum resistance in ovarian cancer. We also applied
combinations of platinums and tumor active phytochemicals such as
curcumin, EGCG, thymoquinone, resveratrol, ursolic acid and genistein to
overcom drug resistance. This presentation will provide a brief overview
of novel platinums designed in our lab with special emphasis on recent
studies on combinations of platinum with phytochemicals and protein
expression.MethodsActivity of the compounds alone and in sequenced
combination in ovarian cancer cell lines including A2780, A2780cisR and
A2780ZD0473R were determined using MTT reduction assay. Drug uptake and
drug-DNA binding were determined using developed protocols. Proteomic
studies involving 2D gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry were
carried out to characterize key proteins associated with platinum
resistance.ResultsGenerally but not always sequenced combinations with 2
to 4 h time gap were found to be synergistic. The variation in combined
drug action with the change in sequence of administration clearly
indicates that the action of one drug has modulated that of the other.
Proteomic studies have identified over thirty proteins believed to be
associated with platinum resistance in ovarian cancer. They belong to six
major groups including cytoskeletal proteins, molecular chaperone and
stress related proteins, proteins involved in detoxification and drug
resistance, proteins involved in metabolic processes and mRNA processing
proteins. The proteins are restored to normalcy due to treatment with
synergistic combinations.ConclusionIf confirmed in vivo, the results of
the study indicate that appropriate combinations of targeted therapy and
tumor active phytochemicals may providing an effective and affordable
means of overcoming drug resistance in ovarian cancer.

