Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of osteoblastic N-cadherin decreases primary
multiple myeloma cell - osteoblast interactions


Introduction: Recent reports have shown that the adhesion molecule
N-cadherin, a mesenchymal cadherin associated with
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, is expressed in a large percentage
of castration resistant prostate cancer tumors, allowing the interaction
between N-cadherin expressing osteoblasts (OSB) and prostate cancer cells
via homophilic binding, and can promote osteoclastogenesis and osteolytic
disease.There is also evidence that in multiple myeloma (MM), direct
adhesive interactions between MM cells and the bone marrow stroma are
responsible for the development of drug resistance and relapse. This
phenomenon termed cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance (CAMDR) is
thought to be one of the major mechanisms by which multiple myeloma cells
(MMC) escape the cytotoxic effects of therapeutic agents.We recently
demonstrated the technical feasibility of culturing difficult to preserve
primary human MMC by reconstructing a physiological relevant 3D
microfluidic bone-like tissue microenvironment. Using this platform, we
found that OSB played a key role in the ex vivo maintenance and expansion
of MMC. In this study, we evaluated the role of osteoblastic N-cadherin
in regulating MMC-OSB interactions as a first step to elucidate the role
of this molecule in the development of CAMDR in MM.Materials and Methods:
Knockdown of N-cadherin protein expression in the human OSB cell line
hFOB 1.19 was achieved using shRNA lentiviral technology. Patient-derived
bone marrow mononuclear cells (BMMC) containing malignant MMC were
cocultured in the microfluidic device with either N-cadherin+OSB or with
a mixture composed of N-cadherin-OSB and N-cadherin+OSB. Monitoring and
quantification of MMC-OSB interactions was performed using time lapsed
images and fluorescence microscopy.Results and Conclusions: Real-time
images showed that CD138+ MMC were preferentially adhered to N-cadherin+
OSB. The retention of CD138+ MMC, based on the scaffold constitution, was
determined by flow cytometric analyses as the CD138+ MMC/OSB ratio.
Notably, after a 2 day coculture period, only 32.78% 4.15% CD138+ MMC was
retained in the tissue scaffold containing N-cadherin-OSB compared to
70.21% 4.64% retention in the mock transfected OSB group. For the first
time, we demonstrated here that osteoblastic N-cadherin is responsible,
at least in part, for the development of strong interactions between MMC
with stromal elements from the tumor microenvironment. Our data suggest a
new therapeutic intervention area in the modulation of N-cadherin
expression by OSB as a way to render MMC more susceptible to drug
treatments and potentially decrease CAMDR.

