Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIVE Proteomics: Integrated, cloud-based RNA-Seq and proteomics
analysis of prostate adenocarcinoma samples


Automated bottom-up proteomics workflows implemented with modern
mass-spectrometry instrumentation can readily generate millions of
peptide fragmentation spectra from cell-lines and clinically derived
samples. The tandem mass-spectra promise to reveal wild-type and somatic
mutations, insertions, and deletions and alternatively spliced isoforms
translated to functional protein isoforms in tumor samples. However, the
available reference proteomes represent a poor analysis substrate for the
observation of protein evidence of genomic and transcript variation. The
advent of cheap and fast RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) provides an elegant
solution to the lack of sample-specific reference proteomes. We
anticipate that the falling cost of RNA-Seq will prompt an increasing
number of proteomics labs to use contract next-gen sequencing (NGS)
services to obtain RNA-Seq data to derive sample-specific reference
proteomes. In contrast to public repositories of genomic variation,
sample-specific RNA-Seq data captures transcribed rare, individual,
cell-type, and sample-specific genomic variation. RNA-Seq-based
transcripts also provide sample-specific information on observable
proteins. Furthermore, paired RNA-Seq and proteomics data links gene
expression and protein abundance, enabling the study of gene regulation
linked to protein abundance dynamics. However, the analysis of
multi-gigabyte paired mass-spectra and RNA-Seq datasets pose significant
scientific and logistical challenges. Few proteomics labs have the
personnel, archival data storage, computational resources, or informatics
pipelines needed. The cloud-based genomics analysis platform
High-performance Integrated Virtual Environment (HIVE) will provide
turn-key integrated proteomics and RNA-Seq analyses to the wider
proteomics community in a secure, trackable, sharable, and scalable
computing platform. We will then use this integrated proteomics_RNA-Seq
analysis pipeline to identify high-value mutations in prostate
adenocarcinoma samples, thereby demonstrating the utility of the platform
while also generating key data for future investigations.

