Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo acquired resistance to the mutant EGFR inhibitor
Rociletinib (CO-1686) is associated with activation of the c-MET pathway


Rociletinib is a novel, oral, targeted irreversible inhibitor of the
cancer-causing mutant forms of EGFR currently being studied for the
treatment of NSCLC. Rociletinib was designed to spare wild-type EGFR
signaling. Heavily-pretreated T790M+ patients treated with rociletinib at
500 or 625mg BID demonstrated a 67% objective response rate (n = 56,
Soria et al., ENA 2014). Despite these promising data, acquired
resistance to rociletinib monotherapy is anticipated. To assess the in
vivo mechanisms of acquired resistance to rociletinib, mice bearing PC-9
(EGFR del19) human NSCLC tumors were chronically dosed with erlotinib (50
mg/kg QD) or rociletinib (150 mg/kg BID). Rociletinib treated mice had an
increased time to tumor progression as compared to erlotinib treated
mice. Resistance, as defined by tumors reaching >300mm3, was observed in
all (n = 10) erlotinib treated mice between days 42-61. Alternatively,
resistance to rociletinib was only observed in 3/10 mice after 126 days
of dosing. Emergence of the EGFR T790M resistance mutation was detected
in all tumors resistant to erlotinib. Erlotinib resistant tumors (n = 7)
were crossed over to rociletinib monotherapy on day 60 of the study at a
mean tumor volume of 500mm3. Rociletinib treatment generated durable
tumor regressions in both crossover and monotherapy treated mice, however
continued dosing of rociletinib ultimately allowed for the collection of
four resistant tumors. Rociletinib resistant tumors were analyzed using
the SuraSeq 500 NGS panel, and all harbored copy number gains (n = 12-15)
in MET and corresponding MET pathway activation as shown by RTK arrays
and Western blotting. Combining rociletinib with the MET inhibitor
crizotinib caused regression of the MET amplified rociletinib-resistant
tumors. In separate experiments, the addition of 50 ng/ml exogenous HGF
was sufficient to render several mutant EGFR cell lines immediately
resistant to rociletinib, and this effect could be overcome with the
combination of rociletinib and crizotinib. Finally, the combination of
rociletinib and crizotinib also demonstrated potent activity in a patient
derived L858R EGFR xenograft model with MET amplification (14 copies).
Taken together, these data show that (1) in a PC-9 front-line model of
mutant EGFR lung cancer, rociletinib has a longer time-to-resistance than
erlotinib; and (2) MET/HGF pathway activation is a likely driver of
acquired resistance to rociletinib in patients with mutant EGFR lung
cancer, and can potentially be successfully prevented and/or treated with
a combination of rociletinib plus a MET tyrosine kinase inhibitor.

