Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gli2 induces melanoma tumor growth and progression: A critical
role of c-Myc


Gli2 is one of the key transcription factors in sonic hedgehog (Shh)
pathway. Aberrant activation of Gli2 has been reported in several
malignancies. However, the role of Gli2 in melanoma progression is
unclear. Our results showed that knock down of Gli2 in melanoma cells
inhibited the proliferation as well as induced apoptosis in melanoma
cells in vitro, which was associated with down-regulation of c-Myc.
Melanoma cells with stable Gli2 knockdown demonstrated diminished tumor
growth when injected subcutaneously in athymic nude mice. In addition,
Gli2 inhibitors GANT58 and GANT61 significantly inhibited the growth of
melanoma cell lines. Furthermore, oral administration of 5mg/kg
piplartine (PL), an alkaloid inhibited the growth of melanoma tumor
xenograft by 84% as compared to control. The tumor suppression by PL was
associated with inhibition of Gli2 and c-Myc as observed by western blot
and immunohistochemistry analysis. The concentration of PL achieved in
plasma was 8.5M whereas in tumor was 6mol/gm as analyzed by LC-MS/MS.
Interestingly, the IC50 of PL at 48 hours was around 3-4M in a panel of
15 melanoma cells lines, correlating well with the concentrations
achieved in vivo. Melanoma cells treated with 2.5, 5 and 7.5M PL for 48
hours induced significant apoptosis, with concomitant inhibition of Gli2
as well as c-Myc. Gli2 overexpression and treatment with Shh ligand
significantly blocked PL mediated inhibition of cell proliferation and
induction of apoptosis, establishing the role of Gli2 in PL-mediated
growth suppression of melanoma cells. PL inhibited nuclear translocation
as well as DNA binding of Gli2 as observed by analysis of Gli2 in nuclear
fraction and Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, indicating the
importance of Gli2 transcriptional activity in melanoma cell
proliferation. In conclusion, our results provide convincing evidence
that Gli2 mediated induction of c-Myc plays an important in melanoma
tumor growth and subsequently establishes that PL mediated inhibition of
melanoma cells in vitro and in vivo is associated with inhibition of
Gli2. [Supported in part by R01 grant CA129038 (to S.K.S) awarded by the
National Cancer Institute].

