Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endothelial cells isolated from colorectal carcinoma exhibit tumor
microenvironment-dependent plasticity allowing the identification of
SPARCL1 as a novel endothelial cell quiescence factor


It is well known that tumor cell heterogeneity and the tumor
microenvironment (TME) contribute to tumorigenesis. In contrast, stromal
cell heterogeneity and plasticity in response to different TMEs and its
impact on tumorigenesis has not been conclusively investigated in human
tumors, as yet. Here we analyzed TME-induced heterogeneity of tumor
endothelial cells (TECs) in colorectal carcinoma (CRC). To this goal
vital and highly pure TEC cultures were isolated from CRC with a Th1-like
TME (Th1-TME) and from CRC with a non-Th1-like TME (Ctrl-TME). Tumors
with a Th1-TME exhibited a significantly reduced angiogenic activity and
were associated with an improved prognosis of CRC patients. Comparative
transcriptome analyses of the established TEC cultures identified a
cluster of genes which was homogeneously expressed in TECs from Th1-TME
but significantly different in TECs from Ctrl-TME. The gene encoding
secreted protein, acidic and rich in cysteine-like 1 (SPARCL1) was
identified to be most strongly up-regulated in TECs derived from a
Th1-TME. We could confirm with in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry that in normal colon and CRC tissues SPARCL1
expression is associated with endothelial cells (EC). Of note, SPARCL1
was consistently and highly expressed in normal colon, to a lower extent
in CRC with a Th1-TME and low or absent in CRC tissues with a Ctrl.-TME.
In cell culture SPARCL1 expression was absent in actively proliferating
EC, but highly induced in EC reaching a confluent quiescent state. The
SPARCL1 induction in confluent cells was reversible after the reduction
of cell density. In functional studies SPARCL1 inhibited proliferation,
migration and 3D sprouting of cultivated EC indicating potent
anti-angiogenic activity. At the morphological level vessels in normal
colon and in CRC with a Th1-TME were larger as compared to vessels in
tumors with Ctrl-TME. Accordingly, SPARCL1 characterizes quiescent mature
vessels that are larger as compared to rapidly sprouting microvessels.
Altogether our results show that TECs isolated from CRC with different
TMEs exhibit specific and differential long-term gene expression
profiles. Characterization of the respective genes identified SPARCL1 as
an anti-angiogenic gene associated with EC quiescence. These results
demonstrate for the first time that human tumor endothelial cells retain
differential TMEs by cellular memory allowing the identification of genes
functionally imprinting the TME in these cellular sensors.

