Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-MET associated with osteogenesis in multiple myeloma patients by
induction of MMP9 expression by HGF in BMSCs


HGF-mediated c-MET signaling plays a critical key in the progression of
multiple myeloma. That signaling is associated with cell proliferation,
drug resistance and osteoblast. In addition dynamic interplay between MM
cell and bone marrow stromal cell regulates that signaling activation.
The expression level of HGF in bone marrow plasma of MM patients is
higher when compared to case control. However, the role of HGF-mediated
c-Met was obscure in the progression of MM. In this study, we elucidate
the role of c-Met signaling in osteogenesis in MM using co-culture
system.In our previous data, we found that the expression levels of HGF
in bone marrow serum of multiple myeloma patients was correlated with the
expression levels of OPN and RUNX2. Also, those expression levels were
associated with bone lesion. It suggested that HGF might be one of
regulators in the progression of osteogenesis. However, mechanisms by
HGF-mediated c-MET activation modulate the expression of matrix
metalloproteinases still remain unknown. In our study, we found that Our
data show that PI3K inhibitor effectively inhibited the MMP9 mRNA
expression in both OPN alone treatment and co-treatment with OPN and HGF
in BMSCs. Induction of OPN and RUNX2 by HGF in MM cells could be one of
the major factors for the progression of MM through interaction of MM
cells and BMSCs. We suggested that induction of OPN/MMP9 strongly
associated with osteoclast.For further analysis, we performed co-culture
system which MM cells were grown with BMSCs obtained from MM patients
bone marrow specimen in order to verify the role of HGF mediated c-MET
activation in the progression of MM patient's osteogenesis. To explore
the detail mechanisms of HGF-mediated osteogenesis, various inhibitors
was used and the expression levels of a set of genes was examined using
real-time PCR. Subsequently, HGF-mediated c-MET activation was regulated
the expression of OPN/MMP-9 via co-effects of PIK3 activation and
activation of wnt signaling pathway in BMSCs from bone marrow of MM
patients. In conclusion, cross-talk between PI3K/AKT pathway and wnt
singaling pathway could be one of the major factors for the progression
of MM through interaction of MM cells and BMSCs.

