Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The prostaglandin E receptor EP4 is upregulated on breast cancer
stem-like cells and regulates sensitivity to Natural Killer cells


The cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) pathway is highly expressed in many breast
tumors and contributes to poor outcomes. The COX-2 product prostaglandin
E2 (PGE2) promotes tumor growth and metastasis by acting on the
G-protein-coupled receptor EP4. Our goal is to understand the role that
EP4 and COX-2 play in the survival of breast cancer cells with stem-like
properties. We compared EP4 and COX-2 expression in mammosphere-forming
and bulk populations derived from a panel of human and murine luminal and
basal type tumor cells with different metastatic capacities. Expression
of both EP4 and COX-2 were markedly increased in mammosphere-forming
cells derived from basal and/or metastatic cells relative to the bulk
population, but neither COX-2 nor EP4 levels were elevated in
mammospheres derived from luminal or non-metastatic cells. Breast cancer
stem-like cells are more sensitive than the bulk population to inhibition
with small molecule EP4 antagonists in vitro. Consistent with these data,
tumor-initiating capacity in vivo is markedly inhibited by EP4
antagonists. PGE2 potently suppresses Natural Killer (NK) cell activities
through the EP4 receptor and the administration of EP4 antagonists to
tumor-bearing mice restores NK activities to normal levels. We asked if
NK cells can recognize and lyse breast cancer stem cells and if EP4 plays
a role in this process. We compared the lytic sensitivity of murine
mammary-forming tumor cells versus the bulk population to cytotoxicity
mediated by normal murine NK cells. In metastatic tumor cell lines 66.1
and 410.4, the breast cancer stem cell enriched population was less
sensitive to NK-mediated lysis than the bulk population. Gene silencing
of EP4 modestly increased the sensitivity of tumor target cells to NK
killing which corresponded to increased expression of the NK activating
ligand H60. We are delineating the mechanism by which EP4 and COX-2 are
upregulated in cells with stem-like properties. Like EP4 and COX-2, STAT3
is upregulated in breast cancer stem cells. Inhibition of STAT3 reduces
mammosphere-forming capacity. Our studies support a mechanism whereby
COX-2/EP4 signaling induces STAT3 to support breast cancer stem cell
survival by a feed-forward mechanism and that these cells may be
relatively resistant to NK-mediated control. These studies support the
continued examination of EP4 as a therapeutic target. In preclinical
studies, EP4 antagonists protect NK cells from tumor-mediated immune
suppression and thereby prevent tumor metastasis and inhibit cancer stem
cells.

