Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and validation of a biomarker for prospective
selection of Notch1 activation in patients with certain advanced solid
tumors in a first-in-human phase1 study of the cancer stem cell targeting
antibody OMP-52M51 (anti-Notch1)


The Notch pathway plays a key role in embryonic development, the
regulation of stem and progenitor cells, and is implicated centrally in
many forms of human cancer. Notch1 is known to be frequently activated in
certain solid tumor types. OMP-52M51 is a humanized IgG2 antibody that
inhibits the signaling function of the Notch1 receptor. Mouse xenograft
studies using minimally-passaged, patient-derived xenografts have shown
that OMP-52M51 impedes tumor growth and selectively eliminates CSCs in a
range of tumor types particularly in tumors with activated Notch1
signaling.We previously reported the frequency of Notch pathway
activation across a large panel of human tumors (n>600) by an
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) assay that detects the activated form of
Notch1 using an antibody that specifically recognizes the Notch1
intracellular domain (ICD). Using this test and a rigorous H-score
cut-off, we found elevated Notch1 ICD in 7-53% of the following cancers:
chemo-resistant breast (29%), gastric (13%), cholangiocarcinoma (20%),
esophageal (27%), hepatacellular carcinoma (HCC, 7%), small cell lung
cancer (SCLC, 12%), pancreatic (12%) and colorectal cancer (53%).Here we
developed a specific CLIA-validated IHC assay capable of identifying
patients with Notch1 activation. The assay has a rapid turn-around time
and shows robust precision, reproducibility and accuracy. The sensitivity
of the method was confirmed by comparing results obtained on xenograft
tumor tissue samples with known levels of Notch1 expression and response
to anti-Notch1 therapy. From these results, the cut-off of the assay was
set. This predictive biomarker was specifically designed to screen
patients for prospective selection in the first-in-human Phase1 study of
OMP-52M51 (anti-Notch1) in certain advanced solid tumors (NCT01778439).
Detailed assay validation data and its application to the analysis of
clinical trial samples will be highlighted.

