Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of the pan-PIM kinase inhibitor INCB053914 in models of
multiple myeloma


The PIM family of serine-threonine protein kinases (PIM1, PIM2 and PIM3)
mediates responses to cytokines and growth factors and drives cell
proliferation and survival in a number of hematologic malignancies.
Overexpression of PIM kinases in these malignancies, including multiple
myeloma (MM), has been associated with poor overall survival. Given the
overlapping functions of these kinases, the ability of one family member
to compensate for the loss of another as well as the relatively benign
phenotype of mice deficient in all three PIM isoforms, discovery of
pan-PIM kinase inhibitors is warranted. The in vitro and in vivo activity
of the pan-PIM kinase inhibitor, INCB53914, was determined in MM cell
lines. The antiproliferative potencies for INCB053914 were The PIM family
of serine-threonine protein kinases (PIM1, PIM2 and PIM3) mediates
responses to cytokines and growth factors and drives cell proliferation
and survival in a number of hematologic malignancies. Overexpression of
PIM kinases in these malignancies, including multiple myeloma (MM), has
been associated with poor overall survival. Given the overlapping
functions of these kinases, the ability of one family member to
compensate for the loss of another as well as the relatively benign
phenotype of mice deficient in all three PIM isoforms, discovery of
pan-PIM kinase inhibitors is warranted. The in vitro and in vivo activity
of the pan-PIM kinase inhibitor, INCB53914, was determined in MM cell
lines. The antiproliferative potencies for INCB053914 were <200 nM in the
majority of MM cell lines tested. INCB053914 potently suppressed the
phosphorylation of multiple PIM substrates in MM cell lines, however in
contrast, a PIM2-sparing compound, INCB050646, was unable to impact
signaling in the KMS12 MM cell line, suggesting the importance of the
PIM2 isoform in myeloma growth and survival. An assay was established to
measure the inhibition of the phosphorylation of the PIM substrate, BAD,
in KMS12 cells when spiked into whole blood (WB) to assess the shift in
compound potency due to protein binding. The IC50 for INCB053914 in this
assay was similar to its potency in suppressing BAD phosphorylation in
KMS12 tumors in vivo. Dose dependent tumor growth inhibition (TGI) was
seen in mice bearing KMS12 tumors, with maximal TGI achieved with 24
hours of KMS12 WB IC50 coverage. Similar data were obtained in a second
MM model, OPM2.To understand the impact of inhibiting the PIM pathway in
combination with other pathways dysregulated in hematological
malignancies, an unbiased in vitro screen was performed and the potential
synergy of INCB053914 in combination with 65 cytotoxic or targeted agents
was determined. This screen identified several agents active against the
PI3K pathway or which impacted cell cycle progression. In addition, the
combinatorial activity of selected targeted agents hypothesized to
exhibit significant interactions with the PIM pathway was assessed in
vivo. Since PIM family members are STAT regulated genes, enhanced
activity may be expected upon combined PIM and JAK inhibition. In fact,
synergistic activity was seen with this combination in the INA6 multiple
myeloma model, and pharmacodynamic analyses revealed enhanced suppression
of both pBAD and c-myc levels in tumors from treated mice. Additionally,
c-myc levels are regulated both by PIM and the BET family member, BRD4.
The expected synergistic efficacy of PIM and BET inhibitors was also
observed in the KMS12 model, again with enhanced reduction in pBAD and
c-myc levels in the tumors of treated mice. Taken together, these data
support the utility of PIM inhibition in MM patients, both as monotherapy
and in combination with other targeted agents.

