Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of chemerin and chemerin receptors in neuroblastoma:
implications in tumorigenesis


Chemerin is an adipokine and immunomodulating factor that promotes
chemotaxis of immature dendritic cells, natural killer cells, macrophages
and endothelial cells. Secreted as prochemerin with low activity, it can
be C-terminally processed by different proteases expressed by a broad
range of cell types and tissues. The resulting isoforms vary in receptor
affinity and biological activity and are natural ligands for the G
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) CMKLR1, GPR1 and CCLR2. To date, the
activation of CMKLR1 (chemokine-like receptor 1) by chemerin and its role
in metabolism and metabolic disorders as well as inflammation is best
understood.Neuroblastoma (NB) is a malignancy of the sympathetic nervous
system and the most common extracranial solid pediatric tumor. Several
chemoattractant GPCRs have been suggested to promote tumor progression,
angiogenesis and metastasis in NB. Although for some cancers a potential
function has been suggested, the role of chemerin and its receptors in
the NB tumor microenvironment remains unknown.In our study, the screening
of microarray databases and analysis of neuroblastoma expression data
showed a correlation between high CMKLR1, GPR1 and CCLR2 expression and a
reduction in the overall survival probability. Expression of CMKLR1,
GPR1, and chemerin was shown in nine neuroblastoma cell lines using
RT-PCR, Western blot and immunocytochemistry. Furthermore, chemerin and
CMKLR1 were also detected in neuroblastoma tumor tissue by
immunohistochemistry. Stimulation of NB cell lines with active chemerin
induced calcium mobilization and increased phosphorylation of MEK1/2 and
ERK1/2 indicating an activation of the MAPK signaling pathway.
Furthermore, chemerin stimulation led to increased NF-B phosphorylation
and translocation to the nucleus. The induction of NF-B mediated
signaling was observed by luciferase reporter assay. TNF, IL-1 or serum
stimulation increased chemerin protein expression and secretion in
neuroblastoma cells.To assess the functional significance of chemerin and
its receptors in neuroblastoma tumorigenesis, cell clones overexpressing
or silenced for CMKLR1/ Chemerin/ GPR1 are used in NB animal models.

