Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prognostic model for clinical response to bevacizumab in
recurrent glioblastoma multiforme


Background: Recurrent glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive and
deadly disease with limited treatment options. In responding patients
bevacizumab-containing therapy prolongs survival and improves quality of
life, although the beneficial effect varies greatly. The impact of
prognostic factors in recurrent GBM patients has not been studied in
detail and results are inconsistent. More importantly, no validated
predictive baseline markers associated with a clinical response to
bevacizumab therapy have been identified. Furthermore, GBM is a very
heterogenic tumor and has been shown to change molecular pattern with
time and as a result of treatment. The primary goal of this study was to
describe molecular characteristics in GBM tumors at initial diagnosis and
at recurrence and relate these data, including clinical baseline factors,
to clinical outcome with the aim of identifying predictive factors for
clinical bevacizumab response. Based on these data we will also elucidate
to what extent molecular markers change expression from initial GBM
diagnosis to time of relapse.Materials and Methods: For generation of
prognostic models 219 recurrent GBM patients treated with bevacizumab
plus irinotecan according to a previous published clinical protocol were
included. For biomarker analysis, routine molecular analyses were
available for 147 of the included patients at time of initial diagnosis
and 81 patients at time of relapse prior to bevacizumab therapy. The
candidate biomarkers constituted an immunohistochemistry (IHC) panel of
EGFR, P53, MGMT and IDH1 and polymerase chain reaction analysis of
1p19q-status. Tumor samples from initial diagnosis and from time of
relapse were analyzed by the 2 test and the Wilcoxon test in order to
evaluate changes in IHC expression patterns. Multiple candidate
prognostic factors were screened by univariate logistic regression and
Cox regression analysis modeling response and survival endpoints and
variables with P-values of less than 0.10 were considered for
multivariate analysis. Factors with a P-value of less than 0.05 in
multivariate analysis were included in the prognostic models for
response, progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival
(OS).Results: In multivariate analysis, corticosteroid use had a negative
predictive impact on response at first evaluation (OR = 0.45; 95% CI:
0.22-0.93; P = 0.030) and at best response (OR = 0.51; 95% CI: 0.26-1.02;
P = 0.056). Independent prognostic factors (PBackground: Recurrent
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive and deadly disease with
limited treatment options. In responding patients bevacizumab-containing
therapy prolongs survival and improves quality of life, although the
beneficial effect varies greatly. The impact of prognostic factors in
recurrent GBM patients has not been studied in detail and results are
inconsistent. More importantly, no validated predictive baseline markers
associated with a clinical response to bevacizumab therapy have been
identified. Furthermore, GBM is a very heterogenic tumor and has been
shown to change molecular pattern with time and as a result of treatment.
The primary goal of this study was to describe molecular characteristics
in GBM tumors at initial diagnosis and at recurrence and relate these
data, including clinical baseline factors, to clinical outcome with the
aim of identifying predictive factors for clinical bevacizumab response.
Based on these data we will also elucidate to what extent molecular
markers change expression from initial GBM diagnosis to time of
relapse.Materials and Methods: For generation of prognostic models 219
recurrent GBM patients treated with bevacizumab plus irinotecan according
to a previous published clinical protocol were included. For biomarker
analysis, routine molecular analyses were available for 147 of the
included patients at time of initial diagnosis and 81 patients at time of
relapse prior to bevacizumab therapy. The candidate biomarkers
constituted an immunohistochemistry (IHC) panel of EGFR, P53, MGMT and
IDH1 and polymerase chain reaction analysis of 1p19q-status. Tumor
samples from initial diagnosis and from time of relapse were analyzed by
the 2 test and the Wilcoxon test in order to evaluate changes in IHC
expression patterns. Multiple candidate prognostic factors were screened
by univariate logistic regression and Cox regression analysis modeling
response and survival endpoints and variables with P-values of less than
0.10 were considered for multivariate analysis. Factors with a P-value of
less than 0.05 in multivariate analysis were included in the prognostic
models for response, progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival
(OS).Results: In multivariate analysis, corticosteroid use had a negative
predictive impact on response at first evaluation (OR = 0.45; 95% CI:
0.22-0.93; P = 0.030) and at best response (OR = 0.51; 95% CI: 0.26-1.02;
P = 0.056). Independent prognostic factors (P<0.05) negatively associated
with PFS and OS were corticosteroid use, neurocognitive deficit and
multifocal disease. Based on the three identified factors a prognostic
model for overall survival at 6 and 12 months was developed. Significant
prognostic and potentially predictive molecular biomarkers will be added
to the models and results will be presented.

