Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient awareness of staging in cancer diagnosis: Helpful or
hurtful


Objective:In this study we will examine if education levels of
English-speaking patients in New Jersey Medical School's Outpatient
Cancer Center is correlated with awareness of their disease. Next we will
examine their level of depression, as well as explore if patients
awareness of their disease is correlated with depression. Lastly we will
explore if patients awareness of their disease is correlated with their
level of self-perceived stigma regarding depression.Methods:This project
is part of a larger questionnaire-based study examining depression
prevalence and its associated stigma in cancer patients. Participants
consisted of English-speaking oncology patients at New Jersey Medical
Cancer Center outpatient oncology clinics. The parts of the questionnaire
that I analyzed for this study:1. What is your level of education?2. What
stage was your cancer in when you were diagnosed?3. Currently is your
cancer localized to a single area or has it metastasized to other
areas?4. Depression symptoms were assessed using the CES-D depression
scale.5. Self-stigma was assessed using Depression Stigma
Scale.Summary:An increased level of education was associated with a
significantly increased level of awareness of cancer staging, linear by
linear association (1, N = 223) = 9.353 p = .002. 31% of patients did not
know their cancer staging and/or whether or not it had metastasized. Out
of the people who were aware of staging only 28.5% were depressed,
whereas 34.8% of people who were unaware of staging and/or metastasis
were depressed, Fisher Exact test p = .308. While this is not
significant, the trend is an important one to be aware of and to examine
in future research.Patients who were aware of their staging and
metastasis had a lower mean self-perceived stigma than patients who were
unaware of staging and/or metastasis, 14.87 and 15.19 respectively,
t(216) = .32, p = .031Conclusion:Doctors must recognize that patients in
low educated demographic areas, such as Newark, require special attention
and need to be evaluated on whether or not they understood what the
doctor explained to them about their disease. Further research should
focus on analyzing the exact reasons underlying this lack of patient
knowledge. In addition, the correlation between lack of knowledge and
depression should continue to be explored as patient control and autonomy
can improve patient outcomes. Doctors should recognize that patients may
have a high self-perceived stigma associated with depression, which can
act as a barrier to treatment. Future studies should look at how to
dispel that stigma.

