Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histopathologic and gene expression analysis in mouse models of
long-term chronic prostatic inflammation using human prostate
cancer-derived bacterial isolates


Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death in the U.S.
and afflicts 1 in 6 men in their lifetime. Evidence suggests that
inflammation contributes to cancer development by causing cellular and
genome damage and contributing to a tumor microenvironment that promotes
cellular replication and angiogenesis. In addition, infectious agents are
known to be the driving force in many inflammation-associated cancers.
For example, in adenocarcinomas of the distal stomach, long-term
inflammation caused by Helicobacter pylori infection is frequently
observed and implicated as a causative factor. Despite the independent
observations of both inflammation and microorganisms in the prostates of
cancer patients, to date, virtually no study has definitively
demonstrated a causal role for microorganisms in the chronic inflammation
observed in prostatectomy specimens. Furthermore, no study has localized
these organisms to the inflammation-associated lesions that are the
predicted precursor lesions to prostate cancer development. We
hypothesize that pathogenic microorganisms play a role in the development
of chronic inflammation in the prostate that in turn serves to initiate
and/or promote prostate cancer development. In addition, we hypothesize
that key molecular changes associated with disease progression are due to
the presence of acute and/or chronic inflammation. We aim to study this
hypothesis in novel animal models of long-term prostatic infection and
inflammation using bacterial isolates from human prostate cancer tissues.
To date, we have isolated over 30 strains of bacteria from human radical
prostatectomy specimens, and 15 strains were chosen for infection studies
in mice. This includes species of bacteria such as Corynebacterium,
Neisseria, Propionibacterium, and Staphylococcus. Our results show that
the induction of long-term chronic inflammation in the mouse prostate may
be bacterial strain dependent. Furthermore, we have noted lesions
consistent with prostatic remodeling in animals that have undergone
bacteria-induced long-term prostatic inflammation. Finally, Illumina gene
expression array analysis of dorsal prostate from mice inoculated with
either PBS or P. acnes was used to identify genes differentially
expressed in the presence of both acute and chronic inflammation. Early
studies identify upregulated genes, including lactoferrin, that are known
to be upregulated in both immune cells and in the epithelium in inflamed
human prostate. Our ongoing studies evaluate gene expression changes
associated with persistent inflammation present up to 6 months
post-infection in these mouse models. The goal of these studies is to
determine both short- and long-term gene expression profiles associated
with bacteria-induced prostatic inflammation and to correlate molecular
changes with phenotypic changes in the inflamed mouse prostate.

