Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NDRG2 suppresses growth and invasion of gallbladder carcinoma via
regulation of matrix metalloproteinase 19/slug interaction


Background: Gallbladder cancer is a relatively uncommon tumor worldwide
but it has a feature of highly invasive and malignant tumor with poor
prognosis. However, relevant molecules and/or genes associated with
growth and metastasis of gallbladder carcinoma are poorly understood.
Although NDRG2 is known as a tumor suppressor gene, its exact role in
gallbladder carcinoma remains unknown.Materials and method: For
deciphering biological roles of NDRG2 in gallbladder carcinoma, first, we
examined the expression of NDRG2 in tumor specimens from 86 gallbladder
carcinoma patients by immunostaining and analyzed the correlation between
NDRG2 expression and clinicopathologic parameters as well as patient
survival. Second, we investigated the functional significance of NDRG2 in
gallbladder carcinoma progression by stable knock-down or overexpression
of NDRG2 in in vitro and in vivo studies.Results: NDRG2 was
differentially expressed in gallbladder carcinoma tissues. The negative
expression of NDRG2 was significantly associated with a pathological T
stage (P = 0.015), high histological grade (P = 0.020), and perineural
invasion (P = 0.016). Multivariate analyses clearly showed that the loss
of NDRG2 expression was an independent poor prognostic factor for
cancer-specific survival. The stable expression of NDRG2 shRNA in
gallbladder carcinoma cell lines significantly increased cell
proliferation, anchorage-independent growth, migration and invasion. In
addition, NDRG2 shRNA remarkably increased metastasis from the spleen to
the liver in mice. Furthermore, loss of NDRG2 expression in cells caused
an epithelial-mesenchymal transition through Slug induction by MMP-19
interaction with Slug promoter.Conclusions: In the present study, we
showed that loss of NDRG2 expression leads to poor prognosis and enhanced
metastasis in gallbladder carcinoma. NDRG2 suppresses MMP-19 which causes
an epithelial-mesenchymal transition through Slug induction. These data
indicate that NDRG2 suppresses tumor progression via regulating
MMP19/Slug axis in gallbladder carcinoma. The loss of NDRG2 is a novel
prognostic factor suggesting it could be a useful biomarker in patients
with gallbladder carcinoma and a potential therapeutic target.

