Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chitinase-3-like-1 (CHI3L1) expressed during allergic pulmonary
inflammation alters lung microenvironment accelerating breast cancer
metastasis


Metastasis is the primary cause of mortality in women diagnosed with
breast cancer. Metastasis to the lungs is greater in patients with
pulmonary inflammatory illnesses, such as asthma. However, it is largely
unknown how pulmonary inflammation impacts mammary tumor growth. Our
laboratory has established a novel breast cancer model in which mice are
induced with allergic pulmonary inflammation prior to mammary tumor
implantation. In this study, we are determining how preexisting
allergen-induced inflammation changes the pulmonary microenvironment to
exacerbate tumor metastasis. Our studies have shown that pre-existing
pulmonary inflammation increases the growth and metastasis of breast
cancer cells. In the lungs of allergic tumor bearing mice, we found that
sustained tissue injury resulting from pulmonary inflammation promoted
infiltration of immune cells, collagen production, and enlargement of
smooth muscle. In addition, we found high levels of a glycoprotein known
as chitinase-3-like-1 protein (CHI3L1) in circulation and in lung tissue.
We and others have reported that CHI3L1 is correlated with poor prognosis
and decreased survival in breast cancer patients. In addition, we
determined that myeloid derived cells from the lungs of allergic mice
produced higher amounts of CHI3L1 compared to controls. Increases in
CHI3L1 expression have been correlated with adverse effects on lung
architecture through an increased deposition of collagen, smooth muscle
actin and extracellular matrix proteins. Thus, we hypothesize that CHI3L1
expression in the lungs of mice with allergic pulmonary inflammation may
alter the lung architecture and accelerate breast cancer metastasis. We
assessed myeloid cell populations in the lungs of allergic mice and found
higher levels of monocytes CD11b+Ly6C+Ly6G-, granulocytes
CD11b+Ly6G+Ly6C-, and macrophages CD11b+F4/80+Ly6G-. These subpopulations
were further increased in 4T1 tumor bearers with allergic pulmonary
inflammation. Additionally, we show that CHI3L1 knockout tumor bearers
with allergic pulmonary inflammation had decreased myeloid cells,
dampened inflammation in the lungs, and a significant reduction in tumor
volume and metastasis compared to controls. These changes may be driving
the establishment of a premetastatic milieu in the lungs and aiding in
the continued support of metastatic foci. Understanding the role of
allergen induced CHI3L1 in tumor bearers and its effects on the pulmonary
microenvironment could result in targeted therapies for breast cancer.

