Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-entrained dendritic cells promote ICOS/ICOSL-dependent
Th17-like responses in pancreatic adenocarcinoma


BACKGROUND: Ranking 4th among cancer-related deaths worldwide, pancreatic
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) boasts a dismal prognosis. The robust immune
infiltrate that comprises its tumor microenvironment (TME) can influence
disease progression. Tumor rejection by T lymphocytes relies on proper
guidance by dendritic cells (DCs). This antigen-education is manifested
by the DCs expression of co-stimulatory factors, such as ICOS-ligand
(ICOSL). In this study, we plan to elucidate the mechanisms used by
PDAC-entrained DC to modify T cell effector function and
differentiation.METHODS: To establish our in vivo model, either PBS or
2.5e+5 FC1242 murine PDAC cells derived from the tumor of a KPC mouse
(LSL-KrasG12D; Trp53R172H; pdxCre/+) were injected into the distal
pancreata of C57BL/6J (WT) mice. After 20 days, mice were euthanized and
the spleen and tumor were assayed. DC phenotype was determined by flow
cytometry (FC). DC function was assessed by mixed-leukocyte reactions
(MLR) and peptide-specific proliferation assays, +/- neutralizing mAbs
against ICOSL or ICOS. Supernatant cytokines were assessed at 84h using
cytometric bead assays (CBA). Intracellular cytokines were analyzed by FC
after 5h re-stimulation with PMA/IMN. To assess in vivo proliferation,
2.5e+6 of both OT1 and OT2 T cells labeled with CFSE or CPD,
respectively, were co-injected into WT mice and challenged with 5e+5
OVA-loaded DC after 24h. Proliferation was assessed 4 days post-DC
inoculation.RESULTS: Splenic FC1242-DC had lower expression of MHC2 and
CD83, while tumor-infiltrating DC (TME-DC) displayed higher levels of
each, relative to controls. TME-DC also exhibited higher expression of
ICOSL, CD80, and CD86. Despite no difference in ICOSL expression between
splenic groups, MHC2 and CD83 were substantially lower on ICOSL+ DC of
FC1242 spleen, while highest on that of the TME, relative to controls. We
found a higher fraction of CD11b+ myeloid DC (mDC) and a lower fraction
of cross-presenting CD8+ DC (xDC) in both tumor-bearing groups relative
to controls. FC1242-mDC expressed higher CD80 and PDL1 than sham-mDC,
while FC1242-xDC displayed lower CD80 and no difference in PDL1. Also,
tumor-entrained DC had a diminished propensity for CD8+ T cell expansion
in vitro and in vivo, resulting in lower Granzyme B, IFN, and TNF.
Interestingly, DC tumor-entrainment improved CD4+ T cell expansion and
augmented IL-17A, IL-6, G-CSF secretion, while diminishing IFN, TNF,
IL-13, and IL-2. Blockade of the ICOS-pathway hindered IL17 production,
and amplified production of IFN and TNF by T cells.CONCLUSION: This study
suggests that DC possess a vital role as liaisons between the TME and
cell-mediated immunity. Furthermore, Th17 cells in the TME can accelerate
PDAC progression. This makes the ICOS-pathway especially attractive, as
it can modify anti-tumor immunity while circumventing the barriers of
drug-delivery to the TME.

