Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PRMT5 inhibitors as novel treatment for cancers


Increased expression or dysregulation of protein arginine
methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) activity is associated with poor prognosis in
many cancers. Through increased methylation of epigenetic and
non-epigenetic targets, the aberrant activity of PRMT5 has been
associated with many pro-tumourigenic cellular changes such as, increased
levels of protein synthesis, dysregulation of cell cycle, cellular
adaptation to hypoxic conditions, and suppression of normal cell death
pathways. Genetic studies suggest that suppression of PRMT5 activity can
reverse many of these pro-tumourigenic effects making PRMT5 an attractive
drug discovery target.We screened a library of 350,000 lead-like
compounds with a biochemical assay measuring the methylation of a histone
H4 peptide by the recombinant human PRMT5/MEP50 complex. Biochemical and
biophysical profiling of the inhibitory compounds indicated that several
distinct binding modes were exhibited by the different chemical
scaffolds. Inhibitors displayed competitive, noncompetitive or
uncompetitive interactions with respect to S-adenosyl methionine and the
peptide substrate. Medicinal chemistry developed several classes of
potent, highly selective inhibitors of PRMT5 methyltransferase activity
from the hit set.The optimised tool compound, CTx-034, is a potent
inhibitor of PRMT5 methyl transferase activity (KD = 2 nM), which is
highly selective (>100-fold) versus a panel of 18 methyltransferases
(including 6 PRMT family members), 11 lysine demethylases, and 15 safety
related targets (GPCRs, ion channels, enzymes). Treatment of cancer cell
lines with CTx-034 reduces cellular levels of symmetrically dimethylated
H4 Arginine 3 (H4R3me2s), in a dose dependent manner (IC50 = 4 nM) to
levels undetectable by Western blot. Furthermore, within this chemical
series the ability of compounds to reduce cellular levels of H4R3me2s
closely correlates with PRMT5 inhibitory activity supporting PRMT5 as the
cellular target of these compounds, and suggesting that PRMT5 is the
major writer of this histone mark in many cancer cell lines. CTx-034 also
inhibits the symmetric dimethylation of arginine on other histone and
non-histone cellular substrates of PRMT5, including H3R2me2s and SmD1.
Conversely, CTx-034 treatment does not reduce levels of H4R3 asymmetric
dimethylation, a histone mark catalysed by PRMT1.Finally, CTx-034 has
good oral bioavailability and pharmacokinetic properties in rodents and
twice-daily dosing (10 - 100 mg/kg) over 10-14 days produces a dose
dependent reduction of the H4R3me2s mark in bone marrow cells and
peripheral white blood cells. This treatment is well tolerated by the
mice, with no significant reduction in body weight or changes in
haematological parameters observed.CTx-034 provides an excellent tool
compound for cellular and in vivo proof of concept studies.

