Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of stem cells by the tumor suppressor PP2A-B56


Protein phosphatase 2 A (PP2A) is one of the major cellular
Serine-Threonine phosphatases and regulates numerous signaling pathways,
including stem cell self-renewal, proliferation, differentiation, and
cell survival. The PP2A holoenzyme has 3 subunits: a catalytic (C)
subunit, a structural (A) subunit, and a variable regulatory (B) subunit,
which directs PP2A to specific targets. PP2A inhibition is required to
completely transform human cells and siRNA screens have shown that loss
of B56, B56, or PR72/PR130 B subunits results in cell transformation,
which are involved in negatively regulating oncogenic pathways including
Wnt, Akt, and Myc. Moreover, PP2A plays an important role in regulating
human embryonic stem cells, where both the A and C subunit levels and
PP2A activity gradually increase during the course of differentiation.
Our preliminary data also demonstrates in breast cancer cell lines that
B56 overexpression decreases the number of mammospheres whereas
inhibiting B56 increases them. Further research is needed to address the
function of specific PP2A complexes in regulating stem cells. Despite the
fact that B56 depletion is important for human cell transformation, no
one has reported on its role in vivo and no mouse model has ever been
generated to our knowledge. Therefore, to study the role of B56 in stem
cells and cell transformation in vivo, we have generated B56 knockout
mice.We generated B56 knockout mice using commercially available gene
trap ES cells. The gene trap sits in the first intron of the B56 gene
and, through a splice acceptor site, splices out the first exon to the
gene trap and therefore stops whole gene transcription in the whole body.
The primary phenotypic effect we observed with B56 loss was spontaneous
skin lesion formation. Thus far 40% of mice have developed skin lesions
between 11 to 21 months and showed hyper-proliferation of the epidermis,
hair follicles, and dermis. Increased number of hair follicles prompted
us to perform stem cell assays using BrDU to label long term
label-retaining cells and the colony assays for the fast adhering
keratinocyte stem cells. We found an increase in skin stem cell numbers.
In addition to skin lesions, we found increased inflammation both in skin
lesions, liver, and spleen and some enlarged lymph nodes. Next we asked
whether loss of B56 also increased the number of hematopoietic stem cell.
Although the number of hematopoietic stem cells in the periphery was
unchanged under normal condition, treating mice with granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor increased the number of circulating stem
cells.Our model suggests that loss of B56 increases the number of stem
cells and that B56 is important for cells to maintain homeostasis; B56
loss can lead to increased activity of important oncogenes, such as cMyc,
leading to aberrant cell growth and defects in stem cell maintenance.
More experiments need to be done to understand the primary effect of B56
loss in skin and the interplay between skin lesions and inflammation.

