Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: INT230-6, a novel intratumoral anticancer agent, is able to
eradicate large established tumors and stimulate potent anti tumor
immunity


Historically, intratumoral (IT) administered chemotherapy has not been
shown to provide better efficacy than the same drugs delivered
intravenously. This is postulated to be due to poor drug diffusion and
dispersion throughout the tumor. Intensity has developed a novel
formulation of cytotoxic chemotherapy plus a penetration enhancer which
improves drug diffusion and uptake into the cancer cell. INT230-6 is a
combination of low dose cisplatin, vinblastine and a cell penetration
excipient. This technology enables more rapid and improved penetration
throughout the tumor including hypoxic and un-vascularized areas. Cohorts
of 10 BALB/c mice were inoculated with 1106 CT26 cells subcutaneously
(SC). Tumors were grown to a mean of 325mm3 and then treatment with
INT230-6 was administered IT daily for a single cycle of 5 days. Control
arms using comparable size tumors pre-dose included no treatment, IV
cisplatin and vinblastine, and IT injection of these drugs without the
enhancer. INT230-6 treatment resulted in regression from baseline in all
animals with a complete regression of the large tumors in 20%. Many
tumors continued to shrink in size well beyond multiple half-lives of the
chemotherapy and excipient implying an anti-tumor effect not due to
direct cytotoxicity from the drugs. INT230-6 administration resulted in a
significant extension of overall survival compared to all controls.
Notably complete responders with this treatment were resistant to 3
separate attempts at re-inoculation with 1106 CT26 cells by SC or IV
administration without retreatment of drug, while control animals rapidly
developed metastatic tumors and died. This apparent tumor immunity
persisted for > 440 days suggesting permanent immunity. In a follow-on
study, tumors of some animals receiving INT230-6 were shown to be 75%
necrotic on day 3 of treatment with an observed increase in the density
of CD4 positive cells and CD11c positive cells in the treated tumors on
day 10 versus controls. These changes might be involved in the induction
of immunity. These results suggest that intratumoral administration of
INT230-6 creates the proper tumor cell apoptosis kinetics and antigen
presentation to enable a personalized adaptive immune response to
develop. Further work is being done to look at repeat dosing and
combinations with other immunomodulating agents.

