Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent anti-tumor activity of talazoparib (BMN673) in combination
with radiation for squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck


Background: Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) is a
radiation-sensitive disease. Standard frontline treatment of locally
advanced SCCHN entails concurrent chemotherapy with radiation. Treatment
of relapsed or metastatic SCCHN often utilizes re-irradiation to the
primary tumor for local control. However, there is no standard systemic
treatment for relapsed or metastatic SCCHN in combination with radiation.
Many SCCHN tumors display alterations in expression of DNA repair genes.
To this end, we evaluated the effect of talazoparib (BMN-673), a potent
poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitor, alone or in combination with
radiation, in vitro and in vivo.Methods: The 50% inhibitory concentration
(IC50) of talazoparib was determined in 30 SCCHN cell lines in vitro.
Using clonogenic assays, the effects of 0, 10 or 100nM talazoparib, alone
or in combination with a single fraction of 4Gray radiation were
determined in four cell lines (two sensitive and two resistant to
talazoparib). Effects on DNA damage of talazoparib, alone or in
combination with radiation were also determined by flow cytometric
analysis of Gamma-H2A.X. Finally, the FaDu head and neck cells were
implanted onto female J/nude. After tumors were established, mice were
treated with talazoparib for 5 days and a total of 20 Gray radiation,
alone or in combination, and effects on body weight and tumor size were
determined.Results: Among 30 SCCHN cell lines treated with talazoparib
alone, 18 displayed sensitivity with 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50)
of 1M or less. In clonogenic assays, addition of radiation to BMN673 in
two sensitive (UMSCC-6 and UMSCC-38) and two resistant (UMSCC-5 and
UMSCC-12) cell lines resulted in synergistic cytotoxicity at doses
ranging from 0-100nM BMN673. Increased gamma-H2A.X was seen when cell
lines were treated with talazoparib, radiation, or the combination,
compared to controls. Combining radiation with talazoparib resulted in a
transient decrease in body weight in J/nude mice, but resulted in
statistically significant and prolonged decrease in tumor volume. These
anti-tumor effects were sustained out to 60 days post
inoculation.Conclusions: The PARP inhibitor talazoparib with radiation
synergistically inhibited tumor growth in vitro and in vivo in SCCHN cell
lines. Further evaluation of this combination is underway.

