Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Promoter methylation regulates interferon- induced indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase expression in breast cancer


Indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase 1, encoded by IDO1, is a key
immunosuppressive enzyme that catabolizes essential amino acid tryptophan
to kynurenine in the tumor microenvironment. Severe depletion of
tryptophan by IDO1 affects proliferation of T cells and tryptophan
metabolites cause T-cell anergy and induce apoptosis. In this study, we
investigated the epigenetic regulation of IDO1 expression by DNA
methylation in breast cancer cells. Bisulfite pyrosequencing analysis of
IDO1 promoter methylation performed on a panel of 10 breast cancer cell
lines revealed that triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines (i.e.
MDA-MB-231, Hs578t, SUM159) are hypomethylated compared to estrogen
receptor positive (ER+) cell lines (i.e. MCF7, BT474, T47D). The same
analysis was extended to 30 primary breast tumor and normal control
samples and the results demonstrated that TNBC tumors had lower IDO1
promoter methylation compared to ER+ tumors. RT-PCR analysis showed that
IDO1 mRNA expression is higher in TNBC cell lines than ER+ cell lines.
This inverse correlation between IDO1 promoter methylation and mRNA
expression can also be observed in TCGA 450K methylation and RNA-seq data
sets in which promoter is hypomethylated and mRNA is up-regulated in
basal-like molecular subtypes as compared to other breast cancer
subtypes. IDO1 promoter is relatively CpG poor with most CpG sites
concentrated near interferon (IFNg) responsive GAS and ISRE transcription
factor binding sites. To investigate the role of CpG methylation in
regulating IDO1 induction by IFNg, we cloned either methylated or
unmethylated IDO1 promoter DNA into a luciferase reporter plasmid.
Methylated promoter reporter exhibited significantly lower luciferase
activity at basal or with IFNg stimulation compared to unmethylated
reporter plasmid when transfected into MCF-7 or MDA-MB-231 cell lines.
Treatment with a demethylating agent, 5-aza-deoxycytidine,
synergistically up-regulated IDO1 mRNA expression with IFNg in MCF7 cells
which have hypermethylated IDO1 promoter further supporting the influence
of CpG methylation on IDO1 expression. IFNg stimulation or co-culture
with activated T-cells significantly induced IDO1 protein expression in
MDA-MB-231 cells, but not in MCF7 cells. We found no difference in IDO1
mRNA stability and IFNg induced JAK/STAT signaling pathway between
MDA-MB-231 and MCF7 cell lines except promoter methylation. Furthermore,
RNA-seq analysis of MDA-MB-231 and MCF7 cell lines co-cultured with
activated T-cells revealed an active immune signaling mediated through
JAK/STAT pathway shared by both cell lines, but also differential
induction of IDO1 transcription between these two cell lines. These
findings indicate IDO1 promoter methylation status as an important factor
that regulates anti-immune responses by tumor cells towards tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes and it could be used as a useful biomarker for
IDO inhibitor based immunotherapy.

