Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo metabolic imaging to differentiate aggressive versus
indolent prostate cancer


Purpose: Many prostate cancers (PCa) detected by screening are indolent
(will not leave the prostate) however, 90% of patients will receive
immediate treatment such as surgery or radiation therapy. There is a
pressing need in the clinic for determining the aggressiveness of PCa
that allows the whole prostate to be examined and is directly correlated
to the metastatic behavior of the tumor. We are using a multi-prong
approach to understand the metabolic changes that occur in the
progression of PCa. (1) We are metabolic profiling tumor and normal
prostate tissue. (2) We are metabolic profiling both the intracellular
and secretion/consumption of metabolites of four human prostate cancer
cell lines with different aggressiveness profiles: RWPE-1
(non-tumorigenic, considered benign), RWPE-2 (non-metastatic), PC3
(aggressive, castration resistant), most aggressive cell line PC3M
(castration resistant). (3) We are following the progression of PCa with
hyperpolarized magnetic resonance (MR) agents in PCa animal models.
Hyperpolarization allows for over >10,000 fold sensitivity enhancement
using conventional MRI and MRS. The polarization (signal enhancement) can
be retained on the metabolites of the hyperpolarized molecule.
Hyperpolarization allows for in vivo real time metabolic profiling.
Results: Based on our metabolic profiling of PCa tissue and cell culture,
we observe significant differences in uptake of glutamine and the amount
of intracellular glutamine, differences in phosphocholine and
glycerophosphocholine, and differences in intracellular succinate levels
between aggressive versus non-aggressive cell lines and in PCa tissue
versus normal prostate tissue. In addition, in our hands we see no
significant difference in the glycolytic rate (production of lactate)
between the indolent and aggressive PCa cell lines in culture. Using
dynamic nuclear polarization, we are designing new in vivo methods for
interrogating metabolic pathways. Using our chemical reaction-induced
multi-molecular polarization (CRIMP) technique, we can fully transfer the
high polarization levels of pyruvate in an irreversible reaction to 1-13C
acetate and 13C-carbon dioxide without substantial signal loses. Because
hyperpolarized carbon dioxide nearly instantly equilibrates with
bicarbonate in the aqueous environment, the pH of the media can be simply
calculated from the signal intensity ratio of the two compounds using the
Henderson Hasselbalch equation. Discussion: As an alternative to
hyperpolarized pyruvate for analysis of the aggressiveness of prostate
cancer, compounds that more comprehensively interrogate glutaminolysis,
choline metabolism, and the Krebs cycle in combination may provide better
metabolic imaging information. Using the CRIMP technique and single
component hyperpolarization of 15N-choline, we are currently using MR to
metabolically image PCa animal models.

