Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-invasive EGFR T790M detection using droplet digital PCR system


Background: Non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) harboring activating
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations show significant
response to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). However, most of them
acquire resistance to EGFR-TKIs, and a half of the resistance is caused
by EGFR T790M mutation. Recently, the third generation-TKIs which are
effective to lung cancer harboring T790M mutation have been developed,
thus the importance of T790M mutation detection is increasing in NSCLC
treatment. Nowadays, the highly sensitive assays such as PNA-LNA PCR
clamp, Scorpion ARMS have been developed to detect T790M mutation. In
this study, we newly established non-invasive assay for T790M mutation
detection from circulating cell free DNA (ccfDNA) using droplet digital
PCR system (ddPCR).Materials and Methods: The sensitivity of ddPCR was
determined using variable proportion of mixture DNAs of human bronchial
epithelial cell with wild-type EGFR and NCI-H1975 with EGFR L858R and
T790M mutations. We collected ccfDNA extracted from the 39 plasma samples
of 22 NSCLC patients, who had been treated with EGFR-TKI and examined
EGFR T790M mutational status by re-biopsy. The T790M mutational status of
the re-biopsy samples were determined using PNA-LNA PCR clamp method. The
circulating T790M alleles in ccfDNAs were detected using ddPCR, and
compared with the T790M mutational status of re-biopsy samples.Results:
In 8 of the 39 plasma samples, T790M alleles were detected by ddPCR. As
10 of 39 plasma samples were collected from the patient who determined
T790M positive by re-biopsy after acquiring resistance to EGFR -TKI, the
sensitivity of ddPCR was 80%. In 3 plasma samples, T790M alleles were
detected by ddPCR although PNA-LNA PCR clamp method could not detect
T790M mutation from the re-biopsy tissues of the patients who provided
their plasmas. The specificity of ddPCR was determined as 89.7% although
we have to consider about the difference between the timings of plasma
collection and re-biopsy, and tumors heterogeneity.Conclusions: The
result of circulating T790M allele detection using ddPCR was highly
concordant with the result of T790M detection in re-biopsy samples using
PNA-LNA PCR clamp method. The ddPCR is promising method for non-invasive
T790M mutation detection.

