Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuropeptide Y (NPY) and its receptor expression in neuroblastoma
patients - associations with disease prognosis and patients survival


Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a sympathetic neurotransmitter, abundantly
expressed in neuroblastoma (NB). Previously, we have shown that NPY,
acting via its Y2 receptor (Y2R), stimulates proliferation of NB cells
and tumor vascularization, while inducible Y5 receptor (Y5R) promotes
tumor cell survival and chemoresistance. The aim of the current study was
to assess the prognostic value of NPY and its receptor expression in
NB.We have tested corresponding samples of RNA, tissue sections and serum
from 87 NB patients at various stages of the disease, obtained from the
Children's Oncology Group. Samples were analyzed in terms of NPY system
expression (NPY, Y2R and Y5R). Protein levels and mRNA in tumor tissue
were quantified by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and real time-PCR,
respectively, while NPY concentration in serum was measured by ELISA. The
expression of other factors implicated in NB development and progression
(MYCN, ALK, TrkA III, TrkB and BDNF) were detected on mRNA levels by real
time-PCR. For each of the categorical prognostic variables, a Wilcoxon
rank-sum or Fisher's exact test were administered to compare NPY and
receptor values between groups, and a log-rank test was performed to
compare the event-free survival and overall survival between groups.1)
NPY mRNA was detectable in 100% of analyzed tumors. IHC staining revealed
that NPY accumulated intracellularly in differentiating and maturing
cells, while in undifferentiated NBs a significant amount of the peptide
was observed in extracellular spaces, suggesting its free release. In
line with this observation, serum concentrations of NPY were higher in
the subset of NB patients with undifferentiated and poorly differentiated
tumors, as compared to those with differentiating NBs (p-value = 0.03).
High serum concentrations of NPY strongly correlated with several adverse
prognostic factors (Stage 4, high risk, diploidy, and unfavorable
histology) (p-valueNeuropeptide Y (NPY) is a sympathetic
neurotransmitter, abundantly expressed in neuroblastoma (NB). Previously,
we have shown that NPY, acting via its Y2 receptor (Y2R), stimulates
proliferation of NB cells and tumor vascularization, while inducible Y5
receptor (Y5R) promotes tumor cell survival and chemoresistance. The aim
of the current study was to assess the prognostic value of NPY and its
receptor expression in NB.We have tested corresponding samples of RNA,
tissue sections and serum from 87 NB patients at various stages of the
disease, obtained from the Children's Oncology Group. Samples were
analyzed in terms of NPY system expression (NPY, Y2R and Y5R). Protein
levels and mRNA in tumor tissue were quantified by immunohistochemistry
(IHC) and real time-PCR, respectively, while NPY concentration in serum
was measured by ELISA. The expression of other factors implicated in NB
development and progression (MYCN, ALK, TrkA III, TrkB and BDNF) were
detected on mRNA levels by real time-PCR. For each of the categorical
prognostic variables, a Wilcoxon rank-sum or Fisher's exact test were
administered to compare NPY and receptor values between groups, and a
log-rank test was performed to compare the event-free survival and
overall survival between groups.1) NPY mRNA was detectable in 100% of
analyzed tumors. IHC staining revealed that NPY accumulated
intracellularly in differentiating and maturing cells, while in
undifferentiated NBs a significant amount of the peptide was observed in
extracellular spaces, suggesting its free release. In line with this
observation, serum concentrations of NPY were higher in the subset of NB
patients with undifferentiated and poorly differentiated tumors, as
compared to those with differentiating NBs (p-value = 0.03). High serum
concentrations of NPY strongly correlated with several adverse prognostic
factors (Stage 4, high risk, diploidy, and unfavorable histology)
(p-value<0.03) and worse survival (p-valueNeuropeptide Y (NPY) is a
sympathetic neurotransmitter, abundantly expressed in neuroblastoma (NB).
Previously, we have shown that NPY, acting via its Y2 receptor (Y2R),
stimulates proliferation of NB cells and tumor vascularization, while
inducible Y5 receptor (Y5R) promotes tumor cell survival and
chemoresistance. The aim of the current study was to assess the
prognostic value of NPY and its receptor expression in NB.We have tested
corresponding samples of RNA, tissue sections and serum from 87 NB
patients at various stages of the disease, obtained from the Children's
Oncology Group. Samples were analyzed in terms of NPY system expression
(NPY, Y2R and Y5R). Protein levels and mRNA in tumor tissue were
quantified by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and real time-PCR, respectively,
while NPY concentration in serum was measured by ELISA. The expression of
other factors implicated in NB development and progression (MYCN, ALK,
TrkA III, TrkB and BDNF) were detected on mRNA levels by real time-PCR.
For each of the categorical prognostic variables, a Wilcoxon rank-sum or
Fisher's exact test were administered to compare NPY and receptor values
between groups, and a log-rank test was performed to compare the
event-free survival and overall survival between groups.1) NPY mRNA was
detectable in 100% of analyzed tumors. IHC staining revealed that NPY
accumulated intracellularly in differentiating and maturing cells, while
in undifferentiated NBs a significant amount of the peptide was observed
in extracellular spaces, suggesting its free release. In line with this
observation, serum concentrations of NPY were higher in the subset of NB
patients with undifferentiated and poorly differentiated tumors, as
compared to those with differentiating NBs (p-value = 0.03). High serum
concentrations of NPY strongly correlated with several adverse prognostic
factors (Stage 4, high risk, diploidy, and unfavorable histology)
(p-value<0.03) and worse survival (p-value<0.04). 2) Y2R was expressed
mainly in undifferentiated NB cells. mRNA of this receptor was detectable
in 100% of cases and its levels positively correlated with MYCN
expression 3) mRNA of Y5R was detectable in 84% of tumors assessed and
correlated with expression of BDNF and its TrkB receptor, factors
associated with poor prognosis. High Y5R protein levels marked a
population of invasive NB cells.This study validated NPY and its
receptors as targets for NB therapy. Serum NPY was the most highly
prognostic variable, found to be associated with five NB prognostic
factors. Higher NPY levels were correlated with a more detrimental
disease phenotype.

