Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Honokiol enhances the anticancer effects of doxorubicin by
regulating Mucin 1 and Multidrug resistance-associated protein 1 (MRP1)
in mammary carcinoma MDA-MB-231 cells


Although great progress has been made in the treatment of breast cancer,
resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs is a problem facing current cancer
research, promoting the need to understand the molecular mechanisms
involved in breast cancer and identify future targeted therapy. One of
the mechanisms by which chemoresistance is attained in cancer cells is
mediated through the expression of MDR-related proteins (MRPs). These
transmembrane proteins efflux drugs across the plasma membrane,
conferring resistance of cancer cells to anticancer drugs. Acquiring drug
resistance has been correlated to the emergence of metastasis, accounting
for two factors that may be related to progression of the disease. One of
the diagnostic markers of metastatic progression is Mucin 1 (MUC1), an
oncoprotein which has been implicated in reduced survival rate.
Interaction of MUC1 with MRP-1 promotes resistance to conventional
chemotherapeutic drugs. While several inhibitors have been identified and
characterized to overcome drug resistance, thus far none of these have
led to effectively managing acquired drug resistance. Along with existing
drug treatments for breast cancer, the focus of clinicians and
researchers have shifted towards exploring natural products to treat
alone or in combination with chemotherapeutic agents to enhance the
efficacy of these drugs in cancer. One such compound is honokiol, a
natural phenolic compound extracted from Magnolia grandiflora that
suppresses breast carcinogenesis in vitro and in vivo. The purpose of the
current study is to determine whether honokiol regulates MUC1 and MRP1 in
mammary carcinoma cells, MDA-MB-231, and the role of honokiol to enhance
the efficacy of chemotherapeutic agent, doxorubicin. We investigated the
effects of honokiol on the expression of MUC1 and MRP1 in MDA-MB-231
cells by RT-PCR and Immunoblotting. Cell proliferation assays
(MTT-(3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide) were
used to study the effect of honokiol on doxorubicin-mediated growth
suppression. Honokiol suppressed mRNA and protein expression levels of
MUC1 and MRP1 in MDA-MB-231 cells. In addition, honokiol suppressed the
growth of mammary carcinoma MDA-MB-231 cells, and enhanced the efficacy
of doxorubicin-mediated mammary carcinoma growth suppression. Taken
together, suppressing the expression level of MUC1 and MRP1 by honokiol
enhances the effect of conventional chemotherapeutic drugs.

