Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the glutaminase inhibitor CB-839 in non-small cell
lung cancer


Glutamine is an abundant nutrient used by cancer cells to support
energetic and biosynthetic pathways. Given that many cancer cells exhibit
glutamine dependence, there has been interest in developing inhibitors
targeting glutaminase, which catalyzes conversion of glutamine to
glutamate. CB-839 is a glutaminase inhibitor with preclinical efficacy in
suppressing cancer cell growth in culture and in vivo. It is now in Phase
I clinical trials for solid and hematological malignancies, including
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).Here we set out to identify biomarkers
predicting sensitivity of NSCLC cells to CB-839, using a highly annotated
panel of 81 cell lines. These lines had heterogeneous oncogenotypes and
displayed about a 5-fold range in their ability to tolerate glutamine
deprivation. Assessing CB-839 sensitivity in 40 lines revealed a 5-fold
difference in growth suppression among cell lines. There was a strong
correlation between CB-839 sensitivity and both glutamine dependence and
glutamate secretion. In a subset of 4 representative cell lines, CB-839
suppressed [U-13C]glutamine metabolism in both sensitive and insensitive
cells suggesting other mechanisms contribute to CB-839 sensitivity. To
identify potential biomarkers predicting CB-839 sensitivity, the
glutamine dependence and drug sensitivity phenotypes were correlated with
several orthogonal high-content data sets including mutational analysis
of commonly-mutated oncogenes and tumor suppressors; sensitivity to
chemotherapeutic agents; gene expression arrays; and reverse phase
protein arrays (RPPA). Although we did not identify a strong correlation
between mutational status and CB-839 sensitivity, expression of
phospho-Rb (S807/811) and Smad3 did correlate with drug sensitivity. In
addition, sensitivity to glutamine withdrawal correlated with expression
of c-Myc and MEK2 protein. While further work is necessary to examine the
importance of these proteins in glutamine metabolism, we hypothesize that
one or more of these may represent novel biomarkers predicting
sensitivity to glutaminase inhibition.

