Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hot spot 19F MR imaging of inflammation predicts
colitis-associated cancer


Introduction: The causal relationship between inflammation and cancer is
well established. In the colon, colitis-associated cancer (CAC) develops
through complications of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), including
ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease. CAC development is directly
correlated with the severity and longevity of inflammation in IBD
patients. We hypothesized that non-invasive serial MRI of inflammatory
sites and measuring their severity may enable earlier diagnosis and
prediction of cancer development.Methods: To induce CAC, female A/J mice
(n = 5) were injected with azoxymethane (10mg/kg) on day 0 and fed with
2.5% dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) solution for every 3 weeks until week
7. 200 l of perfluoro-15-crown-5-ether (PFC) emulsion (Celsense Inc.,
VS-580H), which labels macrophages, was injected through the tail vein 48
hours before the first MRI scan. In vivo MR imaging was performed every
15 days from day 50 to day 110 using a 11.7T MR scanner and a surface
coil tunable to 1H and 19F. Conventional 1H (proton) images were acquired
using a fast spin echo sequence (FSE) with RARE, TR/TE = 1200/30 ms,
matrix size = 256256, FOV = 3.22.0cm, rare factor = 8, and slice
thickness = 2mm. Hot spot 19F (fluorine) images were acquired using an
FSE with RARE, TR/TE = 1000/14ms, matrix size = 6432, rare factor = 8,
and slice thickness = 2mm. Ex vivo images were acquired with a 750 MHz
microimaging system and a 25mm volume coil. Fixed colon tissues were
paraffin-cut to evaluate tumor development. Multiple longitudinal colon
segments were chosen from areas either with or without 19F signal. H&E
stained sections from each segment were scored by a blinded pathologist
for the severity of inflammation and presence of dysplasia.Results and
Discussion: Hot spots of 19F signal were detected in the colon wall after
the onset of IBD, with a patchy distribution pattern. Since PFC emulsions
specifically label macrophages, these signals represent infiltrated
macrophages in the colon wall as a result of inflammation driven by DSS.
Tumor outgrowths were observed on MRI at the inflammatory sites starting
at day 80. In vivo data were validated by ex vivo imaging of excised
colon tissues showing an exact co-localization of tumors with the
19F-positive inflammatory sites. Histologically, tumors were classified
as adenomas. CAC develops through the sequence of
inflammation-adenoma-carcinoma suggesting that we were able to detect
early stages of carcinomatous changes in the inflammatory sites.
Histological scores of inflammation and adenoma showed a significant
correlation with the intensity of 19F signals. We conclude that hot spot
19F MRI enables early diagnosis of future sites of colon cancer
development.

