Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galeterone and its novel analogs induce profound anti-cancer
activities in human pancreatic cancer cell lines: Implications for
pancreatic cancer therapy


Pancreatic cancer is a lethal disease with a 3-5% survival rate.
Histologically, 90% of human pancreatic cancer is presented as pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). The aggressive nature of the disease and
its high metastatic potential makes the development of efficacious
therapeutic strategies very significant.Current therapeutic strategies
are ineffective as the deregulated RAS/MAPK and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways to
enhance drug resistance. Gemcitabine alone or in combination with
erlotinib, the currently used drugs for PDAC, elicit only marginal
survival benefits. The modest efficacy of gemcitabine therapy has been
attributed to activation of the NF-B pathway which activates genes
involved in gemcitabine resistance. Recent studies have implicated the
eIF4F (specifically, eIF4E-Mnk1/2 axis) that control gene expression at
the translational level towards PDAC gemcitabine drug resistant. Several
groups have also implicated the androgen receptor in PDAC
progression/metastasis and have investigated the use anti-androgens in
several in vitro and vivo models of PDAC and in a few clinical trials
with mixed results.In the course of our studies to develop more potent
androgen receptor degrading agents (ARDAs), we discovered that galeterone
(gal) and its novel analogs also effectively target oncogenic eukaryotic
protein translation. These novel small molecule inhibitors significantly
depleted Mnk1/2 protein expression and decreased eIF4E phosphorylation.
Interestingly, our studies revealed that the phosphorylation level of
Nf-kB (p65) was significantly decreased after exposing pancreatic cancer
cells to ARDAs. We note that these targets are implicated in PDAC
progression and drug resistance.Here we report for the first time, the
efficacy of galeterone and its lead ARDA analogs in inhibiting cell
viability of both gemcitabine-nave and gemcitabine/erlotinib-resistant
human pancreatic cancer cells in vitro. Gal/ARDAs alone or in combination
with gemcitabine significantly reduced the colony forming potential of
gemcitabine-nave and gemcitabine resistant pancreatic cancer cells.
Decreased invasive potential of PDAC cells was shown through
wound-healing and matrigel-coated Boyden chambers assays. Gal/ARDAs also
caused significant depletion of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Ezh2, a
prominent metastatic enhancing gene in pancreatic cancer was also
downregulated at the protein level. Immunoblot analysis of treated
lysates also revealed induction of apoptosis via caspase 3 and PARP
cleavage. Flow cytometric analysis showed that gal/ARDAs did not only
deplete cyclins but also inhibited cell cycle progression. Our results
highlight the unique ability of gal and its novel analogs to inhibit the
growth, colonization and metastatic potential of a variety of PDAC cells
through modulation of several oncogenic targets.

