Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Solving genomic assay trade-offs with an optimized, extended
cancer gene panel for research and clinical applications


Choosing a genomic assay for cancer research is complicated by
trade-offs. Cancer gene panels are a common choice, but they target
mutational hotspots in a relatively small number of genes, often for
cancers that are most commonly tested and that have common genetic
etiologies. A common alternative is exome sequencing, which includes all
the coding genes but, due to its larger genomic footprint, cannot reach
the same depths as panels and therefore is less able to deal with low
tumor purity and heterogeneity. Whole genome sequencing trades off very
shallow depth and coverage over vast regions of uninterpretable genomic
sequence in exchange for the identification of intergenic variants and
structural variant breakpoints. All of these assays can be supplemented
with RNA sequencing in order to capture gene fusions, allelic expression,
splice isoforms, and gene expression. RNAseq comes with its own costs:
the need to extract RNA from the same tissue, the need to perform a
second assay, and the need to analyze a very different type of data from
DNA sequencing.The trade-offs generally come down to three major issues:
depth of sequencing, specific genes targeted, and cost. To solve these,
we designed an extended, optimized cancer gene panel facilitating high
depth sequencing at low cost. We started by identifying a comprehensive
list of over 1,300 cancer genes. These genes were chosen through
exhaustive cancer gene database and literature curation, and include
genes from all major cancer pathways and from the Cancer Gene Census. We
then took this gene list and applied an augmented targeting design
strategy that we have previously used to create an augmented exome
enrichment platform which fills in gaps that standard technical exomes
miss.To validate the panel and analysis, we identified test samples
including well-described cancer cell lines, cell line mixtures with
engineered cancer variations, and formalin-fixed neoplastic tissues. We
then performed a series of tests with these samples to measure the
panel's small variant sensitivity and specificity, gauge its limits of
detection, validate the detection of gene fusions, and demonstrate its
ability to identify copy number alterations and loss of heterozygosity.
In engineered cell lines, we detected 100% of small variants down to 5%
allele frequency. We also mixed the cancer cell lines in various ratios
and found similarly high sensitivity as well as very high specificity for
small variant detection. We further compared our structural variation
calls in the DNA and our fusion calls in the RNA with known data and
found that we had very high concordance with known variations.These
studies demonstrate that an extended, augmented cancer gene panel
strategy solves many genomic assay trade-offs and leads to high accuracy
and variant yield for cancer research applications.

