Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical systemic toxicity evaluation of chitosan-solid lipid
nanoparticles encapsulated aspirin, curcumin and free sulforaphane (ACS)
combinations in BALB/c mice


The present study aims to evaluate the preclinical systemic toxicity
profile of chitosan-solid lipid nanoparticles (c-SLNs) encapsulated
aspirin (ASP), curcumin (CUR), and free sulforaphane (SFN) combination
(ACS) in BALB/c mice. Recently, we demonstrated pancreatic cancer
chemopreventive efficacy using ACS-SLNs delivery system in the BOP
carcinogen induced pancreatic cancer hamster model. In order to develop
safe ACS c-SLNs for clinical applications, it is vital to investigate
their toxicity. Thus, we performed acute 3-day, sub-acute 28-day and
sub-chronic 90-day toxicity studies of ACS c-SLNs in the BALB/c mice
model. The mice were orally gavaged once every 24h with 200 l ACS c-SLNs
at three concentrations: low dose ACS (2+4.5+0.16 mg/kg; 1/30th of high
dose), medium dose ACS (20+45+1.6 mg/kg; 1/3rd of high dose) and high
dose ACS (60+135+4.8 mg/kg). Total of 60 mice were used for this study (4
mice each group X 3 timepoints X 5 groups). A standard evaluation was
performed, which included daily clinical signs, weekly body weight,
end-of-study blood hematology, blood clinical chemistry, gross necropsy
on all animals and hematoxylin and eosin-stained examination of range of
tissues from each animal. The clinical chemistry tests include blood urea
nitrogen (BUN) and creatine (CRE), which indicate renal toxicity. Alanine
transaminase (ALT) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) levels indicate hepatic
toxicity, while glucose (GLU) and total protein are measures of healthy
growth. At the end-of-study, data revealed that mean body weight gain was
consistent with low-, medium- and high-ACS c-SLN dose during acute,
sub-acute and sub-chronic treatment period. The blood count and blood
chemistry profiles revealed lack of systemic toxicity as the numbers were
within normal ranges. Extensive histopathological examination of liver,
kidney, heart, brain and pancreatic tissues showed no increase in
treatment-related microscopic lesions in any of the three ACS c-SLN dose
groups. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that repetitive oral
administration of ACS c-SLN even at high concentrations was not
associated with local or systemic toxicity and did not adversely affect
the blood clinical chemistry of mice. Hence, long-term ACS c-SLN oral
therapy is deemed safe for prevention of pancreatic cancer.

