Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemical probe-based approach clarifies binding of receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) to lenvatinib in preclinical models


Background:Lenvatinib mesilate (lenvatinib) is the selective inhibitor of
VEGFR1-3, and other proangiogenic and oncogenic pathway-related RTKs
including fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFR1-4), the
platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) , KIT, and RET.
Lenvatinib inhibits angiogenesis through the inhibition of VEGFR2 and
FGFR1 and tumor proliferation through the inhibition of FGFR1 and RET in
preclinical thyroid cancer models. Chemical probe-based binding protein
isolation is a powerful tool to demonstrate the direct compound-protein
interactions even in complicated biological materials such as intact
cells and their robust protein extracts. The purpose of this study is to
assess the interaction of lenvatinib with RTKs by using lenvatinib
derivative probe as an analysis of mode of action in preclinical
models.Methods:Lenvatinib chemical probe was designed based on a result
of co-crystal structure of lenvatinib and VEGFR2. A linker moiety was
introduced onto free space of quinoline core (position-7) and its
inhibitory activities against RTKs were confirmed by cell-free enzyme
assay system. Lenvatinib chemical probe was immobilized onto the
monolithic affinity matrices and the binding proteins were isolated from
the extracts of the human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC), the
human differentiated thyroid cancer cell lines, RO82-W-1 and TPC-1.
SDS-PAGE and western blotting (WB) with drug competition assay were
performed to assess the binding RTKs of lenvatinib.Results:The chemical
probe showed acceptable inhibitory activities against RTKs for affinity
isolation. In the isolated protein sample from HUVEC, VEGFR2 and FGFR1
were detected by WB and each protein band was clearly reduced by
lenvatinib competition in a dose-dependent manner. It indicates
lenvatinib specifically interacts with VEGFR2 and FGFR1 even in such
complicated protein mixture. In the sample from RO82-W-1, WB analysis
showed that lenvatinib chemical probe efficiently isolated PDGFR and
FGFR1. Those protein bands were dramatically decreased by drug
competition, similar to the experiment with HUVEC. The chemical
probe-based approach was subjected to the protein extract from TPC-1,
which expresses aberrant RET fusion kinase derived from CCDC6-RET gene
rearrangement. WB analysis showed that CCDC6-RET was detected as binding
protein of lenvatinib probe.Conclusions:The chemical probe-based approach
proved the interaction of lenvatinib with VEGFR2, FGFR1, PDGFR and RET
fusion kinase in the complicated biological materials from HUVEC and
thyroid cancer cell lines. These results supported that lenvatinib is
likely to possess a unique anti-tumor activity, in addition to the
anti-angiogenic activity, through the interaction with these RTKs.

