Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-density lipoprotein-like nanoparticles target SR-B1 and
inhibit the cellular uptake of melanoma-cell derived exosomes


Exosomes play a crucial role in the progression of cancer through the
transport of a variety molecular cargo, including proteins, lipids, and
nucleic acids, to and from cells as a means of intercellular
communication. Unraveling mechanisms of exosome-cell interactions may
open avenues for studying cellular communication and lead to new
therapies. Cellular exosome uptake depends on cholesterol-rich membrane
microdomains called lipid rafts. Non-specific depletion of lipid raft
cholesterol reduces cellular exosome uptake; however, to our knowledge,
no targeted mechanism of inhibiting cellular exosome uptake has been
reported. Scavenger receptor type B-1 (SR-B1) localizes to lipid rafts,
and is a high-affinity receptor for cholesterol-rich high-density
lipoproteins (HDL). SR-B1 is an intriguing therapeutic target because it
is upregulated in many different cancers due to the high need for
cholesterol of rapidly dividing cancer cells. Therefore, we hypothesized
that specific targeting of SR-B1 and modulation of cholesterol flux
through this receptor with biomimetic HDL-like nanoparticles (HDL NPs)
would disrupt cellular exosome uptake. As a model, we explored exosomes
derived from melanoma cells as they have been shown to promote
angiogenesis and immunosuppression both crucial events in melanoma
progression. Melanoma exosomes have also been shown to actively prepare
metastatic sites, creating a suitable microenvironment allowing for the
development of metastasis. Because of this, targeting exosomes and
intercellular signaling could be beneficial for the treatment of
metastatic melanoma. Using a variety of techniques including confocal
microscopy, flow cytometry and automated image analysis, data demonstrate
that HDL NPs specifically target SR-B1 in lipid rafts in melanoma cells
and modulate cholesterol flux through this receptor. This leads to a
clustering of SR-B1 at the cell membrane and potent inhibition of the
cellular uptake of melanoma cell-derived exosomes.

