Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The importance of clinically relevant rapid autopsy specimens and
LuCaP patient-derived xenograft models to interrogate the heterogeneous
and evolving treatment resistance of castration-resistant prostate cancer


Recent advances in our understanding of metastatic castration-resistant
prostate cancer (mCRPC) biology have led to the approval and use of
multiple novel drugs, including abiraterone, enzalutamide, cabazitaxel,
sipuleucel-T and radium-223. Although these agents all provide
improvement in survival, resistance always develops after an initial
response. To understand the biology of responses and resistance,
clinically relevant specimens and preclinical models are needed. To
address this critical need, our objectives are: 1) to collect samples of
metastases prior to and after treatment for evaluation of potential
biomarkers of responses and resistance and 2) to generate patient-derived
xenografts (PDXs) that are representative of these novel phenotypes of
advanced mCRPC.A Rapid Autopsy Program (RAP) was established at the
University of Washington to study the lethal phenotype of mCRPC. Through
the RAP we have collected more than 3000 tissue specimens, including bone
and visceral metastases from over 110 patients who died of mCRPC. The
samples were processed for paraffin embedding and frozen for future
histological and molecular analyses. All samples are tracked in a
relational database and cross-linked to clinical and pathologic data.To
provide clinically relevant preclinical models for studies of late stage
advanced prostate cancer, we also implant tissues acquired during the RAP
into immunocompromised mice in order to establish novel CRPC PDXs. At
present we have 28 primary PDXs (the LuCaP series), and 10
castration-resistant sublines of the primary lines. The LuCaP models have
been extensively characterized by light microscopy, immunohistochemistry,
expression arrays, RNASeq, IHC, exome sequencing and other methodologies.
We have also determined responses of these PDXs to castration and
docetaxel. To address the need for models representing the current tumor
phenotypes that exist in patients who develop resistance to secondary
androgen-targeting therapy, we have also evaluated responses to
abiraterone and enzalutamide, and are experimentally developing
abiraterone- and enzalutamide-resistant LuCaP PDXs. In addition, we are
continuing to generate novel PDXs using abiraterone- and
enzalutamide-resistant patient samples, and have four models that were
established from abiraterone-resistant tumors.In summary, we have
established a large biorepository of mCRPC specimens and PDXs. Moreover,
due to the constant evolution of the advanced PCa phenotype we continue
to acquire mCRPC specimens and establish novel PDXs that are refractory
to the most recent treatments which allow us to investigate biology of
late stage mCRPC and to provide valuable clinical specimens and LuCaP
PDXs to the PCa research community.

