Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTEN deletion is associated with metastatic disease and worse
prognosis in pancreatic cancer


Background: PTEN is a tumor suppressor gene encoding a phosphatase. PTEN
inactivation is a frequent event in cancer, occurring through various
genetic and epigenetic alterations. Here we investigate the role of PTEN
alterations in the microenvironment of ductal pancreatic adenocarcinoma
(PDAC).Methods: Presence of PTEN was investigated by immunohistochemistry
and mRNA-in-situ-hybridization (mRNA-ISH) by using multi-punch tissue
microarrays (TMAs)containing at least 4 punches per tumor, in a set of
120 well characterized PDACs with full clinicopathological information.
Expression was assessed separately in tumor and stromal cells. Multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) of DNA probes to identify
loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the PTEN gene was additionally performed
in 61 cases. Results were correlated with clinicopathological features
including survival of the patients.Results: Loss of PTEN protein (i.e.
average immunohistochemical expression in Background: PTEN is a tumor
suppressor gene encoding a phosphatase. PTEN inactivation is a frequent
event in cancer, occurring through various genetic and epigenetic
alterations. Here we investigate the role of PTEN alterations in the
microenvironment of ductal pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC).Methods:
Presence of PTEN was investigated by immunohistochemistry and
mRNA-in-situ-hybridization (mRNA-ISH) by using multi-punch tissue
microarrays (TMAs)containing at least 4 punches per tumor, in a set of
120 well characterized PDACs with full clinicopathological information.
Expression was assessed separately in tumor and stromal cells. Multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) of DNA probes to identify
loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the PTEN gene was additionally performed
in 61 cases. Results were correlated with clinicopathological features
including survival of the patients.Results: Loss of PTEN protein (i.e.
average immunohistochemical expression in <10% of the neoplastic cells
across all tumor punches) was found in 62% of PDAC cases, mostly
paralleled by the results of mRNA-ISH. In 22.2% of the cases PTEN protein
and/or mRNA loss was additionally observed in the tumor stroma.
Interestingly, protein loss in the stromal cells was associated with
distant metastasis (p = 0.0045). MLPA identified PTEN LOH (all exons or
only exon 1) in 51% of all examined cases and in 73.5% of the cases with
PTEN protein/mRNA loss. The occurrence of PTEN LOH was slightly more
frequent among cases with concomitant PTEN protein loss in tumor and
stromal cells (80%). PTEN LOH as identified by MLPA was associated with
higher tumor grade (p = 0.0412), vascular invasion (p = 0.0176), presence
of distant metastases (p = 0.0082) and decreased overall survival (p =
0.0127). In 26.5% of the cases with PTEN protein/mRNA loss, no PTEN
deletion could be found suggesting occurrence of other genetic changes or
epigenetic mechanisms.Conclusion: PTEN LOH is a major cause of PTEN loss
in PDAC and is associated with aggressive tumor characteristics and worse
patient prognosis. This is intensified by concomitant PTEN loss in tumor
and stromal cells.

