Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular characteristics of cancer-associated adipocytes in
breast cancer


Adipose tissue in the tumor microenvironment is now regarded to be an
active player in cancer development and progression. Recent studies have
suggested critical roles of the cancer-associated adipocytes in breast
cancer proliferation and invasion. However, unlike the well-known
cancer-associated fibroblasts, the molecular profiles of
cancer-associated adipocytes are largely unknown.We studied the
histo-morphologic changes in adipose tissue adjacent to the breast cancer
cells in human tissues. Adipocytes had smaller fat droplets and often
associated with immune cell infiltration. We investigated the changes of
mRNA expression profiles of differentiated adipocytes when they were
cultured with breast cancer cells (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231) by using the
NIH-3T3-L1 cell line. Indirect coculture with cancer cells resulted in
significantly altered expression of genes involved in immune response,
extracellular matrix remodeling, angiogenesis, metabolism, and apoptosis.
IL6 and its downstream genes, transcription factors such as RUNX1, as
well as PTX3 and TIMP1 were most unregulated genes. Increased secretion
of IL6 was further validated in the culture media by ELISA. Also, the
gene expression data showed that adipocytes cocultured with cancer cells
showed decreased adipocyte-differentiation genes suggesting the cells
underwent de-differentiation process. Microscopic examination of
co-cultured adipocytes showed smaller fat droplets similar to human
specimens. The co-cultured adipocytes showed different effect on cancer
cells according to the molecular subtypes of the breast cancer cells. The
conditioned media from co-cultured adipocytes resulted in increased
proliferation of ER+ breast cancer cells, suggesting a subtype-dependent
effect of co-cultured adipocytes in breast cancer.Our results suggest
that cancer-associated adipocytes show increased expression of genes
involved in immune response, extracellular matrix remodeling,
angiogenesis, metabolism, and apoptosis. Futhermore, these
cancer-associated adipocytes show features toward the preadipocyte state
suggesting the possibility of de-differentiation of adipocyte under the
influence of adjacent cancer cells. The functional impact of the
cancer-associated adipocyte seem to vary according to the molecular
subtype of epithelial cancer cells.

