Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of pomalidomide dosing strategies in
lenalidomide-refractory myeloma: Impact on clinical outcome, immune
activation and cereblon targets


In preclinical and mostly in vitro studies, pomalidomide (Pom) has been
shown to mediate direct anti-proliferative effects on tumor cells, as
well as immune-modulatory effects on T cells, NK cells and monocytes.
Cereblon (CRBN), a direct cellular target for Pom has been involved in
the anti-proliferative effects in tumor cells via selective degradation
of Ikaros (IKZF1) and Aiolos (IKZF3). Depletion of IKZF1/IKZF3 has also
been implicated in Len-mediated amplification of anti-CD3-induced IL2
production in human T cells in culture. However the impact of
pomalidomide on tumor proliferation and immune activation in vivo is
unknown.Here we have evaluated the clinical and pharmacodynamic effects
of continuous or intermittent dosing strategies of
pomalidomide/dexamethasone in lenalidomide-refractory myeloma in a
randomized trial. 39 eligible patients with relapsed myeloma were
randomized to therapy with Pom/Dexamethazone (following Pom alone for
cycle 1), utilizing either continuous Pom dosing (2 mg-28/28 days, cohort
1, n = 19) or an intermittent dosing schedule (4 mg-21/28 days, cohort 2,
n = 20). Dexamethazone was administered at 40 mg weekly at cycle 2 and
beyond.Intermittent dosing strategy, despite having frequent adverse
events, led to greater tumor reduction. Both cohorts experienced similar
event-free and overall survival. Both regimens led to a distinct pattern
but similar degree of mid-cycle immune activation as manifest by
increased expression of cytokines and lytic genes in T and NK cells.
Pomalidomide induced polyfunctional T cell activation, with increased
proportion of co-inhibitory receptor BTLA+ T cells and Tim-3+ NK cells.
Baseline levels of cereblon, ikaros and aiolos protein in tumor cells
using validated IHC assay on marrow biopsies, did not correlate with
response or survival. Pomalidomide treatment led to a rapid decline in
Ikaros in T and NK cells in vivo as measured by intranuclear flow
staining, and therapy-induced activation of CD8+ T cells correlated with
clinical response.These data demonstrate that pomalidomide leads to
strong and rapid immunomodulatory effects involving both innate and
adaptive immunity, even in heavily pre-treated MM, which correlate with
clinical anti-tumor effects. Clinicaltrials.gov-NCT01319422.

