Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell sorting strategies for the isolation of cancer cells and
associated fibroblasts from tumor biopsies, surgical resections, and
patient-derived xenografts


The ability of early passage patient-derived tumor xenografts (PDXs) to
recapitulate human tumor biology makes them invaluable tools for
pre-clinical drug development (1, 2). Similarly, clinically-annotated
human tumor cell lines of low passage have potential as scalable
biosimilar reagents for in vitro study. Here, we describe an integrated
platform for the purification, expansion, and quality control of tumor
cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) from patient biopsies,
surgical resections, and mouse PDX models. Following dissociation of
solid tumors, cells are cultured on Matrigel in fibroblast conditioned
media containing Y-27632 (a Rho-associated kinase inhibitor). Cells are
then analyzed by FACS using a panel of species- or cell type-specific
antibodies. This panel (anti-mCD9, hCD9, hCD24, hCD90, MHC, HLA, and
hEPCAM) permits quantitation of the percentage of mouse/human cells, and
the percentages of tumor cells and CAFs in each patient specimen. From
these data, a cell sorting strategy can be selected (e.g. mCD9 and hCD90
with hEpCAM or CD24) that will permit purification of both tumor cells
and CAFs, along with removal of any mouse fibroblast contamination (for
PDX tumors). Samples are sorted multiple times until target populations
reach 99.99% purity (typically 2-3 rounds). Purified cells are then
returned to culture, expanded over several weeks, and frozen at low
passage. The purity and identity of these cultures is quality-assured
using 1) mouse-specific QPCR, 2) a cDNA array designed to differentiate
fibroblasts from tumor cells, and 3) STR genotyping. Tumor lines and CAFs
are then scaled and re-qualified at passages 10 and 20, an essential step
given the propensity of low-frequency mouse and human fibroblasts to
overtake impure cultures with time. Lastly, cancer lines and CAF cultures
undergo genomic characterization and are evaluated for in vivo
tumorigenicity (or the lack thereof for CAFs). To date, the platform has
been used to generate a growing number of purified cancer and CAF pairs
from patient materials. In conclusion, our goal is to provide useful
reagents to the extramural community that will accompany current efforts
within the Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis (DCTD, NCI) aimed
at generating a large and extensively characterized repository of PDX
models. Funded by NCI Contract No. HHSN261200800001E.References1.Hidalgo
M, Amant F, Biankin AV, Budinska E, Byrne AT, Caldas C, et al.
Patient-derived xenograft models: an emerging platform for translational
cancer research. Cancer Discov. 2014;4:998-1013.2.Rosfjord E, Lucas J, Li
G, Gerber HP. Advances in patient-derived tumor xenografts: from target
identification to predicting clinical response rates in oncology. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2014;91:135-43.

