Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Description of a scientific treatment approach of mast cell
leukemia, an aggressive orphan hematologic disorder: strategy based on
next-generation sequencing data


BackgroundMast cell leukemia (MCL) is the most aggressive form of
disorder among systemic mastocytosis. Due to its rarity, neither
pathogenesis nor standard treatment is not established for this orphan
disease. Hence, we tried to treat a patient with MCL based on the exome
and transcriptome sequencing result of the patient's own DNA and
RNA.Brief Case History and ResultsIn October 2013, an 18-year-old Korean
female were diagnosed as MCL after visiting our hospital due to left
knee, ankle pain and inguinal lymphadenopathy. C-KIT overexpression was
observed by immunohistochemistry. Whole exome sequencing result failed to
demonstrate either noticeable single nucleotide variant (SNV) or copy
number change. Interestingly, whole transcriptome sequencing (WTS)
revealed mutation of KIT S476I, functionality of which is not known.
Fusion analysis was performed using WTS data, possibility of RAR-B2M
fusion has been arised. However, it was not validated by PCR sequencing.
When RNA expression analysis was performed using WTS data, upregulation
of PIK3/AKT pathway, which is a downstream of KIT (BAD phosphorylation)
and mTOR has been observed.For the treatment perspective, she failed to
achieve complete remission after cytarabine and idarubicin chemotherapy.
Based on our WES and WTS result, we first tried all-trans retinoic acid
targeting RAR, which failed to demonstrate efficacy. Then, she received
dasatinib targeting KIT, which showed transient response for 2 weeks. Now
she is under everolimus targeting mTOR pathway and, further treatment
with PI3K inhibitor is planned in case of disease
progression.ConclusionsWe are demonstrating a case of orphan disease,
where we used targeted approach using WES and WTS data of the patient.
Final results of our treatment outcome will be uncovered shortly, and
utility of this kind of approach is to be validated.

