Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peroxiredoxin induction in breast cancer


Cancer cells possess elevated levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
that can enhance genomic instability and alter redox signaling. Aberrant
antioxidant expression has also been recognized in many cancers,
suggesting an adaptive response to the cancerous state. Breast cancers
express significantly elevated levels of Peroxiredoxins (Prdxs), a family
of thiol-specific antioxidant proteins involved in regulating cell growth
and proliferation in many cell types. We previously reported
overexpression of many Prdx proteins in the MCF-7 breast cancer line, as
well as their importance in doxorubicin-resistance in this line. In the
present study, we analyzed Prdx levels in several human breast tumor
samples, and further investigated possible mechanisms of Prdx regulation
in MCF-7 cells. Comparison of breast tumor and adjacent normal breast
tissue from almost 20 patients showed that most patients exhibited
elevated levels of several Prdx proteins in the tumor tissue. To begin to
understand possible regulators of Prdxs in breast cancer, we focused on
transcriptional regulators known to be aberrantly expressed in breast
cancer, and also implicated in antioxidant regulation. Sequence analysis
revealed potential binding sites for NF-B, Nrf2, and AP-1 in several
peroxiredoxin promoters. We found high levels of NF-B in MCF-7 cells, as
compared to normal breast epithelial cells. We further showed that a
chemo-resistant MCF-7 culture generated from 14 days of doxorubicin
treatment exhibited markedly decreased NF-B expression. We then used both
siRNA and chemical inhibition of NF-B to examine the effect on Prdx
regulation in these cells and found gene-specific effects. Similar
studies are currently underway for Nrf2 and AP-1. This investigation will
help to elucidate the role of peroxiredoxins in breast cancer cell
survival, and the mechanism by which these cells alter Prdx levels to
avoid death and achieve chemoresistance.

