Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the therapeutic potential of midbrain pathways that
impact breast cancer


Most chemotherapeutic agents for breast cancer have variable efficacy and
produce unwanted side effects. While much focus is placed on dissecting
the molecular mechanisms contributing to tumor development, the potential
role of the brain in regulating tumor progression has not been described
in detail. Previous evidence has shown that midbrain activity affects
tumor growth and progression. Stimulation of the midbrain periaqueductal
grey (PAG) increases metastasis in rats injected with Walker-256
carcinosarcoma cells, and the growth of prolactin-dependent mammary
tumors. These findings suggest midbrain pathways play a prominent role in
tumorigenesis. These studies, however, did not address the therapeutic
potential of blocking PAG output for slowing tumor progression.
Therefore, we are studying the mechanisms regulating midbrain-induced
tumorigenesis and the therapeutic potential of altering midbrain activity
to reduce metastatic activity and tumor growth.A common challenge in
neuroscience has been identifying and manipulating specific neuronal
populations in the brain. However, significant advances have been made in
the field of optogenetics, the integration of optics and genetics, which
allows precise control of specific neural pathways in vivo using light.
Optogenetics is gaining considerable clinical interest as a novel
strategy for treating human neurological disorders due to success
observed in rodent and non-primate human models. Therefore, optogenetic
alteration of PAG activity for treating breast cancer is plausible.
Non-pharmacological, therapeutic strategies aimed at manipulating circuit
activity to treat mood and anxiety disorders are already creating
enthusiasm. Given that many of these strategies likely impact PAG
activity, there is great potential for manipulating the same pathways to
treat breast cancer. Before these types of novel strategies can be
implemented, we must first delineate the biology of these circuits and
their therapeutic potential in animal models of cancer.Thus far, we have
identified that muscimol inhibition of PAG activity decreases breast
cancer progression in a transgenic mouse model. We are continuing to
investigate the distinct input/output mechanisms of the PAG that could be
modified to treat breast cancer. Future studies have the potential to
reveal novel avenues for targeting and preventing the development of
breast cancer via the manipulability of specific neural pathways.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

