Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial DNA copy variation and TFAM expression in astrocytoma


Mitochondrial dysfunction plays a role in determining the phenotype
through bioenergetic depletion and increased production of ROS in several
diseases, including cancer. We have previously demonstrated a relevant
reduction of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number in astrocytoma of
different grades of malignancy, predominantly in grade IV-glioblastoma
(GBM). We observed a stepwise increase of TFAM in parallel to the
increase of malignancy, and TFAM expression was higher in GBM patients
with overall survival longer than 24 months than less than 12 months.
TFAM is codified in the nucleus and transported into mitochondria, where
is essential for mtDNA replication, repair and protection by forming
nucleoid complexes. To further understand the role of TFAM in astrocytoma
progression we performed TFAM immunohistochestry in human astrocytoma
samples, confocal analysis in GBM cell lines, in vitro functional assays
after silencing TFAM by siRNA in two GBM cell lines (U87MG, A172), and
high throughput RNA-Seq in Illumina platform for network analysis by
Metacore. TFAM protein was detected in cytoplasm in granular pattern of
low grade astrocytomas, and also in nuclei of malignant atsrocytomas.
Such localization was also confirmed by confocal analysis in two GBM cell
lines. TFAM-siRNA transfection decreased TFAM expression level >80% in
D2, which persisted up to D7 with evident decrease of mtDNA copy number
after 4 days, and maintained until 7 days. Interestingly, a decrease in
migration but not in proliferation was observed in both cell lines after
TFAM knockdown. Comparison of RNA-Seq of TFAM-siRNA to NTC- siRNA, with
20 million of reads in each experiment performed in duplicate, resulted
in 1000 genes differentially expressed and among them 315 were detected
in both cell lines. These genes were in pathways related to cell adhesion
(integrin-mediated: p = 5.79e-5, histamine H1 receptor signaling in the
interruption of cell barrier integrity: p = 3.98e-5, chemokines-mediated:
p = 1.22e-5) and ECM remodeling (p = 9.17e-5), supporting the results of
in vitro migration assay. 82 genes were downregulated together with TFAM
in both cell lines. These genes were in pathways related to immune
response IL15 signaling via JAK-STAT cascade involving MyD88-independent
toll-like receptor signaling pathway involving ADAM17 and STAT2 (p =
1.89e-5), regulation of cytoskeleton proteins (p = 1.65e-2),
hypoxia-induced EMT in cancer and fibrosis (p = 3.37e-2), polyamine and
arginine metabolism (p = 2.73e-2, p = 4.65e-2) and as expected,
regulation of apoptotic process (p = 9.50e-21). The role of TFAM in
cytoskeleton and ECM remodeling may worth additional studies. Also, TFAM
in extracellular space, as released by necrotic cells, may potentiate
mitochondrial N-formyl peptide-induced secretion of chemokines and
activate inflammatory responses, which may open another strategy to
further understand TFAM role in tumorigeniesis.

