Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth regulation of bladder cancer cells by compounds that affect
glucose metabolism


The observation that cancer cells tend to exhibit enhanced rates of
glycolysis presents a target for therapeutic regulation of cancer cell
growth by molecules that regulate glucose metabolism. We have extended
our earlier studies on colon cancer cells with an examination in bladder
cancer cells of the action of an established inhibitor of PFKFB3, namely
3-(3-pyridinyl)-1-(4-pyridinyl)-2-propen-1-one (3PO) as a single agent
and in combination with other molecules that affect glycolysis and
proliferation. 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase 3
(PFKFB-3) is an enzyme regulating glycolysis in many tumor cells. Cell
growth was monitored by staining with sulforhodamine B. Of the 8 cell
lines examined, growth was most rapid in the T24 and UM-UC-3 bladder
cancer cells. The slowest growth was seen with RT4, TCCSUP and HT1197
cells while intermediate growth rates were observed with 5637, HT1376,
and SW780 cells. Glucose uptake from the medium and acidification of the
medium over a 72-hour incubation tended to correlate with growth rate.
Thus the greatest changes were seen with the T24 and UM-UC-3 cell lines
and the least change was seen with RT4 and TCCSUP cells. Growth was
inhibited when glutamine was omitted from the medium but growth was
blocked in the absence of glucose except for RT4 cells in which growth
was inhibited more in the absence of glutamine. Treatment with 10 M 3PO
as a single agent for 72 hours caused average growth inhibition in the
range of 25-50% without apparent relationship to the control growth rates
of the cell lines. Additive inhibitory effects on growth were observed
when cells were coincubated with 3PO and either 1 mM 2-deoxyglucose, 50 M
phenformin or 1 mM butyrate. In addition to being growth inhibitory,
butyrate also caused significant induction of alkaline phosphatase
activity in some cell lines. When cells were incubated with phenformin as
a single agent, there was generally an increased acidification of the
medium that was diminished by coincubation with 3PO. In conclusion, 3PO
was an inhibitor of proliferation of human bladder cancer cells and may
be a useful agent in combination with other drugs that inhibit bladder
cancer cell proliferation.

