Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bio-distribution and tumor targeting of a P-cadherin x CD3
bi-specific redirected T-cell molecule using fluorescence molecular
tomography imaging


Introduction: Previously we have shown the utility of Fluorescent
Molecular Tomography (FMT) imaging in evaluating bio-distribution of
biologics. P-cadherin LP-DART is a bi-specific Dual Affinity Re-Targeting
(DART) molecule targeting CD3 expressed on T-cells and P-cadherin
expressed on tumors. In this study we evaluated the bio-distribution and
tumor targeting of P-cadherin LP-DART using FMT imaging in a colorectal
xenograft model.Methods: NSG or athymic nude mice with subcutaneous
HCT-116 xenografts were used. Studies that included engraftment of
T-cells received either PBMNCs or T-cells isolated from healthy human
volunteers. Bio-distribution studies were initiated when the tumors
reached 300-500 mm3. P-cadherin LP-DART or a negative control-DART
(non-targeted domain x CD3 binding domain) was conjugated with a
near-infrared fluorophore VivoTag680XL (VT680), and the labeling
efficiency was determined by spectrophotometer. T-cells used in
trafficking studies were labeled with CellVue815. Cell surface P-cadherin
expression and P-cadherin LP-DART binding was determined by flow
cytometry. T-cell activity was measured with cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL)
assays. FMT imaging was performed longitudinally post injection of
labeled bi-specifics. Data was analyzed using TrueQuant software. Plasma
and tissues were collected for PK analysis by ELISA or histology.Results:
VT680 conjugation to P-cadherin LP-DART did not significantly affect the
binding to P-cadherin, whereas CD3 binding was decreased. In vivo FMT
imaging revealed high levels of P-cadherin LP-DART accumulation in the
tumors. The in vivo kinetics revealed that the peak accumulation in
tumors was 96hrs post-injection. At 240hrs post-injection, there was
still measurable P-cadherin LP-DART detected in tumors. Ex vivo imaging
showed 20-25 fold increase in accumulation of P-cadherin LP-DART compared
to negative control DART. Comparison of P-cadherin LP-DART accumulation
between PBMNC engrafted and non-engrafted model showed no significant
difference in quantity or kinetics. There was no significant difference
in the kinetics of elimination in the whole-body, heart or liver between
P-cadherin LP-DART or negative control. Ex vivo comparison of
accumulation in various organs showed no difference between P-cadherin
LP-DART or negative control. Cell trafficking studies with CellVue
labeled T-cells showed the co-localization of T-cells and P-cadherin
LP-DART in tumors.Conclusion: FMT imaging showed that P-cadherin LP-DART
specifically targeted HCT-116 tumors. Cell trafficking studies showed
that engrafted T-cells accumulated in tumors. This study shows the
utility of FMT in bio-distribution studies of biologics and in vivo cell
trafficking.

