Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDK4/6 inhibition synergizes with KRAS-MAPK pathway targeting in
pancreatic cancer


Introduction:Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most
difficult human malignancies to treat due to its innate and acquired
therapeutic resistance. Our hypothesis is that cyclin-dependent kinase 4
(CDK4) mediates therapeutic resistance to targeting of the KRAS-MAPK
pathway in PDAC.Experimental Procedure:We characterized the expression of
total and phosphorylated Retinoblastoma (Rb) and MEK protein levels in
KRAS wild-type (BxPC3) and KRAS mutant (PANC1, MiaPaca2) human PDAC cell
lines at baseline and with MEK and CDK4 inhibition alone or in
combination. We then assessed the effects of combined therapy on
cell-cycle progression and tumorigenicity (in vitro and in vivo).
Finally, using the Ptf1a cre/+;LSL-Kras G12D/+;Tgfbr2 flox/flox (PKT)
mouse model of PDAC, we assessed the in vivo overall tumor growth and
survival after combined treatment with CDK4/6 and MEK
inhibitors.Results:Rb functions as a tumor suppressor, and it is
inactivated when phosphorylated by CDK4-Cyclin-D1. The CDK4/6 inhibitor
(LEE011) effectively inhibits phosphorylation of Rb in cell lines
regardless of KRAS mutational status. Combined inhibition of CDK4/6 and
MEK (MEK162) decreased phosphorylation of RB and MAPK expression
synergistically in the KRAS mutant cell lines, but not the KRAS wild-type
BxPC3 cell line. Cell cycle progression was delayed effectively with MEK
inhibition alone in the KRAS wild-type cell line, yet only combined
CDK4/6 and MEK inhibition effectively delayed cell cycle progression in
the KRAS mutant cell lines. Colony formation and invasion were also
significantly decreased when Kras mutant cells were treated with combined
CDK4/6 and MEK inhibition compared to all monotherapy and control groups.
Finally, treatment of PKT mice resulted in a modest increase in OS with
MEK inhibition alone, but mice receiving combined CDK4/6 and MEK
inhibition exhibited a four-fold increase in OS.Conclusions:Combined
inhibition of CDK4/6 and MEK results in significantly enhanced
therapeutic efficacy and prolonged survival in the aggressive PKT mouse
model of PDAC. This study suggests that concurrent inhibition of CDK4/6
and MEK may be an effective treatment for PDAC.

