Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systems-based approach identifies altered carbohydrate metabolism
as a predictor of a malignant phenotype in ovarian cancer


Objective: Metabolic changes occur initially at a molecular level, while
genetic alterations further contribute to this shift and promote cancer
cell survival and proliferation. We sought to identify genomic correlates
of metabolic dysregulation in high grade serous ovarian cancer
(HGSOC).Methods: We profiled 101 HGSOC samples and 15 normal ovarian
tissues samples by LC/MS and GC/MS metabolic profiling; 172 significantly
altered metabolites were identified. We classified these metabolites into
altered pathways and carried out full-scale gene expression
analyses.Results: We compared expression of measured metabolites for
normal ovarian tissues and HGSOC and classified them into super pathways.
We created a random forest classifier to generate a prediction model
using metabolic profiles from normal tissue versus tumor within 3% error.
From the random forest classification, the top 10% of significantly
altered metabolites included gluconate, ADMA, and NAA. Carbohydrate,
amino acid, and lipid super pathways were identified as the most
important, with carbohydrate enrichment as significant (p = 0.03).
Metabolites from the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) and glycolysis were
identified with this prediction model and found to be globally
downregulated. Gene expression for enzymes in the PPP and glycolysis were
compared between HGSOC and normal ovary and not found to be different.
Gene expression ratios from the rate limiting steps in these pathways
were evaluated. No significant difference was identified between gene
ratios from normal and tumor tissues (p = 0.22) within our data set, but
relative expression was significantly different within The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) data set (p = 0.009). We subsequently generated a network
that merged metabolic and gene level changes for enzymes coding for the
synthesis and degradation of these metabolites, while accounting for time
to recurrence in ovarian cancer patients for each gene within glycolysis
and PPP. We then merged the genes identified by our network analysis with
data from a whole-genome siRNA synthetic lethality screen (3 HGSOC
chemoresistant cell lines). When GPI, the gene that encodes
glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (PGI), was silenced, cellular lethality was
observed across all cell lines tested. In our network analysis, GPI was
among the most upregulated within the carbohydrate pathway within our
cohort of ovarian cancer samples. In the TCGA data, ovarian cancer
patients with tumoral GPI levels higher than the median had worse overall
survival (p = 0.0002).Conclusions: Here, we present a novel systems-based
approach using altered metabolites and genes to predict a malignant
phenotype specific to HGSOC patients. Altered metabolism, coupled with
genomic analyses, identified the most interconnected gene-biochemical
networks that will lead to novel biomarkers and therapeutic targets.

