Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stem-cell based selective delivery of alpha keto reductases for
therapeutic targeting of residual androgens in prostate cancer


The twice as high incidence and mortality among African Americans (AA)
compared to Caucasian Americans and other ethnic minorities remains
elusive. The de novo synthesis of androgens by prostate tumors provides a
significant survival advantage leading to outgrowth of castration
resistant tumors. The intracrine production of androgens in the tumor
microenvironment is greatly influenced by the synthesis of androgen
metabolizing enzymes (AMEs) and the level of circulating hormones.
Currently, targeting de novo synthesis of androgens in tumor
microenvironment is singularly the toughest challenge presented to
oncologists. Our present research attempts to identify and exploit the
key players among the AMEs for targeting the backdoor pathway of DHT
synthesis in castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Comparative
analysis of gene expression of AMEs in microdissected cells versus the
adjacent normal tissue revealed AKR1C4 to be the most promising candidate
for targeting the backdoor pathway in DHT synthesis. Existing literature
supports this view since Type 1 3a-HSD enzyme has been shown to readily
oxidize testosterone to 4-androstene-3, 17-dione in a substrate dependent
reaction. Our analysis using recombinant AKR1C4 induced cytotoxicity and
apoptosis in androgen dependent PC cells in vitro. Next, using a
lentivirus construct, we genetically engineered tumor-tropic
adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) to express and secreted AKR1C14 (mouse
homolog of AKR1C4). The results showed that ASCs are capable of
expressing the enzyme, which can catabolize DHT in vitro and induce
apoptosis in androgen dependent prostate cancer cells as shown by DHT
Elisa, psPSA reporter assays and cytotoxicity and survival assays. Our
current research plan is to examine the efficacy of tumor-tropic
AKR1C14-expressing ASCs in targeting and inhibiting prostate metastatic
growth in an animal model system.

