Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of HBV-host junction DNA sequences in urine of patients
with HBV-infected HCC


Hepatitis B virus (HBV) related liver diseases often progresses from
hepatitis to cirrhosis and eventually to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
which has a poor prognosis, mostly due to late detection. Chronic HBV
infections are associated with >50% of HCC cases worldwide, and up to 90%
of HBV-related HCCs (HBV-HCC) were found to contain integrated HBV DNA.
During infection, HBV DNA integrates in the host chromosome at variables
sites, generating a unique HBV-host junction sequence (HBV-JS) that can
serve as a DNA finger print of an infected hepatocyte. During
hepatocarcinogenesis, tumorigenic hepatocyte(s) undergo uncontrolled
clonal expansion resulting in one to few particular HBV-JS's becoming
dominant. Thus, we hypothesize that the appearance of expanded HBV-JS
species is a marker of clonal expansion and can be a potential marker for
early detection of HBV-HCC.A PCR-based enrichment assay and next
generation sequencing (NGS) approach were developed for the HBV DR1-2
integration hotspot region to explore the feasibility of detecting
HBV-JS's in the circulation (i.e. urine) of patients with HBV-HCC.
HBV-HCC tissue DNA samples underwent library construction and were
enriched for DNA containing the HBV DR1-2 sequences. Enriched DNA
fragments were then cloned and sequenced, from which 5 HBV-JS's were
discovered at Chr5 (hTERT promoter), Chr7 (AOAH intronic transcript 1),
Chr12 (KCN2), Chr19 (miRNA 512-1,-2), and Chr22 (LARGE) in four patient
samples. These sites were further confirmed in matched urine DNA samples
by designing primers to amplify the HBV-JS. The NGS approach, which
includes HBV-HCC (n = 18), HBV-hepatitis (n = 5), and HBV-cirrhosis (n =
8) urine samples to identify HBV-JSs, is in progress. Overall, this would
be the first study both to demonstrate unambiguous detection of HBV-JS's
in the urine of HBV-HCC patients and to suggest the potential of
detecting expanded HBV-JS species in urine as a marker for HBV-HCC
screening. Furthermore, if successful, the high-throughput detection of
HBV-JS's in urine by NGS offers a promising noninvasive HBV-HCC screening
platform, as well as provides insight into the carcinogenic mechanisms of
HBV DNA integration.

