Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myogenic regulatory factors and their role in embryonal
rhabdomyosarcoma


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a pediatric sarcoma of muscle. RAS pathway
activation is the dominant oncogenic driver event in fusion negative RMS,
which includes the Embryonal RMS (ERMS). We have previously shown in a
transgenic zebrafish model of kRASG12D induced ERMS that
tumor-propagating potential is confined to molecularly defined cells that
express Myf5, m-Cadherin, c-Met and additional satellite cell markers.
MYF5 and MYOD1 are bHLH myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs) that
orchestrate skeletal muscle differentiation during development and
regeneration. Both are sufficient to reprogram human mesenchymal cells
into a myogenic fate. Importantly, these same factors are highly
expressed a subset of mouse and human ERMS. Given that Myf5 is highly and
specifically expressed in the TPC compartment in our ERMS model, we
hypothesized that Myf5 and its transcriptional targets may regulate
self-renewal and growth of TPCs.To address this question, we utilized
transgenic zebrafish and expressed Myf5 in differentiated ERMS cells that
lack proliferative capacity and can not make tumors when transplanted
into recipient fish. Induced expression of Myf5 was sufficient to confer
tumor-propagating ability to differentiated populations of ERMS cells.
These Induced TPCs proliferate and generate aggressive tumors that
re-express satellite cell markers and yet retain expression of mature
muscle markers. Next, we assessed if Myf5 is required for ERMS initiation
in the zebrafish model. Remarkably, kRASSG12D-induced ERMS could be
generated in Myf5 loss-of-function zebrafish. Moreover, Myf5-deficient
ERMS could regrow following transplantation into rag2E450fs
immune-compromised zebrafish; however, these tumors are histologically
and molecularly distinct when compared with ERMS arising in wild-type
fish. Given the redundancy of function between Myf5 and MyoD in muscle
and their differential expression in satellite cells and muscle
progenitors, our current hypothesis is that Myf5-deficient zebrafish ERMS
likely recapitulate a molecularly-distinct class of human ERMS. This idea
is consistent with the fact that MYF5 is expressed in only 50% of primary
human ERMS and a small fraction of human cell lines. Importantly, knock
down experiments in human ERMS cell lines confirm independent roles of
either MYF5 or MYOD1 in maintenance of ERMS cell viability in
vitro.Collectively, our results support a previously unappreciated role
for bHLH MRFs in ERMS cell survival and intra-tumor functional
heterogeneity and suggest that myogenic factor expression may define
unique subtypes of ERMS.

