Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The drug combination sorafenib and quinacrine targets the
expression of Mcl-1 - an anti-apoptotic protein and candidate prognostic
factor in Anaplastic Thyroid Cancer (ATC)


Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is a rare, highly aggressive form of
thyroid cancer that frequently is resistant to conventional therapy and
therefore requires the development of efficacious novel therapy.
Sorafenib, a multi-kinase inhibitor that inhibits the RAF, MEK and ERK
kinases, was recently approved by the FDA for late stage metastatic
differentiated thyroid cancer but appears to have limited activity in ATC
by itself. Sorafenib-based drug combinations with complimentary drug
targets are being pursued and evaluated preclinically. However, sorafenib
generates a significant number of adverse events in thyroid cancer
patients and drug combinations including sorafenib needs to be carefully
tailored with respect to toxicity and efficacy. We have previously shown
that quinacrine, a potent small molecule inhibitor of NFKB signaling,
combine favorably with several cytotoxic drugs to target hepatocellular
and colorectal cancer cells. Quinacrine is an inexpensive drug, has a
well established safety profile in human subjects and is being evaluated
in cancer clinical trials. Subsequently, we decided to evaluate the
efficacy of the drug combination of quinacrine and sorafenib in ATC. Our
combinatorial dose-response modulation of quinacrine with sorafenib
suggests a synergistic drug-drug interaction with respect to growth
stasis in a panel of ATC cells in vitro, as defined by Chou-Talalay.
Furthermore, in vivo the drug combination of sorafenib and quinacrine
significantly improved survival compared to vehicle control and the
current first line chemotherapeutic doxorubicin in a mouse thyroid
orthotopic xenograft model of ATC. Dose-escalation toxicity studies in
mice suggest that the drug combination was well tolerated and did not
trigger synergistic toxicities compared to either drug alone.
Significantly less gastrointestinal injury, the most commonly observed
toxicity in our study, was present following treatment with the drug
combination of sorafenib and quinacrine compared to treatment with
doxorubicin alone. Western blot analysis suggests that the anti-apoptotic
Bcl-2 family member Mcl-1 is a target for the drug combination. Indeed,
immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of resected ATC and non-neoplastic
thyroid tissues from patients confirmed overexpression of Mcl-1 in ATC
indicating target availability. Interestingly, multi-regression analysis
of our patient IHC data suggest that high Mcl-1 expression together with
tumor size prognosticated poor survival in ATC patients suggesting that
Mcl-1 overexpression was linked to a more aggressive tumor behavior. In
conclusion, our findings suggest that quinacrine in combination with
sorafenib may be a novel and potentially cost effective therapeutic
strategy to target Mcl-1, whose expression potentially may be linked to
the disease progression of ATC.

