Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome and proteomewide analyses of HOXB13 and the G84E variant
associated with prostate cancer


HOXB13 is a prostate-specific transcription factor that plays a critical
role in the development of the prostate. Recently, our group, in
collaboration with Dr. Kathleen Cooney's group at the University of
Michigan, discovered germline mutations in HOXB13 in families with
hereditary prostate cancer. Among the HOXB13 mutations, the G84E variant
has been shown in multiple independent studies to recur at an elevated
frequency in prostate cancer patients. To gain molecular insights into
prostate cancer development, it is crucial to investigate the mechanism
behind HOXB13 G84E's association with prostate cancer. Our previous study
demonstrated that HOXB13 G84E alone or with AR cannot transform prostate
cells and that the G84E variant does not differ from wild type in
cellular localization, interaction with cofactors (AR, MEIS2) and protein
stability. To further search for G84E-induced alterations that link G84E
to prostate cancer predisposition, we performed ChIP-seq analysis to
study the genome-wide occupancy of HOXB13 WT and G84E in LAPC4, a
prostate cell line derived from an AR-positive lymph node metastasis. The
predominant DNA consensus sequence for both HOXB13 WT and G84E identified
by the ChIP-seq data (TTTTAT) was in congruence with the literature,
signifying the validity of the dataset. The enrichments for binding sites
with a range of fold enrichment scores were validated using ChIP-qPCR to
further assess the quality of the dataset. Many enriched sites were in
proximity to genes with functional relevance to prostate cancer (SMYD2,
HOXA7, PMEPA1, MAP3K5, SHH, etc.). Sites that were uniquely bound by
either HOXB13 WT or G84E were absent, although currently it is unknown
whether some sites are more strongly bound by WT or G84E. Next, to
examine genes that are regulated directly by HOXB13 binding, we crossed
our ChIP-seq dataset with an LAPC4 HOXB13 knockdown microarray dataset
obtained from Dr. Donald McDonnell's lab at Duke University. Among 70
genes whose expression changed by at least 2.6-fold with HOXB13
knockdown, 45 genes had adjacent binding sites for HOXB13 WT and G84E.
Pathway analysis of the 45 genes using g:Profiler suggested that they are
involved in the MAPK cascade. Given the apparent lack of G84E-unique
binding sites, we questioned whether changes in the protein interactome
might affect the function of HOXB13. To this end, we performed mass
spectrometry on proteins co-immunoprecipitated with HOXB13 WT or G84E.
The experiment identified fatty acid synthase as a binding partner of
HOXB13 WT but not G84E. Although our genome- and proteome-wide analyses
of HOXB13 WT and G84E need further validation, our preliminary data
suggests the possibility of identifying the potential source of
quantitative and qualitative difference caused by the G84E mutation by
studying gene-protein and protein-protein interaction on a global-scale.

