Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of prostate cancer associated DNA hypermethylation in
diagnostic needle biopsies: Insight into field effects and heterogeneity


Prostate cancer (PC) is the fifth leading cause of cancer deaths among
men worldwide and the second most common cancer form with an estimated
1.1 million diagnoses in 2012. Diagnosis is based on histological
evaluation of needle biopsies by a trained pathologist. Despite the high
number of diagnoses, PC is frequently missed in the initial set of
biopsies. Thus, in more than 15% of patients with initial negative
biopsies, PC is found in repeat biopsies. The aim of this project was to
evaluate if DNA methylation-based cancer field effects can be detected in
cancer-negative prostate biopsy samples for the nine genes HAPLN3, AOX1,
GAS6, KLF8, MOB3B, CCDC181 (C1orf114), GABRE, SLC18A2, and GSTP1, and if
this could be a potential novel diagnostic tool. Hypermethylation of
these genes is known to be strongly associated with PC in prostatectomy
specimens.First, we confirmed the presence of hypermethylation of all
genes in malignant (n = 48) compared to non-malignant biopsy tissue
samples (n = 40) using quantitative methylation specific PCR
(pBonferroni0.00002 in Mann Whitney U test, AUC range 0.80-0.98 in ROC
analysis). Next, non-malignant biopsy samples from men with (n = 39) or
without (n = 40) cancer in other biopsies were compared. Here, the
methylation status of no single gene showed a significant correlation to
the presence of PC in other biopsies. However, PC is a heterogeneous
disease and a panel of markers could lead to increased sensitivity for PC
if each marker adds little but complementary information. Indeed, a
4-gene model (HAPLN3/GSTP1/AOX1/SLC18A2) was able to separate the 2
groups of non-malignant samples with an AUC of 0.65 in ROC analysis (PPV
= 100%, NPV = 59.7%), indicating the existence of an epigenetic cancer
field effect. In our sample set, this corresponds to 12 out of 39 samples
that would be identified as originating from PC patients based on the
molecular analysis although no signs of malignancy were identified by
pathology. Finally, to investigate epigenetic field effects and
heterogeneity on a genomewide scale, we have analyzed multiple cancer
foci, adjacent non-malignant and distant non-malignant samples from
radical prostatectomy specimens from each of 4 patients with multifocal
PC using the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (Illumina). The
results will be presented at the conference.In summary, PC-specific
hypermethylation of all nine genes was confirmed in diagnostic needle
biopsies. Furthermore, DNA methylation based cancer field effects were
detected for several of these genes, and a 4-gene model with potential to
detect non-malignant samples from PC patients based on a DNA
hypermethylation signature was identified. The results of our study
suggest that detection of epigenetic field effects in cancer-negative
prostate biopsy samples may be used to increase the sensitivity for PC
detection.

