Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dietary isoflavone biochanin-A in combination with
atorvastatin induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in human pancreatic
cancer cells


Pancreatic cancer is a devastating disease with a poor prognosis. The
American Cancer Society's estimates for pancreatic cancer in the United
States for 2014 are about 46,420 new cases of pancreatic cancer and about
39,590 deaths from pancreatic cancer. There remains a clear need for
effective mechanism-based approaches that can achieve long-term
improvements in the management pancreatic cancer. While natural products
are well recognized as sources of drugs for various diseases including
cancer, very few studies systematically explored the role of natural
products for their potential preventive/therapeutic benefit in pancreatic
cancer. Although several studies have examined the effect of flavonoids,
there are no studies examining how biochanin-A or atorvastatin regulates
pancreatic cancer cells. We investigated the cell proliferation studies
in pancreatic cancer cell lines, AsPC-1 and MiaPaCa-2. Interestingly, we
observed that by combination of treatment of Biochanin-A and atorvastatin
significantly decreased the viability of AsPC-1 and MiaPaCa-2 cells.
Several studies have been demonstrated the STAT3 play an important roll
in the progression cancer pathogenesis in various cancers. We examined
the STAT3 expression in pancreatic cell line, PANC-1 in biochanin-A or
atorvastatin or in combination treatments and observed 95% decrease in
the phosphorylation of STAT3 observed. Similarly the combination drug
treatment employing biochanin A and atorvastatin decreased activation of
Akt in AsPC-1 cell line. The decreased cell viability in AsPC-1 cell line
involved increased induction of apoptosis with combination treatment and
this evidence was further strengthened by increased PARP cleavage in
combination treated cells. Further studies will delineate the mechanism
of signaling arrested by the combination of drugs, Biochanin-A and
atorvastatin in pancreatic cells with the possibility for uncovering
improved therapeutic strategies to overcome the effectiveness to treat
pancreatic cancer patients.

