Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: YAP1 regulates Oct4 activity and Sox2 expression, facilitating
self-renewal and vascular mimicry of stem-like cells


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is highly correlated with smoking and
has very low survival rates. Multiple studies have shown that cancer
stem-like cells (CSCs) contribute to the genesis and progression of
NSCLC. These cells have been shown to form differentiated tumor cells
upon receiving appropriate microenvironmental cues and can give rise to
multiple components of the tumor, including the vasculature. Earlier work
from our laboratory had shown that Hoechst 33342 dye excluding
side-population (SP) cells are enriched in cells having stem-like
properties. SP cells displayed high self-renewal capacity, were highly
drug resistant, and could form metastatic tumors in immunocompromised
mice. The present study shows that the transcriptional co-activator YAP1,
which is the oncogenic component of the Hippo signaling pathway, is
elevated in the stem-like cells from NSCLC and contributes to their
self-renewal and ability to form angiogenic tubules in matrigel.
Inhibition of YAP1 by a small molecule inhibitor Visudyne or depletion of
YAP1 by siRNAs suppressed self-renewal and vascular mimicry of stem-like
cells. These effects of YAP1 were mediated through the embryonic stem
cell transcription factor Sox2. YAP1 could associate with the Sox2
promoter and could transcriptionally induce Sox2 as seen by qRT-PCRs,
ChIP assays and promoter luciferase assays; this induction was through a
physical interaction of YAP1 with Oct4 protein. The binding of Oct4 to
YAP1 could be detected in cell lines as well as NSCLC tumor tissues as
seen by immunofluorescence, proximity ligation assays (PLA),
immunoprecipitation-western blot experiments and GST binding assays.
Interestingly, the interaction was elevated in NSCLC samples compared to
normal tissue as seen by PLA. A peptide that could disrupt the
interaction between YAP1 and Oct4 abrogated Sox2 expression, self-renewal
and vascular mimicry. Depleting YAP1 reduced the expression of EMT genes
and prevented the growth and metastasis of tumor xenografts in mice,
while overexpression of Sox2 in YAP1 depleted cells could rescue
self-renewal of stem-like cells. In conclusion, our results demonstrate
that YAP1 can modulate the stem-like functions of cancer stem cells by
regulating Sox2, and this regulatory pathway can potentially be targeted
for combating NSCLC.

