Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CAPE (caffeic acid phenethyl ester) induces a mammary stem cell
lineage restriction to a luminal phenotype via chromatin remodeling


Propolis, and its active component, CAPE, is a widely available, safe,
honeybee natural product with anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and
antitumor properties. We have previously shown that CAPE, inhibits 1)
growth of ER+/PR+, ER-/PR- and Her2 + breast cancer cells, 2) the
tumorigenic potential of breast cancer stem cells, and 3) mediates its
effects through epigenetic modifications via HDAC inhibition, resulting
among others, in increased ER in ER- cells. We postulated that CAPE may
be useful in chemoprevention for women at high risk for triple-negative
breast cancers (TNBC). The cell-of-origin hypothesis states that these
cancers arise from transformation of mammary stem cells (SC).We tested
the ability of CAPE to inhibit SC self-renewal in murine mammary
epithelial cells (MEC) and a human breast epithelial cell line (MCF10A).
MEC isolated from BALB/c mice were cultured as mammospheres (MMS) for 7
days in ULA 96 well plates using media containing 5% FBS and 5% Matrigel.
MMS were dissociated into single cells, recultured in the presence of
CAPE for 7 days and passaged in secondary and tertiary passages in media
alone. Alternatively, MCF10A transfected with a Let7c-miRNA reporter were
sorted for Let7c-negative cells, and similarly cultured with CAPE. Murine
MMS were analyzed for luminal marker, K18, basal marker K14, or
progesterone receptor (PR) using immunofluorescence. Open chromatin
states were identified using ATAC-seq and peaks were independently called
using PeakDeck. Open chromatin areas unique to CAPE treated murine MMS
were used for pathway analysis performed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
and confirmed by Integrative Genome Viewer.CAPE treatment resulted in a
dose dependent decrease in mammosphere forming efficiency that persisted
in secondary and tertiary passages, indicating reduced self-renewal. CAPE
shifted the cells within murine MMS from predominantly K14 to
K18-positive and increased PR expression. Interestingly, ATAC-seq showed
enrichment of open chromatin of the SMARCA4 gene in the exonic region.
SMARCA4 is a chromatin remodeling gene that is involved in SWI/SNF
complex and alters the positioning of the nucleosome, it is thought to
regulate transcription of certain genes by altering the chromatin
structure around those genes. In addition, SMARCA4 can bind BRCA1, and
regulate the expression of the tumorigenic breast cancer SC marker,
CD44.These data indicate that CAPE both inhibited mammary SC self-renewal
and shifted the lineage commitment to a luminal lineage. ATAC-seq
demonstrated effects at the chromatin level that may regulate the SMARCA4
gene, which controls the transcription of many genes involved in stem
cell renewal, pluripotency, and embryonic development and is
differentially expressed in the luminal phenotype of human MEC. Thus,
CAPE may have an effect on lineage commitment in agreement with our
chemoprevention strategy to reduce TNBC breast cancer development.

