Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF- and TNF- activate gene transcription programs associated with
poor breast cancer prognosis


Background: Tumor Growth Factor- (TGF-) and Tumor Necrosis Factor- (TNF-)
are cytokines, which induce the local inflammation and contribute to
tumor invasion and metastasis. Recent reports show that TGF- and TNF-
induce epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in both non-cancer and
cancer cells. EMT is a cellular program, through which cancer cells
transform from epithelial to mesenchymal phenotype. It is known that EMT
induces cancer stem cell (CSC), which is a main culprit in tumor
progression. However, it is not well understand what molecular signature
drives EMT and CSC induction in the downstream of TGF- and TNF-. We
hypothesize that TGF- and TNF- promote tumor progression and contribute
to poor cancer prognosis. The objective of this study is to identify the
downstream gene signature of TGF- and TNF- stimulation, which allows us
to predict poor cancer prognosis. Methods and Results: We previously
established in vitro EMT model, in which we stimulated ARPE-19 retinal
epithelial cells with TGF- and TNF- and observed cellular focuses and
fibronectin buildups, hallmarks of in vitro EMT (J Bio Chem 2010). We
analyzed microarray transcription profiles of EMT progression at
different time points (0, 1, 6, 16, 24, 48, 60 hours). To quantify the
likeliness of EMT and CSC, we analyzed EMT and CSC gene scores of the EMT
progression by correlation analysis (PNAS 2009). We observed that EMT
gene score reached the highest at 16 hours and followed by elevations of
CSC gene score, suggesting a dynamic change of gene signature that drives
the progression from triggering EMT to inducing CSC by TGF- and TNF-. In
order to determine which time point of EMT timeframe is more
representative for poor cancer prognosis, the transcriptional profile at
each time point was compared with the one at 0 hour using t-test and the
differentially expressed genes (p 2) were used for further analysis. The
expression pattern of each time point was compared with each cancer
patient from two breast cancer data sets (Mainz and Transbig) and was
used to predict patient prognosis. We discovered that the gene signature
at 6-hour (early phase of EMT) was the only predictable signature for the
poor prognosis of primary breast cancer patients (logrank p-value of
0.045), with a 5-year distance metastasis free (DMF) survival rate of
0.77 vs. 0.94, and a hazard ratio of 1.49. The same gene signature also
predicts poor prognosis in ER-positive primary breast cancer patients
(p-value = 0.028, hazard ratio = 1.74). We further performed Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis using 6-hour gene signature and observed that interferon
response and NF- pathway activation were the top ranked pathways.
Conclusion: Using time-course transcriptional profiles stimulated by TGF-
and TNF-, we discovered gene signature that precedes EMT and CSC
induction, represented by NF- pathway. This signature was significant in
predicting prognosis of breast cancer patients.

