Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncostatin M reduces SLUG expression in lung adenocarcinoma cells
through STAT1-PIAS4-dependent histone deacetylation


We previously described that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) secrete a
multifunctional cytokine - Oncostatin M (OSM) which effectively inhibited
the metastasis and growth of LAC cells, and reduce the SLUG expression,
leading to mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET). Our data showed that
the OSM-dependent inhibition of SLUG is mediated by a STAT1-dependent
pathway through a transcriptional control. Previous studies have shown
both positive and negative role of STAT1 in transcriptional regulation of
its downstream target genes. However, the underlying mechanism of how
STAT1 mediates the suppression of SLUG transcription remains elusive.To
investigate the associated effector or mediator in OSM-induced
STAT1-dependent SLUG suppression, we knocked down PIAS4 (PIAS4-KD), a
co-repressor of STAT1, in A549 cells using lentiviral expressed short
hairpin RNAs (shRNA). We demonstrated that knockdown of PIAS4 reversed
the OSM-suppressed SLUG level and resulted in a higher SLUG mRNA in
comparison to scrambled shRNA control. Moreover, we constructed SLUG
promoter-driven luciferase expression reporters and test the effect of
PIAS4 on SLUG promoter activity. We observed that PIAS4-KD cells
expressed higher SLUG promoter activity than control cells, and OSM
treatment further augmented this difference. In contrast, reconstitution
of PIAS4 expression in PIAS4-KD cells decreased the SLUG promoter
activity. Chromatin immuneprecipitation assay (ChIP) revealed the binding
of PIAS4 to SLUG promoter region one hour after OSM administration. We
also showed OSM-induced tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT1 interacts with
PIAS4 and HDAC1 in a co-immunoprecipitation assay. Finally, the level of
H3K9 acetylation in SLUG promoter region decreased significantly upon OSM
treatment, and the pan HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA) rescues
OSM-induced suppression of SLUG promoter activity.Our findings
demonstrated the underlying mechanism of the tumor-suppressive effect of
OSM, and revealed a STAT1-PIAS4-dependent regulation of SLUG promoter
through histone deacetylation.

