Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical Survey of 19 actionable proteins in multiple indications
using multiplex mass spectrometry


Many available oncology therapies are targeted to specific proteins, the
most notable examples being therapies targeted to EGFR and Her2. For
targeted therapies to have maximal efficacy, it is necessary to identify
patients whose tumors express the target protein. As more pathways and
proteins are identified as tumor drivers and therapies are developed that
target those proteins, and more patient screening tools are needed to
efficiently direct patients to correct therapeutic regimens.While
chemotherapy regimens are not often considered targeted therapies,
protein biomarkers for chemotherapy efficacy have been identified; for
example amplification of TOPO2A is known to improve response to
anthracycline-based therapy combinations. Though many chemotherapy
biomarkers have been identified, screening is not routine, and
chemotherapy regimens are not being adjusted for individual tumor
biology.To address the growing need for efficient patient screening using
minimal tissue, OncoPlex Diagnostics has built a comprehensive protein
quantification panel that allows for the simultaneous quantitation of
multiple actionable proteins from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
patient biopsies using multiplex mass spectrometry. This panel currently
quantifies nine proteins that are markers of targeted therapy (including
ALK, AR, EGFR, HER2, HER3, MET, MSLN, and PD-L1) and includes the
ChemoPlex panel, which quantifies chemotherapy biomarkers (ERCC1,
FRalpha, hENT1, RRM1, SPARC, TOPO1, TOPO2A). Since 2013, over 270
biopsies from multiple indications have been analyzed for protein
expression in the OncoPlex Diagnostics CAP-qualified, CLIA-certified
laboratory, revealing large ranges of expression for many drug targets
that are not routinely assayed.Because of the importance of TOPO2A in
anthracycline-based therapies, which are commonly prescribed in breast
cancer patients, sixty-two breast cancer biopsies were retrospectively
reviewed. Of the 62 samples, 41 were positive for TOPO2A expression;
ranging from 233-1750amol/ug. Of the primary biopsies, 80% of them
expressed TOPO2A; however only two of seven liver metastases were
positive for TOPO2A. These data suggest that anthracycline-based therapy
might not be as efficacious in metastatic sites due to the lack of
TOPO2A.Also of interest, quantification of FRalpha, a biomarker for
folate-targeted therapies, showed a 50-fold range of expression in NSCLC
cases, and TOPO1, the target of irinotecan and topotecan, showed a
10-fold range of expression in various indications, with 4% of biopsies
having no detectable TOPO1.These wide expression ranges of known
biomarkers suggest that certain therapies might have vastly different
response rates based on biomarker expression. To derive the best
therapeutic response to both targeted and chemotherapy regimens, it is
necessary to understand each patient tumor biology individually.

