Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of T-cell protein tyrosine phosphatase suppresses
keratinocyte survival and proliferation following UVB irradiation


Chronic exposure of UV radiation can contribute to the development of
skin cancer by promoting PTK signaling. Studies show that exposure to UV
radiation increases the ligand-independent activation of PTKs and induces
PTP inactivation. In the present work, we report that TC-PTP activity is
stimulated during the initial response to UVB irradiation which leads to
suppression of keratinocyte cell survival and proliferation via the
down-regulation of STAT3 signaling. Our results show that
TC-PTP-deficient keratinocyte cell lines expressed a significantly
increased level of phosphorylated STAT3 after exposure to low dose UVB.
This increase corresponded with increased cell proliferation in
TC-PTP-deficient keratinocytes following UVB irradiation. Loss of TC-PTP
also reduced UVB-induced apoptosis. In corroboration with these results,
overexpression of TC-PTP in keratinocyte cell lines yielded a decrease in
phosphorylated STAT3 levels, which corresponded with a significant
decrease in cell proliferation in response to low dose UVB. We
demonstrate that TC-PTP activity was increased upon UVB exposure and
overexpression of TC-PTP in keratinocyte cell lines further increased its
activity in the presence of UVB. Treatment of TC-PTP-deficient
keratinocytes with the STAT3 inhibitor STA21 significantly reduced cell
viability following UVB exposure in comparison with untreated
TC-PTP-deficient keratinocytes, confirming that the effect of TC-PTP on
cell viability is mediated by STAT3 dephosphorylation. Combined, our
results indicate that UVB-mediated activation of TC-PTP plays an
important role in the STAT3-dependent regulation of keratinocyte cell
proliferation and survival. Furthermore, these results suggest that
TC-PTP may be a novel potential target for the prevention of UVB-induced
skin cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

