Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wogonin suppresses the production of breast cancer-derived
osteolytic factors


Breast cancer is the most frequent cancer in women and the main cause of
its mortality is induced by metastasizing to distant organs. Breast
cancer primarily metastasizes to the bone, lung, liver and brain, and the
bone is the most susceptible to metastasis. When breast cancer
metastasizes to the bone, the dominant lesion is osteolytic. This
osteolytic bone metastasis is highly associated with the complex
interaction between cancer cells and the bone microenvironment.
Interleukin-1 beta (IL-1) and IL-17 act as osteolytic factors and promote
osteolytic lesions in breast cancer pateints by increasing
osteoclastogenesis and decreasing osteoblastogenesis. Especially, both of
IL-1 and IL-17 increase in patients with breast cancer and decrease
disease-free survival in cancer patients. Wogonin, one of the major
flavonoids in the roots of Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi, has been
recognized as a potent anti-cancer agent through increased apoptosis and
decreased proliferation. We investigated whether wogonin could reduce the
cancer cell-induced osteolysis by controlling interaction between cancer
cells and bone-related cells. Wogonin suppressed cell viability, DNA
synthesis and migration in MDA-MB 231 cells. Wogonin reduced the
secretion of IL-1 and IL-17 in MDA-MB 231 cells. Wogonin at non-cytotoxic
concentrations inhibited the receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B
ligand (RANKL)-induced osteoclast formation in mouse bone marrow-derived
macrophages. Furthermore, wogonin blocked an increase in
RANKL/osteoprotegerin mRNA ratio in the osteoblastic hFOB1.19 cells
exposed to MDA-MB 231 cells-derived conditioned medium. Finally, oral
administration of wogonin significantly inhibited osteolytic lesions in
MDA-MB 231 cells-injected mice. Taken together, these results indicate
that wogonin is a promising agent for preventing and treating cancer-cell
mediated bone loss.

