Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The non-cardiotoxic anticancer drug pixantrone targets
topoisomerase II


Pixantrone is a new non-cardiotoxic aza-anthracenedione anticancer drug
structurally related to anthracyclines and anthracenediones such as
doxorubicin and mitoxantrone. Pixantrone is approved in the EU for the
treatment of relapsed or refractory aggressive B-cell non-Hodgkin
lymphoma. This study was undertaken to investigate both the mechanisms of
its anticancer activity and its lack of cardiotoxicity. The reduced
cardiotoxicity of pixantrone compared to doxorubicin may be due to the
fact that it did not bind iron(II) or iron(III). Thus, unlike doxorubicin
it would not be able to induce iron-based oxidative stress in the heart.
Pixantrone did, however, form a weak complex with Cu(II). Pixantrone was
10-fold less damaging to neonatal rat myocytes than doxorubicin as
measured by LDH release. As measured by EPR spectrometry pixantrone
generated about two-fold higher levels of its semiquinone free radical
than doxorubicin in the hypoxanthine-xanthine oxidase reducing system.
Conversely, in intact K562 cells under nitrogen, doxorubicin produced
much more semiquinone radical than pixantrone. The reduced myocyte
toxicity and semiquinone-forming ability in K562 cells compared to
doxorubicin may be due low cell accumulation of dicationic pixantrone.
Multidrug resistant Pgp- (ABCB1) overexpressing MDCK/MDR cells were
40-fold cross resistant to pixantrone, compared to parental cells.
Pixantrone bound to DNA much more strongly than doxorubicin as determined
in a DNA melting point assay. Pixantrone targeted topoisomerase II as
evidenced by its ability to inhibit kDNA decatenation, to produce linear
double-stranded DNA in a pBR322 DNA cleavage assay, and to form covalent
topoisomerase II-DNA complexes in a cellular ICE assay. Pixantrone was
3-fold cross-resistant to K562-derived etoposide-resistant cells. DNA
double strand breaks produced by pixantrone assessed in a cellular H2AX
assay were also characteristic of a topoisomerase II-targeted drug. These
results support the conclusion that pixantrone displays characteristics
that are consistent with targeting topoisomerase II. Support: CIHR; a
Canada Research Chair in Drug Development; R01 CA090787.

