Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel signaling axis that leads to
co-induction of two major actin-regulatory proteins with anti-migratory
properties in breast cancer cells


Dysregulation of actin-regulatory proteins is a hallmark feature of tumor
malignancy. Along this line, recent studies have established causal
relationships between downregulation of expression of actin-binding
proteins profilin-1 and -2 (Pfn1, Pfn2 - genes located on chromosomes 17
and 3, respectively) and increasing invasive ability of breast cancer
cells. Conversely, genetically elevating expression of these Pfn isoforms
suppresses aggressiveness of breast cancer cells. Therefore,
identification of a common signaling pathway linking to regulation of
these two Pfn isoforms may lead to a novel conceptual strategy to
suppress metastatic potential of breast cancer cells in Pfn-dependent
manner. We found that hyperactivating RhoA, a member of Rho-family
GTPases, causes a marked depletion of cellular Pfn1 and Pfn2 expression,
suggesting that a pathway downstream of activated RhoA is one of the
major signaling axes for regulating Pfn1 and Pfn2 expression. Through
overexpression and knockdown experiments, we further identified MKL1
(megakaryoblastic leukemia-1), a transcriptional co-factor that activates
serum-response factor (SRF)-mediated gene transcription downstream of
activated Rho, to be a major regulator of expression of Pfn isoforms.
However, SRF does not appear to play a role in Rho-dependent Pfn
regulation and furthermore, Rho-dependent Pfn regulation occurs
post-transcriptionally suggesting that a non-canonical MKL1-linked
pathway is involved in co-regulation of Pfn isoforms. Finally,
MKL1-dependent induction of Pfn isoforms involves STAT1 and this pathway
can be activated pharmacologically resulting in inhibition of breast
cancer cell motility. In conclusion, we have identified a novel
MKL1-STAT1 signaling axis for co-induction of the two major cellular
isoforms of Pfn. This study could open up promising pharmacological
points of attack in the context of metastatic breast cancer.

