Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunotherapy against breast cancer based on Stat3 blockade


The signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) is
constitutively active in breast cancer (BC) and contributes to malignant
transformation by promoting cell cycle progression, inhibiting apoptosis
and mediating tumor immune evasion. Stat3 inhibition induces expression
of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines. On the other hand, it has
been shown that oncogene inactivation induces cellular senescence and the
secretion of senescence-associated secretome (SAS) in diverse tumor
types. We recently described that Stat3 blockade leads to a senescence
program in murine BC cells, which is accompanied by the secretion of
proinflammatory cytokines. In addition, we demonstrated that immunization
of mice with syngeneic Stat3 blocked BC cells induces an antitumoral
immune response that involves the participation of CD4+ Th cells and
cytotoxic NK cells. In this study our objectives were to study whether
immunization with supernatants (SN) produced by Stat3-blocked cells
induces an antitumor immune response and to explore the contribution of
senescence phenotype in this response. For that purpose we used BC models
of ErbB-2-positive, JIMT-1 and KPL-4 cells (human) and C4HD cells
(murine), and of triple negative, MDA-MB231 cells (human) and 4T1 cell
(murine). Knockdown of Stat3 with siRNA in these cells, induced
senescence (assessed by acidic -galactosidase staining). In human BC
cells the senescent phenotype was accompanied by up-regulation of p21cip1
and downregulation of Rb expressions. In mouse BC cells we observed an
increased expression of p16ink4a. In addition, simultaneous transfection
with siRNAs targeting Stat3 and p16ink4a reverted the senescent
phenotype. Then, we used a pre-clinical model in which we embedded the SN
of C4HD cells in a slow-delivery depot as an adjuvant of a cellular
immunotherapy. We immunized the animals with irradiated C4HD cells
together with a depot containing lyophilized SN of C4HD cells transfected
in vitro either with Stat3 siRNA (senescent) and Stat3 and p16ink4a siRNA
(non-senescent), or a control siRNA. After 3 immunizations, with 15 d of
interval between them, animals were challenged with C4HD tumor and tumor
growth was monitored for 40 d. We observed that immunization with SN of
cells with Stat3 siRNA decreased tumor growth vs. control siRNA group.
Interestingly, there was no difference between tumor growth of animals
immunized with SN of cells with Stat3 siRNA vs Stat3 and p16ink4a siRNA.
We observed in these two groups greater cytotoxic activity of NK cells
and an increase in the number of memory CD4+ T cells vs. control.These
results suggest that Stat3 blockade drives a senescence program also in
human BC cells. The secretome of Stat3-blocked BC cells is an effective
adjuvant and could be formulated for immunotherapies independently of the
SAS. Defining the protein, peptide, cytokine, chemokine composition of
this supernatant opens up new avenues for immunotherapy in cancer
patients.

