Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantifying PD-L1 spatial distribution signatures for patient
selection approaches


Inhibitors of inflammatory checkpoints, such as PD-L1 inhibitors, have
demonstrated great promise in preclinical and clinical studies. This
therapeutic paradigm focuses on controlling natural inflammatory
checkpoints to stimulate an elevated inflammatory response against the
tumor to increase anti-tumor inflammatory cell infiltrates in the tumor
microenvironment or decrease inflammatory suppressor infiltrates. The
proteins which control these processes can be found in the tumor cells,
cells in the tumor micro-environment (TME), or in both locales. Positive
cells are often assessed in a qualitative or semi-quantitative manner
using immunohistochemistry and evaluation of a limited number of
representative microscopy fields across a particular tissue compartment
(tumor vs stroma) or the whole tissue area. However, the locale of the
inflammatory suppressors such as PD-L1 may be more revealing than
estimating the tumor-wide dispersion of an inflammatory cell type.
Unfortunately, the intricate spatial relationships and the often complex
distribution of inflammatory cells in tissues pose significant challenges
for a meaningful evaluation.We have developed an approach which can
quantify these spatial relationships in a contextual, biologically
meaningful score. Immunohistochemistry staining for PD-L1 in whole lung
cancer tissue sections was performed, and our CellMap software was used
to assess inflammatory cell distribution in the whole tissue sections.
PD-L1 positive cells were quantified relative to: 1) the total number of
cells in the tumor and stromal tissue compartments, and 2) the number of
cells within a distance from the tumor/stroma interface. Interestingly,
several unique PD-L1 distribution patterns relative to the tumor/stroma
interface were observed in the sample cohort analyzed. Quantifying the
distribution of PD-L1 positive cells as a function of distance from the
tumor/stroma interface revealed distribution signatures, which could be
used to differentiate between samples. In contrast, this differentiation
of the same samples was not possible when PD-L1 cells were assessed
relative to the total number of cells.This study provided a novel method
for assessing inflammatory cell type spatial distribution relative to a
tissue feature, the tumor/stroma interface. The data suggested that
unique spatial patterns of inflammatory cell type distribution could be
used to uniquely stratify patients compared to existing quantitative
methods. Taken together, this proof-of-concept study demonstrates a
unique quantitative assessment of inflammatory cell infiltrates in tumors
that could be used to gain new insights into inflammatory cell type
distributions and interactions in tumors, inflammatory cell spatial
responses to oncology therapies, and novel patient selection criteria for
traditional and immuno-oncology therapeutics.

