Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a novel irreversible third generation EGFR TKI
that targets T790M-mediated resistant EGFR-mutant NSCLC while sparing
wild type EGFR


Activating mutations in EGFR confer constitutive activity providing the
oncogenic drive in EGFR-mutant NSCLC. First and 2nd generation EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are effective drugs in this setting,
but are constrained by dose-limiting toxicities attributed to inhibition
of wild type (WT) EGFR and by drug resistance caused, in the majority of
cases, via a T790M secondary mutation in EGFR. We report the pharmacology
of a novel irreversible 3rd generation EGFR TKI active against EGFR with
activating and T790M mutations, but sparing WT EGFR.Our novel 3rd
generation EGFR TKI was studied in a variety of in vitro and in vivo
models to determine its inhibitory potencies on different EGFR variants,
pharmacokinetics (PK), antitumor efficacy, exposure-response
relationships, mechanism of action, and predicted human efficacious
dose.In enzyme and cell assays, our compound is a highly potent inhibitor
of EGFR double mutants (L858R/T790M and Del/T790M) and EGFR activating
mutants (L858R and Del), but a weak inhibitor of WT EGFR (26-fold margin
over mutant target potencies). Effects on downstream signaling and
function indicate the underlying mechanism of the compound is direct
inhibition of EGFR, with subsequent inhibition of downstream signaling
that results in apoptosis and viable cell decline. In xenograft mouse
models, the compound demonstrates tumor growth inhibition and regression
at well-tolerated doses in models driven by EGFR double mutants and EGFR
activating mutants. The antitumor efficacy is dose-dependent and strongly
correlates with inhibition of EGFR phosphorylation and EGFR-mediated
downstream signaling, and induction of apoptosis. Plasma concentrations
assumed to be sufficient for efficacy (Ceff) were defined using a
mathematical model incorporating the plasma levels of the compound, the
associated inhibitory effects on EGFR phosphorylation, and the antitumor
efficacy in the double and activating mutant xenograft models. Ceff was
in agreement across several models and was used with in vitro human PK
properties to calculate required human dose.While our compound possesses
a similar profile as other recently disclosed 3rd generation EGFR TKIs,
this molecule is distinguished by better potency on the activating
mutants and by the widest potency margin on WT EGFR. Given that the
target potencies and WT margins of 3rd generation EGFR TKIs have been
sufficient for tolerated clinical efficacy in preliminary results, it can
be inferred that our compound will have similar promise in the clinic.
These results support our compound as a novel EGFR TKI with an inhibitory
profile and favorable drug-like properties that suggest utility for
treating patients with NSCLC with EGFR activating and resistance
mutations.

