Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accelerated drug discovery platform yields synthesis of novel
stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 inhibitors that demonstrate anti-tumor efficacy
in several models of aggressive cancer


BackgroundIntra-tumor heterogeneity is the driving force behind disease
progression and metastasis, drug resistance, and relapse in cancer
patients. Defining personalized treatment regimens and increasing the
arsenal of targeted therapies available will provide the best chance of
prolonging survival and finding curative treatments. Recent work by our
group and others has shed light on aberrant de novo lipogenesis as a
feature of many cancers including kidney, breast, and lung cancer. Of the
molecules involved in fatty acid metabolism, stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1
(SCD1) is frequently over-expressed. Targeted inhibition of SCD1
demonstrates a loss of tumor cell viability in a variety of cancer
models. While there currently are specific small molecule inhibitors for
SCD1 none are under investigation as anti-cancer therapeutics. In order
to evaluate the efficacy of SCD1 inhibitors against ccRCC in both a
preclinical and eventually a clinical setting we sought to generate
unique compounds and test their biological efficacy.MethodsUtilizing an
innovative in silico approach, we designed new inhibitors for SCD1 via a
scaffold hopping approach while searching for different core scaffolds.
Critical interaction moieties from the chemical R-groups were held fixed,
while generated cores were rapidly scanned for best-fit criteria (shape,
docking, pharmacophore fit (QSAR)) into our Z-matrix. Following de novo
compound generation and synthesis, we implemented iterative analog
generation for the top hits. Using this method and diversity of chemical
space, we pursued three divergent species of compounds into the nanomolar
regime.Biological testing of the novel compounds included high-throughput
proliferative-based screening, oleic acid rescue, and evaluation of the
endoplasmic stress response. Enzymatic inhibition of SCD1 was evaluated
by LC-MS. Preclinical pharmacokinetics was established using a range of
doses administered intravenously and orally. Anti-tumor response was
evaluated in an ectopic model of renal carcinoma, both as a single agent
and in combination with SOC.ResultsA cohort of potential unique small
molecule inhibitors against SCD1 were designed and synthesized. Of these,
a select group of compounds demonstrated potent and selective enzyme
inhibition and reduced tumor growth in in vitro and in vivo models of
ccRCC. These novel inhibitors reliably reproduced activation of ER stress
markers, authenticating this biological response as a harbinger for
successful abrogation of SCD1 activity.ConclusionsWe have established an
effective, expedited, and economical format for in silico modeling of
novel agents based on a scaffold-hopping methodology. Our findings
provide compelling evidence supporting the therapeutic benefit of SCD1
inhibitors for clinical use as broad-spectrum anti-tumor agents alone or
in combination with SOC.

