Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An assay to detect hypomethylation in circulating cell free DNA
and monitor cancer burden


Circulating, cell free DNA (cfDNA) is a non-invasive sample source that
contains tumor associated DNA. Next generation sequencing (NGS) of cfDNA
has shown that tumor specific mutations can be detected, providing an
effective means to monitor disease, treatment efficacy, and characterize
the genome wide methylation state of cfDNA. While hypermethylation is
observed for specific gene promoters, on a genome wide perspective,
hypomethylation of cfDNA is observed in cancer, making cfDNA an
attractive target to assess cancer burden. The challenges in deep
sequencing of cfDNA include: mandatory fast turnaround times due to
sample degradation, limited sample material, short DNA fragments, and
limit of detection issues caused by the presence of both normal and tumor
DNA. This study describes a novel library preparation for the Illumina
platforms that is cost-effective, sensitive, and specific to assess the
methylation status of cfDNA.To characterize the methylation status of
cfDNA, NGS libraries were generated utilizing a chemistry that
sequentially ligates the adapters to each end of the DNA molecules. Since
the library is generated after bisulfite treatment, a high recovery of
DNA library molecules is observed, thus enabling high complexity library
preparation from 5 ng of cfDNA. Upon establishment of this technique, we
obtained cfDNA from healthy subjects as well as from subjects with a
spectrum of cancers. Following bisulfite-conversion and library
preparation of these samples, we sequenced each sample on the Illumina
MiSeq to a depth of 10 million reads. A minimum threshold of 1.1% was
used to determine significant hypomethylation.Upon analysis, preliminary
analysis of the hypomethylation status of the cfDNA from 4 of the 5
cancer subjects ranged from 3% to 9% when compared to the healthy
controls. The cfDNA sample which was negative for hypomethylation
originated from the plasma of a subject with a high grade serous
adenocarconima in the fallopian tube. The most hypomethylated cfDNA came
from the plasma of subject with metastatic adenocarcinoma of the colon
which had metastasized to the liver. Other tumor types which resulted in
cfDNA hypomethylation between these two extremes included invasive breast
carcinoma as well as pancreatic ductal carcinoma.This method provides the
basis for a technique to reliably prepare and characterize cfDNA via NGS
deep sequencing. We obtained results 5 days after resection and reliably
made high complexity library using only 5 ng of cfDNA. We have
demonstrated reproducibility and sensitivity for genome wide methylation
status, while also observing that the utility of this assay may vary with
cancer type. To further define biologically significant thresholds for
methylation status, we will present a longitudinal study examining the
cfDNA methylation status of individuals before, during, and after
treatment, thereby generating a methylation gradient as a function of
time and treatment.

