Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA DNA divergences: An unsuspected marker of cancer genomic
instability accurately predicts triple-negative breast cancer severity


Next generation sequencing provides 3 measures of cancer genomic
instability i.e. somatic DNA variations, differential gene expression and
RNA DNA divergences (RDD). The latter reflects changes in RNA sequences
that are not present at the DNA level. Triple negative breast cancers
(TNBC) represent the most severe form of the disease and are currently
not amenable to targeted therapies nor to prognosis testing. We used the
3 measures of genomic instability to construct specific optimal
algorithms that effectively separated 20 TNBC patients with poor or good
clinical outcomes: 11 patients died from the disease within 1000 days
following diagnosis of non metastatic TNBC while 9 were alive after 2500
days of follow up. All 3 models efficiently separated these 2 clinically
polarized groups. However, only RDD based algorithms and not those
relying on somatic mutations and expression profiles retains performances
in excess of 90% accuracy after statistical cross validation. The 3
models were then applied in blind to 45 unknown patients with the same
inclusion criteria i.e. non metastatic TNBC diagnosed before the age of
65 irrespective of menopausal, lymph node, tumor size and ethnic origin
or recruitment centers. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that the RDD based
algorithm was highly predictive of clinical outcome i.e. 100% of patients
predicted with good outcome were alive while 80% of patients predicted
with poor outcome died in the same time interval (pNext generation
sequencing provides 3 measures of cancer genomic instability i.e. somatic
DNA variations, differential gene expression and RNA DNA divergences
(RDD). The latter reflects changes in RNA sequences that are not present
at the DNA level. Triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) represent the
most severe form of the disease and are currently not amenable to
targeted therapies nor to prognosis testing. We used the 3 measures of
genomic instability to construct specific optimal algorithms that
effectively separated 20 TNBC patients with poor or good clinical
outcomes: 11 patients died from the disease within 1000 days following
diagnosis of non metastatic TNBC while 9 were alive after 2500 days of
follow up. All 3 models efficiently separated these 2 clinically
polarized groups. However, only RDD based algorithms and not those
relying on somatic mutations and expression profiles retains performances
in excess of 90% accuracy after statistical cross validation. The 3
models were then applied in blind to 45 unknown patients with the same
inclusion criteria i.e. non metastatic TNBC diagnosed before the age of
65 irrespective of menopausal, lymph node, tumor size and ethnic origin
or recruitment centers. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that the RDD based
algorithm was highly predictive of clinical outcome i.e. 100% of patients
predicted with good outcome were alive while 80% of patients predicted
with poor outcome died in the same time interval (p<10-5). Algorithm
based on somatic mutations and expression failed to predict clinical
outcome in Kaplan-Meier analysis of validation set (p = NS). We then
applied RDD predictive algorithm to TNBC cell lines and found that cells
with RDD rate leading to poor clinical outcome prediction were
statistically significantly associated with higher invasion and migration
capacity (pNext generation sequencing provides 3 measures of cancer
genomic instability i.e. somatic DNA variations, differential gene
expression and RNA DNA divergences (RDD). The latter reflects changes in
RNA sequences that are not present at the DNA level. Triple negative
breast cancers (TNBC) represent the most severe form of the disease and
are currently not amenable to targeted therapies nor to prognosis
testing. We used the 3 measures of genomic instability to construct
specific optimal algorithms that effectively separated 20 TNBC patients
with poor or good clinical outcomes: 11 patients died from the disease
within 1000 days following diagnosis of non metastatic TNBC while 9 were
alive after 2500 days of follow up. All 3 models efficiently separated
these 2 clinically polarized groups. However, only RDD based algorithms
and not those relying on somatic mutations and expression profiles
retains performances in excess of 90% accuracy after statistical cross
validation. The 3 models were then applied in blind to 45 unknown
patients with the same inclusion criteria i.e. non metastatic TNBC
diagnosed before the age of 65 irrespective of menopausal, lymph node,
tumor size and ethnic origin or recruitment centers. Kaplan-Meier
analysis showed that the RDD based algorithm was highly predictive of
clinical outcome i.e. 100% of patients predicted with good outcome were
alive while 80% of patients predicted with poor outcome died in the same
time interval (p<10-5). Algorithm based on somatic mutations and
expression failed to predict clinical outcome in Kaplan-Meier analysis of
validation set (p = NS). We then applied RDD predictive algorithm to TNBC
cell lines and found that cells with RDD rate leading to poor clinical
outcome prediction were statistically significantly associated with
higher invasion and migration capacity (p<0.001). Inactivation of the
expression of the most important transcript contributing to the RDD model
reversed the in vitro phenotype. Comparison of RDD events occurring in
good an poor outcome patients showed statistically significant
differences in affected and replacement bases between the 2 groups.
Therefore, RDD originate in non-random defects in the transfer of
information between DNA and RNA that strongly contribute to tumor
severity, further identification of specific transcripts differentially
affected by RDD rate between poor and good clinical outcome allows
development of novel strategies for selective therapeutic intervention.

