Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inherited variants affecting RNA editing may contribute to ovarian
cancer susceptibility


Background: Recent bioinformatic analyses and high-throughput sequencing
efforts have revealed that RNA editing is a widespread
post-transcriptional modification that affects non-coding repetitive
elements throughout the genome. This modification, which involves the
conversion of adenosine into inosine, is mediated by the action of the
adenosine deaminases acting on RNA (ADAR) family of enzymes. Based on
reports of dysfunctional ADAR expression in epithelial ovarian cancers
(EOC), we hypothesized that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
five ADAR genes (ADAD1, ADAR1, ADAR2, ADAR3, SND1) may contribute to EOC
susceptibility, potentially by altering the expression of corresponding
genes in ovarian tissues.Methods: Using directly genotyped and imputed
data from 10,891 invasive EOC cases and 21,693 healthy controls of
European ancestry represented in the international Collaborative
Oncological Gene-environment Study, we evaluated the frequency of 7,133
SNPs in 5 RNA editing genes. Unconditional logistic regression was used
to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) between
genotypes and case status under a log-additive genetic model, with
adjustment for the first five principal components representing European
ancestry. Subgroup analysis was conducted for the four main histologic
sub-types of EOC. We also aggregated SNP-level data and conducted
gene-level analyses using the Admixture Maximum Likelihood (AML) test and
the Sequence-Kernel Association test for the combined effect of common
and rare variants (SKAT-CR).Results: Association analysis revealed a top
risk-associated SNP (OR (95% CI) = 1.39 (1.17-1.64)) in ADAR3 with P =
1.3 x104, 17 additional SNPs in ADAR1, ADAR3, or SND1 with P = 104, and
51 SNPs with P = 103; this observed number of statistically-significant
SNPs was greater than expected. When restricting to the 6,500 invasive
serous adenocarcinomas, the magnitude of association strengthened for
numerous SNPs. Exploratory analysis for the less common histologic
subtypes (endometrioid (n = 1,439), mucinous (n = 696), and clear cell (n
= 660)) revealed SNP-level associations (PBackground: Recent
bioinformatic analyses and high-throughput sequencing efforts have
revealed that RNA editing is a widespread post-transcriptional
modification that affects non-coding repetitive elements throughout the
genome. This modification, which involves the conversion of adenosine
into inosine, is mediated by the action of the adenosine deaminases
acting on RNA (ADAR) family of enzymes. Based on reports of dysfunctional
ADAR expression in epithelial ovarian cancers (EOC), we hypothesized that
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in five ADAR genes (ADAD1, ADAR1,
ADAR2, ADAR3, SND1) may contribute to EOC susceptibility, potentially by
altering the expression of corresponding genes in ovarian
tissues.Methods: Using directly genotyped and imputed data from 10,891
invasive EOC cases and 21,693 healthy controls of European ancestry
represented in the international Collaborative Oncological
Gene-environment Study, we evaluated the frequency of 7,133 SNPs in 5 RNA
editing genes. Unconditional logistic regression was used to estimate
odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) between genotypes and
case status under a log-additive genetic model, with adjustment for the
first five principal components representing European ancestry. Subgroup
analysis was conducted for the four main histologic sub-types of EOC. We
also aggregated SNP-level data and conducted gene-level analyses using
the Admixture Maximum Likelihood (AML) test and the Sequence-Kernel
Association test for the combined effect of common and rare variants
(SKAT-CR).Results: Association analysis revealed a top risk-associated
SNP (OR (95% CI) = 1.39 (1.17-1.64)) in ADAR3 with P = 1.3 x104, 17
additional SNPs in ADAR1, ADAR3, or SND1 with P = 104, and 51 SNPs with P
= 103; this observed number of statistically-significant SNPs was greater
than expected. When restricting to the 6,500 invasive serous
adenocarcinomas, the magnitude of association strengthened for numerous
SNPs. Exploratory analysis for the less common histologic subtypes
(endometrioid (n = 1,439), mucinous (n = 696), and clear cell (n = 660))
revealed SNP-level associations (P<103) unique to each sub-type.
Gene-level analyses based on AML and SKAT-CR revealed that ADAR1 was
globally associated (PBackground: Recent bioinformatic analyses and
high-throughput sequencing efforts have revealed that RNA editing is a
widespread post-transcriptional modification that affects non-coding
repetitive elements throughout the genome. This modification, which
involves the conversion of adenosine into inosine, is mediated by the
action of the adenosine deaminases acting on RNA (ADAR) family of
enzymes. Based on reports of dysfunctional ADAR expression in epithelial
ovarian cancers (EOC), we hypothesized that single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in five ADAR genes (ADAD1, ADAR1, ADAR2, ADAR3,
SND1) may contribute to EOC susceptibility, potentially by altering the
expression of corresponding genes in ovarian tissues.Methods: Using
directly genotyped and imputed data from 10,891 invasive EOC cases and
21,693 healthy controls of European ancestry represented in the
international Collaborative Oncological Gene-environment Study, we
evaluated the frequency of 7,133 SNPs in 5 RNA editing genes.
Unconditional logistic regression was used to estimate odds ratios (OR)
and 95% confidence intervals (CI) between genotypes and case status under
a log-additive genetic model, with adjustment for the first five
principal components representing European ancestry. Subgroup analysis
was conducted for the four main histologic sub-types of EOC. We also
aggregated SNP-level data and conducted gene-level analyses using the
Admixture Maximum Likelihood (AML) test and the Sequence-Kernel
Association test for the combined effect of common and rare variants
(SKAT-CR).Results: Association analysis revealed a top risk-associated
SNP (OR (95% CI) = 1.39 (1.17-1.64)) in ADAR3 with P = 1.3 x104, 17
additional SNPs in ADAR1, ADAR3, or SND1 with P = 104, and 51 SNPs with P
= 103; this observed number of statistically-significant SNPs was greater
than expected. When restricting to the 6,500 invasive serous
adenocarcinomas, the magnitude of association strengthened for numerous
SNPs. Exploratory analysis for the less common histologic subtypes
(endometrioid (n = 1,439), mucinous (n = 696), and clear cell (n = 660))
revealed SNP-level associations (P<103) unique to each sub-type.
Gene-level analyses based on AML and SKAT-CR revealed that ADAR1 was
globally associated (P<0.10) with susceptibility to invasive EOC, with P
= 0.024 and P = 0.023, respectively. Expression quantitative trait locus
analysis is underway to evaluate associations between genotype and gene
expression in EOC and precursor tissues using data from The Cancer Genome
Atlas Project and other sources.Conclusions: Preliminary data from this
large-scale collaboration suggest that germline variation involving RNA
editing genes may influence susceptibility to EOC. This novel finding
warrants further investigation, as inherited and acquired alterations
affecting RNA editing may serve as important biological mechanisms that
promote the development of EOC and possibly other malignancies.

