Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eps8: a negative regulator of myofibroblast differentiation and
function


In this study we investigate the mechanisms regulating myofibroblast
differentiation and function, and identify the adapter protein Epidermal
growth factor receptor kinase substrate 8 (Eps8) as a negative regulator
of the cancer-associated myofibroblast phenotype.Cancer-associated
fibroblasts (CAFs) are a heterogenous, poorly defined cell population.
Most commonly CAFs are identified by de novo expression of -smooth muscle
actin (SMA) incorporated into stress fibres generating enhanced
contractility, which is associated with an enhanced secretory profile.
Myofibroblasts promote a number of the hallmarks of malignancy, and
clinical studies have shown that the presence of an SMA-rich stroma is
associated with poor outcome in several cancers, suggesting that stromal
targeting may be a useful therapeutic adjunct. The aim of this study was
to investigate the mechanisms regulating differentiation of the
myofibroblastic CAF phenotype.Fibroblasts (HFFF2 and primary fibroblasts
extracted and cultured from normal skin, esophageal and oral mucosa) were
treated with TGF-1 to induce myofibroblast transdifferentiation. Target
genes were suppressed using siRNA. Gene expression was examined using
RNA-seq and qRT-PCR, and protein expression by Western blotting and
immunofluorescence microscopy. Myofibroblast function was examined using
gel contraction assays while the effect of the myofibroblast secretion
profile on cancer cell migration was assessed using Transwell migration
assays.RNA-seq confirmed the upregulation of myofibroblast-associated
genes (FN1, COL1A1, CTGF, ACTA2) in TGF-1-treated fibroblasts.
Conversely, we found that the adaptor protein Eps8 was significantly
down-regulated, and this occurred early in the transdifferentiation
process. Eps8 sits at the heart of a complex system regulating
reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton, and interacts with numerous
intracellular proteins including palladin, F-actin and integrins. We
found that siRNA knockdown of Eps8 in fibroblasts promoted myofibroblast
differentiation, resulting in increased expression of SMA, stress fibre
formation and cell contractility and promotion of cancer cell motility.
Suppression of Eps8 expression sensitized fibroblasts to TGF-1 treatment
and potentiated TGF-1 signalling, in part through transcriptional
upregulation and increased phosphorylation of SMAD2.These data suggest
that Eps8 expression provides tonic inhibition of myofibroblast
transdifferentiation, at least in part by desensitization of cells to
TGF-1 mediated by the regulation of SMAD2 expression. Loss of Eps8
expression may play an important role in the generation of an
SMA-positive myofibroblastic CAF population.

