Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Creating novel translation inhibitors to target pro-survival
proteins in chronic lymphocytic leukemia


Many aspects of malignant phenotypes are associated with dysregulation of
translation control. Due to the fact that the great majority of
oncoproteins turnover rapidly, and have an acute need for mRNA
translation compared to housekeeping proteins, protein synthesis is a
promising avenue to explore for targeted cancer therapy. We propose to
target the biological rewiring that is characteristic of B cell
malignancies, namely the overexpression of short-lived pro-survival
proteins that keep these cells from undergoing apoptosis. We hypothesize
that transient inhibition of translation will cause a lethal decrease in
those labile pro-survival proteins in CLL cells initiating apoptosis.
Further, this will provide selectivity toward the malignancy over normal
cells and may prove to be a more general strategy for overcoming drug
resistance. The marine natural product pateamine A (PatA) inhibits
cap-dependent translation initiation by binding to the eukaryotic
initiation factor 4A (eIF4A) and stalls the initiation complex on mRNA.
We have synthesized a family of PatA-based small molecules to test their
potency for inducing apoptosis in primary CLL cells. Our lead compound,
DMDAPatA, is more stable and easier to synthesize than the parent natural
product, and demonstrated anti-leukemia activity in primary CLL cells
with an IC50 of 2.5 M after 24 h of incubation. This derivative was
equally active in samples from patients with poor prognostic
characteristics such as advanced Rai stage, the unmutated status of the
IgVH gene, or the over-expression of the ZAP70 protein, suggesting its
ability to bypass resistance to conventional CLL therapy. Tritium labeled
leucine incorporation measurements confirmed inhibition of translation by
DMDAPatA that occurred as soon as 4 h, preceding the full activation of
apoptosis. Reduction of the short-lived anti-apoptotic proteins Mcl-1 and
XIAP were observed by 4 h, and persisted over 24 h, while the levels of
the more stable proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL were not affected. This is
consistent with the selective activity of translation inhibitors toward
proteins with rapid turnover rates. Diminished levels of Mcl-1 and XIAP
reduced the anti-apoptotic capacity such that the pro-apoptotic proteins
became more prevalent to initiate cell death. Since DMDAPatA depleted
Mcl-1 without affecting Bcl-2, and ABT-199 inhibits Bcl-2 activity but
spares Mcl-1, the combination of DMDAPatA and ABT-199 targeted both arms
of apoptosis control and killed CLL cells synergistically. Dose reduction
index analysis demonstrated mutual potentiation of ABT-199 and DMDAPatA.
Thus, these studies provide the first proof-of-mechanism investigations
of PatA analogs for CLL therapeutics. DMDAPatA appeared to be highly
plasma protein bound compared to PatA. New derivatives are being
synthesized to reduce plasma protein binding and increase potency.

