Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel animal study software application emulates clinical trials
by enabling the conduct of multi-center, asynchronous pre-clinical trials


Just five percent of anticancer therapeutics are approved following
completion of positive Phase III clinical trials. The high rate of
failure is primarily due to insufficient demonstration of efficacy as
opposed to toxicity. This suggests that existing pre-clinical tools and
methods are suboptimal predictors of clinical efficacy. For this reason,
software tools which are capable of managing and conducting multi-center
pre-clinical trials are needed. Results from pre-clinical studies which
closely emulate clinical trials are assumed to be more predictive of
clinical outcome. To accrue subjects from a genetically diverse patient
population and rapidly complete studies, clinical trials are conducted on
a global scale at multiple sites, enrolling patients on a rolling,
asynchronous basis. The high degree of complexity of such multi-center
trials requires powerful software to enable rigorous scheduling practices
and oversight as well as standardized and centralized protocol and data
management. The use of paper-based and spreadsheet-based approaches to
pre-clinical study conduct, has heretofore made multi-center trials with
rolling enrollments unfeasible. This is due in large part to the
inability of these approaches to manage study task and measurement
schedules, their lack of a standardized, centralized protocol management
functionality, and the lack of centralized data aggregation, processing
and analysis capability. In addition, variability in methods of data
collection, processing and analysis, high manual labor costs and an
overall lack of standardized nomenclature make spreadsheet-based
approaches likewise unsuitable for the conduct of asynchronous,
multi-center trials. For the first time, these problems are surmountable
with the implementation of a novel, commercially-available animal study
workflow software and database. The application manages a trial with arms
conducted at multiple study centers around the world. Each center has its
own database, which is synchronized to a central database so data
acquired at various locations can be aggregated, processed and analyzed.
Methodologies for study conduct, analyses and reporting are detailed in a
single, centralized protocol, ensuring consistency and uniformity of
results across all study centers. Data from animals enrolled on a rolling
basis may be automatically aligned relative to its respective enrollment
day. The ability for a trial to employ transgenic animals which
spontaneously develop tumors, or standard xenografts or patient derived
xenografts (PDX), closely emulates the process of asynchronous subject
accrual used in clinical trials. Additional functionalities which further
enable or facilitate the conduct of Multi-Center Pre-clinical Trials on a
global basis will be described.

