Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting self-renewal in human colorectal cancer by inhibiting
SUMOylation


Colorectal cancer is the third most commonly diagnosed cancer and the
second leading cause of cancer death in the US. It is well recognized
that cancer stem cells (CSCs) are responsible for treatment resistance,
tumor metastasis and relapse, which cause treatment failure. SUMOylation
is known to be important for pluripotency and is dysregulated in cancers
to drive tumor growth and metastasis. Therefore, we investigate the role
of SUMOylation in colorectal cancer CSC maintenance and self-renewal.In
this study, we established that aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) activity
is a valid marker of colorectal CSCs, because ALDH+ cells in HT29
displayed CSC properties including self-renewal, clonal formation and
tumor initiation in NSG xenograft mouse model, while ALDH- cells did not.
Profiling ALDH+ and ALDH- cells showed that SUMO-activating enzyme (SAE)
is highly enriched in ALDH+ cells along with enhanced global SUMOylation.
Overexpression of the catalytic subunit of SAE, SAE2, increased the
population of ALDH+ cells while knockdown of SAE2 decreased the
population of ALDH+ cells. This result suggests that increased SAE level
promotes stemness in colorectal cells. To characterize CSC maintenance
and self-renewal quantitatively, we performed limited dilution assays in
vitro with sphere initiation and in vivo using mouse xenograft models. In
in vitro assays, we observed 4-fold reduction in CSC self-renewal
frequency in SAE2 knockdown cells compared to control cells in the
colorectal cancer cell line HT29. In four colorectal cancer
patient-derived primary culture cells, the frequency was 26 fold lower in
SAE2 knockdown groups than control. In the in vivo experiment, SAE2
knockdown group showed 12-fold reduction in self-renewal frequency of
HT29 cells. These data demonstrate that silencing of SAE2 causes a
significant decrease in stemness of colorectal cancer cells, both in HT29
cell line and primary human tumors. Mechanistic analysis regarding how
SUMOylation regulate colorectal cancer CSC is underway and will be
discussed.In conclusion, our study indicates that SUMOylation, in
particular the SAE, is an important regulator of colorectal CSC
maintenance and self-renewal. Therefore, the data suggests that targeting
SAE is a potential strategy to inhibit colorectal CSC.

