Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma carotenoids and breast cancer risk in the Cancer Prevention
Study II Nutrition Cohort


Background: Several plasma carotenoids have been inversely associated
with postmenopausal breast cancer risk in large cohort studies and a
pooled analysis. Whether associations differ by tumor or participant
characteristics is unclear. We investigated the associations of plasma
carotenoids with postmenopausal breast cancer risk overall and by
estrogen receptor (ER) status, tumor stage, smoking status and body mass
index in a case-control study nested in the Cancer Prevention Study II
Nutrition Cohort.Methods: A total of 561 breast cancer cases diagnosed
between blood draw in 1998-2001 and June 30, 2007 and matched 1:1 with
controls on race, birth date and blood draw date were included.
Multivariable-adjusted conditional and unconditional logistic regression
models were used to calculate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs).Results: Plasma -carotene was inversely associated with
breast cancer risk even after adjustment for total fruit and vegetable
intake (4th vs. 1st quartile OR = 0.58, 95% CI: 0.40, 0.85, P-trend =
0.03). This inverse association was stronger among ever smokers
(P-interactionBackground: Several plasma carotenoids have been inversely
associated with postmenopausal breast cancer risk in large cohort studies
and a pooled analysis. Whether associations differ by tumor or
participant characteristics is unclear. We investigated the associations
of plasma carotenoids with postmenopausal breast cancer risk overall and
by estrogen receptor (ER) status, tumor stage, smoking status and body
mass index in a case-control study nested in the Cancer Prevention Study
II Nutrition Cohort.Methods: A total of 561 breast cancer cases diagnosed
between blood draw in 1998-2001 and June 30, 2007 and matched 1:1 with
controls on race, birth date and blood draw date were included.
Multivariable-adjusted conditional and unconditional logistic regression
models were used to calculate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs).Results: Plasma -carotene was inversely associated with
breast cancer risk even after adjustment for total fruit and vegetable
intake (4th vs. 1st quartile OR = 0.58, 95% CI: 0.40, 0.85, P-trend =
0.03). This inverse association was stronger among ever smokers
(P-interaction<0.05), and obese women (P-interaction = 0.02), but did not
differ by tumor stage (P-heterogeneity = 0.61). Although there was an
inverse trend between -carotene and ER+ (P-trend = 0.01) but not ER-
breast cancer (P-trend = 0.99), the test for heterogeneity by ER status
was not statistically significant (P-heterogeneity = 0.28). There was
some evidence of an inverse association with total carotenoids but this
association was nonlinear.Conclusions: These results suggest that higher
plasma -carotene is associated with lower risk of breast cancer, and this
association was even stronger in smokers and obese women.

