Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The CARMA3-Bcl10-MALT1 signalosome mediates NF-B activation and
cellular invasion in AGTR1-positive breast cancer


Angiotensin II (Ang II) is a potent vasoconstrictor and vascular
pro-inflammatory mediator, known classically for its role in promoting
arterial dysfunction. Many of these pathogenic effects result from
activation of NF-B in response to stimulation of the type-1 Ang II
receptor (AGTR1), a G protein-coupled receptor. We previously discovered
that a complex composed of three proteins, CARMA3, Bcl10 and MALT1 (CBM
signalosome) mediates AGTR1-dependent activation of NF-B in vascular
cells. Despite its principal role in vascular pathobiology, we recently
found that AGTR1 is aberrantly overexpressed in 10-20% of breast cancers
(characterized as Luminal, ER+, PR+, Her2-). In this context, AGTR1
promotes cellular invasion and in vivo tumorigenesis, but the mechanisms
driving this effect of AGTR1 have remained unclear. We hypothesized that
stimulation of AGTR1 in this subset of breast tumors induces
CBM-dependent NF-B activation, thus contributing to tumorigenesis.To
develop experimental models for studying the impact of AGTR1 in breast
cancer (BC), we screened a panel of BC cell lines and found
overexpression of endogenous AGTR1 in BT549 cells, among a few others,
but no expression in most lines. To complement the BT549 line, we stably
over-expressed exogenous AGTR1 in ZR75 cells (an AGTR1-, luminal line) to
produce the ZR75-AGTR1 line. All BC lines tested, irrespective of AGTR1
status, expressed CARMA3, Bcl10 and MALT1.We found that Ang II treatment
induces time-dependent phosphorylation of IB, indicating NF-B activation,
in both BT549 and ZR75-AGTR1 cells, but not in control ZR75 cells. We
then employed an NF-B reporter assay to generate further evidence of NF-B
activation in ZR75-AGTR1 cells. We also demonstrated induction of several
endogenous NF-B target genes using real-time Q-PCR. Importantly, Ang
II-dependent NF-B activation is effectively blocked by pretreatment with
losartan (AGTR1 antagonist) or with IKK-VI (IKK inhibitor), as well as by
siRNA-mediated knockdown of Bcl10 or MALT1. These data indicate that Ang
II dependent NF-B activation in these cells is dependent on activation of
AGTR1, proceeds through the canonical NF-B machinery, and requires the
CBM signalosome. Moreover, we showed that AGTR1 activation triggers a
dramatic increase in migration and invasion of both BT549 and ZR75-AGTR1
cells, and that this response is completely blocked by siRNA-mediated
Bcl10 knockdown.These results demonstrate for the first time that AGTR1
stimulation leads to NF-B activation in a subset of breast cancer cells,
and link this response to aggressive phenotypic behavior. These studies
have significant clinical implications since AGTR1 antagonists, currently
used for treatment of hypertension, might be effectively re-deployed for
treatment of breast cancers that harbor AGTR1 overexpression. Inhibition
of CBM-dependent signaling may also represent a novel treatment approach.

