Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting c-Jun and c-Fos using microRNA's has a potential in
contesting melanoma


Background and Aim:MicroRNAs (miRNAs or miRs) are an abundant class of
short (17 to 25 nt) non-coding single-stranded RNAs that are significant
controllers of cellular gene expression. Mature miRNA is created from
long primary genomic transcripts (pri-miRNA), which are processed in the
nucleus. The resulting 60-80-nucleotide precursor miRNAs (pre-miRNAs) are
transferred to the cytoplasm and are treated to produce a short RNA
duplex. One strand of the duplex is degraded, the remaining
single-stranded miRNA molecule associates with members of the Argonaute
protein family, to form the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). RISC
plus the guide miRNA bind to the 3untranslated region (3-UTR) of the
targeted mRNA and induce gene down-regulation by mRNA cleavage or
translational repression. Serum stimulation of cancer cells has been
shown to prompt positive regulatory transcription factors, such as c-Jun,
c-Fos and Egr-1, as well as increasing transcriptional repressors such as
YY1, NAB2 and GCF2. These transcription factors play critical parts in
the early stimulation of cancer disease phenotypes and are prime targets
for clarifying disease pathways and as therapeutic candidates. The
identification of microRNAs regulating the mRNAs of transcription factors
will improve our understanding of the mechanism of disease gene
stimulation and subsequent pathway initiation leading to cancer disease
phenotypes. MicroRNAs that ablate disease phenotypes are possible
pharmaceutical therapies. Our aim was to identify and profile microRNAs
that interact with the mRNA of transcription factors such as c-Jun and
c-Fos.Results:We measured the expresion of c-Jun and c-Fos at the mRNA
and protein levels (time course 0 to 6 hrs) in MM200 (human melanoma). We
measured the expression of two microRNAs, miR155 and miR125b, which have
been reported as playing a role in regulating c-Jun and c-Fos in Dermal
Fibroblasts and melanoma cells (Song, Liu et al. Cellular Physiology and
Biochemistry 2012 and Kappelmann, Kuphal et al. Oncogene 2013). We show
that miR-155 and miR-125b expression is repressed following serum
activation in these two cell lines (HEK293 and MM200). Loss of function
and gain-of-function studies in these cancer cell lines, by supressing
and overexpressing miR155/125b were performed. Subsquently, a target 3UTR
vs microRNA study was conducted that demonstrated that the miR-155 and
miR-125b have the ability to recognize and repress c-Jun and c-Fos.
Moreover, phenotypic studies such as migration, proliferation, cell cycle
were performed.Conclusions:miR-155 and miR-125b are able to regulate
c-Jun and c-Fos mRNAs and to inhibit their expression at the protein
level.

