Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HACE1 is a putative tumor suppressor gene in B-cell
lymphomagenesis down-regulated by both deletion and epigenetic mechanisms


HACE1, located on chromosome 6q, encodes an E3 ubiquitin ligase and is
downregulated in human tumors such as neuroblastomas and natural killer
(NK) lymphomas. HACE1 has been shown to ubiquitylate Rac1, a protein
involved in cell proliferation and G2/M cell cycle progression. The
function of HACE1 and the factors involved in its transcriptional
regulation are largely unknown in the context of B-cell lymphomas. We
show here, by RT-qPCR, that HACE1 gene is constitutively expressed in
Normal lymph nodes and in normal B-cells isolated from peripheral blood,
contrasting with a strong downregulation of its expression in more than
70% (77/111) of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cases and in four
tested B-Lymphoma cell lines. HACE1 gene copy number was assessed by
quantitative multiplex PCR of short fluorescent fragments (QMPSF) and
array for comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) in 91 DLBCL cases. A
HACE1 heterozygous deletion was observed in 38.1% and an homozygous
deletion in 2.4% of cases. These deletions were associated with a
significant gene expression decrease. The molecular epigenetic mechanisms
underlying HACE1 downregulation were also investigated. Using
pyrosequencing assays, as compared to normal B-cells, we observed an
hypermethylation of HACE1 promoter CpG177 island in 60% (68/111) of DLBCL
cases and in all tested B-Lymphoma cell lines. However, no significant
correlation between promoter methylation status and gene expression level
was demonstrated. Furthermore, RT-qPCR assays revealed that the
demethylating agent 5azacytidine (5AZA) did not induce a HACE1 gene
expression increase in the different cell lines. By contrast, the histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) trichostatin A (TSA) and LBH589 strongly
reactivated the expression of HACE1 in Ramos, Raji and RL cells in which
the CpG 177 island was fully methylated. We next performed ChIP
experiments to determine whether HACE1 locus chromatin was in an active
or inactive conformation in Ramos cell line, the most sensitive cell line
to TSA effect. We found that the chromatin of HACE1 gene promoter region
was predominantly in the inactive conformation (methylated H3 histones).
TSA treatment was able to reverse this pattern, switching the
conformation of HACE1 promoter chromatin to an active one predominantly
associated with acetylated H3 histones. The putative role of HACE1 in
B-cell lymphomagenesis was further investigated using lentiviral
transduction (shHACE1). We demonstrated in Ramos and Raji cells that a
down-regulation of HACE1 expression was associated with a significant
decrease of apoptosis level and cell cycle arrest in G2/M phase.To
conclude, our experiments indicate that HACE1 can act as a
haploinsufficient tumor suppressor gene in most B-cell lymphomas and be
downregulated by deacetylation and methylation of its promoter region
chromatin constituting a potential target for HDAC inhibitors.

