Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutant Kras associated protein oxidation in pancreatic neoplasia


Recent studies have suggested that mutant Kras associated activation of
the Nrf2 pathway may have a significant role in pancreatic cancer (PaCa)
tumorigenesis. Nrf2 regulates a battery of antioxidant genes, including
peroxiredoxin-1 (Prdx-1), thioredoxin (Txn), and sulfiredoxin (Srxn),
which are responsible for maintaining redox homeostasis in the cell.
While ROS detoxification may have significant roles in cancer, several
non-classical mechanisms of redox signaling associated with protein
oxidation and phosphorylation are also important in tumorigenesis. Prdx-1
can regulate transcription as a cofactor in multiple oxidation states,
represses tumorigenesis in its reduced state, and can act as a nuclear
chaperone in elevated states of oxidation and when phosphorylated. Txn
and Srxn prevent Prdx-1 overoxidation. We are therefore investigating the
role of Prdx-1 oxidation and Txn and Srxn regulation in oncogenic
signaling pathways in mutant Kras models of pancreatic tumorigenesis and
neoplasia. Our data suggest that throughout tumor progression, Prdx-1
expression and localization are differentially regulated. These changes
also correlated with reduced Txn and Srxn expression in lesions. In
vitro, neoplastic and tumorigenic pancreatic cell lines have more total
prdx-1 expression and oxidized Prdx-1 expression than non-tumorigenic
cell lines. Moreover, cells that have mutant Kras were associated with
higher levels of protein oxidation than those with wildtype Kras
expression. Interestingly, mutant Kras was also associated with
differences in pERK interaction with Prdx-1, which was also
differentially regulated by NOX inhibitors and omega-3 fatty acids that
control pancreatic neoplasia. ERK inhibitors also differentially affected
Prdx1 expression in pancreatic cells in vitro. In addition, AKT, ERK, and
FOXO3a phosphorylation were also modified by DPI treatment (NOX
inhibitor) and omega-3 fatty acid treatment in wildtype and mutant Kras
normal, neoplastic, and tumorigenic cell lines. We therefore conclude
that mutant Kras is associated with elevated levels of Prdx-1 oxidation
and that Kras-mediated activation of ERK could be associated with changes
in Prdx-1 signaling in pancreatic neoplasia.

