Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of lurbinectedin toward ovarian clear cell
carcinoma


Objectives:Lurbinectedin is a marine-derived covalent DNA minor groove
binder and is structurally similar to trabectedin except for the C
subunit. Lurbinectedin (PM01183) is a newly developed antitumor agent
that is currently being investigated in phase I/II clinical trials in
patients with solid tumors including ovarian cancer. The objective of
this study is to investigate the effectiveness of lurbinectedin as a
single agent or as combination with existing antitumor agent against
ovarian clear cell carcinoma which is regarded as an aggressive
chemoresistant histological subtype.Methods:Using human ovarian clear
cell carcinoma cell lines, the anti-tumor effects of lurbinectedin, SN38,
topotecan, doxorubicin, cisplatin and paclitaxel as single agent were
assessed by MTS assay. Then the cytotoxicities of combination treatments
involving lurbinectedin and 1 of the 4 agents were evaluated by
isobologram analysis to examine which of these combinations displayed
synergistic effects. The antitumor activities of the combination
treatments were also examined using cisplatin-resistant and
paclitaxel-resistant ovarian clear cell carcinoma sublines, which were
derived from the parental clear cell carcinoma cells by continuously
exposing them to cisplatin or paclitaxel. Finally, using nude mice
inoculated with clear cell carcinoma cells, we examined the
growth-inhibitory effect of lurbinectedin in vivo.Results:Lurbinectedin
showed significant antitumor activity toward chemosensitive and
chemoresistant CCC cells in vitro. Mouse xenografts of CCC cells revealed
that lurbinectedin significantly inhibits tumor growth. Concurrent
exposure to lurbinectedin and SN-38 resulted in synergistic interactions
in CCC cell lines. The combination of lurbinectedin plus SN-38 also had
strong synergistic effects on both the cisplatin-resistant and
paclitaxel-resistant CCC cell lines. Treatment with everolimus
significantly enhanced the antitumor activity of single agent
lurbinectedin and combination of lurbinectedin plus
SN-38.Conclusions:Lurbinectedin is a promising agent for CCC as a
first-line chemotherapy and as a second-line treatment of recurrent CCC
that had previously been treated with cisplatin or paclitaxel. Moreover,
lurbinectedin combined with irinotecan may be more efficacious for the
management of CCC.

