Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-proliferative effect of Oman's medicinal plants derived
active principles on breast cancer cells (MDA MB 231)


Breast cancer (BC) is leading cause of death among females in United
States and it is one of the emerging threats in Oman. Heavy doses of
current clinical drugs are too toxic to patient and often failed to abort
the recurrence after therapy. Despite huge number of reports on
development of breast cancer chemotherapeutic drugs, median survival of
BC patients not improved due to extreme ongoing and post treatment
toxicity. Searching of drugs which can kill BC cells in a low dose by
sparing normal cells is life time goal of many cancer researchers.
Keeping the above fact in mind, we searched for potential natural
products from Oman's medicinal plants which can kill BC cells
potentially. We tested different doses (25, 50, 75 and 100 g/ml) of sixty
crude extracts and seventeen pure compounds obtained from Omani medicinal
plants along with different dilutions (1:1000, 1:1500 and 1:2000 -
prepared in medium) of Omani frankincense derived heavy oil for their
ability to induce the cell death in MDA MB 231 cells with normal skin
fibroblast as control. Doxorubicin used as positive drug control. After
24 hrs cells were checked for cell viability by MTT assay.We set the
criteria to select the potent anti-cancer active principle out of tested
extracts and compounds that it should induce more than 50% cell death in
50 g/ml drug concentration. As per this end point, fifteen extracts
induced cell death in the range of 60%-90% and five pure compounds killed
MDA MB 231 cells in the range of 75%-90%. Noticeably heavy oils can
induce 90% cell death in very low dose (1:2000 dil.) of treatment by
sparing normal skin fibroblast. Although it is primitive data, but this
forms rationale for us to test this oil and other compounds and extracts
in in vivo BC xenograft model and subsequently on BC heterogeneity,
recurrence and metastasis.

