Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Employing a unique panel of breast cancer cellular lipids extracts
in the development of a novel nanoliposome drug platform


Breast cancer is a major cause of cancer death in women worldwide. Breast
cancer is a heterogeneous disease characterized by variant pathological
features, disparate responses to therapeutics, and substantial
differences in patient's long-term survival. The use of drug delivery
systems such as liposomes can favorably alter the pharmacokinetic and
biodistribution profile of commonly used drugs used to treat breast
cancer disease.An important feature of a drug delivery system is its
ability to recognize and selectively target tumor cells with relatively
high affinity when compared to healthy tissues. For this reason, the goal
of this study was to develop a novel nanoliposome system that would
target tumor cells to a significantly greater extent when compared to
more conventional liposome systems. In this study, natural lipids
extracted directly from breast cancer cells were used to prepare cellular
lipid-extracted nanoliposomes (CLENs). The rationale is that an array of
different lipids with a unique composition profile would represent a more
relevant source of lipid material when compared to more traditional
methods of liposome preparation. We therefore investigated whether the
inclusion of extracted lipids derived from breast cancer cells would
improve the selective uptake of liposomes by breast cancer cells, and
related formulation features. To achieve these goals, three breast cancer
cell lines were used (4T1, BT-20, and SK-BR-3), a normal breast
fibroblast (CRL-2089), and an ovarian cancer cell line (SK-OV-3- used as
a negative control).The size of CLENs fell within the size range of 120-
203 nm and possessed a negatively-charged liposome surface charge
potential (ranging between -10.97 and -20.97 mV). The nanoliposomes were
also non-toxic to cells within the concentration range evaluated (up to
1mol). Furthermore, without exception, the cellular uptake of CLENs was
greatest when the extracted material used to prepare CLENs was the same
as the target cell from which the lipids were extracted. In addition,
when the breast cancer cell lines (4T1, SK-BR-3 and BT-20) were used to
prepare CLENs, SK-OV-3 and CRL-2089 cell lines took up CLENs to a lesser
extent, suggesting a more selective and differential cellular uptake.In
conclusion, the novel nanoliposome platform represents a promising drug
delivery alternative to more conventional nano drug delivery systems.
Additional formulation studies are currently underway.

