Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long non-coding RNA are differentially expressed in breast cancer
clinical subtypes


A primary benefit of RNA-Seq over traditional DNA microarrays is the
ability to interrogate expression in unannotated areas of the
transcriptome. Methods for identifying novel genes in genomic DNA
sequence can use features such as an open reading frame and conserved
functional protein elements. Non-coding RNA structures are more difficult
to detect, and most of our knowledge of them comes from expressed
sequence tags (ESTs), which are large, sequenced contigs from
transcriptome cDNA libraries. Carninci et al. showed that over half of
these sequences appear to originate from non-coding sources, though very
few are annotated. Moreover, many of these non-coding sources are poorly
conserved over multiple species indicating that these transcripts may not
be functional, but instead, may be the result of random transcription. As
more studies focus on these non-coding regions of the genome evidence of
conservation and functionality is emerging. To identifying possibly
functional transcripts, we took the approach of identifying only
non-coding transcripts which were differentially expressed between breast
cancer tumor subtypes, and tumor versus non-tumor samples by RNAseq
analysis. We reason that such ncRNA transcription is more likely to be
functional because of its association with a specific disease phenotype
and the possibility that they affect some regulatory pathway. We have
identified known long-non coding tumor suppressors, such as H19 and MEG3,
as expressed exclusively in non-tumor samples. In addition we have
identified 59 intergenic regions representing a total of 132 300 bp which
were differentially expressed between ER+/HER2- and ER-/HER2- breast
tumor subtypes. This resulted in 4 potential non-coding regions
associated with ER-/HER2- tumors, and 6 potential non-coding regions
associated with ER+/HER2- tumors. These transcripts are of great
interest, and should be studied in more detail to elucidate the function
of these non-coding RNA molecules.

