Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum circulating DNA and nucleosomes increase in response to
neoadjuvant chemoradiation and surgical resection for pancreatic cancer


Introduction: Pancreatic cancer (PC) is the deadliest of the major
cancers, and response rates to standard therapies are low. Tumor cells
release circulating extracellular DNA (exDNA) and nucleosomes (short
segments of DNA in complex with histone proteins). These factors have
been evaluated as markers of disease burden for prognosis and response to
therapy. We hypothesized that exDNA and nucleosome (NUC) levels would
correlate with each other and decrease in patients (pts) undergoing
neoadjuvant chemoradiation (CRT) and surgical resection for localized
PC.Methods: Blood was collected from pts with radiographically localized
PC before and 4-6 weeks after CRT (N = 8), intraop and 1 week postop in
pts with resectable tumors (N = 4), as well as from pts with advanced
disease (N = 3) and normal volunteers (N = 6) to create a spectrum of
data for disease burden. ExDNA and NUC were isolated from serum samples
and quantified using a fluorescent DNA-specific stain (Picogreen) and
ELISA, respectively.Results: Normal volunteers had the lowest exDNA/NUC
levels while patients with advanced disease had the highest levels.
Overall, exDNA/NUC levels increased 3-fold in patients who underwent CRT
to levels similar to those of patients with advanced disease, regardless
of whether they had radiographic partial response (N = 4), stable disease
(N = 4), or progressive disease (N = 2) on restaging nor whether they
were subsequently able to undergo resection. ExDNA and NUC levels
correlated well except in pts who underwent resection, when exDNA but not
NUC levels peaked intraop at >5-fold post-CRT levels. Both exDNA and NUC
levels remained elevated at least one week postop.Discussion: Contrary to
our hypothesis, exDNA and NUC levels increased following neoadjuvant CRT
regardless of radiographic response to therapy. ExDNA and NUC levels
correlated well except during the intraop period, when exDNA but not NUC
levels were dramatically elevated. These data suggest that exDNA and NUC
are not simply markers of disease burden. We postulate that exDNA and NUC
are released by tumor cells and also by host immune cells in response to
CRT and surgical trauma. In order to put this into a broader context, we
are expanding our dataset to include more patients and time points. We
are evaluating other specific forms of exDNA as well as DNA-associated
proteins as markers of cell death that may be more useful for monitoring
response to therapy.

