Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastasis suppressors regulate the tumor microenvironment by
blocking recruitment of pro-metastatic TAMs


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients have the highest risk of
recurrence and metastasis. Because they cannot be treated with targeted
therapies, and many do not respond to chemotherapy, they represent a
clinically underserved group. While physiological inhibitors of
metastasis (metastasis suppressors) play key roles in regulating tumor
growth, invasion and metastasis, their role in regulating the tumor
microenvironment and immune system is unknown. We hypothesized that the
metastasis suppressor Raf Kinase Inhibitory Protein (RKIP) regulates
stromal cells, which then affect tumor invasiveness.Using
species-specific RNAseq we determined that expression of RKIP in tumors
markedly reduces the number and metastatic potential of infiltrating
TAMs. While TAMs isolated from TNBC xenografts drive in vitro invasion,
RKIP+ derived TAMs did not drive invasion and had decreased secretion of
pro-metastatic factors including SLPI, OPN, MMP-12, Galectin-3, VEGF-A,
VEGF-D, TNFR2, and PGRN. We determined that RKIP regulates TAM
recruitment by blocking HMGA2, which activates CCL5 expression. CCL5
rescued TAM infiltration as well as tumor intravasation. We additionally
showed that factors decreased in RKIP-derived TAMs were restored in
CCL5-derived TAMs. Finally, we demonstrated the TAM secreted factor PGRN
is both necessary and sufficient for TAM driven invasiveness.To determine
the clinical utility of these TAM genes we combined their expression with
RKIP signaling in the tumor to create a signature that strikingly
separates TNBC patients based on outcome. Our results demonstrate for the
first time that metastasis suppressors can regulate the microenvironment,
regulating invasion through TAMs. Our results also suggest TNBC patients
with decreased RKIP activity and increased TAM infiltration may respond
to therapies targeting CCL5 or PGRN.

