Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular ATP is internalized through not only
macropinocytosis but also other endocytic process and promotes growth of
human lung cancer cells with Ras mutations


Within a tumor, extracellular ATP (exATP) concentrations are in the range
of several hundred micromolars or higher, 103-104 times higher than those
in normal tissues1. We recently showed that extracellular ATP, within the
intratumoral concentrations, was internalized by Ras-mutated (Rasmut)
A549 human lung cancer cells through macropinocytosis, elevated
intracellular ATP levels and rescued cancer cells under various
stresses2. However, macropinocytosis3 alone could not account for all the
elevated intracellular ATP increase. Here, we show that other endocytic
processes, in addition to macropinocytosis, also contributed to the
internalization of exATP in A549 and H1299 human lung cancer cells. Cell
viability assays, intracellular ATP luminescence measurement assays,
fluorescent microscopy were used in this study. First,
high-molecular-weight (HMW) dextran uptake assay indicated that A549 and
H1299, both Rasmut cancer cells, exhibited a phenotype of
macropinocytosis. The colocalization of the red fluorescent HMW dextran
and green nonhydrolyzable ATP analog inside the cells indicated that
extracellular ATP was internalized by macropinocytosis. In contrast,
significantly fewer macropinosomes were found in NL-20 noncancerous lung
cells. In addition, the colocalization of low-molecular-weight (LMW)
dextran, an endocytic tracer, and ATP analog indicated the
internalization of exATP through non-macropinocytic-endocytosis in both
lung cancer cell lines. Interestingly, when both red HMW dextran and
green LMW dextran were applied to cancer cells, not only colocalization,
but also some green-only endosomes were observed, strongly suggesting
that both endocytic processes were responsible for exATP internalization.
Collectively, these data indicated for the first time that other
endocytic processes in addition to macropinocytosis contributed to the
internalization of exATP in human lung cancer cells with Rasmut. This
finding may significantly enhance our understanding of energy hemostasis
within cancer cells and the Warburg effect, which in turn facilitates the
development of anticancer therapeutics targeting the endocytic processes
and Ras mutations as well as novel anticancer strategies.1. Pellegatti,
et al. (2008). PLoS ONE 3, e2599.2. Qian, et al. (2014). Cancer Letters
351, 242-251.3. Commisso, et al. (2013). Nature 497, 633-637.

