Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The in vivo activity of a novel anti-angiogenic compound, JFD-WS,
in human breast adenocarcinoma xenograft implanted athymic nude mice


The tumor growth and metastasis of several cancers depend on the extent
of both angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis triggered by chemical signals
that are originating from cancer cells with aggressive growth ability.
The discovery of angiogenic inhibitors have been helping to reduce both
morbidity and mortality resulting from multiple types of cancers. As part
of the comprehensive treatment strategy combining anti-angiogenic agents
with conventional cytoreductive treatments is considered to be the most
effective approach. As part of this strategy an added ability for
inducing apoptosis in cancer cells could make the therapeutic agents very
effective. The in vitro anti-angiogenic activity of water soluble form of
JFD (JFD-WS) was examined by ECMatrixTM gel assay with human umbilical
vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) using 0.01-10 M concentrations at
different time intervals (0, 4 and 8 hrs). A complete inhibition of in
vitro angiogenesis was observed in 8 hrs at 10 M concentration of JFD-WS.
Our newly discovered JFD-WS is also proven as a potent anti-cancer drug
in this study by using GI-101A (human breast adenocarcinoma) xenograft
implanted athymic nude mice. In addition to the anti-angiogenic ability,
the anti-tumor activity of JFD-WS seems to be further enhanced due to
induction of apoptosis in the xenograft tumor implanted animals. In
addition, the intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of JFD-WS (at a dose of
100 mg/kg body weight) was able to significantly inhibit the tumor growth
compared to the control group. At the end of the treatment period 35.19%
inhibition of tumor growth was observed in JFD-WS treated animals along
with prolongation of survival. The tumor inhibition was lot more
effective when JFD-WS was combined with Taxol (10 mg/kg). The analysis of
MUC1 levels in the serum proved a significant regression of the tumor
burden in the experimental animals. Furthermore, when the key apoptotic
signaling molecules such as Bax, Bcl2, Cytochrome c, Apaf-1, cleaved
caspase-3 and p53 were analyzed in the tumor samples, that were extracted
from JFD-WS treated animals. A significant increase in the expression of
Bax (10.6 fold), Apaf-1 (2.2 fold), and p53 (3 fold) were observed. In
support of the induction of apoptotic signals, the expression of
anti-apoptotic protein Bcl2 was decreased by 1.8 fold. Consequently, the
release of Cytochrome c found in the cytosolic fraction was significantly
higher in JFD-WS treated animals as compared with the untreated controls.
Finally, the induction of apoptosis in JFD-WS treated group was confirmed
by the presence of cleaved caspase-3. Our results from both in vivo and
in vitro experiments confirm the anti-angiogenic and pro-apoptotic
effects of JFD-WS in xenograft tumor implanted athymic nude mice (This
project was supported by The Royal Dames of Cancer Research Inc.,
Ft.Lauderdale, Florida).

