Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic study of synergistic interaction between genistein and
equol in MCF-7 human breast cancer cells in vitro


Soy isoflavones, such as genistein, daidzein, glycitein and equol, a
metabolite of daidzein, have been suggested to affect the growth of
estrogen-receptor positive breast cancer cells in vitro, and thus
considered to be involved in the prevention of breast cancer. We have
recently reported that soy isoflavone component mixture has a greater
preventive activity against breast cancer rather than genistein alone
using chemically induced rat model of hormone-dependent mammary
carcinoma. Therefore, we investigated here whether a synergistic
interaction exists between genistein and other isoflavone components in
estrogen receptor positive MCF-7 cells. Effects of genistein in
combination with other isoflavone components on proliferation, apoptosis,
cell cycle perturbation, and signal proteins for survival, proliferation,
and apoptosis were evaluated by WST-1 assay, FACS analyses, and Western
blotting. Synergistic anti-proliferative activity of genistein was
observed in combination with three respective isoflavone components, with
the most efficacious interaction observed in combination with equal. In
FACS study, cells were arrested at the G2/M by genistein but G1/S by
equol. However, when these components were combined, cells were arrested
at the G2/M, indicating a dominant effect of genistein over equol.
Although apoptosis was not evident when cells were treated with either
genistein or equol alone, combination treatment markedly induced
apoptosis, with demonstrable cleavage of PARP. Upon combination
treatment, constitutive activities of Erk1/2 were enhanced, but those of
Akt were significantly inhibited, with subsequent reductions of
activities of downstream mTOR. Reduced expression of anti-apoptotic
Bcl-xL and enhanced expression of proapoptotic Bax were also
demonstrated. These data indicate that synergic mechanism of genistein in
combination with equol would be mediated by enhanced apoptosis induction
through inactivation of Akt and its downstream molecule mTOR, followed by
subsequent upregulation of Bax and downregulation of Bcl-xL, thus
providing mechanistic rationale for soy isoflavone for the prevention of
human breast cancer.

