Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Penfluridol suppresses triple negative breast cancer metastasis to
brain by inhibiting 64 integrins


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer related deaths in the
United States. Breast tumor metastasis to brain is primary cause of
deaths. Brain metastasis of triple negative breast cancer cells (TNBC) is
highly resistant to current therapies and is a cause of reduced survival
rates in patients. In the current study, we evaluated the anti-cancer
effects of penfluridol, a first generation antipsychotic drug against
three different highly aggressive TNBC cell line. The IC50 of penfluridol
was around 6 M in 4T1, MDA-MB-231 and HCC-1806, breast cancer cells
respectively. Our result showed that the expression of integrin4,
integrin6, Fak, Paxillin, Rac1/2/3 and ROCK1 was significantly reduced
after treatment with penfluridol for 24 hours. Penfluridol treatment
induced significant apoptosis in 4T1, MDA-MB-231 and HCC-1806 cells as
exhibited by cleavage of caspase 3. Interestingly, integrin signaling is
known to play significant role in breast cancer metastasis, and
integrin64 are overexpressed in breast tumors. Integrin6 and 4 were
silenced in breast cancer cells using shRNA and siRNA respectively.
Silencing of integrin64 resulted in apoptosis which was further increased
by penfluridol treatment. On the other hand, activation of integrins by
TGF treatment reduced the induction of apoptosis by penfluridol,
confirming the role of integrins. Efficacy of penfluridol was evaluated
in three in vivo experiments. In the first experiment, 4T1, breast cancer
cells were implanted in the mammary fat pads of female mice and the mice
were treated with 10 mg/kg penfluridol by oral gavage everyday till day
27, once the tumor size reached 50 mm3. Penfluridol treatment suppressed
breast tumor growth by 50% as compared to control. In the second
experiment, 4T1 luciferase transfected breast cancer cells were injected
intracranially into the brain. The growth of 4T1-luc cells was monitored
non-invasively using IVIS caliper and the mice started getting treatment
with 10 mg/kg penfluridol by oral gavage the very next day of tumor cell
injection. Our result demonstrated that the tumor growth in the brain of
penfluridol treated mice was reduced by 85% as compared to control.
Furthermore, anti-metastatic effect of penfluridol was determined by
intracardiac injection of 4T1-luc breast tumor cells into the left
ventricle of mouse heart. Once breast cancer cells lodged in the brain,
mice were treated with 10 mg/kg penfluridol for 12 days. Our results
showed that penfluridol treatment suppressed the growth of metastatic
breast cancer cells in brain by 90%. The metastatic tumors from
penfluridol treated mice exhibited reduced expression of integrins. Taken
together, our result indicate that penfluridol is effective in reducing
the growth of primary TNBC tumor as well as metastatic growth in brain by
inhibiting integrin signaling. [Supported in part by R01 grant CA129038,
awarded by National Cancer Institute, NIH].

