Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Information-driven approaches to predicting familial risk for
prostate cancer


Given the known genetic heterogeneity of prostate cancer, risk assessment
for this disease is a field that is likely to be positively impacted by
improved interpretation of genetic variants identified through exome
sequencing. At present, there is insufficient evidence to base decisions
regarding screening, diagnosis and management of prostate cancer on
genetic tests. While a few genes (such as BRCA2 and HOXB13) are
definitively linked to prostate cancer risk, they are not found in
sizeable patient populations. However, a growing number of candidates for
prostate cancer risk have been proposed. As information resources
including the TCGA and other consortium databases expand, clinicians and
patients will face issues with how to interpret genetic data variant
regarding cancer risk. The goal of the present work is to develop a
paradigm that addresses the plausible scenario of a clinician seeking to
provide prostate cancer genetic risk assessment for patients with
personal and/or a family history of one or more types of cancer, but for
whom access to relative specimens for sequencing analysis is highly
limited. In particular, we focus on the development of an operational
framework through which to select and evaluate germ-line variants which
may contribute to familial cancer risk.Our study evaluates the current
potential of integrated informatics resources to help identify clinically
informative variants following exome sequencing of germ-line DNA from 12
prostate cancer patients with elevated risk of prostate or other cancers
based on family history. We explored variants in genes meeting specific
criteria: 1) genes thought to be relevant to hereditary prostate cancer,
or experimentally validated as regulating the growth of prostate tumors
in cell or animal models; 2) genes affected by somatic changes in cancer;
3) genes involved in DNA damage repair (DDR) including recently described
androgen-regulated DDR genes; and 4) genes involved in disorders of
glycosylation. We first filtered exome data based on the observed
frequency of gene variants in the general population. We then utilized
five independent in silico predictors and expert analysis of protein
structure and interactions to identify function-disrupting rare variants.
We described an average of 4 potentially disruptive variants in each
individual and annotated them in the context of the human variation data
accumulated over the last few years and represented in various public
databases. Novel variants were found in PALB2, RAD54L2, HSD3B1, NRIP1,
SCN11A, CYPBP1, SULT1E1 and UBE2D3. Molecular modeling of a p.(S221N)
mutation in the steroid binding site of the aldo-keto reductase AKR1C1
showed it would be predicted to disrupt the active site, influencing
androgen metabolism. Our study highlights the need and potential for
well-curated databases of variants with clinical relevance that will
ultimately facilitate germ-line exome testing in the clinical setting.

