Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of PARP by hyperthermia or pharmacological inhibitors
synergize with cisplatin and doxorubicin but not with 5-FU or paclitaxel


Short-term, high-dose chemotherapy together with hyperthermia (HIPEC) is
widely used for treatment of peritoneal carcinomatosis. However, it is
fairly known which agents currently used for HIPEC actually act
synergistically with elevated temperature. Furthermore, the molecular
mechanisms behind the potentiating effects are incompletely understood.
To mirror the clinical HIPEC setting we cultivated 2 ovarian and 2 colon
cancer cell lines under hypoxic conditions and performed a 1-hour
treatment at atmospheric oxygen levels with Cisplatin, Doxorubicin, 5FU,
or Paclitaxel at either 37C or 42C. Cells were then evaluated for
long-term survival, DNA strand break repair, poly(ADP-Ribosy)lation, and
H2AX and P-53BP1 foci formation. Importantly, we found that Cisplatin as
well as Doxorubicin were potentiated by hyperthermia as revealed by a
significantly reduced colony forming ability whereas high temperature had
no effects together with 5FU or Paclitaxel on long-term survival. The
synergistic effects on survival were due to compromised DNA strand break
repair capacity and followed by a significantly enhanced number of double
strand breaks. Interestingly, this was paralleled by a diminished
poly(ADP-Ribosy)lation indicating a reduced activity of PARP. The role of
this enzyme for the hyperthermia effects was confirmed by using
clinically relevant PARP inhibitors. Combination of PARP inhibitors was
synergistic with the same subset of compounds as observed with
hyperthermia. Short-term treatment with PARP inhibitors mimicked the
effects of elevated temperature both on survival and DNA repair capacity.
Hyperthermia and PARP inhibitors also led to a comparable increase of
H2AX and P-53BP1 foci in cells treated with Doxorubicin or Cisplatin.In
conclusion our data indicate that the cytotoxic effects of only a subset
of currently used chemotherapeutics can be potentiated by hyperthermia.
The molecular mechanisms behind these synergistic effects are related to
PARP functions in DNA repair.

