Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SPARC overexpression combined with irradiation reduces VEGF-A
dependent angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo via up regulation of miR410
in neuroblastoma cells


Neuroblastoma (NBL) is the third most common malignancy in children and
accounts for more than 15% of cancer-related deaths in children in the
US. Approximately 50% of patients present with advanced-stage and/or high
risk disease. Despite significant intensification of conventional
chemotherapy and the addition of immunotherapy to treatment regimens, the
long-term survival rates for these children remain less than 40%.
Secreted protein, acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC), also known as
osteonectin or BM-40, belongs to the matricellular family of secreted
proteins. The biological functions of SPARC are known to be variable in
human cancers. In neuroblastoma however, SPARC expression has been found
to be associated with impaired tumor growth and decreased tumor related
angiogenesis. In the present study we have attempted to elucidate the
mechanisms of this angiogenesis reduction. We overexpressed SPARC
adenovirus (human) with and without ionizing radiation (5Gy) in two
neuroblastoma cell lines SK-N-BE2 (p53mt) and NB1691 (p53wt) and observed
suppression of Vascular Endothelial Growth factor A (VEGFA) in both
NB1691 (5-fold) and SK-N-BE(2) (2-fold) cells. To determine angiogenic
potential of these neuroblastoma cells after SPARC overexpression, we
used the dorsal skin fold model assay from which we observed that
controls developed tumor cell induced vasculature (TV) which was clearly
differentiated from pre-existing vasculature (PV). Radiation treatment
alone of neuroblastoma cells caused the development of smaller and leaky
capillaries. Overexpression of SPARC reduced the tumor cell induced
vasculature to 186% of controls in NB1691 cells and to 485% of controls
in SKNBE2 cells. Addition of radiation treatment to SPARC overexpressed
cells further reduced tumor induced vasculature to 72% in NB1691 and to
153% of controls in SKNBE2 cells. Interestingly irradiation treatment
alone increased the number of new vessel formation in both NB1691 (1107%
of controls) and SKNBE2 (13610% of controls) cells. Previously, we
observed that SPARC overexpression decreased VEGF-A expression in both
NB1691 and SKNBE2 cells in vitro. To further determine the mechanism by
which VEGF-A is suppressed via SPARC overexpression we determined the
expression levels of VEGF-A targeting microRNAs. From the microRNA
analysis we observed that miR410 was consistently overexpressed in SPARC
overexpressed cells both in vitro and in vivo. We also observed that
miR410 targets VEGF-A mRNA at 4 different sites, more than any other
microRNA that targets VEGF-A. Our results indicate that: 1. SPARC
overexpression can sensitize neuroblastoma cells to irradiation even in a
varied p53 environment and; 2. Overexpression of SPARC suppresses
angiogenesis by specifically inducing the expression of VEGF-A targeting
microRNA miR410.

