Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor activity of sHA8k, a HYAL1 hyaluronidase inhibitor, in
bladder cancer cells


INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVE: Tumor cell-derived hyaluronidase HYAL1, which
degrades hyaluronic acid (HA) into angiogenic fragments, promotes tumor
growth and metastasis. HYAL-1 is an independent prognostic marker for
predicting metastasis. Small molecular mass sulfated hyaluronic acid
(sHA) derivatives (sHA8k) inhibit HYAL1 activity through a mixed
inhibition mechanism. Antitumor activity of sHA8k and mechanism of action
was evaluated in BCa models..METHODS: Effect of sHA8k (0-40 ug/ml) on
cell proliferation and apoptosis was examined in BCa cells (253J-Lung,
HT1376, UMUC-3, T24, RT4) by cell counting and Cell Death ELISA kit.
Matrigel invasion and Boyden chamber assays were used to test the effect
of sHA8k on invasive activity. Effect of sHA on signaling, apoptosis
cascade, HA receptor (CD44, RHAMM), EMT markers (-catenin, E-cadherin,
Snail, Twist) levels, was evaluated by Q-pCR and immunoblotting assays.
Angiogenic fragment addition and mAkt transfection were performed to
elucidate mechanism of action. Athymic mice bearing 253J-Lung xenografts
were treated with sHA (25 and 50 mg/kg) by i.p. injection.RESULTS: sHA8k
inhibited proliferation, motility and invasion in BCa cells that
expressed HYAL-1. At IC50 for HAase activity inhibition ( 20-g/ml), sHA
induced > 3-fold apoptosis and inhibited invasive activity of BCa cells.
sHA8k induced caspase-3, -8, -9 activation, up-regulation of Fas, Fas-L,
FADD, DR4, DR5 and E-cadherin. sHA8k downregulated CD44, RHAMM, bcl-2,
phospho(p)-Akt, pGSK3, pcatenin(ser552), snail and Twist expression.
Effect of sHA8k were attenuated by angiogenic HA fragments or
overexpression of m-Akt and downregulation of CD44 and RHAMM mimicked
sHA8k effects. sHA significantly inhibited 253J-Lung xenograft growth.
The majority of the animals did not form palpable tumors at 50-mg/kg
dose. No weight loss or serum and organ toxicity was observed in sHA
treated animals. Biochemical analysis of tumors also showed the same
alterations in Akt and EMT pathways as observed cell culture.CONCLUSION:
This is the first study that shows sHA8k, a small molecular mass HYAL-1
inhibitor has potent antitumor activity.Support: R01 CA 72821-14 (VBL)

