Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD38-expressing myeloid-derived suppressor cells promote tumor
growth in a murine model of esophageal cancer


Myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are an immunosuppressive
population of immature myeloid cells found in advanced stage cancer
patients and mouse tumor models. MDSCs suppress T cell-mediated tumor
clearance by production of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and
arginase, as well as through other mechanisms. The purpose of this study
was to identify the factor(s) contributing to the pro-tumorigenic role of
MDSCs in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC).We have used an
unbiased approach to search for changes in global gene expression profile
of MDSCs derived from conditional p120-catenin knockout mice
(L2-cre;p120ctnf/f, a model of oral-esophageal cancer; Stairs D.B., et al
Cancer Cell 2011), compared to immature myeloid cells from age-matched
wild-type mice. We have detected a dramatic increase in expression of the
Cd38 gene in MDSCs, compared to control cells. CD38 belongs to the
ADP-ribosyl cyclase family and possesses both ectoenzyme and receptor
functions. It has been described to function in lymphoid and early
myeloid cell differentiation, cell activation and neutrophil chemotaxis.
We find that CD38 expression in MDSCs is evident in several mouse tumor
models, and CD38high MDSCs are more immature than MDSCs lacking CD38
expression, suggesting a potential role for CD38 in the maturation halt
found in MDSC populations. CD38high MDSCs also possess a greater capacity
to suppress activated T cells, and promote tumor growth to a greater
degree than CD38low MDSCs, likely as a result of increased iNOS
production. We have identified novel tumor-derived factors, including
IL-6, IGFBP-3 and CXCL16, which induce CD38 expression by MDSCs ex vivo.
Finally, we have demonstrated that monoclonal antibody-mediated targeting
of CD38 results in suppressed tumor growth in vivo in a subcutaneous
transplant model of ESCC.In conclusion, we have shown that expression of
CD38 plays an important role in MDSC biology by promoting an enhanced
immunosuppressive capacity and a more immature phenotype in vivo. We have
also detected an expansion of CD38-positive MDSCs in peripheral blood of
advanced stage cancer patients and propose targeting CD38 in vivo as an
approach to cancer therapy.Supported by NCI P01CA098101.

