Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of chromosomal rearrangements in clinical tissue samples
by chromosome conformation capture


BackgroundThe detection of recurrent and specific chromosomal
rearrangements has become an important element in the diagnostic
evaluation of tumors and in decisions pertaining to their therapy.
Several detection methods applicable to routine clinical samples
currently exist, including in situ hybridization (FISH), RT-PCR, and
direct DNA sequence analysisall of which are associated with various
drawbacks. An approach that has not been extensively explored for the
detection of chromosomal rearrangements in clinical samples is the
analysis of changes in chromatin conformation due to alterations of
chromosomal structure. However, the extensive formalin fixation and
paraffin embedding that these samples routinely undergo would appear to
pose special challenges for analysis of chromatin in such
tissues.DesignTo investigate the practicality and potential value of
chromatin conformation assays for detecting chromosomal rearrangements in
formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples, we have analyzed
fixed and embedded cell lines and FFPE biopsy specimens containing two
different types of chromosomal translocations: the t(8;14)(q24;q32) found
in Burkitt's lymphoma and the t(14;18)(q32q21) found in follicular B cell
lymphoma. These two translocations place DNA of the IGH locus near that
of oncogenes MYC and BCL-2, respectively. The strong enhancers of IGH
induce the overexpression of the two oncogenes, presumably by looping of
chromatin to permit interactions with the oncogene promoters. Utilizing
primers designed to be complementary to DNA within IGH enhancers and MYC
or BCL-2 promoters, we performed chromosome conformation capture (3C) to
interrogate the possible chromatin interactions between the IGH enhancer
and the two promoters in FFPE samples.ResultsSince conventional 3C
procedures worked poorly with FFPE cell lines, probably because of heavy
fixation (16 hours, 10% buffered formalin), we modified the procedures by
partially de-crosslinking the specimens using heat and mild alkali. The
3C procedure modified in this manner can efficiently and specifically
detect the t(8; 14) and t(14; 18) in FFPE cell lines and, at a lower
sensitivity, in clinical biopsy specimens. In follicular lymphoma
samples, the detection of t(14; 18) achieved high specificity with an
analytic sensitivity of at least 10% tumor cells within a volume of 1000
total cells. The sensitivity with the Burkitt's samples was lower,
probably because of differences in preservation of the tissue and
chromatin, as suggested by results of FISH.ConclusionsWe report a
modified 3C workflow that successfully detected chromosome rearrangements
in clinical samples. In addition to diagnostic applications, this method,
with possible further improvements, may permit study of chromatin
interactions in clinical samples to increase understanding of epigenetic
and other basic genomic features in many forms of cancer.

