Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of toll-like receptor 4 agonist on the anti-tumor immune
response to the GVAX vaccine


We evaluated the immune response elicited by co-administration of a novel
toll-like receptor 4 agonist, glucopyranosyl lipid A (GLA), with a
genetically modified tumor cell based vaccine (GVAX) in mice. We have
previously reported that the addition of GLA to the GVAX vaccine in mice
resulted in a paradoxical decrease in delivery of tumor antigen to the
draining lymph node, yet an increase in therapeutic benefit. The addition
of GLA to GVAX altered the distribution of the vaccine induced anti-tumor
T cell response. In mice vaccinated with GVAX + GLA adjuvant
tumor-specific T cells accumulated in the spleen, liver and footpad as
soon as two days following vaccination. In contrast, in mice vaccinated
with GVAX alone, tumor-specific T cells accumulated primarily only in the
dLN.Since our previous study established that incorporation of GLA into
the GVAX vaccine did not alter the magnitude of the anti-tumor T cell
response, we set out to determine if the co-administration of GLA with
GVAX altered the functional capabilities of the anti-tumor T cell
response. We found that GLA did not increase in vivo tumor-specific
cytotoxic activity or increase the number of anti-tumor interferon-
expressing T cells found in the tumor or spleen following vaccination. We
next determined if the addition of GLA to GVAX altered the kinetics of
the anti-tumor T cell response. We found that the addition of GLA to the
GVAX vaccine resulted in rapid accumulation of activated anti-tumor T
cells in the spleen. Our results suggest that addition of GLA to the GVAX
vaccine does not increase the magnitude or significantly improve
functional capabilities of the anti-tumor immune response. These findings
are consistent with the hypothesis that the addition of GLA to the GVAX
vaccine increases therapeutic benefit by altering the distribution of the
response, resulting in a more systemic anti-tumor immune response.

