Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptin induces an IL-6 mediated interaction between macrophages
and ovarian cancer cells that prompted invasiveness and migration


Introduction: The current knowledge in ovarian epithelial carcinogenesis
grants a major role for chronic inflammation in driving the multiple
steps in the natural history of the most deadly gynecological cancer.
Different environmental stimuli have been associated with an increased
ovarian cancer risk. Growing evidence has become to support the potential
role of obesity as one of the conditioning factors. Leptin, an adipokine,
controlling metabolism and energy expenditure and normally circulating at
higher serum levels among overweight women, has been syndicated as the
pro-inflammatory mediator in obesity. So far, few are known about the
role of and how leptin modulate cells to cells interactions among the
different components of tumor microenvironment. Goal: In the present
study we investigated the leptin effect in prompting a pro-inflammatory
microenvironment, the communication between macrophages and ovarian
cancer cells and the impact of this interaction in cancer cell migration
and invasion.Methods: HEY ovarian cancer cell line and the THP-1 monocyte
cell line were used. THP-1 cells were differentiated to macrophages by
using PMA (Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate) 200 nM for 24h. Upon
differentiation macrophages were exposed to a time course of leptin (100
ng/ml, 6h to 24h). Upon control or leptin exposure, conditioned medium
was collected from macrophages (MCM), and used to measure IL-6 release to
the medium and to treat HEY cell line for 24h. Secreted IL-6 was used as
inflammation marker and measured by ELISA assay. Protein extracts were
obtained from HEY cells upon control and MCM exposure and used to
quantify epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) marker vimentin by
Immunoblotting and Immunocytochemistry. The effects of leptin and MCM in
HEY migration and invasion was assessed by Boyden chamber assay without
or with matrigel, respectively. Results: Upon leptin treatment both HEY
and macrophages significantly increased IL-6 release to the medium. More
importantly, incubation of MCM with HEY cells resulted in a synergistic
increase of IL-6 release, (from a basal release of 13,42 pg/mL to 2,3104
pg/mL upon MCM exposure). Moreover, HEY cells exposure to MCM resulted in
phenotypic changes that were associated to changes in vimentin expression
(mainly upon exposure to 6h leptin incubated MCM). Finally, this exposure
to leptin-incubated MCM significantly increased migration and invasion of
HEY cells. Conclusions: Our findings support a role of leptin in
prompting a pro-inflammatory microenvironment that involved an increase
in IL-6 release from the macrophages. These changes induced by leptin in
macrophages resulted in a cytokine secretion pattern, which
consequentially modified cancer cells phenotype favoring migration and
invasion and a more aggressive epithelial ovarian cancer behavior.
(Funding: FONDECYT 1120292 and 3140335)

