Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PAK4 allosteric modulators (PAMs) repress the Wnt/-catenin
signaling pathway and tumor growth


Wnt/-catenin signaling is a ubiquitous pathway conserved throughout
evolution and plays a role in embryonic and cancer development. This
pathway has proven to be difficult to target therapeutically. Another
intractable target is oncogenic Ras which is highly mutated in many
cancer types, including pancreatic, colon and lung. An available target
at the intersection of both of these genes is p21-Activated Kinase 4
(PAK4). PAK4 (1 of 6 PAK proteins) that is downstream of the Ras oncogene
and a direct kinase that stabilizes transcriptional activity of -catenin.
Therefore therapeutically targeting PAK4 in cancer could be beneficial in
a broad range of cancer types. PAK4 Allosteric Modulator (PAM) represents
a novel and selective class of compounds that inhibit PAK4
allosterically.Methods: Flow cytometry and CellTiter AQueous One assay
(MTS) were used to determine compound effects on cell cycle distribution
and proliferation. CCLE, COSMIC and other databases were used for
bioinformatics analysis of mutations in cancer genes. Deep sequencing and
qPCR were used to analyze mRNA expression profiles. Proteomic platforms -
KinomeScan, PTScan (Cell Signaling) and immunoblots were used to study
phosphorylation signature of whole cell proteins and total protein steady
state levels.Results: We identified a selective, orally bioavailable
small molecule PAM, KPT-9274, which demonstrated anti-tumor activity in a
variety of cancer cell lines (IC50 values from 0.005 - 1 M).
Bioinformatics revealed that sensitivity to KPT-9274 was directly
correlated with mutations in APC or N-ras and inversely correlated with
mutations in -catenin, K-ras, or PI3K. KPT-9274 and other PAMs reduced
phosphorylation and steady state levels of PAK4 protein while reducing
Phospho-S675 and total -catenin, Wnt5, Phospho- and total LRP6, Dvl2,
Phospho-Akt, and Phospho-ERK. PAMs also reduced -catenin transcriptional
activity (i.e. cyclin D1, MM7, and S100A4). PAMs arrested cancer cell
cycle at the G1 and G2 phases and induced apoptosis through Caspase and
PARP cleavage. KPT-9274 (100 mg/kg BIDx5 orally) has demonstrated potent
anti-tumor activity against hematological (Z-138, Molt-4, MM1S) and solid
(MDA-MB-468 and Colo-205) xenograft models in mice. PAM-treated
xenografts showed reduction of PAK4, -catenin and cyclin D1
proteins.Conclusions: PAK4 represents a novel anti-cancer target at the
crossroads of Ras and Wnt/-catenin signaling. We have identified
selective small molecule PAMs with anti-tumor activity both in vitro and
in vivo. These allosteric modulators induce tumor cell growth arrest and
apoptosis. Bioinformatics helped identify potential predictive markers in
the Wnt signaling pathway while deep sequencing and proteiomics revealed
possible PDn markers. Based on the in vitro and in vivo activity,
KPT-9274 may be beneficial for the treatment of a wide variety of cancers
and preclinical toxicology studies are ongoing.

