Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of bio-affinity nanoparticles: Applications for cancer
imaging and therapeutics


Treatment of advanced cancer, is an extremely challenging proposition.
Surgery is curative at early stages, but with substantial complications.
Molecular treatments in early disease are of questionable benefit,
coupled with the lack of therapeutic options in advanced disease, make
treatment extremely challenging. Early cancers evolve through many
somatic mutations involving many selective processes, induced in part by
classical drug therapies themselves initiating drug resistance. Genetic
cancers studies show extensive single missense mutations, copy number
variations, splicing variants, genetic rearrangements and short DNA
alterations in a large number of genes. However, physical agent therapies
are immune to genetic alterations, a targeting the cancer cell and
adjacent cells. By investigating cell surface markers that are correlated
with disease progression, we have coupled bio-affinity agents (antibody,
ligand, aptamer) to functionalized carbon nanoparticles and developed a
platform of delivering highly-localized energy in the immediate proximity
to the cells causing significant cellular damage. Similarly, these agents
can be simultaneously used as imaging agents, creates a theranostic
treatment agent. We have used papillary thyroid (PTC) and prostate cancer
(CaP) cancer cells and selectively targeted THSR and PSMA, respectively
in our models. Using a 2W laser light for 30 seconds, we are able to
achieve near 100% cell killing of targeted cells, whereas receptor-null
cells remain unharmed. Electron microscopy was used as a direct analysis
to answer the mechanistic question of cell necrosis and cell death that
cannot be approached via light microscopy. Altogether these results
suggest that significant and specific cell killing can be achieved with
small amounts of power over short periods of time. In conclusion, whereas
in the past, simultaneous multiple drugs therapies have been limited by
systemic toxicities, this approach represents a single delivery platform
that can carry several small molecule drugs, in conjunction with new
genetic modalities, in a targeted fashion with the added benefit of
self-imaging so as to document successful targeting.

