Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantification of biologically relevant vascular phenotypes in
human prostate cancer: automated image analysis using hyperplexed
immunofluorescence


Although anti-angiogenic therapy has emerged as a leading modality in
treating human cancer, further improvements in the duration and frequency
of clinical response of various human cancers remain important clinical
needs. Maturity of the tumor vasculature has been identified as one of
the major determinants of response of cancers to anti-angiogenic
treatments. We have developed and optimized the application of a
quantitative, high throughput, hyper-plexed, fluorescence imaging
technology to refine our understanding of the complexity of vascular
phenotypes in various human malignancies. The technology was used to
quantify tumor blood vessels and expression of thirteen proteins of known
roles in blood vessel biology in single sections from archival primary
tumor tissues from 64 prostate cancer patients. CD31 was used to segment
vascular objects in each image. CD31 and CD34 endothelial cell staining,
SMA pericyte staining, and collagen IV basement membrane staining were
used to classify detected vessels using K-means cluster analysis.
Segmented vessels were clustered into 2-20 cluster sets, and the
reproducibility of vessel classification of each cluster set was
determined using the consensus clustering algorithm. A six cluster set
that reflected biologically relevant tumor vascular subsets with high
consensus clustering concordance was selected for further analysis.
Clusters consistent with different stages of vessel development were
obtained, including clusters with CD34 high/SMA low and CD34 low/SMA high
profiles, reflecting immature and mature vascular phenotypes. Additional
clusters representing phenotypes consistent with transitional vascular
developmental stages were also identified. Nine additional proteins
involved in angiogenesis were also quantified in each vessel and
expression profiles for each cluster were determined. The enrichment of
blood vessel clusters was then analyzed for each patient. This revealed
differential patterns of vascular maturity phenotypes in the prostate
cancer tissues analyzed. We have demonstrated that high-throughput,
quantitative characterization of vascular maturity phenotypes is feasible
in human cancer tissue specimens. Such immunofluorescence hyper-plex
profiling of vascular-related proteins has the potential to illuminate
the complex biology of tumor angiogenesis and to enable novel approaches
for patient tailoring in clinical trials of anti-angiogenic therapeutics.

