Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ionizing radiation modifies the molecular composition of exosomes
derived from breast cancer cells


Metastatic breast cancer fosters an immunosuppressive tumor
microenvironment (TME). Local ionizing radiotherapy (RT) has the
potential to convert the tumor into an in situ vaccine by facilitating
efficient uptake of tumor neoantigens by dendritic cells and enhancing
antigen presentation to promote robust effector T cell responses.
Exosomes are microvesicles (30-100nm) released from living cells that
shuttle and transfer selected intracellular components, including
cytokines, growth factors, mRNA, and miRNA. Tumor-derived exosomes (TEX)
allow for a sophisticated means of communication with a variety of cells,
including immune cells, within the TME. We hypothesized that TEX released
from irradiated tumors may play a role in altering the susceptibility of
tumor cells to immune-mediated rejection.To determine if RT changes TEX
composition, we treated mouse mammary carcinoma cells TSA in vitro with
sham RT, 1 dose of 20Gy, or 3 fractions of 8Gy given in three consecutive
days (8Gyx3). Cells were transferred to exosome-depleted media following
RT and cell-free supernatant was collected 48hr later. TEX were isolated
using differential ultracentrifugation and purified with a sucrose
gradient. Electron microscopy was used to confirm the expected size and
morphology. TEX were lysed for identification of proteins using
label-free quantitation mass spectrometry (LFQ-MS) followed by MS/MS
analyses. To characterize miRNA signatures of TEX and their parent cells,
RNA was isolated for nanoString miRNA expression assay, which includes a
panel of 578 mouse miRNAs. Normalized results were analyzed with
MultiExperiment Viewer.LFQ-MS revealed that TEX from 20Gy- and
8Gyx3-irradiated TSA shared 10 unique proteins not present in TEX from
non-irradiated TSA. In addition, 17 unique proteins were present only in
TEX from 8Gyx3-treated TSA. Among them were proteins involved in T cell
development, MHC class I peptide processing, and proinflammatory lipid
signaling. Radiation induced downregulation of 73% of miRNAs expressed in
untreated TSA cells. Many of the changes in miRNA expression seen in
irradiated cells were also seen in the TEX derived from these cells.
Interestingly, unique expression patterns emerged with different miRNA
subsets expressed in TEX depending on RT regimen used. Interesting
candidates are being analyzed for functional relevance.This data suggests
that irradiation of tumor cells results in changes in protein and miRNA
composition of TEX, with differences dependent on the RT regimen used. We
have previously shown that 8Gyx3 RT synergized with anti-CTLA-4 antibody
and induced an abscopal effect in mice, while 20Gy did not (Dewan et al,
Clin Cancer Res, 2009). We are testing whether TEX contain biomarkers
that define the ability of RT regimens to synergize with immunotherapy.
Exosome-mediated communication networks may provide a new therapeutic
target for treatment of metastatic cancer.

