Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of aldehydes in anthracycline cytotoxicity in S. cerevisiae


Anthracyclines constitute drugs of choice as single agents or in
combination therapy in cancers that are refractory to other therapies,
such as triple negative breast cancer, commonly observed in
African-American women (AA) and is characterized for lacking biomarkers
for targeted therapy, and for being aggressive and carrying bad
prognoses. Anthracyclines effectiveness is dose-dependent, which
increases the risk of side-effects and eventually the development of drug
resistance. In S. cerevisiae, mutants of HOM6 display hypersensitivity to
doxorubicin by inactivation of the homoserine dehydrogenase. We
hypothesized that the L-aspartate-semialdehyde accumulating at this step,
sensitizes the cells to anthracyclines. We confirmed this by inactivating
HOM3, a prior step in the threonine biosynthesis pathway which prevents
the accumulation of the L-aspartate-semialdehyde, rescuing the hom6
strain. To expand our knowledge of the relationship between aldehydes and
anthracyclines, we sought to identify other aldehydes that can enhance
the toxic effects of doxorubicin. We exposed S. cerevisiae to aldehydes
(acetaldehyde, formaldehyde and glutaraldehyde) alone and combined with
doxorubicin, cisplatin and menadione. Combination of formaldehyde (2 mM)
and doxorubicin was most effective at reducing cell survival by between
31 to 39-fold (in wild type cells) relative to doxorubicin and
formaldehyde alone. This effect was dose-dependent on doxorubicin.
Co-treatment with formaldehyde and doxorubicin also showed increased
toxicity in anthracycline-resistant strains siz1 and msh2. Combination of
formaldehyde (2 mM) and menadione (60 mM) reduced cell survival by
between 1- to 1.5-fold in wild type cells. Combination of acetaldehyde (2
mM) and menadione (60 mM) reduced cell survival by between 1.6- to
2.2-fold in wild type cells. Wild type cells treated with the combination
of cisplatin (80 M) and acetaldehyde (2 mM) or glutaraldehyde (2 mM)
showed a reduced cell survival by between 0.4- to 3.12-fold with the
combination of cisplatin and glutaraldehyde being the more cytotoxic of
the two. Acetaldehyde, formaldehyde and glutaraldehyde show enhanced
toxicity of wild type cells when combined with cytotoxic drugs. The
potential use of a combination of aldehydes and cytotoxic drugs could
potentially lead to applications intended to enhance anthracycline-based
therapy.

