Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel chitosan-based hydrogel for intratumoral release of
immunotherapeutic cytokines


Controlled delivery of IL-12 has been shown to stimulate the immune
system to eliminate primary tumors and elicit tumor-specific, protective
immunity. Recently, we have developed a novel in situ gelling
chitosan-based hydrogel that appears capable of further improving
cytokine delivery within the tumor microenvironment while preventing
systemic dissemination of potentially toxic, pro-inflammatory
cytokines.Change in viscosity during gelation was measured using a
Brookfield DV-III Ultra Rheometer, revealing a 300-fold increase in
viscosity. Manipulation of chitosan's chemical properties such as
molecular weight, concentration, and degree of acetylation was found to
control the time of gelation, which ranged from ten seconds to one
minute.A protein release study was conducted using fluorescein
isothiocyanate labeled bovine serum albumin (FITC-BSA) as a surrogate for
IL-12. Dialysis tubes (with a molecular weight cutoff of 100kDa) were
loaded with FITC-BSA co-formulated with hydrogel and FITC-BSA in PBS
alone. The tubes were placed in a PBS bath and samples were taken at 48,
96, and 168 hours. The degree of release from the tubes was determined by
measuring the fluorescence of protein in samples using a
spectrofluorimeter. In vitro drug release studies demonstrated zero-order
release of FITC-BSA from the hydrogel over a one-week period. Comparison
to FITC-BSA in PBS indicates that the hydrogel exhibits a controlled
kinetics profile.Bioactivity of IL-12 when co-formulated with the
hydrogel was determined by quantifying the production of interferon gamma
(IFN) by NK-92MI cells, a line of human Natural Killer immune cells.
NK-92MI cells were grown in the presence of human IL-12 with and without
the hydrogel, and IFN production was measured via ELISA. The bioactivity
assay indicated that IL-12 bioactivity was not compromised when mixed
with the hydrogel. Specifically, after a 24 hour incubation period, the
amount of IFN produced by the NK-92MI cells was found to be similar
between groups treated with IL-12 alone and IL-12/hydrogel
co-formulation.After bioactivity was confirmed, mice (n = 3 per group)
were subcutaneously injected with the mouse urothelial carcinoma cell
line, MB49 (300,000 cells per mouse). After sufficient (approximately
50mm3) tumor growth, the mice were injected with either a hydrogel/IL-12
formulation or saline, which served as a control. Tumor volume was
measured on days 7, 9, 14 and 19 after tumor implantation. In the
anti-tumor study, mice treated with the IL-12/hydrogel co-formulation
experience reduction in tumor size, while those treated with saline
experience expected tumor growth.These studies demonstrate that a novel
chitosan-based hydrogel allows for sustained delivery of antitumor
cytokines without altering bioactivity.

