Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The clinical implication of MMP-1 and TIMP-1 on prognosis in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer


Introduction: The interaction between tumor cells and tumor
micro-environment (TME) plays important role in tumor initiation,
progression, treatment resistance, and prognosis in solid tumors
including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The aim of this study is to
evaluate the prognostic role of TME-related molecules in NSCLC patients
who received surgical resection. To find out a possibility of a potential
serum biomarker, protein expression in tissue from surgical specimen and
pre-operative serum were investigated together.Methods: For 85 NSCLC
patients who underwent surgical resection from August 2006 to September
2010 and had pre-operative serum samplings, we screened the serum levels
of 60 TME-related molecules with angiogenesis array kit for 8 patients
who had recurrences and 4 patients who did not. For matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 and tissue inhibitor of matrix
metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 in which significant difference was observed
between recurrence and recurrence-free groups, protein expressions were
investigated using ELISA in serum and immunohistochemistry in tumor
tissue.Results: High serum MMP-1 was related to carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA) level5 at diagnosis (P = 0.034), higher frequency of the presence
of vascular invasion (P = 0.041). High expression of MMP-1 in tumor cells
(intensity score2) was related to tumor differentiation (P = 0.057),
whereas high MMP-1 expression in stroma was significantly associated with
lymph node metastasis and TNM stage (P = 0.021 and P = 0.022,
respectively). In the case of TIMP-1, expression in tumor cells was
higher for adenocarcinoma but higher in stromal cells for squamous cell
carcinoma (P = 0.046). There was no correlation between the tissue and
serum levels of MMP-1 and TIMP-1. High serum MMP-1 showed a trend for
short overall survival (P = 0.080). When serum MMP-1 was combined with
CEA level or presence of vascular invasion, the prognostic implication
for overall survival was statistically significant. Neither tumor nor
stromal positivity for MMP-1 and TIMP-1 was associated with survival
outcome; however, a tumor/stroma TIMP-1 intensity ratio1 was strongly
associated with early recurrence in multivariate analysis (HR = 13.1, P =
0.008).Conclusion: In surgically resected NSCLC patients, serum MMP-1
showed a possibility as a prognostic biomarker. In addition, the
tumor/stroma TIMP-1 ratio (1) in tissue may be a useful to predict tumor
recurrence.

