Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: O-GlcNAcylation regulates breast cancer cell invasion via the
NAD+-dependent deacetylase SIRT1


Cancer cells increase nutrient consumption leading to the altered
metabolic state known as the Warburg effect. One pathway dependent on
glucose, glutamine and acetyl-CoA is the Hexosamine Biosynthetic Pathway
(HBP). Increased flux through the HBP leads to elevated post-translation
addition of O-linked--N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) on a diverse
population of nuclear and cytosolic proteins, many of which are
implicated in cancer. Recently, our lab provided the first evidence that
breast and prostate cancers increases total O-GlcNAcylation by increasing
O-GlcNAc Transferase (OGT) levels. Importantly, reducing OGT activity
inhibits cancer cell invasion in vitro and metastasis in vivo. OGT
inhibition reduces breast and prostate cancer cell invasion through, in
part, inhibition of the oncogenic transcription factor, FOXM1 and its
transcriptional target matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2). Here, we show
that OGT regulation of FOXM1 and cancer cell invasion requires regulation
of the NAD+-dependent deacetylase, SIRT1. SIRT1 is a NAD+-dependent
deacetylase regulated by changes in energy metabolism and its levels have
been found to be reduced during breast cancer progression. We demonstrate
an inverse relationship between O-GlcNAcylation and SIRT1 protein level
and activity in multiple breast cancer cells and show that SIRT1
regulation by O-GlcNAcylation occurs in an AMPK-dependent manner.
Consistent with this idea that reducing O-GlcNAcylation increases SIRT1
activity, we found that reducing OGT levels results in increased NAD+
metabolite levels in breast cancer cells. Importantly, we demonstrate
that SIRT1 is critical for OGT-mediated regulation of FOXM1 protein
ubiquitination and proteosomal degradation as reducing SIRT1 levels or
activity reverses OGT-mediated regulation of FOXM1 and invasion in
aggressive triple negative breast cancer cells. Furthermore, we show that
SIRT1 regulates FOXM1 to modulate its transcriptional target MMP2 to
promote breast cancer cell invasion. Collectively, these data indicate
that flux through HBP, via O-GlcNAcylation, connects this nutrient
sensing pathways with SIRT deactylases to regulate cellular invasion
signaling via regulation of FOXM1.

