Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of p53 function by KLF5


Background: The transcription factor Krppel-like factor 5 (KLF5) is
essential for normal homeostasis, stemness, and tumorigenesis. Typically,
KLF5 functions as a transcriptional activator, including in esophageal
epithelia where KLF5 promotes keratinocyte proliferation and migration by
activating EGFR and ILK, respectively, and prevents transformation by
activating Notch1. Yet, the function of KLF5 is context dependent, and
mutation of the tumor suppressor p53 switches KLF5 from a transcriptional
activator to a repressor of p21Waf1/Cip1 and from pro-proliferative to
anti-proliferative. Interestingly, KLF5 also inhibits p53 itself, though
the mechanism of this inhibition is unknown. We hypothesized that the
functional switch of KLF5 from transcriptional activator to repressor
involves the recruitment of a co-repressor.Methods: Primary human
esophageal keratinocytes immortalized with hTERT were stably infected
with inducible lentivirus containing shRNA against KLF5 or Sin3A. p53
mRNA and protein levels were assessed by real-time quantitative PCR and
Western blotting, respectively, and p53 protein stability was evaluated
by pulse-chase experiments. We employed ChIP across a 4 kb region on the
p53 gene, from 2 kb upstream to 2 kb downstream of the transcription
start site, to identify the region of KLF5 binding on p53. Promoter
activity was assessed with a series of luciferase reporters containing
varying lengths of p53 and its upstream regulatory region.
Protein-protein interaction was examined by co-IP.Results: KLF5 knockdown
significantly increased p53 both at the mRNA and protein levels. In
unstressed cells p53 protein undergoes rapid degradation such that p53
levels are typically low. Yet, with KLF5 knockdown, despite increased p53
protein levels, we saw no changes in p53 protein stability. By ChIP, we
identified a region of KLF5 binding to p53 between -600 to -356 bp
upstream of the transcription start site. Several other KLF family
members can interact with the co-repressor Sin3A, and we found that Sin3A
also complexed with KLF5 in human primary esophageal keratinocytes.
Knockdown of Sin3A abolished the inhibitory effect of KLF5 on p53,
resulting in elevated p53 expression, growth inhibition, and increased
apoptosis.Conclusion: KLF5 transcriptionally represses p53 via the
co-repressor Sin3A. Thus, KLF5 promotes cell proliferation in normal
keratinocytes by both activating pro-growth signals and inhibiting the
brake machinery of the cell cycle.

