Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide analysis of somatic mutations shared by co-occurring
ovarian high-grade serous carcinomas and serous tubal intraepithelial
carcinomas


INTRODUCTION Serous tubal intra-epithelial carcinoma (STIC) in the
fallopian tube has been proposed as a putative precursor of ovarian
high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC)[1,2]. Association of STIC and HGSCs is
seen in 50% of cases, and in 15% of women undergoing prophylactic removal
of fallopian tubes. Clonal STIC-HGSC relationship is suggested by shared
TP53 mutations and overexpression[3]. To further investigate the
relationship, we applied genome-wide sequencing of same-patient STIC,
HGSC and normal tube DNAs isolated from FFPE tumor specimens of 4 ovarian
cancer patients. Here we report extended patterns of somatic alterations
shared between STIC and HGSC and identify the affected homeostatic
pathways.METHODS We established the STIC-HGSC co-occurrence by
pathological evaluation and immunohistochemistry for TP53 and MKI67
positivity. Overlapping TP53 mutations were determined by Sanger
sequencing. DNA was isolated from STIC, HGSC and normal tissue areas of
paraffin sections, with laser-capture microdissection and whole-genome
DNA amplification employed for STICs due to the small cellular content.
250 ng of DNA was converted to sequencing libraries (Kapa Biosystems kit)
and exome enrichment done by SeqCap EZ System, Nimblegen, Roche. Exomes
were sequenced on Illumina HiSeq2500 at 100x coverage in 100-bp
paired-end run. Somatic mutations were analyzed by MuTect and FreeBayes
callers to determine unique as well as overlapping STIC and HGSC
alterations.RESULTS Deep sequencing expanded the number of shared
STIC-HGSC mutations to 20-55 per patient. ETV5, LPAR4, MTOR, and PAK3
genes harbored recurrent mutations in HGSCs, and the shared STIC-HGSC
mutations involved genes acting in the pathways of response to stress,
regulation of apoptosis, autophagy, RAS and small GTPase-mediated
signaling, and actin cytoskeleton organization (e.g. MTOR, NF1, BECN1,
ARHGEF18, RASA1, PREX2, TTN). Our findings were corroborated for 80
STIC-HGSC-shared gene mutants by the cBioportal/The Cancer Genome Atlas
data on ovarian serous carcinoma.CONCLUSIONS The broad patterns of
somatic alterations shared by STIC and HGSC document a clonal
relationship of these neoplastic lesions and possible origins of ovarian
carcinomas in the tubal epithelium. We propose that our genome-wide
strategy, once reproduced in a higher patient number, may facilitate
future development of approaches to HGSC screening, treatment and
prevention.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS IARC Regular Budget; IARC Postdoctoral
Fellowship Program (supported by the European Commission FP7 Marie Curie
Actions COFUND). NYU Genome Technology Center (supported in part by
NIH/NCI P30CA016087). We thank Dr E. Kuhn for assistance with pathology
evaluations.REFERENCES1. Li HX, et al. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Feb
15;7(3):848-57.2. Kurman RJ. Ann Oncol. 2013 Dec;24 Suppl 10:x16-21.3.
Kuhn E, et al. J Pathol. 2012 Feb;226(3):421-6.

