Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the chemotherapeutic effects of aspirin in mutant
PIK3CA breast cancer


Although aspirin is primarily administered as an antipyretic and
analgesic, numerous observational and randomized clinical trials have
suggested a potential chemotherapeutic use. Recently, two independent
studies demonstrated that aspirin use is associated with superior
survival in colorectal cancer patients with mutant-PIK3CA but not among
those with the wild-type gene. Despite these seminal observations, the
molecular basis for this phenomenon remains poorly understood.
Furthermore, whether this observation occurs in breast cancer is unknown.
Given that (1) mutation of PIK3CA, the gene encoding the catalytic
subunit of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI 3-K) is highly prevalent in
breast cancer and that (2) aspirin use is associated with a decrease in
breast cancer mortality and distant recurrence, the relationship between
PI 3-K pathway activation and the protective benefit of aspirin in breast
cancer was investigated. Here, we utilize both PIK3CA mutant breast
cancer cell lines and a well-characterized system of immortalized mammary
epithelial cells stably expressing either wild-type and mutant PIK3CA
E545K and H1047R respectively. Mutant PIK3CA breast cancer cells show a
dose-dependent decrease in cell viability with increasing concentration
of aspirin/salicylate. In these cells, co-treatment of aspirin with PI
3-K pathway inhibitors BYL719 or BKM120 caused a more significant
decrease on cell growth compared to each single agent alone. In 3D
culture, MCF10A cells expressing mutant PIK3CA-H1047R showed greater
sensitivity to aspirin compared to cells expressing wild-type PIK3CA.
Gene expression profiling and quantitative qRT-PCR was employed to
identify and validate mutant PIK3CA-regulated genes respectively. Many of
these genes were associated with inflammation; among them was the PTGS2
gene which encodes for cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). We observed that mutant
PIK3CA regulates cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) mRNA and protein expression as
well as production of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). Expression of mutant
PIK3CA also increases phosphorylation of IKK and IB; increases mTORC1
signaling and reduces AMPK activity. This is abrogated upon pharmacologic
inhibition of mutant PIK3CA with BYL719 and BKM120. Notably, both aspirin
and its metabolite salicylate can inhibit these PIK3CA-induced pathways
and activate AMPK signaling. An understanding of these key survival and
metabolic signaling pathways, which are modulated by aspirin, may help to
explain aspirin's beneficial effect in PIK3CA-mutant breast cancers.
Given the growing interest in personalized medicine, this pre-clinical
study may provide insight for the stratification of patients who are most
likely to benefit from adjuvant aspirin therapy.

