Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrin-alpha 8 as a potential therapeutic target in multiple
myeloma early relapse


Introduction: Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable neoplastic plasma
cell disorder and many studies about MM biologic complexity have been
reported. Despite the advances of treatment for MM, still many patients
of MM exhibit early relapses and the mechanism of MM relapse is not well
understood Patient with early relapse after autologous bone marrow
transplantation need to be biologically characterized to better
understand and reach complete remission.Materials and Methods: To define
altered gene expression and pathways, we performed microarray with bone
marrow from 16 relapsed MM patients who underwent autologous bone marrow
transplantation. Gene expression profile was compared (P Introduction:
Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable neoplastic plasma cell disorder and
many studies about MM biologic complexity have been reported. Despite the
advances of treatment for MM, still many patients of MM exhibit early
relapses and the mechanism of MM relapse is not well understood Patient
with early relapse after autologous bone marrow transplantation need to
be biologically characterized to better understand and reach complete
remission.Materials and Methods: To define altered gene expression and
pathways, we performed microarray with bone marrow from 16 relapsed MM
patients who underwent autologous bone marrow transplantation. Gene
expression profile was compared (P < 0.01) in 16 MM patients divided into
two groups on the basis of their progression-free survival (PFS) at the
point of 12 months or only four patients with shortest and longest
duration of PFS.Results: 77 genes over two fold up-regulated were
identified and inputted in pathway enrichment analysis. To ascertain of
the result, only four patients with shortest and longest duration of PFS
were examined with same way of analysis that 163 genes over two fold
up-regulated were inputted in KEGG pathway database. Interestingly, both
of the analysis showed common up-regulated Integrin-8 (ITGA8) and its
associated pathway, ECM receptor interaction and focal adhesion, was
identified (P Introduction: Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable
neoplastic plasma cell disorder and many studies about MM biologic
complexity have been reported. Despite the advances of treatment for MM,
still many patients of MM exhibit early relapses and the mechanism of MM
relapse is not well understood Patient with early relapse after
autologous bone marrow transplantation need to be biologically
characterized to better understand and reach complete remission.Materials
and Methods: To define altered gene expression and pathways, we performed
microarray with bone marrow from 16 relapsed MM patients who underwent
autologous bone marrow transplantation. Gene expression profile was
compared (P < 0.01) in 16 MM patients divided into two groups on the
basis of their progression-free survival (PFS) at the point of 12 months
or only four patients with shortest and longest duration of PFS.Results:
77 genes over two fold up-regulated were identified and inputted in
pathway enrichment analysis. To ascertain of the result, only four
patients with shortest and longest duration of PFS were examined with
same way of analysis that 163 genes over two fold up-regulated were
inputted in KEGG pathway database. Interestingly, both of the analysis
showed common up-regulated Integrin-8 (ITGA8) and its associated pathway,
ECM receptor interaction and focal adhesion, was identified (P < 0.05).
Several integrin family members are well documented to involve in MM
disease progression but ITGA8 in MM is largely unknown. Functionally, we
have investigated ITGA8 in MM cell lines that ITAG8 mediates MM cell
adhesion, migration and drug resistance through bone marrow
microenvironment which is regarded as leading events of MM relapse.
Furthermore, its expression in MM is correlated with poor survival
outcomes after autologous bone marrow transplantation.Conclusion: Our
study demonstrated that gene expression in MM patients showed distinctly
different pattern between early relapse and late relapse. Additionally,
our speculated specific gene up-regulated in early relapse in MM, ITGA8,
is a potential prognostic marker and suggests attractive target for
future research.

