Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel J-series prostamide mediates anandamide-induced
endoplasmic reticulum stress-apoptosis in tumorigenic keratinocytes


Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) and other epithelial tumors overexpress
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) differentiating them from normal cells. COX-2
metabolizes arachidonic acid (AA) to H-series prostaglandins (PGs) which
are further metabolized by different synthases to E-, F-, and D-series
PGs. D-series PGs (PGD2) are then converted to J-series PGs (PGJ2) and
these bioactive lipids induce apoptosis by different mechanisms including
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Arachidonoyl-ethanolamide (AEA) is a
cannabinoid that causes apoptotic cell death in diverse tumor types. The
antiproliferative activity of these lipids is mediated by the G-protein
coupled receptors, CB1 and CB2. However, recent studies have demonstrated
that receptor-independent effects may also account for its activity.
Several studies have attributed the receptor-independent cytotoxicity of
AEA to COX-2. COX-2 metabolizes AEA to E-, F-, and D-series
PG-ethanolamides (PG-EAs). Our previous data showed that AEA is also
converted to a novel metabolite, 15 deoxy 12,14 prostaglandin
J2-ethanolamide (15dPGJ2-EA). J-series PGs that are derived from AA are
potent inducers of ER stress-mediated apoptosis. Therefore, the current
study examines the role of 15dPGJ2-EA in the activation of the apoptotic
ER stress pathway.To determine if AEA is selectively toxic to tumorigenic
keratinocytes, tumorigenic (JWF2) and non-tumorigenic (HaCaT)
keratinocytes were used. A significant reduction in cell viability was
observed in JWF2 but not in HaCaT cells treated with AEA. Interestingly,
COX-2 was overexpressed in JWF2 cells suggesting that the selective
toxicity of AEA might be attributed to COX-2 overexpression and the
production of 15dPGJ2-EA. In tumorigenic JWF2 keratinocytes, AEA induced
apoptosis and increased the expression of apoptotic ER stress proteins,
C/EBP homologous protein-10 (CHOP10) and caspase-12. In addition, the use
of ER stress inhibitors salubrinal and 4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA)
inhibited the cytotoxic effect of AEA. To evaluate the role of 15dPGJ2-EA
in AEA-induced ER stress-apoptosis, the selective PGD synthase inhibitor,
selinium tetrachloride (SeCl4), was used. SeCL4 reduced AEA-mediated
synthesis of PGD2, 15dPGJ2, and CHOP10 as well as the initiation of
apoptosis. We also confirmed that PGD2-EA was metabolized to 15dPGJ2-EA
and increased CHOP expression and caspase-3 cleavage, similar to AEA.
Furthermore, we verified that the effect of AEA on ER stress-apoptosis
was cannabinoid receptor-independent.These findings implicate 15dPGJ2-EA
in AEA-induced ER stress-apoptosis. Since this metabolite is formed in
presence of COX-2, AEA may be an ideal topical treatment for NMSC that
will be selectively cytotoxic to cancer cells but not detrimental to
normal, healthy surrounding cells.

