Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Twist1 regulates keratinocyte stem cell proliferation and
migration and is required for skin tumor formation


Twist1 is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor and is known to
play a role in tumor progression through regulation of genes involved in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Twist1 is a known transcriptional
target of signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (Stat3). In
previous studies, Stat3 was shown to play a role in skin tumor
progression in the two-stage skin carcinogenesis model, at least in part,
by regulating the levels of Twist1. Recent studies using
keratinocyte-specific knockout (KO) of Twist1 indicate that Twist1
regulates keratinocyte proliferation during skin tumor promotion. Western
blot analysis of lysates from both Twist1 deficient mouse primary
keratinocytes and from epidermis isolated from BK5.Cre x Twist1flox/flox
mice indicated that Twist1 KO leads to reduced levels of the cell cycle
proteins Cyclin E1, E2F1, and Cdk2 and increased expression of p21
following treatment with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). ChIP
analysis of epidermal lysates from BK5.Cre x Twist1flox/flox mice
revealed that Twist1 bound to the promoter regions of Cyclin E1, E2F1,
and c-Myc, indicating direct transcriptional regulation of these cell
cycle regulators. Moreover, Twist1 KO in keratinocytes impeded cell cycle
progression by reducing the number of cells that advanced to S-phase.
Further analyses have demonstrated that deletion of Twist1 either in
primary keratinocytes or in vivo leads to an upregulation of p53, which
is responsible for the increased expression of p21 observed in these
cells. Keratinocyte specific deletion of Twist1 in vivo suppressed
epidermal proliferation induced by TPA treatment compared to that
observed in wild-type (WT) mice. To further characterize the potential
role of Twist1 during epithelial carcinogenesis, we analyzed the impact
of Twist1 deletion in vivo on bulge region keratinocyte stem cells
(KSCs). Keratinocyte specific deletion of Twist1 in vivo led to a
significant reduction in the number of label-retaining cells as well as
the number of 6-integrin+/CD34+ cells in the hair follicles of untreated
mice. An ongoing two-stage skin carcinogenesis experiment shows that
BK5.Cre x Twist1flox/flox mice have significantly reduced tumor
development as observed by decreased tumor multiplicity and delayed
latency compared WT mice. Furthermore, tumors that developed in BK5.Cre x
Twist1flox/flox mice have significantly reduced size compared to tumors
on WT mice. Collectively, these findings suggest that Twist1 has a novel
role in epithelial carcinogenesis by regulating proliferation and
migration of keratinocytes and KSCs. Research supported by RP140108,
CA76520, and T32 ES007247.

