Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microparticles as novel prognostic markers in multiple myeloma


Introduction: Multiple Myeloma (MM) is an incurable hematological
malignancy affecting plasma cells marked by highly heterogeneous survival
rates and confinement of the disease to bone marrow (BM). Relapse is a
significant impediment in the clinical setting and the development of
multidrug resistance (MDR) to therapy is the main cause of relapse.
Currently, risk stratification to MM sub-groups and categorization of
complete response to therapy are established on molecular and cytogenetic
markers using bone marrow biopsies. We are exploring the clinical
significance of plasma cell derived microparticles as a novel prognostic
indicator in MM. Materials and Methods: We have analysed 79 de-identified
MM patients and 24 normal subjects. Platelet free plasma was centrifuged
and plasma cell derived MPs were identified and quantified by flow
cytometry using Annexin V450, CD138 APC, anti-P-glycoprotein (P-gp)-FITC
(17F9) in BD TruCount tubes. Platelet derived MPs were excluded from the
analysis using CD41a-PE. All patient samples were compared to age-matched
healthy volunteers. Western blot analysis was conducted on MP lysates
probing for the presence of Lung-Resistance related Protein (LRP) and
P-glycoprotein (P-gp). Morphology and the size of MP fraction from MM
patients were investigated using scanning electron micrographs Results:
The number of systemic MPs and CD138+MPs were found to be significantly
higher in MM patient samples compared to the healthy volunteers. MDR
markers (LRP & P-gp) were expressed on systemic MPs from relapsing MM
patients. MPs from patients were spherical in shape and had smooth
surface consistent with those isolated from the MM cell line
OPM2.Conclusions: There are elevated numbers of systemic MPs in all the
79 MM subjects (across all disease stages) compared to the healthy
volunteers. The expressions of CD138 on MPs in the MM patients offer a
sensitive assessment of disease progression and therapeutic outcome.
Systemic MPs from MM patients carry a snapshot of the less accessible
bone marrow compartment and may provide a novel systemic biosignature of
MM progression and therapeutic outcome in the clinical setting. The MDR
markers on systemic MPs may support dosage regimen and therapeutic
decisions in MM clinical setting.Acknowledgements: This project has
ethical approval from Sydney Local Health District Human Research Ethics
Committee (CRGH)- EC00118 # HREC/11/CRGH/223 (CH62/6/2011/150).We would
like to thank all the volunteers whom have contributed to this study.

