Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unfavorable outcomes of EWS-FLI1 expression in different tissues
of a transgenic mouse model


Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive neoplasm of the bone and soft tissue that
arises during adolescence. It is characterized by a pathognomonic
translocation between the EWS and FLI1 gene that is present in about 95%
of cases. The resulting chimeric oncoprotein has been shown to be the
driver of the disease where other genetic aberrations are rare. A mouse
model that closely recapitulates the disease will enormously assist
efforts to understand the initiation and progression of the disease. It
would also facilitate drug discovery efforts. Expression of EWS-FLI1 in
most cells causes cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. The tolerability of
EWS-FLI1 expression, hence its ability to confer tumorigenicity may be
cell type dependent. However, the cell oforigin for Ewing sarcoma is
still unknown which has contributedto the lack of a clinically relevant
transgenic mouse model for the disease. Herein, we have employed
different strategies to express EWS-FLI1 in vivo to potentially drive
Ewing sarcoma development in mice. We used a conditional transgenic mouse
model where EWS-FLI1 is knocked-in into Rosa26 locus
(Rosa26-loxP-stop-loxP-EWS-FLI1). Expression of EWS-FLI1 in this model is
rendered inactive unless cre mediated recombination occurs. In our first
model, we employed adenovirus mediated cre delivery through intramuscular
(IM), intraperitoneal (IP), and intravenous (IV) injection at different
ages. In the IM injected mice, we observed muscle loss, limping, and
clasping of hind leg in the Ad5-cre injected leg, but not in the Ad5-eGFP
injected leg. This phenotype was more evident in those injected at 1 day
old compared to 1 week old injected mice. In the IP injected animals,
abdominal distention and shortened intestine were observed. Whereas in
the IV injected mice, no evident phenotype was observed. None of the
Ad5-cre injected mice developed sarcoma. In our second model, we
expressed EWS-FLI1 in the osteoblast progenitors by
crossingRosa26-loxP-stop-loxP-EWS-FLI1 mice with inducible Tet-Off-based
Osterix-cre mice. Expression of EWS-FLI1 in cells with activated Osterix
promoterwas embryonically lethal. If we delay cre expression, hence
EWS-FLI1 expression, until after birth the mice develop facial bone
deformity. As previously published, Osterix-cre mediated deletion of p53
and Rb (Osx-cre; p53fl/fl; pRbfl/fl) results in osteosarcoma.
Interestingly, when we crossed Rosa26-loxP-stop-loxP-EWS-FLI1 mice
withOsterix-cre; p53fl/fl; pRbfl/fl mice, we did not observe any sarcoma
instead the mice developed leukemia. In conclusion, despite the desperate
need for a mouse model for this aggressive disease, most attempts have
come short. We hope our findings herein will help unravel the paradoxical
biological activity of this fusion protein. We also anticipate that it
will assist others to devise alternative strategies that could engender
Ewing sarcomagenesis.

