Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High throughput triculture: A breast cancer spheroid model for
drug screening


Many drugs that show promise in preclinical evaluation fail miserably
during clinical trials, and the inability of current preclinical models
to properly predict drug response may be attributed to oversimplified or
non-existent tumor microenvironments. To provide a more physiologically
predictive model for drug screening, we have developed an in vitro, 384
well, triculture system that presents key chemical (i.e. low pH, low
glucose, low oxygen), extracellular matrix (ECM), and cellular (tumor
cells, stromal cells and endothelial cells) attributes of tumor tissues.
By using ECM proteins, we can promote the proper physiology for each of
these cell types in triculture. To evaluate interactions between each
cell type, they are fluorescently labeled with fluorophores with
different excitation and emission spectra; MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 human
breast cancer cell lines express a red fluorescence protein, while human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and human adipose-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) are labeled with stable lipophilic
membrane dyes. Breast tumor microtissues spontaneously assemble when
breast cancer cells are co-cultured with hMSCs under low adhesion
conditions. Once formed, these microtissues are deposited onto preformed
tubule networks comprised of HUVECs and hMSCs and are embedded within a
hydrogel composed of ECM proteins. Cellular interactions and
dissemination are monitored via fluorescence microscopy, and cell
proliferation of the breast cancer cells is quantified using a
fluorescence plate reader. The breast cancer cells exhibit cell-cell
interactions with endothelial tubules and stromal cells, forming
microtissues. Furthermore, the response to anti-cancer drugs, paclitaxel
and fluorouracil, in an in vitro triculture system is similar to the
response for the same drugs in xenografts model, unlike 2D or 3D
monoculture. This high throughput triculture cancer model will provide
more insight into pathological mechanisms and can better predict response
to anti-cancer drug treatment.

