Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sub-classification of prostate cancer circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) by nuclear size reveals very-small nuclear CTCs in patients with
visceral metastases


BackgroundCirculating tumor cells (CTCs) are an emerging biomarker in
prostate cancer (PC). Most efforts have focused on enumeration, we and
others have identified subsets within this pool of cells which may be
clinically informative. Using the highly sensitive NanoVelcro technology
for CTC isolation and fluorescence microscopy, our group sub-classified
CTCs by nuclear size and focused on the correlation with sites of
metastatic disease in advanced PC patients.MethodsBlood samples were
obtained from PC patients across the spectrum of metastatic states, i.e.
no metastasis, non-visceral (osseous/lymph node) metastasis, and visceral
metastasis. The patients were divided into training and validation
cohorts. CTCs were captured from the blood and enumerated on NanoVelcro
Chips. These were then subjected to pathologic review for cellular
morphology and nuclear size. The distribution of nuclear sizes was
analyzed using a Gaussian Mixture Model to sub-classify the CTCs.
Correlations were made between CTC subpopulations and metastatic status.
Individual CTCs were isolated by laser-capture microdissection for
subsequent characterization focusing on cellular markers and
transcriptomic signatures in comparison between vsnCTC and other CTC
subpopulations.ResultsStatistical analysis and modeling of nuclear size
distribution revealed 3 distinct subpopulations in the training cohort:
large-nuclear CTCs (lnCTC), small-nuclear CTCs (snCTC), and
very-small-nuclear CTCs (vsnCTCs). While the lnCTC subpopulation alone
failed to distinguish metastatic disease from non-metastatic disease,
snCTC + vsnCTC counts could make that distinction. Furthermore, vsnCTC
counts were elevated in PC patients with visceral metastases when
compared to those without visceral metastases (0.5 0.5 versus 3.1 5.2
cells/mL of blood, p = 0.005). This difference remained statistically
significant in the validation cohort (0.6 1.0 versus 3.5 4.0 cells/mL of
blood, p = 0.007). Serial enumerations for individual patients showed the
emergence of vsnCTCs prior to detection of newly developed visceral
lesions. The recurrence of vsnCTC in patients under treatment is also
associated with radiographic progression of existing visceral lesions
through therapy. Molecular characterization of vsnCTCs reveals
differential expression of genes related to neuroendocrine, stem cell,
and androgen biology.ConclusionsSubsets of CTCs contain information on PC
disease status when analyzed with pathologic approaches, such as nuclear
size measurement. In particular, the detection of vsnCTCs correlated with
the presence of visceral metastatic lesions and should be explored as a
potential biomarker to identify patients at risk for developing this more
aggressive form of PC.

