Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Class I HDAC inhibition upregulates PD-1 ligands in melanoma and
increases the efficacy of PD-1 blockade


Ligation of co-inhibitory molecules such as PD-L1/PD-1 are known
mechanisms of tumor escape. Blockade of this specific pathway with
antibodies against PD-1 has proven effective in the treatment of
metastatic melanoma, with response rates of 30-40% (Topalian, SL et al.
2012). However, since the majority of patients fail to respond,
approaches to augment the efficacy of this approach are needed. We report
herein that histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors against class I HDACs
generate robust and durable upregulation of PD-L1 and PD-L2 in melanoma
cell lines as well as patient tumor samples. Combining the HDAC inhibitor
LBH589 with PD-1 blockade in a murine melanoma model results in delayed
tumor growth and increased survival, superior to either single agent.
Initially, we evaluated the expression of PD-L1 by flow cytometry on
several melanoma cell lines treated with the HDAC inhibitors LBH589,
MS275 and MGCD0103. At 72 hours, all treatments resulted in increased
PD-L1 surface expression. As a follow-up, additional inhibitors and time
points were assessed. Upregulation was seen at 24 hours after treatment
and continued past 96 hours. However, these effects were not observed
with HDAC6 or class IIa specific inhibitors. We then evaluated a larger
panel of HDACi on several patient derived melanomas. We observed dose
dependent upregulation with all inhibitors with inhibition of HDAC1,
HDAC2 and/or HDAC3, but no impact of HDAC6, HDAC8 or class IIa specific
inhibitors. Additionally, we observed low level, but consistent
upregulation of PD-L2 in conjunction with PD-L1. These in vitro results
were validated in vivo using a B16 murine melanoma model and patient
xenografts in SCID mice. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis shows
that treatment of melanoma with an HDAC inhibitor results in increased
histone acetylation at the PD-L1 promoter. Previous studies have
demonstrated PD-L1 regulation by STAT3 (Wolfle SJ et al. 2011), in
addition to HDAC inhibitor alteration of STAT3 activation (Gupta M. et al
2012). We are currently evaluating alterations in STAT3 signaling in HDAC
inhibitor treated melanoma. Given the anti-melanoma properties of LBH589
and its augmentation of immunogenicity previously reported by our group,
combination therapy using PD-1 blocking antibodies with LBH589 was
explored. Treatment of B16 melanoma-bearing C57BL/6 mice with the
combination resulted in tumor progression delay (p = 0.01) compared to
control and single agent treatments. Accompanying this tumor delay was an
increase in overall survival (p = 0.03). These results highlight the
ability of epigenetic modifying agents to augment immunogenicity and
increase the efficacy of current immunotherapies. These results provide a
strong rationale for combining LBH589 with PD-1 blockade for the
treatment of metastatic melanoma.

