Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deciphering the role of long noncoding RNAs in the progression of
hepatocellular carcinoma using next-generation sequencing


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second most common cause of death
from cancer worldwide, estimated to be responsible for nearly 746,000
deaths in 2012 representing 9.1% of the total cancer-related deaths.
Incidence rates of HCC continue to increase in North America and Europe
with a slight decrease in Asia. It is currently accepted that epigenetic
alterations are critical in cancer development in humans, including HCC.
Among the different layers of epigenetic control, long non coding RNAs
(lncRNAs) have been steadily gaining prominence in recent years. LncRNAs
have emerged as critical regulators of the gene expression and growing
evidence points to their tissues and tumour specificity and that their
deregulation may represent early event in tumour development. Several
recent reports have implicated lncRNAs in HCC development, such as HULC
or H19, although the biological and molecular mechanisms by which lncRNAs
contributes to liver cancer development remain poorly understood.. The
purpose of this study is to perform a global profiling of lncRNAs in HCC
using Next Generation Sequencing in order to improve the understanding of
lncRNAs role in HCC and to provide new biologically sound candidate
biomarkers for the identification of patients at higher risk of
developping HCC. We have performed RNA-Sequencing (RNA-Seq) of tumor
tissues and paired-matched surrounding non-tumor (cirrhotic) tissues from
10 patients and normal livers from 3 patients operated for liver
metastases. Based on our first results, we observed a global decrease in
the number of lncRNAs expressed in cirrhotic and tumor tissues compared
with normal livers. We identified 41 lncRNAs differentially expressed in
HCC compared to matched non-tumour tissues, most of whom have not been
reported previously. We identified also more than 700 coding genes
differentially expressed in HCC compared to their non-tumor counterparts.
We compared our results on the coding trascriptome with RNA-Seq data from
44 cases of HCC (paired-matched tumor and non tumor tissues) available in
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset and found that more than 70% of
the genes identified in our study overlap with differentially expressed
genes identified in the TCGA dataset.Our results suggest that lncRNAs may
be involved in the homeostasis of the hepatic tissue and that the loss of
their expression is associated with tissue regeneration and
transformation.

