Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TiMi1 is a novel immune-checkpoint in solid tumors identified via
a tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL)-based RNAi screening


Immunotherapeutic treatment of melanoma achieved major progress in recent
years leading for the first time to improved survival. However, since
melanoma cells employ various suppressive mechanisms in order to evade
recognition and destruction by immune effector cells many patients still
do not benefit from immunotherapy. These mechanisms are far more diverse
than reflected by currently used immune modulatory drugs. In this study,
we established and utilized a novel high throughput RNAi screening to
identify new immune checkpoint molecules in melanoma using
antigen-specific patient-derived tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in
conjunction with primary HLA-matched melanoma cells. Using this approach,
we screened a siRNA library targeting more than 1200 surface receptors
and kinases to explore novel targets for immunotherapy.Briefly, HLA-A2
and luciferase positive M579-A2-luc melanoma cells were reversely
transfected with the siRNA library and then co-cultured with MART1- and
gp100-specific TILs to validate the TIL-mediated tumor lysis. Local
regression models (LOESS) were applied to generate a hit list of 48
candidates that negatively regulated CTL cytotoxicity. Interestingly,
four candidates of a related breast cancer screen were among the top
hits. To streamline the discovery process for large scale molecule
libraries, we established a secondary screen assaying multiple T cell
activation markers, including effector cytokines.One of the strongest
candidates from our primary and secondary screening is TiMi1 (name
altered), a cell surface receptor belonging to the class of GPCRs. We
found that knock-down of TiMi1 increased TIL-mediated killing of
M579-A2-luc without affecting their viability. TiMi1 knock-down increased
TIL activity measured by production of type 1-associated cytokines (e.g.
IFN and TNF-), reduced TC apoptosis and increased markers associated with
raised activity and cytotoxicity (4-1BB and CD107a). We were able to
verify the immune checkpoint function of TiMi1 in melanoma patients using
an autologous set of melanoma cells and TILs. Phosphoplex analysis in T
cells revealed an involvement of the transcription factor CREB in the
mode of action of TiMi1. Preliminary experiments suggest that TiMi1
inhibits anti-tumor immune responses in pancreatic (PDAC) and colorectal
(CRC) cancers as well.In summary, we established a novel antigen-specific
screening approach for immune checkpoints expressed in melanoma and were
able to identify TiMi1 as a promising candidate. Moreover, TiMi1 inhibits
T cell responses in melanoma, PDAC and CRC and might be an interesting
target for immunotherapy. Our novel high-throughput screening offers a
systematic platform to uncover the immune-modulatome of cancer and
subsequently discover novel targets for immunotherapy. Since the
presented work is considered for patent protection, some gene targets are
masked in the presented study.

