Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ITD Assembler: An algorithm for internal tandem duplication
discovery from short-read sequencing data


Tandem duplication of coding sequence is an important mechanism of
somatic mutation capable of activating oncogenes such as fms-related
tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) as well as the potential for underlying
constitutional or germline disease. Detection of internal tandem
duplication (ITD) in short-read sequencing data remains challenging due
to deficiencies in short-read alignment where reads carrying signatures
of ITD are often unmapped. Assembly based approaches collapse repetitive
sequences, resulting in reduced or lost genomic complexity. The majority
of structural variation detection tools are limited to finding insertions
that are contained entirely within individual read alignments, and are
unable to detect read-spanning duplications. Tools designed to detect
large structural variation from paired-end reads that map discordantly
based on expected fragment size and orientation do not provide the
precision needed to detect ITDs. Only tools that consider the
characteristic alignment features that signal the presence of ITDs will
be able to detect them; these alignment features include: an excess of
reads with unaligned, soft-clipped bases, read pairs where one end is
unmapped located near the site of insertion, and read pairs where both
ends are unmapped.We introduce ITD Assembler, a novel approach that
searches all unmapped reads from exome capture or whole genome sequencing
data to identify duplications. From the entire set of unmapped reads plus
subset of mapped reads harboring soft-clipped bases, de Bruijn graph
assembly is applied to select reads that form cycles, indicative of
duplicated sequence structures. Reads from de Bruijn graph cycles are
then assembled using an Overlap Layout Consensus (OLC) methodology
thereby alleviating the collapse of repeat sequences affecting de Bruijn
graph assembly approaches. Resulting OLC assembled contigs are locally
aligned to the reference sequence to annotate the position of ITDs.ITD
Assembler was run on The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) dataset, and FLT3-ITD detection rates were compared
against orthogonal algorithms. ITD Assembler identified the highest
percentage of TCGA FLT3-ITDs, reported significantly higher allele
fractions, and discovered additional ITDs in the KIT, CEBPA and WT1
cancer genes.

