Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A non-ATP competitive IKK inhibitor for cancer therapy


Kinases are promising targets in cancer drug discovery. IKK is an
important kinase in the canonical NF-B pathway, which promotes survival
of cancer cells and is constitutively active in number of cancers
including pancreatic cancer. Inflammatory stimulus such as tumor necrosis
factor- (TNF) is known to activate the canonical IKK-NF-B pathway. Upon
TNF stimulation, serine residues 177 and 181 in the activation loop of
IKK undergo phosphorylation resulting in activated IKK.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) studies showed the presence of the
proinflammatory cytokine TNF in 50% of surgically resected tumor
specimens but in only 10% of corresponding normal tissues. Consistently,
IHC studies by us with patient samples obtained from the UNMC rapid
autopsy pancreatic cancer program showed elevated levels of
phosphorylated S181 IKK in the tumor and liver metastases samples when
compared to the stroma and ductal cells for normal pancreas.Several small
molecule IKK inhibitors were developed by pharmaceutical industry to
treat chronic inflammatory diseases. Despite complete preclinical
characterization of many candidates, to date none of them has been
approved by the FDA for clinical use. Nearly all the small molecule IKK
inhibitors reported are ATP competitive. These inhibitors completely
block IKK mediated NF-B activity as a result chronic administration in
mice leads to granulocytosis and increased susceptibility to
infection-mediated death. Here we report the discovery a non-ATP
competitive IKK inhibitor that allows transient activation but blocks the
sustained activation of IKK mediated NF-B activity. We present a model
that has a novel-binding site, which is accessible upon activation of IKK
and explains the observed experimental results. Our IKK inhibitor does
not share the toxicity profile of the ATP competitive IKK inhibitors. In
an orthotopic pancreatic tumor model mice treated with our inhibitor
showed reduced tumor growth and metastasis compared to vehicle controls.
We also showed that in a mantle cell lymphoma model the median survival
of mice treated with our inhibitor nearly doubled when compared vehicle
treated mice. Our results suggest that non-ATP competitive IKK inhibitors
are viable lead candidates for cancer therapy.

