Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Longitudinal integrative whole transcriptome and exome sequencing
identifies genes that reprogram lymphoma cells for clinical response to
CDK4/6 inhibition in combination therapy


CDK4 and CDK6 drive cell cycle progression through early G1 and are
frequently deregulated in human cancer. The selective inhibitor
palbociclib (PD 0332991) demonstrated exciting clinical efficacy in
diverse human cancers, notably in metastatic breast cancer where it more
than doubled the progression free survival of patients treated with
letrozole. In mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), deregulated CDK4 and cyclin D1
expression underlies unrestrained proliferation and disease progression.
In a phase I clinical trial in recurrent MCL, we showed that palbociclib
produced a durable clinical response. However, the mechanism that
discriminates sensitivity from resistance to targeting CDK4/6 remains
obscure.To address this question, we demonstrated that 1) inhibition of
CDK4/6 leads to early G1 arrest that requires Rb, the CDK4/6 substrate;
2) prolonged early G1 arrest (pG1) sensitizes Rb+ cancer cells to killing
by diverse clinically-relevant agents; and 3) pG1 sensitization stems
from continuous expression of genes scheduled for early G1 only. This
sensitization is exacerbated in synchronous progression to S phase
(pG1-S) after palbociclib withdrawal, due to incomplete restoration of
cell cycle-coupled gene expression. In a hypothesis-driven phase Ib
clinical trial we further showed that palbociclib induces pG1 and
sensitizes MCL cells to the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib. At the
optimal dose of palbociclib, only one in 6 patients progressed, and 4
patients had a durable responses including a complete remission for >800
days.Longitudinal integrative whole transcriptome and whole exome
sequencing of tumor cells from serial lymph node biopsies demonstrated
that cell cycle control by palbociclib is initially intact in Rb+ MCL but
is insufficient to predict clinical response. Palbociclib induced pG1 in
all patients initially regardless of the subsequent clinical response or
patient-specific copy number variation or mutation (ATM, p53). As
expected, pG1 maintained the expression of cell cycle genes programmed
for early G1 and suppressed those scheduled for other phases, and this
was reversible upon release of the early G1 block.However, expressing
only genes scheduled for early G1 led to an imbalance in gene expression.
Of the 1483 genes suppressed in pG1 compared with the baseline in
Responders (Rs) (N = 4), 5 were up-regulated in Non-Responders (NRs) (N =
3); 11 of the 2041 genes up-regulated in pG1 in R were suppressed in NR.
These oppositely expressed genes are involved in redox stress and
metabolism based on functional analysis, suggesting a role for cell
cycle-coupled metabolic imbalance in differential clinical response to
targeting CDK4/6. Further validation of these candidate genes in the
context of clinical response should advance the mechanism for therapeutic
targeting of CDK4/6 as well as genome-based therapy and patient
stratification.

