Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastatic site and response to pembrolizumab (anti-PD1 antibody)
in melanoma


Therapies that block the PD-1/PD-L1 axis have shown significant clinical
activity in melanoma and other cancers. Recent evidence has shown that
pre-existing CD8 T cells infiltrates at the invasive tumor margin of
metastatic melanoma are associated with the presence of the PD-1/PD-L1
immune axis and may predict response to therapy. We examined the
relationship between site of metastatic disease, local immune response,
and treatment outcome in patients with advanced melanoma treated with
pembrolizumab. We studied patients enrolled in the pembrolizumab Phase I
clinical trial in the intention to treat (ITT, N = 112) and full analysis
set (FAS) cohorts (N = 96). Using quantitative immunohistochemistry and
multi-parameter flow cytometry we analyzed the local immune response in
pre-treatment metastatic samples according to organ site of metastasis
and treatment outcome. The overall response rate was 40% with a median
progression-free survival (PFS) of 5.58 months. The presence of melanoma
metastatic to the liver (liver metastasis group) had an objective
response rate (ORR) of 16% and median PFS of 2.79 months. The presence of
melanoma metastatic to the lung (lung metastasis group) had an ORR of 64%
and median PFS of 14.48 months. Preliminary analysis of samples obtained
from patients with liver metastases showed reduced tumor infiltrating
CD8+ T cells (TILs), PD-1 expression, and tumor PD-L1 expression in
distant metastases. Phenotypic and functional analysis of TILs showed
reduced percentages of partially exhausted PD-1+CTLA-4+CD8+ cells, which
correlated with progression and with liver metastasis. These cells were
shown to make IFN but not TNF or IL-2. Additionally, the presence of
liver metastasis in melanoma patients prior to starting anti-PD1 therapy
correlated with treatment failure. Liver metastasis was associated with
fewer PD-1+ CTLA-4+ TILs in distant tumors. These preliminary results
warrant further investigation into determining whether site of metastasis
modulates the systemic immune response to PD-1/PD-L1 blocking therapies.

