Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunotherapy meets epigenetics: GP96-Ig cellular vaccine genetic
signature is modulated by the inhibition of histone modifications


A number of novel cancer treatment strategies have been identified and
developed over the last decade with hopes of eradicating a diverse range
of cancers, however the molecular mechanisms behind patient immune
responses and tumor microenvironment signaling are complex, and have
often hindered the translation of these ideas into successful patient
treatments. Two modalities at the forefront of these potential
blockbuster strategies are combinatorial immunotherapy and epigenetic
manipulation. These approaches are supported by compelling clinical data,
but have been encumbered by a number of factors including: adverse event
profiles, complicated manufacturing and regulatory issues, toxicity due
to non-specific small molecule interactions, limited overlap in
patient/therapy antigen presentation, and exorbitant cost of biological
treatments. To circumvent a number of these limitations, we have taken a
novel approach by engineering allogeneic cellular vaccines tailored to
specific cancers, that secrete heat-shock protein gp96-Ig and achieve
high-frequency polyclonal CD8+ T cell responses to femto-molar
concentrations of tumor antigens through antigen cross-priming in vivo.
Using genomics (RNA-sequencing) we identified differential mRNA
expression levels genome-wide between normal bladder tissue, our
proprietary bladder cancer cellular vaccine Vesigenurtacel-L or HS410,
and patient bladder tumor biopsy samples, to generate a genomic signature
of Bladder Cancer Altered Genes, or BCAGs. Next, we examined a number of
small molecule inhibitors of epigenetic modifications (i.e. histone
deacetylases or HDACs), and determined their effect on BCAG expression
and antigen secretion in HS410 cells. We find that the inhibition of
certain HDACs results in decreased proliferation, dampened secretion of
gp96-Ig, and attenuated expression of tumor specific genes. Together our
work has defined the pattern of gene dysregulation genome-wide in bladder
cancer and shown that epigenetic modifiers are capable of modulating the
expression of many of these genes, which may be important for the
efficacy of our cancer vaccine strategy. Therefore, epigenetic
manipulation may present an attractive means to fine-tune gene expression
programs and maximize antigen secretion thereby increasing vaccine
potency and the ability of a single vaccine to target a variety of cancer
types.

