Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative oncology drug discovery for Osteosarcoma in dogs and
humans


Introduction: The purpose of this study was to identify FDA approved
drugs that initiate cell death or growth arrest in canine and human
osteosarcoma (OS) cell lines in vitro followed by confirmation of
anticancer activity in these cell lines. The ultimate objective of this
comparative oncology project is to identify promising agents for the
treatment of osteosarcoma in dogs and humans, a disease in which survival
rates have remained low and stagnant for the last three
decades.Procedures: A library of 2,328 FDA approved drugs was screened
for activity in 2 canine and 2 human OS cell lines, as well as in 1
corresponding normal cell line. Cell viability was measure using the Cell
Titer-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay (Promega). FDA approved drugs
meeting pre-determined screening criteria for activity, selectivity, and
potency were selected for confirmatory studies. Effects on cell
proliferation were confirmed using cell counting using trypan blue
exclusion performed over a 10 day period. Effects on cell cycle and
apoptosis were performed using propidium iodide staining and flow
cytometry.Summary: Nine FDA approved drugs were identified based on
activity and selectivity. Auranofin, a FDA approved rheumatoid arthritis
agent, was selected for cell proliferation and cell cycle evaluation due
to its IC50 value in control cells in comparison to OS cell lines.
Auranofin displayed cytostatic effects in canine and human OS cell lines
at low doses and drugs appeared to induce G2 arrest in treated
cells.Conclusions: Auranofin is an FDA approved drug that demonstrates
promising, selective anticancer activity in canine and human OS cell
lines. The next steps are to determine whether this agent possesses
additive or synergistic activity in combination with anticancer agents
that have already demonstrated clinical activity in dogs and humans with
OS. In vivo preclinical proof of concept will be determined in mouse
xenograft studies and dogs with spontaneous OS for promising drug
combinations. Subsequently, we hope to rapidly translate preclinical
proof of concept findings to human OS patients.

