Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of variants of uncertain significance (VUS) in
breast and ovarian cancer predisposition genes


Panel-based germline genetic testing of established breast and ovarian
cancer predisposition genes is widely used in high-risk clinics to inform
on risks of breast and ovarian cancer. While most protein truncating
mutations identified in predisposition genes are associated with moderate
to high risks of these cancers, variants of uncertain significance (VUS),
in the form of missense and intronic variants, have an undefined
relevance to cancer. Many hundreds of VUS in BRCA1 and BRCA2 identified
by clinical genetic testing over the last 20 years still have uncertain
clinical relevance. In addition, VUS in other known predisposition genes
are being identified by current panel-testing in up to 10% of individuals
without BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. These VUS cause problems in cancer risk
estimation and clinical management of patients undergoing clinical
genetic testing.In an effort to evaluate the clinical significance of VUS
in cancer predisposition genes we have developed functional assays that
characterize the impact of the variants on the functions of the proteins
encoded by the predisposition genes. In particular, a homology directed
repair reporter assay providing a quantitative measure of homologous
recombination repair of DNA double strand breaks has been developed for
characterization of VUS in homologous recombination associated genes.
When applied to 13 known pathogenic and 30 known neutral variants from
the DNA binding domain of BRCA2, this assay exhibits 100% specificity and
100% sensitivity. Based on these results a model estimating the
probability of pathogenicity of each BRCA2 VUS was developed. The HDR
assay and probability model has now been applied to 230 BRCA2 VUS
identified through genetic testing. Here we identify 80 BRCA2 variants
that are deficient in HDR activity. We further combined these results
with prior probabilities of pathogenicity derived from the sequence based
Align GVGD in silico prediction model to estimate the posterior
probability of pathogenicity for each VUS. Our results suggest that in
the absence of family based segregation information, results from the HDR
functional assay and in silico prediction models can be used to predict
the pathogenicity of BRCA2 VUS. The assay has also been used to
characterize VUS in the PALB2 and RAD51C predisposition genes, leading to
identification of a subset of missense variants that are deficient in HDR
repair activity and may be associated with increased risk of breast and
ovarian cancer. These results will prove useful for improved risk
assessment of carriers of these BRCA2, PALB2 and RAD51C variants and
their family members and for validation of other approaches to mutation
classification.

