Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomics: Potential molecular mechanisms of radiotherapy
(RT)-related normal tissue toxicities in breast cancer


Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in women and the
second leading cause of cancer death in American women. Clinical
guidelines recommend that when breast-conserving surgery is provided as a
primary therapy for early-stage breast cancer, RT should follow to
improve clinical outcome. Although well tolerated by most patients, even
with improved RT technology, breast cancer patients experience moist
desquamation as early adverse skin reactions. To elucidate the molecular
mechanisms involved in RT-related normal tissure toxicity, global
metabolomic profiles were determined in urine samples comparing across
paired pre-RT and post-RT samples from 60 breast cancer patients
exhibiting low (n = 30) or high (n = 30) skin toxicity in response to RT.
The extracted samples were split into equal parts for analysis on the
GC/MS and LC/MS platforms. The dataset comprises a total of 478 compounds
of known identity. Preliminary data suggest that pre-RT glucose and a
variety of derivatives linked to the pentose phosphate pathway, such as
ribulose, or the consumption of pyruvate in the mitochondrial
tricarboxylic acid cycle, including citrate and succinate, were
significantly elevated in the high toxicity group. Multiple metabolites
derived from the oxidation of aromatic compounds such as amino acids and
dietary polyphenolics - vanillate, 3-hydromandelate, tyramine,
3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol, and 2-hydroxyphenylacetate - were
elevated in a trending or significant fashion at the pre-RT baseline in
the high toxicity relative to the low toxicity group. Pre-RT ascorbate
depletion and accumulation of tobacco metabolites were associated with
radiation sensitivity. Ascorbate was significantly decreased at baseline
in the high toxicity group and its pre-RT levels were negatively
correlated with post-RT skin toxicity. Nicotine derivatives were only
detected in 12% of the pre- and post-RT samples but their presence seemed
to be a risk factor that could predispose smokers to unfavorable outcomes
during radiation therapy. Histamine breakdown markers provided an
indication of a heightened inflammatory activity in individuals who
experienced toxicity as suggested that anti-histamines might be useful to
prevent sensitivity. Our preliminary data suggest the potential
application of metabolomics in predicting and monitoring RT-related
normal tissue toxicities; future larger studies are warranted to confirm
out promising findings and identify targeted metabolic pathways for
effective intervention.

