Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of serine/threonine phosphatase LAPP1 as a
diagnostic and therapeutic target for lung cancer


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. Since the
number of patients responding well to current standard therapies is still
small, further development of new anti-cancer drugs with minimum risk of
adverse event is urgently awaited. To screen oncoantigens which could be
used for the development of new diagnostic biomarkers and molecular
targeted drugs, we have established a screening system as follows; i) To
identify overexpressed genes in 120 lung cancers by genome-wide screening
using the microarray representing 27,648 genes and pure populations of
tumor cells taken from cancer tissues by laser microdissection, ii) To
verify the candidate genes for their very low or absent expression in
normal tissues by northern-blotting, iii) To validate the
clinicopathological significance of their expression with tissue
microarray covering hundreds of archived lung cancers, iv) To verify
whether the target genes are essential for the growth or survival of
cancer cells by RNAi and cell growth assays. During this process, we
selected dozens of druggable oncoproteins with various enzymatic
activities, and identified overexpression of Serine/Threonine phosphatase
LAPP1 (lung cancer-associated protein phosphatase 1) in the majority of
lung cancers and its scarce expression in normal tissues except testis.
Strong LAPP1 expression was an independent prognostic factor for lung
cancer patients who underwent curative surgery (PLung cancer is the
leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. Since the number of patients
responding well to current standard therapies is still small, further
development of new anti-cancer drugs with minimum risk of adverse event
is urgently awaited. To screen oncoantigens which could be used for the
development of new diagnostic biomarkers and molecular targeted drugs, we
have established a screening system as follows; i) To identify
overexpressed genes in 120 lung cancers by genome-wide screening using
the microarray representing 27,648 genes and pure populations of tumor
cells taken from cancer tissues by laser microdissection, ii) To verify
the candidate genes for their very low or absent expression in normal
tissues by northern-blotting, iii) To validate the clinicopathological
significance of their expression with tissue microarray covering hundreds
of archived lung cancers, iv) To verify whether the target genes are
essential for the growth or survival of cancer cells by RNAi and cell
growth assays. During this process, we selected dozens of druggable
oncoproteins with various enzymatic activities, and identified
overexpression of Serine/Threonine phosphatase LAPP1 (lung
cancer-associated protein phosphatase 1) in the majority of lung cancers
and its scarce expression in normal tissues except testis. Strong LAPP1
expression was an independent prognostic factor for lung cancer patients
who underwent curative surgery (P<0.0001). We identified EF-1 (a
cadmium-responsive proto-oncogene) as a LAPP1-interacting protein that
was also over-expressed in cancer cells. Knock-down of LAPP1 or EF-1
expression by siRNAs inhibited cell growth, whereas exogenous expression
of LAPP1 in EF-1(+) cells enhanced the dephosphorylation of EF-1(+), and
subsequent increase in the levels of active phospho-AKT. Inhibition of
interaction between LAPP1 and EF-1 by a cell-permeable peptide
corresponding to a leucine zipper motif in EF-1, resulted in the
destabilization of EF-1 and inhibited cancer cell growth and invasion.
LAPP1 is likely to be a prognostic biomarker and a potential therapeutic
target for lung cancer.

