Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TP53 affects SOX2 copy number alterations and expression in
non-small cell lung cancer


Background: Amplifications of the transcription factor, SRY (sex
determining region Y)-box 2 (SOX2), are common in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). SOX2-signaling is important in maintaining the stem
cell-like phenotype of cancer cells and contributes to the pathogenesis
of lung cancer. TP53 is recognized as a critical regulator of stem cell
pluripotency, and it is known that TP53 represses many stem cell
associated genes following DNA damage. We hypothesized that SOX2 copy
number alterations in lung tumors could be correlated to mutational
status of TP53 gene in tumors and that TP53 played a role in regulation
of SOX2 gene expression. Material and Methods: Early-stage lung cancer
cases (n = 258) of Norwegian Caucasians origin were recruited when
admitted to Haukeland University Hospital in Bergen, Norway between 1986
and 1994. Samples of adjacent histologically non-tumorous lung tissue
were collected in the lobectomi specimens at the time of surgery. Tumor
histology was confirmed by an experienced pathologist and samples
containing >80% of tumor cells were analyzed in this study. After
resection tumor and non-tumorous tissues were snap-frozen in liquid
nitrogen and kept at -80oC until further processing. All subjects gave
written consent, and the study was approved by the regional ethical
committee in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration. SOX2 copy number
alterations were evaluated by quantitative RT- PCR using SYBR Green I
Technology. The TP53 and SOX2 expression levels were assessed by q-PCR in
the tumors where mRNA was available. Furthermore, to understand
mechanisms, TP53 and SOX2 genes were knocked down by siRNA in the A427
human lung adenocarcinoma cell line. Additionally, some miRNAs were also
analyzed by q-PCR. TP53 mutations in tumors were analyzed by sequencing
and PAH-DNA adduct levels were determined in non-tumorous lung tissue by
382P-postlabelling.Results: SOX2 copy number alterations were more
frequent in tumor tissues (34%) than in the adjacent non-tumorous tissues
(3%) and TP53 mutations were associated with an increased risk of
acquiring a SOX2 copy number alteration (OR = 2.08, 95% CI: 1.14-3.79, p
= 0.017). SOX2 and TP53 expressions were strongly correlated in lung
tumors and reduction in TP53 decreased SOX2 expression in lung
adenocarcinoma cells. TP53 knockdown also reduced the miRNA hsa-miR-145,
which has previously been shown to regulate SOX2 expression. We propose
that SOX2 may be an important target of TP53 signaling in lung cancer and
that hsa-miR-145-5p may be one potential driver miRNA involved in this
regulation requiring further studies on the mechanisms behind the
TP53-induced regulation of SOX2 expression and the possible importance of
hsa-miR-145 in lung cancer.

