Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LIN28 gene targets are key mediators of breast cancer disease
processes


LIN28 is an evolutionally conserved RNA-binding protein with critical
functions in developmental timing, pluripotency and reprogramming. At the
molecular level, most studies indicate that LIN28 modulates gene networks
and biological processes by negatively regulating miRNA biogenesis and
post-transcriptionally regulating mRNA translation. In addition,
increasing evidence suggests that LIN28 is an oncogene, promoting cell
growth in various cancers, including breast cancer; however the molecular
mechanisms underlying these effects are not known. To provide mechanistic
insights into how LIN28 modulates the gene networks that control breast
cancer disease processes, we integrate next generation technologies,
biochemical approaches and computational analysis to identify LIN28 mRNA
targets.Our results demonstrated that endogenous LIN28 binds 843 mRNAs,
3.5% of the total human reference genome in breast cancer cells. Gene
ontology analyses reveal that the genes targeted by LIN28 are enriched in
those that control cell metabolism. Furthermore, using proteomics
analysis, we identify heteronuclear ribonucleoprotein A1 (hnRNP A1), a
protein with multiple roles in mRNA metabolism, as a LIN28 interacting
partner. Importantly, hnRNP A1 is overexpressed and linked to increased
cell proliferation and transformation in a wide variety of cancers,
including breast cancer. Moreover, and consistent with the observation
that majority of mRNAs bound by LIN28 are involved in metabolism, hnRNP
A1 is known to regulate the expression of key enzymes that control
metabolism in cancer cells. In-depth analysis of the transcriptomes of
LIN28 and hNRNPA1 siRNA-treated cells reveal that these two proteins
cooperate to regulate alternative splicing and the steady state mRNA
expression of genes implicated in various aspects of breast cancer
biology. Most notably, depleting LIN28 results in differential isoform
expression of the ENAH gene, which is linked to breast cancer metastasis.
In summary, by integrating genomic, biochemical and computational
approaches, we identify a broad network of LIN28 targets that modulate
cancer cell metabolism, cancer cell invasiveness and the immune response,
processes that are hallmarks of breast cancer.

