Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vaccine-induced TNF alpha producing T cells synergize with
cisplatin in tumor eradication


Previously we have shown that Synthetic Long Peptide (SLP) vaccination
against Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) oncogenic proteins is safe and
induces functional T-cell responses in mice and humans. Although
vaccination induces potent clinical responses in mice and in patients
with premalignant lesions, no clinical responses were observed in
patients with cervical cancer. Here we show in a preclinical mouse model
for HPV induced malignancies that SLP vaccination can be safely combined
with clinically relevant chemotherapeutics to eradicate tumors. In mice
that received either peptide vaccination or chemotherapy, only a
temporary regression in tumor size was observed. Importantly, combined
chemo-immunotherapy induced complete and sustained tumor eradication in
nearly all mice. The chemotherapeutic agent cisplatin displayed the
strongest synergy with SLP vaccination. Long term regression of tumors
occurred at both the maximal tolerated dose of cisplatin and at 40% of
that dose when combined with SLP vaccination, but at the later dose side
effects such as body weight loss were absent. Upon vaccination tumors
were highly infiltrated with Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha (TNF) and
Interferon gamma (IFN-) producing CD8+ CTLs. Tumor cells incubated with
these cytokines and cisplatin in vitro strongly enhance their chemokine
expression, compatible with the abundant leukocyte infiltration into the
tumor upon combined chemo-immunotherapy. Accordingly, when combined with
cisplatin treatment, SLP vaccine-induced CTLs appeared to migrate earlier
from the tumor rim into the tumor beds. Moreover, analysis of the tumor
cells in vivo showed that combined treatment significantly decreased the
proliferative capacity of tumor cells compared to single treated or
untreated tumors. Furthermore, we showed that TNF enhanced cisplatin-
induced, JNK dependent tumor cell apoptosis. This cell death was
accompanied by an increased expression of pro-apoptotic molecules. The
synergy between cisplatin and SLP vaccination was largely abolished by in
vivo treatment with monoclonal antibody against TNF. Together, our data
show that combined peptide treatment with cisplatin leads to superior
tumor eradication in the absence of T cell immunosuppression.

