Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA splicing events may be related to breast cancer prevention


Pregnancy produces a protective effect against breast cancer in women who
had their first full term pregnancy (FTP) in their middle twenties. Gene
expression profiling of breast biopsies from healthy postmenopausal women
revealed up-regulation of genes related to cell adhesion,
differentiation, chromatin remodeling and RNA splicing in parous (P)
compared to nulliparous (NP) women (Belitskaya-Levy I et al. Cancer Prev
Res 2011; Peri S et al. BMC medical genomics 2012). Due to the role of
alternative splicing in gene regulation and diseases, we performed
RNA-sequencing of 8 P and 8 NP breast biopsies from postmenopausal women
free of disease. Alternative splicing events were identified through the
Multivariate Alternative Transcript Splicing Software (MATS) and
considered statistically significant when FDR were less than 5%. We
evaluated the differences between P and NP of five types of splicing:
mutually exclusive exon, alternative 5 splice site, alternative 3 splice
site, skipped exon and retained intron. These last two types had the
higher number of statistically significant events different between P and
NP. We found 244 skipped exon events, of which 119 events were present in
the NP women and 125 were in the P group. Ninety-five retained intron
(RI) events were found; of interest is that in P women we found 21
events, while in the NP, 74 RI events were found. RI events were selected
for further examination because these events can either be splicing
errors or a form of gene expression regulation, which indicate the genes
have lower expression and/or, they produce lower quantities of functional
proteins. Several of the genes containing RI belong to PI3K-Akt signaling
and spliceosome pathways. Gene ontology (GO) analysis revealed that those
genes with higher levels of RI in the NP breast enriched mainly GO terms
related to RNA processing and splicing. This is in agreement with our
previous gene expression results, in which genes involved in RNA
processing and splicing were down-regulated in the NP women. Alternative
splicing disproportionately affecting important pathways such as
PI3K-Akt, spliceosome and other genes involved in mRNA processing in NP
women may explain their higher risk for breast cancer. These findings
suggest that post-transcriptional regulation is a key element in the
differences between the breast of parous and nulliparous women and their
lifetime breast cancer risk. Accumulative knowledge of the mechanisms
responsible for the protective effect induced by FTP can lead us to the
development of agents to protect women with higher breast cancer risk, or
can lead us to targets for therapeutic purposes. (The sample collection
was supported by Avon Foundation for Women Breast Cancer Research Program
grant 02-2010-117 and the RNA-sequencing by NIH core grant CA06927 to Fox
Chase Cancer Center).

