Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived tumor xenograft are susceptible to formation of
B-cell lymphoma after initial transplantation of human carcinoma to
immunodeficient mice


Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumor models have emerged as new and
effective models for developing novel anticancer therapies and
personalized use of chemotherapeutic drugs. The PDX approach is based on
the transplantation of primary or metastatic human tumors into highly
immunodeficient NOD scid gamma (NSG) mice followed by continuous
propagation of the established engrafment in mice. Clinicians can
evaluate the effects of cancer drugs on their patients personalized tumor
grafts enabling them to select the best treatment for the cancer patient.
Here, we report that PDX tumors engrafted in NSG mice are susceptible to
formation of B-cell lymphomas. We xenografted primary or metastatic human
tumor fragments into NSG mice and found that tumors generated from
patients samples of breast (1 out 3 cases), colon (2 out of 6 cases),
pancreatic (1 out of 3 cases), bladder (1 out of 2 cases) and renal (1
out of 2 cases) cancer were histologically similar to lymphoid neoplasm.
Moreover, we found that the first passage (F1) of some breast and
pancreatic cancer PDX tumors could grow as a lymphoid neoplasm in one
mouse and as an adenocarcinoma in another mouse after initial
transplantation of the pieces from the same human tumor graft (F0).
Whereas subcutaneous PDX tumors resembling primary human carcinoma
histology were slow growing and non-metastatic, we found that
subcutaneous PDX lymphoid neoplasms were fast growing and formed large
metastatic lesions in lymph nodes, liver, lungs and spleen of the mouse.
Immunohistochemical staining confirmed that lymphoma cells express human
leucocyte common antigen CD45 and B-cell antigen CD19/20. By using
Epstein-Barr Virus-encoded RNA (EBER) in situ hybridization, we found
that PDX lymphoma cells were EBER-positive. Because B-cells are typically
present in any solid malignant tumor, B-cell PDX lymphomas may evolve in
a wide range of PDX tumor models. Our results suggest that
histolopathological evaluation and lymphoid marker testing should be
performed as part of the initial model characterization in order to
exclude B-cell lymphomas during the development of PDX tumor model from
solid human carcinoma.

