Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pan-cancer identification and prioritization of cancer-associated
differentially expressed genes: A biomarker discovery application


Cancer is fundamentally a disease of disordered gene expression. In fact,
reversal or neutralization of the changes in gene expression has been
shown to be attractive targets for the development of new anti-cancer
drugs and therapeutic strategies. New approaches such as antibody drug
conjugates (ADCs) also target differentially expressed genes as a mean to
recognize tumor cells to selectively deliver toxins to a tumor. In the
past decade, the global analysis of gene expression in human cancers have
led to the development of a number of potential new biomarkers. For
instance, mesothelin (MSLN) was identified as an over-expressed gene in
pancreatic cancer and later was proved to be a useful diagnostic marker
and so a therapeutic target. Large-scale gene expression analysis, using
techniques such as RNA sequencing, provides a powerful tool to identify
genes involved in human cancers. In this study, with the ultimate goal
being to identify potential novel targets for cancer immunotherapy, we
conducted a pan-cancer differential expression analysis in RNA sequencing
data from more than 5,000 patients with 25 different cancer types
generated by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). We identified differentially
expressed genes (present in at least 5% of samples in a tumor type) in
comparison to a large compendium of normal transcriptomes (more than 650
samples, including 30 tissue types) gathered from Genotype-Tissue
Expression (GTEx), illumina BodyMap project 2.0, TCGA, and an in-house
database. In total, we identified 892 putative tumor-associated
differentially expressed genes. In order to further identify novel
candidate genes and rank them based on their antigenic potential, we
performed an extensive literature search and systematic review to collect
the characteristics of an ideal tumor antigen (TA). We developed an
Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) model - a multiple-criteria
decision-making solution - to depict antigen properties for ranking and
prioritizing the tumor-associated differentially expressed genes. Our
model recognizes the known tumor antigens (such as CA9, Nectin-4, FN1,
MSLN and MUC16, which are currently in clinic or pre-clinical studies) in
the top 25 of the ranked list. We are currently validating the top-ranked
novel antigens in an orthogonal panel of tumor and normal tissues and
cell lines using PCR.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

