Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survival in glioblastoma cancer patients is predicted by miR-340,
that regulates key cancer hallmarks by inhibiting NRAS


Glioblastoma is the most frequent brain tumor in adults and is the most
lethal form of human cancer. Despite the improvements in treatments,
patients survival remains poor. Nevertheless, a subset of patients
survives longer than 3 years and they are classified as long-term
survivors (LTS). The molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying the
rare phenomenon of LTS are not well known. MicroRNAs (miRNAs or miRs) are
a class of endogenous non-coding RNA of 19-24 nucleotides in length that
have an important role in the negative regulation of gene expression.
Deregulation of miRNAs is linked to the pathogenesis of many types of
cancer. We performed a nanostring miRNA analysis on long and short
glioblastoma survivors patients to individuate miRs potentially involved
in LTS phenotype. Using this approach, we identified miR-340 as a novel
tumor-suppressor-miR in glioblastoma. miR-340 expression was increased in
LTS compared to short term survivors. Moreover, a log-rank test analysis
on both the data collected from TCGA database and from a cohort of
glioblastoma patients present in our lab revealed that low levels of
miR-340 were a risk indicator for glioblastoma patients survival. miR-340
overexpression decreased cell proliferation, anchorage independent cell
growth, cell cycle and response to temozolomide in different glioblastoma
cell lines. We identified NRAS as a direct target of miR-340. Rescue
experiments showed its essential role in mediating the onco-suppressive
activity of miR-340. The overexpression of miR-340 decreased the
activation of ERKs and AKT, the main pathways downstream NRAS.
Furthermore, glioblastoma cells stably infected with a lentivirus
encoding miR-340 exhibited a drastic reduction of tumor growth in nude
mice. In conclusion, our findings reveal miR-340 as a new
tumor-suppressor miRNA up-regulated in LTS in glioblastoma. Its
expression inversely correlates with survival of glioblastoma patients.
miR-340 is able to regulate multiple tumorigenic features of glioblastoma
cells, offering a novel potential prognostic and therapeutical target for
glioblastoma.

