Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E3 ubiquitin ligase TRIM32 negatively regulates tumor suppressor
p53 to promote tumorigenesis


Tumor suppressor p53 plays a key role in maintaining genomic stability
and preventing tumorigenesis through its regulation of cellular stress
responses, including apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and senescence. To
ensure its proper levels and functions in cells, p53 is tightly regulated
mainly through post-translational modifications. Ubiquitination is the
most important post-translational modification for p53. TRIM32 is a
protein of the tripartite motif (TRIM) family. The proteins of TRIM
family have been reported to be involved in different biological
processes, including cell growth, differentiation, development, muscular
physiology, innate immune response and cancer. However, like the majority
of TRIM family proteins, the biological function of TRIM32 is not
well-understood. Here, we identified TRIM32 as a novel p53 target gene
and E3 ubiquitin ligase for p53. In response to stress, including
ionizing radiation (IR) and chemotherapeutic agents (e.g. etoposide and
5-fluorouracil), p53 protein binds to the p53 responsive element in the
promoter of the TRIM32 gene and transcriptionally induces the expression
of TRIM32 in cells. In turn, TRIM32 protein interacts with p53 protein
and promotes p53 degradation through ubiquitination to negatively
regulate p53-mediated apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and senescence in
response to stress. Thus, p53 and TRIM32 form a novel negative feedback
loop in cells to regulate p53 protein levels and function. TRIM32 is
frequently overexpressed in different types of human tumors, including
lung, colorectal and liver cancers. TRIM32 overexpression promotes the
oncogenic transformation of primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts in a
largely p53-dependent manner. Furthermore, TRIM32 overexpression promotes
tumorigenesis in mice through the down-regulation of p53 function. Taken
together, our results demonstrated that as a novel p53 target and a novel
negative regulator for p53, TRIM32 plays an important role in regulation
of p53 and p53-mediated cellular stress responses. Furthermore, our
results revealed that impairing p53 function is a novel mechanism for
TRIM32 in tumorigenesis.

