Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cabozantinib eradicates de novo castrate-resistant PTEN/p53
deficient murine prostate cancer via activation of neutrophil-mediated
anti-tumor innate immunity


The majority of kinase inhibitors in cancer clinical trials have been
evaluated in the context of cell autonomous induction of apoptosis.
However, apoptosis can result in protumorigenic immunosuppression, which
limits the durability of an anti-tumor response. Recent clinical trial
data shows striking clinical and radiographic responses with kinase
inhibitor cabozantinib (XL-184) in metastatic solid tumors, particularly
in the context of bone metastases. However, the mechanism responsible for
this robust antitumor response remain unknown. Here we show that
cabozantinib eradicates poorly differentiated invasive cancer that
develop in the context of prostate-specific PTEN and p53 loss,
respectively, within 48 hours of cabozantinib treatment. This rapid tumor
clearance was temporally associated with infiltration of mature
polymorphonuclear leukocytes into the tumor bed. These anti-tumor effects
of cabozantinib appear to be MET-independent, since the MET inhibitor
PF-04217903 did not phenocopy the effects of cabozantinib in the
prostate-specific PTEN/p53 deficient mouse model in vivo. Unexpectedly,
in vitro treatment of PTEN/p53 deficient cell lines derived from murine
tumors showed insignificant apoptosis, but robust extracellular release
of HMGB1, a neutrophil chemoattractant, and marker of immunogenic cell
death. To elucidate the relevance of an immunogenic anti-tumor mechanism
in vivo, we performed RNA-seq profiling and quantitative RT-PCR analysis,
which showed an acute increase in anti-tumor inflammatory cytokine gene
expression signature and neutrophil activation/chemotaxis markers
following acute cabozantinib treatment. Critically, blockade of
neutrophil chemotaxis/trafficking with dexamethasone or depletion with
anti-Ly6G antibody, reversed the effects of cabozantinib towards
eradication of advanced PTEN/p53 deficient tumors. Finally, cytokine
array profiling of supernatant from bone marrow metastases from
castrate-resistant prostate cancer patients showed increased neutrophil
markers and decreased IL-6 levels within the bone microenvironment
following 6 weeks of cabozantinib treatment., thus polarizing the
neutrophils into N1 effector cells. Collectively, these results shed
light on a novel anti-tumor immunogenic mechanism for cabozantinib within
the tumor microenvironment of PTEN/p53 deficient tumors, which unleashes
a profound innate anti-tumor immune response. These findings suggest the
possibility of combination therapies of cabozantinib with T-cell
checkpoint blockade or vaccine-based approaches, to augment immunologic
responses in advanced cancers.

