Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced antitumor efficacy by sequential application of Wnt
pathway antagonists in combination with taxanes


The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, which signals through the Frizzled (FZD)
receptor family and several co-receptors, has long been implicated in
cancer. We have previously demonstrated that inhibition of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling by vantictumab (anti-Fzd7, OMP-18R5) or
ipafricept (FZD8-Fc, OMP-54F28) inhibits tumor growth, decreases
tumorigenicity and induces differentiation in solid tumors. The
anti-tumor effect of our Wnt antagonists is most evident in combination
with chemotherapeutic agents. We sought to determine if the anti-tumor
effect of Wnt pathway inhibitors varied with different chemotherapeutic
agents. We compared the growth inhibitory effect of vantictumab and
ipafricept with either taxanes (paclitaxel and nab-paclitaxel) or with
DNA synthesis inhibitors (gemcitabine and carboplatin) in patient-derived
tumor xenografts. We observed enhanced anti-tumor activity when combining
vantictumab or ipafricept with nab-paclitaxel or paclitaxel compared to
the combination with gemcitabine or carboplatin in pancreatic ductal
carcinoma and serous ovarian cancer xenograft models. Histologic analysis
in a pancreatic ductal carcinoma indicated that nab-paclitaxel increased
mitotic cells and beta-catenin levels. Importantly, the addition of
vantictumab to nab-paclitaxel reversed the nab-paclitaxel-induced
increase in mitotic cells and beta-catenin expression. A potential
mechanism to account for these results involves the observation that
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is under cell cycle control and peaks at the
G2/M phase. Taxanes inhibit microtubule function and block the cell cycle
at G2/M. In contrast, other chemotherapeutic agents, such as platinum
compounds and nucleoside analogs, inhibit DNA synthesis and block cell
proliferation at S phase. Our findings suggest that combination of Wnt
blockade with chemotherapeutic agents, such as taxanes, that induce G2/M
arrest may resulted in enhanced anti-tumor activity. The optimal synergy
of anti-Wnt plus taxane combination occurs when the antibody was applied
prior to taxane. Further analyses in serous ovarian tumors reveal that
pre-treatment with ipafricept resulted in dysregulated beta-cetenin
localization within giant multi-nucleated cells and up-regulation of
genes associated with negative regulators of G1 progression. Our work
provides evidence for the enhanced anti-tumor effect of Wnt pathway
inhibitors in combination with taxanes and highlights the importance of
preclinical examination to identify the most efficacious combination
therapy regimens and the timing of antibody action for Wnt antagonists in
combination with taxanes for optimal treatment efficacy.

