Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer exosome promotes cisplatin resistance In bladder cancer and
inhibition of exosome sensitizes bladder cancer cells to cisplatin
chemotherapy


Exsosomes are nano-vesicles secreted by most types of cells, and
substantially increased secretion in cancer cells. Their role in
tumorigenesis/cancer progression have been extensively studied but their
role in regulating therapy response have been suggested without in depth
investigation. We are particularly interested in exosome's roles in
cisplatin resistant, since cisplatin is one of the most widely used
chemodrugs for many cancer types.To investigate the role of exosomes in
cisplatin resistance in bladder cancer, we examined the cisplatin
sensitivity among five bladder cancer cell lines. The expression levels
of exosome associated genes that are involved in exosome biogenesis and
secretion/internalization were examined by quantative PCR. Interestingly,
cisplatin resistant bladder cancer cells express relative high level of
exosome associated genes as compared to cisplatin sensitive cells. More
importantly, cisplatin treatment induces the expression of exosome
associated genes expression in cisplatin resistant cells, but not in
sensitive cell. Among all those genes, we are particularly interested in
Rab gene family, and mechanistic study of targeting those Rab proteins is
undergoing. The correlative exosome genes profiles with cisplatin
resistance suggested exosome production might facilitate cancer cells
escaping from cisplatin-induced cell death; thereby, inhibition of
exosome might sensitize cancer cells response to cisplatin. To test this,
we have screened several compounds that are known to inhibit exosome
biogenesis and uptake, and. found that inhibition of exosomes by dynasore
+ NSC23766, indeed can sensitize bladder cancer cells to cisplatin. In
summary, we concluded that cancer exosome play a critical role of
promoting cisplatin resistance in bladder cancer, and inhibition of
exosomes sensitizes bladder cancer cell response to cisplain. The exosome
related profiles potentially can serve as therapy biomarkers

