Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Label-free high throughput microfluidic device for the isolation
of circulating tumor cells from breast cancer patients


Introduction and Objective: A necessary step in distant metastasis is the
hematogenous dissemination of cancer cells from the primary tumor site to
remote sites. The presence of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in the
peripheral blood represents a strong and independent prognostic factor
for decreased disease-free and overall survival in many solid
malignancies. Immune-affinity based capture is the most commonly used
method for the isolation of CTCs which utilizes antibodies to capture
tumor cells expressing specific proteins. However, immune-affinity based
approaches offer low throughput (1mL/hr) and considerable cell loss
(20-40%) resulting from heterogeneous expression of biomarkers on CTCs.
Various label-free approaches utilizing physical properties of CTCs have
been developed to overcome the limitations of immune-affinity based
isolation techniques, including micro-filters, microscale laminar
vortices, inertial migration of particles, and integrated systems. Here
we present an inertial microfluidic-based separation technique for high
throughput and label-free isolation of CTCs that yields the highest
throughput with high CTC recovery and high blood cell removal among all
the label-free technologies.Methods: The PDMS-made microfluidic device
has 637 mm in length with 56 corners, 500 m in width, and 100 m in
height. The separation is driven by two main forces: (i) inertial force
that focuses the cells into streamlines, and (ii) drag force from Dean
flow that migrates the focused cells to various positions based on size.
The device was optimized with MCF-7 and Panc-1 cell lines spiked into PBS
buffer and also diluted blood. It was then tested on 10 mL blood samples
from patients with metastatic breast cancer. The separated cells were
cytospun and stained to identify CTCs as cytokeratin positive, DAPI
positive, CD45 negative cells.Results: Samples were processed through the
inertial microfluidic device that enriches CTCs in the second outlet
based on size difference between CTCs and blood cells. The device was
optimized to operate at an extremely high throughput of 2500 L/min with
high recovery (92% for both spiked samples of MCF-7 and PANC-1 cell
lines) and high white blood cells (WBCs) removal (91%). To determine the
efficiency of capture of rare cell populations, healthy donor blood
samples were spiked with MCF-7/GFP at 100 cells and 95% recovery was
obtained. In patient samples, we identified CTCs in 24 of 27 (89%) breast
patients with metastatic disease (4.34.8 CTCs/mL) with low WBCs
contamination (465473 WBCs/mL).Conclusion: The study of CTCs could have a
direct impact upon patient care by presenting a novel CTC isolation
method. This technology may be applicable to early detection, and also
for monitoring response to treatment. Our approach is superior to current
strategies because it is independent of cell surface markers, which may
be varied in tumor cells, and may exclude cancer stem cells.

