Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pin1 suppresses androgen receptor activity


Reactivation of the androgen receptor (AR) is the hallmark of prostate
cancer (PCa) progression to the castration resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC) phenotype. Currently, treatment for CRPC strives to impede the
full-length AR (AR-FL) from becoming activated through targeting the
ligand binding domain (LBD) via androgen deprivation therapy or treatment
with antiandrogens. However, these options can give rise to AR-variants
(AR-Vs) that lack the LBD and are unresponsive to treatment. Therefore,
targeting the N-terminus of AR, which is conserved between AR-FL and
AR-Vs, is critical for identifying new treatment options. Phosphorylation
of serine 81 (AR-pS81) in the N-terminus of AR is critical for AR
activation, stability and recruitment to the chromatin. Similar
phosphorylation sites can be observed in the N-terminus of both AR-FL and
AR-Vs. Expression of Pin1, a proline isomerase, exhibits a strong
correlation with progression and relapse of PCa. Also, suppression of
Pin1 in PCa decreases cell proliferation rates, suggesting that Pin1 may
play a pivotal role in PCa progression. Pin1 isomerizes proline residues
from trans to cis when the adjacent serine/threonine residue is
phosphorylated. Dephosphorylation by phosphatases occurs when a pS-P
motif is in the trans conformation. Therefore, Pin1 isomerization of AR
pS81-P82 from trans to cis could prevent dephosphorylation and result in
constitutive or enhanced AR activity. Stable cell lines with Pin1
knockdown were generated via shRNA targeting the 5 UTR of Pin1 that
express either AR-FL and/or AR-Vs. Pin1 knockdown was confirmed by
western blots, and AR activity was monitored by expression of several AR
regulated genes. Additionally, AR recruitment to chromatin was assayed by
ChIP and Re-Chip. Loss of Pin1 resulted in a 60% reduction of endogenous
PSA expression, and AR was unable to induce PSA expression when treated
with androgens. However, suppression of AR activity was not due to
decreased recruitment of AR to chromatin. Phosphorylation of AR-pS81 was
decreased by loss of Pin1, while protein stability and mRNA expression
was not altered. These data suggest that Pin1 may play a critical role in
regulating the transcriptional activity of AR by altering the
accessibility of AR to interact with transcriptional machinery needed to
maintain AR activity. (Funding for this project was provided by the T.J.
Martell Foundation).

