Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Hedgehog pathway and EGFR signaling to overcome
endocrine resistance


Rationale: Endocrine therapy is the cornerstone in the management of
patients with estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer (BC). While
endocrine therapy is very effective, 30-40% of patients will develop
resistance. Our lab has previously shown that the PI3K/AKT pathway
activates the Sonic Hedgehog pathway, stabilizing the activated
transcription factor, GLI-1, and contributing to the development of
endocrine resistance (Ramaswamy B et al: Can Res:August 2012). The
purpose of our current study is to elucidate how GLI-1 modulates its
target genes that contribute to endocrine-resistance.Methodology: Ectopic
expression of GLI-1 in MCF7 cells was followed by microarray gene
expression analysis. The GLI-1 signature characterized by differential
expression of several BC associated genes was next validated in vitro
using real-time PCR. We next utilized the Hatzis data set to determine
whether these signature genes correlated with GLI-1 expression in BC
patients and whether expression of these genes could be predictive of
metastatic recurrence.Results: Several known GLI-1 targets and novel
genes were found to be differentially expressed in GLI-1 overexpressing
MCF-7 cells. The expression profile of the majority of these genes
followed a similar pattern in the endocrine resistant cell lines, as
determined by real-time PCR. Our analysis with the Hatzis data set
revealed that several genes were positively correlated with GLI-1
expression (ATM, BRCAI, EGFR, ESR2, SERPINE1, SNAI1, IL6) and several
genes were negatively correlated with GLI-1 expression (IGF1R, MUC1, PGR,
SLC-39A6, THBS1, XBP1). Of these signature genes, co-expression of GLI-1
& EGFR and GLI-1 & SNAI1 were predictive of metastatic recurrence in the
luminal A subtype only. Western blot analysis showed an increase in total
EGFR and EGFR phosphorylation upon GLI-1 overexpression in MCF7 cells
suggesting cross-talk between Hedgehog pathway and EGFR
signaling.Conclusions: The Luminal A breast cancer subtype is the most
common molecular subtype of breast cancer. Although associated with good
prognosis, many patients with this subtype ultimately have a recurrence.
Interestingly we observed that combined expression of EGFR and GLI-1 was
predictive of metastatic recurrence in patients with the luminal A
subtype. Prior trials of targeting EGFR with endocrine therapy have not
been very successful. We propose that dual targeting of EGFR and hedgehog
pathways could improve clinical outcomes of ER+ BC and warrants further
investigation.

