Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation and dual immune checkpoint blockade overcome tumor
resistance and distinctly improve immunity


Optimal results with immune checkpoint inhibitors such as CTLA4 and PD-1
will likely require combination therapy. This raises important questions
about tumor resistance and non-redundant mechanisms of action.
Pre-clinical and clinical data indicate that radiation (RT) may augment
responses to immune checkpoint inhibition. We therefore evaluated this
combination for metastatic melanoma using parallel studies in mice and
humans. In a phase I clinical trial with 19 patients with multiple
melanoma metastases, a single index lesion was irradiated with
hypofractionated RT, delivered over two or three fractions, followed by
four cycles of the anti-CTLA4 antibody ipilimumab. We reproduced this
therapy in mice using the melanoma cell line B16-F10. For this, each
flank of C57BL/6 mice was implanted with tumors to model multiple
metastases. Mice received anti-CTLA4 (on days 5, 8, and 11), irradiation
of one tumor using an image-guided micro-irradiator (20 Gy x 1 on day 8),
or both treatments. Mechanistic studies were performed on material
obtained from patients and mice at baseline and thereafter. Overall,
treatment in the phase I study was well tolerated and toxicity was
similar to that reported for anti-CTLA4. Major tumor regressions were
observed in a subset of patients with metastatic melanoma treated with
anti-CTLA4 + RT. In mice, although combined treatment enhanced the CD8 T
cell to Treg ratios and improved responses in irradiated and unirradiated
tumors, resistance was common. Genome-wide and unbiased analyses revealed
that resistant tumors have increased PD-L1, interferon-stimulated genes,
and exhausted T cells that depress the CD8/Treg ratio. Patients and mice
with high PD-L1 tumors that were treated with RT + anti-CTLA4 poorly
reinvigorated exhausted T cells, did not respond, and rapidly progressed.
In mice, adding anti-PD-L1/PD-1 to RT + anti-CTLA4 reinvigorated
exhausted T cells, leading to complete responses and immunity across
multiple cancer types. The extent of T cell exhaustion/reinvigoration
predicts response and can be assessed through peripheral blood.
Resistance to RT + anti-CTLA4 results from depression in the CD8/Treg
ratio due to elevated tumor PD-L1 and persistent T cell exhaustion. Both
clinical and pre-clinical data suggest that the combination of RT with
CTLA4 and PD-1 checkpoint blockade is a rational, non-redundant approach
to overcoming tumor resistance and improving immunity in multiple cancer
types.

