Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ras-mediated evasion of detachment-induced cell death involves
differential signaling pathways for metabolism and anoikis


In order for successful metastasis to occur, cells must overcome anoikis,
a caspase-dependent cell death process triggered by detachment from the
extracellular matrix (ECM). In addition, recent studies have revealed
that ECM-detached cells must also rectify detachment-induced metabolic
defects that compromise cell survival. However, the precise signals
involved in the inhibition of anoikis and the restoration of proper cell
metabolism during ECM-detachment are poorly understood. Of particular
interest to our studies is the oncogene Ras, which is constitutively
active in approximately 30% of all cancers and is well known to be
regulate cell death pathways and metabolism. We have discovered that Ras
facilitates the survival of ECM-detached cancer cells by utilizing
distinct signaling pathways to block anoikis and regulate
metabolism.Using MCF-10A cells engineered to overexpress oncogenic Ras
and HCT116 cells (which contain an activating Ras mutation), we
investigated the signaling pathways downstream of Ras that facilitate the
survival of ECM-detached cells. Interestingly, we discovered that while
Ras-mediated PI(3)K signaling is critical for rectifying metabolic
defects during ECM-detachment, the downstream effector is not Akt, but
rather SGK-1. SGK-1 stimulates glucose uptake, enhances ATP generation,
promotes luminal filling in 3-dimensional cell culture, and drives
anchorage-independent growth in soft agar. Interestingly, our data also
indicate that oncogenic Ras utilizes an entirely distinct signaling
pathway to block anoikis. We discovered that Ras diminishes the
expression of the phosphatase PHLPP1. This inhibits the
dephosphorylation-induced activation of a signaling cascade that
culminates in the activation of pro-apoptotic p38 MAPK. In aggregate,
these data unveil a novel survival strategy utilized by ECM-detached
cancer cells and implicate both SGK-1 and PHLPP1 function downstream of
Ras during ECM-detachment. The molecular mechanisms unveiled here could
be utilized for the design of novel therapies that eliminate
ECM-detached, metastatic cancer cells with Ras mutations through
simultaneous modulation of SGK-1 and PHLPP1.

