Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo development of pan-Pim kinase small molecule inhibitors


Pim-1,-2, and -3 are constitutively active serine-threonine kinases which
are partially redundant and regulate multiple pathways important for
tumor growth and survival. One or more of the human Pims are
over-expressed in multiple hematological tumor types (e.g. multiple
myeloma (MM), NHL and AML) and in some solid tumors (e.g. prostate and
SCLC). Pim over-expression correlates with malignancy and poor prognosis
in several indications. Our goal was to generate a pan Pim kinase
inhibitor with acceptable physical chemical properties and in vivo
anti-tumor efficacy. Here we present data on two ATP-competitive, orally
bioavailable pan Pim inhibitors, Compound I and Compound II. These
inhibitors have potent enzymatic and cellular activity, acceptable
pharmacokinetic properties (PK) and robust in vivo efficacy. In a kinase
enzyme assay Compound I inhibits Pim-1 and Pim-2 activity with 0.4 nM and
0.7 nM IC50s, respectively, while Compound II is even more potent with
Pim-1 and Pim-2 IC50s of 0.1 nM/0.1 nM. In a cellular assay which
measures inhibition of the Pim downstream substrate phospho-BAD (p-BAD),
compounds I and II demonstrate IC50s of 56 and 16 nM, respectively. In an
in vivo pharmacodynamic assay (PD) to demonstrate on-target Pim activity,
compounds I and II significantly inhibited p-BAD in KMS-12-BM multiple
myeloma tumors for 16 hours post dose. Treatment of KMS-12-BM tumor
xenografts with Compound I demonstrated robust in vivo anti-tumor
efficacy resulting in 23% tumor regression at 50 mg/kg BID and tumor
stasis at 100 mg/kg QD. Compound II demonstrated improved PK properties
leading to greater anti-tumor efficacy of 33% tumor regression at 100
mg/kg QD and tumor stasis at 50 mg/kg QD. Compound II showed efficacy in
an orthotopic model of multiple myeloma and in models of AML and DLBCL.
Combination treatment of Compound II and the standard of care
Dexamethasone in the multiple myeloma RPMI-8226 xenograft model
demonstrated enhanced tumor growth inhibition compared to either single
agent activity. In summary, Compound I and II are potent and selective
inhibitors of Pim kinases with excellent in vivo properties. Pim kinase
inhibitors, either as monotherapy or in combination with dexamethasone,
may be effective clinical strategies for certain cancer patients.

