Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor stroma in serous ovarian cancer; inter and intra patient
heterogeneity and impact on survival


Purpose of the study: This study subjected primary tumors and matched
metastasis of serous ovarian cancer to a multi-parametric analysis of
tumor stroma characteristics. The aims were to explore potential
co-regulation of these characteristics, analyze their concordance in
primary and metastatic lesions and define their correlation to survival.
The impact of tumor microenvironment in serous ovarian cancer is largely
unexplored and new prognostic tools for this tumor are strongly needed
Experimental procedures: A retrospective consecutive study was performed,
including 321 patients at primary surgery of ovarian cancer. Patients
with serous ovarian cancer (N = 186) were included in the current study,
91 with matched primary and metastatic tissue. A tissue microarray (TMA)
was built from the pre-treatment paraffin-embedded samples and was
subjected to immunohistochemistry double staining with CD34 (endothelial
cell marker) together with the fibroblast and pericyte markers alpha
smooth muscle actin (-SMA), platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta
(PDGFR), and the pericyte marker desmin. The images were digitally
analyzed to yield thirteen tumor-stroma metrics related to the
vasculature and the fibroblast-rich stroma. Spearman two-tails test was
used for correlation estimates. Log Rank test and Cox proportional
hazards models were used to estimate the overall survival (OS) with uni
and multivariate analysis.Results: Within the ovarian primary site, we
found a strong association between expression of PDGFR in perivascular
cells and in fibroblasts. Similar findings were made concerning
-SMA-positive fibroblasts and perivascular cells. Most stroma
characteristics except PDGFR expression in fibroblast stroma and in
perivascular cells, showed large variations when matched primary tumors
and metastasis were compared. Large PDGFR-positive stroma fraction, as
well as high PDGFFR positive perivascular intensity, was significantly
associated with worse survival in uni and multivariate analysis (HR 1.7,
Cl 95% 1.1-2.5 and HR 1.7, Cl 95% 1.1-2.7, respectively).Conclusions: The
study identified previously unrecognized co-regulation patterns of
PDGFR-positive perivascular cells and fibroblasts, and -SMA-positive
perivascular cells and fibroblasts; it revealed that status of stromal
markers, except PDGFR, differs between matched primary tumors and
metastases. Moreover analyses identified PDGFR expression in perivascular
cells and in fibroblasts as novel prognosis markers. This prognosis
association is in agreement with previous findings from breast and
prostate cancer and suggests that PDGFR could be explored as a target for
personalized tumor microenvironment-targeted treatments.

