Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch signaling increases the number of relapse-driving tumor
propagating cells in embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma


Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS) is a devastating pediatric muscle
cancer with extremely poor prognosis at relapse. Work from our group has
identified the tumor-propagating cell (TPC) in a transgenic zebrafish
model of kRASG12D-induced ERMS that is responsible for driving continued
tumor growth and relapse. The TPC is molecularly similar to an activated
muscle satellite-cell and expresses myf5, c-met, and m-cadherin. Building
on these observations, we have identified the Notch pathway as a potent
enhancer of ERMS self-renewal and TPC number. Specifically, bulk tumor
limiting dilution cell transplantation experiments revealed that TPCs are
increased 10-fold in kRASG12D expressing ERMS that co-express activated
intracellular Notch1 (ICN1). This increase in TPC number is partly the
result of ICN1 expressing ERMS exhibiting a 3-fold expansion of
relapse-driving myf5-GFP+/mylz2-mCherry-negative ERMS-cell population.
Unexpectedly, cell transplantation experiments revealed that Notch
pathway activation also conferred tumor-propagating ability to the
myf5-GFP+/mylz2-mCherry+ mid-differentiated ERMS cells - a population of
cells previously shown to lack self-renewal capacity. Single cell
engraftment studies uncovered that NOTCH activation caused cells to
oscillate between the TPC and mid-differentiated ERMS molecular states
that was not observed in kRASG12D-expressing ERMS, suggesting that Notch
has important roles in both self-renewal and cell state transitions.Next,
we validated our findings in human ERMS where NOTCH1 is highly expressed
both in tumors and ERMS-cell lines. We show important roles for NOTCH in
regulating self-renewal and differentiation in human ERMS. Specifically,
human ERMS cells that expressed activated NOTCH1 had elevated
sphere-colony formation, a surrogate for self-renewal in vitro. By
contrast, shRNA knockdown of NOTCH1 resulted in decreased sphere-colony
formation and robust terminal differentiation of ERMS cells into
late-stage, myosin-expressing myoblasts. Moreover, we identified that
NOTCH1 directly activated SNAI1 expression and was required for both
efficient sphere formation and differentiation in ERMS cell lines. SNAI1
is commonly over-expressed in human ERMS and its expression is positively
correlated with NOTCH1. Taken together, our data indicate that Notch
signaling is an important modifier of human ERMS acting to regulate both
TPC self-renewal and differentiation. Notch and/or SNAl1 pathway
inhibition may have potential benefit for a subset of patients with
relapsed ERMS.

