Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Signaling redundancy between EGFR and c-Met: molecular analysis of
concurrent inhibition of c-Src and therapeutic potential against prostate
cancer


Overexpression of growth factor receptors is often associated with
advanced stage disease and poor prognosis. Importantly, they can interact
with other growth factor receptors and non-receptor tyrosine kinases to
promote proliferation, survival, invasion and metastasis. One such
signaling crosstalk occurs between the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) and the hepatocyte growth factor receptor (c-Met) that are
overexpressed in tumours. The amplification of c-Met in tumours
overexpressing EGFR leads to signaling redundancy that causes resistance
to EGFR inhibitors. Furthermore, the non-receptor tyrosine kinase c-Src
has been shown to synergize with EGFR to promote tumour progression and
to mediate the crosstalk between EGFR and c-Met. In order to investigate
the mechanisms associated with the EGFR-c-Met-c-Src axis, we sought to
identify tumour cell lines responding to the dual-inhibition of EGFR and
c-Met and the triple-inhibition of EGFR, c-Met and c-Src using
pharmacological inhibitions. We identified two androgen independent
prostate cancer cell lines with exquisite sensitivity to EGFR-, c-Met-,
c-Src-based combinations: DU145 and PC3. The results showed that the
combination of crizotinib (c-Met inhibitor) + gefitinib (EGFR inhibitor)
was 2-5-fold more potent (DU145 IC50 = 1.9 M, PC3 IC50 = 1.9 M) than the
drugs alone in growth inhibition assay. Furthermore, the addition of
dasatinib (c-Src inhibitor) to the crizotinib + gefitinib combination
further enhanced its potency (DU145 IC50 = 0.003 M, PC3 IC50 = 0.009 M).
When compared with individual drugs, equieffective combinations of
gefitinib with crizotinib showed 2-3-fold superior potency in blocking
invasion and inducing cytotoxicity. More importantly, the addition of
dasatinib to the crizotinib + gefitinib combination significantly
enhanced anti-invasive potency and cell-killing by apoptosis. Analysis of
signaling crosstalk between the three kinases showed that dasatinib alone
or in combination induced re-phosphorylation of c-Src, EGFR, c-Met and
STAT3, particularly after 2-6h of drug exposure. The results indicate
that these apparent compensatory re-phosphorylation mechanisms induced by
dasatinib did not affect the overall potency of the triple combination.
Given the role of these three tyrosine kinases in driving proliferation,
invasion and survival of cancer cells, our work suggests that
triple-inhibition is required for optimal antitumour activity in cells
co-expressing EGFR and c-Met.

