Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of apoptosis by zeaxanthin in human uveal melanoma cells


INTRODUCTIONUveal melanoma is the highly malignant tumor of the eye and
frequently leads to metastatic death. Depending on size and other
parameters, traditional treatment of the primary tumor has been
enucleation. However, alternative treatments to preserve the eye have
been devised, including cryotherapy, radioactive therapy, transpupillary
thermotherapy, surgical resection and photocoagulation. Despite these
advances in treatment, mortality varies considerably, to more than 50% in
high-risk patients, primarily due to metastasis to the liver. Therefore,
it is critical to develop drugs that are non-toxic and can be
administered for potentially extended periods to patients who have
diagnosed with primary uveal melanoma. In recent years, Zeaxanthin, a
naturally occurring carotenoid alcohol highly enriched in green leaves,
has been used in medicine to treat various diseases. Epidemiological
studies have shown that higher intake and higher blood levels of
zeaxanthin appear to be associated with a lower risk of occurrence of
various cancers. It has also been reported that zeaxanthin may inhibit
cell growth or induce apoptosis of several tumor cell lines in vitro. The
present study was designed to investigate the effect of zeaxanthin on
human uveal melanoma cells.MethodsHuman uveal melanoma cells isolated
from tissues of enucleated eyes were treated with zeaxanthin in a dose-
and time-dependent manner. After zeaxanthin treatment, cell viability was
measured using MTT assay. The proapoptotic and antiproliferative effects
were evaluated by -annexin V staining and flow cytometry respectively.
Mitochondrial transmembrane potential was measured as a function of drug
treatment using
5,5,6,6-tetrachloro-1,1,3,3-tetraethyl-benzamidazolocarbocyanin iodide
(JC-1). Immunoblotting was used to evaluate the expression of
apoptosis-related proteins. Caspase-9 and -3 activities were determined
by spectroflurometry.ResultsZeaxanthin induced apoptosis in dose- and
time-dependent manner. Decrease in the level of Bcl-2 and increase in the
level of Bax were observed in zeaxanthin-treated in human uveal melanoma
cells. Preceding cell death, zeaxanthin evoked a rapid dissipation of
mitochondrial transmembrane potential. This was followed by the release
of cytochrome c into the cytoplasm and a substantial increase in the
activities of caspase-9 and -3.ConclusionsThese results demonstrate that
zeaxanthin induces apoptosis through the regulation of Bcl-2 family
protein and activation of intrinsic mitochondrial pathway. This may
warrant further exploration as an adjuvant to conventional anticancer
therapies for uveal melanoma.

