Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microtubule stabilizers inhibit the cellular transport and
signaling of EGFR in breast cancer cells


Breast cancer is the second most diagnosed cancer in women and it is
estimated that approximately 40,000 women die every year from this
disease in this country alone. The overexpression of EGFR in breast
cancer is associated with drug resistance and an aggressive nature
resulting in an overall poor outcome. The EGFR signaling pathway requires
internalization of the receptor, endosomal translocation and in some
cases nuclear accumulation of the receptor. These processes are dependent
on functional microtubules. Microtubule targeting agents (MTAs) have been
used with great success in the treatment of breast cancer alone and in
combination with other agents. MTAs impair microtubule dynamics, which
results in the inhibition of mitosis. Microtubules are additionally
important in cellular signaling events including cellular transport of
the EGFR. The effects of the microtubule stabilizer taccalonolide AJ on
EGFR transport and activation in breast cancer cells were compared to the
effects of paclitaxel. Our results show that microtubule stabilization
interrupts the cellular trafficking of EGFR, leading to the retention of
the receptor in the cell periphery.. Taccalonolide AJ and paclitaxel
impaired the association of EGFR with the early endosome and delayed its
association with the lysosome. This disruption in cellular transport also
led to decreased phosphorylation of EGFR downstream targets AKT, ERK1/2
and STAT3, with taccalonolide AJ being the more effective inhibitor. Our
studies show that microtubule stabilizers also prevent the association of
EGFR with the Golgi instead leading to the fragmentation of this
organelle. Paclitaxel caused a higher degree of Golgi fragmentation and
it was observed in nearly all cells. The inhibition of EGFR localization
to the Golgi caused by taccalonolide AJ and paclitaxel suggests that
microtubule stabilization interferes with the trafficking of EGFR to the
nucleus. This was confirmed by our results showing that microtubule
stabilization impairs the nuclear transport of EGFR in breast cancer
cells. Not surprisingly, in this case, paclitaxel was much more effective
at preventing this nuclear accumulation. These studies highlight the
utility and versatility of microtubule stabilizers and suggest the
potential for combination treatments with microtubule stabilizers and
small molecule inhibitors of EGFR and EGFR dependent pathways in breast
cancer.

