Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A patient-centric repository of PDX models for translational
oncology research


Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models maintain the complex intra-tumoral
biology and heterogeneity of an intact malignancy, as well as the
interplay with stromal components and other cells fluxing into the tumor
environment. This intrinsic cross-talk between different elements of the
tumor makes PDX models a superior tool for translational drug discovery
research and personalized oncology studies. Champions PDX models were
originally developed for personalizing cancer treatments through the
different Champions clinical programs. These models accurately reflect
the population of patients enrolling in clinical trials. We describe
herein our extensive TumorBank of PDX models, a valuable resource for
translational oncology research to predetermine target populations for
intervention with novel therapeutics in specific cancer subtypes.Tumor
tissue from over 950 patients with a variety of primary and metastatic
solid malignancies, across all ages and ethnicities and encompassing both
treatment-nave and heavily-pretreated individuals, has been implanted
into immunodeficient mice with successful engraftment observed in 72% of
cases. Comprehensive and translational-relevant clinical annotations have
been maintained for these PDX models, including patient demographics,
disease stage, anatomic location, tumor grade and histology, and
treatment history. Importantly, whole exome and RNA sequencing, tissue
histopathology, and protein immunohistochemistry have all been applied to
297 of these models. Finally, 70 of the models were screened against the
corresponding patient's treatment used in the clinic, demonstrating a
sensitivity of 98%, specificity of 76%, positive predictive value of 89%
and negative predictive value of 96%. This wealth of information can be
accessed through the Champions TumorGraft Database. The combination of
extensive molecular and clinical annotation, together with opportunities
for unlimited prospective preclinical testing, makes Champions TumorBank
a pioneering resource for pharmaceutical companies seeking to identify
target populations for therapeutic intervention.

