Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia pathway activation in HPV-associated OSCC


Introduction: HIF1A induces hypoxia dependent transcription of its target
genes, resulting e.g. in increased glycolysis. However, increased
glycolysis is found in a lot of tumors despite presence of oxygen, known
as Warburg effect. Under normoxia HIF1A is hydroxylated by prolyl
hydroxylases (PHDs) and degraded by the proteasome. According to
literature, HIF1A protein level increase in the presence of
HPV-oncoproteins. Nevertheless, HPV dependent induction of HIF1A and
resulting downstream effects are still ambiguous for cervix carcinoma and
even more for OSCC. We propose HPV-associated HIF1A induction in OSCC to
be responsible for a Warburg-like effect, to gain nutrient resources for
tumor growth and to be related to immune escape and metastasis. We
investigated characteristic effects of HPV on the hypoxia signaling
cascade and glycolysis for testing these hypotheses.Experimental
Procedure: HPV-positive and -negative cell lines were cultured under
normoxic and hypoxic conditions or in the presence or absence of hypoxia
mimics. We analyzed components of the hypoxia signaling pathway with
molecular- and cell biological methods. Furthermore we analyzed HIF1A and
its target gene expression in a cohort of 40 HPV-positive and -negative
OSCC by immunohistochemistry.Data: Immunoblot analysis showed 2.6 times
higher HIF1A protein level (normalized relative expression) in normoxia
and increased accumulation under hypoxic conditions in HPV-positive
compared to HPV-negative (4.5 vs. 1.6 times more) cell lines.
HPV-positive and -negative cell lines showed comparable PHD2 expression
level under normoxia. Interestingly, PHD2 protein level increased more in
HPV-positive than in HPV-negative cell lines (5.5 vs. 1.6 times) under
hypoxia. Immunofluorescence also showed increased basal HIF1A expression
and higher up-regulation after incubation with deferoxamine in
HPV-positive vs. -negative cell lines. Immunohistochemistry of GLUT1 in
HPV-associated OSCC showed a distinct HPV-pattern with a more evenly
distributed expression compared to HPV-negative OSCC.Conclusion: Our
findings suggest a difference between HPV-induced and HPV-unrelated
carcinogenesis in OSCC referring to up-regulation of HIF1A and activation
of its target genes under normoxia as well as under hypoxia. This was
shown for HPV-positive cell lines in vitro and indicated for clinical
samples. Current analyzes focus on HPV-oncoprotein interactions with
cellular factors related to HIF1A protein degradation and stabilization.

