Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of TIMP-1 glycosylation in lung carcinoma


Tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs) were initially
identified as endogenous physiological inhibitors of MMPs. However, over
recent years novel functions have been attributed to TIMPs, especially
TIMP-1. Amongst its complex and sometimes paradoxical functions,TIMP-1's
role in inhibition of apoptosis and cell proliferation is
well-documented. Our initial studies have shown that overexpressing
TIMP-1 in a lung adenocarcinoma cells results in larger and more
aggressive tumors when implanted in the mouse brain. This has also been
corroborated in vitro, by demonstrating increased invasion and
anchorage-independent growth as well as decreased apoptosis.In the
present study, we have purified human TIMP-1 in order to examine its
direct molecular activity in tumorigenesis. Non-small cell lung carcinoma
cell line NCI-H460 was utilized because it normally produces high levels
of TIMP-1 as confirmed by western blot analysis and ELISA. We found that
TIMP-1 was secreted directly into the culture media and we could not
identify presence of TIMP-1 in the exosome fraction. TIMP-1 was purified
from serum-free conditioned media of NCI-H460 by ammonium precipitation,
ion exchange chromatography followed by gel filtration, with resultant
purity of greater than 90%. The addition of purified exogenous TIMP-1 to
NCI-H2009, a low TIMP-1 producing NSCLC cell line, resulted in increased
cell proliferation and reduced cytotoxicity from environmental stressors
such as air exposure, H2O2, staurosporine and cycloheximide as determined
by LDH assay. Flow cytometric analysis following addition of purified
TIMP-1 to H2009 cells demonstrated reduced apoptosis. A549, a lung
adenocarcinoma cell line that produces levels of TIMP-1, higher than
H2009, was found to be relatively insensitive to exogenously added
purified TIMP-1. This may be interpreted as indicating concentration
dependent activity of TIMP-1. Deglycosylated TIMP-1 (by PNGase F
treatment) as well as recombinant human TIMP-1 (from E.coli) did not
exhibit any protective functions indicating that glycosylation is
critical for the cell proliferative and anti-apoptotic functions of
TIMP-1. To investigate whether the protective function of TIMP-1 is
MMP-dependent, we constructed a T2G mutant of TIMP-1 where changing the
second amino acid threonine to glycine resulted in impaired
MMP-inhibition function. The T2G mutant was also as protective of cell
survival as TIMP-1, supporting the concept that this is an
MMP-independent function. Collectively our results indicate that TIMP-1
glycosylation is critical for exogenous TIMP-1 to induce cell
proliferation and cell survival in an MMP-independent manner, most likely
through receptors that recognize glycosylated TIMP-1. This study was
supported in part by a Distinguished Cancer Scientist Award to AMR from
the Georgia Research Alliance.

