Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KRAS-induced microRNA-29b attenuates apoptosis in non-small cell
lung cancer


EGFR tyrosine kinase or downstream components of this pathway, e.g. KRAS,
are frequently mutated in NSCLC patients. These mutations enable a
constitutive active downstream signaling pathway and result in lung
cancer development by uncontrolled proliferation and survival. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are noncoding short nucleic acids, and are implicated in NSCLC
progression. We aim to identify miRNAs that are regulated by EGFR
downstream key molecules and to investigate their role in malignant
processes of NSCLC. We demonstrate that viral transduction of bronchial
epithelial cells (BEAS-2B) with mutated KRAS induces an activated
downstream signaling pathway. Subsequently, a miRNA array profiling of
KRAS-transduced cells identified upregulated miR-29b expression. We
confirmed the upregulation of miR-29b expression in individual clones of
KRAS-transduced cells. Moreover, the upregulated miR-29b expression was
affirmed in NSCLC tissue harboring KRAS mutations by comparing it to the
expression in matched normal tissue. Furthermore, to elucidate the
downstream signaling pathway involved in the underlying regulation of
miR-29b expression, NSCLC cell lines were treated with EGFR and MEK
inhibitors which lead to downregulated miR-29b expression. Next, to study
the role of miR-29b in NSCLC apoptosis, we overexpressed miR-29b in
adenocarcinoma cells (A549) and performed cell death assays.
Interestingly, and in contrast to other cell systems, A549 cells
transfected with precursor miR-29b demonstrated attenuated TNF- plus
actinomycin D-induced apoptosis compared to control-transfected cells.
Conversely, the downregulation of endogenous miR-29b levels by
overexpressing antagomiR-29b, lead to increased sensitivity to apoptosis
compared to scramble-transduced A549 cells. Consistently,
KRASG12V-transduced BEAS-2B cells showed reduced sensitivity to TNF- plus
actinomycin D-induced apoptosis, while the effect was reversed in
KRAS/antagomiR-29b co-transduced cells, indicating that KRAS attenuates
apoptosis by overexpressing miR-29b. Furthermore, miR-29b is predicted to
target the pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein Bim and the tumor necrosis
alpha-induced protein 3 (TNFAIP3/A20), an important negative regulator of
the NFB signaling pathway and thereby may confer resistance to apoptosis.
We plan to verify the predicted regulation of these genes by performing
luciferase reporter assays and Western blot analysis. In addition, NFB
activation will be assessed by verifying nuclear and cytoplasmic
fractions of cells transfected with precursor miR-29b. Finally, we plan
to stably overexpress TNFAIP3 in NSCLC cell lines and assess apoptosis by
overexpressing miR-29b. In summary, we provide a novel regulation
mechanism of miR-29b by KRAS signaling, leading to attenuated apoptosis
in NSCLC.

