Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolite assays to illuminate cellular energy networks


Every organism requires cellular energy metabolism to meet developmental
needs. When cells change from a resting to a proliferative state, the
metabolic pathways are reprogrammed to meet the demands of proliferation.
Diseases such as cancer can occur when changes in the metabolic pathways
support unwanted functions such as uncontrolled proliferation.Assays for
analyzing metabolites and metabolic enzymes are needed to understand
cellular metabolic requirements and energy network regulation under
normal and disease conditions.We exploited the robustness, sensitivity
and broad dynamic range of bioluminescence detection to develop assays
for the key metabolites lactate, glucose, glutamate and
glucose-6-phosphate. The technology involves using specific
dehydrogenases to couple metabolite levels to NAD(P)H production. In the
presence of NAD(P)H, a novel proluciferin is converted to a substrate for
luciferase resulting in light signals proportional to the starting
metabolite concentration. Samples (e.g. mammalian cells, culture media,
tissues, 3D microtissues) are added to the metabolite detection reagent
in a 1:1 ratio. An inactivation solution added to complex biological
samples lowers the background and increases sensitivity by lysing the
cells, inactivating cellular enzymes, and destroying endogenous
NAD(P)H.The sensitivity (1-5 pmol/sample) and broad assay window (maximum
signal-to-background > 100 fold) of the assays allows simultaneous
detection of multiple metabolites from the same set of samples. The wide
assay window allows detection of very small changes in metabolite
concentration, an advantage over conventional fluorescent and
colorimetric detection methods. The assays adapt to various formats (96,
384-well plates) and require no instrumentation other than a
luminometer.The assays can be used to measure the levels of critical
metabolites and to monitor the effects of inhibitors and activators of
glycolysis. The shift from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis can be
monitored by measuring lactate production and secretion as well as
glucose consumption from the same set of samples. The assays easily
multiplex with cell viability assays enabling analysis of drug effects on
cell proliferation, cell metabolism and mitochondria function.

