Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting SET oncoprotein reactivates the tumor-suppressor PP2A
and shows synergy with sorafenib in hepatocellular carcinoma


Background:Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth major cancer in
the world. Sorafenib is the first and only approved targeted therapy for
patients with advanced HCC that brought only a 3-month additive survival
benefit to patient. Thus, there is an unmet need for developing effective
treatment against HCC. Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is an important
tumor suppressor whose functions are suppressed by the presence of its
cancerous inhibitor, such as SET/I2PP2A and cancerous inhibitor of PP2A
(CIP2A). Previously, weve shown that enhancing PP2A activity by
inhibiting CIP2A promotes apoptosis of HCC (Oncogene 2010, MCT 2011).
Here, we report the anti-HCC potential of a new approach to reactivate
PP2A by interrupting the binding between SET and PP2A.Method:Using the
quinzoline backbone, we designed and developed a novel PP2A activator,
PA. HCC cell lines were treated with PA alone or in combination with
sorafenib, and apoptosis, signal transduction and phosphatse activity
were analyzed. Combination index (CI) was used to evaluate the synergy of
combining PA and sorafenib. Small interference RNA was applied to silence
gene; co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) and proximity ligation assay (PLA)
were used to determine the association of SET and PP2A within tumor
cells. In vivo anti-HCC effects of PA and combination therapy of PA and
sorafenib were tested in xenografted nude mice.Results:PA induced
apoptosis, in association with reactivation of PP2A and downregulation of
p-AKT, in a dose-dependent manner in HCC cell lines (PLC5, Hep3B,
SK-Hep1, Huh7). Overexpression of Akt and knockdown of PP2A abolished the
anti-HCC effects of PA. Using co-IP and PLA, we found that PA interrupts
the binding of SET and PP2A within HCC cells in a dose-dependent and
time-dependent manner. These data indicated that inhibition of
SET-associated PP2A inactivation mediated the downregulation of p-Akt and
the cytotoxic effects of PA against HCC. In addition, adding PA to
sorafenib significantly induced more potent cell death than sorafenib
alone in all HCC cell lines tested. CI suggested good synergy between PA
and sorafenib under the combination ratio of 1:5. Importantly, the
anti-tumor effects of PA and PA combining with sorafenib were validated
in PLC5 xenografted tumors.Conclusion:In the current study, we showed
that interfering the binding of SET to PP2A induce potent cellular death
through PP2A-dependent p-Akt downregulation. This novel approach
demonstrates great potency of PP2A enhancer and its synergy with
sorafenib for the treatment of HCC.

