Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of promiscuous oncofetal antigen (IMP-3)-derived
long peptides, bearing both Th cell and CTL epitopes


We recently identified CTL epitopes derived from an oncofetal antigen,
insulin-like growth factor II mRNA-binding protein 3 (IMP-3) which was
frequently overexpressed in head-and-neck cancers (HNCs) and lung
cancers, but not in many normal adult organs, by using genome-wide cDNA
microarray analyses. Several phase I/II clinical trials using
IMP-3-derived short peptides (SPs) vaccination against several types of
malignant tumor are ongoing. Recently we reported the phase I/II clinical
trial of multiple tumor-associated-antigen (TAA)-derived SPs vaccinations
including IMP-3-SP for advanced HNC patients. In this trial, we observed
the vaccinated SPs-specific CTL responses and the prolongation of overall
survival of HNC patients (Clin Cancer Res; Nov. 12, 2014 in press). In
order to further develop peptides-based cancer immunotherapy, we
attempted to identify IMP-3-derived long peptides (LPs) containing both
CTL and Th cell epitopes in this study. We successfully identified two
promiscuous IMP-3-derived LPs, and one of them encompasses two natural
CTL epitopes, and these LPs can stimulate IMP-3-LP-specific Th1 cells
restricted by 7 frequent HLA class II molecules. We confirmed that Th
cells induced by two LPs responded to autologous dendritic cells (DCs)
loaded with IMP-3 protein, suggesting that these IMP-3-derived LPs were
possibly naturally processed from IMP-3 protein and presented by DCs. We
also demonstrated that one of the IMP-3-derived LPs could cross-prime
IMP-3-SP-specific CTLs in vitro in human and in vivo in HLA-A2 transgenic
mice. The same LP encapsulated in newly developed pH-sensitive liposome,
that can deliver LPs from endosome to cytoplasm, was also found to be
efficiently cross presented in vitro to stimulate IMP-3-SP-specific human
CTLs. Furthermore, we could induce IMP-3-LP-specific Th cells from a HNC
patient vaccinated with an IMP3-derived SP. Immune response to these LPs
in many other HNC patients is now under investigation. Taken together,
IMP-3-derived LPs may be applicable to cancer immunotherapy.

