Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced therapeutic efficacy of a combination of gemcitabine and
albumin-bound paclitaxel in multistage nanovectors in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma: Evaluation of transport phenomena


The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of encapsulation of
albumin-bound paclitaxel (ABX) in multistage nanovector (MSV)
administered in combination with gemcitabine (Gem) in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA) therapy.PDA is one of the most aggressive
malignancies with a 5-year survival rate of less than 3%. The
inefficiency in treatment of primary pancreatic cancer can be related to
the biophysical barriers in the tumor microenvironment which prevent
delivery of therapeutics to the lesion. The best chemotherapy currently
available for PDA is the combination therapy with Gem + ABX, which was
reported to extend the overall survival as compared to patients receiving
Gem alone by The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of
encapsulation of albumin-bound paclitaxel (ABX) in multistage nanovector
(MSV) administered in combination with gemcitabine (Gem) in pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) therapy.PDA is one of the most aggressive
malignancies with a 5-year survival rate of less than 3%. The
inefficiency in treatment of primary pancreatic cancer can be related to
the biophysical barriers in the tumor microenvironment which prevent
delivery of therapeutics to the lesion. The best chemotherapy currently
available for PDA is the combination therapy with Gem + ABX, which was
reported to extend the overall survival as compared to patients receiving
Gem alone by <2 months. ABX utilizes endogenous albumin pathways of
endothelial transcytosis (gp60) and intratumoral binding of SPARC to
transport the drug into the tumor's interstitium. Our previous studies in
several tumor models report that MSV can overcome biophysical barriers
and carry therapeutic cargo to the tumor microenvironment increasing
therapeutic efficacy of the drug. In this study, we used ABX loaded into
the MSV in combination with Gem to improve the therapeutic efficacy of
the ABX + Gem combination in PDA. We further evaluated transport
mechanisms which can be responsible for the observed efficacy.Mice
bearing orthotopic PDA tumors (L3.6pl) were treated once a week for up to
four months with ABX, Gem, ABX + Gem, MSV/ABX, MSV or MSV/ABX + Gem and
PBS control. Subsets of mice were sacrificed after the first and third
treatment. Levels of the drugs in tumor/plasma were evaluated by
LC/MS-MS. Tumors were immunostained for evaluation of apoptosis (TUNEL),
proliferation (Ki67) and the tumor stromal components (F4/80, CD204,
CD31, SPARC). Survival of remaining animals was monitored (n = 10/group).
The results indicate that treatment with MSV/ABX + Gem was highly
efficient prolonging the survival of 50% of the animals until sacrificed
at the endpoint of the study at four months as compared to median
survival of ABX + Gem mice of 70.5 days. MSV/ABX + Gem increased tumor
levels of paclitaxel in comparison to treatment with Gem + ABX.
Furthermore, the use of the MSV system as a delivery vehicle resulted in
increased macrophage infiltration and SPARC expression in the tumor,
while reducing cancer cell proliferation and increasing apoptosis.In
conclusion, MSV/ABX + Gem outperforms the current standard-of-care (ABX +
Gem) in a mouse model of PDA. The possible mechanism is related to
increased transport of ABX encapsulated in MSV/ABX mediated by
macrophages or SPARC.

