Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ALIBI: a novel, truncated tubulin isotype in AML and stem cells


Tubulin isotype expression is tissue restricted, with -1 tubulin (TUBB1)
restricted to hematopoietic tissues. Using the TCGA database, we found
that -1 is highly expressed in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) among all
hematologic malignancies. -1 may therefore be an attractive target for
the development of novel therapeutics for AML. Analysis of a panel of AML
cell lines using a polyclonal antibody against the C-terminus of -1
revealed the presence of a band at 35kD, distinct from the canonical
tubulin molecular weight of 50kD. This 35kD band, which we call Acute
Leukemia Isoform 1 (ALIBI), was present in 10 of the 19 AML cell lines
tested of various molecular and morphologic subtypes. In addition, we
analyzed 12 AML primary AML patient blast samples and found ALIBI
expression in six patient samples, suggesting that ALIBI is clinically
relevant and prevalent Immunofluorescent analysis of ALIBI's subcellular
localization revealed that ALIBI is present in distinct cytoplasmic
aggregates not co-localizing with native microtubules as well as in the
nucleus. Interestingly, ALIBI was also enriched in AML patient
CD34+/CD38- cells containing leukemia stem cells. Using a murine -1
antibody in a mouse model of acute leukemia (HOXA9-NUP98/BCR-ABL) we
found that ALIBI expression was significantly higher in the leukemic
marrow as compared to normal mouse marrow. As leukemia stem cells share
features with embryonic stem cells (ESCs) we next investigated ALIBI
expression in mouse ESCs after differentiation along megakaryocytic and
erythroid lineages. ALIBI, but not canonical -1, was expressed in ESCs,
while hematopoietic differentiation led to loss of ALIBI and expression
of only canonical -1 tubulin, suggesting that expression of canonical -1
and ALIBI are differentially regulated and that ALIBI expression is
associated with stemness. RNASeq and 5RACE of cell lines and patient
samples revealed that ALIBI mRNA is missing exons 1 and 2 of canonical -1
RNA, while it retains part of exon 3, exon 4 and the intervening intron.
These results suggest that ALIBI mRNA is alternatively spliced, leading
to the use of a cryptic translational start site in exon 4 flanked by a
strong Kozak sequence. Exogenous expression of the putative coding region
of ALIBI in ALIBI-negative cell lines produced a protein product with
similar molecular weight and subcellular localization as endogenous
ALIBI. Studies of ALIBI function using genome editing are currently
underway. In conclusion, ALIBI is a novel truncated isoform of tubulin
that has unique biologic features never previously described for
tubulins. While the exact function of ALIBI within leukemic cells is
still being uncovered, it nevertheless is a highly attractive target of
novel therapeutic development based on its high expression in AML and its
unique biologic properties.

