Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The critical role of CDK2 activation in determining the
differential sensitivity of cell lines to Chk1 and Wee1 inhibitors


Anticancer DNA damaging agents activate checkpoints that halt the cell
cycle to prevent further DNA replication and mitosis until the damage has
been repaired. One of the important regulatory proteins activated in this
pathway is Checkpoint kinase 1 (Chk1). Hence, Chk1 inhibitors have
emerged as promising novel therapeutics. In clinical trials, Chk1
inhibitors are primarily being evaluated in combination with various DNA
damaging agents. However, Chk1 inhibitors also show single agent activity
in a subset of cell lines, and this provides a unique therapeutic
opportunity to target these tumors. The goal of this study is to define
the mechanism of this sensitivity, and identify biomarkers that would
permit selection of appropriate patients for clinical trials. From
screening a large panel of cancer cell lines, we observed that 15% were
sensitive to the Chk1 inhibitor MK-8776, with rapid (Anticancer DNA
damaging agents activate checkpoints that halt the cell cycle to prevent
further DNA replication and mitosis until the damage has been repaired.
One of the important regulatory proteins activated in this pathway is
Checkpoint kinase 1 (Chk1). Hence, Chk1 inhibitors have emerged as
promising novel therapeutics. In clinical trials, Chk1 inhibitors are
primarily being evaluated in combination with various DNA damaging
agents. However, Chk1 inhibitors also show single agent activity in a
subset of cell lines, and this provides a unique therapeutic opportunity
to target these tumors. The goal of this study is to define the mechanism
of this sensitivity, and identify biomarkers that would permit selection
of appropriate patients for clinical trials. From screening a large panel
of cancer cell lines, we observed that 15% were sensitive to the Chk1
inhibitor MK-8776, with rapid (<6 h) induction of DNA double-strand
breaks (DSB) in S phase cells. Most of the resistant cell lines were
sensitive to the Wee1 inhibitor, MK-1775 (AZD1775), while all the cell
lines were sensitive to the Wee1/Myt1 dual inhibitor, PD-166285. Wee1
suppresses activation of CDK1 and CDK2, suggesting that MK-1775-mediated
activation of one or other (or both) of these kinases leads to DSB.
MK-8776 did not activate CDK1, so we hypothesized that activation of CDK2
was critical. To differentiate between the role of CDK1 and CDK2 in cell
lines sensitive or resistant to MK-8776, we used inhibitors to CDK1/2. We
found that CVT-313 was a selective inhibitor of CDK2 at low
concentrations, but that Ro-3306 failed to discriminate between these two
kinases in cells. CVT-313 prevented DSB and the associated
phosphorylation of histone-H2AX induced by MK-8776 and MK-1775. Cyclin E
is a direct target of CDK2; phosphorylation of cyclin E leads to its
degradation which was only observed in sensitive cells and prior to the
formation of DSB. The acute cytotoxicity was dependent on cyclin A rather
than cyclin E, as siRNA-mediated knockdown of cyclin A but not cyclin E,
prevented DSB. We conclude that activation of cyclin A/CDK2 determines
the sensitivity of cells to MK-8776. Resistance to MK-8776 results from
failure to activate CDK2, presumably through failure to activate the
upstream CDC25A phosphatase. MK-1775 can circumvent this resistance by
directly activating CDK2. The untimely and abnormal activation of CDK2 is
then cytotoxic to cancer cells.

