Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitive and robust targeted sequencing of pancreatic precancer
and tumors using microfluidic single-molecule enrichment


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) arises from two precursor
lesions, pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasias and pancreatic cysts, such
as intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasias (IPMNs). Since cyst lesions
are readily detected on cross sectional imaging, early diagnosis of
IPMN-associated PDAC and intervention may be feasible. However, clinical
guidelines dictating which IPMNs are high-risk and require surgical
resection are suboptimal. Recently, the genomic signature of
IPMN-associated carcinomas has been described opening the possibility for
targeted genomic analysis. Previous groups have sought to achieve this
using conventional methods. However, since IPMN tissue and cyst fluid are
limited in quantity and contain inhibitors of PCR, we developed a novel
microfluidics-based approach to achieve sensitive and specific targeted
amplification and Illumina library construction.We have optimized a novel
method to enrich targeted genomic regions for next generation sequencing
(NGS) platforms featuring microfluidic partitioning of the sample into
uniform picoliter volume droplets containing single molecules of target
DNA. All droplets contain all of the primers and PCR reagents, ensuring
that every target molecule from the sample is amplified, and after
endpoint PCR results in a highly uniform yield that facilitates efficient
use of the NGS platform. In addition, the primers contain Illumina tails
that enable easy sample indexing and loading directly onto a MiSeq
without additional library preparation.Here we detail the successful
customization and use of the ThunderBolts Cancer Panel, which targets 230
commonly mutated regions in 50 cancer associated genes, with additional
primers for commonly mutated genes in PDAC. Addition of the 37
PDAC-relevant primer pairs to the commercially available core panel was
very straightforward and resulted in sequencing metrics similar to those
of the core panel alone (100% coverage at 100x depth, mean read depth of
2500). Cyst fluid from 30 patients with IPMN resected under Sendai
criteria were analyzed. We describe the mutational signature of cyst
fluid and relate the presence and quantity of mutations in KRAS, GNAS and
PIK3CA to the presence of invasive carcinoma and high grade dysplasia on
pathology. Finally, unbiased and high resolution sequencing was obtained
using this protocol with as little as 8ng of input DNA.Using picodroplet
PCR technology we were able to achieve unprecedented sequencing
performance on ultra-low sample inputs. Given the ease of use and
customization of the panel, the same platform may be readily adapted to
other applications in which samples are limited or are difficult to
amplify. Future studies will utilize this platform for an expanded
analysis of pancreatic cyst fluid with additional primers.

