Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of GRNMB transcription and cellular effects by
chondroitin 4-sulfation


Increased expression of glycoprotein (transmembrane) NMB (GPNMB;
osteoactivin) has been identified in triple negative breast cancer,
melanoma, glioma, and hepatocellular carcinoma, and followed decline in
expression of the enzyme arylsulfatase B (ARSB; N-acetylgalactosamine
4-sulfatase). The expression and regulation of GPNMB was evaluated in
HepG2 cells and in ARSB-deficient and control C57BL/6J mouse hepatic
tissue. Increased expression of GPNMB was attributable to promoter
activation by phospho(Ser)MITF (microphthalmia-associated transcription
factor), the phosphorylation of which was activated by phospho(Ser)-p38
MAPK. When ARSB was reduced, nuclear phospho-MITF increased and GPNMB
promoter activity increased, as detected by Renilla reniformis luciferase
assay. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay confirmed that phospho-MITF
bound to a specific motif in the GPNMB promoter, and binding increased
when ARSB was silenced. Up-regulation of promoter activity increased the
expression of GPNMB message and the synthesis of GPNMB protein in the
HepG2 cells and ARSB-null mouse liver. The tyrosine phosphatase SHP2
bound more tightly to C4S when ARSB was reduced, leading to inhibition of
SHP2 activity and reduced removal of phosphate from Tyr182 of phospho-p38
MAPK. The increase in C4S stimulated phospho(Ser)-p38 MAPK by activation
of RhoA, leading to MITF phosphorylation and increased GPNMB expression.
Silencing GPNMB by siRNA reduced phosphorylation of ERK and expression of
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9, consistent with effects on hepatic cell
invasiveness. These findings indicate that ARSB-induced changes in
chondroitin 4-sulfation impact on critical phosphorylations mediated by
SHP2 and p38 MAPK, leading to activation of MITF and increased expression
of GPNMB. The interaction between chondroitin 4-sulfation and
phosphorylations may regulate vital cell processes, including
transcriptional events and cell-matrix interactions.

