Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved antitumor effect of combining WNT/beta-catenin inhibition
with sorafenib in hepatocellular carcinoma


[Background] Sorafenib is currently the only approved systemic agent for
advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC); however, its efficacy is
limited. Aberrant activation of WNT/-catenin signaling pathway has been
shown to mediate resistance to various types of anti-cancer therapy. We
hypothesized that inhibition of WNT/-catenin signaling pathway would
improve the anti-tumor effect of sorafenib in HCC.[Materials and Methods]
Human HCC cell lines, including Huh7, HepG2, PLC5, and Hep3B, were
included. Inhibition of WNT/-catenin pathway was achieved by ICG-001, a
small molecule disrupting the interaction of cAMP-responsive element
binding (CREB)-binding protein (CBP) and -catenin and inhibiting the
-catenin-mediated transcription activities, or by RNA interference
(RNAi)- downregulation of -catenin. The efficacy of sorafenib combined
with WNT/-catenin pathway inhibition in HCC cells was determined by MTT
for cell viability, and by flow cytometry and Western blotting for
apoptosis. The in vivo efficacy was evaluated in a subcutaneous xenograft
mode of Huh7 cells.[Results] In multiple HCC cell lines, ICG-001 enhanced
the anti-proliferative effect of sorafenib dose-dependently; the
combination of ICG-001 and sorafenib showed a synergistic antitumor
effect. Downregulation of -catenin by RNAi increased sorafenib
sensitivity, whereas overexpression of -catenin decreased sorafenib
sensitivity in Huh7 cells. Furthermore, the sorafenib-sensitization
effect by short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated -catenin downregulation in
Huh7 cells was offset by -catenin overexpression. Mechanistically,
sorafenib in combination of ICG-001 or shRNA- mediated -catenin
downregulation augmented the induction of apoptosis, and resulted in a
more prominent downregulation of Mcl-1 in HCC cells. Finally, ICG-001 in
combination of sorafenib showed a more significantly growth-retarding
effect in Huh7 xenograft than either drug alone.[Conclusion] Our data
indicate that inhibition of WNT/- catenin signaling pathway improves the
antitumor effect of sorafenib against HCC in vitro and in vivo.(This
study was supported by grants NRPB-100CAP1020-2 and
NSC-101-2314-B-002-141, 100CAP1020-2).

