Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic, transcriptome and epigenomic analysis reveal new genetic
pathways in penile carcinoma


Background: Penile carcinoma (PeCa) is a rare and high morbidity disease.
In contrast with other urological neoplasia, there is a paucity of
molecular and epigenetic data in PeCa. By using integrative genetic,
epigenetic and transcriptome analysis the main aim was to identify
molecular drivers in PeCa.Patients and Methods: 37 PeCa samples, 16
surrounding normal tissues and 14 normal glands were used for evaluate
DNA methylation status (244K Human DNA Methylation Microarray platform,
Agilent Technologies), large-scale expression (444K Whole Human Genome
Microarray, Agilent Technologies and GeneChip Human Transcriptome Array
2.0, Affymetrix), miRNA expression (TaqMan Human MicroRNA Array v2.0,
Applied Biosystems) and genomic copy number alterations by array-CGH
(Agilent Human 444K CGH Microarrays, Agilent Technologies). Quantitative
bisulfite pyrosequencing (qBP), qPCR and RT-qPCR were used to validate
the findings in an independent set of samples. HPV status was assessed
using the Linear Array HPV Genotyping kit (Roche Molecular Diagnostics,
CA, USA). IPA (Ingenuity Pathways Analysis) and KOBAS software were used
for network analysis.Results: HPV positivity was detected in 32% of
cases, mainly for HPV16 subtype. Gain of 8q (66% of cases), where MYC
gene (8q24) is mapped, was de main alteration detected by array-CGH. Gene
expression profiles from both Agilent and Affymetrix microarrays
identified overexpression of matrix metalloprotease and keratin gene
families in tumor samples. Integrative analysis between methylome and
transcriptome revealed a panel of 70 genes with inverse correlation
between methylation and gene expression. Genes reported in stem cell
regulation (SOX family and WNT pathway genes) were altered, suggesting
the involvement of stem cells in a subset of PeCa. Concurrent CpG
hypermetlylation and down-expression was confirmed in 30 genes/miRNAs.
Transcriptome, methylome and miRNA profiles distinguished PeCa cases
according to HPV status. Particularly, down-regulation of hsa-miR-29
family members was confirmed in HPV-positive tumors.Conclusion: These
findings suggest that deregulation of pathways related to transcriptional
regulation of stem cells, matrix metalloprotease, MYC amplification and
hsa-miR-29 family disruption are involved in penile
carcinogenesis.Financial support: FAPESP (2013/03667-6) and CNPq

