Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microfluidic devices for the interrogation of single circulating
tumor cells


Introduction: Genetic and phenotypic characterization of Circulating
Tumor Cells (CTC) offer the opportunity for a real time liquid biopsy.
However, heterogeneity and rarity of CTC command the need for individual
cell characterization. Following an enrichment procedure of CTC from
blood, the identification, isolation and manipulation of single CTC for
further analysis without cell loss remains challenging. Here, we present
microfluidic devices for parallel single cell whole genome amplification
(psc WGA) and parallel probing of drug response of single cancer cells
(psc probing).Method: Microfluidic devices were designed using AUTOCAD
software, and fabricated using PDMS multilayer soft-lithography. Cells
from the SKBR-3 and MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines were used in the
devices and identified using fluorescence microscopy after
immunofluorescence staining. For pscWGA, the GE Single Cell GenomiPhi DNA
Amplification kit was used under isothermal conditions.Results: In the
1st scWGA device, single cancer cells were addressed in 16 individual
reaction chambers, subsequently lyzed, and their DNA amplified on a chip.
We successfully amplified DNA of single cancer cells in a ca. 23
nanoliter reaction volume. 1,000-fold amplified DNAs were validated using
qPCR targeting a set of genes on different chromosomes. For WGA of CTC
present in a large number of other cells, we developed a 2nd scWGA
platform by combining a self-sorting microwell cell sorter and a
microfluidic device. After filtration of a cell suspension using a
microwell plate, cancer cells were identified using fluorescence
microscopy at the bottom of the plate. Cells of interest were
subsequently punched into the open-well structures of the microfluidic
device for further analysis. The lysis and WGA reaction buffers were
loaded using peristaltic pumping of integrated micro-valves. After cell
lysis, DNA was amplified in the open-well reaction chamber. For
validation 100 ng of DNA was pipetted out of the well. We also developed
microfluidic devices to study drug-dose response of single cancer cells.
This device is capable of capturing single cells, dosing various
concentrations of drugs and exposing the cells to the drugs. We optimized
the capturing efficiency using different sizes of beads (3 m, 6 m, and 15
m) as well as MCF-7 cells. We demonstrated that single cancer cells could
be exposed to different drug candidates in the reagent chambers and their
response measured.Conclusion: We successfully developed various
microfluidic devices for individual cell characterization to be applied
for CTC analysis. For genetic make-up, whole genome amplification of
single cells either in suspension or in a self-sorting microwell plate
was demonstrated. On-chip cell lysis and DNA amplification were performed
and validated by qPCR targeting specific genes. In addition microfluidic
devices were designed and tested to investigate single cell response to
cancer drugs.

