Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncolytic viral therapy with immune modulation is an effective
novel treatment strategy for non-small cell lung cancer


Background: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality
worldwide. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) represents approximately
85% of these diagnoses and despite incremental improvements with
cytotoxic chemotherapy and targeted therapeutics, the five-year overall
survival is only 17%. Recently improved understanding of immune
checkpoint pathways and immunosuppresive cellular populations such as
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) have led to a resurgence in
immunotherapeutic strategies. Reovirus (RV) is an oncolytic virus that
only targets cancer cells with certain aberrant signaling pathways such
as Ras while avoiding normal cells. Furthermore, its role in stimulating
an anti-tumor immune response has been recently described. Additionally,
Sunitinib (S), a multitargeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor (anti-VEGFR,
C-Kit and PDGFRa) also affects tumor microenvironment Tregs and MDSC
numerically, which could consequentially augment RV immunotherapeutic
potential.Hypothesis: RV and S combination therapy is an effective
treatment modality for NSCLC via direct oncolysis, tumor
immunosuppression reversal, and host anti-tumor immune response
stimulation.Methods: To determine the relative susceptibility of selected
NSCLC cell lines to RV, S and combination therapy, a WST-1 cell viability
assay was conducted. Four human NSCLC cell lines A549, H460, H1299, and
H1975 and the mouse Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) cell line LL2 were tested,
and the combination index (CI) was calculated using Calcusyn software to
determine in vitro synergy. The LLC syngeneic C57BL/6 immunocompetent
mouse model bearing LL2 cells in the right hind-flank was treated with
PBS, S, RV, UV-inactivated RV (DV), or combination therapies (N = 6
mice/group). Mice were sacrificed on day 27. Spleens, blood, and tumors
were harvested for analysis. Splenocytes were subject to flow cytometry
CD11b and Gr-1 detection for MDSC quantification. Splenocyte CD8+
enrichment was performed, co-cultured with LL2, RV, DV, S or combinations
and subject to IFN- quantification via ELISA to determine immune
recognition.Results: Treatment resulted in efficacy and synergy of RV/S
in A549, H460, and H1299 in vitro as indicated by CI values Background:
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide. Non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) represents approximately 85% of these diagnoses
and despite incremental improvements with cytotoxic chemotherapy and
targeted therapeutics, the five-year overall survival is only 17%.
Recently improved understanding of immune checkpoint pathways and
immunosuppresive cellular populations such as myeloid-derived suppressor
cells (MDSCs) have led to a resurgence in immunotherapeutic strategies.
Reovirus (RV) is an oncolytic virus that only targets cancer cells with
certain aberrant signaling pathways such as Ras while avoiding normal
cells. Furthermore, its role in stimulating an anti-tumor immune response
has been recently described. Additionally, Sunitinib (S), a multitargeted
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (anti-VEGFR, C-Kit and PDGFRa) also affects
tumor microenvironment Tregs and MDSC numerically, which could
consequentially augment RV immunotherapeutic potential.Hypothesis: RV and
S combination therapy is an effective treatment modality for NSCLC via
direct oncolysis, tumor immunosuppression reversal, and host anti-tumor
immune response stimulation.Methods: To determine the relative
susceptibility of selected NSCLC cell lines to RV, S and combination
therapy, a WST-1 cell viability assay was conducted. Four human NSCLC
cell lines A549, H460, H1299, and H1975 and the mouse Lewis lung
carcinoma (LLC) cell line LL2 were tested, and the combination index (CI)
was calculated using Calcusyn software to determine in vitro synergy. The
LLC syngeneic C57BL/6 immunocompetent mouse model bearing LL2 cells in
the right hind-flank was treated with PBS, S, RV, UV-inactivated RV (DV),
or combination therapies (N = 6 mice/group). Mice were sacrificed on day
27. Spleens, blood, and tumors were harvested for analysis. Splenocytes
were subject to flow cytometry CD11b and Gr-1 detection for MDSC
quantification. Splenocyte CD8+ enrichment was performed, co-cultured
with LL2, RV, DV, S or combinations and subject to IFN- quantification
via ELISA to determine immune recognition.Results: Treatment resulted in
efficacy and synergy of RV/S in A549, H460, and H1299 in vitro as
indicated by CI values < 1. LL2 showed additive to synergistic responses
at varying treatment concentrations. When LLC tumors in a C57BL/6
immunocompetent murine model were treated with the combination of RV/S, a
significant tumor reduction occurred compared to monotherapies and
untreated controls (non-overlapping 95% confidence intervals).
Furthermore, an increase in anti-tumor immunity stimulating IFN- was
detected in mice samples upon RV and combination exposure at 0.13g/mL and
0.09g/mL compared to PBS treated mice at 0g/mL. Both S and RV/S treated
mice had a significant splenocyte MDSC reduction. These results indicate
that Reovirus and Sunitinib combination therapy holds promise as a novel
treatment strategy for NSCLC.

