Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Universal homogenous bioluminescent assay that monitor the
activity various classes of methyltransferases in vitro


Post transcriptional modifications of proteins and nucleic acids are
well-recognized to play major role in influencing cell fate towards
cellular proliferation, differentiation, and cell death. Such
modifications that includephosphorylation, acetylation, methylation, etc.
have been validated as drug targets resulting in the development of
several drugs. Recent biochemical and biological data suggest that the
enzymatic activities of several of these enzymes have pathogenic roles in
cancer, inflammation, and neurodegenerative diseases. Thus,
pharmacological modulation of these enzymes by small molecules will be
beneficial in developing novel therapeutics for multiple unmet medical
needs. Of these, methyltransferases are known to alter the epigenome by
altering the methylation status of nucleic acids or proteins resulting in
changes in cellular functions. Towards this goal ofsearching for
activators/inhibitors of these enzymes for the development of next
generation of drugs, screening assays for these modulators are urgently
needed. To address these unmet needs, we have developed a novel assay
that monitors the activities of these enzymes and their modulation by
small molecules. The assay is bioluminescent based, HTS formatted and
highly sensitive. The assay is universal since it is based on monitoring
the formation of the universal product S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH),
i.e., capable of detecting changes in activity of a broad range of
methyltransferases such as DNA, protein, RNA, and small molecules
methyltransferases. In addition, the assay has been validated for all
classes of protein methyltransferases (Lysine and Arginine), and with
different types of substrates (small peptides, large proteins, or even
nucleosomes). This enables determining the specificity of these enzymes
and their substrate requirements. The assay has high signal to background
and low C.V. The assay is robust (Z value > 0.7) and has been validated
using various plate densities such as 96-, 384, and 1536-well plates. A
strong feature of this assay is its utility with broad range of
substrates with no limitations on the use of high concentrations of
substrates or the composition of the substrates (short vs. long
peptides), thus enabling the generation of kinetic data and determining
the mechanism of action of various modulators of methyltransferases of
interest.

