Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BPM 31510 has broad utility as both a single agent and in
combination with standard-of-care chemotherapy in triple-negative breast
cancer


Deregulated metabolism is recognized as a hallmark of cancer although our
understanding of the interplay between metabolic pathway activity and
responses to standard-of-care chemotherapy remains limited. In vitro
studies have demonstrated that BPM 31510, a Coenzyme Q10-containing
proprietary formulation, alters both glycolysis and mitochondrial OXPHOS
in cancer cells. Building on the clinical observation that
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is distinctly glycolytic compared to
other breast sub-types, we examined the effects of BPM 31510 alone and in
combination with standard-of-care chemotherapy in a murine xenograft
model of TNBC (MDA-MB231). Tumor-bearing mice were treated with cycles of
the standard TAC regimen (5mg/kg docetaxel and 1 mg/kg doxorubicin for 3
days followed by 35 mg/kg cyclophosphamide) with or without BPM 31510
every 3 weeks. As expected, chemotherapy treatment extended survival.
Notably, BPM 31510 was more effective as a single agent compared to
traditional chemotherapy and extended survival by more than 6 weeks. The
combination of BPM 31510 with chemotherapy further enhanced survival over
either treatment regimen alone, and this was associated with attenuated
tumor growth over the duration of the study. Analysis of a subset of
tumors after 2 cycles of treatment confirmed a decrease in tumor weight
in all treatment conditions compared to control and a significant
synergistic effect of combined therapy (p = 0.02). Importantly, changes
were not observed in the weight of other organs from the same mice,
suggesting lack of systemic toxicity. Evidence of decreased proliferation
(Ki67 staining) and enhanced caspase activity were also observed in
tumors by immunohistochemical analysis. Assessment of the BPM 31510 IC50
in vitro using a panel of primary human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC),
non-tumorigenic (MCF12A), and breast cancer cell lines demonstrated
selective cytotoxicity in cancer cells compared to primary and
non-tumorigenic cells. Moreover, MDA-MB231 was the most sensitive to BPM
31510-induced cell death in the breast cancer cell panel that was
representative of multiple breast tumor sub-types. Taken together, these
data demonstrate that the metabolic modulating agent BPM 31510 has broad
utility as both a single agent and in combination with standard-of-care
in breast cancer including distinctly glycolytic TNBC for which prognosis
is poor and few therapeutic options exist.

