Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MERIT40 is an Akt substrate that promotes resolution of DNA damage
induced by chemotherapy


Resistance to cytotoxic chemotherapy agents is a common phenomenon in
breast cancer and has a drastic impact on patient survival.
Characterization of the mechanisms that contribute to chemotherapy
resistance, and identification of strategies to circumvent resistance,
would provide more effective therapies for the management of breast
cancer. In this study we show that in addition to inflicting DNA damage,
the cytotoxic chemotherapy agent doxorubicin triggers rapid and sustained
activation of Akt in breast cancer cells. Pharmacological inhibitors of
PI 3-K or Akt effectively block Akt signaling downstream of DNA damage
and render cells markedly more sensitive to doxorubicin. We sought to
identify mechanisms by which Akt promotes resistance to doxorubicin and
have identified MERIT40, a component of the nuclear BRCA1-A DNA damage
repair complex, as a novel Akt substrate that is phosphorylated when
cells are exposed to doxorubicin. We have demonstrated that MERIT40
phosphorylation is necessary for BRCA1-A complex assembly and is required
for resolution of DNA damage. We propose that inhibition of MERIT40
phosphorylation contributes to the efficacy of combination therapy with
PI 3-K or Akt inhibitors and doxorubicin. We also show that MERIT40
phosphorylation is associated with ER status in breast tumor tissue
samples, suggesting that MERIT40 phosphorylation could be used as a
biomarker in ER-positive breast cancer patients to predict sensitivity to
cytotoxic chemotherapy agents. Our data also indicates that patients with
high levels of phosphorylated MERIT40 would likely benefit from
combination therapy with Akt inhibitors and doxorubicin. We are currently
investigating additional mechanisms by which Akt activation downstream of
DNA damage promotes chemotherapy resistance with the aim of identifying
novel combination therapy regimens to circumvent chemotherapy resistance.

