Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of a novel Foxp3-tumor cell vaccine in a murine model of
renal cell carcinoma


Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common type of kidney cancer in
adults and represents 80% of the cases. Treatment options for patients
with advanced disease are limited. Targeted molecular therapies have
shown survival benefit but most patients develop therapy resistance
overtime. Preclinical and clinical studies indicate that immunotherapies
are effective and may play a role in the treatment of advanced RCC.
However, the response rate is 20%, with a limited number of patients
achieving durable remission. A major barrier to vaccine therapy is the
presence of immunosuppressive cell populations including regulatory T
cells (Tregs), myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). In the current study, we designed a
tumor cell and Tregs dual-targeting vaccine by inducing Foxp3 expression
in tumor cells, and tested this vaccine along with an unmodified vaccine
in an orthotopic murine model of RCC, RENCA. We observed that both RENCA
cell vaccine and RENCA Foxp3 cell vaccine prevented tumor growth in 6 out
10 animals. Interestingly, in an intervention setting, the RENCA Foxp3
tumor cell vaccine was superior to the RENCA tumor cell vaccine with a
significant anti-tumor activity (45% inhibition of tumor weights) (pRenal
cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common type of kidney cancer in adults
and represents 80% of the cases. Treatment options for patients with
advanced disease are limited. Targeted molecular therapies have shown
survival benefit but most patients develop therapy resistance overtime.
Preclinical and clinical studies indicate that immunotherapies are
effective and may play a role in the treatment of advanced RCC. However,
the response rate is 20%, with a limited number of patients achieving
durable remission. A major barrier to vaccine therapy is the presence of
immunosuppressive cell populations including regulatory T cells (Tregs),
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and tumor-associated macrophages
(TAMs). In the current study, we designed a tumor cell and Tregs
dual-targeting vaccine by inducing Foxp3 expression in tumor cells, and
tested this vaccine along with an unmodified vaccine in an orthotopic
murine model of RCC, RENCA. We observed that both RENCA cell vaccine and
RENCA Foxp3 cell vaccine prevented tumor growth in 6 out 10 animals.
Interestingly, in an intervention setting, the RENCA Foxp3 tumor cell
vaccine was superior to the RENCA tumor cell vaccine with a significant
anti-tumor activity (45% inhibition of tumor weights) (p<0.01). Moreover,
RENCA Foxp3 tumor cell vaccine reduced the number of tumor infiltrating
Tregs (42% reduction, pRenal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common type
of kidney cancer in adults and represents 80% of the cases. Treatment
options for patients with advanced disease are limited. Targeted
molecular therapies have shown survival benefit but most patients develop
therapy resistance overtime. Preclinical and clinical studies indicate
that immunotherapies are effective and may play a role in the treatment
of advanced RCC. However, the response rate is 20%, with a limited number
of patients achieving durable remission. A major barrier to vaccine
therapy is the presence of immunosuppressive cell populations including
regulatory T cells (Tregs), myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). In the current study, we designed a
tumor cell and Tregs dual-targeting vaccine by inducing Foxp3 expression
in tumor cells, and tested this vaccine along with an unmodified vaccine
in an orthotopic murine model of RCC, RENCA. We observed that both RENCA
cell vaccine and RENCA Foxp3 cell vaccine prevented tumor growth in 6 out
10 animals. Interestingly, in an intervention setting, the RENCA Foxp3
tumor cell vaccine was superior to the RENCA tumor cell vaccine with a
significant anti-tumor activity (45% inhibition of tumor weights)
(p<0.01). Moreover, RENCA Foxp3 tumor cell vaccine reduced the number of
tumor infiltrating Tregs (42% reduction, p<0.05) and Treg Foxp3
expression both in peripheral blood and tumor infiltrates. In summary,
our results suggest that a strategy targeting Tregs along with vaccine
therapy or a dual targeting vaccine strategy may be beneficial in
established RCC. We also observed that suppressive myeloid cell (SMCs)
populations dominate the established tumor microenvironment and we are
currently testing the combination of the dual-targeting vaccine with a
SMC-targeting agent.

