Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predicting therapeutic monoclonal antibody efficacious human doses
from mouse experimental tumors: a pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic approach


Mechanism-based pharmacokinetic (PK)/pharmacodynamic (PD) modeling allows
us to dissect system-specific and drug-specific effects, and has proven
to be a powerful tool for rational human dose projections. While PK/PD
modeling has been applied reasonably well to predict the efficacious dose
levels of small molecule cytotoxic drugs and antibody-drug conjugates
(ADCs), there is no systemic evaluation of methods in predicting human
efficacious doses for monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) targeting the signal
transduction pathways for oncology indications. We collected reported
preclinical and clinical data from 4 mAbs targeting the signal
transduction pathways (cetuximab (anti-EGFR), panitumumab(anti-EGFR),
onartuzumab(anti-cMET), trastuzumab(anti-HER2)) and 1 anti-angiogenesis
mAb (bevacizumab) for anti-cancer therapy. A series of mechanism-based
tumor growth/tumor inhibition models were developed using published
dose-ranging mouse xenograft PK and PD data. PK parameters for each mAb
in tumor-bearing mice were first estimated and were subsequently used to
drive the PD parameter estimation for observed tumor growth and growth
inhibition using non-linear mixed effects modeling approach by NONMEM
(version 7.2, Icon Solutions). The intrinsic tumor exponential and/or
linear growth rates (Kg), the extrinsic drug-specific maximum tumor
inhibition capacity (Kmax) and the serum drug concentrations needed to
achieve half of Kmax (EC50) were obtained by weighted least squares
estimation. For all 5 mAbs, the steady-state plasma drug levels in cancer
patients associated with clinically efficacious doses were found to fall
between the model-predicted mean EC90 and EC95 values for each mAb. Using
model-based mouse EC90 and EC95 and human antibody systemic clearance,
the predicted clinically efficacious doses for these 5 mAbs were within
2-fold of their efficacious doses demonstrated in cancer patients.
Interestingly, using the calculated mouse tumorstatic concentrations
based on PK/PD model parameters, the predicted human doses were in
general more than two-folds lower compared with clinically efficacious
doses. Although tumorstatic concentrations were used to predict the
clinical doses of small molecule cytotoxic drugs and ADCs reasonably
well, we found that tumoricidal concentrations represented by EC90 and
EC95 appear to have a better predictive value for mAbs targeting the
signal transduction pathways in oncology. In conclusion, a
mechanism-based PK/PD modeling approach was developed to project human
efficacious doses for several mAbs in the cancer clinic and it can be
used to predict human doses for investigational mAbs in the same class.

