Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of circulating tumor cells from head and neck cancer
patients undergoing radiation therapy: A pilot study


Background: Circulating tumor cell (CTC) enumeration provides prognostic
information in patients with metastatic breast, prostate, colorectal and
lung cancer. However, the effect of radiation therapy (RT) on CTCs in
patients with primary head and neck malignancies has not been explored.
The purpose of this exploratory study is to examine how CTCs, as measured
by a novel cell capture technique, respond to RT in patients with head
and neck cancer. Methods: A total of a 16 patients undergoing definitive
radiation for primary, non-metastatic head and neck cancer were enrolled
in this pilot study. Peripheral blood was collected at 5 time points,
including at baseline prior to starting RT, at the first week, mid-point
and final week during treatment, and at least 4 weeks after completion of
RT. Quantification of CTCs was performed with a novel device that used a
biomimetic combination of three cancer cell-specific antibodies (aEpCAM,
aHer-2, and aEGFR) immobilized through poly(amidoamine) dendrimers and
E-selectin, which respectively induce concurrent stationary binding and
dynamic cell rolling of the tumor cells. Results: CTCs were successfully
detected in all patients before the start of radiation (100%), including
patients with HPV/p16 positive or negative tumors. The novel CTC device
yielded up to a 4-fold enhancement in capture efficiency relative to the
aEpCAM-functionalized surface. The average CTC count in patients before
RT was 386 CTCs per mL (range, 18 to 1134 CTCs per mL), significantly
higher than the average CTC count of 90 CTCs per mL after the completion
of radiation (range, 5 to 393 CTCs per mL). All but one patient
demonstrated a decrease in measured CTCs at sequential time points during
the course of RT. The patient with an elevation in CTCs during RT had
residual metastatic carcinoma detected after left level II selective
cervical neck dissection, which was performed 12 weeks post-RT due to
persistent radiographic lymph nodal abnormality. At a median follow-up of
1.5 months, no patient has had a local or distant failure. Conclusions:
We have demonstrated that our novel technology can affectively capture
CTCs in head and neck cancer patients. Importantly, our pilot data shows
CTCs decrease over the course of RT, suggesting CTCs can be a predicative
biomarker for radiotherapy response. Further study will investigate
associations between CTC kinetics and clinical outcomes.

