Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum levels of the immunomodulatory protein, the progesterone
induced blocking factor (PIBF) are not higher in women with progesterone
(P) receptor (R) positive vs. negative breast cancer


There is evidence that treatment with mifepristone a P receptor
antagonist will provide a marked palliative effect for many human and
murine spontaneous cancers. One proposed mechanism is that it may work by
suppressing the expression of a unique immunomodulatory protein that
amongst other things stabilizes perforin granules in natural killer (NK)
cells and thus negates their cytolytic activity. In humans exposure to P
causes a rapid rise in the serum of this protein called the PIBF. The
origin for the circulating PIBF is from gamma/delta T cells and is
initiated with P interacting with P receptors on gamma/delta T cells.
PIBF exists as a 90 kDa nuclear protein occupying a centrosomal position
in near proximity to BRCA-1 and is found in all rapidly growing cells
including cancer cells. A 34-36 kDa splice variant is found in the
cytoplasm of all cancer cells tested. Mifepristone has been found to
provide marked palliation despite the absence of evidence of circulating
PIBF in some cancers not known to be positive for P receptors. One
possible mechanism is suppression of the formation of the 34-36 kDa
intracytoplasmic form from the parent 90 kDa form. The objective of the
present study was to determine if tumors known to be P receptor positive
may demonstrate circulating PIBF. In a blinded manner, serum PIBF was
measured in 21 serum samples of women with breast cancer obtained prior
to surgery using a research ELISA assay for PIBF. The PIBF levels were
then compared according to estrogen (E) and P receptor status. The mean
level of PIBF (ng/mL) for those who were ER positive but P receptor
negative in 7 cases was 31.0+49.7 with a range of 2.1 to 142.5. For 7
cases that were ER positive and P receptor positive the mean level +SD
was 24.8+37.46 and the range 2.4 to 108.32. For ER negative and P
receptor positive for 7 cases, the mean PIBF was 24.6+28.3 and the range
6.0 to 86.9. There were no significant differences by ANOVA. It is not
clear as yet if P receptor antagonist therapy will provide better
palliative effect for P receptor positive vs. P receptor negative tumors,
but if so, the mechanism (if it is immunologic) does not seem to be
related to suppressing increased levels of circulating PIBF. Thus,
testing serum with this new ELISA assay does not seem to be a helpful
method to determine which patients may benefit from P receptor antagonist
therapy. Some recent data suggest that the P receptor antagonist may
suppress intracellular PIBF but not circulative PIBF. Thus, these data do
not exclude the possibility that PIBF may play a vital role in escape of
cancer cells from immune surveillance but it is the intracytoplasmic form
that provides immune protection.

