Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cadherin-11 function is required for full neoplastic
transformation of mouse fibroblasts by activated Src


The signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (Stat3) plays an
important role in cancer etiology. Following activation of a number of
growth factor or cytokine receptors or expression of oncogenes such as
vSrc, Stat3 is phosphorylated at tyr-705, dimerizes and migrates to the
nucleus where it activates transcription from a number of genes involved
in cell division and survival. We recently discovered a novel pathway of
activation of Stat3: Engagement of cadherins such as cadherin-11 (cad11),
a cell to cell adhesion protein known to be involved in metastasis,
induces a dramatic increase in the levels of the Rac and Cdc42 small
GTPases, and this leads to interleukin-6 transcription and Stat3
activation. Stat3 in turn, downregulates the p53 tumor suppressor and
upregulates anti-apoptotic genes, thus offering a potent survival
signal.A large number of oncogenes such as activated Src-527 activate the
E2F transcription factor family, which induce the expression of genes
involved in cell division. However, at the same time E2F is a potent
apoptosis inducer, hence the high demand of transformed cells for
antiapoptotic signals. Since cad11 activates Stat3, a potent survival
factor, we examined the effect of cad11 downregulation upon
transformation of mouse Balb/c3T3 fibroblasts by vSrc. Forced expression
of high levels of activated Src caused a dramatic reduction in cad11
levels. On the other hand, intermediate Src levels, which are the levels
that are physiologically relevant, did allow cad11 expression, albeit at
lower levels. Paradoxically, cells expressing high Src levels had
actually lower Stat3 than cells expressing intermediate Src levels. This
could be due to the observed downregulatory effect of Src upon cad11, and
it demonstrates that cad11 is a more potent Stat3 activator than Src.
Cad11 knockdown through shRNA expression in cells expressing intermediate
Src levels, caused a dramatic reduction in Stat3 activity and induced
apoptosis. That is, the residual amounts of cad11 present are sufficient
to activate Stat3 and prevent apoptosis induced by the Src/E2F axis.
Taken together, these findings indicate that cad11, despite its presumed
structural role, and in addition to its known role in promoting
metastasis, it is actually also necessary for full neoplastic
transformation by the Src oncogene.

