Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of molecular mechanisms by which PCA3 modulates
prostate cancer cell survival


PCA3 is a prostate-specific non coding RNA (ncRNA), involved in the
control of prostate cancer (PCa) cell survival, through modulating
androgen receptor (AR) signaling. We aimed to investigate whether several
cancer related genes, including those involved in epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and AR co-regulators could modulate LNCaP cell survival
in response to PCA3 downregulation. We also aimed to promote PCA3 stable
silencing through a lentiviral vector containing a PCA3 short hairpin RNA
(shRNA) specific sequence. Small interfering RNA (siRNA) or lentivirus
vector-based shRNA were used to downregulate PCA3 expression. Upon PCA3
downregulation, cells were analyzed by qRT-PCR to investigate mRNA
expression. Flow cytometry was performed to analyze the percentage of
LNCaP GFP + cells and trypan blue staining to analyze the number of
viable cells after PCA3 stable silencing. Among 14 AR co-regulators genes
investigated, 12 were upregulated in siPCA3-transfected cells in relation
to controls. We also found that among 84 cancer-related genes tested, 16
were differentially expressed in LNCaP siPCA3-transfected cells when
compared to transfected cells with a scramble sequence. Of these, 30% are
genes coding for signal transduction molecules and transcription factors.
Gene expression profile of EMT-related genes revealed that E-cadherin,
Claudin-3, Cytokeratin-18, Snail, Twist and Slug are upregulated in LNCaP
siPCA3-transfected cells compared to control, while Claudin-4,
Cytokeratin-8 and Vimentin are downregulated. LNCaP cells transduced with
lentiviral vectors carrying the GFP gene and shPCA3 stably dowregulated
PCA3 expression, producing a reduction of 60% of LNCaP GFP+ cells
compared to shScr transduced or non-transduced LNCaP cells. Our results
suggest that the decrease in the number of LNCaP viable cells upon siPCA3
transfection is not modulated by the classical EMT program. Observed
upregulation of most tested AR co-regulators upon PCA3 silencing
indicates that this non-coding RNA could negatively modulate the
transcription of these genes. Our data further suggest that that this
ncRNA perform a regulatory role in gene expression, being able to
modulate gene expression of several signaling pathways related to cancer.
Finally, stable silencing of PCA3 expression using lentivirus vector
shows potential as a PCa therapeutic approach by negatively modulating
cell survival.

