Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancer stem cell function is regulated by HNF1A


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is a hierarchal cancer consisting
of tumor-initiating cancer stem cells (CSCs) and transiently
proliferating bulk tumor cells. Despite this understanding, the
biological properties of CSCs remain incompletely defined, including the
role of transcriptional programs like epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Using flow cytometry in conjunction with epithelial-cell surface
marker ESA (EpCAM) and mesenchymal-cell surface marker CD44, we
identified three subpopulations of PDA cells derived from primary patient
samples: CD44highESAlow, CD44lowESAhigh, and CD44highESAhigh cells, each
with different biological characteristics. CD44highESAlow cells exhibited
a more mesenchymal phenotype characterized by high expression of vimentin
and low expression of E-cadherin. CD44lowESAhigh cells, by contrast,
highly epithelial in appearance, expressed high levels of E-cadherin and
low levels of vimentin. Finally, CD44highESAhigh cells showed a phenotype
intermediate between CD44highESAlow and CD44lowESAhigh cells. In
isolation, all subpopulations were able to self-renew, however, only
CD44highESAhigh cells could give rise to all three cell subpopulations.
Additionally, CD44highESAhigh cells exhibited the highest ability to form
tumorspheres, an indicator of CSC-functionality, in vitro, and had a
greater ability to form tumors in vivo, suggesting that this
subpopulation enriched for CSC functional activity. Using microarray
analysis, we identified a set 50 genes, including the CSC marker CD24 and
the transcription factor HNF1A, which showed significant up-regulation in
CD44highESAhigh cells CSC population compared to either CD44highESAlow or
CD44lowESAhigh cells. We hypothesized that these genes might be critical
to CSC biology in PDA. Using bioinformatics analysis to identify possible
transcriptional regulators of these 50 genes, we identified HNF1A as the
factor with most highly overrepresented binding sites in the promoter
regions of (17/50 genes), suggesting a possible role in regulating
CD44highESAhigh-specific genes and serving as a key biological regulator
of the CSC state. Supporting this hypothesis, knockdown of HNF1A
decreased expression of a number of the candidate genes, including CD24,
in the CD44highESAhigh population. By contrast, ectopic expression of
HNF1A resulted in the up-regulation of a similar set of candidate genes,
including CD24, and promoted the formation of tumorspheres. These
findings shine light on the complexity of PDA tumor cell heterogeneity,
suggesting the CSCs exist in a state between EMT and
mesenchymal-epithelial transition, and implicates HNF1A as a key
regulator of CSC-associated genes and CSC functionality.

