Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In silico and in vitro analyses of androgen receptor splicing
variants with a special focus on human patient samples


The androgen receptor (AR) is arguably the critical driver of not only
early but also advanced prostate cancer. AR is a transcription factor
which comprises the four functional domains with the N-terminal
transactivation domain encoded by exon 1, the DNA-binding domain by exons
2 and 3, the hinge domain by exon 4, and the ligand-binding domain (LBD)
by exons 4-8. The functional LBD provides a strict ligand-dependency of
AR's release from cytoplasmic HSP90 and nuclear translocation to act as a
transcription factor. Conversely, disruption of LBD can be caused by some
point mutations or alternative splicing within exon 4-8, thus allowing AR
to exert ligand-independent nuclear actions. Numerous AR splicing
variants (AR-Vs) have been identified and predicted, but these are as yet
less characterized regarding their biochemical functions and clinical
relevance. This prompted us to perform systematic analysis of the
clinical samples in relation to expression patterns of AR-Vs and disease
manifestation.AR-Vs compositions were evaluated on a group of deeply
RNA-sequenced metastases from patients treated with androgen deprivation.
By strictly selecting and counting the reads spanning junctions of exons
defined by Hu et al (1), novel AR-Vs were found to be substantially
expressed: v5es is exon 5 skipped variant whereas v7es skips exon 7.
According to the preliminary results, the v5es and v7es variants were
detected in 20% and 26% of total patient samples, respectively. The v78es
and v8es variants, which had been previously identified but less
characterized, were found to be 28% and 6%, respectively, in the same
comparison. It is of note that AR V7 was detected in 63% of the samples.
While v5es structurally lacks the most part of LBD, the v7es, v78es, and
v8es variants possess LBD with a short C-terminal truncation. Both v7es
and v8es variants showed diffuse distribution in both cytoplasm and
nucleus of the AR-negative M12 cells. These localization patterns were
not largely affected by the presence or absence of the ligand
dihydroxytestosterone. The above observations were consistent with the
results from the probasin ARE-ARR3-luciferase reporter assay showing that
these two variants possessed weak transcriptional activities regardless
of ligand status. The bioinformatics project is now being updated by
including the data from additional patient samples. The biochemical
characterization of AR-Vs (v5es, v7es, v8es, and v78es variants) will be
detailed and reported regarding their transcriptional activities,
subcellular localization, as well as their potential protein-protein
interactions with the full-length AR, HSP90 and co-regulators.
Ligand-independent nuclear actions of AR have been mostly believed to
confer resistance to anti-androgens enzalutamide and androgen
biosynthesis inhibitors abiraterone acetate. This study thus may provide
a foundation for novel AR-targeted therapies.1. Hu R et al. Prostate
(2011) 7, 1656

