Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TBX2 promotes rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) tumorigenesis by repression
of PTEN expression


RMS is most common soft tissue sarcoma in children. We previously
identified TBX2 as an oncogene and showed that TBX2 is required for tumor
formation. Here, we identified the tumor suppressor PTEN as a novel
target of TBX2 in RMS and normal muscle. PTEN, which regulates the
PI3K-AKT pathway, is repressed in RMS. Our work shows that TBX2 functions
to regulate PTEN expression and thus, PI3K-AKT signaling, to enhance the
malignancy of RMS tumors.Both quantitative real time PCR and western blot
assays were used to assay PTEN expression at the level of mRNA and
protein respectively. Immunofluorescence staining was performed to assay
the protein expression in human RMS tumor samples. Muscle tissue slides
of proliferating myoblasts were assayed by co-immunofluorescence
staining, and the proliferating myoblasts were induced by activating
satellite cells with cardiotoxin induced muscle damage. Reporter
constructs for luciferase assay were based on PTEN promoter. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were used to detect protein binding on
gene promoters. Xenograft assays were conducted to assay TBX2 function in
tumor malignancy.We have found that PTEN was up-regulated upon muscle
differentiation, but little expression of PTEN was observed in RMS cells.
Although TBX2 was expressed in proliferating myoblasts, it was highly
down-regulated upon myogenic differentiation. Human RMS tumor samples
showed a down-regulation of PTEN and an up-regulation of TBX2 compared
with normal tissues. Over-expression of TBX2 repressed PTEN expression in
both C2C12 myoblasts and 10T1/2 fibroblasts. Either depletion of TBX2 or
a dominant negative TBX2 increased PTEN expression in RMS cells.
Luciferase assays confirmed the regulation of PTEN by TBX2 and ChIP
assays demonstrated that TBX2 recruited HDAC1 to the PTEN promoter for
repression. The role of HDAC1 in repression of PTEN was confirmed by
treatment with HDAC inhibitors, which abrogated the repression of PTEN by
TBX2.This work demonstrates that the high expression of TBX2 in RMS is
involved in the activation of PI3K-AKT signaling pathway by repressing
PTEN, underlying the oncogenic function of TBX2 in tumor cells.

