Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Rho-associated kinase 2 suppresses MYCN expression
and induces differentiation of neuroblastoma


Background: Neuroblastoma is an embryonic tumor of the peripheral
sympathetic nervous system that originates from cells within the neural
crest. The non-canonical Wnt/planar cell polarity (PCP) signaling pathway
regulates cytoskeletal organization, migration and maturation of neural
crest cells during neuritogenesis. We and others have shown that
high-risk neuroblastoma exhibit frequent mutations of genes controlling
the activity of the Wnt/PCP signaling cascade leading to inhibition of
Rac and activation of Rho resulting in downstream activation of the
serine/threonine kinases Rho-Associated Coiled-Coil Containing Protein
Kinases (ROCK1 and ROCK2)Methods: We performed whole-exome sequencing for
33 neuroblastoma samples of all clinical subgroups to search for
mutations and genetic aberrations. Cytotoxic activity of ROCK inhibitors
was studied in cell viability assays. Morphology and invasion were
studied with microscopy. The molecular mechanisms were characterized
using cell- and molecular biology techniques. In vivo studies (xenografts
and the transgenic mouse model TH-MYCN) in mice were carried out to
validate the therapeutic effects and toxicity.Results: Exome sequencing
detected frequent mutations and gene aberrations in genes controlling the
activity of PCP signalling. Analysis ofgene signatures and
immunohistochemistry showed that high expression of ROCK1 and ROCK2
correlated with poor patient survival. Several mediators of Rho/Rac were
differentially expressed in cell lines and patient samples. Using
compounds blocking ROCK1 and ROCK2 activity revealed that the ROCK2
inhibitor HA-1077 effectively repressed proliferation and reduced cell
viability in neuroblastoma. HA-1077 inhibited migration and induced
differentiation through inhibition of neural outgrowth and inhibited MYCN
protein expression, effects that were mimicked using siRNA against ROCK.
Finally, HA-1077 reduced the growth of established neuroblastoma
xenografts in nude mice and repressed tumor progression in a MYCN-driven
mouse model of neuroblastoma (T-MYCN)Conclusions: Our results show the
significance of the non-canonical/PCP signaling cascade in neuroblastoma
development and progression. Furthermore, ROCK inhibition suppress the
growth of neuroblastoma in preclinical models and provide a novel option
for improved treatment of high-risk neuroblastoma.

