Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating myeloid precursor profile as potential marker to
differentiate radiation changes from tumor recurrence after brain
stereotactic radiosurgery


IntroductionRecent advances in stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) have
improved clinical outcomes in patients with limited intracranial
metastases. As a result of this high-dose radiation delivery to a focal
area within the brain, tissue structural and functional changes within
the treatment field are often difficult to distinguish from local tumor
recurrence based on conventional imaging techniques. Here, we demonstrate
that elevation of circulating cells of myeloid origin, the key regulators
of inflammation and immune responses, can serve as a potential surrogate
marker to differentiate radiation-induced tissues changes from local
tumor recurrence.Materials and MethodsWe retrospectively identified 96
patients who were initially treated with Gamma-knife radiosurgery at MD
Anderson Cancer Center from 2009-2013 for brain metastases, and
subsequently underwent surgical resection of previous irradiated lesions
after presenting with clinical symptoms and radiographic findings
suggestive of tumor progression. All surgical specimens were centrally
reviewed by neuropathology. Pre-operative circulating blood cell profiles
were analyzed for monocytic, granulocytic and lymphocytic
sub-populations.ResultsA total of 11 and 85 patients who underwent
surgical resection after prior SRS for brain metastasis were
pathologically confirmed to have radiation-induced changes or tumor
recurrence, respectively. Among patients with confirmed recurrence vs.
those with radiation-induced changes, the number of circulating immature
granulocytes (mean = 0.093 103ul1 vs 0.032 103ul1, p = 0.075) and
monocytes (mean = 0.632 103ul1 vs 0.401 103ul1, p = 0.007) were elevated
when compared to patients with radiation-induced changes (combined: mean
= 0.71 103ul1 vs 0.43 103ul1, p = 0.002). No statistically significant
differences were observed among mature granulocytic or lymphocytic
populations between the two groups. Receiver operating characteristic
analysis showed significant discriminative utility of pre-operative
myeloid cell count when compared to reference line of no discrimination
(AUC = 0.774, p = 0.003). The cut-point for myeloid cell population was
found be > = 0.5 103ul1, which corresponds to a detection sensitivity of
73.3% and specificity of 72.7% for tumor recurrence.ConclusionBone marrow
cells of myeloid origin play important roles in mediate acute
inflammatory reactions and in regulating adaptive immunity. We showed
here that certain primitive cells of myeloid lineage may potentially be
used to aid the differentiation of tumor recurrence from
radiation-induced changes in patients who had SRS for brain metastasis.
The identification of potential circulating biomarkers that can
complement traditional imaging to distinguish the two distinct
pathological entities has significant implications in the management of
these patients.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

