Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastatic breast cancer cell communication within a pro-dormancy
bone marrow niche


Distant metastases are the major cause of death from breast cancer. In
estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer (BC) in particular,
metastatic relapse can occur years after initial treatment, suggesting
that disseminated tumor cells have a prolonged dormant phase before
becoming proliferative. A major site of early disease dissemination and
metastatic relapse of ER+ BC is the bone, although the critical signals
that allow circulating breast cancer cells (BCCs) to identify bone marrow
(BM) vasculature, enter the tissue, and tether to the BM microenvironment
(BMM) are little understood. Investigating these interactions of BCCs
with the BMM, however, could enable us to target the key biologic
determinants allowing safe harbor for metastases within bone. To address
the features of breast tumors associated with late recurrence, but not
confounded by variations in systemic treatment, we compiled breast tumor
gene expression data from 4,767 patients and established a discovery
cohort consisting of 743 lymph node-negative patients who did not receive
systemic neoadjuvant or adjuvant therapy. Using this data set, we found
that expression of E-selectin ligands and CXCR4 were significantly
elevated in ER+ tumors that had late recurrences. Based on these
observations, we used intravital fluorescence microscopy to study the
precise functions of E-selectin ligands and CXCR4 (SDF-1 receptor) in
tumor metastasis in in vivo xenograft models and found that these play
distinct roles in ER+ BCC migration in the BMM. Using highly specific
E-selectin (GMI-1271) and CXCR4 (AMD3100) inhibitors, we determined that
E-selectin interactions were critical for BCC entry into bone, while
CXCR4/SDF-1 interactions anchored BCCs to the BMM. CXCR4 inhibition led
to significant mobilization of BC micrometastases from the BMM into the
peripheral circulation. Moreover, we found that dormant and proliferating
BCCs occupy distinct regions of the BMM, with dormant BCCs predominantly
found in SDF-1 and E-selectin rich regions and thus highly susceptible to
AMD3100 mobilization. These findings shed light on how dormant and
proliferating BCCs interact with the BMM and suggest new interventions to
break the foothold of dormant BC micrometastases in bone.

