Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next-generation sequencing enables new approach to molecular
cytogenetics


Background:Accurate characterization of chromosomal aberrations
(cytogenetics) in hematologic malignancies is fundamental for proper
disease diagnosis, prognosis and may inform treatment decisions. Current
karyotyping and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) clinical assays
have important sensitivity and sample limitations and cannot detect many
novel chromosomal abnormalities in cancer. We have developed a NGS-based
targeted DNA and RNA sequencing assay (FoundationOne Heme)and analysis
pipeline compatible with typical clinical specimens that can detect all
types of variants including large chromosomal abnormalities at base-pair
level. High accuracy for the detection of recurrent cytogenetic events
was validated across 100 CLL and DLBCL specimens with known
abnormalitiesMethod:Adaptor-ligated sequencing libraries were captured by
solution hybridization using a custom bait-set targeting 405 blood
cancer-related genes by DNA-seq, and 265 frequently-rearranged genes by
RNA-seq. All captured libraries were sequenced to high depth (Illumina
HiSeq), averaging 498x for DNA and 7M on-target unique pairs for RNA, to
enable highly accurate detection of base substitutions, indels, copy
number alterations and gene rearrangements. Cytogenetics calls were
determined using a computational method which compares germline SNP
allele frequencies to model expectations, taking into account tumor
purity, ploidy, and local copy number.Result:Assay performance
demonstrated highly accurate detection of known cytogenetic events,
including large deletions, trisomy and translocations, in 61 CLL and 39
DLBCL specimens previously characterized with CLIA-certified karyotyping
and FISH assays. In the CLL cohort, 40 of 41 (98%) known positives and
172 of 172 (100%) known negatives were successfully characterized,
including deletion of chr11q, chr13q, chr17p and chr12 trisomy. No false
positive was reported in any of the cytogenetic variants. In the DLBCL
cohort, 35 of 39 (90%) known translocations involving IGH-MYC, IGH-BCL2
and IGH-BCL6 were detected. Accurate detection of these rearrangements is
particularly difficult as they are not typical gene fusions and the
genomic breakpoints are highly variable, distributed across upstream,
genic and downstream of the targeted genes. In addition, deletion in
chr17p including TP53 was detected from 37 of 165 DLBCL patients with
large length distribution ranging from 500 kb to 79
Mb.Conclusion:Accurate detection of cytogenetic events at higher
resolution than traditional cytogenetics and FISH techniques is possible
using an optimized NGS-based assay and tailored algorithms. An improved
understanding of the molecular details of chromosomal abnormalities,
integrated with comprehensive profiling of other cancer relevant genomic
alterations, may help the upfront characterization of these alterations
and impact diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic intervention.

