Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Menacalc as an independent prognostic factor and predictor of
metastasis in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer


The Mena protein has been shown to be critical for breast cancer
metastasis, and, in pre-clinical models two of its isoforms MenaINV and
Mena11a are expressed in invasive and non-invasive tumor cell
subpopulations, respectively. We have previously developed a quantitative
immunofluorescence approach to assess the fraction of Mena protein
lacking Mena11a called Menacalc as a method to infer presence of invasive
tumor cells. Menacalc is determined by subtracting the population-based
Z-score (quantifies the relationship to the mean) for Mena11a
quantitative expression score from the population-based Z-score for total
Mena quantitative expression score. The resulting Menacalc scores range
from -4 to +4 with high scores reflecting tumors with relatively high
total Mena (all isoforms) but low Mena11a. We showed that high MENAcalc
scores associated significantly with poor disease-specific survival in
breast cancer patients, including node-negative and positive cases. A
recent study reported that a semi-quantitative approached to Mena
assessment shows prognostic value in early Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer
(NSCLC) (Bria et. al 2014). Here, we asked whether the quantitative
Menacalc assay has prognostic value in NSCLC and if it can predict
metastatic disease. We determined Menacalc on a cohort of 201
predominantly early-stage NSCLC cases using multiplexed quantitative
immunofluorescence (MQIF) and then assessed Menacalc with respect to
clinical and pathological features, as well as disease-specific survival.
There was no significant difference in Menacalc by stage, sex, or age.
However, Menacalc was significantly higher (P = 0.001) in squamous cell
carcinoma (N = 32) as compared to other histological subtypes. High
levels of Menacalc were associated (10% significance level) with decrease
5-year disease specific survival in all patients [HR = 1.78 (95%CI:
0.92-3.43); P = 0.08], and were significantly associated with survival
when either corrected for histological subtype [HR = 2.10 (95%CI:
1.04-4.26); P = 0.04] or in the squamous-only population [HR = 6.60
(95%CI: 1.22-53.75); P = 0.04]. There was no difference in survival as a
function of stage nor in adenocarcinomas. Furthermore, consistent with
Mena isoform status being associated with the metastatic phenotype,
Menacalc was 2-fold higher (P = 0.09) in metastatic patients, but the
sample size with available clinical data was limited (N = 9). Taken
together, these data demonstrate that Menacalc has potential prognostic
value especially in squamous cell carcinoma patients. These data also
preliminarily suggest that Menacalc can predict the metastatic phenotype.
Further studies examining Mena isoform expression in squamous and
later-stage metastatic NSCLC patients is thus warranted and currently
ongoing.

