Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Longitudinal genomic and transcriptomic analysis of mantle cell
lymphoma in a targeted combination trial of a selective CDK4/6 inhibitor


We used whole exome (WES) and whole transcriptome sequencing (WTS) to
study progression of Mantle Cell Lymphoma (MCL) in the context of a
clinical trial of targeted combination therapy of a CDK4 inhibitor
PD0332991 (palbociclib) and a proteasome inhibitor bortezomib. Our
longitudinal study design coupled with an integrative analysis approach
enabled detailed molecular characterization of each subject's disease.
This includes multiple time points for three therapy Responders (Rs) and
two Non-Responders (NRs); a primary goal was to understand genetic
reasons for differential response. To that end, we identified copy number
variants (CNVs) and single nucleotide variants (SNVs) specific to NRs
that are supported by both WES and WTS data and implicate pathways
relevant to mechanisms of drug action.CNVs were identified using multiple
orthogonal methods that use read depth and genome-wide allele
frequencies. These revealed a 29Mb chr9 hemizygous deletion unique to
NRs. This region includes 15 interferon genes of the type 1 interferon
signaling pathway (enrichment: pWe used whole exome (WES) and whole
transcriptome sequencing (WTS) to study progression of Mantle Cell
Lymphoma (MCL) in the context of a clinical trial of targeted combination
therapy of a CDK4 inhibitor PD0332991 (palbociclib) and a proteasome
inhibitor bortezomib. Our longitudinal study design coupled with an
integrative analysis approach enabled detailed molecular characterization
of each subject's disease. This includes multiple time points for three
therapy Responders (Rs) and two Non-Responders (NRs); a primary goal was
to understand genetic reasons for differential response. To that end, we
identified copy number variants (CNVs) and single nucleotide variants
(SNVs) specific to NRs that are supported by both WES and WTS data and
implicate pathways relevant to mechanisms of drug action.CNVs were
identified using multiple orthogonal methods that use read depth and
genome-wide allele frequencies. These revealed a 29Mb chr9 hemizygous
deletion unique to NRs. This region includes 15 interferon genes of the
type 1 interferon signaling pathway (enrichment: p<10-9), which is
involved in B cell differentiation and proliferation, and T cell and
natural killer cell activation. Interferon signaling is implicated in
bortezomib function and loss of interferon genes may contribute to
resistance in non-responders. Additional key genes in deleted regions are
JAK2, RPS6, and CDKN2A, a CDK2 inhibitor, loss of which may antagonize
palbociclib-induced G1 arrest NRs also shared a 24Mb chr3 duplication
resulting in gain of PIK3CA and PIK3CB. Amplification of these genes is
common in cancers, including MCL (classical analysis) and DLBCL, and
often associated with poor prognosis. But, this is the only longitudinal
study of PI3K CNV in a targeted therapy. In context of PD+bortezomib
treatment, higher levels of PI3K may affect sensitivity to proteasome
inhibition activated autophagy since bortezomib's inhibitory activity
involves suppression of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. PIK3CA is amplified in
a responder as well, suggesting additional determinants for clinical
response.Other CNVs differentiating Rs and NRs are a 24Mb chr8 deletion
found only in Rs and a 4Mb chr17 deletion found only in NRs, which
includes p53 in a subject who also has a p53 mutation, resulting in 100%
expression of the mutant allele. The described CNVs result in detectable
shifts in expression of a large proportion of affected genes. Coupled
with SNV data, where we identified 21 SNVs shared by NRs and absent in
Rs, these results offer molecular clues to mechanisms of resistance in
NRs, which we are currently pursuing with functional studies.Overall, we
performed a thorough genomic and transcriptomic analysis of a
longitudinal investigation of MCL patients during a targeted combination
therapy phase I clinical trial and identified potential biomarkers of
response spanning CNVs, SNVs, and differentially expressed genes.

