Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER3 and IGF1R are major mediators of both acquired and intrinsic
cetuximab resistance in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is among the leading causes
of death worldwide. HNSCC originates from the squamous epithelium of the
upper aerodigestive tract, including the lip, oral cavity, pharynx,
larynx and paranasal sinuses. The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
has been found to play an essential role in driving the malignancy of
HNSCC. The monoclonal antibody targeting EGFR, cetuximab, has been
approved for clinical use in HNSCC patients, in combination with either
radiation or chemotherapy. However, intrinsic and acquired cetuximab
resistance is a major problem for effective therapy. Thus, a better
understanding of the mechanisms responsible for cetuximab resistance is
valuable for development of the next generation of antibody
therapeutics.In order to investigate the molecular mechanisms behind
cetuximab resistance in HNSCC, we screened a panel of cell lines for
sensitivity to cetuximab. As expected, the cell lines exhibited a varied
response to cetuximab. The most sensitive cell line, HN5, was used to
establish a number of cetuximab-resistant clones. These resistant clones
had lower EGFR levels but remained partially dependent on EGFR, as
demonstrated by EGFR gene knockdown and treatment with a mixture of two
anti-EGFR antibodies.HER3 and IGF1R are known to be major drivers of
resistance to EGFR targeting therapies, and therefore we investigated the
role of the two receptors in resistant clones with a mixture of
antibodies against EGFR, HER3 and IGF1R. The antibody mixture, which
simultaneously blocked EGFR, HER3 and IGF1R signaling, resulted in near
total growth inhibition of cetuximab resistant clones. These results were
extended to HNSCC cell lines with intrinsic resistance to cetuximab and
also in these cell lines the three target mAb mixture led to effective
growth inhibition.In conclusion, our results demonstrate that HNSCC cell
lines have a heterogeneous response to cetuximab and that HER3 and IGF1R
effectively compensate for EGFR inhibition in both the acquired and
intrinsic cetuximab resistant setting. Our results thus provide a
rationale for simultaneous targeting of EGFR, HER3, and IGF1R in HNSCC.

