Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Factors potentially contributing to sensitivities of
CD22-targeting agents in B-cell malignancies


In order to understand factors which may contribute to in vitro
sensitivity of B-cell malignancies to CD22-targeting agents, we evaluated
the mRNA expression levels of genes involved with diphthamide
biosynthesis, multi-drug resistance, and CD22 (including the splice
variant 3 with exon12 deletion) in untreated and 72-hour CD22-targeting
agent-treated DLBCL and CLL cell lines. Cell line sensitivity (EC50) to
CD22-targeting agent treatment was evaluated by 72 hour exposureto
moxetumomab pasudotox (MP).Cell lines were characterized as insensitive
if the EC50's were greater than100 ng/mL. The sensitivity to CD22
-targeting agent treatment was found to be significantly associated with
baseline CD22 mRNA expression level, as determined by regression
analysis. The highly resistant DLBCL cell line RCK8 and the resistant CLL
cell line Z138 demonstrated low CD22 expression, corresponding to their
elevated EC50s. However, baseline mRNA was not significantly lower in
some other less sensitive cell lines, suggesting that total mRNA CD22
levels may not be the only factor contributing to reduced sensitivity to
anti-CD22 exposure. Given the critical roles of dipthamides in CD22
targeting, we evaluated baseline DPH4 levels and their methylation
status. There was no correlation between CD22-targeting agent sensitivity
and baseline levels of DPH4 expression/promoter methylation. We further
explored how CD22, DPH4, WDR85 and MRP1 mRNA expression changed following
a 72 hour exposure to MP. Following MP exposure, both mRNA and
methylation levels of DPH4 were not significantly changed. However, the
mRNA levels of both the diphthamide biosynthesis protein WDR85 and
multidrug resistance-associated protein 1 (MRP1) were up-regulated in
half of the cell lines following MP exposure. As expression of truncated
CD22 has been reported in ALL, we also evaluated CD22 variant expression
before and following CD22-targeting agent exposure. All CD22 variants
were co-expressed in most cell lines, with significantly increased V3
observed following treatment in some cell lines with lower EC50s. In
conclusion, our results show sensitivity to CD22-targeting agent in the
majority of the cell lines tested, and suggest that multiple factors may
contribute to sensitivity including CD22 expression. Additionally, our
results suggest that factors which may affect continued response to CD22
targeting agents may change with treatment, including increases in CD22
variant 3, MRP1 and WDR85. Ongoing research will evaluate whether these
changes are relevant to CD22-targeting agent sensitivity in vivo.

