Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selenium-binding protein 1-mediated tumor suppression is
associated with alterations of lipid/glucose metabolic pathways in vivo


Selenium-binding protein 1 (SBP1) is significantly decreased in most of
human cancers including liver, prostate, breast, lung and colorectal
cancers, and the decreased SBP1 is associated with poor clinical outcomes
and recurrence, showing a tumor suppressor role. However, the underlying
mechanisms are still unclear. In this study, we constructed a doxycycline
inducible SBP1 plasmid (pRetroX-Tight- Pur-SBP1) and established a stable
colorectal cancer cell line HCT116-TetSBP1, then injected the
HCT116-TetSBP1 cell line into BALB/c CD-1 Nu female mice subcutaneously
on the right flank, the control cell line HCT116-Act was injected in the
left flank. The mice was supplied with Doxycycline (200 g/mL) in drinking
water. Four weeks after injection, the tumors from both sides were
isolated and the weight (gm) and volume (mm3) of tumors were determined.
Tumors were stored at -80C until used for immunoblot and isobaric tags
for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) analysis. We found that
induction of SBP1 showed significant inhibition of cancer cell growth and
metastasis in mice. iTRAQ analysis showed 132 differentially expressed
proteins in response to SBP1 induction, among them, 53 proteins were
upregulated and 79 proteins were downregulated. Importantly, many of the
differentially altered proteins were associated with lipid/glucose
metabolism. Although all seven proteins related to glucose metabolism
(GAA, GAPDH, ALDH2, Thioredoxin, ENO3, UGDH and Lumican) were
downregulated by SBP1 induction, thirteen lipid metabolism-related
proteins act differentially on SBP1-medited signal transduction (five
proteins were upregulated: DKK1, HSP60, DHCR7, ANXA4 and AGPAT5, and
eight proteins were downregulated: LPCAT2, GPX5, GAPDH, NME2, ALDH2,
BPIFA3, PPIA and FABP4). Bioinformatic analysis showed that these
proteins were involved in Glycolysis, MAPK, Wnt, NF-kB, NOTCH and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) signaling pathways. Taken
together, our results have revealed a novel mechanism that SBP1-mediated
cancer inhibition is through altering lipid/glucose metabolic signaling
pathways.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

