Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The unfolded protein response may contribute to racial disparity
in endocrine responsiveness in breast cancer


About 70% of all breast cancers are estrogen receptor alpha positive
(ER+) and depend on estrogen to grow and proliferate. Anti-hormone
therapy such as antiestrogens (e.g., Tamoxifen; TAM) are often used to
treat ER+ breast tumors but the cancer cells can develop resistance to
these drugs (endocrine resistance). Unfortunately, 50% percent of all
antiestrogen treated tumors eventually develop endocrine resistance, and
therefore, there is an urgent need to find ways to treat this incurable
disease. Nonetheless, little is known about the causes of endocrine
resistance, and even less is known about the racial disparities that
exist for antiestrogen responsiveness among ER+ breast cancer cases.
Clinical investigations into ER+ breast cancer cases with similarly
treated tumors showed that progression-free survival (PFS) and overall
survival (OS) in African-American (AA) women were worse than in
European-American (EA) women. The underlying causes of these racial
differences within ER+ breast cancers is unknown. One cellular adaptive
mechanism that allow endocrine resistant cells to survive antiestrogen
treatment is a called the unfolded protein response (UPR) that is
initiated within the endoplasmic reticulum caused by a stress stimulus.
Cellular stress induced by antiestrogens can trigger the UPR leading to
induce a pro-survival response by inhibiting cell death (by apoptosis)
and promoting cell survival (by autophagy). Gene expression analysis for
ER+ tumors of AA patients show up-regulation of UPR genes such as
glucose-regulated protein 78, GRP78 (also known as HSP5A or BiP),
activation transcription factor-6 (ATF6) and spliced X-box-protein-1
(XBP1s). Moreover, ER+ breast cancer cell lines derived from tumors of AA
patients show increased levels of GRP78, ATF6 and XBP1 compared with
cells derived from EA patients. The ER+ breast cancer cell lines derived
from tumors of AA patients also show reduced sensitivity to Tamoxifen
compared with cells derived from EA patients. Through our study, we will
determine how up-regulation of the UPR contribute to the differences
noted in anti-hormone therapy in treatment of ER+ breast cancer in AA
versus EA women. Therefore, targeting critical pro-survival signaling
molecules of the UPR can inhibit endocrine resistance and reduce growth
of ER+ breast cancer cells more efficiently and avoid unsuccessful
treatment in AA breast cancer patients.

