Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serglycin proteoglycan promotes progression and metastasis of
triple-negative breast cancers


Introduction. Triple-negative breast cancers have a propensity to
metastasize and a poor outcome relative to other breast cancer subtypes.
No molecularly targeted therapies exist for triple-negative disease and
the standard of care for remains surgery followed by adjuvant
radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy. Therefore, new therapies that target
the molecular alterations present in triple-negative tumors are needed to
either prevent metastatic dissemination or kill micrometastatic lesions
at distant sites. The serglycin gene encodes a large secreted
proteoglycan decorated with chondroitin sulfate modifications and
expressed primarily by the hematopoietic system.1 While serglycin was
recently shown to be expressed by mammary epithelial cells2, its role in
breast oncogenesis is unclear.Methods. Serglycin expression was analyzed
by RNA-based (qRT-PCR) and protein-based (immunohistochemistry) methods3.
Serglycin expression was specifically knocked down in triple-negative
breast cancer lines (MDA-MB-231_HM4, SUM159) by shRNA technology using
the pGIPZ lentiviral system. Genetically engineered cells were assessed
in vitro using standard assays. Tumor growth and spontaneous metastasis
to lung, liver and spleen was analyzed in vivo by orthotopic inoculation
of cells into Nod.Scid.IL-2Rgamma-null (NSG)5 immuno-deficient
mice.Results. Serglycin was found to over-expressed in a subset of
triple-negative breast cancers as well as in several metastatic
triple-negative/claudin-low breast cancer cell lines including
MDA-MB-231, SUM159 and Hs578T. Knockdown of serglycin was engineered in
highly-metastatic MDA-MB-231_HM (231_HM) cells and in a metastatic
variant of SUM159 cells. In vivo experiments showed that knockdown of
serglycin reduced the growth rate of primary 231_HM tumours implanted in
the mammary fat pads of mice. Moreover, following resection of the
primary tumours, spontaneous metastasis to lung, liver and spleen was
reduced in serglycin-depleted 231_HM cells.Conclusions. The hematopoietic
proteoglycan serglycin is over-expressed in a subset of triple-negative
breast cancers and may represent a novel target for anti-cancer
therapy.References:1. Korpetinou A, et al., Serglycin: at the crossroad
of inflammation and malignancy. Front Oncol. 2014 3:3272. Korpetinou A,
et al., Serglycin is implicated in the promotion of aggressive phenotype
of breast cancer cells. PLoS One 2013 8:e781573. Li XJ, et al., Serglycin
is a theranostic target in nasopharyngeal carcinoma that promotes
metastasis. Cancer Res. 2011 71:3162-31724. Chang XZ, et al.,
Identification of the functional role of peroxiredoxin 6 in the
progression of breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res. 2007 9:R765. Shultz LD,
et al., Human lymphoid and myeloid cell development in NOD/LtSz-scid IL2R
gamma null mice engrafted with mobilized human hemopoietic stem cells. J
Immunol. 2005 174:6477-6489

