Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunohistochemical analysis and comprehensive hormone receptor
profiling of uterine adenosarcomas at a single institution


Uterine adenosarcomas (AS) are rare uterine tumors with benign epithelium
and a sarcomatous component which is typically low-grade. Those
displaying sarcomatous overgrowth (AS+SO) behave in a more aggressive
fashion and are associated with worse clinical outcomes.
Immunohistochemistry performed on AS and AS+SO have shown a greater
preponderance for estrogen receptor alpha (ER) and progesterone receptor
(PR) positivity in those with a low-grade sarcomatous component. Further
studies showed an increased proliferative index (Ki-67) in AS+SO and
confirmed loss of expression in ER/PR in addition to loss of CD10.
Expression of estrogen receptor beta (ER), a classic estrogen receptor as
well as G protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER), a receptor that
interacts with estrogen independently of the classic receptors, has been
reported in uterine carcinosarcomas and they are associated with advanced
stage disease. We conducted this study to analyze the receptor status of
ER and GPER in cases of uterine AS. An H-score was calculated as the
product of intensity and the percentage of cells staining positive
(0-100%), higher scores indicate increased intensity and a greater number
of positive cells. Unpaired t-test was used to compare the mean H-scores
of receptor expression between low-grade AS (LG-AS) and high-grade AS
(HG-AS). Mean age of diagnosis was 59.4 11.9 years, mean BMI of 34.2 8.5,
and median disease free survival was 18 months (range 2-113 months).
There were 7 cases of LG-AS and 3 cases of HG-AS, 2 cases displayed SO.
Seven cases were stage IA, two were IB and one stage IV. There was a
significant difference (p = 0.01) between the mean H-score for ER between
LG-AS (203) and HG-AS (1.7), There was also a significant difference (p =
0.04) in mean H-score for PR between LG-AS (188.6) and HG-AS (18.3). ER
and GPER expression were retained in the HG-AS at similar levels as in
the LG-AS, thus there was no difference in mean H-scores. In one patient
with HG-AS and recurrent disease after 2 years, the recurrent tumor
remained negative for ER and PR, and showed somewhat decreased ER
expression. Although the sample size is small, this is the first report
of comprehensive estrogen receptor profiling in this uncommon uterine
tumor.

