Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A short isoform of DCLK1, transcribed from an alternate promoter
in human colon cancers, represents a novel biomarker and target for
diagnostic and treatment purposes


DCLK1 is a specific marker of colon and pancreatic cancers in mice, and
is expressed by human colon adenocarcinomas (hCRCs). A sub-set of
DCLK1+vecolon cancer-stem-cells, are resistant to
chemopreventive/chemotherapeutic reagents and undergo autophagic
survival, resulting in the relapse of colon-cancer disease. However,
down-regulation of DCLK1, along with chemopreventive agents, inhibits
spheroidal/xenograft growths from hCRC cells, and eliminates both
colon-cancer-stem cells and relapse of the disease. We now know that the
5-promoter of DCLK1 gene is hypermethylated in hCRCs, but not in mouse
colon-tumors, resulting in the loss of expression of DCLK1
long-transcripts (DCLK1-L), from the 5promoter of DCLK1-gene in humans,
but not in mice. We hypothesized that elevated levels of DCLK1 protein,
detected in hCRCs, are likely transcribed from an alternate-promoter in
humans. We used several in silico and molecular biology approaches to
test our hypothesis, and report for the first time that hCRCs express
short-transcripts of DCLK1 (DCLK1-S) from an alternate promoter in
IntronV of the gene, while normal human colons express the long
transcript (DCLK1-L) from 5-promoter. We additionally report an important
role of -catenin and TCF4/LEF binding-sites for activating 5-promoter,
while NF-Bp65 binding to NF-B cis element, activates the TATA box
containing IntronV-promoter in cancer cells. DCLK1-S expression was
examined in a cohort of 92 CRC patients, in relation to overall survival
and clinicopathological parameters. High expressors had significantly
worse overall-survival compared to low expressors, and DCLK1-S expression
was found to be an independent prognostic factor.Conclusions. Our novel
findings regarding alternate promoter usage by normal colons vs hCRCs
suggest that we can develop strategies for specifically targeting DCLK1-S
to eliminate colon cancer-stem-cells, while sparing DCLK1-L functions in
neurons and normal cells. Our findings further suggest
prognostic/diagnostic value of measuring DCLK1-S in CRC patients. Loss of
DCLK1-L expression can also be used as a diagnostic marker for indicating
the on-set of epigenetic changes associated with colon carcinogenesis in
humans, as an early marker.

