Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of adipose derived stromal cells for reversal of
radiation fibrosis


Hypothesis: Up to 70% of patients after radiotherapy develop radiation
fibrosis (RF), an irreversible scarring of normal tissue resulting in
functional morbidity and increased risk of surgical complications.
Adipose-derived stromal cells (ADSCs) have been used effectively for the
treatment of complex wounds in animal models and clinical trials. We
hypothesize that ADSCs may reverse RF by repopulating mesenchymal
precursor cells and by providing angiogenic, anti-inflammatory, and
matrix remodeling factors.Methods: A RF animal model was developed and
ADSC isolation was confirmed by immunophenotype and differentiation
assay. GFP and luciferase labelled ADSCs were used to assess
biodistribution after transplantation. To determine the therapeutic
effect of ADSC transplantation for RF, we assessed functional changes to
leg contracture, oxygen saturation and perfusion and molecular changes to
inflammation, vascularization, and matrix remodeling. To determine the
mechanism of ADSC-mediated fibrosis reversal, we assessed transcriptomic
and epigenetic changes to RF tissue.Results: A RF model was created by
radiating the hind limb of C3H mice. This model showed a dose dependent
leg contracture and histological findings of fibrosis. We confirmed the
immunophenotype of isolated ADSC and their ability to differentiate into
adipogenic, chondrogenic, and osteogenic lineages. ADSC transplantation
showed a statistically significant trend towards improved leg contracture
(2-way ANOVA, pHypothesis: Up to 70% of patients after radiotherapy
develop radiation fibrosis (RF), an irreversible scarring of normal
tissue resulting in functional morbidity and increased risk of surgical
complications. Adipose-derived stromal cells (ADSCs) have been used
effectively for the treatment of complex wounds in animal models and
clinical trials. We hypothesize that ADSCs may reverse RF by repopulating
mesenchymal precursor cells and by providing angiogenic,
anti-inflammatory, and matrix remodeling factors.Methods: A RF animal
model was developed and ADSC isolation was confirmed by immunophenotype
and differentiation assay. GFP and luciferase labelled ADSCs were used to
assess biodistribution after transplantation. To determine the
therapeutic effect of ADSC transplantation for RF, we assessed functional
changes to leg contracture, oxygen saturation and perfusion and molecular
changes to inflammation, vascularization, and matrix remodeling. To
determine the mechanism of ADSC-mediated fibrosis reversal, we assessed
transcriptomic and epigenetic changes to RF tissue.Results: A RF model
was created by radiating the hind limb of C3H mice. This model showed a
dose dependent leg contracture and histological findings of fibrosis. We
confirmed the immunophenotype of isolated ADSC and their ability to
differentiate into adipogenic, chondrogenic, and osteogenic lineages.
ADSC transplantation showed a statistically significant trend towards
improved leg contracture (2-way ANOVA, p<0.05). Biodistribution studies
confirmed the presence of ADSCs in the subdermis of RF tissue with
persistence for at least 18 days post-transplantation. Preliminary
RNA-seq analysis using unsupervised hierarchical clustering showed ADSC
treated radiation tissue was more similar to normal tissue than control.
In depth RNA-seq data analysis is underway.Conclusions: ADSC
transplantation may be an effective treatment for the reversal of
radiation fibrosis. As cancer survivorship increases, the prevalence of
radiation fibrosis will rise and necessitate increased focus on effective
treatment strategies for this condition.

