Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A rat monoclonal antibody against bone sialoprotein II shows
differential activity in MDA-MB-231 cells growing in vitro or in vivo


Elevated serum levels of the small integrin binding ligand N-linked
glycoprotein (SIBLING) family member bone sialoprotein II (BSP) have been
related to breast cancer skeletal metastasis. Also, knockdown of BSP was
associated with significant anti-proliferative, anti-migratory and
anti-clonogenic effects in MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells, and rats
presenting with osteolytic metastases following femoral artery injection
of these cells underwent complete remission following BSP knockdown, thus
validating BSP as target. In order to follow a translational perspective,
we used the IDK-1 rat monoclonal antibody against BSP (Immundiagnostik,
Bensheim, Germany) for treating MDA-MB-231 cells in vitro and in
vivo.MDA-MB-231 cells were exposed to IDK-1 for assessing its effect on
proliferation and migration. The presence of BSP in the cytosol and on
cell membranes was checked by FACS analysis. In addition, the location of
BSP was investigated by immunocytochemistry. For in vivo experiments,
1105 MDA-MB-231luc breast cancer cells were injected into the femoral
artery of male nude rats with skeletal lesions developing subsequently in
the respective hind leg. A preventive arm based on pretreated rats and /
or MDA-MB-231 cells was compared with a treatment arm, in which antibody
administration (10 mg/kg/week) started when tumor bearing rats had shown
stable tumor growth. The appearance and growth of soft tissue tumors was
monitored by luciferin induced light emission and recorded by a Xenogen
IVIS 100 imaging system. Concomitant skeletal lesions were detected by CT
scans. Tumors as well as skeletal lesions were subjected to
pathohistological evaluation by hematoxylin and eosin staining as well as
immunohistochemical staining for BSP.There was no effect of the anti-BSP
antibody IDK-1 on the proliferation or migration of MDA-MB-231 cells. In
line with this, FACS analysis revealed only low concentrations of BSP in
MDA-MB-231 cells growing in vitro. Immunocytochemical staining for BSP
showed that this SIBLING protein could be detected only in a minority of
the MDA-MB-231 cells. However, when treating nude rats bearing fully
established MDA-MB-231 tumors, administration of the IDK-1 antibody
caused complete remissions in 80% of treated rats (10mg/kg/week for 6
weeks). When pre-treating the nude rats, however, and / or pre-exposing
the MDA-MB-231 cells to IDK-1 in addition to treating the established
tumors, the above mentioned effect could not be increased. Interestingly,
histological evaluation of serial sections of MDA-MB-231 tumors growing
in nude rats showed a very robust expression and vesicular secretion of
BSP.It is concluded, that the in vivo growth of MDA-MB-231 cells is
associated with dramatically increased expression and secretion of BSP,
which then is a valid target for the anti-BSP antibody, leading to
complete remissions of MDA-MB-231 tumors in nude rats.

