Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of synbiotics administration on tumorigenesis of colon
cancer mouse model


Introduction:Previous study showed that Synbiotics might have beneficial
effect in human and animal colitis like ulcerative colitis. However, it
is not well known that the influence of Synbiotics for tumorigenesis in
colon cancer. The aim of present study was to investigate the influence
of Synbiotics in colon cancer mouse model and colitis associated cancer
mouse model.Methods:Mouse stains carrying colon epithelium-preferential
Apc mutation (CPC;Apc mice), that show sporadic colorectal adenomas and
carcinomas are used in this study. We also used CPC;Apc mice consumed
1%Dextran Sulfate Sodium (DSS) as colitis associated colon cancer model,
developing apploximately fourfold more adenomas and adenocarcinomas than
CPC;Apc not consumed. At first, 9 of CPC;Apc mice were administerated
symbiotics (Probiotics (Lactobacillus) 0.1g + Prebiotics
(Oligosaccharide) 10mg/0.3ml/body) between 7 and 20 age in weeks and 10
was not administerated. Secondaly, using 9 of CPC;Apc consumed 1%DSS was
administrated Symbiotics, 8 of not administrated, 7 of only Probiotics,
and 7 of only Prebiotics. Body weight was measured weekly. Fecal
microbial analysis was performed. At sacrifice in 21 age in weeks, the
small and large bowel were histologically assessed.Results:Synbiotics
administration group has no differences of tumorigenesis comparing to
control group (tumor incidence rate(88.9%(8/9) vs. 62.5% (5 / 8); control
vs. Synbiotics; p = 0.21)average tumor number(3.2 vs. 2.1; p = 0.38),
average tumor greatest diameter 5.8 vs. 5.1 mm; p = 0.51). Using CPC;Apc
consumed 1%DSS, Symbiotics administration group showed inhibiting
morbidity (50% (8 / 16) vs. 80% (8 / 10); control vs. Synbiotics; p =
0.04) and weight loss, and less tumor incidence than control (18.8 vs.
9.6; control vs. Synbiotics; p = 0.01). On the other hands,
administration of probiotics or prebiotics alone had no significant
differences of tumorigeneis.Conclusion:This data suggest that Synbiotics
administration may have influence of inhibiting tumorigenesis in the
colitis associated colon cancer.

