Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering the biointerface of synthetic high density lipoprotein
nanoparticles enables efficient nucleic acid loading, delivery, and
target gene regulation in cancer cells


Local treatment of cancer confined to the primary organ can be curative.
However, other than a few success stories, locally advanced and
metastatic cancer remains incurable. Ideally, new therapies are needed
that specifically target cancer cells and derive efficacy by targeting
molecular pathways that are unique to distinct tumor profiles and
individual patients. Toward this end, we focus on the use of biomimicry
to exploit mechanisms by which cancer cells uptake molecular cargo.
Naturally, some cancer cells are dependent upon exogenous cholesterol for
cellular signaling, growth, and in some cancers, such as prostate,
steroidogenesis. However, cholesterol is a highly hydrophobic molecule
that requires a delivery vehicle for systemic circulation and cellular
delivery. High-density lipoproteins (HDLs) are natural nanostructures
that engage cancer cells to deliver exogenous cholesterol. In addition to
cholesterol, HDLs bind and deliver nucleic acids, such as microRNAs.
Importantly, HDLs are targeted to a surface receptor, scavenger receptor
type B-1 (SR-B1), whereupon binding allows for particle uptake and cargo
delivery. SR-B1 has been shown to be overexpressed in human cancers, thus
making HDLs a highly attractive delivery vehicle for therapeutic nucleic
acid cargo. Because of the propensity of HDL to bind, stabilize, and
deliver RNA our group has developed ways to synthesize lipoproteins
nanoparticles and use them as therapeutic RNA delivery vehicles.
Importantly, natural HDLs are highly dynamic species, which frequently
undergo exchange of molecular surface components other lipoprotein
species, as well as, HDLs. Recent work is focused on chemically tailoring
the surface of synthetic HDL nanoparticles (HDL NPs) to understand RNA
binding, stabilization, and cellular delivery. In addition, manipulating
the surface chemical features of HDL also provides a way to better
understand intermolecular exchange with native serum lipoproteins. Data
demonstrate that by tailoring the surface chemistry of the HDL NP one can
modulate the efficiency by which siRNAs can be incorporated onto the
particle surface and delivered to target cells to reduce target gene
expression in cancer cells. Further, data show the tendency for
nanoparticle lipids to transfer to natural HDLs; however, siRNA
formulated on the surface of the HDL NP remains bound, even when exposed
to serum for prolonged periods. In short, exploration of HDL NPs for the
systemic delivery of siRNAs may be a promising approach for targeted
patient-specific cancer therapies.

