Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophages in the breast tumor microenvironment as a prognostic
factor among race/ethnicity


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of death by cancer in women in
the United States. The occurrence of high numbers of macrophages in the
tumor stroma has been associated with tumor progression and poor
prognosis in breast and other solid malignances; however macrophage
numbers have not been validated as a standard prognostic factor in the
clinical practice. Breast adipose tissue is also part of the breast tumor
microenvironment, and macrophages are observed in fat tissue surrounding
dead adipocytes in crown-like structures (CLS). CLS have also been
associated with poor survival in breast cancer; however they are not
currently used in the assessment of breast cancer prognosis in the
clinical practice either. This study was designed to determine whether
the numbers of CD163+ tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and/or CD163+
macrophages in the breast adipose tissue (CLS) are independent prognostic
factors in breast cancers across three different ethnic groups, African
American, Latinas and Caucasian women. We also analyzed the polarization
of macrophages as pro-inflammatory M1 (CD40+) and immunosuppressive M2
(CD206+) types, across these three ethnicities. A retrospective analysis
of 150 breast cancer cases encompassing these three ethnic groups was
carried out. African American and Latina women present with less
incidence but more aggressive breast cancer disease and therefore,
proportionally higher death rates. Using immunohistochemistry (IHC), we
sought to identify whether there were any associations between the
numbers of CD163+ TAMs and CLS with overall survival in these groups. Our
findings show a statistically significant relationship between ethnicity
and CD163+ macrophages located in the breast cancer microenvironment
(TAMs/CLS) and reveal that the highest numbers of CD163+ TAMs/CLS are
found in African American breast cancer patients. Latinas precede
Caucasian breast cancer patients when assessing the numbers of CD163+
TAMs/CLS that were found, and Caucasian breast cancer patients show the
lowest number of CD163+ TAMs/CLS. Using univariate survival analysis, our
results show that the numbers of CD163+ TAMs and their M2 activation
profile (CD206+) are associated with lower patient survival, whereas M1
(CD40+) macrophages are associated with higher patient survival.
Univariate survival analysis also shows that the number of CLS exhibiting
both M2/ M1 macrophages is associated with lower patient survival. We
reveal for the first time that race/ethnicity is significantly associated
with the number of TAMs and CLS in breast cancer.

