Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting membrane fluidity as a therapeutic strategy in cancer
using BPM 31510


Cancer cells membranes are relatively more fluid compared to healthy
cells. Higher fluidity in cancer cells closely relate to their invasive
potential, proliferation, and metastatic ability. Pharmacological
modulation of membrane fluidity as a novel therapeutic strategy for
potential treatment of cancer is investigated in this study. BPM 31510, a
proprietary CoQ10 based liposomal formulation currently in clinical
trials affects cell membrane fluidity to influence cancer cell survival.
To study the effect of BPM 31510 on biophysical parameters of membrane
structure in cancer cells, the CoQ10 concentration in the liposomes was
systematically increased and the membrane rigidity (Fluorescence
Anisotropy) as function of temperature was measured. A progressive
(significant, pCancer cells membranes are relatively more fluid compared
to healthy cells. Higher fluidity in cancer cells closely relate to their
invasive potential, proliferation, and metastatic ability.
Pharmacological modulation of membrane fluidity as a novel therapeutic
strategy for potential treatment of cancer is investigated in this study.
BPM 31510, a proprietary CoQ10 based liposomal formulation currently in
clinical trials affects cell membrane fluidity to influence cancer cell
survival. To study the effect of BPM 31510 on biophysical parameters of
membrane structure in cancer cells, the CoQ10 concentration in the
liposomes was systematically increased and the membrane rigidity
(Fluorescence Anisotropy) as function of temperature was measured. A
progressive (significant, p<0.05) increase in rigidity of liposomal
membranes was observed with increase in CoQ10 concentration to a maxima,
after which any further increase in CoQ10 concentration resulted in
decreases in membrane rigidity. Interestingly, the local maxima in
rigidity matched with the concentration of CoQ10 in BPM 31510
formulation. A spectrum of cell lines including cancer of breast,
pancreas, liver, prostate, ovarian cell lines and corresponding healthy
non-disease control cell lines including fibroblast, smooth muscles,
primary prostate were treated with BPM 31510. For all cell lines, there
was a temporal increase in cell membrane rigidity between 0-8 hours
following treatment with BPM 31510. The magnitude of increase in membrane
rigidity was higher for cells with higher initial membrane fluidity for
cancer cells compared to healthy cells. Further, magnitude and rate of
this reorganization of cell lipid and protein profile, bioenergetics and
metabolic state as a maladaptive response of cells to BPM 31510
correlated with the magnitude of change in cell membrane rigidity.
Finally, decrease in cell viability was higher for cells with higher
membrane fluidity compared to cells with rigid membrane after 48 hours of
treatment of BPM 31510. In in vivo preclinical animal model of cancer,
there was a strong correlation between BPM 31510 in-plane rigidity
measurements to observed bio-distribution and efficacy. This work
provides profound insight into CoQ10 effect on cell membrane dynamics and
mechanism of action of BPM 31510. The study provides compelling evidence
in support of targeting membrane fluidity characteristics in cancer cells
as a novel modality with therapeutic potential in the treatment of cancer.

