Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual mTOR kinase inhibitor overcomes rapamycin resistance in vitro


The mTOR pathway is frequently over-activated in human cancers. However,
classic allosteric mTOR inhibitors rapamycin and its analogs only exert
limited clinical benefits in patients. It has been shown that many tumors
either fail to respond to rapamycin initially or are able to acquire
resistance after the initial treatment of rapamycin. Such primary and
secondary resistances remain as major concerns in rapamycin-based
anti-cancer therapies that may inevitably lead to therapeutic failure. We
have previously shown that the ATP-competitive dual mTOR kinase inhibitor
AZD8055 can significantly inhibit malignant behaviors however its
functional efficacies in the rapamycin-resistance setting remains
unclear.Cancer cells with wildtype PTEN were selected as models of
primary rapamycin resistance since the mTOR pathway is usually less
abnormal in these cells. To establish cells with acquired rapamycin
resistance, PTEN-null prostate cancer PC-3 cells were gradually treated
with increasing concentrations of rapamycin (up to 10 M) until the cells
were completely unresponsive to rapamycin (PC-3RR). Cell proliferation
was determined by MTT assay and clonogenic survival was tested by colony
formation assay. m7G pull-down assay was employed to detect the
cap-dependent translation. mTOR downstream pathways, including p-S6K
(T389)/p-S6 (S235/236), p-4EBP1 (T37/S46) and p-Akt (S473) were detected
by Western Blotting.PTEN wildtype and PC-3RR cells essentially failed to
respond to rapamycin; IC50 values were greater than 100 nM in PTEN
wildtype cells and 1 M in PC-3RR cells. However, for both cell types
AZD8055 suppressed proliferation at the nanomolar level in a dose
dependent manner, with IC50 values less than 30 nM. Similarly, cellular
clonogenic capacity was impaired by AZD8055 to a greater extent than was
the case for rapamycin. At the molecular level, AZD8055, but not
rapamycin, strongly prevents the dissociation of 4E-BP1 from eIF4E,
therefore blocking cap-dependent translation. Further, while the p-S6K
and p-S6 pathway was potently inhibited by both agents, AZD8055 displayed
more striking inhibition on p-4E-BP1 and p-Akt than did rapamycin in all
cells tested. Interestingly, similar to rapamycin, AZD8055 slightly
increased p-Akt (T308), suggesting the existence of the PI3K-mediated
feedback loop. However, the PI3K inhibitor wortmannin did not further
sensitize cells to AZD8055, implying such feedback-dependent activation
is less responsible for weakening the drug efficacy.These findings
indicate that AZD8055 significantly inhibits malignant functions in
cancer cells that are highly resistant to rapamycin. Such effects are
likely to be associated with the deactivation of rapamycin-insensitive
mTOR downstream components such as Akt and 4E-BP1, but not the upstream
feedback pathway. These data provide in vitro evidence in support of
future evaluation of ATP-competitive mTOR inhibitors in cancer models
that are resistant to rapamycin analogs.

