Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation of circulating tumor cells and evaluation of PD-L1
expression in metastatic lung cancer


INTRODUCTIONMetastatic lung tumors have adopted methods to evade the
immune system via overexpression of programmed cell death ligand 1
(PD-L1). PD-L1 binds to PD-1 on T-cells and suppresses its activity.
Studies have shown immunotherapy with PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibitors induce
clinical response as well as an association with response and tumor PD-L1
level. Thus, tumor PD-L1 expression is a screening criterion for some
studies of anti-PD-1 or PD-L1 drugs. Current methods of evaluating PD-L1
expression involve an invasive tumor biopsy. The biopsy itself can be
difficult to perform, especially for lung tumors. Biopsies only show one
section of the tumor, which may not represent tumor heterogeneity. We
show that circulating tumor cells (CTCs) express a wide range of PD-L1
levels, this can aid in screening patients for anti-PD-1/PD-L1 drugs.
CTCs slough off from tumors, and can give us a better picture of response
that takes into account the heterogeneity at many tumor sites.METHODSWe
have developed a microfluidic device for rapid, size-based capture of
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from blood. The Vortex HT chip contains
parallel channels and rectangular trapping reservoirs. At high flow rate
(8mL/min), large cells (>15m diameter) experience lift forces and become
stably trapped in fluid vortices in the reservoirs. Small blood cells do
not experience sufficient lift force and can be washed away. We release
the trapped cells by lowering the flow rate to dissipate the vortices and
collect the cells in a concentrated volume (300L).We use Vortex HT to
assess utility of capturing CTCs from patients with non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). After collecting the CTCs (30 patient samples), we
evaluated the expression of PD-L1 using immunofluorescence with positive
controls A549 and H1703, and red blood cells as negative control. We
measure cell size, intensity levels of cytokeratin (CK), and CD45 on the
collected cells. These metrics allow us to distinguish between CTCs and
large leukocytes. Cells larger than 16m, with high levels of CK, and no
CD45 are classified as CTCs. We use a semi-automated algorithm to
quantify fluorescence.RESULTSWe found significant heterogeneity in PD-L1
expression levels across CTCs from the same patient at one time point.
Overall for all samples the PDL1 levels on CTCs ranges from 0 to 4000
total intensity per cell normalized by intensity of PDL1 on H1703. On an
individual scale, a sample with 8.5 CTCs/mL had PD-L1 intensities ranging
from 300 to 4000. While in another sample with 7 CTCs/ml, the PD-L1
intensities ranged from 0 to 1000. For the CTCs analyzed in these
samples, the CD45 levels normalized by CD45 on healthy leukocytes were
lower than 0.08 intensity.CONCLUSIONFurther study can lead to simple,
non-invasive methods to predict patient response to immunotherapy.
Comparison of CTC PD-L1 levels alongside tumor biopsy results could aid
in identifying patients likely to respond to therapy.

