Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RASSF10 suppresses colorectal cancer growth by activating p53
signaling and sensitizes colorectal cancer cell to docetaxel


RASSF10 has previously been reported to be frequently methylated in a
number of malignancies. To understand the importance of RASSF10
inactivation in colorectal carcinogenesis, eight colorectal cancer cell
lines, 89 cases of primary colorectal cancer and 5 cases of normal
colorectal mucosa were examined. Methylation specific PCR, western blot,
siRNA, gene expression array and xenograft mice were employed. The
expression of RASSF10 was was regulated by promoter regional methylation
in colorectal cancer cells. RASSF10 was methylated in 60.7% (54/89) of
primary colorectal cancers and was positively associated with tumor stage
(pRASSF10 has previously been reported to be frequently methylated in a
number of malignancies. To understand the importance of RASSF10
inactivation in colorectal carcinogenesis, eight colorectal cancer cell
lines, 89 cases of primary colorectal cancer and 5 cases of normal
colorectal mucosa were examined. Methylation specific PCR, western blot,
siRNA, gene expression array and xenograft mice were employed. The
expression of RASSF10 was was regulated by promoter regional methylation
in colorectal cancer cells. RASSF10 was methylated in 60.7% (54/89) of
primary colorectal cancers and was positively associated with tumor stage
(p<0.05) and metastasis (pRASSF10 has previously been reported to be
frequently methylated in a number of malignancies. To understand the
importance of RASSF10 inactivation in colorectal carcinogenesis, eight
colorectal cancer cell lines, 89 cases of primary colorectal cancer and 5
cases of normal colorectal mucosa were examined. Methylation specific
PCR, western blot, siRNA, gene expression array and xenograft mice were
employed. The expression of RASSF10 was was regulated by promoter
regional methylation in colorectal cancer cells. RASSF10 was methylated
in 60.7% (54/89) of primary colorectal cancers and was positively
associated with tumor stage (p<0.05) and metastasis (p<0.05). Restoration
of RASSF10 led to inhibition of colorectal cancer cell proliferation in
vitro and in vivo and increased apoptosis. Gene expression arrays
discovered RASSF10 inhibition of MDM2 expression as a mediator of these
effects, which was confirmed with RT- PCR and western blot. RASSF10 was
shown to activate P53 signaling in RKO and HCT116 cells after UV
exposure, and sensitized these cells to docetaxel. In conclusion, our
study demonstrates RASSF10 is frequently methylated in human colorectal
cancer leading to loss of expression. RASSF10 normally suppresses human
colorectal cancer growth by activating P53 signaling in colorectal
cancer, and restored expression sensitizes colorectal cancer to docetaxel.

