Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Duration of signaling through IgM and IgD receptors differentially
influences cell survival and BCL6-regulated CCL3/4 chemokine production
in Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL)


B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling is a central pathogenetic mechanism in
CLL. Most CLL cells express both IgM and IgD receptors, and increased
responsiveness to IgM stimulation correlates with poor disease outcome
and with expression of IGHV-unmutated immunoglobulin receptors (U-CLL).
In contrast, the relevance of IgD signaling remains poorly understood.The
aim of the present study is to characterize functional differences
between IgM and IgD signaling in CLL in terms of protection from in vitro
apoptosis, BCR signaling activation and CCL3/4 chemokine secretion and to
explore the mechanism through which CCL3/4 are regulated, with a focus on
their transcriptional repressor BCL6.CLL cells were stimulated with
anti-IgM and anti-IgD; 48-hour cell viability and BCR expression were
analyzed by flow cytometry; phosphorylation of the BCR-signaling related
molecules HS1 and ERK after 2, 5, 15, 30, 60 minutes of stimulation were
analyzed by Western Blot and flow cytometry; BCL6 protein expression by
Western Blot and CCL3/4 secretion by ELISA were tested after 3, 6, 9, 12,
24 hours of stimulation.Anti-IgM stimulation protected CLL cells from in
vitro apoptosis to a greater extent than anti-IgD and U-CLL were more
responsive to anti-IgM as compared to cells carrying IGHV-mutated
receptors (M-CLL) (p = 0.0022; n = 13 M-CLL vs. n = 11 U-CLL). In line
with this finding, U-CLL expressed higher levels of surface IgM, as
compared to M-CLL (pB-cell receptor (BCR) signaling is a central
pathogenetic mechanism in CLL. Most CLL cells express both IgM and IgD
receptors, and increased responsiveness to IgM stimulation correlates
with poor disease outcome and with expression of IGHV-unmutated
immunoglobulin receptors (U-CLL). In contrast, the relevance of IgD
signaling remains poorly understood.The aim of the present study is to
characterize functional differences between IgM and IgD signaling in CLL
in terms of protection from in vitro apoptosis, BCR signaling activation
and CCL3/4 chemokine secretion and to explore the mechanism through which
CCL3/4 are regulated, with a focus on their transcriptional repressor
BCL6.CLL cells were stimulated with anti-IgM and anti-IgD; 48-hour cell
viability and BCR expression were analyzed by flow cytometry;
phosphorylation of the BCR-signaling related molecules HS1 and ERK after
2, 5, 15, 30, 60 minutes of stimulation were analyzed by Western Blot and
flow cytometry; BCL6 protein expression by Western Blot and CCL3/4
secretion by ELISA were tested after 3, 6, 9, 12, 24 hours of
stimulation.Anti-IgM stimulation protected CLL cells from in vitro
apoptosis to a greater extent than anti-IgD and U-CLL were more
responsive to anti-IgM as compared to cells carrying IGHV-mutated
receptors (M-CLL) (p = 0.0022; n = 13 M-CLL vs. n = 11 U-CLL). In line
with this finding, U-CLL expressed higher levels of surface IgM, as
compared to M-CLL (p<0.0001; n = 40 M-CLL vs. n = 33 U-CLL). IgM
stimulation induced protracted HS1 and ERK phosphorylation up to 30
minutes following receptor engagement, as analyzed in 10 M-CLL and 10
U-CLL cases. In contrast, IgD stimulation induced short-lived
phosphorylation of both proteins, which rapidly returned to baseline.
U-CLL cells were more responsive than M-CLL to both anti-IgM and anti-IgD
stimulation. High CCL3/4 secretion was detected after anti-IgM, in
particular in U-CLL. Surprisingly low, if any, induction of both
chemokines was detected after stimulation of IgD receptors.
Interestingly, increased CCL3/4 production and concomitant BCL6 protein
downregulation were observed after 6 and up to 12 hours following
anti-IgM but not anti-IgD stimulation.In conclusion, IgM stimulation
induces a long-lived signaling response, increased CLL-cell survival and
CCL3/4 secretion, in particular in U-CLL; in contrast, IgD signaling is
short-lived and has minimal effects on protection from apoptosis and
chemokine secretion. BCL6 protein downregulation induced by anti-IgM
parallels CCL3/4 production, suggesting a functional link between BCL6
expression and CCL3/4. Taken together, these evidences suggest that the
differential functional outcomes of IgM and IgD signaling might be
related to the duration of the signaling response and support the
relevance of IgM signaling in CLL pathogenesis.

