Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thiol-modification induced reactivation of mutant p53 protein in
human cancers using a nontoxic stabilized homoglutathione disulfide


Loss of functional p53 gene is a frequent and most critical event in the
genesis and progression of half of all human cancers. Conversion of the
non-DNA binding and misfolded-p53 mutant proteins to their wild-type
conformation using small molecules to induce apoptosis is currently an
intense area of research. Although a few compounds with this property
have been described, their abilities to alter the p53 structure in animal
models have not been documented and they appear toxic as well. Human
cancers harbor elevated levels of oxidative stress and are vulnerable to
even slight redox oscillations. To exploit this susceptibility, we have
designed a glutathione mimic, namely, homoglutathione disulfide that has
been stabilized with the addition of small amounts of cisplatin
(1000:10). This compound perturbs the cellular redox, alters kinase
activities and induces protein-glutathionylation. Since the human p53
contains several redox-sensitive cysteines in the DNA-binding domain, we
explored the possible reactivation of mutant p53 (R273H) present in HT29
and SW620 colon cancer cells by the stabilized hGSSG.Pt (hGTX).
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated a concentration and
time-dependent restoration of DNA-binding for the mutant p53 in HT29
cells by hGTX. DNA affinity immunoblotting, immunoprecipitation and
direct western blotting using specific antibodies against the mutant
(Mab240) or wild type p53 (Mab1620) or pan p53 (MabDo1) confirmed a
progressive generation of wild type p53 and a gradual decline of mutant
p53 levels in HT29 cells. The half-life of the altered p53 remained
similar to the endogenous mutant form. Treatment of HT29 nuclear extracts
with hGTX also induced the binding of mutant p53 with DNA, indicating
that thiolation of specific cysteines mediates the reactivation. RT-PCR
and western analyses showed significant upregulation of many p53 target
genes (2-5 fold). Furthermore, when nude mice bearing the HT29 xenografts
were administered HGTX (100 mg/kg daily for 7 days), marked p53
reactivation with concomitant reduction of mutant p53 was observed in
tumor tissues. Treatment of hGTX also modulated redox sensitive DNA
repair systems like MGMT and Topoisomerase-I. A highly significant
amplification of cytotoxicity was induced by anticancer drugs in
association with hGTX. We conclude that the alteration of redox milieu
following hGTX modifies the reactive thiols in the p53 protein to restore
the native conformation. These findings acquired with a nontoxic
endogenous metabolite suggest therapeutic applications in combination
with chemotherapy agents. Molecular modeling and mass spectrometry
studies are underway to determine the structural changes and residues
altered by hGTX treatment (Supported by grants from CPRIT (RP130266), NIH
(R03CA125872) to KSS.

