Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The transcription factor POU3F2 is expressed in human gliomas and
promotes tumorigenesis in vivo


The neurodevelopmental transcription factor POU3F2 (also called OCT7 /
BRN2) is expressed during neurogenesis. Moreover, POU3F2 expression has
been reported as a promoter of proliferation and invasion in malignant
melanoma of the skin. Since both melanomas and CNS-malignancies arise in
organs of neuro-ectodermal origin, we investigated whether human gliomas
expressed POU3F2 and the role of POU3F2 in glioma tumorigenesis. We
performed immunohistochemistry of 149 grade II-IV gliomas from our tumor
bank, and subsequently performed western blots and qPCR of 12 samples
from each grade. In addition, we performed flow cytometric analysis of
POU3F2 expression in 5 acutely dissociated tumors. Using lentiviral
transfection we established glioma cell lines with POU3F2 overexpression
or knock down in order the to investigate the effect of POU3F2 on
proliferation, migration and differentiation, both in vitro and in vivo.
The mechanism, by which POU3F2 regulates glioma progression, was also
investigated. Immunohistochemistry showed that POU3F2 was almost
uniformly expressed in human gliomas. Both western blot, qPCR and flow
cytometry confirmed expression of POU3F2 in human gliomas. In acutely
dissociated tumors, the POU3F2 positive cells displayed an increased cell
percentage in the S and G2/M phase of the cell cycle. Moreover, POU3F2
overexpression in the glioma cell lines increased growth rates and colony
formation. Overexpression of POU3F2 increased the levels of
phosphorylated p-44/42 indicating activation of the ERK1/2 signaling
pathway. Increased levels of downstream transcriptional targets c-Myc,
Elk1 and Stat3 transcription factors in the POU3F2 overexpressing cell
lines confirmed activation of the MAPK signaling pathway. Furthermore,
the POU3F2 overexpressing cell lines displayed increased expression of
the growth factor FGF2. U0126, an inhibitor of MEK1/2, decreased the cell
proliferation and decrease levels of phospho-p44/42, phospho-stat3 and
FGF2. Moreover, overexpression of the POU3F2 increases the level of other
neurodevelopmental transcription factors associated with a pluripotent
state. Ongoing studies aim at further elucidating the multiple roles of
POU3F2 in brain tumor progression.

