Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel mouse model for mature B cell lymphoma reveals the
requirement of Fas downregulation in lymphomagenesis


Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma includes mostly mature B cell lymphomas such as
Burkitt lymphoma (BL), diffuse large cell lymphoma (DLBCL), and
follicular lymphoma which are all derived from germinal center B (GCB)
cells. Clarifying the molecular mechanisms during lymphomagenesis
requires appropriate mouse models with short latency that can be easy to
monitor the whole process from the cell of origin to full-blown lymphoma.
Here, we developed a novel mouse model for mature B cell lymphoma
originated from GCB cells by using ex vivo culture system with retroviral
transduction. Naive B cells harvested from Ink4a/Arf-/- mice were
cultured and stimulated with IL-4 and anti-CD40 antibody to differentiate
into GCB cells. GCB cells were retrovirally transduced with c-Myc, highly
expressed in most human lymphomas, and then transplanted into irradiated
mice. Around 60% of mice transplanted via intraperitoneal injection
exhibited splenomegaly and enlarged lymph nodes in the axilla, inguinal
and intestinal regions, and finally died. Lymphoma cells and tissues from
those mice showed mature B cell immunophenope (B220+IgM+IgD+) and
histopathology similar to human Burkitt lymphoma. Interestingly, lymphoma
cells from all analyzed mice did not show Fas expression at protein and
mRNA levels in contrast to the original GCB cells that highly express
Fas. Furthermore, spontaneously developed lymphoma cells in all -Myc mice
(a transgenic mouse carrying c-Myc under the control of the Ig light
chain enhancer) also showed no Fas expression. Fas is a cell death
receptor which has an important role in negative selection of GCB cells
with high affinity antibody. To clarify the role of Fas downregulation in
lymphomagenesis, Ink4a/Arf-/- GCB cells were transduced with c-Myc and
shRNA for Fas and then transplanted. All mice transplanted with
shFas-treated GCB cells developed lymphoma and died faster than mice
transplanted with shControl-treated GCB cells. These results suggest that
Fas downregulation is required for lymphomagenesis.In primary culture of
the lymphoma cells, Fas expression was restored after CD40 ligand
treatments, suggesting that reduced CD40 signaling may be involved in Fas
downregulation. We further found that 8 out of 10 human lymphoma cell
lines including 2 BL and 6 DLBCL exhibited low Fas expression whereas 2
cell lines exhibited high Fas expression. Among those Fas-downregulated
cells, Fas expression in some cell lines was restored not only after Fas
ligand treatment, but also after a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor
5-Aza-dC treatment or an HDAC inhibitor TSA treatment, indicating that
Fas expression is also regulated by epigenetic mechanisms in human
lymphoma cells. Collectively, these findings suggest that Fas
downregulation is a crucial event for mature B cell lymphomagenesis to
escape from immune surveillance and that restoration of Fas expression
could be a new strategy for lymphoma treatment.

