Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ex vivo cultures of freshly explanted tumors: a potent
translational approach for screening novel targeted agents


Background: In vitro and in vivo models are important screening tools for
novel anticancer agents but they do not reliably reflect the complexity
of human tumors and are, by essence, incapable of evaluating the
intricate interplay of cancer cells in their native stroma. We used a
novel approach using freshly explanted human tumor slices to test the
pharmacodynamic effects of targeted agents or combination
therapies.Materials and Methods: Tumor samples were obtained from fresh
surgical specimens cut in 300 m thick slices using a Leica microtome and
maintained in culture for 24-72 hours in a defined environment that
allows for diffusion of oxygen and nutrient in specific culture media.
Tumor samples were analyzed by immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence for various pharmacodynamics (PD) biomarkers.Results:
The first step was to establish the suitable conditions for ex vivo
culture, by comparing several O2 levels and medium composition. Tissue
quality and viability controls were more reliably assessed by HE staining
than by MTT and LDH assays. In our study, 60% of the samples had >80%
viable cancer lesions. Thirteen ex vivo hepatocellular tumor explants
were treated with the TGF- inhibitor galunisertib or sorafenib as
control. Galunisertib specific target engagement was evaluated by
p-SMAD2/3 expression. We showed a significant decrease in p-SMAD2/3
expression after galunisertib exposure that was mostly unchanged after
sorafenib treatment. Expression of the non specific early PD biomarkers
pAKT and pERK were decreased in 60% and 90% of the samples treated with
galunisertib and sorafenib respectively. Expression of the late PD
biomarkers MIB1/Ki67 was decreased in 54% and 77% of the samples whereas
expression of caspase-3 was increased in 54% and 62% of the samples
treated with galunisertib and sorafenib, respectively. Combination of
galunisertib and sorafenib exacerbated the results observed using
p-SMAD2/3 expression and early PD biomarkers but not those observed using
late PD biomarkers. In twelve head and neck tumors, target engagement for
SMAC mimetic treatment was evaluated by c-IAP1 expression using cisplatin
and carboplatin as controls. We showed a significant decrease in c-IAP1
expression in all samples after exposure to SMAC mimetic. For both mono
and combination therapies, we evaluated expression of MIB1 and caspase-3
as well as necrosis as late PD biomarkers. We observed a stronger effect
of the SMAC mimetic/cisplatin combination in inducing necrosis (92% vs
70%) whereas the SMAC mimetic/carboplatin combination was more efficient
in inducing caspase-3 expression (90% vs 83%). Both combinations
displayed similar effect on reducing MIB1 expression.Conclusion: Ex vivo
culture of fresh tumor explants is a valuable tool to assess the
pharmacodynamic effects of anticancer agents in tumors and may contribute
to evaluate drug effects in the perspective of predictive medicine.

