Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A urine based assay to select patients for initial cystoscopy


ObjectiveOnly 2.6 - 28% of the patients that present with haematuria will
be diagnosed with bladder cancer. Unnecessary cystoscopies and upper
tract imaging lead to high diagnostic costs and patient burden. In order
to better select patients for diagnostic cystoscopy and thereby reduce
cost and over-testing, we aimed to develop a diagnostic urine assay by
combining mutation status of FGFR3, TERT and PIK3CA with methylation
markers OTX1 and ONECUT2.Material and MethodsA total of 258 patients
undergoing cystoscopy for haematuria were included, 175 were diagnosed
with bladder cancer and 83 had a non-malignant source of the haematuria.
Voided urine samples were collected prior to cystoscopy. DNA was
extracted and analyzed for mutations in FGFR3, TERT and PIK3CA.
Methylation assays were done using a single-nucleotide probe extension
assay with multiple probes for OTX1 (4 probes) and ONECUT2 (5 probes).
Methylation percentages were calculated and cut-off values (sensitivity
85%) were determined for dichotomization. All results were combined and
the optimal model was selected through logistic regression analysis. The
Bootstrap procedure was used for internal validation.ResultsCombining the
results of the dichotomized methylation markers OTX1 (probe 2), ONECUT2
(probe 1+4) with the mutation markers FGFR3, TERT, PIK3CA and the
clinical parameters Age and Gender led to a prediction model with an AUC
of 0.95 (95% CI 0.92-0.98) and an optimism-corrected AUC of 0.94.To
further improve the model, analyses were repeated for continuous
methylation marker variables. Now, adding ONECUT2 probe 2 enhanced the
predictive capacity of the model even further (AUC 0.97, 95% CI 0.94 -
0.99 and an optimism-corrected AUC of 0.96). Overall material cost was
estimated to be 20 euro per patient.A mutation-analysis first strategy
would lead to a potentially larger reduction in cost. This strategy
identified 120 patients with bladder cancer based on mutation assays
alone. For the remaining 125 mutation-naive patients the prediction model
containing the previously selected continuous methylation markers
combined with Age and Gender was used. The overall combined strategy
sensitivity was 92,1% and specificity was 89% (AUC of
0.96).ConclusionAnalyzing haematuria patients for their risk of bladder
cancer may lead to a reduction of unnecessary diagnostic cystoscopies and
upper urinary tract imaging. This will present a major cost reduction in
the urological practice. Combining continuous marker variables for OTX1
and three probes for ONECUT2 with mutation markers FGFR3, TERT, PIK3CA
and Gender and Age results in an accurate prediction model with an AUC of
0.97 and an optimism-corrected AUC of 0.96. A mutation-analysis first
strategy seems most practical and feasible (Sens 92%, Spec 89%). The
assay must be further improved to reach a more satisfactory overall
sensitivity (>95%), for instance by adding RAS mutation analysis.

