Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Platelets possess prostate cancer specific miRNAs: Implications
for a novel source of biomarkers


Introduction and Objective:Our previous studies demonstrated that some
circulation-bound tumor-derived factors are taken up and concentrated by
circulating platelets, and are released upon platelet activation.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, non-coding nucleic acid molecules involved
in regulation of gene expression that have potential as biomarkers in
prostate cancer. Prior descriptions of miRNA presence in platelets of
healthy individuals indicates that uptake of tumor-derived miRNAs may be
reflected by changes in platelet miRNA signature. To date, in the
prostate cancer setting, the role of platelets as a source of miRNA-based
biomarkers has not been investigated. The aim of this study was to
ascertain the presence of prostate cancer-associated miRNAs in platelets
from patients with aggressive disease and explore the potential use of
platelets as a source of miRNA-based biomarkers.Methods Patients with
aggressive prostate cancer (n = 12) were identified at a large, tertiary
care medical center, informed of the study and consented to provide whole
blood samples. Platelets were isolated from venous blood using citrate
containing tubes and purified by serial centrifugations and washings.
Platelet purification was confirmed at >99.9% by flow cytometry and
platelet specific antibodies. Total RNA was extracted from platelets of
men with aggressive prostate cancer (n = 2), low risk disease (n = 1) and
age matched (50+) controls (n = 2). By performing a Real
Time-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) profiling using the Human Panel I
(Exiqon) (which encompasses 373 microRNAs representing the
best-established and well-annotated human miRNAs) we identified several
miRNAs as potential candidates of the aggressive disease. TaqMan miRNA
Reverse Transcription kit and miRNA-specific stem loop primers were then
used to validate the presence of miRNA candidates identified by the array
in platelets from patients with aggressive disease (n = 10). All RT-qPCR
reactions were performed in triplicates using TaqMan 2x Universal PCR
Master Mix.Results Eleven of 12 patients in our initial study had
castrate-resistant prostate cancer (the remaining one was characterized
as having low risk prostate cancer). Patient ages ranged from 57 to 82.
Upregulated expression of the following prostate cancer-specific miRNA
molecules in platelets were identified: mir-141 (n = 7/12 patients),
mir-134 (6/12), mir-181c (7/12), mir-193 (3/12),and mir-132
(7/12).ConclusionsOur findings indicate that platelets may potentially
represent a novel source of biomarkers in prostate cancer.

