Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of histology on serum thyroglobulin as a biomarker for
nonmedullary thyroid cancer recurrence


PurposeThyroid cancer is one of the most common cancer diagnoses amongst
cancer survivors given the overall good prognosis. Thyroglobulin (Tg) is
a thyroid but not tumor specific marker. Serum Tg levels less or equal to
0.1 ng/ml in patients without Tg autoantibodies (TgAbs) indicate cure
following total thyroid ablation. The major limitations of Tg are false
low interferences by TgAbs and a lack of established reference ranges for
cured patients with thyroid remnants. Additionally, it is unknown if
thyroid histology impacts on its utility as a biomarker for disease
recurrence. This retrospective study investigates the relationship
between the various histological subtypes of non-medullary thyroid
cancers and TG levels to determine whether TG levels are an effective
predictor of disease recurrence for all subtypes of differentiated
thyroid cancers (DTC).Methods:We retrospectively examined all patients
with DTC seen at the National Cancer Centre Singapore between January 1,
2004 and March 31, 2014. 745 DTC cases were identified and patient
records were examined. Diagnosis of DTC and subtype determination was
based on histological analysis of thyroid tissues during
fine-needle-aspiration-biopsy(FNAB) or from tissue samples during
surgery. DTC recurrence was confirmed by histology or by CT/PET scan.
Each patient had blood drawn before Iodine-131 treatments and regular
follow up surveillance CT/PET scans as well as following biochemical
tests: TSH, free thyroxine, thyroglobulin and TGAb. To avoid interference
from the presence of thyroglobulin antibody (TGAb), only patients with
TGAb levels below 40IU/ML at baseline were included for the analysis. The
association of the histological subtypes with failure of TG levels to
rise secondary to recurrence was determined by a Fisher's
test.Results:463 patients met the inclusion criteria above and were
available for analysis of TG as a biomarker for DTC recurrence. The
histologies included: 61 (13%) follicular thyroid cancer (FTC), 369 (80%)
papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) and 33 others (7%). 52 patients with
recurrent DTC was identified with either histological or radiological
evidence of disease. An elevated serum TG was found in 94% (49/52) of
patients with a recurrence of DTC, of which 81% (42/52) were PTC, 12%
(6/52) were FTC. FTC was overrepresented in the 3 patients whereby TG was
not predictive of recurrence accounting for 2 of the 3 cases (66% vs 33%
PTC; P = 0.06).Conclusions:Rise in serum TG is predictive for DTC
recurrence in the absence of TgAB interference. Our data suggests that
FTCs may be overrepresented in the group where serum TG was not
predictive of recuurence. A bigger sample size will be needed to
determine if the utility of serum TG is affected by histological subtype.

