Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: What are the greatest challenges of rectal cancer survivors?
Results of a population-based survey


Purpose: Rectal cancer (RC) survivors with and without permanent ostomy
have similar health-related quality of life outcomes, though these may be
driven by different factors. Identifying patient-centered concerns among
survivors with different surgical reconstructions can guide treatment
decision-making and optimize survivorship care.Methods: We mailed a
survey to long-term (5 years post-diagnosis) RC survivors enrolled in
Kaiser Permanente (Northern California and Oregon/Southwest Washington).
Participants with anastomosis, temporary ostomy, and permanent ostomy
were asked an open-ended question about the greatest challenge they
experienced related to their cancer surgery. Using a grounded theory
approach, we identified all topics in the responses of 440 participants
who wrote an answer (76% of 577 respondents). These topics were collapsed
into codes and organized into domains. Responses were assigned as many
codes as were applicable and double-coded by pairs of researchers who met
to resolve any discrepancies. We used Bonferroni-adjusted chi-squares to
test differences in the proportion of respondents within each surgical
group who mentioned challenges in each domain.Results: Greatest challenge
responses were provided by 241 participants with anastomosis, 54 with
temporary ostomy, and 145 with permanent ostomy. Respondents were more
educated but otherwise they resembled non-respondents demographically and
clinically. Respondents described seven challenge domains: 1) bowel
dysfunction; 2) bowel self-care; 3) post-operative recovery; 4)
complications and late-effects; 5) negative psychosocial impacts; 6)
comorbidities and aging (unrelated to RC); and 7) negative health care
experiences. The most commonly reported problems in each group were bowel
dysfunction, negative psychosocial impacts, complications and late
effects, and bowel self-care. Anastomosis and temporary ostomy groups
provided similar response profiles, but there were some significant
differences in the proportion of respondents in each group who mentioned
challenges for each domain. Respondents with permanent ostomy were less
likely to mention challenges with bowel management than either
respondents with temporary ostomy (p = .0024) or anastomosis (p = .0003).
Respondents with temporary ostomy reported more complications and late
effects than those with permanent ostomy (p = .0009). Respondents with
anastomosis were less likely to report negative psychosocial impacts than
those with permanent ostomy (p = .0003).Conclusions: We identified
enduring concerns for long-term RC survivors that should be prioritized
in survivorship care. Patients choosing among surgical options should
know that long-term bowel dysfunction, complications, and late effects
are more common concerns for patients without permanent ostomy. In
contrast, patients with permanent ostomy report the most negative
psychosocial impacts.

