Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical combination activity of SGN-CD19A and CVAD in
patient-derived B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia models


Combining targeted therapies with standard of care chemotherapy is a
proven method for improving outcomes for cancer patients. SGN-CD19A is an
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) targeting the B-lineage specific marker
CD19, and it is currently in phase 1 clinical trials for treatment of
B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(NHL). HyperCVAD (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and
dexamethasone) is a common frontline chemotherapy regimen used to treat
adult ALL. To explore the potential for combining SGN-CD19A with these
agents (CVAD) ALL patient-derived xenografts (PDX) were developed, as
these models are known to more closely reflect clinical disease. PDX were
established by intravenous implant of 1-5106 unsorted ALL patient bone
marrow isolate cells into irradiated NOD scid IL2Rgammanull (NSG) mice.
Initially, patient isolates were comprised of a wide-ranging (20-77%)
population of CD19+/CD10+/CD45low blast cells and a varied population
(5-70%) of CD19+/CD10+/CD45high cells. After implant, cells homed to and
expanded in the bone marrow, thereafter progressing into the spleen and
peripheral blood. After passage in mice, phenotyping revealed an
enrichment of the CD19+/CD10+/CD45low blast cells and a loss of the
CD19+/CD10+/CD45high population. These passaged cells were utilized for
subsequent activity experiments. To evaluate PDX sensitivity to
SGN-CD19A, a single dose at 1, 3 or 10 mg/kg was administered when bone
marrow in sentinel animals contained between 5-24% blast cells. Activity
was measured by the extent of ALL blast cell reduction in the bone marrow
compared to untreated mice. SGN-CD19A elicited a dose-dependent depletion
(71-99%) of blast cells in bone marrow by day 14 post dose. Like
SGN-CD19A, CVAD also produced a dose-dependent depletion of the ALL
blasts. Next, PDX models were used to examine SGN-CD19A in combination
with CVAD. SGN-CD19A + CVAD produced a statistically superior depletion
of blast cells when compared to SGN-CD19A or CVAD alone. To better
understand these combined therapies, NALM-6 and RS4;11 cell line
disseminated xenografts were also evaluated. SGN-CD19A + CVAD
significantly prolonged survival compared to either single treatment
alone in these cell line derived xenografts as well. Remarkably,
SGN-CD19A in combination with vincristine (NALM-6, RS4;11) or
dexamethasone (RS4;11) resulted in a survival advantage that was similar
to that of SGN-CD19A + CVAD. When SGN-CD19A was tested in combination
with CVAD and CVAD components in the PDX models, it was observed that
SGN-CD19A potentiated the single-agent activity of vincristine,
cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin. Together, these data suggest that
SGN-CD19A can combine with a frontline ALL chemotherapy regimen and
potentially improve outcomes for patients with ALL.

