Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Connexin 43 and E-cadherin modulate prostate cancer cell migration


Connexins play a major role in cell-cell communication and form a
bidirectional signaling pathway to assemble gap junctions and, along with
cadherins, alter cell behaviors, such as motility. To assess the effect
of Connexin 43 (Cx43) on migration of prostate cancer cells we performed
two types of migration assays using shRNA Cx43 transfected PC3 cells with
suppressed Cx 43. Wound healing and transwell chamber assays were used to
assess the migratory potential of stably transfected shCx43-PC3 cells.
When we reduced Cx 43 we saw approximately a two-fold reduction in
migration of shCx43 transfected PC3 cells compared to those transfected
with scramble controls. Since suppression of Cx43 reduced migration of
the highly migratory PC3 cells, we wondered whether this reflected a
partial loss of mesenchymal traits (e.g., motility) and acquisition of
epithelial markers, (e.g.,E-cadherin expression). Using quantitative
RT-PCR, E-cadherin expression was assessed in shCx43-PC3 and scramble
control cells. Suppression of Cx43 increased E-cadherin mRNA levels
5-fold or greater in shCx43-PC3 cells than in scramble control cells. An
alternative approach used to transcriptionally up-regulate E-cadherin
mRNA in PC3 cells (via suppression of a transcriptional repressor)
resulted in a similar approximately 2.5-fold suppression of migration as
measured by wound healing and transwell chamber assays. Thus, an inverse
relation of Cx 43 and E-cadherin was observed in prostate cancer cells
and alterations in either led to aberrant migration. These results were
consistent with our hypothesis that differential connexin expression in
prostate cancer cells contributes to different metastatic potential. To
correlate differential connexin subunit expression with migratory
potential, we quantified gene expression of 13 different Connexin
subunits in non-invasive LNCaP and in invasive PC3 cells using qRTPCR. In
LNCaP cells we observed low levels of Cx43 along with high levels of Cx32
and E-cadherin expression and the converse in PC3 cells. Overall, these
results suggest that reducing high levels of Cx43, associated with
enhanced E-cadherin expression and reduced migratory behavior could
potentially block lethal metastatic tumor progression of prostate cancer
cells.

