Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic effect of Withaferin-A on in
vivo models of prostate cancer


Several groups have emphasized on the functional role of phytochemicals
in chemoprevention and chemotherapy of prostate cancer (CaP). In this
study we have focused on Withaferin A (WA) a bioactive compound derived
from Withania somnifera, which has been extensively used in Asian and
African traditional medicine system. In our in vitro studies, WA inhibits
the growth of CRPC cells by targeting AKT mediated pro-survival signaling
and simultaneously activating FOXO3a dependent apoptosis in CaP cell
lines. The objective of the present study was to evaluate the in vivo
efficacy of WA on both xenograft and transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse
prostrate (TRAMP) models. DU-145 and C4-2B CaP cells stably
overexpressing AKT were xenografted in nude mice and WA (5mg/kg body
weight) was orally administered along with control groups fed with oil
alone for 4-5 weeks. AKT-overexpressing tumors showed 2-3-fold faster
growth than pCMV-expressing tumors and oral administration of WA
significantly reduced AKT-induced tumor growth. Immunohistochemistry of
tumor sections revealed high expression of AKT, pAKT and down regulation
of nuclear FOXO3a in tumor sections derived from AKT-overexpressing
tumors. On the contrary, WA treated controls as well as AKT over
expressed tumor sections clearly revealed that WA reverted FOXO3a
mediated apoptotic signaling by down regulating AKT activation. In
addition, activation of AKT has emerged as a central feature of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Our results also revealed
elevated expression of important EMT related transcription factors and
genes such as snail, slug, -catenin, vimentin, and MMPs and decrease in
the expression of E-cadherin expression in AKT overexpressing tumors.
Simultaneously, WA treatment of pCMV and AKT-overexpressing tumors showed
decrease in the expression of these EMT markers and increase in the
expression of E-cadherin.Similarly, TRAMP mice were randomized into
controls and WA (oral gavage-3mg/kg body weight) for 31 weeks. Control
and WA-treated mice were sacrificed periodically at 11, 20, 27 and 31
weeks. Histopathological examination revealed both the groups (control
and WA-treated) showed prostatic hyperplasia with no signs of metastasis
up to 20 weeks. However, 58.3% mice in the control group showed
metastasis to lungs, liver or kidneys, whereas in the treatment group
16.6% mice showed metastasis in 31 weeks. Molecular analysis showed
higher expression of phosphorylated AKT, FOXO3a, along with EMT markers
like -catenin, snail, vimentin and down regulation of E-cadherin
expression in control-TRAMP tumors. On the other hand, WA-treated tumor
tissues revealed low expression of pAKT and pFOXO3a in WA treated mice.
Also, low expression of -catenin; snail, vimentin and upregulation of
E-cadherin in WA treated mice was observed. These results potentiate the
chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic effects of WA in CaP and steers the
clinical translation of this biomolecule.

