Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOCS3 regulates IDO proteasomal degradation and inflammatory
signaling in triple negative breast cancer


An intrinsic claudin-low subtype within the TNBC was recently identified
based on low/absent expression of luminal differentiation markers,
enrichment of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and stem cell
markers. Interleukin-6 (IL6), a potent pleiotropic cytokine, is induced
in response to acute and chronic inflammation. IL6 is a key regulator of
inflammatory responses and orchestrates these physiological functions by
controlling the Suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) mediated
Stat3/NF-B pathway. SOCS3 is a critical negative regulator of
IL6-mediated pathways. We have showed that constitutive activation of
inflammatory loop in transformed cells but not in their untransformed
counterparts depends on proteolytic degradation of SOCS3. Several studies
indicate that activation of the tryptophan-degrading enzyme
indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) represents a key pathway suppressing
anti-tumor immunity. Moreover a recent study in dendritic cells found
that SOCS3 binds IDO via phosphotyrosine-containing peptides and target
the IDO/SOCS3 complex for ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal
degradation. IDO is shown to be constitutively expressed by many tumors.
We analyzed a panel of breast cancer cell lines and found an inverse
correlation between SOCS3 and IDO1 protein levels. Interestingly IDO
protein and transcript levels were significantly increased in TNBC
compared to luminal cell lines, thus confirming that IL6-JAK-STAT
inflammatory loop is responsible for IDO regulation. Enforced expression
of stable form of SOCS3, lacking the PEST and SOCS box domain in TNBC
cell lines resulted in decreased expression of IDO. Therapeutic targeting
of the IDO-IL6-SOCS3 inflammatory loop would revert the immune
suppression mediated by IDO in this breast cancer subtype. These studies
would provide a strong rationale for development of inflammatory pathway
targeted agents for the treatment of TNBC, an aggressive disease that
currently lacks molecularly targeted therapeutics.

