Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Replication stress and DNA damage promote genomic instability in
near-tetraploid colorectal cancer cells


Aneuploidy represents a hallmark of most solid tumours, and potentially
has a causal role in carcinogenesis. Also, cancer cells exhibit high
rates of chromosome missegregation, which leads to chromosomal
instability (CIN). However, a large amount of tumours present
near-triploid karyotypes likely to go through a tetraploid transient
stage. Here, by using DLD-1 isogenic diploid and tetraploid cell lines
generated by single cell FACS-sorting, we aimed at exploring how
polyploidization affects cellular functions and whether tetraploid per se
generates CIN in a genomically stable background. First, gene expression
and subsequent gene set enrichment analysis revealed that genes involved
in the machinery of the DNA synthesis and replication, such as MCM2 and
RRM2, and genes involved in cell cycle, were significantly upregulated in
near-tetraploid cells compared to their diploid counterparts.
Functionally, polyploidy cells exhibited replication stress, as indicated
by higher levels of pCHK1, RPA and 53BP1 foci, which resulted in
increased DNA damage in S- and M-phase. In addition, tetraploid cells
displayed impaired proliferative capabilities as a consequence of a cell
cycle delay confirmed by BrdU pulse and flow cytometry. Furthermore,
near-tetraploid clones showed a higher amount of intracellular karyotypic
heterogeneity due to the higher frequency of micronuclei formation
compared to their diploid counterparts. In fact, polyploid cells
displayed an increased tendency of abnormal anaphase events, including
lagging chromosomes and acentric fragments. Interestingly, these
heterogeneous cellular populations showed strengthen migratory
capabilities and preliminary experiments suggested an increment in tumor
invasiveness too. Taken together, our data suggest that near-tetraploid
cells systematically undergo replication stress, which can be responsible
for the increased levels of genomic instability.

