Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glioblastoma stem cell-secreted exosomes can induce a tumor
supportive M2 response


INTRODUCTION: Tumor-released exosomes have pleiotropic functions in
promoting autocrine signaling to distant cells. Elucidating the
mechanistic modulation of the immune system by these exosomes provides
insights into potential biomarkers for detection, recurrence and response
and identifies potential new therapeutic targets.METHODS: Exosomes were
isolated from human glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs) and fibroblasts
(control) using differential centrifugation and characterized by
nanosight technology, electron microscopy, and western blotting.
Fluorescent-labeled exosomes were co-cultured with human immune cells.
Confocal microscopy was used to determine the preferential uptake in
various immune populations and to evaluate the intracellular trafficking.
The cell-secreted exosome content was characterized by mass spectrometry
and nanostring technology. The phenotypic and functional skewing of the
monocyte lineage was analyzed given its propensity to take up
exosomes.RESULTS: GSC-secreted exosomes were homogenous in morphology,
ranged from 50-120 nm in size, and expressed CD63 and CD9 surface
molecules. The GSCs-produced exosomes were preferentially absorbed by
CD14+ monocytes (precursors to macrophages) and Gr-1+ derived myeloid
cells isolated from healthy volunteers and/or glioblastoma patients. When
activated, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, but not NK cells could also uptake
exosomes. Longitudinal kinetic studies established that the highest
uptake of PKH67-labeled GCS-secreted exosomes occurred at 48 hours after
exposure. Confocal microscopy revealed that monocytes could only
internalize GSC-released exosomes but not fibroblast-secreted exosomes.
The exposure to GSC-secreted exosomes induced a phenotypic change in
monocytes and prevented them from undergoing apoptosis. Studies of M1/M2
macrophage markers by flow cytometry revealed that GSCs-secreted
exosomes, but not the fibroblast-secreted exosomes, increased expression
of CD80, CD163, CD206 and decreased expression of MHC class II. This
profile was similar to myeloid suppressor cells and macrophages that were
obtained directly ex vivo from glioblastomas (n = 17). The GSC-secreted
exosomes were preferentially enriched relative to fibroblast-secreted
exosomes in transcriptional regulators that induced the M2
phenotype.CONCLUSIONS: Monocytes demonstrate preferential uptake of
GSC-secreted exosomes which then induces a glioma-supportive M2 phenotype
- similar to the phenotype observed in myeloid cells and macrophages
isolated from human glioblastomas. This data indicates that the
GSC-secreted exosomes can be a contributing factor in the M2 skewing
within the tumor microenvironment.

