Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of p63 protein expression in rat ventral prostate
submitted to intrauterine undernutrition associated to hormonal exposure
in adult life


Basal cells expressing p63 contain multipotent stem cells that can
efficiently differentiate during postnatal prostate morphogenesis, adult
prostate epithelial homeostasis and carcinogenesis. Our project aim is to
investigate p63 expression by focusing on the rates of basal epithelial
cell proliferation/differentiation in the ventral prostate after
intrauterine undernutrition (IUN) associated with or without hormonal
exposure in adult life. Briefly, 20 Sprague Dawley dams were distributed
equally into two groups during gestation: control diet (NP; fed a normal
diet containing 17% protein) and restricted protein diet (RP, fed a diet
containing 6% protein). After birth, all animals were maintained on the
control diet. Experiment 1: To analyze p63 expression during prostate
development, NP and RP animals were euthanized at postnatal day (PND) 3,
10, 21 and 35. The ventral prostate (VP) was dissected, weighed and
processed for IHC (Ki67, p63 and AR) and Western blot (WB) analysis
(PCNA, p63 and AR). Experiment 2: To analyze p63 expression in adults
after hormonal exposure, 14 week-old NP and RP animals were subjected to
17-beta estradiol+testosterone administration (subcutaneous implant) for
16 weeks. The animals were killed at 35 weeks old and the VP was excised,
weighed and processed for IHC and WB analysis. RP treated animals showed
lower body weight compared to NP control treated animals. Reductions of
testosterone plasma levels as well as the absolute and relative values of
VP weights from the RP animals compared to the NP animals were observed.
Normal glandular architecture was observed in both groups at PND 3, 10,
21 and 35. There was a reduction of AR expression in VP from RP animals
at all ages analyzed. However, the proliferation rate and p63+ cells were
higher in the RP group indicating that the low androgenic stimulation
induced by IUN promoted a delay in VP development. As a consequence, the
proliferation/differentiation cell dynamic was impaired, leading to an
increase in basal cell number and damaging their differentiation into
secretory luminal cells. We observed in hormone exposed adults that
prostatitis aggressiveness and prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN)
incidence were higher in the RP compared to NP animals. These results
were followed by a decrease in apoptosis index and increases in
proliferation rate and p63+ cells. It is clear that IUN alters adult
prostate response to androgen/estrogen exposure and interferes in adult
prostate susceptibility to diseases. In conclusion, IUN-induced fetal
programming impairs ventral prostate growth, maturation and homeostasis
highlighting the importance of adequate nutritional status during
embryonic/fetal development.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

