Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acetylation regulates TET2 stability and enzymatic activity


DNA methylation, one of the key epigenetic modifications in the mammalian
genome, plays fundamental roles in development and disease. Although DNA
methylation and DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) have been studied
intensively, our knowledge about DNA demethylation is just starting to
emerge. The Ten-eleven translocation (TET) family of proteins are newly
identified methylcytosine dioxygenases/demethylases that can oxidize
5-methylcytosine (5mC) to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), and promote DNA
demethylation either passively through DNA replication, or actively via
thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG)-mediated base excision repair. TET-mediated
DNA demethylation has also been shown to play important roles in diverse
biological processes and tumorigenesis.Human TET2 is frequently mutated
in myeloid malignancies, while loss of 5hmC and TETs expressions have
been broadly observed in many other cancer types. Recent studies
suggested that TETs may be regulated by microRNAs and calpain proteases,
but, overall, the regulation of TET activities is not well outlined. Here
we show, in human ovarian cancer cells, that TET2 activity may be
significantly modulated by post-translational modifications. TET2 is
acetylated by p300/CBP at K110/111, and this acetylation can be reversed
by HDAC1/2 and SIRT1/2 deacetylases. Acetylation increases TET2 stability
by protecting it from ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated degradation.
Interestingly, DNMT1 physically associates with and stabilizes TET2
protein, and a TET2 acetylation deficient mutant (2KR) disrupts this
association, indicating that acetylation of TET2 may stimulate DNMT1
binding which prevents TET2 from degradation. In addition, we show that
acetylation increases TET2 enzymatic activity. Treatment of cells with
HDAC inhibitors TSA/NAM, or knocking down HDAC1/2, significantly
increases global 5hmC levels. Consistent with these latter observations,
the 2KR mutant almost completely abolishes TET2 catalytic activity, and
this mutant protein is less efficient in forming dimer with wild type
TET2. Thus acetylation events may increase the activity of TET2 through
enhanced dimerization of the protein. Taken together, our study reveals a
novel acetylation-dependent regulatory mechanism controlling the function
of TET2.

