Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BAP1 mutation is a frequent somatic event in peritoneal malignant
mesothelioma


Malignant mesothelioma (MM) arises from mesothelial cells that line the
pleural, peritoneal and pericardial surfaces. The majority of MMs are
pleural and have been associated with asbestos exposure. Previously,
pleural MMs have been genetically characterized by the loss of BAP1
(40-60%) as well as loss of NF2 (75%) and CDKN2A (60%). The rare
peritoneal form of MM occurs in 10% cases. With only 300 cases diagnosed
in the US per year, its link to asbestos exposure is not clear and its
mutational landscape unknown. We analyzed the somatic mutational
landscape of 12 peritoneal MM of epitheloid subtype using copy number
analysis (N = 9), whole exome sequencing (N = 7) and targeted sequencing
(N = 12). Peritoneal MM display few copy number alterations, with most
samples having less than 10 Mbp total changes, mostly through deletions
and no high copy number amplification. Chromosome band 3p21 encoding BAP1
is the most recurrently deleted region (5/9), while, in contrast to
pleural MM, NF2 and CDKN2A are not affected. We further identified 87
non-silent mutations across 7 sequenced tumors, with a median of 8
mutated genes per tumor, resulting in a very low mutation rate (median
1.3 10-6). BAP1 was the only recurrently mutated gene (N = 3/7). In one
additional case, loss of the entire chromosome 3 leaves a non-functional
copy of BAP1 carrying a rare nonsense germline variant, thus suggesting a
potential genetic predisposition in this patient. Finally, with targeted
sequencing of BAP1 in 3 additional cases, we conclude that BAP1 is
frequently altered through copy number losses (N = 3/12), mutations (N =
3/12) or both (N = 2/12) sometimes at a sub-clonal level. Our findings
suggest a major role for BAP1 in peritoneal MM susceptibility and
oncogenesis and indicate important molecular differences to pleural MM as
well as potential strategies for therapy and prevention.

