Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PARG inhibition: development of novel compounds and a biomarker
strategy to determine cell line sensitivity in breast cancer


Background: DNA single strand breaks (SSBs) are the most common type of
damage occurring in cells. Poly (ADP ribose) polymerase (PARP) binds to
SSBs and auto-ribosylates itself using NAD+ as a substrate. PARG is the
only enzyme known to efficiently catalyse the hydrolysis of O-glycosidic
linkages of ADP-ribose polymers and exists (unlike PARP) as a single
gene. We have developed novel inhibitors of PARG and here we describe our
efforts to understand their sensitivity against a range of cell
linesMethods: A robust and detailed screening cascade for small molecule
inhibition of PARG has been developed. Active compounds are tested in
cells for PAR chain persistence and for cytotoxicity using a 3-day HeLa
assay. In addition, suitable compounds were then evaluated for their
physico-chemical properties and their in vivo PK profiles determined.
Compounds with the desired PK properties are subsequently profiled in
tumour bearing mice to determine their pharmacodynamic effect before
progressing to efficacy studies.Results: We have developed nM PARG
inhibitors that are highly selective against ARH3 and PARP1and these
derivatives show potent activity in cells. We have designed a breast
cancer cell panel against which our compounds have been tested. Our
initial bioinformatics analysis suggests that deficiency of a known
tumour suppressor confers sensitivity to PARG inhibition.Conclusions: We
have developed two drug-like series of PARG inhibitors that block the
breakdown of PAR chains in cells after exogenous DNA damage by
methylating agents. These tool compounds are potent, selective and have
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics properties that have allowed us to
explore their anti-tumour potential. The discovery of a tumour suppressor
profile indicating cell line sensitivity will aid the about
identification of patient populations that will potentially benefit from
PARGi therapies.

