Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosome transfer from ovarian cancer cells to mesothelial cells
promotes cell invasion by upregulating MMP-9 secretion and increasing
clearance of mesothelial cells


Ovarian cancer cells metastasize to organs in the abdominal cavity, such
as the omentum, which are covered by a single layer of mesothelial cells.
Thus, the cell-cell connection between ovarian cancer cells and
mesothelial cells is the crucial step of metastasis. Exosomes are 30-100
nm membrane vesicles of endocytic origin, mediating diverse biological
functions through transfer of proteins, mRNAs and microRNAs. However,
whether exosome-mediated transfer plays any role in ovarian cancer cell
invasion remains poorly understood. Thus, the aim of this study is to
identify the functional role of ovarian cancer-derived exosomes during
the process of ovarian cancer metastasis.Methods:Exosomes were isolated
from two ovarian cancer cell lines (HeyA8 and TYK-NU) and immortalized
normal ovarian epithelial cell line (IOSE) using differential
centrifugation. Human peritoneal mesothelial cells (HPMCs) were isolated
from normal omentum of patients undergoing gynecologic surgery. The
isolation of exosomes was confirmed by electron microscope and the
transfer of exosomes into HPMCs was confirmed by fluorescent-labeling
exosomes. The effects of exosome transfer from ovarian cancer cells to
mesothelial cells were analyzed in vitro 3D culture model, morphological
assessment, Western Blotting and gelatin zymography. We found that CD44
was enriched in cancer derived exosome. Thus, gain or loss of function of
CD44 was analyzed. CD44 expression of ovarian cancer omental metastasis
and surrounding organs in clinical samples was assessed by
immunohistochemistry.Results:Fluorescent-labeled exosomes were evidently
transferred into HPMCs. Exosome-treated HPMCs changed in cellular
morphology to spindle phenotype. Ovarian cancer invasion was
significantly promoted in the presence of exosome-treated HPMCs. In
exosome-treated HPMCs, MMP-9 secretion was up-regulated and E-cadherin
expression was down-regulated. The clearance of mesothelial barrier was
increased in exosome-treated HPMC monolayer. By Western Blotting, we
confirmed CD44 was enriched in exosomes and exosome-treated HPMCs display
high-level of CD44. When CD44 expression was knocked down by siRNA in
ovarian cancer cells, these effects to HPMCs were significantly
attenuated. In contrast, the enforced expression of CD44 into HPMCs
promoted cancer invasion by secreting MMP-9 and increasing mesothelial
clearance. In human omentum with microscopic metastasis of ovarian
cancer, positive CD44 expression was confirmed in a mesothelial cell
layer when cancer cells are attaching onto it, while CD44 expression was
generally negative in normal mesothelial cells.Conclusion:Herein, we
revealed that ovarian cancer-derived exosomes transfer CD44 to HPMCs,
which can facilitate ovarian cancer invasion by up-regulating of MMP-9
secretion and increasing clearance of HPMCs.

