Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput engineering and functional annotation of cancer
fusion genes


Next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies are rapidly being
incorporated into the clinic to facilitate decisions on cancer patient
care. Recognizing this, large-scale efforts by The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) and others are generating a compendium of genomic aberrations
found across major cancer types with the goal of identifying new
therapeutic targets. The challenge now is to find ways to identify
functional driver aberrations, as targeting driver events or their
activated pathways offers the greatest hope of improving patient
outcomes. Oncogenic transcript fusions resulting from chromosomal
rearrangements represent an important class of such events. The
successful targeting of fusion oncoproteins such as BCR-ABL and EML4-ALK
with imatinib and crizotinib, respectively, provide strong rationale for
comprehensive testing of cancer fusion genes. Unfortunately, the
functional interrogation of fusion genes is complicated by the large
quantity identified, inability to accurately predict those with driver
activity, and significant technical roadblocks preventing fusion gene
construction for biological assays. To circumvent these bottlenecks, we
developed novel technologies permitting (1) high-throughput fusion gene
construction using a novel multi-fragment DNA recombineering strategy
with our platform of >35,000 human open reading frame gene clones, and
(2) rapid lentiviral delivery of fusion genes to generalized and
context-specific cell models to identify those with in vitro and in vivo
driver activity and responsiveness to available therapeutics. As
proof-of-concept, we used this approach to engineer known fusion
oncogenes (BCR-ABL, EML4-ALK, and ETV6-NTRK3) and validated their
transforming ability using our in vitro and in vivo driver screening
systems, demonstrating our ability to rapidly deliver fusion genes with
functional activity. In a pilot screen of fusion genes identified in
pan-negative melanoma (i.e., devoid of signature mutations in BRAF and
NRAS) by TCGA, we identified multiple uncharacterized BRAF and RAF1
fusion events among others that strongly activate MAPK signaling and
exhibit potent transforming activity. Moreover, cells carrying the BRAF
and RAF1 gene fusions revealed a marked sensitivity to RAF and MEK
inhibitors, a finding that may indicate use of these agents for patients
whose tumors harbor these events. We are now scaling these efforts for
the comprehensive analysis of uncharacterized gene fusions, ultimately
allowing functionalization of thousands of fusion events across diverse
cancer types. These systems will reveal the highest priority fusion gene
targets to enroll in deep mechanistic biology studies, drug discovery and
development programs ultimately leading to personalized treatment
strategies.

