Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNAs as potential therapeutic agents for AML: Targeting the
AML1-ETO Oncogene by pre-miR-520 and -373


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous neoplasm characterized by
the accumulation of poorly differentiated myeloid cells in the bone
marrow and blood of patients. Differentiation therapy is an attractive
therapeutic approach for treating patients with AML. All-Trans Retionic
Acid, induces differentiation of patients with the PML/RARa oncogene, but
is ineffective in treating other more frequent types of AML. Here we
describe the use of microRNAs to target the oncogene formed as a result
of the (8;21) translocation, The goals was to identify miRNAs that could
target the breakpoint region of the fusion protein, and determine if this
would reduce expression of AML1-ETO and promote differentiation and/or
apoptosis. Bioinformatics analysis was used to identify 28 different
miRNAs that could potentially target AML1-ETO transcripts. Among those,
miRNA-520 and -373 showed the highest degree of complimentary to AML1-ETO
transcripts at the braikpoint. To look for miR-520 and -373 efficacy, we
transfected two AML cell lines, Kasumi 1 and SKNO1, which have AML1-ETO
translocation, with pre-miR-520 and -373 LNA probes, as well as HL60
cells which lack AML1-ETO. Expression of the LNA pre-miR-520/373 in
Kasumi-1 and SKNO-1 cell lines decreased AML1-ETO transcripts and led to
a significant reduction of AML1-ETO protein levels. The inhibition of
AML1-ETO fusion protein also induced apoptosis of leukemic cells in
vitro, but had no effect on HL60 cells. Moreover, the administration of
LNA pre-miR-520 in an AML xenografts murine model increased apoptosis of
leukemic cells and reduced tumor burden without obvious toxicity. We are
currently testing the effects of miR-520 and -373 on differentiation and
proliferation of primary blasts from patients with the AML1-ETO
translocation.Our results suggest that small molecules such as miRNAs can
be identified that directly target a frequent AML oncogene. miRNAs are
naturally accruing molecules and have the potential advantage of
producing modest side effects, with highly significant specificity. The
approaches we developed in this study can be used to evaluate and
optimize other pre-miRs and anti-miRs as therapeutic agents to target
other types oncogenes not currently amenable to small molecule drugs.

