Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accurate variant detection using molecular barcodes


HaloPlex is an amplicon based method for targeted sequencing. The
protocol utilizes specificity gained from restriction enzyme recognition,
hybridization and DNA ligation to capture molecules originating from the
target region to be sequenced. The target region is fully customizable
from a single gene up to several thousand discrete regions. Amplicon
based methods for multiplex target enrichment are, in general, convenient
methods for capturing a wide range of target region sizes. However, in
contrast to hybridization capture methods where random shearing is
deployed, it is not possible for Haloplex or other amplicon based
techniques to use the start point of paired end reads to identify
duplicate reads. Duplicate read information can be useful for improving
base calling accuracy and to monitor sampling to determine the degree of
confidence to assign calls at different presumed allelic fractions. For
somatic variants, which are generally present at a lower than 50% allelic
fraction, it is even more advantageous to know how many molecules have
been sampled when calling a particular base. To enable identification of
duplicate reads from libraries prepared with Haloplex, we have added a
molecular barcode to the introduced primer cassette. The molecular
barcode consists of ten degenerate bases allowing for over one million
unique sequences to be present for tagging of molecules. Using
information derived from the molecular barcode sequences we demonstrate
observation of variants down to 5% allelic fraction in multiple molecules
tagged with different molecular barcodes. The new protocol has, besides
the introduction of molecular barcodes, been optimized in a few
additional aspects. Due to improved reagent formulations and streamlining
of workflow, complete target enrichment can now be completed in less than
5 hours. Using 50 ng input we demonstrate >85% specificity and above 90%
of target regions being covered at >10% of average depth.

