Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screens reveal candidate therapeutic
targets and tumor suppressor genes for human glioma


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive and common form of
brain cancer in adults. There are currently no effective therapies for
GBM. Even with standard of care treatments, such as surgery, radiation,
and chemotherapy, 90% of adult patients die within 2 years of diagnosis.
Our inability to develop new more effective therapies may arise from
pre-clinical models that inadequately predict therapeutic window and the
fact that many new GBM drugs are hand-me-downs from other cancers, not
specifically developed for treating brain tumors. To identify
patient-tailored drug targets for GBM, our group has performed a series
of functional genetic screens in patient derived GBM stem-like cells
(GSCs) and also non-transformed human neural stem cells (NSCs). GSCs
retain tumor-initiating potential and tumor-specific genetic and
epigenetic signatures, even during extended outgrowth in serum-free
culture. NSCs represent non-transformed candidate cell of origin
controls, which share similar gene expression signatures and identical in
vitro growth conditions. Using these systems along with RNAi or
CRISPR/Cas9 platforms, we have identified multiple molecular
vulnerabilities specific to GSCs, which appear to be largely driven by
oncogenic transformation, in processes ranging from kinetochore
regulation to 3 pre-mRNA splice site recognition. At this meeting, we
present our latest findings from genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 gene knockout
screens in multiple GSC and NSC isolates. These include validation
studies of patient tumor-lethal genes using gene knockout rather than
gene knockdown technology. In addition, we will present validation
studies of gene products growth limiting for NSC expansion/self-renewal
from these screens, a subset of which are candidate tumor suppressors for
glioma. Strengths and weaknesses of using gene editing technology and GSC
isolates for identification of therapeutic targets will be discussed.

