Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome sequencing of the Reed-Sternberg cells of classical
Hodgkin lymphoma


Introduction: Most genomic studies of classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL)
have been confined to cell lines due to the difficulty of isolating
sparsely distributed Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells from reactive
background tissue. One approach to evaluate primary cases has been to
microdissect HRS cells from fresh-frozen tissue biopsies, which has been
used for gene expression profiling and array comparative genomic
hybridization to assess copy number alterations. However, laser capture
microdissection is technically challenging, does not provide a pure tumor
cell population, and yields very small amounts of degraded nucleic acids
that may not be adequate for whole-transcriptome level RNA
sequencing.Methods: We used a flow cytometric cell isolation method,
which has enabled rapid isolation of thousands of viable HRS cells from
primary cHL tumors (Fromm, et al., Am J Clin Pathol 126, 2006). Here we
combined flow cytometry using CD64, CD95, CD30, CD5, CD20, CD15, CD40,
and CD45, with the Arcturus PicoPure RNA Isolation kit to isolate high
quality RNA from viable HRS cells and intratumor B cells from nine
primary cases of CHL respectively. We applied the Clontech SMARTer Ultra
Low Input RNA Kit followed by Kapa Library Preparation kit to generate
what is to our knowledge the first full transcriptome RNA sequence data
from primary cases of cHL. Four cell lines were sequenced using the same
methodology. We performed differential expression and gene fusion
analyses, and conducted a search for activated pathways.Results: We
report the expression signature of purified primary HRS cells. PCA
analysis showed that these segregate from HRS cell lines and primary B
cells. We confirmed at the RNA level overexpression of relevant amplified
genes for which inhibitors are available (AURKA and EZH2), and
underexpression of transcripts encoded by genes previously found to be
deleted (for example ATM). Pathway analysis revealed extensive
downregulation of antigen presentation, consistent with our previous
exome sequence analysis showing mutations in beta-2 microglobulin as the
most common genetic alteration. Results of the mutational and
transcriptional landscape of the HRS cells will be presented.Conclusions:
Transcriptome-level analysis of flow-sorted HRS cells allows for expanded
study of CHL pathogenesis, new target identification based on altered
signaling pathways and potentially individualized approaches to CHL
therapy.

