Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autopsy derived orthotopic xenograft (ADOX) mouse models for
terminal pediatric brain tumors


Brain tumors are the leading cause of cancer related death in children,
and there is biological differences between treatment nave tumors and
their therapy resistant relapses. As surgery is rarely an option for
terminal brain tumors that have failed existing therapies, autopsy is
frequently the only chance to obtain tumor tissues. Despite the urgent
need of models of terminal brain tumors, it remains unknown if autopsied
tumors can be used for in vitro and in vivo model development. To
determine if (some) tumor cells can survival postmortem anoxia/starvation
to proliferate in vitro and, more importantly, to form orthotopic
xenograft tumors, we collected 29 autopsied brain tumors, including 15
diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas (DIPG), 7 glioblastomas (GBM), 4
medulloblastomas (MB), 2 ependymoma and 1 atypical teratoid/rhabdoid
tumor (ATRT), and made the following discoveries. i) A small fraction of
tumor cells exhibited strong survival capacity and remained viable,
ranging from 0.5%-40% (13.5% 10.9%), in tumors harvested 5-72 hrs (31.2
25 hrs) after patients death. Cell viability, however, did not appear to
be strictly correlated with the length of autopsy time (r = 0.17),
suggesting that ample time should be given to the families to say goodbye
to their loved ones. ii) While many autopsied tumor cells appear to have
stayed alive for short terms in culture, only one pair of permanent lines
(monolayer in FBS media and neurosphere in serum-free media) were
established from a GBM tumor. iii) Direct implantation of tumor cells
into matched locations in the brains of SCID mice led to the formation of
xenograft tumors in 17 of 22 tumors (7 additional tumors are still
pending). 8 of the 17 autopsy derived orthotopic (ADOX) models have been
subtransplanted in mouse brains for > 3 times (5 DIPGs and 1 each of GBM,
MB and ATRT). Detailed characterization confirmed their replication of
histopathological features and genetic/genomic abnormalities of the
patient tumors. iv) To identify the cellular origin of surviving patient
tumor cells that propagated ADOX model formation, time course analysis of
putative cancer stem cells (CD133, CD15, CD24/CD44, CD57, CD117) was
performed. CD57+ tumor cells were found to be the most abundant
subpopulations in the autopsied tumors, and their fractions increased in
the ADOX tumors during serial subtransplantations. Additionally, CD57+
cells alone were able to form orthotopic xenografts, establishing their
role as cancer stem cells. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that a
fraction of tumor cells can survive the lengthy period of postmortem
anoxia/starvation and regain tumorigenic capabilities in mouse brains;
and identified CD57 as a new marker of the therapy-resistant cells with
extraordinary survival and tumorigenic (TREST) capabilities. This novel
panel of ADOX models should facilitate biological studies and preclinical
drug screening of therapy-resistant pediatric brain tumors.

