Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting prostate cancer stem cells (CSCs) with the novel BET
bromodomain (BRD) protein inhibitor OTX015


In human neoplasias small subpopulations of cancer cells with stem
cell-like properties are thought to play a role in progression,
metastasis, disease recurrence and treatment failure. Effective targeting
of CSCs may thus provide the basis for a paradigm shift in cancer
therapy. Epigenetic and transcriptional regulators such as BRD proteins
(BRD2/3/4) may contribute to the CSC phenotype and as such represent
druggable targets for CSC-directed therapies. No data are currently
available on the anti-CSC activity of BRD protein inhibitors. OTX015 is
an orally bioavailable small molecule BRD protein inhibitor. It
demonstrates broad anticancer activity in vitro and is currently under
clinical evaluation in hematologic malignancies and solid tumor patients,
including castrate-resistant prostate cancer. We investigated the effects
of OTX015 on the phenotypes of bulk tumor cells and CSCs in a panel of
human prostate cancer cell lines, including the androgen receptor
positive (LNCaP, VCaP and 22RV1) and negative (DU145 and PC3) prostate
cell lines. Similar levels of BRD proteins were present in the cell lines
independent of androgen receptor (AR) status and the presence of ETS gene
fusions. OTX015 strongly inhibited proliferation in all cell lines tested
(IC50, 200-800 nM) by MTT assays after 72h-exposure. Soft agar clonogenic
capability of prostate cancer cells was also inhibited by OTX015 (IC50,
20-100 nM). OTX015 also potently inhibited the CSC component in
prostato-sphere forming assays (IC50, 1-100 nM) after 10 days of
treatment. Of note, the CSC-directed activity of OTX015 was independent
of the AR and ETS translocation state. Effective inhibition of CSCs by
OTX015 was consistently associated with downregulation of critical CSC
genes, including c-Myc and Nanog mRNA. In vivo experiments in 5 human
tumor xenografts models (LNCaP, VCaP, 22RV1, DU145 and PC3) in nude mice
are ongoing to evaluate antitumor and anti-CSC activity of OTX015. To our
knowledge, this is the first evidence implicating BRD proteins in the
expansion and maintenance of prostate CSCs independently of the specific
biologic and genetic features of the bulk tumor cell population. These
results suggest that the BRD protein inhibitor OTX015 could be effective
for eradicating the CSC component in prostate cancer, providing the basis
for novel treatment approaches.

