Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tracking the functional analysis of cancer risk variants


Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified thousands of
alleles associated with cancer risk, but understanding the functional
effects of these variants has proceeded more slowly. In addition,
although catalogs of variants exist, tracking progress to determine
variant function is challenging. We conducted a literature search and
review to assess the trajectory of functional characterization of GWAS
results and describe the types of analysis conducted and tools and
databases used. We used the PubTator Web-based tool, which uses advanced
text-mining techniques to accelerate manual literature curation, to
search the literature for articles describing functional annotation of
cancer GWAS hits. We generated a list of 646 unique SNPs from the Cancer
Genomics and Epidemiology Navigator (CGEN) and imported the list to
PubTator. We identified a total of 292 articles that included both
variant discovery by GWAS and functional analysis, and reviewed the
articles for information including cancer type, variant functional class
(e.g., intron, exon, intergenic, etc.), and type of functional analysis
conducted. These articles included 40 different cancer types or subtypes.
The majority of cancer risk variants were intronic or intergenic, with
only a small number located in coding regions. Most of the functional
analyses were focused on the potential modification/disruption of
regulatory processes by the risk allele (e.g., alteration of
transcription factor binding sites, putative expressed quantitative trait
loci), in line with current hypotheses regarding cancer risk variant
function. Most studies also described effects of variants at the
molecular, or cellular, rather than organismal level. We also reviewed
the literature pertaining to variants identified for three cancers with
possible pleiotropy - ovarian, breast, and prostate - to understand the
trajectory of functional analyses beyond the initial discovery of the
variants. We describe our use of the PubTator tool and provide a
literature-based overview of progress in understanding the function of
cancer risk variants identified via GWAS.

