Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Brca1-deficient ovarian cancer cells are sensitized to the
DNA-strand-breaking nucleoside analog sapacitabine that synergizes with
PARP inhibition


Sapacitabine is an orally bioavailable prodrug of the deoxycytidine
analog, CNDAC. Sapacitabine is currently in a Phase III registration
trial for elderly AML patients (NCT01303796). CNDAC (as DFP-10917) is in
a Phase I/II trial for AML and ALL (NCT01702155).
Sapacitabine/CNDAC-induced DNA damage, double-strand breaks converted
from initial single-strand breaks, is repaired mainly by the homologous
recombination (HR) pathway. Deficiency in HR components, including ATM,
Rad51, Xrcc3, Brca2 and Brca1, confer sensitivity to CNDAC. Brca1 and
Brca2 function is frequently compromised in ovarian cancer. To determine
the role of Brca1 in DNA damage repair after sapacitabine, we used a
Brca1-null ovarian carcinoma cell line, UWB1.289 and its complemented
line, UWB1.289+Brca1 in this study. First, the clonogenic sensitivities
of the two lines to therapeutic agents were compared. The deficient cells
were 3-4 fold more sensitive to CNDAC than the repleted cells. In
contrast, Brca1 repletion did not confer resistance to cytarabine,
fludarabine or gemcitabine. These results confirm the unique action
mechanism of CNDAC among nucleoside analogs. Second, a cytogenetic
approach was taken to compare CNDAC-induced chromosome damage in both
lines (N = 50 metaphases scored for each sample). We found Brca1-null
cells bearing more chromosomal structural abnormalities (50% metaphases)
than Brca1-complemented cells (30%), apparently due to genetic
instability when lacking Brca1. UWB1.289 cells exposed to 15 nM CNDAC for
27 hr (1 cell cycle) and 54 hr (2 cell cycles) manifested massive
chromosomal aberrations (>60% and >90% metaphases, respectively), nearly
40% and 70% of which could not be scored. In contrast, UWB1.289+Brca1
cells showed significantly fewer chromosome aberrations (42% and 48%
metaphases, respectively), the majority of which were scorable, upon
extended incubation with CNDAC under the same conditions. These results
provided cytogenetic evidence for Brca1 involvement in DNA damage repair
after CNDAC. Third, interaction between sapacitabine and other classes of
therapeutic agents was explored using clonogenic assays. For example,
CO-338, a camsylate salt of the PARP inhibitor, rucaparib, greatly
sensitized Brca1-deficient cells. Despite the distinctive sensitivities
of the two lines, the CO-338 - CNDAC combination showed synergistic cell
killing by median-effect analysis (combination index Sapacitabine is an
orally bioavailable prodrug of the deoxycytidine analog, CNDAC.
Sapacitabine is currently in a Phase III registration trial for elderly
AML patients (NCT01303796). CNDAC (as DFP-10917) is in a Phase I/II trial
for AML and ALL (NCT01702155). Sapacitabine/CNDAC-induced DNA damage,
double-strand breaks converted from initial single-strand breaks, is
repaired mainly by the homologous recombination (HR) pathway. Deficiency
in HR components, including ATM, Rad51, Xrcc3, Brca2 and Brca1, confer
sensitivity to CNDAC. Brca1 and Brca2 function is frequently compromised
in ovarian cancer. To determine the role of Brca1 in DNA damage repair
after sapacitabine, we used a Brca1-null ovarian carcinoma cell line,
UWB1.289 and its complemented line, UWB1.289+Brca1 in this study. First,
the clonogenic sensitivities of the two lines to therapeutic agents were
compared. The deficient cells were 3-4 fold more sensitive to CNDAC than
the repleted cells. In contrast, Brca1 repletion did not confer
resistance to cytarabine, fludarabine or gemcitabine. These results
confirm the unique action mechanism of CNDAC among nucleoside analogs.
Second, a cytogenetic approach was taken to compare CNDAC-induced
chromosome damage in both lines (N = 50 metaphases scored for each
sample). We found Brca1-null cells bearing more chromosomal structural
abnormalities (50% metaphases) than Brca1-complemented cells (30%),
apparently due to genetic instability when lacking Brca1. UWB1.289 cells
exposed to 15 nM CNDAC for 27 hr (1 cell cycle) and 54 hr (2 cell cycles)
manifested massive chromosomal aberrations (>60% and >90% metaphases,
respectively), nearly 40% and 70% of which could not be scored. In
contrast, UWB1.289+Brca1 cells showed significantly fewer chromosome
aberrations (42% and 48% metaphases, respectively), the majority of which
were scorable, upon extended incubation with CNDAC under the same
conditions. These results provided cytogenetic evidence for Brca1
involvement in DNA damage repair after CNDAC. Third, interaction between
sapacitabine and other classes of therapeutic agents was explored using
clonogenic assays. For example, CO-338, a camsylate salt of the PARP
inhibitor, rucaparib, greatly sensitized Brca1-deficient cells. Despite
the distinctive sensitivities of the two lines, the CO-338 - CNDAC
combination showed synergistic cell killing by median-effect analysis
(combination index <1). Since PARP inhibitors have promising efficacy in
Brca1-deficient ovarian cancer patients, the synergistic combination of
rucaparib and sapacitabine could be a novel therapeutic strategy to be
tested in clinic. Together, this study provided mechanistic insight into
the function of Brca1 in repairing sapacitabine/CNDAC-induced DNA damage
and rationale for sapacitabine-PARP inhibitor combination to target
Brca1-deficient ovarian cancer.

