Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunotherapy with a CD40L/4-1BBL double-armed oncolytic
adenovirus drives Th1 immunity and control tumor progression in a
pancreas cancer model


We hypothesized that an immunostimulatory oncolytic virus (LOAd703) is a
potent inducer of anti-tumor immunity and tested its biological functions
in models of pancreas cancer. LOAd703 is a double-armed oncolytic
adenovirus that introduces the simultaneous expression of a trimerized
membrane-bound CD40L and 4-1BBL locally in the tumor aiming to induce
potent Th1-mediated anti-tumor immunity. By utilizing an oncolytic
adenovirus serotype 5/35 for gene transfer, virally induced tumor cell
oncolysis will provide a broad release of antigens at the site of immune
activation. Transgene expression is driven by a separate promoter to
allow for efficient expression in both tumor cells and tumor stroma while
virus replication is restricted to tumor cells by E1A delta24 deletion.
CD40 ligand is a potent stimulator of myeloid cells including dendritic
cells (DCs) that in turn induce robust T cell responses. CD40L can also
reduce the levels of myeloid suppressor cells and M2 macrophages as well
as enhancing T cell infiltration into tumors. Further, CD40-mediated
signaling combined with TLR stimuli (such as adenovirus) induces intense
Th1 immunity. 4-1BBL is known to provide expansion and survival signaling
to pre-activated T- and NK cells.Pancreatic cancer cell lines and healthy
exocrine pancreas cells were transduced with LOAd703 and it efficiently
killed tumor cells while normal cells remained intact as evaluated by an
MTS assay. CD40L and 4-1BBL were highly expressed by the transduced tumor
cells as detected by flow cytometry. Cell lysis by LOAd703 was equally
efficient as a similar oncolytic virus without transgenes demonstrating
that the double transgene expression did not interfere with viral
replication. Repeated (6x) peritumoral injections of LOAd703 in a
xenograft Nu/Nu/Panc01 model showed efficient tumor cell growth control
and sustained complete responses. The effect could be further enhanced by
gemcitabine in both xenograft mice and in a syngeneic immunocompetent
C57BL/6/Panc02 model. Transduction of human monocyte-derived immature DCs
resulted in a strong CD40L and 4-1BBL expression without lysis of the
cells. Instead, the transduced DCs matured as shown by high CD83 and IL12
expression. The addition of 4-1BBL significantly enhanced DC maturation
compared to a virus containing only CD40L, or no transgenes, by
expressing higher levels of CD70, IL12, TNFa, IFNg and IL21. Further,
LOAd703-transduced DCs pulsed with pp65 CMV peptides potently expanded
antigen-specific T cells as well as NK cells.In conclusion, LOAd703 is a
novel, double-armed immunostimulatory oncolytic gene therapy that
initiates robust Th1 immunity, and eradicates pancreatic cancer in
experimental models. A clinical trial using LOAd703 for pancreatic cancer
is underway.

