Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NSCLC PDX model for the evaluation of immuno-oncological treatment
strategies


Patient-derived tumor xenografts (PDX) have played a major role in the
development of new cancer therapies and their strengths and weaknesses
have gradually been elucidated. One major drawback of PDX is the lack of
an immunological competent host. To overcome this hurdle we supplemented
NSG/NOG mice with human hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and subsequently
examined growth characteristics of the non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
PDX model LXFA 923 in these mice. In parallel we monitored the presence
of human and murine immune cells in different organs of the mouse.HSC
(2106) cells were isolated from healthy donors and injected intravenously
into sub-lethally irradiated NSG or NOG mice (n = 43 mice in 3 ind.
exp.). After 8 weeks LXFA 923 was transplanted subcutaneously (s.c.) into
the pretreated mice. Murine peripheral blood was examined by flow
cytometry for common murine and human markers expressed on immune cells
(hCD14, mCD14, hCD3, mCD3, hCD56, mCD56, hCD19) once weekly. At the end
of the experiment tumors and organs were analyzed for human cancer (CD44,
CD133, CDCP1, CD166, CD24) and immune cell markers (hCD14, hCD3, hCD56,
hCD19) by flow cytometry. Tumors and organs were additionally
histologically and immunohistochemically examined. Growth of the
implanted tumors was monitored by caliper measurement. Mice bearing only
the subcutaneous PDX or the HSC served as control groups.Stable
engraftment of human immune cells in immune-compromized mice was
successfully achieved. Human immune cells expressing T-, B-, NK- and stem
cell markers could be detected in different compartments (bone marrow,
peripheral blood and spleen) of the tumor-bearing as well as non-tumor
bearing mice. Furthermore, infiltrates of human monocytes (CD14+) as well
as T cells (CD3+) could be detected in s.c. implanted tumor tissue.
Implantation of LXFA 923 did not influence the proliferation of human
immune cells in recipient mice. Growth behavior of the s.c. implanted PDX
was not affected by the engraftment of HSC in the murine host. The
histological architecture of LXFA 923 was similar when implanted s.c. in
humanized or immunodeficient mice and it still closely resembles the
patient donor material.In conclusion, our investigations validate the
analysis of PDX in mice engrafted with human immune cells, as it enables
the interaction of tumor cells with human immune cells as well as with
murine stroma to be investigated. This preclinical PDX based in vivo
platform provides a further step to support the development of new drugs
targeting the host immune response.

