Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deregulation of the Ras-Erk signaling axis modulates the enhancer
landscape


Unrestrained activation of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) pathways drives
tumorigenesis through the persistent activation of critical signaling
pathways, including the Ras-ERK axis. This aberrant signaling is
unleashed by mutations in signaling effectors such as Ras, as well as
through disruption of feedback control by regulatory proteins such as the
Sprouty family. Mutations in epigenetic regulators also commonly occur
during cancer progression, modulating chromatin architecture and gene
expression. While unrestrained signaling and epigenetic deregulation are
root causes of tumorigenesis, the relationship between aberrant RTK
signaling and chromatin modifications at cis-regulatory elements remains
to be fully elucidated. We establish linkage between these processes by
examining the effects of oncogenic HRasG12V or loss of feedback
regulation by Sprouty on global changes in gene expression and
enhancer-associated chromatin modifications. Using RNA-sequencing and
ChIP-sequencing, we demonstrate that aberrant RTK signaling unleashed by
oncogenic HRasG12V or Sprouty gene deletion disrupts gene expression
programs and remodels histone modifications associated with active
enhancers, including histone 3 lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac).
Abolishing persistent Ras-Erk signaling through chemical inhibition of
MEK activity reverses the aberrant transcriptional program and H3K27ac
remodeling at deregulated enhancers. While both lesions disrupt the
Ras-Erk axis, the specific target genes and enhancers modulated upon
HRasG12V-transformation or Sprouty deletion are largely distinct.
Specifically, oncogenic HRasG12V significantly elevates the expression
and H3K27ac levels near key target genes encoding the transcription
factor Gata4 and the kinase Prkcb. Gata4 is necessary for the HRasG12V
expression program and coordinates H3K27ac marking at enhancers of
deregulated target genes. We further show that HRasG12V-driven cells are
sensitive to chemical inhibition of Prkcb, which reduces the viability
and clonogenicity of HRasG12V-transformed cells. These oncogenic effects
upon HRasG12V-transformation are also reduced by chemical inhibition of
the chromatin regulators BET bromodomain proteins and p300/CBP, which
recognize and deposit H3K27ac, respectively. Taken together, our data
support a model in which dynamic reprogramming of the cellular enhancer
landscape is a key effect of oncogenic RTK signaling. Furthermore, our
study shows that identification of enhancers regulated by oncogenic Ras
yields insight into targeting key epigenetic regulators and downstream
factors that promote Ras-driven malignancies.

