Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) subunits
retinoblastoma-binding protein 4 and 7 (RbBP4/7) in triple-negative
breast cancer


Around 15% of all breast cancers are classified as ER/PR/HER2, or triple
negative (TNBC). This subtype of breast cancer does not respond to
traditional endocrine therapies or targeted agents against HER2 and is
particularly invasive with a high rate of recurrence due to resistance of
cancer stem cells against therapy. Currently no efficient treatments are
available to target cancer stem cells in TNBC. With this unmet need, it
is a necessity to determine the molecular mechanisms underlying stem cell
biology in TNBC to develop better targeted therapies of this
disease.Recent studies have shown that the subunits of the polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2), such as EZH2, have been linked to
invasiveness, metastasis, and chemoresistance in TNBC. PRC2 consists of
four core members: EZH2, SUZ12, EED and RbBP4/7 which together mediate
H3K27 trimethylation to repress gene transcription. In addition to its
role in gene regulation, PRC2 has been linked to the regulation of breast
cancer stem cells. However, the function of RbBP4/7 in breast cancer and
breast cancer stem cells is unknown. The purpose of this study is to
examine the role of RbBP4/7 in PRC2 in maintenance of the H3K27me3 mark,
regulation of cancer cell stemness, and breast tumorigenesis.Analyzing
the expression of RbBP4/7 in publicly available data sets through
ONCOMINE, we found that both RbBP4 and RbBP7 were overexpressed in breast
cancers, especially TNBC, compared with normal breast tissues. Similar to
EZH2, higher expression of RbBP4 and RbBP7 was correlated to higher
incidence of metastasis and poor prognosis. Using RNA interference, we
successfully knocked down RbBP4 and RbBP7 in TNBC cell lines SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231.Our results show that knockdown of both RbBP4 and RbBP7
significantly decreases cell growth by 70%, reduces H3K27me3 levels and
drastically inhibits the mammosphere forming capability of these breast
cancer cell lines by 80%. In addition, there was an increase in apoptotic
cells as assessed by Annexin V staining from 12% in untreated cells to
28% in the RbBP4/7 knockdown cells. Knockdown of either RbBP4 or RbBP7,
on the other hand, only has a moderate effect on cell proliferation,
H3K27me3 levels and mammosphere formation. Our studies indicate that
together RbBP4 and RbBP7 help maintain PRC2 function and breast cancer
stem cell phenotype and could be exploited as a novel therapeutic target
for treating TNBC.The effects of RbBP4 and RbBP7 knockdown on target gene
regulation and breast tumor initiation and progression using xenograft
models are currently under investigation.

