Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytoplasmic p53 protects against MG132-induced apoptosis in a cell
state-dependent manner


Since the approval of proteasome inhibitor, Bortezomib, for use in
multiple myeloma in 2003, pharmacological proteasome inhibitors has been
shown to be an important strategy for treating many types of cancer.
While proteasome inhibitors induce apoptosis in certain rapidly
proliferating cancer cells, some cells enters quiescence and survives.
The mechanism by which quiescent cells become resistant to proteasome
inhibitors is largely unknown. The tumor suppressor protein p53 plays an
essential role in establishing and maintain quiescence in human cells. It
also regulates several cell survival mechanisms, including cell cycle
arrest, autophagy, and activation of reactive oxygen detoxifying enzymes.
Here, we investigated the role of p53 in establishing resistance against
proteasome inhibitors in quiescent cells. We found that MG132 (a know
proteasome inhibitor) treatment induces the accumulation of p53 and its
downstream target p21 more in quiescent cells than in proliferating
primary human fibroblasts. shRNA mediated down-regulation of p53
sensitizes both proliferating and quiescent fibroblasts to MG132-mediated
apoptosis and cell death, suggesting that p53 plays a protective role in
all cell states. Additional experiments demonstrated that proliferating
fibroblasts are susceptible to inhibition of cytoplasmic p53 activity,
whereas quiescent fibroblasts are sensitive to inhibition of nuclear p53
activity. These findings suggest that p53 induces different protective
mechanisms against MG132-mediated cell death, depending of the
proliferative state of the cells. Autophagy, an alternative degradation
pathway regulated by p53, is also induced in both cell states upon MG132
treatment. Identification of p53-mediated regulatory mechanisms that are
activated in quiescent cells in response to proteasome inhibition may
help to suggest strategies for improving the effectiveness of proteasome
inhibitors in treating cancer. This work was supported by NCI K01
CA128887 to Aster Legesse-Miller.

