Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Megabase-scale phased haplotypes of genetic aberrations from whole
cancer genome sequencing of primary colorectal tumors


Cancer genomes contain multiple types of genetic aberrations that include
mutations, deletions, copy number variants and chromosomal
rearrangements. Despite advances in next generation sequencing, it
remains a major challenge to delineate many of these somatic genomic
alterations because of intrinsic complexity of cancer genomes.
Haplotyping involves the assignment of genetic variants such as mutations
and structural variants to specific segment of homologous chromosomes.
Experimentally determined phasing of cancer genomes offers an opportunity
to resolve complex genomic structures such as somatic rearrangements,
aneuploidy composition and ongoing evolutionary changes. However,
contiguous phasing of cancer genomes on a megabase (Mb) scale remains
difficult to achieve with sequencing-based approaches.In this
proof-of-concept study, we experimentally determined Mb-scale haplotypes
of primary tumor samples via whole genome sequencing. To generate
haplotypes, we employed an automated instrument that partitions long DNA
fragments into hundreds of thousands of reactions, each of which
incorporates a unique, nonrandom barcode into indexed sequencing
libraries. Given need to amplify from sparse numbers of molecules and the
high efficiency of the automated sequencing library construction process,
the DNA requirements for each sample are less than 5 ng.We sequenced the
genomes of primary colorectal cancer samples and their matched normal
diploid DNA with an Illumina sequencer. We used the single nucleotide
variants to generate Mb-scale haplotype blocks (N50 of 1.2 Mb) with
phased haplotype block size of up to 11.3 Mb. We were able to delineate
cancer genome haplotypes that cover allelic imbalances, copy number
variations such as deletions and other genomic instability events.
Structural variants were identified in the context of their position in
specific chromosome homologues. Thus, we improved the characterization of
somatic genetic aberrations using contiguity mapping and cancer genome
haplotypes in the context of whole cancer genome sequencing. Overall, we
demonstrated the feasibility and potential utility of conducting
contiguous phased haplotypes in whole cancer genome sequencing from
primary tumor samples.

