Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of structural changes in SN79-derived sigma-2 receptor
modulators: effect on apoptotic efficacy in SK-N-SH neuroblastoma


Sigma receptors are a unique class of membrane bound receptors with key
roles in mediating cell survival. The sigma-2 subtype has received
attention due to its significant upregulation in rapidly proliferating
tumor cells as compared to non-cancerous cells. When activated, the
sigma-2 receptor induces apoptosis. Previously, we described the use of
-NCS derivatives of SN79, a moderately sigma-2 selective antagonist (Ki =
290 and 30 nM at sigma-1 and sigma-2, respectively), to induce apoptosis
in breast, brain, and pancreatic cancer cell lines (Nicholson et al.,
Proc. Amer. Assoc. Cancer Res. 74: #3237, 2014). CM572, a potent
selective partial agonist of the sigma-2 receptor (Ki = >10M and 15nM at
sigma-1 and sigma-2, respectively), was found to irreversibly bind and
induce apoptosis in several cancer cell lines. Here we present a series
of heterocyclic ring structural variants of CM572 and our evaluation of
these ligands for use as potential chemotherapeutics. When the methyl
ketone group on the heterocyclic ring of SN79 was substituted with -NO2,
the resulting ligand showed low or no selectivity (2-fold) for the
sigma-2 receptor over the sigma-1 receptor, while -NCS substituted
ligands showed higher selectivity (10-fold) for the sigma-2 receptor.
Substitution of the -O- in the heterocyclic ring of SN79 with -S-
resulted in excellent sigma-2 receptor affinity but greatly reduced
selectivity, suggesting potential interaction at this position in the
binding pocket of the sigma-1 receptor. Substituting this position with
-N-Me significantly increased selectivity by reducing sigma-1 receptor
affinity, suggesting that steric hindrance rendered this position less
amenable to sigma-1 receptor binding. -NCS derivatives of SN79 were
cytotoxic to SK-N-SH neuroblastoma, while substitution of -NCS for -NO2
reduced efficacy, potency, and eliminated irreversible binding
capability. Substitution of the -NCS group with -NH2 eliminated agonist
properties, rendering these ligands unable to induce apoptosis up to 50
M. Interestingly, while high sigma-2 receptor affinity was retained for
-NH2-substituted ligands, they were unable to attenuate agonist activity
at the sigma-2 receptor, suggesting poor antagonist activity compared to
the parent compound. This data implies that the presence of an electron
withdrawing group on the heterocyclic ring imparts agonist activity. We
conclude that the greatest potential for a potent, highly efficacious,
selective sigma-2 receptor -targeted chemotherapeutic agent will result
from an SN79 derivative containing an -NCS at the 4 position of the
aromatic moiety and an N-Me group in the heterocyclic ring. Future work
will focus on the effects of these compounds in tumor xenograft models
across a variety of cancer types, as well as using structural variants to
predict characteristics of the binding pockets of sigma-1 and sigma-2
receptors.

