Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Honokiol inhibits the invasive potential of melanoma cells by
targeting NADPH oxidase 1 and decreasing the binding of core proteins


Melanoma is an aggressive and deadly skin cancer that causes the majority
of skin cancer related deaths, and is increasing rapidly in children. As
melanoma is a highly metastatic cancer, an approach that could reduce its
metastatic potential, may facilitate the development of an effective
strategy for its prevention or treatment. To develop more effective
chemopreventive agents for the prevention of metastatic melanoma, we
determined the effect of honokiol, a phytochemical from Magnolia plant,
on the migratory potential of melanoma cells and the molecular mechanisms
underlying these effects using Hs294t and SK-Mel 28 cell lines as an in
vitro model. Nox1 is a member of NADPH oxidase (Nox) family, consists
both cytosolic and membrane bound subunits, and play a role in reactive
oxygen species (ROS) generation. Nox1 generated ROS contributes to cell
migration through an increase in the expression of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs). Here, first we checked the protein level
(Nox1) and enzymatic activity (Nox) in melanoma cells and compared with
normal human epidermal melanocytes (NHEM) and found elevated.
Overexpression of Nox1 in melanoma cells was associated with increased
migration rate in comparison to NHEM, as determined by cell migration
assay. Treatment with diphenyliodonium chloride (DPI, an inhibitor of
Nox1) significantly decreases migration potential of melanoma cells. We
also found that the treatment of melanoma cells with honokiol reduced the
expression of Nox1, and caused significant reduction in cell migration
potential. The increased expression of MMPs (2 and 9) is resultant of ROS
production by Nox1, which played an important role in cell migration.
Honokiol treatment to melanoma cells inhibits MMPs expression. To verify
the observations, the Hs294t and SK-Mel 28 cells were treated with DPI,
and n-acetyl cysteine, an antioxidant. A reduction in the level of MMPs
and cell migration was observed. Further, we examined the effect of
honokiol on Nox activity, and the levels of core proteins (p22phox and
p47phox) of complex using Hs294t and SK-Mel 28 cells. It was found that
treatment of melanoma cells with honokiol not only reduced the Nox
activity, but also reduced the binding of p22phox to p47phox proteins
through increasing the cytoplasmic accumulation of p47phox protein and
decreases the expression level of membrane bound protein p22phox.
Together, these results indicate that honokiol acts as a Nox1 inhibitor,
and has the ability to inhibit melanoma cell migration by targeting the
Nox1-mediated ROS production. This new insight into the anti-melanoma
cell migration activity of honokiol could serve as a basis for
development of improved chemopreventive or therapeutic strategies for
metastatic melanoma.

