Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deregulated long non-coding RNAs in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)


Background: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are larger than 200
nucleotides in length and pervasively expressed across the genome. An
increasing number of studies indicate that lncRNA transcripts play
integral regulatory roles in cellular growth, division, differentiation
and apoptosis. Deregulated lncRNAs have been observed in a variety of
human cancers, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, small
sample sizes in previous studies limited statistical power to identify
reliable lncRNA biomarkers associated with hepatocarcinogenesis. The
potential impacts of hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV)
infection on expression of lncRNAs are also unclear.MATERIALS & METHODS:
In this study approved by the Institutional Review Board of Columbia
University Medical Center, 65 paired HCC tumor and adjacent non-tumor
tissues were collected by the Center for Liver Disease and
Transplantation of the Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center. We
determined the expression profiles of 90 lncRNAs, 5 housekeeping gene
reference controls and one negative control using the LncProfiler lncRNA
qPCR array (System Biosciences).RESULTS: We found that eight lncRNAs
(L1PA16, lincRNA-VLDLR, LUST, Zeb2NAT, MEG9, ncR-uPAR, p53 mRNA and TEA
ncRNAs family) were significantly down-regulated in HCC tumor compared to
non-tumor tissues. The fold changes ranged from -2.2 to -5.9. Four
lncRNAs (H19, HOTAIR, HULC and MALAT1) previously associated with HCC
were also up-regulated in tumor tissue, but did not reach statistical
significance. We observed over 83% of the tumor tissues carrying one of
those aberrant lncRNAs, indicating the importance of lncRNAs in HCC.
Categorized by hepatitis infection, we observed that five lncRNAs were
significantly repressed in HBV positive/HCV negative tumors (N = 13
pairs). No significantly aberrant lncRNA was observed in HCV positive/HBV
negative tumors (N = 19) in comparison with non-tumor tissues. Within
non-tumor tissues, we found 3 up-regulated lncRNAs (Kcnq1ot1, PSF
inhibiting RNA and NRON) were significantly associated with HBV
infection, and upregulated PRINS was significantly associated with HCV
infection in comparison with viral negative cases. These data suggest
that the deregulated lncRNAs found within HCC non-tumor tissues may be
specifically modified by relevant hepatitis viral infection.CONCLUSIONS:
Aberrant lncRNAs are potential HCC tumor biomarkers that are impacted by
HBV or HCV infection. Further investigation of tumor specific biomarkers
should consider the effects of different etiologies that will improve
early detection of HCC.

