Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Stanford-Cancer Genome Atlas Portal: A web/mobile navigation
interface for exploring the clinical associations of cancer drivers


The NIH Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project has generated enormous data
sets covering >20 malignancies and provides many valuable insights into
the underlying genetic and genomic basis of cancer. However, exploring
the association between TCGA results and clinical phenotype remains a
challenge, particularly for individuals lacking formal bioinformatics
training. This will be an important step towards the clinical translation
of cancer genomic/proteomic data. Several websites such as cBio portal or
UCSC genome browser make TCGA data accessible but these sites have few
interactive features for querying clinically-relevant phenotypic
associations with cancer drivers. To enable exploration of the clinical
associations of the TCGA data, we developed the Stanford-TCGA Portal
(http://genomeportal.stanford.edu/pan-tcga). Using a web/mobile
interface, this website enables easy navigation of cancer
genomic/proteomic/clinical data provided by the TCGA and pose clinically
relevant questions. For example, What genes are associated with advanced
breast cancer? or What is the frequency of copy number deletion of APC
for samples with/without PIK3CA mutations?.The Stanford-TCGA portal
interface provide querying of TCGA data in three different ways; i)
search for clinically relevant genes/micro RNAs (miRs)/proteins by names,
cancer types or clinical parameters, ii) profile genomic/proteomic
changes by clinical parameters in a cancer type, or iii) test two-hit
hypotheses. Any user can easily navigate the lists of these identified
genes through the Stanford-TCGA Portal. SQL queries run in the background
and show the results on our portal according to user's input. To derive
these associations, we relied on elastic-net estimates of optimal
multiple linear regularized regression; we relied on clinical parameters
in the space of multiple genomic/proteomic features provided by the TCGA
data. We identified the set of top gene predictors (by 10 fold cross
validation) of each clinical parameter for each cancer. The robustness of
results was estimated by bootstrapping with 2,000 iterations. As a
proof-of-concept, we demonstrated this approach's utility in the TCGA
colorectal cancer data (HoJoon Lee et al., BMC Medical Genomics 2013) and
we have since expanded our analysis to include nearly all TCGA
malignancies. We identify clinically relevant genes/miRs/proteins by our
statistical analysis, some which has been previously described, from 17
cancer types with 19 clinical parameters such as clinical stage or
smoking history.In summary, the Stanford-TCGA Portal enables the cancer
research community and others to fully utilize TCGA data. With its
straightforward web/mobile interface, it provides simple yet clinically
relevant associations of TCGA results. Thus, one can examine queries and
test hypothesis regarding genomic/proteomic alterations in cancers from
any time and place.

