Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COP1 functions as a sensor of cellular lipids and regulator of
lipogenesis in human cancer cells


BackgroundConstitutive photomorphogenesis protein 1 (COP1; also known as
Rfwd2), an evolutionally conserved E3 ubiquitin ligase, has been defined
to mediate the degradation of several important proteins, such as p53,
c-Jun, ETS, FOXO1 and ACC1, being involved in tumorigenesis. In response
to DNA damage, COP1 is autodegraded in the context of ATM, which is
triggered by 14-3-3. However, the biological function and expression
regulation of COP1 remain to be fully understood. This study reports a
novel function of COP1 in lipid metabolism.MethodsWe targeted COP1
expression in cancer cells MCF-7 and HepG2 with COP1 shRNA lentivirus and
COP1 overexpression lentivirus, respectively. We investigated the lipid
synthesis, glucose oxidation and conversion into lipids in these cells
using radiolabeled acetate and glucose and lipid complex analysis.
Quantitative real-time PCR and Western blot were used to examine gene
expression. Acetyl CoA carboxylase-1 (ACC1) siRNA and TOFA, an inhibitor
of ACC1, were used to modulate the intracellular lipid
synthesis.ResultsLipid depletion induced by acetyl CoA carboxylase-1
(ACC1) knockdown or the inhibition of ACC1 by TOFA induced COP1
expression, but palmatic acid, the end-product of de novo fatty acid
synthesis pathway, reversed TOFA-induced COP1 expression. In addition,
U73122, an inhibitor of phospholipase C that cleaves PIP2 into DAG and
IP3, triggered COP1 expression. These data suggest that COP1 expression
is mediated by cellular lipid state, and the lipid second messengers
(PIP2 and DAG) are involved in the expression regulation of COP1. In
contrast, the ectopic expression of COP1 greatly reduced pAMPK and pACC1
levels, but elevated fatty acid synthase (FASN) expression, leading to
the increase of fatty acid (FA)/lipid synthesis. In sharp contrast,
siRNA-mediated COP1 knockdown in cancer cells significantly increased
pACC1 and pAMPK levels and reduced FASN expression, leading to decrease
of lipid synthesis. The cell growth and proliferation was accordingly
changed in response to the alterations of lipid synthesis. Altogether our
data suggest that COP1 expression is regulated through the lipid second
messenger mediated signaling, and the upregulated COP1 in turn enhances
lipid synthesis, functioning as a positive feedback.ConclusionCOP1
functions as a sensor of cellular lipid state and promoter of
lipogenesis, facilitating tumorigenesis.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

