Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparing the mutational landscape of African American and
Caucasian lung cancers


Background: The overall death rate from lung cancer is higher in
African-Americans (AA) compared to Caucasians (CAU). Understanding
differences in the prevalence and type of somatic alterations between
races may illuminate differences in prognosis and lead to the reduction
of outcome disparities by more precisely targeting patients
treatment.Methods: Formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tumor samples were
collected from Baptist Cancer Center, Memphis, TN. DNA was extracted and
sonicated to 250 bp following Covaris FFPE DNA Extraction & Purification
protocol and further purified using Agencourt AMPure XP beads. The
OncoPanel_v2 target enrichment panel (Agilent SureSelect) was used for
hybrid capture of 502 cancer-related genes. Samples were pooled and
sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq2500 to a mean depth of coverage of 210x.
Tumors with >30x sequencing depth over >80% of targeted bases were
considered for analysis. MuTect and SomaticIndelDetector were used to
identify somatic single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and short insertions
or deletions (indels), respectively. As matched normal DNA was not
available for these samples, analysis was limited to variants previously
observed in tumors as described in the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in
Cancer (COSMIC) database, and variants were excluded if found in the
germline dataset of the Exome Sequencing Project (ESP).Results: 510 tumor
specimens from 242 Black and 268 White patients (with self-reported race)
were analyzed including 320 adenocarcinomas and 142 squamous cell
carcinomas. Pathological classification was independently reviewed and
confirmed for 374 of 472 cases for an overall concordance rate of 79%.
Using principle component analysis (PCA) on germline SNVs, we observed
that the biological ancestry was different than the self-reported race
for 1.5% of patients. Mutational frequencies for genes with known roles
in adenocarcinoma such as KRAS and EGFR were not significantly different
between tumors from Black and White patients (Fisher's exact p-value >
0.05). Amplification rates for NKX2-1, MET, MDM2, and MYC and homozygous
deletion rates for CDKN2A were also not significantly different between
populations. Translocations involving ALK and ROS1 were detected in
tumors from Black patients demonstrating that these events are present in
both populations. Similarly, mutational frequencies for genes such as
PIK3CA and PTEN were not significantly different across populations in
squamous cell carcinomas.Conclusions: These results demonstrate that lung
cancers from Black patients are more similar to Whites than East Asians
with respect to genes such as EGFR, and suggest that clinical trials of
targeted therapies could significantly benefit patients in both
populations.

