Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Excess of cytoplasmic NPM-ALK driven oncogenic signaling is toxic
and promotes cellular apoptosis and drug dependency


Most of Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma (ALCL) cases carry the t(2;5;
p23;q35) that produces the fusion protein nucleophosmin (NPM)-ALK. NPM
provides an oligomerization domain that causes the spontaneous
dimerization and ligand-independent activation of the ALK. NPM-ALK
deregulated kinase activity drives several pathways involved in cellular
proliferation and survival and sustains the process of malignant
transformation. NPM-ALK is localized both in the cytoplasm and the
nucleus, but the role of NPM-ALK cytoplasmic or nuclear fractions on ALCL
phenotype maintenance is undetermined. We found that in all ALK+ ALCL
cell lines and in primary ALCL NPM-ALK was equally distributed between
cytoplasm and nucleus, but only the cytoplasmic portion, formed by
NPM-ALK homodimers, was kinetically active and had transforming
properties. The nuclear portion, formed by NPM/NPM-ALK heterodimers, was
inactive. Thus, about 50% of the NPM-ALK fusion is sequestered and
inactivated in the nucleus of ALCL cells by WT NPM1. Indeed,
relocalization of NPM-ALK entirely to the cytoplasm in NPM-/- cells or
its overexpression in several ALK+ ALCL cell lines resulted in cell death
through activation of the ERK1/2 pathway and of -H2AX, a key player of
the DNA damage response pathway. Thus, excessive oncogenic ALK signaling
induces a cell stress leading to apoptosis and a balanced amount of ALK
activation is necessary for optimal ALCL growth. Interestingly, we
selected three human NPM-ALK positive cell lines resistant to the dual
ALK/EGFR inhibitor AP26113. Resistance was due to genomic NPM-ALK
amplification that caused overexpression of NPM-ALK and consequently
hyperactivation of downstream ALK-dependent pathways. These cell lines
were not only resistant, but also drug-dependent, meaning that addition
of a low amount of AP26113 was required for cellular growth and to keep
normal NPM-ALK signalling levels. Indeed, upon drug withdrawal, NPM-ALK
and its downstream pathways were hyperactivated. The viability of all
three drug-addicted cell lines dramatically dropped, confirming that an
excess of NPM-ALK signaling was detrimental for cell growth. In two
resistant cell lines out of three a new population recovered in the
absence of the drug and was re-sensitized to AP26113. Notably, in these
new drug-sensitive populations NPM-ALK overexpression was abrogated. All
together, these findings support the idea that deregulation of NPM-ALK
localization might be an attractive therapeutic option. Moreover, for a
subset of patients that may develop drug dependency as well as drug
resistance as a consequence of NPM-ALK overexpression, a discontinuous
tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapeutic schedule may be more effective than
a continuous one, as it is usually proposed.

