Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of patient-derived platform to assess activity of
anticancer agents in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer (PDAC) affects 44,000 individuals yearly in the US.
This cancer is almost universally lethal, with a very limited efficacy of
approved chemotherapy (gemcitabine, nab-paclitaxel, platinum, 5FU).
Clinical trials seeking to expand the portfolio of anti-cancer agents
active in PDAC have been largely unsuccessful. PDAC is almost always
characterized by activating mutations in the KRAS oncogene, which is
difficult to directly inhibit, focusing therapeutic strategies on
inhibiting downstream KRAS effectors in the RAF-MEK-ERK signaling
cascade. However, disruption of these effectors has been complicated by
the existence of extensive redundancies in signaling leading to rapid
reversal of inhibition. Thus, there is a clear and urgent need for the
development of new anti-PDAC agents as well as reliable models of PDAC
that better recapitulate biological properties of pancreatic cancer.Here,
we report on the development of a new drug screening platform to evaluate
the activity of existing and emerging chemotherapeutics against
pancreatic cancer. Surgically resected pancreatic tumors were implanted
in immunocompromised mice to develop direct patient-derived xenografts
(PDX). Cell lines derived from the PDX models were subsequently screened
for proliferation and viability following exposure to 867 clinical grade
or FDA approved drugs. Top hits were then validated in mice bearing the
PDX tumors as well as in a genetically modified KRAS/p53 mutant mouse
model of pancreatic cancer (KPC).Triptolide, a natural product compound
from Chinese medicinal plant Tripterygium wilfordii, was found to be the
most active agent in the screen. In vivo, triptolide produced complete
tumor regressions for up to 6 weeks in c-Myc amplified PDX models.
Molecular analysis revealed the specific ability of triptolide to quickly
deplete c-Myc protein in Myc-amplified cancers by binding and
inactivating ERCC3 protein. Finally, we used our PDX platform to evaluate
the activity of a novel anticancer agent STA-12-8666 (Synta
Pharmaceuticals), a small molecule drug conjugate consisting of a tumor
selective delivery moiety (HSP90 inhibitor) attached via a cleavable
linker to SN38, the active metabolite of the topoisomerase I inhibitor
irinotecan. HSP90 inhibitors and irinotecan, members of the screening
library, showed only modest activity when tested individually in the
primary pancreatic cell lines and PDAC PDX models suggesting that the
potent antitumor activity of STA-12-8666 is due in part to its tumor
targeted delivery and prolonged SN38 exposure. Thus, STA-12-8666, that
provides targeted delivery to the tumor with activated HSP90, was
significantly more effective than irinotecan in all pancreatic PDX models
tested, and providing complete, durable responses in a subset. In
conclusion, our patient-derived platform provides a valuable tool for
preclinical analysis of promising therapeutic agents for treatment of
pancreatic cancer.

