Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic alterations in ERBB2 define a subset of pleomorphic
invasive lobular breast cancer


Background. Pleomorphic invasive lobular carcinoma represents a unique
histologic subset of breast cancer with poorer outcomes as compared with
classic invasive lobular carcinoma of the breast. With the recent finding
of ERBB2 alterations in recurrent invasive lobular carcinoma, the goal of
this study is to define the relationship of ERBB2 alterations in the
distinct subset of pleomorphic invasive lobular carcinomas.Methods. Using
the provisional invasive breast cancer data set of 962 cases in The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), all breast cancers with CDH1 alterations were
identified and pathologic review was performed. Independent
identification of ERBB2 genomic alterations was done. The frequency and
nature of genomic alterations in ERBB2, PTEN, PIK3CA, and TP53 were
determined. FFPE specimens from an additional 18 cases from our own
institution have been evaluated using the combination of the RainDance
ThunderBolts Cancer Panel for validation.Results. Of 116 TCGA breast
cancers with CDH1 alterations, 86 were invasive lobular breast cancer.
Within this subset, 21 pleomorphic lobular breast cancers were identified
based on morphologic review. Nine ERBB2 mutations (42.9%) and three
amplifications (14.3%) were found in pleomorphic invasive lobular
carcinoma, but none in classic invasive lobular carcinoma (p value
1.92e-9). There were no significance differences in the frequency of
TP53, PTEN or PIK3CA alterations in pleomorphic invasive lobular
carcinoma as compared to classic invasive lobular carcinoma. Data from
the additional 18 validation cases will be presented.Conclusions. Genomic
alterations in ERBB2 strongly associate with the finding of pleomorphic
invasive lobular but not classic invasive lobular histology. The presence
of ERBB2 alterations has therapeutic implications specific to this rare
breast cancer subset that could impact outcomes. Comprehensive genomic
profiling identifies ERBB2 mutations that are not detected with standard
clinical immunohistochemistry or FISH.

