Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dramatic differences in the extents and patterns of PKC delta
modification among the different members of the NCI-60 cancer cell line
panel


Protein kinase Cs (PKCs) are validated targets for cancer therapy with
many agents in clinical trials which affect their activity and/or
expression. PKC delta is one of the most highly expressed PKC isoforms
and typically functions biologically to promote apoptosis. Multiple
phosphorylation sites, both on serine/threonine and on tyrosine, have
been identified on PKC delta and various sites have been shown to be
differentially important for the various biological activities of PKC
delta. Unfortunately, phosphosite specific antibodies are only available
for a few of these phosphorylation sites. Capillary isoelectric focusing
on a nanoscale with immunoassay readout, using pan-reactive antibodies
that detect all modified states, reveals signatures of the differently
modified states of PKC delta in cells. In LNCaP cells, the
phosphorylation pattern of PKC delta was modestly complex under basal
conditions but it became highly complex after ligand treatment. This
phosphorylation signature depended on the ligand and the subsequent
subcellular localization of PKC delta. To assess the generality of the
findings in the LNCaP cells, we have extended our analysis to assess the
phosphorylation signatures of PKC delta in different cell lines of the
NCI-60 cancer cell line panel. Under basal conditions, the various cell
lines showed dramatic differences. Some of them (SR leukemia, HT-29 colon
cancer, OVCAR-5 ovarian cancer, many lung cancer cell lines, T-47D breast
cancer) showed a pattern similar to that of LNCaP cells. Many others
(most renal cell lines, OVCAR-8 ovarian cancer, MDA-MB-468 breast cancer,
SK-MEL5 melanoma) displayed a complex pattern of highly phosphorylated
peaks in the PKC delta signature. The extents of PKC delta
phosphorylation did not correlate with the sensitivity of the cell lines
to growth inhibition by the PKC ligand mezerein. Current efforts with
selected cell lines from the NCI-60 cell line panel are directed at 1)
characterizing in detail the PKC delta signature using different
phosphosite specific antibodies to deconvolute the modifications
responsible for the multiplicity of the peaks, 2) exploring what factors
influence the PKC delta signature, and 3) evaluating whether the basal
PKC delta phosphorylation signature is a measure of overall DAG signaling
or is specific to the PKC delta isoform. We conclude that capillary
isoelectric focusing with immunoassay is a powerful tool for exploring
the complexity of PKC delta activation/modification in different cells
and for identifying those cancer types where dysregulation of the DAG
signaling pathway is most prominent. While the current studies focus on
PKC delta, this same methodology should be similarly informative for the
many other proteins with an intermediate level of complexity in their
post-translational modifications.

