Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mosaic RNase IIIb domain DICER1 mutations in children with
multiple primary tumors


The DICER1 syndrome or pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB) familial tumor and
dysplasia syndrome (PPB FTDS) (OMIM #601200) is caused by heterozygous
germ-line mutations in the microRNA maturation pathway gene, DICER1.
Several rare phenotypes constitute the syndrome including PPB, cystic
nephroma (CN), ovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors (SLCT), intra-ocular
medulloepithelioma, nasal chondromesenchymal hamartoma (NCMH),
pineoblastoma, pituitary blastoma, multinodular goitre (MNG) and other
rare childhood sarcomas and dysplasias. Highly characteristic second
somatic mutations have been identified in DICER1-associated tumors,
affecting amino acid residues central to the catalytic activity of the
RNase IIIb domain.We describe four children with multiple primary tumours
associated with the DICER1 syndrome. Sanger sequencing of constitutional
DNA obtained from peripheral blood lymphocytes and/or saliva revealed no
likely deleterious germ-line DICER1 mutations. We subsequently sequenced
the region encoding the DICER1 RNase IIIa and RNase IIIb domains in gDNA
extracted from the tumor samples, and noted the presence of the same
RNase IIIb missense mutation in multiple tumors from each patient
(Patient A: c.5437G>C; Patient B: c.5125G>A; Patient C: c.5439G>C;
Patient D: c.5425G>A). We performed targeted capture followed by deep
sequencing on DNA extracted from both normal and tumor tissue, which
revealed the presence of the respective RNase IIIb mutations in a low
percentage of sequencing reads (0.2 - 13%) in constitutional DNA from
three of the four patients (Patients A, B and C). The relative abundance
of the allele harboring the DICER1 RNase IIIb mutation was significantly
higher in the tumors compared to normal tissue from the surrounding organ
and/or distant sites. Taken together, these findings indicate a mosaic
origin of the DICER1 RNase IIIb missense mutations. The mosaic origin of
Patient D's mutation remains to be unequivocally established.We further
hypothesized that, in the setting of a mosaic DICER1 RNase IIIb
mutations, we might discover second somatic mutations outside of the
RNase IIIb domain which initiate two-hit tumorigenesis as seen in most
DICER1-related tumors. Sequencing data identified individually distinct
second somatic, likely-deleterious DICER1 mutations in Patient A's left
ovary SLCT and sinonasal inflammatory polyp, in Patient C's NCMH, and in
Patient D's Type II PPB which arose in a pre-existing lung cyst. Each of
these second somatic mutations are predicted to prematurely truncate the
DICER1 protein.We demonstrate that mosaic DICER1 RNase IIIb missense
mutations are an occasional and important genetic cause of the DICER1
syndrome in patients presenting with multiple primary tumors associated
with the syndrome, and that for tumor initiation, they appear to be
accompanied by second somatic truncating non-RNase IIIb DICER1 mutations.

