Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlating RAS oncogenic allele dependence with drug sensitivity


KRAS is a small G-protein that is a highly important member of the EGFR
pathway. KRAS is frequently mutated in human cancers and predicts a
shorter survival for patients with lung and colorectal cancers. Although
any mutation at codon 12 or 13 is potentially oncogenic, Cysteine-12,
Aspartate-12, Valine-12, and Aspartate 13 mutations predominate in human
cancers, and the various oncogenic alleles correlate with distinct
clinical outcomes. There is even some indication that Glycine 12
mutations may benefit from EGFR targeted therapy, whereas codon 12
mutations are contraindicated.We hypothesize that these clinical
observations may be explained by subtle differences in effector pathway
activation. It has been reported that G12C and G12V mutations
preferentially activate the Ral-GDS pathway, while cell lines with G12D
mutations elevate the PI3 kinase and MAPK pathways. However, it is
difficult to correlate clinical response to differences in biochemical
signaling amidst a myriad of potentially confounding genetic alterations
present across a panel of cell lines or patient tumor samples. In order
to normalize the contributions of cell line heterogeneity, we tested
pairs of isogenic cell lines to isolate KRAS allele specific effects, and
to identify compounds that selectively inhibit RAS dependent growth in an
allele specific manner.To do this, we used an engineered mouse embryonic
fibroblast cell line - H-Ras/, N-Ras/ and K-Raslox/lox, which expresses a
transgene cre-recombinase - estrogen receptor fusion. Treatment with 4OHT
results in excision of the endogenous K-Ras alleles, loss of KRAS
expression, suppression of the MAPK pathway and G1 arrest. Reconstitution
with any RAS isoform (K- H- or N-Ras), including any of the KRAS
oncogenic alleles using a lentiviral vector system, allows the cells to
re-enter the cell cycle and proliferate. The doubling time and basal pERK
and pAKT levels are comparable across all isogenic uniclonal cell lines
regardless of the RAS allele introduced. This system takes advantage of
its dependency on a single RAS mutant to help screen for effector pathway
dependence or synthetic lethal interactions unilaterally relevant to one
mutant KRAS allele.Majority of compounds tested were unbiased towards the
cell lines, but a few classes of drug showed selectivity. Cells
expressing wild-type RAS were more sensitive to RTK inhibitors compared
with cells expressing a mutant KRAS allele. Farnesyl Transferase
Inhibitors (FTIs) such as Tipifarnib (R115777/Zarnestra) and Lonafarnib
(SCH66336/Sarasar) were more potent against the HRAS WT dependent cell
lines as compared to the KRAS dependent lines, validating the escape
mechanism by which K-Ras and N-Ras get geranylgeranylated in the presence
of FTIs. This strategy provides us with tools to delineate the subtle
allele specific sensitivity differences which may translate to meaningful
biology and may be used for tailoring mutant specific drug regimens in
the clinic.

