Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphorylation of Thr165 within the activation loop of Nek3
kinase is necessary for its pro-migratory function in breast cancer cells


The polypeptide hormone prolactin (PRL) is increasingly recognized as
contributing to the development and progression of human breast cancer.
Activation of the prolactin receptor (PRLr) by PRL contributes to the
growth, survival and motility of human breast cancer cells. The PRL/PRLr
complex activates multiple signaling pathways, including the
serine/threonine kinase, Nek3 (NIMA-related kinase 3). PRL acts as a
chemoattractant for breast cancer cells, accompanied by reorganization of
the cytoskeleton. However, the molecular mechanisms by which PRLr
signaling contributes to the invasive breast cancer cellular phenotype is
not fully understood. Nek3 [NIMA (never in mitosis gene a)-related kinase
3] is a member of the serine/threonine (S/T) Nek protein kinases. Data
from our laboratory suggests that Nek3 may contribute to breast cancer
pathogenesis through regulation of cell migration/invasion, apoptosis,
and cytoskeletal reorganization. Therefore, targeting Nek3 in breast
cancer cells represents a novel therapeutic approach to potentially
improve the treatment of breast cancer. We previously demonstrated that
PRL/PRLr-signaling activates Nek3, however the molecular mechanisms of
Nek3 kinase activation remain to be elucidated. Therefore, to better
understand the mechanism of PRL-dependent regulation of Nek3 kinase
activity, we focused on determining whether Nek3 activity is regulated by
phosphorylation and to identify the potential sites(s) of
autophosphorylation. Through site-directed mutagenesis of Nek3 residues
in the activation segment, we identified threonine residue 165 (Thr165),
as a major site that regulates the catalytic activity of Nek3. In
addition to being autophosphorylated in vitro, Nek3 Thr165 was also
phosphorylated in response to the PRL-MEK-ERK1/2 signaling pathway in
PRL-stimulated breast cancer cells. We show here that phosphorylation at
Thr165 Nek3 plays an important regulatory role in cell migration and
adhesion, steps that are critical in the invasive process leading to
tumor metastasis. In order to test this, we expressed wild-type Nek3 and
a nonphosphorylatable Nek3 mutant (T165V) in the breast cancer cell lines
T47D and MCF7. We found that expression of T165V Nek3 resulted in a
significant decrease in cell adhesion to the basement membrane matrix,
Matrigel, while additionally inhibiting cell motility in a wound healing
assay. Ongoing studies are further examining the role of Nek3 in
regulating focal adhesion dynamics and cytoskeletal remodeling.

