Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Population pharmacokinetic (PPK) modeling of onapristone in
patients (pts) with progesterone receptor (PR)-expressing cancers


Background: Onapristone is a type I PR antagonist, which prevents
PR-induced DNA transcription. Onapristone anti-cancer activity is well
documented. An extended-release (ER) tablet formulation of onapristone
was designed to address the liver function test (LFT) elevations seen
with immediate-release (IR) onapristone. A phase 1 study with onapristone
in patients with tumors expressing PR is underway. Objectives included
determining the PK profile of ER onapristone using a PPK
approach.Materials and methods: This is an ongoing multi-center,
open-label, randomized, parallel-group, 2-stage ph1 study. Female pts 18
yrs with tumors expressing PR are eligible. The Stage 1 primary endpoint
is the recommended ph2 dose of ER onapristone; secondary endpoints
include: safety, efficacy, and PK. Pts received onapristone ER 10, 20,
30, 40 or 50 mg BID, or onapristone IR tablets 100 mg QD until
progressive disease or intolerability. PK blood samples from 8 time
points were collected over 12 h post-dose Day 1 for the ER and 9 blood
samples over 24 h post-dose for the IR formulation. Onapristone plasma
concentrations were measured using validated UPLC with tandem mass
spectrometry detection (range 1-250 ng/mL). Monolix V4.1 was used to
calculate absorption constant (Ka); apparent clearance (CL/F);
inter-compartmental clearance (Q); apparent distribution volume (V1/F),
2nd compartment distribution volume (V2) and bioavailability (F) of ER vs
IR.Results: Stage 1 is complete. 42 pts have validated PK data. A
2-compartment open model adequately described the total onapristone
time-concentration curve with linear elimination. Results are in Table
1.Estimated PK parameters for onapristone in pts with PR-expressing
cancers (n = 42)Conclusions: The PPK modeling described the plasma
onapristone time-concentration curves well. A central volume equivalent
to the circulating blood volume and a large volume of the deep
compartment suggest a large tissue diffusion. PPK/PD modeling to explore
safety and efficacy is ongoing, with no overt PK/safety relationship
detected.

