Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of stromal cell-related genes between
primary nasopharyngeal carcinoma and distant metastasis


Stromal cells in the tumor microenviroment play an important role in
development and progression of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Aim of
this study is to identify the stromal cell related genes which may
promote distant metastasis in NPC. Materials and methods: Differently
expressed genes were accessed by comparing nasopharyngeal carcinoma and
distant metastasis by microarray. Then stromal cells related genes were
analyzed by using statistics tools. Five selected genes were validated in
112 nasopharyngeal carcinoma specimens. Results: We have identified 3360
genes up-regulated (P Stromal cells in the tumor microenviroment play an
important role in development and progression of nasopharyngeal carcinoma
(NPC). Aim of this study is to identify the stromal cell related genes
which may promote distant metastasis in NPC. Materials and methods:
Differently expressed genes were accessed by comparing nasopharyngeal
carcinoma and distant metastasis by microarray. Then stromal cells
related genes were analyzed by using statistics tools. Five selected
genes were validated in 112 nasopharyngeal carcinoma specimens. Results:
We have identified 3360 genes up-regulated (P < .05)and 2327 genes
down-regulated(P Stromal cells in the tumor microenviroment play an
important role in development and progression of nasopharyngeal carcinoma
(NPC). Aim of this study is to identify the stromal cell related genes
which may promote distant metastasis in NPC. Materials and methods:
Differently expressed genes were accessed by comparing nasopharyngeal
carcinoma and distant metastasis by microarray. Then stromal cells
related genes were analyzed by using statistics tools. Five selected
genes were validated in 112 nasopharyngeal carcinoma specimens. Results:
We have identified 3360 genes up-regulated (P < .05)and 2327 genes
down-regulated(P < .05) in distant metastasis versus primary
nasopharyngeal carcinoma, among the differently expressed genes,111
stromal cells related genes were picked up according to previous
researches for cluster analysis and pathway analysis. Upon validating 5
selected genes (BIRC3,FRAS1,NPNT,POSTN,PCSK6) in 112 additional NPC
cases, the authors found that expression of POSTN was negative correlated
significantly with lymph node involvement (p = 0.006)and clinical stage(p
= 0.035) at the moment of diagnosis and FRAS1 was negative correlated
with disease-free survival (p = 0.002) and distant metastasis survival (p
= 0.02).Conclusion: Increasing knowledge of metastasis promotion of
stromal cells related genes may provide feasible explanations underlying
NPC progression and metastasis along with the development of biomarkers
for screening high-risk populations.

