Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Active secretion of CXCL10 and CCL5 from colorectal cancer
microenvironments associates with GranzymeB+ CD8+ T-cell infiltration


T-cell infiltration varies among colorectal tumors and directly impacts
patient survival. Chemoattraction and infiltration of CD8+ T-cells are
mediated by surface chemokine receptors CXCR3 and CCR5, and are
associated with favorable prognosis. Transcriptional expression of these
receptors cognate chemokines, as well as other inflammation-associated
chemokines, correlate with prolonged disease-free survival (DFS). These
findings, however, were derived from paraffin embedded tissues, thus
little is known about the pattern of secreted T-cell targeting chemokines
from colorectal tumors. Therefore, this investigation aimed to determine
the secretion pattern of chemokines associated with DFS from immediately
excised live tumor tissues. Our results demonstrate the first real
functional analysis of chemokine activity in colorectal tumors beyond
immunohistochemistry and real-time PCR. Forty-four colorectal tumors were
procured immediately after surgery and categorized by transcriptional
expression of two T-cell marker genes that represent the magnitude of
type-1 T-cell activity. Tumors that more highly co-expressed IFNG and
TBX21 consequently have a higher frequency of infiltrating GzmB+ CTLs and
IFN-+ CD4+ helper T-cells and transcribe a unique pattern of
DFS-associated chemokines when compared to normal mucosa. High
co-expression of IFNG and TBX21 was bimodally distributed across the
tumors collected. Tumors with higher co-expression more strongly secreted
two DFS-associated chemokines, CXCR3 ligand, CXCL10 and CCR5 ligand,
CCL5. Additional results demonstrate that tumors with higher
co-expression are proportionally skewed towards early TMN stages and with
mismatch repair-deficiency, confirming that infiltration of CD8+ T-cells
are associated with early TNM stages and lack of metastasis. Secreted
chemokines were detected using a novel immunoassay that may have
implications for future development of immunopotentiating treatments in
cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

