Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and clinical validation of a quantitative mass
spectrometric assay for immuno-oncology targets in FFPE samples


BackgroundImmune check point proteins play a pivotal role in immune
evasion by the tumor. Recent trials involving inhibitors of the immune
checkpoint protein pairs, PD-1 and PD-L1 have demonstrated anti-tumor
activity. Measuring the levels of immune check point proteins and other
members of the immunological synapse will help clinicians personalize
therapy. Currently, immunohistochemistry (IHC) is the preferred
diagnostic to assess PD-L1 status; however, PD-L1 positivity varies based
on the antibody that is used. Additionally, PD-L1 negative patients by
IHC have responded to anti-PD-L1 therapy implicating disconnect between
PD-L1 diagnostics and response. We have developed and clinically
validated a quantitative mass spectrometric technique that not only
quantitates PD-L1 in formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue but
can concurrently quantitate other members (B7H3, B7.1, B7.2, OX40L) of
the immunological synapse using the same tissue section.MethodRecombinant
PD-L1 protein was used to identify optimal quantitative peptides for
PD-L1 assay. Standard curves were generated using labeled and unlabeled
peptides. The PD-L1 assay was pre-clinically validated on 14 cell lines
with known expression levels of PD-L1. The assay was then run on archived
FFPE sections from in 9 normal tissues, 21 early staged (stage 1 and 2)
and 4 advanced staged (stage 3) NSCLC patients. In addition PD-L1 was
also assayed in bladder, breast and gastric cancer.ResultsPD-L1 protein
expression was detected in 7 out of 14 cell lines The regression analysis
between SRM and mRNA analysis demonstrated moderate correlation (R2 =
0.8894). Normal lung tissue did not express PD-L1; 24% of early stage
(5/21) and 50% of advanced stage NSCLC (2/4) expressed measurable PD-L1
protein. PD-L1 was detected more frequently in squamous cell carcinoma
than adenocarcinoma. We are currently assessing the levels of PD-L1 and
other targets of the immunological synapse using multiplex mass
spectrometry and comparing it with IHC in 100 cholangiocarcinoma and
possible inclusion of PD-L1diagnostics in clinical trials.DiscussionThe
need to characterize expression levels of druggable targets in small
biopsies is becoming ever more critical as new drug targets and
biomarkers are identified. Initial PD-L1 screening using clinical NSCLC
samples suggests that more advanced NSCLC patients are more likely to be
PD-L1 positive compared to early stage NSCLC patients. Laser
microdissection (LMD) can be used to specifically microdissect the
immunological synapse. Additional quantitative assays for both lymphocyte
(CD8, CD68) and immunotargets (B7-H3,B.1, B7.2 etc) have been developed
for assessing the immune profile in tumor associated stroma via LMD. This
immuno-proteomic assay of the key immunological synapse members within
tumor and/or stroma may lead to improved personalized immunotherapy.

