Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A multi-parameter in vitro screen demonstrates increased cardiac
toxicity with pan-HER inhibitors afatinib and neratinib when used in
combination with chemotherapy


The human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) oncogene is amplified
and overexpressed in 25 to 30% of breast cancers and is associated with
poor prognosis. Currently, two HER2-targeting agents have been
FDA-approved for the treatment of these breast cancers: trastuzumab and
lapatinib. Despite their proven clinical benefit, acquired resistance and
reports of cardiotoxicity have limited the utility of both drugs which
has led to the development of pan-HER inhibitors such as afatinib and
neratinib. However, little is known about the cardiac safety profile of
pan-HER inhibitors when used alone or in combination with
chemotherapeutic agents as they are often utilized in the clinic. To
better understand the effect of these compounds on cardiac cells, we
utilized a multi-parameter in vitro toxicity screen in human induced
pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CM). This in vitro
model evaluated each drug's effect, both alone and in combination with
chemotherapy, on the overall health, metabolic stress, and function of
hiPSC-CM. Our results showed that although afatinib and neratinib were
relatively cardiac safe at doses near their Cmax (150nM), higher doses of
both drugs (>30X Cmax) induced a range of damaging effects on cardiac
health and function. Interestingly however, combination treatment with
lower doses of afatinib and neratinib followed by chemotherapeutic stress
led to significant cardiotoxicity including alterations in cardiac cell
beating, increased lipid accumulation (indicative of mitochondrial
damage), and decreased cell viability. These results suggest that
although afatinib and neratinib are relatively cardiac safe when used
alone at lower doses, combination regimens with these drugs and
chemotherapeutic agents may increase cardiac toxicity risk. These effects
are likely mediated by the inhibition of survival pathways in
cardiomyocytes by pan-HER inhibitors which exacerbates
chemotherapy-mediated damage. Similar effects have been shown previously
for the HER2-targeted antibody trastuzumab when used in combination with
anthracyclines. Together this study shows the utility of a
multi-parameter in vitro screen using a more relevant hiPSC-CM model to
detect potential cardiac risk for both single drug and novel combination
treatments. Since many targeted therapies are given with other oncology
treatments, comprehensive safety screening for combination therapies is
warranted to illuminate any potential synergies on cardiotoxicity.

