Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The nuclear-targeted gold nanoparticles inhibit the tumor growth
in mouse model as potential anticancer agents


The use of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) as chemotherapeutic agents, based
on their intrinsic antineoplastic properties is becoming an increasingly
exciting possibility for the treatment of cancer. The specific targeting
of AuNPs to the nucleus of malignant cells can be achieved via peptide
functionalization of the nanoparticle surface, resulting in DNA damage
and subsequent apoptosis. Here, we utilized these novel AuNPs for
systemic delivery in vivo and determined their efficacy as
chemotherapeutic agents. In addition, we assessed their effects on
overall health in order to characterize their systemic toxicity. AuNPs
(30 nm in diameter) were functionalized with an Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) peptide
sequence, providing tumor cell specific targeting, as well as a
Lys-Lys-Lys-Arg-Lys nuclear localization sequence (NLS) peptide. These
novel nuclear-targeting AuNPs were delivered via tail vein injection in
nude mice bearing Tu212 tumors. Their in vivo therapeutic efficacy was
evaluated, along with assessing their systemic toxicity. The AuNPs,
specifically targeted to the tumor cell nucleus, exhibit circulation
half-life of 4.1 h, which is exceptionally greater than common
chemotherapeutic agents and, although they exhibit uptake by organs of
the reticuloendothelial system (RES) (e.g. liver and spleen), they also
accumulate in the tumor. In addition, when systemically delivered at low
doses (5 nM AuNPs) these novel targeted AuNPs show significant tumor
regression (via DNA damage and subsequent apoptosis) when compared to
their non-targeting counterparts (P = 0.004), with no observed toxicity
in terms of hepatic function, renal function, or body weight. In
conclusion, by delivering AuNPs to the nucleus of tumor cells, at low
doses in vivo, high therapeutic efficacy is achieved with minimal side
effects, indicating the potential for the use of these novel
nuclear-targeted AuNPs as chemotherapeutic agents.

