Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant methylation at chromosome 6p as novel biomarkers for
diagnosis and prognosis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma


Background: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) has the highest incidence in
Guangdong province and Hong Kong in Southern China. Early detection of
NPC is necessary to improve patient survival. Although aberrant
methylation at promoter region of the tumour suppressors were often
reported in NPC, genome-wide methylation changes have not been
comprehensively investigated.Aim: We aimed to examine the methylation
profile of NPC patient tumours using a high-throughput approach to
discover candidate biomarkers for early detection of NPC.Methods: We
systematically analyzed methylome data in the primary tumours and matched
normal adjacent tissues from 25 NPC patients collected by Area of
Excellence (AoE) NPC Tissue Bank using the Illumina HumanMethylation450
BeadChip platform. Comparatively, methylome data of solid tumours
including prostate cancer, invasive breast cancer, pancreatic cancer,
kidney cancer, thyroid cancer, liver cancer, rectal cancer, colon cancer,
head and neck cancer, lung adenocarcinoma and lung squamous cell
carcinoma collected by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) were examined. A
quantitative method, bisulfite pyrosequencing, was applied to evaluate
the aberrant methylation in an independent NPC patient cohort.Results: In
NPC, the hypermethylation pattern was more dominant than hypomethylation,
where over 90% of the differentially methylated loci were hypermethylated
within or close to CpG islands in tumours. The comparative methylome
analysis reveals aberrant methylation at chromosome 6p frequently
occurred in NPC (FDR = 1.3310-9), but was rare in other types of solid
tumours. Evident enrichment of the repressive mark H3K27me3 was found at
this region, indicating both DNA methylation and histone modification
function together, leading to epigenetic deregulation. Bisulfite
pyrosequencing results further confirmed the aberrant methylation at 6p
in an additional patient cohort, and 76.9% of the early-stage NPC
patients can be detected by aberrant methylation on 6p. Furthermore,
aberrant methylation at this region was observed in NPC recurrent tumours
and matched metastatic lymph nodes, indicating the potential use of genes
in this region for prognosis.Conclusion: Our study highlights the
importance of epigenetic deregulation in NPC. A novel genomic region on
6p with aberrant methylation was identified. This region contains several
important genes that have great potential to be used as biomarkers for
NPC early detection. The global genome-wide unbiased approach is useful
to discover potential biomarkers for early diagnosis and prognosis in
cancers.Acknowledgements: NPC AoE funding was provided by the Hong Kong
Research Grants Council (AoE/M-06/08) to MLL and HKU Small Project
Funding to WD.

