Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell longitudinal studies reveal cell cycle specific
effects of selective inhibitors of nuclear export (SINE)


Nuclear export of proteins is fundamental for cell growth and function.
Selinexor is a SINE compound that is in clinical development for the
treatment of different cancers. Selinexor forms a slowly reversible
covalent bond to Exportin-1 (XPO1), preventing its association with
protein cargos, thereby resulting in their nuclear retention. XPO1 cargos
include the majority of tumor suppressor proteins (TSP) and cell cycle
regulators such as p53, p21 and p27 that have key roles in cancer
progression and drug response. It is unclear how selinexor affects cell
cycle progression in individual cells and the subsequent stress and fate
of those cells. To elucidate selinexor action, we developed cell lines
that stably express fluorescent ubiquitin cell cycle reporters (FUCCI),
and followed individual cells longitudinally using continuous time-lapse
microscopy for 72 hours. We report that in fibrosarcoma-derived HT-1080
cells that express wildtype p53 and p21, 20% of the initial cell
population became arrested with >90% in G1- or S-phase and 35% died with
nearly 70% from G1- or S-phase after a cell cycle delay or arrest. We
also found that 45% of cells divided, but the progeny died or arrested in
G1- or S-phase of the next cell cycle - often after cell cycle arrest or
slowed cell cycle progression. Using FUCCI, we tracked the response of
cells treated acutely in specific cell cycle stages. Cells treated in
G1-phase most often arrested or died in G1- or S-phase, whereas cells
treated in G2-phase usually progressed to cell division. As FUCCI
revealed S-phase progression defects and associated cell death, we
further characterized this phenotype. Using nucleotide incorporation with
fluorescent detection, we find that as soon as 8 hours after selinexor
fewer cells are undergoing DNA replication and those that are, are doing
so inefficiently as both the rate and maximal levels of nucleotide
incorporation are significantly reduced. S-phase arrest and progression
defects may manifest as DNA double-strand breaks. We find a strong
association between S-phase status and DNA damage. In some cells, the
damage occurs within hours of selinexor treatment and appears as a
striking cluster of foci. At 8 hours, nearly 50% of cells contain DNA
damage clusters. Importantly, the damage clusters sometimes repair as
determined by fixed cell time-course analysis and live-cell microscopy.
We are exploring the nature of these DNA damage structures, the
mechanisms of their formation and repair, and are also testing for
redundancy of the cell cycle regulators in determining selinexor
responses. In summary, selinexor is fast acting, shows cell cycle
selectivity, and is highly effective at arresting cell growth and
inducing apoptosis in tumor cells. These data suggest that selinexor may
exert anti-cancer effects even on slow growing tumors where the bulk of
the cell mass presents a G1-like state and that it likely combines well
with other cell cycle targeted therapeutics.

