Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the functional role of retinoic acid receptor beta2
in the development of oral cancer


Background: Retinoids are the best studied chemopreventive agents in oral
cancer patients, whose effects are mediated by retinoic acid receptors
(RAR). The loss of RAR2 expression early in the development of oral
cancer is attributed to acquisition of cellular immortalization or
abrogated senescence. Aim: To determine the functional effects of RAR2
dysfunction (constitutive expression or loss) in precancerous oral
keratinocytes. Methods: Characterization of a panel or mortal (D6, D30)
and immortal precancerous oral keratinocytes (D19, D20, D34 and D38), and
tert immortalized normal cells (FNB-6) for baseline RAR2 expression and
their role in senescence, differentiation, apoptosis, and methylation.
Re-express RAR2 in immortal cells by treatment with all trans retinoic
acid, 5-aza-2- deoxycytidine, administered alone and in combination and
asses their effect on senescence and promoter methylation. Results:
Mortal cells showed constitutive expression of RAR2 in senescing cultures
and loss of expression in immortal cells. This was reflected in tissue
engineered 3D composites as well as in the corresponding biopsies, when
stained with RAR antibody. Concomitant expression of CDKN2A and CDKN1A in
senescing cultures and their absence in immortals suggest that the loss
of RAR2 strongly correlate with transition from senescence to
immortalization. Re-expression of RAR2 in immortal cells by treatment
with retinoic acid (RA), 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (Aza-C) and combination of
RA + Aza-C with simultaneous upregulation of CDKN2A and CDKN1A confirm
RAR2 as tumor suppressor gene, which is silenced due to hypermethylation.
Increase in the Histone Repressor A (HIRA) foci and Senescence associated
- galactosidase (SA- gal) activity in treated cell confirmed the
restoration of senescence program in an immortal cell. Promoter
methylation analysis confirmed that the silencing of RAR2 in immortal
cell was due to hypermethylation. Conclusion: The role of demethylating
agent in growth inhibition and apoptosis highlights the importance of RAR
beta serving as an intermediate biomarker in chemoprevention.
Identification of methylation status may prove useful as a selective
biomarker prior to combined demethylation and retinoid treatment in oral
precancerous lesions.

