Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular targeting of cetuximab resistant head and neck cancer


Despite promising preclinical data, the EGFR targeted monoclonal
antibody, cetuximab, has limited use as single agent therapy in the
treatment of head and neck cancer due to the development of therapeutic
resistance. Improved approaches to treat these cancers will need to
address the evolving molecular landscape of head and neck cancer. Recent
reports describing mutations or copy number alterations in PI3K and PTEN
as potential causes of cetuximab resistance have sparked interest in
therapeutics that target these pathways as alternatives to or in
combination with EGFR targeting drugs.Using both in vitro and in vivo
models of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) we have
recapitulated the diversity of responses to cetuximab observed in the
patient population and are testing alternative therapies. Examining an
array of HNSCC cell lines, including both human papillomavirus (HPV)
positive and negative lines, we observed a wide range of sensitivities to
this drug, with little to no growth inhibition in some lines even at
micromolar concentrations. For lines that were sensitive to drug,
effective growth inhibition, demonstrated in both proliferation and
colony formation assays, was linked with suppressed phosphorylation of
both Akt and ERK/MAPK signaling downstream of EGFR. Additionally, in the
sensitive HPV+ HNSCC lines, cetuximab treatment induced apoptosis marked
by caspase activity. Both sensitive and resistant HNSCC lines were then
tested for response to both AZD8055, a dual mTORC1/2 inhibitor and
BEZ235, a PI3K/mTORC1 inhibitor, resulting in both growth inhibition and
successful suppression of phosphorylation of their Akt and S6 targets,
suggesting that these drugs may be useful alternatives or adjuvants for
cetuximab treatment.In vivo models of HNSCC were also utilized to test
the efficacy of cetuximab treatment and begin to evaluate alternative or
combination therapies. Using immunocompromised mouse models, both cell
line xenografts and novel patient derived xenografts presented a range of
sensitivities to cetuximab. In an effort to identify potential biomarkers
that would predict response to cetuximab, IHC staining of pre-treatment
tumor samples was carried out and demonstrated that low phospho-Akt and
phospho-ERK levels correlated with cetuximab sensitivity. Initial in vivo
studies using the PI3K/mTORC inhibitors AZD8055 and BEZ235 to treat both
cetuximab sensitive and resistant xenografts, have shown that these
compounds may be effective at suppressing growth in both categories of
tumors. These studies provide initial pre-clinical data to support the
use of PI3K inhibition for the treatment of head and neck cancer.

