Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aromatase inhibition shapes the clonal architecture of estrogen
receptor-positive breast cancers


BACKGROUND:Aromatase inhibitors are routinely used to treat estrogen
receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer in postmenopausal women. Yet,
one-third of ER positive tumors are resistant to aromatase inhibitors
with a further one-third developing resistance over time. The underlying
mechanism conferring resistance to endocrine therapy is poorly
understood. In the current work, we study the effect of aromatase
inhibitor therapy on the clonal evolution of breast cancer and how it
relates to therapy response.MATERIALS AND METHODS:We selected 12
aromatase inhibitor sensitive (post-treatment Ki67 10%) that had
previously been whole genome sequenced (Ellis, et al. 2014). We obtained
surgical samples of the same tumors after 4 months of aromatase inhibitor
treatment, whole-genome sequenced them, and also obtained RNA-sequencing
data for 19 of the pre-treatment and 18 of the post-treatment tumors. To
better understand spatial heterogeneity we also whole-genome sequenced 11
secondary core biopsies taken from a subset of both the baseline and
surgical tumors.RESULTS AND DISCUSSION:We classified each tumor based on
its clonal heterogeneity, as inferred with the sciClone R package, and
found 3 simple tumors, comprised of only a founding clone, and 19 complex
tumors that contain one or more subclones. We further classified each
tumor based on a stability metric, where stable tumors (n = 4) showed
little or no evidence of evolution between baseline and surgical
intervention and complex tumors (n = 18) exhibited a spectrum of clonal
changes. These changes ranged from moderate shifts in subclonal
frequencies to whole-scale remodeling, where minor subclonal populations
gained near-complete dominance. In one extreme case, we observed
co-occurring tumors of independent origin, with selection against an
ER-positive population and relative expansion of an ER-negative tumor.
Spatial heterogeneity was widespread as well, with 6 out of 11 secondary
cores containing clonal architecture that differed from the primary.We
find that the majority of tumors are both complex and dynamic in that
they are made up of multiple subclones at baseline that undergo clonal
selection following endocrine therapy. This clonal evolution may provide
a path by which a tumor can bypass therapeutic intervention. Further
study is needed to identify the genetic aberrations that underlie this
differential response. Our results suggest that clonal heterogeneity is
widespread in hormone positive breast cancer and has relevance to
endocrine therapy response.

