Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alternative tumor suppressor mechanisms in lung carcinomas -
modulation of senescence by growth factor-induced signaling


Cellular signaling pathways integrate multiple intra- and extracellular
signals and thereby influence cell fate. Outcome of oncogene-targeted
pharmacotherapies (cell cycle inhibition, apoptosis, senescence,
autophagy) depends on variable factors (e.g. compound, dose, duration,
cellular genetic background etc.). Oncogene-induced senescence is
recognized as an important tumor-suppressive mechanism, bypassing of
which may contribute to malignant transformation of the cells. On the
other hand, senescence induction, in addition to apoptosis stimulation
and proliferation suppression, is responsible for the cytostatic activity
of many commonly used anticancer drugs. Therefore, senescence escape must
be considered as an important drug-resistance factor.In our work we
characterize,,DNA Damage-independent senescence induced by tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKI) and growth factor deprivation of non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines and other EGFR-dependent cells.Treatment
of different cell lines with various concentrations of EGFR-TKIs was
followed by the assessment of cell fate (i.e. apoptosis, cell cycle
distribution, senescence and clonogenic survival) as well as
intracellular signaling. We could show that treatment of EGFR-dependent
cells with specific EGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI)
can lead to generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), activation of a
DNA damage response (DDR) program and cellular senescence. Surprisingly,
under certain experimental conditions DDR activation was found to be
independent from detectable DNA damage. Key players of DDR signaling were
shown to be essential for senescence induction.Molecular dissection of
crucial signaling nodes and molecular switches involved in modulation of
cell fate in oncogene dependent cells treated with specific
EGFR-inhibitors is currently being performed. Furthermore, our work is
focussed on the identification and characterization of cellular factors
activating DNA damage response (DDR) pathways in the absence of DNA
damage under certain experimental conditions.Understanding the interplay
between theses decision making pathways either leading to proliferative
arrest, cellular senescence or apoptosis will help improve current
pharmacotherapies and develop new therapeutic approaches.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

