Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Changes in mitochondrial background affect nuclear DNA methylation


There is emerging evidence demonstrating that mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
contributes to complex genetic diseases such as cancer. To test directly
the role of mtDNA in tumorigenicity and metastasis, a new genetically
engineered mouse model was created that contains nuclear DNA from one
mouse strain and mtDNA contribution from different mouse strain(s).
Taking advantage of maternal inheritance, Mitochondrial Nuclear Exchange
(MNX) mice can be bred to mice sharing the same nuclear DNA background.
As a result, MNX serves as an important tool to determine if and how
mitochondrial genetic background contributes to cancer, negating the
concern for mixing maternal and paternal nuclear DNA polymorphisms. MNX
mice are healthy, breed normally, show no overt differences in cell cycle
or apoptosis and are genetically stable for multiple (>10) generations.
Nonetheless, they are distinct strains based upon behaviors and gene
expression patterns. The mechanisms controlling gene expression in
different MNX strains are not yet known; however, retrograde and
anterograde cross-talk exists between the nuclear and mitochondrial
genomes. Our hypothesis is that important epigenetic changes occur in the
nuclear genome depending upon mitochondrial genetics. To test this
hypothesis, we performed Meth-Seq using the Agilent Mouse SureSelect
platform and Affymetrix gene expression arrays on four mouse brains (8
wk) that were pooled from different litters and cages of wild-type and
MNX to minimize age, developmental, inter-individual and generational
heterogeneity. Both differential DNA methylation and gene expression
patterns were observed but analyses are ongoing to better define the
observed differences. Together these observations provide novel insights
into how mtDNA could be altering epigenetic regulation and thereby
contribute to cancer pathogenesis. Support: Susan G. Komen for the Cure
(SAC11037), Natl Fndn Cancer Res., Kansas Bioscience Authority, Steiner
Family Fund.

