Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SUPR peptides as novel targeted molecular imaging agents for Her2


Ideal molecular imaging agents would combine the affinity and selectivity
of monoclonal antibodies with the rapid clearance and pharmacokinetics of
small molecules Here we describe the use of directed evolution to design
Scanning Unnatural Protease Resistant (SUPR) peptides as novel molecular
scaffolds for in vivo optical and PET imaging of the Her2 receptor. SUPR
peptides were obtained through selection against Her2-expressing breast
cancer cells in culture using focused biological display peptide
libraries pre-selected for protease resistance. SUPR peptide libraries
were programmed with unnatural amino acids for enhanced stability and
chemically cyclized after translation to enhance affinity. Peptides
isolated from selection selectively bind the Her2 receptor in vitro with
low nanomolar affinity and do not compete with Trastuzumab or Pertuzumab.
Cy5-labeled SUPR peptides show rapid and Her2-specific tumor uptake in
vivo and minimal retention in non-tumor tissues after 24 hours of
washout. SUPR peptides can be efficiently labeled with 18F via the
copper-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddtion and the resulting radiotracers
used for nuclear imaging of Her2-postive tumors by PET/CT. Unlike
antibodies and their derivatives, SUPR peptides are synthesized
chemically and show rapid clearance from systemic circulation. SUPR
peptides also show dramatically enhanced stability relative to linear
peptides obtained from phage display or combinatorial chemistry while
still retaining affinities compatible with molecular imaging
applications. While SUPR peptides are selected from biological display
libraries, they share similar chemical composition and structure with
peptides derived from non-ribosomal peptide synthesis. We believe that
this combination of affinity, stability, evolvability, and synthetic
accessibility make SUPR peptide technology a general approach for
generating highly potent compounds for targeted molecular imaging of
cancer biomarkers.

