Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depletion of glioma infiltrating myeloid derived suppressor cells
promotes anti-tumor T cell responses


MDSCs represent a population of immature myeloid cells at various stages
of differentiation that have the potential to inhibit anti-tumor T cell
immunity. We demonstrate the accumulation of MDSCs in GL26 and M7-induced
glioma (GBM) bearing mice. Absolute numbers of Ly-6G+ (Gr-1high) MDSCs
showed a 200 fold increase within the tumor microenvironment (TME) 28
days post-tumor implantation. The numbers of Ly-6C+ (Gr-1low) MDSCs also
showed a similar trend within the TME. While this massive influx of MDSCs
was noted within intracranial tumors, MDSC levels did not increase in the
dLNs, spleen or bone marrow (BM) of intracranial tumor bearing mice. MDSC
numbers were significantly elevated in the blood of GL26 and M7
intracranial tumor bearing mice at 28 days. While both Gr-1high and
Gr-1low MDSCs isolated from the TME of GL26 intracranial tumor bearing
mice inhibited antigen-specific T cell proliferation, Gr-1low MDSC were
found to be more efficient. Gr-1high or Gr-1low MDSCs from the bone
marrow of intracranial tumor bearing mice failed to suppress
antigen-specific T cell proliferation suggesting that TME derived factors
may activate MDSCs to exert their immune-suppressive properties. In vivo,
depletion of Gr-1+ cells enhanced the median survival of GBM bearing
mice. Furthermore, when combined with Ad-TK + Ad-FLT3L immune-gene
therapy, Gr-1+ depletion significantly enhanced the frequency of
tumor-specific T cells within the TME and spleen and increased IFN-
production by splenic T cells. Our data therefore indicates that
inhibiting the accumulation of MDSCs with in the GBM TME promotes the
generation of robust anti-tumor immunity. Preliminary experiments to
determine the mechanism of MDSC trafficking to the TME point towards the
receptor CXCR2 and its ligand CXCL1. Microarray analysis of glioma cell
lines showed elevated levels of CXCL1 mRNA. Additionally a culture of
primary mixed glial cells also produced CXCL1 when stimulated with GBM
cell lysates. SB225002, a CXCR2 inhibitor suppressed the migration of
MDSCs towards GBM cells in an in vitro migration assay. Overall, our data
suggests that strategies that inhibit MDSC recruitment to the GBM TME
and/or block their activity could enhance the T cell mediated tumor
clearance and provide survival benefit.Work supported by grants from
NIH-NINDS

