Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toxicity and long-term outcomes of elderly patients with
refractory or relapsed diffuse large B cell lymphoma undergoing
autologous stem cell transplantation


Background: High-dose immunochemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell
transplantation (Auto-SCT) is the standard treatment for fit individuals
with refractory or relapsed diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL). We
conducted a retrospective study to investigate toxicities and long-term
clinical outcomes of elderly pts with relapsed or refractory DLBCL
undergoing Auto-SCT. Methods: All pts with relapsed or refractory DLBCL
undergoing Auto-SCT at our institution between November 2008 and November
2013 were included in the analysis. Prior treatment, secondary
age-adjusted international prognostic index (saa-IPI), response to
salvage treatment, Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation-Comorbidity Index
(HCT-CI), Cumulative Illness Rating Scale for Geriatrics (CIRS-G), and
stem cell collection yields were recorded for each patient. Treatment
complications and long-term clinical outcomes were compared between two
age groups (65+ vs. Background: High-dose immunochemotherapy followed by
autologous stem cell transplantation (Auto-SCT) is the standard treatment
for fit individuals with refractory or relapsed diffuse large B cell
lymphoma (DLBCL). We conducted a retrospective study to investigate
toxicities and long-term clinical outcomes of elderly pts with relapsed
or refractory DLBCL undergoing Auto-SCT. Methods: All pts with relapsed
or refractory DLBCL undergoing Auto-SCT at our institution between
November 2008 and November 2013 were included in the analysis. Prior
treatment, secondary age-adjusted international prognostic index
(saa-IPI), response to salvage treatment, Hematopoietic Cell
Transplantation-Comorbidity Index (HCT-CI), Cumulative Illness Rating
Scale for Geriatrics (CIRS-G), and stem cell collection yields were
recorded for each patient. Treatment complications and long-term clinical
outcomes were compared between two age groups (65+ vs. <65 years).
Results: 81 individuals underwent Auto-SCT for refractory or relapsed
DLBCL. The median age was 60.1 years (24-75 years) and 26 individuals
were over 65 years at the time of transplantation. The majority of pts
(77%) received salvage therapy with rituximab, ifosfamide, carboplatin,
and etoposide followed by AutoSCT with carmustine, cyclophosphamide, and
etoposide conditioning. Pts aged greater than 65 years had similar
baseline CIRS-G comorbidity scores compared to the younger cohort, but
they were more likely to have HCT-CI scores of 3 or more (45% vs. 20%, p
= 0.015). The advanced aged group had fewer stem cells collected (4.2 vs
6.1 x106 cells, p = 0.01), despite a trend toward higher number of
apheresis sessions (3.2 vs 2.7 days, p = 0.13). However, the two groups
experienced similar duration of Auto-SCT hospitalization (21.3 vs 20.9
days), time to neutrophil recovery (10.6 vs 10.4 days), and time to
platelet recovery (13.1 vs. 13.1 days). The two groups also experienced
similar frequency of blood stream infections, pneumonia, ICU transfers,
and hospital readmissions (p = 0.61). One death occurred in each group
within the first 100 days (100-day TRM 2.5%), with two additional aged
individuals experiencing late deaths due to myeloid neoplasms. After
adjusting for age, comorbidities and saa-IPI, response to salvage
immunochemotherapy (CR vs. non-CR) remained the only significant
predictor of PFS using proportional hazard modeling (HR 0.32, p = 0.002).
Conclusions: While prospective clinical trials utilizing Auto-SCT for
relapsed large B cell lymphomas have excluded pts over the age of 65, our
results suggest selected individuals with advanced age experience an
acceptable level of treatment toxicity and have clinical outcomes
comparable to younger counterparts. Response to salvage
immunochemotherapy, not age, appears to be the strongest predictor of
long-term outcomes following Auto-SCT in the setting of relapsed DLBCL.

