Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alleviation of sepsis in osteosarcoma-bearing mice via
immunomodulatory cytokine interleukin-30 treatment


BackgroundSepsis, an acute systemic inflammatory response to infection,
is the most common cause of patient mortality in intensive care units.
Cancer patients are nearly 10 times more susceptible to sepsis than
non-cancer patients, and sepsis accounts for 8.5% of all deaths among
cancer patients. Current therapeutic strategy to sepsis is antimicrobial
therapy, hemodynamic support and adjunctive therapy, and other supportive
therapy. Despite recent therapeutic progress, mortality rates remain high
in sepsis patients. Here we tested the protective effect of IL-30, a
novel cytokine against inflammation-induced liver injury, on sepsis in
both normal and tumor-bearing mice.MethodsMice were injected with LPS (20
mg/kg) to induce septic shock or underwent cercal ligation and puncture
(CLP) to induce polymicrobial sepsis. C3H/He mice were orthotopically
inoculated with LM8 cells (1105) to generate tumors and performed CLP
after tumor development. The control or IL30 encoding DNA was
administered to tibialis msucles via electroporation. Recombinant mouse
IL30, IFN- or TNF- protein was directly administered via injection. Mice
were monitored every 6 h for the subsequent 6 days to determine their
survival. The concentrations of cytokines in serum were analyzed via
Luminex system. The cellular sources of cytokines were analyzed by
intracellular flow cytometry.ResultsIL-30 treatment reduced mortality in
both normal and tumor-bearing mice in multiple experimental sepsis models
including osteosarcoma bearing mouse model. This reduction in mortality
is likely through attenuation of the systemic pro-inflammatory response
and increasing of bacteria clearance. Specifically, IL-30 treatment
suppressed TNF- and IFN- production and increased IL-10 production in
serum induced by LPS. And IL-30 treatment increased the percentage of
IL10+ NKT cells and decreased the percentage of IFN-+ NKT cells, which
were induced by LPS in liver and spleen of C57BL/6 mice. Administering
either recombinant IFN- or TNF- impaired the protective function of IL30
against sepsis. Likewise, mice deficient of IL-10 or NKT cells abolished
the protective role of IL-30 against sepsis. These results show that the
protective effect of IL-30 against sepsis is mediated via augmentation of
IL-10 secretion and suppression of abundant IFN- production.
Interestingly, p-STAT3 was increased, and p-STAT1 was dramatically
decreased by IL-30 treatment in spleen of LPS-challenged mice. Therefore,
IL-30 may increase IL-10 production via STAT3 activation. Though IL-30 is
one of the subunit of IL-27, but its effect on sepsis reduction was
independent on IL-27 signaling pathway.ConclusionIL-30 is valuable
candidate for prevention and treatment of sepsis via promoting the
generation of IL-10-producing NKT cells. These findings reveal the
anti-inflammatory role of IL-30 in sepsis.

