Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting cancer-induced anemia with hepcidin lowering ALK2
inhibitors


Anemia of cancer (AOC) is a cytokine driven condition that frequently
occurs in patients due to chronic inflammation associated with cancer
development. It differs from chemotherapy-induced anemia because the
anemia is a result of the disease itself and not a side effect of a
treatment regimen, although the both causes can work in concert. AOC is
caused by high levels of the liver peptide hormone, hepcidin, which
sequesters iron in epithelial cells and macrophages, thereby limiting
bioavailable iron required for erythropoiesis. Reducing elevated hepcidin
levels in cancer patients can reverse the hypoferremia and anemia seen in
AOC. Hepcidin levels are controlled by inflammatory cytokines through
pathways dependent on bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP). BMPs up-regulate
hepcidin by activating the SMAD signaling pathway through the
activin-like kinase receptor 2 (ALK2). Therefore, ALK2 has emerged as an
attractive therapeutic target to modulate hepcidin levels in cancer
patients and treat their AOC. We have developed novel small molecule ALK2
inhibitors which have shown promising results in tissue culture models as
well as a preclinical cancer model of AOC. The two most promising
compounds downregulate hepcidin expression in BMP-induced cell culture
studies at concentrations of 100 nM or lower. Importantly, this activity
was observed at concentrations that exhibited little cytotoxicity
suggesting the compounds have a clean selectivity profile. The two
compounds have been tested in a TC-1 syngeneic mouse model of AOC where
anemia is induced after tumor formation, in a manner similar to human
cancer caused anemia. Treatment with the lead candidates reversed the
induction of hepcidin expression and also decreased the symptoms of
anemia as measured by serum iron and red blood cell levels. From these
data, we have nominated a candidate to advance into IND-enabling studies
that has favorable drug-like properties. We anticipate a clinical
development strategy that focuses on AOC.

