Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of triple-negative breast cancer tumorigenesis by
targeting cancer stem cells through JNK/Notch1 signaling inhibition


Background: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive disease
with a poor prognosis and lacks targeted therapies. Basal-like TNBC
exhibits hyperactivated JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase). JNK plays a vital
role in malignant transformation of different cancers. However, it is
unknown whether JNK signaling is a clinically relevant target in TNBC.
Here, we tested the hypotheses that JNK signaling plays a fundamental
role in TNBC pathogenesis by promoting self-renewal of cancer stem cells
(CSCs).Methods: The role of JNK signaling in TNBC pathogenesis was
determined by examining the effects of JNK signaling inhibition using
siRNA or JNK-IN-8 (an ATP-competitive JNK inhibitor) and the effects of
JNK overexpression on growth, migration, and invasion of TNBC cells using
cell proliferation, migration, and invasion assays. CSC regulation by JNK
signaling was examined using mammosphere-forming assay. The effect of JNK
signaling inhibition on tumor growth was assessed using a xenograft mouse
model. The downstream molecules involved in JNK signaling-mediated CSC
regulation were identified using RT-PCR stem array analysis. Association
between JNK and c-Jun was analyzed using a reverse phase protein array
dataset of TNBC samples (n = 81). Disease-free survival (DFS) probability
in TNBC patients was analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method using a cDNA
microarray dataset (n = 79).Results: Knockdown of JNK1 or JNK2 led to
significant reductions in growth, migration, and invasion of TNBC cells,
mammosphere formation, and ALDH1+ CSC subpopulation. Similar results were
obtained when JNK signaling was inhibited using JNK-IN-8. In contrast,
overexpression of JNK1 or JNK2 enhanced these cellular activities.
Importantly, JNK signaling inhibition by JNK-IN-8 (25 mg/kg) reduced
tumor growth by 60.88% (PBackground: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)
is an aggressive disease with a poor prognosis and lacks targeted
therapies. Basal-like TNBC exhibits hyperactivated JNK (c-Jun N-terminal
kinase). JNK plays a vital role in malignant transformation of different
cancers. However, it is unknown whether JNK signaling is a clinically
relevant target in TNBC. Here, we tested the hypotheses that JNK
signaling plays a fundamental role in TNBC pathogenesis by promoting
self-renewal of cancer stem cells (CSCs).Methods: The role of JNK
signaling in TNBC pathogenesis was determined by examining the effects of
JNK signaling inhibition using siRNA or JNK-IN-8 (an ATP-competitive JNK
inhibitor) and the effects of JNK overexpression on growth, migration,
and invasion of TNBC cells using cell proliferation, migration, and
invasion assays. CSC regulation by JNK signaling was examined using
mammosphere-forming assay. The effect of JNK signaling inhibition on
tumor growth was assessed using a xenograft mouse model. The downstream
molecules involved in JNK signaling-mediated CSC regulation were
identified using RT-PCR stem array analysis. Association between JNK and
c-Jun was analyzed using a reverse phase protein array dataset of TNBC
samples (n = 81). Disease-free survival (DFS) probability in TNBC
patients was analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method using a cDNA microarray
dataset (n = 79).Results: Knockdown of JNK1 or JNK2 led to significant
reductions in growth, migration, and invasion of TNBC cells, mammosphere
formation, and ALDH1+ CSC subpopulation. Similar results were obtained
when JNK signaling was inhibited using JNK-IN-8. In contrast,
overexpression of JNK1 or JNK2 enhanced these cellular activities.
Importantly, JNK signaling inhibition by JNK-IN-8 (25 mg/kg) reduced
tumor growth by 60.88% (P<0.001) in a xenograft mouse model. RT-PCR stem
array analysis indicated the involvement of Notch1 in JNK
signaling-mediated CSC regulation; luciferase reporter assay showed that
JNK regulated Notch1 expression at the transcriptional level via c-Jun, a
transcription factor and a substrate of JNK. Knockdown of c-Jun or Notch1
reduced cell growth, mammosphere formation, and ALDH1+ CSC subpopulation;
overexpression of c-Jun or Notch1 blocked the inhibitory effect of
JNK-IN-8 on mammosphere formation. These results suggest that JNK
signaling promotes CSC self-renewal through up-regulation of Notch1 via
c-Jun. Furthermore, in TNBC patients, a high level of phosphorylated JNK
was associated with a high level of phosphorylated c-Jun (P = 310-8); low
c-Jun mRNA level was associated with better DFS (P = 0.03); and there was
a tendency (P = 0.17) toward better DFS with low JNK1 mRNA level but not
with low JNK2 mRNA level.Conclusion: JNK signaling regulates TNBC
tumorigenesis by promoting CSC self-renewal via Notch1 signaling.
JNK-IN-8 is a promising therapeutic agent for TNBC by targeting
JNK/Notch1 signaling.

