Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming resistance to HER2-targeting drugs using CDK8 inhibitors


HER2-targeting therapies transformed the treatment of patients with HER2+
breast cancer and are now being explored in other cancer types. However,
nearly 70% of patients with HER2+ metastatic breast cancer have intrinsic
resistance and almost all develop acquired resistance to HER2-targeting
drugs. New therapeutic approaches aimed at resistance to HER2-targeting
therapies are urgently needed. We have previously found that resistance
to HER2-targeting drugs involves increased activity of the phosphatase
PP2A. PP2A was reported to stimulate the kinase activity of CDK8, a
transcription-regulating kinase that in contrast to some other members of
the CDK family does not regulate cell cycle progression. Thus CDK8 may
play a role in resistance to HER2-targeting therapies. CDK8 has been
identified as an oncogene amplified in 50% of colon cancers.
Immunohistochemical staining of breast tissue arrays and meta-analysis of
breast cancer microarray data revealed that CDK8 is overexpressed in
breast cancers and that higher CDK8 expression correlates with the
failure of systemic therapy. Selective small-molecule inhibitors of CDK8
and its paralog CDK19 show no limiting toxicities at therapeutically
effective doses. We have found that an optimized CDK8/19 inhibitor
Senexin B has a synergistic growth-inhibitory effect in combinations with
an anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody (a biosimilar of trastuzumab) and with
the HER2/EGFR small-molecule inhibitor lapatinib. These synergistic
effects were observed in all HER2+ breast and colon cancer cell lines
tested so far, including those that are either sensitive to
HER2-targeting drugs or non-responsive to these agents due to innate or
acquired resistance. Furthermore, combining lapatinib with Senexin B
inhibited the development of de novo resistance to lapatinib. Taken
together these results suggest that combining anti-HER2 and anti-CDK8
therapies is a rational potential treatment for HER2+ cancers, which may
overcome both innate and acquired resistance to HER2-targeting drugs.

