Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasticity of CD44+ colorectal cancer stem cells depends on
TGF-beta-induced epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT): evidences from
ex vivo culture system


BackgroundEpCAMhigh CD44+ colorectal cancer (CRC) cells are thought to be
cancer stem cells. Recently CD44- CRC cells are also suggested to acquire
a character of cancer stem cells, but the molecular mechanisms have not
been clarified. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a possible
process of cancer cells to acquire stemness. However, it is unclear
whether EMT can be induced in primary human CRC.Patients and MethodsWe
obtained surgical specimens from 51 CRC patients, and cultured isolated
cancer cells on matrigel-coated dish with medium containing several
growth factors. For induction of EMT, TGF-beta was added into the culture
medium. Immunocytochemistry staining, flow cytometric analysis of the
spheroid cells and single cell PCR analysis using 48-gene set containing
and Embryonic stem cell (ES)-related genes EMT-related genes were
performed.ResultsCancer cells proliferated and formed sphere (>50 m in
diameter) in 15 out of 51 samples after one week culture. The
sphere-forming ability was related with clinical stage (Stage1 and
2:16.7% Stage 3 and 4:41.3%). Sorted single CD44+ cell had higher
sphere-forming ability, compared to CD44- cell. The higher expression of
ES- and EMT-related genes was observed in sphere-forming cells than in
non-sphere forming cells. To confirm the heterogeneity of sphere forming
cells derived from sorted single cell, we performed single cell PCR using
C1 single cell auto prep system. Cells consisted of a sphere were
classified into 2 different population on the basis of primary component
analysis. In addition, flow cytometric analysis revealed that sphere
forming CD44+ cells gave rise to CD44- cells. These results suggest that
CD44+ cells have an ability to reconstruct the heterogeneous population.
Next we isolated sphere-forming cells and cultured on the same condition.
Isolated sphere-forming CD44+ cells could form sphere with high
efficiency. This result suggests that CD44+ cell have a self-renewal
ability. Previously, it has been reported that EMT was induced after
TGF-beta treatment in cancer cell lines and these cells acquired cancer
stem cell properties. In our culture system, we could detect very few
CD44+ cells after 8-days culture of CD44- cells, and TGF-beta treatment
also increased the number of CD44+ cells. These CD44 expressing cells
expressed N-cadherin. Furthermore N-cadherin expressing cells expressed
ES-and EMT-related genes. At last, TGF-beta enhanced sphere-forming
ability in CD44- cells.ConclusionsTo our knowledge, this is the first
report that CD44- cells from primary CRC samples undergo EMT and induced
CD44+ cells by TGF-beta treatment. Investigation whether these induced
CD44+ cells have cancer stem cell like properties such as tumorigenic
potential in immunosuppressive mouse is underway. Also we are going to
identify cancer stem cell specific gene expression in our culture system
using DNA microarray.

