Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rab25 and Rab-coupling protein (RCP) coordinate H-Ras and EGFR
post-Golgi vesicle trafficking, plasma membrane targeting, and function
in mammary epithelial cells


In this study we investigated cellular and molecular mechanisms for
breast cancer signaling by EGFR and Ras proteins, independent of
activating mutations. Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) ligation to its
receptor, EGFR, at the plasma membrane (PM) activates Ras small GTPases,
propagating Ras mitogenic signaling. However, activating Ras mutations
are not associated with breast cancers. EGFR and palmitoylated (Pa-) Ras
localize to lipid rafts at the PM. Pa-Ras isotypes (H- and N-Ras, but not
K-Ras) cycle through vesicle trafficking pathways between the Golgi and
PM. We have found that anterograde H-Ras vesicles are sorted in the
endocytic recycling compartment (ERC) into vesicles which contain the
epithelial-specific transport mediator Rab25 (Rab11c), and Rab11/FIP1C
(Rab-coupling protein, RCP). RCP couples Rab25 to vesicles to mediate
vesicle anterograde transport. Rab25 and RCP expression are highly
correlated with breast cancer progression, aggressiveness, and invasion
and metastasis. Rab25, unique among the large family of human Rab genes,
has been identified as a major marker and potential stimulator of breast
cancers. RCP was recently shown to be a breast cancer driver oncogene,
supporting the suggestion that RCP and Rab25 status may be significant
clinical markers. Moreover, RCP stimulates H-Ras activation.
Meta-analysis of human breast cancer cell line panels shows that while
most do not harbor H- or N-Ras mutations, both RCP and Rab25 are highly
over-expressed and levels correlate with resistance to EGF and Ras
signaling inhibitors. We demonstrate that Rab25, RCP, H-Ras and EGFR
co-localized in the ERC and in transport vesicles in MCF10A mammary
epithelial cells, and that dominant negative (DN) Rab25 sequestered H-Ras
and EGFR from the plasma membrane. DN Rab25 or Rab25 knockdown by shRNA
inhibited EGF-induced EGFR phosphorylation, H-Ras activation, and ERK
phosphorylation (ppERK), demonstrating a functional link between Rab25
activity and EGFR and H-Ras signaling. Both ER/PR-positive and -negative
human breast invasive ductal carcinoma tissues showed elevated ppERK
correlated with elevated Rab25 expression over normal breast tissue,
whereas HER2+ tumor tissues had elevated ppERK even with low Rab25
expression. Thus, Rab25 and RCP regulate EGFR and Ras trafficking to the
plasma membrane, required for mitogenic signaling and associated with
tumorigenic effects, even in Ras (WT) cells.

