Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in RNA expression and chemosensitivity in 2D versus 3D
non-small-cell lung cancer cultures


Introduction: Increasing efforts to integrate tumour-stroma interaction
and 3-dimensional structures in innovative in-vitro models were made
within the last years. We established a 3D co-culture system in
non-small-cell lung cancer applicable for drug testing. In this work, we
present data on the differences in RNA expression and drug sensitivity in
the 2D and 3D culture system.Methods: A549 and Colo699 NSCLC cell lines
were both cultivated in a 2D standard cell culture (flasks, PAA, Germany)
and a 3D 96 well plate hanging drop system (GravityPlusTM, Insphero,
Switzerland) for 5 and 10 days, respectively. 3D microtissues were
cultured either in mono- or in co-cultures with the human lung fibroblast
cell line SV80. RNA expression profiling via Affymetrix chip analyses was
performed with 3 biological replicates per cell line (A549, Colo699 and
SV80) in mono- and co-cultures. For this purpose, RNA was isolated by a
TriReagent standard protocol.Cytotoxicity was determined for cisplatin
and vinorelbine after 24 hours of incubation by ATP measurements of lysed
microtissues/cells and modified AnnexinV/Propidium iodide staining for
flow cytometry on Colo699 cells. Furthermore, standard flow cytometry
cell cycle analyses and microscopic volume measurements were performed to
analyse drug induced inhibition of proliferation.Results: RNA expression
profiles revealed within the A549 monocultures 892 and the Colo699
monocultures 1,042 regulated genes ( two-fold change in expression) for
2D versus 3D cultures, respectively. Between the cell lines A549 and
Colo699 only a limited overlap (131 genes) in differentially expressed
genes was detected. However, significant differences in gene expression
were experienced in co-cultures with SV80. The most frequently altered
genes are involved in the regulation of the cell cycle, organelle
fission, RNA polymerases, histone methylation, DNA repair, oxidative
stress and WNT signalling pathways. To prove the potential in-vivo
relevance of these findings, we assessed the chemosensitivity in the
Colo699 for 2D and 3D cell cultures. A significant difference in LD50
could be observed for cisplatin between 2D (100M) and 3D (250M) cultures
in both ATP release measurements and AnnexinV/PI flow cytometry analyses.
In cell cycle analyses the maximum M arrest for vinorelbine was achieved
with 25M in 2D, whereas in 3D 100M of vinorelbine were needed.
Cytotoxicity assays did not reveal a significant difference for
vinorelbine in 2D versus 3D models.Conclusion: Herein, we demonstrate
that cultivation of cell lines either in a 2D or 3D environment lead not
only to a difference in RNA expression but also in chemosensitivity.
Thereby, these data support the urgent need of more in vivo like cell
culture models for analysing drug related modes of action.

