Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A local chemotherapy with hyaluronan-cisplatin conjugate
significantly attenuates growth of lung adenocarcinoma xenografts in
mouse model


Nanoparticle-based chemotherapy, while promising, remains clinically
unsuccessful, mainly due to a lack of targeted delivery methods of the
therapeutics into cancer tissues and the side effect of
chemotherapeutics. We have demonstrated that the nanoparticle formulation
with hyaluronan-cisplatin conjugates (HylaPlat) is suggested to be an
effective chemotherapeutic delivery method in breast cancer mouse models
(Cai, et al., J Surg Res., 2008; Cai, et al., Ther Deliv, 2011). The
objectives of the present study were to examine the growth inhibition
efficacy of HylaPlat formulation on lung adenocarcinoma cells in cell
culture and to examine the therapeutic efficiency of the local
administration of HylaPlat on lung adenocarcinoma in mice. Effect of the
HylaPlat on the growth of lung carcinoma was evaluated using Lewis Lung
carcinoma (LLC) cells in 2D culture and 3D spheroid cell culture, as well
as, orthotopic autografts in C57BL/6 mice lungs. Cell culture studies
clarified that the HylaPlat effectively attenuated cell growth in 2D and
3D spheroid culture with IC50 of 0.35M and 1.35 M, respectively; whereas
control cisplatin-dependent growth inhibition was achieved with several
fold higher concentrations (IC50 1.64 and 3.6 M, respectively). The 3D
spheroid cell culture study also revealed that the treatment with
HylaPlat induced apoptosis in the cells located on the peripheral area of
the spheroid first, this effect lasted for several days. A single
intratracheal administration of 7.5mg/kg HylaPlat (1mg cisplatin
equivalent/kg) seven days after LLC cell inoculation almost completely
inhibited growth of LLC autografts in the mouse lungs. Histological
analysis of dissected lungs revealed that a small number of microscopic
tumor nodules were detected in the treated mouse lungs, whereas several
large tumors were detected in the untreated control mouse lungs. Normal
lung architectures of the trachea, bronchioles and alveoli were
maintained in the treated mice although small inflammation spots can be
detected at peripheral areas. Apoptotic index was significantly higher in
the treated tumors than PBS treated control tumors, suggesting that
cisplatin was successfully delivered to the tumor tissues by nanoparticle
formulated HylaPlat and caused apoptosis of tumor cells. The
pharmacokinetics of cisplatin 14 days after intratracheal administration
of HylaPlat is under investigation. Taken together, the current study
suggests that an intratracheal administration of HylaPlat nanoparticles
offer an effective strategy for lung cancer treatment. This work was
supported by the Kansas State University Johnson Cancer Research Center,
Kansas Bioscience Authority Collaborative Cancer Research grant,
1R01CA173292 (LF) and American Cancer Society RSG-08-133-01-CDD (LF).

