Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bilateral blockade of MEK- and PI3K-driven pathways is effective
in the treatment of KAS mutant mucinous colorectal cancer cells


Purpose. A significant proportion of sporadic colorectal cancers (CRCs)
(10-15%) are of the mucinous subtype (>50% of the tumor). Mucinous
colorectal adenocarcinomas (MCAs) are clinically, morphologically and
molecularly distinct from nonmucinous CRCs as they show a different
spectrum of genetic alterations (higher KRAS mutations, MSI-H, lower p53,
high MUC2) and exhibit more aggressive behavior (more prone to peritoneal
dissemination and lymph node involvement). MCAs are associated with
poorer response to chemotherapy and have limited treatment options. The
purpose of this study was to test the effectiveness of combinatorial
targeting of two KRAS-associated parallel pathways in an attempt to
counter adaptive resistance associated with single pathway
inhibition.Methods. Two KRAS mutant MCA cell lines LS174T and RW7213 were
treated with two small molecule inhibitors, GDC0973 and GDC0941, to block
mitogen-activated extracellular regulated kinase kinase (MEK) and
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) respectively. Adaptive resistance of
these two cell lines to the PI3K inhibitor (PI3Ki) was examined by
protein phospho-receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) arrays, western blots and
immunocytochemistry.Results. Bioinformatic analysis of the colon cancer
datasets in the cancer genome atlas (TCGA) showed increased mutation
rates in mucinous over nonmucinous CRCs for effectors of RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK
(80% versus 41.9%) and PI3K-AKT-mTOR (60% versus 21.8%) pathways. Both
MCA cell lines were sensitive to MEK inhibitor (MEKi) treatment. In
contrast, these cell lines, though initially sensitive to PI3Ki, later
became resistant. Concomitant with the development of resistance were a)
increase in phosphorylated RTKs including IR, IGF-1R, EGFR, ErbB2 b)
increase in phosphorylated ERK and AKT, c) nuclear translocation of the
transcription factor FOXO3A and d) a decrease in proapoptotic protein
BIM. Combinatorial treatment of PI3Ki and MEKi synergistically reduced
viability of MCA tumor cells with attendant decrease in phosphorylated
ERK and AKT and increase in BIM.Conclusions. Our data suggest cellular
dependence (addiction) of KRAS-mutant mucinous CRC cells on
hyperactivation of MEK and PI3K pathways. Interestingly, PI3K single
agent inhibition initially triggers pathway downregulation and reduced
tumor cell viability but later leads to development of adaptive
resistance. Our studies suggest this resistance involves dynamic rewiring
of signaling circuits mediated through FOXO3A nuclear localization,
relief of RTK inhibition, MEK-ERK activation and BIM reduction. Adaptive
resistance however, can be overcome by co-targeting of PI3K and MEK. Our
studies thus provide a rational basis for MEKi and PI3Ki combination
therapy for KRAS mutant CRCs.

