Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PD-1:PD-L1 pathway in the context of the osteosarcoma tumor
microenvironment


BackgroundPD-1 is a transmembrane protein found on immune cells including
T cells, B cells, natural killer (NK) T cells, activated monocytes, and
dendritic cells. Its interaction with its ligand, PD-L1, plays a role in
the suppression of the immune system and is important in many processes
such as autoimmunity and both central and peripheral tolerance. Cancer
cells can hijack the PD-1:PD-L1 pathway in order to evade clearance by
the immune systema mechanism that is evident in many solid tumors,
including breast, ovarian, renal cell carcinoma, colorectal, and lung
cancers. Inhibition of the PD-1:PD-L1 pathway with both PD-1 and PD-L1
inhibitors have shown varying levels of efficacy, and provide proof of
conceptthat modulating the PD- 1:PD-L1 pathway can tip the balance of
immune response in favor of the patient, working to eliminate the tumor.
We seek to determine the expression of PD-L1 in osteosarcoma (OS),
specifically in relation to the prescience of tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs). By displaying expression of PD-L1 and the presence of
TILs we hope to subsequently target the PD-1:PD-L1 pathway in
OS.MethodsParaffin imbedded and sectioned patient primary OS tumor
samples were provided by IRB approved protocols at Montefiore Medical
Center and Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. Antibodies to identify
various immune cells were first validated and optimized using immune
tissues and subsequently used to stain tumor sample. Next, RNA was
extracted from patient OS tumor samples and used to generate cDNA. PD-L1
expression was determined using quantitative real time PCR. Protein was
also extracted and will be used to confirm PD-L1 expression using western
blotting.ResultsA variety of TILs are found in OS patient tumor samples.
We see expression of T cells (CD3) and T cell subsetshelper (CD4),
cytotoxic (CD8), and natural killer (CD56) T cells. There is also robust
expression of B cells (CD20) and macrophages (CD68). Furthermore, the OS
tumors displayed varying degrees of PD-L1 positivity, with some tumors
displaying greatly increased expression, some showing moderate elevation,
and others showing low to no changes in PD-L1 expression.Conclusions and
Future DirectionsOS tumors display varying levels of PD-L1 positivity,
suggesting that the PD-1:PD-L1 pathway can be modulated for
immunotherapeutic purposes. Importantly, we also demonstrated that a
subset of immune cells, potentially expressing PD-1, is present in some
tumors. Cell lines derived from tumors expressing low, moderate, and high
levels of PD-L1 are being cultured. These cell lines will be used to test
inhibition of the PD-1:PD-L1 pathway and its impact on their tumorigenic
properties.

