Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic BRAF fusion induces MAPK-pathway activation targeted by
MEK inhibitor and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor combination
treatment in mucosal melanoma


Background: Although remarkable progress has been made in the genomic
characterization of cutaneous melanoma, the genetic alterations of
primary mucosal melanoma (PMM) remain largely unknown. This study aims to
investigate the recurrent mutations in PMM and to characterize the
oncogenic potential of the newly identified ZNF767-BRAF fusion as well as
its therapeutic implications in PMM.Methods: A total of 46 PMMs underwent
exon-capture sequencing of 111 cancer-associated genes to identify
somatic non-synonymous mutations, copy number alterations, and structural
variations. A cancer cell with a novel ZNF767-BRAF fusion was established
from a patient with PMM of the respiratory tract, who was refractory to
vemurafenib. To characterize the oncogenic functions of the novel
ZNF767-BRAF fusion, we performed western blot, soft agar growth assay and
in vivo tumor. The inhibitory effects of vemurafenib, trametinib,
buparlisib and LEE011 monotherapy and their combination treatment were
measured in vitro and in vivo.Results: Targeted exon-capture sequencing
of 46 PMMs revealed a total of 48 somatic non-synonymous mutations in 26
genes. Eight genes harbored recurrent mutations on NRAS (n = 6; 13%) and
TP53 (n = 4; 9%) along with BRAF, KIT, MAP3K9, C8A, KRAS, FGFR3 (all
observed in two cases; 4%). Of note, a novel ZNF767-BRAF fusion was
identified in a PMM of the respiratory tract refractory to vemurafenib
treatment. ZNF767-BRAF fusion was validated by Sanger sequencing. We show
that ZNF767-BRAF encoded protein promotes the dimerization of RAF and
potently activates mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. The ectopic
expression of ZNF767-BRAF fusion induced tumor formation as shown in
colony forming assay and tumor xenograft model. The treatment of
trametinib inhibited the growth of PMM cells harboring the ZNF767-BRAF
fusion but vemurafenib showed no inhibitory effects. Compared with either
agent alone, the combination of trametinib and buparlisib showed
synergistic antitumor effects in vitro and in vivo.Conclusions: The
genomic makeup of PMM is remarkably diverse and distinct from that of
cutaneous melanoma. BRAF fusion defines a new molecular subset of PMM and
can be therapeutically targetable by the combination of MEK inhibitor and
PI3K Inhibitor.

