Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors combined with cytotoxic drugs for
treatment of NSCLC with EGFR gene mutations: Efficacy and mechanisms


Background: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) have improved overall survival in non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients whose tumors have EGFR activating mutations.
After treatment with EGFR-TKIs, NSCLC tumors with EGFR activating
mutations become resistant to EGFR-TKIs, and development of novel
treatment strategies is needed to improve survival in such
patients.Next-generation EGFR-TKIs have been developed, and a clinical
trial showed clinical activity of 3rd generation EGFR-TKIs in patients
with acquired resistance, especially secondary mutation T790M to
EGFR-TKIs. Moreover, clinical trials demonstrated survival benefit of
combination with cytotoxic agents and EGFR-TKIs in patients with
EGFR-mutated NSCLC. In contrast, the IMPRESS study showed that
continuation of gefitinib in addition to cisplatin and pemetrexed didn't
show survival benefit in patients with acquired resistance to
gefitinib.Several basic studies reported that efficacy of targeted
therapy combined with chemotherapy is schedule dependent. We, therefore,
conducted an in vitro study to develop a novel therapeutic strategy for
NSCLC with EGFR mutations. Methods: In vitro effects of docetaxel and an
EGFR-TKI, gefitinib (AstraZeneca) or AZD9291 (Selleckchem), were examined
in five lung cancer cell lines (PC9, PC9GR, HCC827, HCC827GR, and H1975)
using a 3D culture model (PrimeSurface 96, SUMITOMO BAKELITE CO.). The
NSCLC cells were treated with the combinationeither concurrently or
sequentially (EGFR-TKIs after docetaxel or docetaxel after EGFR-TKIs).
Combination Index (CI) values were calculated at various levels of
cytotoxicity (the Chou-Talalay method). We evaluated changes in MAPK
pathway activation and in expressions of Bcl2 family proteins and cleaved
PARP (Cell Signaling) by western blot analysis. Results: Docetaxel
followed by EGFR-TKIs weremore effective at CI, compared with EGFR-TKIs
followed by docetaxel in two of the five cell lines with EGFR activating
mutations, PC9GR (EGFR19del+T790M) and HCC827GR (EGFR19del+METamp) cells.
The HCC827GR cells were likely to be more sensitive than PC9GR to the
combination with docetaxel and gefitinib. The combo led to inactivation
of the MAPK pathway and alteration of the Bcl2 family proteins. d)
Conclusion: In conclusion, our results suggest that the sequential
combination of docetaxel followed by EGFR-TKIs was effective against
NSCLC with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs.

