Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Widespread deficiency of ASS1 in uveal melanoma and sensitivity to
pegylated arginine deiminase


Uveal melanoma, involving the iris, choroid and ciliary body, is the
commonest intraocular tumor in adults. Approximately half of these
patients will develop metastasis with a high mortality despite currently
available systemic therapies including immune checkpoint blockade. The
urea cycle enzyme argininosuccinate synthetase 1 (ASS1), responsible for
arginine synthesis, is downregulated in melanoma and other cancers and
these are therefore sensitive to arginine deprivation therapy. In early
phase trials of the arginine depletor pegylated arginine deiminase,
ADI-PEG20, uveal melanoma, in particular, was identified with potential
for further therapeutic development. Here, we tested uveal melanoma cell
lines for sensitivity to ADI-PEG20 and analyzed enucleated tumors for
ASS1 expression to assess the extent of ASS1 deficiency.Methods: ASS1
gene and protein expression were assessed in three uveal melanoma cell
lines (OMM1, OMM2.5 and Mel270) by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) and
western blot analysis, respectively. Sensitivity to ADI-PEG20 was
performed using the cell viability MTS assay. We screened 102 enucleated
choroidal and ciliary body melanomas for ASS1 protein using red chromogen
for the immunohistochemistry (IHC) and selected the most positive area
for scoring.Results: The uveal melanoma cell lines expressed negligible
ASS1 mRNA with a complete absence of ASS1 protein. All three ASS1
negative uveal melanoma cell lines were sensitive to ADI-PEG20 by day 6
of the MTS assay, whereas an ASS1-expressing positive control cell line
was resistant. There was a convincing lack of ASS1 expression (Uveal
melanoma, involving the iris, choroid and ciliary body, is the commonest
intraocular tumor in adults. Approximately half of these patients will
develop metastasis with a high mortality despite currently available
systemic therapies including immune checkpoint blockade. The urea cycle
enzyme argininosuccinate synthetase 1 (ASS1), responsible for arginine
synthesis, is downregulated in melanoma and other cancers and these are
therefore sensitive to arginine deprivation therapy. In early phase
trials of the arginine depletor pegylated arginine deiminase, ADI-PEG20,
uveal melanoma, in particular, was identified with potential for further
therapeutic development. Here, we tested uveal melanoma cell lines for
sensitivity to ADI-PEG20 and analyzed enucleated tumors for ASS1
expression to assess the extent of ASS1 deficiency.Methods: ASS1 gene and
protein expression were assessed in three uveal melanoma cell lines
(OMM1, OMM2.5 and Mel270) by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) and
western blot analysis, respectively. Sensitivity to ADI-PEG20 was
performed using the cell viability MTS assay. We screened 102 enucleated
choroidal and ciliary body melanomas for ASS1 protein using red chromogen
for the immunohistochemistry (IHC) and selected the most positive area
for scoring.Results: The uveal melanoma cell lines expressed negligible
ASS1 mRNA with a complete absence of ASS1 protein. All three ASS1
negative uveal melanoma cell lines were sensitive to ADI-PEG20 by day 6
of the MTS assay, whereas an ASS1-expressing positive control cell line
was resistant. There was a convincing lack of ASS1 expression (<5%
staining) in the majority of uveal melanomas (75/102; 74%) and where ASS1
was present (5-30% staining) in the remainder (27/102; 26%) this was due
to a mixture of melanoma cells and intratumoral macrophages, the latter
being confirmed with CD68 (IHC) in the cases with the highest ASS1
expression.Conclusion: ASS1 is absent in the tested uveal melanoma cell
lines and predisposes to arginine sensitivity with ADI-PEG20 in vitro.
Most primary uveal melanomas have a marked deficiency of ASS1,
representing a good target for exploring arginine deprivation further in
the clinic, either alone or in combination with rationally selected
agents. A trial of ADI-PEG20 combined with carboplatin and paclitaxel is
planned in metastatic malignant melanoma with an expanded cohort in
patients with uveal disease.

