Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule SIRT3 inhibitor 4-bromo-resveratrol inhibits
proliferation, promotes apoptosis and causes metabolic reprograming of
human melanoma cells


Sirtuin-3 (SIRT3) is an important mitochondria NAD+-dependent deacetylase
that is known to target mitochondrial proteins for deacetylation and
regulates a variety of cellular functions. We have previously shown that
SIRT3 was overexpressed in human melanoma cells and tissues and its
genetic knockdown resulted in a significant antiproliferative response in
human melanoma cells (In: AACR Annual Meeting: Proceedings; 2014 April
5-April 9, San Diego; CA, Abstract # 3516). Our data suggested that small
molecule inhibitors of SIRT3 may be developed for the management of
melanoma. In this study, we determined the anti-proliferative efficacy of
a newly identified small molecule SIRT3 inhibitor, 4-bromo-resveratrol,
in human melanoma cell lines (G361, SK-MEL-28 and SK-MEL-2). Treatment of
melanoma cells with 4-bromoresveratrol (0, 12.5, 25, 50, 100, and 200
10-3 mM; for 24, 48 and 72 hrs) resulted in a significant decrease in
cell proliferation in a dose- and time- dependent manner. In addition,
4-bromo-resveratrol treatment also resulted in a marked decrease in the
growth, viability, clonogenic survival and migration of melanoma cells.
Further, the anti-proliferative effects of 4-bromo-resveratrol were
accompanied by a marked downregulation of proliferating cell nuclear
antigen (PCNA) protein as well as SIRT3 mRNA and protein. Furthermore,
4-bromo-resveratrol treatment to melanoma cells resulted in 1)
significant induction of apoptosis in melanoma cells, as evident from
increase in PARP cleavage, decrease in pro-caspase-3, pro-caspase-8; and
2) G0/G1 phase cell cycle arrest. We also observed a marked increase in
WAF-1/p21 protein levels and decreases in cyclin D1 and cdk2 protein
levels as a result of 4-bromo-resveratrol treatment in melanoma cells.
Finally, we also found that 4-bromo-resveratrol caused a metabolic
reprograming in human melanoma cells as shown by decreases in the levels
of lactate production, glucose uptake, NAD+/NADH ratio, which were
accompanied by downregulation in protein levels of lactate dehydrogenase
A (LDHA) and glucose transporter 1 (Glut1) in melanoma cells.
Collectively, our data suggest that the small molecule SIRT3 inhibitors,
including 4-bromo-resveratrol, may be developed for melanoma management.
However, detailed mechanistic studies as well as in vivo validation
studies in appropriate animal model(s) are needed to ascertain the
clinical potential of 4-bromo-resveratrol and/or other SIRT3 inhibitors.

