Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole genome sequencing of primary breast cancers and matched
distant metastases


Metastatic disease is the main cause of death for breast cancer patients,
but it is still unclear whether primary tumor characteristics are
predictive of the metastasis phenotype. Our aim was to investigate, by
analyzing chromosomal structural variation, the clonal similarities
between primary breast tumors and their matched distant metastases. For
11 patients, we performed low-coverage (10x) whole-genome sequencing on
11 primary breast tumors and 13 matched distant metastases to enumerate
chromosomal rearrangements. The tumor genomes (n = 24) harbored a median
of 85 (range 18-405) chromosomal rearrangements per tumor, with a median
of 82 (26-310) in primaries compared to 87 (18-405) in distant
metastases. Similarity between tumors was assessed based on presence or
absence of chromosomal rearrangements. Concordance between matched
primaries and distant metastases from the same patient was high, with a
median of 89% rearrangements being shared (range 61-100%). Nearly all of
the rearrangements were patient-specific, with very little overlap when
comparing all possible pairings of tumors from different patients (median
3%). The tumors exhibited different genomic patterns of rearrangements:
some carried events scattered throughout the genome while other tumors
had events in densely clustered foci - chromothripsis-like hotspots - at
a few chromosomal locations. Irrespective of the type of rearrangement
profile of the tumor genomes, the patterns were highly conserved between
the primary tumor and metastasis from the same patient, although in
general metastases acquired additional rearrangement events. Our study
suggests that analysis of structural variation in tumor genomes could be
useful for identifying tumor origin, facilitating cancer detection via
measurement of rearrangements in circulating tumor DNA, and estimating
degree of relatedness between primary tumors and metastases. Moreover,
our finding that distant metastases have a close clonal relationship to
the primary tumor at the level of chromosomal structure is most
consistent with chromosomal rearrangements being early events in breast
cancer progression that remain stable during the development from a
primary tumor to its distant metastasis.

