Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of germline microRNA-related polymorphisms on pediatric
medulloblastoma prognosis and survival


Background: Five-year survival for pediatric medulloblastoma is between
60-80%, which remains far from ideal. While the molecular features of
these tumors are being used to improve risk stratification, novel markers
are needed to identify those at the greatest risk of recurrence and poor
survival. MicroRNAs (miRNA) regulate gene expression and may play a major
role in regulatory networks related to cancer therapy. Because of that,
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within these regions (miR-SNPs),
which have the ability to alter normal miRNA function, are being
evaluated in terms of cancer prognosis and survival. However, to our
knowledge, miR-SNPs have not been evaluated in terms of outcomes
(recurrence and survival) among those with pediatric
medulloblastoma.Methods: Patients with medulloblastoma (n = 100) treated
at Texas Children's Cancer Center and MD Anderson Cancer Center between
1982 and 2009 who had existing genotype data from the Illumina Omni1
array were included in this analysis. We selected 25 miR-SNPs within 24
genes with a minor allele frequency (MAF) greater than 5%. Variants were
selected from within pri- or pre-miRNAs, miRNA processing machinery, or
within binding sites identified in the literature as related to
tumorigenesis. The remaining variants were predicted to create or destroy
miRNA binding sites per the prediction algorithm PolymiRTS 3.0. Adjusted
hazard ratios (aHR) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated
using Cox regression under log-additive or dominant genetic models (if
the MAF fell between 5-15%) to estimate the association between miR-SNPs
and progression-free and overall survival (OS) times. All models were
adjusted for sex (reference = male), race (reference = white), and age at
diagnosis (continuous). Clinical variables including risk group, and
craniospinal radiation were also analyzed. Multiple comparisons were
adjusted for using the false discovery rate method.Results: The median
follow-up time among 88 survivors was 8.33 years (range 1.16 - 25.83
years). Individuals who carry a copy of the minor allele of KIAA0423
(rs1053667), which is located within a putative miR-19a/b binding site,
experienced 2.93 times the hazard of progression (CC+CT vs. TT: aHR =
2.93; 95% CI: 1.10-7.83). For overall survival, carriers of a copy of the
minor allele experienced 3.96 times the hazard of death (CC+CT vs. TT:
aHR = 3.96; 95% CI: 1.12-14.02). While these data point to a potentially
strong effect, the results did not remain significant after adjustment
for multiple comparisons.Conclusions: This preliminary analysis suggests
that certain miR-SNPs may be associated with pediatric medulloblastoma
recurrence and survival; however our findings must be validated in a
larger population. Validated miR-SNPs may potentially be used for refined
risk stratification for those diagnosed with childhood cancers or may be
informative for targeted therapies.

