Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-specific human monoclonal antibodies isolated from cancer
patients that bind antigens expressed on the outer plasma membrane of
cancer cells


Introduction: Cancer cells express novel antigens that reflect their
transformed state and may engender an antibody response. We hypothesize
that some of these auto-antibodies detect neo-antigens that are shared by
diverse tumor types and that a subset of these are expressed on the outer
plasma membrane (PM) of cancer cells, but not normal cells. Here, we
describe two human mAbs, isolated from lymph node B-cells of breast
cancer patients, that bind antigens expressed only on the surface of
cancer cells.Methods: We have optimized a hybridoma method for cloning
human IgG monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) by screening for those that bind
to live, heterologous cancer cell lines. We use whole cell
immunofluorescence binding assays with human cancer cell lines, detecting
cell-reactive human IgG with the Operetta. We use B-cells from lymph
nodes obtained at surgery from stage I, ER+PR+ breast cancer patients and
Stage I or II lung cancer patients, as well as peripheral blood B-cells
from lung cancer patients responsive to PD-1 inhibitors. We used cDNA
library expression methods to identify the tumor antigens and
characterized the tumor-specific activities of two mAbs using
immunohistochemistry (IHC), gene transfection, flow cytometry,
immunoblotting, and invasion assays.Results: Two of the mAbs isolated
from lymph nodes of patients with breast cancer bind to antigens that are
only expressed on the outer PM of cancer cells. The antigen recognized by
mAb 9H2 is known to be expressed on the outer PM of metastatic cells,
while the antigen recognized by mAb 2B9 is a cytoplasmic protein not
previously recognized to exist on the outer PM. IHC demonstrates that the
9H2 antigen is expressed only rarely on normal cells, but is commonly on
breast and colon cancers (3 of 4 samples tested for each tumor type).
Binding was also seen on 2 of 4 small cell lung cancers samples and 1 of
3 pancreatic cancers. The existence of the 2B9 antigen on the outer PM
was confirmed by study of 293T cells transiently transfected with
MYC-tagged antigen expression constructs and analyzed by flow cytometry
with the mAb 2B9 and an anti-myc mAb. Treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells with
the mAb 2B9 substantially reduced invasion in the transwell migration
assay. An additional panel of 12 mAbs exhibited internalizing activity
and is being evaluated for efficacy as antibody-drug
conjugatesConclusion: Our panel of mAbs from cancer patients supports the
hypothesis that patients with malignancies make antibodies that bind
novel cancer-specific antigens. Two mAbs bind antigens expressed only on
the surface of malignant cells; one has not previously been detected on
the outer PM. The ability of mAb 2B9 to inhibit breast cancer cell
invasion suggests that the anti-tumor immune response may be functional.
Studying the anti-cancer antibody repertoire may identify new targets for
mAb-based cancer diagnostics and therapeutics.

