Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum angiogenic factors may predict prognosis in patients with
epithelial ovarian cancer


Objective: Angiogenesis is one of the processes that is critical for the
growth, invasion and metastasis of solid tumors, including epithelial
ovarian cancer (EOC). The vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
family is one of the major pathways involved in tumor angiogenesis, and
VEGF expression is activated by hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1. The aim
of this study was to determine whether serum levels of these angiogenic
factors could be used as prognostic biomarkers in patients with
EOC.Methods: A total of 133 patients with EOC who were treated at Tottori
University Hospital between 2006 and 2012 were enrolled in this study.
The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the School of
Medicine of Tottori University. All patients gave written informed
consent before the collection of specimens according to institutional
guidelines. Serum samples were collected before initial surgery and
levels of VEGF-A, -C and HIF-1 were analyzed by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). We evaluated the association between the
levels of VEGF-A, -C, and HIF-1 and clinicopathologic variables. We also
determined the protein expression of VEGF-A, -C, and HIF-1 by
immunohistochemical staining in paraffin-embedded tumors from EOC
patientsResults: The protein expressions of VEGF-A, -C, and HIF-1 were
strongly observed in the cancer cells. Median levels of serum VEGF-A, -C
and HIF-1 were 280, 4866 and 125 pg/ml, respectively. The levels of
VEGF-A in patients at stage IV were significantly higher than those in
patients at stage I. Both histologic subtypes and lymph node involvement
were not related to levels of these angiogenic factors. We found a
significant positive correlation between VEGF-A levels and the ascitic
volume. The overall survival rate was significantly lower in FIGO stage
III or IV patients with EOC. We set the cutoff value of these factors at
the median levels of each angiogenic factors. The 5-year survival rate
for patients with high VEGF-A levels was significantly lower than those
with low levels (61.7% vs. 41.8%, P = 0.0147). Both HIF-1 and VEGF-C
levels were not related to outcome of patients. Multivariate analysis
revealed that serum VEGF-A level and FIGO stage were independent
prognostic factors.Conclusion: These results suggest that serum VEGF-A
may be a promising prognostic biomarker for EOC.

