Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGF-II causes translocation of estrogen receptor beta to the
mitochondria in triple negative breast cancer cell lines


Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and is the leading
cause of death among women worldwide. Breast cancer is classified by the
presence or absence of the estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor
(PR), and the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). Triple
negative breast cancers (TNBCs) lack all 3 receptors and account for
approximately 15-20% of all breast cancers. Due to lack of targeted
treatments TNBCs become aggressive and can metastasize to other parts of
the body. The insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF-II) has an important
role in fetal and cancer development. IGF-II signals through the IGF-I
receptor (IGF-IR), insulin receptor (Ins-R), and has been associated in
cross-talk with the estrogen receptors alpha and beta (ER, ER). Our lab
has demonstrated that IGF-II activates the translocation of estrogen
receptor alpha (ER-) and estrogen receptor beta (ER-) in the absence of
the estrogen ligand. When co-expressed, ER- counteracts the proliferative
function of ER-, however the role of ER- in ER- negative breast cancers
is unclear. Although TNBC accounts for 20% of all BC, 50-90% of all TNBC
express high levels of ER-. Triple negative breast cancer can be more
aggressive and difficult to treat. Also, the cancer is more likely to
spread and recur. With the elevated levels of expression of the ER- found
in TNBC our lab demonstrated through western blotting and confocal
microscopy that not only did treatment with IGF-II increase the
expression of ER- in both ER positive (MCF-7) and TNBC cell lines
(CRL-231, 2335, and HS578-T) but it also stimulated translocation
predominantly to the mitochondria in the TNBC cell lines. The presence of
ER- in the mitochondria suggests a need for further study on the action
of ER- in the mitochondria of all BC cell lines, especially TNBC cell
lines.

