Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Equimolar vs. pharmacokinetics-guided dosing in anti-cancer
efficacy assessment of precursor-product pairs: Example with
pyranocoumarins from Korean Angelica


Prostate cancer is a malignant disease quite unique to men and has the
second highest mortality rate next to lung cancer in the United States,
with an estimated 233,000 new cases to be diagnosed in 2014. Angelica
gigas Nakai (AGN) is a traditional medicinal herb in Korea and China.
Ethanol extract of dried AGN root has been shown by us and others to
exert anti-cancer activity in several allograft and xenograft models. In
recently completed studies in primary carcinogenesis model (TRAMP mice),
our group has demonstrated that AGN ethanol extract can significantly
suppress the growth of neuroendocrine (NE)-lineage cancers and inhibit
prostate epithelial lineage lesions. These studies also found that major
pyranocoumarin isomer compounds decursin (D) and decursinol angelate (DA)
from AGN when provided at equimolar intake to that provided by AGN
accounted for the epithelial lineage suppression efficacy, but was less
active than AGN extract against NE-Ca growth. Because rodent models and
humans convert D/DA rapidly and extensively (>95%) into decusinol (DOH),
we hypothesize that DOH (and/or its metabolites) may be the true active
chemical for suppressing the epithelial cancer. To test this, we compared
oral gavage of DOH at equimolar dose as D/DA in SCID mice carrying human
LNCaP/AR-Luc cells inoculated subcutaneously. Whereas DOH treated mice
showed greater suppression of tumor growth than D/DA, measurement of
plasma DOH levels showed 1.7 fold higher in the former at 3 h post-dose.
Our earlier work has shown in a rat model that gavage of DOH led to 2.4
fold area under curve (AUC) over that achieved by equimolar dosing of
D/DA, suggesting differences for absorption, distribution, metabolism,
and excretion (ADME) of DOH vs. D/DA in other species as well. We are
currently conducting PK studies of DOH and D/DA in mice to establish
their PK parameters in order to achieve bio-equivalent dosing to
critically test DOH efficacy and our hypothesis. In summary,
PK-evaluation of precursor-product pairs might be important to determine
bio-equivalent dosing before costly anti-cancer efficacy tests are
conducted to ensure valid efficacy comparison.

