Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling synergistic anti-PD-1 immunotherapy combinations with
virtual tumor


The tumor microenvironment and local immune response play a key role in
cancer biology, and immune resistance is a feature of many cancers. For
this reason, immunotherapy, which re-educates the immune system to
recognize and target tumor cells, has recently developed into a highly
active area of anticancer drug development. The field is dominated by
immune-checkpoint blockers, which counteract the suppression of the
immune response that is often observed in cancer. While early results for
monotherapies are promising, with response rates exceeding those
typically observed for chemotherapy, the real potential of immunotherapy
agents could be in combining them together or with other anticancer
treatments. However, there is currently no rational basis on which to
select optimal dosing regimens or combination schedules, and hence there
is a clear unmet need for predictive tools to aid this
process[1,2].Physiomics has developed a preclinical and a clinical
Virtual Tumour (VT) technology that can predict how a tumor will respond
to drug exposure. This integrated PK/PD simulation platform can be used
to optimize drug dosing and scheduling, and to design new combination
therapies. The VT technology integrates pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic effects and models the way individual cells behave within
a tumor population. These agent-based methods are particularly suitable
for modeling not only tumor cells, but also other cell populations - such
as those involved in the immune response - and also interactions between
cells. Here we describe our recent development and application of the VT
technology for modeling preclinical efficacy of immune-checkpoint
blockers, with a focus on anti-PD-1 agents.The VT platform has been
extended by the addition of an immunotherapy module, which has been
developed and calibrated using qualitative and quantitative data taken
from the literature. This module captures the mechanisms by which the
immunotherapy activates the innate antitumor immune response and
synergizes with other anticancer therapies. Through a preclinical case
study also derived from the literature, we demonstrate that the extended
VT can be applied to model the efficacy of immune-checkpoint blockers,
both alone and in combination with other anticancer agents. Furthermore,
we show that the VT accurately captures the synergy between an
immunotherapy agent and conventional anticancer treatments.Our enhanced
VT capability represents the first step towards a ground-breaking tool
for optimizing dosing and scheduling of immunotherapy, which is set to
revolutionize cancer therapy in the near future, especially for patients
with resistant disease.1. Pardoll, D. M. The blockade of immune
checkpoints in cancer immunotherapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer 12, 252-264
(2012).2. Lesterhuis, W. J., Haanen, J. B. A. G. & Punt, C. J. A. Cancer
immunotherapy - revisited. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 10, 591-600 (2011).

