Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Boric acid inhibits cell proliferation through RB1 protein in head
and neck cancer


Boric acid is a very common chemical used in a wide variety of
applications as well as in medicine. In this study, the usage of boric
acid as a potential alternative cancer therapeutic was investigated by
examining its effect in head and neck cancer cell line proliferation and
tumor suppressor gene expression.Head and neck cancer cell lines UT-SCC
6A, 6B, 9A, 16A, 16B, 24A, 54C, 74A, and 74B were treated with varying
doses of boric acid, ranging from 200 ug/mL to 1800 ug/mL and XTT assay
was used to measure the dose response. Subsequently, RNA was isolated
from treated cells and was converted to cDNA to evaluate the expression
of P53, RB1, ING1 and ING3 via Real-time PCR. Also protein was isolated
from the same cell lines for Western Blot analysis.Boric acid treatment
caused a significant decrease in proliferation in all of the head and
neck cancer cell lines investigated, including UT-SCC 6A, 6B, 9A, 16A,
16B, 24A, 54C, 74A, and 74B. Results from boric acid treatment and
untreated controls were analyzed for statistical significance using Mann
Whitney U test. The results approached statistical significance with p
value of 0.05. After determining the effective doses, cell lines were
treated with boric acid and gene expression of P53, RB, ING1 and ING3
were analyzed. All of the genes expression were increased in several of
the cell lines examined. We couldn't detect the protein expression of
ING1 and ING3. But weve detected the higher expression of Phospho (PP)-RB
and Bax, lower expression of bcl2 protein.In short, our results displayed
similar results to prostate cancer reported in literature in terms of
inhibition of proliferation. Weve showed that boric acid has reduced
levels of cell proliferation in head and neck cancer cell lines for the
first time in our study. Also higher expression of PP-RB indicated that
boric acid stopped cell cycle at G1. As a pro-apoptotic Bax expression
was up-regulated and anti-apoptotic bcl2 was down-regulated in some of
the cell lines showing that boric acid may lead the cells to apoptosis.
In the light of these results, boric acid appears to be a candidate
alternative therapeutic agent for cancer. Of course, further experiments
are necessary in order to strengthen this conclusion.

