Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next generation sequencing for discovery of somatic mutations and
clonal relationships in platinum-resistant metastatic urothelial cancer


Background: Beyond first-line platinum based chemotherapy, there are
currently no FDA-approved therapies for advanced platinum-resistant
urothelial carcinoma (PRUC). Our objective was to generate the first
detailed genomic profile of metastatic PRUC to identify molecular changes
critical to the development of platinum-resistance and metastasis.
Methods: Following informed consent, we collected 50 urothelial tumor
samples, from 23 patients consented through our precision medicine
protocol. Metastatic tumor samples were obtained from metastatic biopsies
or surgical metastatectomy. Germline samples were prospectively collected
for every patient and matched archival formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
primary tumors from the same patients were retrieved. Our cohort
comprises 23 metastatic samples, 37 platinum resistant urothelial samples
and 18 trios of matched primary, metastatic and germline samples
including two rapid autopsy cases that yielded tumor samples from
multiple primary and metastatic sites. We performed whole exome
sequencing of all tumor and germline samples and RNA sequencing on 18
advanced PRUC tumors. We utilized our in-house computational pipeline for
integrated analysis of somatic single nucleotide variants and somatic
copy-number alterations and to analyze the clonal evolution of the
primary and metastatic in each patient. We utilized the DAVID
bioinformatic tool for pathway analysis. Results: Advanced PRUC samples
were enriched for several molecular alterations, we identified 414
recurrently mutated genes (defined as genes mutated in 2 or more samples
and having the highest number of mutations per nucleotide) including
common genes such as TP53(45%) as well as actionable alterations in
PIK3CA(11%) and TSC1(19%). Frequent copy number alterations included
CDKN2A deletions (33%), E2F3(10%) and ERBB2(7%) amplifications. Pathway
analysis showed an enrichment of mutations in genes involved in
controlling apoptosis (p = 1.0E-7, FDR 1.7E-4) and cell cycle regulation
(P = 1.6E-2, FDR 2.3E1) compared to the TCGA dataset of untreated
urothelial carcinoma primary tumors.We reconstructed phylogenetic trees
from matched primary, metastatic and germline trios revealing evidence of
divergent clonal evolution between primary tumors, lymph node and
visceral metastases. In some cases, shared mutations occurred with
gradually increasing variant allele frequencies across primary tumors,
lymph node metastasis and visceral metastases respectively, indicating
clonal selection of mutations that were present in the primary tumor. We
also identified unique acquired mutations in metastatic lesions that were
not present in primary tumors. Conclusions: This study generates a
detailed molecular profile of the genomic landscape of PRUC revealing
evidence of extensive heterogeneity and clonal selection underlying
platinum-resistance and metastatic spread.

