Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinatorial therapeutic targeting of BMP2 and MEK in NF1-null
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors


Our lab has identified and validated bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2)
signaling pathways as a therapeutic target in malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors (MPNSTs), independent of the NRAS and MEK1/2 regulation.
BMP2/SMAD signaling is associated with enhanced motility and invasion, a
hallmark feature of the biological aggressiveness of MPNSTs. We have
shown that inhibition of BMP2 leads to decreased motility and
invasiveness in MPNST cell lines. Consistent with our data, gene
expression studies from NF1 patient tissue samples demonstrated that
increased expression of BMP2 is associated with malignancy in NF1
patients. Ras-GAP related domain (GRD) is the most widely studied
functional target of Nf1 implicated in tumorigenesis, however,
therapeutic interventions targeting Ras activity have met with limited
success. Our objective is to target the BMP2/SMAD pathway, involved in
migration and invasion, in combination with MEK inhibitors to develop a
novel therapeutic approach for treatment of MPNSTs.The mechanism by which
NF1-deficiency leads to activation of BMP2 signaling pathways, and
consequently increased cellular motility and invasion is unknown. Using
NF1(+/-) and NF1 knockdown MPNST cell lines, we are investigating the
transcriptional regulation of BMP2 by NF1 to identify signaling
mechanisms downstream of NF1 mediating increase in BMP2 levels. We will
present data showing that BMP2 is regulated at the level of transcript
stability upon NF1 deficiency. We will identify and design a rational
approach of targeting of the molecular components involved in stability
of the BMP2 3 UTR in MPNSTs. Furthermore, we will present a combinatorial
approach that targets the growth and proliferative potential of MPNSTs by
RAS-MEK inhibitors, along with motility and invasive capability by
inhibition of the BMP2-Smad axis for better targeting of these tumors.
The overall goal of our research is to use the regulation of BMP2
transcriptional control to define mechanism-based novel druggable targets
that can be exploited in combinatorial therapies with RAS-MEK inhibitors
to treat NF1-related tumors.

