Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A naturally occurring model for gastric cancer


Gastric cancer is the fourth most common cancer and the second leading
cause of cancer related deaths. While there are increasing data
characterizing the molecular features and defining potential targets for
gastric carcinoma, preclinical animal models that recapitulate the human
disease are limited. We have developed a number of resources to permit
the characterization of spontaneously occurring canine gastric cancer
which may provide a useful resource to understand gastric cancer
carcinogenesis, its prevention and treatment.While gastric carcinoma is
reportedly uncommon in dogs, certain breeds have significantly increased
risk. To study this disease, we have established a database and tissue
repository. Our goal has been to characterize canine gastric carcinoma
clinically, histologically, and molecularly to determine its comparative
value as a model for the human disease. Recently, we have performed a
histologic review of 50 canine gastric carcinomas and have found that the
canine disease is comprises largely of diffuse type gastric carcinoma and
is enriched in the signet ring variant.We report for the first time a
technique for culturing primary gastric cancer from affected dogs.
Gastric cancer tissue specimens collected from spontaneously occurring
tumors in dogs were disaggregated with collagenase and cells were grown
in mammary epithelial growth media with or without 5% FBS. Four different
cell lines were derived from tumors of a Labrador mix (GC1), a Basset
hound (GC2), a Bouvier de Flandres (GC3) and a mixed breed (GC4). Early
passages of all cell lines were able to form colonies when grown in soft
agar.Different growth patterns were observed when cells were cultured
with versus without serum. Serum treated cells tend to be fast growing,
fibroblastic in appearance and senesce within 10 to 18 passages and these
may represent cancer associated fibroblasts or mesenchymal
differentiation of cancer cells. However, cells grown in mammary
epithelial growth media without serum tend to form spheres that grow well
when transferred to ultra-low attachment plate and form extensions when
grown in matrigel. That semi-attached growth behavior is consistent with
that reported for some human gastric cancer cell lines.Canine gastric
cancer cell lines provide a new resource for the characterization of this
spontaneous model that recapitulates diffuse, signet ring cell gastric
carcinoma.

