Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trastuzumab-dolaflexin, a highly potent Fleximer-based
antibody-drug conjugate, demonstrates a favorable therapeutic index in
exploratory toxicology studies in multiple species


Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) represent a promising drug class that
relies on monoclonal antibody recognition of specific cancer-associated
antigens for targeted delivery of chemotherapeutic agents. Fleximer ADCs
utilize a polymer-based conjugation platform to enable high drug-antibody
ratios (DAR) and significantly greater anti-tumor potency compared to
ADCs with DAR 3-4. We previously showed that trastuzumab-dolaflexin
(T-dolaflexin), a HER2-targeted ADC comprised of the antibody trastuzumab
conjugated to 15 proprietary auristatin molecules via Fleximer, has
excellent pharmacokinetics and efficacy in mouse models (AACR 2014
Abstract #2645). T-dolaflexin is efficacious at a single dose of 0.67
mg/kg in mouse xenograft models, and achieves prolonged tumor-free
survival after a single 2 mg/kg dose in a low HER2-expressing model that
is insensitive to ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1). We sought to test
the tolerability of T-dolaflexin in exploratory mouse, rat and non-human
primate toxicology studies. Cohorts of 6 mice were treated with a single
dose of vehicle or T-dolaflexin at 20, 30 or 40 mg/kg and followed for 21
days. The 20 and 30 mg/kg doses were well-tolerated based on body weight
loss and mortality and achieved a therapeutic index (TI) in mouse >40X.
Cohorts of 4 female cynomolgus monkeys were treated with a single dose of
vehicle or T-dolaflexin at 0.67, 1.34 or 2.68 mg/kg (payload doses 600,
1200 and 2400 g/m2, respectively). Day 3 necropsy was performed on 2
animals per cohort, with recovery necropsy on Day 22 in the remaining 2
animals. All animals survived until scheduled necropsy with limited body
weight loss. There were no test-article related findings on gross
pathology. Most notable clinical pathology findings were transaminase
elevations (primarily AST), and decreased platelet counts at Day 8. One
high dose animal demonstrated laboratory findings consistent with hepatic
injury with full recovery by Day 22 and no findings on gross or
microscopic pathology at necropsy. There was no evidence of
myelosuppression. Microscopic pathology findings were limited, with no
test-article related findings in HER2-expressing organs including heart,
lungs and GI tract. All doses were considered well-tolerated.
Toxicokinetics demonstrated good stability of drug conjugate in plasma
with t1/2 5 days (comparable to antibody t1/2) and minimal exposure to
free payload. Plasma exposure at the 2.68 mg/kg dose in cyno was several
fold higher than mouse exposure at the minimally efficacious dose of 0.67
mg/kg, and was comparable to the mouse exposure associated with prolonged
tumor free survival after a single 2mg/kg dose. Trastuzumab-dolaflexin, a
highly potent Fleximer-based ADC, demonstrates a favorable TI in tumor
models with low HER2 expression where current HER2-directed therapies are
inactive.

