Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation levels of LINE-1 in primary lesion and matched
metastatic lesions of colorectal cancer.


Background: Cancer cells exhibit two types of DNA methylation changes:
global DNA hypomethylation and site-specific CpG island promoter
hypermethylation. Genome-wide DNA hypomethylation plays an important role
in genomic instability and carcinogenesis. As LINE-1 or L1
retrotransposon constitutes a substantial portion of the human genome,
the level of L1 methylation is regarded to be a surrogate marker of
global DNA methylation. In Colorectal cancer (CRC), L1 methylation in
primary tumor has been shown to be highly variable, and L1
hypomethylation is strongly associated with poor prognosis. Nonetheless,
no study has examined L1 methylation level in metastatic lesions [liver,
lung, and lymph node (LN)] from CRCs, and assessed the heterogeneity of
L1 methylation level within CRC tumor. Methods: A total of 65 patients
with liver and/or lung metastases from CRC who were undergoing hepatic
and/or lung resection at Kumamoto University Hospital were enrolled in
this study. The bisulfite-pyrosequencing technology was utilized to
quantify the L1 methylation level in 60 liver metastases, matched 26
primary tumors and matched 6 LN metastases, and 6 paired lung metastatic
and primary tumors. The heterogeneity within primary tumor (superficial
area vs. invasive area) was also evaluated (n=6). Results: The
distribution of the L1 methylation level in liver metastases (n=60) was
as follows: mean, 68.9; median, 71.0; SD, 10.8; range, 37.1-90.1 (all in
0-100 scale). L1 methylation level of liver metastases was not associated
with sex, age at hepatic resection, tumor stage of primary lesion, or
tumor size. L1 methylation level of liver metastases was significantly
related with that of matched primary tumors (n=26; Pearson correlation
coefficient r=0.71, p=0.0001). LN metastases showed similar L1
methylation level of matched primary tumors and liver metastases (n=6);
the distribution of the L1 methylation level in matched 6 LN metastases
was as follows: mean, 71.0; SD, 9.37; range, 59.3-81.9. In addition, lung
metastases and matched primary tumors exhibited similar L1 methylation
level; the distributions of the L1 methylation level in lung metastases
and matched primary tumors (n=6) were as follows: mean, 65.6 and 71.3;
range, 55.7-82.2 and 66.1-79.6, respectively. Interestingly, the
heterogeneity of L1 methylation level was not observed; the difference
between superficial area and invasive area was within 7 in all 6 cases.
Conclusions: Liver, lung and LN metastases showed similar L1 methylation
level with primary tumors. In addition, L1 methylation level of
superficial area was roughly in accordance with that of invasive area;
thus supporting the absence of heterogeneity of L1 methylation level
within one tumor. These results may suggest that cancer cells acquire
global DNA hypomethylation at the early stage of tumor development, and
it is preserved through the process of cancer invasion and metastasis.

