Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of epsin in breast cancer and critical role of epsin
in promoting cancer growth and metastasis.


We have previously demonstrated that deficiency of epsins, a family of
endocytic clathrin adaptor proteins, decreases tumor growth by enhancing
VEGF signaling in endothelial cells and causing dysfunctional tumor
angiogenesis. However, the role of epsin in cancer cells is unclear. Our
preliminary data indicate that epsins are upregulated in various human
cancers, including breast cancer, prostate cancer, ovary cancer, cervix
cancer, bladder cancer, and esophagus cancer. Here, we determined the
role of epsin in cancer cells in regulating breast cancer growth and
metastasis. Increased epsin level was found in ER(+/-) and/or PR(+/-)
human breast cancer cell lines including MDA-MB-231, BT-20, ZR751, MCF7
and T47D, and in mouse breast cancer cell lines, such as168FARN and 4T1.
The level of epsins was also considerably augmented in tumors derived
from MMTV-PyMT spontaneous breast cancer mouse model at different
progressive stages. We observed a correlative increase in epsin
expression with cancer progression in MMTV-PyMT mice. We also generated
stable epsin-deficient MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 cells. Epsin deficiency
markedly inhibited cell proliferation and migration in vitro. Xenograft
mouse models of epsin-deficient breast cancer cells revealed striking
reduction in tumorigenesis and lung metastasis. Lung metastasis by
tail-vein injection of epsin-deficient MDA-MB-231 cells was also
decreased compared to controls. Mechanistically, we showed that
epsin-deficiency induced morphological change from mesenchamal-like to
epitheial-like in MDA-MB-231 cells, indicating a reversal of
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) to
Mesenchymal-Epithelial-Transition (MET). Moreover, epsin-deficiency
increased E-cadherin expression but decreased vimentin, and EMT inducing
genes snail/slug expression in MDA-MB-231 cells. Epsin-deficiency also
dramatically reduced cyclin D1 expression and Rb activation. Accordingly,
elevated E-cadherin but attenuated vimentin, slug and cyclin D1 were
observed in tumor tissues or lung tissues isolated from epsin-deficient
MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 tumor models. Conversely, overexpression of epsin in
MDA-MB-231 cells enhanced cyclin D1 and vimentin expression.
Collectively, epsin promotes breast tumor growth and metastasis through
coordinated regulation of cell cycle and EMT. Our study provides a basis
for novel therapeutic targets for anti-cancer treatments.

