Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene signatures derived from in vitro isolated migratory and
invasive breast cancer cells indicate early metastatic relapse.


BackgroundCancer cell motility and tissue invasion are cornerstones of
metastatic dissemination. Adequate molecular profiling of
chemotaxis-driven tumor cells is impeded by the transient and stochastic
nature of motility occurring in only a small subset of tumor cells. To
unveil molecular pathways implicated in breast cancer cell invasion and
migration, an in vitro set-up was designed to extract total RNA for
microarray hybridisation from isolated migratory and invasive breast
cancer cells at an early and a late time point. These target populations
were compared to corresponding non-migratory and non-invasive cells for
migration- and invasion-related expression profiling to assess potential
prognostic relevance.Methods and resultsA 24-well Transwell set-up was
used to perform both migration and invasion experiments on MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells after 24h serum starvation (400000 cells/insert). A
Matrigel coating (20%/15L) was applied to the bottom-side of insert
membranes in both settings. For invasion experiments, a layer of Matrigel
(20%/20L) was added on top of the membranes. Total RNA was isolated at
early and late timepoints from both migratory / invasive and reference
cells and hybridized onto Illumina HumanHT-12 v4 BeadChips in biological
triplicates. Normalization and differential gene expression analysis were
performed using the Limma-package in BioConductor. Lists of
differentially expressed genes were analyzed using Ingenuity software.
Using the nearest shrunken centroid algorithm gene signatures
characteristic for early or late invasive or migratory cells were
generated. The resulting models were applied onto six distinct gene
expression data sets of pre-treatment samples from patients with mostly
lymph node negative breast cancer. Survival analysis was performed using
distant metastasis-free or disease-free survival as endpoint. Although
all signatures were associated with survival in at least one data set,
the gene signature associated with late invasion was associated with
survival (range HR: 1.403 - 1.929; all PBackgroundCancer cell motility
and tissue invasion are cornerstones of metastatic dissemination.
Adequate molecular profiling of chemotaxis-driven tumor cells is impeded
by the transient and stochastic nature of motility occurring in only a
small subset of tumor cells. To unveil molecular pathways implicated in
breast cancer cell invasion and migration, an in vitro set-up was
designed to extract total RNA for microarray hybridisation from isolated
migratory and invasive breast cancer cells at an early and a late time
point. These target populations were compared to corresponding
non-migratory and non-invasive cells for migration- and invasion-related
expression profiling to assess potential prognostic relevance.Methods and
resultsA 24-well Transwell set-up was used to perform both migration and
invasion experiments on MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells after 24h serum
starvation (400000 cells/insert). A Matrigel coating (20%/15L) was
applied to the bottom-side of insert membranes in both settings. For
invasion experiments, a layer of Matrigel (20%/20L) was added on top of
the membranes. Total RNA was isolated at early and late timepoints from
both migratory / invasive and reference cells and hybridized onto
Illumina HumanHT-12 v4 BeadChips in biological triplicates. Normalization
and differential gene expression analysis were performed using the
Limma-package in BioConductor. Lists of differentially expressed genes
were analyzed using Ingenuity software. Using the nearest shrunken
centroid algorithm gene signatures characteristic for early or late
invasive or migratory cells were generated. The resulting models were
applied onto six distinct gene expression data sets of pre-treatment
samples from patients with mostly lymph node negative breast cancer.
Survival analysis was performed using distant metastasis-free or
disease-free survival as endpoint. Although all signatures were
associated with survival in at least one data set, the gene signature
associated with late invasion was associated with survival (range HR:
1.403 - 1.929; all P<0.05) in all but two data sets. Of note, gene
signatures associated with the late timepoints were prognostically more
relevant (significance obtained for 66.7% when using the models for the
late timepoint vs. 16.7% and 33.3% when using the models for the early
timepoint).ConclusionsGene expression characteristics of invasive and
migratory breast cancer cells indicate poor prognosis on several publicly
available breast cancer expression data sets. For both migration and
invasion, the strongest prognostic relevance was associated with the late
time points, possibly by extended differences caused by early events. The
role of identified target genes is being functionally validated and
additionally, these data can be subjected to multivariate regression
analysis to study association with the molecular subtypes.

