Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: T315, a novel integrin-linked kinase inhibitor, suppresses
hypoxia-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in prostate cancer.


The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an early event in
metastasis that involves the loss by epithelial cells of many of their
distinctive epithelial characteristics and the acquisition of mesenchymal
properties. EMT can be induced in cancer cells by several factors, such
as hypoxia and TGF-1, leading to an aggressive and malignant phenotype.
In prostate cancer therapy, EMT can be a major clinical challenge as it
can contribute to tumor recurrence, therapy resistance, and metastasis.
Recently, the integrin-linked kinase (ILK) has been identified as an
important protein involved in the process of EMT by inducing the protein
expression and activation of Snail, one of the major EMT markers in
various cancer cells. The objective of this study was to evaluate the
ability of T315, a novel ILK inhibitor developed in our laboratory, to
block hypoxia-induced EMT in prostate cancer cells and to validate the
role of ILK in hypoxia-induced EMT. Based on our results, the protein
expression level of ILK was induced by hypoxia as well as EMT examined by
efficiently decreasing the protein expression level of E-cadherin and
increasing those of vimentin, Snail, and Zeb1 in PC-3 cells. This ILK
induction was due to transcriptional regulation by HIF1 which also could
be induced by positively regulating ILK promoter. To elucidate the
mechanism of hypoxia-induced EMT in prostate cancer, we used T315 to show
its ability to downregulate PKB/Akt and mTOR activities and decrease HIF1
expression. These results showed that hypoxia-induced EMT is driven by
HIF1/ILK positive loop in prostate cancer. Meanwhile, we also
demonstrated that YB-1, a DNA/RNA binding protein, plays as a
transcriptional factor to negatively regulate the expression of Foxo3a
which has been showed as an EMT-related protein to regulate Snail and
E-cadherin expression. Our results showed T315 could increase Foxo3a
expression by inhibition of YB-1 protein expression. On the other hand,
according to a previous study, GSK3-mediated Snail phosphorylation
altered the nuclear sequestration of Snail and caused Snail to undergo
proteasomal degradation. Our results also showed that T315 could cause
GSK3 dephosphorylation, increase the phosphorylation status of Snail and
promote Snail degradation. More importantly, we performed functional
assays to observe the inhibition of hypoxia-induced EMT in prostate
cancer. T315 showed its ability to inhibit hypoxia-induced cell motility
dose-dependently in migration, invasion and 3D culture assays. In
conclusion, these results indicate that the inhibition of ILK can block
hypoxia-induced EMT in prostate cancer cells as reflected by changes in
molecular markers and cell behavior, and that this inhibition can be
achieved by treatment with the novel small molecule agent T315, which may
have therapeutic benefits for prostate cancer patients with subsequent
metastasis.

