Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plucked hair as a biomarker platform for monitoring
transcriptional consequences of clinical exposure to antagonism of the
HDM2/P53 interaction in tumors.


The ability to assess and monitor target engagement is crucial for
informing early drug development decisions. High vascularisation of the
hair follicle, frequent epithelial origin of tumors, and high degree of
congruence of expression in hair of pathways dysregulated in cancers,
makes the cellular bulb on plucked human scalp hair an excellent
surrogate tissue for non-invasive monitoring of PD effects in clinical
trials. Disruption of the p53-HDM2 interaction with small molecules has
demonstrated single agent anti-tumor activity in preclinical models and
represents an attractive treatment strategy in oncology. Development of a
peripheral tissue based gene expression signature of inhibition of the
p53-HDM2 interaction could facilitate the early development of these
compounds. To develop a peripheral PD biomarker of antagonism of this
interaction, we used two selective p53-HDM2 antagonists, Nutlin-3 and
Sanofi's SAR405838 and applied our plucked hair biomarker platform to
develop a gene expression signature indicative of compound exposure.
SAR405838 displays potent activity in vitro and in vivo against p53 WT
cell lines / xenograft models, but not in the p53 mutant context. Three
hairs from each of four healthy donors were exposed to either SAR405838
or Nutlin-3 over a range of compound concentrations for 6hr or 24hr in
our proprietary ex vivo cultures. We extracted RNA from the cellular bulb
of individual hairs and assessed the transcriptome by microarray
analysis. Biological enrichment analysis of genes differentially
expressed revealed strong correlation to activated P53 signaling
pathways. Further analysis revealed a core set of congruent genes as
candidate PD biomarkers of p53-HDM2 antagonism, one of which was MIC-1, a
secreted plasma protein that demonstrates a strong PK/PD relationship in
patients treated with p53-MDM2 antagonists in Phase 1 trials. In ex vivo
plucked hair, we have demonstrated biologically relevant differential
expression of a panel of transcriptional markers exhibiting common
response to Nutlin-3 and SAR405838. These reflect compound mechanism of
action, and can provide further evidence of target engagement in addition
to plasma MIC-1 levels. While the temporal and kinetic relationship
between gene expression changes, toxicity, and clinical efficacy remains
to be determined, the genes identified in this study may be used to
provide further MOA information in clinical settings to monitor PD
responses in plucked scalp hair obtained from patients exposed to
SAR405838.

