Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pediatric osteosarcoma patients are taller than average from birth
to age twelve: a report from the Children's Oncology Group.


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common form of bone cancer in children and
displays a peak incidence that coincides with the pubertal growth spurt.
Consequently a number of studies have investigated whether cases are
taller at diagnosis than the general pediatric population; a recent
analysis which pooled seven such studies found that cases were
disproportionately in the 51st-89th and especially the >90th percentiles
of height-for-age (HFA). However, no study to our knowledge has examined
whether OS patients exhibit greater HFA at earlier ages. During 2008-2010
we enrolled 290 OS cases Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common form of
bone cancer in children and displays a peak incidence that coincides with
the pubertal growth spurt. Consequently a number of studies have
investigated whether cases are taller at diagnosis than the general
pediatric population; a recent analysis which pooled seven such studies
found that cases were disproportionately in the 51st-89th and especially
the >90th percentiles of height-for-age (HFA). However, no study to our
knowledge has examined whether OS patients exhibit greater HFA at earlier
ages. During 2008-2010 we enrolled 290 OS cases <20 years of age
diagnosed at Children's Oncology Group institutions in the United States
and Canada in a genetic epidemiologic study. In addition to collecting
buccal cell samples for genetic analysis we requested permission to
obtain length/height data from medical records from birth to diagnosis.
Records were obtained for 153 male and 111 female participants.
Anthropometrics and date of measurement were doubly entered into a custom
database, and inconsistencies were resolved by a third abstraction.
Between 1 and 46 measurements (median = 11) were recorded up to the
earlier of diagnosis or 12 years of age. Mixed effects cubic spline
models were applied to length/height to produce individual growth curves
using Stata. Sex was included as a main effect and as interactions with
the model slope terms to account for gender differences in growth.
Individual estimates of length/height at every three months of age
between birth and age two years, and at each year of age thereafter, were
computed and transformed to Z-scores according to the CDC 2000 reference.
OS cases of both sexes were consistently longer or taller than reference
data at all ages, as at no age did the 95% confidence interval around
mean Z-score include 0 (i.e. the population mean and median). Under 2
years of age length was examined; mean Z-score at birth was 0.56 (71st
%ile), rose to 0.72 (76th %ile) at 0.5 years, and fell to 0.31 (62nd
%ile) at 2 years. Over 2 years of age height was examined; mean Z-score
was 0.48 (68th %ile) at 4 years, dipped to 0.33 (63rd %ile) at 8-9 years,
and rose to 0.49 (69th %ile) at 12 years. No differences in mean Z-score
at each age were observed by age at diagnosis (sex specific
inter-quartile range of age at diagnosis vs. other), location of tumor
(long bone of the lower limb vs. other), or race (White non-Hispanic vs.
other). Our data clearly indicate that pediatric OS patients are
substantially longer/taller than the United States national norm at all
ages before puberty.

