Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proinflammatory activity of type II interleukin 1 receptor, a
decoy receptor.


We have previously demonstrated that type II interleukin 1 receptor
(IL1R2), an IL-1 decoy receptor, plays a dual role on regulation of
inflammatory signaling, i.e., IL1R2 inhibits the exogenous interleukin 1
(IL-1) signaling on the one hand but activates intracellular IL-1 and its
downstream proinflammatory cytokines. To have a better understanding of
the proinflammatory activity of IL1R2, we modulated the intracellular
IL1R2 levels by ectopic expression or siRNA silencing techniques. In the
present study, our results showed that ectopic expression of IL1R2 in
HaCaT cells, an immortalized cell line of human keratinocyte,
significantly enhanced the expression of IL-6, MMP-1, and VEGF-A. Since
T4R2 cells, a tumorigenic cell line derived from HaCaT cells by long-term
exposure to inorganic arsenic, expressed a significant amount of IL1R2,
we therefore silenced the expression of IL1R2 in T4R2 cells by RNAi
technique. Our results consistently showed that silencing of IL1R2 in
T4R2 cells decreased expression of IL-6, MMP-1, and VEGF-A. Meanwhile,
our results demonstrated that the intracellular levels of IL1R2 are
closely associated with migration ability of HaCaT cells. Moreover, IL1R2
silencing reduced the growth rate of T4R2 cells in nude mice. The
conditioned medium harvested from T4R2 cells was able to stimulate
migration, proliferation, and tube formation of cultured endothelial
cells, whereas the angiogenesis activity of conditioned medium harvested
from IL1R2 silenced T4R2 cells was significantly suppressed. Furthermore,
the enhanced migration ability of endothelial cells culturing in T4R2
conditioned medium was suppressed by antibodies against VEGF-A and IL-6.
We also demonstrated that tumors derived from T4R2 cells contained higher
levels of CD31 positive cells as compared to those derived from IL1R2
silenced T4R2 cells, indicating more blood vessels formed in T4R2 tumor
tissues. Mechanistically, our present studies showed that IL1R2 may work
together with cFos and bind to Ap-1 site of promoters of IL-6 and VEGF-A.
Taken together, we revealed that intracellular IL1R2 acts as a
proinflammatory factor and hence enhances the expression of several
inflammatory cytokines involving in angiogenesis and tumor malignancy.

