Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epidermal growth factor inhibition of HPV positive head and neck
cancer cells and primary tumorgrafts results in significant growth
inhibition mediated by apoptosis.


Purpose: Cetuximab, a monoclonal antibody targeting the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), is approved for use in the treatment of head and
neck cancer (HNC). One recent study (SPECTRUM) suggested that patient
with recurrent or metastatic HPV+ HNC do not benefit from treatment with
EGFR targeted therapy. However, most studies of EGFR inhibition have been
performed with HPV-negative cells and clinical trials have been performed
without regard to HPV status. We performed this study to determine
whether HPV+ HNC cells and patient-derived tumorgrafts respond to
cetuximab and to examine the mechanisms through which cetuximab affects
HPV+ HNC.Methods: Four HPV+ cell lines (UD-SCC2, UM-SCC47, UPCI-SCC90,
93-VU-147T) were assessed for EGFR expression by western blot.
Sensitivity to cetuximab was tested by assessing cell density 2, 4, 6,
and 8 days after cetuximab treatment and by assessing colony formation 2
weeks after plating. Apoptosis was measured by caspase activation, flow
cytometry for Annexin V and propidium iodide staining, and immunoblot.
Cell cycle was assessed by immunoblot for cyclin D1, cyclin B1, and
p27Kip-1 and confirmed by flow cytometry for propidium iodide stained
cells. Subcutaneous flank xenografts and tumorgrafts were performed in
Hsd:athymic Nude-Foxn1nu female mice treated with intraperitoneal
cetuximab (0.2mg/mouse) delivered twice weekly for 2 weeks. Time to tumor
quadrupling from baseline was assessed by Kaplan-Meier method.Results:
Significant variation in EGFR expression was seen in HPV+ cells.
Cetuximab treatment resulted in significant delay in cell proliferation
(pPurpose: Cetuximab, a monoclonal antibody targeting the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR), is approved for use in the treatment of
head and neck cancer (HNC). One recent study (SPECTRUM) suggested that
patient with recurrent or metastatic HPV+ HNC do not benefit from
treatment with EGFR targeted therapy. However, most studies of EGFR
inhibition have been performed with HPV-negative cells and clinical
trials have been performed without regard to HPV status. We performed
this study to determine whether HPV+ HNC cells and patient-derived
tumorgrafts respond to cetuximab and to examine the mechanisms through
which cetuximab affects HPV+ HNC.Methods: Four HPV+ cell lines (UD-SCC2,
UM-SCC47, UPCI-SCC90, 93-VU-147T) were assessed for EGFR expression by
western blot. Sensitivity to cetuximab was tested by assessing cell
density 2, 4, 6, and 8 days after cetuximab treatment and by assessing
colony formation 2 weeks after plating. Apoptosis was measured by caspase
activation, flow cytometry for Annexin V and propidium iodide staining,
and immunoblot. Cell cycle was assessed by immunoblot for cyclin D1,
cyclin B1, and p27Kip-1 and confirmed by flow cytometry for propidium
iodide stained cells. Subcutaneous flank xenografts and tumorgrafts were
performed in Hsd:athymic Nude-Foxn1nu female mice treated with
intraperitoneal cetuximab (0.2mg/mouse) delivered twice weekly for 2
weeks. Time to tumor quadrupling from baseline was assessed by
Kaplan-Meier method.Results: Significant variation in EGFR expression was
seen in HPV+ cells. Cetuximab treatment resulted in significant delay in
cell proliferation (p<0.005 for all lines) and decrease in colony
formation (pPurpose: Cetuximab, a monoclonal antibody targeting the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), is approved for use in the
treatment of head and neck cancer (HNC). One recent study (SPECTRUM)
suggested that patient with recurrent or metastatic HPV+ HNC do not
benefit from treatment with EGFR targeted therapy. However, most studies
of EGFR inhibition have been performed with HPV-negative cells and
clinical trials have been performed without regard to HPV status. We
performed this study to determine whether HPV+ HNC cells and
patient-derived tumorgrafts respond to cetuximab and to examine the
mechanisms through which cetuximab affects HPV+ HNC.Methods: Four HPV+
cell lines (UD-SCC2, UM-SCC47, UPCI-SCC90, 93-VU-147T) were assessed for
EGFR expression by western blot. Sensitivity to cetuximab was tested by
assessing cell density 2, 4, 6, and 8 days after cetuximab treatment and
by assessing colony formation 2 weeks after plating. Apoptosis was
measured by caspase activation, flow cytometry for Annexin V and
propidium iodide staining, and immunoblot. Cell cycle was assessed by
immunoblot for cyclin D1, cyclin B1, and p27Kip-1 and confirmed by flow
cytometry for propidium iodide stained cells. Subcutaneous flank
xenografts and tumorgrafts were performed in Hsd:athymic Nude-Foxn1nu
female mice treated with intraperitoneal cetuximab (0.2mg/mouse)
delivered twice weekly for 2 weeks. Time to tumor quadrupling from
baseline was assessed by Kaplan-Meier method.Results: Significant
variation in EGFR expression was seen in HPV+ cells. Cetuximab treatment
resulted in significant delay in cell proliferation (p<0.005 for all
lines) and decrease in colony formation (p<0.04 for all lines). In these
cell lines, cetuximab caused an increase in apoptosis as measured by
caspase activity, Bax activation, and Annexin V labeling. In addition, as
previously seen in HPV- cell lines, cetuximab increased p27Kip-1 and
decreased cyclin B1 and cyclin D1 coinciding with in a G1 cell cycle
arrest. Using both a cell line xenograft model and a direct-from-patient
tumorgraft model of HPV+ HNCs, cetuximab resulted in significant tumor
growth delay (median time to tumor quadrupling: 15 vs. 24 days, p=0.02;
and 42 vs. 89 days, p=0.0001, respectively).Conclusions: Epidermal growth
factor receptor inhibition by cetuximab appears to be effective in
slowing proliferation and inducing apoptosis in HPV+ HNC. The proposed
mechanism of action appears to be similar to that shown over a decade ago
in HPV- HNC. These results suggest that cetuximab may play a role in the
management of patients with HPV+ HNC.

