Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunomodulatory effects of a small molecule dipeptidyl peptidase
inhibitor, Ari-4175, are mediated through NK cell activation in a
colorectal cancer model.


Introduction: A possible mechanism of the antitumor effect of many
therapeutic monoclonal antibodies is antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC) mediated by NK cells. We recently observed that an
inhibitor of dipeptidyl peptidase (DPP)4-like serine proteases, Ari-4175,
significantly slowed the growth of K-RAS mutated HCT-116 tumor xenografts
in nude mice, either as a single agent or in combination with cetuximab.
Ari-4175 is not directly cytotoxic in vitro, and since it was able to
overcome, in vivo, the resistance to blockade of the epidermal growth
factor receptor engendered by the KRAS mutation in the HCT-116 colorectal
cancer (CRC) cell line, we tested the hypothesis that the mechanism of
the antitumor activity involves the activation of NK cells, resulting in
the enhancement of ADCC.Methods: Ari-4175 was administered orally to
C57Bl/6 mice at 200 g q.d. x5 days/week. Peripheral blood or spleens were
assayed for immune parameters, ex vivo, at various time points.
Expression of surface markers on myeloid and NK cells were monitored by
flow cytometry. Natural cytotoxicity and ADCC were assayed using HCT116
cells and cetuximab using a flow cytometry-based assay. Cytokines were
measured in mouse serum using Luminex assays.Results: Treatment of mice
with Ari-4175 induced up-regulation of the activation marker CD69 on NK
cells on day 2, followed by up-regulated expression of FcRIIIA (CD16,
which mediates ADCC) on day 7. Coordinate with these changes in surface
markers detected in peripheral blood samples, splenocytes from
Ari-4175-treated mice exhibited significantly increased in vitro natural
cytotoxicity responses toward the HCT116 colon cancer cell line. The
treated mice exhibited increased serum levels of inflammatory cytokines,
including IL-1, IL-6, MCP-1, GCSF, and IL-2. In addition to the impacts
on NK cells, we also observed a significant expansion of a distinct
CD45+CD14+Gr-1+MHC-IICDllb+CD11cvariable myeloid cell population in both
peripheral blood and spleens of mice after one week of treatment with
Ari-4175.Conclusion: The prolyl peptidase inhibitor, Ari-4175, showed
dramatic anti-tumor effect in KRAS mutant colorectal cancer xengrafts
when given alone or in combination with cetuximab. In vitro data suggest
that the therapeutic effect of 4175 might partially be due to the
augmentation of ADCC through elevating expression of CD16 on NK cells. In
addition, Ari-4175 appears, in vivo, to expand a unique myeloid cell
population, which may be responsible for an inflammatory cytokine
response and subsequent activation of NK cells. Our study provides a
mechanistic rationale for testing Ari-4175 in a clinical trial and
possible biomarker endpoints for evaluation in peripheral blood samples.

