Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Framing therapeutic opportunities in tumor-activated gametogenic
programs.


Tumors frequently activate genes whose expression is otherwise restricted
to testes, and which can invoke a humoral immune response in cancer
patients. Given their germline-biased expression pattern, these
Cancer-Testes antigens (CT-antigens, CTAs) may afford the potential for
an extraordinary therapeutic window, if they are required for tumorigenic
behaviors. While the function of CTAs in normal and neoplastic settings
remains obscure, mounting evidence suggests that specific CTAs can
contribute to tumor cell autonomous behaviors. To generate a more
comprehensive understanding of the functional roles of CTAs, we have
employed an unbiased, multi-dimensional, loss of function discovery
platform to systematically assess the contribution of CT-antigens to a
range of tumorigenic signaling pathways and phenotypes. By employing a
diverse panel of 11 tumor-derived cell lines to screen 120 CTAs, we find
that these tumor-activated genes are required to support a number of the
hallmarks of cancer. For example, we reveal multiple MAGE family members
that mitigate response to mitotic stress and hypoxia. Additionally, we
find that the SPANX family of CTAs contributes to -catenin signaling.
Finally, we reveal a role for GAGE proteins in supporting the viability
of a range of tumor types. The diversity of neoplastic settings analyzed
in our primary screen allowed for the identification of CTAs that support
tumor cell fitness in multiple disease backgrounds. For example, we have
uncovered CTAs that contribute to mitochondrial integrity in lung,
breast, melanoma and sarcoma. Alternatively, we find that CTAs can
display lineage selective dependencies, such as supporting TGF signaling
in claudin-low breast tumors. Taken together, these observations support
the hypothesis that CTAs are frequently integrated into the tumor cell
regulatory environment to support cell division, survival and modulate
stress responses by regulating key signaling pathways. Thus, CT-antigens
present previously unrecognized tumor-specific vulnerabilities that may
be exploited for therapeutic intervention.

