Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pro-apoptotic proteins affect survival of tumor-specific low
avidity CD8+ T cells in tolerant mice.


A major barrier to cancer vaccines as therapy is the many tolerance
mechanisms inhibiting the activation of cancer-specific T cells. Higher
avidity T cells have been shown to be more strongly affected by tolerance
signals leaving the potential for lower avidity T cells to be effective.
These signals as well as co-regulatory signals strongly affect T cell
activation, function, and survival in vivo. Our study aims to identify
tolerance mechanisms and co-regulatory signals in lower avidity CD8+ T
cells as compared to other cells within a T cell repertoire specific for
the same cancer antigen. We used the HER-2/neu (neu-N) transgenic mouse
model of spontaneous mammary tumors. Vaccines targeted at the HER-2/neu
protein induce T cell responses of differing avidities against the
immunodominant epitope RNEU420-429. We created high and low avidity TCR
transgenic mice whose high and low avidity tumor-specific T cells can be
tracked in the tolerized HER-2/neu mice in vivo. T cells from the high
and low avidity TCR transgenic mice were adoptively transferred into
neu-N mice under different treatment conditions to evaluate changes in
protein expression. Treatment groups included: tumor alone, tumor plus a
GM-CSF secreting whole cell vaccine, and tumor plus vaccine plus the T
regulatory cell (Treg) depleting agent cyclophosphamide. The combination
of the Treg depleting agent and vaccine allows the activation of high
avidity T cells including the ability of those T cells to reject tumor.
Low avidity T cells do not reject tumor with any of these treatments. We
used microarrays to compare gene expression between the high and low
avidity T cells in tolerant and non-tolerant environments and found
several genes with higher expression in the low avidity Tcells. In
particular, cell death pathways were upregulated in the low avidity T
cells when compared with high avidity T cells in a tolerant environment.
The specific molecules within the cell death pathways that showed the
most distinction were CD24, FasL, and DR5. Further analysis confirmed
that protein expression of these molecules was also increased on low
avidity T cells. We also found that these molecules are more highly
expressed on T cells undergoing apoptosis. The increases in proteins
involved the cell death pathway on low avidity T cells correlates with
our finding that in tolerant mice lower avidity T cells have a shorter
survival than higher avidity T cells. These studies also show that T
cells expressing these death proteins secrete less effector cytokines,
including IFN, than T cells that do not express them. Currently these
proteins are being targeted therapeutically to determine if the survival
and function of low avidity T cells can be altered. Thus, this study
should identify novel combinatorial immune-based treatments to enhance
the overall anti-tumor activity of cancer vaccines.

