Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thyroid hormones maintain the proliferative phenotype in T cell
lymphomas through nuclear and membrane-initiated transcriptional programs.


T cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas (T-NHL) are a heterogeneous group of
lymphoproliferative disorders with aggressive clinical course and no
specific treatments. Thyroid Hormones (TH) are crucial regulators of
differentiation, growth and metabolism. TH modulate these functions by
activating canonical nuclear (TR) and membrane receptors (mTR, for most
cells represented by RGD integrin dimers). Recent studies of us showed
that TH stimulate the proliferation of T-NHLs through complimentary
intracellular pathways involving both TH receptors, thus suggesting that
both pathways are co-opted by malignant T cells to maintain proliferation
and survival. This could represent a specific way to target these
lymphoma subtypes. To characterize their participation on the T-NHL
malignant phenotype, we analyzed the effect of TH through TR and mTR in 8
human cell lines representing the spectrum of immature and peripheral
T-NHLs (CUTLL-1, Jurkat, Hut78, Mac-2A, OCI-Ly12, OCI-Ly13.2, SUDHL-1,
Karpas299). Compared to normal T cells, T-NHL expressed higher levels of
TR and TR, and mTR (integrins with RGD site). To discriminate between
nuclear vs. membrane-initiated effects, T-NHL cells were treated with
physiological concentrations of free and cell impermeable agarose-bound
T3/T4 (TH-AG), for 1 to 5 days. In these conditions, both free and TH-AG
increased the proliferation of T-NHL (doubling time increased between 24
to 43%), PCNA and CCNDs proliferation markers and ERK phosphorylation. To
further characterize TR and mTR initiated transcriptional programs,
CUTLL1 cells were exposed to Free TH and TH-AG for 24 h and 96 h and mRNA
extracted for RNA-sequencing in triplicates. We found 16 and 174
transcripts were significantly (pT cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas (T-NHL) are
a heterogeneous group of lymphoproliferative disorders with aggressive
clinical course and no specific treatments. Thyroid Hormones (TH) are
crucial regulators of differentiation, growth and metabolism. TH modulate
these functions by activating canonical nuclear (TR) and membrane
receptors (mTR, for most cells represented by RGD integrin dimers).
Recent studies of us showed that TH stimulate the proliferation of T-NHLs
through complimentary intracellular pathways involving both TH receptors,
thus suggesting that both pathways are co-opted by malignant T cells to
maintain proliferation and survival. This could represent a specific way
to target these lymphoma subtypes. To characterize their participation on
the T-NHL malignant phenotype, we analyzed the effect of TH through TR
and mTR in 8 human cell lines representing the spectrum of immature and
peripheral T-NHLs (CUTLL-1, Jurkat, Hut78, Mac-2A, OCI-Ly12, OCI-Ly13.2,
SUDHL-1, Karpas299). Compared to normal T cells, T-NHL expressed higher
levels of TR and TR, and mTR (integrins with RGD site). To discriminate
between nuclear vs. membrane-initiated effects, T-NHL cells were treated
with physiological concentrations of free and cell impermeable
agarose-bound T3/T4 (TH-AG), for 1 to 5 days. In these conditions, both
free and TH-AG increased the proliferation of T-NHL (doubling time
increased between 24 to 43%), PCNA and CCNDs proliferation markers and
ERK phosphorylation. To further characterize TR and mTR initiated
transcriptional programs, CUTLL1 cells were exposed to Free TH and TH-AG
for 24 h and 96 h and mRNA extracted for RNA-sequencing in triplicates.
We found 16 and 174 transcripts were significantly (p<0.05) regulated at
24 h in free TH vs. TH-AG, respectively; and 27 and 31 at 96 h in free TH
vs TH-AG, respectively. Among the top programs regulated by free TH we
found activation of TR, TNFR and IL2 pathways. While activation of the
mTR caused activation of genes involved in mitochondrial respiration,
fatty-acid synthesis, angiogenesis and DNA replication. Common pathways
activated by TR and mTR included the TNFR/ASK1/ERK and WNT/CCND signaling
pathways. Transcripts of interest were validated by RT-qPCR. These data
suggest that both TR and mTR regulate T-NHL proliferation to distinct yet
complimentary programs. To determine whether abrogation of the mTR causes
decrease in cell proliferation, we treated our panel of T-NHLs with siRNA
for ITGAV, ITGB1, ITGB3 and mTR inhibitors. We found that mTR inhibition
affected the mTR-induced transcriptional program and abrogated TH-induced
proliferative effect. All these data suggest that (i) TH are important
inducers of T-NHLs proliferation by transcriptionally regulating major
survival pathways, and (ii) inhibition of mTR could constitute a
selective chemotherapy-free treatment for T-NHLs.

