Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic evaluation of drug combinations in vitro and in vivo.


In recent years great advances have been made in developing targeted
cancer therapeutics that produce dramatic responses in a subset of
rationally selected patients. The initial breakthrough of the targeted
design concept was established by the treatment of chronic myelogenous
leukemia with Abl inhibitors and has been expanded to other cancer
indications. As a consequence of this early success in CML, the
identification and targeting of genetic lesions that confer cancer
dependence has become an established strategy for drug discovery efforts.
However, this approach has met with mixed degrees of success as
confounding factors, such as tumor heterogeneity, have often resulted in
partial responses and/or the emergence of resistance when targeted
therapies were employed as single agents.To improve the therapeutic
benefit in cancer, rationally-devised novel combinations of two or more
agents are being explored clinically. To discover combinations that may
be more effective therapies, an unbiased, systematic approach was used to
identify drug combinations in vitro, using a panel of genetically
diverse, and well characterized cell lines from the cancer cell line
encyclopedia (CCLE: Barretina et al. Nature 2012). For three cancer
indications, all pairwise combinations of 18 selected drugs (both novel
inhibitors and standards of care) were tested as dose matrices in a
proliferation assay. Synergistic interactions were scored using
isobologram/Loewe's excess inhibition and synergistic concentration
ranges for each agent were identified. However, the clinical translation
of positive combinations from in vitro matrix-based screens into
clinically-relevant doses and schedules are challenging, due to host
biology, tumor-stroma interactions, and the pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamics of drug delivery. To explore this higher complexity, we
evaluated the in vitro to in vivo translation of drug synergies in
immune-compromised mouse tumor xenograft models. To recapitulate the
pharmacological combination effects in vivo, mouse pharmacokinetic data
and simulation was used to determine single agent doses that would result
in the desired compound plasma concentration range and duration of
action. Pharmakokinetics, pharmacodynamics, antitumor activity and
tolerability of the combinations were then tested in tumor-bearing mice.
Observed combination effects in vivo could in some cases be explained by
either the expected biological pathway interactions or partially by
physiological effects relating to drug-drug interactions.

