Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial NF-B signaling is required for different functions in
Kras- and EGFR-mediated lung tumorigenesis.


The transcription factor nuclear factor-B (NF-B) is a key mediator of the
inflammatory response, and its activation correlates with poor prognosis
in non-small cell lung cancer patients. Oncogenic KRAS and epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations occur frequently in lung
adenocarcinoma and are associated with increased NF-B activation in lung
tumors. Recent papers have shown that inhibition of epithelial NF-B
signaling in a mouse model of Kras-mediated lung tumorigenesis decreases
tumor formation. However, the mechanisms linking NF-B signaling to tumor
formation remain unclear. We hypothesize that epithelial NF-B signaling
is a common requirement for lung tumorigenesis. For our studies, we used
mice that inducibly express oncogenic KrasG12D or EGFRL858R+T790M as well
as a dominant negative inhibitor of B signaling (DN-IB) in Clara Cell
Specific Protein (CCSP)-expressing lung epithelium (designated KrasDN or
EGFRDN mice). EGFRDN mice developed smaller and fewer tumors after two
months of doxycycline administration compared to mice expressing
EGFRL858R+T790M alone, while KrasDN mice did not develop any tumors. In
KrasDN mice, loss of Kras transgene expression and increased cell death
were observed after one week of doxycycline, suggesting that NF-B
signaling may be required for survival of Kras mutant cells in vivo. In
EGFRDN mice, NF-B inhibition led to a significant reduction in the
percentage of BAL neutrophils when compared to mice expressing
EGFRL858R+T790M alone. In addition, NF-B inhibition led to reduced
expression of CXCR2 ligands CXCL1 and CXCL2, which are known
NF-B-regulated neutrophil chemoattractants. In vitro inhibition of CXCR2
did not affect proliferation of EGFR-mutant cells, suggesting that the
critical function of CXCL1 and CXCL2 may be inflammatory cell
recruitment/activation. Future studies will investigate the effects of
CXCR2 inhibition and neutrophil depletion on EGFR-mediated tumor
formation in vivo. Together, these results suggest that NF-B signaling is
required for both Kras- and EGFR-mediated lung tumorigenesis, but NF-B's
function in a tumor may depend on the driver mutation. From these
studies, we hope to identify NF-B-regulated genes critical for tumor
formation as potential targets for the development of better therapeutic
strategies for lung cancer patients.

