Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progress towards developing a universal, prophylactic cancer
vaccine.


Background: Our goal is to create a vaccine that would be administered to
prevent cancer. Such a vaccine would overcome many of the problems and
limitations in current cancer treatments by eradicating the tumor at the
earliest stages, before evasion strategies or metastasis could evolve. We
have chosen to compose the vaccine of frameshift (FS) peptides, which can
be produced by various mutations and abnormal splicings in tumors. These
peptides would be novel to the immune system and produce strong immune
responses. We have conducted bioinformatics and genetics analyses to
identify a list of aberrant RNA that encode FS peptides and their
frequency in different tumors. Previous studies showed a mis-splicing FS
RNA of SMC1A is common in different human and mouse tumors. Vaccination
with the SMCA1 FS peptide protected against tumor progression in the B16
mouse melanoma model and several mouse mammary gland tumor models, both
injectable and transgenic. A key aspect of this strategy is the ability
to pool FS components to provide broad protection against any tumor that
could arise. Here we test the ability to pool antigens using mouse tumor
models.Results: Besides SMC1A FS, we identified potential FS peptides
encoded in human and mouse tumors for SLAIN2 FS, RBM14 FS and THAP2 FS
RNA. These were tested individually in the BALB-NeuT transgenic mouse
mammary tumor model. Each demonstrated the ability to delay tumor
progression. However, when all four antigens were pooled into a vaccine,
the protection was no better than each individual component. ELISA
analysis of each FS peptide indicated that the humoral immune responses
to SMC1AFS, SLAIN2FS, and RBM14FS in the pooled vaccine were reduced
while the THAP2FS humoral immune was low in both the individual and
pooled response. This suggested that THAP2FS could suppress the immune
response to the other components. To test this, a composite vaccine
excluding THAP2FS was tested. This vaccine produced robust, additive
protection.Discussion: We conclude that though THAP2FS was itself
protective, it suppressed the response to the other antigens in a pooled
vaccine. As we administered the gene vaccine, each cell received all four
components. Therefore, we speculate that THAP2 dominates antigen
presentation in a cell. This implies that each component of the
prophylactic vaccine will need to be tested for its ability to be pooled.
This screen has now been added to the process.Future Plans: The ability
to pool antigens was the last hurdle in the pre-clinical development of
the prophylactic vaccine. 30% of the possible human vaccine components
also are in mouse tumors, so these can be directly tested for the ability
to be pooled. We are also developing a chip to test for human immune
response to these tumor antigens in cancer patients. With these advances
we should be able to propose a vaccine for a Phase I safety trial. (This
research is supported by an Innovation Award from the DoD and The Keck
Foundation to SAJ.)

