Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel TDA technology and high content imaging as complementary
assay platforms to identify VEGFR-2 inhibitors.


Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is potent mitogen for
endothelial cells that signals through VEGF Receptor-type2
(VEGFR-2)/Flk-1/KDR. Binding of VEGF to VEGFR-2, a membrane bound
receptor tyrosine kinase of the VEGF-receptor family, leads to receptor
dimerization, protein kinase activation, trans-autophosphorylation, and
initiation of signaling pathways stimulating angiogenesis. In adults,
angiogenesis normally occurs during wound healing to restore blood flow
post injury and during menstruation and pregnancy. Angiogenesis is also
involved in several pathological disease states such as rheumatoid
arthritis, psoriasis, diabetic retinopathy and cancer. While
physiological angiogenesis involves interplay between pro- and
anti-angiogenic factors, the ability to inhibit pathological angiogenesis
has therapeutic potential. Inhibitors of VEGFR-2 provide targeted
treatments for tumor growth as well as abnormal neovascularization
related diseases. The caveat of traditional biochemical VEGFR-2 assays is
that only the catalytic domain of the receptor is used to identify hits.
One strategy to identify true novel inhibitors against membrane
associated proteins is to screen these targets in a more physiological
environment, where lipid-protein and protein-protein interactions are
included in the assay. We achieved this goal by docking the entire
cytoplasmic domain of the receptor on a liposome. Template Directed
Assembly (TDA) is a screening technology designed to accomplish this
objective. TDA technology utilizes recombinant VEGFR-2 cytoplasmic domain
tagged with polyhistidine at the juxtamembrane position and docked to the
liposome via the nickel residues. The lipids in TDA are able to diffuse
within the surface of the liposome and, therefore, proteins can diffuse
to form oligomeric complexes such as homo- or hetero-dimers formation. To
compliment the TDA biochemical screen, we are implementing an image based
high content screen (HCS) utilizing human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVECs) that express native VEGFR-2. The HCS screen is designed to
identify potent and specific inhibitors of VEGFR-2 as assessed by a
reduction in the proliferation marker Ki67. We are currently (1)
validating the TDA assay with known VEGFR-2 inhibitors (2) screening a
focus small molecule library to identify novel hits (3) testing the
primary hits against a kinase selectivity panel and (4) designing and
developing a VEGFR2 cell-based HCS assay to confirm the primary hits. The
hit to lead program will be guided by using both physiologically relevant
biochemical-based and cell-based assays. The combination of our novel TDA
screening platform and the HCS assay technology permits us to identify
unique VEGFR-2 inhibitors.

