Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Champions TumorGraft models represent oncology clinical trial
populations.


One of the challenges in oncology drug development is the inability of
traditional in vivo models to predict clinical responses. Champions
Oncology overcomes this challenge through the use of its innovative
Champions TumorGraft platform, where primary human tumors are implanted
into immunocompromised mice in a manner that preserves the biological
properties of the original human tumor. The current study evaluated the
molecular and demographic characteristics of the Champions TumorGraft
bank to demonstrate that these models closely resemble cancer patients
that pharmaceutical companies encounter in clinical trials during the
development of innovative and targeted oncology compounds. In particular,
the relative frequency of ethnicity, age, and geographic location in the
Champions TumorGraft bank closely aligns with patients enrolled in
oncology clinical trials. For instance, greater than half of the models
in Champions TumorGraft bank are derived from patients with advanced
disease, who failed several previous lines of therapy. This is extremely
important for accurate translational research, as most patients enrolling
in critical mid-stage oncology clinical trials often have advanced
disease and have failed multiple lines of therapy. Additionally, in
recent years, clinical trials have progressed to designs where there are
specific enrichments in patient populations/sub-populations based on the
incorporation of companion diagnostics. Molecular evaluation of the
Champions TumorGraft bank identifies models that possess genomic
signatures or pathway expressions which can be used to identify and
validate potential enrichment strategies. For example, 40% of Champions
NSCLC models possess p53 mutations and 36% of all NSCLC clinical cases
also possess p53 mutations according to the COSMIC database.
Additionally, 50% of Champions colorectal TumorGraft models possess K-ras
mutations, whereas 36% the clinical colorectal cancer population
possesses this mutation. These cases, as well as other mutations observed
across several tumor types, demonstrate that the TumorGraft mutation
prevalence is representative of the prevalence in cancer patients.
Together, these results demonstrate that Champions TumorGraft models
represent a unique preclinical in vivo platform that correlate to
oncology clinical trial populations. Overall, these results suggest that
Champions TumorGraft models are capable of predicting the clinical
effectiveness of drug candidates and can accelerate and enhance oncology
drug development.

