Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule HIF-2a inhibitors down regulate its activity in
vivo and ameliorate the vhl zebrafish phenotype.


Hypoxia Inducible Factor (HIF) target genes are involved in several
cellular processes including angiogenesis, erythropoiesis, metabolism and
stem cell proliferation. The von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor
protein targets HIF for degradation in conditions of normal oxygen
tension. Loss-of-VHL leads to constitutive expression of HIF. We have
discovered small molecules that repress HIF-2 translation by enhancing
the binding of Iron-Regulatory Protein 1 (IRP1) to the Iron-Responsive
Element (IRE) within the 5-UTR of HIF-2 mRNA and showed that these small
molecules specifically down-regulate HIF-2 expression in vitro.To
validate the HIF-2 inhibitors in vivo, first we tested their efficacy to
inhibit acute hif induction in wild-type (wt) zebrafish embryos
challenged with the hypoxia mimetic DMOG. Treatment of wt embryos with
100M of DMOG up-regulated the expression of zebrafish HIF-target genes,
such as vascular endothelial growth factor (vegf), erythropoietin (epo)
and prolyl-hydroxylase 3 (phd3). Pre-treatment of embryos with the small
molecule HIF-2 inhibitor 76 (10nM) significantly decreased the
DMOG-induced up-regulation of HIF target genes and resulted in decrease
of DMOG-induced erythrocytosis and blood vessel sprouting.Furthermore, we
tested the efficacy of this HIF-2 inhibitor in a vhl zebrafish model
(homozygougous mutants harbouring inactivating vhl mutations), which
recapitulates aspects of human VHL disease (erythrocytosis, abnormal
vascular proliferation in sites such as retina and brain, early
lethality). Treatment with inhibitor 76 (10nM, 100nM and 1M) down
regulated the expression of the HIF-target genes phd3, epo and vegf in a
dose response manner and rescued the erythrocytosis and sprouting
phenotype of vhl embryos. To image and quantify the blood vessel
abnormalities of vhl embryos, we generated a Fli-GFP::vhl+/- line and
showed that compound 76 improves the abnormal connections between the
intersegmental vessels of the Fli-GFP::vhl embryo tail, as well as their
human hemangioblastoma-resembling brain vessel proliferation. Finally, we
showed that treatment of vhl embryos with compound 76 rescues early
lethality.Our data demonstrate that HIF-2 inhibitor 76 is active in vivo
at low concentrations and encourage further development and preclinical
testing of this HIF-2 inhibitor for treatment of VHL-associated lesions,
such as renal cell carcinoma, hemangioblastoma and neuroendocrine tumors.

