Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and In vivo characterization of circulating tumor cells
from breast cancer patients.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are an independent prognostic marker
associated with poor clinical outcome in patients with metastatic
diseases. However, CTC biology, especially the tumorigenic and metastatic
activity of CTCs, is not yet well understood. In this study, we
hypothesized that CTCs contain a population of cancer stem cells (CSCs)
that are the seed cells responsible for metastases. To test this
hypothesis, we sought to assess subpopulations of CTCs in breast cancer
patients and to characterize CTCs for CSC properties and tumorigenic
potential. For assessment of CTC subsets, blood samples from breast
cancer patients were enriched for CTCs by magnetic separation. The
enriched CTC samples were immunostained for various cell surface markers
and then analyzed by FACS. The phenotypes of CTCs were further confirmed
by imaging analysis. To evaluate tumorigenicity of CTCs, CTC samples from
patients were cultured in vitro and then implanted into immunodeficient
mice by orthotopic injection. Different phenotypes of CTCs were found in
breast cancer patients, including EpCAM+CD44CD24/dimCD45,
EpCAM+CD44+CD24/dimCD45, EpCAM+CD44+CD24+CD45, and
EpCAM+CD44+CD24+CD45dim. Of these phenotypes, EpCAM+CD44+CD24/dim cells
have been reported as CSCs in breast cancer. This subset of CSC-like CTCs
constituted 4.6% to 71% of the total CTC population. In vitro culture of
CTCs resulted in the generation of mammospheres, as is typical of CSCs.
During in vitro culture, some of CTCs showed staining positive for Ki-67,
indicating that these cells were proliferating. To assess tumorigenic
potential of CTCs, cultured CTCs were injected into the mouse mammary fat
pads of immunodeficient mice. Human tumors were developed in these mice.
Further analysis of the CTC-derived tumor xenografts demonstrated a
heterogenous phenotype where EpCAM+CD44+CD24dim/ CSCs accounted for less
than 3% of the total tumor cells. Only this subset of cells isolated from
CTC-derived xenograft tumors could form secondary tumors after being
reimplanted into mice. Our results support the hypothesis that CTCs
contain a CSC-like population that may initiate new tumors. As a result,
CTCs may be a potential therapeutic target for the prevention of
metastasis in addition to serving as a readily accessible source for
biomarker evaluation of new therapies in cancer patients.

