Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The non-coding RNA landscape of lung, liver and breast cancer
reveals novel tumor-associated ncRNAs, concerted regulation and
unexpected tissue specificity.


Non-coding RNA profiles in cancer are largely unknown which greatly
impedes the discovery of functionally important ncRNAs in tumorigenesis
as well as the generation of genome-wide libraries.Here, we define the
ncRNA expression landscape of lung, breast and liver cancer as well as
normal tissue from the respective organs in a large set of primary
patient samples (N=150). These samples were carefully selected to have a
long patient follow-up and complete clinical datasets to allow an
in-depth analysis. We provide the first comprehensive map of 17000+ long
ncRNAs in a broad range of human tumor and normal tissues and discovered
hundreds of new ncRNAs associated with three major tumor entities.
Importantly, we uncovered that ncRNA profiles are significantly more
specific to the tissue of origin than patterns of protein-coding mRNAs.
Also, the significant ncRNA signatures in this study demonstrate specific
ncRNA patterns that are unlikely to be transcriptional background but
rather the result of concerted regulation.To mimic the response to
cytotoxic chemotherapy, we have also treated lung and liver cancer cells
with the DNA damaging agents Cisplatin andEtoposide and found significant
deregulation of long ncRNAs - reversing in part the differences seen
between normal and malignant lung tissue. Importantly, one of the
Cisplatin-regulated ncRNAs interacts with DNA repair factors linking it
immediately to the DNA damage response.To elucidate the molecular
functions of the novel ncRNAs, we used RNA affinity purification to
identify the protein interaction partners. In addition, we create human
knockout cells for lncRNAs using ZFN and TALEN technology to integrate
RNA destabilizing elements into the human genome which yields more than
1000-fold lncRNA silencing. Our so far largest ncRNA expression map is
also exploited in another way: We generate an siRNA library specifically
targeting over 600 tumor-associated ncRNAs based on our profiling
landscape. This comprehensive but focused library will elucidate the role
of ncRNAs in tumorigenesis, viability, apoptosis and the DNA damage
response.In summary, we provide the first global comprehensive map of
long ncRNA expression in a broad range of human tumor and normal tissue
samples and discovered many new lncRNAs associated with cancer as well as
tissue-, histology- and prognosis-specific ncRNA signatures.

