Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Classification of DPYD variations using an isogenic system of
expression.


The pyrimidine analog 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) was developed in the 1950s
and remains one of the most widely used chemotherapy drugs in use today.
A significant portion of patients who receive 5-FU suffer severe adverse
toxicities, and, in extreme cases, death. Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
(DPD, encoded by the DPYD gene) rapidly degrades 85% of administered
5-FU, and as such, limits the amount of drug available for conversion
into active metabolites. Genetic variations in DPYD have been suggested
to increase the risk of 5-FU toxicity. Large-scale sequencing efforts
have identified nearly 100 missense and nonsense DPYD variations, however
only a handful of alleles have been studied for their association with
5-FU toxicity. Most studies have focused on a single allele (DPYD*2A),
which only accounts for a small fraction of DPD deficiencies. Further
complicating the interpretation of DPYD alleles, many individuals carry
multiple variations within the DPYD gene. The purpose of this study was
to identify missense variants that affect the enzyme function of DPD
using a mammalian isogenic system of expression. Expression vectors
encoding missense DPYD variations were generated by site directed
mutagenesis and the expressed protein assayed for enzyme activity. Cells
expressing selected variants were also teasted for sensitivity to 5-FU
using a novel implementation of electrical impedance based realtime
cellular analysis. The results of functional studies are compared to in
silico predictions used to classify variants as deleterious or benign. An
appreciable fraction of DPD variants showed enzyme activity that was
significantly lower than that of wildtype protein. Within the deficient
group of variants, a gradient of activities was noted, prompting the
grouping of variants as mildly, moderately, and severely impaired. In
addition to loss-of-function variations, a few hyperactive DPYD alleles
were identified. This novel class of DPYD variants may be protective
against 5-FU toxicity at the cost of treatment efficacy. The further
evaluation of hyperactive alleles in clinical studies will be necessary
to determine their impact on patient outcomes. Overall these data will
facilitate the development of predictive tests for 5-FU toxicity by
allowing researchers to prioritize variations for association studies.

