Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sodium butyrate induced cellular senescence and inhibited invasion
of cancer cells with distinct mechanism.


Sodium butyrate (SB) -C-4 saturated fatty acid (short-chain fatty acids)
present in the human bowel membrane in the quite high concentration (2
mM) as food metabolites. It was previously reported that SB showed
anti-tumor effect as HDAC inhibitor, however, the precise mechanism has
not been elucidated yet. Here, we focused on the role of SB on cancer
cell growth, motility and invasion. Physiological concentration of SB
(0.25-4 mM) induced inhibition of cell growth (2D), colony formation in
soft agar, in vitro motility and invasiveness with Boyden chamber and
wound healing assay in a dose-dependent fashion using human fibrosarcoma
(HT1080), glioblastoma (A172) cells and rat mammary Walker 256 cells. SB
also affected the morphology of HT1080, A172 and Walker 256 cells, namely
spread out with marked stress fibers bridging focal adhesions.
Phosphorylation levels of focal adhesion kinase (Y577 and Y397 sites)
were increased but that of myosin light chain (S19 site) was not altered.
All of these biological effects of SB were reversible, and recovered
after withdrawal. In contrast, HDAC inhibitor trichostatinA inhibited
cancer cell growth irreversibly but not affected motility, invasiveness
and morphology. In addition, HT1080 and A172 cells treated with SB showed
positivity for senescence-associated -gal (SA- gal) staining with
elevated expression levels of p53 and p21 proteins in a time and
dose-dependent manner. In contrast, mRNA level of p21 was sharply
declined after the treatment with SB. Knocking down of p21 protein
expression by siRNA reversed both the growth inhibition and positivity
for SA- gal staining but not the inhibition of invasiveness. Thus p21 was
required for cellular senescence but not for the decrease in motility
induced by SB. Further, proteasome inhibitor, MG132 decreased the
cellular growth and inhibited motility and invasiveness of the HT1080 and
A172 cells, and showed similar all these biological effects of SB.
Finally, intrathecal administration of SB effectively inhibited the
invasion of Walker256 cells into the brain and elongated the animal (rat)
survival in vivo. Collectively, SB inhibited growth with induced cellular
senescence, inhibited invasion by distinct mechanism, and thus would be a
good candidate for anti-invasive therapy without severe adverse effects.

