Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel inhibitor of Notch signaling for the treatment of cancer.


The Notch pathway is a highly conserved signaling system that plays an
important role in development and tissue homeostasis. While Notch
mutations are well characterized and implicated in hematological
malignancies such as T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, mutations in
solid tumors were not reported until recently. With the whole genomic
deep sequencing of a large number of samples, deregulated Notch signaling
has been implicated in a small percentage of solid tumors such as
ovarian, lung, and triple negative breast cancer due to genomic
alterations including mutations, amplification, and fusion of Notch
pathway components. Inhibition of Notch signaling may provide an
attractive targeted cancer therapeutic strategy. We have identified and
characterized LY3039478 a novel small molecule that is an exquisitely
potent inhibitor of Notch-1 intracellular domain (N1ICD) cleavage with an
IC50 of 1nM in most of the tumor cell lines tested. We also demonstrate
that LY3039478 potently inhibits mutant Notch receptor activity. In a
xenograft tumor model, LY3039478 inhibited N1ICD cleavage and expression
of Notch-regulated genes in the tumor microenvironment. The inhibition of
Notch cleavage also resulted in the induction of apoptosis in a
Notch-dependent xenograft model. Using extensive PK/PD data we determined
the strength and duration of N1ICD cleavage required for anti-tumor
activity which was observed in several xenograft tumors including patient
derived tumors representing colon, lung, ovarian, gastric, and breast
cancer and glioblastoma. To mitigate the mucoid gasteroentropathy caused
by Notch inhibition, PK/PD data were incorporated in devising dosing
strategies that identified an optimal intermittent dosing schedule
without negatively impacting efficacy. Furthermore, the mucoid
gastroentropathy was also mitigated by the prophylactic administration of
dexamethasone without negatively impacting the Notch inhibitor mediated
efficacy. Mechanistic studies revealed that dexamethasone does not
interfere with LY3039478-mediated inhibition of N1ICD cleavage and gene
expression but alters the expression of stem cell gene expression in GI
tract. In summary, we have characterized an orally bio-available small
molecule Notch inhibitor that may provide therapeutic benefit to cancer
patients with deregulated Notch signaling. LY3039478 is specifically
designed to potently inhibit Notch signaling and is being investigated in
Phase I.

