Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the functional roles of RET isoforms in breast
cancer.


REarranged during Transfection (RET) is a receptor tyrosine kinase
crucial for normal development of the kidneys, endocrine tissues and
nervous system. RET is normally activated though binding of both a ligand
from the Glial Cell-line Derived Neurotrophic Factor (GDNF) family, and a
co-receptor of the GDNF Family Receptor alpha (GFR) proteins. Abnormal
RET signalling caused by germline activating mutations of RET,or somatic
gene rearrangements are known to play an important role in tumorigenesis
and disease progression in thyroid cancers. However, expression of
wildtype RET and its ligands have also been linked to other tumour types
such as pancreatic cancer, where the expression and activation of RET may
lead to more aggressive disease. RET is also expressed in 25-30% of
invasive breast cancers, with relatively more frequent expression in
hormone receptor-positive sub-types. RET has two major distinct protein
isoforms, called RET9 and RET51, that share the first 1062 residues but
differ in their C-terminal amino acids. RET9 and RET51 are highly
conserved across species, and both isoforms are normally co-expressed in
the kidneys and in neural crest-derived tissues during development.
Previous studies have begun to elucidate certain isoform-specific
differences including: differential phosphorylation patterns after
activation, unique target gene expression patterns, and distinct
trafficking properties. The functional differences between RET9 and RET51
in breast cancer, however, have not yet been explored. As such, our
overarching research objective has been to investigate the roles of
individual RET isoforms in breast cancer progression. We used
quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR to assess expression of
RET9, RET51, pan-RET (all isoforms of RET) and two GFR co-receptors, GFR1
and GFR3, in both estrogen receptor (ER) negative and ER positive breast
cancer cell lines. RET9 and RET51 protein expression were verified by
Western blotting. Our data suggest that RET9 is more highly expressed
than RET51 in breast cancer cells. We are currently conducting
proliferation, migration and invasion assays with tumour cell lines
expressing single RET isoforms to explore individual roles of RET9 and
RET51 in breast cancer. Further, using well-characterized
isoform-specific antibodies, we have examined expression of RET9 and
RET51 in two large cohort breast cancer TMAs(>150 samples/array).
Analyses are currently ongoing to explore the expression of each
individual isoform in tumours. This study may shed light to potential
functional differences between RET9 and RET51 in breast cancer,
furthering our understanding of RET isoform-specific differences.

