Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating drug resistance mechanisms in melanoma with
quantitative proteomics.


Introduction: Exciting breakthroughs have been made in targeted therapy
for melanoma; however, the development of drug resistance remains a
critical problem for patients due to the speed of onset and the numerous
complex mechanisms. Parallel development of platform for quantitative
protein expression enables biomarker monitoring to evaluate the multiple
pathways through which tumor cells can acquire drug resistance. We have
developed quantitative assays using liquid chromatography-multiple
reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (LC-MRM) to assess a diverse panel
of >70 proteins involved in signaling pathways, including apoptosis,
receptor tyrosine kinases, PI3K/Akt/MTOR, and MAP kinases. Assays
quantify changes in response to targeted therapeutic agents and examine
subsequent resistance mechanisms in cell lines, xenografts, and biopsies
from patients.Experimental procedures: Nave and BRAF V600E
inhibitor-resistant melanoma cell lines were treated with vehicle
control, BRAF V600E inhibitor (PLX4720), HSP90 inhibitor (XL-888,
Exelixis), or MEK inhibitor (AZD6244). Immunoblotting and LC-MRM were
used to evaluate protein expression levels. Heat shock proteins can be
measured directly from whole cell lysates or tumor homogenates using a
few micrograms of protein. For expression of cancer signaling proteins
(many of which are HSP90 clients), 50 micrograms of total protein were
fractionated by SDS-PAGE prior to digestion and LC-MRM quantification.
Similar experiments were conducted with mouse xenograft tumors from
treated and control mice; these measurements have also been applied to
fine needle aspirates (FNAs) and core biopsies from patients in the
context of a clinical trial.Data summary: LC-MRM quantification is
effective in quantifying these proteins in cell lines, xenografts, and
biopsies or FNAs. The LC-MRM panel assay was able to screen for a diverse
range of proteins revealing previously undescribed cellular responses to
treatment and elucidate potential mechanisms of resistance. As an
example, both LC-MRM data and Westerns showed consistent responses to
HSP90 inhibition, including increased expression of HSP71 and reduction
of HSP90 client levels. Proteins were also modulated in response and
resistance to BRAF and MEK inhibitors.Conclusion: LC-MRM quantifies
biomarker panels and provides an assessment tool that can translated in a
straightforward way from cell line models to patient specimens. This
emerging technique holds great promise for biopsy-mandated clinical
trials, particularly in diseases like melanoma that can be readily
sampled. Measurements using this LC-MRM platform can be used to assess
drug performance and patient response to evaluate treatment, detect drug
resistance, and suggest rational combination therapies.

