Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined targeting of antigens expressed in prostate cancer and
prostate stem cells using Listeria-based cancer vaccines for the
treatment of prostate cancer.


Immune-based therapies have demonstrated benefit in multiple clinical
trials, and as we gain better knowledge of the mechanisms by which tumors
avoid immune detection, new strategies can be designed to more
effectively target tumor-specific antigens. Aduro BioTech, Inc. has
engineered attenuated Listeria monocytogenes (Lm), to be safe for human
use and to also induce potent and broad innate and adaptive immune
responses including CD4 and CD8 T cells specific for tumor-associated
antigens. Aduro's lead therapeutic, CRS-207, is now being evaluated in a
randomized, controlled Phase 2 study in patients with metastatic pancreas
cancer. Prostate cancer is the only type of cancer for which a targeted
therapeutic cancer vaccine has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA). Provenge, an autologous cellular vaccine targeting
prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP) developed by the Dendreon Corporation,
was approved in 2010 for patients with metastatic, castrate-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC), validating the benefits of immunotherapy and
providing a new treatment for CRPC with significantly less toxicity than
chemotherapy. We have developed a candidate therapeutic vaccine strain
for prostate cancer, named Lm-PCaVx, in which Aduro's proprietary Lm
platform has been engineered to express three antigens, PAP, NY-ESO-1 and
NKX3.1. The goal is to concurrently target antigens that are expressed by
tumor cells (PAP and NY-ESO-1) as well as an antigen that can be
expressed by cancer stem cells (NKX3.1). PAP has been clinically
validated as the target of the Provenge vaccine; NY-ESO-1 has been shown
to a tumor-associated immunological target by other vaccine approaches;
and NKX3.1 is over-expressed in prostate tissue that regenerates after
castration therapy. In this study, we report the construction of an Lm
vaccine strain encoding these three antigens and demonstrate expression
of the encoded antigens in Lm-infected antigen-presenting cells.
Immunization with Lm-PCaVx induced PAP-, NY-ESO-1- and NKX3.1-specific
T-cell responses in mice as well as anti-tumor-type responses in
HLA-A2/HLA-DR1 transgenic mice. Together these findings support the
further development of a multivalent Lm-based vaccine targeting
cell-mediated immune responses against multiple tumor-associated antigens
as a novel, cost-effective and rational approach for the treatment of
patients with prostate cancer.

