Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Critical role of zinc finger protein 521 in the control of growth,
clonogenicity and tumorigenic potential of medulloblastoma cells.


The stem cell-associated transcription co-factor ZNF521 has been
implicated in the control of haematopoietic, osteogenic and neural
progenitors. Very high expression of this factor is present in cerebellum
and particularly in the granule layer of neonatal cerebellum, that
contains candidate cells-of-origin of medulloblastoma. Here we have
explored the possible involvement of ZNF521 in the development of this
tumour.As an experimental system we used the human medulloblastoma cell
line, DAOY, and primary cells from medulloblastomas occurring in Ptc1-/+
mice. To investigate the effect of ZNF521 on the growth and tumourigenic
potential of these cells, its expression was modulated using lentiviral
vectors carrying the ZNF521 cDNA, or containing shRNAs that silence its
expression.Enforced overexpression of ZNF521 in DAOY cells, that normally
produce relatively low amounts of this protein, was associated with a
significant increase in their proliferation rate. This was mirrored by an
increase in the ability to grow as spheroids and clonogenicity in
single-cell cultures and in semisolid media, and accompanied by an
enhanced migratory capacity in wound-healing assays. Finally,
ZNF521-expressing DAOY cells demonstrated a greatly enhanced tumourigenic
potential in nude mice. All these activities required the presence of an
N-terminal domain of ZNF521 that recruits the nucleosome remodeling and
histone deacetylase (NuRD) complex. Consistently with the effects of
ZNF521 overexpression in DAOY, silencing of Zfp521 in Ptc1-/+
medulloblastoma cells resulted in a drastic decrease in their
proliferation and tumourigenic potential, lending further support to the
notion that zinc finger protein 521 may contribute to the generation
and/or maintenance of the cancer-initiating cell compartment in this
cancer. Preliminary experiments detected a selective up-regulation of
HES5 mRNA in DAOY overexpressing ZNF521, raising the possibility that
some of the effects illustrated here may at least in part be mediated by
the co-operation of ZNF521 with the Notch pathway.Citation Format:
Raffaella Spina, Gessica Filocamo, Enrico Iaccino, Stefania Scicchitano,
Michela Lupia, Emanuela Chiarella, Tiziana Mega, Daniela Pelaggi, Maria
Mesuraca, Eli E. Bar, Heather M. Bond, Charles G. Eberhart, Christian
Steinkuhler, Gianni Morrone. Critical role of zinc finger protein 521 in
the control of growth, clonogenicity and tumorigenic potential of
medulloblastoma cells. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 5045. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5045

