Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Akt2-specific signaling in prostate cancer maintenance.


Mutations and amplification in genes regulating the PI 3-K/Akt pathway
are common in prostate cancer, with deletion or mutations of PTEN being
the most frequent. This has led to major efforts in developing
anti-cancer drugs targeting the Akt pathway. Although the role of Akt in
tumorigenesis has been studied extensively, little is known regarding
isoform-specificity, and it is largely assumed that Akt isoforms play
redundant roles in regulating cancer cell survival.In this study, we have
developed a tet-on inducible system for expressing Akt1/2/3 shRNAs to
determine the role of Akt isoforms in prostate cancer progression.
Three-dimensional (3D) matrigel cultures are employed to better
recapitulate tumors growing in vivo. Administration of doxycycline (dox)
in Akt1 or Akt2 shRNA PTEN-deficient LNCaP cells at the start of culture
resulted in the inhibition of spheroid formation, suggesting an important
role of both Akt1 and Akt2 in the initial growth of spheroids.
Conversely, when spheroids were allowed to form for 7 days, followed by
dox for further 10 days, no difference was observed between Akt1-depleted
and control spheroids. In contrast, silencing of Akt2 resulted in
complete disintegration of spheroids. Confocal microscopy studies showed
a significant induction of active caspase-3 and fragmented nuclei in
Akt2-silenced cells. Moreover, whereas Akt1 is uniformly expressed, Akt2
is localized in the cytoplasm and/or on the plasma membrane.
Interestingly, the differences of effect of Akt isoforms on cell survival
in conventional 2D culture are considerably more modest. The exclusive
requirement of Akt2 for survival is also observed in PC3 prostate cancer
cells, which are also PTEN-deficient. Importantly, our preliminary data
indicated that Akt2, but not Akt1 knockdown, led to tumor regression in
the LnCaP xenograft model.These results indicate that Akt2, but not Akt1,
plays a critical role in prostate cancer maintenance. Current efforts are
aimed at identifying novel Akt isoform-specific substrates that
contribute to prostate cancer progression using a genome-wide proteomic
screen. The results of these studies could point to new targets for
anti-cancer therapeutics.This work was supported by grants from NIH
(A.T., CA122099; R.C., 1K99CA157945-01, T32 CA081156-09)

