Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing tumor cell response to chemotherapy by simultaneous
delivery of siRNA and cisplatin using polymeric nanoparticles.


Cisplatin and other DNA adduct-forming chemotherapeutics are widely used
for the treatment of a broad spectrum of malignancies. However, their
application is limited by the emergence of tumor chemoresistance and
relapse. It is generally believed that acquired resistance can arise from
cisplatin-induced mutations which increase tumor cell capacity to either
repair or tolerate DNA damage. Recent studies have shown that the
suppression of crucial genes products (e.g. Rev1 and Rev3) involved in
the error-prone translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) could inhibit
cisplatin-induced mutagenesis and restore tumor chemosensitivity to
treatment. In this context, the combination of conventional
chemotherapeutics with small interfering RNA (siRNA)-based therapeutics
represents a promising strategy for treating patients with chemoresistant
tumors. Thus, it is necessary to develop a versatile delivery system
capable of accommodating the diverse physicochemical characteristics of
multiple therapeutic agents. Towards this end, we have developed a
nanoparticle (NP) platform to simultaneously deliver cisplatin and siRNA
targeting specific genes encoding Rev1 and Rev3, essential TLS proteins,
to the same tumor cells. NPs are formulated through self-assembly of a
biodegradable copolymer and a self-synthesized cationic lipid. Both siRNA
and cisplatin prodrug can be co-encapsulated within the resultant NPs at
high loading efficiencies (up to 11%) and sustainably released over 10
days. The in vitro and in vivo gene silencing capacities of
siRNA-containing NPs was first evaluated using anti-firefly luciferase
siRNA as a reporter gene. Up to 98% silencing efficacy could be achieved
in Dual-Luc HeLa cells with a small siRNA dose (2.5 nM), a result which
is markedly better than the commercially available Lipo2000-siRNA
complex. Twenty-four hours after siRNA-NP administration, the
bioluminescence images of mice bearing luciferase-expressing tumor showed
approximately 80% less luminescence intensity compared to the control
group. The therapeutic efficacy of NPs containing both cisplatin and anti
Rev1/3 siRNA was also evaluated in vitro and in vivo. The sensitivity of
LNCaP cells to cisplatin increased up to 10-fold after treatment with NPs
carrying anti Rev1/3 siRNA and cisplatin prodrug. RT-PCR results showed
that anti Rev1/3 siRNA-NPs exhibited sustained suppression of both genes
(up to 90%) in tumors for up to 3 days. We further demonstrated that
administration of NPs loaded with both anti Rev1/3 siRNA and cisplatin
prodrug can induce a synergistic tumor suppression effect in a prostate
cancer (PCa) xenograft mouse model. This work presents a promising
two-in-one nanomedicine approach for cancer therapy.

