Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High levels of expression of the transcription factor Brachyury
induce resistance of human carcinoma cells to immune-mediated attack.


The phenomenon of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is recognized
as a relevant process during the progression of carcinomas. EMT is a
phenotypic switch that allows epithelial tumor cells to acquire features
of mesenchymal cells, including the ability to migrate and invade and,
therefore, to disseminate from the primary site. In addition to promoting
tumor dissemination, various reports have demonstrated that acquisition
of features of EMT associates with tumor resistance to the cytotoxic
effects of chemotherapy, radiation, and some targeted therapies.
Presently, no studies have been conducted to thoroughly investigate
whether this phenotypic switch may also contribute to the escape of
tumors from host immune-surveillance and immune-mediated rejection. Our
laboratory has characterized the T-box transcription factor Brachyury as
a tumor-associated antigen and a regulator of EMT in human carcinomas.
Currently, a Brachyury-based, recombinant yeast cancer vaccine is ongoing
Phase I clinical testing for the treatment of patients with advanced
carcinomas. Work in our laboratory has demonstrated that high levels of
Brachyury expression in human carcinoma cell lines is associated with
increased resistance to both chemo- and radiation therapies. In the
present study, human epithelial carcinoma cell lines undergoing EMT via
Brachyury over-expression and their epithelial tumor cell counterparts
were comparatively utilized to evaluate whether EMT imparts resistance to
immune-mediated attack. Our results demonstrate a bell-shaped
relationship between the levels of Brachyury expression and the
susceptibility of human carcinoma cell lines to lysis by immune cells.
While tumor cells with low/intermediate levels of Brachyury expression
are vulnerable to cell lysis, those with high levels of Brachyury
expression are very resistant to lysis by immune cells. Our results
demonstrate that a high level of Brachyury expression in human tumor
cells reduces their susceptibility to antigen-specific CD8+ cytotoxic T
cells and innate, natural killer (NK) and lymphokine-activated killer
(LAK) cells. While the mechanisms involved in this phenomenon are
currently under investigation in our laboratory, preliminary studies
suggest that antigen processing and/or presentation is not responsible
for the defective immune-mediated cytotoxicity of EMT-tumors. Altogether
our results indicate that targeting the process of EMT may be a
successful strategy not only to interfere with tumor dissemination but
also to increase the effectiveness of immunotherapeutic interventions
against metastatic tumors.

