Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific inhibitors of nuclear export (SINE) for cancer therapy:
from bench to bedside.


Nuclear protein transport is an evolutionary conserved mechanism that
controls aberrant cell proliferation through balanced nuclear expression
of tumor suppressor proteins (TSPs). In cancers, overexpression of
exportin protein chromosome region maintenance 1 (CRM-1) disrupts this
balance leading to nuclear exclusion of TSPs leading to the low efficacy
of traditional anti-cancer drugs. Our recent screening of pancreatic,
colon, triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
(NHL) patient samples showed over-expression of CRM-1. These important
finding suggests that therapeutic targeting of CRM-1 leading to
restoration of TSPs in the nucleus is an attractive strategy against
cancer. Earlier attempts to develop CRM-1 inhibitor were not successful
as exemplified by the failure of the Leptomycin B in a single clinical
trial due to severe off-target toxicity. Since then the field has not
witnessed any serious attempts to develop newer classes of CRM-1
inhibitors that could be used clinically. We have developed specific
inhibitors of nuclear export (SINE) that are highly specific, orally
active drugs with excellent pharmacokinetic parameters. We tested SINEs
as targeted inhibitors of CRM-1, in a panel of pancreatic, colon,
prostate, breast, NHL cell lines. SINE showed cancer selectivity (IC50s
in low nano molar range in cancer cells and >20 micro Molar in normal
lymphocytes, fibroblasts and NIH-3T3 cells). SINE induces global
re-alignment of important tumor suppressors such as IKB, FOXO, p53, p73
and p27. SINEs were ineffective in killing cancer cells that were
transduced with cys528 mut-CRM-1 proteins (a binding site for SINE)
confirming the drugs selectivity. In in vivo studies, the clinical grade
SINE induced significant tumor growth inhibition in subcutaneous and
orthotopic solid and disseminated NHL xenografts. Our new class of SINEs
has excellent pharmacokinetic parameters and has passed advanced toxicity
profiling. Based on our strong preclinical data, SINE has entered
clinical trials for both solid tumors and hematological malignancies.

