Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplex panels for cancer-associated biomarkers: quantify 40
biomarkers from 40 L of serum or plasma.


There is currently a gap in the translational research between
identification of new biomarkers and development and commercialization of
FDA-approved diagnostic tests. A large number of potential cancer
serum/plasma biomarkers have emerged from academic research projects.
Although none of them has sufficient sensitivity and specificity to be
used alone as a screening assay, a combination of markers might allow
identification of individuals who are at the earliest and most treatable
stage of cancer.Discovery and validation of biomarker panels for early
detection requires samples, ideally collected before cancer diagnosis,
with cases and controls collected using the same protocol. Stand-alone
ELISAs require a significant amount of sample, e.g. 100 L or more per
replicate and per assay. To make maximum use of these precious samples,
assays must be developed to minimize sample volume requirements.We
developed electrochemiluminescence (ECL)-based, multiplexed, serum/plasma
immunoassay panels to measure more than 40 cancer-related biomarkers
using a 96-well, 7-spot format. Due to the high sensitivity of ECL
technology, these assays can be used with diluted serum or plasma
bringing the total sample volume required to run all 40 assays down to
approximately 40 L per replicate.These MSD MULTI-ARRAY assay panels
contain most of the classical cancer markers (AFP, Ca125, Ca15.3, Ca19.9,
Ca125, CEA, Cyfra 21.1, Her-2, NSE) as well as a number of
cancer-associated markers such as growth factors and their receptors
(e.g., VEGF, sFlt-1, cMet, SCF, cKit, EGFR); cytokines and chemokines
(e.g., IL6, IL-2R); MMPs; and inflammation markers.The assay format is
simple: diluted sample or calibrator is added to blocked and washed
plates. After a 2-hour incubation with agitation, plates are washed, and
detection antibody reagent is added. After a 1-hour incubation, plates
are washed and read on an MSD SECTOR Imager (read time, 1-3 minutes per
plate).The assays are sensitive enough to measure these biomarkers in
normal samples, and the dynamic range extends beyond the elevated levels
expected in disease states. Multiplexing does not affect accuracy; each
analyte is measured accurately even when other analytes are present in
high abundance. Spike recovery and dilution linearity for most assays
were in the range of 80% to 120% of expected values. Detection limits for
a majority of the assays were between 1 and 10 pg/mL, and dynamic ranges
were between 3 and 4 logs.In conclusion, MSD MULTI-ARRAY assay panels
have been developed and validated for measurement of serum biomarkers of
relevance to early detection, diagnosis, prognosis, and/or monitoring of
various cancers. The versatility, ease of use, and high-throughput
features of the technology make it ideally suited for large scale
clinical studies.

