Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted quantitation of candidate metabolic biomarkers for
hepatocellular carcinoma.


The aim of this study is to compare metabolite levels in sera of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients versus cirrhotic controls. This
is accomplished through targeted quantitative analysis of candidate
metabolic biomarkers of HCC by using an ultra-performance liquid
chromatography coupled to an electrospray ionization-quadrupole linear
ion trap mass spectrometry (UPLC-ESI-QLIT MS). The targets were selected
from our previous untargeted analysis, where we observed association of
HCC to dysregulated levels of bile acids, lysophosphocholines (LPCs),
lysophosphoethanolamines (LPEs), sphingophoslipid, long chain carnitines
and amino acids. In this study, we performed quantitative analysis of
three metabolites (glycodeoxycholic acid, 3beta
6beta-dihydroxy-5beta-cholan-24-oic acid, 3 sulfo-glycodeoxycholic acid)
in sera of 199 participants from two cohorts (US and Egypt). The
participants consist of 110 subjects (55 HCC cases and 55 cirrhotic
controls) from the US and 89 subjects (40 HCC cases and 49 cirrhotic
controls) from Egypt. Through a logistic regression model, we analyzed
the quantitative results obtained by the UPLC-ESI-QLIT MS to evaluate the
ability of the three candidate markers as a panel in distinguishing HCC
cases from patients with liver cirrhosis. Receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve obtained through the regression model yielded
an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.754 in distinguishing the HCC cases
from cirrhotic controls for the US cohort and an AUC of 0.709 for the
Egyptian cohort. The model resulted in an AUC of 0.717 for the combined
US and Egyptian cohort. We compared the diagnostic capability of these
metabolites versus -fetoprotein (AFP) in the US cohort, for which AFP
measurements were available for both the HCC cases and cirrhotic
controls. While AFP alone resulted in an AUC of 0.681, the combination of
AFP with the three metabolites increased the AUC to 0.806. These results
indicate the potential of these candidate biomarkers in combination with
AFP for more accurate diagnosis of HCC in high risk population of
cirrhotic patients.Citation Format: Jun Feng Xiao, Yi Zhao, Rency
Varghese, Bin Zhou, Cristina Di Poto, Lihua Zhang, Mahlet G. Tadesse,
Dina Hazem Ziada, Kirti Shetty, Habtom W. Ressom. Targeted quantitation
of candidate metabolic biomarkers for hepatocellular carcinoma.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2492.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2492

