Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Concomitant HDAC and PI3K-AKT pathway inhibition as a new
therapeutic strategy for prostate cancer.


Background: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most prevalent cancer in men in
the United States. Prostate cancer patients that progress to a lethal
phenotype are currently treated with chemotherapy, second generation
androgen therapies and immunotherapy. Unfortunately, patient response is
not often durable; therefore novel treatments are urgently needed.
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have shown to be up-regulated in PCa.
Preclinical data indicates that HDAC inhibitors induce apoptosis in
androgen receptor (AR)-positive cells. Unfortunately, HDACi display
minimal clinical benefit. From this, we propose that combination of HDACi
with novel targeted therapies will result in greater therapeutic
efficacy. Methods: PC3, PC3AR and PtenCaP8 PCa cell lines treated with
panobinostat (HDACi) and BEZ235 (PI3K-mTORC1 inhibitor) as single
treatment or in combination for 48 hours. Cell death/apoptosis was
assessed by loss of cell membrane integrity, phosphotidylserine exposure,
cell cycle and caspase activation by flow cytometry. Expression levels of
activated AKT were assessed by immunoblot. Results: Panobinostat induces
cell death/apoptosis greater in PC3AR than parental PC3 cells by
increasing subG1 population (47.89.3 vs. 11.12.8,), phosphotidylserine
exposeure (41.43.0 vs. 217.2,) and caspase activation (57.30.9 vs. 12.0
4.1,) respectively. Moreover, PC3AR cells treated with panobinostat
results in loss of AKT activation, but not in PC3 cells. Further,
combination of panobinostat with BEZ235 increases greater cell apoptosis
in PC3AR cells compared to panobinostat single agent (30.61.9 vs.
19.91.4) and in PtenCaP8 cells (42.06.5 vs. 29.42.2). Western blotting
also shows that combination treatment leads to loss of AKT activation
compared to panobinostat and BEZ235 as a single agent. Conclusions:
Overall, our results suggest that inhibition of HDACs induces greater
cell death associated with loss of AKT activation in AR-positive cells,
but not in AR-null cells. Also, combination of HDAC inhibitor and
PI3K-mTORC1 inhibitor has more effective cell cytotoxicity compared to
single agent, suggesting that inhibition of HDACs and PI3K-mTORC1 will
exhibit greater therapeutic efficacy. In future work, combination of
panobinostat with BEZ235 will be investigated in preclinical animal
models to propose this therapy combination for clinical trials in
patients with lethal PCa.

