Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRAIL resistance by radiation induced hypermethylation of DR4 CpG
island in recurrent laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma .


The radiotherapy has been known as one of standard treatment methods in
larynx cancer, and the many targeted therapies have been developed for
improving radiotherapy. In this regard, the tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) can be one promising candidate, because
TRAIL has a high selectivity for tumor cells and radiation efficiently
sensitizes tumor cells towards apoptosis induction by TRAIL. It has been
showing that irradiation strongly sensitizes malignant cells to
TRAIL-induced apoptosis without any synergistic effects in normal
tissues. Up to now, however, most studies have focused on
immediateTRAIL-effect after small amount of irradiation. In this study,
we aim to investigate the effect of chronic irradiation on TRAIL response
to see if TRAIL could be an effective targeted therapy in recurrent
laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma.Using previously established AMC-HN3
cell line from laryngeal SCCa patient, we have generated isogenic model
of chronic irradiated HN3R cell line after every 2 or 3 day irradiation
of 2 Gy/day of X-rays (70 Gy cumulative doses). Interestingly, through
MTS assay, HN3R cells show much more resistance to TRAIL induced
apoptosis than HN3 cells. Among suggested mechanisms, we found that a
significantly reduced DR4 receptor is the cause of this resistance.
Reverse transcription-PCR, western blotting and FACS analysis for DR4
receptors show that the expression of mRNA and the total amount, and
surface expression of DR4 protein was much less in HN3R cells. Inhibition
of DR4 by antagonistic antibody or si-DR4 significantly decreased TRAIL
sensitivity in HN3 cells, and overexpression of DR4 enhanced the TRAIL
sensitivity in HN3R cells. To evaluate this result in laryngeal cancer
specimens, tissue microarray with 81 advanced laryngeal cancer specimens
was constructed. Immunohistochemical assessment score of DR4 staining in
23 salvage surgical specimens after radiation failure shows statistically
significant lower score than 58 surgical specimens without radiation
treatment (3.092.23 vs.4.433.36, p=0.040). Postulating thatDR4 gene might
be silenced by hypermethylation after long-term irradiation,
methylation-specific PCR for DR4 was undertaken. Compared to HN3 cells,
HN3R cells had a methylated 5 regulatory CpG island that was partially
demethylated by the DNA demethylating agent 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine
(5-AZAdC). In conclusion, chronic irradiation induces the TRAIL
resistance by hypermethylation of CpG island of DR4 receptor in recurrent
laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma. Thus, the status of receptor
methylation might be one of biomarker to predict TRAIL response
especially after radiation failure.

