Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth characteristics of breast cancer stem cells in vitro and in
vivo.


Breast cancer (BCa) is the most common malignancy in United States women,
accounting for greater than 40,000 deaths each year. Studies have
attributed the presence of cancer stem cells (CSC) with resistance to
chemotherapy as a key component of refractories of treatments in BCa.
Breast cancer stem cells (BCa-SC) are characterized by CD24lo and CD44hi
phenotype with mesenchymal properties, which differ from the epithelial
CD24hi and CD44hi phenotype expressed in the majority of BCa cells. Thus,
further understanding properties of BCa-SC may lead to the development of
novel treatment options towards treating refractory cancer cells.
Fundamental to this, further characterization of BCa-SC will be needed to
identify therapeutic targets based CSC biology. To this end, we sought to
characterize the plasticity of BCa-SC based on cell cycle in vitro and
growth kinetics in vivo. A murine BCa cell line, 4T1, was cultured in CSC
medium and analyzed every 6 hrs for CD24 and CD44 expression by flow
cytometry. Results of this analysis indicated that specific BCa-SC
markers peaked every 24 hours. This data supports a possible
reprogramming of BCa-SC based on cell cycle regulation, suggesting the
use of cell cycle inhibitors to block cells in particular stages of the
cell cycle, which may improve therapeutic approaches to induce cell
death. The stemness of these cells was further confirmed by real-time
PCR. BCa-SC showed increased expression of ALDH1, TWIST, and TGF-3 with
decreased E-Cadherin and CD24 levels correlating to the phenotypic
changes observed with CD24 and CD44 expression. To further examine the
role of BCa-SC in tumor growth in vivo, BALB/c mice were subcutaneously
implanted with populations of 4T1 cells that constituted CSC and non-
cancer stem cells (NCSC) in different combinations and tumor growth was
analyzed. Results showed that the growth kinetics CSC and NCSC when used
alone was significantly lower in vivo compared to mixed populations
containing both CSC and NCSC, suggesting CSC may attribute for the
repopulation of the disease but an aggressive growth requires
differentiated non-stem cells in the tumor microenvironment.

