Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down regulation of retinoblastoma protein expressionimpedes the
antileukemic activity of erufosine.


Erufosine is a new antineoplastic agent from the class of
alkylphosphocholines, which interferes with AKT phosphorylation, the
related signal transduction and confers apoptosis. An improved
understanding of its mode of action is important for its potential
clinical application. The present study demonstrates that erufosine's
antileukemic efficacy is related to the level of cellular retinoblastoma
(Rb) protein expression.Stable Rb-knockdown in SKW-3 leukemia T-cells was
induced by lentiviral delivery of constructs expressing short-hairpin-RNA
species with 21 or 27 bp lengths. The cytotoxicity of erufosine was
tested via MTT proliferation test on thus engineered cell populations
with reduced Rb expression levels. Likewise, the clonogenicity of these
engineered cell populations was determined by CFU assay before and after
treatment with erufosine. The effects on cell cycle were investigated by
FACS analysis. The expression of signal transduction factors was examined
by RT-PCR and immunoblot.The Rb protein expression levels in the
shRNA-transduced cells ranged from 1%- 36% of wild type or nonsense
control. Low Rb expression correlated with significantly diminished
antiproliferative and anticlonogenic activities of erufosine (pErufosine
is a new antineoplastic agent from the class of alkylphosphocholines,
which interferes with AKT phosphorylation, the related signal
transduction and confers apoptosis. An improved understanding of its mode
of action is important for its potential clinical application. The
present study demonstrates that erufosine's antileukemic efficacy is
related to the level of cellular retinoblastoma (Rb) protein
expression.Stable Rb-knockdown in SKW-3 leukemia T-cells was induced by
lentiviral delivery of constructs expressing short-hairpin-RNA species
with 21 or 27 bp lengths. The cytotoxicity of erufosine was tested via
MTT proliferation test on thus engineered cell populations with reduced
Rb expression levels. Likewise, the clonogenicity of these engineered
cell populations was determined by CFU assay before and after treatment
with erufosine. The effects on cell cycle were investigated by FACS
analysis. The expression of signal transduction factors was examined by
RT-PCR and immunoblot.The Rb protein expression levels in the
shRNA-transduced cells ranged from 1%- 36% of wild type or nonsense
control. Low Rb expression correlated with significantly diminished
antiproliferative and anticlonogenic activities of erufosine (p<0.05) at
concentrations near and above the IC50. Erufosine induced a G2 arrest,
and complete Rb-deficiency aggravated this condition. With regard to
proteins involved in cell cycle and apoptosis induction, Rb-deficiency
reduced the expression of cyclin D3, that of the subsequently regulated
kinase Cdk 4 and activated caspases 3 and 9, followed by PARP-cleavage.
In partial variance, erufosine reduced cyclin D3 at RNA and protein
levels, but affected not or only slightly the expression of its partner
kinase Cdk 4.Rb-knockdown impaired the cytotoxic effect of erufosine
significantly and contributed to the formation of a resistant cell
fraction. It is concluded thatRb is a main mediator of erufosine's
antileukemic activity and this suggests that the effect of the drug in
patients might be predicted by determining the Rb expression status.

