Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein tyrosine phosphatase epsilon (PTPE), a candidate
tumor-suppressor in Wilms tumors of childhood, can regulate PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway.


Wilms Tumor is the most common pediatric cancer of the genitourinary
tract. It is a primitive multilineage malignant neoplasm of embryonic
renal precursor cells and is often associated with persistent foci of
embryonic renal tissue known as Nephrogenic Rests. However, early
molecular events that orchestrate the progression of Nephrogenic Rests to
Wilms Tumor are unknown. Protein tyrosine phosphorylation, a critical
regulator of signaling pathways, is a reversible process controlled by
the opposing activities of protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and protein
tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs). The possible role of PTPs in Wilms Tumor
has not been explored. Through immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of
tissue microarrays containing Wilms Tumors, Nephrogenic Rests, and normal
kidney, we have identified downregulation of protein tyrosine phosphatase
epsilon (PTPE) as a potential early event in Wilms tumorigenesis. IHC
results showed strong staining for PTPE in 6 of 6 (100%) Nephrogenic
Rests. In contrast, of the 51 Wilms Tumors studied, PTPE staining was
absent in 2 (4%), weak in 26 (51%), moderate in 16 (31%), and strong in 7
(14%) compared to normal renal cortex. In addition, quantitative
reverse-transcription PCR showed decreased PTPE expression in Wilms Tumor
tissues compared to normal renal cortex. To identify potential targets of
PTPE, we performed phosphokinase arrays and demonstrated that
overexpression of PTPE in HEK293 cells results in dephosphorylation of
Focal adhesion kinase (FAK), Lymphocyte-specific protein tyrosine kinase
(LCK), and Gardner-Rasheed feline sarcoma viral (v-fgr) oncogene homolog
(FGR). To validate the relevance of PTPE in Wilms Tumors, we established
primary tumor cultures from nephrectomy specimens of children undergoing
treatment for Wilms Tumor. Consistent with our IHC data, these primary
cultures exhibit varying levels of PTPE expression. We have extended our
results in these primary Wilms Tumor cells and found that overexpression
of PTPE leads to dephosphorylation of FAK and LCK. We also probed
downstream effector pathways and found that PTPE overexpression leads to
dephosphorylation and inactivation of AKT (T308 and S375) and mTOR
(S2448). Collectively, these PTPE targets have been established to
control essential functions like cell proliferation, adhesion, and
migration. In light of our results, we suggest that PTPE is a putative
tumor suppressor in Wilms Tumor, acting to control signaling through FAK,
LCK, and other SRC family proteins, as well as the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway.
These results establish the utility of primary Wilms Tumor culture
models, and provide the rationale for exploring SRC family kinase and
AKT/mTOR pathway inhibitors as novel targeted agents for the treatment of
Wilms Tumor.

