Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of BCCIP as a novel BARD1 interaction partner.


BARD1 (BRCA1-Associated Ring Domain 1) was originally identified in a
yeast-two-hybrid (Y2H) screen as a binding partner of BRCA1. The
functional heterodimer BRCA1/BARD1 is required for several of the
cellular and tumor-suppressor functions of BRCA1. Both proteins interact
through the N-terminal RING domain to form a heterodimeric E3 ubiquitin
ligase that constitutes the major catalytic activity of the BRCA1-BARD1
complex. BARD1 is also associated to p53-mediated apoptosis, in a
BRCA1-independent manner. The carboxy terminus of BRCA1 is highly acidic
and contains two tandem BRCA1 C-terminal (BRCT) domains, which are
characteristic of members of a large superfamily of proteins involved in
DNA repair and cell cycle checkpoint control. These domains are
protein-protein interacting regions that mediate the association with a
number of other proteins with a role in DNA replication, DNA damage
repair pathway, transcription, cell cycle control, and ubiquitination.
Although several BRCA1-interacting proteins were reported, few proteins
were described to interact with BARD1. In order to identify putative
interaction-proteins with BARD1 C-terminal region we performed a Y2H
assay using BARD1 BRCT tandem domain (aa 554-777) to screen a human
testis cDNA library. We identified, among other hits, a cDNA coding for
BCCIP (BRCA2 and CDKN1A Interacting Protein) C-terminal region. BCCIP is
known for its involvement in DNA damage repair and the cell cycle
control. BCCIP interacts with BRCA2, and both proteins are important for
RAD51 focus formation after ionizing radiation and homologous
recombination (HR) repair of double-strand-breaks (DSBs). BCCIP enhances
the p21 suppression activity towards CDK2, and BCCIP downregulation
reduces p21 expression by abrogating p53 transcription activity. We
confirmed BCCIP/BARD1 interaction by pull-down and co-immunoprecipitation
(co-IP) analysis of ectopically expressed BARD1 and BCCIP. We also
identified the constitutive BCCIP/BARD1 complex in human cells by co-IP
assays. Interestingly the BCCIP observed in complex with BARD1
corresponds to a mono-ubiquitinated form, suggesting that BCCIP may be a
putative natural target for BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimer E3 ubiquitin ligase.
BRCA1 participation in a multicomponent complex with BCCIP is under
investigation. In order to assess the biological significance of the
interaction between BCCIP and BARD1 we are investigating its role in DNA
damage repair, cell cycle control and apoptosis. We are also evaluating
the BCCIP protein interaction network using a tandem affinity
purification approach.

