Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Berberine suppress the colon cancer proliferation through
activating AMPK.


Background and Objectives: Numerous clinical studies and in vitro study
have shown efficacy of Berberine, an isoquinoline alkaloid isolated from
plants, in treating multiple diseases. Berberine possesses anti-diabetic,
anti-inflammatory and anti-tumor properties. AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) is a cellular energy sensor that exists in almost all eukaryotes
and is a potential therapeutic target for cancer. Berberine displays
beneficial effects in the treatment of diabetes and obesity at least in
part via stimulation of AMPK activity. Herein, this study explores
whether the therapeutic role of Berberine on colon cancer is linked to
the activation of AMPK signal pathway. Methods: In vitro studies: Three
human colorectal cancer cell (CRC) lines (HCT116, SW480, LOVO) were
treated with Berberine (0M to 100M) and cell proliferation assay was used
to evaluate the inhibition effects on cell growth. The CRC lines were
then treated with Berberine (0 to 60M), for 24h or 48h, after which AMPK
activation was measured by western blotting. In vivo studies: we used the
azoxymethane-dextran sulfate sodium (AOM/DSS) mouse model of colitis
induced colon cancer to explore the effects of Berberine on colon
carcinogenesis. After DSS exposure, the FVB mice were randomly divided
into two groups (N=19) and treated with Berberine (40mg/kg) or water for
10 weeks. After 10 weeks, all the mice were euthanized, the colon tissues
were collected and the tumor numbers and tumor sizes were observed under
microscopy.Results: In vitro studies: Berberine inhibited the growth of
the three CRC lines with an IC50 around 30M. Berberine activated AMPK in
a dose-dependent and time-dependent manner. In addition, mTOR, a
downstream target of AMPK, was down-regulated by Berberine in a
dose-dependent and time-dependent manner. Furthermore, 4EBP1 and
p70s6kinase, downstream target of mTOR, were also down-regulated
byBerberine treatment in three colon cancer cell lines, whereas the MAPK
pathway was not affected by Berberine. In vivo studies: Berberine treated
mice showed a significant reduction of tumor numbers (60% reduction,
p=0.013) and in tumor size (49% reduction for 4mm p=0.024) compare to
vehicle treated mice.Conclusions: We have provided evidence that
Berberine inhibits colon cancer cell growth and decrease AOM/DSS induced
tumor numbers and tumor size. Our data suggest that Berberine suppresses
colon epithelial proliferation via inhibition of mTOR through the
activation of AMPK. Similar anticancer activity has been reported for
Metformin, another antidiabetic drug that activates AMPK and inhibits
mTOR signaling. Metformin is currently being tested in clinical trials
for preventing cancer. In conclusion, Berberine might offer a safe and
promising candidate for chemoprevention of colon cancer.

