Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methodology design for identifications of protein targets of
chemopreventive isothiocyanates using click chemistry.


Isothiocyanates (ITCs) derived from cruciferous vegetables are inhibitors
of carcinogenesis in animal models and can induce cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis in a variety of cancer cell lines. It is known that ITCs can
conjugate with glutathione (GSH) and induce cellular oxidative stress;
ITCs can also bind to intracellular proteins (e.g. tubulin) which may
constitute a mechanism underlying their cancer preventive effects. To
fully understand the cellular responses to ITCs, it is crucial to develop
an unbiased method that can rapidly identify their protein targets. In
this study, the direct protein targets of phenethyl isothiocyanate
(PEITC) were investigated by using click chemistry. An alkyne-tagged ITC
was used as an analog of PEITC, a known cancer prevention agent. The
tagged ITC (N-(2-(4-methoxyalkyne)phenethyl)isothiocyanate (NPPEITC) was
designed and synthesized with a moiety for copper-catalyzed Huisgen 1,3
dipolar cycloaddition reaction (click chemistry), the tagged ITC,
NPPEITC, was also found to show similar biological activities to PEITC;
The click-chemistry reaction conditions of copper-catalyzed azide-alkyne
cycloaddtion (CuAAC) for NPPEITC and
N-(2-(4-methoxyalkyne)phenylethyl)acetamide (NPA, a negative control)
with biotin azide were optimized and the reaction product was isolated
and analyzed by mass spectrometry. A model click reaction between NPPEITC
and tubulin was employed to validate this method. The western-blot showed
that the tubulin protein is modified by biotin after NPPEITC treatment
then followed by click reaction with biotin azide. In contrast, no biotin
was found on NPA treated tubulin. Secondly, cancer cells exposed to the
tagged ITC (NPPEITC or NPA) was lysed and exposed to click chemistry
reagents to conjugate ITC-adducted proteins with biotin for subsequent
affinity purification; the ITC conjugated proteins were identified and
quantified using proteomic analysis by LC/MS/MS.(Supported by NCI grant
CA100853)

