Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identical TP53 mutations support a common origin for mixed
histology epithelial ovarian cancer.


Background: Traditionally, epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC), and its
various histologic subtypes, was considered one disease process. With an
improved understanding of underlying carcinogenesis, it is now
hypothesized that ovarian cancers of different histologies may originate
in different sites - serous from the fallopian tube, endometrioid and
clear cell from endometriotic implants, and mucinous from the GI tract.
However, five percent of EOC are classified as mixed tumors, with two or
more histologic subtypes present in the same tumor. Whether these cancers
represent phenotypic diversions of the same cancer, or synchronous tumors
from different sites is not known, and if discovered, may shed light on
the etiology of single-histology malignancies.Objective: By comparing the
TP53 mutational signatures of both histologic subtypes within the same
tumor, we sought to determine if mixed histology ovarian cancers arise
from the same tumor initiating cells.Methods: After IRB approval,
formalin fixed paraffin embedded samples of mixed histology tumors were
identified. After review by a gynecologic pathologist, the specific area
of each histologic subtype was identified and isolated using Laser
Capture Microdissection (LCM). DNA was extracted separately from each
histologic subtype. PCR reactions were performed to amplify TP53 exons
4-8. Gel electrophoresis was performed to specifically isolate the
desired exon, which was extracted and purified for sequencing. Sanger
sequencing was performed in forward and reverse directions, and mutations
were identified by comparison to the TP53 reference sequence (NC_000017).
TP53 mutations were compared between both histologic subtypes of the same
tumor sample to assess for clonality.Results: 10 patients were identified
with mixed histologies and subjected to LCM. Extracted DNA was of
sufficient quality to sequence both histologies in 9 patients. Thus far,
4 patients samples have been sequenced and analyzed. In one patient no
TP53 mutation was identified. In the remaining 3, a single mutation was
found, and was identical in both histologic sections. All mutations were
missense. The TP53 mutations identified in these samples had all
previously been described, supporting the validity of identified
mutations. These findings support additional sequencing of the remaining
5 patients.Conclusions: These analyses suggest that the separate
components of mixed histology epithelial ovarian cancer harbor the same
early TP53 mutations - supporting their clonality. This supports the
hypothesis that that mixed histology EOC tumors originate from the same
tumor initiating cell, and that not all histologic subtypes of non-mixed
ovarian cancers may have separate origins.

