Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Id3: Tumor suppressor of squamous cell carcinoma.


Skin cancer, the most common type of cancer with more than 1 million
cases diagnosed in the US every year, occurs at least once to about half
of Americans 65 years or older. The three main types of skin cancerBasal
Cell Carcinoma (BCC), Squamous Cell Carcinoma (SCC), and melanoma have
mortality rates that are estimated to be 0.1%, 4.3% and 10% respectively
in 2011. The Inhibitor of DNA Binding/Differentiation 3 (Id3) protein, a
helix-loop-helix (HLH), dominant negative transcription factor, is one of
four Id proteins found in mammals (Id1-4). The Id protein family plays a
role in many cellular processes, including differentiation,
proliferation, apoptosis, and angiogenesis. Previous studies in the
Rosenthal lab have shown that Id3 over-expression in immortalized human
keratinocytes induces apoptosis in part by activation of a
Bax-caspase-9-caspase-3-dependent mitochondrial pathway via upregulation
of bax promoter activity. To further elucidate the roles of Id3 in
apoptosis, proliferation, and tumorigenesis, our studies focused on
effects of induced Id3 expression on tumor growth in vivo.To investigate
the role of Id3 in SCC, a tetracycline (Tet)-regulated expression (T-REx)
system was utilized to induce Id3 expression in A431 cells, a human
malignant cervical SCC cell line. Immunoblot and RT-PCR analysis of
A431-TRex-Id3 cells verified Id3 expression in the presence of Tet. When
Id3 was induced by Tet in these cells in vitro, caspase-3 and -9 were
activated. Cells were stably transfected with GFP to monitor tumor growth
over thirty days by Maestro in vivo imaging. Effects of Id3 on
tumorigenesis in vivo was examined by subcutaneous injection of these
cells onto athymic nude mice, half of which were fed with a doxycycline
(Dox; a tetracycline derivative)-containing feed, leading to induced Id3
expression in the tumor, and half with a regular diet.
Subcutaneously-injected A431 cells formed significantly (50%) smaller
tumors upon Id3 induction. Immunofluorescent staining of tumor sections
from Dox-fed mice revealed a 1.5-fold increase in active caspase-3 but no
significant change in Ki-67, a proliferation marker. To investigate the
mechanism of tumor shrinkage caused by Id3, microarray analysis was
performed, and four genes were found to be significantly up- or
down-regulated by Id3. Id3 deletion mutants were further created to study
the domain(s) responsible for the decrease in tumor size. Mutation
analysis showed that Id3 induces Max dimerization protein 3 (MXD3)
protein expression through its HLH domain. Other candidate genes remain
to be tested. The role of Id3 in SCC cell killing by cisplatin, a
commonly used chemotherapeutic drug for SCC, is also currently under
investigation. Our results together indicate that Id3 is a potential
apoptosis inducer and therefore a therapeutic target in treating SCC.

