Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chloroquine inhibits cancer stem cells in triple negative breast
cancer via regulation of DNA methylation.


Post-treatment enrichment of the tumor initiating CD44+/CD24- breast
cancer stem cell (CSC) population is believed to be responsible for
breast tumor recurrence and metastasis. Among breast cancer subtypes,
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) particularly is known to have an
abundant CSC population, and is characterized by frequent metastatic
recurrence. Chloroquine (CQ), an anti-malarial drug, is a lysotropic
reagent that inhibits autophagy. Recently, CQ has been shown to reduce
the CSC population in various cancers and has been tested in clinical
studies. Concurrently, CQ was identified as a potential CSC inhibitor
discovered from gene expression signatures of the CD44+/CD24- CSC
population. However, little, aside from inhibition of autophagy, is known
about the working mechanism of chloroquine in reducing CSCs, particularly
in TNBCs. Based on recent recommendations that low doses of CQ be used to
limit toxicities in the heart and retina, we investigated how low doses
of CQ enhance the antitumor effects of paclitaxel (PTX) and reduce the
CSC population. CSC population changes and apoptosis were analyzed using
flow cytometry analysis (CSC: CD44+/CD24-; apoptosis: annexin V) and
western blot analysis for cleaved caspase 3, and CSC function was
measured by mammosphere formation efficiency in SUM159PT, MDA-MB-231,
MDA-MB-468, and Hs578T TNBC cell lines. We observed enhanced cytotoxic
effects and significant reduction of the CSC population by combined
treatment of PTX and CQ compared to single treatment of either PTX (5nM)
or CQ (1 or 5 uM) in SUM159, Hs578T, and MDA-MB-231 cells. The enhanced
cytotoxicity by co-treatment of CQ and PTX correlated well with
inhibition of autophagy, as indicated by cleavage of LC3B, increased
expression of p62, and accumulation of autophagosomes. Moreover, the
combined treatment inhibited PTX induced STAT3 activation in CSCs and
epigenetically regulated gene expression critical in maintenance of CSCs
via repression of DNMT1 expression. Finally, we observed enhanced
therapeutic efficacy in vivo with the combination of CQ (10-20 mg/kg,
daily) and PTX (30 mg/kg, two times per week) when compared to either CQ
or PTX alone (pPost-treatment enrichment of the tumor initiating
CD44+/CD24- breast cancer stem cell (CSC) population is believed to be
responsible for breast tumor recurrence and metastasis. Among breast
cancer subtypes, triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) particularly is
known to have an abundant CSC population, and is characterized by
frequent metastatic recurrence. Chloroquine (CQ), an anti-malarial drug,
is a lysotropic reagent that inhibits autophagy. Recently, CQ has been
shown to reduce the CSC population in various cancers and has been tested
in clinical studies. Concurrently, CQ was identified as a potential CSC
inhibitor discovered from gene expression signatures of the CD44+/CD24-
CSC population. However, little, aside from inhibition of autophagy, is
known about the working mechanism of chloroquine in reducing CSCs,
particularly in TNBCs. Based on recent recommendations that low doses of
CQ be used to limit toxicities in the heart and retina, we investigated
how low doses of CQ enhance the antitumor effects of paclitaxel (PTX) and
reduce the CSC population. CSC population changes and apoptosis were
analyzed using flow cytometry analysis (CSC: CD44+/CD24-; apoptosis:
annexin V) and western blot analysis for cleaved caspase 3, and CSC
function was measured by mammosphere formation efficiency in SUM159PT,
MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, and Hs578T TNBC cell lines. We observed enhanced
cytotoxic effects and significant reduction of the CSC population by
combined treatment of PTX and CQ compared to single treatment of either
PTX (5nM) or CQ (1 or 5 uM) in SUM159, Hs578T, and MDA-MB-231 cells. The
enhanced cytotoxicity by co-treatment of CQ and PTX correlated well with
inhibition of autophagy, as indicated by cleavage of LC3B, increased
expression of p62, and accumulation of autophagosomes. Moreover, the
combined treatment inhibited PTX induced STAT3 activation in CSCs and
epigenetically regulated gene expression critical in maintenance of CSCs
via repression of DNMT1 expression. Finally, we observed enhanced
therapeutic efficacy in vivo with the combination of CQ (10-20 mg/kg,
daily) and PTX (30 mg/kg, two times per week) when compared to either CQ
or PTX alone (p< 0.05). Herein, we demonstrate effective reduction of the
CD44+/CD24- CSC population by combined CQ and PTX treatment through
autophagy inhibition. Moreover, we found that the low-dose combined
treatment of CQ with PTX was able to regulate gene expression by altering
DNA methylation, subsequently reducing CSCs in the TNBC cancer cells.
Thus, a low dose treatment of CQ along with chemotherapy may be effective
in treating TNBC patients, lend further support for in-depth studies on
the mechanism of CQ among the subgroups of TNBC.

