Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIF-2 alpha is required for the tumor stemness switch of cancer
cells during hypoxia/oxidative stress.


Tumor is characterized by intermittent hypoxia and re-oxygenation that
generates oxidative stress. The effect of acute hypoxia
microenvironmental stress on the cancer cell behavior is not clearly
known. We hypothesized that hypoxia/oxidative stress could re-program
cancer cells to a highly aggressive and metastatic state, we termed
"tumor stemness state" (1). To test the hypothesis, we have characterized
an in vitro model of acute hypoxia/re-oxygenation (2), and identified a
highly tumorigenic and metastatic side-population cells (SP) phenotype
from a diverse groups of established cancer cell lines including
neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma and small cell lung cancer (3). These
post-hypoxia SP cells (henceforth known as SPhox cells) exhibited high
metastatic activity, localization in the hypoxic niche, and expressed
several stemness associated genes including Nanog, Oct-4 and Bmi-1 (3).
In this present study, we report further characterization of the SPhox
cells including the expression of stemness associated transcription
factors, expression of inflammatory cytokines and receptors, and the
putative interaction of SPhox cells with bone marrow (BM) stem cell
niche. First, SPhox cells expressed very high level of Nanog, Lin 28, MYC
and HIF-2 proteins. Second, SPhox expressed inflammatory Toll-like
receptors. Third, SPhox cells increased tolerance to ROS-inducing agents.
Fourth, SPhox cells, when co-cultured with mouse BM Sca-1 cells, the
CD271+ fraction, enriched in mesenchymal stem cells (4) was expanded.
This expanded CD271+/Sca-1+ cells exhibited high expression of Nanog,
Lin28, Oct-4, MYC and HIF-2alpha and ABCG2. Furthermore, the conditioned
media obtained from the CD271+/Sca-1+/ABCG2+ cells maintained the
stemness of the SPhox cells for two weeks. These results indicated the
potential interaction between the SPhox and CD271/Sca-1+ cell. However,
these characteristics of SPhox cells were transient, reversible, and
lasted only for 3-4 weeks, indicating an underlying transient
re-programming mechanism behind the SPhox phenotype. Because, recently we
discovered a HIF-2alpha dependent transient reprogramming of human ES
cells (5), here we investigated the potential role of HIF-2alpha in the
re-programming of SP cells to SPhox cells. We found that the specific
siRNA gene silencing of HIF-2alpha reduced the SP to SPhox reprogramming
by sixteen-fold. Thus, here we have further characterize the tumor
stemness state, including the potential role of HIF-2alpha. We suggest
that this tumor stemness state could be the part of the cancer cell
defense mechanism persist, and reactivate the aggressive/metastatic
phenotype of cancer.1. Das B. PhD thesis, University of Toronto, 20072.
Das B et al. Cancer Research, 20053. Das B et al. Stem Cells, 20084. Das
B et al. In Press5. Das B et al. Stem Cells, 2012Citation Format: Bikul
Das, Reza Bayat-Mokhtari, Rika Tsuchida, Herman Yeger. HIF-2 alpha is
required for the tumor stemness switch of cancer cells during
hypoxia/oxidative stress. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2932. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2932

