Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SGI-110 and entinostat therapy reduces lung tumor burden and
reprograms the epigenome .


The DNA methyltransferase inhibitors (DNMTi) Vidaza (5-azacytidine) and
Dacogen (5-aza-2-deoxycytidine, decitabine) are approved by the FDA for
chemotherapy against myelodysplastic syndrome, a heterogeneous bone
marrow disorder. Vidaza in combination with the HDAC inhibitor entinostat
has shown some promise in treating lung cancer and this has been
replicated in our orthotopic lung cancer model. However, the
effectiveness of these DNMTi against solid tumors is likely impacted in
part, by their stability and rapid inactivation by cytidine deaminase in
the liver. These studies were initiated to test the efficacy of SGI-110,
a prodrug for decitabine. SGI-110, a dinucleotide consisting of
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine followed by a deoxyguanosine, has been shown to be
effective in vitro as a DNA methylation inhibitor and less prone to
deamination by cytidine deaminase. In this study, we used our in vivo
lung cancer model to explore the potential therapeutic effect of SGI-110
alone and in combination with entinostat. In vivo plasma concentrations
and pharmacokinetic properties of SGI-110 and its metabolite decitabine
were evaluated in nude rats after a single SC dose of SGI-110. Upon SC
administration, SGI-110 is rapidly converted to decitabine. Dose
proportional pharmacokinetics showed no significant difference in
accumulation of SGI-110 or decitabine, while the half life of decitabine
was increased to 4hrs. SGI-110 alone or in combination with entinostat
significantly reduced tumor burden by 56% of Calu-6, a K-ras/p53 mutant
lung adenocarcinoma cell line engrafted orthotopically in nude rats. On a
molecular level, global changes in gene profiles were associated with a
reduction in tumor burden. Microarray analysis revealed that a 212 and
592 genes were differentially expressed in SGI-110 alone or with
combination therapy. Highly significant gene expression changes were seen
in key cancer regulatory pathways. In addition, SGI-110 treatment
activated p21 and apoptotic genes BIK and BAK in these tumors. SGI-110
caused widespread epigenetic reprogramming that induced demethylation of
an average of 291 genes; in particular 208 genes were polycomb target
genes. The polycomb targets were enriched for transcription factors.
These preclinical in vivo findings demonstrate that SGI-110 alone shows
strong demethylating activity and when combined with entinostat more
effectively retards tumor growth. (Supported by Astex Pharmaceutical and
SU2C)

