Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional Role of FKBP51 in malignant progression of melanoma.


FKBP51 is a high molecular weight FK506-binding protein involved in the
regulation of diverse biological processes. Its aberrant expression and
pathological implications has been reported in some cancer types;
however, its role in malignant melanoma has remained underexplored. In
this study, we investigated the functional role of FKBP51 in melanoma
pathogenesis by performing in vitro and in vivo studies. FKBP51
expression was observed in majority of primary and derivative melanoma
cell lines. Interestingly, a greater expression of FKBP51 was detected in
metastatic derivative lines (A375SM and FEMX-I) as compared to their
respective parental cells (A375P and FEMX-V). Next, we stably repressed
the expression of FKBP51 in A375SM and FEMX-I cells through short-hairpin
RNA (shRNA)-mediated silencing. FKBP51 repression led to a decrease in
growth and clonogenicity, in part, through suppression of cell cycle
progression and induction of apoptosis. A reduced motility and invasion
was also observed in both the FKBP51-silenced melanoma cell lines.
Immunoblot analyses demonstrated loss of mesenchymal markers and elevated
expression of epithelial markers in FKBP51-silenced cells, indicating a
role of FKBP51 in epithelial to mesenchymal transition of melanoma cells.
When injected subcutaneously into nude mice, FKBP51-silenced A375SM cells
displayed significant inhibition of tumor growth as compared to the
control cells. Immunohistochemical analysis of tumor tissues demonstrated
a decrease in the proliferating (Ki67 positive) cells and increased
numbers of apoptotic (TUNEL positive) cells in FKBP51-silenced A375SM as
compared with control tumors. Furthermore, low vessel density and
infiltration of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) was observed in
tumors formed by FKBP51-silenced cells as examined by isolectin lectin B4
(Griffonia simplicifolia isolectin B4) and Gr-1 staining, respectively.
Notably, tail vein injection of FKBP51- silenced cells produced no
metastatic lesions in lungs, while significant metastases was observed in
lungs of mice injected with control cells. Estimation of interleukin-8
(IL-8/CXCL-8), a chemokine previously associated with melanoma growth,
metastasis and angiogenesis, demonstrated its decreased production in
FKBP51-silenced cells and derived tumors. In conclusion, our study
provides experimental evidence to support the functional significance of
FKBP51 in malignant progression of human melanoma.

