Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HO-3867, is selectively cytotoxic to ovarian cancer cells through
a dual mechanism of action involving the STAT3 and AKT pathways .


Objective: The development of anticancer drugs that selectively kills
cancer cells while sparing the surrounding healthy tissues is of
paramount importance for safe and effective anti-cancer therapy. We have
developed a novel class of compounds that are fluoro-substituted analogs
of curcumin, called diarylidenylpiperiden-4-ones (DAPs). We hypothesize
that the structural backbone of DAP compounds would have cytotoxic
activity, and the -NOH moiety would function as a tissue-specific
modulator of this cytotoxicity via its anti-oxidant properties. The goal
of this study was to analyze the differential cytotoxic effects of one of
these compounds, HO-3867, on both ovarian cancer and normal
cells.Methods: Protein expression in pro-apoptotic and survival signaling
pathways were analyzed via western blotting, and immunofluorescence
assays using human ovarian cancer (SKOV-3) and normal ovarian surface
epithelial (hOSE) cell lines treated with 10 M HO-3867. Flow cytometry
was used to quantify apoptosis and immunohistochemistry was performed to
analyze cellular localization of proteins. The selective cytotoxic effect
of HO-3867 was verified using STAT3 cDNA and Akt siRNA transfection. In
vivo analysis was performed on mice administered oral HO-3867 using
histopathological analysis and TUNEL assays. Efficacy of HO-3867 proved
in STAT3 knockdown SKOV3 ovarian cancer cell line.Results: HO-3867 did
not affect the proliferation rate of hOSE cells while showing potent
cytotoxic activity against SKOV-3 cells. In vivo histopathological
evaluation of internal organs collected from treated adult mice revealed
no evidence of toxicity. TUNEL staining of collected tissues suggested
that selective apoptotic induction was limited to neoplastic cells in
tumor xenografts. HO-3867 protected the normal cells by up-regulating the
pro-survival protein pAkt. Tumor cells were targeted through
downregulation of pAkt, pStat3, pErk1/2 and Bcl2 and upregulation of p21
and p53. Furthermore, HO-3867 was selectively regulates kinase activity
in ovarian cancer cells and compared with hOSE cells. In addition,
HO-3867 treated into STAT3 knockdown SKOV3 cells, resulted in the
decreased apoptosis. These data indicated that HO-3867 induced apoptosis
through the targeting STAT3.Conclusion: Our results showed that HO-3867
protects normal cells while retaining antiproliferative activity against
ovarian cancer cells. Increased levels of pAkt and the free
radical-scavenging effects of the pro-nitroxide N-hydroxypyrroline group
mediate this selective protection. The results suggest that the
antioxidant-conjugated DAPs may be useful as safe and effective
anticancer agents for treatment of ovarian cancer

