Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PLK1 inhibitors interact synergistically with HDAC inhibitors in
IM-sensitive or -resistant BCR/ABL+ leukemia cells in vitro and in vivo.


Purpose: Previous studies have shown that inhibitors of the
serine/threonine kinase PLK1 potently induce cell death in human BCR/ABL+
leukemia cells both sensitive and resistant to imatinib mesylate (IM;
Cancer Research 70:1513, 2010). Furthermore, HDACIs are known to
potentiate tyrosine kinase lethality in such cells. The goal of the
present studies was to determine whether PLK1 inhibitors (e.g. BI2536)
and HDACIs interacted synergistically in BCR/ABL+ cells sensitive or
resistant to imatinib mesylate in vitro and in vivo and if so, to
identify the mechanism(s) underlying this interaction.
ExperimentalDesign: K562 and LAMA84 cells, IM-resistant Adult-T315I and
BV173/E255K cells, and primary CML cells were exposed to BI2536 with or
without vorinostat (Merck) for various intervals. Effects on apoptosis
and signaling pathways were determined by flow cytometry, western
blotting, and gene transfection. K562 and BV173/E255K cells were used to
test the in vivo efficacy of this drug regimen in animal models.Results:
Co-treatment with BI2536 and vorinostat synergistically induced cell
death in parental or IM-resistant BCR/ABL+ cells and primary CD34+ bone
marrow cells but was minimally toxic to normal cells. BI2536/vorinostat
co-treatment triggered pronounced mitochondrial dysfunction, caspase
activation, PARP cleavage, ROS generation, and DNA damage (manifested by
increased expression of H2A.X, p-ATM, p-ATR), all of which were
significantly attenuated by the anti-oxidant TBAP. Combined treatment had
little effect on T210 phosphorylation of PLK1, but clearly reduced S137
phospho-PLK1 without changing PLK1 expression. While the agents alone had
little effect on BCR/ABL phosphorylation, combined treatment induced
modest reductions in phospho-BCR/ABL but not total expression. Exposure
of cells to BI2536 alone induced marked G2M arrest, whereas vorinostat
co-administration abrogated this effect. PLK1 shRNA knockdown
significantly increased HDACI lethality, whereas HDAC 1-3 shRNA knockdown
reciprocally increased BI2536-induced apoptosis. Genetic interruption of
the DNA damage linker H1.2 partially but significantly reduced PLK1/HDAC
inhibitor-mediated cell death, arguing for a functional role for DNA
damage in lethality. Finally, BI2536/vorinostat co-treatment dramatically
reduced tumor growth in both subcutaneous and systemic BCR/ABL+ leukemia
xenograft models (including those resistant to IM), and significantly
enhanced animal survival. Notably, the regimen was highly effective in a
late stage tumor model which is classically resistant to most therapeutic
interventions.Conclusions: These findings suggest that concomitant PLK1
and HDAC inhibition is active against IM-sensitive or refractory CML
cells both in vitro and in vivo, and that this strategy warrants further
evaluation in the setting of BCR/ABL+ leukemias.

