Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-24 influences proliferation of prostate cancer cells in vitro
via targeting ZNF217.


Background: Prostate cancer is one of the leading causes of tumor-related
death in men. To identify the underlying mechanisms, microRNA (miRNA)
expression profiles of primary prostate cancer samples and of adjacent
non-tumor tissue were analyzed. Using database analysis, we sought to
identify regulatory targets of aberrantly expressed miRNA miR-24.Material
and Methods: We performed comparative miRNA expression profiling using
deep sequencing of cDNA libraries. Potential target genes of deregulated
miRNAs were identified by database analysis and subsequently validated in
vitro using reporter gene constructs. miRNA and mRNA expression was
determined using quantitative real-time PCR.Results: One of the miRNAs
consistently deregulated in primary prostate cancer samples was miR-24
which was found downregulated in tumor samples more than 1.5-fold in the
deep sequencing approach. Independent target prediction databases
(including miRanda, Targetscan and PicTar) indicated that the 3
untranslated region (3UTR) of the zinc finger protein 217 (ZNF217) gene
is a regulative target for miR-24. This prediction could be confirmed
using a luciferase reporter gene construct containing the ZNF217 3UTR.
Co-expression of the reporter gene construct with miR-24 resulted in a
reduction of reporter gene activity while mutation of the miRNA binding
sites caused a loss of responsiveness to the respective miRNA.
Furthermore we could show that transient expression of miR-24 reduced the
amount of ZNF217 protein in DU145 and LNCaP prostate cancer cells. miR-24
expression was significantly reduced in tumor tissue compared to matched
non-tumor tissue (pBackground: Prostate cancer is one of the leading
causes of tumor-related death in men. To identify the underlying
mechanisms, microRNA (miRNA) expression profiles of primary prostate
cancer samples and of adjacent non-tumor tissue were analyzed. Using
database analysis, we sought to identify regulatory targets of aberrantly
expressed miRNA miR-24.Material and Methods: We performed comparative
miRNA expression profiling using deep sequencing of cDNA libraries.
Potential target genes of deregulated miRNAs were identified by database
analysis and subsequently validated in vitro using reporter gene
constructs. miRNA and mRNA expression was determined using quantitative
real-time PCR.Results: One of the miRNAs consistently deregulated in
primary prostate cancer samples was miR-24 which was found downregulated
in tumor samples more than 1.5-fold in the deep sequencing approach.
Independent target prediction databases (including miRanda, Targetscan
and PicTar) indicated that the 3 untranslated region (3UTR) of the zinc
finger protein 217 (ZNF217) gene is a regulative target for miR-24. This
prediction could be confirmed using a luciferase reporter gene construct
containing the ZNF217 3UTR. Co-expression of the reporter gene construct
with miR-24 resulted in a reduction of reporter gene activity while
mutation of the miRNA binding sites caused a loss of responsiveness to
the respective miRNA. Furthermore we could show that transient expression
of miR-24 reduced the amount of ZNF217 protein in DU145 and LNCaP
prostate cancer cells. miR-24 expression was significantly reduced in
tumor tissue compared to matched non-tumor tissue (p<0.0001, N=26,
Wilcoxon-signed-rank-test) while the expression of ZNF217 mRNA was
significantly higher in tumor tissue compared to matched non-tumor tissue
(p=0.033, N=26, Wilcoxon-signed-rank-test).In Western blot analyses 61%
(14/23) of primary tissue samples also displayed an increased amount of
ZNF217 protein.A transient knock-down of ZNF217 in DU145 and LNCaP cells
applying siRNA technique led to reduced cell proliferation over a time
period of 72 hours.Conclusion: Our findings demonstrate that the 3-UTR of
ZNF217 is one regulative target of miR-24, which is commonly deregulated
in prostate cancer. ZNF217 mRNA and protein is elevated in the majority
of tumor samples analyzed. A transient knock-down of ZNF217 leads to a
reduced proliferation in prostate cancer cell lines.

