Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons exhibit differential tumor
promoting properties through mitogen activated protein kinases and
inhibition of gap junctions in murine lung cells.


Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are ubiquitous environmental
contaminants as well as major components of tobacco smoke. Exposure to
PAHs represents a significant health concern due to their association
with a variety of cancer endpoints. While a majority of research has
focused on the ability of the high molecular weight PAHs to act as
carcinogens through their ability to bind and adduct DNA, recent evidence
suggests that the low molecular weight PAHs, two to four ring compounds,
may act through distinct mechanisms to promote, rather than initiate,
neoplasia. We evaluated five sidestream smoke PAHs, 1-Methylanthracene
(1-MeA) and 2 Methlyanthracene (2-MeA), Phenanthrene (Phe) and Anthracene
(A) and Fluoranthene (Flthn) for their ability to (1) inhibit gap
junction intercellular communication (GJIC), (2) with a concomitant
effect on the gap junction protein Connexin 43 (Cxn43) and (3) to
activate mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPK) in murine lung cells.
Since both dysregulation of GJIC and activation of MAPK have been
previously reported to contribute to tumor promotion, these pathways
represent potential mechanistic targets for PAH perturbation. Murine C10
cells (a non-tumorigenic type II alveolar pneumocyte, and progenitor cell
type of lung adenocarcinoma) were used to assess the effects of these low
molecular weight PAHs on GJIC and MAPKs over a time course of 15 minutes
to 4 hours. Detection of MAPKs and Connexin 43 protein was determined by
immunoblot, and GJIC was assessed by a scrap-load dye transfer assay.
Pathway specific antagonists were used to further elucidate the mechanism
by which 1-MeA 2-MeA, Phe, A, and Flthn inhibited GJIC in a dose and time
dependent manner while the isomers, 2-MeA and A, did not. With 1-MeA,
this inhibition was prevented by blocking either the
phosphotidylcholine-phospholipase or p38 pathway, while inhibiting the
MAP kinase kinase (MEK) pathway had no effect. Treatment with 1-MeA also
activated ERK1/2 and p38 MAP kinases and also decreased the overall
amount of Connexin 43, the major lung connexin, in a time-dependent
manner. The ability of 1-MeA to both inhibit GJIC as well as activate
MAPKs supports a role for low molecular weight tobacco-smoke PAHs to act
as tumor promoters in lung cells, and is consistent with previous studies
that suggest these compounds may act as tumor promoters in liver cells.
The differences observed between 1-MeA and 2-MeA and Phe and A suggests
that the ability of low molecular weight PAHs to inhibit GJIC and
activate MAPKs is highly dependent on chemical structure. Such
structure-activity relationships are often indicative of discrete
toxicological mechanisms.

