Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JNK1 and MERTK are markers of MEK inhibitor resistance and new
targets for therapy.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most devastating
human cancers, having a median survival of 6 months and a 5-year survival
rate of 6%. It is the fourth leading cause of cancer deaths due to its
resistance to conventional radiotherapy and chemotherapy and a lack of
early detection. Alternatively, small molecule inhibitors have been
emerging as a means of transitioning away from non-selective treatments
towards a more personalized approach.Pancreatic cancer, having mutant
K-RAS and TP53 in upwards of 90% of cases, appears to be a great
candidate for molecular therapy due to this high genetic homogeneity
among patients. TP53 is an inactivation mutation and not a candidate for
inhibition. K-RAS is an over-activating mutation but unfortunately cannot
currently be treated by small molecule inhibitors. However, its
downstream pathways, which signal both growth and survival, can. The most
predominant of these is the MAP kinase pathway. Several small molecules
have been developed to target members of this pathway such as MEK 1/2
including U0126, PD0325901 and AZD6244. Often, however, these therapies
are still ineffective and it would be immensely beneficial to be able to
predict when MEK inhibition will be effective or should conversely be
avoided.To discover such markers, we tested a panel of 18 pancreatic
cancer cell lines for sensitivity to the MEK inhibitor AZD6244. After
classifying each line's sensitivity, microarray and qPCR analysis found
significantly different genes between the sensitive and resistant groups.
Most notable were MERTK and MAPK8, which both were upregulated in
resistant lines and showed some redundancy in the studies. These genes
code for the Tyrosine-protein kinase Mer (MERTK) and c-Jun N-terminal
kinase (JNK1) proteins respectively. Correlation studies showed both gene
and protein expression levels to track with resistance to the small
molecule inhibitor. To test whether these genes and the proteins they
code for could serve as potential new therapy targets, shRNA studies were
performed. Studies yielded a noticeable decrease in proliferation in both
MAPK8 and MERTK knockdown, even being lethal in one case. While the
results support the importance of these proteins for tumorgenecity,
knockdown did not alter the cell lines sensitivity to MEK inhibition. Our
findings suggest the use of MERTK and JNK1 as markers of MEK inhibition
resistance and propose new target for future therapies.

