Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Severe hypoxia drives the increased glucose demand in ascites
carcinomas.


Warburg reported his discovery in Ehrlich ascites carcinoma model, that
in the presence of ample oxygen (21% or 150 mmHg O2), cancer cells
utilize glucose by aerobic glycolysis (Warburg effect), apparently,
ascites carcinoma had been assumed to be oxic. However, during past
decade, growing evidences indicated that hypoxic cancer cells had
evaluated radiolabeled glucose analog18F-FDG uptake than oxic cancer cell
in vitro and in vivo. The objective of this study was to observe the
oxygen status of ascites fluid and ascites carcinoma in mouse model of
ascites carcinoma and its effect on glucose metabolism. Methods: Ascites
carcinoma (floating single cells or clusters) and serosa tumors (attached
to serosa) were induced by HT29, A549 or MDA-MB-231 cancer cells in the
mouse peritoneal cavity. Ascites pO2 was measured using OxyLite systems
in ketamine/xylazene anesthetized mice. Hypoxia status in ascites
carcinoma and serosa tumors was tested by immunohistochemical
visualization of exogenous hypoxia marker pimonidazole binding and
HIF1alpha induced glucose transporter-1 expression. Glucose metabolism of
was examine by 18F-FDG autoradiography. Effect of carbogen breathing (95%
O2 & 5% CO2) on 18F-FDG uptake was investigated. Results: The pO2 of
ascites was measured as low as 0.90mmHg (or 0.5% O2) in mice with HT29
ascites carcinomas. In all cell lines we tested, ascites carcinomas was
evident 4-6 wk after cell inoculation, all ascites tumors were stained
positive for pimonidazole and glucose transporter-1 (GLUT-1), indicating
severe hypoxia. Hypoxia status in serosa tumors was heterogeneous and
dependent on tumor size. 18F-FDG uptake was significantly higher in
ascites and sub-millimeter serosa tumors than in larger ones (generally
greater than 1 mm), the former was stained positive for pimonidazole and
GLUT-1, but the latter was not. Carbogen breathing (2hrs) significantly
reduced 18F-FDG uptake and pimonidazole binding in ascites carcinoma and
submillimeter serosa tumors. GLUT1 expression was not affected.
Conclusions: In mouse model of ascites carcinoma, ascites and floating
ascites carcinoma are severely hypoxic which is in contradict with ample
oxygen condition of Ehrlich ascites carcinoma model where Warburg effect
derived from. Glucose utilization measured by 18F-FDG uptake is oxygen
dependent in both ascites carcinoma and serosa tumors, this is
unexplained sole by aerobic glycolysis of glucose metabolism, thus
challenging Warburg effect theory.This study was supported by Kentucky
Lung Cancer Research Program Award

