Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The down-regulation of ferritin heavy chain as an adjuvant therapy
in human glioma.


Increased iron requirements and heightened iron metabolism is among the
key characteristics of highly proliferative cancer cells. As the major
iron storage protein, ferritin expression is elevated in cancer cells and
we have previously shown that ferritin down-regulation in human
glioblastoma cells increases their sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agent
both in vitro and in vivo. In this study, we report that the
sensitization of H-ferritin down-regulation in glioma cells against
radiation and suggest the potential of H-ferritin down-regulation as an
adjuvant therapy in human glioma.Down-regulation of H-ferritin was
performed in human glioma cell line U251 through a nanotechnology-based
transfection platform and effective knockdown efficiency was achieved. A
transient decrease in transferrin receptor level was also observed,
suggesting a release of intracellular iron with loss of ferritin. This
iron release in turn produced intracellular oxidative stress,
demonstrated by protein oxidation damage, as well as a decrease in the
stability of hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs), which is an indicator of
radioresistance. In U251 cells, exposure to radiation resulted in protein
oxidation which could be exacerbated by H-ferritin
down-regulation.Previously we have demonstrated a DNA protection role for
H-ferritin. Here we report that the down-regulation of H-ferritin is
associated with increased DNA vulnerability when cells were exposed to
ionizing radiation. Moreover, the activation of DNA repair mechanisms was
impaired when H-ferritin was absent. The in vitro data suggest a
synergistic effect of radiation and H-ferritin
down-regulation.Additionally, we expand our research into CD133-positive
glioma stem cells (GSCs), which are notoriously resistant to anti-cancer
treatment. Down-regulation of H-ferritin in these cells inhibited cell
proliferation in vitro. With an intracranial glioma model established by
GSC implantation, we demonstrated that the survival was significantly
prolonged by H-ferritin siRNA transfection through intravenous injection,
in tumor bearing mice treated with first-line drug Temodar. This study
supports the potential of H-ferritin siRNA as an adjuvant therapy in
glioma treatment.

