Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of different recruitment methods for a neurofibromatosis
type 1 online registry.


Background. Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (NF1) is a hereditary cancer
syndrome caused by a germline NF1 gene mutation. Affecting an estimated
70,000-100,000 Americans, cancer in individuals with NF1 is a leading
cause of death. However, the factors that modify cancer risk in NF1 are
largely unknown. To facilitate NF1 research aimed at defining
epidemiologic and clinical cancer risk factors, we created an online
patient registry (https://nf1registry.wustl.edu/). In the current study,
we sought to evaluate different recruiting mechanisms and the
characteristics of participants recruited by each mechanism.Methods.
Potential participants were alerted to the registry through three main
mechanisms: (1) paid online advertising (Facebook and Google ads), (2)
posting on government, academic, and advocacy group websites, and (3)
healthcare provider-based recruiting through established NF1 Clinical
Programs. Referral patterns were tracked through the online questionnaire
that included a question about where the participant first heard about
the registry. We compared the total number and characteristics of
participants recruited through each method for the period of
4/17/2011-10/22/2012. Statistical significance of differences in
participant characteristics between recruiting mechanisms were evaluated
using ANOVA and chi-square tests.Results. A total of 693 participants
with self-reported NF1 participated in the registry during the study
period. The most effective recruitment mechanism was paid online
advertising that resulted in over half of the recruits (n=378), of which
75% responded to a Facebook ad. The second most effective method was
postings on government, academic, and advocacy group websites (69
participants) followed by healthcare provider referrals (53
participants). The remainder of the participants reported hearing about
the registry through a variety of other mechanisms. The mean age of
participants was 30.7 years with the majority of participants reporting
white race (72%) and female sex (62%). Age and sex were not significantly
associated with the specific recruitment mechanism. However, there was a
significant difference in referral patterns by race, with a higher
percentage of Whites recruited by Facebook ads than other races and a
higher percentage of other races reporting referral via a Google ad than
Whites.Conclusions. We found that the internet, especially Facebook
advertising, provides a highly effective means for rapidly assembling
large numbers of patients with a rare disease to an online registry for
clinical research studies. Although participants were similarly recruited
by all three recruitment mechanisms with respect to age and sex, referral
patterns appear to differ by race.Supported by: An American Cancer
Society Institutional Research Grant, Alex's Lemonade Stand Foundation,
and the St. Louis Children's Hospital Foundation

