Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of omental seeding of ovarian cancer cells by SPARC.


Epithelial Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death from malignant
gynecologic tumors, as most patients have extensive late metastatic
disease at the time of diagnosis. Ovarian cancer (OvCa) cells have
specific predilection to metastasize to omentum, a condition known as
peritoneal ovarian carcinomatosis, POC but rarely leave the peritoneal
cavity. Despite aggressive surgical debulking and cytoreduction,
recurrence of omental implants is high with poor patient survival. We
have recently reported that the tumor suppressor role of matricellular
glycoprotein SPARC (secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine) in POC
through differential effects on OvCa cells and their interactions with
components of the peritoneal microenvironment. Given that SPARC is the
first known matricellular protein involved in adipose tissues
homeostasis, we sought to elucidate the potential roles of SPARC on the
omental adipocyte-OvCa cells cross-talk and its impact on POC, in vivo
and in vitro. Using primary omental SP/ and SP+/+ omental stromal cells,
we found that adipocyte-SPARC delayed the adipogenic differentiation of
omental stromal cells. SP/- omental adipocytes expressed significantly
higher levels of adipogeneic markers and accumulated significantly less
oil droplets than SP+/+. Primary SP/ adipocytes promoted homing of ID8
murine OvCa cells to the omentum in vivo and their migration and invasion
in 3D-cocultures in vitro. Mechanistic studies using human and murine
adipocyte-OvCa genetically manipulated for SPARC expression in 3D
co-cultures, revealed that the effect of SPARC suppressing adipocyte-OvCa
cell cross-talk mediated by the effect suppressing the activation of
cEBP-, NFB and AP-1 in OvCa cells as well as in adipocytes with
subsequent decrease in chemokines/adipokines as well as fatty acid
exchange between OvCa cells and adipocytes. Our data indicates the
metastasis suppressor effect of SPARC in POC is mediated in part via
inhibiting the key transcription factors involved in adipocytes
differentiation and OvCa progression identifying SPARC as a potential
inhibitor of OvCa cell omental seeding and dormancy.

