Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Minocycline abrogates IL-6 signaling and inhibits migration,
invasion and adhesion capacity of ovarian cancer cells.


Aims: Minocycline (7-dimethylamino-6-desoxytertracycline) has been
recognized as a drug with interesting pleiotropic properties including
suppression of pro-inflammatory cytokine levels. The beneficial effects
of minocycline arisen from suppression of proinflammatory cytokines and
in particular IL-6 have been elucidated in central nervous system.
However, this drug has never been examined in cancers with aberrant IL-6
expression. Considering the key role of IL-6 and its signaling pathways
in the growth and progression of ovarian cancer, we evaluated whether
minocycline modulates IL-6, its receptor system and signaling pathways in
ovarian cancer.Methods: Expression of IL-6 in control and
minocycline-treated ovarian cancer cell lines (OVCAR-3, SKOV-3 and
CAOV-3) was determined by immunocytochemistry. ELISA was used to quantify
the effects of minocycline on both constitutive and IL-1 or
4-OH-estradiol stimulated IL-6 expression in these cell lines. The
effects of minocycline on IL-6R expression was assessed by
immunocytochemistry and western blot. Activation of STAT3 and ERK1/2, two
major pathways down-stream of IL-6 were evaluated by western blotting. To
further characterize the influence of minocycline against IL-6
bioactivity, the effect of the drug on the functional status of SKOV-3
cells was examined by adhesion assay and transwell migration and invasion
assay. Finally, to determine the effect of minocycline on IL-6 expression
in vivo, female nude mice bearing intraperitoneal OVCAR-3 tumors were
treated with a single 30 mg/kg dose of minocycline administered
intraperitoneally for 4 and 24 h. The IL-6 expression in plasma and tumor
samples excised from these animals was evaluated by ELISA and western
blot.Results: We found that minocycline was potent in suppressing both
constitutive and stimulated IL-6 expression in vitro. Analysis of plasma
and tumors also revealed substantial down-regulation of IL-6 in
minocycline-treated mice in vivo. Moreover, minocycline blocked the
expression of IL-6R and phosphorylation of STAT3 and ERK1/2
time-dependently. It was also found that minocycline-treated cells
exhibit dose-dependent attenuation of cell adhesion, migration and
invasion capacity.Conclusion: These results demonstrated that minocycline
effectively blocks IL-6 signaling in ovarian cancer. Blockage of IL-6
signaling may provide benefits for the treatment of this deadly cancer.

