Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGF-I receptor targeting therapy for esophageal carcinomas.


Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I receptor (IGF-IR) signaling is
required for tumorigenicity and cancer development of many malignancies,
however this pathway has not been well studied in human esophageal
carcinomas. Esophageal cancer is one of worst prognostic disease, main
types of which are squamous cell carcinomas (ESCC) and adenocarcinoma
(EAC). Previously we have reported that the IGF axis may play a key role
in tumor progression of ESCC and its detection may be useful for the
prediction of recurrence and poor prognosis and possibly for selecting
patients for targeting therapy for IGF-IR. We have previously shown
successful therapy for several gastrointestinal cancers using recombinant
adenoviruses expressing dominant negative forms of IGF-IR (Ad-IGF-IR/dn).
In this study, we wanted to develop potential targeted therapeutics to
IGF-1R; therefore, we assessed the effect of IGF-IR blockade in both
types of esophageal cancer. We analyzed immunohistochemical expression of
IGF-IR in a tissue array. A tyrosine kinase inhibitor, BMS-536924, and
Ad-IGF-IR/dn were used to treat several ESCC lines, such as TE1, TE8, TT,
TTn, and EAC lines, including OE19 and OE33. We assessed the effect of
both IGF-IR blockade on signal transduction, growth, and apoptosis.
IGF-IR is expressed frequently in esophageal tumors, but not in normal
mucosa. IGF-IR was produced in ESCC more than EAC, and is detected in
metastasized similar to the primary site. IGF-IR inhibition suppressed
proliferation and colony formation in both types of cancer. Blockade of
IGF-IR up-regulated both stress- and chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in
both esophageal tumor type. Although IGF-IR/dn blocked ligand-induced
activation of Akt-1 mainly, BMS-536924 effectively blocked both
activation of Akt and MAPK. Thus, the IGF axis may play a key role in
tumor progression of human esophageal carcinomas. The IGF-IR targeting
strategies might be useful anticancer therapeutics which can be used
widely for human esophageal malignancies.

