Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of new hypermethylated candidate genes in
colorectal cancer using reduced representation bisulfite next generation
sequencing.


Background: The identification and validation of genes that are
frequently methylated in CRC will have potential value for both
diagnostic and therapeutic implications. However, the DNA methylation
patterns in CRC especially in African Americans have not been well
investigated. Here we aimed to determine the methylation status of CpG
islands of candidate genes in critical pathways important in the
initiation and development of CRC.Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA from
7 individuals (1 normal, 2 adenomas, and 4 adenocarcinomas) was used for
global methylation analysis using Reduced Representation Bisulfite
Sequencing (RRBS). Based on literature review, differential methylation
ratio, gene ontology, WNT, Notch, EGFR, RAS-MPK, PI3K, TGF-b, and P53
pathways analysis, RGS3, EID3, GNAS, ATXN7L1, GAS7, HNRNPF, GPR7, SOX15,
and TNFAIP2 genes were selected for methylation validation . Established
methylation status of NDRG4, BMP3, Septin 9, Vimentin, and B-Actin were
used as validation controls. Forty-four paired colorectal tumors and
normal adjacent colonic tissue samples were used for validation. Samples
were first bisulfite converted and then amplified at specific loci using
48.48 Access Array (Fluidigm). Amplicon pools were barcoded and
adapterized prior to 150-bp paired-end sequencing on the Illumina MiSeq
Reads were de-multiplexed using the Fluidigm indexes and mapped back to
the reference genome (Hg18). A paired t-test was used for p-value and
meth-diff estimation.Results: We validated the methylation status of 355
CpG sites located in 16 gene promoter regions associated with CpG
islands. Fifty-nine CpG sites located on CpG islands of ATXN7L1 (2), BMP3
(7), EID3 (15), GAS7 (1), GPR75 (24), NDRG4 (2), Sept9 (6), and TNFAIP2
(1), were significantly methylated in tumor vs. normal (pBackground: The
identification and validation of genes that are frequently methylated in
CRC will have potential value for both diagnostic and therapeutic
implications. However, the DNA methylation patterns in CRC especially in
African Americans have not been well investigated. Here we aimed to
determine the methylation status of CpG islands of candidate genes in
critical pathways important in the initiation and development of
CRC.Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA from 7 individuals (1 normal, 2
adenomas, and 4 adenocarcinomas) was used for global methylation analysis
using Reduced Representation Bisulfite Sequencing (RRBS). Based on
literature review, differential methylation ratio, gene ontology, WNT,
Notch, EGFR, RAS-MPK, PI3K, TGF-b, and P53 pathways analysis, RGS3, EID3,
GNAS, ATXN7L1, GAS7, HNRNPF, GPR7, SOX15, and TNFAIP2 genes were selected
for methylation validation . Established methylation status of NDRG4,
BMP3, Septin 9, Vimentin, and B-Actin were used as validation controls.
Forty-four paired colorectal tumors and normal adjacent colonic tissue
samples were used for validation. Samples were first bisulfite converted
and then amplified at specific loci using 48.48 Access Array (Fluidigm).
Amplicon pools were barcoded and adapterized prior to 150-bp paired-end
sequencing on the Illumina MiSeq Reads were de-multiplexed using the
Fluidigm indexes and mapped back to the reference genome (Hg18). A paired
t-test was used for p-value and meth-diff estimation.Results: We
validated the methylation status of 355 CpG sites located in 16 gene
promoter regions associated with CpG islands. Fifty-nine CpG sites
located on CpG islands of ATXN7L1 (2), BMP3 (7), EID3 (15), GAS7 (1),
GPR75 (24), NDRG4 (2), Sept9 (6), and TNFAIP2 (1), were significantly
methylated in tumor vs. normal (p<0.05). Most of these genes showed
significant hypermethylation in tumors compared to normal mucosa,
According to gene ontology analysis, GAS7 methylation is associated with
the cadherin signaling (WNT) pathway.Conclusion: Methylation profiling
based on RRBS is an effective method for screening aberrantly methylated
genes in CRC. We identified novel methylated genes that are potential
biomarkers for CRC. In consistence with other reports, our study showed
that GAS7 is also hypermethylated in African American CRC patients.
Investigations into the possible roles of this gene as a potential
biomarker in the context of early diagnosis and prognosis of CRC are
underway.

