Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of protein phosphatase 2A promotes prostate cancer
progression and metastasis.


Clinical progression of prostate cancer (PCa) is characterized by a
transition from castration-sensitive (CS) to castration-resistant (CR)
phenotype. The resulting CR tumors are highly aggressive and metastatic,
and thus pose increased risk of morbidity and death to PCa patients.
Therefore, identification of novel gene targets associated with CR growth
and metastatic behavior remain a priority area in PCa research.
Previously, we identified that PPP2CA, which encodes for the isoform of
catalytic subunit of PP2A (a serine/threonine phosphatase), is
downregulated in CRPCa. In additional findings, we reported that PP2A
downregulation sustained the growth of PCa cells under steroiddeprived
conditions. In the present study, we examined the role of PP2A in
malignant behavior of PCa cells using in vitro and in vivo functional
assays. Furthermore, we also delineated the underlying molecular
mechanisms. Our data demonstrated that downregulation of PPP2CA (in CS
LNCaP cells) promoted, whereas its overexpression (in CR C4-2 and PC3
cells) decreased the migration and invasion of human PCa cells.
Similarly, we observed a loss of homotypic interactions in
PPP2CA-silenced LNCaP cells, while it increased in PPP2CA-overexpressing
C4-2 and PC3 cells. These changes were associated with epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) or vice versa in PPP2CA-silenced or
overexpressing PCa cells, respectively. When examined in vivo in an
orthotopic mouse model, PPP2CA-overexpressing PC3 cells exhibited
dramatic decrease in tumorigenesis due to diminished proliferation and
enhanced apoptosis as compared to the control cells. Moreover,
significant reduction in metastatic incidence was also observed.
Mechanistic studies revealed that PPP2CA downregulation increases nuclear
accumulation of -catenin and NF-B and subsequent activation of
transcriptional activity of the responsive gene promoters. We also
observed cooperative involvement of both -catenin and NF-B in the PPP2CA
downregulation-induced EMT and invasiveness of PCa cells. Lastly, our
data demonstrated a role of PP2A/Akt axis in enhanced nuclear
accumulation of -catenin and NF-B through phosphorylation-induced
inactivation of Gsk3- and IkB-, respectively. Altogether, our data
suggest that loss of PPP2CA is associated with PCa progression and
metastasis, and restoration of PP2A activity could serve as an effective
preventive and/or therapeutic approach against the advanced disease.

