Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of genes up-and down-regulated by dermcidin in
G-361 malignant melanoma cell line.


Dermcidin (DCD) is a human gene mapped to chromosome 12q13 region, only
identified in primates and humans, and normally expressed in the eccrine
glands of skin and brain. Several studies have confirmed DCD-derived
peptides contribute to innate and immune surveillance and in the
oncogenic processes of breast, prostate and skin cancers, as revealed by
its role as a growth factor and cell survival. We have further explored
DCD function and its tumorigenic potential on skin melanocytes by
specifically knocking down its expression in G-361 malignant melanoma
cells via expressing constitutively short hairpin RNA against DCD mRNA.
Biological and biochemical assays showed that the "knockdown" in the
expression of DCD in two cell clones decreased significantly the in vitro
growth in cell culture and tumor formation in nude mice. Similar results
were obtained treating nude mice bearing G-361 melanoma xenografts with
rabbit polyclonal antibodies against DCD protein (1 mg/Kg, i.p., once
week, and one month). Here, we present a summary of a DNA
microarray-based study that identified the genes that are up- and
down-regulated in a G-361 pLKO control clone and a clone expressing
constitutively short hairpin RNA against DCD mRNA. A total of 213 genes
were differentially and repeatedly expressed in the G-361-DCD-RNAi clone
IBC-I (>3-fold change and P Dermcidin (DCD) is a human gene mapped to
chromosome 12q13 region, only identified in primates and humans, and
normally expressed in the eccrine glands of skin and brain. Several
studies have confirmed DCD-derived peptides contribute to innate and
immune surveillance and in the oncogenic processes of breast, prostate
and skin cancers, as revealed by its role as a growth factor and cell
survival. We have further explored DCD function and its tumorigenic
potential on skin melanocytes by specifically knocking down its
expression in G-361 malignant melanoma cells via expressing
constitutively short hairpin RNA against DCD mRNA. Biological and
biochemical assays showed that the "knockdown" in the expression of DCD
in two cell clones decreased significantly the in vitro growth in cell
culture and tumor formation in nude mice. Similar results were obtained
treating nude mice bearing G-361 melanoma xenografts with rabbit
polyclonal antibodies against DCD protein (1 mg/Kg, i.p., once week, and
one month). Here, we present a summary of a DNA microarray-based study
that identified the genes that are up- and down-regulated in a G-361 pLKO
control clone and a clone expressing constitutively short hairpin RNA
against DCD mRNA. A total of 213 genes were differentially and repeatedly
expressed in the G-361-DCD-RNAi clone IBC-I (>3-fold change and P <
0.005). Relative to pLKO vector control data profiling, 99 genes were
up-regulated and 120 genes were down-regulated. Next, we validated
various genes by real time-PCR. Systematic functional analysis of the
differentially expressed genes using DAVID platform revealed significant
enrichment for U1-U5 spliceosomal complex genes (SNORs) required for
post-transcriptional processing of rRNA, mRNA and tRNA as well as small
nucleolar RNA and non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs). Further studies are on way to
prove the functional connections among ncRNAs in DCD-induced the
development and progression of melanoma malignancy.

