Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bz-423: A novel benzodiazephine mitochondrial-targeted drug,
cytotoxic to human ovarian cancer cells.


Objectives: Bz-423 is a chemically synthesized 1,4-benzodiazepine with
cytotoxic activity in several cell types. We sought to determine the
anti-neoplastic potential and mechanism of action in human ovarian cancer
cells.Methods: A total of 12 human ovarian cancer cell lines were used.
Cultured cells were treated with Bz-423 or vehicle control in
dose-response and time-course experiments. Viability was determined on
the basis of plasma membrane integrity using flow cytometry. The
mechanism leading to death in these cells was characterized
ultrastructurally using electron micrscopy and by determining changes in
reaction oxygen species, glutathione, mitochondrial function, caspase and
Bak activation. Cytochrome c release from mitochondria was analyzed by
immunofluorescence. Apoptosome complex formation was monitored by gel
filtration chromatography.Results: Bz-423 induced apoptosis in all
ovarian cell lines at low micromolar concentrations by generating an
intracellular superoxide signal from the mitochondria. The apoptotic
response was associated with the release of cytochrome c from the
mitochondria, collapse of the mitochondrial transmembrane gradient, and
formation of the apoptosome complex containing Apaf-1 and caspase-9. The
release of cytochrome c and a decrease in mitochondria glutathione within
2 hours of treatment was identified by ultrastructural evidence of
mitochondrial swelling. Furthermore, Bak activation was necessary for
apoptosis. Bz-423 effectively induced apoptosis in chemoresistant ovarian
cancer cells overexpressing Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL.Conclusion: Bz-423 is a
novel compound that effectively kills human ovarian cancer cells,
including cells that are resistant to conventional chemotherapies such as
Cisplatinum. This compound has cytotoxic qualities that are unique among
benzodiazepines. The mechanism of action involves both proximal and
direct effects on the cell mitochondria that lead to apoptosis. Bz-423 is
a novel compound that may have broad clinical impact in the treatment of
ovarian cancer patients.Citation Format: Gong He, Lijun Tan, Weimin Wang,
Anthony E. Boitano, Natalie A. Vandeven, Anthony W. Opipari, J Rebecca
Liu. Bz-423: A novel benzodiazephine mitochondrial-targeted drug,
cytotoxic to human ovarian cancer cells. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of
the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2479. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2479

