Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced in vivo inhibition of neuropeptide-mediated castration
resistant prostate cancer progression by combination therapy with
enzalutamide and saracatinib.


Introduction: It has been shown that overexpression of the neuropeptides
gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) in LNCaP cells renders the cells
castration-resistant through both androgen receptor (AR) activation and
intracrine androgen biosynthesis. Aberrant activation of AR by GRP is
mediated through Src kinase activation, which may be inhibited by the
specific SFK inhibitor saracatinib. Inhibition of cognate AR activation
requires anti-androgen. We hypothesize that treatment of this kind of
CRPC demands the combination of saracatinib and new generation
anti-androgen enzalutamide (MDV-3100).Materials and methods: LNCaP
GRP-Pro cells grown in CS medium were treated with control, saracatinib
(2 M), enzalutamide (10 M) or the combination. Cell proliferation over 7
days was monitored by MTT assays. Cell cycle distributions over 72 hours
of treatment were analyzed by flow cytometry. Cells were collected to
prepare nuclear and cytosolic lysates respectively and examined by
Western Blotting analysis for AR, pSrc, pAkt, LC-3 and -actin. Expression
of full-length AR and variants were compared by RT-qPCR. Orthotopic
injection of GRP-Pro cells into castrated SCID male mice was used as the
animal model for drug treatment studies.Results: Enzalutamide or
saracatinib alone only slightly inhibited CR cell growth but the
combination brought it down to 27% of the control. Apoptosis was also
enhanced with the combination. Enzalutamide only inhibited AR nuclear
translocation in regular serum-kept GRP-Pro cells, while saracatinib
inhibited the translocation in CS conditions. In the orthotopic model,
neither treatments with saracatinib (25 mg/kg/daily) or enzalutamide (10
mg/kg/daily) alone showed any effect on tumor take, tumor weight or serum
PSA levels. However, the combination treatment drastically reduced the
tumor weights (0.660.13 g for controls vs. 0.240.07 g for the combo) and
serum PSA levels (120.7927.87 ng/ml vs. 19.197.45 ng/ml).Conclusions: For
GRP mediated CRPC growth, neither saracatinib or enzalutamide alone is
sufficient to inhibit AR translocation and tumor progression. Combination
of the two significantly improved the treatment for the CRPC orthotopic
tumor model.

