Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Super-enhanced permeability and retention (SUPR) effect induced by
photo-immunotherapy (PIT) can accommodate massive nano-sized reagents
deep into tumors.


A major barrier to cancer treatment is the inability to deliver
sufficient concentrations of drug to the interior of tumors without
incurring systemic toxicities. Nanomaterials are appealing because they
can carry a large drug payload, however, tumor delivery is limited by
modest leakage and retention in most tumors. Photo-immunotherapy (PIT) is
a newly developed therapy involving the injection of a conjugate composed
of an armed monoclonal antibody (mAb) and a near infrared phthalocyanine
dye, IR700 [Mitsunaga M. Nature Med 2011;17:1685]. When exposed to NIR
light, the conjugate induces a highly-selective necrotic cell death only
in mAb-IR700 bound cancer cells. This target-specific necrotic cell death
occurs within 10 minutes of exposure to NIR light and results in rapid
morphologic changes including cellular swelling, bleb formation, and
rupture of vesicles indicating necrotic cell death. Meanwhile,
immediately adjacent receptor-negative cells are unharmed. Because it
damages cells immediately adjacent to the tumor vasculature, PIT results
in marked increases in vascular permeability leading to 12- to 25-fold
enhanced nano-particle delivery into cancer tissue, an effect termed
super-enhanced permeability and retention (SUPR) to differentiate it from
inherent enhanced permeability and retention (EPR). Of particular
interest is that nano-sized reagents including macromolecules
(dendrimers), particles (quantum dots, iron oxide nano-particles), and
liposomes up to 300 nm in diameter rapidly enter and are retained within
the tumor space following PIT. Therefore, although PIT might not be able
to eliminate all cancer cells due to heterogeneity of tumor antigen
expression, SUPR allows the delivery of extremely high concentrations of
nano-sized anti-cancer reagents such as daunorubicin containing liposome
(Daunoxome), resulted in significantly synergic therapeutic effects of
PIT and nano-sized agents. In conclusion, target-selective PIT can induce
a SUPR effect leading to the accumulation of relatively high
concentrations of nano-sized reagents into the tumor bedthus improving
effectiveness of PIT..

