Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induced stable neuroblastoma stem cells recapitulate in vivo
highly aggressive large-cell neuroblastomas.


Neuroblastoma (NB) is a pediatric tumor of neural crest origin, and half
of the cases are highly aggressive. Based on the degree of neuronal
differentiation, NB is histopathologically divided into undifferentiated
(UD), poorly differentiated (PD) and differentiating subtypes. Recently,
a unique histological subset of NBs within the UD and PD subtypes has
been identified. These tumors are uniformly composed of large cells
having vesicular nuclei with sharply outlined nuclear membranes, and one
to four prominent nucleoli, which are referred to as Large-Cell
Neuroblastomas or LCNs. Patients with the UD neuroblastoma with the LCN
appearance had a very poor prognosis regardless of age at diagnosis,
clinical stage, and DNA index. Surprisingly, non-MYCN amplified UDs
behaved significantly worse than MYCN amplified UDs. Our hypothesis is
that the histological features and the clinical behavior of LCNs are the
reminiscence of a malignancy likely driven by stem cell-like cancer
cells. To gain better understanding of the nature of LCNs, we have
generated phenotypically stablilized stem cell-like NB cells by treating
monolayer NB cell lines with epigenetic modifiers for a short time.
Without further exposure to epigenetic modifiers, stemness phenotypes of
the NB cells were maintained over a year in sphere-forming culture
conditions. Hence, we referred to these spheres as induced CSCs (iCSCs).
We previously presented that the SKNAS iCSC had a very high
tumor-initiating ability in SCID/Beige mice and SKNAS iCSC xenografts
recapitulated the histological appearance of totally undifferentiated
large-cell NBs. A cancer stem cell marker, CXCR4, was preferentially
expressed in the iCSC xenografts over the monolayer counterparts. In this
study, we established additional iCSCs from three NB cell lines
[SKNBE(2)C, CHP134, SY5Y]. The expression of stemness factors was
augmented in these NB iCSCs compared to conventional monolayer
counterparts. In addition, the expression of stem cell markers (CD24,
CD133) and neural crest stem cell markers (SOX9, SLUG, Musashi, p75NTR)
was elevated in these NB iCSCs. Notably, SCID/Beige mice subcutaneously
injected with one hundred SKNBE(2)C iCSCs formed tumors, and in some
cases, SKNBE(2)C iCSCs metastasized to adrenal gland, liver, spleen,
kidney, indicating an increased tumor invasiveness of these cells. CXCR4
and p75NTR expression was positive in the iCSC xenografts, although not
uniformly. By histopathological and immunohistochemical examinations, we
confirmed that the xenografts established from SKNAS iCSC, SKNBE(2)C
iCSC, CHP134 iCSC, and SY5Y iCSC shared two common and consistent
features: the LCN phenotype and high-level expression of MYC/MYCN. These
characteristics may help identify the presence of CSC compartment in
patients specimens. The established NB iCSCs may also serve as useful
tools for the development of effective therapeutics against NB.

