Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lymphomas associated with aberrant DNA rearrangements are
suppressed by Mre11 mutation.


Many translocations associated with spontaneous human lymphoid
malignancies are mediated by short regions of sequence homology
(microhomology) at the breakpoints. The hallmark features of this error
prone pathway are deletions of flanking sequence and short homologies of
1-25 bases at the junctions that serve to align the DNA ends prior to
joining. In addition to its importance in the etiology of human cancers,
microhomology-mediated joining or alternative NHEJ (aNHEJ) also appears
to play a significant role in therapy-induced oncogenic
translocations.Studies have provided compelling evidence that the DNA
end-binding complex composed of Mre11 (nuclease), Rad50 (tetherer) and
Nbs1 (signaler)MRNfunctions in the context of the aNHEJ pathway. In
addition, in vivo and cell based studies have identified that
deficiencies in components of the MRN complex reduce aNHEJ activity.
However, it is not known whether the MRN complex participates in the
generation of aNHEJ catalyzed translocations that can predispose to
cancer. Therefore, our studies seek to better understand the contribution
of Mre11/MRN to the aNHEJ pathway and thus, in generation of
translocations.We have obtained mice harboring an Mre11 conditionally
targeted null allele as well as an Mre11 knock-in mutation that abrogates
nuclease activity. We have included mutant mice in this study that
succumb to early onset Pro-B lymphomas associated with clonal
translocations containing microhomologies of 2-8 nucleotides. Thus, the
spontaneously arising tumors in this mutant background represent a
valuable in vivo system to assess the involvement of Mre11/MRN in aNHEJ
mediated translocations.We have determined that Mre11/MRN inactivation in
the B-cell lineage suppresses Pro-B lymphoma in this mutant background.
In future experiments we are investigating the impact of Mre11/MRN
inactivation on various cancer phenotypes. Together, these studies will
provide insights into the mechanisms underlying human lymphoma and may
ultimately provide insights into targets for improved treatment of
lymphoid malignancies.

