Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide approach to identify gene targets of pleuropulmonary
blastoma.


Pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB) is an extremely rare and highly aggressive
pediatric pulmonary malignancy that is often part of inherited cancer
syndrome. Recently, germline mutations of DICER1, a gene encoding an
endoribonuclease type III critical to the generation of small noncoding
regulatory RNAs were reported in the majority of familial PPB. However,
little is known about other genetic changes than DICER1 mutations that
are responsible for the development and/or progression of PPB. Therefore,
to assess the genetic alterations underlying the pathogenesis of PPB,
genome-wide analyses using whole-exome sequencing and 250K SNP array were
performed in total of ten cases with non-familial PPB. Whole-exome
sequencing was performed in two cases which primary tumor-relapse tumor
pairs were available.Although most mutations were commonly detected in
both the primary and relapse tumors, several alterations were private to
either of both samples, suggesting that clonal evolution derives genetic
divergence in relapsed/metastatic tumors of PPB. In accordance with this,
SNP array analysis also revealed several shared or private copy change
variations, the most common finding was gain of the long arm of
chromosome 8 in 7 cases, which was previously reported common in
PPB.Whole-exome sequencing disclosed that DICER1 mutation, major cause of
familial PPB, was recurrently found in the primary and relapse tumors of
one case, but not detected in the another case. In the validation cohort
of 8 cases of non-familial PPB, all of them had DICER1 mutations, and 6
cases had compound heterozygous mutations of DICER1. Notably, homozygous
DICER1 mutation was observed in one case, and subsequent SNP array
analysis revealed uniparental disomy of 14q lesion harboring DICER1 in
this case. Somatic origins of missense changes were confirmed in 2 of 10
cases, for which DNA was obtained from peripheral blood.Meanwhile,
whole-exome sequencing identified 13 candidate genes including the
cadherin-related gene and a negative regulator of cell cycle in one case
without DICER1 mutation. These gene mutations shared in primary and
relapse samples, suggests that these are driver mutations rather than
passenger mutations or non-functional SNPs.In conclusion, DICER1 mutation
might be a driver mutation not only in familial PPB, but also in
non-familial PPB. While DICER1 mutation was reported only germline
heterozygous mutation in familial PPB, we notably found compound
heterozygous or homozygous DICER1 mutations in non-familial PPB.
Furthermore, there were different clones between primary and relapse
samples, suggests that clonal evolution contributes to relapse tumor
progression.

