Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitory effect of PID1 in medulloblastomas, gliomas and ATRT.


The recently identified PID1 (Phosphotyrosine Interaction Domain
containing 1) is a modulator of insulin signaling in adipocytes and
muscle cells. Using a number of independent datasets we show that mean
PID1 mRNA was lower in unfavorable medulloblastomas (subgroups 3 and 4)
and in glioblastomas compared with favorable medulloblastomas (SHH and
WNT subgroups) or normal brain, respectively. Higher PID1 mRNA correlated
with longer progression-free survival and overall survival in
medulloblastoma patients and with longer overall survival in glioma
patients. Ectopic expression of PID1 in medulloblastoma, glioblastoma and
ATRT (atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor) cell lines inhibited colony
formation by 68% 3.5 (pThe recently identified PID1 (Phosphotyrosine
Interaction Domain containing 1) is a modulator of insulin signaling in
adipocytes and muscle cells. Using a number of independent datasets we
show that mean PID1 mRNA was lower in unfavorable medulloblastomas
(subgroups 3 and 4) and in glioblastomas compared with favorable
medulloblastomas (SHH and WNT subgroups) or normal brain, respectively.
Higher PID1 mRNA correlated with longer progression-free survival and
overall survival in medulloblastoma patients and with longer overall
survival in glioma patients. Ectopic expression of PID1 in
medulloblastoma, glioblastoma and ATRT (atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor)
cell lines inhibited colony formation by 68% 3.5 (p<0.0001 in total of 24
experiments in triplicates) compared with controls. PID1 effects on
apoptosis and proliferation were demonstrated by increased sub-G0/G1 and
annexinV staining, decreased S-phase. Additionally, PID1 induced
mitochondrial depolarization in the medulloblastoma, glioblastoma, and
ATRT cell lines. In keeping with PID1 having a PTB (phosphotyrosine
binding) domain, endogenous PID1 co-immunoprecipitated with the low
density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (LRP1, which is a
potential binding partner for PID1 via its C-terminal NPXY motif).
However, PID1 with mutated PTB domain retained its inhibitory effects on
colony formation, suggesting that other domains of PID1 mediated (or
contributed to) PID1s inhibitory effect. Analysis of PID1 domains
comprising its N-terminal region (D1), C-terminal region (D3) and middle
region (D2), each comprising approximately 1/3 of the protein, revealed
that indeed, each 1/3 of PID1 inhibited colony formation at least as
efficiently as full length PID1. Interestingly, although by itself D2 was
more inhibitory than full length PID1, when it was combined with D3,
which was also inhibitory by itself, we observed marked mitigation of the
inhibitory effect of the combined D2+D5 fragment on colony formation,
suggesting functional intramolecular interactions in PID1. These data
suggest for the first time that PID1 has a tumor suppressor-like effect
in brain tumors and shed light on the molecular mechanism of its
inhibitory action.

