Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Studies in cancer models with AGX51, a Direct Transcriptional
RegulatorTM.


Studies in cancer models with AGX51, a Direct Transcriptional
RegulatorTMThe inhibitors of differentiation (Id) proteins (Id1, Id2,
Id3, and Id4) are negative regulators of differentiation that act by
sequestering basic helix loop helix (bHLH, e.g. E47) transcription
factors. Ids are highly expressed during embryonic development but in
adult tissues their expression is rare to absent. However, Id proteins
are required for tumor angiogenesis, highly expressed in many cancers and
as shown in many clinical studies, associated with an aggressive
phenotype and a poor clinical outcome As a proof of concept, decreased
angiogenesis and tumor load as a result of blocking Id expression by
antisense and siRNA molecules demonstrated that Id is a compelling
anti-cancer target. Despite these findings, the Ids are a heretofore
unexplored target for the treatment of cancer. While no anti-Id agent has
been studied clinically or has undergone preclinical development, AGX
recently discovered and patented the first unique and potent anti-Id
agent, AGX51. This small molecule is an inhibitor of the Id1-E47
interaction and was discovered through a systematic research effort using
x-ray crystallography, gel shift (EMSA) assays, Matrigel evaluations and
xenograft studies. AGX51 is the founding member of a new class of
therapeutics: Direct Transcriptional RegulatorsTM.In preclinical studies:
(1) At a dose below 7 mg/kg, bid, AGX51 significantly blocked the growth
of tumors in mice with implanted human breast cancer cells when treated
briefly with a taxane like Taxol, paclitaxel, or Taxotere, docetaxel.
This effect of AGX51 was expected based on the discovery that endothelial
cell production in the bone marrow is responsible for the rapid repair to
damaged vasculature after administration of paclitaxel or vascular
disrupters such as ZD6126 or AVE8062, through mobilization of endothelial
precursor cells (EPCs) followed by homing of the EPCs to the damaged
vasculature; (2) At a dose below 20 nM, AGX51 restored cell cycle control
in DU-145 human prostate cancer cells; (3) At low micromolar
concentrations, AGX51 blocked migration of DU-145 cancer cells in scratch
assays; (4) As a single agent, AGX51 completely blocked tumor associated
angiogenesis in nude mice implanted with MDA-MB231 human breast cancer
cells at a dose of 60 mg/kg, bid; (5) As expected, AGX51 restored levels
of p21 and p27, two important mediators of cell cycle regulation in both
PC3 and DU145 cancer cells; (6) AGX51 caused no toxicity in multiple day
dosing based on weight, clinical chemistry or hematology measurements;
(7) AGX51 has a terminal elimination half-life in mice of approximately 6
hours, which is suggestive of ultimate bid and perhaps even qd dosing in
man. In summary, a specific inhibitor of Id-E47 interaction that has
anti-tumor activity is described for the first time. This research was
supported by AngioGenex, Inc.

