Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased anticancer effect of combining Wee1 (MK1775) and Chk1
(AZD7762) inhibitors in malignant melanoma cell lines.


Malignant melanoma is one of the most increasing forms of cancer
worldwide, in addition to being notoriously resistant to therapy. Despite
recent advances, there are no curative treatments once the cancer has
spread (stage IV); there is thus a precarious need to find new and better
treatment alternatives. Unlike normal cells, the majority of cancer cells
have a defective G1/S DNA-damage checkpoint and are therefore more
dependent on the G2/M checkpoint when DNA damages arise. Central in
regulating the latter checkpoint is Wee1, a kinase which may stop the
cell cycle by adding a negative phosphorylation on CDK1. Wee1 is
regulated by Chk1 which upon DNA damage can also inhibit the
complimentary counterpart of Wee1; CDC25. In recent studies, Wee1 and
Chk1 have additionally been indicated as key players in regulating DNA
replication in S-phase. We have previously reported that increased Wee1
protein expression was associated with malignancy in melanoma tumour
samples, and that siWee1 transfection led to reduced viability in
melanoma cell lines. In the present study we have combined inhibitors of
Wee1 (MK1775) and Chk1 (AZD7762) in a panel consisting of both metastatic
melanoma- and normal cells, including a Plexxikon resistant melanoma cell
line (MelJR post3.3). We found that the combination synergistically
reduced the amount of viable cells in the melanoma cell lines (50-80%
reduction), whilst only having very moderate effect (10% reduction) in
the normal cells. Interestingly, the reduction in number of viable cells
was found in both p53WT and p53Mut cell lines, indicating that the p53
status do not predict the response to such treatment. Furthermore,
combinational treatment with the inhibitors caused increased cleavage of
PARP and caspases, indicative of apoptosis, as compared to MK1775 or
AZD7762 treatment alone. The combination also caused a marked increase in
DNA double-strand breaks, as demonstrated by augmented levels of -H2AX
(predominantly found in S-phase cells). In line with this, preliminary
results from melanoma cells grown as spheroids, revealed the same
tendency, with approximately 50% reduction in spheroid volume when
combining the inhibitors. In vivo experiments using melanoma cells grown
in SCID mice are currently ongoing. In conclusion, our results indicate a
potential new role for inhibitors of Wee1 and Chk1 in treatment of
malignant melanoma.

