Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ovarian visualization in transvaginal ultrasound scans and risk of
ovarian cancer.


Background. Ovarian cancer is typically diagnosed at an advanced stage,
resulting in poor survival. Detection of ovarian cancer at an early
curable stage could reduce mortality; however, annual screening with
transvaginal ultrasound (TVU) and CA-125 serum levels using predetermined
cutpoints did not lower mortality in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and
Ovarian (PLCO) trial. In this trial, approximately 40% of TVU scans
resulted in non-visualization of the ovaries. Currently, TVU studies
consider non-visualization of the ovaries as having normal ovaries, even
though this may confer risk information. Accordingly, we assessed risk of
ovarian cancer among women with non-visualization of the ovaries by TVU
in the PLCO trial.Methods. Study participants were women from the ovarian
screening arm of the PLCO trial. Briefly, women aged 55-74 years were
recruited at ten US clinical centers between 1993 and 2001. Those with a
previous diagnosis of ovarian cancer were excluded from enrollment.
Subjects with at least one ovary underwent a TVU at baseline and annually
for 3 additional years and were followed-up for up to 13 years.
Individuals were excluded from the current analysis if they did not
complete the baseline questionnaire or did not have at least one adequate
screening (i.e., visualization of the iliac vessels). Ovaries were
considered not visualized if they were not seen after a search of at
least 5 minutes. Associations between participant characteristics and
ovarian visualization were estimated using logistic regression models
adjusted for age and calendar year. Hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) were computed to estimate the risk of ovarian cancer with
TVU visualization using Cox proportional hazard models. Age was the time
metric and models were adjusted for calendar year, body mass index (BMI),
race, parity and oral contraceptive (OC) use.Results. Our analysis
included 29,329 women, with 98.6% of them having two or more TVUs. Two
hundred and five women were diagnosed with invasive ovarian cancer during
follow-up. Lack of visualization of the ovaries by TVU was associated
with older age, non-White race, greater BMI, ever use of OC and ever
having children. However, ovarian visualization was not associated with
risk of ovarian cancer (HR=1.17; 95% CI: 0.86-1.59). Moreover, women with
visualized ovaries but negative TVUs were not at elevated ovarian cancer
risk compared to women with non-visualized ovaries (HR=1.06; 95% CI:
0.77-1.45).Conclusions. Women with non-visualization of the ovaries by
TVU and those with visualization and a negative result do not have a
different risk of ovarian cancer, suggesting that data for these women
may be combined. Ongoing analysis will examine serial measurements of
ovarian volume by TVU and ovarian cancer risk.

