Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from breast cancer
patients in EpCAM independent manner using parallel multi-orifice flow
fractionation (p-MOFF).


It is generally accepted that circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in the
peripheral blood of cancer patients are highly correlated with the
"invasive behaviors" of a proportion of cancer cells. Therefore the
precise measurement or isolation of CTCs can serve as a powerful tool for
cancer prognosis, diagnosis of minimal residual disease, assessment of
tumor sensitivity to anticancer drugs, and personalization of anticancer
therapy.In a previous study, we introduced a novel hydrodynamic method
for size-based particle separation multi-orifice flow fractionation
(MOFF), in which the animal cellis moved laterally according to their
size due to hydrodynamic inertial force. This technique is advantageous
for CTC separation because of its simple experimental set up and high
operational flow rate (100-300 L/min). However, it has a limitation that
the blood sample should be diluted over 400 times to make a suitable
inter-particle distance in the channel. Therefore, we designed the
parallel MOFF chip (p-MOFF) which is connected by four single MOFF
channel to isolate CTC from cancer patient blood. Using breast cancer
cell line, we separated 93.75% of MCF-7 cells and 91.60 % of MDA_MB_231
cells, and eliminate 90.8 % of WBCs from individual experiment at 600
L/min inlet flow rate and 240 L/min outlet flow rate.Based on these
results, we have attempted to isolate CTCs from whole blood (7.5ml) of
the breast cancer patients under the same conditions. After processing of
blood from metastatic breast cancer patients on the p-MOFF device, cells
were fixed on a slide glass and stained with DAPI for DNA content, PE
conjugated pan-Cytokeratin for CTC, and APC conjugated CD45 for WBC.
Following imaging the slide glass, captured images were examined
carefully with predefined criteria. Cell size and shape were also
considered in cell characterization. We found the CTCs which are positive
for DAPI, negative for CD45 and positive for Cytokeratin. When the blood
samples of 24 breast cancer patients were subjected to our device, 1 to
21 CTCs were identified in 19 patients.Subsequently, we have conducted
the multi-parameter analysis to investigate the EpCAM expression level of
CTCs. The blood samples of 24 metastatic breast cancer patients were
analyzed. With our device, 17 patients had at least one CTC in 7.5 ml of
blood. Among them, when we stained the cells using multi-parameter (DAPI
for DNA content, phycoerythrin conjugated pan-Cytokeratin for CTC, APC
conjugated EpCAM for EpCAM positive CTC, and FITC conjugated CD45 for
WBC), we observed that the 47.1% of patients had both of EpCAM positive
and negative CTCs simultaneously. So,the most advantageous feature is
that p-MOFF is able to detect heterogeneous CTCs because the method is
based on label-free and hydrophoresis

