Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining molecular target drugs to inhibit cancer-stromal cell
interaction in gastric cancer.


Recent studies in molecular and cellular biology have shown that tumor
growth and metastasis are not determined by cancer cells alone but also
by various stromal cells. Many human tumors secrete platelet-derived
growth factor (PDGF) ligands, and PDGF receptors (PDGF-Rs) are expressed
by various stromal cell populations, including carcinoma-associated
fibroblasts (CAFs).Tumor cells in surgical specimens and orthotopic
tumors have been shown to express PDGF-B, whereas PDGF-R has been shown
to be expressed predominantly by stromal cells, including CAFs,
pericytes, and lymphatic endothelial cells.mTOR (mammalian target of
rapamycin) is a central regulatory kinase that increases the production
of proteins that stimulate key cellular processes such as cell growth and
proliferation, cell metabolism, and angiogenesis. mTOR also increases the
translation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a), which drives the
expression of angiogenic growth factors such as vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), resulting in new vasculature.In the present study,
we examined the effects of PDGF-R tyrosine kinase inhibitors (imatinib,
nilotinib) and mTOR inhibitor (everolimus) on tumor stroma in an
orthotopic nude mouse model of human gastric cancer. Treatment with
PDGF-R tyrosine kinase inhibitors did not inhibit tumor growth but did
significantly decrease the stromal reaction, lymphatic invasion,
lymphatic vessel area, and pericyte coverage of tumor microvessels. In
contrast, treatment with mTOR inhibitor reduced tumor growth and
microvessel density but did not decrease the stromal reaction. PDGF-R
inhibitor and mTOR inhibitor used in combination reduced both the growth
rate and stromal reaction. (control (5/5, 0.30.1g), nilotinib (6/6,
0.30.1g), everolimus (4/6, 0.080.02g: pRecent studies in molecular and
cellular biology have shown that tumor growth and metastasis are not
determined by cancer cells alone but also by various stromal cells. Many
human tumors secrete platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) ligands, and
PDGF receptors (PDGF-Rs) are expressed by various stromal cell
populations, including carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs).Tumor
cells in surgical specimens and orthotopic tumors have been shown to
express PDGF-B, whereas PDGF-R has been shown to be expressed
predominantly by stromal cells, including CAFs, pericytes, and lymphatic
endothelial cells.mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) is a central
regulatory kinase that increases the production of proteins that
stimulate key cellular processes such as cell growth and proliferation,
cell metabolism, and angiogenesis. mTOR also increases the translation of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a), which drives the expression of
angiogenic growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), resulting in new vasculature.In the present study, we examined
the effects of PDGF-R tyrosine kinase inhibitors (imatinib, nilotinib)
and mTOR inhibitor (everolimus) on tumor stroma in an orthotopic nude
mouse model of human gastric cancer. Treatment with PDGF-R tyrosine
kinase inhibitors did not inhibit tumor growth but did significantly
decrease the stromal reaction, lymphatic invasion, lymphatic vessel area,
and pericyte coverage of tumor microvessels. In contrast, treatment with
mTOR inhibitor reduced tumor growth and microvessel density but did not
decrease the stromal reaction. PDGF-R inhibitor and mTOR inhibitor used
in combination reduced both the growth rate and stromal reaction.
(control (5/5, 0.30.1g), nilotinib (6/6, 0.30.1g), everolimus (4/6,
0.080.02g: p<0.05), combination (1/6, 0.04g))Target molecule-based
inhibition of cancer-stromal cell interaction may hold promise as an
effective anti-tumor therapy.

