Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilization of Sleeping Beauty mutagenesis for the identification
of potential driver genes of ovarian cancer.


Background: The goal of this project is to increase our understanding of
the molecular aetiology of ovarian cancer by developing a mouse model of
this tumor. Inherited mutation of BRCA1 is the best known risk factor for
the most common subtype of ovarian cancer, i.e. serous epithelial ovarian
cancer (SEOC); however, loss of Brca1 alone is insufficient for SEOC
development in the mouse. Somatic mutation of TP53 is the most common
molecular change in SEOC, but does not result in SEOC in the mouse,
either alone or in combination with loss of Brca1. These findings suggest
that additional currently unknown genetic factors are required for
ovarian carcinogenesis. We hypothesized that random mutagenesis would
activate these genetic factors and utilized Sleeping Beauty (SB)
insertional mutagenesis to initiate ovarian tumors in mice that we have
sequenced to determine potential genetic drivers of these tumors.Methods:
Breeding colonies of the following genetically engineered mice were
established and cross bred: homozygous floxed SB (STOCK
Rosa26-LsL-D-SB11;T2/Onc2,TG6113), homozygous floxed Brca1 knock-out
(C57BL/6.Brca1tm2Brn) and Tp53 mutant (C57BL/6-Trp53tm1Tyj/J). CRE
recombinase packaged into an adenoviral vector (AdCreM2, MicroBix
Biosystems Inc, CA) was surgically injected under the ovarian bursal
membrane of mature female mice to delete Brca1 and activate SB
mutagenesis in the ovarian surface epithelium. Mice were monitored and
sacrificed at ethically defined endpoints or a maximum of 15 months
post-surgery. Tumors were assessed for SB transposase activity by
immunohistochemical staining. DNA was extracted from paraffin embedded
sections of ovarian tumors and underwent high-throughput sequencing for
T2/Onc2 insertion sites (Illumina, University of Iowa).Results: Ovarian
tumors were observed at low penetrance starting at 30 weeks post-surgery
in SBflox/+Tp53mut/+ mice (6%, 3/48) and SBflox/+Brca1flox/flox p53mut/+
mice (8%, 4/50). No ovarian tumors were observed in
SBflox/+Brca1flox/flox mice (n=38) or in SBflox/+Brca1flox/+ mice (n=26).
Sequencing of the insertion sites identified a number of genes of
interest including kinases and tumor suppressors.Conclusions: While
ovarian cancer had low penetrance in these models, a number of potential
driver genes were identified which may provide insights into the
pathogenesis of these tumors. The low penetrance of tumor from targeted
epithelial cells with SB T2/Onc2 is similar to that seen for pancreatic
cancer. For this reason, mice with SB T2/Onc3 which is reported to
preferentially induce epithelial tumors are currently being monitored for
the development of ovarian tumors.This work was supported by Cancer
Institute NSW, Cancer Council NSW and The Northern Translational Cancer
Research Unit, NSW, Australia.

