Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cycloxygenase-2 inhibitor regulates p73 isoform expression
pattern, inhibit growth, and induce apoptosis in NHL cell line model with
1p36 chromosomal disruption.


Diclofenac is a cycloxynase-2 (COX-2) inhibitor that is used in clinics
as an analgesic anti-inflammatory drug and has been shown to increase
TP73 gene signature in multiple tumor cell lines. TP73, a gene at 1p36
locus, is controlled by a balance between two isoforms with opposing
functions, the full length TAp73 protein (pro-apoptotic) and the
NH2-terminally truncated Np73 protein (anti-apoptotic through
antagonizing both TAp73 and p53). Our previous work has shown a
differential Np73 up-regulation among NHL cases with 1p36 chromosomal
disruption correlates with decreased apoptosis, increased cellular
proliferation and increased angiogenesis. Modulation of Np73:TAp73 ratio
using TAp73 expression vector in Granta-519 (NHL cell line model that
harbor disrupted 1p36 and express high levels of Np73) resulted in growth
inhibition and increased response to chemotherapy. In this study, we
hypothesized that diclofenac treatment will modulate the expression
profile of p73 isoforms and alter the behavior of the NHL cells with 1p36
disruption. Diclofenac treatment of Granta-519 cells resulted in a
decrease in Np73, increase in TAp73 mRNA expression. MTT assay showed a
concentration- and duration-dependent cell growth inhibition. Decreased
expression of the proliferation marker ki-67 and cell cycle arrest as
indicated by flow cytometric cell cycle analysis; were evident following
diclofenac treatment. Furthermore, Annexin-V-Flous flow cytometric
analysis showed increased number of apoptotic cells that was associated
with increased cleaved caspase-3 following diclofenec treatment.
Moreover, pro-apoptotic target genes expression was induced by diclofenac
treatment including p21, PUMA, NOXA, and BIM. Next we tested the effect
of diclofenac treatment on standard CHOP-resistant Granta-519 sub-clones,
that resulted in down-regulation of Np73 mRNA expression and a
significant dose-dependent growth inhibitory effect. Together, our data
demonstrate that diclofenac treatment caused p73 isoforms reconstitution
(TAp73 and/or Np73), inhibited growth of NHL cells with 1p36 abnormality
and highlights the potential of diclofenac as a potential new adjuvant
therapy in NHL with disrupted TP73 gene region.

