Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence supporting a role of ETV4 in pancreatic cancer
pathogenesis.


The clinical outcome from pancreatic cancer has not improved over the
years. This is, in part, due to not well understood disease mechanisms
and consequently there is little progress made in developing intervention
therapy. Many genetic alterations have been characterized in pancreatic
cancer, of which some have been shown to be functionally relevant. ETV4,
proto-oncogenic transcription factor, has been shown to be aberrantly
expressed in various cancers types and plays important role in disease
pathogenesis. The role of ETV4, however, has not been defined in
pancreatic cancer so far. In this study, we investigated the pathological
involvement of ETV4 in pancreatic cancer. For this, we silenced its
expression in two highly tumorigenic and metastatic ETV4 overexpressing
pancreatic cancer cell lines (Colo357 and ASPC1) by stable transfection
of ETV4-targeted short-hairpin RNA (shRNA)-expression plasmid. Silencing
of ETV4 led to a decrease in growth and clonogenicity of ETV4-silenced
pancreatic cancer cells (Colo357-shETV4 and ASPC1-shETV4) as compared to
their respective controls (Colo357-Scr and ASPC1-Scr). Furthermore,
inhibition of ETV4 also caused suppression of pancreatic cancer cell
motility and invasiveness. In contrast, ETV4-silenced pancreatic cancer
cells exhibited greater cell-cell interaction as compared to their
respective control cells. Immunoblot analyses demonstrated a loss of
mesenchymal markers, N-cadherin, Vimentin, and twist, and gain of
epithelial marker, E-cadherin, in ETV4-silenced Colo357 and ASPC1 cells,
indicating a role of ETV4 in epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)
of PC cells. Lastly, expression analysis of ETV4 in clinical specimens
demonstrated its aberrant expression in malignant pancreatic tissue,
while no expression was detected in the normal pancreas. Altogether,
these findings provide first experimental evidence for a functional role
of ETV4 in pancreatic cancer.

