Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of various first- and second-generation tyrosine-kinase
inhibitors on frequency and functionality of immune cells.


Combining immunotherapeutic approaches with targeted therapies like
tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKIs) may give additional benefits to
patients with VEGF-driven tumors (e.g. RCC). Previously, we have
investigated the impact of first-generation TKIs sorafenib and sunitinib
demonstrating distinct, in part opposing effects on immune cells (Hipp et
al, Blood 2008, 111(12): 5610ff). Meanwhile, second-generation TKIs
(pazopanib, axitinib, tivozanib) were approved or are expected to receive
approval soon. In contrast to the multi-targeting first-generation TKIs,
these TKIs act more selectively, therefore potentially inducing less
off-target toxicities. However, so far little is known about the
immunomodulatory properties of these new TKIs. Thus, we compared the
influence of two first- and three second-generation TKIs on frequency and
function of immune cells and on immune responses in mice.C57BL/6 mice
were orally treated with vehicle, 25 mg/kg axitinib, 20 mg/kg tivozanib,
30 mg/kg pazopanib, 30 mg/kg sorafenib or 40 mg/kg sunitinib (daily for
one week). Twelve hours after the last application, splenocytes were
analyzed for CD4+ CD25+ FoxP3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs). Tivozanib and
(as published before) sunitinib significantly reduced the frequency of
Tregs among CD4+ cells, while no effect was observed for axitinib,
pazopanib and sorafenib. Moreover, percentages of CD4+ as well as CD8+ T
cells were increased in tivozanib- and sunitinib-treated mice.The
functional status of isolated immune cells from TKI pre-treated mice was
assessed in a mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR). CD4+ T-cell proliferation
of cells isolated from sorafenib-treated mice was diminished, while CD8+
T-cell proliferation of cells from sunitinib-treated mice was increased.
In vitro activation assays revealed that - irrespective of the used TKI -
the treatment led to reduced responsiveness of immune cells in terms of
cytokine secretion and expression of surface activation markers.Finally,
C57BL/6 mice were immunized subcutaneously twice (days 1 and 8) with
ovalbumin peptide vaccine alone (negative control) or combined with
poly-IC (positive control). To analyze the effect of TKIs in vivo, mice
were pretreated (day -7 to -3) or concurrently treated (day 1 - 13) with
axitinib, tivozanib or pazopanib in addition to vaccinations with peptide
plus poly-IC. On day 15, induction of peptide-specific T cells was
analyzed by MHC multimer staining as well as by IFN- ELISPOT.
Pretreatment or concurrent treatment with all three second-generation
TKIs did not negatively impact the induction of immune responses - in
contrast to concurrent treatment with sorafenib reported before.In
conclusion, these results suggest that immunotherapy and
second-generation TKIs can be combined in the treatment of cancer, but
the influence of these TKIs on the immune system requires further
assessment in clinical trials.

