Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging and treatment of brain metastatic tumors using
nanopolymers.


A significant clinical problem with brain metastatic (BM) tumors is drug
delivery and diagnostic imaging to verify MRI enhancement(s) for planning
treatment. MRI enhancement in cancer patient's brain may result from
infection after chemotherapy that impairs immune system; metastasis from
primary lung/breast cancer; or a new primary brain tumor. Unlike
lung/breast, brain biopsies are often technically impossible. Most drugs
or monoclonal antibodies (mAb) are effective for primary tumors but
cannot penetrate blood brain barrier (BBB) failing to treat brain
metastasis.We used a natural nanobiopolymer, polymalic acid (PMLA), as a
platform for the tumor-targeted PolycefinTM drugs for differential brain
tumor imaging and treatment.Three xenogeneic orthotropic human brain
metastatic tumors, MDA-MB-474, HER2+ breast cancer; A549 lung cancer, and
MDA-MB-468, triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), both EGFR+, were
injected into the brain of mice.For imaging, PolycefinTM had a covalently
attached MRI tracer Gadolinium (Gd-DOTA). Antisense oligonucleotides
(AON) were conjugated to PolycefinTM to inhibit gene/protein expression
to block tumor growth. The combination of cell surface targeting mAbs,
including anti-transferrin receptor (TfR) mAb for drug BBB transcytosis,
and AONs to multiple tumor markers on the same delivery polymer was used
for tumor treatment.MRI 1H imaging was performed on a 9.4-Tesla MRI
system. Treatment groups of animals included (1) HER2+ MDA-MB-474 breast
cancer metastases targeted with PMLA-Gd-DOTA/Trastuzumab/TfR mAb; (2)
EGFR+ MDA-MB-468 TNBC metastases targeted with PMLA-Gd-DOTA/Cetuximab/TfR
mAb; and (3) Controls inoculated with PMLA-IgG mAb and clinical
Gd.Imaging: Specific tumor imaging was shown for brain-implanted lung and
breast tumors: the inverse of T1-1 relaxation time proportional to Gd
concentration was measured in healthy brain and in the tumor. T1-1 time
dependence for Gd-DOTA-Polycefin (T1-1 ratio tumor/normal brain) was
compared with clinical Gd, MultiHance. After reaching a maximum, high
T1-1 relative values prevailed for several hours for
Gd-DOTA-mAb-Polycefin, but declined rapidly for Gd. High contrast for Gd
was seen in 20 min, whereas that for Gd-DOTA-Polycefin peaked in 45-60
min, and remained for up to 3 hrs. By differential MRI with anti-HER2
(Trastuzumab) or anti-EFGR (Cetuximab) mAb attached to the nanoplatform,
we were able to differentiate HER2+ from EGFR+ metastatic brain
tumors.Treatment: Animal survival after Polycefin treatment was
significantly higher than in untreated or mAb (Herceptin or Cetuximab)
treated animals. Survival increases were as follows: 66% for lung cancer,
47% for HER2+ breast cancer, and 81% for TNBC.We developed a system for
differential imaging and successful systemic treatment of various
metastatic brain tumors based on specific metastasis targeting, and
inhibition of expression of tumor-specific genes/proteins.

