Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PMEPA1 enhances the prostate cancer cell growth inhibitory effect
of MDV3100 and bicalutamide.


Introduction and Objective: PMEPA1 is a highly androgen-inducible gene in
prostate cancer cells, recruits the NEDD4-1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, to
degrade AR. We hypothesize that the frequently (65%) observed decrease or
loss of PMPEA1 expression in human prostate tumors may lead to enhanced
AR functions and accelerated prostate tumorigenesis. Therefore, we
investigated the growth and survival of prostate cancer cells in the
presence of AR inhibitors in response to PMEPA1 knockdown.Methods: PMEPA1
was silenced by PMEPA1 Mission shRNA lentivirus infection and puromycin
selection in LNCaP and VCaP cells respectively. The PMEPA1 deficient
LNCaP and VCaP cells were treated with the AR inhibitors (MDV3100 and
bicalutamide), as well as the artificial synthesized androgen R1881.
Ectopic NEDD4-1 was expressed by pCMV-XL4-NEDD4-1 eukaryotic expression
vector. Cell growth was monitored by cell counting assay, BrdU
incorporation assay and colony plating efficiency assay. Cell cycle was
analyzed with propidium iodide staining based flowcytometry assay.
Protein levels of AR, PMEPA1, PSA and NEDD4-1 were assessed by immunoblot
assays.Results: PMEPA1 silenced LNCaP and VCaP cells had higher AR, PSA
protein levels, suggesting activated AR signaling. Consistent with this
observation, inhibition of PMEPA1-1 by shRNA resulted in increased cell
growth, stronger BrdU incorporation ability and higher colony plating
efficiency in both LNCaP and VCaP cells. Cell cycle assay showed more
S-phase cells in PMEPA1 deficient LNCaP and VCaP cells in regular medium
or R1881 supplemented charcoal-striped medium. Ectopic expression of
NEDD4-1 could not inhibit cell growth in PMEPA1 silenced LNCaP cells.
More interestingly, the PMEPA1 deficient CaP cells (both LNCaP and VCaP
cells) demonstrated more resistance to the growth inhibitory effects of
MDV3100 and bicalutamide.Conclusions: The frequently observed decreased
expression of PMEPA1 results in elevated AR protein levels and activated
AR signaling, which in turn promotes cell growth in androgen responsive
prostate cancer cells. The PMEPA1 deficient cells develop more resistance
to AR inhibitors. Our findings further suggest the important role of
decreased PMEPA1 in AR related prostate tumorigenesis. These data
highlight that PMEPA1 deficiency may confer resistance to AR inhibitors
during CaP progression.This study is supported by the NIH grant
(R01CA106653) to SS.

