Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Squamous cell carcinoma in the mouse: A novel, rapidly growing,
syngeneic orthotopic lung tumor model .


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death and accounts for 28% of
all cancer death in the United States. About 80% of lung cancers are
non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) of which over 20% are Squamous
Cells Carcinoma (SCC). The currently available therapies, for NSCLC, are
less effective against squamous cells carcinoma. While there are several
established in-vivo models for lung adenoma and adenocarcinomas, there
are no rapidly growing, syngeneic, orthotopic tumor models for lung SCC.
The goal of the present study was to develop such a model in order to
facilitate research of new treatments against SCC.Murine SCC (KLN205)
cells were mixed with matrigel and injected directly into the lungs of
C57BL/6 and DBA-2 mice using the same methodology applied during the
induction of Lewis Lung Carcinoma orthotopic tumors. Injection of KLN205
resulted in development of highly variable tumors with an average size of
24mm3 in DBA-2 mice after 3 weeks from inoculation. No sustainable tumors
were seen in C57BL/6 mice. Cells derived from DBA/2 lung tumors (referred
to as KLN205-T1) were subcultured for over 10 generations and their
cytological characteristics were determined. A second round of orthotopic
tumor injections using KLN205-T1 cells resulted in the formation of
reproducible, solitary and localized tumors in the lungs of over 85% of
the DBA/2 mice but not in C57BL/6 mice. The tumors increased in average
size from 20 to 40 to 80 mm3 between days 10, 13 and 16. Comparable
results were obtained while imaging tumor progression using MRI.
Metastases were observed only in thoracic lymph nodes which were probably
a result of cells escaping the lung during tumor injection.
Immunostaining of KLN205-T1 tumors with p63 and cytokeratin 5/6
demonstrated similar characteristics as described for human SCC.Cisplatin
and paclitaxel were tested in this KLN205-T1 tumor model demonstrating
its potential use for testing treatment options for SCC lung cancer. The
effect of Tumor Treating Fields (TTFields) therapy with and without
paclitaxel or cisplatin is currently being tested in this novel tumor
model.

