Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A rapid, sensitive and quantitative method to measure protein
biomarkers MUC16 and MSLN from archived clinical samples using TaqMan
proximity ligation assays.


MUC16 and MSLN are tumor-specific antigens highly prevalent in ovarian
and pancreatic cancers and have been used as targets in developing
antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs). Development of a sensitive method to
quantitatively measure these protein biomarkers in archival clinical
samples may enable potential companion diagnostics to these novel
therapeutic agents. Here we report the development of a method to
quantitatively measure these biomarkers from formalin fixed paraffin
embedded (FFPE) tumor samples using TaqMan proximity ligation assays
(PLA). Monoclonal antibodies that recognize the extracellular domains of
MUC16 and MSLN were conjugated to amplicon forming oligonucleotides to
generate proximity ligation probes for TaqMan quantification. Using
purified MUC16 and MSLN recombinant protein the assay sensitivities were
determined to be lower than single-digit ng/mL concentrations for both
MUC16 and MSLN and the dynamic ranges were >3 logs and 2 logs,
respectively. In addition, the assays were demonstrated to be highly
selective by testing lysates from expressing and non-expressing cell
lines as determined by qRT-PCR. For clinical application of these assays,
we further developed and optimized a simple two-step method for
extraction and antigen retrieval of protein from archival FFPE tissues.
FFPE extracts were prepared from a set of 10um sections of ovarian tumor
tissue blocks and analyzed to determine relative MUC16 and MSLN protein
expression levels. We benchmarked these results from the FFPE protocol
with PLA data generated from matched fresh frozen tumor tissue as well as
expression level determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and gene
expression level determined by qRT-PCR assays from the same FFPE tissue
blocks. All three comparisons with FFPE PLA were remarkably well
correlated. In conclusion, we have established the technical feasibility
and clinical utility of TaqMan PLA-based protein assays for sensitive and
quantitative measurement of protein biomarkers in archival clinical
samples. The methodology developed in this study represents a promising
approach in companion diagnostic development for quantitative protein
biomarker assessment.

