Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic profiling of PTEN-deletion mouse prostate and its
molecular pharmacodynamic responses to methylseleninic acid .


Recent genomic and exome sequencing analyses revealed that loss of one
allele of tumor suppressor gene Pten (phosphatase and tensin homolog
deleted on chromosome 10) occurs frequently in primary prostate tumors,
and homozygous deletion of Pten plays a casual role in advanced prostate
cancer. Therefore, the prostate-specific PTEN-deletion driven prostate
cancer mouse model resembles many features of human prostate cancer
including disease progression to metastasis. Due to its high clinical
relevance, this model is gaining wider utility for prostate cancer
chemoprevention and therapeutic studies. Very recently, our collaborative
team found that oral administration of methylseleninic acid (MSeA), a
second-generation selenium compound, significantly inhibited PTEN-loss
driven prostate tumorigenesis in vivo. In particular, the efficacy was
associated with a super-activation of p53-p21 senescence pathway
(PTEN-loss induced cellular senescence, PICS). To gain insights into
additional molecular targets, we profiled the prostate proteome of
PTEN-deletion mice. Whole prostates from PTEN-deletion mice (12-15 weeks
of age) and their wild type littermate were obtained from the NCI Mouse
Model Repository. Homogenate from 4 prostate pairs (Pten/ and wild type)
was prepared and digested individually and the peptides were labeled with
8-plex iTRAQTM reagents. Labeled peptides were pooled and analyzed by
2D-LC-MS/MS (LTQ Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Scientific). Out of 949 proteins
identified, we further analyzed 152, the expressions of which were
significantly and concordantly changed in all four pairs of mice. Among
them, we detected enrichment of proteins related to cellular senescence
(chitinase-3 like protein3 [CH3L3], cathelin-related antimicrobial
peptide [Camp]), p53 (S100-A8, sorbitol dehydrogenase [DHSO]) and
molecular targets involved in AKT signaling pathway (lipocalin 2, CH3L3),
in line with the well-described AKT driven p53-mediated senescence in
Pten-deficient prostate cancer mouse model. We also found decreased
protein expression of GRP78 (78 kDa glucose-regulated protein),
endoplasmin, probasin and TGM4 (transglutaminase4), same as we reported
in the TRAMP model. Some of these protein changes (over or under) were
predicated by published changes of their mRNA levels in prostates
(probasin, TGM4, etc) and/or protein levels in sera (probasin,
endoplasmin, GRP78, etc). Moreover, the congruence on some proteins
(DHSO, S100-A8, etc) between the mouse model and clinical specimens (e.g.
by C. Sawyers) highlights the clinical relevance of the model. The
proteomic changes induced by MSeA are being investigated.

