Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The retinoid-induced G0S2 protein undergoes ISG15ylation and
destabilization.


The interferon stimulated protein ISG15 was one of the first
ubiquitin-like modifiers discovered. Similar to ubiquitin, ISG15 is
conjugated to cellular proteins through a three-step enzymatic cascade
involving an activating enzyme E1 (UBE1L), a conjugating enzyme E2 and a
ligase E3. Conjugated ISG15 is removed from substrate proteins by the
UBE1L-ISG15 deconjugase Usp18 (UBP43). To date, few direct target
proteins of the ISG15 system were found and the biologic implications of
their ISG15ylation are actively under study. We previously reported that
the G0/G1 switch gene 2 (G0S2) was a direct target of all-trans-retinoic
acid (RA) treatment in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Prior work by
others found that G0S2 was able to regulate lipolysis by inhibiting
adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL). The current study extends prior work
by reporting that G0S2 was induced in APL cells by RA-treatment
coordinately with UBE1L, ISG15 and the deconjugase Usp18. G0S2 was also
shown to be a previously unrecognized target of ISG15ylation. G0S2
species were co-immunoprecipitated with ISG15. The functional consequence
of this modification was confirmed by finding that G0S2 protein stability
was directly affected by the ISG15 deconjugase Usp18. Loss of Usp18
expression by transfection of individual siRNAs into studied cells led to
G0S2 protein destabilization. In contrast, engineered gain of Usp18
expression in the same cells stabilized G0S2 protein. Agents that can
inhibit specific protein degradation pathways were also examined.
Findings revealed that G0S2 protein was stabilized by treatment with
proteasome or caspase inhibitors, but was not affected by lysosome or
aggresome inhibitors. Thus, these findings indicate that G0S2 is a novel
ISG15 substrate and that this modification substantially reduces G0S2
protein stability. Taken together, these results provide a mechanistic
basis for cross-talk between interferon and retinoid signaling at the
level of the G0S2 protein that undergoes ISG15ylation. This provides
evidence for a role of lipolysis regulation in both interferon and
retinoid signaling. The functional consequences of this are under study
in mouse models.

