Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regression of established tumors requires timely adoptive T cell
transfer following whole body irradiation.


Adoptive immunotherapy with CD8+ T cells has achieved some success in
treating established cancer. Response rates are increased by
preconditioning the patient with lymphodepleting whole body irradiation
(WBI) prior to T cell transfer, including an increased fraction of
complete responses. Using a mouse model of autochthonous brain cancer, we
previously demonstrated that adoptive transfer of tumor-specific T cells
following WBI promotes complete regression of established tumors and
long-term survival. However, the mechanisms required to achieve complete
responses remain to be defined. Here we investigate kinetic requirements
for adoptive T cell transfer to achieve tumor control following WBI. To
test the hypothesis that adoptive transfer early after irradiation is
required for maximum long-term tumor control, we delayed adoptive
transfer of T cells to tumor-bearing mice at varying intervals following
irradiation. We show that delay of adoptive transfer did not affect
initial T cell priming or the timing of initial appearance of activated T
cells at the tumor site. However, we observed a modest decrease in T cell
accumulation at the earliest appearance of cells in the brain (5 days
post-transfer). Tumors were completely eliminated within 10 days in mice
that received T cell transfer one day following WBI, while delayed
transfer abrogated this effect. When adoptive transfer was delayed by one
week following WBI, incomplete tumor regression was observed at 10 days
post-transfer. Although mice in this group lived significantly longer
than control animals, they eventually succumbed to lethal tumor
recurrence. Our data suggest that lymphodepleting doses of WBI promote a
prolonged window for effective T cell priming against the endogenous
tumor antigen, but that optimal therapeutic potential requires T cell
transfer early after irradiation conditioning. Supported by research
grant CA02500 from the National Cancer Institute/National Institutes of
Health.

