Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low levels of estrogen sensitize PTEN-deficient endometrial tumors
to poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibition in vivo.


Prior in vitro work suggests that PARP inhibition can destroy tumor cells
with defects in homologous recombination resulting from loss of PTEN.
Clinical trials have tested the efficacy of this strategy in BRCA mutant
ovarian tumors. This approach has not been reported in endometrial
carcinomas in vivo. Loss of PTEN tumor suppressor function is the most
common genetic alteration associated with endometrial cancer that is the
leading gynecologic cancer in the U.S. We hypothesized that oral
administration of the PARP inhibitor AZD2281 (Olaparib) would be an
effective therapeutic strategy for treating endometrial carcinomas
resulting from PTEN loss. This hypothesis was tested in a mouse model for
endometrial cancer established by our group. Uterine epithelia were
harvested from PTENloxP/loxP mice, dissociated and infected with a Cre
lentivirus resulting in PTEN deletion in uterine epithelia. These cells
were combined with wild type stroma and placed subrenally in SCID mice
resulting in formation of endometrial tumors that accurately recapitulate
human disease. After tumor establishment (8 weeks), mice were divided
into two cohorts: Group 1 was subjected to a continuous supply of
estrogen and Group 2 was deprived of estrogen. Ten SCID mice were treated
with a PARP inhibitor, AZD2281, administered orally for 3 weeks while the
other 10 SCID mice were treated with vehicle in both hormonal conditions.
At completion of therapy, tumors were harvested and analyzed. Forty mice
were included in this preclinical trial. AZD2281 was successful in
achieving a significant reduction in tumor size in a low estrogenic
hormonal milieu. In striking contrast, no response to AZD2281 was seen in
tumors exposed to high levels of estrogen. Hormonal deprivation resulted
in a 20-fold increase in circulating levels of AZD2281 concomitant with
increased inhibition of PARP enzyme activity at the tumor bed. Low levels
of estrogen sensitize PTEN deficient tumors to PARP inhibition via two
potential mechanisms: 1) down-regulation of key components of the
homologous recombination pathway in low compared to high levels of
estrogen and 2) a significant increase in the serum concentration of
AZD2281 coupled with increased efficacy of PARP inhibition at the tumor
bed. We suspect that withdrawal of estrogen results in a decrease in
homologous recombination proteins and an increase in circulating levels
of AZD2281 by decreasing its metabolism. The net result is greater
circulating levels and effectiveness of PARP inhibitors in estrogen
deprived treated mice. The results of this preclinical trial suggest that
orally administered PARP inhibitors in a low estrogenic hormonal milieu
can be effective in targeting PTEN-null endometrial tumors. Extension of
this work to a clinical trial can result in personalizing therapies for
women afflicted with endometrial cancer using well tolerated orally
administered therapeutic agents.

