Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide comparison of matched canine osteosarcoma primary
tumours and metastases by array comparative genomic hybridization.


Canine osteosarcoma is a common and highly aggressive cancer that shares
many characteristics with human osteosarcoma and can serve as a model of
this disease. We collected snap frozen normal muscle, primary
appendicular skeleton tumour, and matched terminal lung metastases from 8
canine osteosarcoma patients. DNA was isolated from these samples and
gene copy number aberrations were assessed using high-resolution
oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization (Agilent G3
Canine 180k array). Data analysis was performed using Agilent Genomic
Workbench 5.0 analysis software and the Aberration Detection Method 2 and
Circular Binary Segmentation algorithms were applied to identify aberrant
chromosomal intervals with the log2 ratio threshold set to 0.5. As
expected, many cases had copy number aberrations that contain genes
commonly altered in canine and human osteosarcoma, including MYC,
CDKN2A/CDKN2B, PTEN, p53, and RB. To assess the degree of genomic
similarity of the 8 primary tumours to their corresponding metastasis, we
used these same samples to generate 8 random pairings of unmatched
primaries and metastases, as well as 8 random pairs of primary tumours
and 8 random pairs of metastases. A set of 11,000 random 10 base pair
segments spanning the entire genome was generated and a correlation
analysis was conducted between pairs of samples using the log2 ratios for
each segment. Matched samples showed significant correlation with the
square of the correlation coefficient (R2) being 0.44 (p0.05 for each).
Thus, as a group, primary tumours are genomically more similar to their
corresponding metastasis than to unmatched metastases, and are also more
similar than primary tumours or metastases are to each other. However,
the range of similarity between matched primaries and metastases was
relatively wide, with half the cases showing very high similarity and
half showing moderate similarity that was close to the upper range of
unmatched samples. These results have implications for therapies that
rely on analysis of primary tumours to derive strategies that target
metastases.

