Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential Mcl-1 processing in evasion of DCA-induced apoptosis
of colorectal cancer cells.


Recent evidence indicates that dichloroacetate (DCA) may be a
cancer-specific agent that targets the unique metabolism of cancer cells,
avoiding disruption of normal somatic cells. However, our laboratory has
shown that some human colorectal cancer cell lines do not show the
predicted response to DCA treatment, and the molecular mechanism
responsible for this is currently unknown. Of interest is the Bcl-2
protein family, which consists of both pro- and anti-apoptotic members.
The expression, regulation, and interactions of the Bcl-2 proteins will
mediate the release of cytotoxic molecules such as cytochrome c from the
mitochondria into the cytosol, activating apoptosis via a caspase
cascade. Differential regulation of the Bcl-2 proteins in response to DCA
treatment may indicate whether apoptosis will be induced in cancer cell
lines. The human colorectal cancer cell line HCT116 was cultured and
exposed to DCA as well as 5-fluorouracil, a known initiator of Bcl-2
protein-mediated apoptosis. Key changes in Bcl-2 protein expression were
analyzed using immunoblotting. The expression of Mcl-1, an anti-apoptotic
Bcl-2 protein, occurred at 40-kDa in all treatments, and at 28-kDa only
in non-DCA treatments. PCR for the known splice variants of Mcl-1
confirmed only one gene product, suggesting the involvement of
post-translational modification. The presence of cleaved caspase 3
indicates that an increase in 28-kDa Mcl-1 compared to 40-kDa Mcl-1
occurs with apoptosis in 5-fluorouracil treated cells, but does not occur
in DCA-treated cells, which were not apoptotic. This suggests that Mcl-1
modification may be acting to modulate susceptibility to DCA treatment.
The interactions involved in or resulting from these responses are
currently under investigation. Using modified HCT116 cells without
functional p53 or without functional Bax, the role of these two proteins
will be emphasized. Co-immunoprecipitation of Mcl-1 will allow changes in
its binding partners, such as p53, to be observed in response to DCA
treatment. By utilizing mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions for protein
analysis, the effect of DCA on mitochondrial localization of proteins
such as Bax and the release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria will be
observed. Further research may provide insight into the mechanism by
which some human cancer cell lines are protected against DCA-induced cell
death, and the potential role of a pathway involving Mcl-1 in this
cell-specific protection.

