Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of estrogen receptor signaling in rhabdomyosarcoma.


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a malignant tumor thought to arise from
immature precursors of skeletal muscle cells. In children, RMS accounts
for approximately 50% of soft tissue sarcomas and 10% of solid tumors.
There are two major histologic subtypes, embryonal and alveolar, both of
which exhibit metastatic potential. Despite multimodal therapy (surgery,
radiation, and chemotherapy), the failure-free survival of patients with
metastatic RMS is only 25%. Currently there is no molecularly targeted
therapy for RMS, but several independent clinical observations point to
tamoxifen (a selective estrogen receptor modulator) as a promising drug
to explore, including the efficacy of tamoxifen against desmoid tumors
(which share a similar ontogeny as RMS) and the tendency of RMS to arise
during periods of elevated constitutive estrogen exposure. This led our
group to investigate estrogen receptor (ER) signaling in RMS. Previous
work in our lab has shown that RMS primary tumors and cell lines express
ER, and that estrogen stimulates RMS cell growth in vitro. In addition,
exposure of RMS cells to 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4OHT), an active metabolite
of tamoxifen, leads to decreased cell viability and increased apoptotic
signaling, accompanied by MAPK activation. These findings suggest that an
active ER pathway play a role in RMS, and demonstrate the antagonistic
effect of 4OHT in RMS in vitro. To expand on this work, we conducted
studies to: 1) further define the molecular mechanism of 4OHT-induced
apoptosis in RMS; and 2) test the efficacy of tamoxifen in combination
with other chemotherapeutic drugs commonly used to treat RMS (vincristine
and actinomycin D). We found that 4OHT (10 M)-induced apoptosis can be
blocked by inhibition of ER and c-Jun N-terminase kinase (JNK). In
addition, ER inhibition blocked 4OHT (10 M)-associated MAPK
phosphorylation. Interestingly, long-term treatment (8 weeks) of RMS
cells with 4OHT (4 M) inhibited cell growth as determined by measuring
cell population doublings. Using an MTS assay, we found that tamoxifen in
combination with vincristine and actinomycin D significantly reduced RMS
cell viability compared to vehicle and the drugs alone (pRhabdomyosarcoma
(RMS) is a malignant tumor thought to arise from immature precursors of
skeletal muscle cells. In children, RMS accounts for approximately 50% of
soft tissue sarcomas and 10% of solid tumors. There are two major
histologic subtypes, embryonal and alveolar, both of which exhibit
metastatic potential. Despite multimodal therapy (surgery, radiation, and
chemotherapy), the failure-free survival of patients with metastatic RMS
is only 25%. Currently there is no molecularly targeted therapy for RMS,
but several independent clinical observations point to tamoxifen (a
selective estrogen receptor modulator) as a promising drug to explore,
including the efficacy of tamoxifen against desmoid tumors (which share a
similar ontogeny as RMS) and the tendency of RMS to arise during periods
of elevated constitutive estrogen exposure. This led our group to
investigate estrogen receptor (ER) signaling in RMS. Previous work in our
lab has shown that RMS primary tumors and cell lines express ER, and that
estrogen stimulates RMS cell growth in vitro. In addition, exposure of
RMS cells to 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4OHT), an active metabolite of
tamoxifen, leads to decreased cell viability and increased apoptotic
signaling, accompanied by MAPK activation. These findings suggest that an
active ER pathway play a role in RMS, and demonstrate the antagonistic
effect of 4OHT in RMS in vitro. To expand on this work, we conducted
studies to: 1) further define the molecular mechanism of 4OHT-induced
apoptosis in RMS; and 2) test the efficacy of tamoxifen in combination
with other chemotherapeutic drugs commonly used to treat RMS (vincristine
and actinomycin D). We found that 4OHT (10 M)-induced apoptosis can be
blocked by inhibition of ER and c-Jun N-terminase kinase (JNK). In
addition, ER inhibition blocked 4OHT (10 M)-associated MAPK
phosphorylation. Interestingly, long-term treatment (8 weeks) of RMS
cells with 4OHT (4 M) inhibited cell growth as determined by measuring
cell population doublings. Using an MTS assay, we found that tamoxifen in
combination with vincristine and actinomycin D significantly reduced RMS
cell viability compared to vehicle and the drugs alone (p<0.05). These
results show that: a) 4OHT-induced apoptosis may be mediated by a
signaling sequence from ERs to MAPKs to apoptosis, b) the late growth-
inhibitory effect of 4OHT may be caused by both early/transient and
late/continuous genes and c) combining tamoxifen with vincristine and
actinomycin D is effective against RMS cells in vitro. These findings
will guide future gene expression profiling studies, provide a list of
specific therapeutic targets that can be tested in vivo, and may find
application in clinical protocols in the treatment of RMS.

