Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Flow-proteometric analysis of single signaling complex.


Signal transductions are critical for cell physiology functions and
signaling complexes play major roles in carrying and delivering signals.
These processes occur mainly through protein-protein interaction (PPI)
and protein-nucleic acid interaction (PNI). Conventional approaches are
usually limited in identifying a specific cellular PPI, or PNI from large
amount of a specific protein with limited relative quantification.
However, multiple PPIs and PNIs actually occur within a single signaling
complex in vivo in a dynamic manner and an effective methodology for
accurately detecting these individual complexes for multiple targets are
critical for further understanding the in depth mechanisms of cell
signaling transduction. Herein we introduce a novel flow-proteometric
technique named microchannel for Multi-parameters Analyzing Proteins in
Single-complex (mMAPS), which integrates a microfluidics device into
single-molecule spectroscopy with three different emission-wavelength
detectors to directly detect and analyze each individual signaling
complex. Briefly, proteins and/or nucleic acid were labeled by three
separate wavelength fluorophores in individual complexes and each complex
was examined when it flew through the detection spot in microchannel.
Using this approach, we demonstrate various applications by analyzing
multiple endogenous PPIs and PNIs in p53, EGFR, HER2, and NFB complexes
from cancer cell lines with the resolution of single signaling complex.
For instance, using 50,000 cancer cells (HeLa) we have detected and
quantified the interaction between three proteins including EGF, EGFR and
STAT3. We identified the single protein complexes which contain all three
targets (EGF/EGFR/STAT3) after EGF treatment for 30min. EGF/EGFR and
EGFR/STAT3 were also been identified as well but we didn't identified
EGF/STAT3 interaction. Interestingly, although 20% of detected EGFR were
interacted with STAT3 after EGF stimulation, only 3% of EGFR found to
interact with EGF in the EGFR complex. In addition, we have also detected
the protein complexes containing both proteins and nucleic acid including
endogenous p53, TBP1, and genomic DNA fragment and successfully
identified p53, TBP1, and genomic DNA in a complex. Quantification
results revealed that p53 and TBP1 interaction only occurred in the
complexes with genomic DNA. In conclusion, mMAPS provides a powerful
platform for direct investigating the composition of individual target
protein complexes and reveals the actual quantitative results of specific
PTMs, PPIs, and PNIs involved in the signaling complexes, which is
important to dissect the detailed dynamics of signal transduction in vivo.

