Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Age-related effects following exposure of bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells to etoposide .


Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been shown to be one of the
populations that support hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) development within
the bone marrow microenvironment. High dose myelosuppressive or ablative
chemotherapy regimens that are utilized prior to bone marrow
transplantation have the potential to damage MSCs, consistent with damage
which we have previously reported for more differentiated stromal and
osteoblast cells. As with more differentiated progenitor cells,
interactions between MSCs and HSCs are vital to hematopoietic homeostasis
with alterations of these interactions having the potential to hamper
hematopoietic reconstitution following treatment. In the current study we
begin to investigate age associated differences in the vulnerability of
the microenvironment to stress utilizing primary human MSCs from passages
6 to 10, characterized functionally by adipocytic and osteogenic
differentiation and surface expression profiling (CD105+CD44+CD166+CD45).
We have shown that treatment of MSCs with 25M etoposide for 24 hours
in-vitro causes the occurrence of dsDNA breaks that recover within 48
hours following treatment. In addition, chemotherapy induced stress was
followed by an induction of p21. Homologous recombination associated
transcripts (XRCC2, XRCC3, Rad51) were reduced following etoposide
treatment relative to non-homologous end joining associated transcripts
(Ku70, Ku80, DNA-PK), and the magnitude of these differences was
augmented with age in-vitro. Pro-apoptotic transcripts Puma and Noxa and
the anti-apoptosis associated Bcl-XL showed induction with treatment
while Bcl-2 decreased, suggesting the wide range of genes that are
responsive to chemotherapy exposure. These results provide insight into
the damage responses of MSCs to etoposide and how DNA repair capabilities
following chemotherapy could be influenced by patient age. A more
mechanistic understanding of the recovery pathways that are altered with
age may be valuable for innovative approaches to the treatment of elderly
patients for whom escalated chemotherapy is required in an effort to
optimize microenvironment supported immune system recovery.

