Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The short isoform of stem-cell-marker DCLK1(DCLK1-S) is strongly
up-regulated during adenoma-carcinoma sequence of coloncancer disease:
Role of autocrine/endocrine progastrin.


We now know that colonic tumors increasingly express progastrins (PG) as
they progress through hyperproliferative (Hp) / adenoma (Ad) /
adenocarcinoma (AdCA) sequence. We and others have recently reported that
autocrine PG up-regulates expression of stem-cell-markers DCLK1/CD44/LGR5
(Gastro, 2011; IJC, 2012). Two major isoforms of DCLK1 (DCLK1-S, DCLK1-L)
have been reported in neuroprogenitor cells. The two isoforms were
discovered to be similarly expressed in colonic epithelial cells.
Regulatory effects of PG were examined on the two isoforms in
normal/cancer cells. Specific primer sets were designed to amplify S and
L transcripts using qRT-PCR. Colon cancer cells either expressed S
(HCT-116) or both S and L forms (HT-29, DLD1). HEK293 cells were used as
a model of non-transformed cells since they respond to PG, do not express
autocrine PG, and are non-tumorogenic. PG significantly up-regulated both
the transcripts in HEK293 cells. The L-isoform is transcribed by the 5
promoter of the gene while S-isoform is transcribed by intron V promoter.
Promoter-reporter constructs, specific to the two promoters, were
generated to confirm promoter activation in response to PG in HEK293
cells. Colonic tumors obtained from consented patients at the time of
colonoscopy, were immunohistochemically analyzed, using an antibody which
recognizes both the forms of DCLK1; Hp/Ad/AdCA increasingly expressed
DCLK1. Relative expression of S vs L transcripts was examined in stages
I-III AdCAs, using a commercial cDNA plate. We learnt for the first time
that S-isoform is increasingly up-regulated by 5-20-fold in stages I-III
AdCAs, compared to that in surrounding normal tissues; the L-isoform, on
the other hand, was only slightly elevated in most tumor samples. Thus
even though PG can potentially up-regulate expression of both S and L
isoforms, the L-isoform appears to be silenced in many tumors in a
stage-dependent manner. This possibility was confirmed in established
colon cancer cell lines, including HCT-116. The physiological
significance of S vs L isoform, at different stages of colon cancer
development, remains unknown. Our studies so far strongly suggest that
DCLK1 expression is required for maintaining proliferation of colon
cancer cells and that while normal colonic cells/non-transformed HEK293
cells mainly express the L-isoform, colonic tumors increasingly express
the S-isoform, suggesting a differential role of these isoforms in the
normal vs cancer cell biology. Thus over-expression of DCLK1-S/PG may
serve as a robust diagnostic/prognostic marker, and provide a useful
target for treating cancer-stem-cells, while sparing normal stem cells
(which largely express the L-isoform and do not express PG).This work was
supported by NIH Grant to PS (R01CA09795909).

