Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNA-mediated anticancer properties of the PPAR-activator
fenofibrate on glioblastoma cell growth and migration.


Background: Glioblastoma is an aggressive tumor which originates from the
glial cells and accounts for nearly 50% of adult brain tumors. These
tumors are characterized by rapid proliferation, aggressive metastatic
potential, and resistance to radio- and chemotherapy. MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
are 22-nucleotides long RNAs that regulate gene expression
post-transcriptionally. Fenofibrate is a potent agonist of peroxisome
proliferator activated receptor alpha (PPAR) that is used for the
treatment of cardiovascular disease and various metabolic disorders. In
addition, treatment with Fenofibrate results in the proliferation of
peroxisomes and a marked reduction in the growth of Glioblastoma
cells.Methods: To evaluate the effects of treatment on miRNA expression,
we used TaqMan quantitative real-time PCR assays from Life Technologies
(Grand Island, NY). miRNAs were cloned into BLOCK-iT Pol II miR RNAi
Expression Vectors (Life Technologies). Cell growth was evaluated using
Guava ViaCount Reagent (Guava Technologies, Hayward, CA). Migration of
miRNA-expressing cells was assessed 24h after plating on 8 m membranes
(BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA).Results: In this study, we utilized the
LN229 Glioblastoma cell line and found that among the miRNAs up-regulated
by Fenofibrate treatment, miR-634 and miR-136 targeted CYR61, a protein
involved in migration and proliferation of cancer cells. We additionally
found that miR-136 was up-regulated by Fenofibrate treatment while
miR-155, another miRNA previously shown to target CYR61, was
down-regulated by Fenofibrate. All three miRNAs were predicted and
validated to directly target the 3-UTR of Cyr61. Over-expression of
miR-136 and miR-634 miRNAs negatively affected proliferation, but not
migration, of LN229 cells. Forced expression of miR-155 reduced migration
and addition of recombinant Cyr61 reversed this impairment in migration.
Investigation of the signaling pathways regulated by miR-634, revealed an
increased phosphorylation of p70 S6 kinase (Thr389), suggesting an
induction of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1 pathway.
Induction of the mTOR pathway was dependent on Akt and Erk activation. In
miR-634 overexpressing cells, TSC2, a negative regulator of mTOR
signaling, was found to be decreased. Further studies on the differential
roles of miRs-136, -155, and -634 in controlling cell growth, cell size,
and migration will provide important information on the molecular
mechanisms involved in the anticancer properties of Fenofibrate.

