Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circadian rhythms of glioma stem cells and progenitor cells.


The circadian timing system generates and maintains daily rhythms in
physiological processes throughout the body. Disruption of circadian
timing is associated with higher cancer incidence and more malignant
cancers, although the interactions between cancer and circadian rhythms
remain unclear. Embryonic stem cells appear to lack endogenous circadian
rhythms until they differentiate. We asked whether cancer stem cells
(CSCs) also lack persistent circadian oscillations at the molecular
level. An inability to generate circadian rhythms may be linked to the
undifferentiated state of CSCs, and treatments that can induce clock gene
expression might help to initiate rhythms and promote differentiation.
Because CSCs appear to evade standard cancer therapies that are effective
against non-CSCs new methods to force their differentiation would be
useful. To examine the circadian properties of CSCs, we selected the C6
rat glioma cell line because it expresses a strong circadian rhythm in
gene expression. C6 CSCs have been characterized through flow cytometry
by the side-population cell sorting method that relies on the ability of
CSCs to efflux the fluorescent dye Hoechst 33342. We developed a Hoechst
dye-exclusion method to identify putative CSCs in C6 monolayer cultures.
This cell subpopulation failed to show a circadian rhythm in nuclear
transport of a fusion protein of GFP and the circadian clock component
mPER2, while the remaining cells were rhythmic. Evidence that these
non-rhythmic cells are CSCs was shown by their proliferation in a medium
that promotes stem cell growth and their prevalence in neurospheres grown
from the C6 line that are masses of CSCs and partially differentiated
cells including progenitor cells. The spheres showed immunostaining for
the stem cell surface marker CD-133 and they could be induced to form
astrocyte and neuron-like cells according to the cell-specific markers
GFAP and beta III-tubulin, respectively. To determine whether the
neurospheres are capable of generating circadian rhythms, C6 cells
expressing a firefly luciferase and mPER2 fusion protein under control by
the mPer2 gene promoter were imaged after they formed neurospheres.
Circadian rhythms in bioluminescence persisted when the cells were
synchronized with a 2-hour pulse of forskolin that induces clock genes
but not when the spheres were imaged without forskolin treatment. We
interpret these results as indicating a lack of circadian clocks in CSCs
but circadian clocks functioning in progenitor cells of neurospheres that
require synchronization for coordinated circadian activity. Because CSCs
in the microenvironment of tumors may also be arrhythmic, efforts to
manipulate circadian clock genes should be examined when treating gliomas
and possibly other cancers.

