Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stable knockdown of osteoprotegerin increases cell proliferation
and metastasis in breast cancer cells.


Human breast cancer cells express and secrete osteoprotegerin (OPG, also
called TNFRSF11B), a negative regulator for osteoclast differentiation.
Previous in vitro data indicated that OPG expression promotes survival of
breast cancer cells by inhibiting the apoptotic effect of TRAIL, through
direct interaction of OPG with TRAIL. We generated stably transfected
OPG-knockdown (KD) MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, using OPG shRNA
clones, to examine the effect of OPG expression on primary tumor growth
and metastasis in vivo. Positive selection of successfully transfected
clones revealed that OPG KD cells expressed 60% less OPG (mRNA and
protein) than control shRNA cells. OPG expression in control shRNA cells
was not different from wild-type (wt) cells. Cell proliferation showed a
small decrease after TRAIL challenge of KD cells compared to control and
wt cells, assessed by MTT-assay, suggesting this was not a significant
interaction. We decided to investigate the impact of OPG KD on tumor
growth and metastasis using the chick embryo in vivo model. In brief,
fertilized white leghorn chicken eggs were incubated for 10 days, after
which the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) was inoculated with 3 million KD
or control cells. After an additional 7 days incubation, the primary
tumor and a portion of the distant CAM were excised and measured for
weight and the presence of human DNA, respectively. Primary tumor weight
of KD cells was 31% higher than primary tumors from control cells.
Moreover detection of human DNA in the distant CAM was 58% higher in eggs
incubated with KD cells than in eggs incubated with control cells. Cell
growth experiments in vitro showed that cell proliferation of KD cells
was 40% higher compared to control and wt cells, as measured by trypan
exclusion method. For validation in human cancer patients we mined a
public microarray database, detailing gene expression in primary breast
tumors. In agreement with our experimental data, high OPG gene expression
in breast tumors was correlated with better prognosis. Contrary to the
current understanding of OPG expression in breast cancer cells, our data
indicates that OPG expression in breast cancer cells inhibits growth, the
ability to metastasize and may promote survival in breast cancer patients.

