Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mechanism of mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition driven by
hepatocytes in prostate cancer.


Metastasis of prostate cancer (PCa) almost always leads inexorably to
death, but little is known about how cancer cells seed ectopic sites and
survive in these inhospitable sites. Our lab has previously shown that
carcinoma cells undergo a phenotypic change driven by the metastatic
microenvironment, to attain an, at least partial mesenchymal
(like)-to-epithelial reverting transition (MET/MErT). This phenotypic
plasticity, marked by E-cadherin re-expression, plays a key role in
metastatic breast and prostate cancer cell survival in vitro and is
though to occur after seeding in the ectopic sites and subsequent
treatment with chemotherapeutics. In this study we are seeking the
pathway(s) involved in the mesenchymal to epithelial transition and
subsequent cell survival. By using hepatocytes co-cultured with prostate
cancer cells (DU145 or PC3) we found MET PCa cells displayed more
resistance to chemotherapeutics, cell death inducing cytokines, or a
combination of both. Moreover, E-cadherin knockdown in PCa cells
abolished this survival advantage conferred by hepatocytes. This
indicated the key role of E-cadherin in hepatocyted driven PCa cells
survival. We focused next on the feedback pathways activated by
E-cadherin homotypic binding, the MAP kinases. Our data showed that p38
MAPK regulated E-cadherin expression during DU145 cells MET driven by
hepatocytes. By using immunofluorescence, the level of phosphor-p38 was
much lower in DU145 cells co-cultured with hepatocytes, and the p38 was
only detected in the nucleus, which suggested that hepatocytes suppressed
p38 MAPK activity in DU145 cells. When co-cultured with hepatocytes, p38
knockdown DU145 displayed much higher levels of E-cadherin, especially in
the rim of cells. Additionally, both p38 inhibitor SB202580 and p38 siRNA
transfected cells expressed higher E-cadherin than control in DU145.
Taken together, hepatocytes regulate PCa cells to undergo MET via
suppressing p38 MAPK activity in the cancer cells.

