Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gemcitabine (GEM), a drug with clinical activity against pediatric
solid tumors, demonstrates satisfactory CNS penetration in a preclinical
murine medulloblastoma (MB) model.


GEM, a fluorinated nucleoside analog, was identified by in vitro
high-throughput screening as a potent inhibitor of murine tumor cell
lines derived from a preclinical model of a highly-aggressive subgroup of
pediatric MB (MYC-driven Group 3). To support the potential
preclinical-to-clinical transition of GEM for this indication, we
determined the pharmacokinetic (PK) disposition and central nervous
system (CNS) penetration of GEM in a murine Group 3 MB model. A serial
sacrifice plasma PK study (single sample per mouse) was performed in
tumor-bearing mice to obtain initial GEM plasma PK parameter estimates.
These estimates were used to inform a D-optimal, limited sampling
strategy for microdialysis experiments. Cerebral microdialysis was
applied in CD-1 nude mice bearing orthotopic allograft Group 3 mouse MB
tumor lines (SJCRH 2416/2417), which permitted repeated in situ
measurements of GEM tumor extracellular fluid (tECF) concentrations.
Microdialysis probes (BASi; 1 mm membrane) were introduced into the tumor
through cannulae inserted during tumor cell implantation. After
microdialysis probe equilibration, 5 mice were each dosed with 60 mg/kg
of GEM via tail vein injection. In each mouse, serial plasma samples were
collected at 0.083, 1.5, and 6 hrs after dosing, and tECF dialysate
fractions were collected over 60 min intervals for up to 6 hrs post-dose.
To measure GEM in both plasma and tECF, a robust, sensitive LC-MS/MS
method was developed and validated. Both within-day and between-day
precision (%CV) were 7% and accuracy ranged from 95.3% to 103%. GEM
concentration-time plasma and tECF data were accurately described using a
unified population PK model, consisting of a central plasma compartment,
a peripheral compartment, and a perfusion-limited well-stirred tumor
compartment. For modeling purposes, both the plasma flow to the brain and
the volume of the brain ECF were fixed to published values. The PK
analysis showed that plasma elimination of GEM followed bi-exponential
kinetics, with an initial rapid decay (mean SD) t1/2,alpha of 8.2 3.3 min
followed by a relatively slower beta phase t1/2,beta of 1.6 0.3 hrs. The
(mean SD) area under the concentration-time curve (AUC0-) for GEM in
plasma was 544 199 g/ml*min, consistent with previously published AUC
values in pediatric patients at tolerable dosages (1,200 mg/m2). On
average, GEM CNS penetration (calculated as the tECF/plasma GEM AUC0-8hrs
ratio from the simulated concentration-time curves) was 0.21 0.16. The
peak tECF concentrations ranged from 2.7 to 76 M, and simulated tECF
concentrations exceeded in vitro cell line IC50 values for approximately
6 hours. Overall, these data provide convincing rationale to prioritize
GEM efficacy evaluations in additional MB models within our preclinical
brain tumor drug development program.

