Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plk1 decreases DNA double-strand break (DSB) formation during
replication-stalling genotoxic stress.


Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) is a key regulator of mitosis and its
over-expression/ deregulation is linked to cellular transformation.
Recent studies highlight its role in resumption of cell cycle progression
after DNA damage. Plk1 has also been shown to enhance DNA replication
under stress of stalled replication forks. We reported Plk1
activation-induced G2/M checkpoint bypass in normal human lung cells
(HLFs), in the presence of acute genotoxic stress. The present aim was to
determine the effect of Plk1 on DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) during
genotoxic stress. In the present study, we measured DNA DSB induction in
HLFs by Cr(VI), etoposide, and H2O2 after Plk1 activation using the comet
assay and H2AX immunofluorescence staining. We used equitoxic
concentrations of the different genotoxins and found that DNA DSBs
increased > 2 fold after exposure to 3 M Cr(VI), 12.5 M etoposide, and
150 M H2O2, respectively, and persisted for at least 4h. Transfection of
a Plk1 constitutively active (c/a) mutant (T210D) abrogated both Cr(VI)-
and etoposide-induced DNA DSBs as early as 30 min for the duration of
treatment, in comparison to the vector-transfected cells. In sharp
contrast, Plk1 had no effect on H2O2-induced DNA DSBs. Consistent with
DNA DSB formation, Cr(VI) exposure was associated with G1 arrest, at
least at 4h, as determined by BrdU incorporation. Moreover, Plk1 enhanced
S phase progression during Cr(VI) treatment, which was accompanied by
increased replication fork velocity and longer inter-origin distances as
determined by using a single-molecule approach based on molecular
combing. Expression of a Plk1 kinase-dead mutant (K82R) also abrogated
DNA DSBs during Cr(VI) treatment, suggesting that this effect may be
independent of Plk1 kinase activity. In summary, our data underline the
ability of Plk1 to override DNA DSB-induced checkpoints, and to decrease
DSBs after replication-stalling genotoxin exposure. We postulate these
effects to be due to the replication-enhancing ability of Plk1, which may
occur at the expense of genomic stability. This work was supported in
part by NIH grants CA107972 and ES017334 (S.C.); ES05304 (S.R.P.); and a
PhRMA Foundation predoctoral fellowship (G.C.K.).

