Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell cycle requirements shape ovarian cancer progression.


Acquired resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs and subsequent recurrence
of drug-resistant cancer are serious challenges associated with
epithelial ovarian cancer. Most high-grade tumors initially respond well
to the combination of platinum and taxane-based agents but recur as
platinum-resistant disease, which is incurable. In addition, a subset of
primary tumors, including CCNE1-amplified tumors, are inherently less
susceptible to standard chemotherapy. Studies by The Cancer Genome Atlas
have revealed that CCNE1 (cyclin E) amplification is mutually exclusive
with mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2, which render ovarian cancer cells
sensitive to DNA-damaging agents and PARP inhibitors, as a result of
synthetic lethality. In order to develop a similar therapeutic concept
for CCNE1-amplified cancers, we have studied responses and resistance
mechanisms of human ovarian cancer cells to several pharmacological
inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK). Functional and biochemical
studies have established cyclin E as an activator of CDK, which
phosphorylate the RB tumor suppressor. However, despite the functional
importance of the RB pathway in cancer, CDK inhibitors (CDKi) have yet to
make a significant impact on the management of solid tumors.Here, we
describe oncogenic pathways that are activated in CDKi-resistant cells
and play critical roles in tumor progression and drug resistance.
Targeting individual CDK or subsets of multiple CDK in vitro and in vivo,
we found that cyclin E dependence was the main driving force that shaped
tumor progression in different model systems of CCNE1-amplified and
recurrent ovarian cancer. We identified robust and specific compensatory
mechanisms that sustain cyclin E-associated activity in CDKi-resistant
cells via activation of oncogenic signaling upstream of the cyclin
E-RB-E2F axis. Specific targeting of cooperating oncogenes increased CDKi
efficacy and prevented the outgrowth of CDKi-resistant cancer cells.
Collectively, our results suggest that CDKi can be highly effective
elements of combination therapy.

