Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinically relevant efficacious doses of resveratrol induce
changes in the AMPK/mTOR pathway, accompanied with senescence in
preclinical models of colorectal cancer .


Resveratrol, a polyphenol present in red wine and peanuts exerts an array
of beneficial effects, including anticancer activity and calorie
restriction (CR) mimicry. Recent work from our laboratory has shown that
low doses of resveratrol, comparable to amounts contained in a glass of
red wine significantly reduced adenoma development in ApcMin mice when
given with a high fat diet (Scott et al, unpublished). The protective
effect was more pronounced than that caused by higher amounts, equivalent
to doses used in clinical trials. The CR activity of resveratrol is
mediated via the energy regulator AMP-activated kinase (AMPK). This study
aims to investigate whether AMPK signalling contributes to the
chemopreventive effect of resveratrol.Intestinal mucosa from female
ApcMin mice maintained on a high fat diet containing resveratrol (0.00007
or 0.014% in their diet) for 10 weeks was analysed by Western blotting to
assess AMPK signalling, and the induction of autophagy and senescence.
For more detailed mechanistic interrogation APC10.1 cells originally
derived from adenomas of ApcMin mice were incubated with resveratrol
(0.001-10M) for 6 days and protein expression examined.The extent of AMPK
activation in vivo correlated with the degree of adenoma inhibition; AMPK
expression and phosphorylation was evident in mucosa of resveratrol
treated mice, but not in control animals, with highest levels in those
that ingested the low dose. This chronic resveratrol treatment was also
associated with increased expression of p21, a biomarker of senescence,
particularly at the low dose. In APC10.1 cells resveratrol caused
significant increases in AMPK phosphorylation at 0.01, 0.1 and 1M, but
not at 10M, consistent with a bell-shaped dose-response. Activity was
accompanied by significantly reduced phosphorylation of the mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR), which is regulated by AMPK signalling, plus
its downstream targets p70S6K and 4E-BP1. Furthermore, these
concentrations also increased autophagy and senescence, as measured by
LC3-II and p21 expression, respectively, and greater numbers of
senescence-associated -galactosidase positive cells.The results suggest
that activation of AMPK signalling and the induction of senescence may
contribute to the cancer chemopreventive effects of resveratrol at
dietary relevant intakes.

