Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioluminescent assays for investigating cell metabolism.


Cell metabolism is an important and expanding area of research in the
field of cancer biology. Simple, rapid assays for studying cellular
metabolic pathways, their enzymes, metabolites and cofactors can
facilitate these studies. We have developed two novel bioluminescent
technologies, one for monitoring cell viability, and the other for
monitoring changes in cellular nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides, that
can facilitate the study of cell metabolism and its regulation.The
bioluminescent cell viability assay is based on the metabolic activity of
live cells. Metabolically active cells reduce a proluminogenic substrate
in vivo which is then detected by a luciferase enzyme in the media. The
luminescence output is correlated with the number of viable cells. The
assay is non-toxic, sensitive (detects less than 10 cells/well) and has a
large dynamic range (S/B>100). The key, differentiating feature of this
assay is the incorporation of the recently developed stable and very
bright NanoLuc luciferase and its profurimazine substrate, which allows
changes in viability to be monitored in real-time and continuously, over
extended periods of time, from the same sample.Three homogeneous,
one-step, bioluminescent assays have been developed for the detection of
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides, specific for: (1) reduced forms NADH
and NADPH, (2) non-phosphorylated forms NAD and NADH, and (3)
phosphorylated forms NADP and NADPH. The assays are based on the reaction
of the enzyme diaphorase with a proluciferin substrate, which in the
presence of NADH or NADPH is converted to luciferin, a substrate for
luciferase. These assays are sensitive (LOD 50 nM) and have large maximum
signal windows (S/B > 100), two advantages over currently available
colorimetric and fluorescent detection methods. They are also robust, and
amenable to automated and high-throughput protocols (Z > 0.8). The high
sensitivity, one-step reagent addition, and no requirement for sample
processing, permit an in-well protocol for the assay of cells directly in
culture plate wells. Changes in cellular NAD levels can be rapidly
monitored, as demonstrated using FK866, an inhibitor of NAD biosynthesis.
FK866 caused a decrease in NAD levels in multiple cell types with good
signal windows (S/B > 10) and expected pharmacology (IC50 values = 1-10
nM).

