Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer MET at the metastatic lesion preserves the malignant
features acquired via EMT.


Purpose: Cancer EMT is one of the mechanisms to acquire malignant
features including invasiveness, drug resistance and stemness. However,
the subsequent mechanism after EMT toward progression has not been fully
understood yet. Based on the EMT-centered theory, it is simply thought
that the reversal event of EMT, MET," is caused in the tumor cells at the
distant metastatic lesions. However, the molecular mechanism still
remains unclear. In this study, we attempted to clarify the post-EMT
mechanism in tumor cells.Results: Firstly, we prepared tumor cells
harvested from metastatic lesions of mice after tumor implantation
provisionally as post-EMT tumor cells. Murine metastatic melanoma B16-F10
cells were transduced with a neo resistant gene, and were subcutaneously
(s.c.) implanted in many C57BL/6 mice to obtain spontaneous tumor
metastasis. Three weeks later, various tissues including bone marrow were
harvested from the mice, and the single-cell suspensions were cultured in
G418-supplemented medium for tumor selection. To characterize the
post-EMT tumor cells, RT-PCR, immunostaining and cellular functional
assay were conducted. As compared to the primary tumor cells harvested
from s.c. tumor tissues, these tumor cells proliferated extremely slowly,
and were resistant to chemotherapeutics, but rapidly grew in vivo after
implantation. However, these tumor cells were very adhesive accompanied
by increase of epithelial markers such as E-cadherin, but not mesenchymal
markers such as Snail, indicating epithelial features. In addition, its
chemoresistance and in vivo tumorgenesis activity of these tumor cells
were superior to those of even Snail-transduced B16-F10 tumor cells,
which were harvested from the metastatic lesions in a similar way. DNA
microarray analysis revealed the significant upregulation of epithelial
markers and drug resistant genes such as c-kit and GDF15 in the post-EMT
tumor cells, as compared to those of the Snail transfectant. These imply
that MET may not be just a reversion of EMT.Conclusions: These results
suggest that tumor cells revert into an epithelial state preserving
malignant features acquired via EMT even after Snail lost at the
metastatic lesions toward progression. We are now attempting to elucidate
the molecular mechanism specific for the unique transition utilizing DNA
microarray data.

