Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical impact of NF-KB activation in diffuse large B cell
lymphoma.


Deregulated nuclear factor KB (NF-KB) activity has been associated with a
number of lymphoproliferative diseases, including diffuse large B cell
lymphoma (DLBCL), but the importance and consequence of this activation
are still not fully understood. In this study, we describe the extent of
NF-KB activation in a range of human lymphoma types and observe a
frequent concurrent activation of both classical and alternative pathways
in DLBCL. The activation of the classical and alternative NF-KB pathways,
was present in 34.8% and 29.3% of DLBCL cases respectively, as assessed
by nuclear expression of p50 (classical pathway) and p52 (alternative
pathway) by immunohistochemistry in a series of 167 samples. Activation
of NF-KB was observed in both germinal centre B-cell like (GC) and
activated B-cell like (ABC) subtypes, although with a predominance of
classical NF-KB in the ABC subtype (41,8% positive cases versus 21,2% in
the GC subtype). In our cohort of samples from 167 R-CHOP treated DLBCL
patients, excluding cases positive for Epstein-Barr virus, nuclear
expression of NF-KB was significantly associated with a superior overall
survival (Log Rank pDeregulated nuclear factor KB (NF-KB) activity has
been associated with a number of lymphoproliferative diseases, including
diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), but the importance and consequence
of this activation are still not fully understood. In this study, we
describe the extent of NF-KB activation in a range of human lymphoma
types and observe a frequent concurrent activation of both classical and
alternative pathways in DLBCL. The activation of the classical and
alternative NF-KB pathways, was present in 34.8% and 29.3% of DLBCL cases
respectively, as assessed by nuclear expression of p50 (classical
pathway) and p52 (alternative pathway) by immunohistochemistry in a
series of 167 samples. Activation of NF-KB was observed in both germinal
centre B-cell like (GC) and activated B-cell like (ABC) subtypes,
although with a predominance of classical NF-KB in the ABC subtype (41,8%
positive cases versus 21,2% in the GC subtype). In our cohort of samples
from 167 R-CHOP treated DLBCL patients, excluding cases positive for
Epstein-Barr virus, nuclear expression of NF-KB was significantly
associated with a superior overall survival (Log Rank p<0.05), as
compared to those without nuclear NF-KB. The 3-year overall survival rate
in the NF-KB positive group was 83.6% compared to 68.0% in the NF-KB
negative group. While p50 expression alone did not give rise to any
significant differences in the survival curves, p52 expression did
associate significantly with better clinical outcome (p=0.032). Thus,
alternative NF-KB activation is frequently present in DLBCL tumors, is
not associated with the ABC subtype, and is characterized by an enhanced
overall survival.

