Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The NF-kB pathway is constitutively active in endometrial cancer.


The NF-B Pathway is Constitutively Active in Endometrial CancerMetastatic
endometrial cancer (EC) is a disease for which therapeutic options are
limited and prognosis is poor. Although 75% of endometrial cancers are
diagnosed at an early stage and cured by surgery, 15-20% develop
metastases and die from their disease. Uterine papillary serous carcinoma
(UPSC) occurs in less than 10% of patients, but has a worse clinical
outcome. Prior studies suggest that NF-kB signaling may play a role in
UPSC. We therefore proceeded with a detailed investigation of the NF-B
pathway in EC.Methods: A set of 11 endometrial cancer cell lines,
representing endometrioid EC and UPSC, were tested for sensitivity to a
specific inhibitor of IKK after 3 days of drug treatment using XTT assay.
Western blot was used to assess changes in NF-B proteins after treatment
of sensitive UPSC cell lines ARK-1 and ACI-126 with IKK inhibitor over a
time series ranging from 15 min to 24h. RNA was extracted from ARK-1 and
ACI-126 cell lines after 48h treatment with IKK-2 inhibitor IV or DMSO
control, and after transfection of the same cell lines with IB
super-repressor or empty vector control. RNA was hybridized to Affymetrix
U133 Plus2.0 microarray platform for gene expression profiling and the
data was analyzed using mAdb. Gene and protein expression was examined in
patient samples to verify biologic relevance.Results: Six of 11 cell
lines were sensitive to IKK inhibitor with IC50s ranging between 4 and
10uM. The highest sensitivity occurred in two UPSC cell lines ARK-1 and
ACI-126. Following pharmacologic IKK inhibition, nuclear levels of NF-B
p65 decreased by 3h and began to increase again from 6h to 24h.
Cytoplasmic NF-B p65 increased from 15 min to 3h and then began to fall.
Gene expression profiling after IKK inhibition, either by drug treatment
or by mutant IkBa super-repressor, revealed an overlapping gene signature
in the two UPSC cell lines. The genes were co-expressed across the gene
expression profiles of patients with EC, and were significantly highest
in African American women with UPSC.Conclusions: There is aberrant
signaling through the NF-B pathway in a subset of EC. An IKK target gene
signature shows that this pathway is most relevant in African American
women with UPSC. Therefore, targeting NF-kB may provide a novel treatment
strategy for this underserved population with a rare variant of EC.

