Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) induces cell scattering
by upregulating krppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) through the PKC-ERK signaling
axis.


Krppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) is a C2H2 zinc-finger transcription factor
known to regulate multiple cellular processes including cell
proliferation, differentiation and stemness. Cell scattering is
characterized by disruption of E-cadherin-mediated intercellular adhesion
and acquisition of fibroblast-like morphology with increased motility and
invasiveness, a cellular process reminiscent of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). We have previously demonstrated the involvement of KLF4
in hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)-induced cell scattering (Lai et al., J.
Cell Sci., in press). Still, the question as to whether KLF4 is generally
involved in cell-scattered response induced by other stimuli such as
12-O-Tetradecanoylphorbol-13-Acetate (TPA) has never been formerly
addressed and thus the main focus of this study. Using human
hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2 as the cellular model, we herein
presented evidence that KLF4 was clearly up-regulated following TPA
stimulation. RT-PCR analysis and luciferase reporter assay revealed that
both the mRNA and promoter activity of KLF4 was markedly increased by
TPA, indicating that TPA up-regulated KLF4 at the level of transcription.
Of note, knockdown of KLF4 severely impaired the level of TPA-induced
HepG2 cell scattering, highlighting the requirement of KLF4 in
TPA-induced scattered response. Additionally, we found that the promoting
effect of TPA on KLF4 expression was clearly blocked when cells were
pre-treated with the pan-PKC inhibitor G6983 as well as the PKC-specific
inhibitor G6976. Likewise, TPA-induced cell scattering and KLF4
up-regulation were ablated when ERK activity was inhibited by U0126.
Taken together, our results defined the involvement of KLF4 in
TPA-induced cell scattered response. Particularly, TPA engages the
PKC-ERK signaling axis to induce transcriptional up-regulation of KLF4,
leading to the initiation of cell scattering. Our findings further
implicate the possible involvement of KLF4 in other TPA-induced cellular
responses such as cell migration and invasion.

