Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of RasGRP3 expression and function in human breast
cancers and breast-derived ductal adenocarcinoma cell lines.


RasGRP3 is a member of the Ras guanine nucleotide releasing protein
(RasGRP) family of the Ras-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factors.
These proteins play role in the regulation of the activity of Ras
signaling pathway which constitutive activation is demonstrated in many
cancer types. The RasGRP3 protein has potential oncogenic effect, the
amplification of the gen of the protein is observed in many malignant
cancer types. Recent investigations have highlighted that RasGRP3 plays a
role in tumorigenesis, hence it exerts effect on the proliferation,
migration, survival and tumorigenecity of prostate adenocarcinoma-derived
and melanoma cells. In light of this potential oncogenic effect we have
examined the change of expression and potencial function of RasGRP3 in
breast-derived ductal adenocarcinoma.The RasGRP3 and phosphoRasGRP3
expressions were examined in human ductal adenocarcinoma-derived samples
from different grades and in 1 primary ductal adenocarcinoma-derived cell
line called BT-474 and 5 different metastatic: JIMT-1, MCF7, SK-BR-3,
MDA-MB-453 s T-47D cell lines both in mRNA (Q-PCR) and protein levels
(Western blot; immunhisto-and cytochemistry). To explore the biological
function of the protein RasGRP3 knockdown cultures were created on MCF7
and T-47D cell lines. To examine the role of RasGRP3 in the viability of
cells annexin-V/PI staining was performed. To clarify the function of the
protein in cell proliferation and in the developement of resistance
against chemotherapeutic drugs Tamoxifen and Herceptin CyQuant assay was
performed. To observe the RasGRP3 function in tumor formation and
maintance SCID mouse model was used.According to our results the
expression of RasGRP3 and the active phosphoRasGRP3 were elevated at
protein level on the human ductal adenocarcinoma samples. This expression
was increased in the tumor samples compared to the normal. RasGRP3 was
found typically in the cytoplasm of the cells, while the phosphoRasGRP3
showed strong nuclear reaction. The RasGRP3 expression of the BT-474 cell
line was lower then in the metastatics. The downregulation of RasGRP3
induced apoptosis, inhibited cell proliferation and sensitizied the T-47D
cells to killing by Tamoxifen and Herceptin. In vivo tumor growth in
mouse xenografts of both cell lines were decreased. Suppression of
RasGRP3 expression inhibited downstream RasGRP3 responses AKT and ERK1/2
phosphorylation were reduced.Our results suggest the RasGRP3 may have an
importante role in the regulation of cell growth, chemotherapeutic
resistance, and tumor formation in breast cancer.

