Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Age-related DNA methylation in normal breast tissues.


Age-related DNA methylation in normal breast tissuesIt is well
established that age is a key risk factor for breast cancer, with
increasing incidence associated with older age. Epigenetic mechanisms,
such as DNA methylation alterations, may contribute to age-related
increases in breast cancer risk. Altered patterns of DNA methylation can
modify the regulation of gene expression or expression potential, and DNA
methylation alterations are frequently observed in the early stages of
breast tumorigenesis. However, genome-wide interindividual variation in
normal breast DNA methylation has not been well characterized for its
relation with age and other key breast cancer risk factors. To
investigate the relationship between age and DNA methylation in normal
breast tissues, we first performed a meta-analysis using two independent
data sets GSE32393 (n=23) and GSE31979 (n=15), from the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) database. For each of the considered datasets, genome-wide
DNA methylation was assessed using the Illumina Infinium
HumanMethylation27 Beadchip, which profiles the methylation status of
27,000 CpG loci, associated with >14,000 genes. Associations between DNA
methylation and age were examined by fitting a series of linear
regression models to arcsine square root transformed average beta values
for all CpG loci in both data sets. Between these data sets, 204 CpG loci
were significantly and consistently associated (P Age-related DNA
methylation in normal breast tissuesIt is well established that age is a
key risk factor for breast cancer, with increasing incidence associated
with older age. Epigenetic mechanisms, such as DNA methylation
alterations, may contribute to age-related increases in breast cancer
risk. Altered patterns of DNA methylation can modify the regulation of
gene expression or expression potential, and DNA methylation alterations
are frequently observed in the early stages of breast tumorigenesis.
However, genome-wide interindividual variation in normal breast DNA
methylation has not been well characterized for its relation with age and
other key breast cancer risk factors. To investigate the relationship
between age and DNA methylation in normal breast tissues, we first
performed a meta-analysis using two independent data sets GSE32393 (n=23)
and GSE31979 (n=15), from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. For
each of the considered datasets, genome-wide DNA methylation was assessed
using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation27 Beadchip, which profiles
the methylation status of 27,000 CpG loci, associated with >14,000 genes.
Associations between DNA methylation and age were examined by fitting a
series of linear regression models to arcsine square root transformed
average beta values for all CpG loci in both data sets. Between these
data sets, 204 CpG loci were significantly and consistently associated (P
< 0.05) with subject age. Relative to the distribution of CpG loci on the
array, we observed a significant enrichment of age-related DNA
methylation patterns at CpG loci residing in CpG islands (P = 8.7e-6).
Further, compared to non-island CpGs, loci in CpG islands were
significantly more likely to exhibit increased age-related methylation (P
= 0.008). To validate observed age-related DNA methylation, we performed
bisulfite pyrosequencing of selected CpGs in an independent set of normal
breast tissues (n=20) obtained through the National Disease Research
Interchange. Our findings demonstrate consistent age-related methylation
changes in normal breast tissue that may represent early events
contributing to breast carcinogenesis and additional investigation for
enrichment of local sequence and bioinformatic features near CpGs with
age-related methylation is ongoing. This work contributes to the
understanding of epigenetic mechanisms by which age serves as a major
risk factor in the development of breast cancer.

