Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA expression of non-terminal respiratory unit type lung
adenocarcinoma.


Background: Lung adenocarcinomas can be classified into two major
subtypes, terminal respiratory unit (TRU) type and non-TRU type. We
previously reported that non-TRU type adenocarcinoma has unique clinical
and morphological features compared with TRU type adenocarcinoma. In
brief, among 36 cases of non-terminal respiratory unit type
adenocarcinoma, 24 cases revealed mucous columnar cell changes that were
continuous with bronchial ciliated columnar cells. The mucous columnar
cells became dysplastic showing loss of cilia, disorientation, and
enlarged nuclei. Adenocarcinoma arose from these dysplastic mucous
columnar cells and, characteristically, this type of adenocarcinoma
showed acute inflammation, and honeycombing changes in the background.
TTF1 immunostaining was consistently negative. In a case study with 14
males and 10 females, including 12 smokers or ex-smokers, EGFR and KRAS
mutations were detected in 3 and 6 patients, respectively. We think that
this kind of adenocarcinoma arising through mucous columnar cell change
belongs to non-terminal respiratory unit type adenocarcinoma, and mucous
columnar cell change is a precursor lesion of pulmonary
adenocarcinoma.Objectives: We investigated whether microRNA (miRNA)
expression profiles can differentiate between non-TRU type and TRU type
lung adenocarcinoma.Methods: MiRNA expression in lung adenocarcinoma with
non-TRU and TRU type was analyzed by microarray analysis with 1205 human
and 144 human viral miRNAs.Results: Eight pairs of lung adenocarcinomas
and corresponding noncancerous lung tissues (4 for non-TRU type and 4 for
TRU type) were analyzed by microarray analysis. Initially, 44 miRNAs
showed statistical differences in expression between lung cancer tissues
and corresponding noncancerous tissues. Comparison analyses between
non-TRU type and TRU type revealed 30 miRNAs with statistically different
expression. Particularly, hsa-mir-494 and ebv-mir-BART19 were upregulated
with more than 5-fold difference as compared with TRU type
adenocarcinoma. Similarly, hsa-mir-551b was downregulated at more than
5-fold as compared with TRU type adenocarcinoma. Only 2 miRNAs (hsa-mir-1
and hsa-mir-133b) were shared in both non-TRU and TRU type of
adenocarcinoma.Conclusion: We demonstrated that non-TRU type
adenocarcinoma showed different miRNAs expression patterns compared with
TRU type adenocarcinoma, suggesting different carcinogenic pathways for
these tumors. Further studies are required for validation the results
from microarray analysis.

