Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of negative selection strategy for enrichment of
circulating melanoma cells (CMCs) from patients with metastatic melanoma.


Introduction. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have emerged as a predictive
biomarker in the treatment of metastatic breast, colorectal and prostate
cancers. Non-epithelial tumors such as melanoma also present evidence of
circulating cells that have been difficult to detect due to technological
limitations. Previous clinical studies have shown presence of melanoma
specific marker mRNAs circulating in the blood, used as a surrogate of
the circulating melanoma cell (CMC). This study was designed to use a
negative cell selection platform to enrich CMCs from blood. The approach
involved depletion of red blood cells by centrifugation and lysis, and
white blood cells by immunomagnetic tagging with pan-leukocyte (CD45)
antibody and magnetic separation. The enriched non-hematopoietic cell
analysis was optimized for high sensitivity and specificity of CMC
detection using a panel of antibodies against known melanoma markers. The
secondary goal was to estimate the number of CMCs per milliliter of blood
based on immunophenotype and morphology criteria.Methods. The study was
reviewed and approved by the IRB. The leukocyte depletion was
accomplished using a fluid dynamics-based quadrupole magnetic separating
device (1) which, in principle, enriches CMCs without affecting them by
immunomagnetic reagents. CMC cytospin smears were immunostained against
known melanoma markers (Melan-A and S100). A high magnification
microscopy imaging and a computer-aided image analysis were developed for
efficient CMC enumeration.Results. Based on preliminary studies with
SKMEL-28 melanoma cell line, normal adult blood controls and blood
samples from advanced melanoma patients, the CMC was defined as an
intact, nucleated cell, positive for Melan A or S100 and negative for
CD45. Separations of SKMEL-28 cells spiked at approximately one SKMEL-28
cell per million leukocytes resulted in high efficiency separation with a
mean recovery of (93.0 5.4 S.E.M.)% of SKMEL-28 cells. Samples obtained
from apparently healthy donor blood (n =5) had a baseline of 0-3 positive
cells per mL blood, whereas samples from stage IV melanoma patients (n
=8) exhibit CMC counts ranging from 78 to 28,500 cells per mL of
blood.Conclusions. Our study combines negative selection platform with
immunophenotypic and morphological criteria for CMC enrichment,
identification and enumeration. Interestingly, our preliminary results
indicate the presence of high numbers of CMCs in malignant melanoma
patients, providing basis for larger studies on correlations with
clinical outcomes of the disease. Moreover, negative selection method
lends itself to in vitro or in vivo culture bioassays, and molecular
marker assays such as qRT-PCR, genomic PCRs, FISH or microarrays.

