Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differing sensitivity to stage-specific autophagy inhibition.


Background: Autophagy is an intracellular process that involves the
sequestration of cytosolic proteins and organelles into double-membraned
vesicles called autophagosomes and their subsequent degradation in the
lysosome. This process is induced during cellular stress and is crucial
for maintaining proper homeostasis. Recently, autophagy has been
identified as a potential mechanism of chemoresistance. Thus, autophagy
inhibition has become an attractive anti-cancer therapy. However,
autophagy is a multi-step process and it is still unclear if blocking
autophagy at one particular stage is more advantageous than another.
Therefore, we inhibited autophagy at various points in the pathway using
genetic and pharmacologic means in multiple cancer models.Material and
Methods: Murine cell lines used were 4T1, mammary carcinoma, B16-F10,
melanoma, DLM8, osteosarcoma, and A20, lymphoma. Autophagy was inhibited
by multiple methods. The first method was pharmacologic inhibition using
10uM chloroquine (CQ) or 1nM bafilomycin A1 (Baf A1), doses sufficient to
inhibit autophagy. The second method was genetic knockdown by decreasing
expression of critical autophagy proteins Beclin-1 (Bcn-1) or Atg7 by
shRNA lentiviral delivery. Cells were assessed for protein knockdown by
western blot and qPCR analysis. Proliferation of cells in the presence or
absence of active autophagy was assessed using an Alamar Blue assay. For
cell cycle analysis, cells were grown for 48h, stained with propidium
iodine and analyzed by flow cytometry.Results and Conclusions: A
significant decrease in expression of Bcn-1 and Atg7 was observed after
lentiviral transduction. Autophagy was also successfully inhibited as
indicated by a failure to induce elevations in autophagy marker LC3 after
serum starvation, a positive autophagy control. CQ and Baf A1, which
inhibit late stage autophagy, had little effect on the 4T1 cells, but CQ
did inhibit the other three lines. Bcn-1 knockdown, preventing nucleation
of the autophagosome, was able to inhibit proliferation in all lines at a
level that was even more pronounced than CQ inhibition. In addition, the
percentage of cells in G1 significantly increased in the Bcn-1 knockdown
cells. Continued study with the Atg7 cells and Baf A1 will reveal if the
effects of CQ and Bcn-1 knockdown are merely off target effects or truly
autophagy inhibition. The inclusion of Vps 34 inhibitors and late stage
mediator knockdown lines will also be useful in determining if the early,
nucleation stage of autophagy is the critical step(s) to target. Lastly,
it will be important to determine if these effects differ when cells
experience stress, such as the presence of chemotherapy. These studies
suggest that the sensitivity toward autophagy inhibition may depend on
the stage of the pathway that is targeted and cancer
type.Acknowledgements:Role of Autophagy in Tumor Cell DeathNational
Cancer Institute 1R01CA150925

