Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simple identification of specific mutations using allele-specific
PCR primers and micro capillary electrophoresis (WAVE MCE).


Transgenomic, Inc. has developed a size-based analysis for the detection
of all EGFR Exon 19 deletions (including complex mutation) greater than 6
base pairs (ACE Kit EGFR Exon 19). Currently there are over 70 known EGFR
Exon 19 deletions in the region important for response of non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) to thymidine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). The majority
of these deletions are rare, but the patients may benefit from TKI
treatment if the deletion is present. In most current testing paradigms,
a NSCLC patient with one of these rare mutations would be considered EGFR
mutation negative and not receive TKI therapy. We have designed an easy,
size-based PCR assay to detect any of the deletions present in any sample
after a single PCR reaction. The assay is based on the separation of PCR
fragments of different sizes using microcapillary electrophyoresis (MCE).
Transgenomic's WAVE MCE platform can discriminate the deletions from the
wild-type sequence in EGFR Exon 19, however the exact nature of the
mutation cannot be determined. If the exact nature of the mutation is
required, the PCR fragment can be sequenced.To confirm that the platform
can detect common and rare mutations, plasmids containing various EGFR
Exon 19 deletions were synthesized, mixed with EGFR wild-type plasmids
and analyzed on the WAVE MCE platform. The Limit of detection for the
plasmid mixing experiments is between 0.5 and 1% for all plasmid
constructs tested. These plasmids include 6, 9, 15, 21, 24, and 25 bp
deletions . As all samples tested have some wild-type sequence present, 6
base pair deletions cannot be resolved from the wild-type fragment.
Several of the deletion constructs contain those not detected by any
allele-specific kit, however patients with these deletions, as determined
by Sanger sequence analysis, have benefitted from TKI therapy. In
addition cell line DNA and DNA isolated from FFPE sections have been
analyzed for the detection of EGFR Exon 19 deletions and similar limits
of detection (0.5-1.0%) were seen.This simple, size-based analysis for
EGFR Exon deletions will result in NSCLC patients with both common and
rare EGFR Exon 19 deletions being able to receive the treatment option
best suited for their molecular profile.

