Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo oncology target screening using a lentiviral inducible-
shRNA knockdown system.


Background: Small RNAs are able to suppress expression of any gene
through the endogenous RNA interference pathway and have been used to
identify therapeutic targets in a variety of pathological conditions. In
this project, we aimed to optimise a lentiviral inducible-knockdown small
hairpin RNA (shRNA) system for efficient in vivo cancer target
validation, using polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1), an essential cell-cycle
protein, as a proof-of-concept target.Methods: An inducible shRNA
construct targeting PLK1 or a control construct was transduced into the
colon carcinoma cell line SW620. Inducible shRNA expression (marked by
turbo-RFP) was monitored by fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry in
vitro and by spectrum CT in vivo. PLK1 gene expression was quantified by
real-time PCR and protein expression was quantified by Western blotting
in vitro or IHC ex vivo. Cell viability was assessed by MTT assays.
Xenografts were established by subcutaneous injection of PLK1
inducible-knockdown cells into nude mice. Growth inhibitory effect was
assessed by calliper measurement of tumour size and correlated with ex
vivo assessment of gene and protein knockdown, and of cell proliferation
as measured by Ki67 staining.Results: Cell viability assays demonstrated
that concentrations of 2ug/ml of doxycycline or less did not result in
cell death over an assay period of 7 days in both wild-type cells and
cells transduced with a control shRNA construct. Following doxycycline
treatment, PLK1 inducible-knockdown cells showed dose- and time-dependent
shRNA induction with an increase in the level of shRNA expression and the
percentage of positive cells. PLK1 down-regulation correlated with
induction of shRNA expression reaching 80% gene knock-down and 60%
protein knock-down 72 hours post-induction. The optimal delivery route of
doxycycline via measurement of turbo-RFP induction and PK/PD measurements
was assessed in vivo. In tumour-bearing mice treated with doxycycline,
there was a decline in tumour growth rate in the PLK1 knockdown group
compared with the control group. Ex vivo analysis showed significantly
lower PLK1 gene and protein expression in the doxycycline-treated group
compared with the control group which correlated with lower rates of cell
proliferation in the treated group.Conclusion: The results support the
anti-tumour effects of PLK1 down-regulation and confirm an efficient
target validation methodology for cancer target screening using a
lentiviral inducible-knockdown shRNA system.

