Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization and establishment of a drug-resistant human lung
cancer model.


Introduction In 2012, lung cancer is expected to be the leading cause of
cancer death in the United States, accounting for about 28% of all cancer
deaths. Eribulin mesylate (Halaven) is a microtubule-dynamics inhibitor
approved for third line clinical use in patients with heavily pretreated
metastatic breast cancer based upon statistically significant increase in
median overall survival (OS) compared to treatment of physician's
choice.Methods H522-T1 human non-small cell lung cancer subcutaneous
xenograft tumors were established in nude mice that were subsequently
treated with a sub-optimal dose of eribulin (half MTD). Two to three days
after final drug administration, residual tumors were harvested and
implanted again into nave nude mice. These tumors were treated again with
the same regimen and the residual tumors were again collected and
re-implanted into nave nude mice for another cycle of selection. A cell
line named H522-T5er was established from the 4th cycle of residual
tumor.Results In vitro, H522-T5er showed strikingly increased resistance
to eribulin compared to the parental cell line (82-fold). In vivo,
H522-T5er xenograft tumors also showed high resistance to eribulin dosed
at MTD. Further flow cytometry analysis identified enrichment of a
CD44+/CD24- subpopulation of H522-T5er cells, suggesting stem/progenitor
cell properties of H522-T5er. Expression profiling analysis of parental
tumors and drug-selected residual tumors, as well as H522-T1 and
H522-T5er cells were conducted. A total of 71 genes with more than 2-fold
changes were identified in the comparison between parental tumor and
drug-selected residual tumors, while 187 genes showed more than 2-fold
changes between H522-T1 and H522-T5er cells. Twelve genes were identified
in both comparison and only 5 of them were changed in the same direction.
Protein levels of several drug pumps reported to be frequently involved
in drug resistance were also determined by Western blot analysis. No
significant increase of Pgp (1.3-fold) was identified in H522-T5er cells.
Both BCRP and LRP showed about a 2-fold increase in H522-T5er cells,
while a slight decrease of MRP1 (20%) was observed in H522-T5er
cells.Conclusions An eribulin-resistant cell line, not characterized by
significant increase of Pgp expression, has been generated. It provides a
valuable tool to develop and test agents which can target residual tumor
after eribulin treatment.

