Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Normal mammary epithelial mitochondria introduced into human
breast cancer cells results in inhibition of proliferation and increased
drug sensitivity of the MCF-7 breast cancer cell line.


Warburg in the 1920s postulated that mitochondrial dysfunction alters
metabolism in cancer. He observed in cancer cells aerobic glycolysis,
which is the conversion of glucose to lactic acid in the presence of
oxygen, the so called Warburg effect [1]. Mitochondrial dysfunction of
cancer cells includes increased aerobic glycolysis, elevated levels of
ROS, decreased apoptosis, and resistance to chemotherapeutic agents. We
reported on the ultrastructural observations of mitochondria in human
breast carcinoma cells [2]. There were three distinct groups: (1)
mitochondria absent, (2) mitochondria present, (3) mitochondria present
but sparse and abnormal. Tumors in the absent group were more anaplastic,
aggressive, and resistant to treatment. We hypothesized that the
introduction of normal mitochondria into cancer cells might restore
mitochondrial function and inhibit cancer cell growth, and reverse
chemoresistance. First we tested if mitochondria of normal mammary
epithelial MCF-12A cells could enter into cultured human cancer cells.
Then we determined if introducing normal mitochondria into cancer cells
would inhibit proliferation. Finally we determined if addition of normal
mitochondria increases the sensitivity of human breast cancer MCF-7 cells
to chemotherapy. We found JC-1 stained mitochondria from normal mammary
epithelial MCF-12A cells can enter into the cancer cell lines MCF-7,
MDA-MB-231, and NCI/ADR-Res, but cannot enter normal MCF-12 A cells. The
normal mitochondria from normal MCF-12 A cells suppressed the
proliferation of MCF-7 and NCI/ADR-Res cells in a dose dependent pattern,
but did not affect the proliferation of normal MCF-12A cells. The normal
mitochondria from normal MCF-12A cells increased the sensitivity of human
breast cancer MCF-7 cells to doxorubicin, Abraxane, and carboplatin. In
conclusion the introduction of normal mammary mitochondria into human
cancer cells inhibits cancer cell proliferation and increases the
sensitivity of the MCF-7 human breast cancer cells to doxorubicin,
Abraxane, and carboplatin. This phenomenon has never been reported, and
the results support the role of mitochondrial dysfunction in cancer and
suggest the possible use of targeted mitochondria as an adjunct to cancer
therapeutics.

