Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of Ganoderma lucidum on cytokine expression in
Inflammatory Breast Cancer.


Ganoderma lucidum (Reishi) is a medicinal mushroom used to treat among
many diseases, hyperglycemia, inflammation and cancer. Our laboratory
studies the effects Reishi, as an alternative approach to treat
Inflammatory Breast Cancer (IBC). IBC is an aggressive form of breast
cancer. IBC symptoms include a diffuse redness and swelling of the
breast, which resembles inflammation and may suggest the involvement of
both immunological and inflammatory processes in the pathogenesis of this
disease. Pathological findings indicate the presence of tumor emboli
invading the dermal lymphatics of the breast. In these tumors
pro-inflammatory mediators such as interleukin-8 (IL-8), IL-6, and
Monocyte Chemotactic Protein 1 (MCP-1) are produced to contribute to
cancer progression. These proteins are regulators of the immune system
but in the tumor microenvironment they can act as growth factors,
allowing tumor cell survival, invasion and metastasis. Our published data
demonstrates that Reishi disintegrates tumor emboli, reduces tumor growth
and modulates the abundance of plasma membrane proteins involved in
downstream signaling of invasion cascades. Herein, we are characterizing
cytokine production in vitro and in vivo and their modulation upon Reishi
treatment. SUM-149 conditioned media was analyzed via cytokine bead array
to quantify cytokine production after 0 or 0.5mg/mL Reishi treatment at
different time points. For in vivo studies, severe combined
immunodeficient (SCID) mice were treated daily for two weeks with 0, 7,
14 or 28mg/kg BW of Reishi via oral gavage. At two weeks the mice were
injected with SUM-149 IBC cells in their mammary fat pad and continued
oral gavage treatment for an additional 14 weeks. Our in vitro study data
shows that SUM-149 cells secrete IL-6 and IL-8 and that secretion of
these cytokines, which are known to behave as growth factors, was
decreased by 23% and 76% respectively after 48 hours of Reishi treatment.
As of 10 weeks of the study, tumor size is reduced in all Reishi treated
animals when compared with vehicles. Interestingly, Reishi shows a
tendency to decrease the expression of MCP-1 and IL-6 in plasma, while a
slight increase in TNF- is observed. Our results show that Reishi has an
immunomodulatory role, demonstrated by its ability to reduce cytokine
production both in cells and in mice plasma. Reishi may be used as a
targeted therapeutic for women afflicted with IBC, for whom no direct
therapeutics are currently available. This project was sponsored by Title
V PPOHA US Dept of Education #P031M105050 to UCC, NIH/RCMI #2G12RR003035
to UCC, NIH/INBRE #5P20RR016470 to UPR/UCC, NIH/NCRR #U54RR026139 to
UPR/UCC, and a research donation from the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico to
UCC-Centro Universitario de Medicina Integral y Complementaria (CUMIC) /
MMM.

