Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of NKX3.1 by RMND5 proteins.


Expression of the prostatic tumour suppressor, NKX3.1 is reduced or
undetectable in a large proportion of advanced human prostate tumours.
Although loss of heterozygosity (LOH) is common at the 8p21.2 locus which
encompasses the NKX3.1 gene, mutations of the remaining NKX3.1 allele
that would account for loss of NKX3.1 expression have not been
identified. Indeed, the documented discordance between NKX3.1 mRNA and
protein expression suggests that translational or posttranslational
mechanisms contribute to the loss of NKX3.1 expression in prostate tumour
tissues. We have identified two novel NKX3.1 binding proteins in LNCaP
cells, RMND5A and RMND5B. The RMND5A gene locus at 2p11.1 is deleted or
amplified in a variety of cancers, while the RMND5B locus at 5q35.3
undergoes frequent LOH in breast tumours from BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation
carriers and is located within an uncharacterised prostate cancer
heritability locus. RMND5 proteins are widely expressed, multidomain
proteins that each contain a putative RING domain, suggesting that they
are able to function as E3 ubiquitin ligases. In in vitro ubiquitin
assays, the RING domain of RMND5A was able to associate with UbcH2,
UbcH5b and UbcH5c, while the RING domain of RMND5B interacted with UbcH5b
and UbcH5c to mediate ubiquitin transfer. Both RMND5A and RMND5B were
associated with ubiquitinated proteins in vivo and the increased
expression of RMND5A or RMND5B augmented cellular levels of ubiquitinated
proteins, providing further evidence of their E3 ubiquitin ligase
activity. Overexpression of either RMND5A or RMND5B in LNCaP cells
resulted in dose-dependent declines in endogenous NKX3.1 levels, which
were attenuated following proteasome inhibition. In addition, RMND5A or
RMND5B overexpression enhanced cellular levels of ubiquitinated NKX3.1.
In LNCaP cells, RMND5 proteins were diffusely distributed in the
cytoplasm and nucleus, with RMND5B occasionally exhibiting a punctate
cytoplasmic distribution. When NKX3.1 and RMND5A or RMND5B were
overexpressed, RMND5 proteins became predominantly nuclear, while the
nuclear levels of NKX3.1 were markedly reduced. Together, these findings
indicate that RMND5 proteins promote NKX3.1 ubiquitination and
proteasome-dependent degradation and additionally modify the
intracellular localisation of NKX3.1, potentially regulating its function
as a transcription factor.

