Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional and molecular characteristics of 20 novel
patient-derived xenografts of Asian gastric cancer.


Introduction: Asian and Caucasian populations are distinct regarding the
prevalence of different tumor types due to differences in lifestyle and
genetics. The molecular makeup of tumors of the same type can also vary.
When developing drugs for the treatment of stomach cancer it is important
to study tumors in both Asian and Caucasian backgrounds. In East Asia
stomach cancer is the 2nd most common malignancy. The development of
patient derived xenografts (PDX) from patients of East Asian origin is
therefore critical. Oncotest established xenografts from stomach cancer
patients who underwent surgery for the treatment of their cancer at the
Seoul National University, South Korea. These Asian gastric cancer
xenografts (GXA) were utilized for the investigation of molecular
characteristics and sensitivity to anticancer agents.Material and
Methods: 78 gastric tumor samples from SNU were implanted subcutaneously
in nude mice and sequentially passaged. Tumor material was collected for
molecular profiling, including mutational analysis by Sanger sequencing
and OncoCarta panels I, II, III. The efficacy of standard of care drugs
5-fluoruracil, cisplatin and taxol was tested in vivo.Results: From the
78 implantations we were able to establish 21 Asian patient-derived
gastric cancer xenografts, representing a take rate of 27%. The majority
of tumors from which GXA xenografts were derived were poorly or
moderately differentiated adenocarcinomas. The panel also includes
mucinous adenocarcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas. The morphological
features of the tumors (degree of differentiation) were preserved
throughout serial passages.Mutational analysis for 18 established models
revealed that TP53 (13/18, 72%), PTEN (6/9, as well as one with PTEN RNA
levels too low for RT-PCR), KRAS (5/18, 28%) and PIK3CA (4/18, 22%) were
frequently mutated in these gastric cancers. Mutations in EGFR, MLH1 and
APC were also detected, but no mutations in NRAS (0/18) or BRAF (0/17)
were found.Regarding sensitivity to anticancer agents, the response of
the tumors varied strongly. Tumors were considered sensitive if the
optimal treatment / control (T/C [%]) value was lower than 30%. 6 of 18
(33%) tumors were sensitive to 5-fluoruracil, 5 of 18 (28%) to paclitaxel
and 3/18 (17 %) to cisplatin. Some gastric PDX were responsive to more
than one chemotherapy, whereas 7 of 18 (39%) were not sensitive to any of
these standard of care therapies.These results demonstrate (i) that
standard of care therapies are not the therapy of choice for a large
proportion of these tumors and (ii) great heterogeneity within the 18
analyzed gastric Asian patient- derived xenografts.Conclusion: In this
study we developed a panel of Asian patient-derived gastric cancer
xenografts with diverse molecular characteristics and responses to
standard of care drugs.

