Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The estrogen receptor agonists, Liquiritigenin and S-equol,
inhibit breast cancer cell proliferation through the activation of
tumor-suppressor and other pathways.


Estrogen and estrogen receptors (ER and ER) play an important role in
breast cancer. Currently, antiestrogen (AE) targeted to ER and aromatase
inhibitors (AI), which block local and systemic estrogen production, are
used in the treatment of breast cancer. Both treatments improve outcomes
for about 50% of patients with early or advanced ER positive breast
cancer. Unfortunately, in women with advanced breast cancer, essentially
all breast cancers develop resistance to these two classes of agents.
Moreover, the side effects associated with currently used AI limit the
long-term utility of them as chemopreventative agents. Therefore there is
a critical need to develop effective alternate strategies to prevent or
delay the development of resistance to endocrine therapy and the
resulting tumor progression. Recent studies have identified several
natural compounds that have the potential to function as ER agonists.
Plant-derived ER-agonists, Liquiritigenin (LIQ), from the plant
Glycyrrhizae uralensis and an active component of MF101, and S-equol,
from the soy isoflavone daidzein, are currently being tested to treat
vasomotor hot flashes associated with menopause. In addition, S-equol is
also being tested as a treatment for BPH in men. However, the exact
mechanism of action of these compounds is not clear. In this study we
sought to determine the mechanism by which ER acts as a tumor suppressor,
and whether these ER agonists could resensitize Letrozole-resistant
breast cancer cells. MCF7aro and LTLT-ca cells were used as models of
hormone-responsive and hormone-resistant breast cancer respectively. MTT
assay was used to determine the half maximal inhibitory concentrations of
the ER agonists. Upon treatment, our results show changes in the levels
of p53, NFkB, cyclin D1, KLF5 and others using qRT-PCR and western blot
analysis. The effects of ER agonists on the activation of these genes
were confirmed using specific gene promoter-luciferase reporter gene
constructs. Specificity of ER-mediated actions was confirmed using a
siRNA approach in addition to other methods and knockdown efficiency was
confirmed through RT-PCR. Interestingly, our results show that the
plant-derived ER-agonists, LIQ and S-equol, not only affect the growth of
breast cancer cells and tumors but treatment increases the expression of
p53 and others, and upon ER knockdown this effect is ablated. This study
suggests that ER acts as a tumor suppressor by regulating the expression
of p53 and others involved in cell proliferation. In conclusion, this
study demonstrates the potential role for ER agonists to improve adjuvant
endocrine therapy to treat both hormone-responsive and hormone-resistant
breast cancers, as well as provides rationale for new preventive
approaches to decrease the incidence of breast cancer.

