Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triapine sensitizes chemoresistant ovarian cancer cells to
platinum therapy.


Objectives:Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the second most common
female pelvic reproductive organ cancer in the United States, and carries
the highest mortality in this category in the Western world. The
progression free survival and overall survival depend greatly on tumor
sensitivity to a platinum chemotherapy. Once platinum resistance is
encountered, response rates of only 6-30% are achieved. Triapine, a novel
small-molecule drug developed in our laboratory, potently inhibits the
activity of ribonucleotide reductase involved in the key step of DNA
synthesis and replication. Given that triapine caused profound disruption
of dNTP levels and S phase progression, we examined the effects of
triapine on the repair of replication-associated DSBs and on the
sensitivity of platinum resistant EOC to DNA damaging and platinum
therapy.Methods:Cell sensitivity to varying ratios of treating drug
combinations (triapine/6-thio-guanine alone, triapine/6-thioguanine with
cisplatin, carboplatin, doxorubicin, or paclitaxel) was carried out by
clonogenic survival assays using multiple EOC cells lines (A2780, CP70,
CAOV-3, IGROV-1, BG-1, PEO1, PEO4, SKOV-3). Colonies were stained and
counted to determine % survival. DNA replication was determined by EdU
incorporation into DNA using flow cytometry and confocal
microscopy.Results:Treatment with triapine leads to synergistic
sensitization of BRCA wild-type EOC cells to platinum drugs. The degree
of sensitization by triapine is more pronounced toward the lower
concentrations of platinum drugs, at which DNA replication is still
ongoing. Platinum drugs induce DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) and Rad51
foci in BRCA wild type EOC cells. Triapine attenuates formation of Rad51
foci, a marker of DSB repair, in these cells. For EOC cells that are
highly platinum resistant, combination of triapine and 6-thioguanine is
required to achieve significant sensitization to platinum
drugs.Conclusions:Platinum drugs induce replication-associated DSBs and
Rad51-dependent repair in BRCA wild-type EOC cells. Triapine inhibits
Rad51-dependent repair of DSBs and therefore sensitizes BRCA wild-type
EOC cells to platinum drugs. The mechanism by which 6-thioguanine
enhances the effects of triapine is currently being investigated. Our
findings indicate for the first time that triapine and 6-thioguanine can
be used in combination with platinum agents to target BRCA wild-type and
platinum-resistant EOC.

