Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of ERG splice variants and their effect on
c-myc expression in prostate cancer.


Introduction and Objectives: The oncogenic activation of ERG in prostate
cancer has been well established in recent years. Towards understanding
the functional role of ERG, our laboratory previously identified two
major types of ERG splice variants in human prostate tumors: Type I,
which encodes a full length prototypical ERG protein, and Type II, which
encodes a truncated protein lacking the ETS DNA-binding domain. Analysis
of clinico-pathologic data from patients and ratios of Type I/Type II ERG
revealed that an increased ratio correlated with a higher Gleason sum and
poorly differentiated phenotype. However, the functional significance of
the ERG splice variants is not clearly understood. Studying the function
and interaction of the individual splice variants can further enhance our
understanding of ERG, and advance efforts towards its clinical utility in
the treatment of prostate cancer.Methods: Exogenous Type II ERG was
expressed in TMPRSS2-ERG fusion harboring VCaP cells and endogenous
levels of Type I ERG and C-MYC proteins were evaluated. Type I and Type
II ERG were also co-transfected in various cell lines to examine
interaction among splice variants and regulatory efficiency with
luciferase reporter constructs. In addition, quantitative RNA expression
data of C-MYC and Type I/Type II ERG ratio were assessed by correlation
analysis in patient samples.Results: Expression of exogenous Type II ERG
resulted in a decrease in endogenous Type I ERG protein expression in
VCaP cells in a dose dependent manner, with a concomitant decrease in
C-MYC. This decrease was not observed in the other cell lines. Decreased
regulatory efficiency of Type I ERG, by addition of Type II ERG, was also
observed. Patient data analysis also revealed a positive correlation
between C-MYC expression and increased Type I/Type II ratio.Conclusions:
Decreased Type I/Type II ratios in VCaP cells showed decreases in C-MYC,
suggesting that modulation of Type II ERG alters Type I ERG and thus its
regulation of C-MYC. This interference was not observed in other cell
lines, indicating the interaction is context dependent. While Type I ERG
positively regulated downstream targets, addition of Type II ERG
decreased their expression, implying an interaction between splice
variants. Analysis of patient data affirmed in vitro results, thus we
propose that modulation of Type I/Type II ratio may regulate downstream
targets including oncogenic C-MYC in prostate cancer, providing a strong
rationale for the biomarker and therapeutic utility of ERG splice
variants.Funding source: DoD/CDMRP (PC073614) grant to S.S.Citation
Format: Anshu Rastogi, Shyh-Han Tan, Gyorgy Petrovics, Yongmei Chen,
Taduru Sreenath, David G. McLeod, Shiv Srivastava, Albert Dobi.
Functional analysis of ERG splice variants and their effect on c-myc
expression in prostate cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 3004. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3004

