Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depletion of serum levels of miRNA-150 indicates bone marrow
damage following total body irradiation.


Total body irradiation (TBI) is part of the preparative regimen for bone
marrow transplantation in lymphoma and leukemia patients. Depending on
the aggressiveness of the disease, patients receive a dose between 2 -12
Gray, in 2 Gray fractions over three days. Fast and accurate estimation
of the absorbed dose is critical for evaluation of the depletion of
cancer cells prior to transplantation. Physical dosimeters and the
available biologics have limitations to accurately evaluate the effect of
radiation because the normal tissue toxicity as well as the radiation
response in cancer cells varies depending on individual's genetics,
immune status and other confounding factors. We sought to identify and
validate robust and fast responding biomarkers of radiation response,
which are repeatedly assayable from body fluids. We have utilized an
amplification-free, hybridization based quantitative assay utilizing the
nCounter multiplex platform developed by nanoString Technologies to
compare the relative abundance of over 600 miRNAs in body fluids. Our
studies have identified several evolutionarily and functionally conserved
miRNAs in serum and urine collected from two different strains of mice.
Development of a novel normalization strategy using multiple spike-in
oligonucleotides allowed the accurate measurement of changes in serum and
urine miRNAs after TBI. miRNAs with good dose response were further
investigated for their potential for development as radiation
biodosimeters. Hierarchical clustering followed by comparison of changes
in individual miRNAs with varying dose (1 - 12 Gray) and time points (1 -
7 days) has identified miRNA-150 as a very promising biomarker for
radiation biodosimetry. miRNA-150 is expressed at high level in mature
lymphocytes and the abundance of circulating miRNA-150 seems correlating
with that of lymphocyte counts. With acute single doses of 1, 2, 4, 6 and
8 Gray, a 30%, 38%, 48% 70% and 72% statistically significant reduction
in serum miRNA-150 was observed at 24 hrs, which was further reduced at
later time points. Consistent with this data, a time and dose dependent
reduction of miRNA-150 was observed after fractionation, with a near
complete depletion by 24 hrs after completion of 12 Gray. The kinetics of
depletion of serum miRNA-150 following radiation indicate its potential
as an alternative to complete blood count (CBC) to evaluate lymphocyte
depletion, and hence evaluating damage to the hematopoietic system. The
effect of relevant acute single doses and fractionated radiation
treatment at various time points will be presented. The utilization of
these readouts for understanding the effects and mechanism of action of
radioprotectors will also be discussed.

