Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of co-regulation of proline oxidase and succinate
dehydrogenase on oxidative respiration.


Proline oxidase (POX) is an inner mitochondrial membrane protein that
oxidizes proline to generate superoxide as well as ATP. Work in our
laboratory has documented that POX activity is highly regulated during
genotoxic and metabolic stress. Inducers of POX include p53, and
proline-dependent ROS play a role in p53- and mitochondrial-mediated
apoptosis. Succinate dehydrogenase, also known as Complex II of the
electron transport chain (ETC), oxidizes the TCA cycle metabolite
succinate to fumarate as it reduces ubiquinone to ubiquinol, generating
ATP through oxidative respiration. Complex II and the p53-DNA damage
repair pathway are intimately linked. Mutations in Complex II have been
shown to increase risk of breast and thyroid cancer through
destabilization of p53, and tocopherol-succinate has been demonstrated to
reduce radiation-induced apoptosis. Thus, the ETC and activities of p53
appear to be linked through Complex II.Because POX can generate ATP from
proline, we explored the relationship between POX and the ETC. We found
that POX binds directly to ubiquinone, and that ubiquinone is a very
effective acceptor of proline-derived electrons. Increased POX catalytic
activity due to ubiquinone required Complex III and Complex IV of the ETC
to be functional, indicating that ATP generated by POX is through
oxidative respiration. In addition, experiments using the Seahorse XF24
analyzer confirmed that while POX can utilize proline as a short term
source of electrons during nutrient stress conditions, long term
expression of POX results in reactive oxygen species (ROS)-dependent
suppression of respiration, consistent with its role in
mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis. We found that the POX and Complex II
were linked functionally, and that the presence of succinate dramatically
affects POX activity. Lineweaver-Burk analysis showed that succinate
inhibits POX catalytic activity using anti-competitive inhibition, a rare
mechanism of enzymatic inhibition. Two highly selective inhibitors of the
Complex II holoenzyme, TTFA and carboxin, inhibit the ubiquinone-mediated
activities of POX; in addition, POX co-immunoprecipitates with Complex
II, indicating a physical interaction between these two enzymes.
Interestingly, proline appears to stimulate oxidation of succinate by
Complex II in vitro, and acute co-administration of proline and succinate
to POX-expressing cells results in a burst of oxidative respiration well
above that seen with either substrate alone. Finally, addition of
succinate to cell culture inhibits ROS generation by POX and inhibits the
long-term effects of POX on respiration.Together, these data support a
model in which POX is an integral contributor in oxidative respiration
during nutrient stress, and in which respiration is regulated by level
and duration of POX expression, as well as levels of proline relative to
the TCA cycle metabolite, and Complex II substrate, succinate.

