Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docetaxel followed by temsirolimus suppresses mTOR pathway and can
overcome PI3K / AKT over activation mechanism of resistance in lung
cancer cell line.


Background: Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a downstream
regulatory protein of PI3K/AKT signal transduction pathway. The
activation of cell surface receptors including IGF-1R (Insulin-Growth
Factor-1Receptor) and EGFR (Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor) signals
through PI3K/AKT pathway and is essential in cell proliferation,
angiogenesis and anti-apoptosis process. Over activation of PI3K/AKT is a
potential mechanism of resistance to mTOR inhibitors. mTOR inhibition
could be a potential novel strategy in the treatment of lung cancer.
Docetaxel (D) is commonly used in lung cancer treatment. Previously, we
demonstrated that the sequence of D followed by mTOR inhibitor
temsirolimus (T) in lung cancer cell lines (LCCL) had increased
suppression of cell proliferation as compared to reverse sequence of TD.
The reason for this difference in decrease in proliferation effect is
unclear. We hypothesized that DT sequence can suppress the over
activation of PI3K/AKT mechanism of resistance. We studied the expression
of pmTOR, AKT and PI3K expression in lung cancer cell lines treated with
different sequences of D and T and at different time points.Methods:
Adenocarcinoma LCCL H2122 and H1437 were treated with T 1000nM or D 100nM
for 24, 48 and 72h. We then treated both LCCL with D exposed for 24h
followed by addition of T and the reverse sequence in both LCCL and
prepared cell lysate at 24, 48 and 72h time points. We determined the
expression of pmTOR, pAKT and PI3K by western blot using antibody from
Cell Signaling.Results: T alone suppressed pmTOR after 24h but not at 48
and 72h in both LCCL. AKT was not suppressed. PI3K increased after 48h in
both LCCL. The sequence of DT suppressed expression of pmTOR and
decreased expression of pAKT and PI3K at 48 and 72h in the H1437. We
observed suppression of mTOR and PI3K but not AKT in the H2122. The
opposite sequence of TD did not suppress the expression of pmTOR and did
not suppress the expression of pAKT and PI3K.Conclusion: The combination
of D T has synergistic inhibition of mTOR and it is able to suppress the
over activation of AKT/PI3K pathway when compared with reverse sequence.
This suggests that sequence of DT can overcome the over activation of
PI3K/AKT mechanism of resistance and it would be the ideal treatment
sequence when using D in combination with mTOR inhibitor in the treatment
of lung cancer. Expression of AKT/PI3K could be used as a biomarker of
response to this regimen.

