Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunomodulation in response to radiation-induced lung injury.


Introduction.Pneumonitis and fibrosis constitute dose-limiting side
effects of thorax and whole body irradiation. Although several novel
disease biomarkers have been described during recent years, the cellular
and molecular factors responsible for disease initiation and progression
are still not sufficiently understood. Here, we characterized local and
systemic changes in the immune cell compartment in response to
radiation-induced lung injury and defined the role of lymphocytes for
fibrosis development in a murine model.Material and methodsA single dose
of hemithorax or whole thorax irradiation (15 Gy) was applied on C57BL/6
wild type mice (WT) or immunodeficient RAG-2-/- mice. Mice were
sacrificed at defined time points and lungs were isolated for
histological and immunohistochemical analysis as well as immune cell
phenotyping. Moreover, immune cells were isolated from spleen, blood and
cervical lymph nodes and also characterized by flow cytometry.
Bronchioalveolar lavage fluid was collected for determination of cytokine
levels.Results and discussion.Whole thorax irradiation triggered
time-dependent changes in the composition and activation state of immune
cells isolated from the lung tissue. These changes were paralleled by
specific alterations in the cytokines present in the bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid. In WT mice whole thorax irradiation with 15 Gy led to a
time-dependent increase in collagen deposition and lung fibrosis.
Irradiated RAG-2-/- mice showed an earlier onset of collagen deposition
and an increased number of fibrotic foci in the lung when compared to WT
mice.Conclusion.Thorax irradiation triggers local and systemic changes in
the composition and the activation state of immune cells. The increased
sensitivity of RAG-2-/- mice to radiation-induced fibrosis suggests a
role of mature lymphocytes in the suppression of fibrotic changes. An
improved understanding of the contribution of specific immune cells to
the pathogenic process in the lung may open novel routes to prevent or
treat radiation-induced pneumopathy.

