Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integration of estradiol signaling at the translational and
transcriptional level in prostate cancer cells.


IntroductionThe prostate is an organ where the dual actions of estrogen
receptors (ER and ER)are just beginning to be understood and appreciated
in a physiological context. Steroid receptors can act outside of the
nucleus by interacting with cytoplasmic or membrane bound proteins and
activating or inhibiting signaling pathways in a ligand dependent or
independent manner. However, our understanding of this non-nuclear
activity remains partial. Here, we attempt to uncover how estrogens
regulate post-transcriptional gene expression programs in prostate
cancer. The rationale for studying impacts on post-transcriptional gene
expression programs downstream of a transcription factor is that there is
often no direct correlation between the level of an mRNA and the
corresponding protein product. Additionally, several intracellular
signaling pathways affected by estrogen signaling (e.g MAPK and PI3K
pathways) directly regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally. One
post-transcriptional mechanism that is tightly regulated by various
intracellular signaling pathways is mRNA translation initiation - a
highly controlled step that is regulated on multiple levels and is
commonly deregulated in cancer. Many factors acting on mRNAs in cis
and/or in trans, including RNA-binding proteins, RNA secondary structures
or modifications of the cap structure by methylation can have strong
impact on the efficiency of mRNA translation. Thus, estrogen signaling,
by directly and indirectly affecting intracellular signaling can
potentially regulate translational activity of its transcriptional
targets.ApproachWe used prostate derived cell lines to assess how
estrogens regulate proliferation and survival as a function of their
ability to modulate transcription and translation. We performed
polysome-microarray approach where the cytoplasmic mRNA population is
separated based on the number of associated ribosomes followed by
quantification of mRNA levels in pools of actively translating mRNAs.
Using prostate cell lines, epithelial and stromal in origin, we first
characterized the level of transcription and translation in unstimulated
conditions to obtain a snapshot of the translational activity of each
mRNA in baseline conditions. Secondly, we tested the impact on
transcription and translation following stimulation for 2 hours with
estradiol or with an ER-specific agonist (8-VE2). We are currently
validating ER/ translational targets and identifying regulatory RNA
sequences that enable ER-induced translational control.ConclusionWe
endeavor to determine how the gene expression programs regulated by ER
and ER are integrated at the transcriptional and translational level to
direct proliferation, growth and survival in prostate tumors.

