Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor cell panels: New tools in genomic era.


Increased understanding of cancer genome is affecting every corner of
cancer research. Although human tumor cell lines have been used as
essential tools for decades, there are only a few cell line panels have
been developed for drug screening. The most widely used NCI60 human tumor
cell line panel was composed by selecting cell lines to represent nine
subtypes of cancer. The rising of targeted therapeutics has led to new
generation anticancer agents. However, it's difficult to predict clinical
response to these agents because of the genetic diversity and genomic
heterogeneity in human cancers. Therefore, there is a gap between the new
knowledge of cancer genome and the cell line based platforms for both
basic and translational research.Here, we show that new generation tumor
cell panels are filling the gap. The panels were generated by selecting
authenticated cell lines derived from variant cancer types, and annotated
with genetic alteration information generated by large scale sequencing
projects such as the Catalog of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) and
the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE). There are more than 25 tumor
cell line panels, which include hundreds of cell lines, have been
developed in this initiative. They cover 18 most common cancer types,
such as lung, breast, colon, pancreatic cancer and so on. To capture the
genetic diversity of cancer, each panel includes cell lines with varying
gene mutation complexity. To further facilitate targeted drug discovery,
the molecular signature tumor cell line panels focus on individual driver
genes, critical protein kinases, transcription factors and cell signaling
pathways. Those panels have been analyzed to verify gene mutation, gene
expression, protein expression and bio-functions.Therefore, the new
generation tumor cell panels provide powerful tools to accelerate the
discoveries in basic cancer research, compound screening, biomarker
selection, pathway analysis, and targeted therapeutic development.

