Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rejuvenation of dissociated cryopreserved human ovarian papillary
serous tumor cells in an in vivo model.


Banked tumor tissues are a vital source of research material; however,
current preservation techniques rely on flash-freezing. While this
storage technique maintains the integrity of the nucleic acids and stable
proteins, it does not allow for the recovery of live cells from the
banked specimen. Serous carcinomas are the most common and deadliest form
of gynecologic cancers. These tumors are heterogeneous with a wide array
of genetic alterations. Our lab has developed a method which allows
banking of live cells derived from primary ovarian serous papillary
carcinoma specimens. Here we show that viable cell populations of
interest can be isolated from banked cryopreserved tumor samples and
grown in vivo as a potential source for analysis of individual tumors.
Primary serous tumor samples were subjected to mechanical disruption and
enzymatic digestion to produce dissociated cell suspensions. Samples were
cryopreserved using controlled temperature reduction and stored in liquid
nitrogen vapor. Viability of banked human tumor specimens was evaluated
as the ability to establish a xenograft that histologically resembled the
primary tumor. Serous tumor epithelia were isolated by flow cytometry
using a cell surface marker, epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM),
from this banked cryopreserved cellular population. Xenografts were
generated by subcutaneous injection into NOD-scid IL2Rgammanull mice.
Growth was monitored by palpation and regenerated tumors were analyzed
for histology and marker expression profile. Nine serous tumor samples
were banked using this method. To prove the viability of this
cryopreservation process, 3 dissociated tumor cell preparations were
thawed and injected into NOD-scid mice. Within 6 months, all 3 samples
grew as xenografts that closely resembled the primary serous tumor. We
then tested if viable cellular fractions of interest could be isolated
from these banked serous tumors cells using fluorescent activated cell
sorting. A subpopulation of tumors cells expressing EpCAM was collected
from the cryopreserved tumor cell population and injected to establish
xenografts. In this in vivo assay, xenografts grew as epithelial tumors
in 7 of 9 cases. Our findings demonstrate that cryopreservation of
dissociated primary tumor cells is a viable option for the generation of
live cell tumor banks for papillary serous carcinoma. The advantages of a
live cell tumor bank are numerous: 1) characterization of subpopulations
of tumor cells in each patient's tumor sample at the RNA, DNA, and
protein levels and 2) defining heterogeneity of a serous tumor with a
special focus on identifying cancer initiating populations in each
patient. We foresee that characterization of each patient's tumor sample
using this live tissue bank may help individualize therapeutic strategies
in patients with serous cancers.

