Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SKP2 overexpression is associated with increased serine-10
phosphorylation of p27 (pSer10p27) in triple-negative breast cancers.


Breast cancer is expected to be the most frequently diagnosed form of
cancer and the second leading cause of cancer deaths among women in 2012.
The primary objective of the present study was to provide insights into
the molecular mechanisms underlying the aggressive growth of
triple-negative and basal-like breast cancers. In this study, we use the
Tamoxifen-selected, MCF-7 derivative, TMX2-28 breast cancer cell line.
TMX2-28 cells are triple-negative, have acquired a mixed basal/luminal
cytokeratin profile, suggestive of a more basal-like phenotype, and are
highly proliferative. We also examined thirty frozen breast carcinoma
samples for mRNA, and 188 breast tumors and 50 benign reduction
mammoplasty samples (formalin-fixed paraffin embedded) for protein
expression. S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (SKP2) plays an important
role in cell cycle regulation by targeting p27 for degradation. The
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor p27 regulates G1/S transition by
binding cyclin/CDK complexes and abrogating its activity. By targeting
p27 for degradation, SKP2 frees the complexes needed to progress into the
S phase of the cell cycle. Evaluation of SKP2 expression in TMX2-28
revealed significantly higher levels than in other breast cancer cell
lines. Despite the high levels of SKP2 expression, p27 protein was not
reduced. However, levels of the serine-10 phosphorylated form of p27
(pSer10p27), which has been associated with increased proliferation
rates, was found to be upregulated. Furthermore, suppression of SKP2
completely eliminated pSer10p27 expression and slowed cell cycle
progression confirming the role of SKP2 in the aggressive growth of
TMX2-28 cells. Assessment of mRNA from 30 frozen human breast cancers
demonstrated that SKP2 is more highly expressed in ER-negative and
basal-like breast cancers. Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed that
SKP2 is more highly expressed in ER-negative breast cancers and for the
first time demonstrated that triple-negative breast cancers are more
likely to overexpress SKP2 than are non-triple negative, but still
ER-negative tumors. We did not observe an inverse relationship between
SKP2 and p27 expression, however a significant positive relationship was
discovered between SKP2 and pSer10p27. Furthermore, high levels of SKP2
and pSer10p27 were observed significantly more often in ER-negative and
triple-negative than in ER-positive breast cancers. The relationship
between SKP2 and pSer10p27 is a better indicator of increased tumor
proliferation in triple-negative breast cancers based on these results
and those of our cell culture model. Inhibiting SKP2 in tumors expressing
high levels of both SKP2 and pSer10p27 may be a valid therapeutic
approach.

