Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gramicidin-based nanopores induce cellular energy depletion and
cell death in renal cell carcinoma.


The plasma membrane physically separates the intracellular components of
a cell from the extracellular environment and its integrity is absolutely
essential to sustain cellular functions. Ionophores are lipid soluble
organic molecules that disrupt cellular transmembrane potential by
rendering biological membranes permeable to specific ions. They are
classified on the basis of their mechanism of action; mobile carriers
complex with metal cations to shield their hydrophilic charge from the
interior of the lipid bilayer and channel-formers insert into the
membrane to form hydrophilic pores that permit the rapid passage of
selected ions through membranes. Research over the past decade has
described an new role for mobile carrier ionophores as novel anticancer
therapeutics yet the potential anticancer attributes of channel-forming
ionophores have not been explored. In this study we utilized the
channel-forming ionophore gramicidin A (GA) as a model nanopore to study
its effects upon the growth and survival of renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
cells. RCC is a histologically heterogeneous malignancy that is highly
resistant to conventional chemotherapy. We found that disruption of
plasma membrane integrity with GA reduced the in vitro viability of
several RCC cell lines when treated at sub-micromolar concentrations (all
IC50 The plasma membrane physically separates the intracellular
components of a cell from the extracellular environment and its integrity
is absolutely essential to sustain cellular functions. Ionophores are
lipid soluble organic molecules that disrupt cellular transmembrane
potential by rendering biological membranes permeable to specific ions.
They are classified on the basis of their mechanism of action; mobile
carriers complex with metal cations to shield their hydrophilic charge
from the interior of the lipid bilayer and channel-formers insert into
the membrane to form hydrophilic pores that permit the rapid passage of
selected ions through membranes. Research over the past decade has
described an new role for mobile carrier ionophores as novel anticancer
therapeutics yet the potential anticancer attributes of channel-forming
ionophores have not been explored. In this study we utilized the
channel-forming ionophore gramicidin A (GA) as a model nanopore to study
its effects upon the growth and survival of renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
cells. RCC is a histologically heterogeneous malignancy that is highly
resistant to conventional chemotherapy. We found that disruption of
plasma membrane integrity with GA reduced the in vitro viability of
several RCC cell lines when treated at sub-micromolar concentrations (all
IC50 < 1.0M). Comparison of GA with the mobile carrier ionophore monensin
revealed that cell viability was decreased by GA to a degree that was
equal to or greater than monensin depending on the cell line. Mechanistic
examination determined that GA induced cell death that was associated
with cellular energy depletion. Importantly, GA exhibited similar
toxicity in RCC cells regardless of histological subtype or the
expression of either the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor or its
downstream target hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) -1. Taken together,
these results demonstrate the utility of nanopore-forming drugs as a new
strategy for cancer therapy.

