Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: G-CSF-dependent regulation of STAT3 in neuroblastoma cancer stem
cell subpopulations.


Neuroblastoma is a neural crest derived malignancy arising form
peripheral sympathetic nervous system of infants and young children. We
have recently defined a highly tumorigenic sub-population of
neuroblastoma cells based on surface expression of CD114 (the G-CSF
receptor, CSF3R). These cells meet the operational criteria for cancer
stem cells based on their self-renewal, differentiation and lineage
restricted tumorigenicity, and can be isolated directly from primary
tumor biopsy specimens. As STAT3 activation is a canonical downstream
event of G-CSF receptor ligation, is critical for neuronal specification,
and is implicated in cancer stem cell maintenance, we hypothesized that
inhibition of the STAT3 pathway may functionally inhibit the cancer stem
cell-like neuroblastoma subpopulation. We used pathway-specific qPCR
arrays to evaluate differential gene expression in CD114+ and CD114-
tumor subpopulations. As predicted, STAT3 target genes were up-regulated
in the CD114+ stem cell-like population. In addition, critical genes
controlling early neural crest specification, cell cycle progression,
self-renewal, and maintenance of pluripotency were up-regulated in CD114+
population while markers of mature mesenchymal neural crest were
increased in CD114- population. Treatment of Neuroblastoma cell lines
with G-CSF increased both CD114 expression and STAT3 transcriptional
activation in a dose and time dependent manner. Phospho-flow analysis
confirmed STAT3 phosphorylation (Y705) in response to exogenous G-CSF.
The addition of a STAT3 inhibitor which prevents phosphorylation and
dimerization of STAT3 (Stattic), specifically abrogated the effect of
exogenous G-CSF treatment. Finally, we identified putative STAT3 binding
sites within the 5UTR of the CSF3R gene and confirmed binding of STAT3
and pSTAT3 using chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis (ChIP-qPCR). We
demonstrate significant enrichment of binding in response to exogenous
G-CSF within CD114 receptor positive subpopulation in contrast to CD114-
population. These data support a model for a positive-feedback loop where
G-CSF triggers STAT3 dependent up-regulation of the G-CSF receptor,
further sensitizing these cells to exogenous ligand, promoting STAT3
transcriptional activation, and contributing to stem cell maintenance.
Our data support further evaluation of the potential clinical role for
specific STAT3 inhibitors as anti-cancer stem cell therapy in
neuroblastoma.

