Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Barriers to sharing biospecimens or biospecimen data among
researchers: qualitative findings from a regional survey.


Background:Efforts to identify biological and genetic factors
contributing to cancer health disparities have increased the need to
access biospecimens from diverse populations. One challenge is the
limited number of specimens from diverse populations within existing
biobanks. Members of certain racial/ethnic minority groups may be less
aware of or less willing to participate in biospecimen donation
opportunities. Second, although there are already a large number of
established biorepositories nationwide, it remains a challenge for
researchers to allocate sufficient, well-annotated tumor tissues to these
repositories. As such it is important to determine the perceived barriers
and attitudes to sharing data and biospecimens among researchers; and in
turn inform programs on ways to increase sharing of limited biospecimens
collected from diverse populations. This qualitative study assessed data
sharing practices, barriers and concerns of researchers in a 5-state
region (AZ, CO, NM, OK and TX). Little is known about the data sharing
perceptions of researchers in this region, which is multi-cultural and
multi ethnic.Methods:The present qualitative analysis was part of a
larger study that assessed researchers willingness to participate in a
virtual national biorepository. NIH RePORT db was used to identify 605
individuals engaging in research involving biospecimens. Email
invitations to complete an online survey were sent with an embedded
informed consent, via a secure state-specific link; 119 participants
responded. Open-ended questions captured the respondents perceived
barriers to implementation of a national biorepository; common reasons
for refusal of individuals to donate specimens; requirements for
collaborating and sharing data; and their concerns if unwilling to share
biospecimens/data. A thematic analysis was conducted on these responses
using two independent coders. Participants reported a variety of common
themes on each of the questions.Results:Most respondents were principal
investigators at PhD granting institutions (91.1%), conducting basic
(62.3%), translational (43.9%), clinical (8.8%), and epidemiological
(5.3%) research. Most were non-Hispanic White (63.4%), males (60.6%).
Respondents provided 255 detailed statements. Legal and ethical concerns
and requirements for biospecimen sharing were a persistent theme.
Methodological concerns were also raised including sample quality, sample
size and study design. Sharing biospecimens beyond the home institution
was also raised as a barrier to data sharing in a number of
contexts.Impact:Determining the perceived barriers and attitudinal
factors to sharing data will help generate recommendations to increase
researchers participation in the scientific data sharing process
involving high-quality, multi-ethnic human biospecimens. This will
ultimately reduce cancer health disparities.

