Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of chemoresistance: linking lysine acetylation to cell
death.


Breast tumors often possess regions of hypoxia in which tumor cells must
either adapt metabolically to survive or die. Some tumor cells adapt and,
through a process that is poorly understood, become chemoresistant. We
are interested in defining the mechanisms by which this chemoresistance
develops, with focus on the role of lysine acetylation_an enigmatic
protein modification thought to play a role in tuning metabolism to the
available nutrient supply. We posit that changes in lysine acetylation
reflect metabolic adaptation to hypoxia and modulate apoptotic-signaling
pathways.The importance of protein lysine acetylation in tumor cell death
is evidenced by numerous clinical cancer trials testing the tumor-killing
potential of deacetylase inhibitors (e.g., Varinostat). However, the
molecular mechanisms by which lysine acetylation modulates cell death are
poorly understood. Using a proteomics approach to characterize
acetylation dynamics under conditions of hypoxic stress in breast cancer
cells, we found a striking correlation between changes in acetylation and
hypoxia sensitivity. Specifically, proteome-wide increases in protein
acetylation were only observed in hypoxia-sensitive cell lines, likely
reflecting their attempt to adapt metabolically to hypoxia. Moreover,
these experiments revealed potential networks of acetylated proteins
involved in the hypoxia response, including metabolic enzymes, oncogenes
(e.g., c-myc), nutrient-responsive transcription factors, and 14-3-3.Our
previously published data suggested that acetylation of 14-3-3, a small
pro-survival phospho-binding protein, led to its release from protein
complexes and consequently sensitized cells to apoptosis (1). Consistent
with this idea, we observed a 12-fold hypoxia-induced increase in 14-3-3
acetylation in the hypoxia-sensitive cells (with no detectable change in
14-3-3 acetylation in resistant cells). Moreover, this acetylation
correlated with a shift of 14-3-3 from high to low molecular weight gel
filtration fractions, indicating a dissociation of 14-3-3 from protein
complexes. Proteomics efforts to characterize the 14-3-3 interactome in
sensitive cells revealed that hypoxia triggers the release of 14-3-3 from
proteins involved in glucose metabolism, and shifts its binding to
proteins involved in autophagy and starvation metabolism, implicating
14-3-3 as a regulator of metabolism under these conditions. Importantly,
depletion of 14-3-3 with siRNA (thus perturbing its network of
interactions) potently sensitized all breast cancer cell lines, including
the most highly resistant cells, to hypoxia.Collectively, our data
suggest that lysine acetylation plays an integral part in dictating the
survival of cells in hypoxia. Moreover, we propose that 14-3-3, and the
pathways that govern its acetylation, are promising therapeutic targets
to sensitize breast cancer cells to death.

