Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumorigenic effects of a novel digitoxin analogue.


Cardiac glycosides (cardenolides) such as digitoxin have been used to
regulate heart function for centuries; however, recent studies have
reported their potential use as anti-cancer agents. Although detailed
investigation of their anti-cancer properties have been tempered by
concerns relating to a narrow therapeutic index, their versatility in
inhibiting multiple pathways critical to tumorigenesis has sustained
interest in evaluating their potential to treat cancer. An approach to
ameliorate potential side effects associated with cardenolides would be
to synthesize chemical analogs with much higher anti-tumor efficacy,
while still maintaining the pathway-specificities of their parent
compounds. To this end, we have developed a library of digitoxin
analogues using a patented palladium-catalyzed de novo synthesis
methodology. One novel non-natural monosaccharide derivative
(-L-digitoxin or MonoD) in particular demonstrates strong cytotoxic
effects on a wide variety of tumors. Using several ex vivo and in vitro
techniques, we have further characterized this compound to determine its
efficacy and mode of action in lung cancer cells. We first established
using SAR studies that MonoD exhibited much stronger tumor-cytostatic
effect than digitoxin across the NCI panel of sixty cell lines, with most
potent activity against non small-cell cancer NCI-H460 cells. Further
characterization of cell death using the Hoechst assay showed that MonoD
induced apoptosis at doses almost ten-times lower than digitoxin (DTX),
which could be overcome using the pan-caspase inhibitor ZVAD;
non-tumorigenic lung epithelial Beas-2B cells were not significantly
affected at such doses. Since MonoD is a cardenolide derivative, we
assessed its safety profile using the Langendorff assay with intact rat
hearts. Robust cardiac activity was observed even at very high MonoD
levels, validating its safety. The mechanistic details of MonoD action
were characterized using various functional assays. Fluorometric caspase
assays showed that MonoD exerted its pro-apoptotic effect mainly through
the intrinsic caspase-9 apoptotic pathway. In response to MonoD, global
protein analysis of apoptotic proteins using immunoassays demonstrated a
decrease in the levels of pro-survival proteins such as Bcl-2, c-IAP,
NF-B and Survivin, and an increase in levels of pro-apoptotic proteins
Bax, SMAC and p53. MonoD also inhibited Akt and HIF-1, and had a strong
anti-angiogenic effect as assessed by in vitro tube formation assays.
Luciferase reporter assays demonstrated cross-talk between Bcl-2 and
HIF-1, suggesting that anti-angiogenic effects of MonoD may be mediated
at least in part by the apoptosis pathway, and further studies are
underway. Our long-term goal is to generate, using a rational drug-design
approach, a class of more potent MonoD derivatives that act as
tumor-vascularization disruptors, leading to regression in lung
carcinogenesis via apoptotic cell death.

