Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reaching minority and low-income women with breast cancer
prevention mobile messages: Implications for health promotion and
clinical office collaboration.


Background: While growing literature for breast cancer information
supports the use of the Internet, little is known about breast cancer
prevention and the use of mobile messages especially for women of
different ages, race/ethnicity, income, and education levels. Minority
and low-income women are more likely to be diagnosed with breast cancer
at a later stage. Purpose: We examined differences for breast cancer risk
factor knowledge, current channels, and mobile message preferences among
Hispanic and non-Hispanic women in southern New Mexico. The study was
guided using a conceptual framework of McGuire's Input-Output Persuasion
Model. Methods: Women ages 40 and older at an imaging center completed a
survey assessing their knowledge of breast cancer risk factors, channels
of information, mobile message preferences, and demographics. In
bivariate analysis, relationships between age, income, race/ethnicity and
education of women and their mobile message preferences were examined.
Results: A total of 157 women ages 40 to 91 (mean = 61, SD = 12.07)
completed the survey. Breast cancer risk factor knowledge was
significantly higher for non-Hispanic (p=.035), women with higher
education levels (p=.023) and higher income levels (p=.000). The most
common channels were television, magazines, Internet, and brochures.
Overall, 87% used cell phones. Cell phone use was more likely among
younger women ages 40-59 (p=.017), non-Hispanic women (p=.013), and women
with incomes $20,000 or higher (p=.032). Of the cell phone users, 20%
preferred breast cancer prevention messages. Breast cancer prevention
cell message preferences were more likely among younger women ages 40-59
(p=.001), Hispanic women (p=.000), and women with lower incomes (p=.011).
Nearly 47% used text messaging. Of the text users, 36% preferred breast
cancer prevention text messages and 37% preferred mammogram appointment
text reminders. Text message preferences were more likely among Hispanic
women (p=.001). Conclusions: Traditional and mobile messages for breast
cancer information are preferred by women. Targeting lower income,
Hispanic, and younger women with mobile messages may help to reduce
health disparities. Further research is needed for mobile technology use
in health promotion. Health promotion specialists may partner with
clinical offices to develop and target breast cancer prevention mobile
messages for improved mammography adherence, patient education, and best
practices in managing screening appointments.

