Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mammary fibroblasts induce hormone-independent growth in estrogen
receptor-positive breast cancer cells via an epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition in a 3D cell culture model.


The majority of breast cancers diagnosed in the United States are
estrogen receptor positive (ER+). These patients may respond to targeted
endocrine therapies, but up to 30% of patients experience a cancer
recurrence. We hypothesized that the molecular interaction of ER+ breast
cancer cells with mammary fibroblasts might lead to endocrine resistance
and, eventually, breast cancer relapse. We developed a three-dimensional
(3D) co-culture model representing cancer cell-fibroblast interactions
during early tumor invasion. We show that the proliferation of MCF7 ER+
cells switches from hormone-dependent to growth factor-dependent in the
presence of human mammary fibroblasts. Further, we determine that this
transition is associated with gene and protein hallmarks of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in tumor cells, in particular
upregulation of SNAIL and SLUG mRNA and loss of E-Cadherin protein. We
identified the secreted proteins that arise from epithelial-fibroblast
interactions in this system using an antibody-based array. The proteins
secreted into the conditioned medium are sufficient to induce EMT markers
in primary normal human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs). Our report
demonstrates that estrogen receptor activity is dynamic and therefore is
not best assessed with immunohistochemical techniques alone. For the
facile and rapid determination of ER activity in a clinical setting, we
propose the use of an emerging imaging method, highly sensitive
label-free Fourier Transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopic imaging. We
validate this technology in predicting endocrine sensitivity in breast
cancer here, by detecting significant changes in spectroscopic peaks
correlated with proliferation and metabolism of MCF7 cells grown in 3D
culture.(Supported by grants from The Breast Cancer Research Foundation
to BSK, DOD postdoctoral fellowship W81XWH-09-1-0398 to AB, NIH NCI
Alliance for Nanotechnology in Cancer Midwest Cancer Nanotechnology
Training Center R25 CA154015A to SEH, and National Institutes of Health
RO1CA138882 to RB.)

