Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated energetics and flux analysis reveals differential
metabolic reprogramming in highly and less invasive cancer cells.


Cancer cell metabolism was investigated using systems biology tools such
as metabolic flux analysis (MFA) to reveal intracellular cancer cell
metabolic flux distribution. To obtain a complete role of
nutrient-induced deprivation in metabolic reprogramming of cancer cells,
we need to use metabolic flux analysis to determine unknown intracellular
fluxes. MFA provides a framework for the estimation of intracellular
fluxes and energy balance analysis (EBA) ensures the thermodynamic
feasibility of the computed optimal metabolic fluxes. MFA uses
stoichiometric and mass balance constraints to compute the intracellular
fluxes. Here, we have developed an integrated energy balance and flux
balance analysis framework. Our framework allows estimation of
intracellular fluxes and reveals specific adaptations and dysregulation
of metabolic pathways in ovarian cancer cells as a result of the nutrient
(glucose and glutamine) deprivation conditions.Glutamine and glucose are
known to be important for cancer cell survival, growth and progression.
Thus, there is a strong motivation to study metabolic alternations caused
by glucose and glutamine deprivation and uncover links between various
fuel sources for highly and less invasive cancer cells. Our findings
indicate that NAD+/NADH ratio regulates glutamine's direct effect on
lactate production irrespective of the bioenergetic substrate requirement
for different kinds of cancer cells. Our findings, using quantification
of metabolites pertaining to central carbon and nitrogen metabolism
provided clues as to which pathways relevant to glycolysis, the pentose
phosphate pathway, the TCA, urea cycles and lipid cycles, amino acid and
nucleotide metabolisms may be altered by glucose and glutamine in cancer
cells. This resulted in identification of dominant factors which control
cancer metabolism. We believe that development of our oncosecretomics
based metabolic strategy provides an unprecedented opportunity for the
development of nutritional supplementation that can deregulate the
adaptations and alterations induced by various nutrients in cancer
metabolism.Citation Format: Abhinav Achreja, Lifeng Yang, Hongyun Zhao,
Juan C. Marini, Deepak Nagrath. Integrated energetics and flux analysis
reveals differential metabolic reprogramming in highly and less invasive
cancer cells. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of
the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington,
DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr
1892. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1892

