Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Snail 1 regulates invasion through uPA-uPAR signaling using the
MAPK pathway in prostate cancer cells.


Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a process by which cancer
cells acquire mesenchymal properties, such as induction of N-cadherin,
while epithelial-associated genes like E-cadherin are lost. This enables
the cells to be more invasive, migratory and metastatic. Factors that can
induce EMT include growth factors like transforming growth factor -
(TGF-) and epidermal growth factor (EGF), and transcription factors like
Snail1. Snail1-induced EMT promotes migration and invasion and we
hypothesized that this may be mediated by urokinase (uPA) and its
receptor (uPAR) activities. uPA, a serine protease, may be activated by
integrin engagement to bind to its receptor, uPAR, and initiate a
signaling cascade that regulates a variety of biological pathways
including invasion. Androgen-dependent LNCaP and 22Rv1 and
androgen-independent ARCaP human prostate cancer (PC) cells were stably
transfected with empty vector control (Neo) or constitutively active
Snail1 which led to increased cell migration and invasion. Superarray
analysis revealed an upregulation in uPAR expression in Snail-transfected
cells as compared to Neo control. Next, the protein expression levels of
Snail1, uPA, and uPAR were measured by Western Blot analysis. uPA
activity in conditioned media was measured using the Elisa uPA activity
assay kit. Also, uPAR was transiently silenced in ARCaP
Snail-overexpressing cells using uPAR siRNA. Additionally, cells were
treated with MAPK inhibitor, UO126, at set time points. The data suggests
that overexpression of Snail1 increased uPA and uPAR protein levels, and
uPA activity was elevated in conditioned media from LNCaP, 22Rv1 and
ARCaP Snail-overexpressing cells, as compared to Neo controls.
Additionally, the silencing of uPAR decreased cell invasion in ARCaP
Snail-overexpressing cells. Finally, MAPK inhibitor, UO126, inhibited
cell invasion and decreased uPA activity. Therefore, Snail-mediated cell
invasion in human prostate cancer cells may occur via the regulation of
the MAPK and uPA/ uPAR signaling pathway.Acknowledgements: These studies
were supported by the: NIH/NCRR/RCMI grant G12RR03062 and NIH P20 grant
1P20MD002285.

