Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PARP-1 regulates death receptor 5-mediated apoptosis in pancreatic
cancer.


Pancreatic cancer is a highly malignant tumor with limited therapy and
poor prognosis. Activation of death receptors (DR)-induced apoptotic
pathways using antibodies or agonists for the tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a promising cancer
therapy. However, most pancreatic tumors are resistant to TRAIL therapy.
The present studies aimed to identify combination therapies that enhance
the efficacy of TRAIL therapy by sensitizing resistant pancreatic cancer
cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis, and to investigate the underlying
mechanisms.Using TRA-8, a monoclonal agonistic antibody specific for DR5,
we demonstrated that TRA-8 induced apoptosis of 60% and 83% of BxPc-3 and
MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells in 24 hours. By contrast, only 20% and
24% of PANC-1 and Suit-2 cells underwent apoptosis in response to TRA-8
(n=3), despite the fact that they express high levels of the DR5
receptor. The expression of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) was
higher in the PANC-1 and Suit-2 cells than that BxPc-3 and MiaPaCa-2
cells, which may contribute to their resistance to TRA-8-induced
apoptosis. Inhibition of PARP-1 with a pharmacologic inhibitor (PJ-34)
sensitized PANC-1 to TRA-8 induced apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner.
Furthermore, small interfering RNAs specifically knocking down PARP-1 in
PANC-1 cells enhanced TRA-8-induced apoptosis in vitro by 2.5 fold, as
well as the efficacy of TRA-8 therapy on tumorigenesis of PANC-1 cells in
a mouse xenograft model by 3.8 fold (n=8, pPancreatic cancer is a highly
malignant tumor with limited therapy and poor prognosis. Activation of
death receptors (DR)-induced apoptotic pathways using antibodies or
agonists for the tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL) is a promising cancer therapy. However, most pancreatic tumors
are resistant to TRAIL therapy. The present studies aimed to identify
combination therapies that enhance the efficacy of TRAIL therapy by
sensitizing resistant pancreatic cancer cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis,
and to investigate the underlying mechanisms.Using TRA-8, a monoclonal
agonistic antibody specific for DR5, we demonstrated that TRA-8 induced
apoptosis of 60% and 83% of BxPc-3 and MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells
in 24 hours. By contrast, only 20% and 24% of PANC-1 and Suit-2 cells
underwent apoptosis in response to TRA-8 (n=3), despite the fact that
they express high levels of the DR5 receptor. The expression of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) was higher in the PANC-1 and
Suit-2 cells than that BxPc-3 and MiaPaCa-2 cells, which may contribute
to their resistance to TRA-8-induced apoptosis. Inhibition of PARP-1 with
a pharmacologic inhibitor (PJ-34) sensitized PANC-1 to TRA-8 induced
apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, small interfering RNAs
specifically knocking down PARP-1 in PANC-1 cells enhanced TRA-8-induced
apoptosis in vitro by 2.5 fold, as well as the efficacy of TRA-8 therapy
on tumorigenesis of PANC-1 cells in a mouse xenograft model by 3.8 fold
(n=8, p<0.01). PARP-1 knockdown increased TRA-8-induced activation of
caspase-8 in the death-induced signaling complex (DISC).
Immuoprecipitation with DR5 antibody identified the recruitment of PARP-1
and PARP1-mediated protein poly-ADP-ribosylation(pADPr) modification in
the DR5-associated DISC, which was associated with caspase 8 activation
in the DISC. Our studies determined a novel function of PARP-1,
independent of its known function in DNA repair, in regulating caspase 8
activation in the DISC. These results not only provide novel molecular
insights into the function of PARP-1 in regulating the extrinsic
apoptosis machinery, but also support the intervention of combining PARP
inhibitors with death receptor agonists to enhance the efficacy of
pancreatic cancer therapy.

