Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer cells
using Honokiol, a natural phenolic compound.


Introduction: The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) presents a
critical step in the acquisition of metastatic state. Tumor cells
undergoing EMT not only exhibit increased migration and invasion
potential but also acquire increased resistance to chemotherapy and
radiation therapy. Hence, EMT is an attractive target for therapeutic
interventions directed against tumor metastasis. Honokiol (HNK) is a
natural phenolic compound isolated from an extract of seed cones from
Magnolia grandiflora. Recent studies from our lab show that honokiol
inhibits breast carcinogenesis. The present study is designed to
systematically elucidate if nontoxic lower doses of honokiol can be used
to specifically inhibit EMT in breast cancer cells.Results: Our studies
show that HNK inhibits EMT in human breast cancer cells. Exposure of
estrogen-independent and estrogen-responsive breast cancer cells to
nontoxic lower doses of HNK results in significant downregulation of
mesenchymal marker proteins (Fibronectin, Vimentin) along with
simultaneous upregulation of epithelial markers (E-cadherin,
Cytokeratin-18). HNK also inhibits expression and nuclear translocation
of transcriptional modulators of EMT-related genes (Snail, ZEB1/2 and
Twist). Experimental EMT induced by exposure to TGF and TNF in a
spontaneously immortalized nontumorigenic human mammary epithelial cell
line (MCF-10A) was also completely reversed by HNK treatment as evidenced
by morphological changes (inhibition of fibroblast-like appearance,
decreased pseudopodia and actin reorganization to membrane-bound location
in TGF and TNF treated MCF10A cells) as well as molecular changes
(downregulation of Fibronectin, Vimentin, Snail, Zeb1/2 and upregulation
of E-cadherin and Cytokeratin-18). Mechanistically, HNK inhibits
MTA1-Wnt1 axis leading to stabilization and nuclear translocation of
-catenin to inhibit EMT. Analysis of breast tumors treated with honokiol
show modulation of EMT markers and inhibition of key molecules of
MTA1-Wnt1--catenin axis corroborating our in vitro findings.Conclusions:
Taken together, these data provide the first in vitro and in vivo
evidence of the potential of HNK as a novel, non-toxic and non-endocrine
therapeutic strategy for breast carcinoma. MTA1, Wnt1 and -catenin appear
to be novel biomarkers associated with HNK treatment.

