Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Robust in vitro cancer metabolism in non-tumorigenic microglial
cells.


It is well documented that energy metabolism differs between cancerous
tissue and normal tissue for a large variety of human and animal tumors.
The murine J2 retrovirus contributes to oncogenesis in macrophage cells.
The BV-2 microglia cells were immortalized using the v-raf/v-myc carrying
J2 retrovirus. These cells, however, do not form tumors when grown in
vivo in the natural C57BL/6 host. Consistent with v-raf/v-myc expression,
the in vitro metabolic and proliferation rate of the BV-2 cells greatly
exceeded that of the tumorigenic and metastatic VM-M3 microglia cells
when grown in DMEM containing 25 mM glucose. When controlling for
proliferation and ATP production, the BV-2 cells produced more lactate
than did the VM-M3 cells under aerobic conditions, thus demonstrating a
robust Warburg effect in the BV-2 cells. The Warburg effect is associated
with HIF stabilization under aerobic conditions. Mutations in the IDH1
gene produce 2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG), a recognized onco-metabolite that
also contributes to HIF stabilization under aerobic conditions. Mass
spectrometry analysis showed that the non-tumorigenic BV-2 cells made
2-HG only under anoxic conditions. 2-HG was not detected under anoxia or
normoxia in VM-M3LM cells, a less malignant clonal variant of VM-M3. It
appears that the BV-2 cells have a more robust cancer metabolism than
either the high malignant VM-M3 cells or the low malignant VM-M3LM cells.
The VM-M3LM cells consumed more oxygen and produced less lactate per ATP
than did either the BV-2 cells or the VM-M3 cells, thus displaying a
reduced Warburg effect. In other words, the Warburg effect was greatest
in the non-tumorigenic BV-2 cells, was lowest in the low malignant
VM-M3LM cells, but was intermediate in the high malignant VM-M3 cells.
The results suggest that over expression of the v-raf/v-myc oncogenes,
production of the IDH1 onco-metabolite, and a robust Warburg effect are
not sufficient to drive tumorigenesis in the BV-2 cells. Supported in
part from Boston College Res. Expense Fund.Citation Format: Roberto
Flores, Kenjiro Kami, Thomas Seyfried. Robust in vitro cancer metabolism
in non-tumorigenic microglial cells. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5429. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5429

