Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cetuximab treatment reduces VEGF expression and targeting of
radiolabeled bevacizumab in breast cancer xenografts.


Introduction: Bevacizumab (anti-VEGF) and cetuximab (anti- EGFR) are
approved for the treatment of cancer. However, in advanced colorectal
cancer, the combination of bevacizumab and cetuximab did not improve
survival (Tol et al. NEJM 2009). Up to now, the reason for the lack of
activity of the combination therapy remains unclear. Previously, we have
shown that bevacizumab reduces the vascular density of xenografts and
consequently limits the delivery of cetuximab to tumors. Thereby, it can
potentially limit the therapeutic efficacy of cetuximab. Alternatively,
cetuximab treatment could alter VEGF expression, limiting tumor targeting
by bevacizumab. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of
cetuximab treatment on VEGF expression and targeting of bevacizumab to
the tumor.Material and methods: Mice with subcutaneously implanted SUM149
xenografts, which express EGFR and VEGF, were treated intraperitoneally
with 1 mg/kg cetuximab (twice a week). Before start of treatment and
after 7, 14, and 21 days, the uptake of radiolabeled bevacizumab in the
tumor was measured by immunoSPECT/CT. Three days prior to scanning, mice
received 15 MBq of 111In-bevacizumab. After scanning, tumors were
dissected for ex vivo biodistribution and immunohistochemical analysis of
VEGF and CD34 expression.Results: After cetuximab treatment, tumor
targeting of bevacizumab was significantly reduced on immunoSPECT/CT
compared to untreated tumors. Tumor uptake measured ex vivo was 28.9 4.0
%ID/g for untreated tumors, compared to 18.2 2.8 %ID/g for tumors treated
21 days with cetuximab (p = 0.009). Immunohistochemical analysis showed
that the vascular density was unaltered while VEGF expression decreased
during cetuximab treatment.Conclusion: Cetuximab treatment reduced VEGF
expression and targeting of radiolabeled bevacizumab to the tumor. This
could at least partly explain why the combination of bevacizumab and
cetuximab does not result in improved therapeutic efficacy.

