Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exhaustion of autophagy-mediated cell survival underlies the
pre-clinical and clinical activity of chemotherapy combined with the AKT
inhibitor MK-2206 in BRAF wild-type melanoma.


Although targeted therapy strategies are currently lacking for patients
whose melanomas are BRAF wild-type, some therapeutic efficacy was noted
in a phase I clinical trial of the AKT inhibitor MK-2206 in combination
with Carboplatin (C) and Paclitaxel (P). In the present study we
addressed the mechanism underlying the responses to MK-2206 + CP in BRAF
wild-type melanoma. As single agents, MK-2206, carboplatin and paclitaxel
had only limited cytotoxic activity in both 2D and 3D cell culture and
induced very little apoptosis. Prolonged treatment (>9 days) with the AKT
inhibitor in combination with C+P led to significant levels of cell death
in 4 3D spheroid culture models of BRAF-wild type melanoma. In contrast,
treatment with single agent MK-2206 or C+P alone induced little cell
death. To investigate the mechanism of interaction between these three
compounds we focused upon autophagy induction. It was noted that
significant levels of autophagy, as demonstrated by increased LC3-II
staining, p62 expression and increased acridine orange staining, were
induced following up to 6 days of treatment with the combination. In this
context autophagy was protective, with levels of cell death induced by
the combination significantly enhanced following treatment with the
autophagy inhibitor chloroquine. The protective autophagy induced by
MK-2206 + CP was only transient, with diminished levels of autophagy
being observed by 9 days. The observed reduction in autophagic flux was
associated with marked increases in cell death. In summary it appears
that chronic insult with MK-2206 and CP pushes autophagy to its limit,
relinquishing its protective role and enhancing sensitivity of the cells
to therapy-induced apoptosis. These studies form the basis for a phase II
trial evaluating MK-2206 in combination with chemotherapy, as well as
autophagy inhibitors, in patients whose melanomas are BRAF-wild type.

