Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a human model to study the role of Glypican-3
(GPC3) on tumor progression of the mammary gland.


GPC3 was proposed as a negative regulator of cell proliferation in the
mammary gland. Whereas normal breast tissues present high GPC3 levels,
its expression is reduced in breast tumors. We have transfected LM3
murine mammary tumor cells with the GPC3 gene. We found that GPC3
reexpression inhibited metastasis in vivo. Although GPC3 signaling
pathway is unclear, we reported that this glypican modulates Wnt, p38 and
Akt pathways. However, regulation hierarchy has not been determined and
we have no data in human cells. We believe it possible to generate an
anti-metastasis therapy targeting GPC3 pathway. To test it, we developed
a pre-clinical human model. First, we showed by qPCR that GPC3 expression
levels are inversely proportional to the metastatic ability of a panel of
human breast cancer cells. The metastatic Hs578T and MDA-MB231 cells
expressed less GPC3 than the poorly-metastatic ZR-75-1 and MCF7 lines. We
selected MDA-MB231 and MCF7 to be modified by genetic engineering. GPC3
expression was blocked by RNA interference technology. We transfected
four shRNA-GPC3 and one shRNA scramble (shNC) into MCF7. After selection
and cloning, we chose clone 2 that expressed about 75% less GPC3 for
further characterization.On the other hand, GPC3 was reexpressed in
MDA-MB231 cells by transduction of pLV-GPC3-GFP (empty vector was used as
control). GPC3 mRNA increased up to 200-fold in pLV-GPC3-GFP transduced
cells. Then we evaluated cell properties in the generated models.
Surprisingly, MDA-MB231-GPC3 cells showed a higher proliferation rate
than controls, that became significant from 48 h of exponential growth
(Population doubling time= 45 h for control vs. 24 h for GPC3
reexpressing cells). On the other side, MCF7-shGPC3 bulk and clone 2
proliferated faster than -shNC. This suggests that, in this cell line,
GPC3 is inhibiting proliferation. GPC3 reexpression induced a 30%
inhibition on MDA-MB231 viability when cells were serum starved for 96 h,
while parental and -GFP remained 100% viable. No differences were
detected among MCF7 engineered cells. So, the effect of GPC3 on cell
viability would depend on the cellular context. We performed a wound
healing assay to evaluate migration, determining that MDA-MB231-GPC3
cells were significantly less migrant than their controls (Wound
coverage: MDA-MB231-GPC3 10% vs. parental and -GFP 90%). In sum, we have
developed a human cell model to study the role of GPC3 on tumor
progression. Our preliminary in vitro results reveal the importance of
GPC3 in the biology of breast cancer cells.

