Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HTS performance and high-content analysis of antimigratory
compound phenotypes using the Oris Pro 384 cell migration assay.


The discovery of anti-metastatic agents that inhibit cancer cell motility
has been hindered by a dearth of highthroughput screening (HTS)
-compatible cell motility assays. The Oris Pro 384 well cell migration
assay, developed by Platypus Technologies, is an innovative cell motility
assay designed to enable HTS of potential anti-cancer compounds and wound
healing agents on adherent tumor and endothelial cell lines. The assay
utilizes a centrally located, non-toxic, biocompatible gel (BCG) to form
a uniformly sized, cell-free detection zone into which cells migrate. The
assay is logistically simple and does not require any mechanical
processing steps, such as cell wounding or removal of physical barriers.
The assay is fully compatible with laboratory automation, including
robotic liquid handlers, plate washers, and high-content screening (HCS)
readers.A formal investigation of the accuracy, robustness, and HTS
performance of the assay was conducted following guidelines in place at
the University of Pittsburgh Drug Discovery Institute (UPDDI). Using
MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells, the assay was optimized for
migration kinetics, cell seeding density, and DMSO tolerance. In
multi-day variability studies, the assay delivered signal-to-background
ratios > 10 and Z-factors above 0.5 on three consecutive days, was
insensitive to process errors or edge-effects, and passed UPDDI Assay
Protocol Approval Committee (APAC) criteria. The assay delivered equal
HTS performance on two different HCS platforms the Thermo Scientific
Cellomics ArrayScan II and the Molecular Devices ImageXpressUltra point
scanning confocal reader. Screening of a test cassette of 1280 compounds
with known biological activities identified several agents with
mechanisms associated with cell motility. The multiparametric nature of
the HCS assay permitted correlation of antimigratory activity with
cellular toxicity. Our results validate the Oris Pro 384 cell migration
assay as a logistically simple and information-rich cell motility
analysis platform that meets the demands of large scale compound
screening.

