Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bortezomib enhanced cytotoxic effects of novel sTRAIL-targeted
nanocarriers against neuroectodermal tumors .


The soluble form of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (sTRAIL) is a cancer cell-specific molecule
exerting anti-tumor activity in a variety of transformed cells. sTRAIL
elicits apoptosis by activating the pro-apoptotic receptors 1 (TRAIL-R1)
and 2 (TRAIL-R2). However, clinical studies in cancer patients
demonstrated that recombinant human sTRAIL showed short serum half-life
that does not lead to a subsequent tumor accumulation over time. The aim
of this work was to develop a novel liposomal formulation carrying the
sTRAIL at the outer surface (sTRAIL-SL) in order to improve its
pharmacokinetic features, while preserving its anti-tumor activity and
increasing its in vivo efficacy. Neuroectodermal tumor cells (i.e
neuroblastoma (NB) and melanoma) can be either sensitive or resistant to
sTRAIL-driven death. In this regard, we investigated the possibility to
combine our novel sTRAIL liposomal formulation with the proteasome
inhibitor Bortezomib (BTZ), known to be able to sensitize tumor cells to
sTRAIL-induced apoptosis, by up-regulating TRAIL-R2.The expression of
TRAIL receptors was validated by FACS analysis in a panel of human NB and
melanoma cell lines. Receptors expression after BTZ treatment was also
evaluated, confirming the BTZ-driven up-regulation of TRAIL-R2 in all the
tumor cells tested. No effect on TRAIL-R1 expression was pointed out.
Cellular association of sTRAIL-SL was evaluated by FACS analysis on both
NB and melanoma cell lines. In vitro cytotoxicity and selective apoptosis
induction by sTRAIL-SL were examined in both sTRAIL-sensitive and
-resistant NB and melanoma cell lines, by using annexin V/PI assay.
Treatments were carried out with sTRAIL, either free or coupled to SL,
alone and in combination with BTZ. In sTRAIL-sensitive cells, we observed
that sTRAIL-SL treatment resulted in a dose-dependent induction of
apoptosis with an efficacy slightly more pronounced than free sTRAIL.
Moreover, experiments of combination treatments showed that BTZ
effectively sensitized cells to sTRAIL-induced apoptosis. Upon BTZ
priming, sTRAIL-resistant cells undergo enhanced apoptotic death by
triggering with sTRAIL-SL compared to treatment with free sTRAIL. In
preliminary mechanistic experiments sTRAIL-induced cytotoxicity is
dependent on -catenin degradation and Caspase-3 and 8 activation. No
effect was exerted on normal fibroblasts. In vivo experiments
investigating the pharmacokinetic profile of sTRAIL when coupled to
nanocarriers and evaluating its anti-tumor activity against both NB and
melanoma animal models are on running. Our data show that sTRAIL, when
coupled to nanocarriers preserved and improved its tumor-selective
activity on both NB and melanoma, suggesting that it might be an
efficient vehicle for sTRAIL delivery and, in combination with BTZ, a
valid strategy for the treatment of sTRAIL-resistant tumors.

