Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of bifunctional cross-linking agents to identify
intermediate proteasomes.


Introduction: This research was conducted to develop bifunctional
cross-linking agents that can be used to identify intermediate
proteasomes. Two well-characterized proteasome subtypes, the constitutive
proteasome and immunoproteasome, differ with respect to their distinct
sets of catalytic subunits. Additionally, intermediate proteasome
subtypes comprised of non-standard mixtures of catalytic subunits have
more recently been discovered. These intermediate proteasomes differ from
constitutive and immunoproteasomes in their proteolytic activity
profiles, suggesting that they have unique cellular functions. In
agreement with this, intermediate proteasomes in cancer cell lines were
shown to play important roles in the production of several tumor
antigens. However, largely due to limitations of methods currently
available to distinguish between subtypes, the detailed functions of
intermediate proteasomes remain poorly defined. Bifunctional agents
capable of cross-linking two different catalytic subunits within a single
proteasome complex will facilitate a simple approach to identify distinct
proteasome subtypes present within cells. These compounds will serve as
important chemical probes for investigating the functions of individual
proteasome subtypes in cancer cells.Experimental Procedures: Bifunctional
cross-linking agents were synthesized by coupling two broad-spectrum or
subunit-selective proteasome inhibitors through hydrocarbon or
polyethylene glycol linkers. Positions for derivatization of these
inhibitors were selected based on computational modeling, and linker
lengths were varied to increase cross-linking efficiency. The ability of
the resulting compounds to cross-link two proteasome catalytic subunits
in cancer cell lysates was assessed via western blotting. Competition
assays with subunit-selective proteasome inhibitors were conducted to
verify the identities of the cross-linked subunit pairs.Data Summary: The
structures of the bifunctional cross-linking agents were confirmed by
mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Western
blotting results revealed the ability of several of these bifunctional
agents to cross-link two catalytic subunits within individual proteasome
complexes, facilitating compositional analysis of distinct proteasome
subtypes.Conclusions: We have successfully developed bifunctional agents
capable of cross-linking two catalytic subunits within individual
proteasome complexes. These compounds will be utilized in functional
studies of intermediate proteasomes present within cancer cells.

