Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RhoGTPase-based regulation of cell motility by Plk4.


Background. Polo-like kinase 4 (Plk4) is a serine-threonine kinase that
localizes to centrioles and is essential for centriole duplication. Plk4
expression is increased in colorectal, pancreas and breast cancers, and
predicts resistance to therapy and poor survival. While centriolar
overduplication and multipolar spindle formation is one mechanism by
which dysregulated Plk4 can facilitate oncogenesis, our laboratory has
found that Plk4 promotes migration and invasion of fibroblasts and of
cancer cells by mechanisms currently under investigation. Haploid levels
of Plk4 are associated with an increased incidence of improper cleavage
furrow positioning during mitotic division, and we previously showed that
RhoA is not adequately activated to effect proper actomyosin ring
placement and contraction in Plk4 heterozygous murine embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs). We showed that the effect of Plk4 on RhoA activation
is mediated by phosphorylation of the GEF Ect2 by Plk4 (Rosario et al.,
PNAS 2010). The small Rho GTPases RhoA, Rac1 and Cdc42 are known to
regulate cell motility. We hypothesize that Plk4 promotes cancer cell
motility by altering the activation of one or more of these
RhoGTPases.Methods and Results: Pulldown experiments have shown a
two-fold reduction in activated Rac1 in Plk4+/ as compared to Plk4+/+
MEFs. Depletion of Plk4 from wildtype MEFs using siPlk4 (confirmed by
real time RT-PCR) reduced levels of activated Rac1, as compared to
siLuciferase controls. Cdc42 activation was unaffected by Plk4. To
determine the mechanism of the effect of Plk4 on Rho GTPase activation we
investigated the upstream regulators that may be affected by Plk4, aside
from Ect2. We scanned a library of 149 GEFs and GAPs cloned into the
Creator system and identified 8 potential interactors (all GEFs) that
contain the Plk4 consensus phosphorylation motif. We are evaluating these
8 candidates for physical interaction with Plk4 by co-transfection and
co-immunoprecipitation from HeLa cells. By this method, we find that Plk4
physically interacts with the RhoA GEF ARHGEF1. To establish functional
validation of this interaction, we are examining the phenotype of
individually- and co- transfected HeLa cells. Transient transfection with
Plk4 for 24h results in an arborized phenotype, while transfection with
ARHGEF1 results in a rounded morphology; co-transfected cells display an
intermediate phenotype. Immunofluorescence imaging shows co-localization
of Flag-Plk4 and GFP-ARHGEF1 in lamellipodia, in keeping with a potential
functional interaction. Whether the effect of ARHGEF1 on cell morphology
is mediated through Rac1, RhoA, or both requires further investigation,
as does the precise role of Plk4.Conclusions: Plk4 regulates the
activation of Rac1 GTPase, and we demonstrate a physical and functional
interaction of Plk4 with the Rac1 GEF ARHGEF1. Regulation of cancer cell
motility via this pathway may contribute to promotion of invasion and
metastasis by Plk4.

