Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A microRNA downregulated in human cholangiocarcinoma induces G2/M
arrest through multiple targets.


Background: Cholangiocarcinomas (CCA) are cancers with dismal prognosis,
thought to arise from epithelial cells lining the biliary tree. An
improved understanding of the pathogenesis of CCA, as well as novel
diagnostic and therapeutic approaches are direly needed. MicroRNAs (miRs)
are short, single-stranded sequences of RNA, that were recently
demonstrated to play a major role in the regulation of virtually all
cellular processes. Several previous studies identified miRs that are
dysregulated in CCA as well as distinct roles played by miRs in CCA
genesis or progression. Methods: We performed microRNA-arrays on 5 normal
biliary duct epithelias and 5 CCAs that had been obtained at surgery.
After data analysis, we selected mir-494 for all subsequent analysis
among top 5 miRs. To confirm the initial miR array data, quantitative
real time RT-PCR analysis was performed using 12 human CCA as well as 5
normal cholangiocyte specimens. And then, we transfected 2 CCA cell lines
with miR-494 and a non-specific mimic, respectively, and performed mRNA
arrays to identify in an unbiased fashion the genes whose expression is
downregulated by miR-494. Furthermore, we performed fluorescence
activated cell sorting, as well as differential interference contrast
microscopy.Results: miR-494 is significantly downregulated in human CCA
specimens. Cells transfected with miR-494 showed a significant decrease
in growth in the cell proliferation assay. As for the results of mRNA
array, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis also indicated that miR-494 appears to
coordinately affect several genes involved in the Mitotic Roles of
Polo-like Kinase and Cell cycle: G2/M Checkpoint Regulation canonical
pathways. We verified that miR-494 modulates the protein level of six
genes involved in the G2/M transition. Next, we identified direct binding
of miR-494 to the open reading frame (ORF), and downregulation of PTTG1
and TOP2A. Conclusions: our findings suggest that miR-494 has a global
regulatory role in cell cycle progression. Therefore, it appears that the
simultaneous effects of a single miR species on multiple targets along
the same canonical pathway is advantageous for the usage of miRs as
therapeutics.

