Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic anticancer activity of Sorafenib in combination with
HS-173, a novel PI3K inhibitor against pancreatic cancer cells.


The K-RAS mutation, resulting in activation of the Raf/MEK/ERK pathway,
has been implicated in pancreatic cancer development. And the PI3K/Akt
pathway is highly activated in pancreatic cancer and considered to be a
cancer hallmark. The principal objective of this study was to assess the
synergic effect between Sorafenib (a Raf inhibitor) and HS-173 (a novel
PI3K inhibitor) along with the underlying mechanism to gain insight into
novel therapeutic strategies for treating pancreatic cancer. We first
investigated the cytotoxic effect of co-treatment with Sorafenib and
HS-173 using the Calcusyn program. Combined treatment with the two drugs
synergistically inhibited the viability of Panc-1 cells (combination
index The K-RAS mutation, resulting in activation of the Raf/MEK/ERK
pathway, has been implicated in pancreatic cancer development. And the
PI3K/Akt pathway is highly activated in pancreatic cancer and considered
to be a cancer hallmark. The principal objective of this study was to
assess the synergic effect between Sorafenib (a Raf inhibitor) and HS-173
(a novel PI3K inhibitor) along with the underlying mechanism to gain
insight into novel therapeutic strategies for treating pancreatic cancer.
We first investigated the cytotoxic effect of co-treatment with Sorafenib
and HS-173 using the Calcusyn program. Combined treatment with the two
drugs synergistically inhibited the viability of Panc-1 cells
(combination index < 1). Concomitantly, co-treatment with Sorafenib and
HS-173 induced G2/M arrest and increased apoptosis with the loss of
mitochondria potential. Apoptosis resulting from co-treatment with
Sorafenib and HS-173 was accompanied by increased levels of cleaved
caspase-3 and PARP as well as greater numbers of TUNEL-positive apoptotic
cells compared to treatment with either drug alone. Furthermore, combined
treatment with these drugs decreased the expression HIF-1 and VEGF, two
factors that play an important role in angiogenesis. The anti-angiogenic
effect of simultaneous treatment with Sorafenib and HS-173 was confirmed
by observing the suppressed tube formation of VEGF-induced human
umbilical vein endothelial cells and inhibition of blood vessel formation
in a Matrigel plug assay in mice. Taken together, our study demonstrated
that combined treatment with Sorafenib and HS-173 has a synergistic
anticancer effect on pancreatic cancer cells, indicating that
simultaneously targeting the Raf/MEK and PI3K/Akt pathways can induce a
synergistic inhibitory effect on pancreatic cancers in which both
pathways are activated. Based on the observations from our study, we
suggest that the combined administration of these two drugs may be
considered to be a new therapeutic regimen for treating pancreatic cancer.

