Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ectopic expression of CHST11 promotes proliferation and migration
of human breast cancer cells.


Introduction. We have previously demonstrated that the expression levels
of carbohydrate (chondroitin 4) sulfotransferase-11 (CHST11) correlates
with P-selectin binding and aggressiveness (basal-like, triple-negative
and mesenchymal phenotype) of human breast cancer. The present study was
performed to establish stably transfected cell lines and study the
functional role of CHST11 in human breast cancer cells. Methods. MCF7
cells were transfected with a plasmid vector containing the CHST11 coding
sequence. Stable transfectants, MCF-7-CHST11, were established. Flow
cytometry and real-time PCR were used for expression analysis. Metastatic
phenotype of cells was characterized through conduction of proliferation
and migration assays. Morphology and growth pattern of MCF-7-CHST11 cells
were monitored and compared to parental MCF-7 cells. Results. We observed
that MCF-7-CHST11 reacted strongly with anti-chondroitin sulfate A (CS-A)
antibody and recombinant P-selectin. CS-A is the immediate product of
CHST11 activity. CHST11 expression significantly affected cell
proliferation as MCF-7-CHST11 cells grew much faster. Migration assay
using transwell chamber showed high migratory potential for MCF-7-CHST11
cells as compared to the parental MCF-7 cells. The significant migratory
advantage was not proliferation dependent. The CHST11expression affected
the morphology of cells and cell spreading behavior consistent with more
efficient anchorage independent growth. Colony formation in soft agar,
Invasion and adhesion assays are being performed at the present time. We
are planning more experiments to study mechanisms involved. Conclusions.
The data confirm that the CHST11 products on the cell surface can serve
as P-selectin ligands. The results indicate that the CHST11 expression
can affect metastatic phenotype of cancer cells by promoting cellular
proliferation and migratory potential.

