Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carboxyl terminal region of MUC16 is critical for tumor cell
invasion and drug resistance.


MUC16, also known as CA125, is routinely used to monitor the progression
(as a biomarker) and response to therapeutics (as a prognostic marker)
for epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC), but the deregulated expression is
not restricted only to EOC. Recent studies from our lab have shown that
normal breast and pancreas (ducts) do not express MUC16; however its
expression progressively increases in primary and metastatic breast and
pancreatic cancers. In addition, we have observed the involvement of
MUC16 in enhancing the tumorigenic potential by shRNA studies. In the
present study, to understand the mechanistic involvement of MUC16, we
have focused on its C-terminal region. MUC16 is a type-I membrane-bound
mucin with a heavily glycosylated N-terminal domain, a transmembrane
region (TM) and a 32-residue cytoplasmic tail (CT) domain. Though it has
been predicted that MUC16 undergoes cleavage/shedding in the
extracellular SEA domain(s) by proteases such as MMP7 and neutrophil
elastase, the exact nature and site of cleavage and the fate of the
membrane bound portion (C-terminal) after release of extracellular
portion is not entirely understood. The post cleavage C-ter region is
interesting due to presence of (a) stretch of polybasic aminoacids, the
site of interaction for cytoskeletal proteins like Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin,
(b) potential nuclear localization signal (bioinformatics prediction)
which might facilitate its nuclear localization with associated
transcription factors modulating the transcription of various target
genes and (c) several potential serine, threonine and tyrosine
phosphorylation sites facilitating its interaction(s) with proteins
influencing oncogenic signaling pathways. Therefore, we hypothesized that
the oncogenic potential of MUC16 is in part, mediated by the potential
involvement of C-terminal domain of MUC16. Thusly, we have made several
truncated versions of MUC16 from the C-terminal end with N-terminal FLAG
tag and C-terminal HA-tag and are in the process of characterization. To
understand the functional significance of this C-terminal region, we have
stably transfected MCF7 (breast cancer), MiaPaCa and T3M4 (pancreatic
cancer) cells with an empty vector, FLAG-MUC16-114AA-HA and
FLAG-MUC16-114AA-dCT (32 AA in the CT is deleted). Our results from in
vitro functional assays indicate that C-terminal region of MUC16 is
responsible for enhancing the invasive potential of cancer cells and
confers resistance to chemotherapeutic agents such as Cisplatin and
Gemcitabine. Moreover, we see that the function of the carboxyl terminal
MUC16 is dependent on the stability of the protein, which is a function
of N-glycosylation and ubiquitylation. Overall, our studies indicate that
C-terminal region of MUC16 is an important mediator of cancer cell
invasion and drug resistance. (This work is supported from the Department
of Defense BC101014).

