Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of CXCR2 and its ligands in KRAS oncogene-induced
initiation of pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is considered the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the United States. The high
mortality-to-incidence ratio for the disease can be attributed to late
clinical presentation. Thus, the detection of early markers of this
disease remains a major challenge in the field of PC research. Somatic
mutations in oncogene KRAS are the most common and earliest events during
development of PC, suggesting their crucial role in tumor initiation;
however, the precise functional molecular mechanism of action remains
poorly understood. CXCR2, a CXC chemokine receptor, and its ligands have
also been found to be important in regulating angiogenesis and
metastasis. Their enhanced expression is observed as early as the
precursor lesions of PC. The objective of this study was to investigate
the role of CXCR2 signaling in the KRAS(G12D)-induced PC development. To
validate that mutant KRAS(G12D) is essential for this increased
secretome, studies were performed using two cell line models having both
exogenous and endogenous expression of mutant KRAS(G12D):
Htert-HPNE-E6-E7-st/KRAS(G12D), which is an immortalized pancreatic
duct-derived cell line having exogenous expression of mutant KRAS (G12D),
and CD18/HPAF KRAS (G12D) -scram/Sh, which is a tumor-derived cell line.
The endogenous expression of mutant KRAS (G12D) was silenced by stable
expression of Sh-RNA specific to the KRAS(G12D) allele. Real time PCR,
ELISA and western blot analysis of these cells revealed that mutant KRAS
(G12D) regulates the expression of CXCR2 and its ligands at both
transcription and protein levels. We observed an enhanced expression of
the CXCR2 and its ligands in Htert-HPNE-E6-E7-st-KRAS(G12D) cells.
Interestingly, stable knock-down of KRAS in CD18/HPAF-shKRAS(G12D) cells
upregulated CXCR2 expression, but inhibited the expression of its
ligands. In addition, immunohistochemical analysis of PC lesions from
Pdx-cre-LSL-KRAS (G12D) mice showed a higher expression of both receptor
and its ligands as the lesions progress to advanced stages. Taken
together, these results suggest that KRAS effector pathways are essential
for modulating the expression of CXCR2 and its ligand, which, in turn,
can mediate cellular- responses in PC growth and progression.

