Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD10 positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma have
chemoresistant and radioresistant properties.


Background: Despite recent advances in the understanding of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and the development of novel therapeutic
targets, five-year survival rates for HNSCC have not improved in more
than three decades. Prognosis for recurrent or metastatic HNSCC remains
poor. Thus, it is important for improvement of HNSCC therapy, to research
therapeutic resistant mechanism. We found CD10 positive HNSCC cells have
chemoresistant and radioresistant properties.Materials and Methods: In
order to investigate HNSCC chemoresistant and radioresistant properties,
we used Lyoplate (company:BD).This reagent contains 242 purified
monoclonal antibodies to cell surface markers and can be used for
screening cells with flow cytometry. First, in three HNSCC cell lines, we
compared cell surface antigen expression patterns to normal cultured
cells, temporarily cisplatin exprosured cells and irradiated
cells.Result: We found four cell surface markers that upragulated in
cisplatin exprosured cells and irradiated cells. These are CD10, CD15s,
CD146, CD282. Next, we compered these expression pattern to normal
cultured cells and cisplatinresistant cells. CD10 and CD282 was
upregulated. Focused on CD10, we performed cisplatin MTT assay. CD10
positive cells had more resistant property than CD10 negative
cells.Conclusion: CD10 is a cell surface zinc-dependent
metalloendopeptidase, which is expressed in a wide variety of normal
cells. CD10 is also expressed by several solid tumors such as melanoma
and several carcinomas originating from kidney, lung, skin, pancreas,
prostate, liver, breast, stomach, cervix, and bladder. Several studies
have shown that CD10 might be a good marker for differentiating between
primary tumors and derived metastases, and therefore for evaluating tumor
progression. In HNSCC, only one report demonstrated role of CD10 in the
differentiation and growth of neoplastic cells and concluded that CD10
expression can have an important role in the tumor invasion, metastases.
Our date is first report that CD10 positive HNSCC have chemoresisitant
and radioresistant properties. This result may correlate with CD10
positive HNSCC has invasive and metastatic character.Learning Objective:
We identified CD10 positive HNSCC have chemoresisitant and radioresistant
properties.

