Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of ADAM10-mediated APP processing in pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death in
United States and is characterized by poor prognosis and low survival
rate. Current chemotherapeutic interventions include drugs such as
Gemcitabine which can prolong the survival only marginally and hence it
is important that new molecular targets be identified for early detection
and drug development for more effective treatment of this cancer.Recent
studies have shown that Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP), a protein mainly
studied in association with pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), is
overexpressed in human pancreatic cancer raising the possibility that it
may be involved in oncogenesis. APP is processed by different proteases
and secretases to give rise to fragments with different functional
properties. Certain proteolytic fragments of APP are known to cause
neuronal apoptosis, as in AD, while other fragments exhibit growth
promoting and anti-apoptotic properties. The molecular mechanisms by
which APP or fragments of APP induce cell proliferation or oncogenesis
has not been elucidated.One of the proteolytic fragments of APP that
exhibits growth promoting characteristics is the secreted APP alpha
(sAPP). The major enzyme that mediates APP cleavage to generate sAPP has
been identified as ADAM10, which belongs to the ADAM (a disintegrin and
metalloprotease) family of proteases. ADAM10 expression is elevated in
pancreatic cancer but the functional significance of this upregulation is
not known. Based on the role of this enzyme in generation of the
pro-proliferative sAPP, we hypothesize that ADAM10 promotes pancreatic
cancer progression through regulation of APP. Our studies show that CD18,
MiaPaCa2 and Panc1 pancreatic cancer cells overexpress APP as well as
ADAM10. In order to determine whether inhibition of ADAM10 has an effect
on generation of sAPP, we treated these cells with Batimastat, a known
inhibitor of ADAM10. We found that Batimastat significantly inhibits sAPP
generation, with concomitant reduction in cell proliferation as well as
anchorage-independent growth of colonies in soft agar. Interestingly,
this inhibitory effect is enhanced when cells are treated with a
combination of Batimastat and Gemcitabine suggesting that Batimastat
sensitizes the cells to Gemcitabine. In vitro addition of recombinant
sAPP could rescue the inhibitory effect of Batimastat thereby suggesting
that ADAM10 is promoting the proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells
through the generation of sAPP. This was further supported by knock down
studies using siRNA targeting APP. Cytotoxicity assay with APP knock down
cells showed a significant reduction in cell viability which was
comparable to cells treated with Batimastat. These results suggest that
inhibitors of sAPP generation can enhance the therapeutic potential of
the established pancreatic cancer treatment regimen and help improve the
prognosis of cancer patients.

