Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput combination screening identifies novel drug-drug
pairings for a Bruton's tyrosine kinase inhibitor against the ABC subtype
of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.


The vast majority of cancer treatments currently administered to patients
consist of combinations of more than one drug via routine infusions that
adhere to specific dosing schedules. It is thought that this multi-arm
and time dependent approach will kill not only the tumor cells within the
primary site, but also any metastatic lesions, and importantly, any
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) which may still exist in the blood.
Combination therapies have also been developed as a means to reduce
general cytotoxic side effects and prevent resistance and recurrence. Our
labs have recently developed a high throughput screening platform to test
compounds in pair-wise combinations to rapidly and systematically
identify additive, synergistic and antagonistic drug combinations. This
HTS capability can easily generate hundreds of dose response matrices in
a single study and can increase significantly when applied to multiple
cell lines. We are using this combination screening platform with in
vitro models from both established cell lines and primary patient
material, and we expect it will serve as a very valuable tool and a
starting point when designing clinical trials after these combinations
show promise within in vivo models. In a proof of concept study, we
tested combinations of compounds that effectively kill 2 established
lines of the ABC sub-type of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL); TMD8
and HBL1. We will present the infrastructure and methods that we have
developed to implement the combination screens, visualize data from the
combination dose response comparisons and numerically compare
combinations in terms of their response matrices. We will also describe
how this approach allows us to investigate putative polypharmacological
effects that play a role in compound combination responses. Finally, we
will show the results of a combination screen with TMD8 and HBL1 cells,
including the identification of a novel drug-drug combination for the BTK
inhibitor ibrutinib (PCI-32765) which is of both basic and translational
interest for the treatment of DLBCL.

