Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of molecular dynamic simulations to explore changes in
conformation and sequence preference for DNA-binding biaryl polyamide
structures.


As a class, minor-groove non-covalent binding small molecules generally
show A/T selectivity. The lack of G/C selectivity is thought to relate to
the wider minor groove in G/C regions and the presence of the exocyclic
2-amino groups of guanines which project into the minor groove and
prevent multiple close van der Waals contacts with the G/C-rich minor
groove. AT-selective structures such as distamycin and netropsin
orientate in the minor groove in an NH down conformation, with their NH
groups pointing into the minor groove to enhance the isohelicity of the
structures and produce favourable van der Waal interactions with the
groove floor below. Using a distamycin scaffold as a starting point we
introduced biaryl building blocks in place of pyrroles to change the
curvature and van der Waals interaction potential of this novel class of
polyamides. We started by designing a library of fragments to span two
DNA base pairs based on simple phenyl-substituted heterocycles of
sufficient length. With each library member containing one heterocyclic
and one carbocyclic component, sufficient diversification was achieved
through modifications to, and substitutions within, both components. This
allowed the production of libraries of building blocks possessing
different curvatures and hydrogen-bonding abilities with the potential to
complement functional groups and hydrogen bond donors and acceptors in
the walls and floor of the minor groove. A fluorescent intercalator
displacement (FID) assay was then used to select molecules with a
preference for GC-rather than AT-rich sequences which identified the
4-(1-methyl-1H-pyrrol-3-yl)benzenamine (MPB) motif. Molecular dynamics
simulations were undertaken using the AMBER v11 software in implicit
solvent over a time-scale of 20ns with the structures in both a
carbonyl-in and NH-in conformation. This demonstrated that the MPB
component within the biaryl polyamides undergoes a switch in orientation,
with a carbonyl down conformation preferred which induces GC specificity.
As well as occupying an idealised hydrogen-bonding distance between two
side-by-side guanine residues, MPB units contained within the MPB biaryl
polyamide structures showed superior hydrogen bonding interactions with
GC compared to AT sequences, with each carbonyl of the MPB unit hydrogen
bonding to a guanine residue. This was further supported by free-energy
of binding calculations undertaken using AMBER-MMPBSA, where the MPB
units showed a distinct preference for GC sequences (a difference of
-13kcal/mol in favour of carbonyl -in over NH-in structures). This
discovery has been applied to the design and synthesis of more-complex
MPB-containing DNA minor-groove binding ligands with a high level of
GC-selectivity and significant in vitro and in vivo antitumour activity.

