Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYCN coordinately regulates the entire polyamine gene pathway to
drive polyamine biosynthesis in neuroblastoma, with expression of every
synthetic and catabolic polyamine pathway gene being highly prognostic of
clinical outcome.


Background: Polyamines are highly regulated essential cations that are
elevated in rapidly proliferating tissues. We have previously shown that
the MYC/MYCN target ornithine decarboxylase (ODC1), rate-limiting for
polyamine biosynthesis, is a therapeutic target for neuroblastoma
(Hogarty et al, Cancer Res 2008; 68: 9735). We have also shown that
targeting multiple steps in the polyamine pathway enhances therapeutic
efficacy in complementary pre-clinical models (Haber et al, Adv Neurobl
Res, 2012, OR 88). An international Phase I trial for refractory
neuroblastoma, coordinated by the New Approaches to Neuroblastoma
Treatment (NANT) consortium USA, will open shortly using ODC1 inhibition
by high-dose difluoromethylornithine and SAT1 induction by celecoxib. We
have now examined the prognostic impact of all polyamine pathway genes in
a large cohort of neuroblastoma tumors.Methods: Gene-expression profiles
of 650 primary untreated neuroblastomas were analyzed for all polyamine
pathway genes, and related to clinical outcome. Gene expression was
evaluated by Real-Time PCR (RT-PCR) and correlated with MYCN levels in
neuroblastoma cell lines. Activation and repression of polyamine genes by
MYCN were analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Polyamine
gene promoters were cloned into luciferase reporter vectors and tested as
a function of MYCN expression.Results: Expression of all polyamine
pathway genes was highly prognostic of neuroblastoma outcome. High levels
of each synthetic gene and low levels of each catabolic gene predicted
poor outcome. Multivariate analysis showed 6/11 genes retained
independent prognostic significance following adjustment for MYCN, age
and stage. In neuroblastoma cell lines, in the presence or absence of
MYCN expression, RT-PCR analysis demonstrated a correlation of high MYCN
with high biosynthetic polyamine gene expression, but an inverse
correlation of high MYCN with low catabolic polyamine gene expression.
ChIP assays confirmed that MYCN associates with biosynthetic gene
promoters by binding to E-box sites in order to activate transcription.
In contrast, MYCN binds the promoters of the catabolic genes in proximity
to the transcription start sites by interacting with the Sp1 protein in
order to repress transcription of these genes. Direct activation by MYCN
of biosynthetic genes and down-regulation by MYCN of catabolic genes was
confirmed by luciferase activity assays.Conclusions: These results
provide a remarkable demonstration of an oncogene coordinately regulating
the expression of every gene in a metabolic pathway in order to drive
cell proliferation. The findings highlight the importance of polyamines
in neuroblastoma and identify target enzymes in addition to ODC1 for
potential therapeutic intervention.

