Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of primary cell lines from advanced colon cancer: a
tool for screening novel anticancer molecules.


For diversely heterogeneous diseases like cancer, a major challenge in
the development of new drugs is using appropriate in vitro testing
platform. Although high throughput screening of new compounds requires a
large panel of genetically well characterized cell lines, their numbers
are far less than requirement of biophrama. On top of this the
translational potential of cell line panel is limited because most of the
commercially available cell lines have been generated from metastatic
site and highly transformed, therefore do not represent the true state of
the disease. In this context, we have developed two early passage patient
derived primary colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines. Using this improved
in vitro testing system we tested the efficacy of a number of anticancer
agents against CRC.Cell lines were generated by enzymatic disaggregation
method. The tissues were obtained after informed consent from patient.
The tumor tissues were sectioned into to small pieces (1mm) and were
digested using 0.5% Collagenase for 2-4 hrs at 37C. The single cell
suspensions were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum. The epithelial cells were propagated up to passage 2 and were
cryopreserved for further applications. Mutational (K-RAS, BRAF, PIK3CA,
PTEN) and standard CRC specific marker (such as mucin) analyses were done
in order to confirm the authenticity of these lines. The cell viability
was evaluated using MTT assay following treatment with Standard of Care
(SOC) agents (both single and combinations). Additionally for screening
of selected FDA approved NSAIDs like Aspirin, Etoricoxib, Ibuprofen,
Indomethacin, Mefenamic acid, Methotrexate and Nimesulide (repurposing)
were performed at their respective CMAX concentrations after 48 hrs of
treatment.Our results showed that, the SOCs when tested as single agents
did not show any significant cell death. However, when treated in
combination with Irinotecan, Fluorouracil and Leucovorin in the presence
and absence of Avastin a significant augmentation of cell death was
observed in both the cell lines. Further, Mefenamic acid, Methotrexate,
Ibuprofen and Aspirin exhibited a significant cytotoxic effect in both
cell lines after 48 hrs of treatment. Together, these results demonstrate
that COX-2 inhibitors could be developed as a as an effective anticancer
therapeutics for colorectal cancer treatment and primary cell line model
provides a rapid and more reliable screening platform.

