Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune cell profile of sentinel lymph nodes in melanoma patients .


Besides being a preferential site of early metastasis, the sentinel lymph
node (SLN) is also a privileged site of T-cell priming, and may thus be
an appropriate target for investigating cell types involved in antitumor
immune reactions. We determined the prevalence of OX40+ activated T
lymphocytes, FOXP3+ regulatory T cells, DC-LAMP+ mature dendritic cells
(DCs) and CD123+ plasmacytoid DCs by immunohistochemistry in 100 SLNs
from 60 melanoma patients. Density values of each cell type in SLNs were
compared to those in non-sentinel nodes obtained from block dissections
(n=37), and analyzed with regard to associations with clinicopathological
parameters and disease outcome. Sentinel nodes showed elevated amount of
all cell types studied in comparison to non-sentinel nodes. Metastatic
SLNs had higher density of OX40+ lymphocytes compared to tumor-negative
nodes, while no significant difference was observed in the case of the
other cell types studied. Within the sentinel-positive group, FOXP3+ cell
density was higher in patients showing disease progression and >5 years
survival than in those without progression and Besides being a
preferential site of early metastasis, the sentinel lymph node (SLN) is
also a privileged site of T-cell priming, and may thus be an appropriate
target for investigating cell types involved in antitumor immune
reactions. We determined the prevalence of OX40+ activated T lymphocytes,
FOXP3+ regulatory T cells, DC-LAMP+ mature dendritic cells (DCs) and
CD123+ plasmacytoid DCs by immunohistochemistry in 100 SLNs from 60
melanoma patients. Density values of each cell type in SLNs were compared
to those in non-sentinel nodes obtained from block dissections (n=37),
and analyzed with regard to associations with clinicopathological
parameters and disease outcome. Sentinel nodes showed elevated amount of
all cell types studied in comparison to non-sentinel nodes. Metastatic
SLNs had higher density of OX40+ lymphocytes compared to tumor-negative
nodes, while no significant difference was observed in the case of the
other cell types studied. Within the sentinel-positive group, FOXP3+ cell
density was higher in patients showing disease progression and >5 years
survival than in those without progression and <5 years survival,
respectively, or in sentinel-negative cases. High amount of FOXP3+ cells
in SLNs was associated with shorter progression-free (P=0.0203) and
overall survival (P=0.0238), while no significant correlation was found
in the case of the other immune cell types. In multivariate analysis, SLN
status, ulceration, Breslow index and patient gender, but not the density
values of the immune cell types, proved significant independent
predictors of survival. Taken together, our results are compatible with
the hypothesis of functional competence of sentinel lymph nodes based on
the prevalence of the studied immune cells. The density of FOXP3+
lymphocytes showed association with progression and survival, but none of
the immune markers emerged as independent prognostic factor. These
results, together with our previous findings on the prognostic value of
activated T cells and mature DCs infiltrating primary melanomas, suggest
that immune cells residing in the primary tumor, rather than those in
sentinel lymph nodes, may be crucial in the development of antitumor
immune response reflected in influencing the outcome of the disease. This
work was supported by the National Scientific Research Fund OTKA 72836.
*The first two authors contributed equally to the work.

