Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinations of lapatinib and all-trans retinoic acid control the
coordinate expression of microRNA modules and target-mRNAs in
ERBB2+/RARA+ breast carcinoma cells: Significance for the antitumor
activity.


In a recent report (Paroni et al, Oncogene, 31:3431-43, 2012), we
demonstrated that 25% of all ERBB2+ breast cancers present with a
co-amplification of the RARA locus, encoding the nuclear retinoic acid
receptor, RAR. ERBB2+/RARA+ breast cancer cell lines, like SKBR3 and
AU565, are sensitive to the anti-proliferative and cyto-differentiating
effects of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), whereas the ERBB2+/RARA
counterparts are refractory. Simultaneous targeting of RAR with ATRA and
ERBB2 with lapatinib in SKBR3 and AU565 cells leads to synergistic
interactions as to growth inhibition and cyto-differentiation. In
addition, combinations of ATRA and lapatinib exert an apoptotic effect,
which is not observed with the single components. This suggests that
ERBB2+/RARA+ breast cancer patients may benefit from lapatinib+ATRA
regimens and represent the rationale of an ongoing clinical trial.The use
of lapatinib and ATRA for the stratified therapy of ERBB2+/RARA+ patients
requires knowledge of the molecular mechanisms underlying the cross-talk
between the two compounds. We evaluated the effects of lapatinib and/or
ATRA on the expression profiles of more than 1,000 microRNAs in SKBR3
cells using an appropriate microarray platform. Both lapatinib and ATRA
caused up- and down-regulation of numerous microRNAs. The combination of
the two compounds enhanced the action of the single components of the
mixture and resulted in the up- and down-regulation of novel target
microRNAs as well. We integrated these results with microRNA-target-gene
prediction algorithms and whole-genome gene-expression data looking for
significant correlations between microRNA and potential/established
target mRNA levels. Network analysis led to the identification of two
highly interconnected microRNA/target-mRNA modules controlled in opposite
directions by lapatinib+ATRA. The first one consists of six microRNAs
(miR-1207-5-p, miR-874, miR-134, miR-762, miR-1181 and miR-320c) which
are up-regulated by lapatinib+ATRA and control a common set of
down-regulated target mRNAs in a coordinate fashion. Most of the mRNAs of
the module control cell proliferation in a positive fashion. The second
network consists of seven microRNAs (miR-203, miR-125a-5p, miR-193a-5p,
miR-210, miR-362-5p, miR-532-5p and miR-342-3p) which are down-regulated
by lapatinib+ATRA and control a series of up-regulated target-mRNAs. In
this case, the majority of regulated genes is involved in negative
regulation of cell proliferation. Coordinated regulation of microRNA sets
controlling a common group of genes and functions represents a new
concept that deserves further studies. Currently, we are in the process
of establishing the functional significance of the identified microRNA
modules for the anti-tumor effects of lapatinib and ATRA.

