Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Measuring telomere length for the early detection of precursor
lesions of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.


Objectives: Esophageal cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer death
worldwide. The five-year survival is approximately 16%. Patients can be
successfully treated if diagnosed early, but current early detection
screening tests are inadequate. Balloon cytology is a simple and
inexpensive method of retrieving esophageal cells, but traditional
cytologic examination of these cells has poor sensitivity and
specificity. We examined whether telomere length, a marker for
chromosomal instability, in DNA extracted from balloon cytology-collected
esophageal cells is associated with precursor lesions of esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma.Methods: The Cytology Sampling Study 2, a
population-based esophageal cancer early detection screening study,
recruited over 700 healthy subjects from a high-risk population in
Linxian, China. The screening study used a mesh-covered balloon to
collect esophageal cells. All subjects underwent endoscopy, and precursor
lesions were diagnosed by biopsy. Using a nested case-control study
design, we examined the association between telomere length and dysplasia
in 37 low-grade dysplasia cases, 52 high-grade dysplasia cases, and 92
matched controls. DNA was extracted from cells collected by balloon
cytology, and telomere length was measured in triplicate by a
quantitative PCR assay. Logistic regression models adjusted for age, sex,
smoking tobacco, alcohol intake, and hypertension were used to examine
the association between telomere length and risk of low-grade dysplasia
and high-grade dysplasia, compared with normal controls.Results: Telomere
lengths were comparable among the low-grade dysplasia cases, high-grade
dysplasia cases, and controls, with a median of 0.93 [interquartile range
(IQR), 0.84-1.06], 0.94 (IQR, 0.82-1.09), and 0.93 (IQR, 0.78-1.05),
respectively. Overall, telomere length was not associated with risk of
low-grade dysplasia or high-grade dysplasia, with an odds ratio [OR, 95%
confidence interval (CI)] of 1.16 (0.87-1.54) and 1.20 (0.92-1.56),
respectively.Conclusions: Given that esophageal cancers have very poor
prognoses, it is of utmost importance to improve early detection. In this
study, esophageal cell telomere length was not associated with esophageal
precursor lesions and cannot serve as an early detection marker.

