Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Self-assembled lipid-polymer hybrid nanoparticles for the
sustained delivery of siRNA and the treatment of drug-resistant cancers.


RNA interference (RNAi), which can selectively knockdown target genes,
has shown great potential in the treatment of various diseases including
cancer. Thus far, numerous nanoparticle (NP) platforms such as lipoplex
and polyplex have been developed to facilitate the safe and effective
delivery of small interfering RNA (siRNA), which represents a major
hurdle for the clinical applications of RNAi. Nevertheless, these NP
systems lack the sustained siRNA release property, and thus can only
induce transient gene silencing due to the short lifetime of siRNA.
Therefore, the delivery of siRNA using controlled-release NPs would be
necessary for achieving sustained gene silencing.Herein, we will present
a novel NP platform for safe and effective siRNA delivery in a sustained
manner, which can be developed through the self-assembly of biodegradable
and biocompatible polymers and lipids. The lipid-polymer hybrid NPs show
excellent in vitro knockdown efficacy at low doses of siRNA, and
promising in vivo results for delivering siRNA to xenograft tumors. More
importantly, these NPs can control the temporal release of siRNA, with
the half-release time of 9 days, for sustained silencing of target gene
expression. Results demonstrate that the luciferase expression is still
less than 25% at day 7 when the lucifrease-expressed HeLa cells were
transfected with the NPs containing 40 pmol anti-luciferase siRNA. As a
comparison, the luciferase expression is largely recovered ( 80%) at day
7, after transfection with lipo2000-siRNA complexes. Furthermore, this NP
platform has been applied to deliver anti-drug resistance siRNA (e.g.,
anti-PHB1) and chemotherapeutic drugs (e.g., taxanes) for the effective
treatment of drug resistant cancers. We believe that the lipid-polymer
hybrid NP platform with the property of sustained siRNA release could
hold potential in both fundamental studies and clinical applications.

