Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of estrogen receptor beta isoforms on the function of
estrogen receptor beta in estrogen recpetor alpha negative breast cancer
cell lines.


African American (AA) women with breast cancer are more likely to be
diagnosed at a more advanced stage of the disease, have a higher
recurrence rate and a poorer prognosis than Caucasian (CA) women. African
American women are more often diagnosed with high-grade breast tumors at
an earlier age (pre-menopausal), most of which are negative for the
estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER-, PR-). These factors result in a
higher mortality rate among AA breast cancer patients. This survival
disparity can be attributed to socioeconomic status and other related
factors, however, there are biological factors that may also be involved.
The insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) plays a crucial role in fetal
and cancer development by signaling through the IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR),
the insulin receptor (Ins-R) and also crosstalk with the estrogen
receptor alpha (ER-). Compared to CA women, AA women have an increased
level of proIGF-II expression in breast tissues and higher signaling
activation through the IGF-1 and Ins-R. Studies have shown that the
estrogen receptor beta (ER-) is also expressed in a majority of breast
cancers. The estrogen receptor (ER) as well as the progesterone receptor
and Her2Neu have been the most common markers used for determining breast
cancer status. Most research done in breast cancer as it pertains to the
ER status has mainly been done in cells and tissues expressing the
Estrogen Receptor Alpha (ER-). However, with its discovery in 1996, the
Estrogen Receptor Beta (ER-) has lead to a better understanding the
breast cancer disease. Studies have shown that the estrogen receptor beta
() is expressed in a majority of breast cancers, including cancers
designated as ER negative (ER-). The tumor suppressing function of ER-
has been described based on its interaction with ER-, however it's
function in the absence of ER- has not been clearly assessed. ER- has 5
isoforms of which ER- isoform 5 (ER-5) is the most abundantly expressed
among AA women with triple negative breast cancer. ER-5 expression is
associated with a poor prognosis and decreased survival of breast cancer
patients. Therefore, we hypothesize that the heterodimerization and
subsequent activation of ER- with its isoforms, mainly ER-5, leads to a
suppression of its function in breast cancers not expressing ER-, thus
preventing cell death. To test this hypothesis we analyzed the basal
expression of ER- and all of its isoforms (ER- 1-5) in AA and CA normal
and breast cancer cell lines. The expression of ER-5 increased in cells
lines in response to insulin like growth factor-II (IGF-II). IGF-II
promotes the phosphorylation of ER- and ER-5 and may regulate the ER-
signaling pathway in ER- negative cell lines.

