Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of glioma proliferation via allosteric inhibition of JAK2.


Gliomas are the most common primary brain tumors. Glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM), WHO grade IV, is the most frequent and aggressive form, with a
median survival of approximately 12 months following aggressive treatment
with surgical resection, radiation and chemotherapy. Epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) is frequently amplified and mutated in human
cancers including GBM. While the rationale for treating GBM patients with
EGR inhibitors is strong, the efficacy of anti-EGFR small molecular
inhibitors or monoclonal antibodies in treating gliomas with PTEN
mutation or deletion has been modest. Here we show a novel approach to
inhibiting EGFR that involves a small molecule (G5-7) that selectively
blocks JAK2 phosphorylation of EGFR, inhibits cell proliferation and
reduces VEGF secretion, and leads to glioma shrinkage via apoptosis and
anti-angiogenesis. G5-7 inhibited EGFR and STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation
by JAK2 through binding to its N-terminal FERM domain. Interestingly,
G5-7 selectively inhibited the proliferation of U87MG/EGFRvIII cells and
human GBM explant neurosphere cultures but only weakly affected
U87MG/PTEN cells or normal neural progenitor cultures. Moreover, oral
administration of this compound markedly diminishes the brain tumor
volumes in both subcutaneous and intracranial models, supporting that
this compound itself and/or the metabolites might be able to penetrate
the brain-blood barrier and exert the anti-proliferative actions through
blocking the oncogenic pathways in vivo. Chronic treatment of mice with
50 mg/kg G5-7 exhibits no obvious toxicity in the animals. Our finding
demonstrates that G5-7 is a novel allosteric JAK2 inhibitor with potent
anti-tumor activity for GBM. Our report not onlyidentify a novel drug for
treating the GBM, but also provide insight into the molecular mechanisms
of how these small molecules impinge on the EGFR/PTEN signaling.
Optimization of these novel compounds will lead to new treatments for the
patients with these devastating tumors.[K.H. and Q.Q. contributed equally
to this work.]

