Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EWS-FLI1 reduces RNA Helicase A activity.


Background: EWS-FLI1 requires the protein binding of RNA Helicase A (RHA)
to enable oncogenic transformation. RHA is a DExH box RNA helicase family
member. RHA has critical roles modulating transcription, splicing and
translation. RHA also functions as a scaffolding protein in multi-protein
complexes including BRCA1, DICER, EGFR, POL2R, TOPO2. Our previous work
demonstrated that YK-4-279 inhibited the protein-protein interaction of
RHA, with EWS-FLI1 and led to cellular apoptosis. The biochemical
mechanism remained cryptic, so we investigated the effect of EWS-FLI1
upon the helicase activity of RHA. Methods: Full-length purified
recombinant RHA from insect cells. Infrared-labeled double stranded RNA
was used as a substrate to measure helicase activity of RHA. We included
full-length recombinant EWS-FLI1 in to the helicase reaction to test the
effect of EWS-FLI1. Results: RHA unwinds double stranded RNA in the
presence of ATP with Km value of 5.322 nM. We also showed that RHA
manifests reannealing activity of single stranded RNA to double stranded
RNA in the absence of ATP. Unlike ADP, ATP and additionally the
non-hyrolysable gamma-S-ATP prevent reannealing activity of RHA. A
molecular modeling of RHA structure predicted the surface exposure of the
region (between 823-832aa), which EWS-FLI1 interacts with. The function
of this region is not well described but presumed to support helicase
activity. EWS-FLI1 interferes RNA helicase activity of RHA in a dose
dependent manner. Moreover, the reduction of RHA protein level exerted
cytotoxic effect on Ewing Sarcoma cells. Decreased RHA protein level
changed EWS-FLI1 and its target gene expression profile. IGFBP3, GRK5,
p21, and PRR3 gene expression levels increased massively. RPLA1 and NR0B1
mRNA levels were also increased by moderately in these cells. The change
in the profile may contribute to apoptosis. Conclusions: The purified
recombinant RHA is very active in vitro helicase assays. We demonstrated
that RHA's helicase activity might depend on ATP binding but not ATP
hydrolysis. The protein partnering as well as posttranslational
modification of RHA might modulate the helicase and/or reannealing
activity of RHA, which may augment oncogenesis of EWS-FLI1. This is the
first time that a protein partner reduces the helicase activity of RHA.
Further experiments are ongoing that investigate whether YK-4-279
blocking of EWS-FLI1 binding to RHA will restore the helicase activity of
RHA as part of it contribution to cell death.

