Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smad7 is integrated mediator for the proteolysis of Myc.


Myc, a pleiotropic transcription factor, plays a prominent role in human
cancer progression. The regulation of Myc stability, therefore, is
critical to understand the molecular mechanism of tumorigenesis in
various cancers. Myc stability is tightly regulated by the activity of
ubiqutin ligases, Skp2 and Fbw7. However, a key mediator of this process
has not been addressed yet. Here, we have identified Smad7 as an
intermediary regulating Myc stability by recruiting F-box protein, Skp2.
Microarray analysis using the cell lines stably expressed Smad7,
indicates that Smad7 markedly inhibits transcription of, c-myc-target
genes including Id1, Id2, and Id3 without affecting c-myc gene
expression. The expression of Myc protein, however, is down-regulated by
induction of Smad7 in vitro, and in vivo, Smad7 transgene inducible
system in primary epidermal keratinocyte. Conversely, the loss of Smad7
is implicated in the increase of endogenous Myc and Id2 expression,
indicating that Smad7 is involved in post-translational regulation of
Myc. Indeed, Smad7 ubiquitylates Myc through Smad7 PY motif, showing that
mutation or deletion on PY motif diminishes the ubiquitylation of Myc.
Treatment of proteasome inhibitor abates Smad7-mediated Myc degradation
in HaCaT cell line that conditionally express level of human c-myc.
Mapping of Smad7 interactions with Myc and Skp2 indicates that
c-terminus, MH2 domain, of Smad7 binds to 3LRR/7LRR domain (aa142-390) of
Skp2, and also interacts with Fbw7. Furthermore, intermediate domain (aa
162-236) of Myc has been identified to interact with c-terminus of Smad7.
In the presence of Skp2 and Fbw7, Smad7 facilitated the degradation of
Myc, thus impairing Myc stability. Smad7 also markedly represses
Myc-mediated transcriptional activity and its target gene expression.
These findings provide a new insight of Smad7 functions as a key mediator
for the proteolysis of Myc proto-oncoprotein.

