Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Wnt co-receptor LRP6 sensitizes basal-like breast
cancer stem cells to TRA-8 anti-DR5 monoclonal antibody.


Introduction: Basal-like breast cancers (BLBC) are poorly differentiated
and display aggressive clinical behavior. These tumors generally become
resistant to cytotoxic agents and resistance has been attributed to the
presence of tumor initiating cancer stem cells (CSC). Recent studies have
shown that the Wnt co-receptor LRP6 is an indispensable element of the
Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway known to regulate CSC proliferation.
Furthermore, LRP6/Wnt appears to play a crucial role in BLBC, and may
represent an excellent target for this type of cancer. We have previously
described that TRA-8, a monoclonal antibody specific to TRAIL death
receptor 5, kills both the CSC and non-CSC population of BLBC. This study
examined whether niclosamide (an FDA approved antihelminthic) which
inhibits Wnt/-catenin signaling by degrading LRP6 is cytotoxic to BLBC
and its stem cell population, and whether niclosamide in combination with
TRA-8 produced synergistic killing.Methods: BLBC cell lines HCC1187,
HCC1143, 2LMP and SUM159 were examined for cytotoxicity using the ATPlite
assay, inhibition of tumorsphere formation, TOPflash reporter assay, and
Western blot analysis for LRP6, free and total -catenin and Axin 2. 2LMP
tumorspheres were treated for 3h ex vivo with TRA-8 and/or niclosamide
(10 nM TRA-8, 1 uM niclosamide), and orthotopically implanted into
NOD/SCID mice to assess inhibition of tumorigenicity. 2LMP cells were
also orthotopically implanted into athymic nude mice to test for in vivo
therapeutic efficacy with TRA-8 and niclosamide.Results: All four BLBC
cell lines, maintained as either attached parental cells or as
non-adherent tumorspheres showed a dose-dependent cytotoxic response to
niclosamide alone and additive or synergistic cytotoxicity with TRA-8.
However, tumorspheres exhibited enhanced sensitivity at a lower dose
range and earlier time points. There was also a dose-dependent reduction
of free -catenin, phosphorylated LRP6 and Axin 2 after treatment with
niclosamide. The combination of niclosamide and TRA-8 further reduced
TOPflash activity in the 2LMP and SUM159 cell lines (p=0.05).
Interestingly, TRA-8 inhibited Wnt/-catenin signaling in all four BLBC
cell lines. Ex vivo treatments with niclosamide suppressed 2LMP
tumorigenicity (p=0.05), which was further suppressed by combination
treatment with TRA-8 (p=0.01). Preliminary in vivo studies also showed
that niclosamide in combination with TRA-8 suppressed growth of
established 2LMP orthotopic tumor xenografts (p=0.009).Conclusions:
Niclosamide inhibited Wnt/-catenin signaling in BLBCs by degrading LRP6
and -catenin. Niclosamide in combination with TRA-8 further inhibited Wnt
signaling which resulted in synergistic killing of both the CSC and
non-CSC populations. Treatment with niclosamide in combination with TRA-8
may be an effective therapy against BLBC.

