Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Guided imagery use in the peri-operative period of gynecologic
oncology surgery.


Objective: To assess the feasibility of using guided imagery therapy in
the peri-operative period at the time of Gynecologic Oncology
surgery.Methods: IRB approval was obtained for this randomized control
trial. Patients were recruited based on having an exploratory laparotomy
surgery with the gynecologic oncology group. Research staff performed a
phone interview and obtained written consent. Patients were randomized to
standard of care therapy, blank CD which was to simulate noise reduction
headphones, or a validated guided imagery CD. The intervention would be
used in pre op waiting area, during surgery, and after surgery. VAS
scores, amount of narcotics used, amount of anti-emetics used, FACT G and
POMS surveys were collected.Results: 12 patients were attempted to be
recruited for the study from April 2012 to the present. Prior to study
enrollment, all patients were excited about the study and willing
participants. All 12 pre op nurses were a barrier to discuss the study
with the patients in the pre op area. 2 patients were unable to be
consented due to the pre-operative nursing staff baring the research
staff from consenting. 3 of the 10 RNAs stated that the player was
dysfunctional, though the players were tested prior to delivery to the
pre-operative area. 7 of the 12 patients stated that they forgot to
listen to the CD prior to surgery, or that the nurses did not let them
take the time to listen. Only 2 of the 12 patients actually listened to
the CD prior to surgery; only 2 of the 12 had the CD played during
surgery. 4 of the 12 never received the CD player and surveys after
surgery on the surgical oncology floor. Only 1 of the 12 actually
listened to the CD throughout the entire hospital stay. 5 patients were
told that it was too busy to listen to the CD by the floor nursing staff.
6 CD players were lost or stolen during the course of the study. To date,
only 1 patient in the control group completed all surveys. However, 3
patients voiced excitement and satisfaction when using the intervention
CD during their immediate peri-operative time, and were documented by
external observers to have resolution of their anxiety while using the
intervention CD.Conclusions: While subjectively beneficial for patients
to decrease stress responses peri-operatively, integrative medicine
techniques such as guided imagery will be difficult to implement until
the culture of medicine embraces this novel modality.

