Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive interactome of embryonic transcription factors,
mitogenic stresses and miRNAs involved in breast tumorigenesis.


Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) is associated with tumour
initiation and progression. EMT is associated with a profound genetic
reprogramming including reactivation of embryonic transcription factors
(ETFs) and severe changes in miRNA expression. Cross-regulation between
EMT-inducers and miRNAs was previously described like the Zeb1-miR-200
feed-back loop. Our goal is to determine whether specific expression
networks between ETFs, miRNAs and mitogenic stresses exist in tumors, and
represents a driving force towards transformation in breast
tumorigenesis.We performed oncogenic cooperation assays in immortalized
human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC-hTert) by using an EMT-inducer
expression library in combination with various mitogenic stresses
(activated form of beta-catenin, EGFR, shPTEN, shP53). As recently
demonstrated in the laboratory, these combinations were efficient in
transforming human cells, as assessed by soft-agar colony assay.
EMT-inducer expression was next analyzed in a large number of colonies to
evaluate a potential specificity of EMT-inducers according to the
mitogenic insult.We found that expression of Slug was specifically
enriched in colonies generated when EGFR is highly expressed, whereas
Zeb1 expression was selected following PTEN depletion, p53 inactivation
and beta-catenin activation. FoxC2 expression was enriched in cells
expressing the activated form of beta-catenin. The prediction of
specificity of the identified combinations is currently being validated
by bioinformatics tools. In parallel, we developed an in silico approach
utilizing predictive algorithms to identify novel miRNAs targeting
embryonic transcription factors. We have identified two novel miRNAs able
to regulate EMT inducers and we have validated their down-regulation in a
panel of basal B breast cancer cell lines. We have also found new
feedback loops between these two miRNA and some ETFs. The interplay
between miRNAs, mitogenic proteins and EMT inducers will be further
examined by assessing their expression in a large cohort of Basal B/
Claudin-low human breast tumours, a recently identified subtype
displaying a mammary stem cell signature and EMT features.

