Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel role for sirtuins in modulating ER stress: implications
for neuroblastoma therapy.


Sirtuins (SIRTs) are NAD+ dependent deacetylases, which play an important
role in cancer cell survival and resistance to chemotherapy. SIRT1, the
most studied sirtuin, is overexpressed in many drug resistant cancers
including neuroblastoma. SIRTs mediate cellular processes by
deacetylating histone and non-histone proteins including those involved
in the oxidative stress response, DNA repair and apoptosis. Here we
define a novel role for Sirts in modulating the unfolded protein response
(UPR) and cell survival following endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress.
Cellular stresses such as hypoxia, nutrient deprivation and chemotherapy
can reduce the protein folding capacity of the ER leading to the
accumulation of unfolded proteins which triggers activation of the UPR.
The UPR is an adaptive mechanism that functions to restore ER and
cellular homeostasis and as such plays a key role in cancer cell survival
and tumor growth.To induce ER stress we exposed neuroblastoma cell lines
NB1691, SK-N-BE2 and SH-SY5Y to the glucose analog, 2-deoxy-D-glucose
(2-DG). In addition to inhibiting glycolysis, 2-DG has been shown to
activate the UPR by interfering with N-linked glycosylation and proper
protein folding. 2-DG (2mM) induced the UPR markers grp78, grp94 and CHOP
as determined by western blot analysis. Treatment of neuroblastoma cell
lines with the SIRT inhibitor, sirtinol (50M), blocked the induction of
grp78 by 2-DG, attenuated grp94 and increased CHOP. Recently it has been
shown that activation of SIRT1 and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)
exerts similar effects and may regulate the activity of each other. AMPK
can increase the transcription of the NAD+ biosynthetic enzyme Nampt,
which in turn increases the NAD+/NADH ratio We found that 2-DG induced
rapid activation of AMPK, as indicated by robust induction of phospho-ACC
(serine 79) and inhibition of AMPK with compound C prevented grp78
induction by 2-DG. To determine if this effect of SIRT inhibition on
grp78 induction was unique to 2-DG, we also treated neuroblastoma cells
with the ER stressors velcade (bortezomib) and the endoplasmic reticulum
Ca2+-ATPase inhibitor, thapsigargin. Inhibiting SIRTs significantly
decreased the induction of grp78 and enhanced CHOP levels. Furthermore,
sirtinol significantly increased 2-DG, velcade, and thapsigargin induced
cell death as determined by MTS assay.The UPR promotes cancer cell
survival in response to cellular stressors including chemotherapy.
Therapeutic targeting of the UPR is a novel anti-cancer approach.
Inhibiting the activity of SIRTs modulates the UPR in neuroblastoma and
represents an innovative way to enhance the effect of chemotherapy in a
cancer with minimal survival.

