Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The transcriptional regulation of the long non-coding RNA HOTAIR
in ovarian cancer.


The Polycomb Group (PcG) Repressive Complexes 1 and 2 (PRC1 and PRC2)
maintain gene expression patterns by epigenetically modifying chromatin.
PRC2 suppresses transcription by catalyzing the trimethylation of histone
H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3), a hallmark of repressed chromatin. Although
overexpression of PRC2 components has been implicated in cancer
initiation, progression and metastasis how PRC2 is recruited to its
target genes remains poorly understood. Recent work suggests the
interaction of PRC2 with the long-non coding (lnc) RNA HOX transcript
antisense intergenic RNA (HOTAIR) could serve as a potential guide to
silence target genes, but the mechanism has yet to be defined. In this
study, we performed whole transcriptome RNA-seq analysis of isogenic
cisplatin- sensitive and -resistant A2780 ovarian cancer (OC) cell lines.
Of the lncRNA examined, HOTAIR was markedly induced in the cisplatin
resistant cells (5-fold upregulation compared to the cisplatin-sensitve
A2780 parental line). shRNA depletion of HOTAIR resensitized the
drug-resistant cells to cisplatin. Based on analysis of the HOTAIR
promoter using luciferase assays, we identified two putative NF-B binding
sites and three E-box binding sites. To further investigate whether these
sites contributed to HOTAIR expression, platinum-sensitive cells were
treated with different growth factors and cytokines (0 to 48hrs) and
analyzed for changes in HOTAIR expression. Treatment with TNF-, a
well-known inflammatory cytokine and established activator of NF-B,
resulted in 16 fold-induction of HOTAIR. In accord with these results, we
observed significant enrichment of both NF-B and cMYC on the HOTAIR
promoter using ChIP assay. Pharmacological inhibition of cMYC and NF-B
reduced HOTAIR expression by 2-fold, and siRNA depletion of the NF-B p65
subunit or cMYC similarly reduced (PThe Polycomb Group (PcG) Repressive
Complexes 1 and 2 (PRC1 and PRC2) maintain gene expression patterns by
epigenetically modifying chromatin. PRC2 suppresses transcription by
catalyzing the trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3), a
hallmark of repressed chromatin. Although overexpression of PRC2
components has been implicated in cancer initiation, progression and
metastasis how PRC2 is recruited to its target genes remains poorly
understood. Recent work suggests the interaction of PRC2 with the
long-non coding (lnc) RNA HOX transcript antisense intergenic RNA
(HOTAIR) could serve as a potential guide to silence target genes, but
the mechanism has yet to be defined. In this study, we performed whole
transcriptome RNA-seq analysis of isogenic cisplatin- sensitive and
-resistant A2780 ovarian cancer (OC) cell lines. Of the lncRNA examined,
HOTAIR was markedly induced in the cisplatin resistant cells (5-fold
upregulation compared to the cisplatin-sensitve A2780 parental line).
shRNA depletion of HOTAIR resensitized the drug-resistant cells to
cisplatin. Based on analysis of the HOTAIR promoter using luciferase
assays, we identified two putative NF-B binding sites and three E-box
binding sites. To further investigate whether these sites contributed to
HOTAIR expression, platinum-sensitive cells were treated with different
growth factors and cytokines (0 to 48hrs) and analyzed for changes in
HOTAIR expression. Treatment with TNF-, a well-known inflammatory
cytokine and established activator of NF-B, resulted in 16 fold-induction
of HOTAIR. In accord with these results, we observed significant
enrichment of both NF-B and cMYC on the HOTAIR promoter using ChIP assay.
Pharmacological inhibition of cMYC and NF-B reduced HOTAIR expression by
2-fold, and siRNA depletion of the NF-B p65 subunit or cMYC similarly
reduced (P<0.01) HOTAIR expression. Based on these results, we
hypothesize a positive feedback loop for HOTAIR transcriptional
regulation: HOTAIR inhibits I-B (an inhibitor of NF-B) allowing the
lncRNA to enter the nucleus and activate not only its own expression but
also cMYC expression to further drive HOTAIR expression as well as
cMYC-inducible genes. We are currently testing this hypothesis. We
believe this novel pathway, whose components have been implicated in
numerous other cancers, may be involved in cisplatin-resistant OC.

