Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ApoStream, a new dielectrophoretic device for antibody-independent
isolation and recovery of circulating tumor cells from blood of patients
with metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma.


Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC) remains the fourth most common cause of
cancer-related mortality with a 5-year survival rate of less than 5%. The
available diagnostic tools and biomarkers for PAC fail at early detection
and suffer from low specificity and sensitivity. Advances in the
isolation, recovery, and characterization of circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) offer hope for the development of noninvasive techniques for
disease detection, monitoring, and biomarker discovery. While CTC
enumeration provides prognostic information in patients with various
cancer types, the biological characterization of CTCs may offer insight
into the molecular determinants of disease progression. Epithelial cell
adhesion molecule (EpCAM) and cytokeratin (CK) dependent CTC technologies
fare poorly in the metastatic PAC setting, due to altered phenotypes
acquired during epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT). The links
between EMT, plectin-1, mesothelin and metastatic progression of PAC are
emerging and underscore the need for biomarker information in real time.
Here we used ApoStream, a novel, antibody-independent device which uses
dielectrophoretic (DEP) technology in a continuous flow system to isolate
CTCs from the blood of patients with metastatic PAC and expand their
phenotypic characterization in order to elucidate the population
heterogeneity and characterize pancreatic specific markers (CA19-9, KRAS,
plectin-1 and mesothelin). This prospective study will evaluate thirty
patients. Paired blood samples from 11 metastatic PAC patients were
analyzed by CellSearch and ApoStream. Collected cells were immunostained
using antibodies against CK, CD45, DAPI, CA19-9, plectin-1 and
mesothelin. CTC enumeration was performed using laser scanning cytometry
(LSC). A multiplexed immunofluorescent assay and LSC analysis were
applied to identify cell phenotypes based on combinations of CK, CD45,
plectin-1 and mesothelin marker expression. Results:The detection of
CK+/CD45/DAPI+ cells was comparable between CellSearch and ApoStream with
counts ranging from 1-10 CTCs/7.5 mL blood in 50% of patients. In
addition, ApoStream, recovered CK/CD45/DAPI+ cells in 100% of patients
with counts in the range of 12-166 cells/7.5 mL of blood. CA19-9+ cells
were identified in both CK+/CD45/DAPI+ and CK/CD45/DAPI+ subpopulations
isolated by ApoStream. KRAS, plectin-1 and mesothelin analysis is
pending. Conclusions: ApoStream recovers putative CTCs with multiple
phenotypes in patients with metastatic PAC. Preliminary data is
encouraging and if confirmed in a larger sample size of PAC patients,
ApoStream could prove to be a sensitive method for isolating and
detecting biomarkers in CTCs of PAC patients. Acknowledgments: Supported
in part by the Lockton Fund.

