Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutant p53 depletion: a possible mechanism of inhibition of human
prostate cancer by dietary phenethyl isothiocyanate.


Phenethyl isothiocyanate (PEITC) derived from cruciferous vegetables has
been shown to inhibit tumor growth by induction of apoptosis. Previously,
we demonstrated that PEITC can selectively deplete mutant p53, but not
the wild type. However, whether p53, wild type or mutant, plays
functional roles in PEITC-induced growth inhibition, remains unsettled.
We hypothesize that the direct binding to mutant p53 by PEITC followed by
conformational changes, subsequently leading to its depletion or/and
restoration to the wild type may constitute a mechanism by which PEITC
induces apoptosis. To determine whether PEITC can deplete mutant p53 in
vivo and whether its depletion is correlated with tumor inhibition and
apoptosis, in this xenograft model study BALB-C Nu/Nu mice carrying
prostate tumor cells with either mutant (DU145) or wild type p53 (LNCap)
were fed diets with and without PEITC (5 micromol per gram diet) for 8
weeks. Tumors were harvested at the end of bioassay for
immunohistochemistry and immunoblot studies. Results showed that the
tumor volumes of both LNCap and DU145 were significantly decreased in the
PEITC-treated animals, compared with that on a diet without PEITC. The
p53 level detected by immunoblot showed a moderate, yet significant,
decrease in DU145 tumors, but not in LNCap tumors. Immunohistochemistry
assays were carried out to examine the apoptotic markers, such as TUNEL,
and anti-proliferation marker Ki67 in tumors from the PEITC-treated vs.
untreated mice. This study provides the first in vivo evidence that
mutant p53 can be depleted in tumors of mice fed PEITC-containing diet
and its depletion seems to correlate with growth inhibition in the mutant
p53 tumors. These findings suggest that mutant p53 maybe further
investigated as a possible novel target for cancer chemoprevention and
therapy by PEITC. (Supported by NCI grant CA100853)

