Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker development for the evaluation of molecular circadian
desynchrony in a single measurement.


Most organisms possess an endogenous circadian clock which is responsible
for the temporal organization of rhythmic biochemical and metabolic
processes. At the molecular level, rhythmicity in peripheral tissues is
maintained by a core set of circadian genes, which in turn influence the
expression programs of a large number of additional genes. Disruption in
circadian rhythms has been implicated in a variety of human diseases,
including cancer. However, the dynamic nature of the circadian system
complicates study of molecular rhythms, and this is compounded by the
inherent tissue-specificity of biological rhythms, which preclude the use
of surrogate tissue. Since serial sampling of target peripheral tissue is
unrealistic in human studies, our goal is to produce a model that will
allow single-measurement evaluation of molecular desynchrony in archived
tissue by identifying in-phase gene expression signatures in circadian
gene pairs that vary over time on an absolute scale, but do not vary
relative to one another. Using next-generation sequencing technologies,
we have annotated the complete circadian transcriptome in primary,
pre-stasis human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs) with sampling every
4-hours over a 24-hour time period. Cycling transcripts were identified
using the non-parametric JTK_CYCLE algorithm, with further stratification
according to circadian phase. In-phase transcript pairs were identified
by calculating the standard error of the mean difference (SEM) in
normalized gene expression across all time points for all pairwise
comparisons among genes within each phase. Candidate pairs were then
selected for further investigation, both in vitro and in normal and tumor
tissue profiling experiments extracted from publicly available datasets,
in order to evaluate their utility as biomarkers of tumor-associated
desynchrony. Here we present the example of one such pair: IFNGR2 and
PER1. In our primary HMEC model, IFNGR2 expression varies in a circadian
manner over time, but maintains a consistent relationship with the core
circadian gene PER1 with an approximately two-fold difference at each
time-point (mean ratio = 2.29, SEM = 0.2280). In array data from single
time point measurements of human mammary tissue (Array Express accession
number E-TABM-276), the relationship between IFNGR2 and PER1 expression
is similar to the tissue culture model in normal tissue, but becomes
increasingly desynchronous in tissue with cystic changes (mean ratio =
3.83, SEM = 0.5717, P = 0.0422), and invasive carcinoma tissue (mean
ratio=9.12, SEM = 0.9367, P = 0.0002). This data provides proof of
principle that objective, quantitative biomarkers of molecular circadian
disruption can be identified. In addition, these biomarkers can be useful
for single measurement analysis, and are shown to correlate with the
progression from normal tissue to invasive carcinoma.

