Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cross-resistance and re-sensitization to multiple drugs in an IBC
model of lapatinib acquired resistance parallels redox adaptation.


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is characterized by rapid progression
from onset of disease, therefore an early and aggressive multimodal
therapy is essential to improve outcome. IBC tumors are frequently ErbB2-
and EGFR-positive, and the use of trastuzumab in combination with
lapatinib has seen clinical success; however, de novo and acquired
resistance to these agents due to interplay between different members of
the ErbB family is a significant challenge. In addition, it is well
recognized that there is paucity of IBC cellular models. We have
characterized a novel isogenic-derived progression model of lapatinib
drug resistance (rSUM149) and re-sensitization (rrSUM149). Four IBC cell
lines representing either HER2 overexpression or basal-type were profiled
to identify approved oncology drugs from that can act as potent
inhibitors of IBC cell proliferation. In our present study, rSUM149 cells
showed cross-resistance to a number of the drugs previously shown to act
on the parental cells. We show that long term removal of lapatinib, the
primary drug against which resistance was developed from rSUM149 cells
led to isolation of a population of cells (rrSUM149) that are then
re-sensitized to multiple drugs, behaving in a manner comparable to the
parental SUM149 cell line. Recently, we identified that the
lapatinib-resistant rSUM149 had increased levels of anti-apoptotic
proteins, increased antioxidant expression (superoxide dismutase and
GSH), and decreased ability to accumulate reactive oxygen species (ROS),
all of which lead to inhibition of drug-induced apoptosis. We had
previously validated this finding with the observations that: (i).
Overexpressing XIAP in therapy-sensitive IBC cells renders them
therapy-resistant and this corresponds to low ROS accumulation in
response to oxidative stress; (ii). specific XIAP inhibition using siRNA
or XIAP small molecule inhibitors reversed drug resistance, decreased the
antioxidants involved in redox-adaptation and increased significant ROS
accumulation leading to IBC cell death. In our results presented herein,
re-sensitization was accompanied by a decrease in expression of the
apoptosis inhibitor XIAP and antioxidant SOD2; assessment of ROS
following challenge with lapatinib revealed that the ability to
accumulate ROS was restored to the cells through those changes. This
mechanistic phenotype supports our current observations of
cross-resistance to multiple drugs, which is also commonly seen in
patients. These results strengthen the need for novel strategies to
modulate cellular redox to overcome drug resistance in IBC.*Joint
corresponding authors (GRD & KPW). Supported in part by NIH grant
CA137844 (KPW), American Cancer Society grant RSG-08-290-01-CCE (GRD),
DCI Cancer and Environment Initiative award, Duke Uni (GRD). Additional
funding; Golden LEAF Foundation and BIOIMPACT Initiative of the State of
NC.

