Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of AKT and p38 MAPK by high dose butyrate may influence
inflammatory cytokine expression in human U937 leukemia cells.


Sodium butyrate (NaB) is a sodium salt of butyric acid. It is a HDAC1
inhibitor implicated in many studies as a potential therapy for various
forms of cancer. Due to its ability to promote both total and gamma
globin during erythroid differentiation, low concentrations (1.5 mM) have
been shown to activate apoptosis in several cancer cell lines including
prostate, endometrial, breast and leukemia. Low concentrations of NaB
influence multiple signaling pathways that are known mediators of
cytokine production. However, it is not known whether high concentrations
alter these pathways having the capacity to modulate cytokine expression
in cancer cells and alter the cancer microenvironment, which is the
purpose of this study. We exposed U937 leukemia cells to NaB at 5 or 10
mM doses for various time points. The culture media of the cells were
harvested and analyzed by Human Multi-Analyte Cytokine ELISArray for
levels of cytokines and chemotactic properties via migration assay. As
evidence of apoptosis, we monitored cells for caspase-3 activation and
cell viability. Our results indicate NaB induces differential expression
of several inflammatory cytokines within 24 hours. Significant increases
were seen in IL-5, -10, and -17A and a significant decrease for TNF-. In
monocytes, the magnitude of cytokine induction is less as compared to the
leukemia cells. Moreover, monocyte migration decreased in a
concentration-dependent manner to U937 cells exposure to NaB. Also, NaB
induced at least 2-fold activation of caspase-3 and reduced cell
viability by 60%. To elucidate the mechanism of cytokine expression,
activation of AKT and p38 MAPK proteins were investigated using 5 mM NaB.
Analyses indicate an increase in phosphorylation of p38, but a decrease
in AKT activation over a 24-hour time course. This data suggests while
promoting apoptosis, NaB has the potential to influence cancer
microenvironment by inducing differential expression of cytokines
potentially via the AKT and/or p38 MAPK pathways. This effect may
influence the biology of normal and cancer cells altering the status of
the patient receiving NaB therapy. *Ms Stephanie Pulliam is supported by
NHLBI T32 Pre-doctoral training grant # 2 T32 HL007735-16 to Dr. Adunyah
and the CTSA award No. UL1TR000445 from the National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences. Additionally, Dr. Adunyah is supported by NCI
Cancer Partnership U54 grant # 5 U54 CA163069-02 and NIMHD MeTRC grant #
8 U54 MD007593-04. The content is solely the responsibility of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH.

