Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome analyses of the tumor cell line resistant to
anti-VEGF therapy.


Despite overt clinical success of anti-VEGF (vascular endothelial growth
factor) agents, such as Avastin, for cancer patients, increasing evidence
shows that prolonged treatment of anti-VEGF therapy results in tumor
resistance. In order to understand how tumor cells become resistant to
anti-VEGF therapy, we developed a mouse Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) cell
line, which was resistant to a potent VEGF blocker, VEGF-Trap. The cell
line was established through five rounds of VEGF-Trap treatment and
selection in vivo. In each round, C57BL/6 mice were inoculated with LLC
cells and subjected to VEGF-Trap or PBS treatment. Tumors grown from
treated mice were harvested and the isolated cells were injected to a new
batch of mice for the next round of treatment. It was found that tumor
cells became insensitive to VEGF-Trap in vivo after five rounds of
VEGF-Trap treatment, i.e., VEGF-Trap no longer inhibited tumor growth. In
contrast, VEGF-Trap remained efficacious to the LLC cells which underwent
five passages in mice but treated with PBS. The resistance phenotype was
maintained in LLC cells after the tumor cells were expanded for a number
of passages in vitro, indicating that the resistance was due to inherited
alterations in tumor cells. To gain insights into the molecular mechanism
underlying the resistance to anti-VEGF therapy, we compared transcriptome
profiles of the resistant and non-resistant tumor cells using mRNA-seq.
The next generation sequencing reads were aligned to mouse genome; gene
transcripts were assembled and calculated for relative abundance for
individual gene. Results showed that 644 genes were differentially
expressed with statistically significances, 317 up-regulated and 327
down-regulated in the resistant tumor cells. Interestingly, VEGF-C was
significantly up-regulated in the resistant tumor cells (fold change =
4.91), which was further verified by real-time PCR analysis. Given the
stimulatory effects of VEGF-C on both angiogenesis and lymphatic
angiogenesis, it is possible that VEGF-C over-expression plays a role in
the development of LLC tumor resistance to anti-VEGF therapy.

