Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unraveling the role of CYB5A in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC): correlation with clinical outcome and functional characterization
in the modulation of autophagy and oncogenic phenotypes.


Loss of 18q22.3 was reported to be a prognostic factor in PDAC. This
study aimed at evaluating whether the genes of this cytoband were
associated with PDAC outcome and provides mechanistic insights on their
role in the suppression of oncogenic properties. The expression of
FBXO15, C18orf55, CYB5A, CPGL and CPGL-B was evaluated in cells (11 PDAC
cell lines, 5 primary cultures, and a normal pancreatic ductal cell line)
and in 48 stage IIB PDAC specimens, isolated by laser-microdissection
after surgical resection. Low CYB5A expression correlated with 18q22.3
deletion and shorter survival (16.3 vs. 29.5 months, P=0.01). Association
with outcome was validated in a tissue-microarray of a second cohort
radically resected patients (N=100): patients with CYB5A protein
expression levels below median value had significantly shorter OS, and
multivariate analysis confirmed CYB5A prognostic relevance (increased
risk of death, 2.0, P=0.02). CYB5A expression in primary cultures
correlated with expression in their respective tissues, and CYB5A
retrovirus-mediated up-regulation of both PDAC-2 primary cells and
Su86.86 cells suppressed proliferation and migration/invasion, while
enhancing apoptosis and autophagy induction. Marked accumulation of
autophagic vacuoles was detected by electron microscopy, while
immunofluorescence revealed CYB5A colocalization with LC-3. Activation of
pro-autophagic pathways was corroborated by PCR arrays showing a
significant up-regulation of several ATG-genes, accompanied by
down-regulation of BCL-2 and MAPK14. The phosphorylation status of MAPK14
was also inhibited, together with phospho-EGFR and the pro-invasive
kinases phospho-Src/STAT6, as revealed by 144-kinase peptide substrate
arrays. Network analysis suggested that this down-regulation was caused
by CYB5A interaction with the NF-B activator TRAF6, whose expression was
significantly reduced after reconstitution of CYB5A in a genetic and
histopathologic characterized patient-derived orthotopic mouse model.
Furthermore, CYB5A upregulation increased survival, while decreasing
primary tumor dimension and metastatic spread, as longitudinally
monitored with Firefly- and Gaussia-luciferase. We thus identified CYB5A
as a novel prognostic factor that modulates autophagy and oncogenic
phenotypes, holding a potential as a novel therapeutic approach in the
clinical management of PDAC patients.

