Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR4 invalidation limits the MLL-ENL induced leukemogenesis in
vivo.


A particular leukemia subtype, namely mixed lineage leukemia
(MLL)-rearranged leukemia that is a result of chromosomal rearrangements
leading to fusions between MLL and partner genes, is associated with a
dismal outcome. Therapeutic targeting of MLL rearrangements has proven
challenging as there have been dozens of described rearrangements. A
characteristic of leukemic cells is to sustain chronic proliferation
while avoiding terminal differentiation and it is increasingly apparent
that crosstalk between leukemic cells and stroma environment impact tumor
progression. Here, we attempt to understand the role of the bone marrow
(BM) microenvironment in promoting leukemia development in a murine model
of MLL-ENL induced leukemia by manipulating CXCR4/CXCL12 axis. We used
retrovirus to express MLL-ENL oncogene in CXCR4+/+ and CXCR4-/-
hematopoietic primitive cells isolated from fetal liver and showed that
CXCR4 is not required for generation of immortalized colonies in vitro.
To determine CXCR4 function in vivo, CXCR4+/+ and CXCR4-/- transformed
cells were transplanted into lethally irradiated mice. Strikingly,
recipients of MLL-ENL transduced CXCR4-/- cells (CXCR4-/- chimera) showed
significantly increased life span, with a median survival time of 93 days
compared to 49 days of recipients of MLL-ENL transduced CXCR4+/+ cells
(CXCR4+/+ chimera). Whatever their genotype, the recipients developed a
leukemia with myelo-monocytic cells characterized by Gr-1 and Mac-1
expression. However, Gr-1 expression was higher in leukemic cells from
CXCR4-/- chimera and the proportion of c-kit positive cells was lower. In
addition, leukemic colony forming cells were reduced in BM and much
severely decreased in spleens of CXCR4-/- chimera. Moreover, leukemic
initiating cells (LSC) were reduced in BM of CXCR4-/- chimera. Finally,
BM and spleen from CXCR4-/- chimera exhibited less intense Ki-67 staining
compared to that of CXCR4+/+ chimera. Altogether, these results suggest
that invalidation of CXCR4 limits proliferation and induces
differentiation of MLL-ENL leukemic cells. To more precisely characterize
the effects of absence of CXCR4 expression, CXCR4+/+ chimera were treated
with CXCR4 inhibitor -TN140 for 7 days. Following treatment, functional
and phenotypic analysis demonstrated lower leukemic cell numbers in BM
and spleen associated with higher mobilization in blood. Moreover, TN140
treatment decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis of leukemic
cells.Collectively, these findings indicate that CXCR4 inhibition results
in cell differentiation and reducing LSC numbers, thus representing a
potentially promising novel treatment for MLL-ENL related leukemia.
Further understanding of the signaling pathway involved in CXCR4 function
and BM microenvironment in MLL-ENL related leukemia might lead to the
development of effective therapeutic agents that modulate the BM
microenvironment and attenuate leukemogenesis.

