Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of aldehyde dehydrogenase isoenzymes in cancer cell
proliferation, migration and drug resistance.


Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) proteins are a superfamily of 19 human
genes that play crucial role in epithelial cell homeostatsis. Several of
these enzymes have been studied in cancer and were shown to protect cells
against cytotoxic drugs and oxidative stress in addition to the promotion
of cancer cell proliferation and invasion. Our study focuses on 5 less
studied isoenzymes (ALDH1B1, ALDH3B1, ALDH4A1, ALDH5A1, and ALDH7A1)
using lentiviral mediated overexpression of the enzymes in H1299 lung
cancer cell line which is previously known to have negligible amount of
ALDH activity. H1299 wild type cells (WT) and cells expressing GFP or RFP
were used as controls. Expression of the proteins was confirmed by
Western blots and ALDH enzymatic activity assay. We used cell culture,
colorimetric MTT assay, wound healing assay, aldefluor assay,
colony-forming assay, and in vitro treatment with doxorubicin (Doxo) and
4-hydroperoxycyclophosphaimde (4-HC). All the proteins were highly
expressed and resulted in increased ALDH activity detected by using
propionaldehyde or benzaldehyde as substrates with NAD+ as a co-factor.
The activity of ALDH4A1, 5A1 and 7A1 was not detected by aldefluor flow
cytometry assay. Cells expressing ALDH1B1, ALDH4A1 or ALDH7A1 had delayed
wound healing at 6 hr, while overall cell proliferation was depressed for
ALDH1B1, ALDH3B1 and ALDH5A1 and normal for the other isoenzymes. Cells
overexpressing ALDH4A1 or ALDH7A1 showed higher clonal efficiency as
well. Only ALDH1B1 and ALDH7A1 showed significant protection against the
toxicity of 4-HC (10 M for 72 hrs) as measured by MTT assay with an
increase in average cell survival of 52 and 23%, respectively. Cells
overexpressing ALDH5A1 showed significantly increased sensitivity to Doxo
(1 and 10 M for 72 hrs). There was a trend for ALDH7A1 to be protective
against Doxo toxicity but did not reach statistical significance. In
conclusion, the overexpression of ALDH isoenzymes in this manner may
contribute to better understanding of their role in cancer biology and
may lead to new cancer treatment approaches that incorporate specific
inhibition or stimulation of these enzymes. This is an important goal
especially in view of the high ALDH activity in cancer stem cells and
their potential contribution to cancer recurrence.

