Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of human skingraft model in
immunodeficient mice.


The humanization process of mice with various tissues named Chi-mice
aimed to reproduce better the human situation and to be more predictive
than conventional models. In order to evaluate new targeting therapies or
adverse side effects involving skin components, pre-clinical studies need
to be assayed with new molecules in adequate and validated mouse models
bearing human skin.The collection of skin samples was done under
ethically approved master agreements and with the signed consent of each
patient. The patient's clinical history, the serology results (HIV, HBV
and HCV) and tissue banking were centralized in our internal approved
biological resource center. To develop such models, we used skins of
different origins including foreskin, breast and abdomen that were
isolated by different methods (full recovery of about 1 cm depth sample
or dermatomization of the 1-2 mm epidermal/dermal layer). These samples
were xenografted on immune deficient NOD-SCID mice under different
conditions including matrigel grafting. After one month implantation,
skingrafts were collected and observed microscopically to confirm the
preservation of human organization of skin by full histology. Also, the
species nature of vessels was characterized by immunochemistry to
evaluate the host penetration within human skingraft and both CD-31
positive mouse and human vessels were found in the skingraft. In the
context of vascular leak syndrome (VLS) induction by IL2 treatment, we
have used the wet/dry ratio of skingraft to measure the induced-edema and
we have measured the blue evans uptake in those injured skingraft to
appreciate the epidermal vasculature leaking. Anapathological comparisons
were also performed to reveal the histological modifications observed
during VLS.These different characterizations performed during development
of the skingraft model enabled us to obtain human skin xenografted on
mice that retained the human characteristics of the primary material. The
co-implantation of other human tissue (tumor) with skin in same mice
which refined better the humanized model will be presented.The use of
fresh skin and various tissues in drug discovery and early preclinical
development of new therapies aimed at corroborating results with clinical
reality. Altogether, these processes from the clinical sample collection
to the in vivo drug efficacy study through ex vivo assays should help the
preclinical drug selection, development and clinical positioning as well
as companion biomarker identification.

