Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Designer nanoparticles for selective targeting of multiple myeloma
and overcoming CAM-DR.


In the continuing search for effective treatments for cancer, here we
report the targeting and efficacy studies pursued with a designer
multifunctional nanoparticle that combines traditional chemotherapy with
cell targeting and anti-cellular-adhesion functionalities to selectively
target multiple myeloma (MM) cells and overcome cell adhesion-mediated
drug resistance (CAM-DR). Anti-cellular-adhesion evolves as a promising
target in oncology. VLA-4-mediated adhesion to the bone marrow
extracellular matrix and stromal cells confers MM cells with CAM-DR. In
our design, we used micellar nanoparticles as dynamic self-assembling
scaffolds to present VLA-4-antagonist peptides and doxorubicin conjugates
simultaneously to selectively target MM cells and to overcome CAM-DR.
Doxorubicin was conjugated to the nanoparticles through an pH-sensitive
hydrazone bond to prevent premature release and thus non-specific
toxicity. Peptides were conjugated via a multifaceted synthetic procedure
for generating highly effective targeting. Each component of the
nanoparticle was purified to >98% purity prior to particle formation, and
by controlling the stoichiometries of each component during particle
formation, we were able to precisely control the number of targeting
functionalities per nanoparticle. The nanoparticles, which exhibited a
size of 20nm, were efficiently internalized by MM cells with an optimal
peptide valency of 20 per micelle, and induced cytotoxicity to MM cells.
Mechanistic studies revealed that nanoparticles induced DNA double strand
breaks as evidenced by H2AX phosphorylation, and triggered apoptosis,
which was associated with PARP and caspase-8 cleavage. Importantly,
multifunctional nanoparticles were more efficacious than doxorubicin in
the presence of fibronectin (IC50=0.150.04 M and 0.420.09 M,
respectively), and overcame CAM-DR induced by adherence of MM cells to
fibronectin. Finally, in a MM xenograft model, nanoparticles
preferentially homed to MM tumors, with a 10 fold more drug accumulation
when compared to doxorubicin, and demonstrated dramatic tumor growth
inhibition with much reduced overall systemic toxicity. Taken together,
we demonstrate the disease-driven engineering of a nanoparticle-based
drug delivery system, enabling the model of an integrative approach in
the treatment of MM.

