Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer malignancy is regulated by PAX5 through the
disruption of FAK1 signaling.


Breast cancer is the most common cancer diagnosed in women worldwide. 30%
of these women will succumb to their disease. More specifically,
metastasis accounts for 90% of deaths in breast cancers patients.
Therefore, the study of genetic factors regulating cancer malignancy is a
top priority to mitigate the morbidity and mortality associated to this
disease. PAX5 (Paired Box 5) is a transcriptional factor normally
implicated in embryogenesis and B cell differentiation. However, the
aberrant expression of PAX5 is associated to several types of cancer
pathology and more recently in breast cancer.We have recently reported
that PAX5 promotes epithelialisation and its expression inversely
correlates with the Focal Adhesion Kinase 1 (FAK1), a key component in
cancer motility and invasion leading to metastasis. On one hand, these
finding suggest that PAX5 could attenuate FAK-mediated
epithelial-mesenchymal transitioning (EMT) of primary tumors. On the
other hand, PAX5 could also initiate the mesenchymal-epithelial
transitioning (MET) of circulating cancer cells enabling them to colonize
and establish secondary tumours.In this study we set out to validate the
role of PAX5 in the metastatic cascade of mammary tumours, particularly
to uncover the molecular regulation of FAK1 cascades through PAX5 in
breast cancer cell malignancy. Through conditional expression of the PAX5
gene in breast cancer cells, we demonstrate experimentally a negative
regulation of FAK1 protein and phosphorylation levels mediated by PAX5
over expression. We also confirm that PAX5 suppresses the transcriptional
expression of FAK1. Further investigation shows a PAX5-mediated
suppression of FAK1 signaling pathways (e.i. AKT, p38, JNK and Paxillin)
leading to attenuated cancer cell proliferation, death and migration
processes. These findings bring light to molecular mechanisms driving
breast cancer malignancy and benefit our quest in the development of
diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.

