Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DPD for dummies: efficacy and toxicity in digestive cancer
patients with pharmacogenetic-driven adaptive dosing of 5-FU.


5-FU remains the backbone of most regimen in digestive oncology.
Drug-related toxicity is a major concern at bedside that shows in 10-20%
of patients administered with standard 5-FU. In particular, patients
presenting with DPD-deficiency, a pharmacogenetic syndrome resulting in
the partial or total lack of ability to detoxify 5-FU in the liver, will
experience severe or lethal toxicities. Pre-therapeutic screening for
DPD-deficiency should help to improve the efficacy/toxicity balance of
5-FU through adaptive dosing strategies. In this POC study, a total of 40
adult patients with a variety of digestive cancers scheduled for
5-FU-based regimen were included. DPD-deficiency was screened primiraly
using a simple and rapid surrogate phenotypic test based upon the UV-HPLC
monitoring of the endogenous U to UH2 ratio in plasma. In addition,
search for the DPYD*2A allelic variant was scheduled. 5-FU doses were
tailored (ie, up to 50% cut in dosing) according to DPD functional
status. 5-FU administration was precluded in patients displaying total
DPD-deficiency. Toxicity was monitored using standard CTC 2.0. grading.
Efficacy was evaluated at 3-month using standard RECIST criteria. Seven
out of 40 patients (ie, 17%) displayed mild (4 patients, 10%), strong (2
patients, 5%) and severe (1 patient, 2.5%) DPD-deficiency. No patient
with total deficiency was observed. Accordingly, no patient bearing the
IVS14+1G>A polymorphism was found. 5-FU dosage was cut by 15% to 50% in
patients with DPD-deficiency. As a result, mean 5-FU total dose was 3643
1484 mg in normal patients, and 2257 1310 mg in the other group (ie,
-38%, p=0.011). Despite the marked differences in dosing, efficacy in
DPD-deficient patients whom dosage had been cut displayed a response rate
(CR+PR: 57%) similar to that of patients with full dosage (CR+PR: 45%).
G1-G2 toxicities were recorded in 82% of patients with normal DPD status
and given standard dosage, and in 72% of patients with DPD-deficiency
administered with reduced dosing. No severe toxicities were encountered
in both groups. Here, we have demonstrated that rapid and cost-effective
pre-therapeutic screening for DPD-deficiency associated with a simple and
geometric scale for tailoring 5-FU dosing can reduce the risk of
drug-related toxicities. Despite the significantly lower doses
administered in patients showing mild to severe DPD-deficiency, no loss
of clinical efficacy was observed. Additionally, no >G2 toxicities was
recorded, whereas 5-FU normally leads to 10-20% of severe toxicities.
This study suggests that the efficacy/toxicity balance of 5-FU can been
improved indeed, and that immediate clinical benefit can be achieved in
patients. Despite the small sample-size and the heterogeneity of the
regimen, this pilot study advocates for the pre-therapeutic screening of
DPD-deficiency in patients scheduled for any 5-FU-based therapy.

