Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel NOTCH3 activating mutations identified in tumors sensitive
to OMP-59R5, a monoclonal antibody targeting the Notch2 and Notch3
receptors.


The Notch signaling pathway, driven by four Notch family receptors
(NOTCH1-4) and five canonical Notch ligands (DLL1, DLL3, DLL4, JAG1, and
JAG2) in humans, critically regulates key functions during embryonic
development as well as stem cell maintenance and differentiation in adult
tissues. Altered Notch signaling activity has been documented in many
types of cancers; depending on the tumor type, Notch signaling can be
oncogenic or tumor suppressing. Activating mutations in NOTCH1 have been
identified in hematopoietic cancers including T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia and chronic lymphoblastic leukemia. With the advance in
high-throughput genomic sequencing platforms, mutations in the NOTCH
genes have also been identified in solid tumors, albeit at much lower
frequencies. Here we report for the first time the identification of two
activating mutations in NOTCH3. One is a frameshift mutation in the PEST
domain, and the other a frameshift mutation in the ankyrin (ANK) domain.
The PEST frameshift mutation leads to the production of C-terminally
truncated NOTCH3 protein, and by Western Blotting of nuclear fractions of
tumor tissues and Immunohistochemistry (IHC) we show that this mutant
NOTCH3 accumulates stably in the nuclei of the breast tumor in which it
was identified. Breast xenograft tumors carrying this mutation are highly
sensitive to OMP-59R5, a ligand-blocking antibody targeting the Notch2
and Notch3 receptors, suggesting that the mutation, although activating,
is still ligand dependent. Consistent with this finding, expression of
this mutant NOTCH3 constructed by site-directed mutagenesis exhibits
higher baseline activity compared to wild type NOTCH3 and is equally
responsive to ligands in in vitro NOTCH reporter assays. We are not able
to observe increased nuclear accumulation of the ANK frameshift mutant
NOTCH3 in the colon tumor in which it was identified. However, in vitro
the ANK mutant NOTCH3 has higher baseline activity than wild-type NOTCH3
in the absence of ligands and remains highly responsive to ligands. The
colon xenograft tumors carrying this NOTCH3 ANK mutation are also
sensitive to OMP-59R5 in in vivo efficacy studies. Taken together our
data suggest that NOTCH3 is oncogenic in certain subtypes of tumors, and
tumors with these activating mutations may predictive sensitivity to
therapeutic antibodies targeting the receptor.

