Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of gene expression patterns downstream of multiple
metastatic suppressor genes.


In recent decades, a distinction has been made between the tumorigenesis
and metastasis processes. Metastasis Suppressor Genes (MSGs) are
down-regulated in the metastasis compared with the primary tumor. When
re-expressed in experimental models, MSGs are able to block spread to
distant sites without effecting primary tumor formation. After the
discovery of the first MSG, NME1, many others have been identified. To
date more than 20 genes have been described to have MSG functions. They
include factors involved in cellular proliferation, motility, adhesion,
invasion, resistance to apoptosis, and angiogenesis. We hypothesized that
common signaling pathways mediate the effects of many MSGs. Using
microarray databases of breast cancer cell lines, and siRNA down
regulation of 18 MSGs in human MCF-7 breast carcinoma cells (NME1, BRMS1,
CD82, CDH1, CDH2, CASP8, MKK4, MKK6, MKK7, MAPK14, GSN, ARHGDIB, AKAP12,
DRG1, CD44, PEPB1, RRM1, KISS), we conducted a bioinformatic search for
common pathways.Several candidate genes were identified whose expression
was inversely related to at least five MSGs. These candidates include
UGT1A, PDE5A, SRMS, IL11Ralpha, DNM3, OAS1, BCAR4, and CA9, many of which
are previously unknown in the metastasis literature. After stable
down-regulation of each candidate gene in the highly aggressive breast
cancer cell line MDA-MB-231, in vitro experiments evaluating cell
proliferation and motility were performed to validate their link to the
metastatic property of tumor cells. Promising data have been obtained
with PDE5A. PDE5 (phosphodiesterase type 5A) is a key enzyme involved in
the regulation of cGMP-specific signaling pathways in processes such as
smooth muscle contraction and relaxation. PDE5A mRNA expression was
upregulated by siRNA to 13 MSGs: ARHGDIB, CASP8, CD44, CDH1, CDH2, CDH11,
GSN, MKK4, MKK6, MKK7, NME1, PEBP1, RRM1. Stable clones down-regulating
PDE5A (MDA-MB-231 shPDE5A) were tested as described above and no
difference in cell proliferation was observed, while a 58% reduction in
cell motility compared to the empty vector-expressing cells was measured
(p=0.0001). An experimental metastasis assay was conducted to determine
if altered PDE5A expression functionally contributed to breast cancer
metastasis. Tail vein injection of MDA-MB-231 shPDE5A in athymic/nude
mice resulted in a 62% reduction in lung metastasis formation compared to
the injection of empty-vector expressing cells (p= 0.0004). This result
suggests that PDE5A is a new potential therapeutic target in breast
cancer metastasis.

