Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: shRNA library screening by dual shRNA technique identifies CHEK1
as a synthetic lethal gene in the absence of IKK in ovarian cancer.


Background: IKK was previously identified as an oncogene in breast cancer
and was associated with poor clinical outcome in ovarian cancer.
Recently, we demonstrated that IKK is a key regulator of invasion and
metastasis programs in ovarian cancer. Therefore, we developed a rapid
and robust dual shRNA technique to create IKK-matched cell line pairs and
performed synthetic lethality screens to identify the key molecular
targets influenced by the loss of IKK expression in ovarian
cancer.Material and methods: To create an IKK-matched cell line pair, we
utilized a retroviral bicistronic vector containing the transmembrane and
extracellular domains of the mouse T-cell surface glycoprotein CD8 alpha,
co-expressed with either IKK or negative control shRNAs. The positively
transduced cells were isolated using mouse CD8a-specific microbeads.
After recovery from beads purification, the human kinome shRNA library,
containing a puromycin selectable marker fused to GFP, was introduced. To
identify shRNAs that sensitized ovarian cancer cells to IKK depletion, we
harvested each shRNA library infected control and IKK- depleted cells at
two time points. This screening was performed in two different ovarian
cancer cell lines, one with and one without p53 mutation.Results: We
prioritized the genes consistently depleted at two different time points,
depending on their doubling times (A2780 at Days 4 and 7, Ovcar5 at Days
7 and 14). In order to generalize this synthetic lethality to ovarian
cancers expressing a high level of IKK, we first focused on the genes
identified in both ovarian cancer cell lines, yielding 29 candidate
genes. We examined the expression levels of these 29 candidate genes in
The Cancer Genome Atlas data portal containing more than 500 ovarian
serous cystadenocarcinoma. Most of these 29 genes were overexpressed in a
subset of TCGA ovarian cancers. Strikingly, CHEK1 was overexpressed by
more than 2 fold in 98% of TCGA ovarian cancers. The combination
knockdown with IKK and CHEK1 resulted in a further decrease in cellular
proliferation and a further increase in G0/G1 arrest compared to
individual depletion of either gene. Consistently, we observed the same
biological effect using pharmacological inhibitors of IKK (BX795) and
CHEK1 (PF00477736).Conclusion: Our dual shRNA technique efficiently
identified CHEK1 as an IKK synthetic lethal gene in ovarian cancer.
Identification of IKK dependent signaling will lead to development of
context-specific therapeutics in the poor prognostic group of patients
with a high level of IKK expression.

