Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular stratification of bladder cancer reveals distinct
subtypes associated with unique clinical behaviors.


Bladder cancer is a common malignancy, and in the US approximately 15,000
patients a year succumb to metastatic disease. The transition from the
non-invasive to the lethal invasive variety is poorly understood, and
this is reflected by the lack of efficacious treatment options for
patients presenting with advanced disease. Notably, a significant
fraction of superficial cancers can recur, requiring additional surgeries
and conferring a higher risk for disease progression. Stratifying bladder
cancers into molecular subtypes with defined clinical attributes could
highlight non-invasive tumors with high risk of recurrence and reveal
opportunities for therapeutic intervention in advanced disease. To this
end, we molecularly characterized a collection of 200
clinically-annotated, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues that
represent non-invasive and invasive/advanced stage histopathologies.
Tumors were assessed for mutation status at 100 mutation hotspots in key
oncogenes as well as for the expression levels of 100 genes on a custom
Fluidigm platform to interrogate key bladder cancer pathways, such as the
FGFR3, PI3K and MAPK signaling axes. Integrative analysis of gene
expression, mutation, and clinical data identified non-invasive subtypes
that were FGFR3 mutation positive and exhibited a pathway up regulation
gene expression signature. In contrast, invasive tumors were FGFR3 wild
type and displayed less prominent pathway up regulation. As expected,
invasive tumors had significantly worse disease-free survival (DFS) than
their non-invasive counterparts (HR = 0.54; P = 0.03). On the molecular
level, advanced tumors exhibited dysregulation of key pathways, including
p53 and PI3K. Although similar histologically, and of common FGFR3
mutation status, tumors of the non-invasive type could be further
classified into two distinct transcriptional subtypes associated with
remarkably different DFS profiles (HR = 0.29; P = 0.004). Our molecular
stratification of bladder cancer identified distinct subtypes associated
with their respective clinical behaviors. In advanced disease, we defined
molecular alterations that highlight opportunities for therapeutic
intervention. We also identified a novel subtype of non-invasive
malignancies associated with a surprisingly high risk of recurrence,
highlighting the value of molecular stratification for identifying
bladder cancer patients who might benefit from more aggressive treatment
than the current standard of care.

