Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic biochemical tissue analysis of P-selectin ligands
expressed on colon cancer.


Selectin ligands are known to be upregulated in metastatic tumor cell
lines, and growing evidence suggests selectin/selectin-ligand
interactions mediate the adhesion of circulating tumor cells to distant
sites. Thus, novel methods of characterizing selectin ligands expressed
on human tissue may serve as valuable assays with significant diagnostic
and prognostic potential. Because the kinetic and tensile properties of
selectin/selectin-ligand bonds are influenced by local physiological
conditions, i.e., wall shear stress due to hydrodynamic force,
traditional immunohistochemical approaches cannot adequately detect
selectin ligands. That is, though immunohistochemistry is very successful
in identifying high affinity interactions, selectin/selectin-ligand
interactions exhibit high affinity only when the external force applied
on the bond is at an optimal value. This affinity is considerably weaker
when applied force on the bond is significantly larger than this optimal
value, or else is low or zero, as in traditional immunohistochemistry.
Therefore, we have developed a method for detecting selectin ligands
expressed on human tissue using a dynamic approach that allows for
precise control of the force applied to the bonds between probe and
target molecules. More specifically, we conjugated recombinant P-selectin
to polystyrene microspheres and perfused this probe over tissue sections
of colon cancer - which is known to express P-selectin ligands.
Selectin/selectin-ligand adhesive interaction in the form of microsphere
rolling on tissue was observed, and specific interaction was confirmed
using 10 mM EDTA as a negative control. Increased probe surface coverage
(i.e., higher density of P-selectin molecules coated on the surface of
the microspheres) resulted in increased interaction with colon cancer
tissue. In addition, rolling velocities measured between physiological
wall shear stresses 0.25-2.0 dyne/cm2 indicated adhesive interaction of
the selectin-conjugated probe with ligands in colon cancer tissues was
stabilized at 0.75 dyne/cm2. Analysis of distinct regions within colon
cancer tissue sections subjected to this dynamic biochemical tissue
analysis revealed different levels of microsphere adhesion in discrete
areas, evidence of heterogeneous cellular expression of P-selectin
ligands. Taken together, these results demonstrate that functional
P-selectin ligands are detectable using dynamic biochemical tissue
analysis.

