Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Normalization of miRNA-sequencing data.


microRNAs (miRNA) are endogenous, small non-coding nucleotides that
negatively regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally. Through
interactions with Argonaute (Ago) proteins, they form the RNA-induced
silencing complex (RISC) and can recognize and bind to the 3UTR of mRNAs
in a sequence-specific manner, leading to translational inhibition or
mRNA degradation. Over 30% of human protein-coding genes are predicted to
be conserved targets of miRNAs. Consequently, changes in their expression
are likely to be associated with the development and progression of
diseases, including cancer.An increasing number of studies are utilizing
high-throughput sequencing over microarrays for the expression profiling
of miRNAs. Processing of the raw sequencing data usually involves
filtering based on quality measures, trimming for adapters and mapping
the reads to a (genome or miRNA) reference. Then, normalization of the
data is crucial before any downstream analysis can be performed.
Normalization is the process of removing sources of variation, which are
of non-biological origins (stemming from sample handling, library
preparation, imaging and so on), and can affect the measured expression
levels. An effective normalization method should minimize technical and
experimental bias without introducing noise; the differences that remain
should be truly biological effects.Several normalization methods for
miRNA-seq data have been proposed, including linear scaling, non-linear
scaling, quantile normalization and variance stabilization normalization.
These methods differ in terms of complexity and the assumptions made.
However, no standard technique has been recommended. Read counts from
each experiment are usually simply adjusted for differences in sequencing
depth (library size) to reads-per-million (RPM). Unfortunately, the
performance and appropriateness of any of the normalization methods
cannot be assessed using real data because the true values are not
known.To this end, we have used a 12x12 Latin Square design to spike in
12 different oligonucleotides with known nominal concentrations, into a
complex mixture of human miRNAs. These spike-in pools were subjected to
all the preparatory steps of small RNA library construction for
sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq2000. Preliminary results show that the
spike-in sequences can be recovered successfully from the data. Using
this data set, the relative merits of different normalization procedures
are being assessed based on measures of bias, variance and improved
sensitivity and specificity for the detection of differentially expressed
miRNAs. The goal is to identify an optimal normalization method for
miRNA-seq data, which would reduce variance without increasing bias.

