Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protective effects of rebamipide liquid on radiation-induced
glositis in rats.


[Background & Aims] Rebamipide is widely used for mucosal protection,
healing of gastric ulcers and treatment of gastritis. Recently, it was
reported that Rebamipide gargle inhibited oral mucositis induced by
chemoradiotherapy in head and neck cancer patients. In this study, we
examined protective effects of Rebamipide Liquid on radiation-induced
glossitis rat model and analyzed the expression level of pro-inflammatory
cytokines and chemokines in the injury area of tongue.[Materials &
Methods] Rebamipide Liquid, comprising with Rebamipide crystals less than
500 nm particles, was prepared by a neutralizing crystallization
technique. This formulation is a stable homogenous aqueous suspension
provided with appropriate viscosity by adding viscosity enhanced agents
to improve the retention in the oral cavity.The glossitis was induced by
X-ray with 15Gy irradiation only around the snout (Day 0) in rats.
Rebamipide Liquid was administered intraorally at doses of 5, 10 or 20
mg/kg (1, 2 or 4%, respectively), 6 times a day for 14 days from Day -7
to Day 6. These tongue tissue specimens were obtained at Day 7 and their
images were recorded by a digital camera for efficacy evaluations. Gene
expression analysis was performed with quantitative real-time PCR (ABI)
and protein level was evaluated with Bio-Plex system(BioRad) or ELISA in
a different study which was conducted at the two doses of 0 and 20 mg/kg
(0 and 4%).[Result & Conclusions] The ulcer-like areas (10.8 1.2, 7.9 1.1
and 7.0 0.7%) at doses of 5 - 20 mg/kg (1 - 4%) of Rebamipide Liquid
administration, were statistically smaller than the vehicle control at
14.71.6%. Another study revealed that the expression of pro-inflammatory
cytokines (TNF-, IL-6 and Il-1) and chemokines (MCP-1 and Gro-) were
dramatically elevated in the irradiated tongue at Day7, as compared to
normal. But these elevated expressions were significantly suppressed by
the 4% Rebamipide treatment. These immuoassays elucidated that the
production of these cytokines and chemokines were significantly
suppressed by the Rebamipide administration. These results demonstrated
that the Rebamipide Liquid has a potent pharmacological action for the
radiation-induced oral mucositis mediated by the suppression of
pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-, IL-6 and Il-1) and chemokines (MCP-1
and Gro-).

