Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The circadian neurohormone melatonin inhibits aerobic glycolysis
(Warburg effect) and fatty acid metabolic signaling in human colorectal
and cervical cancer.


Over 630,000 people in the U.S. alone this year will be diagnosed with
either breast, prostate, colorectal, or cervical cancers. Epidemiological
studies have indicated that the risk of breast, prostate and colorectal
cancer is increased in night-shift workers. These individuals experience
circadian disruption in response to ocular exposure to light at night,
which suppresses the nocturnal circadian production of melatonin by the
pineal gland. In previous studies, we determined that nocturnal blood
levels of melatonin inhibit tissue-isolated human breast cancer xenograft
growth via suppression of an MT1 melatonin receptor-mediated suppression
of tumor cAMP leading to an inhibition of tumor linoleic acid (LA) uptake
and its metabolism to the mitogenic signaling molecule
13-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid (13-HODE), culminating in down-regulation
of the epidermal growth factor and insulin-like growth factor-1 signaling
pathways. Here we showed the effects in vivo of a physiological,
nocturnal concentration of melatonin (500 pM) on tumor proliferative
activity mediated via aerobic glycolysis (Warburg effect) and LA
metabolic signaling in tissue-isolated human HT-29 colorectal and HeLa
cervical cancer xenografts perfused in situ in nude rats. Following tumor
implantation, HT29 colorectal and HeLa cervical cancer xenografts
exhibited latency-to-onset and growth rates that were 12 and 8 days, and
0.12 0.01 and 0.09 0.01 g/day, respectively; mean tumor weights were 5.6
0.2 g (n = 20/group). These tissue-isolated human cancer xenografts in
nude rats perfused in situ for 60 min with rat donor blood containing
melatonin resulted in a significant reduction in tumor aerobic glycolysis
that included a 30% reduction in glucose uptake, lactate release, O2
uptake and CO2 production. Additionally, melatonin induced a complete
inhibition of LA uptake, 13-HODE release, ERK 1/2, MEK, Akt, and GSK3
expression, as well as significant reductions in tumor cAMP levels, DNA
content and [3H]thymidine incorporation into tumor DNA. Addition of the
non-selective MT1/MT2 melatonin antagonist S20928, forskolin,
8-Bromo-cyclic-AMP, or pertussis toxin to the tumor perfusate completely
reversed the inhibitory effects of melatonin on aerobic glycolysis, LA
metabolic signaling and proliferative activity in both types of
xenografts. These results demonstrate in HT29 colorectal and HeLa
cervical adenocarcinomas that nocturnal melatonin levels directly and
rapidly inhibit tumor growth activity via a melatonin receptor-mediated
suppression of the Warburg effect and LA metabolic and other related
signaling mechanisms. An understanding of this novel signaling pathway
for the control of aerobic glycolysis and LA metabolism in cancer could
lead to new circadian-based approaches for cancer therapy and/or
prevention.

