Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncostatin M is a proinflammatory cytokine capable of exerting
long term biological effects via its binding to ECM components in a
bioactive conformation.


Oncostatin M (OSM) is a proinflammatory cytokine that has been reported
to promote a metastatic phenotype in cancer cells via its effects on cell
proliferation, attachment, migration, invasion and the epithelial to
mesenchymal transition. Full length OSM is expressed as a 26 kDa MW
species that can be proteolytically processed into a 22 kDa truncated
species, via removal of a hydrophilic C-terminal peptide. The
extracellular matrix (ECM) acts as a reservoir of biologically active
molecules and as a storage site for cell signaling molecules. Many
interactions between ECM proteins and cytokines are highly specific and
the binding of cytokines to ECM is reported to regulate their
distribution, activation and presentation to cells. In the current study,
the ability of full length versus truncated OSM to bind to ECM molecules
was examined, as well as the effects of immobilized OSM on T-47D and
ZR-75-1 breast carcinoma cell signaling and morphology. Both full length
and truncated OSM were observed to bind to the ECM components collagen-1,
collagen-11, laminin and fibronectin. At least two distinct binding sites
were apparent for OSM binding to ECM proteins. Full length 26 kDa OSM was
observed to bind ECM to a greater extent at neutral pH than truncated 22
kDa OSM, which indicated a role for the C-terminal region of OSM in ECM
binding. Under acidic conditions (pH 5.5) similar amounts of full length
versus truncated OSM bound to ECM, which indicated binding independent of
the C-terminal tail of OSM. Electrostatic interactions appeared to
mediate OSM binding to ECM, since greater binding of 26 kDa and 22 kDa to
ECM was observed at pH 5.5 versus pH 7.5 and a slow detachment of OSM
bound to ECM at pH 5.5 was observed when the pH was raised to neutral.
OSM bound to ECM was observed to be protected from cleavage by
tumor-associated proteases, when compared to proteolysis of unbound OSM,
which suggested a stabilizing effect on OSM. Importantly, OSM bound to
ECM was demonstrated to be biologically active and able to induce pSTAT3
and other OSM associated proteins in T-47D and ZR-75-1 breast carcinoma
cells, in vitro. The induction of pSTAT3 could be inhibited with an OSM
neutralizing antibody indicating that the ECM binding sites were distinct
from the OSM receptor binding site. In addition, OSM bound to ECM was
observed to induce morphological changes in T-47D breast cancer cells
that included the formation of invadapodia. Taken together, this data
suggests an important role for OSM bound to ECM in tumor metastasis, as
well as in the acquisition of chronic inflammation and provides
additional evidence for the role of inflammatory processes in cancer.

