Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Family history of cancers, medical history, and pancreatic cancer
risk in the Ontario Pancreatic Cancer Case-Control Study.


Background: Pancreatic cancer is one of the most fatal cancers. Given the
high mortality burden of this disease, there is a pressing need to
determine causes so effective prevention strategies can be implemented.
Family history of pancreatic cancer, and medical history of diabetes or
chronic pancreatitis have been previously identified as risk factors for
pancreatic cancer. However, it is not clear whether other medical
conditions or family history of other cancers have a role in pancreatic
cancer etiology. Therefore we aim to conduct an in-depth analysis to
investigate the association between family history of cancer and medical
history with pancreatic cancer risk, in the Ontario Pancreatic Cancer
Case-Control Study. Methods: We used data from 743 cases and 656 controls
from the Ontario Pancreatic Case-Control Study. Self-administered
questionnaires provided information regarding family history of cancer,
medical history and other risk factors such as smoking status and BMI.
Family history was defined as any biological first-degree relative
(parent, sibling or child) with a cancer diagnosis. We analyzed the
association by cancer site, and within each site by type and numbers of
affected relatives. Medical history of a disease or condition was defined
as having the disease or condition two years prior to diagnosis of
pancreatic cancer. We also conducted stratified analysis by smoking
status and age of onset of pancreatic cancer. Unconditional logistic
regression was used to produce odds ratios with 95% confidence limits for
all factors of interest.Results: A family history of pancreatic cancer
was associated with increased pancreatic cancer risk (OR=1.87 95% CI
1.11-3.16). We also observed an increased risk of pancreatic cancer for
individuals with a family history of prostate cancer, with an OR of 1.59
(95% CI = 1.05-2.40). This association was modified by smoking behavior,
and was only present among never smokers (OR=2.19, 95% CI 1.25-3.83), not
ever smokers (OR=0.98, 95% CI= 0.53-1.82). Diabetes mellitus more than 2
years prior to pancreatic cancer was associated with increased pancreatic
cancer risk (OR=3.48, 95% CI 2.13-5.71). Risk was also elevated for
long-term diabetes of 10 years or more (OR=4.73, 95% CI 2.20-10.17).
Other medical conditions were not associated with risk.Conclusions: Our
results suggest that individuals with long-term diabetes or family
history of pancreatic or prostate cancer are at increased risk of
pancreatic cancer. Our finding that the association with family history
of prostate cancer was present only in never smokers suggests a common
etiology between the two tumor types and further investigation is
warranted.

