Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-related risk factors in Hispanic women in the San Juan
metropolitan area of Puerto Rico.


Background: Estimates indicate that 35% of cancer deaths worldwide are
attributed to behavioral and environmental risk factors, including
tobacco use, excess body weight, low intake of fruits and vegetables,
physical inactivity, smoking, alcohol use and infection with HPV. For
unknown reasons, the incidence of cancer in females residing in Puerto
Rico significantly (pBackground: Estimates indicate that 35% of cancer
deaths worldwide are attributed to behavioral and environmental risk
factors, including tobacco use, excess body weight, low intake of fruits
and vegetables, physical inactivity, smoking, alcohol use and infection
with HPV. For unknown reasons, the incidence of cancer in females
residing in Puerto Rico significantly (p<0.05) increased from 203.9 per
100,000 in 1987 to 248.5 per 100,000 in 2009, an annual average increase
of 0.9% during this period. Objective: This study assessed the prevalence
of modifiable cancer-related risk factors among a population-based sample
of women living in the San Juan Metropolitan Area of Puerto Rico.
Methods: We used data from a population-based survey of 496 women, aged
16-64 years, living in the San Juan Metropolitan Area to assess the
prevalence of cancer-related risk factors and preventive practices,
including selected demographic characteristics and cancer-related risk
behaviors: tobacco use, alcohol consumption, BMI, physical activity
(participation in moderate-intensity activities for a minimum of 30
minutes on five days per week or vigorous-intensity activity for a
minimum of 20 minutes on three days per week), daily intake of at least
five portions of fruits and vegetables, and cervical HPV-DNA infection in
cervix. Logistic regression was used to assess the association between
individual cancer-related risk factors and socio-demographic
characteristics. Results: The prevalence of cancer-related risk factors
was high: obesity (BMI30 kg/m2), 41.9%; current smoking, 18.6%; binge
drinking, 38.7%; low physical activity, 68.2%; low intake of fruit and
vegetables, 95.0%; HPV-DNA infection for any type, 27.8%; and high-risk
HPV infection, 8.6%. Only 0.8% of women had none of these cancer-related
risk factors, 42.9% had 1-2 risk factors, and 56.2% had at least 3.
Multivariable analyses showed that less educated women were significantly
more likely to smoke and to meet physical activity recommendations. Older
women were significantly more likely to be obese and significantly less
likely to report binge drinking or to have HPV-DNA infection (any type or
high-risk) in the cervix. Conclusion: The elevated prevalence of major
cancer-related risk factors among women in PR underscores the need for
interventions aimed at lifestyle modification in this population.
Additional research on the extent to which behavioral and environmental
exposures are responsible for the increase in cancer incidence in Puerto
Rico is highly warranted.

