Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mathematical modeling of cellular dose-response for radiation and
radiation-drug combinations including cell cycle effects.


Thirty-six in vitro radiation dose-response data sets having 7 or more
points, covering a variety of cell lines, were used to test four proposed
models as alternatives to the linear-quadratic equation: the
single-mechanism lognormal, the two-mechanism lognormal, the
single-mechanism Hill and the two-mechanism Hill. All four models are
forms of our general damage model, developed originally for drug
dose-response. The lognormal models relate survival to damage using the
cumulative lognormal density function, whereas the Hill models use a Hill
equation. The models were ranked according to the Akaike Information
Criterion, with the single-mechanism lognormal performing the best
overall. A subset of the data showing 2-mechanism behavior was identified
using the F-test method; for this subset, the two-mechanism lognormal
model was superior. The lognormal model is therefore proposed as an
alternative to the linear-quadratic.The lognormal damage model is then
extended to the case of radiochemotherapy using the concept of additive
damage, which we previously developed for drugs with two mechanisms, and
then applied to combination exposure. Previously, it was found that
fixed-schedule, varying-dose exposures to drug and radiation could be
described by the additive damage model. Here, the case of varying
schedule is considered, for gemcitabine, which showed schedule-dependent
radiosensitization in studies by Pauwels et al (2003, 2009). Cell cycle
effects are included through a kinetic equation describing the evolution
of the population distribution over the cell cycle. In contrast to some
previous models where discrete phases of the cell cycle are treated as
compartments, here the distribution is a continuous density function.
Gemcitabine is assumed to cause a block at a single point, with
dose-dependent duration. The cell cycle phase population density
distribution then enters into the radiation damage term. The model thus
includes radiation-drug interaction in two ways: through additive damage
and through cell cycle effects. The case of fractionated doses of
gemcitabine alone is also considered. Overall, the model provides a
framework for understanding the complex effects of schedule and dose, as
well as a method to potentially predict combination or fractionated
dose-response from knowledge of a drug's perturbations to the cell cycle
phase distribution. It is expected that these models will have
application in preclinical optimization of combination therapy, as well
as in computational simulation of anticancer therapy.

