Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer metastatic competency in the hepatic niche is driven
by E-cadherin re-expression.


Nearly half of breast cancer metastases will become clinically evident 5
or more years after the cancer was seemingly ablated. This implies that
metastatic cancer cells survived over this extended timeframe without
emerging as detectable nodules. Breast cancer metastatic dormancy has yet
to be universally defined, and is not well understood as a potential
means by which clinically evident metastases emerge after being
undetected for years (or decades) from the primary tumor diagnosis.
Various mechanistic and microenvironmental factors may work
independently, collaboratively (or both) in order to allow a dormant
metastatic breast cancer cell (or small cluster) to survive long term. At
least one tumor dormancy hallmark is likely required: that of E-cadherin
re-expression in order to form heterotypic connections between the
carcinoma cells and the liver parenchyma. This re-expression is known as
the mesenchymal-to-epithelial-reverting-transition (MErT). This
re-expression provides not only survival signals to the breast cancer
cells but may also establish cell polarity and protection from autocrine
signaling (or extracellular factors) that otherwise may prompt the breast
cancer cells to initiate metastatic outgrowth.The purpose of this study
is to determine E-cadherin's function in the establishment of breast
cancer metastases to the liver. The MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cell
line, that can undergo induced MErT ex vivo, was transfected with either
exogenously expressing E-cadherin or shRNA to E-cadherin. Xenograft
splenic injections of these cell line variants into mice were performed
and tumors allowed to grow for 30-60 days until sacrifice.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on the liver and splenic tissue
sections in order to assess the number and size of metastatic depostis.
Preliminary data demonstrate that cells expressing exogenously encoded
E-cadherin developed large splenic tumors with fewer to no liver
metastases. MDA-MB-231 wild type cells spawned liver metastases about
half the time. In order to more fully probe E-cadherin's role in
metastatic competency experiments are underway to develop a
doxycycline-inducible E-cadherin bicistronic vector allowing for the
down-regulation of E-cadherin in the primary tumor and the re-expression
in the metastatic niche. Subsequent immunohistochemistry will determine
the metastatic E-cadherin status across these MDA-MB-231 cell variants.
These results will provide insights into the role of MErT in metastatic
establishment.

