Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of TGF-alpha in the resistance to mesothelioma
chemotherapy.


Background. Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is a cancer of the pleura caused
mainly by the inhalation of asbestos fibers. The impact of chemotherapy
on the outcome of patients with MM is still unclear. We hypothesized that
unresponsiveness to chemotherapy is due to inadequate gene expression in
tumor cells. We have previously shown that inhibitors of histones
deacetylases (such as valproate, VPA) significantly increases the
efficacy of compounds used in chemotherapy (Vandermeers et al, 2010,
Clinical Cancer Research 15: 2818). A recent clinical trial on relapsing
MM patients has shown that VPA in combination with doxorubicin improves
response rates and quality of life (Scherpereel et al, 2011, European
Respiratory Journal 37:129).Results. To study the mechanisms associated
with the response to chemotherapy, we compared two types of cell lines
(M14K and H28) characterized by a difference in sensitivity to
doxorubicin+VPA. Using Agilent microarrays and RT-qPCR, we observed that
the basal expression level of TGF was higher in "resistant" H28 compared
to "sensitive" M14K cells. To evaluate the functional relevance of TGF,
we modulated its expression either by RNA interference or by transfection
of a cDNA vector. A decrease of TGF expression correlated with induction
of apoptosis. Inversely, an inhibition of apoptosis occurred when TGF was
over-expressed. As TGF is the ligand of EGFR, we tested the effect of
gefitinib and erlotinib in combination with VPA+doxorubicin. Both EGFR
inhibitors increased apoptosis induced by VPA+doxorubicin in H28
chemoresistant cells. Finally, the VPA+doxorubicin+erlotinib regimen
prevented tumor growth in two mouse models (ZL34 in SCID and AB12 in
Balb/c).Conclusions. Our data demonstrates that TGF is involved in the
chemoresistance to VPA+doxorubicin, a second-line regimen for MM.
Although inefficient alone, tyrosine kinase inhibitors synergize to
induce apoptosis in chemoresistant cells and prevent tumor growth in
mouse models.

