Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive profiling of actionab.


Comprehensive characterization of genetic profiles in clinically
actionable genes in each tumor promises to facilitate personalized
approaches to cancer treatment. However, development of systematic
genetic profiling of cancers in the clinical setting is facing unique
technical challenges. More than 90% of tumor samples available for
clinical sequencing are formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE).
These samples are not only limited by quantities, the DNA quality in
these samples is often compromised due to different degree of
degradation, cross-links and chemical modifications. Targeted sequencing,
in which genomic regions of interests are selectively enriched before
sequencing to achieve high coverage and sensitivity, can potentially
provide a cost-effective and efficient solution for clinical sequencing.
However, very few studies have been reported on the development of
methodology that is applicable and robust in analyzing real-world
clinical FFPE samples. Here we report the development of a novel
methodology that integrates microfluidic multiplex PCR-based target
enrichment with massively parallel sequencing for high-throughput,
high-content targeted sequencing of clinically actionable cancer genes in
FFPE tumor tissues. This method enables amplifying 963 regions from 88
common cancer genes in 48 samples and simultaneously sequencing 48 pooled
barcoded samples in a single sequencing reaction. Using this method, we
sequenced 40 cancer cell lines and a well-defined Latin square study with
dilution series of 8 known somatic mutations, to comprehensively assess
the sensitivity, specificity, reproducibility in both target enrichment
and variant detection. Furthermore, using paired fresh frozen/FFPE
tissues obtained from 16 cancer patients, we developed and optimized a
FFPE protocol that yields high-quality genetic profiles highly concordant
to those derived from parallel fresh frozen samples. To demonstrate the
clinical utility of this method, we sequenced a cohort of 73 FFPE tumor
samples from endometrial cancer patients. Many clinically actionable
mutations were identified in these patients samples and confirmed using
orthogonal validations. Our results demonstrated the feasibility and
clinical utility of our method in clinical sequencing, setting the stage
for ultimately translating this method in clinical setting to inform and
guide cancer treatment.

