Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NF-B2/p52 induces expression of inflammatory mediators in prostate
cancer in vivo.


Introduction and objective: Inflammation plays a key role in the etiology
of carcinoma of colon, cervix or liver, but PCa, in which inflammation
has not been deemed to play a causative role, also display a
pro-inflammatory gene profile. NF-B is central to the induction of
inflammation and the classical and alternative NF-B activation pathways
have been shown to modulate expression of inflammatory mediators. Here we
explored the induction of markers of tumor-infiltrating inflammatory
cells in two in vivo models overexpressing NF-B2/p52.Methods: LNCaP human
PCa cells were infected with adenoviruses encoding empty vector or
NF-B2/p52 and injected s.c. into both flanks of nude mice. Gene
expression of markers of inflammatory mediators such as macrophages,
lymphocytes and dendritic cells was analyzed in the tumor tissues by
qRT-PCR. In addition, whole prostates were collected from transgenic mice
expressing NF-B2/p52 in the prostate and RNA was analyzed for
inflammatory markers. Expression of the cell surface markers was
validated by immunohistochemistry in sections of whole prostates.Results:
The infiltration of host immune cells into the xenograft tissues was
detected by expression of surface markers of cells of myeloid and
lymphoid lineage. The expression of B220 (B cells), F4/80 (activated
macrophages), Cd8A (CTL) was increased in p52-expressing xenografts
compared to controls, indicating the presence of host-derived
inflammatory cells in the xenografts. Expression levels of chemokines
(Cxcl1), chemokine receptors (Ccr1, Ccr3) and pro-inflammatory cytokines
(Il-6 and Tnf) were enhanced in the xenografts compared to the controls,
indicating that expression of NF-B2/p52 induces an inflammatory response
in xenografts of human PCa cells.Compared to littermate negative
controls, expression of B220, F4/80, Cd8A and Cd208 was increased in
transgenic mouse prostates expressing p52. Furthermore, expression levels
of Cxcl1, Ccr1, Ccr3, Il-6 and Tnf were also enhanced compared to
controls, indicating the induction of inflammation in mouse prostates by
NF-B2/p52.Conclusions: Our previous studies have shown that NF-B2/p52
plays an important role in the development of castration resistance in
human PCa cells. In this study we showed that NF-B2/p52 may induce an
inflammatory response in xenografts of human PCa cells or in transgenic
mouse prostates, and thereby promote tumor proliferation.

