Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gender disparity in esophageal cancer incidence.


Introduction: Over the past thirty years, esophageal cancer (EC)
incidence has been increasing more rapidly than any other solid neoplasm
in the Western world. Globally, there is a large male predominance in
both esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and esophageal
adenocarcinoma (EAC). The reasons for this gender difference and the
possible role of estrogen remains unclear. We conducted an analytical
epidemiological study to determine if estrogen exposure explains the male
predominance in observed esophageal cancer incidence.Materials/Methods:
We evaluated the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) cancer
incidence trends from 1975 to 2008 using SEER Stat to calculate the
annual percentage change (APC) in each five year age group and in EAC and
ESCC by gender.Results: Male predominance in incidence rates of EC was
most evident in the younger population and those with EAC histology as
previously demonstrated. EAC and ESCC incidence rates both increases with
aging, consistent with cancer being an age-related disease, but the male:
female incidence ratio of EAC significantly decreased with aging. The
rate of increase for EAC incidence in post menopausal females is greater
than in any other demographic category. This increasing incidence rate in
the post menopausal female was also observed in the ESCC, but to a lesser
extent. The APC was negative (-1.5) between 1975-2008 only in the 50-64
age female cohort. Interestingly, the APC doubled in the last two age
groupings of older females (age 65-74 = + 0.3 and age 75 and greater = +
0.7). APC rates for the males increased gradually in all their age groups
(age 50-64 = +1.2, age 65-74 = +1.4, age 75+ = +1.9).Conclusions: The
males incidence of EAC increases at a steep rate with aging and females
incidence rates are not as steep except after age 60-64 where their
incidence rate of change steeply increases. The steeper change in EAC
incidence rates in the post menopausal female may explain why the male:
female EAC incidence ratio decreases with age as seen nationally (SEER).
The negative APC in the female 50-64 years age group may be explained by
their peri-menopausal state and by the increased use of post-menopausal
hormonal therapy since 1975 for this age group. Using age as a proxy for
estrogen exposure, our findings suggest a hormonal component for the
observed age-related, declining male to female EAC incidence rate ratios.
It also confirms gender differences in incidence long observed in EC and
suggests that the pre-menopausal estrogen milieu in females may serve as
a protective factor against EAC. Moreover, this protective state
dissipates with time in the post menopausal females where the effect of
estrogen exposure dissipates.Implications: Our initial epidemiological
observation of gender-age differences warrants translation into a
molecular epidemiology study with the use of sophisticated biomarkers to
establish the seemingly protective role of estrogen exposure in
esophageal adenocarcinoma.

