Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular mechanisms of paclitaxel-resistance and resveratrol
sensitivity in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.


Treatment of drug-resistant cancer cells remains a difficult problem in
cancer therapy because most resistant cells can pump out drugs or
upregulate other survival pathways to bypass a targeted therapy. To study
cancers that are resistant to the common cancer drug, paclitaxel, a novel
paclitaxel-resistant cell line was generated from the breast cancer cell
line MDA-MB-231. A spiking method of paclitaxel treatment was used to
select for a population of cells that are resistant to the drug. This
method mimics the development of resistance in recurrent tumors in
patients. The IC50 of paclitaxel in these cells was 75 M compared to the
0.037 M IC50 of the parent cell line, a 2000-fold increase in resistance.
In this very heterogeneous population, the mechanism of resistance was
not due to increased protein levels of the efflux protein,
p-glycoprotein, as quantitated by western blot analysis. To better study
these cells, the paclitaxel-resistant cell line was cloned using a
limiting dilution method to provide more homogeneous populations of
resistant cells. The 29 clones obtained exhibited a paclitaxel IC50 range
of 8 M to 78 M which was equivalent to a 200- to 2000-fold increase in
resistance compared to the parent line. It has been suggested that the
polyphenol natural compound, resveratrol, which has been shown to inhibit
cell growth of multiple cancer types, may be useful as a combination
anti-cancer treatment or novel therapeutic for drug-resistant cancer
cells. There was no significant difference among the 72 hour IC50 of
resveratrol in the parent line, the heterogeneous resistant line, the
least paclitaxel-resistant clone or the most paclitaxel-resistant clone.
We observed that treatment with 10-100 M concentrations of resveratrol in
all cell lines showed a reduction in cell proliferation and increased
apoptosis within 72 hours (pTreatment of drug-resistant cancer cells
remains a difficult problem in cancer therapy because most resistant
cells can pump out drugs or upregulate other survival pathways to bypass
a targeted therapy. To study cancers that are resistant to the common
cancer drug, paclitaxel, a novel paclitaxel-resistant cell line was
generated from the breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231. A spiking method
of paclitaxel treatment was used to select for a population of cells that
are resistant to the drug. This method mimics the development of
resistance in recurrent tumors in patients. The IC50 of paclitaxel in
these cells was 75 M compared to the 0.037 M IC50 of the parent cell
line, a 2000-fold increase in resistance. In this very heterogeneous
population, the mechanism of resistance was not due to increased protein
levels of the efflux protein, p-glycoprotein, as quantitated by western
blot analysis. To better study these cells, the paclitaxel-resistant cell
line was cloned using a limiting dilution method to provide more
homogeneous populations of resistant cells. The 29 clones obtained
exhibited a paclitaxel IC50 range of 8 M to 78 M which was equivalent to
a 200- to 2000-fold increase in resistance compared to the parent line.
It has been suggested that the polyphenol natural compound, resveratrol,
which has been shown to inhibit cell growth of multiple cancer types, may
be useful as a combination anti-cancer treatment or novel therapeutic for
drug-resistant cancer cells. There was no significant difference among
the 72 hour IC50 of resveratrol in the parent line, the heterogeneous
resistant line, the least paclitaxel-resistant clone or the most
paclitaxel-resistant clone. We observed that treatment with 10-100 M
concentrations of resveratrol in all cell lines showed a reduction in
cell proliferation and increased apoptosis within 72 hours (p<0.05), with
the paclitaxel-resistant cells to a greater extent. In addition,
resveratrol decreased the ability of the parent, heterogeneous resistant
and the highest resistant clone cells to form colonies (an indication of
reduced cell survival capacity). To better characterize the molecular
mechanisms of the paclitaxel-resistant cell line and the effects of
resveratrol treatment, RNA sequencing will reveal the unique
transcriptome and pre-miRNA changes in the resistant cells compared to
the parent as well as changes in both cell lines due to resveratrol
treatment. This resistant cell line and its clones provide a powerful
tool to study paclitaxel-resistance in and therapeutics for breast cancer.

