Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genome-wide RNA interference screen identifies autophagy
mediators with therapeutic implications in chronic myeloid leukemia.


Autophagy plays a critical role in cancer formation and therapeutic
resistance. However, little is known about how autophagy is regulated in
cancer and how it mediates therapeutic resistance. Here we elect to use
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) as a cancer model to study autophagy in
that it is driven by a single onco-protein BCR-ABL, whose activity can be
selectively blocked by imatinib a front-line treatment for CML. Moreover,
imatinib resistance frequently occurs in CML patients. Thus, unraveling
autophagy regulation in CML and its role in overcoming imatinib
resistance has substantial therapeutic benefits not only for CML but also
for other cancers that can be treated by imatinib. In this report, we
performed a genome-wide RNA interference screen in K562 human CML cells
using monodansylcadaverine (MDC) that marks autolysosomes followed by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting to label and isolate autophagic
cells. We have identified 336 candidate genes, knockdown of which
significantly increased MDC fluorescence. Our further validation utilized
Cyto-IDTM Green dye that selectively stains autophagy vacuoles and
quantitative RT-PCR that measures knockdown efficiency of shRNAs. We have
uncovered a set of genes acting as autophagy mediators in K562 cells. To
study their role in imatinib resistance, we measured the effect of
imatinib in combination with the knocking down of autophagy mediators.
Our results showed that the shRNA of VAMP7, a pivotal factor in vesicle
transportation, substantially sensitized K562 cells to imatinib.
Intriguingly, our further work revealed that depletion of VAMP7 blocked
the activity of key autophagy suppressors AKT and mTOR, suggesting that
VAMP7 and perhaps other autophagy mediators regulate imatinib sensitivity
through signaling pathways that inhibit autophagy. In conclusion, a set
of genes revealed by a genome-wide RNA interference screen mediates
autophagy in CML cells and, more importantly, some of these genes render
CML cells resistant to imatinib thereby becoming appealing drug targets.

