Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Library screen to rapidly determine activity against normal and
mutant bone marrow progenitor cells.


Aberrant signal transduction plays a central role in the pathogenesis of
myelodysplastic syndrome/ myeloproliferative neoplasm (MDS/MPN), as
indicated by the high prevalence of mutations that activate Ras
signaling. Yet despite the key role of Ras signaling in hematopoietic
neoplasms, there are currently no signal transduction inhibitors with
established efficacy. This necessitates a screen of inhibitors that may
potentially reveal novel therapeutic strategies and inform efforts to
treat neoplasms driven by hyperactive Ras signaling.Unfractionated bone
marrow cells harvested from Mx1-Cre, KrasD12 (n= 10) and wildtype (WT)
mice (n=18) were utilized in the screening of 94 different inhibitors. A
disease relevant, homogenous population of PreGM cells identified as
Lineage lo/- Sca1- c-kit+ CD34+ FcRII/III- CD105- CD150- was purified
from bone marrow using flow cytometry. The PreGM cells were then sorted
into 96 well plates containing various inhibitors at set concentrations
ranging from 1E-7 (5E-7ug/ml) to 1 (5ug/ml). DMSO and cytotoxic agents
(Cytarabine, Adriamycin, Gemcitabine) served as negative and positive
controls respectively. The freshly sorted PreGM cells were exposed to
inhibitors for 3 days under standard culture conditions. At the end of
that period, cell growth was quantified using the IN Cell Analyzer 2000
and dose response curves constructed for WT and mutant cells. WT and
mutant IC50s for each compound were calculated using the drc package from
the R Project for Statistical Computing.The 94 drug candidates tested in
this screen included cytotoxic agents, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, PI3K
family inhibitors, mitotic kinase inhibitors, epigenetic modifiers,
hedgehog signaling inhibitors, and others. Candidates were screened for
preferential activity against Mx1-Cre, KrasD12 cells. However, none of
the compounds tested were found to demonstrate preferential inhibitory
activity against Mx1-Cre, KrasD12 cells when compared to WT cells.
Furthermore, the IC50s calculated for mutant and WT cells were not
significantly different across all inhibitors tested.The majority of
compounds tested were either FDA approved drugs or agents used in recent
clinical trials. Hyperactive Kras signaling is a major underlying
etiology for MDS/MPN, and thus we designed our study to test the efficacy
of these candidates against mutant Kras cells. Our results indicate that
mutant cells have similar drug sensitivities as normal cells over a broad
range of mechanistic approaches. This leads us to believe that
"synthetic" lethal opportunities may not be the approach of choice for
treating Kras driven neoplasms. However, these findings have directed our
efforts towards compounds that target upstream mediators of Kras
signaling and future endeavors are currently underway to use the assay
system to assess the activity of a highly curated library of kinase
inhibitors on mutant and WT proliferation.

