Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A dynamic interplay of KSR1, p53 and BRCA1 in breast cancer.


Background: We have previously performed a human kinome screen and
identified kinase suppressor of ras 1 (KSR1) as a potential regulator of
estrogen receptor (ER) in breast cancer. Recent studies have suggested
that KSR1, originally known as a positive modulator interacting with RAS
and RAF in the MAPK pathway, may have dual functions as a scaffold
protein and a kinase. Although KSR1 has been implicated in Ras-dependent
cancers, its role in breast cancer has not been studied.Methods: The
clinical significance of KSR1 levels and single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) were assessed by analyzing its expression in tissue microarrays
(n=1000) by immunohistochemistry in univariate and multivariate analyses.
Expression of KSR1 in a panel of breast cancer cell lines were measured.
A KSR1 stable over-expression breast cancer cell line (MCF7-KSR1) was
generated to study its effects on growth and colony formation by 3D
matrigel and soft agar assays. A xenograft mouse model was used to
examine the effects of KSR1 on tumor development in vivo. Stable isotope
labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) was used to analyse
KSR1-regulated proteins and pathways. Additional molecular biology
techniques (including immunoprecipitation, luciferase reporter and
uibiquitination assay) were performed to study the action of KSR1 on p53
and BRCA1.Results: KSR1 was differentially expressed in breast cancer
patients. High KSR1 expression correlated significantly with longer DFS
(p=0.014) and OS (p=0.012) in > 20 yrs follow-up, independent of tumor
stage, grade and size. KSR1 was associated positively with BRCA1
(p=0.002) and inversely with p53 levels (p=0.038). Two KSR1 SNPs were
identified with no correlations with either DFS or OS. RT-qPCR and
western blotting showed that KSR1 is ubiquitously expressed in breast
cancer cell lines. In vitro 3D matrigel and soft agar assays revealed
that MCF7-KSR1 had a significant decreased number of colonies and formed
smaller size colonies compared to MCF7-parental cells. In vivo breast
cancer mouse model showed tumor volumes of xenografts over-expressing
KSR1 were significantly reduced compared to controls. SILAC analysis
revealed various novel KSR1-regulated proteins and phospho-proteins in
breast cancer. Our results showed over-expression of KSR1 decreases the
transcriptional activity of p53 by reducing DBC1 phosphorylation, which
leads to a reduced interaction of DBC1-SIRT1 and therefore allowing SIRT1
to deacetylate p53. Finally, KSR1 stabilizes BRCA1 by up-regulating BARD1
and promoting the interaction of BRCA1-BARD1.Conclusion: KSR1 is an
independent prognostic factor in breast cancer; high KSR1 correlates with
longer DFS and OS. KSR1 over-expression inhibits tumor formation and
growth in vitro and in vivo. KSR1 is part of a dynamic interplay with p53
and BRCA1; it reduces p53 transcriptional activity by abolishing the
interaction of SIRT1-DBC1, while it stabilizes BRCA1 by enhancing
BRCA1-BARD1 interaction.

