Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subpopulations of lung neuroendocrine cells mirror neuronal
development.


Pulmonary neuroendocrine cells (PNECs) which comprise less than 1% of
airway epithelium were recently shown to be the cell of origin for small
cell lung cancer (SCLC). SCLC is the most aggressive form of human lung
cancers and characterized by early dissemination or metastases and
neuroendocrine features. We used immunohistochemistry (IHC) and animal
models in order to delineate the cellular hierarchy of PNEC potentially
leading to cancer.PNECs were first identified in the early lung
development (E12.5) as positive for the proneural basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor Achaete-scute homolog-1 (Ascl1) which is pivotal for
PNEC differentiation and highly expressed in SCLC. Later in the
development (E16.5) and in adulthood, PNECs coexpressed Ascl1 and
calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), a primary neuropeptide in mouse
lung.Interestingly, we showed that doublecortin (DCX), a marker of
immature migrating neurons, is transiently expressed in PNECs during the
early development. Later in the development (E16.5), we observed a
subpopulation expressing the neural-specific 3-tubulin (TUBB3), a
neuronal marker. We also observed that neural cell adhesion molecule
(NCAM), a marker of SCLC, is transiently expressed in a low number of
PNECs in the late embryonic period. In parallel, using the transgenic
CC10-hASH1 mouse model, where Ascl1 is overexpressed in
non-neuroendocrine airway epithelial cells, we determined that it is not
sufficient to induce neuroendocrine differentiation or expression of DCX,
TUBB3 and NCAM.We conclude that Ascl1, DCX and TUBB3 are consecutively
expressed in PNECs during development, similarly to the pattern observed
during neuronal development. However, Ascl1 expression seems to be
maintained even in the mature PNECs unlike in the mature neurons where it
is turned off. On the other hand, NCAM expression in PNECs is transient
and maybe reactivated during the instance of SCLC. To establish the
relationships between the different PNEC populations and Ascl1
expression, we are currently evaluating Cre-dependent conditional Ascl1
deletion in mouse lung. Further work will be necessary to address the
functional potential of the PNEC subpopulations in tumorigenesis.

