Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functionally prioritizing somatic driver aberrations in cancer.


The Cancer Genome Atlas and similar efforts are cataloging genomic
aberrations across major tumor lineages. These projects are revealing an
extraordinary level of genome complexity made up of not only key driver
events critical to pathogenesis, but also numerous biologically-neutral
passengers inherent to unstable tumor genomes. The challenge now is to
identify functional driver aberrations, as targeting such events or their
activated pathways has great potential for improving patient outcomes.
Efficient driver identification requires robust pipelines to prioritize
the thousands of putative targets emerging from genomics studies.
However, little progress has been made toward developing gain-of-function
systems for validating overexpressed or activated oncogenes. We have
assembled a platform of 32,000 sequence-verified open reading frames
(ORFs, hereafter termed genes). We have integrated these reagents into
infrastructure enabling high-content genetic screens. This work is made
possible through technological advances made in our laboratory that
include 1) robotics driven, high-throughput modeling of somatic mutations
(missense, indels, etc) in a manner that permits construction of every
aberration found within a given candidate gene and 2) a molecular
barcoding approach that facilitates detection of driver events following
in vitro and in vivo pooled functional screens. This scalable "HiTMMoB"
(High-Throughput Mutagenesis and Molecular Barcoding) platform allows
rapid construction of expression-ready wild-type and mutant gene clones.
These reagents are being used in our functional genomics pipelines to 1)
identify novel cancer driver genes, 2) to examine functionality of rare
tail mutations in known cancer genes and 3) to asses these genes for
their ability to modulate cell response to available therapeutics. An
important feature of our system is that target cells, once infected with
a gene library, can be entered into parallel screens to maximize
discovery (e.g., screens for driver addiction, cell invasion,
anchorage-independent growth, drug resistance). While cell-based
screening systems are tractable, in vitro models do not fully
recapitulate all hallmarks of cancer. To address this challenge, we have
developed in vivo screening models that leverage barcode sequencing
technology to identify drivers positively selected within tumors and
metastases. We are using these platforms to identify drivers of pancreas,
lung and breast cancer among others through our participation in multiple
projects that include one within the NIH Cancer Target Discovery and
Development Network, a consortium whose goal is to leverage these and
other tools to identify new cancer targets across a variety of cancer
types. Our "prioritization pipeline" will provide the cancer research
community information on the most promising somatic aberrations for
downstream biomarker and drug development.

