Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential signaling and efficacy responses to SDF-1 and
plerixafor in neuroblastoma cells.


Purpose: We have previously demonstrated that CXCR4 is widely but
heterogeneously expressed in neuroblastoma cells and that the selective
CXCR4 drug Plerixafor has preclinical efficacy for reducing growth of
ectopic neuroblastomas in mice. Despite this reports exist which show
Plerixafor can exhibit positive effects on growth in other cancers.
Knowledge of the biochemical effect of CXCR4 occupancy by SDF-1 or
Plerixafor in neuroblastoma cells and how this might vary based on CXCR4
isotype is largely unknown. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the
efficacy response of neuroblastoma cells to SDF-1 or Plerixafor and
determine if any differences exist and is so are these differences
influenced by CXCR4 isotype. Additionally, we seek to identify signaling
pathways activated in neuroblastoma cells by SDF-1 and
Plerixafor.Experimental Design: Patient-derived neuroblastoma cell lines
that differ by level and nature of CXCR4 isoform expressed were evaluated
for their response to SDF-1 or Plerixafor. Serum-starved cells were
treated with either agent in microplates and calcium mobilization or cell
growth was measured using FluoForte and MTT assay kits respectively. For
measurement of Akt activation total protein was extracted from stimulated
cells, followed by western blot detection of Phosphorylated Akt using
phospho-specific antibody and enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL).Results:
We observed dose-dependent increases in calcium-mobilization in response
to SDF-1 and Plerixafor treatment in all cell lines. Effects on cell
growth were heterogeneous and variable in response to SDF-1 stimulation.
High-CXCR4 expressing cell line SK-N-SH showed a dose-dependent increase
in growth subsequent to SDF-1stimulation, while the low-CXCR4 expressing
cell lines SH-SY5Y and SK-N-AS showed stimulation and inhibition at
different doses. Plerixafor treatment of SK-N-SH cells resulted in a
dose-dependent inhibition of cell growth while the low-CXCR4 expressing
lines showed differential efficacy responses, with lower doses
stimulating growth and higher doses inhibiting growth. Both SDF-1 and
Plerixafor stimulation resulted in increased phosphorylation of
Akt.Conclusion: In neuroblastoma cells signaling through CXCR4 occurs in
response to Plerixafor as well as SDF-1; signaling by these two agents
involves utilization of similar downstream signals including activation
of the PI3K/Akt pathway. Neuroblastoma cells show differential efficacy
responses to both SDF-1 and Plerixafor with respect to cell growth and
this response appears to be dependent on CXCR4 expression type. In
addition to its inhibitory effect Plerixafor is partially agonistic as
well, underscoring the fact that further understanding of the mechanisms
associated with differential efficacy response to Plerixafor is critical
to developing effective treatment strategies for neuroblastoma based on
this modality.

