Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Higher plasma levels of heparan sulfate are associated with
improved survival of patients with advanced ovarian cancer.


Background: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the leading cause of gynecologic
cancer death in the United States. Survival in advanced OC is highly
variable and is impacted by the endogenous anti-tumor immune response.
Toll-like receptors (TLR) on tumor-infiltrating leukocytes can modulate
anti-OC immunity. Heparan sulfate (HS) is an oligosaccharide component of
the extracellular matrix that, when released, binds and triggers TLR-4 to
induce production of multiple cytokines; HS is liberated from the
extracellular matrix by heparanase, which is overexpressed by many
ovarian cancers. We therefore explored the association between plasma
levels of HS, heparanase, proinflammatory and immunosuppressive
cytokines, and survival in patients with advanced OC.Methods: We designed
a two stage cohort study of plasma biomarkers in ovarian cancer patients.
For the pilot stage, we enrolled 100 patients with advanced OC (AJCC
Stage III and IV), 50 patients with early stage OC (Stage I and II), and
50 patients with benign surgical conditions from the Mayo Ovarian SPORE
Biospecimens Core. For the expansion stage, 257 patients with advanced OC
were enrolled. Presurgical plasma samples were assayed for HS,
heparanase, and multiple cytokines by ELISA and electrochemiluminescence.
Differences in plasma levels between benign, early, and advanced OC
patient groups were assessed using plate-adjusted linear models.
Associations between plasma levels of HS and heparanase with overall
survival in advanced OC patients were assessed by Cox proportional
hazards models using a log2 transformation; total effects across stages
were estimated using a meta-analysis approach.Results: In the pilot
cohort, soluble HS levels were similar in control (mean +/ STD: 88.26 +/-
32.23), early stage (93.91 +/- 37.77), and advanced OC (93.55 +/- 40.44),
with similar values observed in the expansion cohort (129.29 +/- 95.64).
There was no correlation between heparanase and HS levels. Higher levels
of HS were associated with improved overall survival (log2 HR = 0.62, p =
0.042; HR = 0.84, p = 0.014; HR = 0.82, 95% CI: 0.71-0.93, p = 0.003 for
the pilot, expansion, and combined sets, respectively). There was no
association between heparanase levels and overall survival (all p >
0.45).Conclusions: Neither soluble HS nor heparanase were elevated in
presurgical OC patients relative to controls; however, higher levels of
HS were associated with improved survival in patients with advanced OC.
These results suggest that HS may play a key role in modulating the
innate immune response to OC.

