Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGFR inhibition modulates ErbB receptor tyrosine phosphorylation
in FGFR amplified cell lines.


Fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) family of receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) are currently under investigation as therapeutic targets
for the treatment of breast cancer. FGFR1 amplifications range from
7.5-17% in breast cancers and are associated with a shorter overall
survival. FGFR1 amplified cell lines drive activation of AKT and ERK
pathways and are highly sensitive to FGFR1 inhibition, suggesting an
oncogenic addiction to FGFR1. FGFR2 has been reported to be activated in
lapatinib-resistant, HER2-positive cells. Likewise, FGFR3 expression
levels are often elevated in tamoxifen-resistant, ER positive patients.
FGFR 4 overexpression correlated with poor response to chemotherapy due
to activation of MAPK and increase in B-cell lymphoma extra large
(BCL-XL) levels. Using a highly sensitive, novel proximity mediated
immuno-microarray, Collaborative Enzyme Enhanced Reactive-immunoassay
(CEERTM), this study seeks to determine whether FGFR signal transduction
pathway inhibition modulate ErbB receptor tyrosine kinases and AKT/ERK
signal transduction pathway in cell lines expressing varying levels of
FGFR and ErbB receptors.FGFR 1, 2, 3, and 4 amplified cell lines
(MDA-MB-134VI (KRAS), SNU16, RT112, and MDA-MB-453) were individually
treated with varying dosages (1, 10, 100, and 1000nM) of pan FGFR
inhibitors (AZD4547 and Ponatinib-AP24534) in presence of corresponding
FGF ligand (FGF1, FGF7, FGF9, and FGF19). Expression and activation of
FGFR 1, 2, 3, 4 and EGFR, HER2, HER3, HER4 and downstream signaling
proteins FRS2, AKT, ERK, MEK, and RSK were measured utilizing CEERTM.Both
FGFR inhibitors sufficiently inhibited phosphorylation of FGFRs in each
of the four FGFR amplified cell line. In MDA-MB-453, FGFR4 inhibition
increased phosphorylation of HER2, and HER3 along with AKT. In
MDA-MB-134, FGFR1 inhibition decreased levels of HER3 phosphorylation
along with reduction in phosphorylated ERK, MEK, and RSK. In SNU16, FGFR2
inhibition led to a decrease in EGFR, HER2, and HER3 phosphorylation
along with reduction in phosphorylated MEK, ERK, and RSK. Analysis of
RT112 and additional cell lines with varying levels of ErbB and FGFR
receptor tyrosine kinases are currently in progress. Our data suggests
that FGFR inhibition may modulate parallel / compensatory ErbB and other
signaling pathway as observed in this study. Utilizing CEERTM,
comprehensive profiling may provide unique insight into potential
feedback mechanisms in each patient and evidence for rational selection
of appropriate combinational therapies.

