Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interactions between LRIG proteins and LMO7 and the expression of
LMO7 in human lung cancer.


The Leucine-rich repeats and immunoglobulin-like domains proteins (LRIG)
1, 2 and 3 are integral membrane proteins that have been implicated in
human cancer. We and others have shown that LRIG1 is a negative regulator
of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling. LRIG1 is down regulated in
many tumors; the expression of LRIG1 is often associated with long
patient survival; and LRIG1 has been shown to be a tumor suppressor in
the mouse intestine. Cytoplasmic expression of LRIG2 is associated with a
poor survival for oligodendroglioma patients and perinuclear expression
of LRIG3 in astrocytic tumors is associated with a better survival for
the patients. LRIG3 is involved in the formation of the inner ear during
embryology and a study suggests that LRIG3 is a serum biomarker for
NSCLC. To further elucidate the functions of the LRIG proteins we
performed a yeast two hybrid (YTH) screen in which we identified LMO7 and
LIMCH1 as interaction partners to LRIG3. LMO7 is a cytoskeletal binding
protein and functions as a transcription factor. A study in which LMO7
was deleted in mice showed that these mice developed spontaneous lung
cancers, especially adenocarcinomas, at high age. Using laser confocal
microscopy we found that LRIG3 and LMO7 co-localized in cytoskeletal like
structures, the border of the cell and at the perinuclear region. To
analyze the possible interaction between LRIG1, 2 and 3 and LMO7, we used
the proximity ligation assay (PLA) technique. Endogenously expressed
LRIG1, 2 and 3 all appeared to interact with endogenous LMO7 in all cell
lines tested. LMO7 down regulation by siRNA resulted in fewer apparent
LMO7-LRIG interactions, confirming the specificity of the PLA assays.
Using QRT-RTPCR we found that LMO7mRNA was highly expressed in small
intestine, lung and colon. Comparison of themRNA level of LMO7 in normal
human lung and a panel of different human lung tumors showed a dramatic
decrease of LMO7 mRNA expression in the human lung tumors. Analysis of
the cancer genome atlas (TCGA) database indicated that LMO7 gene
expression was high in human normal colorectal and lung tissues, and the
expression of LMO7 was dramatically decreased in malignant colorectal and
lung tissues.To further study LMO7 in lung cancer, we stained a tissue
microarray with 364 lung cancer tissue samples and 17 normal human lung
tissue samples for LMO7.LMO7 was rarely expressed in the human lung
tumors. Multivariate Cox regression analysis indicated that LMO7 was a
prognostic factor in human lung cancer (p =0.013). In summary LMO7
interacted with all three LRIG proteins, the expression of LMO7 was
decreased in malignant colorectal and lung tissues compared to normal
tissues and LMO7 appeared to bea prognostic factor in human lung cancer.

