Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The association between personal sun exposure, serum vitamin D and
global methylation in human lymphocytes, in a population of healthy
adults in South Australia.


A positive association between solar UV exposure and micronuclei (MN)
frequency (biomarker of chromosome breakage or loss) was previously
reported with the effect of solar UV exposure on DNA damage greater when
serum vitamin D (25(OH)D) levels were insufficient (A positive
association between solar UV exposure and micronuclei (MN) frequency
(biomarker of chromosome breakage or loss) was previously reported with
the effect of solar UV exposure on DNA damage greater when serum vitamin
D (25(OH)D) levels were insufficient (<50nmol/L). MN formation can result
from global hypomethylation of the DNA repeat sequence, which is
suggested to be a significant factor in driving oncogenesis. Therefore
the aim was to evaluate the relationship between lymphocytic DNA
methylation pattern in LINE-1 repetitive elements and solar UV exposure
in 208 male and female participants from South Australia. Possible
modifying effects of serum 25(OH)D levels were examined. Personal solar
UV exposure was estimated from hours of outdoor exposure over 16 weeks
recalled at the time of blood collection. DNA methylation pattern in
LINE-1 repetitive elements was assessed in peripheral blood lymphocytes
using pyrosequencing. DNA methylation in LINE-1 repetitive elements
decreased with increasing sun exposure (% decrease=0.5% per doubling of
sun exposure; 95%CI: -0.7-0.2 pvalue=0.00003). There was no correlation
between LINE-1 methylation and MN frequency, however for every 1%
increase in LINE-1 methylation there was a corresponding 4.3% (95%
CI:0.6-8.1 p-value=0.02) increase in nucleoplasmic bridges (biomarker of
dicentric chromosome formation) and a 4.3% increase in necrosis
(CI:1.9-6.8 p-value=0.0005). This suggests that the reduction in LINE-1
methylation with increased solar exposure may be too small to explain
increases in MN frequency and therefore other mechanisms must be
considered. There was no clear relationship between 25(OH)D and DNA
methylation. In conclusion, the inverse relationship between solar UV
radiation and LINE-1 DNA methylation status suggests a role for solar UV
exposure in influencing genomic methylation patterns, which in turn
appears to be associated with specific biomarkers of cell death
(necrosis) and chromosomal stability (NPBs). If this holds true, then the
use of LINE-1 hypomethylation, and possibly methylation of other
sequences such as Alu repeats, as a biomarker for studying the role of UV
in inducing both skin and internal cancers (and other diseases) might
deserve further consideration.

