Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of spontaneous in vivo cachexia models in
Champions TumorGraft models.


Cachexia, defined as a loss of adipose tissue and skeletal muscle mass
not reversible by nutritional support, is present in the majority of
patients with advanced cancer progression. This reduces the patient's
quality of life and impacts their ability to function normally and
undergo treatments. Reversing cachexia has been problematic due to a lack
of quality pre-clinical models. Traditional xenograft models using cell
lines are limited due to their inability to accurately replicate the
whole body response to cancer. Champions Oncology overcomes this
challenge through the use of its innovative Champions TumorGraft
platform, where primary human tumors are implanted into immunocompromised
mice in a manner that preserves the biological properties of the original
human tumor. Champions has identified a panel of three TumorGraft models
which spontaneously induce cachexia when implanted subcutaneously into
nude mice: 1) CTG-0282, a pancreatic cancer model, 2) CTG-0765, a NSCLC
model, and 3) CTG-0804, a renal cell carcinoma model. All three models
have shown a greater than 90% cachexia rate, as demonstrated by lost body
weight, over multiple passages. In addition, loss of body weight
correlates with an increase in tumor volume size. Mice that have little
or no tumor growth show no loss of body weight. Past studies have
indicated a function for pro-inflammatory cytokines, including tumor
necrosis factor- (TNF-), interleukin 1 (IL-1), interleukin 6 (IL-6) and
interferon gamma (IFN), in the cachexia process. Champions is currently
investigating the roles of these possible tumor-mediated factors in the
aforementioned models. Principle among these factors is IL-6, which has
been shown to be required in the regulation of cachexia in tumor-bearing
mice and is correlated with weight loss and survival in patients.
Preliminary results from our studies suggest a correlation between IL-6
levels and spontaneous cachexia in Champions TumorGraft models. In
summary, we demonstrate that the Champions TumorGraft platform preserves
the biological properties of the original human tumor, including
spontaneous cachexia behavior in these models, and is therefore ideal for
oncology drug development programs focused on the inhibition of cachexia.

