Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simvastatin alters oxysterol profiles in TRAMP mice.


Due to mounting epidemiological data evidence, we sought to determine if
simvastatin, the most widely used cholesterol lowering medication, could
alter prostate cancer incidence in the TRAMP mouse model of prostate
cancer. We hypothesized that simvastatin would inhibit advanced prostate
cancer formation. Two separate studies were performed using high doses of
simvastatin (up to 0.050% w/w) or simvastatin plus genistein in a high
fat Western diet. While prostate cancer incidence was only moderately
reduced, surprising changes in the serum oxysterol profiles of the TRAMP
mice were detected. Oxysterols, oxygenated derivatives of cholesterol,
have recently been shown to influence human diseases, and here we suggest
that five oxysterols may play a role in prostate cancer progression. Ten
mice were chosen from each treatment group, and their serum oxysterol
profiles were analyzed by LC-MS-MS. The oxysterol that was most
responsive to treatment was 24(S)-hydroxycholesterol, reducing
significantly in all treatment groups. 24(S)-OHC was reduced from the
control at 20 ng/mL to 10 ng/mL with statin treatment (p-value Due to
mounting epidemiological data evidence, we sought to determine if
simvastatin, the most widely used cholesterol lowering medication, could
alter prostate cancer incidence in the TRAMP mouse model of prostate
cancer. We hypothesized that simvastatin would inhibit advanced prostate
cancer formation. Two separate studies were performed using high doses of
simvastatin (up to 0.050% w/w) or simvastatin plus genistein in a high
fat Western diet. While prostate cancer incidence was only moderately
reduced, surprising changes in the serum oxysterol profiles of the TRAMP
mice were detected. Oxysterols, oxygenated derivatives of cholesterol,
have recently been shown to influence human diseases, and here we suggest
that five oxysterols may play a role in prostate cancer progression. Ten
mice were chosen from each treatment group, and their serum oxysterol
profiles were analyzed by LC-MS-MS. The oxysterol that was most
responsive to treatment was 24(S)-hydroxycholesterol, reducing
significantly in all treatment groups. 24(S)-OHC was reduced from the
control at 20 ng/mL to 10 ng/mL with statin treatment (p-value <0.001).
27-hydroxycholesterol was also reduced in the 0.044% simvastatin w/w dose
to 10 ng/mL from 16 ng/mL in the control diet (p-value = 0.025).
5,6-dihydroxycholesterol responded to the 0.044% simvastatin diet
lowering to 10 ng/mL as compared to the control of 18 ng/mL (p-value =
0.0002). 4-beta-hydroxycholesterol only responded to a combination of
0.050% simvastatin and 400 mg/kg genistein treatment, lowering from the
control of 605 ng/mL down to 340 ng/mL with combination treatment
(p-value Due to mounting epidemiological data evidence, we sought to
determine if simvastatin, the most widely used cholesterol lowering
medication, could alter prostate cancer incidence in the TRAMP mouse
model of prostate cancer. We hypothesized that simvastatin would inhibit
advanced prostate cancer formation. Two separate studies were performed
using high doses of simvastatin (up to 0.050% w/w) or simvastatin plus
genistein in a high fat Western diet. While prostate cancer incidence was
only moderately reduced, surprising changes in the serum oxysterol
profiles of the TRAMP mice were detected. Oxysterols, oxygenated
derivatives of cholesterol, have recently been shown to influence human
diseases, and here we suggest that five oxysterols may play a role in
prostate cancer progression. Ten mice were chosen from each treatment
group, and their serum oxysterol profiles were analyzed by LC-MS-MS. The
oxysterol that was most responsive to treatment was
24(S)-hydroxycholesterol, reducing significantly in all treatment groups.
24(S)-OHC was reduced from the control at 20 ng/mL to 10 ng/mL with
statin treatment (p-value <0.001). 27-hydroxycholesterol was also reduced
in the 0.044% simvastatin w/w dose to 10 ng/mL from 16 ng/mL in the
control diet (p-value = 0.025). 5,6-dihydroxycholesterol responded to the
0.044% simvastatin diet lowering to 10 ng/mL as compared to the control
of 18 ng/mL (p-value = 0.0002). 4-beta-hydroxycholesterol only responded
to a combination of 0.050% simvastatin and 400 mg/kg genistein treatment,
lowering from the control of 605 ng/mL down to 340 ng/mL with combination
treatment (p-value <0.0001). Lastly 7-keto-cholesterol was reduced by the
0.044% simvastatin treatment, lowering to 44 ng/mL from the control of 67
ng/mL (p-value = 0.004). Future studies will determine how these
oxysterols can influence signaling pathways that can affect prostate
cancer progression. In summary, we have found an off target effect of
simvastatin treatment in TRAMP mice. Although serum cholesterol
parameters remain statistically similar, with no observable changes in
LDL, HDL, triglycerides, or total cholesterol, serum oxysterol profiles
were changed significantly with simvastatin treatment. Potentially one of
the pharmacological mechanisms for the beneficial effects of statin
treatment on cancer outcomes is not due to their cholesterol lowering
abilities, but instead may hinge on their capacity to change the
concentration of oxysterols in vivo.

