Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cells: novel chemopreventive targets for pancreatic
cancer.


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of mortality in the United
States and no significant treatment is currently available. Although an
increasing number of therapeutic options exist for patients with advanced
disease, their efficacy is time limited and non-curative. Presently
approximately close to 60% of cancer patients in the United States are
believed to utilize therapies derived from plants, herbs, flowers, or
nutrients either exclusively or concurrently with traditional
chemotherapy or radiation therapy.Recent evidence suggests the existence
of a small population of tumorigenic stem cells responsible for tumor
initiation, metastasis and resistance to chemotherapy and radiation.
Identification of the regulatory mechanisms and signaling pathways
involved in cancer stem cells (CSCs) will help in designing novel agents
to target this refractory cell population in pancreatic cancers.We are
currently investigating the mechanisms by which purified crocetinic acid,
a carotenoid molecule isolated from saffron, inhibits growth of
pancreatic cancer in vitro and in vivo models. Our studies demonstrate
that the compound had significant cytotoxicity against pancreatic cancer
cells in both a dose- and time-dependent manner. Pancreatic CSCs can be
allowed to divide and grow in ultra-low binding tissue culture dishes to
form multicellular spheroids called pancospheres. Treatment with purified
crocetinic acid decreased the number and size of the primary and
secondary pancospheres in a dose dependent manner, suggesting that
crocetinic acid targets CSCs. To understand the mechanism of inhibition
of pancospheres, the signaling pathways affected by crocetinic acid were
dissected. Aberrant activation of Sonic Hedgehog signaling pathway has
been associated with renewal of cancer stem cells, and in the development
of several solid cancers. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) upon binding to its
cognate receptor patched, allows smoothened to accumulate and activate
Gli transcription factor. Treatment with crocetinic acid inhibited the
expression of both Shh and smoothened in the pancreatic CSCs with
concomitant reduction of the expression of a novel pancreatic CSC marker,
DCLK-1 (Doublecortin Calcium/Calmodulin-Dependent Kinase-1). Furthermore,
it inhibited the expression of patched-1 and Gli-1, downstream targets of
the hedgehog signaling pathway. Crocetinic acid also inhibited tumor
formation in pancreatic cancer in vivo xenograft models.Taken together,
these data suggest that crocetinic acid effectively inhibits pancreatic
CSCs by down regulating the sonic hedgehog pathway, thereby inhibiting
tumorigenesis.

