Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coal mining and cancer risk: important gaps in public health
knowledge.


Coal fueled 42% of electricity generation in the US in 2011 with >1
billion tons mined across 27 states. Considering that 33% of petroleum
used in the US comes from Arab States and Venezuela, coal will remain a
critical component of US energy policy with national production expected
to increase 7.6% by 2035. Given the large spatial extent of coal bearing
formations, substantial proportions of the population are now, with more
likely to be, exposed to coal mining (CM) activities, e.g. dust from
mining and processing, leachates from mine tailings, and smoke from coal
combustion. While CM activities are known to release carcinogens such as
crystalline silica dust, polyaromatic hydrocarbons, and trace elements
(e.g. Cd, As), a systematic review of literature published since 1980
regarding resultant impacts upon cancer rates in potentially exposed
populations is equivocal. Occupational studies are designed to provide
data concerning the effects of acute or long term exposure. Of 11 such
studies identified, 7 found an increased risk of cancer in coal miners
(digestive/gastric, lung, all cancers) but 4 found no increased risk
(gastric, lung, all cancers). Another 17 studies compared miners to other
populations, or examined CM as a risk factor. Nine found associations
between CM and increased cancer risk (bladder, gastric, larynx, lung,
nasal, all cancers), but 8 found no increased risk (gastric, lung).
Finally, 6 studies were identified which examined associations between CM
and cancer in the general population. Three found associations between
community cancer rates and CM, with those living near CM at increased
risk (male colorectal, lung), 2 used spatial statistics to identify
cancer clusters associated with CM (breast, lung, respiratory, all
cancers), and 1 used community surveys to identify increased
self-reported cancer in mining areas. While the strength of these latter
studies is limited by weaknesses inherent in ecological and
cross-sectional designs, evidence exists to support the biological
plausibility that populations near CM activities are at increased risk.
Environmental studies have shown that lignite bed leachates are
associated with renal pelvic cancer and induce kidney cell culture
proliferation; rodents captured from CM areas had greater DNA damage than
non-exposed controls; and crystalline silica may be found in coal at high
levels and released by burning. In sum, the data are too weak to conclude
there is an increased risk of cancer to the general population, to
identify which specific populations suffer that risk, or indicate which
mitigation strategies may be effectively implemented. While prospective
cohort studies might provide such data, the long lag time between
exposure and cancer may preclude practicality and other measures of
exposure (e.g. toenail clippings, wind patterns) and potential
pre-cancerous cellular conditions (e.g. DNA methylation, histone
modifications) should be investigated as interim outcomes.

