Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analysis of transcriptomic and metabolomic data
reveals a critical role for aminosugar metabolism in prostate cancer.


Prostate Cancer is the second most common cause of cancer-related death
in men in the US. Like other tumors, prostate cancer development and
progression is dictated by multiple molecular events that include changes
in levels of genes, transcripts, proteins and metabolites. To better
understand the biology of prostate cancer development it is essential to
integrate these disparate yet related datasets. Our laboratory has
identified matched transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic changes in
localized prostate cancer relative to adjacent benign tissue as well in
metastatic disease compared to organ-confined tumor. To study this using
a System's Biology approach we have recently embarked on a pilot study
aimed at integrating transcriptomic and metabolomic data to obtain
biochemical pathways that key to prostate cancer development. Using an
in-house network-based enrichment strategy, amino sugar metabolism was
found to be significantly enriched in organ-confined prostate cancer but
not in metastatic disease. Amino sugar metabolism describes the
utilization of glucose-derived carbon and amino acid (mostly
glutamine)-derive nitrogen to produce glucosamines. These amino sugars
participate in synthesis of immune modulatory compounds as well as in
glycosylation cascades. In this study, we describe the molecular analyses
of Glucosamine-6 phosphate-N-acetyl Transferase (GNPNAT1), a key enzyme
that converts D-glucosamine 6-phosphate to N-acetyl-D-glucosamine
6-phosphate, in prostate cancer. Our results indicate upregulation of
GNPNAT1 in organ-confined prostate cancer as compared to benign adjacent
tissue as well as metastatic tissue and regulation of the pathway by
androgen. Stable knockdown of GNPNAT1 in androgen dependent LNCap cells
leads to diminished cell growth and cell cycle arrest. In contrast,
growth and cell cycle are not affected by the knockdown of GNPNAT1 in
androgen independent C4-2 cells. Knockdown of GNPNAT1 in C4-2 cells
enhances invasiveness which is not observed in LNCap knockdown cells. In
this work we show that GNPNAT1 is linked to androgen receptor (AR) action
and thus is a critical enzyme for the survival of androgen dependent
prostate cancer cells.

