Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A gene expression profiling and molecular pathway analysis in
early recurrence of patients with early stage lung adenocarcinoma.


Background: Clinico-histopathological staging is insufficient to predict
disease progression and clinical outcome in lung carcinoma. Here, we show
that gene expression profiles and molecular pathways based on microarray
and functional analysis can be used to predict early relapse in patients
with early-stage lung adenocarcinoma.Methods and Results: Based on the
results of principal component analysis of a series of 24 samples of
early-stage lung adenocarcinoma, there were two subgroups within the
early-relapse group. The histological classification of all of group A
was poorly differentiated, whereas only one of three cases in group B was
classified as such. DAVID functional annotation analysis revealed 16 and
17 enriched pathways in groups A and B, respectively. Clusters of genes
related to oncological or immunological functional signaling were found
enriched in group A as were pathways such as cell adhesion molecules
(CAMs), cell cycle, and antigen processing and presentation, whereas in
group B the pathways were CAMs, T cell receptor signaling,
cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, toll-like receptor signaling,
chemokine signaling, primary immunodeficiency, and natural killer cell
mediated cytotoxicity. The CAMs pathway was found to be enriched in both
groups.Conclusions: In this study, we present a comprehensive gene
expression analysis and functional pathway analysis of early-stage lung
adenocarcinoma, wherein we identified a distinct molecular pathway
category, CAMs that correlated with early relapse of early-stage lung
adenocarcinoma subclasses. This prognostic signature could be used to
identify patients with early-stage high-risk NSCLC who might benefit from
adjuvant therapy following surgery.Citation Format: Hisashi Saji,
Masahiro Tsuboi, Yoshihisa Shimada, Yasufumi Kato, Wakako Hamanaka,
Koichi Yoshida, Jitsuo Usuda, Tatsuo Ohira, Norihiko Ikeda. A gene
expression profiling and molecular pathway analysis in early recurrence
of patients with early stage lung adenocarcinoma. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1997.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1997

