Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct gene expression profile of recurrent stage II colorectal
cancers in African American and Caucasian American patients.


Objective: To determine gene expression profile of Stage II colorectal
cancers (CRCs) based on disease recurrence and patient
race/ethnicity.Background: About 25-35% of Stage II CRCs recur after
potentially curative surgery. Furthermore, the incidence, recurrence, and
mortality rates for CRC are higher in African Americans (AAs) relative to
Caucasian Americans (CAs), even when they are diagnosed with early stage
disease. Differences in tumor biology may contribute to this race-based
disparity. Thus, identification of these high-risk patients is an unmet
medical need.Methods: Using GeneChip microarray technology, we obtained
gene expression profiles for Stage II CRCs from 16 AA and 30 CA patients.
Samples from recurrent disease, within 5 years post-surgery (n=5 in AA,
n= 9 in CA) were compared against non-recurrent, within 10 years
post-surgery, (n=11 in AA, and n=21 in CA) samples. The data were
analyzed for expression differences at the gene level comparing AA with
CA patients and further analyzed for functions and pathways.Results: In
the samples of recurrent CRCs, a significant number of genes (n=561) were
differentially expressed, with a false-discovery rate of 5%. Further
analyses showed 253 genes differentially expressed within the AA
recurrent subgroup and 317 genes in CA recurrent subgroup. In recurrent
CRCs, there were 9 genes common to AA and CA patients, suggesting a
common gene signature specific for Stage II disease. Canonical pathway
analyses and interaction network analyses for these differentially
expressed genes revealed that ERK/MAPK, protein kinase A, and CDK5
signaling were the top three affected signaling pathways in recurrent
samples from AAs. In contrast, RhoA, integrin, and cell cycle control
signaling were the top three affected pathways in Stage II CRCs of CAs.
This suggests, for samples from CAs and AAs, a distinct race-based gene
expression and downstream effects on pathways.Conclusion: A common gene
expression signature, specific for stage II, together with a
race-specific expression profile may have therapeutic implications for AA
and CA patients.

