Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cells and cisplatin.


Introduction:Cisplatin is an important chemotherapeutic agent, which has
resulted in higher overall response rates when combined with 5-FU or
taxane combinations in treating squamous cellular carcinoma of the head
and neck. However, HNSCC tumor response rates to cisplatin range from
20-30%, a major clinical hurdle today. To address this issue thoroughly,
we investigated the resistance to cisplatin in HNSCC under the purview of
the cancer stem cell hypothesis, using the widely studied CSC marker
combinations of, CD44+ 24- and ALDH-Hi. In order to get a broader
perspective on this issue, we worked on multiple HNSCC tumor cell lines
with varying degrees of cisplatin resistance, arising from tumors of the
pharynx, larynx, tongue, tonsils, alveolus, hypopharynx and
supraglottis.Methods:Seven HNSCC cell lines were analyzed for their CSC
percentage through FACS, utilizing CD44+ 24- and ALDH-Hi marker systems.
Cisplatin IC-50 for each of these seven cell lines was then determined by
plotting percent viability vs. drug concentration curves. The remaining
viable cells after cisplatin treatment were then analyzed through FACS
for their CD44+ 24- and ALDH-Hi percentages in order to compare with the
CSC percentage in the untreated HNSCC lines.Results:There was a wide
variation in the percentages of CD44+24- and ALDH-Hi cells across these
seven HNSCC lines. An inverse correlation between the initial percentages
of CD44+24- and ALDH-Hi cells and the corresponding cisplatin IC-50
values was seen. HNSCC cell lines that had lower IC-50 values for
cisplatin displayed greater cell viability at higher concentrations of
cisplatin. This was evident by a long tail in the sigmoidal dose response
curve. The number of viable cells at the end of cisplatin treatment had a
linear relationship with the overall percentage of CSCs in the control
untreated cell lines.Conclusion:Our results suggest that the resistance
offered by the CD44+24- and ALDH1-Hi cells is apparent only once the
initial 50% loss of cells occurs. This in vitro biphasic decline in
percent viable cells clearly indicates that HNSCC cisplatin resistance is
a twofold problem. The bulk of non-cancer stem cells within a tumor can
acquire resistance to cisplatin via multiple molecular pathways, but this
is only a front line cover of resistance to the resistance offered by the
cancer stem cells.

