Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stroma-derived Basigin controls survival of leukemia cells through
regulation of their redox state.


Leukemia cells critically depend on interactions with the
microenvironment in bone marrow and at extramedullary sanctuary sites,
which provides protection to escape chemotherapy. Co-culture of primary
leukemia cells on mesenchymal stroma cells (MSCs) derived from human bone
marrow supports leukemia cell survival. We have developed an automated
microscopy-based approach to identify stroma-derived pro-survival signals
by RNA interference of candidate genes in MSCs enabling functional
profiles of primary leukemia cells with respect to support from the
microenvironment. We took advantage of our leukemia xenograft system of
well characterized primary ALL samples, including cases with refractory
disease. Based on gene expression and cell surface proteomic data from
both cellular compartments, we generated a customized siRNA library of
110 genes with a potential function in stromal support. Primary ALL cells
were seeded on reversely transfected MSC cells, and ALL cell viability
was assessed with a fluorescent viability dye after 6 days. Image
analysis and machine learning algorithms were developed for specific
quantification of surviving ALL cells on top of MSCs.As proof of concept,
we could show that down-regulation of VCAM1 or the VEGF pathway in MSCs
decreased ALL survival in a subgroup of cases. Inhibitors of VEGF
signalling recapitulated a decrease of ALL cell viability for the same
samples. One of the strongest effects on ALL survival was achieved by
down-regulation of the membrane protein Basigin (CD147). Specifically, 13
out of 17 ALL cases analysed in validation experiments were affected by
modulation of Basigin on MSC level. Basigin has been implicated in cell
signalling, in interactions with extracellular matrix, and serves as
chaperone to different membrane carrier proteins. Among putative Basigin
interactors we identified the heteromeric amino acid transporter SLC3A2
(CD98) to be required for ALL survival in the same 13 ALL cases.
Down-regulation of Basigin or SLC3A2 in MSCs induced a decrease of GSH
levels and increased ROS levels in leukemia cells, enhancing oxidative
stress. Downregulation of Basigin/SLC3A2 also increased the sensitivity
of leukemia cells to oxidative stress by H2O2. Depletion of cysteine in
co-culture conditions mimicked the effect of Basigin downregulation, and
addition of cysteine restored ALL cell viability despite downregulation
of Basigin in MSCs, identifying stroma-dependent cysteine metabolism as
important regulatory mechanism to maintain GSH levels in ALL cells.Taken
together, we have established a robust platform for functional
investigation of primary ALL cell survival in a model of the leukemia
microenvironment and obtained evidence for dependence of ALL cell
survival on Basigin/SLC3A2 activity in stroma. Our data indicate that
Basigin/SLC3A2 function is important for the regulation of the redox
state of ALL cells in this model of the leukemia niche.

