Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Probing accessibility and conformational changes in ATP-binding
sites during the catalytic cycle of human P-glycoprotein (ABCB1).


P-glycoprotein (P-gp) is an ATP-binding cassette (ABC) efflux transporter
implicated in the development of multidrug resistance in cancer cells.
The catalytic cycle of P-gp is still not fully understood. Both the C431
and C1074 residues in the Walker A motifs of nucleotide-binding domains
(NBDs) are highly conserved in P-gp from different species and these
residues are excellent reporter sites to study the interaction between
the two NBDs during the catalytic cycle. Using homo-bifunctional
crosslinkers, disulfide crosslinking of the 431C and 1074C residues in a
cysless background can be observed in the presence of copper
phenanthroline (CuP) and M17M, which have spacer arm lengths of 0 and 25
, respectively. However, crosslinking with M17M was prevented in the
ADP-vanadate-trapped (closed) conformation, indicating that the distance
between 431C and 1074C or the accessibility of these residues changes
upon ATP hydrolysis. In addition, the accessibility of the residues,
separately or together (431C/1074C) in both the apo and closed
conformations was determined with fluorescein-5-maleimide (FM) and
methanethio-sulfonate derivatives of rhodamine (MTS-rhodamine) and
verapamil (MTS-verapamil), which exhibit different physical properties.
The crosslinking of cysteine residues with thiol-reactive compounds is
observed both in apo (open) and ADP-vanadate-trapped (closed)
conformations, though at a reduced level in the latter case, indicating
the flexible nature of the cysteines in Walker A domains. Consistent with
these findings, the docking of FM in a homology model of human P-gp ATP
sites shows that the sulfur atoms of 431C or 1074C can be oriented either
facing the ATP pocket or facing away from the pocket. A different degree
of labeling was observed between the two residues; for 1074C having 1.4-
fold and 2-fold higher labeling with FM compared to 431C in the apo and
closed conformations respectively, suggesting that accessibility of 1074C
is greater than that of 431C in both conformations. In the presence of
the transport substrate cyclosporine A (50 M), crosslinking is still
observed with CuP and M17M, suggesting that the binding of substrates to
the drug-binding site in the transmembrane domains does not change the
accessibility of the cysteines in the NBDs. In summary, the cysteines in
the Walker A motifs of human P-gp are flexible and differentially
accessible in the apo and closed conformations. In addition, the NBDs of
human P-gp are closer together (20-25 ) than the NBDs observed in the
X-ray structure of mouse P-gp (36 ).

