Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of AR W741 mutation in circulating tumor DNA from plasma
samples of castration-resistant prostate cancer patients using LNA
clamp-mediated PCR.


After one to two years of hormone therapy, most hormone-dependent
prostate cancers become refractory and stop responding to castration
treatment. Treatment-emergent mutations in the AR (androgen receptor)
gene have been identified in these patients and present a possible
mechanism underlying the development of castration-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC). However, since most patient have a biopsy performed only
at the time of diagnosis, in general, representative tumor tissue sample
giving real time information about the disease status from CRPC patients
are missing. The detection of AR mutations in circulating tumor DNA
(ctDNA) may be a potential alternative.In this study we validated a
locked nucleic acid (LNA) clamp assay for the detection of the AR
mutation W741C, known to lead to bicalutamide resistance. The LNA
clamp-mediated PCR is based on the blockade of the wildtype (wt) DNA by
the LNA, RNA monomers with a modified backbone leading to an increased
thermal stability. The identification of the qRT-PCR-enriched mutated DNA
(mut) was subsequently performed by sequencing.In a first step, we
optimized the annealing and elongation temperatures as well as the
concentrations of LNA construct and DNA necessary to achieve the optimal
blocker efficiency for the wt, but avoiding blockage of the mut.
Therefore we used different concentrations of the genomic wt DNA from the
prostate cancer cell line LAPC4. A cell line (KuCaP-1) harboring the
W741C mutation was obtained from the group of O. Ogawa (Kyoto
University). Using optimized parameters, we were successful in detecting
mutated DNA in a 1000x background of wt DNA. In a second step, we applied
the developed assay to clinical plasma samples of 19 CRPC patients, all
of whom were receiving bicalutamide treatment except patients 3, 15 and
18. The ctDNA was isolated from plasma using the QIAamp Circulating
Nucleic Acid Kit from Qiagen. Three out of nineteen patients were
classified as mutation-positive (PID 4, 5, 11). The availability and
subsequent sequencing of ctDNA from patient 5 confirmed the existence of
the bicalutamide resistance W741 mutation. Due to the small amount of
available DNA, sequencing of the mutated ctDNA of patient 4 failed. The
ctDNA of patient 11 harbored another SNP in codon 741 leading to a false
positive result. In conclusion, our work led to the successful
development of a potent LNA clamp-mediated qRT-PCR method for the
detection of the bicalutamide resistance mutation W741 in ctDNA of plasma
samples.

