Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of clonally expanded HBV DNA integration sites as a
marker for early detection of HBV related HCC.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the 5th most frequent cancer worldwide,
has a 5-year survival rate of 14% because it is difficult to diagnose at
its curative stages. The goal of this project is to determine if the
detection of clonally expanded HBV DNA integration sites can be used as a
marker for early detection of HBV related HCC (HBV-HCC) in order to
improve its prognosisHepatitis B virus (HBV) infections are associated
with over 80% of HCC cases worldwide. Upon infection, the HBV genome
integrates into the host chromosome at a random site, thus creating a
unique genetic signature for each HBV infected cell. Certain HBV infected
cells undergo progressive uncontrolled clonal expansion leading to the
development of tumors, resulting in an over expansion of the unique HBV
integration sites making them the predominant or major HBV integration
sites (MIS).Cell-free circulating DNA from cancer patients reflects the
characteristics of the tumor DNA. We and others have shown that urine
contains DNA from the circulation and can be used as a source for
cell-free circulating DNA. Successful detection of HBV integration sites
in the circulation of HBV-HCC patients has not been demonstrated. In
order to detect cell free circulating HBV DNA integration sites, a
targeted enriched Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) assay was developed.
Targeted enrichment was performed using an in-solution hybridization
platform with biotinylated HBV RNA baits surrounding the HBV DNA
nucleotide positions 1571 to 1960, the most frequent HBV breakpoint
region. The assay was tested using library constructed DNA controls:
Hep3B, which contains integrated DNA, and HepG2, which contains no HBV
DNA. To determine the amount of captured DNA containing HBV DNA, the
captured DNA was quantified for HBV containing DNA and total captured
DNA. Almost all captured DNA contained HBV DNA. To confirm targeted
capture of integrated HBV DNA, the captured DNA was cloned followed by
sequencing. 3 out of 3 clones that were sequenced contain integrated HBV
DNA. This assay demonstrated targeted capture and enrichment of HBV
integration sites. This assay will be tested for sensitivity in detecting
HBV integration sites and used to establish the criteria for the
appearance of MIS as a biomarker for HBV-HCC. Overall, if successful,
this cancer related HBV DNA marker would offer a high specificity and
sensitivity in screening for HBV-HCC.

