Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diet-induced obesity increases tumor levels of MCP-1, macrophage
infiltration and microvessel density in a murine model of breast cancer.


Epidemiological studies indicate that obesity is associated with poor
outcomes in breast cancer. In our previous work, we demonstrated that a
chronic consumption of a high fat diet increases solid tumor growth and
metastasis in a spontaneous mammary cancer mouse model. In addition to
higher tumor burdens and rates of metastases, mice fed a high fat diet
showed elevated levels of adipocyte derived monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1 (MCP-1) in the blood. We hypothesized that diet-induced obesity
promotes mammary carcinogenesis by inducing an inflammatory and
tumor-supportive microenvironment. We further compared chow fed lean
MMTV(PyMT) mice with those fed 45.0% (w/w) high fat (HF) to investigate
the impact of body adiposity and dietary nutrient overload on levels of
MCP-1 in tissue, tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) and for the degree
of microvessel density. We analyzed early and late carcinoma stage tumors
together with adipose tissue from mice fed HF and control diets in order
to identify possible sources of MCP-1 production. MCP-1 levels in tumors
of mice differed significantly by cancer stage and diet, with late stage
tumors showing more MCP-1 (PEpidemiological studies indicate that obesity
is associated with poor outcomes in breast cancer. In our previous work,
we demonstrated that a chronic consumption of a high fat diet increases
solid tumor growth and metastasis in a spontaneous mammary cancer mouse
model. In addition to higher tumor burdens and rates of metastases, mice
fed a high fat diet showed elevated levels of adipocyte derived monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) in the blood. We hypothesized that
diet-induced obesity promotes mammary carcinogenesis by inducing an
inflammatory and tumor-supportive microenvironment. We further compared
chow fed lean MMTV(PyMT) mice with those fed 45.0% (w/w) high fat (HF) to
investigate the impact of body adiposity and dietary nutrient overload on
levels of MCP-1 in tissue, tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) and for
the degree of microvessel density. We analyzed early and late carcinoma
stage tumors together with adipose tissue from mice fed HF and control
diets in order to identify possible sources of MCP-1 production. MCP-1
levels in tumors of mice differed significantly by cancer stage and diet,
with late stage tumors showing more MCP-1 (P<0.05). Moreover, MCP-1
production was elevated in adipose tissue of obese mice compared to lean
mice. Tumors and adjacent adipose were stained with CD68 and the numbers
of TAMs were quantified. Significantly more TAMs (PEpidemiological
studies indicate that obesity is associated with poor outcomes in breast
cancer. In our previous work, we demonstrated that a chronic consumption
of a high fat diet increases solid tumor growth and metastasis in a
spontaneous mammary cancer mouse model. In addition to higher tumor
burdens and rates of metastases, mice fed a high fat diet showed elevated
levels of adipocyte derived monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) in
the blood. We hypothesized that diet-induced obesity promotes mammary
carcinogenesis by inducing an inflammatory and tumor-supportive
microenvironment. We further compared chow fed lean MMTV(PyMT) mice with
those fed 45.0% (w/w) high fat (HF) to investigate the impact of body
adiposity and dietary nutrient overload on levels of MCP-1 in tissue,
tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) and for the degree of microvessel
density. We analyzed early and late carcinoma stage tumors together with
adipose tissue from mice fed HF and control diets in order to identify
possible sources of MCP-1 production. MCP-1 levels in tumors of mice
differed significantly by cancer stage and diet, with late stage tumors
showing more MCP-1 (P<0.05). Moreover, MCP-1 production was elevated in
adipose tissue of obese mice compared to lean mice. Tumors and adjacent
adipose were stained with CD68 and the numbers of TAMs were quantified.
Significantly more TAMs (P<0.05) were found within tumor beds and more
crown-like structures were evident in adipose tissue from obese mice at
both early and late stage carcinoma. Tumor beds also showed increased
microvessel density when stained with CD31. In summary, diet-induced
obesity increased levels of MCP-1 in tumors and adipose with more
macrophage infiltration and greater vascular density evident in mammary
tumor beds. Taken together, these findings suggest that high body
adiposity caused by diet-induced changes promote an inflammatory and
tumor-supportive microenvironment in breast cancer. NIH P20 RR016440, P30
R032138/GM103488, and P20 RR016477

