Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determination of free bisphenol A (BPA) concentrations in breast
milk of U.S. women using a sensitive LC/MS/MS method.


Bisphenol A (BPA) is a synthetic compound with structural similarities to
the hormone 17-estradiol. BPA is a major component of polycarbonate
plastics and epoxy resins, which are used in the production of plastic
containers, metal can linings, dental sealants, thermal receipt paper and
household paper products. Incomplete polymerization of BPA as well as
exposure to high temperatures and acidic or basic conditions can cause
BPA monomers to leach from these products. Therefore, most people are
exposed to BPA and levels have been quantified in human urine, blood,
saliva, amniotic fluid, placental tissue, colostrum and breast milk.BPA
is a weak estrogen and is considered a potential endocrine disrupting
compound in humans. Initially it was thought that BPA was rapidly
conjugated and excreted from the body. However, free BPA has been
detected in human samples indicating that humans are internally exposed
to estrogenically active BPA. The length of time that free BPA remains in
circulation in the body and the extent to which it accumulates in
tissues, such as the breast, is unknown.Given the known sources of BPA
exposure, it is likely that lifestyle habits lead to varying levels of
BPA exposure. Repeated use of products that contain or are packaged in
materials with a high BPA content can lead to higher exposure rates. The
same lifestyle choices resulting in high BPA exposure may also lead to
high body mass index (BMI); for example, frequent consumption of
carbonated soft drinks is associated with a high BMI in women and these
beverages are often packaged in plastic bottles or metal cans that may
contain BPA. Two recent studies have demonstrated a relationship between
BPA levels in urine and obesity in adults and children.Because of the
difficulty in measuring BPA in a complex fatty matrix such as milk, few
studies have reported on BPA levels in breast milk, and none have
examined the relationship between BMI and BPA. In the present study we
optimized a sensitive method for assessing free BPA in breast milk and
determined whether the levels of BPA were related to characteristics
including age, race, BMI, child's age, and number of children nursed. BPA
was separated from breast milk samples from 21 nursing women in the U.S.
by solid-phase extraction and subsequently analyzed by HPLC-MS/MS. Free
BPA was detected in 71% (15/21) of the breast milk samples. The method
detection limit in water was determined to be 0.11 ng/mL. Free BPA
concentrations were detected ranging from below the method detection
limit to 10.81 ng/mL (median 0.49, mean 3.06, SD 3.85 ng/mL). No
statistical difference in BPA concentrations was observed between women
with a low BMI ( 27.00, n = 11). However, there was a significant
association between BPA concentration and race. Caucasian women (n = 14)
had significantly higher levels of free BPA in their breast milk than
non-Caucasian women (n = 7) (Two-tailed test: t = 2.54, p 27.00, n = 11).
However, there was a significant association between BPA concentration
and race. Caucasian women (n = 14) had significantly higher levels of
free BPA in their breast milk than non-Caucasian women (n = 7)
(Two-tailed test: t = 2.54, p < 0.05).

