Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disabeled-2 (Dab-2) modulates platelet-cancer cell interactions
through its sulfatide binding domain.


Platelets role in cancer progression and metastasis has largely been
attributed to platelet-mediated enhancement of tumor cell survival,
extravasation (exiting form capillaries and entering organs), and
angiogenesis. Correlations exist between the ability of some tumor cells
to aggregate platelets in vitro and their metastatic potential in vivo
that it is manifested as a hypercoagulable state found in most cancer
patients. We have identified a tumor suppressor molecule (Dab-2) that it
is released upon platelet activation and that modulates the extent of
blood clotting. Our results show Dab-2 is released from alpha-granules in
the platelet to the membrane surface where specifically binds to the
integrin receptor, thus inhibiting platelet aggregation. Binding of Dab-2
to integrins is modulated by sulfatides, a form of glycosphingolipid that
accumulate in platelet membrane and effectively compete for Dab-2 levels.
Interestingly, we found that the N-terminal region of Dab-2 specifically
binds to sulfatides through two conserved sulfatide-binding sites. Upon
activation, sulfatides protect Dab-2 from thrombin cleavage, facilitate
its internalization and modulate the surface expression of P-selectin, a
coagulation protein needed for stabilization of platelet aggregates.
P-selectin also mediates both tumor cell adhesion to vascular endothelial
cells and the interaction between activated platelets and cancer cells
(emboli) during metastasis. Interestingly, our data show that
Dab-2/sulfatide recognition influences the stability of platelet
aggregates heterotypically with cancer cells through sulfatide binding
and, indirectly, by controlling P-selectin levels. Thus, we hypothesize
that manipulation of Dab-2 function in response of platelet activation
will impact emboli formation offering an alternative route for
therapeutic strategies aimed to control metastatic processes.

