Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role and mechanism of MUC16 in the pathogenesis of pancreatic
cancer.


Background: MUC16/ CA125 is a high-molecular weight O-glycosylated
protein that has been shown to be dysregulated and aberrantly expressed
during the progression of several malignant conditions including
pancreatic cancer (PC). MUC16 is the gold standard tumor marker used in
clinics for detecting ovarian cancer. CA125 levels have been shown to be
elevated in PC but its functional significance in PC remains elusive.
Hence we hypothesize that MUC16 plays an important role in the
proliferation and metastasis of PC.Materials and methods: MUC16
expression was analyzed in 14 human PC cell lines and stable knockdown
clones of MUC16 were established in Capan1 and Colo357 PC cell lines by
retroviral transfection using the shRNA construct
(pSUPER-Retro-MUC16-sh). Growth kinetics, motility and tumorogenicity
assays were done on both MUC16 knocked down cells and scramble cells. In
addition we also analyzed the expression of Muc16 during PC progression
using the spontaneous mouse model (KrasG12D;Pdx1-Cre and
KrasG12D;Pdx1-Cre; Trp53R172H) to identify the role of Muc16 in
facilitating PC progression.Results: MUC16 is not expressed in the normal
pancreatic ducts or acini; however, a strong expression is observed in PC
tissues. Further a similar observation was obtained in the spontaneous
mouse model wherein expression of Muc16 increased in tandem with PC
progression. PC cells with stably silenced MUC16 exhibited significantly
decreased proliferation, motility (in vitro), tumorigenicity and
metastasis (in vivo) when compared to scrambled RNA transfected cells. In
addition, MUC16 knockdown cells accumulated in the G1/S phase of the cell
cycle indicating that MUC16 might play a role in cell cycle regulation.
Western blot analysis of MUC16 knockdown cells with Cyclin E, p21 and p27
showed a decrease in their expression indicating that MUC16 could be
playing an important role during PC cell cycle progression.Conclusion:
Our results show that MUC16 expression is aberrantly upregulated in PC
tissues and plays a key role in the proliferation and metastasis of PC
cells as inferred from the various in vitro and in vivo assays. Further
MUC16 may be play a significant in facilitating cell cycle progression as
Cyclin E, p21 and p27 levels were altered when MUC16 was knocked down. In
conclusion, our results reveal that MUC16 is differentially expressed in
PC and could be a potential player facilitating distant metastasis in PC.
Further studies need to be done to determine the specific role of MUC16
in the metastasis of PC.

