Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benzo(a)pyrene exposure increases expression of HPV oncoproteins:
a potential co-factor for increased cervical cancer among Northern Plains
American Indian women.


Introduction: Cervical cancer remains one of the most common and deadly
cancers in women worldwide. There is a significant health disparity in
the incidence and mortality of cervical cancer between American Indian
and Caucasian women residing on the Northern Plains. The development of
cervical cancer is closely associated with persistent infection with high
risk HPV genotypes. Additionally, exposure to cigarette smoke is also a
risk factor for cervical cancer. Our studies indicate that Northern
Plains American Indian women have a high rate of both HPV infection and
smoking. Our studies also show that American Indian women who tested
positive for HPV were more likely to have an abnormal PAP test than HPV
positive Caucasian women. While smoking is known to increase the risk of
developing cervical cancer, the molecular interactions between HPV and
smoke carcinogens are not well known. Herein, we determine the cellular
and molecular effects of benzo-a-pyrene (BaP) (a carcinogen in cigarette
smoke) on HPV oncoprotein expression in cervical cancer cells and
elucidate the role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) in this
process.Methods: The effects of BaP on HPV oncoproteins and AhR mediated
molecular events was determined using cervical cancer cell line models
and real time PCR, immunoblotting, immunostaining and flow cytometry
analyses. The level of AhR activation in normal cervix and in cervical
cancer tissues was also determined with immunohistochemical
analysis.Results: Our results indicate that exposure to BaP, a tobacco
carcinogen, activates the AhR pathway in a time and dose dependent
manner, as determined by an increase in nuclear localization of AhR and
increased expression of cytochrome p450 1A. Expsoure to BaP ultimately
results in increased expression of HPV oncogenes. Importantly, curcumin,
a natural compound, attenuated the BaP induced increase in the expression
of HPV E7 oncoprotein. Interestingly, both cytoplasmic and nuclear
localization of AhR is increased in cervical cancer tissue compared to
normal cervical epithelium.Conclusion: Taken together this data imply
that a high prevalence of HPV infection and a high exposure rate to BaP
may synergize to increase the incidence and mortality of cervical cancer
in American Indian women residing in the Northern Plains. We have
identified curcumin as a potent compound that may be effective in
attenuating oncogenic HPV infection. However, increased cervical cancer
screening is warranted in addition to HPV vaccine and use of
chemopreventive agents, such as curcumin, to effectively decrease the
cervical cancer health disparity in Northern Plains American Indian women.

