Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An RNAi-based functional classification of lung cancer reveals
recurring subgroups strongly correlated with EMT status.


Introduction: Personalized therapeutic approaches which stratify patients
into subgroups based on mutation, amplification, or expression profiles
have proven effective. Previously, we showed that mRNA expression
profiling of nuclear receptors (NRs) segregated NSCLC patients into
prognostic groups. Using a gene-library knockdown strategy, we aim to
demonstrate the diagnostic and therapeutic value of NRs and their
co-regulators (Co-Regs).Aims and Methods: We used a large panel of lung
and breast cell lines of various types to develop a patient
stratification scheme based on functional/survival response to pooled
siRNA mini library screens. The first siRNA mini-library consists of 48
NR and 72 CoReg targets. Screens were performed in triplicate across a
panel of 54 lung cancers (NSCLC and SCLC), 20 breast cancers, 6
immortalized human bronchial epithelial cell lines (HBECs), and a series
of oncogenically progressed HBECs. Each triplicate assay was repeated
three times using optimized transfection conditions and followed by
statistical analysis (r>0.83 for replicate screens). A second siRNA
library targeting 53 chromatin remodelers, 26 jumonji enzymes, and 23
palmitoyl transferases was also screened against these same lines using
the same protocol.Results and Conclusions:1) Response (inhibition or
stimulation of growth) to any given siRNA knockdown was heterogeneous
across the panel, reflecting the high degree of genetic/functional
variability between cancer lines.2) 85% of the siRNA knockdowns reduced
viability in at least one tumor line. Several knockdowns demonstrated
selective killing of a significant portion of the cancer lines but not
the normal HBECs. Many knockdowns differentially affected subsets of cell
lines (suggesting possible personalized therapeutics) while others
uniformly affected nearly the entire panel.3) Screening a series of
oncogenically progressed HBECs (with p53, KRAS, LKB1) revealed new
vulnerabilities detected by a change in response to NR/CoReg knockdown,
highlighting the underlying biological changes accompanying
oncogenesis.4) Unexpectedly, we found that classification of the tumor
cells by the NR/CoReg mini-library was similar to the classification
derived from the second library. The two libraries independently produced
a similar subgrouping of the tumor panel. Combined analysis of the two
libraries found similar groups.5) Although there was no obvious
correlation between oncogenotypes or mRNA expression of individual NRs or
CoRegs, one subgroup (n=26) consisted almost exclusively of lines that
had undergone EMT, suggesting possible subtypes of mesenchymal cells.We
conclude that siRNA-minilibrary screens targeting NRs, CoRegs, and
chromatin remodeling genes provide a new functional classification of
lung and breast cancer with strong translational potential. Work funded
by CPRIT.

