Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deletion of p21/Cdkn1a confers protective effect against prostate
tumorigenesis in Transgenic Adenocarcinoma of the Mouse Prostate model.


Mutations in tumor suppressor genes and proto-oncogenes, and
constitutively active mitogenic signaling are known to cause cell cycle
deregulation and uncontrolled proliferation in tumorigenesis. Cyclin
dependent kinase inhibitors (CDKIs), p21 and p27, play a determining role
in G1-S transition by regulating cyclin dependent kinase (CDK) activity.
While lower protein p27 expression is often associated with poor
prognosis in PCa, the prognostic significance of p21 in PCa is still
controversial. Whereas up regulation of p21 by anticancer agents has been
shown to induce growth arrest in several androgen-dependent and
-independent PCa cell lines, in many cases, the elevated p21 levels in
human PCa tissues have been correlated with higher Gleason score, poor
survival and increased recurrence rate of the disease. However, some
reports have also associated high p21 levels with metastasis-free
survival in PCa patients. Thus, these mixed observations warrant
extensive studies to examine the roles of p21 molecule in PCa
progression. Accordingly, in the present study, transgenic mice harboring
p21/Cdkn1a homozygous deletion (p21-/-) were crossed with the transgenic
adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) mice so as to characterize
the in vivo consequences of p21 deletion on prostate tumor initiation and
progression. At 24 weeks of age, necropsy was performed across the
groups; the lower urogenital tract (LUT) weight of the p21-/-/TRAMP (male
TRAMP mice with homozygous deletion of p21) mice was found to be
significantly lower than the LUT weights of both p21+/-/TRAMP (male TRAMP
mice with heterozygous deletion of p21) and male TRAMP mice. Detailed
histopathological analysis revealed the same trend as gross pathology
showing less aggressiveness in prostates of p21-/-/TRAMP. Importantly,
there was a marked difference in tumor incidence between TRAMP and
p21/TRAMP male mice. A significantly higher incidence of low-grade
prostatic intraepithelial lesions with a concomitant reduction in
adenocarcinoma incidence was observed in p21-/-/TRAMP mice compared to
TRAMP mice. In addition, where TRAMP mice showed the presence of poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma lesions, no such lesions were observed in
p21/TRAMP transgenic mice. Specifically, there was a significant
reduction in the severity of lesions in both p21-/-/TRAMP and
p21+/-/TRAMP mice compared to TRAMP mice; a better protective effect due
to homozygous p21 deletion was observed in p21-/-/TRAMP mice. Overall,
these results suggest the possibility that intact p21 expression is
associated with PCa aggressiveness, while its decreased levels may in
fact confer protection against prostate tumorigenesis.

