Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mucosal imprinting of vaccine induced-CD8+T cells is crucial to
inhibit mucosal tumors.


Although many human cancers are located in mucosal sites, most cancer
vaccines are tested against subcutaneous tumors in preclinical models.
The utility of preferentially inducing an anti-tumor immune response in
the mucosal anatomic site of tumors has never been addressed. We
therefore wondered whether mucosa-specific homing instructions to the
immune system might influence mucosal tumor outgrowth. For this purpose,
we set up original orthotopic models of head and neck and lung cancers
monitored by magnetic resonance imaging or luciferase based in vivo
optical imaging and vaccine based on a non replicative delivery system,
the B subunit of Shiga toxin (STxB) as mucosal vector which has
previously been shown to target antigen to dendritic cells. We showed
that the growth of orthotopic head and neck or lung cancers expressing
the E7 protein from HPV16 was only inhibited, when a cancer vaccine was
delivered by the intranasal (i.n) mucosal and not the intramuscular (i.m)
route. This anti-tumor effect was dependent on mucosal CD8+T cells as :
i) Only a vaccine composed of STxB coupled to an E7 derived polypeptide
(STxB-E7), but not the free E7 polypeptide elicited mucosal CD8+T cells.
This mucosal induction of anti-E7 CD8+T cells, but not the systemic
(spleen) specific anti-E7 CD8+T cells correlated with mucosal tumor
protection. ii) A greater mucosal tumor infiltration of CD8+T cells was
detected 7 days after tumor graft in mice that had been previously
intranasally immunized with STxB-E7, than in mice vaccinated by the i.m.
route. iii) CD8+T cell-depleted mice vaccinated with STxB-E7 by the i.n.
route died before 20 days, whereas mice survived more than 6 months
without CD8 depletion. As control, both routes of vaccine administration
controlled the growth of subcutaneous tumors and elicited anti-E7
specific CD8+T cells in the spleen. To explain this finding, we
demonstrated that only i.n. vaccination elicited mucosal specific CD8+T
cells expressing the mucosal integrin CD49a. Blockade of CD49a decreased
intratumoral CD8+T cell infiltration and the efficacy of cancer vaccine
on mucosal tumor. We then showed that after intranasal vaccination, only
dendritic cell from lung parenchyma, but not from spleen induced the
expression of CD49a on co-cultured specific CD8+T cells.
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes from human mucosal lung cancer also
expressed CD49a at higher levels than TIL from non mucosal tumors,
supporting the relevance and possible extrapolation of these results in
humans. We thus identified a link between the route of vaccination and
the induction of a mucosal homing program on induced CD8+T cells
controlling their trafficking with a direct application on the efficacy
of cancer vaccine to control mucosal tumors.

