Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic microRNA-31 as prognostic potential biomarker in
histologically negative surgical margins of head and neck cancer patients.


The development of locoregional recurrence is the main reason for
treatment failure in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) and
the remaining of tumor cells in surgical margins is associated with
recurrence. Surgical margins are considered negative based on histologic
assessment of the pathological specimen. However, this method lacks
sensitivity in identifying cells that already started malignant
transformation but have not yet developed a pathologic phenotype. We
investigated the usefulness of assessing the expression of microRNA-31
for the detection of molecular alterations in histologically negative
surgical margins (HNSM) and determine the correlation of these
tumor-related alterations with clinical and prognostic parameters.
MicroRNAs are endogenously expressed non-coding RNAs that have important
biological and pathological functions. The microRNA-31 was found markedly
upregulated in different malignancies, including HNSCC. The microRNA-31
expression was determined by qRT-PCR in HNSCC (n=19), HNSM (n=37) and
normal mucosa (n=10). According to our results, 76% of tumor samples and
30% of the HNSM specimens were positive for microRNA-31 overexpression.
Moreover, the overexpression of this microRNA in the HNSM was associated
with perineural invasion (p The development of locoregional recurrence is
the main reason for treatment failure in head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas (HNSCC) and the remaining of tumor cells in surgical margins
is associated with recurrence. Surgical margins are considered negative
based on histologic assessment of the pathological specimen. However,
this method lacks sensitivity in identifying cells that already started
malignant transformation but have not yet developed a pathologic
phenotype. We investigated the usefulness of assessing the expression of
microRNA-31 for the detection of molecular alterations in histologically
negative surgical margins (HNSM) and determine the correlation of these
tumor-related alterations with clinical and prognostic parameters.
MicroRNAs are endogenously expressed non-coding RNAs that have important
biological and pathological functions. The microRNA-31 was found markedly
upregulated in different malignancies, including HNSCC. The microRNA-31
expression was determined by qRT-PCR in HNSCC (n=19), HNSM (n=37) and
normal mucosa (n=10). According to our results, 76% of tumor samples and
30% of the HNSM specimens were positive for microRNA-31 overexpression.
Moreover, the overexpression of this microRNA in the HNSM was associated
with perineural invasion (p < 0.05 Fisher's exact tests) and showed a
tendency to correlates with poor disease-free survival (p The development
of locoregional recurrence is the main reason for treatment failure in
head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) and the remaining of tumor
cells in surgical margins is associated with recurrence. Surgical margins
are considered negative based on histologic assessment of the
pathological specimen. However, this method lacks sensitivity in
identifying cells that already started malignant transformation but have
not yet developed a pathologic phenotype. We investigated the usefulness
of assessing the expression of microRNA-31 for the detection of molecular
alterations in histologically negative surgical margins (HNSM) and
determine the correlation of these tumor-related alterations with
clinical and prognostic parameters. MicroRNAs are endogenously expressed
non-coding RNAs that have important biological and pathological
functions. The microRNA-31 was found markedly upregulated in different
malignancies, including HNSCC. The microRNA-31 expression was determined
by qRT-PCR in HNSCC (n=19), HNSM (n=37) and normal mucosa (n=10).
According to our results, 76% of tumor samples and 30% of the HNSM
specimens were positive for microRNA-31 overexpression. Moreover, the
overexpression of this microRNA in the HNSM was associated with
perineural invasion (p < 0.05 Fisher's exact tests) and showed a tendency
to correlates with poor disease-free survival (p < 0,09 log-rank).These
findings demonstrate that the overexpression of microRNA-31 in
histologically negative surgical margins is a frequent event. The use of
qRT-PCR may be an useful tool in detecting actually negative HNSCC
surgical margins and the overexpression of microRNA-31 in these margins
could be helpful in the identification of patients with worst
outcome.Supported by Fapesp (Grant 2011/01919-2).

