Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERR ligand DY131 regulation of the hedgehog signaling pathway by
modulation of Akt phosphorylation.


Nuclear receptor family member, Estrogen Related Receptor (ERR), and
hedgehog (Hh)-signaling are reported to be significant for both
tumorigenesis and stem cell maintenance. ERR itself is a crucial factor
in inducing pluripotent stem cells. Here we investigate the hypothesis
that ERR can interact with Hh signaling pathway, and modulation of ERR
can influence Hh signaling. NIH3T3 and HEK293 cells, transfected with a
Gli response element driven luciferase reporter, were treated with
different concentrations of DY131, a synthetic ERR ligand, in the
presence or absence of exogenous ERR. We monitored the Gli reporter
activity, as well as Gli1, Akt and phosphorylated Akt via western
blot.Results: We found that DY131 inhibited Hh signaling activity when
the pathway was activated by hedgehog peptide-conditioned medium, or the
Smoothened Agonist (SAG), with an IC50 of 500nM. We also found that in
HEK293 cells, where Gli reporter activity cannot be activated by either
conditioned medium or SAG, DY131 dose dependently increased both
endogenous and exogenous Gli1-induced reporter activity up to 4 fold. In
addition, the transfection of ERR potentiated DY131s effect on Gli
reporter activity up to 7 fold. Western blot results, which are
consistent with Gli reporter activity in both cell lines, showed that
when Hh signaling is activated by Hedgehog peptide-conditioned medium,
DY131 decreased Gli1 protein concentration; however when Hh signaling is
not activated by conditioned medium, DY131 increases the concentration of
Gli1 protein. Phosphorylated Akt, which is a non-canonical activator of
Gli1, is up-regulated when Gli1 concentration increases, and
down-regulated when the cells are treated with DY131.Conclusion: Our
results suggest a new level of regulation by ERR on the Hh-signaling
pathway. ERR, induced by DY131, can modulate Akt's regulation of Gli1.
Additionally, our results indicate that modulation of ERR, via ERR
selective drugs like DY131, may serve as a new target for Hh-driven
cancer treatment.

