Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smad6 upregulation provides an alternative mechanism for BMP
inactivation in SMAD4 wild type pancreatic cancers.


Introduction: Genetic inactivation of SMAD4, a central mediator of TGF-
superfamily signaling, is significantly correlated with metastatic
behavior in pancreatic cancer patients. However, because some patients
with pancreatic cancer have genetically intact TGF- and BMP pathway
components, we investigated the role of alternative mechanisms of
inactivation in promoting pancreatic cancer metastasis.Methods: Eighteen
cell lines for which the genetic status of all members of the TGF-
pathway were known were used in this study. TGF- signaling levels were
analyzed in each cell line using a luciferase reporter system under the
control of a Smad Binding Element (SBE). Immunoblotting was performed on
protein lysates from pancreatic cancer cell lines of known genotype. Cell
lines that express high levels of Smad6 were transiently transfected with
shRNA constructs targeting Smad6; cell lines that express low levels of
Smad6 were transiently transfected with a construct to constitutively
express Smad6. The effects of Smad6 modulation were assessed by
proliferation assay, migration assay, and invasion assay.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on primary and metastatic pancreatic
cancer tissues and staining intensity correlated to clinical
data.Results: Functional TGF- and BMP signaling were eliminated in cell
lines with known SMAD4 inactivation, as well as in several cell lines in
which these pathways remain intact. Immunoblotting for known TGF-
superfamily antagonists in these cell lines revealed differential
expression of Smad6, an inhibitory Smad. Modulation of Smad6 levels in
vitro suggests that Smad6 overexpression contributes to increased levels
of proliferation, migration, and invasion in SMAD4-intact cell lines.
Overexpression of Smad6 did not restore TGF- signaling, but did increase
BMP response. Immunohistochemistry for Smad6 in patient samples revealed
a nuclear localization pattern, suggesting that the pro-oncogenic roles
of Smad6 are mediated by its ability to act as a transcription factor.
High Smad6 levels correlated with worse prognosis and metastatic behavior
among SMAD4-intact pancreatic cancers.Conclusions: Smad6, an inhibitory
Smad, is differentially expressed in pancreatic cancer, both in cell
lines and patient samples. High levels of Smad6 in patients at autopsy
associate with widespread metastasis, irrespective of SMAD4 status.
Preliminary studies in vitro support a metastasis-promoting function of
Smad6: Smad6 overexpression is associated with increased levels of
proliferation, migration, and invasion in SMAD4-intact pancreatic cancer
cell lines. Experiments are ongoing to determine the mechanism through
which Smad6 is acting in pancreatic cancer.

