Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combined activation of MET signaling and PKC is sufficient to
induce tumors in mouse skin.


Aberrant activation of MET signaling has been identified in multiple
cancers but its relation to cancer-associated inflammation has not been
explored. To address this issue in the context of skin carcinogenesis, a
double transgenic mouse model (MT1-HGF/ K5-PKC or DT) was generated.
K5-PKC mice that overexpress PKC in basal keratinocytes develop a strong
neutrophilic cutaneous inflammatory response upon topical TPA
(12-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate) application. These mice were crossed
with MT1-HGF mice that overexpress HGF under a metallothionein promoter
to create MT1-HGF/ K5-PKC double transgenic (DT) mice and their
respective controls. We observed that DT animals were very sensitive to
squamous carcinogenesis. Using a low promoting dose of TPA that primarily
activates PKC in K5-PKC or DT mice yielded an average of 6 tumors per
mouse in the DT group; single transgenic K5-PKC or MT-HGF mice developed
an average of 1 tumor while WT developed none at this TPA dose. We
hypothesize that in DT mice, keratinocyte-derived HGF synergizes with PKC
to drive tumor promotion and increase tumor growth. Primary keratinocytes
derived from MT1-HGF or DT mice display a phenotype reminiscent of EGFR
activated cells: increased expression of pro-inflammatory factors,
upregulation of Keratin 8 (K8) and downregulation of K1 and K10 mRNAs.
Indeed western blot analysis shows that EGFR is transactivated in MT1-HGF
and DT keratinocytes and cell proliferation is elevated as well but not
in K5-PKC or WT keratinocytes. The release of CXCL1,a hallmark of RAS
transformation, is augmented in RAS-keratinocyte cell culture
supernatants with MT1-HGF and DT keratinocytes producing the most in the
absence of RAS-transduction. Blockade of EGFR or IL-1 activity can
mitigate the HGF-induced RAS-phenotype. K5-PKC and DT mice exhibit the
same acute inflammatory response and regenerative epidermal hyperplasia
following low dose TPA treatment. When promoted for 10 weeks with TPA,
100% of DT mice but none of the single transgenic controls developed
squamous papillomas in the absence of DMBA-mediated initiation. Our data
suggest that the synergistic activity of Met and PKC can substitute for
the lack of RAS mutation during skin carcinogenesis. It remains to be
determined if that mechanism could provide an alternate route to
transformation in human skin tumors lacking RAS mutations.

