Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Succession of transiently active TIC clones drives long-term human
pancreatic cancer progression .


Despite accumulating evidence indicating a pivotal role of
tumor-initiating cells (TIC) in tumor progression and metastases
formation of pancreatic cancer (PC), very little is known about the
clonal TIC dynamics within PC tumors in vivo. It is unclear whether the
high aggressiveness of PC is driven by a homogeneous population of
self-renewing TIC or whether distinct classes or activation states of TIC
drive long-term disease progression. To address this we tracked the
clonal contribution of individual TIC to tumor formation in
vivo.Serum-free adherent cultures were established allowing enrichment of
PC TIC without restriction to a certain phenotype. These cultures grow as
3-dimensional epithelial colonies with tight cell-to-cell contacts und
reliably form subcutaneous tumors in NSG mice. To induce differentiation
of TIC, FBS was added and FGF2, FGF10 and Nodal were withdrawn. Under
these conditions, irregular shaped cells form a monolayer and down
regulate markers previously described for TIC or normal pancreatic
progenitors. Strikingly, despite profound changes in morphology and
marker expression tumor initiation and self-renewal of TIC in serial
transplantation were unchanged. Moreover, sorted CD133+ and CD133 cells
equally efficient formed tumors containing similar proportions of CD133+
in vivo. Together these data indicate an unexpected phenotypic plasticity
of TIC in PC.To determine the clonal kinetics of individual self-renewing
TIC in vivo, early passage serum-free cultures from 3 patients were
transduced with a lentiviral vector (LV) and serially transplanted. LV
stably integrate into the host cell genome resulting in TIC clone
specific fusion sequences which were identified by highly sensitive
LAM-PCR and high throughput sequencing. In primary mice, 0.003-0.113% of
all transduced cells contributed actively to tumor formation.
Unexpectedly, in subsequent generations tumor formation was mainly driven
by distinct TIC clones not detectable in earlier but recruited to tumor
formation in later generations. Moreover, individual primary xenografts
generated pairs of secondary tumors with very little overlap between
clonal compositions. Mathematical modeling indicates strong changes in
proliferative activity of individual, otherwise homogenous TIC which
predominantly produce non-tumorigenic progeny with very limited
self-renewal.These data indicate that long-term progression of PC is
driven by a succession of transiently active TIC generating tumor cells
in temporally restricted bursts. The recruitment of inactive TIC clones
to tumor formation after serial transplantation points to a
context-dependent regulation of TIC activity within the growing tumor.
Further understanding the mechanisms regulating the balance between
activated and resting states of TIC may allow developing specific
treatment strategies targeting this most relevant cell population in PC.

