Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A cell-permeant amiloride derivative induces caspase-independent,
AIF-mediated programmed necrotic death of breast cancer cells.


Amiloride is a potassium-sparing diuretic that has been used as an
anti-kaliuretic for the chronic management of hypertension and heart
failure. Several studies have identified a potential anti-cancer role for
amiloride, however the mechanisms underlying its anti-tumor effects
remain to be fully delineated. Our group previously demonstrated that
amiloride triggers caspase-independent cytotoxic cell death in human
glioblastoma cell lines but not in primary astrocytes. To delineate the
cellular mechanisms underlying amiloride's anti-cancer cytotoxicity, cell
permeant and cell impermeant derivatives of amiloride were synthesized
that exhibit markedly different potencies in cancer cell death assays.
Here we compare the cytotoxicities of 5-benzylglycinyl amiloride
(UCD38B), and its free acid 5-glycinyl amiloride (UCD74A) toward human
breast cancer cells. UCD74A exhibits poor cell permeability and has very
little cytotoxic activity, while UCD38B is cell permeant and induces the
caspase-independent death of proliferating and non-proliferating breast
cancer cells. UCD38B treatment of human breast cancer cells induces
autophagy, reflected in LC3 conversion, however this does not appear to
be the cause of cell death. Electron microscopy reveals that UCD38B
induces a dramatic swelling of intracellular organelles such as the
endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria. Surprisingly UCD38B, but not
UCD74A, induces efficient AIF translocation from the mitochondria to the
nucleus, and AIF function is necessary for the efficient induction of
cancer cell death. Our observations indicate that UCD38B induces
programmed necrosis through AIF translocation, and suggest that cytosolic
accessibility may facilitate drug action.Citation Format: Leonardo J.
Leon, Nagarekha Pasupuleti, Fredric Gorin, Kermit Carraway. A
cell-permeant amiloride derivative induces caspase-independent,
AIF-mediated programmed necrotic death of breast cancer cells.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 595.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-595

