Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR4 expression in VHL-related and sporadic hemangioblastomas.


Background & aim. Central nervous system hemangioblastomas are
sporadically as well in patients with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease. In
VHL disease a germline mutation in the VHL- gene leads to a defect VHL
protein. This results in enhanced transcription of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF)-A, chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) and its ligand
(CXCL12). The aim of this study was to analyze whether VEGF-A, CXCR4, and
CXCL12 protein expression differ between VHL-related and sporadic
hemangioblastomas.Methods. Freshly frozen tissue of patients operated in
the University Medical Center Groningen the Netherlands, for
hemangioblastomas between 1995-2010 was retrieved. Thirtythree samples of
27 patients were available, including 11 patients diagnosed with
VHL-disease. Immunohistochemical analysis of 33 hemangioblastoma
specimens (4 VHL patients and 1 sporadic patient were included more than
once) was performed for hematoxylin & eosin, VEGF-A, CXCR4 and CXCL12
expression and compared with normal surrounding brain tissue. VEGF-A was
evaluated describing morphology in relation to positive cells. A semi
quantitative evaluation was performed for CXCL12; negative, positive (>1%
positive cells) or strongly positive (>50 % positive cells or high
intensity). CXCR4 was scored quantitatively by counting percentage of
positive cells per specimen.Results. VEGF-A was equally expressed in all
sporadic and VHL-related hemangioblastomas, and present in
hemangioblastoma cells and endothelial cells. CXCL12 was strongly
expressed in 78% of hemangioblastoma tissues and did not differ between
sporadic and VHL-related hemangioblastomas. In all hemangioblastomas
CXCR4 was overexpressed as compared to the normal surrounding brain
tissue (found in 15 specimens). Interestingly, in sporadic
hemangioblastomas the mean percentage of CXCR4 positive cells per
specimen (15%) was higher as compared to VHL-related hemangioblastomas
(7%, p=0.001).Conclusions. VEGF-A and CXCL12 protein expression was
overexpressed in the majority of VHL-related and sporadic
hemangioblastomas. This makes targeting VEGF-A a potential strategy for
hemangioblastoma treatment. In addition, targeting CXCR4 could be of
additional value as it was overexpressed in all hemangioblastomas,
although differences in expression between sporadic and VHL related
hemangioblastomas do exist.Supported by a grant from the Jan Kornelis de
Cock Stichting and a UEF-JSM Talent Grant to RC Kruizinga.

