Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of novel selenium-NSAIDs as potential cancer
therapeutics.


Several non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been shown to
be effective chemopreventive agents in both pre-clinical and clinical
studies on various cancer types. Here in, we developed several selenium
(Se)-NSAID hybrid molecules and evaluated their efficacy as cancer
therapeutics. The rationale for introducing Se into the NSAIDs is that
this redox-active trace element is an essential micronutrient and a
normal component of diets with chemopreventive and anticancer properties.
Our recent studies have also shown that appropriately designed
organoselenium compounds exhibited promising anti-tumor properties in
various preclinical cancer models. We hypothesized that the rational
incorporation of Se into NSAIDs should enhance their anti-cancer
properties and therefore, we synthesized 16 novel Se-NSAID hybrid agents
designed by incorporating Se moieties into the structures of aspirin,
ibuprofen, and naproxen. In the first phase, a selenocyanate moiety was
incorporated to these NSAIDs and screened for their cytotoxicity in
various cancer cell lines. The cell viability results at 24 and 48 h
showed that the introduction of this Se functionality on aspirin scaffold
achieved a dramatic increase in the activity as compared to aspirin, as
well as other NSAIDs or their Se hybrids. Thus, we continued optimization
of aspirin with a variety of Se moieties, such as selenides and
selenomethyl functionalities. Most of these compounds reduced cell
viability in a dose dependent manner, while aspirin had no significant
effect. Based on these studies we identified two Se-aspirin hybrid
compounds; ASD-43, having a selenide functionality and ASD-49, with a
selenocyanate functionality, as the most potent compounds for further
development. The IC50 values after 48 h treatment in HCT116 cells were
2.5M and 1.0 M and in MiaPaCa-2 cells were 5.0 M and 2.5 M for ASD-43 and
ASD-49, respectively. To further establish the cytotoxic potential of
these compounds, an esterase staining (live and dead) assay was performed
in colon (HCT116) and pancreatic (MiaPaCa-2) cancer cells. Treatment of
ASD-43 and ASD-49 reduced cell viabilities dose dependently in both
HCT116 and MiaPaCa-2 cells, while aspirin had no significant effects. In
addition, both these compounds induced caspase-mediated PARP cleavage as
early as 24 h in HCT116 cells. In conclusion, new Se-NSAID hybrid agents
have been developed which showed a solid potential to be effective cancer
therapeutics in our initial studies. Detailed results of these
investigations will be presented.

