Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional crosstalk between the p53 and NF-kB transcription
factors.


The tumor suppressor p53 and NF-kB are sequence-specific transcription
factors (TFs) playing crucial roles in controlling cell proliferation and
cell survival with an undeniable impact on cancer progression. In
response to cellular stresses they induce the expression of a large
variety of genes. Synergistic or antagonistic interactions between the
p53 and NF-kB proteins may modulate the expression of common targets and
potentially lead to a modified cellular response. To specifically
investigate cell-autonomous, cooperative interactions between NF-kB and
p53 on gene expression changes, we performed a genome-wide transcriptome
analysis in the breast-cancer derived MCF-7 cells following single or
combinatorial treatments with the chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin (DXR)
and the NF-kB inducer TNF-alpha (TNF). The microarray results revealed
720 upregulated (log2FC>1.5) and 926 repressed genes for the DXR+TNF
treatment (log2FC 0.1} and 188 repressed genes {log2[FCDXR+TNF] -
(log2[FCDXR] + log2[FCTNF]) The tumor suppressor p53 and NF-kB are
sequence-specific transcription factors (TFs) playing crucial roles in
controlling cell proliferation and cell survival with an undeniable
impact on cancer progression. In response to cellular stresses they
induce the expression of a large variety of genes. Synergistic or
antagonistic interactions between the p53 and NF-kB proteins may modulate
the expression of common targets and potentially lead to a modified
cellular response. To specifically investigate cell-autonomous,
cooperative interactions between NF-kB and p53 on gene expression
changes, we performed a genome-wide transcriptome analysis in the
breast-cancer derived MCF-7 cells following single or combinatorial
treatments with the chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin (DXR) and the NF-kB
inducer TNF-alpha (TNF). The microarray results revealed 720 upregulated
(log2FC>1.5) and 926 repressed genes for the DXR+TNF treatment (log2FC
0.1} and 188 repressed genes {log2[FCDXR+TNF] - (log2[FCDXR] +
log2[FCTNF]) < -0.1}. Notably, gene ontology analysis applied to these
gene groups indicated an apparent enrichment for epithelial mesenchymal
transition and cell migration functions. We focused the validation
experiments on 15 up-regulated genes to investigate the direct
involvement of p53 and NF-kB on their expression using RT-qPCR assays
coupled to p53 activation by DXR, 5-fluorouracil or Nutlin, p53 RNAi
and/or NF-kB chemical inhibition. In silico analysis of the potential
target genes promoter sequence identified both p53 and NF-kB responsive
regions where cis-mediated interactions of these TFs may occur, a result
that has been followed up by mining of available ChIP-seq data. Among the
15 chosen targets, we uncovered five (LAMP3, ETV7, UNC5B, NTN1 and PLK3)
that were induced synergistically after DXR + TNF treatment in MCF-7
breast cancer cells. Over-expression of LAMP3 has already been associated
with an increased metastatic potential for particular cancers, and ETV7
can act as a regulator of cell proliferation. To study the migratory
phenotype associated with the DXR+TNF combinatorial treatment, we
performed migration assays using three different approaches: trans-well
migration assay, Xcelligence Migration Assay and wound healing. The
results consistently showed an increase in migration potential upon
DXR+TNF compared to mock or to single treatments. We propose that the
functional crosstalk between the p53 and NF-kB TFs can lead to the
activation of specific gene expression programs that may impact on cancer
phenotypes. Given that most tumors carry an activated NF-kB pathway, and
a significant proportion of breast cancers, particularly the luminal
subtype, maintains wild type p53, the uncovered crosstalk could
potentially modify the efficiency of cancer therapy.

