Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneity of response to anti-TGF- antibody therapy in
preclinical models.


TGF-s are pleiotropic growth factors with complex roles in tumorigenesis.
Overexpression of TGF-1 in many advanced human tumors correlates with
metastasis and poor prognosis, and TGF- antagonists are being developed
for cancer therapy. Using a panel of syngeneic mouse transplant models of
metastatic breast cancer, we found that an anti-TGF- neutralizing
antibody suppresses metastasis in several models, including the
widely-used 4T1 model. However, as expected from the complexity of TGF-
action, responses were heterogeneous and anti-TGF- antibody treatment had
no effect or even stimulated metastasis in other models. This panel of
models provides a powerful platform to identify candidate biomarkers for
their ability predict therapeutic response to TGF- antibodies. Previously
we have shown that therapeutic outcome does not correlate with the
expression of TGF- ligands, the growth inhibitory response of the tumor
model to TGF- in vitro, the level of Six-1 expression, or the activation
of non-canonical TGF- signaling through formation of mixed Smad
complexes. We next performed extensive histopathologic and
immunohistochemical characterization of the tumor models to look for
features that might correlate with therapeutic response. We found no
obvious correlations between therapeutic response and a variety of
markers, including estrogen receptor status, cytokeratin expression
profile (luminal vs basal differentiation), p63 expression (basal
marker), p53 expression or mutation status, smooth muscle actin
expression or desmoplasia. There was also no correlation of response with
tumor cell proliferation as assessed by quantitation of mitotic figures
and Ki67, tumor cell apoptosis, extent of necrosis or histomorphology of
the tumor cells (spindled vs polygonal). We then focused on mechanistic
analysis of the undesirable stimulatory effect of anti-TGF- antibodies in
the Mvt-1 model in an attempt to generate new leads for biomarker
analysis. We showed that the stimulatory effect of anti-TGF- antibody
treatment in the Mvt-1 model is still seen in SCID mice, suggesting that
it does not involve T-cell mediated immune responses. Comparison of
treated and untreated Mvt-1 tumors showed no effect of anti-TGF-
antibodies on tumor cell apoptosis, or infiltration by F480+ or CD11b+
immune cells. Tumor cell proliferation was actually decreased by the
antibody treatment. In vitro assays showed that TGF- had similar
stimulatory effects on migration and invasion in both the 4T1 and Mvt-1
models, suggesting that the stimulatory effect of antibody therapy in the
Mvt-1 model could not be explained by an anomalous invasion response to
TGF-. Thus the mechanism by which anti-TGF- antibodies can stimulate
metastasis in this model are unclear. Transcriptomic analyses of treated
and untreated tumors are ongoing and results will be presented.

