Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deletion of GCN5 confers sensitivity to the histone deacetylase
inhibitor CG-1521.


Aberrant histone post-translational modifications including acetylation
are common in human cancers and result in dysregulation of gene
expression. Histone acetylation is regulated by histone
acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) and HDAC
inhibitors (HDACi) are promising anticancer therapeutics. Our laboratory
has focused on studying the effects of hydroxamic acid based HDACis
including TSA, SAHA and CG-1521. We have previously shown that CG-1521
induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in various cell lines of breast
and prostate cancer.The purpose of this study is to gain insight into the
mechanism of the HDAC inhibitor CG-1521 and identify potential
combinatorial drug targets. We have employed a whole genome yeast
deletion library screen to determine which gene deletions confer
sensitivity and resistance to CG-1521. 407 sensitive and 80 resistant
strains were identified. We used gene ontology enrichment analysis to
determine which pathways are modulated by CG-1521. Sensitive strains are
highly enriched in processes regulating chromatin remodeling and
transcription. The list of resistant strains contains many genes involved
in the regulation of transcription and tRNA modification. Deletions of
components of the SAGA HAT complex are highly overrepresented in the
sensitive strains, including the catalytic subunit Gcn5. It appears that
the SAGA complex is required to reduce the effect of CG-1521 on cell
growth. Cell cycle analysis shows that CG-1521 treatment in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae results in G1 arrest in both the wild type and the gcn5
strain. The gcn5 strain displays increased sensitivity to CG-1521 induced
cell death compared to the wild type strain. In contrast to the highly
sensitive gcn5 deletion strain, a yeast strain expressing a catalytically
inactive variant of the Gcn5 protein is less sensitive to CG-1521. This
indicates that functions other than the acetyltransferase activity are
partially sufficient to attenuate the effects of CG-1521.We have
identified that disruption of the SAGA HAT complex can sensitize cells to
CG-1521 and are validating whether loss of the human Gcn5 homologs, Gcn5
and PCAF, also confers sensitivity to CG-1521 in breast cancer cell
lines. Taken together, our work suggests that the combination of
selective HAT and HDAC inhibitors might be effective for the treatment of
cancer.

