Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Xenografts of human prostate cancer - a genetic profile analysis.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer-related death
in the US. Recent clinical trials have shown responses in a subpopulation
of patients; thus we need methods to identify likely responders. The
genetic basis of PCa is understood to the extent that patients can be
classified based on underlying molecular aberrations: 50-60% of PCas have
rearrangements in ERG, ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, BRAF, and RAF1 and
overexpression of SPINK1 and AR. PCas with PTEN deletion along with ERG
have altered clinical behavior. We developed a strategy to establish PCa
xenografts with tissue taken directly from men and implanted
subcutaneously in SCID mice. After its growth, the tumor is harvested and
sequentially passaged over 4 or 5 mice. We have established 62 PCa
xenografts since the program's inception. These xenografts, which are
often developed while the donor PCa patient is alive, have proven
valuable for testing drugs and have led to initiation of a promising
clinical study (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT00831792). In the study reported
here we systematically characterized 51/62 xenografts for the presence of
known PCa markers by immunohistochemistry and fluorescence in situ
hybridization. The PCa xenografts were derived from PCas in the prostate
or direct extensions to adjacent organs (21) or from metastases to bone
(4), lymph node (3), liver (6), thyroid (1), testis (1), adrenal gland
(2), brain (3), and unusual sites (skin, chest wall, soft tissue) (4) or
ascites (3), and pleural effusions (3). 81% of xenografts derived from
prostatic adenocarcinomas were AR positive (27/33); 16 were small-cell,
poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas or ductal adenocarcinomas
and did not express AR. One sarcomatoid and 1 ductal adenocarcinoma
expressed AR; 77% of evaluable tumors had a deletion in PTEN (31/40); 48%
of AR-positive tumors expressed recurrent gene fusions (eg, ERG, ETV1,
ETV5) (13/27). Together, these results in this cohort_AR and recurrent
gene fusion expression and PTEN deletion_nicely correlate with findings
in human PCa. We next assessed whether PCa xenografts maintained
histopathologic and molecular fidelity with the human tumor of origin in
selected cases (n=16). Histopathologic pattern and recurrent gene fusion
expression were the same in the paired human and mouse tissue. The AR and
PTEN status were the same in most paired human and mouse samples. In 4
cases, AR expression was lost or PTEN deleted in the PCa xenograft,
suggesting that selection for more aggressive genotypes may occur during
xenograft development and that PCa xenografts develop by selecting cells
drivers of cancer progression. In conclusion, we have developed a
protocol for xenograft development that has fidelity with human PCa. This
approach has provided a repository of clinically annotated samples that
can be linked prospectively to clinical progression/response to therapy
and thus will help identify therapy responders.

