Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depletion of tumor stroma with Smoothened inhibition leads to
altered epithelial differentiation and paradoxical acceleration of
pancreatic tumorigenesis.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is highly resistant to
conventional chemotherapy and is rapidly fatal. PDA is characterized by
the presence of abundant stromal proliferation which can be replicated in
mouse models. This stromal component is driven by paracrine signals from
the neoplastic epithelium. These signals include Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), a
secreted ligand of the hedgehog pathway which is overexpressed in PDA
epithelium and signals through Smoothened to activate Gli family
transcription factors and drive stromal proliferation. We have previously
demonstrated that pharmacologic inhibition of Smoothened depletes tumor
stroma and facilitates deliver of chemotherapy to the tumor epithelium.
This approach led to prolonged survival in a genetically engineered mouse
model of PDA (KPC mouse) and led to clinical trials utilizing this
approach.Unfortunately, combination therapy with Smoothened inhibition
and chemotherapy did not improve survival in subsequent clinical trials.
In an effort to explain this discrepancy we initiated therapy of KPC mice
with a Smoothened inhibitor alone at 8 weeks of age. We hypothesized that
unlike in previous studies that utilized advanced tumors and thus
evaluated relatively short treatment effects, this design would allow us
to investigate the long term effect of stromal depletion. Surprisingly,
prolonged Smoothened inhibition led to an acceleration of pancreatic
tumorigenesis and decreased survival to 122 days compared to 155 days in
historic controls (pPancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is highly
resistant to conventional chemotherapy and is rapidly fatal. PDA is
characterized by the presence of abundant stromal proliferation which can
be replicated in mouse models. This stromal component is driven by
paracrine signals from the neoplastic epithelium. These signals include
Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), a secreted ligand of the hedgehog pathway which is
overexpressed in PDA epithelium and signals through Smoothened to
activate Gli family transcription factors and drive stromal
proliferation. We have previously demonstrated that pharmacologic
inhibition of Smoothened depletes tumor stroma and facilitates deliver of
chemotherapy to the tumor epithelium. This approach led to prolonged
survival in a genetically engineered mouse model of PDA (KPC mouse) and
led to clinical trials utilizing this approach.Unfortunately, combination
therapy with Smoothened inhibition and chemotherapy did not improve
survival in subsequent clinical trials. In an effort to explain this
discrepancy we initiated therapy of KPC mice with a Smoothened inhibitor
alone at 8 weeks of age. We hypothesized that unlike in previous studies
that utilized advanced tumors and thus evaluated relatively short
treatment effects, this design would allow us to investigate the long
term effect of stromal depletion. Surprisingly, prolonged Smoothened
inhibition led to an acceleration of pancreatic tumorigenesis and
decreased survival to 122 days compared to 155 days in historic controls
(p<.001 by log-rank test.) The tumors observed in treated mice were
notable for their lack of stroma and high vascularity. Additionally, a
change in differentiation state was noted in these tumors with nearly all
tumors demonstrating poor or undifferentiated morphology.During
pancreatic development, SHH and other signals from nearby stromal cells
designate the exocrine fate of epithelial progenitor cells, and support
exocrine growth. Tumor stromal cells may play a similar
pro-differentiation role in pancreatic cancer, resulting in the well- to
moderately-differentiated ductal morphology that is typically observed in
human PDA. Previous studies have shown that tumors that are poorly
differentiated by histologic exam or quasi-mesenchymal by gene expression
pattern are associated with significantly shorter overall survival. Taken
together, these data suggest that the loss of stromal signals following
prolonged inhibition of Smoothened may result in de-differentiation of
neoplastic epithelial cells and lead to more aggressive tumors. These
findings may explain the clinical trial results and may inform future
attempts to modulate stromal-epithelial interactions in PDA.

