Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The TWEAK-FN14 pathway promotes prostate cancer bone metastasis
through the NFB pathway.


Advanced prostate cancer is highly associated with castration resistance
and the development of bone metastases. Understanding the mechanisms
contributing to prostate cancer bone metastasis is needed in order to
develop novel therapeutic agents. NFB signaling has been implicated in
prostate cancer progression. The Tweak-Fn14 axis, which activates both
canonical and non-canonical NFB pathways, has been shown to be
up-regulated in many cancer types. However, the role of the Tweak-Fn14
signaling in prostate cancer progression has not been investigated. In
this study, we show that oncogenic Ras transformation of the AR negative,
DU145 cell line led to the acquisition of bone metastatic capability and
associated increased expression of TWEAK and FN14. Knocking down FN14
using shRNAs, as well as blocking the NFB pathway using an IKB super
repressor, in DU145/Rasb1 cells, significantly inhibited bone metastasis
and improved survival. This inhibitory effect of FN14shRNA was fully
rescued by activating the NFB canonical pathway, but not the NFB
non-canonical pathway. FN14 expression is also high in the bone
metastatic, AR negative prostate cancer PC3 cell line. Similarly,
knocking-down FN14 in PC3 cells inhibited bone metastatic capacity
following intracardiac inoculation in a xenograft model. TWEAK and FN14
are relatively low or undetectable in AR positive prostate cancer cell
lines including Lncap and 22RV1. AR binding was detected in both TWEAK
and FN14 promoters as determined by chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis in Lncap. Reporter assays demonstrated that AR binding inhibited
FN14 and TWEAK transcription. The above experimental models were further
supported by analyses of publically available expression data sets for
clinical prostate cancer samples that showed FN14 expression was
inversely correlated with AR gene expression signatures. In addition,
individual FN14 RNA mean expression was higher in clinical metastasis of
castrate (n=11) as compared to non-castrate (n=8) patients. We propose
that down-regulation of AR activity under castrate conditions may lead to
increased FN14 expression and NFB activation, which provides a survival
benefit for prostate cancer cells associated with disease progression.
Therefore, targeting the TWEAK-FN14 pathway in prostate cancer patients
provides potential, new preventive and therapeutic approaches.

