Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I trial of combined temsirolimus, erlotinib, and cisplatin
in advanced solid tumors.


A large subset of triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) are driven in
part by a combination of activated growth factor signaling and downstream
constitutive activation of the PI3K pathway. We have hypothesized that
targeting the EGFR, PTEN and DNA damage pathways simultaneously with the
rapalog temsirolimus, the EGFR inhibitor erlotinib, and cisplatin may
provide therapeutic benefit in a definable subset of TNBC patients. As an
initial step we conducted a single institution phase one dose escalation
trial to test the tolerability of combined temsirolimus, erlotinib, and
cisplatin in patients with advanced solid tumors. The trial accrued nine
patients between August 2010 and May 2012. Cisplatin was given at a dose
of 30 mg/m2 while the starting doses of erlotinib and temsirolimus were
100 mg and 15 mg, respectively. Cisplatin and temsirolimus were
administered on days 1 and 8 of 21 day cycles and erlotinib was taken
daily. The trial incorporated a standard anti-emetic regimen, dispensed
prn scripts for loperamide at treatment start, and utilized a
prophylactic rash treatment strategy with doxycycline given 100 mg bid
for at least the first six weeks of treatment. Two of the six patients in
dose level one experienced a DLT within the first week of treatment
(dyspnea and mucositis, respectively). Three additional patients were
then accrued at the de-escalated dose level in which erlotinib was
dose-reduced to 75 mg, without a DLT. Among the seven patients that did
not experience a DLT, total time on treatment is listed in order of
accrual (14, 14, 6, 31, 38, 20, and 15 weeks). Six stopped treatment due
to PD and one stopped due to intolerance (increased edema). Frequent dose
delays due to thrombocytopenia occurred in one patient (20% of planned
treatments) at dose level one and one patient at the de-escalated dose
level (38% of planned treatments). Infrequent causes of dose delays
included fatigue, mucositis, neutropenia, and increased serum creatinine.
Frequent grade 2 adverse events thought to be likely or definitely caused
by study drugs included, hypomagnesemia, hypokalemia, anemia, and
increased serum creatinine. Rash, nausea, and diarrhea were all well
controlled. Of the six patients evaluable for response, three had
colorectal cancer and three had breast cancer. One PR was seen in a
patient with TNBC treated on the de-escalated dose level but the response
was short lived (eight weeks) due to PD in the skin. The average number
of prior treatment regimens was 4 (range 1 to 6). Translational studies
are ongoing. In conclusion, the combination of cisplatin at 30 mg/m2,
temsirolimus at 15mg, and erlotinib at 75 mg was well tolerated. Given
the known genetic lesions in TNBC, this novel drug combination may be
reasonable to test in a pick-the-winner phase 2 randomized trial with
incorporated futility testing.

