Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral-regulated expression of IL-12 as a potential
immunotherapeutic strategy for the treatment of breast cancer.


A major obstacle for the development of immunotherapeutics is the ability
of tumors to escape the immune system coupled with toxicity associated
with systemic administration of cytokines. To overcome these challenges
we have developed an adenoviral vector with regulated expression of
IL-12, Ad-RTS-mIL-12 (Ad), was administered intratumorally under the
control of the RheoSwitch Therapeutic System (RTS) expression platform.
Previously we have shown that a single intratumoral injection of Ad
combined with oral administration of the activator ligand, INXN-1001
(AL), led to significant inhibition of tumor growth and increased
survival. Herein, we show that localized delivery of IL-12 is well
tolerated and its mechanism of action is through an increase in tumor
infiltrating leukocytes concomitant with a reduction in tumor growth. In
vitro studies using HT1080 human fibrosarcoma cells transduced with Ad
and incubated with AL have shown a concentration-related increase in
IL-12 mRNA concomitant with an increase in expression of IL-12 protein.
Removal of AL from the media resulted in return of IL-12 expression to
baseline within 48 hours. In the 4T1 BALB/c mouse model, oral
administration of AL elicited a dose- related increase in plasma AL
levels which correlated with increasing tumor levels of AL. The increase
in tumoral AL in turn activated the RheoSwitch portion of the adenoviral
vector leading to a dose-related increase in tumor IL-12 production with
virtually no increase in systemic IL-12. The maximal tumoral IL-12
protein level of 280 pg/mg protein was achieved on Day 4 of AL dosing
with a concomitant serum IL-12 level of 0.5 pg/mg protein following a
single intratumoral injection of Ad-RTS-mIL-12 (1x1010 vp) on Day 1
combined with once daily oral administration of AL at 150 mg/m2 on Days
1-7. This increase in tumoral IL-12 levels correlated with a dose-related
increase in tumor-infiltrating CD4-positive and CD-8 positive lymphocytes
in and adjacent to the tumor, coupled with an increase in apoptotic
marker caspase 3 in the tumor when compared with vehicle. No increase in
IL-12 protein expression in mice treated with Ad or AL alone was
observed. Moreover, this therapeutic strategy appears to be
well-tolerated as no change in clinical signs or body weight was observed
in the treated animals when compared with vehicle alone.These results
support our hypothesis that localized delivery of IL-12 is well tolerated
and results in an increase in tumor infiltrating leukocytes concomitant
with a reduction in tumor growth. These findings suggest the
applicability of our immunotherapeutic strategy for the treatment of
metastatic breast cancer.

