Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An epigenomic next-generation sequencing approach to identify
predictive markers for PARP inhibitor response in breast cancer cells.


Background: Inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose)-polymerase-1 (PARP1) leads to
synthetic lethality in BRCA-associated breast cancer cells, and is a
promising novel treatment strategy for hereditary BRCA-mutated tumors.
Since BRCA1/2 germline mutations are relatively infrequent, our study
aims at a systematic identification of epigenetic aberrations that may
predict PARP inhibitor (PARib) response in sporadic breast cancer
cells.Methods: Genome-wide DNA methylation was assessed in nine malignant
and one non-malignant (MCF10A) breast cell line (BCL) by MBD-isolated
genome sequencing (MiGS). Sensitivity to the PARib AG14361 was determined
by viability and clonogenicity assays before and after global DNA
demethylation in vitro, and confirmed with the PARib AZD-2281 (olaparib).
Correlation analyses of DNA methylation with PARib sensitivity identified
potentially predictive candidate genes and microRNAs. By incubation with
increasing concentrations of AG14361 we generated an isogenic PARib
resistant BCL originally sensitive to AG14361.Results: BCL clustered in
three sensitivity groups (sensitive, intermediate, resistant) independent
of hormone receptor status, but associated with PARP1 level (p=0.042).
BRCA1 mutated (MDA-MB-436) and BRCA1 methylated (UACC3199) BCL were most
sensitive to PARib. After global DNA demethylation sensitive BCL acquired
resistance while resistant BCL were modestly sensitized. MCF10A cells did
not shift PARib resistance after DNA demethylation. Correlation of MiGS
profiles with PARib sensitivity identified 382 genes and seven microRNAs
with exclusive promoter/exon1 methylation in sensitive BCL, while 313
genes and one microRNA were affected in resistant BCL. Artificially
mediating resistance to BRCA1 methylated cells did neither hypomethylate
the BRCA1 promoter nor induce BRCA1 expression, but significantly reduce
cell proliferation. Gene ontology analyses revealed that methylation of
WNT, ErbB, SHH, and mTOR signaling genes was significantly enriched in
PARib resistant cells, while PARib sensitive cells exhibited methylation
in DNA repair genes.Conclusions: Aberrant DNA methylation seems to be
involved in PARib sensitivity/resistance in BCL. By epigenomic analyses
we identified several potential candidate genes beyond BRCA1 that might
modulate PARib sensitivity/resistance in breast cancer, implying that
more patients than currently anticipated may benefit from this drug
class. Their expression, DNA methylation and net effect on cancer
pathways are currently validated in BCL and explored in primary breast
cancer tissues.

