Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The human mammary circadian transcriptome.


The circadian rhythm, a phenomenon present in all of Eukaryota and in
some members of Prokaryota, describes the processes within an organism
that fluctuate throughout a daily cycle. Within peripheral tissues, clock
gene expression is organized into a roughly 24-hour period by an
elaborate feedback loop mechanism developed around a core set of
circadian genes. In addition to maintaining rhythmicity within the
molecular clock, key circadian genes such as CLOCK and ARNTL1 are also
transcription factors that regulate the expression of a number of
additional transcripts; the so-called clock-controlled genes (CCGs). This
transcriptional control forms the backbone of circadian rhythmicity and
is critical for the maintenance of proper cellular function in a variety
of physiological processes, ranging from cell cycle regulation to
cellular metabolism. Despite the importance of this regulatory clockwork
system, little is known about the extent of molecular circadian control
in human peripheral tissues. In fact, the majority of our knowledge of
molecular oscillatory systems is derived from studies of model organisms
which consistently demonstrate that outside of the core circadian genes;
there is virtually no overlap in the compendium of CCGs across tissue
types. Based on this critical observation, it is reasonable to expect
that if CCGs vary considerably across tissues within the same organism,
there may also be considerable heterogeneity across organisms, even
within the same tissue type. Here we use next-generation sequencing
analyses to provide the first circadian transcriptome in pre-stasis
non-immortalized primary human mammary epithelial tissue. Using the
non-parametric JTK_CYCLE algorithm, we found that approximately 6% of all
expressed genes within this tissue are CCGs. We also find considerable
evidence for circadian control in RNA processing events, including splice
isoform usage and alternative polyadenylation, and a pathway analysis of
all CCGs indicates circadian involvement in multiple signaling and growth
pathways. These results demonstrate, for the first time, that a
significant and important proportion of the human mammary transcriptome
is regulated by the circadian system. Given the importance of circadian
disruption in the pathophysiology of a range of human disorders, from
metabolic disease to breast cancer, we believe that categorization of the
circadian rhythm in human peripheral tissue will lay an important
foundation for future breakthroughs in disease prevention, as well as in
the development of novel therapeutic strategies.

