Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells produce soluble mediators to
modulate endothelial cell-T cell interactions in classical Hodgkin
Lymphoma.


Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma (CHL) is characterized by the presence of a
small minority of malignant Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells (H-RS cells)
surrounded by a massive mixed of inflammatory infiltrates. CD4+ T helper
2 cells, regulatory T cells and CD8+ cytotoxic T cells form a significant
part of this infiltrates. The mechanisms underlying T cell recruitment
into the involved lymph nodes are still unknown. The aim of this study is
to elucidate whether H-RS cells can modulate endothelial cell-T cell
interactions in CHL.KM-H2 cell is used as a representative H-RS cell
line. Cell based ELISA and FACS are employed to check the adhesion
molecules expression on the endothelial cells (EC). Static transwell
transmigration and dynamic flow system are used to determine the
interaction between EC and T cell. Western blot is used to study the
mechanism involved in KM-H2 cell activation.ELISA analyses show KM-H2
culture supernatant (C/S)-stimulated EC up-regulates ICAM-1, VCAM-1 and
E-selectin expression. Static transwell transmigration assay shows C/S
stimulated EC enhanced nave and memory T cells transmigration in response
to CXCL12. Besides that, C/S stimulated EC demonstrates higher
interaction with nave and memory T cells in dynamic flow condition. In
vitro L929 cytotoxic assay shows that KM-H2 cells produce soluble
lymphotoxin-. FACS analyses show that lyphotoxin- neutralizing antibody
treated C/S has less stimulatory effect on ICAM-1, VCAM-1 and E-selectin
expression on stimulated EC compared to respective control. SP600125 and
Indomethacin treated KM-H2 cells produce less soluble lymphotoxin- as
determined by L929 cytotoxic assay. ELISA analyses shows reduced ICAM-1,
VCAM-1 and E-selectin expression on EC stimulated by C/S harvested from
JNK (SP600125) and COX (Indomethacin) inhibitors treated KM-H2 cells.
Western blot analysis shows that treatment of KM-H2 cells with SP600125
reduced expression of phosphorylated JNK and C-Jun protein. Level of
phosphorylated C-Fos and total C-Fos remained unchanged in JNK inhibitor
treated KM-H2 cells. However, level of phosphorylated C-Fos and total
C-Fos reduced significantly in COX inhibitor treated KM-H2 cells while
level of phosphorylated JNK and C-Jun is up-regulated in Indomethacin
treated KM-H2 cells. Production of lympotoxin- by H-RS cells is
reconfirmed by immunohistochemistry staining on tissue samples from
Hodgkin Lymphoma patients.Our data suggest that in CHL, malignant H-RS
cells secrete soluble lymphotoxin- which can modulate EC function. JNK
and COX pathways are involved in regulating the production of
lymphotoxin- from KM-H2 cells.

