Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel monoclonal antibody to native HER2 epitope detects
HER2-positive CTCs, HER2 in blood, and HER2 in tissue: realistic approach
for monitoring breast carcinoma.


Background: Amplification of the HER2 gene and/or overexpression of its
protein product have been reported in 25% to 30% of breast carcinomas and
have been associated with poorer outcomes. However, there are still
highly controversial aspects of HER2 testing. In the present study, we
generated a novel monoclonal antibody against human native epitope of
HER2 and investigated its clinical potential in managing breast
carcinoma.Methods and findings: We generated a novel monoclonal antibody
(mAb), AB-HER2 using hybridoma technology and native folding of the
protein as an immunogen. This mAb is of IgG1 (kappa) type. It
specifically recognized both native and denatured human HER2 protein and
displayed high affinity as assessed by Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs),
ELISA, immunohistochemistry assay, western blot and flow cytometry
applications. We have developed a CTCs assay to detect specific
HER2-positive tumor cells circulating in blood, while we did not observe
any background staining in blood cells. Using AB-HER2 mAb in ELISA, we
showed soluble HER2 level is significantly increased in breast cancer
patients plasma which directly correlated with HER2 expression pattern in
breast cancer tissues. Tissue expression of HER2 was determined by using
immunohistochemical techniques. Most of normal tissues showed negative
staining, while different levels of membrane staining were observed in
cancer sections. To evaluate the immunoreactivity of HER2 associated with
tumor histological types, the staining intensity in membranes were scored
according to the guidelines of ASCO/CAP. We also have compared AB-HER2
mAB with commercial HER2 antibodies in all immunoassays.Conclusion: The
novel AB-HER2 mAb showed improved accuracy in all immunoassays and
clinical outcome. Circulating HER2-positive tumor cells, HER2 protein
levels in plasma and in breast tissues significantly increased in
patients with breast carcinoma compared to normal healthy controls. Our
data suggest the potential clinical use of AB-HER2 mAB as a powerful
immunoreagent in measuring real-time HER2 levels in managing breast
cancer.

