Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genetic selection system for microRNA targets identification and
validation.


Overwhelming evidence has indicated that microRNAs can play a fundamental
role in regulation of diverse cellular functions and dysregulation of
microRNA expression could lead to a variety of disorders including human
cancer. Although significant progress has been made in the past years in
discovery of microRNAs and their biogenesis, and their role in many
cellular phenotypes, it is not fully understood how microRNAs exert their
cellular functions because a single microRNA can have hundreds of
targets. Hence, identification of microRNA targets is a critical step
toward understanding of molecular mechanisms of microRNA-mediated gene
expression in normal and disease processes. Here we reported a selection
system for microRNA target identification and validation. We used
Sleeping Beauty (SB) transposon system to generate selection vectors. The
first generation of SB-based vector is named pSSMT-5/6 which carries
tetO-EF1a promoter driving GFP/or mCherry-T2A-Pu and tetR-Krab under CMV
promoter. We examined the feasibility of these new constructs in 293T and
HeLa cells. Using GFP or m-Cherry along with Pu (puromycin resistance) as
a reporter, we found that the construct carrying either a given UTR or
microRNA sponge provides a significant selection advantage over the
vector alone. For example, we cloned 6 different UTRs into the construct
and identified 3 of them, CDH1, p53 and p27, revealed stronger mCherry
signals and are more resistant to puromycin. Thus, we will test our
microRNA library to identify microRNAs capable of targeting these genes
(i.e., one known UTR construct against the microRNA library). Together,
these results suggest that this system provides proof of principle. In
the future, we will generate a UTR library so that we will be able to
test for an individual microRNA against the UTR library to identify its
biologically relevant targets.

