Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short peptides for targeted apoptosis in cancer cells: development
& evaluation of therapeutic applications.


The ING proteins are type II tumor suppressors that are involved in the
regulation of gene transcription, DNA repair, cellular senescence,
tumorigenesis and apoptosis. Inactivation of apoptosis pathways is
frequently observed in cancer cells, and it leads to a drastic decrease
in the efficiency of available cancer treatments. Inactivation of INGs
during the suppression of apoptosis tumors and greater sensitivity of
cancer versus normal cells to the elevation of ING1 levels suggest that
the INGs could serve as viable targets for cancer therapy. In this study
we expand our previous observations that all ING proteins share a
conserved sequence domain, the Lamin Interacting Domain (LID), which is
unique to INGs in the human proteome. The overexpression of a recombinant
peptide containing multiple fragments of the LID domain was previously
shown to induce apoptosis in a rapid and efficient way in several cancer
cell line models. Together, rather limited knowledge of the molecular
mechanisms that mediated these apoptosis-inducing effects and the large
size of the recombinant LID peptide precluded use of the LID for
therapeutic purposes. Here we define the minimal portion of the LID
domain that is capable of efficiently inducing apoptosis, and devise
approaches to efficiently introduce it into cancer cells where we predict
it will show a good therapeutic index by virtue of inducing apoptosis in
cancer cells much more efficiently than in normal surrounding cells. Our
preliminary in silico analysis of the LID protein structure indicated
that LID peptides could interfere with several master regulators of cell
cycle control and apoptosis, including Retinoblastoma and SMAC proteins.
Overexpression of LID peptides could also interfere with the formation of
functional ING1-HDAC chromatin modifying protein complexes by disrupting
ING1-Lamin A interactions, thus leading to the loss of HDAC targeting and
apoptosis. Our ongoing studies should help to identify the molecular
mechanism(s) of LID-mediated apoptosis induction and identify the minimal
required sequence of LID peptide that still displays potent
apoptosis-inducing activity against tumor cells. Our long term goal is to
further expand current understanding of apoptosis pathways and develop
LID-based therapeutic for the selective induction of apoptosis in cancer
cells.

