Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recurrent pathway mutations of multiple components of cohesin
complex in myeloid neoplasms.


Recent genetic studies have revealed a number of novel gene mutations in
myeloid malignancies, unmasking an unexpected role of deregulated histone
modification and DNA methylation in myeloid neoplasms. However, our
knowledge about the spectrum of gene mutations in myeloid neoplasms is
still incomplete. So, we analyzed 50 paired tumor-normal samples of
myeloid neoplasms using whole exome sequencing, among which we identified
recurrent mutations involving STAG2, a core cohesin component, and two
other cohesin components, including STAG1 and PDS5B.Cohesin is a
multimeric protein complex which is composed of four core subunits (SMC1,
SMC3, RAD21 and STAG proteins), and is engaged in cohesion of sister
chromatids, DNA repair and transcriptional regulation. To extend the
findings in the whole-exome analysis, an additional 534 primary samples
of various myeloid neoplasms was examined for mutations and deletions in
a total of 9 components of the cohesin complexes, using high-throughput
sequencing and SNP arrays. In total, mutations/deletions were found in a
variety of myeloid neoplasms, including AML (22/131), CMML (15/86), MDS
(26/205), in a mutually exclusive manner.Cohesin mutations frequently
coexisted with other common mutations in myeloid neoplasms, significantly
associated with spliceosome mutations. Deep sequencing of these mutant
alleles revealed that majority of the cohesin mutations existed in the
major tumor populations, indicating their early origin during
leukemogenesis.Next, we examined several myeloid leukemia cell lines with
or without cohesin mutations for expression of each cohesin component and
their chromatin-bound fractions. Interestingly, the chromatin-bound
fraction of several components of cohesin was significantly reduced in
cell lines having mutated or defective cohesin components, suggesting
substantial loss of cohesin-bound sites on chromatin. Finally, we
introduced the wild-type RAD21 allele into RAD21-mutated cell lines
(Kasumi-1), which effectively suppressed the proliferation of Kasumi-1,
supporting a leukemogenic role of compromised cohesin functions.Less
frequent mutations of cohesin components have been described in other
cancers, where impaired cohesion and consequent aneuploidy were
implicated in oncogenic action. However, about half of cohesin-mutated
cases in our cohort had completely normal karyotypes, suggesting that
cohesin-mutated cells were not clonally selected because of aneuploidy.
Of note, the number of mutations determined by our whole exome analysis
was significantly higher in cohesin-mutated cases compared to non-mutated
cases. Since cohesin participates in post-replicative DNA repair, this
may suggest that compromised cohesin function could induce DNA
hypermutability and contribute to leukemogenesis.In conclusion, our
findings highlight a possible role of compromised cohesin functions in
myeloid leukemogenesis.

