Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P-Cadherin overexpression modulates insulin-like growth factor
signaling in oral squamous carcinoma cells.


Altered expression of cadherin cell adhesion proteins is a frequent
occurrence in epithelial tumor development. P-cadherin, a component of
normal epithelia, has been ascribed both causative and preventive roles
in tumor development, contingent upon the tissue of origin. In oral
epithelia, histological studies demonstrate an upregulation of P-cadherin
during dysplasia, and a subsequent loss of P-cadherin in later stage oral
squamous carcinomas. A possible mechanism by which P-cadherin may
modulate tumor development is via alterations in ligand-mediated
signaling of receptor tyrosine kinases, a phenomenon that has previously
been demonstrated for both E- and N-cadherin. To better understand the
role that P-cadherin plays in tumor development, retroviral transduction
was used to deplete or overexpress P-cadherin in two oral squamous
carcinoma cell lines. Six growth factors were independently utilized to
screen for P-cadherin-dependent alterations in signaling, with the
greatest effects occurring in response to insulin-like growth factor
(IGF) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF). The increased level of
P-cadherin in IGF-treated cells greatly altered the kinetics of
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling, but had little direct
effect on the activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway.
P-cadherin overexpression increased steady-state levels of Snai1 protein,
with further increases noted upon IGF administration. Inhibition of
either MAPK or PI3K signaling pathways in P-cadherin overexpressing cells
resulted in decreased Snai1 expression. Ser-9 phosphorylation of GSK-3
was unchanged after IGF treatment, suggesting P-cadherin contributes to
Snai1 stability independent of GSK3 activity. P-cadherin over-expressing
cells treated with IGF showed a time-dependent decrease in P-cadherin
levels. This decrease was accompanied by a decrease in detectable levels
of immunofluorescence staining of P-cadherin at cell borders. The
internalization of P-cadherin could be inhibited by treatment with
dynasore, a dynamin inhibitor. Also, increases in motility were found in
P-cadherin overexpressing cells compared to normal cells. Our data
suggests that the increase in P-cadherin seen in early oral cancer may
promote tumor aggressiveness by altering cell behavior, and increasing
EMT- related signaling. The contribution of P-cadherin to tumor
development may be helpful in identifying biological targets for oral
cancer therapies in dysplastic tissue.

