Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of GDP-mannose-4,6-dehydratase mutation and
loss of fucosylation in colorectal cancer.


(Background and Aim) Oligosaccharides are one of the most important
factors in the posttranslational modification of proteins and lipids.
Glycomics, the systematic study of glycans and glycan-binding proteins in
various biological systems, is an emerging field in the post-genomics and
post-proteomics era. In particular, fucosylation is one of the most
important glycosylation involved in cancer and inflammation.
Fucosylation, which comprises the transfer of a fucose residue to
oligosaccharides and proteins, is regulated by many kinds of molecules,
including several kinds of fucosyltranferases, GDP-fucose synthetic
enzymes, and GDP-fucose transporter(s). Fucosylation is increased during
carcinogenesis of many cancers through the up-regulation of expression of
fucosylation-regulatory genes as described above. In contrast, we found a
colon cancer cell line HCT116, which had complete loss of fucosylation
due to the mutation of a GDP-fucose synthetic enzyme, GMDS
(GDP-mannose-4, 6-dehydratase) a few years ago. While knockout mice of a
GDP-fucose synthetic enzyme are lethal (Smith et al J Cell Biol, 158,
2002), HCT116 cells showed more aggressive pheno-type, including in vivo
tumor growth and metastasis. The underlying mechanisms were found to be
an escape from TRAIL-mediated immuno-surveillance of NK cells (Moriwaki
et al, Gastroenterology 137, 2009). In the present study, we investigated
whether or not the GMDS mutation was really found in clinical samples of
colorectal cancer. (Subjects and Methods) Thirteen cases of liver
metastasis, 6 cases of lymph node metastasis and 81 cases of the original
cancer tissues derived from patients with colorectal cancer were included
in this study. All projects were approved by the ethical committee of
Osaka University. GMDS mutation was analyzed by RT-PCR using primers,
which include all exons of GMDS gene. Immunohistochemical experiments
were performed using AAL lectin, which recognizes all types of
fucosylation. (Results and Discussion) Approximately 10-15% of GMDS
mutation was found in the original cancer tissue as well as their
metastatic liver cancer and lymph node metastasis. However no mutation
was found in normal colon tissue around cancer. Most GMDS mutation was a
hetero-type, but not a homo-type, which was found in HCT 116 cells.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed complete loss of fucosylation in a
few cases of metastatic cancer. These data indicate the involvement of
GMDS mutation in the progression of colorectal cancer.

