Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of gpA33 as a marker expressed on colon cancer stem
cell lines.


Introduction: Recent studies have implied that solid tumors including
colon cancer, can arise from tissue-specific stem cells. Defined
serum-free culture conditions, employed to select for fetal colon
epithelial progenitor cells, were utilized to isolate and expand a
sub-population of epithelial cells from human tumors resected from a
repertoire of colon cancer patients (Roberts 2011, AACR #5211). These
cancer stem-like cell (CSLC) lines are stable homogenous populations
that, when cultured under conditions that promote colon crypt
differentiation, differentiate into organoids containing the 3 principal
cell types seen in the colon and in differentiated colorectal tumors. In
vivo they form tumors that fully recapitulate the morphologic and
phenotypic characteristics of the patients original tumors. While any
consistent definition of cancer stem cell properties remains elusive,
these CSLC providing unique tools to interrogate the biology of CSC or
tumor initiating cells, and identify CSC-expressed surface
antigens.Methods: Cell immunizations were performed with colon CSLC. mAbs
were analyzed by IHC to determine their reactivity toward normal and
cancer tissues as well as a panel of cancer lines including colon CSLC.
Antitumor bioactivity screens were followed by antigen identification of
promising candidates. Affymetrix U133 micro-array analysis was performed
to profile gene expression and Taqman analyses performed to identify
differentially expressed genes compared to non-CSLC control populations.
Results: mAbs from CSLC immunizations included a subset that displayed
uniform binding across the complete panel of CSLC lines while displaying
high penetrance of expression on both primary and metastatic colon cancer
tissues. Expression cloning identified the antigen as glycoprotein A33
(gpA33), which was confirmed by IP and SPR analyses. Transcriptional
profiling confirmed elevated gpA33 expression across the panel of colon
CSLC in addition to revealing enhanced LGR5, ASCL2 and SOX9 expression,
consistent with the CSLC having a colon stem cell origin. The uniform
expression of gpA33 on putative cancer stem cell populations is
distinguished from other cell surface molecules generally regarded as
canonical CSC markers, including CD133 and CD44, which are variably
expressed.Conclusion: gpA33 is an antigen with excellent expression
penetrance in colon cancer and colon cancer-derived CSLC. As shown here,
immunizations with CSLC lines can yield antibodies specific for colon
cancer antigens that may also represent CSC expressed markers. This
provides an example how new therapeutic antibody candidates can be
generated to recognize and target both differentiated cancer cells as
well as their associated CSC population.

