Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gremlin 1 labels a mesenchymal progenitor in the gastrointestinal
tract, bone and tumor microenvironment.


Introduction: The cellular origin and contribution of mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs) in the gastrointestinal tract, bone marrow and tumor
microenvironment are unknown. More specific markers of MSCs are needed.
We hypothesized that Grem1 expression would be a specific marker of
MSCs.Methods: We developed Grem1-BAC-CreERT, SMA-BAC-CreERT,
Grem1-BAC-EGFP-peptide 2A-DTR-peptide 2A-CreERT and Vimentin-BAC-CreERT
transgenic lines to characterize the origin, function and kinetics of
gastrointestinal, bone marrow and tumor-associated mesenchyme. These mice
were crossed to reporters, Grem1fl/fl and diphtheria toxin associated
lines. The cellular fate and function of the Grem1, SMA and Vimentin
expressing cells, was analyzed by direct fluorescence microscopy and
immunostaining at several time points (up to 12 months) and in several
cancer models.Results: In the bone marrow, Grem1 recombination was
identified in a very rare population of CD45/Ter119/CD31 triple negative
cells (0.004% of all cells from compact bone extraction). In the bone
marrow, Grem1-EGFP identified a discrete population of perisinusoidal
cells. Grem1-recombined cells dramatically expand within MSC cultures
forming large colony forming units, with a CFU-F efficiency of 3%.
Grem1-recombined cells could be differentiated in vitro into adipocytes,
osteoblasts, chondrocytes and SMA(+) myofibroblasts. Furthermore, these
cells are long-lived, recoverable from the bone at least 9 months after
tamoxifen induction and can be transplanted. In the small intestine, 24
hours after tamoxifen induction, there were single Grem1 recombined cells
found immediately subjacent to the basement membrane. These initially
rare SMA(-) recombined cells expanded over the next 12 months to
completely trace the periepithelial fibroblast sheath. In both the gut
and bone marrow, perinatal tamoxifen induction led to dramatically
accelerated lineage tracing. Syngeneic tumorigenicity and carcinogenesis
studies (including hepatic metastatic model (splenic injection of MC38,
C57Bl/6 colorectal cancer cell line), MNU/Hfelis and AOM/DSS
gastrointestinal cancer models) in our Grem1-BAC-specific lines revealed
that Grem1 marked a cellular origin of cancer-associated mesenchyme,
although many cancer-associated fibroblasts also arise from a specific
SMA+ stromal population. The exact lineage relationship between these
Grem1 and SMA+ cells is being tested.Conclusions: Grem1-expression labels
a specific mesenchymal progenitor in the bone and gut that can give rise
to multiple mesenchymal lineages during development and in the
peritumoral stroma. We are currently examining the functional relevance
of these cells and Grem1 production in supporting the normal and
pathological stem cell niche in the bone marrow, gut and tumor
microenvironment.

