Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Src inhibition enhances BMP receptor antagonists downregulation of
Id1 and growth suppression of lung cancer cells with a K-Ras mutation.


The bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) is aberrantly expressed in 98% of
non-small cell lung carcinomas. Our studies show that selective
antagonists (DMH1, DMH2, and LDN) of the type I BMP receptors inhibit the
proliferation and induce cell death of lung cancer cell lines, which is
mediated at least in part by downregulating the expression of Id1 and
Id3. The Id proteins are known to regulate essential aspects of
tumorigenesis in many carcinomas.The Src signaling pathway has been shown
to increase the expression of Id1 in A549 cells. Src regulation of Id1 is
mediated through the BMP pathway. Src binds to pSmad 1/5, which enhances
its translocation into the nucleus. Src also mediates activity of
response elements on the Id1 promoter that also bind pSmad 1/5. The BMP
signaling pathway suppresses Src signaling, suggesting feedback
inhibition.We examined the ability of a BMP receptor antagonist (DMH2)
and a Src antagonist (PP2) to regulate Id1 and Id3 expression in three
lung cancer cell lines with a K-Ras mutation (A549,H157,H727) and 3
without a K-Ras mutation (H1299,H865,U1752). PP2 caused a reduction in
Id1 and/or Id3 in 2 of the 3 cell lines with a K-Ras mutation
(A549,H157). PP2 had no effect or increased the expression of Id1 and Id3
in cell lines without a K-Ras mutation. DMH2 decreased expression of Id1
and Id3 and caused growth suppression of all the cell lines. In the A549
cells, the combination of DMH2 and PP2 caused significantly greater
reduction in Id1 promoter activity and growth inhibition than either
agent alone. Inhibition of BMP signaling caused an increase in the
expression of phosphorylated Src, suggesting feedback regulation.The data
suggests that Src inhibition leads to the downregulation of Id expression
predominately in lung cancer cells with a K-Ras mutation. Inhibition of
BMP signaling with receptor antagonists causes significant downregulation
of Id1/Id3 and growth inhibition even in lung cancer cell lines with
K-Ras mutations. Inhibition of BMP signaling may activate Src, suggesting
that both BMP and Src antagonists are needed to suppress Id expression
and inhibit tumor growth.

