Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating new therapies in Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor using
in vivo molecular optical imaging.


Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common mesenchymal
tumors with an estimated annual incidence of 6,000 new cases in the
United States. The majority (75%) of GISTs possess gain-of-function
mutations in KIT exons 9, 11, 13 or 17, causing constitutive activation
of the kinase receptor, with smaller subsets possessing either
gain-of-function mutations in PDGFRA (exons 12, 14 or 18) or BRAF (exon
15). Management of GIST has been transformed by the identification of
these tumor driver mutations leading to unprecedented disease control of
advanced GIST with the introduction of imatinib mesylate (IM). Despite
the efficacy of IM, most patients experience primary and/or secondary
resistance within 2 years of treatment. Therefore additional therapies
are needed and methods to optimize screening of novel approaches are
warranted. Efficacy of treatment is typically assessed using Response
Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors (RECIST) guidelines. Using RECIST,
patients with advanced disease have equivalent survival when they have
stable disease as when they have complete or partial responses. The Choi
criteria define treatment response as a >10% decrease in tumor size or a
>15% decrease in tumor density of tumor lesions assessed on CT scans.
Response by Choi criteria has been shown to correlate better with FDG-PET
than RECIST response, but can only be used with contrast enhanced CT
imaging. RECIST and Choi both require a period of time on therapy before
changes indicative of response can be observed. None of these criteria
however informs us directly about cell death. Here we evaluate the use of
molecular imaging technology using near-infrared (NIR) imaging probes in
combination with three-dimensional fluorescence molecular tomography
(FMT) for assessing therapeutic response and ultimately optimizing our
understanding of the biologic effects of these agents. We determine the
potential of two NIR probes (PSVueTM794 and KcapQ647) for detecting
apoptosis and compare this to tumor size measured by MRI in response to
IM treatment in GIST-T1 xenografts. PSVueTM794, used as a marker of
apoptosis, binds to phosphatidylserine residues exposed on the surface of
apoptotic cells and, in addition, binds to negatively-charged necrotic
regions found in various tumors. KcapQ647, a cell penetrating activatable
probe was used to detect apoptosis-associated caspase acitivity. Our
studies revealed statistically significant increases in apoptotic
activity due to IM treatment (compared to control) using both the PSVue
TM794 and KcapQ647 probes (p=1.41e-04, 0.002 respectively) as early as 24
hours post IM treatment. These findings were confirmed by IHC. We believe
that this methodology will allow for faster and more effective screening
of novel therapies in preclinical GIST models.

