Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of CXCL9/Mig expression in the tumor microenvironment
promotes protective antitumor immune responses.


Despite intense efforts to design immunotherapeutic strategies, the
success of cancer immunotherapy remains extremely limited. Major factors
limiting immune responses to tumors include insufficient activation of
tumor-reactive effector T cells, poor intra-tumor recruitment of effector
T cells, and/or suppression of their functions within the tumor. One
mediator involved in effector T cell activation and recruitment to
inflammatory sites is the T cell chemoattractant chemokine CXCL9/Mig. Our
recent studies in murine models of aggressive skin cancer (cutaneous
sarcoma and melanoma) have indicated that these tumors cease the
production of CXCL9/Mig as a result of immunoediting mediated by T cells
and IFN-g. The consequence of Mig deficiency in the tumor
microenvironment is the increased resistance of immunoedited
Mig-deficient tumor variants to T cell-mediated immunity. Here we
demonstrated that inducing constitutive expression of Mig within
Mig-deficient tumors by delivery of Mig-encoding retroviral vector
promotes protective anti-tumor immune responses and results in rejection
of cutaneous tumors. This modulation of intra-tumor Mig expression
induced potent tumor-specific CD4 and CD8 T cell-mediated responses
capable of complete tumor elimination and subsequent protection to tumor
re-challenge. Furthermore, the delivery of Mig-overexpressing tumor cells
as a vaccine into mice with established cutaneous tumors induced systemic
anti-tumor immune responses that suppressed growth of established tumors.
This therapeutic effect correlated with the presence of dendritic cells
(DC) in the tumor-draining lymph nodes (TDLN) that were very potent in
the activation of tumor antigen-specific IFN-g producing T cells. These
results suggest that besides the recruitment of effector T cells into the
tumor, tumor-derived Mig enhances activation of these T cells possibly by
affecting tumor-infiltrating DC that acquire tumor antigens and then
migrate into TDLN to prime tumor-specific effector T cells. Therefore,
Mig might be a potent component of vaccines aimed to boost anti-tumor
immunity in patients with aggressive skin cancers deficient in the
expression of this chemokine.

