Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRAIL and Noxa are selectively up-regulated in prostate cancer
cells downstream of the RIG-I/MAVS signaling pathway by non-replicating
Sendai virus particles.


PURPOSE: The treatment of cancer with oncolytic viruses primarily depends
on the selective viral replication in cancer cells. However, we
previously reported that a replication-incompetent hemagglutinating virus
of Japan (HVJ; Sendai virus) envelope (HVJ-E) suppressed the growth of
human cancer cells, including prostate cancer cells, as effectively as
replication-competent live HVJ without producing toxic effects in
nonmalignant cells. Here, we analyze the molecular mechanism of the
oncolytic activity of HVJ-E and also analyze the treatment efficacy of
HVJ-E using an orthotopic prostate cancer model.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The
molecules responsible for HVJ-E-induced cancer cell death were elucidated
in human prostate cancer cell lines, PC3, DU145 and LNCap. The cell
viability was examined using MTS assay after HVJ-E treatment or the
transfer of viral RNA genome fragments from HVJ-E. The viral RNA genome
fragments and siRNAs were transferred to cells using liposome
transfection. The expression of TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL) and Noxa were examined using Western blot analysis. The
orthotopic prostate cancers were established by the inoculation of PC3
cells into the prostate of nonobese diabetic-severe combined
immunodeficient (NOD-SCID) mice. After the tumors increased and
microscopically visualized, HVJ-E was injected into the prostate of
NOD-SCID mice. Tumor sections were prepared, and then, histological
analysis and TUNEL assay were performed.RESULTS: The liposome-mediated
transfer of viral RNA genome fragments from HVJ-E suppressed the
viability of prostate cancer cells, PC3 and LNCaP, but not the viability
of the noncancerous prostate epithelium, PNT2. Knockdown experiments
using siRNAs showed that the cancer cell-selective killing induced by
HVJ-E was mediated by retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and
mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS). Downstream of the
RIG-I/MAVS pathway, both TRAIL and Noxa were up-regulated by either HVJ-E
treatment or transfer of viral RNA genome fragments in PC3 cells but not
in PNT2 cells. TRAIL siRNA and/or Noxa siRNA significantly inhibited
HVJ-E-induced cell death in prostate cancer cells. Furthermore, the
orthotopic prostate cancers were dramatically eradicated in NOD-SCID mice
injected with HVJ-E. Although tubuloalveolar glands were histologically
maintained in the prostate injected with HVJ-E, dramatic increase of
TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells were detected exclusively in the tumors
treated with HVJ-E.CONCLUSION: The oncolytic activity of HVJ-E was
mediated by TRAIL and Noxa, downstream of the RIG-I/MAVS signaling
pathway, selectively up-regulated in prostate cancer cells by HVJ-E
treatment. The RIG-I/MAVS signaling pathway represents an attractive
target for cancer therapy.

