Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCL8 is a secretory inflammatory stimulus of the activated TME
that modulates breast cancer phenotype.


The tumor microenvironment (TME) is a heterogeneous niche consisting of
numerous stromal cells, structural components, and secreted molecules
from both the malignant and surrounding cells that contribute to tumor
growth and progression. Importantly, these diverse types of secreted
molecules can initiate crosstalk events between the tumor cells and TME.
One such molecule, CXCL8/Interleukin-8 (IL-8), is a proinflammatory
chemokine, primarily involved in neutrophil mobilization, which activates
multiple cellular signaling pathways via the membrane associated G
protein-coupled CXCL8 cognate receptors, CXCR1 and CXCR2. We hypothesized
that IL-8, a ubiquitous inflammatory molecule that is secreted by
macrophages, activated fibroblasts and mesenchymal cells, can alter
breast cancer phenotype. To this end, using a cell culture model we
analyzed both estrogen receptor (ER) positive and ER negative breast
cancer cell lines T47D and MDA-MB-231 respectively that were found to
express the CXCL8 receptors CXCR1 and CXCR2. The cellular source of IL-8
was from conditioned media (CM) from in vitro cultures of primary stromal
cells including primary mesenchymal and fibroblast cells, as well as the
established monocytic cell lines HL-60 and THP-1. Each cell line secreted
adequate amounts of IL-8 as measured by ELISA, however primary
mesenchymal cells produced four times that of the fibroblasts and
macrophages suggesting that activated mesenchymal cells may be a very
potent source of chronic inflammation in the TME. Interestingly,
treatment with IL-8 or CM from the phorbol ester treated macrophages
THP-1 led to increased proliferation in T47D in vitro however only IL-8
treatment led to proliferation of MDA-MB-231. Recombinant IL-8 as well as
CM of THP-1 and mesenchymal cells enhanced migration and invasion of both
T47D and MDA-MB-231 cells as evaluated by a modified Boyden chamber
assay. Supplementation of the triple negative MDA-MB-231 line with THP-1
CM enhanced its invasive propensity nearly two fold. THP-1 CM treatment
also led to the activation of the PI3K/p-Akt and Mek/Erk pathways in the
ER MDA-MB-231 cells but not the ER+ T47D cells suggesting a link between
CXCL8 mediated inflammation and constitutive signal transduction pathways
that is translatable into enhanced metastatic propensity. Our studies are
directed towards the analysis of both chronic and acute inflammation of
the TME and we believe IL-8 and its associated intracellular molecular
markers may be important preventive and therapeutic targets in triple
negative breast cancer.

