Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Procyanidin B2 3,3-di-O-gallate causes strong efficacy towards
prostate cancer stem cells via targeting Notch1 signaling.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common malignancy in US men;
statistical estimates for 2012 indicate 241,740 new PCa cases and 28,170
associated deaths. Epithelial cancers including PCa are now recognized as
generated and maintained by a small sub-set of undifferentiated cells
known as cancer stem cells (CSC) or tumor initiating cells. Importantly,
CSC are inherently resistant to chemo- and radio-therapies, and that has
been the major reason for the failure of most of the current therapies.
Since an early event in carcinogenesis involves expansion of CSC pool,
interventions inducing apoptosis or differentiation with a loss of
self-renewal capacity of CSC, represent a rational approach for PCa
prevention and treatment. In this regard, the present study was aimed to
determine whether grape seed extract (GSE), a natural non-toxic
chemopreventive agent and its active constituent Procyanidin B2
3,3-di-O-gallate (B2G2), have the potential to target CSC in PCa. For
this, we determined the effect of these agents on the self-renewal
capacity of the CSC population of PCa cell lines. The CSC cell
populations were isolated and purified based on CD44+ 21highsurface
markers in PCa cell lines LNCaP, C4-2B, 22Rv1, PC3, and DU145, and then
subjected to sphere cluster formation assays, in the absence or presence
of (a single or multi-treatments) GSE (5-125 g/ml) or B2G2 (25-100M). The
percentage of floating spheroids (prostaspheres) generated in the sphere
cluster assays after 1-2 weeks were determined. Results indicated that
while a single treatment of GSE is not sufficient to reduce either the
number or size of generated spheres in the PCa cell lines, multiple
treatments with GSE at low dose was sufficient to cause a significant
reduction in the number and size of generated spheres. On the other hand,
single treatment of PCa cells with B2G2 significantly reduced the number
and size of prostaspheres. As formation of spheroids under specific in
vitro conditions is a measure of stemness, these results indicate the
potential of GSE and B2G2 to target the self-renewal of CSC in PCa cell
lines, though B2G2 was found to be more potent in its efficacy.
Subsequent mechanistic studies revealed that both agents strongly
decreased the constitutive as well as Jagged1 (Notch1 ligand)-induced
protein levels of cleaved Notch and its transcriptional target Hes-1 in
PCa cells. The implications of such an effect could be important, since
the modulation of Notch signaling among stem cells and progenitor cells
in PCa results in the expansion of CSC pool together with an increase in
proliferative cell population. Together, our results are significant as
they show that both GSE and B2G2 interfere with kinetics of CSC pool
expansion via targeting Notch-1 regulatory signals, which eventually
could help control PCa growth and progression.

