Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proinflammatory chemokine receptor CXCR2 promotes cellular
proliferation through suppression of cell cycle inhibitor p21 protein in
ovarian cancer.


Introduction: Ovarian cancer is responsible for the highest rate of
mortality in gynecological malignancy. Increased expression for
proinflammatory chemokine receptor CXCR2 and its ligand CXCL1 in ovarian
cancer have been shown to be associated with poor patient outcomes.
However, the mechanisms regulating the interplay between CXCR2 and
ovarian cancer remain poorly understood. This study was designed to
assess the role and molecular mechanisms of CXCR2 in ovarian cancer cell
progression.Methods: The influence of CXCR2 on cell proliferation was
examined in CXCR2 null ovarian cancer cells A2780, OVCAR3 and SKOV3, and
its stable transfected cells as a molecular tool. The signaling pathways
and related genes and protein expressions were determined by Western
blot, PCR array and promoter activity assay.Results: CXCR2 promoted cell
proliferation in all ovarian cancer cell lines examined. CXCL1, a CXCR2
ligand, further enhanced the potentiation of CXCR2 in cell proliferation.
PCR array for cell cycle-related genes displayed inhibited expression for
cell cycle inhibitor p21 gene in CXCR2 expressing cells. Western blotting
showed that CXCR2 decreased tumor suppressor p53 protein, a tightly
regulator for p21, particularly in p53 wild-type A2780 cells.
Interestingly, CXCR2 down-regulated histone deacetylase inhibitor
(romidepsin)-induced p21 protein expression, even in p53 mutant OVCAR-3
and p53 null SKOV-3 cells, implying the interaction between CXCR2 and p21
protein in a p53-indepentent manner. Nutlin-3, a p53 stabilizer,
inhibited ovarian cancer cell proliferation in p53 wild-type cells, and
CXCR2 expressing cells were more responsive to nutlin-3 in cell
proliferation, indicating the substantial impact of nutlin-3 on p53
stabilization. On the other hand, nutlin-3 had no or little effect on
cell proliferation in p53 mutant or null cells. Furthermore, a CXCR2
antagonist, SB225002, recovered the CXCR2-induced down-regulation of p21
protein, and the expression for murine double minute (Mdm2), an important
negative regulator of p53, was enhanced in CXCR2 expressing cells. As an
evidence to regulate Mdm2, CXCR2 activated epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) followed by PI3k/Akt phosphorylation, suggesting the
involvement of Akt signaling in the induction of Mdm2
protein.Conclusions: CXCL2-induced cell proliferation is specifically
mediated by suppressing cell cycle inhibitor p21 protein, probably
resulting from EGFR-Akt-Mdm2 signaling. Therefore, targeting this
signaling pathway may represent a potential therapeutic and prophylactic
approach for CXCR2 expressing cancer cells.

