Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined inhibition of EMMPRIN and EGFR abrogates growth and
migration of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells.


Head and neck cancer squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the most common
malignancy of the upper aerodigestive tract. Despite intense efforts to
improve different treatment modalities, mortality rates in advanced cases
remain high. A deeper understanding of the HNSCC progression mechanisms
is needed to improve survival in patients with HNSCC. The epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a receptor tyrosine kinase, which
regulates crucial cellular signaling pathways contributing to tumor
progression. EGFR is frequently amplified and overexpressed in several
human solid tumors including a high percentage of HNSCCs. Evidence
accumulated in several studies has shown that EGFR stimulation induces
expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which degrade
extracellular matrix, and its activation process is critical for tumor
development. Recently, extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer
(EMMPRIN), which is known as CD147 and is a member of the immunoglobulin
superfamily, has been reported to be highly expressed in malignant tumors
including HNSCC. It has been reported that EGFR expression is associated
with EMMPRIN in some solid tumors; however, the relationship of EMMPRIN
with EGFR in head and neck cancers is not fully understood. To determine
the relationship between EMMPRIN and EGFR in HNSCC, HNSCC cells were
stimulated with epidermal growth factor (EGF), a ligand of EGFR.
Immunoblotting analysis showed that EMMPRIN expression in HNSCC cells was
upregulated by EGF in a dose- and time-dependent manner. In addition,
gelatin zymography showed that EGF stimulation-induced cell invasion and
MMP-9 expression of HNSCC cells. Interestingly, this increase in invasion
and MMP-9 expression were abrogated by downmodulation of EMMPRIN
expression using the siRNA technique. Furthermore, to determine the
effects of combined EMMPRIN and EGFR targeting in the HNSCC cell line,
HNSCC cells were investigated in cell proliferation and migration assays.
The effects of combined treatment with the EMMPRIN function blocking
antibody and the EGFR inhibitor AG1478 were examined on the proliferation
and migration of HNSCC cells. This combined treatment resulted in greater
inhibition of HNSCC cell proliferation and migration compared with the
individual agents alone. These results suggest that EMMPRIN mediates
EGFR-induced invasion and MMP-9 expression in cases where combined
targeting of EMMPRIN and EGFR may be an efficacious treatment approach.

