Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclooxygenase pathway in ovarian cancer.


Objectives: To examine the role of the cyclooxygenase (COX) pathway in
ovarian cancer. Cyclooxygenases, specifically COX1 and COX2, are
frequently overexpressed in malignancies and lead to the synthesis of
prostaglandins. A particularly important prostaglandin, PGE2 is exported
from the cell into the extracellular milieu by the multi-drug resistance
protein 4 (MRP4) transporter where it acts in a paracrine and autocrine
manner by activating a family of G-protein coupled receptors (EP1-4).
PGE2 is transported into the cell by the prostaglandin transporter (PGT)
and catabolized by 15-prostaglandin dehydrogenase (15-PGDH). It has been
previously shown that COX1, rather than COX2, is overexpressed in ovarian
cancer. Little is known about the role of other members of this pathway,
including EP receptors, PGT, MRP4, and 15-PGDH, in this disease.Methods:
HOSE (benign immortalized ovarian epithelial cells) and two ovarian
cancer cell lines, SKOV3 and OVCAR3, were grown under standard
conditions. Cells were harvested and RNA and protein were isolated.
Quantitative RT-PCR was done using the SYBR Green protocol to examine the
expression of members of the cyclooxygenase pathway and expressed
relative to HOSE cells.Results: In both ovarian cancer cell lines
relative to HOSE, expression of COX2, PGT, EP4, and EP1 was decreased. In
SKOV3 cells, COX1 and 15-PGDH expression was decreased but MRP4 levels
were comparable to levels detected in HOSE cells. In OVCAR3 cells, COX1
and 15-PGDH expression levels were increased and MRP4 was decreased
relative to HOSE cells. PGE2 levels in media will be measured to
determine the net effect of these changes. Protein levels of the members
of the cyclooxygenase pathway will be determined by western
blot.Conclusions: It is clear that several members of the cyclooxygenase
pathway are expressed differently in malignant versus normal ovarian
cells. Studies in progress will determine the functional significance of
these differences.

