Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotherapy-enhanced NFkB pathway activation in gynecological
cancers increases the differentiation of monocytes to M2 macrophages
instead of dendritic cells.


Current therapy of gynecological malignancies consists of
platinum-containing chemotherapy. Resistance to therapy is associated
with increased levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and prostaglandin E2
(PGE2), two inflammatory mediators known to skew differentiation of
monocytes to tumor-promoting M2 macrophages. We investigated the impact
of cisplatin and carboplatin on 10 different cervical and ovarian cancer
cell lines as well as on the differentiation and function of monocytes
cultured in the presence of these tumor cells in vitro. Treatment with
cisplatin or carboplatin increased the potency of tumor cell lines to
induce IL10-producing M2 macrophages which displayed increased levels of
activated signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3) due
to tumor-produced IL-6 as well as decreased levels of activated STAT1 and
STAT6 related to the PGE2-production of tumor cells. Blockade of
canonical NFB signaling showed that the effect of chemotherapy depended
on the enhanced activation of the NFB pathway and subsequent increased
production of PGE2 and IL-6 by tumor cell lines originally producing
these factors. Treatment with cyclooxygenase (COX)-inhibitor indomethacin
and/or the clinical monoclonal antibody against IL-6 receptor (IL-6R),
tocilizumab, prevented M2-differentiation. Importantly, no correlation
existed between the production of PGE2 or IL-6 by cancer cells and their
resistance to chemotherapy induced death, indicating that other
mechanisms underlie the reported chemoresistance of tumors producing
these factors. Our data suggests that a chemotherapy-mediated increase in
tumor-promoting M2 macrophages may form an indirect mechanism for
chemoresistance. Hence, concomitant therapy with COX-inhibitors and/or
IL-6R antibodies might increase the clinical effect of platinum-based
chemotherapy in otherwise resistant tumors.

