Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinically relevant paclitaxel concentrations cause chromosome
missegregation rather than mitotic arrest.


Paclitaxel is a chemotherapeutic, microtubule-stabilizing drug used to
treat a variety of cancers, including those of the breast. In the
neoadjuvant setting, paclitaxel effects tumor shrinkage in up to half of
patients. Identification of a biomarker to predict response to paclitaxel
would reduce side effects and improve patient outcomes. It has long been
known that micromolar concentrations of paclitaxel cause cells in culture
to arrest in mitosis, which can lead to cell death. However, the
concentration range found within patient tumors remains unclear, both
because it has not been directly measured and because paclitaxel
accumulates intracellularly up to 1000 fold. In a pilot clinical trial,
we are directly measuring the intratumoral drug concentration in breast
tumors following neoadjuvant paclitaxel treatment. Our preliminary data
support the hypothesis that treatment of cultured cells with a low
nanomolar concentration more accurately models the intratumoral drug
levels in breast cancer patients. Unlike treatment with micromolar
concentrations, treatment with low nanomolar paclitaxel does not cause a
significant mitotic arrest. Rather, cells treated with low nanomolar
paclitaxel frequently proceed through mitosis with multipolar mitotic
spindles, resulting in chromosome missegregation and the production of
two or more daughter cells. This alternative mechanism of action may
explain why tumors treated with paclitaxel fail to show an increase in
mitotic index. Previous studies have shown that low rates of chromosome
missegregation are well tolerated, but high rates of chromosome
missegregation cause cell death due to loss of both copies of one or more
essential chromosomes. Therefore, the fidelity of chromosome segregation
may be of use as a predictor of response to paclitaxel. In chromosomally
stable breast cancer cells, exposure to paclitaxel for two days is
sufficient to induce aneuploidy, and within three days there is an
increase in cell death. However, a subset of cells are able to survive in
low nM paclitaxel for over one week, and survival is higher than in cells
which exhibit chromosomal instability (CIN), and have a preexisting rate
of chromosome missegregation during division. In patients, chromosomal
stability is of potential use as a predictive biomarker to select
patients most likely to respond to paclitaxel treatment.

