Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ganoderma lucidum (Reishi) induces autophagy in inflammatory
breast cancer cells to promote cell death.


Autophagic cell death is an important physiological cell death process
that is characterized by massive degradation of cellular contents by
means of intracellular membrane/vesicle reorganization and lysosomal
activity. Herein, we test the autophagy inducing effects of the medicinal
mushroom Ganoderma lucidum (Reishi) in the inflammatory breast cancer
(IBC) cell line, SUM-149. IBC is a rare, lethal and aggressive form of
advanced breast cancer with poor prognosis and no targeted therapy.
Because the mechanism is not well defined, some autophagic cell death
events might be attributed to apoptosis. This death or survival mechanism
depends on cell type and cells stress, since in such cases the induction
of both, autophagy and other pro-death signals (i.e. BAX), occur in
parallel. Our hypothesis is that Reishi induces autophagy in IBC cells to
promote cell death. SUM-149 cells were treated with 0.5mg/mL of Reishi
for 2h, 4h, 6h, 8h, 12h and 24h. Cells were lysed and equal total protein
was western blotted against Beclin-1, Atg5, Atg12 and LC3B autophagy
proteins. To confirm autophagy effects on cell viability, cells were
treated with 3-methyladenine (3-MA), chloroquine (CQ) and PP242 with or
without Reishi for 24 hours. Cells were fixed and stained with propidium
iodide to assess viable nuclei. Herein we show that Reishi affects the
expression of autophagy-associated molecules depending on treatment time.
Reishi increases the expression of autophagy proteins in IBC. Moreover,
the autophagy inhibitors increased cell viability after 24h, while cancer
cell viability decreased when Reishi was added. Autophagy inducer PP242
alone and in combination with Reishi decreased cell viability and induced
the expression of the pro-apoptotic protein, BAX. Thus, we demonstrate
that Reishi induces autophagy, promoting cell death in IBC cells, as
cancer cell viability is reduced, with a subsequent increase in
pro-apoptotic protein expression when Reishi is added. Our findings are
the first to show a novel mechanism responsible for the inhibition of IBC
cell viability by Reishi demonstrating its potential for use in treatment
of cancer. This project was sponsored by Title V PPOHA US Dept of
Education #P031M105050 to UCC, NIH/RCMI #2G12RR003035 to UCC, NIH/INBRE
#5P20RR016470 to UPR/UCC, NIH/NCRR #U54RR026139 to UPR/UCC, and a
research donation from the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico to UCC-Centro
Universitario de Medicina Integral y Complementaria (CUMIC) / MMM.

