Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanical properties of cancer cells: a possible biomarker for
stemness.


There is evidence that mechanical properties and deformability can be
used as a biomarker to distinguish between healthy and cancerous cells. A
number of biophysical techniques such as atomic force microscopy (AFM),
and optical tweezers have been used to measure the mechanical properties
of cancer cells. Deformability of a whole cell, which depends on the
properties of the cytoplasm, the cytoskeleton and the nucleus, can be
defined in terms of the strain response of the cell to an applied stress.
Two different cell mechanical behaviors have been observed: 1)
circulating white blood cells behave as liquid drops with a cortical
tension; 2) most tissue cells behave as viscoelastic solids. In this
study, micropipette aspiration was used to investigate deformability
differences between two breast cancer cell lines: BT-20 and Hs578T.
Hs578T breast cancer cells have been reported to have a stem-like
phenotype, whereas BT-20 cells are more recognized as being
non-stem-like. Cancer cells were aspirated one-by-one at controlled
pressures into small glass micropipettes with radius, Rp, while the
length of the aspirated section of the cell inside the micropipette, L,
was measured. Two different aspiration procedures have been developed: 1)
ramp test and 2) creep test. In the ramp test, suction pressure was
increased linearly using a syringe pump, while for the creep test, the
pressure was increased rapidly and then kept constant during the
experiment. Using the ramp test, graphs of cell deformation (L/Rp) versus
applied pressure, showed a linear trend for small deformations for both
BT-20 and Hs578T cells, while for large deformations, the graphs were no
longer linear. One explanation for this, was that above a deformation
threshold the cells were exhibiting liquid-like behavior. This was tested
using a constant aspiration pressure in the creep test. It was seen that
half of the cells fully entered the micropipettes at constant pressure, a
character of liquid drops, while the rest reached an equilibrium
position, which implies a viscoelastic behavior for the cells. It could
be concluded that for small deformations, cells mostly have solid-like
behavior, while for large deformations they could exhibit liquid-like or
viscoelastic behaviors. We also found that stem-like cancer cells are
softer than non-stem-like cells with no significant differences between
the mechanical properties of their cytoplasmic and nuclear regions, which
allows them to deform more easily while undergoing extravasation and
intravasation processes during metastasis. Our hypothesis is that the
stem-like or non-stem-like phenotype of cancer cells is correlated with
differences in mechanical properties. If these differences are
significant enough, mechanical properties could be used as a biomarker
for stemness of cells, which could eventually lead to a new diagnostic
method in cancer research. This work was supported by grant CBET-1106118
from the National Science Foundation.

