Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of PAR-4 activity in chemoresistant ovarian cancer
cells: A major role for the cleaved fragment in the control of apoptosis.


Prostate Apoptosis Response-4 (PAR-4) is a tumor suppressor protein whose
expression level in cancer is frequently decreased; however it is neither
mutated nor suppressed. A unique feature of PAR-4 is that it can induce
apoptosis selectively in cancer cells without destroying normal cells,
giving it an interest in anti-cancer targeted therapy. PAR-4 is not only
regulated at the expression level, but also post-translationally by
phosphorylation, and protein cleavage. Most recently, the caspase-3
cleaved form of PAR-4 has been demonstrated by our laboratory and we have
shown that it has all the necessary sites to induce apoptosis. In the
present study, we have investigated the mechanisms regulating PAR-4 and
its cleaved form in chemosensitive versus chemoresistant ovarian cancer
cells.Using A2780/A2780CP ovarian cell lines (sensitive and resistant to
cisplatin in vitro) and OV2295/OV2295-2 (sensitive cells obtained before
treatment and cisplatin resistance acquired in vivo), we compared
expression level of PAR-4 and its cleaved form (cl.PAR-4) after treatment
with cisplatin. Only sensitive cancer cells have a decrease of PAR-4
level and an increase of cl.PAR-4. To further investigate mechanisms
behind cl.PAR-4, we produced stable clones of A2780/A2780CP expressing
cl.PAR-4-MYC using lentiviral particles. Our first observations were
that, upon cisplatin treatment, cl.PAR-4-MYC protein level was increased
indicating post-translational mechanisms regulating cl.PAR-4. Using
proteasome inhibitor, MG-132, cl.PAR-4-MYC expression level highly
increase indicating a link between cl.PAR-4 and the proteasome. We also
obtained preliminary results indicating a regulation of cl.PAR-4-MYC by
the MAPK pathway. Using U0126, a MEK inhibitor, we were able to lower
cl.PAR-4-MYC protein level and also basal cl.PAR-4. Upon cisplatin
treatment in A2780-cl.PAR-4, p-ERK expression increased in correlation
with the increase of cl.PAR-4-MYC while in A2780-Empty cells, the level
of p-ERK was not influenced. We also investigated the localization of
cl.PAR-4 using cytoplasmic/nuclear fractionation and harvested the
culture supernatant to verify if the protein is excreted from the cancer
cells. The fractionation indicates that cl.PAR-4-MYC is localized equally
in both nucleus and cytoplasm. We have analyzed the supernatant and found
that cl.PAR-4 is also present outside of the cell indicating an
excretion/secretion mechanism of cl.PAR-4.Further analyses of the
post-translational mechanisms behind cl.PAR-4 still need to be
investigated to better understand the regulation of this potential tumor
suppressor. By better understanding the mechanisms of PAR-4 and its
cleaved form, we may be able to utilize this protein to sensitize
chemoresistant ovarian cancer cells. These findings may open new
treatment options against women's cancers by improving their health.

