Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacologic inhibition of NF-kappaB overcomes de novo resistance
to erlotinib in models of EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinoma.


Treatment of patients with lung cancers that harbor activating mutations
in the kinase domain of EGFR (e.g. L858R, in frame Exon19 deletion),
which account for 15-20% of lung adenocarcinomas, with the EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI) erlotinib, causes tumor regression in many
patients. However, the magnitude of tumor regression is variable and
responses are short-lived with a median duration of 9-12 months. Thus
inhibition of mutant EGFR activity by treatment with erlotinib results in
incomplete responses and is not curative in the majority of EGFR-mutant
lung cancer patients. While mechanisms of acquired resistance to EGFR TKI
treatment are well defined, mechanisms of de novo resistance, or
incomplete initial response to EGFR TKI therapy, remain uncharacterized.
We recently identified activation of the NF-kB (Nuclear Factor
kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells) signaling pathway as a
key mediator of de novo resistance to EGFR TKI therapy in cell lines and
tumor xenograft models of lung cancer. Furthermore, patients with
EGFR-mutant lung cancers that demonstrate elevated IkB (NF-kB inhibitor)
expression, and consequently low NF-kB activity, exhibit improved
responses to EGFR TKIs compared to patients with low IkB levels. NF-kB is
a family of transcription factors that regulates numerous biological
processes, including cell proliferation and apoptosis, as well as a
critical mediator of both innate and adaptive immune cell activity. We
hypothesized that pharmacologic inhibition of NF-kB activity would
enhance the efficacy of EGFR TKI in EGFR-mutant lung cancer. Using a
novel rel (reticuloendotheliosis) inhibitor of NF-kB, PBS-1086 (relMD,
Inc.), we found that treatment of human lung cancer cells and tumor
xenografts that harbor an EGFRL858R activating mutation (11-18), yet are
EGFR TKI resistant, with erlotinib in combination with PBS-1086 induces
tumor cell apoptosis and tumor regression. Erlotinib + PBS-1086 treatment
results in decreased binding of the NF-kB subunit RelA to the IL6
promoter and a significant decrease in IL6 mRNA expression. IL6 has
previously been shown to promote EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinoma cell
proliferation and survival, and its downregulation by PBS-1086 represents
a possible mechanism of action of the compound. Using CC10-rtTA;
Tet-Op-EGFR-mutant transgenic mouse models of lung adenocarcinoma, we
have shown that treatment of mice with PBS-1086 enhances
erlotinib-induced tumor regression. We believe that these results will
guide future clinical trials of NF-kB inhibitors in combination with
erlotinib to improve outcomes in selected EGFR-mutant lung cancer
patients.

