Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I/II study of val-083 in patients with recurrent malignant
glioma or secondary brain tumor.


Background: Recurrent glial tumors of the brain remain one of the most
challenging malignancies to treat. Median survival for patients with
recurrent disease is approximately 6 months for glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM), as front-line therapy temozolomide (TMZ) is subject to resistance
by DNA repair protein O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT).
VAL-083 represents a first-in-class bi-functional N7 DNA alkylating agent
that readily crosses the blood-brain barrier and accumulates in brain
tissue. Previously published pre-clinical and clinical studies suggest
that VAL-083 has activity against a range of tumor types, including GBM.
Furthermore, research shows that VAL-083 overcomes MGMT-driven drug
resistance in vitro and has activity against cancer stem cells. Hence,
the purpose of this Phase I/II study is to determine the safety and the
maximal tolerated dose (MTD) of VAL-083 in patients with recurrent GBM or
progressive secondary brain tumor, and to explore the pharmacokinetic
properties and tumor responses to treatment.Objectives Part 1:1)
Establish the dose-limiting toxicities (DLT) of VAL-083 and identify
appropriate dose and dosing regimen of VAL-0832) Assess the safety and
characterize the toxicities associated with VAL-0833) Collect information
about anti-tumor activity of VAL-083Objectives Part 2:4) Confirm the
safety and tolerability of the chosen dose/dosing regimen in a larger
number of patients5) Obtain preliminary evidence of anti-tumor activity
in GBM, as measured by response rate and progression free
survivalMethods: An open-label, single arm Phase I/II dose-escalation
study designed to evaluate the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics and
anti-tumor activity of VAL-083 in patients with i) histologically
confirmed initial diagnosis of primary WHO Grade IV malignant GBM, now
recurrent, or ii) progressive secondary brain tumor, having failed
standard brain radiotherapy, and with brain tumor progression after at
least one line of systemic therapy. The study utilizes a 3 + 3 dose
escalation design, until the MTD or the maximum specified dose is
reached. Patients receive VAL-083 intravenously at the assigned dose on
days 1, 2, and 3 of each 21-day treatment cycle. In Phase II, additional
patients will be treated at the MTD (or other selected optimum Phase II
dose) to measure tumor responses. All patients enrolled have previously
been treated with surgery and/or radiation, if appropriate, and must have
failed both bevacizumab and TMZ, unless contraindicated. Results (study
ongoing): Cohort 1 (3 patients) and cohort 2 (4 patients) were completed
without reaching DLT and no drug-related adverse effects (AEs) were
detected. 28.5% (2/7 patients) show stable disease or tumor regression in
response to VAL-083 treatment as assessed by regular MRI scans and
check-ups. Cohort 3 currently has 1 patient enrolled without reaching
DLT. ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01478178

