Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deletion of 3p22.1 by FISH in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
is significantly correlated with loss of -catenin membrane expression and
dysregulated cell adhesion.


The role of WNT signaling is well established in lung cancer and numerous
studies have shown that loss/reduction in expression of catenin, a key
regulator of this pathway, is related to dysregulated cell adhesion,
epithelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) and poor survival. A recent
genome-wide association study (GWAS) in patients with advanced NSCLC and
receiving platinum-based therapy showed that a SNP involving 3p22.1
(rs7629386) situated close to catenin (CTNNB1) was associated with worse
survival. In prior studies we have shown that deletion 3p22.1 (del 3p)
was frequently involved in early events of lung cancer pathogenesis. The
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) BAC probe for 3p22.1 used in our
studies is closely adjacent to CTNNB1. We therefore hypothesized that del
3p might involve a concurrent deletion of CTNNB1, and hence would be
associated with reduced catenin expression.Tumor microarrays (TMAs) from
145 NSCLC patients, 107 early stage (I and II) and 38 advanced stage (III
and IV), were reacted with anti- catenin antibody and scored in
triplicate. Normal staining was defined as complete membranous or partial
membranous with/ without cytoplasmic staining in >90% of tumor cells, and
all others were classified as reduced. FISH performed on bronchoscopic
brush biopsies: ipsilateral to tumor (TBB), contralateral to tumor (NBB),
normal lung (NTP), tissue adjacent to tumor (TAB), and tumor touch
preparations (TTP) were evaluated for del 3p by comparing to an internal
centromeric probe. A logistic regression model was used to assess the
relationship between del 3p at the different sites and catenin
expression. TMAs were also evaluated for Ki-67 by immunohistochemistry. A
Cox proportional hazard model was used to assess for overall survival by
del 3p at the different sites and Ki-67 proliferation index.Of the 145
cases, 113 stained normal and 32 had reduced staining. Statistical
analysis showed there was no significant effect of del 3p on reduced
catenin staining for sites TBB (p=0.14), NBB (p=0.39), NTP (p=0.24), and
TAB (p=0.24); however there was a significant correlation of del 3p from
tumor touch preparations (TTP) on the percentage of cases with reduced
staining (p=0.015).We did not observe any significant correlation of
reduced staining when compared to stage of disease, histologic subtype,
overall survival (OS) or recurrence-free survival (RS). There was also no
significant correlation observed between Ki-67 proliferation index and
catenin expression or Ki-67 and OS/ RS.In conclusion, there is a
significant correlation between del 3p22.1 and loss of catenin staining
in primary NSCLC, and reduced catenin expression likely relates to tumor
initiation and progression, secondary to dysregulated cell adhesion and
EMT.(Funding: Specialized Program of Research Excellence grant P50CA70907)

