Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Iron oxide nanoparticles functionalized with the Clostridium
Perfringens Enterotoxin carboxi-terminal fragment peptide: A novel
diagnostic and therapeutic approach to specifically target ovarian cancer.


Ovarian carcinoma remains the cancer with the highest mortality among
gynecological tumors. Development of novel strategies for the diagnosis
and treatment of chemotherapy resistant ovarian disease remains a high
priority. Magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (NP) consist of an iron oxide
core and hydrophilic coating. NP can establish magnetic field gradients
that alter proton relaxation properties, thus providing an excellent
source of contrast for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Moreover, since
they can be heated in alternating magnetic fields (AMF), they may also
provide an effective form of hyperthermia for cancer therapy.
Unfortunately, currently available iron oxide NP, although potentially
able to allow MRI detection of single cells in vivo, are not tumor
specific. Our group has recently analyzed the genetic fingerprints of
ovarian cancer identifying extremely high expression of the genes
encoding the proteins claudin-3 and -4, the epithelial receptors for
Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin (CPE). Since the C-terminus domain
(C-CPE) of the toxin is sufficient for CPE binding and it is not toxic to
cells, we used iron oxide NP complexed to C-CPE peptide to target
chemotherapy resistant ovarian cancer cells overexpressing claudin-3 and
-4. We report that NP functionalized by the fluorescent C-CPE peptide
effectively bind and rapidly internalize into ovarian cancer cells using
flow cytometry,confocal microscopy and Prussian blue staining. A 5-fold
increase in iron cellular uptake after incubation of tumor cells with
C-CPE NP was consistently detected when compared to tumor cells exposed
to non specific control NP [i.e., iron concentration of (mean STDV) 20.3
0.5 vs 4.1 1.3 nmoles/5*10 cells respectively; pOvarian carcinoma remains
the cancer with the highest mortality among gynecological tumors.
Development of novel strategies for the diagnosis and treatment of
chemotherapy resistant ovarian disease remains a high priority. Magnetic
iron oxide nanoparticles (NP) consist of an iron oxide core and
hydrophilic coating. NP can establish magnetic field gradients that alter
proton relaxation properties, thus providing an excellent source of
contrast for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Moreover, since they can
be heated in alternating magnetic fields (AMF), they may also provide an
effective form of hyperthermia for cancer therapy. Unfortunately,
currently available iron oxide NP, although potentially able to allow MRI
detection of single cells in vivo, are not tumor specific. Our group has
recently analyzed the genetic fingerprints of ovarian cancer identifying
extremely high expression of the genes encoding the proteins claudin-3
and -4, the epithelial receptors for Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin
(CPE). Since the C-terminus domain (C-CPE) of the toxin is sufficient for
CPE binding and it is not toxic to cells, we used iron oxide NP complexed
to C-CPE peptide to target chemotherapy resistant ovarian cancer cells
overexpressing claudin-3 and -4. We report that NP functionalized by the
fluorescent C-CPE peptide effectively bind and rapidly internalize into
ovarian cancer cells using flow cytometry,confocal microscopy and
Prussian blue staining. A 5-fold increase in iron cellular uptake after
incubation of tumor cells with C-CPE NP was consistently detected when
compared to tumor cells exposed to non specific control NP [i.e., iron
concentration of (mean STDV) 20.3 0.5 vs 4.1 1.3 nmoles/5*10 cells
respectively; p<0.01]. Importantly, only tumor cells exposed to C-CPE NP
were detectable in MRI in vitro experiments using a Bruker 4.7Tmagnet.
Finally, to assess the potential of C-CPE NP to be used for hyperthermia
therapy against chemotherapy resistant ovarian cancer, we characterized
the magnetic heating capacity of C-CPE NP using an induction heating
system (Ambrell, Easy Heat). Our results show a temperature increase of
7.85 0.6 C (mean STDV) when C-CPE NP were subjected to an AMF of 343 kHz
of frequency and 2 KW of power for 10 minutes. Our data clearly suggest
that C-CPE NP may represent a novel theranostic tool to specifically
target chemotherapy resistant ovarian cancer.

