Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recurrent FGFR1 hotspot mutations represent a novel therapeutic
target in childhood astrocytoma.


Introduction: Pilocytic astrocytoma (PA) is the most common childhood
brain tumor. This tumor can occur throughout the central nervous system,
with roughly 50% of cases arising outside of the cerebellum. Tumors in
these non-cerebellar locations are often difficult to treat surgically,
leading to multiple tumor recurrences. PA can therefore become a chronic
disease, with patients experiencing substantial morbidities. Alterations
in the MAPK pathway, particularly BRAF, have previously been identified
in 80% of PAs. Interestingly, however, the majority of those cases
without a recognized change are non-cerebellar.Methods: To investigate
the full range of genetic alterations occurring in PA, we used Illumina
HiSeq technologies to perform whole-genome sequencing of matched tumor
and germline DNA from 47 patients, with corresponding RNA sequencing data
for 35 tumors.Results: The average somatic mutation rate in PA was
extremely low, at 0.065/Mb, with an average of only 1.8 non-synonymous
coding single nucleotide variants (SNVs) per tumor - almost ten times
lower than we have recently reported for medulloblastoma. We found
several novel alterations in known PA-related genes, including two new
oncogenic BRAF fusions. Most strikingly, however, we identified mutations
at two hotspots in the FGFR1 receptor tyrosine kinase in 4/6 centrally
located PAs lacking any other MAPK pathway change. Two of these cases
also carried a mutation in a downstream adaptor protein, PTPN11 (Shp2).
Interestingly, germline mutations of PTPN11 are associated with Noonan
syndrome (NS), and there are case reports of NS patients developing PAs.
Screening of additional non-cerebellar PAs revealed four further cases
with an FGFR1 mutation. All PAs, regardless of MAPK pathway alteration,
displayed highly elevated expression of FGF2, indicating a general role
for ligand-mediated activation of the FGFR1/MAPK pathway in PA
tumorigenesis. Notably, the same FGFR1 mutations were also identified in
four midline pediatric glioblastomas (GBM), a highly malignant brain
tumor, suggesting a possible common origin for a subset of these two
entities, despite their dramatically different clinical
course.Conclusion: Altogether, MAPK alterations were identified in 96% of
PAs, with very few other changes, confirming the concept of PA as a
single-pathway disease. Our results also suggest that a subset of
centrally located, FGFR1-driven pediatric PAs and GBMs may share common
origins. Most importantly, they reveal a novel therapeutic target in
clinically relevant subsets of childhood glioma.

