Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hazard ratio for colorectal cancer risk in Lynch syndrome is
inversely associated with age.


Introduction: Carriers of germline mutations in mismatch repair genes
(MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2) have a high risk of colorectal and other cancers
(Lynch syndrome). Between 30% and 70% of carriers will be develop
colorectal cancer by age 70 if they are not screened for the disease.
What is not well understood is how the effect of mutations, in absolute
and relative terms, varies by age.Methods: We conducted a literature
review to identify studies of colorectal cancer that estimated
age-specific hazard ratios for colorectal cancer for carriers of a
mutation in MLH1 or MSH2 compared with the general population. Studies
were excluded if they did not adjust correctly for ascertainment. We
conducted a random effects meta-analysis to estimate the average
age-specific hazard ratio. Annual risk (incidence) by multiplying the
population incidence by the age-specific hazard ratio estimated by the
meta-analysis.Results: We identified six studies comprising 673 families
(282 MLH1, 391 MSH2). All studies observed that the hazard ratio for
colorectal cancer was highest at young ages and decreased with age. This
pattern was observed for both males and females and for both MLH1 and
MSH2 mutation carriers. Overall, the hazard ratio dropped 6-8 fold over
three decades (Table). Incidence of colorectal cancer for carriers
increased until age 40 years for males and 50 years for females, and then
plateaued (Table).Conclusion: At younger ages, in multiplicative terms,
the magnitude of the increased risk conferred by the mutations is
substantially greater than at older ages. The reason for this
age-dependency is not known. It is, however, consistent with a
multi-stage model of carcinogenesis for Lynch syndrome. These findings
add to the complement of factors that complicate risk estimation for
Lynch syndrome including: polygenic effects, non-genetic risk modifiers,
and the possibility of a parent-of-origin effect. There is still much to
learn about the clinical implications and carcinogenesis of Lynch
syndrome.
Meta-analysis estimates of hazard ratios and incidences for colorectal
cancer by age group.

