Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using embryonic melanoblast transcriptome analysis to identify
novel mechanisms promoting metastatic melanoma.


Melanoma is among the most aggressive of cancers in its ability to
metastasize. Although melanoma makes up Melanoma is among the most
aggressive of cancers in its ability to metastasize. Although melanoma
makes up <6% of all skin cancers, it contributes to over 70% of skin
cancer deaths. There is no other tumor type that consistently gains
metastatic potential in a matter of millimeters. However, the genes and
pathways involved in this deadly manifestation remain elusive. The
enhanced ability of melanoma cells to metastasize is reminiscent of the
innate propensity of melanoblasts to migrate for long distances during
embryonic development - from the neural crest to the eventual niche
across the skin of the whole body. Once transformed, melanoma cells mimic
migratory and growth capability similar to that of the embryonic
melanoblasts. Therefore we hypothesize that late stage metastatic
melanoma can exploit pathways employed by embryonic melanoblasts to
achieve a more aggressive malignant phenotype.In the present study, we
paint a novel picture of the oncological landscape based on the mouse
melanoblast signature to reveal an intimate connection between
tumorigenesis and developmental processes. We have, for the first time
isolated and sequenced the transcriptomes of murine embryonic
melanoblasts at several key representative developmental stages utilizing
a newly developed genetically engineered mouse model with
melanocyte-specific GFP expression. To uncover the overall classes of
gene expression and to identify and characterize genesets whose
expression is common and equally important to melanomagenic and
developmental processes, a heat-map of the top 1000 most variable
developmental genes was generated, and then shortlisted based on compared
levels of expression in human and mouse metastatic melanomas and a
relationship with melanoma patient survival data. A series of
bioinformatics and meta-analyses led us to identify a small number of
candidate genes. The resulting gene set was found to be related to early
neural expression, epigenetic regulation, collagens, G-protein coupled
receptors and calcium regulators. As a final step toward the
identification and characterization of genes whose expression is common
and equally important to both melanoma metastasis and melanoblast
developmental processes, we are determining the consequences of
RNAi-based knockdown on experimental metastasis potential in mouse
models. Developmental genes that regulate melanoma metastatic behavior
will be fully characterized. This approach should facilitate
identification of novel therapeutic targets for melanoma treatment and
diagnosis. Our study will attempt to provide insight into elements of
melanocyte development that might prime them for metastasis in future
malignancies. Pathways parallel between embryonic and metastatic melanoma
cells will be identified and validated, offering both mechanistic and
prognostic significance to our understanding of this fatal disease.

