Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kawain, a kavalactone, inhibits urinary bladder carcinogenesis in
the UPII-mutant Ha-ras transgenic model and associated with inhibition of
the mTOR pathway.


Nonmuscle invasive bladder cancer (NIBC) is the most expensive cancer to
treat because of its high rate of recurrence. Therefore, there is an
urgent need to develop novel agents that can prevent NIBC recurrence and
progression. Kava is a traditional drink of the Pacific Islands for
thousands of years and kava drink was linked to unusually low incidences
of several cancers, including lung and bladder cancer, despite a high
portion of smokers in these populations. Kavalactones, including kawain,
are major bioactive components in the kava extract. Given genetic
alterations leading to over activity of H-Ras are predominantly found in
NIBC, we examined the effect of kawain on the growth of bladder tumors
and the survival of the mice in the UPII-mutant Ha-ras transgenic mouse
bladder model. This model mimics human NIBC and exhibits enhanced mTOR
activity in the bladder tumors. We also investigated the effect of kawain
on the mTOR pathway in bladder cancer cell lines. Homozygous mutant
Ha-ras transgenic mice were identified through genotyping using Southern
blotting analysis. The mice were fed orally with vehicle control or 6 g
kawain /kg food for about 5 months starting at 6 weeks of age. More than
68% control food- fed male mice died of ureter obstruction and
hydronephrosis within 6 months of age, while more than 78% of mice fed
with kawain food survived beyond 6 months of age (P=0.0082, log-rank
test). The mean bladder weight of male transgenic mice in kawain
treatment group decreased by about 56% compared to those fed with vehicle
control diet (mean bladder weights for vehicle control versus kawain
treatments are 0. 320.13 versus 0.140.01, P=0.035). In addition, kawain
treatment significantly reduced the incidences of hydronephrosis and
hematuria. Mouse pathology analysis revealed that vehicle control treated
mice exhibited poorly differentiated transitional cell carcinoma in the
bladder, while that kawain treated mice presented well differentiated
tumors in the bladder. The bladder tissues from kawain treated mice
showed a decreased number of Ki67 positive cells compared to those in
vehicle control treated mice, which suggested that kawain inhibited cell
proliferation in vivo in bladder tumors. In addition, kawain inhibited
the growth of bladder cancer cell lines T24 and UMUC3 with a marked
suppression of 4E-BP1 expression and induction of autophagy. The growth
inhibitory effect of kawain in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) is at
least in part dependent on the existence of TSC1. This result suggested
that kawain inhibits the mTOR pathway. Therefore, kawain, as a
naturally-occurring mTOR inhibitor, deserves further investigation for
its potential in preventing the recurrence of NIBC.

