Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative Exonic Quantification analyzer (CEQer): a graphical,
event-driven tool for copy number and allelic imbalance detection from
whole-exome sequencing data.


Copy number alterations (CNA) are common events occurring in leukaemias
and solid tumors. Comparative Genome Hybridization (CGH) is actually the
gold standard technique to analyze CNA, however CGH analyses require
dedicated instruments and it is able to perform only low resolution Loss
of Heterozygosity (LOH) analyses.Recently, the development of
high-throughput sequencing instruments able to generate hundreds of
Gigabases per run allowed the development of completely new approaches to
the analysis of cancer genomes. By using exome reads as digital counters
and by performing a case/control normalization to take into account
differences in the enrichment efficiency, it is possible to detect both
negative and positive CNA by identifying the associated decrease/increase
in the exonic read counts. Unfortunately, the availability of
user-friendly bioinformatics tools dedicated to the coupled CNA/AI
(allelic imbalance) analysis of exome sequencing data is very limited.To
overcome this limitation we developed CEQer (Comparative Exome
Quantification analyzer), a new graphical, event-driven tool for
CNA/allelic-unbalance coupled analysis of exome sequencing data. By using
case-control matched exome data, CEQer performs a comparative digital
exonic quantification to generate CNA data and couples this information
with exome-wide LOH and AI detection. These data are used to build mixed
statistical/heuristic models allowing the identification of CNA/AI
events. CEQer runs on standard 32 or 64 bit desktop/notebook PC and
accepts the most widely used alignment/pileup file formats (Pileup/BED,
SAM and BAM) as input. CEQer requires no a priori bioinformatics or
scripting knowledge, being graphical and event driven. It manages either
single or multiple jobs by using a dedicated batch tool and generates
interactive graphical views as well as textual reports as output.To test
our tool, we initially used in silico generated data with progressively
increasing background noise, then we performed whole-exome sequencing
from 20 leukemic specimens and corresponding matched controls and we
analyzed the results using CEQer. Taken globally, these analyses showed
that the combined use of comparative digital exon quantification and
LOH/AI allows to generate very accurate CNA data, when compared to
standard CGH. Therefore, we propose CEQer as an efficient, robust and
user-friendly graphical tool for the identification of CNA in the context
of whole-exome sequencing data.

