Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the Ikaros transcription factor in regulatory T cell
(Treg) development and function in a murine pancreatic adenocarcinoma
model.


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is currently the only major form of cancer that
still has survival rates in the single digits. The limited success of
cancer therapies in treating pancreatic cancer has been primarily due to
the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment. In particular, there is an
increased prevalence of regulatory T cells (Tregs) (CD4+CD25+CD127),
which suppress anti-tumor immune responses in PC tumor-bearing (TB)
hosts. Tregs express the Forkhead BoxP3 (FoxP3) gene, which is critical
for their suppressive function. Studies have shown that Ikaros, a zinc
finger transcription factor, is an important regulator of T lymphocyte
development and function. The regulation of Ikaros expression and
function is controlled by post-translational modification events.
Deficiencies in Ikaros are observed in various T cell leukemias and
lymphomas. However, little is known about the possible role of Ikaros in
regulating immune cell development in response to solid cancers. In this
study, we aim to identify the role of Ikaros in regulating Treg
homeostasis and function in a pancreatic tumor microenvironment.
Therefore, using our murine model of pancreatic cancer, we isolated
splenocytes from TB and control mice and performed flow cytometry and
magnetic activated cell sorting (MACS) to immunophenotype and enrich T
cell populations for in vivo and in vitro analyses. Also, we performed
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) and western blot analyses to
evaluate Ikaros and FoxP3 mRNA and protein expression in whole and
enriched CD3+ T cells from TB and control splenocytes. Our results showed
that effector T cell percentages (CD4+ and CD8+) were significantly lower
in splenocytes from TB mice compared to control. However, our results
also showed a significant expansion of Tregs in splenocytes from TB mice
compared to control. In addition, enriched TB Tregs (CD4+CD25+)
suppressed antigen-specific CD8+T cell immune responses in a
dose-dependent manner, in vitro. Preliminary qRT-PCR results revealed no
significant difference in Ikaros mRNA expression; whereas, Ikaros protein
expression was reduced in TB whole splenocytes compared to control. Also,
Ikaros protein expression was reduced in TB enriched CD3+ T cells
compared to control. Furthermore, our results showed an increase in FoxP3
protein expression in TB CD3+ T cells compared to control. These findings
suggest that the pancreatic tumor microenvironment potentially
down-regulates Ikaros protein expression, which may contribute to the
expansion of Tregs and their suppression of CD8+T cell (anti-tumor)
immune responses.

