Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune cell profile of the SLN has prognostic value in stage III
melanoma.


Background: The prognosis for stage III melanoma is variable, with the
5-year survival ranging from 23-87%. Previous studies have demonstrated
both immune cell activation and dysfunction within the sentinel lymph
node (SLN) of melanoma patients. We hypothesize that differences within
the host response, specifically the immune cell profile of the SLN, may
predict the heterogeneous behavior of stage III melanoma.Methods: A
retrospective review of clinically node negative patients undergoing a
SLN biopsy at our institution was undertaken. Thirty four SLN positive
cases in which the patients also underwent a complete lymph node
dissection were identified and the archived FFPE SLN blocks were
obtained. A single tumor positive SLN was selected and
immunohistochemistry was performed for dendritic cell markers (CD123,
CD86, CD11c and HLA-DR), cytotoxic T cells (CD8), anergic T cells (PD-1)
and regulatory T cells (Foxp3). Slides were digitized and analyzed for
percent of the SLN staining positive for each respective marker using
IHCscore. These findings were correlated with risk of further non-SLN
disease in the same nodal basin as well as effect on disease-free and
overall survival.Results: The SLN exhibited expression of both immune
activation (CD8, CD86, and CD11c) and immune suppressive (CD123, PD-1 and
Foxp3) markers. HLA-DR expression was significantly higher in females
(52.07% vs. 42.32%, p=0.02). No other immune marker was associated with
any baseline demographic or clinical variable. Median disease-free
survival and overall survival was 6 months and not yet reached and 16
months and not yet reached for patients with and without non-SLN
involvement, respectively; however, no difference was noted in any of the
SLN immune markers between patients with and without non-SLN involvement.
Increased CD8 expression in the SLN was associated with an improvement in
disease-free survival (HR 0.94 p = 0.048) but not overall survival (HR
0.93 p = 0.07). In two variable multivariate analyses, CD8 expression
remained independent for disease-free survival when adjusted for Breslow
depth but not non-SLN involvement. The median disease-free survival for
patients with low CD8 expression within the SLN was 19.5 months and
median disease-free survival has not been reached in those with high CD8
expression in the SLN after a median of 59 months follow up (log-rank p =
0.05).Conclusion: Previous reports suggest T cell infiltration of
melanoma tumors is an important prognostic factor. In this study we found
that CD8 T cell accumulation within the SLN was associated with a
disease-free survival advantage. Cytotoxic T cell accumulation within the
SLN declines early in melanoma and the degree of CD8 depletion
corresponds to the risk of disease recurrence. These findings support a
key role for effector T cells in the control of melanoma progression.

