Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor type and organ type dependent differences of vascular
permeability to pegylated liposomal doxorubicin.


Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) for cancer therapy is advantageous
over conventional chemotherapy with doxorubicin, because of the
preferential delivery of drugs to tumors owing to the enhanced permeation
and retention (EPR) effect. The biological barriers include abnormal
structure of tumor vessels in heterogeneous tumor microenvironments shall
influence the EPR effect and result in heterogeneous tumor perfusion of
PLD and therapeutic efficacy.Although 4T1, murine breast cancer cells and
3LL, murine lung cancer cells had similar sensitivity to PLD in vitro,
only 4T1 tumors responded to therapy with PLD in vivo. There were no
significant differences of the microvessel density and blood perfusion in
these tumors. In contrast, PLD extravasated and accumulated into 4T1
tumors significantly more than 3LL tumors, indicating vascular
permeability was higher in 4T1 tumors. Coverage of endothelial cells by
collagen type IV, which constitutes basement membrane of the vessels, was
significantly lower in 4T1 tumors as compared to those in 3LL tumors.
Differential analysis of protein expression by 4T1 and 3LL cells in vitro
revealed that MMP-9 (collagenase) production was significantly higher in
4T1 cells as compared to 3LL cells. MMP-9 expression was also higher in
4T1 tumors as well as in sera of mice bearing 4T1 tumors as compared to
3LL tumors and sera of mice bearing 3LL tumors and normal mice
respectively. Batimastat, MMPs inhibitor, injected in vivo increased the
coverage of endothelial cells by basement membrane and abrogated the
accumulation of PLD into the 4T1 tumors, indicating MMP-9 can play a
pivotal role in controlling the vascular permeability. Interestingly, 4T1
tumors were accumulated with PLD only when tumors were growing in the
brain and mammary fat pad, but not in the liver. Coverage of the
endothelial cells by basement membrane was significantly higher in the
tumors growing in the liver as compared to the other two locations. The
levels of TIMP-1, endogenous inhibitor of MMPs, were significantly higher
in the mice bearing 4T1 in the liver as compared to the mice bearing the
tumors in the other locations. These data indicate the levels as well as
balance between MMP-9 and TIMP-1 can determine the vascular permeability
to PLD. Therefore the these enzymes in the circulation can serve as
surrogate markers for the vascular permeability to PLD and there is a
possibility to personalize the therapy by selecting patients who will
likely accumulated with PLD into tumors to increase clinical outcome.

