Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination tTerapy KPT-SINE (selective inhibitors of nuclear
export) with radiotherapy have additive effects in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cells in vitro and in vivo.


Radiation therapy is an established therapeutic option for lung cancer,
but its use is limited due to side effects. Combining radiosensitizers
with RT is a way to augment the efficacy of RT. Chromosome Region
Maintenance Protein 1/Exportin 1 (CRM1/XPO1) is a key nuclear export
protein, the cargoes of which are Tumor Suppressor Proteins (TSPs) such
as p53, FOXO, PTEN, pRB and I-B. Small molecule SINE block CRM1-dependent
nuclear export and force the nuclear retention of TSPs, potentially
sensitizing cells to RT. Suggested mechanisms include: 1) Induction of
genome fidelity review by forced nuclear retention of TSPs; 2) Prevention
of single stranded DNA break repair, and thereby reduction of resistance
of cancer cells to RT.Methods: IC50 of KPT-SINE e.g. KPT-185 and clinical
compound KPT-330, were determined in MTT assays using human NSCLC p53
wild type (wt) cancer cell lines H1299 and A549. Clonogenic assays in the
SINE sensitive H1299 (IC50 100nM) and SINE-resistant A549 (IC50 1.7M)
lines were conducted in the presence or absence of escalating doses of
radiation. An in vivo tumor xenograft model using the A-549 cell line in
SCID mice was also conducted with KPT-330.Results: KPT-185 demonstrated
inhibitory effects on the clonogenicity of two NSCLC cell lines in a dose
dependent fashion. We showed that, while RT alone treatment caused
coloines growing curve reduced to less than 75% tumor volume reduction
when compared to vehicle, and a >65% reduction when compared to
Cisplatin. In this model, KPT-330 was fairly well-tolerated, with minimal
body weight loss by animals over the course of the study.Conclusions:
These studies showed that KPT-SINE significantly inhibited the growth of
two p53 wt NSCLC lines by MTT assay. Similar inhibition was observed in
clonogenic assays with cells (A549) resistant to SINE. We described the
additive effects of SINE and RT on NSCLC cell lines, suggesting that
SINEs can act as radiosensitizers. We further demonstrated that SINEs are
efficacious in vivo in the A549 xenograft model, and display superior
efficacy when compared to Cisplatin. SINE compounds represent a promising
novel therapy against NSCLC both as stand-alone agents and in combination
with RT. These data support further development of SINE-based therapies
for NSCLC. Further work on in vivo studies of KPT-SINE in combination
with RT will be reported.

