Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HTLV-1 Tax deregulates autophagy in promoting T-cell survival and
proliferation.


The retroviral oncoprotein Tax from Human T cell leukemia virus type 1
(HTLV-1) is an etiological factor of adult T cell leukemia and lymphoma.
HTLV-1 viral genome-encoded oncoprotein, Tax, plays a pivotal role for
promoting viral replication and initiating malignant transformation of
CD4+ T lymphocytes. Tax deregulates various oncogenic signaling pathways
including IB kinase (IKK)/NF-B, STAT3 and PI3K/Akt for aberrant
proliferation of infected T cells. Tax activates IKK complex in the
cytoplasm, resulting in persistent activation of NF-B, a transcriptional
factor that plays key roles in the pathogenesis of chronic inflammation
and cancer. The IKK complex can be activated by divergent upstream
kinases that connect it to signals from cell surface receptors such as T
cell receptor (TCR). Upon T cell activation, IKKs are recruited to the
plasma membrane lipid raft microdomains where they become catalytically
active. Lipid raft microdomains are detergent-resistant membrane
structure enriched with cholesterol and sphingolipids and serve as
crucial signal transduction platforms. Distinct from TCR activation, Tax
bypasses upstream kinases to directly target IKK, thereby recruiting the
IKK complex to the lipid raft microdomains for activation. The IKK
complex has been implicated to play an important role in starvation- or
rapamycin-induced autophagy, though the underlying mechanism is not yet
determined. Autophagy is a catabolic process that involves degradation of
unnecessary or dysfunctional cellular proteins and organelles through
lysosomal machinery. In response to metabolic stress, autophagy process
generates energy for the need of metabolically stressed cells, and hence,
the primary function of autophagy is pro-survival. The autophagic process
is regulated by a variety of oncogenic signaling pathways. Given the
evidence that HTLV-1 mediates oncogenic activation, it is conceivable
that HTLV-1 may deregulate autophagy for its own benefits in viral
oncogenesis. We here report that Tax is the causative factor for
induction of autophagy in HTLV-1-transformed T cells and Tax-immortalized
CD4 memory T cells. Tax deregulates autophagy by activating the IB kinase
complex, which subsequently recruits the autophagy molecule complex
containing Bif-1, Beclin 1 and PI3KC3 to the lipid raft microdomains. By
connecting the IkB kinase complex to the autophagy molecule complex, Tax
facilitates assembly of LC3+ autophagosomes. Expression of the lipid raft
targeted Bif-1 or Beclin1 is sufficient to form LC3+ autophagosomes,
indicating that Tax recruitment of the autophagic molecules to lipid
rafts is the main strategy to deregulate autophagy. Further, depletion of
Beclin 1, the key mediator of autophagy pathway, results in growth arrest
of the leukemic cells. Together, our data suggest an essential role of
Tax-mediated autophagy in promoting survival and malignant transformation
of virally infected T cells.

