Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MARCKS-ED peptide targets highly curved vesicles: Potential probe
for exosome detection.


Malignant tumor cells overexpress and release nanosized, lipid-enclosed
vesicles referred to as exosomes into body fluids for the primary
function of facilitating cell-to-cell communication and transferring
vital proteins necessary for survival to other parts of the body,
resulting in metastasis. It was found that an increased secretion of
exosomes in the peripheral blood is correlated to lung cancer and
melanoma metastasis. The hallmarks of exosomes are their highly curved
membrane surface (d = 30-100 nm) and their enrichment in the anionic
lipid phosphatidylserine (PS) in the outer leaflet of the membrane
bilayer. These properties may provide unique strategies in designing
peptides to selectively target exosomes as potential cancer biomarkers.
Some current clinical methods that are being used to classify metastatic
patients, such as the biopsy and assays measuring circulating tumor
cells, are not reproducible and do not always indicate whether or not
treatment is reducing metastasis. Furthermore, these methods involve
invasive procedures. We aim to develop a novel, minimally invasive,
peptide-based diagnostic tool to detect and measure exosome
overexpression in cancer patients. The successful creation of this
diagnostic tool for cancer metastasis will help in the proper prognosis
and therapy for cancer patients.We rationally chose the effector domain
of the intracellular membrane protein myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase
substrate (MARCKS) as our core molecule based on recent reports that this
peptide differentially interacts with nanometer size synthetic lipid
vesicles. It has also been shown that MARCKS inserts its five hydrophobic
phenylalanine (Phe) residues into the membrane of highly curved synthetic
lipid vesicles, and its binding affinity increases with increasing
vesicle curvature, presumably corresponding to a larger number of defects
on the membrane surface. We hypothesize that as vesicle curvature
increases, the Phe residues will insert deeper into the membrane due to
more lipid defects exposed on the membrane surface in highly curved
vesicles. Five analogs of the MARCKS peptide were synthesized,
substituting one Phe residue with a cysteine residue for all 5 Phe
positions. The cysteine was then labeled with
1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-3-pyrroline-3-methyl) methanethiosulfonate
(MTSL), which will be used as a paramagnetic spin label for electron
paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (EPR). The depth parameter of
insertion of the MTSL into the lipid vesicle membrane at each of the five
cysteine positions will be quantified using EPR and will be reported
herein.Citation Format: Sara K. Coulup, Leslie A. Morton, Hang Yin.
MARCKS-ED peptide targets highly curved vesicles: Potential probe for
exosome detection. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2233. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2233

