Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of various immune escape mechanisms on redirected lysis by
T cells engaged via EpCAM/CD3 bispecific BiTE antibody AMG 110 .


BiTE antibodies are single-chain bispecific antibody constructs with dual
specificity for CD3 on T cells and a surface antigen on target cells.
They are capable of temporarily mounting a polyclonal T cell response
that is not restricted by T cell receptor specificity, presence of MHC
class I, generation and presentation of peptide antigen, or the addition
of T cell co-stimuli. Examples are the CD19/CD3-bispecific BiTE antibody
blinatumomab, which has been reported to show high response rates in
leukemia and lymphoma patients, and EpCAM/CD3-bispecific BiTE antibody
solitomab (AMG 110), which is in a dose-escalating phase 1 study in
patients with solid tumors. Because specific T cell responses against
cancer cells are frequently hampered by a variety of immune escape
mechanisms, we have here assessed to what extent surface expression of
PD-L1 (B7-H1) and CD73, cytoplasmic expression of IDO and serpin PI-9,
and secretion of TGF- and IL-10 can protect target cells from redirected
lysis by AMG 110-engaged T cells.The six human proteins, which are all
known to be associated with immune escape of cancer cells by inhibition
of T cell function, were stably expressed in human EpCAM-expressing
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. In all cases, expression levels of the
six proteins in stable CHO cell lines exceeded those found in human
cancer cell lines. Characterized CHO cell lines and the parental EpCAM+
CHO line were used in co-culture assays as target cells for analysis of
EC50 values for redirected lysis, and induction of proliferation of
resting human peripheral T cells in the presence of various AMG 110
concentrations.High level cytosolic expression of the tryptophan
metabolizing enzyme IDO had no effect on redirected lysis but reduced AMG
110-induced T cell proliferation, while expression of the granzyme
inhibitor PI-9 increased the EC50 value for redirected lysis but had no
effect on T cell proliferation. High level expression of the
membrane-bound ligand for PD-1, PD-L1, and of secreted IL-10 and TGF- all
had no impact on AMG 110-induced T cell proliferation. The EC50 value for
redirected lysis was however impacted by expression of TGF- and PD-L1 as
determined by a FACS-based cytotoxicity assays. In no case, transfected
CHO cell lines became completely resistant to BiTE-induced lysis despite
expressing the immune escape proteins at higher levels than observed in
tumor cell lines. Our data suggest that BiTE-engaged T cells are
relatively insensitive to proteins expressed by cancer cells to fend off
T cells, and that inhibitory effects can be compensated by higher
concentrations of the BiTE antibody.

