Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel hematopoietic neoplasms in prkar2a- deficient mice.


Background: Histiocytic sarcoma (HS) is an aggressive hematological
neoplasm that responds poorly to therapy. The molecular etiology and
pathology of this disease remain unclear, hampering the development of an
effective therapy. Therefore, a need for more, and more realistic, animal
models remains. Lymphoproliferative disorders have been reported in mice
deficient for the prkar1a gene coding for the regulatory subunit type 1A
of protein kinase A (PKA), but nothing is known about the role of type II
PKA regulatory subunits in hematologic malignancies.Methods: Mice
deficient for the Prkar1a and Prkar2a alleles were previously reported
(Kirschner et al, 2005 Burton et al, 1997) and were kept on a mixed
genetic background (C57BL/129Sv). Mice were crossed to create prkar2a+/-
and prkar2a-/-. Mice were phenotyped at the ages of 3-6-9-12-18 months or
when they exhibited signs of advanced disease. Tissues were collected for
histological and molecular analysis.Results: Unexpectedly, mice deficient
for the prkar2a allele(s) developed lymphomas, with significant higher
incidence compared to the prkar1a+/- mice [8/13 (61.5%) of the prkar2a+/-
and 5/8 (62.5%) of the prkar2a-/- vs. 3/21(14.2%) of the prkar1a+/-,
Fisher's exact test p=0.02]. Histology studies of sections stained with
H&E revealed a variety of pathologic changes in lymphoid and non-lymphoid
tissues. Lesions characteristic of histiocytic sarcoma (HS) were found in
spleen and abdominal lymph nodes, sometimes associated with leukemic
infiltrates in lung and bone marrow (BM). Abnormal megakaryopoiesis in
spleen and BM was associated with cells actively phagocytosing red cells,
others with a pseudo Gaucher-like appearance and increased immature
forms. Erythropoiesis was reduced in BM and spleen. Vascular thrombi were
associated with schistocytosis. Accumulations of mostly mature plasma
cells and some plasmablasts were present in the splenic red pulp together
with large, active germinal centers. Cells with characteristics of
diffuse large B cell lymphoma often occupied expanded splenic follicles
and lymph nodes. Kidneys exhibited degenerative changes in glomeruli and
tubules. Median age at presentation was 18 months (range 16-25 months).
FACS analysis of BM cells revealed a decrease in late pro-B cells in the
prkar2a deficient mice compared to the wild-type, indicating a
developmental block at this stage of early B cell differentiation.
Interestingly, Southern blot analysis of these B cell lymphomas showed
that in most cases they were monoclonal with either one or both IgH
alleles rearranged.Conclusions: Our data indicate that PRKAR2a may be
involved in the development of malignant lesions of the hematologic
lineage. The presented mouse model can be used to gain insights into the
molecular and cellular origins of this rare neoplasm and provide a
preclinical model in which to test novel therapeutic strategies.

