Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel in vivo model of breast cancer hypoxia reveals an
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition switch.


Background: Low levels of oxygen within cells are characteristic of many
solid malignant tumors. This phenomenon has been described as an
important trigger of tumor invasion and metastasis. Despite the
importance of this association between hypoxia and more aggressive cancer
phenotypes, experimental models to study the influence of hypoxia in
cancer development and progression have been limited to in vitro models
and in vivo models based on mice being subject to a systemic hypoxic
state or drug-induced hypoxia. These models have provided inconclusive
and controversial data. We developed a novel in vivo model of breast
cancer hypoxia to study the influence of transitory hypoxia on epithelial
to mesenchymal transition (EMT).Methods: 4T1 and 67nr cell lines were
engrafted into the kidney cortex of female BALB/c mice. Placing an
aneurysm clip on the kidney hilum for 40 minutes, hypoxia was directed to
tumor site after 7 days of engraftment. After 14, 21 and 28 (67nr only)
days of engraftment, mice were sacrificed and the histological evaluation
was used to analyze the morphological changes induced by ischemia in
kidney cortex, and to verify the metastatic potential to lungs and liver.
Tumors were sampled after 14 days of engraftment for gene expression
assay. Real time RT-PCR was performed to analyze the relative expression
of Cdh1, Vim, Fn1, Ctnnb1, Jag1, Notch1, Snai2, Sox9, Tgfb1, Twist1,
HIF2A, Hif1a and Ca9 genes (TaqMan Gene Expression Assay) in cell lines
and in tumors in the control group and the hypoxia group. TBP and HPRT
were used as housekeeping genes and 12 weeks-old normal breast mouse
tissue was used as reference.Results: All mice engrafted with 4T1 and
67nr into the renal cortex developed local tumors. We did not observed
metastasis to the liver. In 4T1 group, metastases to the lungs were
observed only in hypoxia group after 14 days after engraftment. After 21
days, all mice developed lung metastases. In 67nr, metastases to the
lungs were observed only in hypoxia group after 28 days after
engraftment. According to gene expression analyses, virtually all genes
were different expressed after engraftment comparing to cell lines. When
comparing the control and hypoxia groups, we observed a significant 2.6
fold and 3.1 fold change in VIM expression, and an 0.51 fold and 0.53
fold change in CDH1 expression in 4T1 and 67nr cell lines, respectively.
In 67nr the SLUG expression changed 496 fold and the SLUG/SOX9 ratio
changed 4.8-fold. The HIF1A/HIF2A expression ratio increased in 4T1 and
67nr tumors after hypoxia. The expression of TGFB1, TWIST1 and CTNNB1
genes was not significant changed in tumors subjected to
hypoxia.Conclusion: hypoxia directed to the tumor site in an in vivo
model induces a EMT transition signature and accelerate the metastatic
dissemination of murine breast cancer allograft. The expressive increase
in SLUG expression suggests this transcription factor is crucial to
hypoxia-induced EMT.

