Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-31 contributes to immortalization and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition of oral keratinocyte.


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is a prevalent malignancy worldwide.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short, non-coding RNAs that regulate gene
expression by RNA interference and crucial for tumorigenesis. Our
previous studies identified miR-31 as an oncogenic miRNA of OSCC, and the
increased miR-31 may be contributive to oral carcinogenic process in the
early stages. This study further specified the higher miR-31 expression
in dysplastic potential malignant disorder (PMD) tissues than
non-dysplastic PMD tissues in oral cavity. In addition, miR-31 in the
patient's saliva was significantly higher than control subjects. To
elucidate the contribution of miR-31 in modulating the extended growth of
normal oral keratinocyte, exogenous expression of both miR-31 and hTERT
genes were introduced to normal oral keratinocyte (NOK) culture, which
led to immortalization of two NOK lines, designated M31OK1 and M31OK3.
These immortalized lines exhibited cellular phenotypes lying between NOKs
and OSCC cell lines and diminished expression of senescence-associated
-galactosidase. Knockdown of hTERT and/or miR-31 decreased the growth and
migration of both lines. M31OK1 also carries p53 gene mutation in codon
273, exhibiting the tolerance to serum-induced senescence,
anchorage-independent growth and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
properties relative to NOK. However, the stemness properties were not
increased in M31OK1 in relation to NOKs. Knockdown of miR-31 expression
decreased the expression of vimentin and ZEB1 and slightly increased
E-cadherin expression in M31OK1 cells. This was correlated with the
clinical findings that high miR-31 expression was associated with higher
expression of VEGF and lower expression of E-cadherin in PMD tissues.
This study concluded that miR-31 may be contributive to early oral
carcinogenesis by stimulating factors to facilitate cellular
immortalization or by modulating the expression of EMT markers in oral
keratinocytes.

