Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemical optimization of direct and selective molecular activators
of pro-apoptotic BAX for cancer therapy.


BAX is a pro-apoptotic BCL-2 family member that lies dormant in the
cytosol until triggered by cellular stress to translocate to the
mitochondria and form toxic oligomeric pores. The majority of cancer
cells retain wild-type BAX and instead neutralize the death pathway by
overexpressing anti-apoptotic BCL-2 family proteins. Thus, direct
activation of BAX represents a pharmacologic opportunity to lower the
apoptotic threshold in the setting of chemoresistance. Using a Stabilized
Alpha-Helix of BCL-2 domain (SAHB) modeled after the BIM BH3 helix, we
previously identified the trigger site for direct BAX activation at the
confluence of alpha-helices 1 and 6. In silico screening for small
molecule modulators of BAX led to our identification of BAX activator
molecule 7 (BAM7), which selectively engages the trigger site and
promotes BAX-mediated cell death (Gavathiotis et al, Nat Chem Biol,
2012). Here, we applied BAM7 to a panel of acute lymphoblastic leukemia
cells and observe dose-responsive killing in the micromolar range. To
improve the potency of anti-ALL activity, we undertook a systematic
medicinal chemistry-based iteration of BAM7s molecular features. A series
of analogs demonstrate improved BAX binding activity based on a FITC-BIM
SAHB/BAX competitive fluorescence polarization assay. The most potent
binders were advanced to testing in a cellular model of anti-apoptotic
protein-dependent chemoresistance. Whereas select BAM7 derivatives
exhibited a potency similar to or greater than the BCL-2/BCL-XL inhibitor
ABT-737 in a BCL-XL-dependent ALL cell line, the compounds significantly
outperformed ABT-737 in the isogenic MCL-1-dependent ALL cells.
Preliminary studies revealed favorable pharmacokinetic profiles for lead
BAM7 derivatives, including oral bioavailability and central nervous
system penetration. These early encouraging structure-activity
relationship and pharmacokinetic data on chemically-optimized BAM7
analogs suggest that direct and selective activation of BAX may be a
viable strategy for therapeutic induction of apoptosis in the context of
cancer chemoresistance.

