Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel protease resistant antibody platform with selectable cell
killing functions.


Invasive cancers express matrix metalloproteases, such as MMP-3 and
MMP-7, which have the ability to cleave human antibodies in the lower
hinge region. The human IgG lower hinge region contains two heavy chains,
and cleavage occurs in a two-step process. First, one heavy chain is
cleaved, resulting in a singly-cleaved intermediate. Cleavage of the
second heavy chain liberates the Fc region from the antigen-binding
region, resulting in an Fc fragment and a F(ab)2 fragment. Previous work
has demonstrated that the singly-cleaved intermediate accumulates on the
surface of IgG1-opsonzied tumor cells in the presence of MMPs. The
singly-cleaved intermediate is indistinguishable from the intact IgG
counterpart when assessed by analytical techniques under native
conditions and maintains normal antigen binding. However, the
singly-cleaved intermediate displays a profound loss of Fc-mediated
cell-killing functions both in vitro (e.g. ADCC and CDC) and with in vivo
cell clearance, presumably because the lower hinge contains key
recognition points for both FcRs and the C1q component of complement.
Singly-cleaved IgGs are of particular concern with regards to human IgG1
monoclonal therapeutic antibodies, because the proposed mechanisms of
action for several anti-tumor mAbs in the clinic may be partially
dependent on Fc effector functions, such as ADCC and CDC. For this
reason, our group and others have proposed that cleavage and the
subsequent inactivation of Fc-effector functions of human IgG antibodies
may function as an immune evasion mechanism. To overcome the
loss-of-function associated with human IgG1 cleavage, we aimed to develop
a protease-resistant IgG1 platform which would still maintain Fc-mediated
cell-killing functions. Mutation of the lower hinge of IgG1 provided
protease-resistance, but also resulted in a loss of Fc-effector
functions. Through specific mutations of amino acids in the CH2 region to
enhance complement or Fc receptor binding, we were able restore or even
enhance cell-killing functions selectively while maintaining
protease-resistance. Therefore, we were able to generate
protease-resistant antibodies with the ability to mediate either
complement-dependent and/or antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity,
which were also significantly resistant to inactivation by proteases
associated with many invasive cancers.

