Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of PCDHB3 as a potential tumor suppressor gene in
colorectal cancer by exome sequencing.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers in worldwide.
Previous studies have identified hundreds of recurrent mutations in CRC.
To gain a comprehensive view of the genetic alterations underlying
colorectal tumorigenesis, we sequenced the exome in colorectal cancer
from 10 patients without chemo-/radio- therapy histories. In total, we
identified 378 novel somatic alterations, in which 341 missense, 41 small
indels, and 7 splice-site mutations, 9 genes with more than two novel
alterations were discovered in the list. Sequenom MassARRAY validation
reached a positive rate of 85%. Two PCDHB family members which totally
mutated in 4 sites attracted our attentions. We focused on PCDHB3, which
had three missense mutations in 3 individuals and has never been
investigated before. We re-sequenced another 104 cases of CRC genomic DNA
through PCR arrays focused on the PCDHB3 exon and reached a final
mutation rate of 7.02%. A semi-quantitative RT-PCR assay was performed to
compare the PCDHB3 mRNA levels among 98 pairs of CRC tissues. A
statistical significant decrease of PCDHB3 level was observed in tumor
tissues compared with normal intestinal epithelium mucosa (PColorectal
cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers in worldwide. Previous
studies have identified hundreds of recurrent mutations in CRC. To gain a
comprehensive view of the genetic alterations underlying colorectal
tumorigenesis, we sequenced the exome in colorectal cancer from 10
patients without chemo-/radio- therapy histories. In total, we identified
378 novel somatic alterations, in which 341 missense, 41 small indels,
and 7 splice-site mutations, 9 genes with more than two novel alterations
were discovered in the list. Sequenom MassARRAY validation reached a
positive rate of 85%. Two PCDHB family members which totally mutated in 4
sites attracted our attentions. We focused on PCDHB3, which had three
missense mutations in 3 individuals and has never been investigated
before. We re-sequenced another 104 cases of CRC genomic DNA through PCR
arrays focused on the PCDHB3 exon and reached a final mutation rate of
7.02%. A semi-quantitative RT-PCR assay was performed to compare the
PCDHB3 mRNA levels among 98 pairs of CRC tissues. A statistical
significant decrease of PCDHB3 level was observed in tumor tissues
compared with normal intestinal epithelium mucosa (P<0.001). IHC results
showed that PCDHB3 expressed less and weaker in tumor. Furthermore,
reduced PCDHB3 expression is associated with poor clinical outcome
(overall survival: P=0.028; progression free survival: P=0.004) in
advanced CRC patients with stage III and IV. It indicates that tumor
tissues with higher and stronger expression of PCDHB3 are less aggressive
in inducing metastasis and leads to longer survival of patients. In vitro
studies, over-expressed PCDHB3 in DLD1, a CRC cell line, showed a
decreased number of cells capable of passing through the filter in a
transwell migration assay, whereas the SW480 cell line with decreased
PCDHB3 passed through more compared to its control. In the MTT assays,
HT29/DLD1 cells with higher PCDHB3 levels showed a lower ratio of
proliferative performance compared to their negative controls; and SW480
with less PCDHB3 had an advantage over its control. In vivo assays of
nude mice confirmed that with higher expression of wild-type PCDHB3,
tumor developed significantly smaller than the control group, as well as
the mutant-type group. It comes to a conclusion that PCDHB3 may function
as a potential tumor suppressor gene in CRC, and we made a hypothesis
that there are two mechanisms underlying PCDHB3-related CRC
tumorigenesis: by mutations affecting amino acid sequence or by
down-regulated expression of amino acid. In summary, our study provides a
catalog of genetic alterations in colorectal cancer from 10 patients. The
discovery of PCDHB3 as a potential tumor suppressor gene and the
elucidation of mutated genes involved in pathways known to be relevant
with colorectal cancer has broadened our understanding of molecular basis
in colorectal tumorigenesis.

