Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel therapeutic approaches targeting the transferrin receptor 1
for the treatment of mantle cell lymphoma.


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive B-cell malignancy with no
defined curative therapy. A hallmark of MCL is the high level of cyclin
D1 expression that promotes cell cycle progression with the subsequent
increase in proliferation, need for iron, and, thus, overexpression of
the transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1). We previously developed an
antibody-avidin fusion protein (ch128.1Av) targeting this receptor that
shows an enhanced intrinsic in vitro cytotoxicity in malignant
hematopoietic cells when compared to the parental antibody without avidin
(ch128.1). This cytotoxicity is due to the ability of ch128.1Av to
decrease cell surface TfR1 leading to lethal iron deprivation. However,
both ch128.1Av and ch128.1 have shown anti-tumor activity in human
xenograft models of multiple myeloma. ch128.1Av is also a universal
delivery system of biotinylated agents. The main goal of this study is to
evaluate the potential use of our anti-TfR1 antibodies alone and as
delivery vehicles as possible MCL therapies. Screening of a panel of six
human MCL cell lines (Mino, JVM-2, JVM-13, JeKo-1, Z-138, and REC-1)
showed high expression of TfR1 but not TfR2, confirming specificity of
TfR1 targeted therapy. We found that, when used alone, ch128.1Av exhibits
cytotoxicity in MCL cells. In addition, the cytotoxicity dramatically
increases when this fusion protein is conjugated to biotinylated saporin,
a plant protein synthesis inhibitor. However, a concern with the systemic
delivery of potent toxins is their potential side effects. To further
enhance the delivery specificity, we explored the potential of dual
targeted gene therapy approaches. The first level of targeting occurs
through the use of our anti-TfR1 antibodies and takes advantage of the
overexpression of the TfR1 on cancer cells. The second level of targeting
occurs through transcriptional regulation using the immunoglobulin (Ig)
promoter to restrict the expression of the delivered gene to malignant
B-cells. Two different approaches were examined: 1) the use of the
parental antibody (ch128.1) complexed to lentivirus with a modified,
pseudotyped Sindbis virus envelope protein containing the ZZ domain of
protein A; and 2) the use of ch128.1Av conjugated to a similar virus
containing the biotin acceptor peptide (instead of the ZZ domain) that
allows for biotinylation of the virus. We found that the reporter gene
encoding enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP), under the control of
the Ig promoter, was expressed in human malignant B cells U266 (multiple
myeloma) and Z-138 (MCL), but not in Jurkat (human T-cell leukemia)
cells. As expected, EGFP was expressed in all cell lines when a
ubiquitous promoter was used. These results confirm the dual targeted
nature of our approaches and suggest the potential use of our anti-TfR1
antibodies alone or as delivery vehicles as therapeutic interventions
against incurable B-cell malignancies such as MCL and multiple myeloma.

