Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin increases AMPK activity by inhibition of AMPK and cell
cycle proliferation in Asian gastric cancer.


The LKB1/AMPK signaling pathway has been well elucidated and recent
evidence suggests its involvement in cancer cell biology, demonstrating
that the reinforcement of the tumor suppressive functions of LKB1/AMPK is
a valuable therapeutic strategy for cancers. Interest in metformin as a
novel anticancer agent for breast cancer and other solid tumors continue
to grow, currently being investigated in several cancer types in both
neoadjuvant and metastatic settings. The biological effect of metformin
on cancer cells is driven by its ability to activate AMPK through
upstream kinase LKB1, tumor suppressor gene in epithelial tissues.
Metformin increases intracellular AMP level, which allosterically
activates AMPK. We have previously identified the AMPK as a modulator in
gastric cancer (GC) and through experimental evidence. We show the impact
of LKB1/AMPK modulation of HNF4, a dramatic suppression of cancer cell
growth.GC samples were collected and sequenced on SOLiD v 3.0 for both
WT-seq and small RNA-seq. Computational analysis showed that 356 out of
18,890 genes were identified as GC related differentially expressed genes
in the five-group comparison (normal, tumor stage I, II, III or IV). 28
genes were identified as stage-specific differentially expressed genes,
and 13 out of the 28 genes were within the network between HNF4 and HNF1.
In order to test the anti-proliferation activity of metformin in GC cell
lines associated with activation of PRKAA1, PRKAA2 and LKB1, and by HNF4
suppression, 4 GC cell lines (NCI-N87, AGS, HS 746T and MKN 45) were
treated with metformin. Both PRKAA1/2 showed increased gene expression
level when the cells were treated with 10mM of metformin. As for STK11
(LKB1 gene) and HNF4A gene expression level, LKB1 increased and HNF4A
decreased with metformin treatment on all four cell lines. Metformin
treated NCI-N87 and AGS show that it is involved in cell cycle arrest.
Western-blot analysis shows, decreased protein expression of Cyclin A/B
and D1 on metformin treated. Lastly, NCI-N87 xenograft study show
metformin treated suppression of tumor progression compared to
non-treated mouse. During the 28 day treatment of metformin, PRKAA1 and
PRKAA2 expression level increased compared to the untreated with.
Consistent with in vitro assay, LKB1 level was elevated in the metformin
treated tumor compared to the non-treated, and HNF4 level decreased over
time in the metformin treated tumor.Study shows that AMPK is a strong
therapeutic tumor suppressor target and that metformin is a potential
drug for Asian early gastric cancer patient. In our research in progress,
we observe potential relationships between the Wnt pathway and AMPK in
light of WNT druggability with metformin. In conclusion LKB1/AMPK by HNF4
inhibition suggests metformin could be a candidate for gastric cancer
treatment, probably in combination with conventional chemotherapy and/or
as a maintenance therapy.

