Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colorectal cancer heterogeneity from a gene expression perspective.


In a robust and unsupervised analysis of 1113 stage II-III CRC gene
expression profiles from PETACC3 and 4 public datasets we defined a set
of five gene expression subtypes which were validated in an independent
set of 720 samples. We tested these subtypes with common
clinico-pathological features, copy number variations, mutations in key
cancer associated genes - such as BRAF or KRAS - and prognosis, and found
important associations. The gene set enrichment analysis of groups of
genes with similar gene expression patterns and existing CRC signatures
followed by the literature search of gene members identified a number of
biological motifs underlying the CRC gene expression heterogeneity, such
as EMT/stroma, immune, proliferation, Wnt signaling, 20q chromosome,
markers of enterocytes, secretory cell markers or lipid synthesis. Based
on these results we named the subtypes A: Surface crypt, B: Lower crypt,
C: CIMP-H-like, D: Mesenchymal and E: Mixed. Subtype A, specific by
expression of markers of differentiated colon crypt cells was enriched
for KRAS mutant tumors (77%); WNT-high proliferative subtype B had a good
prognosis and comprised mainly MSS (100%) and left (76%); subtype C had
the worse prognosis in SAR and was enriched for BRAFm (29%), right (73%),
MSI (60%) and mucinous (38%) tumors. Subtype D, with the worse prognosis
in OS and RFS was characteristic by high expression of EMT/stroma genes
and subtype E enriched for p53 mutations (73%).We performed nuclear
-catenin immunoreactivity scoring of paraffin sections of 133 samples and
found significant associations with the subtypes. The supervised
histopathological assessment of the same set of paraffin sections
resulted in an identification of subtype specific morphological patterns
(serrated and papillary pattern in subtype A, complex tubular pattern in
subtypes B and E, solid and mucinous in subtype C, desmoplastic reaction
in D). Next, we concentrated our efforts on gene networks analysis in
order to identify subtype specific gene-gene interactions. These results
further refined between-subtype differences. The proposed CRC
characterization provides a molecular basis to different morphological
patterns in CRC and the identified molecular motifs allow subtypes to be
further interrogated functionally in vitro for driving oncogenic events.

