Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The natural compound hydroxytyrosol inhibits the Wnt/EMT axis and
migration of triple-negative breast cancer cells.


The Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway is frequently activated in invasive
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), and it is able to modify epithelial
cancer cells towards a more aggressive and metastatic mesenchymal-like
phenotype through activation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
Hallmarks of EMT are loss of epithelial markers (e.g. E-cadherin) while
gaining those of mesenchymal cells associated with metastatic potential
(e.g. Snail, Slug, nuclear -catenin). The antioxidant hydroxytyrosol (HT)
(3,4-dihydroxyphenilethanol) is a phenolic compound present in olive oil
which exerts anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic activity on cancer
cells. The aim of this study was to investigate whether HT exerts
inhibitory features on the Wnt/EMT axis and migration of TNBC cells.
BT549 cells were infected with either the retroviral vector pMV/Wnt-1,
pMV/DKK1 or pMV7 (parental retrovirus). BT549/Wnt-1 and MDA-MB-231 cells
were seeded at a density of 1x106 in DMEM (supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum and antibiotics) and treated with HT for 48h (0, 0.5, 1, 5,
10, 25, 50, 75, 100M). BT549/DKK1 and BT549/MV7 were used as controls.
Western blotting was employed to evaluate Wnt pathway activation (p-LRP6,
LRP6, -catenin, cyclin D1) and EMT marker expression (E-cadherin, Snail,
Slug), with -actin as a loading control. Cell motility was assessed by
scratch assays of confluent MDA-MB-231 cells in presence of HT (10 and
25M) for 72h in low serum conditions (0.1%), followed by recovery in
regular media without treatment for 14h. Our results show, for both cell
lines, that treatment with HT (at 10, 25, 50, 75, and 100M) reduces total
levels of the Wnt co-receptor LRP6 and reduces its phosphorylation status
only at high concentrations (50, 75, and 100M). The diminished receptor
activation is correlated with a dose-dependent decrease of -catenin and
cyclin D1 protein levels. Similar findings were observed with EMT
markers, with a significant decrease in both Snail and Slug transcription
factors and an increase in protein levels of the epithelial marker
E-cadherin. This dramatic reduction of EMT phenotype was further
correlated with a clear inhibition of the migration rate of metastatic
MDA-MB-231 cells. In conclusion, this is the first report indicating that
the small molecule HT acts as a novel Wnt inhibitor, possibly by
interference with the onset of the signaling cascade. This natural
compound can also reduce the aggressiveness and invasive potential of
TNBC cell lines by altering EMT markers and cell motility. Further
studies will be needed in order to get insight into the anti-cancer
properties of hydroxytyrosol and evaluate its future potential for
clinical trials.

