Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BCR-Abl independent, Abl-TKI-therapy-resistant CML cells show
enhanced sensitivity to GDC0941.


Introduction: Chronic Myeloid leukemia (CML) is driven by the BCR-ABL
oncogene and is initially treated with ABL tyrosine-kinase inhibitors
(ABL-TKI), such as Imatinib or Dasatinib. Despite strong initial
responses to these drugs, many patients acquire resistance over time
through acquisition of BCR-ABL mutations such as T315I, compound BCR-ABL
mutations or through BCR-ABL-independent mechanisms. Even though the next
generation pan-ABL inhibitor, Ponatinib, targets all know resistant ABL
mutations, some patients don't benefit from Ponatinib and in these cases
resistance to TKI therapy may be due to BCR-ABL-independent mechanisms.
We analyzed the mechanism of ABL-TKI-dual-resistant CML cells independent
of new BCR-ABL mutations and tested the sensitivity of these resistant
cells to the PI3K inhibitor, GDC-0941 and/or the MEK inhibitor
GDC-0973.Methods: We created ABL-TKI-dual-resistant cells and clones
through prolonged treatment of K562 and KCL22 cells with Imatinib and
then Dasatinib. The cells and clones were tested for sensitivity to
Imatinib, Dasatinib, Ponatinib, GDC-0941 and GDC-0973. Whole genome copy
number scan (Oncoscan) and targeted deep sequencing using GAII were used
to identify BCR-ABL mutations and newly acquired somatic gene
alterations. Phosphoproteomic analysis of cell lysates by Reverse Phase
Protein Arrays was used to profile cell signaling pathway status
associated with resistance and sensitivity to these drugs.Results: The
K562 ABL-TKI-dual-resistant cells were insensitive to all three ABL-TKIs
including Ponatinib suggesting that resistance was mediated by a
BCR-ABL-independent mechanism. Unexpectedly, the resistant cells and
clones became more sensitive to GDC-0941 but not GDC-0973 compared to the
parental cells. These resistant cells and clones had acquired new somatic
mutations in p53, BRCA2, PTEN, RB, SMARCA4 and PBRM1, but not in BCR-ABL.
Phosphoprotein profiling showed low phosphorylation of the BCR-ABL
substrates c-ABL, SHC and FAK indicative of BCR-ABL-independent
mechanisms of resistance. Activity of the PI3K/AKT and MEK/ERK pathways
varied across the resistant clones. However, high levels of the AKT
substrate, FOXO-1 directly correlated with Dasatinib resistance and with
GDC-0941 sensitivity. Sensitivity to GDC-0941 also correlated with
modulation of phospho-FOXO-1. Our data suggest that GDC-0941 may be a
therapeutic candidate for CML patients who progress on TKI therapy
through BCR-ABL-independent mechanisms of resistance.

