Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting prion protein as a potential oncogene in pancreatic
cancer.


Background: Human prion protein (PrP) has been found to be up-regulated
in gastric, breast, pancreatic cancers and its expression in cancer cells
contributes to cancer progression and resistance to various cancer
therapies. Current literature suggests that overexpression of PrP induces
inherent resistance to cancer therapeutics, while repression of PrP
induces sensitization to cancer therapeutics. Our previous studies using
expression microarray have revealed that PrP is not detected in normal
human pancreatic ductal cells but is expressed in human pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cell lines and 40% of pancreatic cancer specimens.
Further, expression of PrP confers a worse prognosis in PDAC patients.
The poor prognosis of pancreatic cancer demonstrates needs for better
target and drug development. Our recent studies also found that PrP is
universally expressed in fetal pancreatic precursor ductal cells, and
co-expresses with pancreatic stem cell markers, such as Pdx1 and Notch1,
suggesting that PrP is a marker of pancreatic stem cells and may
cross-talk with Notch1 during development and pancreatic tumorigenesis.
However, the role for PrP in the establishment or progression of cancer
is unknown, and whether PrP cross-talks with oncogenes such as Notch in
these processes need to be elucidated.Methods: We applied
immunoprecipitation (Abcam, Anti-Prion protein antibody 8H4) and western
blotting to investigate the binding partners for PrP. Knockdown and
over-expression of PRNP gene were carried out on various pancreatic cell
lines, followed by in vitro proliferation assay and apoptotic activity
analysis of these cells.Results: Pancreatic cancer cell lines express
different levels of PrP, e.g. BxPC3 and Pan02.03 have higher PrP
expression when compared to Capan-1. Western blot analysis revealed that
PrP can bind with Notch1 protein in both BxPC-3 and CAPAN-1 cell lines.
Moreover, down-regulation of PrP led to decreased cell proliferation and
accelerated apoptosis, accompanied by down-regulation of
cleaved/activated Notch1 (ICN1) and Notch2 (ICN2) expression in BxPC3
cells, but had lesser effect on CAPAN-1 cells. In comparison,
over-expression of PrP significantly increased the proliferation rate of
CAPAN-1 cells and dramatically upregulated the expression of ICN1. In
conjunction with our previous findings that PrP exists as a pro-prion
that binds filamin A in pancreatic cancer cells, these findings suggest
that PrP may mediate pancreatic cancer cell progression through
regulation of Notch activity and other cell mechanic and signaling
integrators. This hypothesis is being further tested by xenograft
analysis. Elucidating the mechanisms for PrP mediated Notch activation in
PDAC will further our long-term goal of understanding the role of
oncogenic PrP in conferring pancreatic cancer aggressiveness, and
potentially will lead to novel therapeutic options for treatment of
pancreatic cancer.

