Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using CTCs to interrogate mechanisms of taxane resistance in the
prospective TAXYNERGY clinical trial in prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer progression into castration-resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC) is driven by continued androgen receptor (AR) signaling despite
surgical and chemical androgen ablation. The taxanes represent the only
class of chemotherapy that improves overall survival in CRPC patients.
Despite their success, CRPC patients do progress on taxane treatment
rendering taxane-resistant tumors. The molecular mechanisms underlying
clinical taxane resistance in CRPC have not been well elucidated due to
the lack of available tumor tissue to study. Circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) represent a liquid biopsy of the original tumor and isolation of
them can lead to their molecular characterization potentially revealing
predictive biomarkers for taxane sensitivity or resistance. Here, we use
a geometrically enhanced differential immunocapture (GEDI) microfluidic
device that couples an anti-prostate specific membrane antigen (PSMA)
antibody with optimized 3D geometry to capture and isolate live CTCs from
whole blood of CRPC patients. The GEDI-microfluidic device was shown to
have a 2-400 fold higher sensitivity for CTC capture than the
FDA-approved CellSearch system. We have previously shown that CRPC
patient CTCs can be used to derive functional information that correlates
to clinical response to taxane chemotherapy, namely AR subcellular
localization status. We have developed a suite of other functional assays
that can be performed on live GEDI-captured CTCs that enable their
molecular characterization and allow us to test specific mechanistic
hypotheses based on our extensive preclinical data. Included, and herein
described, are the determination of AR subcellular localization, extent
of effective drug-target engagement assessed by microtubule bundling,
identification of RNA species relevant to the mechanism of taxane
resistance and computer vision algorithms that will allow for enriched
and automated analysis of high-volume image sets of GEDI-captured CTCs.
In addition, we will be testing the hypothesis that distinct AR splice
variants may affect patient sensitivity to taxane-based chemotherapy.
This suite of assays are being rigorously applied in a phase II clinical
trial in which chemotherapy-nave CRPC patients will be initially treated
with either docetaxel or cabazitaxel and clinically evaluated for an
early switch to the other taxane following disease progression. This
prospective, randomized, multi-site clinical trial will enroll 100 CRPC
patients within one year. Patients will be followed until relapse and
each patient will have 15 independent GEDI assays performed across five
time points from baseline to chemotherapy crossover to relapse. The depth
of coverage this suite of assays provides will offer unique insights for
potential mechanisms of clinical taxane resistance and predictive
biomarkers for taxane sensitivity in CRPC patient CTCs.

