Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual roles of ERK2 to TRAIL sensitivity in SK-N-MC
neuroepithelioma cells.


Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a new
promising agent for clinical use since it kills a wide range of tumor
cells but not normal cells. It is regulated by 2 death receptors (DR),
DR4 (TRAIL-R1) and DR5 (TRAIL-R2), and 2 decoy receptors (DcR), DcR1
(TRAIL-R3) and DcR2 (TRAIL-R4). However, the determining factors of the
sensitivity to TRAIL cytotoxicity are not clearly understood. This study
aims to elucidate the role of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
on enhancement of TRAIL cytotoxicity in cultured neuroepithelioma cell
line SK-N-MC. When 1 g/ml cisplatin-pretreated cells were exposed to 100
ng/ml TRAIL for 48 h, apoptotic cell death increased, compared with the
cells treated with cisplatin or TRAIL alone (66% versus 27% or 9%
apoptotic cell death). In addition, pretreatment with cisplatin in
SK-N-MC cells significantly increased ERK1/2 activity and increased
expression levels of DR5, but not DR4, DcR1 and DcR2, which correlated
with increase of their susceptibility to TRAIL cytotoxicity. Introduction
of ERK2 siRNA or ERK2 shRNA in SK-N-MC cells significantly decreased
cisplatin-induced DR5 expression, suggesting that cisplatin-induced ERK2
activity is involved in DR5 expression. On the other hand, treatment with
20 M U0126, an inhibitor of MEK, completely reduced basal ERK1/2 activity
and induced cell death in SK-N-MC cells. In addition, pretreatment with
U0126 increased TRAIL-mediated apoptosis via up-regulation of DR5
expression in response to the decrease in basal ERK2 activity. Because
pretreatment with U0126 completely inhibited not only cisplatin-induced
ERK2 activation but also basal ERK2 activity, the following treatment
with TRAIL significantly increased cell death, indicating that
constitutively activated ERK2 blocks DR5 expression in SK-N-MC cells.
Taken together, our results implicate that basal ERK2 activity is
involved in TRAIL resistance but induced ERK2 plays a role in TRAIL
sensitivity, and suggest that the enhanced sensitivity of SK-N-MC cells
to TRAIL is associated with an increase in DR5 expression.

