Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Limiting glucose availability with metformin increased reactive
oxygen species, decreased cell survival, and promoted apoptosis in human
and mouse pancreatic cancer cells.


Background: Recently, we found that calorie restriction (CR) protected
K-ras G12D; Pdx-1Cre mice against the progression of advanced PanIn
lesions and pancreatic cancer. Since CR limits glucose availability, the
CR mimetic metformin is also potential approach to prevent pancreatic
cancer. Recent studies found that metformin reduced the incidence of
pancreatic cancer in diabetic patients. However, it is not clear how
metformin promotes the anticancer effects. One potential mechanism is by
altering reactive oxygen species (ROS) and autophagy. In this in vitro
study, we explore the role of ROS and autophagy in mediating the
growth-inhibitory effects of metformin by treating pancreatic cancer
cells and normal pancreatic ductal cells with metformin.Methods: We
acclimated MiaPaca and KP mouse pancreatic tumor cells from K-ras G12D;
Pdx-1Cre mice to physiological concentrations of glucose and then treated
cells cells with metformin with and without the antioxidant N-acetyl
cysteine (NAC) or chloroquine (autophagy inhibitor) for 24h. Cell
viability, ROS production, and apoptosis were measured.Results: Metformin
decreased viability of MiaPaca and KP cells in a concentration-dependent
manner in comparison to untreated cells; metformin did not have any
effect in HPNE human pancreatic normal epithelial cells. Pretreating
MiaPaca and KP cells with NAC increase survival and decreased apoptosis,
which suggests that ROS promotes the growth-inhibitory and apoptotic
effect of metformin. Metformin increased ROS formation in MiaPaca and KP
cells but not in HPNE cells. Cell survival increased and apoptosis
decreased when MiaPaca cells were pretreated with chloroquine. Our
findings suggest that ROS and autophagy may mediate the cytotoxic effects
of metformin in MiaPaca and KP pancreatic cancer cells.Conclusion: In
summary, metformin may be a potential chemoprevention agent against
pancreatic cancer without cytotoxic effects in normal pancreatic ductal
cells.

