Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromosomal aberrations implicated in colorectal adenoma to
carcinoma progression as markers of high risk colorectal adenomas.


Background: Advanced adenomas are considered as an important intermediate
endpoint for colorectal cancer (CRC) screening. Still the majority of
these lesions do not progress to cancer. Hence, using this intermediate
endpoint in evaluation of screening programs may lead to an
overestimation of the effect of screening. Underlying genomic alterations
like chromosomal instability characteristic of colorectal adenoma to
carcinoma progression (gains of 8q, 13q, 20q and losses of 8p 15q, 18q)
may more precisely mark high risk adenomas. Previously, we have shown
that the presence of two or more of these particular chromosomal
alterations was associated with malignant progression. The aim of this
study is to evaluate the prevalence of chromosomal aberrations implicated
in colorectal adenoma to carcinoma progression in advanced and
non-advanced colorectal adenomas.Methods: The prevalence of DNA copy
number gains and losses of 8q, 13q, 15q, 18q, 20q, 8p and 17p was
determined in 65 advanced and 58 non-advanced adenomas using multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). Adenomas 1.0 cm, with any
villous features (i.e. tubulovillous or villous adenoma) or high-grade
dysplasia were called advanced adenomas, while tubular adenomas, 1.0 cm
than 1.0 cm than <1.0 cm (p=0.01 and p=0.001 respectively). 8q gain and
17p loss were significantly more present in adenomas with high degree
dysplasia than with low degree dysplasia (p=0.04 and p=0.01
respectively). None of the DNA copy number changes studied was associated
with the histological subtypes of advanced adenomas.Conclusions: 22% of
the advanced adenomas and 2% of the non-advanced adenomas showed two or
more CRC associated chromosomal aberrations. These findings are
consistent with the hypothesis that the morphological parameters used to
classify adenomas lack specificity as an intermediate endpoint in CRC
screening.

