Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The genomic evolution of prostate cancer under the selective
pressure of anti-androgen therapy.


Background: The implementation of novel technologies such as array
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and next-generation sequencing
has led to a deeper understanding of the genomic nature of cancer.
However, these analyses have classically been done without respecting
intra-tumor heterogeneity. Here, we applied a methodology that allows us
analyzing the genomic profile of distinct tumor populations from
individual tumors and their clonal evolution during the progression to
castration-resistant disease. Methods: Matched pre- and post- hormone
treated fresh frozen and/or formalin fixed prostate cancer samples were
selected from our biobank. Clonal tumor populations were flow-sorted
according to their nuclear DNA content. Sorted tumor populations were
subjected to whole genome CGH and to full exome sequencing analyses by
the use of Agilent SurePrint 2x400k microarrays and the SureSelect All
Exon Kit, respectively. Results: The genomic analyses of the tumor
samples underscore the presence of significant intra-tumoral
heterogeneity. The analysis of matched tumor specimens allowed us to
identify two particular patterns of tumor evolution during the
progression after treatment: First, a more parallel pattern of tumor
evolution, in which the ancestor population is breeding multiple
aneuploid tumor clones. In this case, only the 2N ancestor population is
able to withstand therapy by the acquisition of few specific genomic
aberrations whereas the aneuploid populations are eradicated. Second, a
more sequential pattern of tumor evolution with a tumor population that
evolves out of a continuous line of clones. This population shows
increasing signs of genomic instability over time, with a punctual event
of chromothripsis (a massive destruction and rearrangement of chromosomal
structures) resulting in castration-resistant clonal tumor populations.
Conclusions: Genomic profiling of distinct clonal tumor populations
during prostate cancer progression allows for analysis of intra-tumoral
heterogeneity and the underlying clonal evolution. Importantly, this
approach identifies genomic aberrations that were selected for under the
pressure of hormone ablation therapy.

