Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral antiangiogenic therapy suppresses xenograft growth and is
well tolerated in rats.


Lodamin, the oral formulation of TNP-470, a methionine aminopeptidase 2
(MetAp2) inhibitor, was previously shown to significantly inhibit
angiogenesis and suppress the progression of fast growing murine tumors.
Lodamins unique structure as a polymer micelle composed of
poly(ethylene-glycol)-poly(lactic)acid (PEG-PLA) conjugate of TNP-470 is
pharmacologically advantageous over the non-conjugated form. It shows
better stability, oral availability, solubility in water and importantly,
has an improved safety profile (Benny O. Folkman J et al, Nat Biotech,
2008). We now report the successful large scale synthesis of Lodamin,
yielding pure and active product composed of mPEG-PLA-TNP-470 conjugate
without residual free drug as confirmed by NMR and LC-MS/MS. The safety
profile of Lodamin was studied in an acute high dose rat study (4 fold
higher than therapeutic dose). Lodamin was administered at 10mg/kg or
60mg/kg via oral gavage while control rats were given vehicle only. After
7 days of daily treatment, no changes in body weight or behavior were
observed compared to the control group. On day 8 post treatment, gross
pathology of all rats was examined. This data showed Lodamin treatment
had no adverse effect on tissue morphology. Lodamin is a potent
antiangiogenic drug in numerous in vivo murine models including the
corneal micropocket assay, matrigel assay, Delayed-Type Hypersensitivity
(DTH) reaction and the choroidal neovascularization (CNV) model (Benny O.
Folkman J et al, Nat Biotech, 2008, Benny O. D'Amato R et al, Plos One
2010). We now show that in addition to its dramatic anti-cancer effects
on Lewis lung carcinoma and B16F10 melanoma murine tumors, Lodamin
suppresses human tumors induced in nude mice. The volume of subcutaneous
(s.c) human glioblastoma (U87MG) xenografts were reduced by 70% after 30
days, and 71% after 45 days when administered by gavage or in drinking
water, respectively. Human breast tumor (MDA-MB231, s.c) growth was
inhibited by 62% after 47 days of administration, and Human
hepatocarcinoma (HepG2, s.c) tumor growth was inhibited by 60% after only
12 days. Taken together we have established Lodamin as a potent
antiangiogenic drug which retains TNP-470 activity without
TNP-470-associated side effects. Lodamin is a safe and efficacious drug
in our animal models and hopefully will be reintroduced for the treatment
of cancer in patients.

