Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential cellular response to nanoparticle docetaxel and
docetaxel at sub-therapeutic dose range.


Nanoparticle (NP) formulations of taxanes overcome the need for
excipients and improve the delivery of taxane therapeutics to tumors.
These advantages have resulted in rapid clinical translation of NP
taxanes and high interest in preclinical and clinical development of
novel NP taxanes. However, the effects of NP taxanes on tumor cells
compared to their small molecule counterparts have not been evaluated.
Existing NP taxanes are polymeric NPs and release their cargo in a slow
and controlled fashion. Due to this controlled release, the taxane
concentration level and exposure time to a cell at any given time from NP
taxanes are different from that of small molecule taxanes. We have
utilized two distinct polymeric NP docetaxel formulations to study the
influence of NP drug delivery of taxanes on tumor cells in vitro. We
hypothesize that the cellular response to polymeric NP taxanes is
different from that of small molecule taxanes due to the controlled
release property.We used docetaxel (Dtxl) as a model taxane therapeutic
and studied tumor cell response to Docetaxel-PNP, a commercial polymeric
NP formulation of Dtxl currently under clinical investigation, and
folate-targeted nanoparticle docetaxel (FT-NP Dtxl), a targeted
lipid-polymer NP formulation of Dtxl that was developed by our
laboratory. The taxane formulations were evaluated using KB head and neck
carcinoma. We performed liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry and
determined that using the Dtxl equivalent dose of the Dtxl formulations
provided the same intracellular concentration of Dtxl after 1 h exposure
in KB cells. We demonstrated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting of
the cell cycle distribution that NP Dtxl formulations and small molecule
Dtxl have similar effects on KB tumor cells at therapeutic
concentrations. However, cells treated with a sub-therapeutic
concentration of NP Dtxl undergo a different progression through the cell
cycle compared to cells treated with small molecule Dtxl, which suggests
a difference in the cellular response between the Dtxl formulations. We
validated the differential cellular response to sub-therapeutic doses of
NP Dtxl and Dtxl by live cell imaging analysis of KB green fluorescent
protein-histone 2B (GFP-H2B) expressing cells after treatment. We found
that the cellular response of tumor cells to NP Dtxl is different from
that of Dtxl at sub-therapeutic doses. In this dose range, we also found
that the cellular response of cells to NP Dtxl is similar to that of Dtxl
at a much lower dose, suggesting that controlled release property of NP
Dtxl is responsible for the difference in the cellular response.In
conclusion, we have demonstrated that the cellular response of tumor
cells to NP Dtxl is different from that to Dtxl at sub-therapeutic doses.
We speculate that this difference is due to the controlled release
property, which causes cells to be exposed to a lower concentration of
Dtxl.

