Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor target vs. tissue of tumor origin: cluster analysis of
genomic profile of 42 human tumor in vitro and in vivo models.


Traditionally, drug development has relied upon testing cancer drug
candidates in cell lines. Active drugs are then tested in human tumor
xenograft models, usually selected based upon the cell lines in which the
drug showed activity. The majority of drugs fail at this stage as they do
not show activity in the xenograft models chosen. We performed Affymetrix
genomic analysis on 42 human tumor xenograft models and the original cell
lines from which they were established. The genomic profiles obtained
underwent Unsupervised Hierarchical Cluster Analysis to ascertain which
cell lines and xenograft models had similar genomic profiles and which
did not. The analysis showed that only 24 of 42 human tumor xenograft
models clustered side-by-side with the cell line from which they were
established. All 6 human leukemia/lymphoma xenograft models clustered
very well with the cell lines from which they were established, and they
clustered perfectly according to histological class. Five out of six
human colon tumor xenograft models clustered well with the cell lines
from which they were established and according to histotype. Of the 18
xenograft/cell line pairs that did not cluster side-by-side, 10 pairs
remained in the same general cluster, whereas the partners of 8 other
pairs were dispersed across different major clusters. Ovarian, breast,
melanoma, and pancreatic human tumor xenograft models did not cluster
according to histotype. Our data may explain why some drugs that show in
vitro activity in some cell lines are not active in other cell lines of
the same histological type, and also why some drugs that show activity in
vitro then fail in xenograft models. In our laboratory, the PANC-1 cell
line is very often chosen as a model of pancreatic cancer. A drug showing
activity in the PANC-1 cell line would next be tested in other in vitro
models of pancreatic cancer (e.g., MIA PaCa-2, CFPAC-1, and BxPC-3).
However, none of these other pancreatic models have a similar genetic
profile to PANC-1. Based upon our data, the cell line showing most
similarity to the PANC-1 cell line is the breast cancer cell line
MDA-MB-231. It is our suggestion that a drug showing activity in the
PANC-1 cell line should be tested in other cell lines showing similar
genetic profiles, not in cell lines based on histotype. Another example
from our analysis is the LOX-IMV1 melanoma cell line. Not only does this
cell line not cluster with its corresponding LOX-IMV1 xenograft model, it
clusters most closely with the NCI/ADR-RES ovarian cell line. In summary,
the genomic profiles of approximately 57% of the tumor xenograft models
analyzed closely associate with the cell line from which they were
established. Some of the tumor xenograft models show very little
similarity to the cell lines from which they were established.
Additionally, many of the models (both xenografts and cell lines), do not
cluster according to their tissue of origin.

