Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel animal models of pancreatic cancer induced by smoking and
chronic pancreatitis.


Background and Aims: Smoking and pancreatitis are two major risk factors
for pancreatic cancer. We developed novel mouse models of pancreatic
cancer induced by smoking and chronic pancreatitis. We used two
pancreatic cancer mouse models induced by overexpression of Kras with two
different degrees of disease complexity. Methods: Wild type (WT), EL-Kras
and Pdx1-Cre;LSL-Kras transgenic mice were subjected to a major cigarette
smoke compound nitrosamine 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone
(NNK) at doses close to those accumulated with smoking (100mg/kg) or
exposed to tobacco smoke (80mg/m3) in tobacco smoke chambers for five
days a week during 6 weeks. Standard model of chronic pancreatitis
induced by cerulein injections (50g/kg) for 3 weeks was applied to WT and
Pdx1-Cre;LSL-Kras mice. Mice were then sacrificed and pancreatic tissue
analyzed. Apoptosis was assessed by TUNEL. Autophagy was assessed by
measuring autophagic markers LC3-II and p62. Pancreatic lesions,
proliferation, fibrosis and inflammation were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry. Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
expression of stem cell markers were analyzed by Western. Results: NNK
and exposure to tobacco smoke significantly increased the number and
stage of pancreatic neoplastic (PanIN) lesions in Kras transgenic mice.
Smoking stimulated fibrosis and stellate cells activation but had no
significant effect on inflammation. EMT markers (decrease in E-Cadherin
and increase in vimentin protein levels) were stimulated by NNK and
tobacco smoke exposure in both WT and transgenic mice. NNK decreased
apoptosis and LC3-II level in Kras mice. In addition, smoking stimulated
expression of stem cell markers sox2 and CD133. Cerulein stimulated
fibrosis, stellate cells activation, inflammation, and slightly
stimulated EMT in WT and transgenic mice. Combination of smoking and
cerulein had additive effect on stimulation of PanIN lesion formation,
fibrosis, EMT and stem cell markers induction. Conclusion: The results
indicate that both tobacco smoke and chronic cerulein pancreatitis
promote pancreatic cancer progression in both EL-Kras and
Pdx1-Cre;LSL-Kras mice models. Smoking acts through enhancing fibrosis
and EMT; whereas pancreatitis stimulates mainly inflammation and
fibrosis. Smoking and pancreatitis have additive effect on fibrosis, EMT
and acquiring of stem cell characteristics.

