Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MM-111, a bispecific HER2 and HER3 antibody, synergistically
combines with trastuzumab and paclitaxel in preclinical models of gastric
cancer.


Increasing evidence suggests amplification or overexpression of human
epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2), and HER3 levels are correlated
to decreased survival in gastric cancers. Our previous studies
established that MM-111, a novel bispecific antibody that specifically
targets the HER2/HER3 heterodimer, blocks heregulin (HRG) binding to HER3
and corresponding downstream signaling pathways. In this study we used
computational and experimental biology to assess the activity of MM-111
combination therapies in treating gastric cancer. First, we utilized a
multi-scale computational network model of HER2-positive tumors that
relates HER family signal transduction with cell growth to predict that
MM-111 plus trastuzumab would synergistically inhibit tumor growth. The
mechanism underlying this prediction is that the combinatorial blockade
of HER2 and HER3 suppresses signal propagation through both the AKT and
ERK cascades and this leads to synergistic cell growth arrest. Cell
viability and signaling experiments in a gastric cancer model (NCI-N87)
confirmed these predictions. In particular, MM-111 plus trastuzumab
caused 25% greater cell growth inhibition than the additive effects of
the individual treatments (compared to Bliss independence; pIncreasing
evidence suggests amplification or overexpression of human epidermal
growth factor receptor-2 (HER2), and HER3 levels are correlated to
decreased survival in gastric cancers. Our previous studies established
that MM-111, a novel bispecific antibody that specifically targets the
HER2/HER3 heterodimer, blocks heregulin (HRG) binding to HER3 and
corresponding downstream signaling pathways. In this study we used
computational and experimental biology to assess the activity of MM-111
combination therapies in treating gastric cancer. First, we utilized a
multi-scale computational network model of HER2-positive tumors that
relates HER family signal transduction with cell growth to predict that
MM-111 plus trastuzumab would synergistically inhibit tumor growth. The
mechanism underlying this prediction is that the combinatorial blockade
of HER2 and HER3 suppresses signal propagation through both the AKT and
ERK cascades and this leads to synergistic cell growth arrest. Cell
viability and signaling experiments in a gastric cancer model (NCI-N87)
confirmed these predictions. In particular, MM-111 plus trastuzumab
caused 25% greater cell growth inhibition than the additive effects of
the individual treatments (compared to Bliss independence; p< 0.05).
Next, we assessed the effect of exogenous HRG on this combination
therapy. HRG reduced the activity of trastuzumab but did not affect
MM-111s activity, and it enhanced the synergy of this combination (50%
greater than Bliss independence; p Increasing evidence suggests
amplification or overexpression of human epidermal growth factor
receptor-2 (HER2), and HER3 levels are correlated to decreased survival
in gastric cancers. Our previous studies established that MM-111, a novel
bispecific antibody that specifically targets the HER2/HER3 heterodimer,
blocks heregulin (HRG) binding to HER3 and corresponding downstream
signaling pathways. In this study we used computational and experimental
biology to assess the activity of MM-111 combination therapies in
treating gastric cancer. First, we utilized a multi-scale computational
network model of HER2-positive tumors that relates HER family signal
transduction with cell growth to predict that MM-111 plus trastuzumab
would synergistically inhibit tumor growth. The mechanism underlying this
prediction is that the combinatorial blockade of HER2 and HER3 suppresses
signal propagation through both the AKT and ERK cascades and this leads
to synergistic cell growth arrest. Cell viability and signaling
experiments in a gastric cancer model (NCI-N87) confirmed these
predictions. In particular, MM-111 plus trastuzumab caused 25% greater
cell growth inhibition than the additive effects of the individual
treatments (compared to Bliss independence; p< 0.05). Next, we assessed
the effect of exogenous HRG on this combination therapy. HRG reduced the
activity of trastuzumab but did not affect MM-111s activity, and it
enhanced the synergy of this combination (50% greater than Bliss
independence; p < 108). We then assessed the effect of adding paclitaxel
to the trastuzumab plus MM-111 combination. Our key finding was that
activation of HER3 by HRG greatly reduced paclitaxel's activity. MM-111,
but not trastuzumab, restored cell sensitivity to paclitaxel in the
presence of HRG. A synergistic effect (35% greater than Bliss
independence; p Increasing evidence suggests amplification or
overexpression of human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2), and
HER3 levels are correlated to decreased survival in gastric cancers. Our
previous studies established that MM-111, a novel bispecific antibody
that specifically targets the HER2/HER3 heterodimer, blocks heregulin
(HRG) binding to HER3 and corresponding downstream signaling pathways. In
this study we used computational and experimental biology to assess the
activity of MM-111 combination therapies in treating gastric cancer.
First, we utilized a multi-scale computational network model of
HER2-positive tumors that relates HER family signal transduction with
cell growth to predict that MM-111 plus trastuzumab would synergistically
inhibit tumor growth. The mechanism underlying this prediction is that
the combinatorial blockade of HER2 and HER3 suppresses signal propagation
through both the AKT and ERK cascades and this leads to synergistic cell
growth arrest. Cell viability and signaling experiments in a gastric
cancer model (NCI-N87) confirmed these predictions. In particular, MM-111
plus trastuzumab caused 25% greater cell growth inhibition than the
additive effects of the individual treatments (compared to Bliss
independence; p< 0.05). Next, we assessed the effect of exogenous HRG on
this combination therapy. HRG reduced the activity of trastuzumab but did
not affect MM-111s activity, and it enhanced the synergy of this
combination (50% greater than Bliss independence; p < 108). We then
assessed the effect of adding paclitaxel to the trastuzumab plus MM-111
combination. Our key finding was that activation of HER3 by HRG greatly
reduced paclitaxel's activity. MM-111, but not trastuzumab, restored cell
sensitivity to paclitaxel in the presence of HRG. A synergistic effect
(35% greater than Bliss independence; p < 108) was observed for the
combination of MM-111, trastuzumab and paclitaxel. Similar combination
effects were also achieved using a three-dimensional NCI-N87 spheroid
assay: Inhibition of HER2, HER3, and the AKT and ERK pathways correlated
with spheroid growth inhibition. Furthermore, HRG-overexpressing NCI-N87
(NCI-N87-HRG) xenografts were less sensitive to paclitaxel than the wild
type xenografts. MM-111 restored the sensitivity to paclitaxel in these
xenografts, even when given as a second line treatment regimen after
tumor progression on the front-line regimen (trastuzumab plus
5-fluorouracil). Trastuzumab alone did not overcome the HRG-induced
paclitaxel resistance, but its combination with MM-111 showed
significantly greater activity than either drug alone. Taken together,
our data suggest that combination of MM-111, trastuzumab and paclitaxel
is worthy of investigation as a potential therapeutic strategy for the
treatment of HER2-positive gastric cancer.

