Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomic profiling reveals a protective modulation on fatty
acid metabolism in colorectal cancer patients following consumption of
freeze-dried black raspberries.


Metabolic reprogramming which refers to altered nutrient uptake and use
is thought to be essential for rapid cancer cell proliferation.
Accelerated phospholipid biosynthesis is another metabolic signature of
cancer because proliferating cells have a significant need for membrane
production. Fatty acids that compose the hydrophobic tails of membrane
phospholipids can regulate gene transcription through enzyme-mediated
pathways, e.g., cyclooxygenase, lipoxygenase, and changing lipid raft
composition that affect receptor-mediated signalings. We previously
showed that dietary intervention with freeze-dried black raspberries
(BRBs) decreased cell proliferation in colorectal tumors and IL-8, a
pro-inflammatory cytokine, in plasma in colorectal cancer patients. The
goal of the current study was to determine if BRBs affect fatty acid
metabolism which may contribute to their anti-proliferative and
anti-inflammatory activities. Plasma samples were collected from 28
colorectal cancer patients before and after oral consumption of BRB
powder (60g/day) for 1-to-9 wks for metabolomic profiling analysis. 421
biochemicals were analyzed using UHPLC/Gas chromatography and mass
spectrometry. When data from all 28 patients were combined, the top 30
ranking biochemicals suggest that berry intervention led to alterations
mostly in lipids, following by carbohydrates, amino acids, and cofactors
and vitamins. Both monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs), e.g., eicosenoate
(20:1n9 or 11), and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), e.g., linoleate
(18:2n6), arachidonate (20:4n6), were lower in the post plasma samples.
PUFAs can be synthesized from linoleate and they also can be released by
phospholipase A from phospholipid membrane. Therefore, berry intervention
might alter activities of phospholipase A, elongases, and desaturases
which in turn reduce levels of PUFAs. Alternatively, berry intervention
increased secondary bile acids, e.g., glycodeoxycholate, produced by the
action of enzymes existing in the microbial flora of the colonic
environment, suggesting dietary BRBs could alter colonic microflora.
Berry intervention associated alternations in bile acid metabolism could
affect fat absorption and subsequently impact fatty acid metabolism. In
conclusion, our results suggest that dietary berry consumption
protectively modulates enzymes associated with fatty acid metabolism in
the host as well as in gut microflora leading to decreased proliferation
and inflammation in colorectal cancer patients. Supported by R01 CA148818
to L-S Wang

