Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential effects of biochanin A on cell proliferation and
ROS-dependent pathways in estrogen receptor positive and HER-2 positive
breast cancer cells.


The naturally occurring isoflavone biochanin A has been reported to have
chemo-preventative properties towards cancer. Biochanin A exhibits
antioxidant properties. Because of its antioxidant properties, biochanin
A may be used to target breast cancer cells with high intracellular
levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). In this study, we investigated
the effects of biochanin A on two cell lines an estrogen receptor (ER)
positive and a HER-2 positive breast cancer cell line. Biochanin A is
implicated to affect both hormonal receptors and receptor tyrosine
kinases. Overstimulation of ER is a basis for tumor progression due to
the disruption of the cell cycle and apoptosis in estrogen positive
breast cancer cells. Activation of HER-2 initiates cell growth, survival
and invasion promoting cell signaling events in HER-2 positive breast
cancer cells. MCF-7 (estrogen positive) and SK-BR-3 (HER-2 positive)
cells were treated with biochanin A (2-100 M) for 72 hours. Then MTT
(cell survival) assay was carried out to determine the effects of
biochanin A on cell survival. Our results suggest that biochanin A
induces a dose-related inhibition of MCF-7 and SK-BR-3 cell viability at
50 M. MCF-7 and SK-BR-3 cells were also treated with biochanin A (50 M)
for 12 hours and subsequently treated with hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)(2 M)
for 30 minutes: then western blotting was carried out to determine their
expression of ERK and transcription factor NFB. We found that biochanin A
inhibits phospho-ERK pathway in SK-BR-3 but not in MCF-7 cells. However,
expression of the transcription factor NFB was decreases in both SK-BR-3
and MCF-7 cells. Thus, biochanin A may be an effective chemotherapeutic
agent for breast cancer because of its ability to affect both hormonal
receptors and receptor tyrosine kinases and to decrease intracellular ROS
levels. (Supported by NIH INBRE P20RR016454, URC and MSTMRI)

