Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profiles from exfoliated cervical cells identify
potential biomarkers predictive of HPV16 clearance or persistence.


Cervical cancer is the second most common cancer in women worldwide with
about 500,000 new cases and 250,000 deaths annually. The incidence of
cervical cancer has dramatically decreased in developed countries over
the past fifty years, mainly due to effective Pap test screening and
follow-up programs that allow for early detection and treatment. However,
many abnormal cervical lesions detected by the Pap test would
spontaneously regress if not treated; therefore current screening and
follow-up protocols result in expensive and painful interventions that
also may compromise future pregnancies. The etiologic agent of cervical
cancer is sexually-transmitted, high-risk human papillomavirus (HR-HPV),
with HPV16 being responsible for 50% of all cervical cancer. Most women
will acquire HR-HPV at some point during their lifetime; however most of
these infections clear within 9-18 months. Only women with persistent
HR-HPV infection are truly at risk of developing cervical cancer.
Biomarkers that would identify women at risk for persistent HR-HPV
infection would allow physicians to follow these patients, sparing others
unnecessary and costly follow-up. We have performed microarray gene
expression profiling, using Agilent 4x44K human microarrays, on five
HPV16 positive exfoliated cervical cell samples collected in RNAlater
(Ambion) from women who cleared an HPV16 infection, and eight HPV16
positive cervical cell samples from women with persistent HPV16
infection, defined as being positive for HPV16 for at least one year.
Data analysis was performed using limma/limmaGUI (Bioconductor),
GeneSifter (Geospiza), and Cluster/Treeview (Eisen Lab) software. Using
the nonparametric Wilcoxon rank-sum test and 0.01 and 2 as p-value and
fold change cutoffs, respectively, we identified 391 differentially
expressed genes in HPV16 persisters as compared to HPV16 clearers. In
addition, we identified a molecular signature composed of 14 genes that
separates the samples into their corresponding groups (persisters and
clearers) when studied by both cluster analysis and correlation analysis.
Expression of 4 immune-related genes (IL6, IL1A, IL1B and TNF-alpha) was
also determined by quantitative real time PCR. Expression of all four
genes was confirmed to be downregulated in HPV16 persisters as compared
to HPV16 clearers. These 4 potential biomarker genes, and others to be
validated, have potential clinical importance, since they can predict if
HPV16 infections will be persistent or will be cleared. We are currently
validating these initial results with a second, much larger validation
set of exfoliated cervical cells collected from women that had persistent
HPV16 infections or were able to clear the HPV16 infection. Supported by
grant P20MD001770 from the NIH/NIMHD

