Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Catechol suppresses EGF-induced cell transformation by inhibiting
ERK2 activity as confirmed by a crystallographic study.


Catechol (pyrocathechol, 1,2-dihydroxybenzene) is a chemical that is used
by industry in the manufacture of certain products. It also occurs
naturally in many fruits such as apple, apricot, grape, bananas, pear,
plum, mango, avocado, potato, and mushrooms. Browning of fruit occurs
because of a chemical reaction between catechol and oxygen. Even though,
catechol has toxicity at a high dose as shown by an in vivo study, the
Environmental Protection Agency has not classified catechol with respect
to potential carcinogenicity. Whether a lower concentration (Catechol
(pyrocathechol, 1,2-dihydroxybenzene) is a chemical that is used by
industry in the manufacture of certain products. It also occurs naturally
in many fruits such as apple, apricot, grape, bananas, pear, plum, mango,
avocado, potato, and mushrooms. Browning of fruit occurs because of a
chemical reaction between catechol and oxygen. Even though, catechol has
toxicity at a high dose as shown by an in vivo study, the Environmental
Protection Agency has not classified catechol with respect to potential
carcinogenicity. Whether a lower concentration (< 40 M) of catechol
treatment has effects on carcinogenesis is not known. We found that
catechol binds to ERK2 and inhibits its activity. The extracellular
signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) belong to the mitogen-activated protein
(MAP) kinase family, and regulate important biological processes such as
cell growth, proliferation, differentiation, and transcription
regulation. ERK2 is activated in response of UV, cytokines and growth
factors, such as epidermal growth factor (EGF) and insulin-like growth
factor. Constitutive activation of ERK2 is observed in many human cancers
such as colon, breast, lung and skin cancers. In this study we present
the co-crystal structure of ERK2 bound with catechol in the ATP-active
site. The conserved amino acid residues within the hinge region that are
involved in the interaction of ERK and its inhibitors make the contacts
with catechol. Contacts include side chain of Q105, and the main chains
of the D106 and M108 residues. We found that catechol inhibits ERK2 in
vitro kinase activity more than two-fold at a 20 M concentration. This
was confirmed by the observed decrease of the phosphorylation of Elk1, a
specific downstream target of ERK2. In addition, 20 M catechol inhibited
EGF-induced JB6 cell transformation. Interestingly, JB6 cell
proliferation was not affected at 20 M concentration. Taken together, the
results showed that catechol inhibits EGF-induced cell transformation
without any toxicity through the inhibition of ERK2 activity.

