Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MALDI mass spectrometry imaging for on-tissue spatial profiling of
tumor-specific N-linked glycans and lipids in renal carcinomas.


Pathologic staging of renal clear cell carcinoma (ccRCC) provides useful
but limited prognostic information suggesting that there are underlying
molecular processes not readily identified through conventional
histopathological techniques in the primary tumor. At the molecular
level, transcript, metabolomic and protein expression patterns have
indicated a striking Warburg Effect profile in ccRCC tissues, with major
affects on sugar and lipid metabolism. Our group has been applying
MALDI-MS imaging approaches to ccRCC tissues to profile lipids and
glycans associated with disease progression. As both lipids and glycans
can act as signaling molecules and have been associated with cancer
progression, ccRCC tissues were selected by a pathologist to contain
substantial tumor, non-tumor and tumor margin regions to characterize the
differential localization of lipid and glycan species within the tissue.
Lipid profiles from fresh-frozen tissue slides coated in DHB matrix were
obtained on a dual source Bruker Solarix 70 FTICR mass spectrometer.
Glycans were imaged in a similar fashion with a method developed by our
lab using protein N-glycanase F to release protein bound N-glycans. There
are clear patterns of specific lipid and glycan species that are only
present along the margin of the tumor and non-tumor interface, or those
primarily localized in non-tumor or tumor regions. Off-tissue extraction
of lipids and glycans from similarly processed tissues and further mass
spectrometry analysis was done to confirm structural designations.
Linkage of differentially expressed lipid and glycan species with
clinical data and other molecular markers of ccRCC is ongoing. This
approach has the potential to not only improve prognostic assessment and
enhance post-operative surveillance, but also to better define the
underlying biology of ccRCC aggressiveness and identify new rational
targets for therapeutic intervention.

