Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3-D imaging and illustration of nerve-lesion association in the
mouse tongue of experimental oral cancer.


Introduction:Tongue has a rich nerve supply and is in constant contact
with a variety of neurotrophins in the saliva.In tongue/oral cancer,
patients suffer from pain that is often more severe than the symptom
caused by other cancers, likely due to the stimulation of the nerve
endings and/or compression and invasion of sensory nerves. Despite the
noticeable neural component in tongue/oral cancer development,
high-resolution microscopic observation of the tongue innervation in
health and disease has been difficult. This is primarily due to the
dispersed neural network in space that cannot be easily portrayed by the
standard microtome-based 2-dimensional (2-D) microscopy. The artifact and
distortion caused by microtome slicing as well as the challenge of
aligning series of microtome slices in precision seriously limit our
ability to examine tongue innervation. Method: To overcome the imaging
limitation, we prepared transparent mouse tongue specimens by optical
clearing (use of immersion solution to reduce random scattering as light
travels across media; Fu & Tang, Gastroenterology,139:p1100, 2010 and
www.3d-histology.com) and combined vessel painting and3-dimensional (3-D)
neurohistology for joint visualization of the tongue tissue
architectures. Cardiac perfusion of the fluorescent lectin was used to
label the blood vessels. Neuronal markers including PGP9.5, tyrosine
hydroxylase, vesicular acetylcholine transporter, and calcitonin
gene-related peptide were used as the immunostaining targets of neural
tissues. Results: We simultaneously revealed the microstructure,
vasculature, and innervation of the normal tongue with m-level
resolution. Examples of 3-D features such as the neurovascular complex at
the core of the filiform papilla and the taste bud innervation in the
fungiform papilla were used to demonstrate the image quality. In the
progression of experimental oral cancer induced by
4-Nitroquinoline-1-oxide, we observed remodeling of the tongue
innervation with prominent peri- or intra-lesional nerve fibers,
indicating intimate nerve-lesion interactions. Sympathetic,
parasympathetic, and sensory nerves were all found associated with the
lesion. Conclusion: This tongue innervation imaging method does not
require tissue microtome sectioning and provides a useful tool for 3-D
presentation and analysis of normal and diseased tongue in an integrated
fashion.

