Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quinacrine and sorafenib as potential combination for anaplastic
thyroid carcinoma.


Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) comprises 2% of all thyroid cancers and
its median survival rate remains poor. ATC is frequently resistant to
conventional therapy and therefore it is essential to expand the number
of treatment options for ATC. Proto-oncogenes RET, RAS and BRAF are some
of the best targets described in thyroid cancer. Sorafenib is a small
molecule multi-kinase inhibitor that inhibits RAF, MEK and ERK kinases
among other targets and is therefore being evaluated in several phase
II/III clinical trials in thyroid cancer. Quinacrine, a potent small
molecule inhibitor of NFKB signaling, is currently being evaluated in
phase II clinical trials. We have previously shown the effectiveness of
quinacrine in combination with cytotoxic drugs in hepatocellular and
colon carcinoma cells acts by inhibiting NFKB, Mcl-1, and angiogenesis in
tumor cell lines that are deficient in p53. Here, we evaluate the
efficacy of quinacrine in combination with sorafenib on a panel of human
ATC cells. Quinacrine as a single agent effectively inhibits growth and
promote apoptosis of ATC cells in vitro in a dose-dependent manner as
assessed by CellTiter-Glo and sub-G1 analysis respectively. Combinatorial
dose-response modulation of quinacrine with sorafenib suggests a
synergistic drug-drug interaction with respect to growth stasis of ATC
cells in vitro, as defined by Chou-Talalay. Western blot analysis suggest
that the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member Mcl-1, over-expressed in a
number of solid tumors, is efficiently down-regulated in the ATC cell
line 8505C by the combination of quinacrine and sorafenib. We also
observe that the active form of transcription factor Stat3 is
down-regulated by both quinacrine and sorafenib. In contrast to
chloroquine that inhibits autophagy, our previous results have not shown
that quinacrine's anti-tumor efficacy involves alterations in autophagy.
Furthermore, sorafenib and quinacrine significantly improve survival in a
mouse thyroid orthotopic in vivo xenograft model of ATC. We are currently
exploring the detailed molecular mechanism of the quinacrine and
sorafenib drug synergy and associated anti-tumor activity in vitro and in
vivo. In addition, we are exploring the possibility of performing in vivo
assays of the therapy combination with clinical samples. Our findings
suggest that quinacrine in combination with sorafenib may be a novel and
potentially cost effective therapeutic strategy for the treatment ATC.

