Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Daily coffee drinking reduces gastric cancer risk among Singapore
Chinese women.


BACKGROUND Gastric cancer is among the deadliest cancers in the world.
Gastric cancer incidence is highest among Asian populations. Numerous
cell and animal studies have demonstrated chemopreventive effects of
coffee, one of the most widely consumed beverages worldwide. Chinese in
Singapore are one of the few Asian populations that drink coffee. There
are few prospective data among Asians that have explored the effect of
coffee drinking on gastric cancer risk.METHODS We examined the
association between dietary factors, including coffee and caffeine, and
the risk of gastric cancer in the population-based prospective cohort of
the Singapore Chinese Health Study. At baseline, dietary information was
ascertained with a validated food frequency questionnaire. Incident
gastric cancer cases (n=519) were identified from 61,321 men and women
after a mean follow-up of 12.4 years. Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated for the relationship between
coffee and gastric cancer risk using Cox proportional hazards regression
after adjustment for potential confounders, including smoking history and
alcohol use. Secondary analyses were conducted with stratification by
gender and subsite of gastric cancer (cardia, non-cardia, or
unspecified).RESULTS In the overall cohort, daily or more frequent coffee
consumption was associated with a statistically non-significant decrease
in gastric cancer risk (HR=0.83; 95% CI: 0.63, 1.08), compared to monthly
or no consumption. When the analysis was confined to women, the inverse
association strengthened and became statistically significant with
adjustment for caffeine intake (HR=0.56; 95% CI: 0.36, 0.88; P for
trend=0.004). In analyses among women, further stratification by duration
of follow-up revealed that the inverse association with daily coffee
intake was confined to those with longer follow-up (e.g., 7 years)
(HR=0.40; 95% CI: 0.22, 0.75), compared with never/monthly coffee intake.
There was no association with coffee intake and gastric cancer among men.
Overall and gender-stratified analyses for coffee and gastric cancer risk
did not differ by gastric cancer subsite.CONCLUSIONS We provide results
from the first prospective analyses of coffee intake and gastric cancer
risk among an Asian population. We report that moderate coffee
consumption was associated with a statistically significant 44% reduction
in gastric cancer risk among Singapore Chinese women, regardless of
caffeine intake. The effect appears strongest among women with a longer
period of follow-up, suggesting that coffee may exert its protective
effects during the earlier stages of gastric cancer development. Further
research is needed to determine why the protective effect of coffee on
gastric cancer risk may be isolated to women.

