Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sirtuin1, a longevity gene, is over-expressed and enhances
proliferation and survival of endometrial carcinoma cells via
deacetylation of p53.


Background: Sirtuin1 (SIRT1) is one of the NAD-dependent histone
deacetylases, known as a longevity gene induced by caloric restriction or
various stresses. SIRT1 also contributes to cell survival under stress
conditions through deacetylation of apoptosis or cell cycle-related
proteins. The overexpression of SIRT1 in several cancers was reported,
however, the expression and function of SIRT1 in endometrial cancer
remained undetermined. In this study, we examined the role of SIRT1 on
the carcinogenesis and survival of endometrial carcinoma cells.Methods:
The expressions of SIRT1 protein was examined by immunostaining using
formalin-fixed tissue specimens of 110 endometrial carcinomas, 72 normal
endometria and 24 endometrial hyperplasias. Immunoreactivity was
evaluated according to the ratio of positive cells in 500 cells and
described as a positivity index (PI, full score 100). All of surgical
specimens were used after obtaining the consents. The mRNA and protein
levels of SIRT1 in endometrial carcinoma cell lines, Ishikawa and HEC1B,
were examined using real-time RT-PCR and Western blotting under stresses
such as ultraviolet, hypoxia and cisplatin (CDDP) treatment. The
viability of those cells under CDDP treatment was examined using WST-1
assay with/without suppression of SIRT1 by SIRT1 inhibitor (EX527) or
siRNA. The effect of SIRT1 inhibition on the acetylation of p53 and the
p53-related protein expression was in Ishikawa and HEC1B cells were
examined using Western blotting under CDDP treatment.Results:
Imunoreactivity of SIRT1 protein of carcinoma (PI=37.025.6) was
significantly higher than that of normal endometrium (PI=25.326.5, P=
0.006). The expression of SIRT1 was significantly higher in grade 3
tumors (P= 0.006) and those with lympho-vascular space invasion (P=
0.044). There is a weak correlation between the expression of SIRT1 and
growth potential indicated by Ki67 (P=0.051). The expression of SIRT1
protein was inversely correlated with that of p53 in carcinoma tissues
and cell lines. In addition, the suppression of SIRT1 significantly
reduced cell proliferation activity (P=0.01) and resistance against CDDP
(P=0.004) in Ishikawa and HEC1B cells. The suppression of SIRT1 enhanced
the acetylation of p53 protein and its downstream proteins.Conclusions:
SIRT1 is over-expressed in endometrial carcinoma and may be involved in
the carcinogenesis and development. SIRT1 may enhance the survival of
endometrial carcinoma cells against various stresses, especially CDDP
exposure, via inhibition of p53 by deacetylation. These findings suggest
that SIRT1 can be a potent therapeutic target of endometrial carcinoma.

