Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The ketogenic diet potentiates radiation therapy in a mouse model
of glioma: effects on inflammatory pathways and reactive oxygen species.


Patients with malignant brain tumors have a median survival of
approximately one year following diagnosis, regardless of currently
available treatments which include surgery, radiation and chemotherapy.
Although there have been advances in the development of novel treatments,
targeted therapies face the challenge of overcoming phenotypic
variability resulting from tumor heterogeneity. One phenotypic trait
shared by virtually all cancer cells is dysregulation of metabolism. It
has therefore been postulated that one approach to treating brain tumors
may be through metabolic alteration such as that which occurs through the
use of the ketogenic diet (KD). The KD is high-fat, low-carbohydrate diet
that has been utilized for the non-pharmacologic treatment of refractory
epilepsy. We and others have shown that this diet enhances survival in
mouse models of malignant gliomas. Further, radiation in combination with
KD was synergistic, and survival was significantly increased over
radiation treatment alone. To gain an understanding of the mechanism(s)
by which the KD exerts anti-tumor effects and enhances the efficacy of
radiation therapy we performed gene expression profiling analyses on
tumor tissue and non-tumor containing brain using the Affymetrix GeneChip
Mouse Genome 430 2.0 array. To identify changes in gene expression
representing chronic effects of KD and radiation plus KD we harvested
tissue when the animals became symptomatic. We previously reported that
tissue from animals maintained on the KD in the absence of radiation
treatment showed a reduction in reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression compared to those maintained on a
standard diet (Stafford et al, Nutr and Metab (7):74, 2010). We now
report that peritumoral edema is significantly reduced early in tumor
progression in animals fed the KD when compared to those fed a standard
rodent diet. Furthermore, gene expression profiling of animals treated
with radiation and KD demonstrated alterations in the chronic expression
of crucial genes involved in radiation-induced inflammation including
COX-2 and the nuclear transcription factor NF-B, both of which are
implicated in radioresistance. We are repeating these studies using
tissues harvested shortly after radiation therapy to identify genes
acutely affected by radiation therapy in animals fed a KD. Taken
together, our data to date suggests that the KD may be interfering with
the radiation-induced inflammatory signaling network implicated in tumor
progression. A greater understanding of the effects of the ketogenic diet
as an adjuvant therapy will allow for a more rational approach to its
clinical use.

