Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cellular effects of the mitochondrially-directed antioxidant
Tempol.


The mitochondrial respiratory chain is a major source of reactive oxygen
species, making it a high-yield target for antioxidants and potential
radioprotection. The lipophilic cation triphenylphosphonium (TPP) has
been used to target antioxidants to the mitochondrial membrane. Its
lipophilicity permits it free passage through biological membranes while
its positive charge traps it in the mitochondrial membrane, which is
characterized by a large membrane potential. Among the agents localized
to mitochondria via TPP have been stable nitroxide radicals, superoxide
dismutase mimetics which also demonstrate the ability to scavenge free
radicals. 4-Hydroxy-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-N-oxyl, or Tempol (TP),
is a nitroxide which is radioprotective both in vitro and in vivo when
present during ionizing radiation. As with most chemical radioprotectors,
relatively high concentrations of Tempol are required for protection. We
questioned whether mito-Tempol (MTP), Tempol directed to mitochondria via
TPP, would provide protection against radiation or hydrogen peroxide (HP)
cytotoxicity as measured by the clonogenic assay in Chinese hamster V79
cells. MTP (10-500 M) present 10 min prior to, during, and 4 hr after 12
Gy provided no radioprotection. MTP exhibited no cytotoxicity alone. In
contrast, both TP and MTP (500 M), when present immediately before and
during a 1 hr exposure to HP, provided significant protection against HP
cytotoxicity. We next evaluated the effects of continuous exposure to TP
or MTP (100 M) on the growth rate of several human tumor cell lines
(MCF7, HT29, 786-0). TP had little effect on growth of these cell lines
while MTP completely inhibited cell growth. The effects of the TPP-carbon
linker alone will be presented; in short-term studies it did not exhibit
cytotoxicity to V79 cells. These preliminary data with mitochondrial
targeting of Tempol demonstrate that MTP exhibited antioxidant properties
similar to TP with regard to protection against HP; at concentrations up
to 500 M, however, MTP did not protect against radiation. The latter
finding is consistent with the requirement that chemical radioprotectors
be present in sufficient concentration in the nucleus to afford
radioprotection. Additional studies will be presented addressing the
mechanism of MTP-mediated growth inhibition in human tumor cell lines.

