Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt pathway inhibition by niclosamide: a therapeutic target for
ovarian cancer.


Objective: The majority of patients diagnosed with ovarian cancer
initially respond to chemotherapy, but recurrence invariably occurs. The
Wnt/-catenin pathway is known to regulate cellular proliferation and
differentiation and has been shown to play a role in chemoresistance and
contribute to stemness of cancer cells. Wnt co-receptor, LRP6, forms a
trimeric complex with Wnt ligand and Frizzled and becomes phosphorylated.
This causes cytoplasmic buildup of -catenin, which acts as a
transcriptional activator leading to proliferation. Studies have shown an
association of LRP6 degradation with apoptosis and inhibition of cellular
proliferation. Niclosamide, an FDA approved salicyclamide derivative used
for the treatment of tapeworm infections, causes LRP6 degradation.
Therefore, the objective of this study was to investigate niclosamide as
a potential therapeutic agent for ovarian cancer.Methods: Two ovarian
cancer cell lines A2780, SKOV3ip1 and their carboplatin and paclitaxel
chemoresistant derivatives, A2780.cp20 and SKOV3ip2.TRip2, were treated
with niclosamide (0.1 to 5 M) alone or in combination with carboplatin (5
to 150 M). Tumor cells isolated from the ascites of six patients with
primary ovarian cancer were also treated. Cell viability was assessed
using the ATP-lite assay. The levels of LRP6, Axin 2 and cytosolic free
-catenin were determined using Western blot analysis. Cell lines were
treated with Wnt3A ligand and niclosamide, and Wnt transcriptional
activity was measured by the TOPflash reporter assay.Results: Combination
treatment produced increased cytotoxicity compared to single agent
treatment in all ovarian cancer cell lines, and in the six patient
samples. In the cell lines, combination treatment with carboplatin and
niclosamide caused synergistic cytotoxicity. Western blot analysis showed
a dose-dependent decrease in phosphorylated LRP6, Axin 2 expression, and
the level of cytosolic free -catenin in patient samples and in the A2780
cell line after niclosamide treatment for 24 hours. A significant
reduction of Wnt/-catenin signaling was confirmed by TOPflash assay in
both parental (p=0.05) and chemoresistant cell lines
(p=0.009).Conclusion: This study demonstrates that niclosamide is a
potent Wnt/-catenin signaling inhibitor by causing a decrease in LRP6,
Axin 2 expression, and cytosolic free -catenin. Targeting the
Wnt/-catenin pathway led to decreased cellular proliferation and
increased apoptosis. Niclosamide displays excellent anti-tumor activity
in ovarian cancer cell lines and in ovarian cancer cells from patient
ascites. These findings warrant further preclinical and clinical
evaluation of this drug as a treatment option for ovarian cancer.

