Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibiting the CSF-1 receptor on tumor-infiltrating monocytes may
enhance the efficacy of radiotherapy for glioblastoma multiforme.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common brain tumor and is one of the most
deadly forms of cancer with median survival only 15 months after
diagnosis. Ionizing radiation (IR) is the most effective treatment for
GBM, but the prognosis remains poor because the tumors invariably recur.
We have previously shown that bone marrow-derived monocytes promote GBM
recurrence after radiotherapy by homing to the irradiation site and
stimulating the growth of new tumor blood vessels in a process referred
to as vasculogenesis. We found that this infiltration of monocytes can be
prevented and tumor recurrences delayed by inhibition of the SDF-1/CXCR4
chemokine axis.1 Here we present data that suggest Colony Stimulating
Factor-1 (CSF-1) may also play an important role in this phenomenon.
CSF-1 is a potent chemokine secreted by several different types of solid
tumors and is also the main growth factor regulating the differentiation
of monocytes into macrophages. RT-PCR analysis of U251 GBM tumors growing
in mice revealed a more than 2.5-fold increase in expression of CSF-1
after treatment with a single dose of 12 Gy IR. Increased CSF-1
expression in these tumors correlated with increased recruitment of
CD11b+ monocytes. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and fluorescence activated
cell sorting (FACS) showed that the number of CD11b+ monocytes in GBM
tumors had approximately doubled within 2 weeks of IR treatment. F4/80
staining indicated that the majority of the CD11b+ cells were mature
macrophages. Treatment with 40 mg/kg/day PLX3397, which inhibits the
receptor for CSF-1 (CSF-1R), effectively blocked the recruitment of
monocytes/macrophages to the irradiated tumors. Moreover, bioluminescence
imaging (BLI) of intracranial U251-luciferase tumors growing in mice
showed that combined treatment with IR and PLX3397 was more effective at
inhibiting tumor growth than IR alone. Eighty percent of mice treated
with IR and PLX3397 were alive at 50 days post-irradiation whereas there
were no survivors among groups receiving monotherapy. These results
suggest inhibition of CSF-1R may prevent post-irradiation recurrence of
GBM by blocking the recruitment of tumor-infiltrating
monocytes/macrophages.

