Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic pancreatitis induces the cancer-related gene expressions .


Background & Aims: Several studies reported that chronic pancreatitis
(CP) is a risk factor for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). The
loss-of-function mutations of serine protease inhibitor Kazal type 1
(SPINK1) gene are associated with various forms of hereditary
pancreatitis.We previously showed that deletion of Spink3,the mouse
homologue of human SPINK1, causes pancreatitis-like changes in the mouse.
A careful molecular and pathological analysis of evolving PDAC has
revealed a characteristic pattern of genetic lesions. The field is now
faced with the challenge of understanding how these signature genetic
lesions _ mutations of cancer-related genes _ contribute to the
biological characteristics and evolution of this disease. The aim of this
study was to rescue the Spink3/- phenotype by generating Spink3/- mice
with knocked-in SPINK1, and to characterize time-dependent changes of
cancer-related genes in the pancreas in this genetic model. Methods: We
placed CAG promoter-SPINK1 minigene(SP1) into diaphanous homolog 2
(Diap2) locus, which is located on X chromosome, using the Cre-Lox
technology. X-inactivation is a process whereby one of the two copies of
the X chromosome present in female mammals is inactivated. By utilizing
X-inactivation,we were able to create mice in which SPINK level was
partially, but not completely, reduced compared with the wild type. The
SP1 knock-in mice(male YXSP1 and female XSP1/SP1 or XSP1/+) were crossed
to Spink3+/- mice, thus generating Spink3/SP1 knock-in mice. Mice were
followed up for up to 6 months.Time-dependent changes in pancreatic
histology, stellate cell activation, and serum amylase were measured.
Results: Spink3/YXSP1,as well as Spink3/XSP1/SP1 mice in which SP1
transgene was present on both X chromosomes, showed no abnormalities in
pancreas or any other organ during the 6 months of observation,
indicating that human Spink1 rescues Spink3 deficiency in mice.
Spink3/XSP1/+ mice in which SP1 transgene is present on only one of the
two X chromosomes, showed slight growth retardation but were healthy and
fertile. Pancreas of Spink3/XSP1/+ mice at birth contained both normal
and degenerated acinar cells, with accumulation of autophagic vacuoles.
The Spink3/XSP1/+ mice time-dependently developed pathologic features of
chronic tissue damage, including loss of acinar cells, intralobular
fibrosis with activated stellate cells. Interlobular ducts were dilated
and contained protein plugs, which resembled chronic pancreatitis in
human. Older mice displayed acinar-ductal metaplasia and prominent
expression of proto-oncogenes Egfr, Her2, and Ras. Conclusions: CP may
contribute to carcinogenesis by preventing the senescence barrier
characteristic of normal pancreas. Antiinflammatory treatment of CP
patients may reduce their risk of developing PDAC.

