Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HDAC inhibitor entinostat reverses letrozole resistance in MCF-7Ca
xenografts through modulation of Her-2.


Development of aromatase inhibitors (AIs) has significantly improved the
treatment outcome of hormone responsive post-menopausal breast cancer.
However, not all tumors respond initially and others eventually acquire
resistance. Using our hormone sensitive human aromatase expressing
MCF-7Ca xenograft model, we also saw that although AI letrozole provides
a longer control over tumor growth, tumors eventually began to grow.
Furthermore, we observed that Her-2 protein levels within the tumors were
upregulated as early as 4 weeks (as tumors were responding). Her-2 levels
increased further as the tumors became resistant. A cell line was
isolated from these Long-Term Letrozole Treated tumors (LTLT-Ca), which
showed increased Her-2 and reduction in ER and aromatase. The increase in
Her-2 protein levels was not accompanied by gene amplification but we
observed that Her-2 protein in LTLT-Ca cells was more stable and had a
longer half-life than that in MCF-7Ca cells. In addition, when MCF-7Ca
cells were deprived of estrogen (E2W) or treated with letrozole,
stability of Her-2 protein was immediately increased, suggesting that
lower estrogen levels stabilize Her-2. In order to identify novel
approaches to restoring sensitivity to AIs, we treated letrozole
resistant MCF-7Ca tumors with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor
entinostat (ENT). Addition of ENT to either letrozole or exemestane in
letrozole resistant MCF-7Ca tumors led to increased ER expression,
aromatase activity and significantly inhibited further tumor growth,
along with downregulation of Her-2, p-Her-2, p-MAPK and p-Akt. Based on
the observations made in letrozole resistant tumors treated with
entinostat (with or without letrozole), we hypothesized that entinostat
reverses letrozole resistance due to modulation of Her-2. Entinostat
reduced interaction between HSP-90 and Her-2 in entinostat treated
tumors, resulting in degradation of Her-2. Based on the findings that
Her-2 is upregulated even when the tumors are responding, we evaluated
the effect of adding entinostat to letrozole from the start of treatment
in the MCF-7Ca xenografts. Tumors of MCF-7Ca cells were allowed to form
in the presence of androstenedione (4A), aromatizable substrate for
estrogen. When the tumors reached 300mm3, the mice were grouped to
receive 4A 100g/day (control), letrozole (1g/day), entinostat (50g/day)
or combination of entinostat plus letrozole. Mice receiving letrozole
treatment had significantly lower tumor growth rate than control
(p=0.0001), so did mice treated with the combination of entinostat plus
letrozole (pDevelopment of aromatase inhibitors (AIs) has significantly
improved the treatment outcome of hormone responsive post-menopausal
breast cancer. However, not all tumors respond initially and others
eventually acquire resistance. Using our hormone sensitive human
aromatase expressing MCF-7Ca xenograft model, we also saw that although
AI letrozole provides a longer control over tumor growth, tumors
eventually began to grow. Furthermore, we observed that Her-2 protein
levels within the tumors were upregulated as early as 4 weeks (as tumors
were responding). Her-2 levels increased further as the tumors became
resistant. A cell line was isolated from these Long-Term Letrozole
Treated tumors (LTLT-Ca), which showed increased Her-2 and reduction in
ER and aromatase. The increase in Her-2 protein levels was not
accompanied by gene amplification but we observed that Her-2 protein in
LTLT-Ca cells was more stable and had a longer half-life than that in
MCF-7Ca cells. In addition, when MCF-7Ca cells were deprived of estrogen
(E2W) or treated with letrozole, stability of Her-2 protein was
immediately increased, suggesting that lower estrogen levels stabilize
Her-2. In order to identify novel approaches to restoring sensitivity to
AIs, we treated letrozole resistant MCF-7Ca tumors with histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor entinostat (ENT). Addition of ENT to either
letrozole or exemestane in letrozole resistant MCF-7Ca tumors led to
increased ER expression, aromatase activity and significantly inhibited
further tumor growth, along with downregulation of Her-2, p-Her-2, p-MAPK
and p-Akt. Based on the observations made in letrozole resistant tumors
treated with entinostat (with or without letrozole), we hypothesized that
entinostat reverses letrozole resistance due to modulation of Her-2.
Entinostat reduced interaction between HSP-90 and Her-2 in entinostat
treated tumors, resulting in degradation of Her-2. Based on the findings
that Her-2 is upregulated even when the tumors are responding, we
evaluated the effect of adding entinostat to letrozole from the start of
treatment in the MCF-7Ca xenografts. Tumors of MCF-7Ca cells were allowed
to form in the presence of androstenedione (4A), aromatizable substrate
for estrogen. When the tumors reached 300mm3, the mice were grouped to
receive 4A 100g/day (control), letrozole (1g/day), entinostat (50g/day)
or combination of entinostat plus letrozole. Mice receiving letrozole
treatment had significantly lower tumor growth rate than control
(p=0.0001), so did mice treated with the combination of entinostat plus
letrozole (p<0.0001). The growth rate of tumors treated with entinostat +
letrozole was similar to the growth rate of letrozole alone suggesting
that in the absence of acquired or de novo resistance pathways the
addition of entinostat did not provide benefit beyond the aromatase
inhibitor alone.

