Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TNF-TNFR interactions influence tumor growth and metastasis by
manipulating regulatory T cell homeostasis.


Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) signals via two cell surface receptors, TNFR1
and TNFR2 and is involved in a number of physiological processes
including the regulation of immune cell homeostasis and function.
Initially identified to cause tumor necrosis, a number of recent studies
showed TNF to drive inflammation-induced cancer and metastasis.We
employed two syngeneic in vivo bioluminescence imaging (BLI)-based mouse
tumor models in conjunction with exogenous TNF treatment, TNF/TNFR
knockout (ko) mice and bone marrow chimeras to determine the role of
TNF-TNFR interactions in tumor growth and metastasis.8-12 week-old female
C57BL/6 mice were injected i.v. with luciferase-expressing B16F10
melanoma cells or orthotopically with luciferase-expressing Panc02
pancreatic cancer cells. We assessed the growth of B16F10 lung metastases
and Panc02 primary pancreatic tumors using BLI. Finally, tumor-bearing
organs were imaged ex vivo and analyzed by flow cytometry,
immunofluorescence microscopy, and qRT-PCR.In the B16F10 model, treatment
of mice with exogenous TNF markedly enhanced tumor metastasis resulting
in elevated in vivo luciferase signals and increased lung metastases
numbers. TNF-induced metastasis correlated with an accumulation of
regulatory T cells (Tregs) in the lungs in vivo and we found TNF to
induce Tregs in vitro in a TNFR2-dependent manner. This receptor was
significantly higher expressed on Tregs than on effector CD4 T cells. The
depletion of Tregs in genetically engineered mice attenuated B16
metastasis and ablated the pro-metastatic effect of TNF-treatment. Loss
of either TNF or TNFR2 on immune cells in vivo reduced both metastasis
and the number of Tregs. In the pancreatic tumor model, neither the loss
of TNF nor TNFR2 changed tumor growth compared to wildtype mice. Loss of
TNFR1 strongly promoted tumor growth and increased the infiltration of
CD4 T cells and Tregs into the tumor tissue. Influx of CD8 T-cells into
the tumors inversely correlated with the numbers of Tregs. Expression of
activation markers on tumor infiltrating T cells was the same in TNFR1 ko
and wildtype mice, as was mRNA-expression of immune suppressive genes.
Loss of TNFR1 resulted in up-regulation of IL-4 expression within Panc02
tumors which suggests changes in TH1/TH2 immunity to be involved in tumor
immunity in this model. Enhanced pancreatic tumor growth observed in
TNFR1 ko mice may furthermore reflect reduced activity of other
anti-tumoral acting cell types that are stimulated via TNFR1.We suggest
that TNF activates TNFR2 on Tregs and thereby contributes to
tumor-associated immune suppression in the B16F10 lung metastasis model.
The induction of suppressive Tregs could be seen as a feedback-loop in
which TNF down-regulates its own pro-inflammatory functions and
eventually ablates immune control of tumors and enhances tumor growth and
metastasis.

