Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular thiols and system xc play a significant role in
non-targeted in vitro activity of a folate-tubulysin B conjugate.


Several folate-targeted small-molecule drug conjugates (SMDCs) are under
development for the treatment of folate receptor-positive (FR+) cancer.
To date, all clinical SMDCs have been constructed with a disulfide-based
linker strategically placed in between the targeting ligand (e.g. folate)
and the therapeutically active drug. At least for SMDCs, the disulfide
linker remains relatively stable in circulation, but it rapidly breaks
once the SMDC enters the reductive endocytic process within the targeted
cell. While this structural design has proven to be successful for
folate-based SMDCs constructed with mitomycins, maytansinoids, vinca
alkaloids, and epothilones, the development of a more potent
folate-tubulysin B conjugate (herein called EC0531) has revealed a
non-FR-specific component related to in vitro cytotoxic activity,
particularly at drug concentrations exceeding that required to saturate
the FR. Rationalizing that the potential instability of the disulfide
linker may contribute to this effect, we explored the impact of
extracellular thiols on non-FR-specific activity of EC0531. Thus, when KB
cells (FR+) and A549 cells (FR) were co-treated with high-dose EC0531 (1
M) in the presence of cell-impermeable thiol inhibitors, such as
5,5-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB) or N-(2-carboxyethyl)maleimide
(NCEM), non-FR-specific cytotoxicity was inhibited along with reduced
non-specific uptake of 3H-EC0531 (tritium in the tubulysin moiety). We
next found that independent of cell type or FR expression status,
eliminating cystine and glutathione from the incubation medium
significantly attenuated the non-specific activity of EC0531; this
maneuver also significantly reduced the cellular efflux of extracellular
thiols, such as cysteine, which we confirmed is the predominant thiol
released by the cell, and at levels reaching 11-42 M (for KB and A549
cells, respectively) following only a 2-hour conditioning period at 37C.
System xc is a cystine/glutamate antiporter which has been shown to be
involved in regulating the extracellular redox state of the
cysteine/cystine couple in vitro. Thus, using system xc inhibitors (e.g.
sulfasalazine), we observed significant reductions in: (i) extracellular
thiol activity; (ii) uptake of 3H-EC0531 (i.e. 3H-tubulysin); and (iii)
non-specific activity of EC0531. Finally, siRNA-mediated knockdown of xCT
(the functional subunit of system xc) also caused dramatic reduction of
extracellular thiol activity as well as reduced non-FR-mediated activity
of EC0531. Taken together, our data support the involvement of
extracellular thiols (mainly cysteine) in the extracellular reduction of
disulfide-containing SMDCs to release the active drug payload which, in
turn, may allow for non-specific drug uptake and possible activity,
especially when the extracellular SMDC concentration is exceedingly high.

