Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of Igfbp7 leads to the expansion of luminal progenitors by
altering the stromal fibroblasts ability to support luminal cell
differentiation.


Insulin-like growth factor binding protein 7, IGFBP7, is a secreted
glycoprotein that unlike other IGFBPs, binds insulin with higher affinity
than IGFs. Interestingly, high-grade invasive breast cancers lack IGFBP7
expression, and its low expression levels is associated with reduced
patient survival. Interestingly, in some cancers expression of IGFBP7 is
lost due to promoter methylation or loss of hetrozygosity. Also, in vivo
xenograft assays have shown that IGFBP7 can suppress breast cancer cell
proliferation. These data together imply that IGFBP7 may act as a
potential tumor suppressor. Recent evidence suggests that tumor
suppressors and oncogenes play essential roles in regulating the normal
development of mammary gland and that alterations to their expression or
functions may transform the undifferentiated breast stem cells and
progenitors into cancer initiating cells. To examine if IGFBP7 plays
essential roles in regulating the normal development of the mammary
gland, we developed Igfbp7-null mice and examine the development of the
mammary glands. Notably, the pre- and post-pubertal Igfbp7-null glands
featured decreased overall size and diminished terminal end bud and
alveolar densities. However, the Igfbp7-null glands showed the most
startling defects during pregnancy and lactation where lobular sacs were
severely deformed and decreased in numbers. To ascertain the molecular
mechanism underlying this defective lobular development, we compared the
transcriptome profiles of the Igfbp7-null glands and the Wild-Type (WT)
glands using RNA-Seq technology. Our transcriptome analysis revealed the
decreased expression of a number of key signaling molecules involved in
the Notch and IGF/Insulin and other signaling pathways. Interestingly our
analysis also revealed the decreased expression of luminal cell
differentiation-associated genes such as Gata3 and Pml. Through
quantifying, for the first time, the number of luminal progenitors during
the different phases of pregnancy and lactation, we determined that loss
of Igfbp7 lead to the increased frequency (up to 50.3 folds) and thusly,
yield (up to 30.25 folds) of the luminal progenitors and yet these
Igfbp7-null progenitors are unable to differentiate in vivo. We further
show that the Igfbp7-null stromal fibroblasts are unable to support the
differentiation of the luminal progenitors. For the first time we
demonstrate that loss of a tumor suppressor gene, Igfbp7, can suppress
the ability of luminal progenitors to differentiate by altering the
properties of stromal fibroblasts. It is interesting that the loss of a
tumor suppressor gene would result in the expansion of the luminal
progenitors since these progenitors and other undifferentiated cells have
been envisaged to be prime cellular targets to accumulate transforming
mutations that can cause them to act as cancer initiating cells.

