Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An uncharacterized mechanism of cell death independent of p53
mutation status.


Resistance to chemotherapeutic agents is often a rate-limiting event in
the treatment of metastatic cancers. Mutations of TP53 or dysfunctions in
the p53 pathway are known to play primary roles in the resistance to
apoptosis-inducing agents. A stapled alpha-helical p53 peptide (SAH-p53)
capable of disrupting the p53-HDM2 and p53-HDMX complexes and restoring
p53 function has been found to induce a death response in breast,
melanoma and choriocarcinoma cancer cells independent of p53 mutational
status. We have recently discovered that the mechanism of death induced
by SAH-p53 does not exhibit all of the characteristics of classical
apoptosis, necrosis or autophagy independently. The binding of SAH-p53 to
HDM2, HDMX, or a yet unidentified target results in a mechanism that
leads to the intracellular aggregation of proteins and lipids that are
extruded from the cell, resulting in catastrophic damage to the integrity
of the cell membrane and culminating in cell death. This type of cell
death involves the loss of cytoplasm, generation of phase-clear
vacuole-like structures, apparent degradation of cellular membrane
components, and the significant release of uniform non-vesicular cellular
components. The cellular debris, while yet undefined, displays orange
staining with acridine orange as well as accumulation of MitoTracker,
suggesting that the debris contains hydrophobic regions. Thus far it has
been established that there is a lack of any membrane blebbing, no
chromatin condensation, no apoptosis signaling events or typical necrotic
bubble formation after treatment with SAH-p53 in cells harboring
wild-type p53, mutant p53, or null p53, suggesting an alternative
mechanism of cell death. Data suggest the manifestation of early
autophagy within 6 hours of SAH-p53 treatment as evidenced by LC3
accumulation, yet this phenotype is lost within 24 hours post-treatment.
In addition, the pretreatment of the cells with chloroquine does not
inhibit the release of debris and changes in morphology characteristic of
SAH-p53 treatment, suggesting that the mechanism of death is independent
of classical autophagy. We have begun to uncover the precise mechanism of
cell death through the identification and validation of the
transcriptional program regulated by SAH-p53 in both wild-type and mutant
p53-containing cells via microarray analysis. The complete understanding
and characterization of this novel mechanism may be exploited to overcome
resistance to apoptosis and thus lead to a more effective way of treating
chemotherapy-resistant metastatic cancers.

