Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peripheral cytokine profiles and prostate cancer risk in CLUE II.


BackgroundRecent evidence suggests a role for inflammation in the
etiology of prostate cancer. Cytokines are important regulators of immune
response, including in cancer. In the context of cancer, Th1 cytokines,
such as interferon gamma (IFN-), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-), and,
to some extent, interleukin (IL)-6, can elicit immune reactions to tumor
cells. IL-1, IL-8, IL-10, and IL-12p70 may suppress immune response to a
tumor. Immune profile may be an important prognostic factor for
disease-free survival in cancer patients. Whether the circulating
cytokine profile influences prostate cancer incidence is understudied.
Thus, we evaluated the cytokine-prostate cancer association
prospectively.MethodsWe conducted an age-race matched case-control study
(268 pairs) of inflammatory cytokines (IFN-, IL-10, IL-12-p70, IL-1,
IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-), measured using the ultrasensitive Meso Scale
Discovery (MSD) platform, and incident prostate cancer in CLUE II. Cases
were identified by cancer registry linkage. The odds ratio (OR) and 95%
confidence interval (95% CI) of prostate cancer by quartile of cytokine
was calculated using matched and multivariable-adjusted conditional
logistic regression.ResultsMedian concentrations of IFN- (p=0.002), TNF-
(p=0.04), and IL-6 (p=0.06) were lower in cases than controls.
Concentrations of the other cytokines did not differ by case status. The
multivariable-adjusted OR of prostate cancer decreased across quartiles
of IFN- (p-trend=0.004), TNF- (p-trend=0.03), and IL-6 (p-trend=0.005).
After their mutual adjustment, the patterns of association remained the
same. Of note, the highest (vs lowest) quartile of TNF- (p=0.03) and IL-6
(p=0.001) was associated with lower risk of metastatic prostate cancer
with high Gleason sum 7. Overall prostate cancer risk did not change
across quartiles of the other cytokines, including IL-10, a Th2 cytokine.
However, in normal weight men, higher IL-10 concentration was inversely
associated with prostate cancer (highest vs lowest quartiles: OR=0.36;
95% CI: 0.19-0.68), whereas in overweight and obese men, IL-10 was not
inversely associated with risk (OR=1.32; 95% CI: 0.87-1.97;
p-interaction=0.001). Significant interactions with BMI were not observed
for the other cytokines.ConclusionMen with a prediagnostic circulating
cytokine profile indicative of Th1 immune response may have a lower risk
of prostate cancer, including aggressive disease. Whether this
circulating cytokine profile reflects 1) the intraprostatic immune
environment in benign tissue that protects against the development of
prostate cancer, 2) the immune milieu in response to a yet undetected
prostate adenocarcinoma that inhibits its growth and thus detectability,
and/or 3) a systemic immune profile that mediates the influence of
modifiable factors on prostate cancer risk, warrants additional study.
The IL-10-obesity interaction also warrants further study.

