Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of a combination of resveratrol and sulforaphane on
mutagenesis and DNA adduct formation in rat mammary tissue and a rat
mammary fibroblast cell line.


In this study we investigated the effects of the combination sulforaphane
(Sul) and resveratrol (Rev) on carcinogen metabolism to DNA adducts in
rat mammary fibroblasts, and on DMBA-induced mutagenesis in mammary
tissue from rats treated in vivo. The use of combinations of potential
cancer chemopreventive agents has become one strategy to optimize
chemoprevention. By targeting more than one pathway/process it may be
possible to impact prevention by additive or synergistic effects, and
utilize lower doses of agents that might have toxic effects at higher
doses. We have previously tested a number of potential inhibitors of
mutagenesis induced by the rat mammary carcinogen,
7,12-dimethylbenzanthrace (DMBA) in rat mammary epithelial and fibroblast
cell lines (isolated by Dr. P.D. Josephy from lacI rats, Mutat Res, 497:
39-47, 2001). We had compared binary combinations of the agents,
sulforaphane (Sul), resveratrol (Res), lipoic acid, epigallocatechin
gallate, a vitamin C and E mix, and N-acetylcysteine. The agents alone
had minor effects, but the combination of Sul and Res inhibited
mutagenesis by about 40%. The current study extended this finding. In the
metabolism study, HPLC of metabolites was employed; benzo(a)pyrene (BaP),
rather than DMBA was used as the carcinogen, as standards of BaP
metabolites, but not those of DMBA were available. BaP like DMBA is a
carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon. Fibroblasts were used, as
these metabolized BaP much more effectively than epithelial cells. In the
presence of 4uM BaP, in the absence of inhibitors, the cells generated
498 83 pg/ml medium of the BaP-7,8 dihydrodiol -9,10 epoxide
decomposition product, BaP 7,8,9,10 tetrol. This was reduced by 0.18uM
Sul to 153 48, by 4uM Res to 416 87 and by a combination of the agents to
83 37 pg/ml. The reduction was significant for Sul and for the
combination. For the in vivo study rats were treated (6/group) by gavage
with a single dose of 80 mg/kg DMBA. Two weeks before the DMBA treatment
and continuing for 4 wks, rats received 50 mg/L Res, 120 mg/L Sul, and
combinations of the agents at 50 and 120 mg/L or the doses in drinking
water. Eight wks after the DMBA treatment the rats were euthanized and
mutagenesis in the cII gene was measured. The treatments and mutant
fractions resp. were: DMBA alone, 9.1 5.0; DMBA + Res, 8.9 3.4; Sul, 8.2
2.0; Res + Sul, 7.1 2.8; Res + Sul, dose, 7.9 3.4; control, 1.3 1.0.
DMBA-induced mutagenesis was inhibited by both combination treatments,
and Sul alone, although the inhibitions did not reach statistical
significance, possibly because of large inter-animal variations. Taken
together the results support the use of combinations of agents to enhance
chemoprotection. Supported by the Susan Komen Foundation grant # KG080836.

