Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High throughput screen to identify compounds that reverse
glucocorticoid resistance in pediatric leukemia.


Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common pediatric
malignancy. Although cure rates are approaching 85%, it remains one of
the most common causes of death from disease in children. Glucocorticoids
(e.g. dexamethasone) form a critical component of chemotherapy regimens
for pediatric ALL and the initial response to glucocorticoid therapy is a
major prognostic factor, where resistance is predictive of poor outcome.
We have previously established a clinically relevant ALL xenograft model,
consisting of primary pediatric ALL biopsies engrafted in
immune-deficient mice, in which in vitro and in vivo dexamethasone
sensitivity significantly correlate with patient outcome. In this study
we used a high throughput screen (HTS) to identify novel small compounds
that reverse glucocorticoid resistance. A xenograft (ALL-19) derived from
an aggressive and chemoresistant pediatric ALL that induced early
fatality in the patient, and is representative of the most common
pediatric ALL subtype (B-cell precursor, BCP-ALL, or c-ALL) was used to
identify compounds that potentially will have wide applicability. Cells
were exposed in vitro to dexamethasone at a concentration ineffective in
cell killing against this xenograft (1 M), but which is around 100-fold
greater than the IC50 for other (sensitive) xenografts, simultaneously
with one of 40,000 HTS library compounds (10 M). Effective compounds were
then tested alone and in the presence of dexamethasone, to identify those
that sensitized the xenograft to glucocorticoids, rather than those that
were toxic alone. The compound
2-(4-chlorophenoxy)-2-methyl-N-(2-(piperidin-1-yl)phenyl)propanamide
showed little activity alone (IC50 22 M), but when combined with
dexamethasone caused a marked decrease in cell viability. Pre-incubating
ALL-19 xenograft cells with either the compound or dexamethasone did not
increase the sensitizing effect. Fixed-ratio combination assays were
performed against a broad panel of dexamethasone-resistant and -sensitive
xenografts representative of BCP-ALL, T-ALL and MLL-rearranged ALL, in
order to determine whether the compound was broadly active. CalcuSyn
software was employed to determine combination indices, and synergy was
observed in all 4 BCP-ALL xenografts tested, which included a
dexamethasone-sensitive BCP-ALL and a dexamethasone-resistant
Philadelphia chromosome-positive ALL. Synergy was also observed in
dexamethasone-resistant MLL-rearranged ALL xenograft cells. Additionally,
despite an antagonistic effect observed in a dexamethasone-resistant
T-ALL xenograft, the compound potentiated the effects of dexamethasone in
a glucocorticoid-sensitive T-ALL. In conclusion, using a clinically
relevant xenograft model and a HTS, this study has identified a novel
compound that reverses dexamethasone resistance in BCP-ALL xenografts,
and may have applications in other leukemia subtypes.

