Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization and evaluation of a mouse ovarian cancer model
for its preclinical suitability.


Ovarian cancer is the second most frequent invasive malignancy of the
female genital tract and the most common cause of death among women with
gynecologic malignancies. Although epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)
accounts for over 90% of all ovarian malignancies, the lack of proper
animal models that mimic the development and consequences of human EOC
limits the ability of current preclinical ovarian cancer models to
predict treatment response. The orthotopic development of syngeneic EOC
within its relevant tumor microenvironment is an experimental ideal.
Here, we demonstrate the development and characterization of a syngeneic
EOC mouse model in immunecompetent C57BL/6 mice by orthotopic
implantation of ID 8 mouse ovarian cancer cells. Using conventional and
ultrasound-based techniques to compare tumor weight, volume and
vascularity we followed the development of primary tumors, metastases and
ascites over 16 weeks. ID 8 cells were implanted directly underneath the
left ovarian bursa. Normal saline was injected to the contralateral ovary
as control. Ovarian tumors grew consistently throughout the study period;
ovarian weight and volume increased twelve and seven fold, respectively,
compared to the contralateral, non-cancerous ovary. Ultrasound
measurements of primary tumors and surrounding tumor tissue correlated
with the actual size after surgical tumor harvest. Abdominal ascites were
first observed at 12 weeks post orthotopic ID8 implantation with volume
changes correlating with changes in abdominal circumference. Metastatic
lesions were identified by ultrasound at 12 weeks after orthotopic ID8
implantation; sites included peritoneum, liver, and intestine.
Histopathological analysis of tumors and metastases indicated
similarities between orthotopic ID8 ovarian tumors and human ovarian
tumors, except a significantly lower formation of angiogenic vasculature
within the ID8 tumors. This study confirms the successful development of
a mouse model that closely replicates characteristics seen in human
ovarian cancer patients. It shows the feasibility of using ultrasound to
assess tumor formation, progression and vascularization. Furthermore, we
demonstrate potential shortcomings, which could significantly limit the
use of current animal models predicting therapeutic efficacy of novel
agents, especially anti-angiogenic therapeutics, impacting the
translation of preclinical information to actual clinical outcomes.

