Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FAK inhibition with small molecule inhibitor Y15 decreases
viability in thyroid cancer cell lines.


Introduction: Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine malignancy and
papillary the most common subtype. While low stage papillary carcinomas
are treatable, for nonresectable tumors that do not respond to iodine, a
treatment is still needed. In comparison, for advanced medullary cancer,
a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, Vandetanib, is currently being used. Focal
Adhesion Kinase (FAK) is a tyrosine kinase involved in many
protein-protein interactions that control important cellular functions.
FAK is upregulated in many cancer cell lines, including thyroid. It
contains an autophosphorylation site Y397, which is blocked by
1,2,4,5-Benzenetetraamine tetrahydrochloride (Y15), a small molecule FAK
inhibitor. We propose that this inhibitor, Y15, will decrease viability
of thyroid cancer cell lines.Methods: Four human thyroid cancer cell
lines were cultured in vitro. K1, BCPAP, and TPC1 were derived from
papillary thyroid carcinomas, and TT was derived from a medullary thyroid
carcinoma. Western blots were used to detect expression of FAK and pY397
FAK in each untreated line. These were repeated with differing
concentrations of Y15 plus the Novartis FAK inhibitor TAE226 as a
positive control. MTS assays of each cell line were used to measure cell
viability with increasing doses of Y15. Untreated medium, DMSO, and
TAE226 were used as negative and positive controls.Results: All untreated
thyroid cancer cell lines expressed FAK and phosphorylated Y397 FAK on
Western blotting. Increasing doses of Y15 in Western blotting decreased
the expression of pY397 FAK in all cell lines. This was also associated
with increased cell detachment. In MTS assays, viability was also
decreased with Y15 in a dose-dependent manner across all cell lines.
Significant inhibition was reached at relatively low doses: there was a
90% decrease in viability with 10M Y15 in TPC1 cells and 5M Y15 in TT
cells. The effects were seen across all lines, but most profound in TPC1
and TT.Conclusions: Papillary thyroid cancer cell lines and medullary
carcinoma cells express FAK and pY397. The FAK inhibitor Y15 causes a
dose-dependent decrease of phosphorylated FAK, and this disruption
decreases cell viability. Our data suggests Y15 may be an effective
potential treatment for advanced papillary thyroid cancer.

