Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sonic hedgehog inhibition reduces in vitro tumorigenesis and
alters expression of GLI1-target genes in a desmoplastic medulloblastoma
cell line.


Medulloblastoma is one of the most frequent and aggressive tumors of
childhood. The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway, related to human
development, is altered in most medulloblastomas: genes like Ptch, Smo,
or Sufu suffer mutations in 15% to 25% of these tumors. We tested Shh
inhibition in the Daoy medulloblastoma cell line by two methods: a
molecular one (direct Gli1 siRNA inhibition); and a pharmacological
inhibition of Smo, upstream of Gli1, by cyclopamine. Afterwards, a
comparison of cellular and molecular responses was done. We proved that
MTT cell viability, and cell migration assessed by the scratching assay
decreased after Shh inhibition. Furthermore, colony formation assay in
culture decreased by 70%, and colony formation assay in soft agar
decreased up to 90% when Shh inhibition was applied. As a whole, Shh
inhibition conferred a less in vitro tumorigenic status to Daoy cells.
Moreover, we assessed the expression of different Gli1 target genes and
other genes, before and after Shh inhibition, and found that Shh shows a
crosstalk with oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes that have been
described in numerous tumors. Therefore, we found downregulation of
Ptch1, Cyclin D2, Plakoglobin, Nkx2.2, Bmi1, Smo and N-myc after Shh
inhibition. Sufu and Gli3 showed parallel results, where Gli1 siRNA did
neither decrease nor increase expression of both genes, whereas
cyclopamine reduced them in 15-25%. Pax6 mRNA levels were upregulated by
either Gli1 siRNA or cyclopamine. Finally, Notch1 was upregulated after
inhibition of Shh, while Notch2 showed contrasting results, as siRNA
inhibition decreased its expression, while cyclopamine increased it. All
these experiments give an overview of the Shh pathway in medulloblastoma,
its relationship with other genes, and the demonstration of the efficacy
of cyclopamine and Gli 1 siRNA Shh inhibition in vitro.

