Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional impairment of microRNAs induced by chronic inflammation
is the cause of inflammation-associated colon tumorigenesis.


Background: A widespread downregulation of microRNAs is commonly observed
in human cancers and is involved in cellular transformation and
tumorigenesis. Because we previously reported that microRNA functions are
inhibited under various kinds of cellular stresses including inflammatory
cytokines in vitro, we hypothesized that chronic inflammation in vivo may
also cause chronic functional impairment of microRNAs, which mimics a
global reduction of microRNA abundance, resulting in a causal role in
inflammation-associated tumorigenesis. Methods & Results: 1) To examine
this hypothesis, we first confirmed the functional impairment of
microRNAs under inflammatory stimuli in vitro using artificial reporter
constructs. The derepression of microRNA-targeting reporter activities by
inflammatory stimuli could also be observed using reporter constructs
containing natural 3UTR sequences of c-myc and Lin28B genes, which are
targeted by endogenous let-7. 2) Next, we constructed reporter transgenic
mice bearing CMV-promoter driven GFP construct carrying target sequences
of microRNAs in its 3UTR, and monitored the changes of microRNA functions
in vivo during the course of a Dextran Sulfate Sodium (DSS) induced
colitis-associated colon tumor model. The expression levels of GFP were
significantly increased during colitis, suggesting that microRNA
functions were impaired during the chronic inflammation in vivo. The
expression levels of microRNA-target oncogenes such as c-myc and Lin28B
in the colonic mucosa were indeed upregulated. 3) Lastly, to determine
the consequences of the global functional impairment of microRNAs during
the colitis, we examined Dicer-deficient mice, which have globally low
levels of microRNA expression and may mimic the functional impairment of
global microRNAs induced by chronic inflammation described above. As
expected, Dicer deficient mice were more liable to have the
colitis-associated tumors. This indicates that the global decrease of
microRNAs leads to oncogenesis, suggesting that the functional impairment
of global miRNAs during chronic inflammation can also be a cause of the
inflammation-associated carcinogenesis. Conclusion: In conclusion, we
propose a novel concept that the attenuation of global microRNA functions
by chronic inflammation is the cause of inflammation-associated
tumorigenesis.

