Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of total saponins of Gynostemma pentaphyllum on
melanogenesis and anti-melanoma effect in B16 cells.


Melanogenesis is a physiological process of melanin production in
response to UV exposure, which is modulated through multi-signaling
pathways including cAMP/PKA, Wnt/-catenin and MAPK signaling cascades. In
this study, we investigated both the melanogenesis and anti-melanoma
effects of total saponins of Gynostemma pentaphyllum (GpS). Our results
showed that non-toxic dosages of GpS stimulated tyrosinase activity and
increased melanin content in a dose-dependent manner. Western blot
analysis showed that GpS treatment significantly up-regulated the
expression levels of the melanogenic proteins, tyrosinase (TYR) and
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) in a dose-dependent
manner. The p-CREB, which is the down-stream target of PKA is also
elevated upon GpS treatment. We further observed that H89, a PKA
inhibitor, attenuated the GpS induced tyrosinase activity, melanin
content, and the protein expression of p-CREB and the nuclear -catenin.
To identify the active saponins, GpS was fractionated in the MCI-CHP 20P
column and eluted with methanol in a gradient of 50 to 100% . The
resulting ten fractions were tested for their melanogensis activities. We
found that Fractions 5 to 9 showed the strongest effect in melanin
synthesis in B16 cultures, while up-regulated the expression levels of
TYR and MITF, while Fractions 7 to 9 increased nucleus -catenin protein
expression. Further purification of GpS is under way. Our early works
showed that GpS exhibits strong anti-cancer effects in both in cellular
and animal model. We were wonder whether GpS would exert anti-cancer
effect against melanoma. To address this question, we tested and showed
that GpS inhibited B16 cells migration in a dose-dependent manner.
Meanwhile, GpS also increased G1/S ratio of the GpS-treated B16 cells,
suggesting that GpS may act as G1 inhibitor. Our study seems to be in
line with the recent reports that stimulation of melanogenesis might be
associated with the anti-melanoma effect by decreasing proliferation and
invasiveness of melanoma (Chien, et al.,2009). Based on the above
results, we proposed that GpS might exert the anti-melanoma effect by
stimulating the melanogenesis through the activation of cAMP/PKA and
Wnt/-catenin signaling pathways.

