Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tyrosine kinase inhibitor Gefitinib selectivley induces apoptosis
in Zap70+ chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells and inhibits B cell receptor
signaling.


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), the most common adult leukemia in the
western world, is characterized by an accumulation of B cells in the
peripheral blood, lymph nodes, and bone marrow leading to
immunosuppression. Patients can be stratified into two distinct groups
based upon the expression of a T-cell receptor kinase, ZAP70. CLL
patients with 20% cells staining for the ZAP70 have more aggressive
disease and survive shorter times compared with patients with lower ZAP70
expression. Thus, tyrosine kinase inhibitors could be attractive
therapeutic agents targeting ZAP70 over expressing CLL cells. In this
study, we investigated tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib that has been
shown to inhibit tyrosine kinase Syk (a ZAP70 family member) and is not a
myelo- or immuno-suppressive drug as other chemotherapeutic agents are in
treating CLL. We found using MTT viability assay that the tyrosine kinase
inhibitor gefitinib is effective in primary CLL cells with a significant
preference for Zap70+ CLL; gefitinib had a median IC50 of 4.5 M in Zap70+
patient cells and >15.0 M in Zap70- patient cells. Flow cytometry
analysis showed a decrease of viable Zap70+ CLL cells 24 hours post
gefitinib treatment. Although gefitinib decreased the viability of the
Zap70+ Jurkat T leukemia cell line, it failed to affect T cells from CLL
patients. Western blot analysis showed gefitinib inhibited tyrosine
phosphorylation of ZAP70 and Syk in CLL cells. In addition, both basal
and B cell receptor-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation was reduced after
gefinitib treatment. Compared with other known inhibitors dasatinib and
ibrutinib, gefitinib has the same downstream inhibition of Erk and Akt
phosphorylation in Zap70+ cells. The significance of Zap70 expression was
further determined by treating the Raji B lymphoma cell line transduced
with vector control or vector encoding Zap70; indeed Zap70 expression
sensitized the B cell line Raji to gefitinib treatment whereas other
tyrosine kinase inhibitors were less effective. Therefore, gefitinib
inhibits the Zap70 signaling pathway in CLL cells and holds potential as
a targeted therapy for aggressive CLL.

