Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of EpCAM expression in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.


Background: The epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) has been
reported its various roles in variety of cancers, particularly in
adenocarcinoma. EpCAM broad expression on human carcinomas and its
involvement in cell proliferation have brought EpCAM into focus as an
immunotherapeutic target for therapeutic strategies. However, its
expression level and role in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is
remained unclear. This study is to investigate the clinicopathologic
significance of EpCAM expression in ESCC.Methods: The EpCAM expression
was immunohistochemically investigated in 74 primary ESCCs with R0
resection without any preoperative treatment using the monoclonal
antibody. We evaluated the intensity of the stain in 4 grades. We
considered 3 (strong) and 2 (medium) as positive and 1 (weak) and 0
(negative) as negative. Down regulation of EpCAM gene expression was
performed using the shRNA in EpCAM high ESCC cell line (TE4-shRNA), TE4.
The cell proliferation assay was performed using cell counting kit to
assess cell proliferation in vitro. To evaluate cell proliferation and
tumorgenesis in vivo, we inoculated TE4 and TE4-shRNA into nude mice
subcutaneously. The size and incidence of subcutaneous tumors were
recorded.Results: Thirty-six (48.6%) patients showed positive for EpCAM
immunostaining and 38 (51.4%) patients showed negative. EpCAM expression
was not significantly correlated with histology, tumor depth, regional
lymph node metastasis, disease stage, lymphatic invasion, or venous
invasion. However, high expression of EpCAM was significantly associated
with poor survival in ESCC patients (P = 0.026). Multivariate Cox
regression analysis showed overexpression of EpCAM was a significant and
independent prognostic factor for surgically treated ESCC (P = 0.004).
The cell proliferation rate of TE4-shRNA was lower than TE4 in vitro. TE4
cells could initiate tumors in 7 of 10 injected nude mice, whereas
TE4-shRNA cells produced only 2 of 10 injected mice at 6 weeks after
transplantation. The tumor sizes were larger in the TE4 cells than in the
TE4-shRNA cells.Conclusion: High expression of EpCAM was independent
prognostic factor for surgically treated ESCC. EpCAM expression level
could change cell proliferation and tumorgenesis in vitro and in vivo.
These results suggested that EpCAM might be a potential molecular target
for esophageal cancer therapy.

