Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations between fatalistic beliefs, modesty concerns and
breast cancer screening in the American Muslim community.


Background: Research on breast cancer screening among American Muslims is
limited. The handful of studies conducted in the Muslim community, and
research of South Asian and Arab Americans, a proportion of which are
Muslim, consistently demonstrate rates of mammography screening markedly
lower than the 81% Healthy 2020 target. Our prior work suggests that
American Muslim health behaviors are strongly influenced by shared
religious concepts such as the concern for modesty. We sought to assess
mammography screening rates among a diverse sample of Muslims in Greater
Chicago, and assess the relationships between religiosity, modesty
concerns, fatalism and breast cancer screening in this group.Methods: We
used a community-engaged research design partnering with the Council of
Islamic Organizations of Greater Chicago to survey a diverse sample of
Muslim women frequenting mosques and community sites. The survey
incorporated several measures of fatalism adapted to the Muslim context,
a measure of discrimination, several measures of Islamic Religiosity and
a pilot measure of Islamic modesty concern.Results: 254 women
participated with 56 African Americans (24%), 70 Arab Americans (30%),
and 84 South Asians (36%). 76% of participants had insurance, while 84%
had access to a primary care physician and 78% reported high levels of
modesty concern. 75% of the sample reported ever having a mammogram while
44% had a mammogram within the past 1-2 years. There was not a
significant relationship between racial and ethnic status and mammography
rates. On multivariate analysis adjusting for socioeconomic factors high
ratings of religiosity were associated with increased odds of ever having
a mammogram (OR=1.08, pBackground: Research on breast cancer screening
among American Muslims is limited. The handful of studies conducted in
the Muslim community, and research of South Asian and Arab Americans, a
proportion of which are Muslim, consistently demonstrate rates of
mammography screening markedly lower than the 81% Healthy 2020 target.
Our prior work suggests that American Muslim health behaviors are
strongly influenced by shared religious concepts such as the concern for
modesty. We sought to assess mammography screening rates among a diverse
sample of Muslims in Greater Chicago, and assess the relationships
between religiosity, modesty concerns, fatalism and breast cancer
screening in this group.Methods: We used a community-engaged research
design partnering with the Council of Islamic Organizations of Greater
Chicago to survey a diverse sample of Muslim women frequenting mosques
and community sites. The survey incorporated several measures of fatalism
adapted to the Muslim context, a measure of discrimination, several
measures of Islamic Religiosity and a pilot measure of Islamic modesty
concern.Results: 254 women participated with 56 African Americans (24%),
70 Arab Americans (30%), and 84 South Asians (36%). 76% of participants
had insurance, while 84% had access to a primary care physician and 78%
reported high levels of modesty concern. 75% of the sample reported ever
having a mammogram while 44% had a mammogram within the past 1-2 years.
There was not a significant relationship between racial and ethnic status
and mammography rates. On multivariate analysis adjusting for
socioeconomic factors high ratings of religiosity were associated with
increased odds of ever having a mammogram (OR=1.08, p<.01) while measures
of fatalism, discrimination and modesty concern were not. Similarly in
adjusted models having a mammogram biennially was negatively associated
with positive religious coping (OR=0.33, pBackground: Research on breast
cancer screening among American Muslims is limited. The handful of
studies conducted in the Muslim community, and research of South Asian
and Arab Americans, a proportion of which are Muslim, consistently
demonstrate rates of mammography screening markedly lower than the 81%
Healthy 2020 target. Our prior work suggests that American Muslim health
behaviors are strongly influenced by shared religious concepts such as
the concern for modesty. We sought to assess mammography screening rates
among a diverse sample of Muslims in Greater Chicago, and assess the
relationships between religiosity, modesty concerns, fatalism and breast
cancer screening in this group.Methods: We used a community-engaged
research design partnering with the Council of Islamic Organizations of
Greater Chicago to survey a diverse sample of Muslim women frequenting
mosques and community sites. The survey incorporated several measures of
fatalism adapted to the Muslim context, a measure of discrimination,
several measures of Islamic Religiosity and a pilot measure of Islamic
modesty concern.Results: 254 women participated with 56 African Americans
(24%), 70 Arab Americans (30%), and 84 South Asians (36%). 76% of
participants had insurance, while 84% had access to a primary care
physician and 78% reported high levels of modesty concern. 75% of the
sample reported ever having a mammogram while 44% had a mammogram within
the past 1-2 years. There was not a significant relationship between
racial and ethnic status and mammography rates. On multivariate analysis
adjusting for socioeconomic factors high ratings of religiosity were
associated with increased odds of ever having a mammogram (OR=1.08,
p<.01) while measures of fatalism, discrimination and modesty concern
were not. Similarly in adjusted models having a mammogram biennially was
negatively associated with positive religious coping (OR=0.33, p<.05),
whereas measures of religiosity, fatalism, discrimination and modesty
were not significantly associated. Increasing age, longer duration of US
residency, higher levels of education, were positively associated with
ever having mammograms as was PCP access with having a mammogram in the
past two years.Conclusions: Contrary to our hypotheses modesty concerns
and fatalistic beliefs were not significantly associated with mammography
rates. Yet, on one hand higher intrinsic religiosity was positively
associated with ever having a mammogram while positive religious coping
was negatively associated with getting a mammogram every two years.
Shared religious concepts appear to influence breast cancer screening
behaviors among American Muslims across race and ethnicity, and research
teasing out how religiosity impacts decisions to pursue breast cancer
screening is needed.

