Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Splicing factor SRSF3 knockdown-induced breast cancer cell growth
suppression and apoptosis is partially reversed by Z-VAD-FMK and its
expression correlates malignancy of breast cancer.


Cancer-specific alternative splicing as well as aberrant splicing factor
expression is seen in tumors, compared to normal tissues. Splicing
factor, arginine/serine-rich 3 (SRSF3; SRp20) belongs to a family of
highly conserved serine-arginine-rich proteins with multiple functions in
RNA processing such as spliceosome assembly and alternative splicing. We
have reported that knockdown (KD) of SRSF3 inhibited breast cancer cell
growth and nearly complete KD of SRSF3 induced apoptosis in breast cancer
cells via activating intrinsic apoptotic pathway (T-T Ho et al.,
Proceedings of the 2010 CTRC-AACR San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium).
To further determine whether SRSF3 KD-induced cell growth suppression and
apoptosis is caspase-dependent, we treated triple negative breast cancer
MDA-MB-231/LUCsh and MDA-MB-231/SRSF3sh2 cell lines [MDA-MB-231 cell
lines carrying doxycycline (Doxy)-inducible luciferase shRNA and
SRSF3shRNA2, respectively] with Doxy and a general caspase inhibitor
Z-VAD-FMK and then evaluated cell survival using MTT assay. While we did
not observe any effect of Z-VAD-FMK on the growth of MDA-MB-231/LUCsh
cells, Z-VAD-FMK partially abolished SRSF3 KD-induced cell growth
inhibition by 24.1% and 42.3%, respectively, following 10 M or 50 M
Z-VAD-FMK treatment in MDA-MB-231/SRSF3sh2 cells compared to controls. In
addition, co-treatment of Doxy and 10 M or 50 M of Z-VAD-FMK in
MDA-MB-231/SRSF3sh2 cells resulted in 55.3% and 75.3%, respectively,
reduction in apoptosis compared to Doxy treatment alone, while no effect
of treatment was observed on control MDA-MB-231/LUCsh cells, as assessed
by Hoechst 33342 dye staining. We are presently assessing the downstream
targets of SRSF3 and investigating the mechanistic basis for the
apoptotic effect of KD of SRSF3. Of note, we found that the expression of
SRSF3 was upregulated in immortalized human mammary epithelial cells
(HMECs), compared to isogenic finite HMECs, and that the level of SRSF3
correlated with the transformation state of cells. To evaluate the
clinical significance of this splicing factor, we noticed a significant
increase (p=0.001) of SRSF3 expression in breast tumor tissues compared
to normal breast tissue, as assessed by immunohistochemical staining for
SRSF3 of tissue microarrays. Indeed, we noted a correlation between SRSF3
staining and higher tumor grade (p=0.016), suggesting that expression of
SRSF3 is associated with malignancy of human breast tumors. In summary,
our results indicate that SRSF3 plays a major role in the survival of
some breast cancer cell lines and is overexpressed in some breast
cancers. We conclude that this splicing factor, which appears to behave
as an oncogene, may represent a novel therapeutic target for the
treatment of some breast cancers.

