Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced chemosensitivity of osteosarcoma cells by
telomerase-specific oncolytic adenovirus in combination therapy.


Osteosarcomas are the most common malignant bone tumors. Although the
multi-agent chemotherapy has improved the long-term survival rate of
osteosarcoma patients, some patients show a poor response to
chemotherapy, leading to recurrence and poor prognosis. Therefore, the
enhancement of chemosensitivity is required to cure patients with
osteosarcomas. We recently developed a telomerase-specic
replication-competent oncolytic adenovirus, Telomelysin (OBP-301), and
confirmed the antitumor effect of OBP-301 in human osteosarcoma cells. A
phase I clinical trial in US has also shown the safety of OBP-301 in
cancer patients. In this study, we investigated whether OBP-301 enhances
the antitumor effect of chemotherapeutic agents, doxorubicin and
cisplatin, that are used for the treatment of osteosarcomas, and the
molecular mechanism of chemotherapy- and OBP-301-mediated cell death
pathway, autophagy and apoptosis, in human osteosarcoma cell lines. We
used four human osteosarcoma cell lines, HOS, MNNG/HOS, 143B and SaOS2.
OBP-301 is an attenuated adenovirus, in which the human telomerase
reverse transcriptase (hTERT) promoter element drives expression of E1A
and E1B genes, and causes tumor-selective lysis in a variety of human
malignant tumor cells with high telomerase activity. OBP-301 infection
enhanced the cytotoxic effect of chemotherapeutic agents and the
calculation of combination index revealed the synergistic effects in all
human osteosarcoma cell lines. To analyze the molecular mechanism in the
synergistic effect induced by combination therapy, western blot analysis
for apoptosis (PARP) and autophagy (LC3, p62) was performed. Combination
of OBP-301 increased both apoptosis (the cleavage of PARP) and autophagy
(conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II and p62 downregulation) in the
chemotherapeutic agents-treated human osteosarcoma cells. In contrast,
the replication of OBP-301 was not suppressed by chemotherapeutic agents.
Moreover, combination therapy of chemotherapeutic agents with OBP-301
signicantly suppressed tumor growth in a subcutaneous xenograft tumor
model compared to monotherapy with chemotherapeutic agents or OBP-301.
These results suggest that combination therapy of chemotherapeutic agents
with OBP-301 provides a novel therapeutic strategy for human
osteosarcomas.

