Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The miR-200 family as a potential therapeutic target in
inflammatory breast cancer.


Purpose: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is the most lethal, aggressive
variant of breast cancer characterized by rapid progression, local and
distant metastases, younger age of onset, and poor overall survival.
Despite advances in multimodal breast cancer care, no IBC specific
therapy is available clinically, demonstrating a critical need to
identify novel therapeutics that target the distinct biology of IBC.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that regulate gene expression
and have been implicated as potential therapeutic targets. Although the
oncogenic or tumor-suppressor functions of a large number of miRNAs have
been described in various solid tumors including breast cancer, the role
of miRNAs in the biology of IBC is poorly understood. Herein, we
investigated miRNAs differentially expressed in IBC, particularly miR-200
family miRNAs as potential therapeutic targets in IBC.Methods: MicroRNA
microarray profiling was conducted in IBC and non-IBC cell lines, and
microarray results were validated using qRT-PCR. MirZip lentiviral based
mirRNA inhibition was used to stably knockdown miRNAs and the effects of
specific miRNA knockdown on proliferation, EMT, colony and mammosphere
formation was evaluated. For tumor progression and metastasis in vivo
experiments, we injected 500,000 SUM149 miR-200a, miR-141 knockdown and
control (N=15 for each group) cells into the cleared mammary fatpad of
SCID/Beige mice. We also validated the expression of miR-200 miRNAs in
IBC patient samples.Results: Differential expression of mirRNAs was
observed in IBC vs. non-IBC cell lines with a significantly higher
expression of all miR-200 family (miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-141
and miR-479) in IBC cell lines. These results were validated using
qRT-PCR, with the IBC cell lines showing a >1,000-fold higher expression
of miR-200s vs non-IBC aggressive cell lines (PPurpose: Inflammatory
breast cancer (IBC) is the most lethal, aggressive variant of breast
cancer characterized by rapid progression, local and distant metastases,
younger age of onset, and poor overall survival. Despite advances in
multimodal breast cancer care, no IBC specific therapy is available
clinically, demonstrating a critical need to identify novel therapeutics
that target the distinct biology of IBC. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small
noncoding RNAs that regulate gene expression and have been implicated as
potential therapeutic targets. Although the oncogenic or tumor-suppressor
functions of a large number of miRNAs have been described in various
solid tumors including breast cancer, the role of miRNAs in the biology
of IBC is poorly understood. Herein, we investigated miRNAs
differentially expressed in IBC, particularly miR-200 family miRNAs as
potential therapeutic targets in IBC.Methods: MicroRNA microarray
profiling was conducted in IBC and non-IBC cell lines, and microarray
results were validated using qRT-PCR. MirZip lentiviral based mirRNA
inhibition was used to stably knockdown miRNAs and the effects of
specific miRNA knockdown on proliferation, EMT, colony and mammosphere
formation was evaluated. For tumor progression and metastasis in vivo
experiments, we injected 500,000 SUM149 miR-200a, miR-141 knockdown and
control (N=15 for each group) cells into the cleared mammary fatpad of
SCID/Beige mice. We also validated the expression of miR-200 miRNAs in
IBC patient samples.Results: Differential expression of mirRNAs was
observed in IBC vs. non-IBC cell lines with a significantly higher
expression of all miR-200 family (miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-141
and miR-479) in IBC cell lines. These results were validated using
qRT-PCR, with the IBC cell lines showing a >1,000-fold higher expression
of miR-200s vs non-IBC aggressive cell lines (P<0.0001). Moreover, two
known targets of the miR-200 family, Zeb1 and Zeb2, were significantly
downregulated while E-cadherin was upregulated in the IBC samples.
Importantly, these observations were validated in IBC patient samples
which showed a significantly higher expression of all miRNA 200s compared
to the normal breast tissues (PPurpose: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC)
is the most lethal, aggressive variant of breast cancer characterized by
rapid progression, local and distant metastases, younger age of onset,
and poor overall survival. Despite advances in multimodal breast cancer
care, no IBC specific therapy is available clinically, demonstrating a
critical need to identify novel therapeutics that target the distinct
biology of IBC. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that regulate
gene expression and have been implicated as potential therapeutic
targets. Although the oncogenic or tumor-suppressor functions of a large
number of miRNAs have been described in various solid tumors including
breast cancer, the role of miRNAs in the biology of IBC is poorly
understood. Herein, we investigated miRNAs differentially expressed in
IBC, particularly miR-200 family miRNAs as potential therapeutic targets
in IBC.Methods: MicroRNA microarray profiling was conducted in IBC and
non-IBC cell lines, and microarray results were validated using qRT-PCR.
MirZip lentiviral based mirRNA inhibition was used to stably knockdown
miRNAs and the effects of specific miRNA knockdown on proliferation, EMT,
colony and mammosphere formation was evaluated. For tumor progression and
metastasis in vivo experiments, we injected 500,000 SUM149 miR-200a,
miR-141 knockdown and control (N=15 for each group) cells into the
cleared mammary fatpad of SCID/Beige mice. We also validated the
expression of miR-200 miRNAs in IBC patient samples.Results: Differential
expression of mirRNAs was observed in IBC vs. non-IBC cell lines with a
significantly higher expression of all miR-200 family (miR-200a,
miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-141 and miR-479) in IBC cell lines. These results
were validated using qRT-PCR, with the IBC cell lines showing a
>1,000-fold higher expression of miR-200s vs non-IBC aggressive cell
lines (P<0.0001). Moreover, two known targets of the miR-200 family, Zeb1
and Zeb2, were significantly downregulated while E-cadherin was
upregulated in the IBC samples. Importantly, these observations were
validated in IBC patient samples which showed a significantly higher
expression of all miRNA 200s compared to the normal breast tissues
(P<0.001). In vitro, miR-200a and miR-141 knockdown significantly reduced
both colony and mammosphere formation in the triple negative SUM149 cells
(P0.05) while it upregulated the EMT markers N-cadherin, Fibronectin,
TGF, and Smad4 and reduced E-cadherin expression compared to transduced
controls. In vivo, miR-200 knockdown resulted in an increase in tumor
progression vs. controls (P0.05) while it upregulated the EMT markers
N-cadherin, Fibronectin, TGF, and Smad4 and reduced E-cadherin expression
compared to transduced controls. In vivo, miR-200 knockdown resulted in
an increase in tumor progression vs. controls (P<0.05, Day 63) while
metastasis studies are undergoing.Conclusions: These data suggest that
miR-200 family microRNAs play an important role in IBC tumor progression
and altering miR-200 levels could be an efficacious approach to target
IBC.

