Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wedelolactone, a medicinal plant-derived coumestan, induces
caspase-dependent apoptosis in prostate cancer cells via down-regulation
of PKC-epsilon without inhibiting Akt.


Background: Prostate cancer cells continuously generate 5(S)-HETE series
of metabolites via 5-lipoxygenase (5-Lox) activity, and inhibition of
5-Lox blocks production of metabolites and triggers apoptosis both in
androgen-sensitive and androgen-independent prostate cancer cells.
Apoptosis is prevented by 5(S)-HETE and 5-oxoETE, but not by leukotrienes
or metabolites of 12-Lox or 15-Lox, which is consistent with the idea
that the 5-HETE series of metabolites are essential survival factors for
prostate cancer cells. Recently, we found that 5-Lox-regulated
survival-signaling is mediated via protein kinase C-epsilon (PKC), but
not Akt, or ERK. Prostate tumor tissues express high levels of 5-Lox, but
the expression of 5-Lox in normal prostate glands is undetectable. Thus,
5-Lox emerges as a novel molecular target for prostate cancer therapy.
However, lack of suitable 5-Lox inhibitors for in vivo use is hampering
progress towards clinical development. Several natural compounds possess
5-Lox inhibitory effects, raising the possibility that effective 5-Lox
inhibitors may be found in natural products for use against prostate
cancer. Wedelolactone (WDL), a medicinal plant-derived coumestan, is
known to inhibit 5-Lox activity in neutrophils. However, its potential on
apoptosis induction in prostate cancer cells is not known. Thus, we
tested the effects of WDL on a range of human prostate cancer cells in
vitro. Methods: Prostate cancer cells were treated with doses of WDL for
varying periods of time. Apoptosis was measured by annexin-V binding,
PARP-cleavage, and DNA-degradation. Role of caspase in apoptosis was
tested by enzymatic assays and chemical inhibitors. Effects of WDL on
PKC-epsilon and Akt were analyzed by Western blot and enzymatic assays.
Results: We observed that WDL kills both androgen-sensitive as well as
androgen-independent prostate cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner by
dramatically inducing apoptosis. This apoptosis is dependent on c-Jun
N-terminal Kinase (c-JNK) and caspase-3. Interestingly, WDL was observed
to trigger apoptosis in prostate cancer cells via down-regulation of
protein kinase C-epsilon (PKC), but without any inhibition of Akt. WDL
does not affect the viability of normal prostate epithelial cells (PrEC)
at doses that kill prostate cancer cells. Moreover, it was found that
WDL-induced apoptosis is effectively prevented by 5-oxoETE, a metabolite
of 5-Lox, confirming that WDL induces apoptosis in prostate cancer cells
via inhibition of 5-Lox activity. Conclusion: Our findings indicate that
WDL selectivity induces caspase-dependent apoptosis in prostate cancer
cells via a novel mechanism involving inhibition of the oncogenic
serine/threonine kinase PKC without affecting Akt, and suggest that WDL
may emerge as a novel therapeutic agent against clinical prostate cancer
in human.

