Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of protein biomakers in prostate and colorectal tumor
lysates.


Traditional tumor biomarkers are proteins that have been shed in the
bloodstream and have been critical in identifying and treating cancer. We
sought to survey proteins relevant to oncology in colon and prostate
tumors; in order to identify potential proteins of interest for cancer
research. Four colon and three prostate tumors were homogenized and 115
proteins were analyzed from the Oncology MAP 2.0. Each tumor had 2
fractions homogenized to look at heterogeneity of the protein with the
tumor. In all of the samples measured 102 of the 115 protein showed
levels above the LLOQ. Five proteins (PSP94, Tenascin-X, lipocalin-1,
Tie-1 and BAFF) were 100 fold higher in prostate tumors compared to colon
tumors (PTraditional tumor biomarkers are proteins that have been shed in
the bloodstream and have been critical in identifying and treating
cancer. We sought to survey proteins relevant to oncology in colon and
prostate tumors; in order to identify potential proteins of interest for
cancer research. Four colon and three prostate tumors were homogenized
and 115 proteins were analyzed from the Oncology MAP 2.0. Each tumor had
2 fractions homogenized to look at heterogeneity of the protein with the
tumor. In all of the samples measured 102 of the 115 protein showed
levels above the LLOQ. Five proteins (PSP94, Tenascin-X, lipocalin-1,
Tie-1 and BAFF) were 100 fold higher in prostate tumors compared to colon
tumors (P<0.001). PSP94 has been shown to be a prostate cancer marker in
serum; however, none of the other markers have been shown to be markers
of prostate tumors. Eight proteins (PECAM-1, CA 72-4, Eotaxin-2, HGF-R,
CA 15-3, TATI, CEACAM6 and CEA) were greater than 10 fold higher in colon
tumors compared to prostate tumors (PTraditional tumor biomarkers are
proteins that have been shed in the bloodstream and have been critical in
identifying and treating cancer. We sought to survey proteins relevant to
oncology in colon and prostate tumors; in order to identify potential
proteins of interest for cancer research. Four colon and three prostate
tumors were homogenized and 115 proteins were analyzed from the Oncology
MAP 2.0. Each tumor had 2 fractions homogenized to look at heterogeneity
of the protein with the tumor. In all of the samples measured 102 of the
115 protein showed levels above the LLOQ. Five proteins (PSP94,
Tenascin-X, lipocalin-1, Tie-1 and BAFF) were 100 fold higher in prostate
tumors compared to colon tumors (P<0.001). PSP94 has been shown to be a
prostate cancer marker in serum; however, none of the other markers have
been shown to be markers of prostate tumors. Eight proteins (PECAM-1, CA
72-4, Eotaxin-2, HGF-R, CA 15-3, TATI, CEACAM6 and CEA) were greater than
10 fold higher in colon tumors compared to prostate tumors (P<0.001).
Although oncology MAP 2.0 was developed for serum biomarkers, it may
provide a valuable tool for examining proteins biomarkers in tumors.

