Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying AML-specific key targeted drugs using high-throughput
drug sensitivity and resistance testing profiles of AML cells.


Introduction: Conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens for adult
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) are effective in curing less than 50% of the
patients, and there is a major need for targeted drugs with better
anti-cancer selectivity. Here, our aim was to i) identify potential
clinically used or emerging cancer drugs by quantitative drug sensitivity
and resistance testing (DSRT) of 16 AML cell lines ii) compare the cell
line data with results obtained from tested 24 ex vivo AML patient
specimens iii) identify genomic correlations potentially explaining drug
responsiveness.Methods: The cancer pharmacopeia-wide drug collection is
composed of 119 FDA approved and 90 investigational chemical compounds
including cytotoxic agents and cell signaling molecule inhibitors. Each
drug was tested over a 10,000-fold concentration range and that has
generated quantitative five point dose-response curves. AML cells were
plated in 384 well plates (where the drugs were pre-printed using an
acoustic nano-dispensing technology, Labcyte) and incubated in standard
cell culture conditions. Cell viability was measured by Cell Titer Glow
luminescence assays. Analysis of dose response curves using Dotmatics
software resulted in IC50 values. Moreover, the genomic profiles of the
AML cell lines were determined by microarrays and/or next-gen sequencing
data for further integration with drug responses.Results: Comprehensive
data analysis of 16 AML cell lines indicated that specific targeted drugs
were selectively killing AML cells. The data analysis revealed relatively
strong responses for MEK inhibitors in most AML cell lines (e.g.
refametinib 87%, trametinib 82%, selumetinib 75%) while 21% of ex vivo
AML patient samples were sensitive to these MEK inhibitors. In case of
rapalog sensitivity, 80% of AML cell lines (e.g. temsirolimus 82%,
everolimus 71%, sirolimus 81%) and 25% of ex vivo AML patient cases were
responsive to the mTOR inhibitors. The AML cell lines carrying FLT3-ITD
mutations were extremely sensitive to FLT3 inhibitors (e.g. quizartinib,
lestaurtinib, tandutinib, and sorafenib) but very few responses to FLT3
inhibitors were observed in AML patients carrying an ITD mutation in the
FLT3 kinase.Summary: Systematic DSRT profiling of AML cell lines
illustrates drug sensitivity patterns to classify the cell lines as
sensitive or resistant to specific classes of drugs. mTOR and MEK
inhibitors were among the most effective inhibitors for most cell lines
and also in some ex vivo patient cases suggesting that these drugs may
have potential as therapeutic agents in AML. Also, bioinformatics
predictions can be used to identify key synergistic combinations of
tested drugs for effective AML therapy. Further integration of molecular
profiles and functional responses of AML cell lines will help provide
better understanding of drug efficacy based on known genetic background
of the disease.

