Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential effects of specific dietary fat sources on
inflammation and intestinal tumorigenesis.


Diet-induced obesity (DIO) and metabolic syndrome (MetS) are important
factors that contribute to the development and progression of cancer,
especially colon cancer. DIO and MetS have reached epidemic proportions
in the United States and are heavily influenced by diets high in
saturated and omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids. Using the ApcMin/+
model of intestinal neoplasia and diets constructed from 58% coconut,
corn or olive oils, we demonstrate that high amounts of dietary fats can
have differential effects on DIO and MetS, as well as on intestinal
tumorigenesis when compared to ApcMin/+ fed corresponding calorically
equivalent control diets that contained 10% fat from these same sources.
Specific sources of dietary fat lead to more rapid tumor progression,
elevated polyp number and mass, as well as increased mortality, thus
eliciting a detrimental impact on disease outcome, while others fail to
induce an increase in polyp burden and reduce cancer severity in mice
with genetic predisposition to intestinal neoplasia. We demonstrate that
the tumor promoting effects of different fats are associated with
systemic and local intestinal inflammation and that excess nutritional
richness from specific sources can increase pro-inflammatory factors such
as IL-6, IL-1, TNF, COX-2. Adipokines, such as adiponectin and leptin,
are differentially modulated in response to different fat sources. Short
(3 day) dietary exposure is sufficient to induce inflammation and
tumorigenesis before the onset of DIO or MetS, suggesting a potent effect
of diet on intestinal immunity. Additionally, we demonstrate a novel
mechanism for the innate immunity in diet-induced intestinal cancer. We
show that pharmacological and genetic inhibition of innate immunity
factors can significantly reduce polyp number and mass in ApcMin/+. These
results suggest that nutritional modification may be a useful approach to
alter intestinal and systemic inflammation with potential preventative
value for use in colon tumorigenesis and that diet, immunity and cancer
are intrinsically related.

