Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small C-terminal domain phosphatase 1 stabilizes PML to regulate
the progression of renal clear cell carcinoma.


The promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein elicits pleiotropic tumor
suppressive functions and is aberrantly degraded in multiple types of
human cancers through poorly understood mechanisms. Previous study in our
laboratory revealed that CDK1/2-mediated phosphorylation of PML Ser518 is
required for targeting PML to Pin1 for prolylisomerization and
subsequently to KLHL20-containing ubiquitin ligase complex for
ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. To identify the negative
regulators of this PML degradation pathway, we employed a functional
genomic approach to search for phosphatases that act on PML Ser518. This
study identifies the small C-terminal domain phosphatase 1/2/3 (SCP1/2/3)
as PML Ser518 phosphatases. Because these three phosphatases are of
structural and functional similarities, we focus on the prototype of this
family, SCP1. We show that SCP1 interacts with PML and reduces PML Ser518
phosphorylation levels both in vivo and in vitro. Through this
dephosphorylation, SCP1 decreases Pin1-KLHL20 mediated-PML
polyubiquitination and prolongs PML half life. Consequently, SCP1
increases the number of PML-nuclear bodies and elevates PML protein
abundance in both normoxia and hypoxia conditions. At functional levels,
SCP1 overexpression enhances multiple tumor suppressive effects,
including promotion of apoptosis and inhibition of cell proliferation and
migration. Importantly, all of these effects are reversed by PML
knockdown. Clinically, SCP1 expression is downregulated in renal clear
cell carcinoma (RCC) and this downregulation correlates with PML
downregulation. Restoration of SCP1-mediated PML stabilization inhibits
RCC proliferation, migration and transformation. Together, our study
identifies SCP1 as a positive regulator of PML by dephosphorylation of
PML Ser518 to antagonize the Pin1/KLHL20-dependent PML degradation
pathway. Blockage of SCP1/PML axis is manifested in RCC and contributes
to RCC progression.

