Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I (phI) study evaluating the cardiac safety of oral
chemotherapy s-1 in patients (pts) with advanced solid tumors.


The incidence of cardiotoxicity (CTx) due to 5FU varies in the literature
ranging from 1-68% of pts. Angina-like chest pain is the most common
symptom of 5FU associated CTx. Cardiac arrhythmias, congestive heart
failure, myocardial infarction, dilatative cardiomyopathy, cardiogenic
shock, cardiac arrest or sudden death have been also reported. Most cases
occur during or following initial treatment (trt) courses. Only 18% of
pts developing CTx have a history of underlying cardiac disease.
Capecitabine (Oral 5FU) is also associated with a non-negligible
incidence (3-9%) of CTx (E. Yeh. JACC 2009). S-1 is a new oral
formulation combining a 5FU prodrug (tegafur) and 2 targeted modulators
of its metabolism (gimeracil and oteracil) to preserve efficacy and
improve safety. We report the results of a European Ph1, evaluating the
effect of S-1 on cardiac repolarization evaluated during S-1 trt under
controlled conditions with assessment of 24hour (h) Holter monitor (HM)
electrocardiograms (ECGs). Study design: Pts received S-1 30mg/m2 dose
BID D1 to 14 q3w. This trial investigated the effect of S-1 vs baseline
and placebo on cardiac repolarization QTc (corrected QT interval). During
cycle 1, pts were assessed via 24h HM ECGs monitoring after each dose of
S-1.Results: 56 pts with advanced solid tumors were enrolled and final
cardiac safety results analyzed on 49 pts:- The 1-sided 95% upper
confidence boundaries for QTc changes were completely within the 10 msec
boundaries set by the ICH guideline.- Mean changes relative to placebo
(adjusted for baseline) following single-dose of S-1 did not indicate any
effect on QTc.-Following multiple dosing with S-1, any mean increases in
QTc relative to placebo were below the threshold of regulatory
concern.Forty two (75.0%) pts reported 225 adverse events (AEs). Only 5
pts (8.9%) experienced trt-related Grade 3 or higher including anemia,
neutropenia and diarrhea. Discontinuation of trt: 1 pt (Hand foot
syndrome Gr2). No cardiac SAEs or trt-related AEs were observed. No
syncope or arrhythmia reported (Gr1 atrial fibrillation: 1 pt and Gr1
tachycardia: 1 pt, unrelated to trt). S-1 was well-tolerated in heavily
treated pts, with no unexpected trt-related AE that resulted in death or
AEs leading to discontinuation of trt.Conclusion: No effect on cardiac
repolarization was observed among the 49 pts analysed and no cardiac SAE
was reported. The good cardiac safety profile of S-1 is also supported by
a survey performed in Japan on more than 4,000 pts treated with S-1 (F.
Nagashima. IJGC 2005). No more than 0.2% all grades and 0.05% Gr3-4
cardiac events were observed, which compare favorably with the incidences
reported for this class of drugs. In the context of published
fluoropyrimidines related-cardiotoxicity, S-1 is probably a good option
to treat patients efficiently with a low risk of severe cardiac event.

