Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: X-MAN reporter cell lines: Enabling the study of endogenous
promoter activity and protein dynamics.


To allow promoter activity and protein dynamics to be studied at
endogenous levels for the first time, Horizon Discovery has developed
suites of X-MAN reporter cell lines incorporating NanoLuc and HaloTag
technologies from Promega. By creating these innovative reporters, we
have removed the need for either exogenous plasmid based overexpression
studies, or use of surrogate markers of activity, both of which can yield
artefactual data. Horizon's proprietary rAAV-based GENESIS gene editing
platform has been used to introduce reporter genes (NanoLuc or HaloTag)
into several specific chromosomal loci (including HIF1A, cMYC, -Catenin
and NRF2) either as endogenous promoter fusions or in-frame protein
fusions. Our extensive expertise in cell line engineering means that the
technology can be rapidly applied to virtually any gene of interest.
NanoLuc produces high intensity luminescence enabling accurate
quantification of gene expression even at low endogenous expression
levels. HaloTag is a multifunctional protein reporter which can be used
for many applications including intracellular fluorescent imaging of live
cells in real time. Validation experiments, including kinetic
measurements and treatment with compounds or conditions that modulate
transcription or protein expression, reveal robust and reproducible
results for all reporter cell lines and demonstrate their value in a wide
variety of applications, from pathway analysis to high throughput
screening platforms. To further demonstrate the utility of the X-MAN
reporter cell lines in HTS-screening applications, we used the HCT116
HIF1A NanoLuc protein reporter line in a multiplexed siRNA library screen
against 960 druggable targets, under both normoxic and reduced oxygen
conditions. As expected, many known regulators of HIF1A were identified,
such as AKT, PDK1 and cRaf, showing once more the robust nature of the
reporter system. Several novel regulators were also identified
highlighting the value of the reporter cell lines for rapid
identification of key regulators of endogenous proteins. In conclusion,
we have used the combination of NanoLuc, HaloTag and the GENESIS gene
editing platform to generate highly sensitive reporter cell lines that
are capable of registering physiological levels of gene transcription and
protein activity/localization in live cells. These reporter technologies
can be used for a wide range of applications and provide an exciting new
tool for biologically relevant drug discovery.

