Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human umbilical cord matrix-derived stem cells control tumor
growth by tumor suppressor gene expression.


Umbilical cord matrix derived stem cells (UCMSC) have the potential to
treat various diseases including cancer. We have shown that nave human
and rat UCMSC significantly attenuate proliferation of multiple cancer
cells (Ganta et al., Cancer Res., 2009. Ayuzawa et al., Cancer Lett.,
2009). However, the growth attenuation ability of rat UCMSC is stronger
than that of human UCMSC. To clarify their different tumoricidal
abilities, differential gene expression profiles of these two cells were
studied by micro-array analysis using Illumina HumanRef-8 V2 for human
and RatRef-12 BeadChip for rat UCMSC. The gene expression profiles were
compared between UCMSC untreated and co-cultured with either human
(MDA-231) or rat breast carcinoma cells (Mat B III). Selection criteria
used for the screening of candidate genes associated with UCMSC-dependent
tumoricidal ability are as follows; 1) gene expression difference should
be at least a 1.5 fold between naive UCMSC and those co-cultured with
mammary tumor cells; 2) they must encode secretory proteins; and 3) they
must encode cell growth regulation-related proteins. These analyses
screened 16 common genes from both human and rat UCMSC. The comparison
between two sets of gene expression profiles identified that two genes,
adipose-differentiation related protein (ADRP) and follistatin (FST),
were specifically up-regulated in rat UCMSC, whereas they were
down-regulated in human UCMSC when they were co-cultured with the
corresponding species breast cancer cells. The suppression of either
protein by adding specific neutralizing antibody in culture of rat UCMSC
significantly abrogated their ability to attenuate cell growth.
Over-expression of both genes by adenovirus vector in human UCMSC
enhanced their ability to suppress the growth of MDA-231 cells. FST
over-expression in MDA 231 cells also decreased their growth
significantly. In the experimental lung metastasis model with MDA 231
cells in immunodeficient mice, the treatment with FST-over-expressing
human UCMSC was administered three times, at one week intervals, via tail
vein injection, starting 6 days after tumor cell inoculation. Examination
4 weeks after tumor inoculation showed a significant decrease in the
number of tumor nodules in the lungs. Both ADRP and FST are considered to
be tumor suppressor genes. These results suggest that both ADRP and FST
may play important roles in exhibiting a stronger tumoricidal ability in
rat UCMSC than human UCMSC. These results imply that human UCMSC can be
transformed into stronger tumoricidal cells by enhancing tumor suppressor
gene expression. This work was supported by the Kansas State University
(KSU) Terry C. Johnson Center for Basic Cancer Research, KSU College of
Veterinary Medicine Dean's Fund, NIH RR017686, RR15563, CA135599, Kansas
Bioscience Authority research grant.

