Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The 3DKUBE segregated co-culture system: optimal tumor-stromal
interactions for modeling the tumor microenvironment in anticancer
therapeutic development.


Background: Better models of the tumor microenvironment (TME) are needed
in order to reduce the number of anticancer drug failures in clinical
trials and to reduce animal use. Current models fail because of 1)
reliance on single cell systems; 2) reliance on artificial 2 dimensional
(2D) monolayers; and 3) a focus on high throughput assays that pre-select
drugs affecting growth and apoptosis. To more accurately model the TME,
we developed a 3D perfusion co-culture system for purposes of anti-cancer
testing. Materials & Methods: The system consisted of 3DKUBE 3D Cell
Culture Plasticware, membranes, closed flow circuits, connectors,
syringes and gas exchange reservoir bags. 3D static culture experiments
combining a variety of cell types, scaffolds, media and reagent
conditions, and analytical techniques were performed to define the
co-culture conditions. Flow rates and cycling times are used to
demonstrate: 1) fibroblast priming, 2) drug effect, 3) intra-spheroid
cell viability and 4) long term culture conditions. Multiple methods of
in situ and endpoint analytical techniques are shown to be compatible
with the 3DKUBE including resazurin reduction, Hoechst staining,
immunohistochemistry and 3D confocal imaging. Enhanced kinase signaling
is demonstrated by immunoblotting and phosphor-protein signaling. 6-21
day experiments are performed in the 3DKUBE Tumor-Fibroblast model with
cytotoxic agents (cisplatin[CP], 5-flourouricil) and small molecule
inhibitors (PI3K inhibitors) to demonstrate utility. A polyHEMA-based
technique was used to preform standardized spheroids of consistent size
among many tumor cell lines (MCF-7, DLD-1, HepG2, A2780). Fibra-Cel disc
scaffolds permit stable stromal cell (MRC-5, human foreskin fibroblasts)
adhesion and growth, and accommodate varying analytical methods. 3D
perfusion co-cultures demonstrate larger spheroids (confocal) with more
viable cells (confocal, hoechst pBackground: Better models of the tumor
microenvironment (TME) are needed in order to reduce the number of
anticancer drug failures in clinical trials and to reduce animal use.
Current models fail because of 1) reliance on single cell systems; 2)
reliance on artificial 2 dimensional (2D) monolayers; and 3) a focus on
high throughput assays that pre-select drugs affecting growth and
apoptosis. To more accurately model the TME, we developed a 3D perfusion
co-culture system for purposes of anti-cancer testing. Materials &
Methods: The system consisted of 3DKUBE 3D Cell Culture Plasticware,
membranes, closed flow circuits, connectors, syringes and gas exchange
reservoir bags. 3D static culture experiments combining a variety of cell
types, scaffolds, media and reagent conditions, and analytical techniques
were performed to define the co-culture conditions. Flow rates and
cycling times are used to demonstrate: 1) fibroblast priming, 2) drug
effect, 3) intra-spheroid cell viability and 4) long term culture
conditions. Multiple methods of in situ and endpoint analytical
techniques are shown to be compatible with the 3DKUBE including resazurin
reduction, Hoechst staining, immunohistochemistry and 3D confocal
imaging. Enhanced kinase signaling is demonstrated by immunoblotting and
phosphor-protein signaling. 6-21 day experiments are performed in the
3DKUBE Tumor-Fibroblast model with cytotoxic agents (cisplatin[CP],
5-flourouricil) and small molecule inhibitors (PI3K inhibitors) to
demonstrate utility. A polyHEMA-based technique was used to preform
standardized spheroids of consistent size among many tumor cell lines
(MCF-7, DLD-1, HepG2, A2780). Fibra-Cel disc scaffolds permit stable
stromal cell (MRC-5, human foreskin fibroblasts) adhesion and growth, and
accommodate varying analytical methods. 3D perfusion co-cultures
demonstrate larger spheroids (confocal) with more viable cells (confocal,
hoechst p<0.001) and more sensitivity to CP as compared with static
cultures. Perfusion permits priming of fibroblasts prior to establishing
co-cultures, which further promotes spheroid maintenance and growth.
Perfusion demonstrated enhanced maintenance of cell proliferation in
primary mouse mammary tumor slices cultured in the 3KDUBE. LY294002
demonstrated enhanced activity in 3D co-culture as compared to 2D
monoculture, which correlates with increased p-Akt signaling in 3D. A
panel of PI3K and c-Met pathway inhibitors is being tested to
discriminate activity in the 3DKUBE co-culture system. Conclusions: The
3DKUBE Segregated Co-culture system is a universally applicable method
across multiple different tumor types for modeling the 3D tumor
microenvironment for evaluation of anti-cancer drug efficacy.

