Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATDC drives bladder cancer formation by promoting methylation of
the PTEN promoter and inhibition of p53 function.


Bladder cancer is the 5th most common malignancy and a significant cause
of morbidity and mortality, but the molecular events leading to its
development are incompletely understood. We have identified an oncogene,
Ataxia-Telangiectasia Group D Complementing (ATDC) gene, which drives
formation and progression of pancreatic and bladder tumors. To better
characterize the oncogenic function of ATDC, we generated transgenic (tg)
mice which overexpress ATDC and the predominant phenotype of these mice
was the development of non-invasive and muscle-invasive urothelial
carcinomas. Tg bladder tumors were histologically identical to human
tumors and displayed a similar gene expression signature to human
invasive bladder tumors. ATDC expression was assessed in a tissue
microarray and was highly up-regulated in 70% of human invasive bladder
tumors (173/252). High expression of ATDC correlated with more advanced
stage disease and worse survival after chemotherapy (p = 0.002). ATDC
knockdown in human bladder cancer cell lines correlated with increased
sensitivity to chemotherapy in vitro and decreased proliferation and
invasion both in vitro and in vivo in a human bladder cancer xenograft
model. To understand the mechanism of ATDC-mediated tumor formation, we
modulated ATDC expression in normal and bladder cancer cells lines. ATDC
overexpression down-regulated PTEN levels via DNA promoter methylation by
DNMT3A in both tg mouse tumors and human cell lines. IHC analysis of
ATDC, PTEN and DNMT3A expression in human bladder tumors specimens
demonstrated similar findings. ATDC was also found to bind to p53 and
inhibit p53 mediated functions. These findings establish ATDC as a novel
determinant of bladder cancer initiation, progression and resistance to
treatment which mediates tumorigenesis by down-regulation of PTEN
expression and inhibition of p53.

