Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-145 targets MUC13 and suppresses invasion and metastasis
of pancreatic cancer cells .


Background: Pancreatic cancer (PC) is an extremely fatal disease due to
late diagnosis and a lack of efficient therapy. Identification of
aberrantly expressed proteins which are functionally involved in the
pathobiology of PC is critical to achieve early diagnosis and the
development of effective therapeutic strategies. Mucins are a group of
glycoproteins that under normal conditions protect mucosal surfaces, but
have tumor promoting properties when over-expressed in neoplastic
conditions. We have previously shown that mucin 13 (MUC13) is aberrantly
overexpressed in pancreatic cancer tissues and promotes the growth and
invasion of pancreatic cancer cell lines, indicating the importance of
MUC13 in pancreatic cancer pathogenesis and the potential utilization of
MUC13 for diagnostic and therapeutic applications. Here, we report a
novel microRNA (miRNA)-mediated mechanism underlying aberrant expression
of MUC13 in pancreatic cancer. miRNAs have been implicated in cancer
initiation and progression via their ability to affect expression of
genes and proteins that regulate cell proliferation and/or cell
death.Methods: To investigate whether the expression of MUC13 is
regulated by miRNAs, we searched the MUC13 sequence for potential miRNA
binding sites using Target Scan and miRanda. In silico analysis revealed
a putative 8 mer-binding site for miRNA-145 (miR-145) in the 3UTR of
MUC13 transcript, suggesting that miR-145 may target and inhibit the
expression of MUC13. MUC13 expressing pancreatic cancer cell lines
(HPAF-II and Capan-1) were used for the study. Following transient
transfection of mature miR-145 RNAs and miR-145 inhibitors, Western
blotting and immunofluorescence techniques were used to investigate the
effects of miR-145 on MUC13 expression and on additional proteins known
to be affected by MUC13 expression. Additionally, functional studies of
the effects of miR-145 included cell proliferation, colony formation,
cell migration, and cell invasion assays.Results: We demonstrate that the
overexpression of miR-145 significantly downregulates endogenous MUC13
protein levels (by 80%). Of interest, overexpression of miR-145 inhibits
cell proliferation, clonogenicity, migration, and invasion and enhances
intercellular adhesion in pancreatic cancer cells. Exogenous expression
of miR-145 also causes a reduction of HER2, P-AKT, and PAK1 and an
increase in p53. Similar results are found when MUC13 is specifically
inhibited by shRNA directed at MUC13. Additionally, the miR-145 inhibitor
abrogated the effects induced by miR-145. Interestingly, we detected only
a low level of miR-145 in pancreatic cancer cells with high MUC13 protein
levels, suggesting an inverse association between miR-145 and MUC13
expression.Conclusions: These findings demonstrate that miR-145 is a
novel regulator of MUC13 and acts as a tumor suppressor miRNA in PC.

