Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decursin and doxorubicin are in synergy for the induction of
apoptosis via STAT3 and/or mTOR pathways in human multiple myeloma cells.


Drug resistance causes a serious limitation for the chemotherapy of
multiple myeloma. Combination cancer therapy is one of attractive
approaches to overcome drug resistance of cancer cells. In the present
study, we investigated the synergistic effect of decursin (a major
compound in Angelica gigas) and doxorubicin on the induction of apoptosis
in three human multiple myeloma cells. Concurrent treatment of decursin
and doxorubicin significantly exerted significant cytotoxicity, while
doxorubicin or decursin alone had no cytotoxic effect at physiologically
relevant concentrations in signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) positive cell lines such as U266 and RPMI8226
cells and also STAT3 negative cell line MM.1S cells. We further
demonstrated that the loss of the viability of the cells co-treated with
decursin and doxorubicin was due to the induction of apoptosis.
Combination treatment of doxorubicin and decursin enhanced the activation
of caspapse-9 and 3, the cleavage of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)
and sub G1 population compared to either drug alone in three multiple
myeloma cells. In addition, the combined treatment of doxorubicin and
decursin downregulated the phosphorylation of the mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) and its downstream S6K1 and activated the
phosphorylation of extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK) in three
multiple myeloma cells. Furthermore, the combined treatment of
doxorubicin and decursin reduced mitochondrial membrane potential,
suppressed the phosphorylation of JAK2, STAT3 and Src, activated SHP-2
and attenuated the expression of cyclind-D and survivin in STAT3 positive
U266 cells. Conversely, the broadly-acting tyrosine phosphatases
inhibitor pervanadate reversed STAT3 inactivation and also PARP cleavage
and caspase-3 activatio induced by combine treatment of doxorubicin and
decursin in U266 cells.

