Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The requirement of Runx2-dependent Akt phosphorylation in breast
cancer cell survival and metastasis.


Breast cancer is not only most commonly diagnosed in women worldwide but
its metastasis shows serious life threatening consequences. The cell
survival and mitogenesis via phosphatidyl inositol 3 kinase (PI3K) and
mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways are critical
for breast cancer cell survival, proliferation, metabolism and
metastasis. A de-regulation of osteogenic Runt-related transcription
factor-2 (Runx2) is recently implicated in mammary carcinogenesis. We
found that Runx2 differentially regulates the serine/threonine kinase Akt
phosphorylation (pAkt), a downstream effecter of PI3K signaling, in
non-tumorigenic and invasive mammary epithelial cell lines. The decline
in pAkt upon Runx2 suppression in invasive MDA-MB-231 cells was
completely abrogated by PI3K inhibitor LY294002. In contrast, the MAPK
inhibitor, U0126, showed partial restoration of pAkt upon Runx2 depletion
suggesting that Runx2-mediated crosstalk stimulates feedback mechanism
within the PI3K and MAPK signaling pathways. The expression analysis of
kinases and phosphatases functional in pAkt regulation revealed that the
decline in pAkt upon Runx2 knockdown in MDA-MB-231 cells is due to the
reduction in PI3K p85 subunit and mammalian target of rapamycin complex-2
(mTORC2). Additionally, we find altered expression of FOXO1, a downstream
molecule of PI3K/Akt signaling, due to Runx2-mediated regulation of pAkt
levels in MCF-10A and MDA-MB-231 cell lines. To examine the phenotypic
effects of Runx2 and PI3K/Akt pathway crosstalk, we evaluated the
Runx2-depleted MDA-MB-231 cells for survival under stress conditions.
These studies revealed an altered morphology coupled with increased
rounding and sub-G1 population in response to glucose- and
serum-deprivation upon Runx2 knockdown. The increase in sub-G1 population
was restored by glucose and serum re-constitution in the culture media.
An increase in Annexin V staining, decline in pAkt levels and cleavage of
caspase-3 confirmed the induction of apoptotic cell death. To understand
the Runx2-mediated regulation of PI3K/Akt signaling pathway in breast
cancer metastasis, the control or Runx2-depleted MDA-MB-231 cells were
inoculated intra-cardiacally into immunodeficient mice. The tumors at
lung and bone metastatic sites were harvested, FACS-sorted and examined
for pAkt levels. Interestingly, to this end, the in-vivo metastatic
tumor-derived Runx2 knockdown MDA-MB-231 cells showed an increase in pAkt
levels in contrast to in-vitro cultured Runx2 knockdown MDA-MB-231 cells.
The data suggests that the mechanism of pAkt activation might involve a
dynamic requirement of transcriptional control and feedback regulation
within PI3K/Akt and MAPK signaling pathways during different phases of
tumor growth in primary and metastatic microenvironment.

