Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tolfenamic acid inhibits medulloblastoma cell proliferation and
tumor growth in mice by targeting Sp1 and survivin.


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant tumor of the central
nervous system in children. MB requires intensive multimodality treatment
that often causes extensive long term side-effects. The morbidities
associated with intensive therapy for treating this malignancy are a
serious concern in children. Hence research focusing on identifying novel
agents with less toxicity is very important. Specificity protein1 (Sp1)
is a transcription factor which regulates several genes involved in cell
proliferation and cell survival. Sp1 is also known to mediate the
expression of survivin, a member of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein
family that is associated with aggressive disease and poor prognosis in
multiple human cancers. Recently we showed that Tolfenamic acid (TA), a
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) inhibits neuroblastoma cell
growth by targeting Sp1 and survivin. Strategies to target Sp1 and
transcriptional regulation of survivin for treating MB have not yet been
evaluated. The aim of the current investigation was to test the
anti-cancer activity of TA using in vitro assays and a mouse model for
MB. Human MB cells, DAOY and D283, were treated with vehicle (DMSO) or
increasing concentrations (5-20 g/ml) of TA and cell viability was
measured at 24, 48 and 72 hours post-treatment. TA inhibited MB cell
growth in a time and dose dependent manner. MB cells were treated with
vehicle (DMSO) or TA (10 or 20 g/ml) and the effect on cell apoptosis was
measured. Apoptotic cells were measured by flow cytometry (Annexin-V
staining) and caspase (3/7, 8, and 9) activity was determined using
Caspase Glo kits. TA up-regulated caspase activity and augmented the
apoptotic cell population. The expression of Sp1, c-PARP and survivin was
determined by Western blot analysis. TA significantly inhibited the
expression of Sp1, c-PARP, and survivin. Cell cycle phase distribution
was measured using flow cytometry and results revealed that TA caused
G0/G1 arrest in MB cells. For the in vivo assay, athymic nude mice were
subcutaneously injected with D283 cells and treated with TA (50 mg/kg 3
times/wk) for 4 weeks. TA treatment caused 30-40% decrease in tumor
weight and volume. Tumor tissue was subjected to immunohistochemical
analysis to evaluate the expression of Sp1 and survivin. Consistent with
in vitro results, TA-induced tumor growth inhibition in mice was
accompanied with a decrease in Sp1 and survivin expression in mice tumor
tissue. These pre-clinical data demonstrate that TA can act as an
anti-cancer agent in medulloblastoma potentially targeting Sp1 and
survivin.

