Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The human Norrin/beta-catenin signaling enhancer TSPAN12 is
expressed on colorectal tumors; evidence for cell-type specific
responsiveness to Norrin signaling in the tumor microenvironment.


Introduction. While the majority of colorectal cancers (CRC) harbor
mutations in Wnt pathway component APC, leading to constitutive pathway
activation, tumor cells remain responsive to Wnt signals arising at the
cell membrane through the interaction of extracellular Wnt ligands and
cell surface frizzled (Fz) receptors. The strength of the Wnt signal can
be modified through epigenetic modification of genes encoding for
extracellular Wnt pathway inhibitors that produce proteins released into
the tumor microenvironment. Norrin is an extracellular molecule that
binds to Fz4 and induces beta-catenin (canonical Wnt) signaling. This
signaling is also dependent on the expression of TSPAN12 which functions
as a signal enhancer. Norrin promotes angiogenesis in the eye but the
role of Norrin signaling in colorectal cancer is not known. In this study
we have examined the expression of Norrin pathway components in CRC and
other cell types in the tumor microenvironment.Methods. Human CRC and
normal colon tissues, including mucosa, stroma and endothelial cells were
analyzed by immunohistochemistry and reversed transcription polymerase
chain reaction in order to define expression of Norrin, Fz4 and TSPAN12.
In vitro, endothelial cells were grown on collagen in the presence of CRC
cell line-produced conditioned medium (CM), with or without Norrin
blocking antibody.Results. Norrin and Fz4 were expressed in normal
colonic mucosa, CRC, and endothelial cells. TSPAN12, the component that
usually determines what tissues will respond to the Norrin signaling, was
expressed in CRC but not in normal colonic mucosa. Low amounts of
endothelial cell TSPAN12 in tissue sections was difficult to quantitate
due to insufficient sensitivity of the method. In vitro, elongation of
endothelial cells treated with CM from CRC cell lines was partly
abrogated by Norrin blocking antibodies, suggesting responsiveness of
these cells to Norrin-mediated signals.Conclusions. Critical components
of the Norrin/beta-catenin pathway are expressed in CRC and the colon
tumor microenvironment but TSPAN12, the signal enhancer that promotes
signaling through this pathway is found on CRC cells and not expressed on
normal mucosa In vitro evidence suggests that Norrin signaling also
affects endothelial cells.Implications. The distribution of TSPAN
expression in the CRC tumor microenvironment, and the effect of Norrin
blocking antibodies on CRC CM-treated endothelial cells in vitro, suggest
that the predominant roles of Norrin are a direct action on CRC and
potentially also promotion of tumor angiogenesis.

