Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor phenotype of tumor-associated macrophages are induced
by COX-2 inhibition via the up-regulation of IFN-.


BACKGROUNDS AND AIMSMacrophages are a major constituent in tumor stroma,
and macrophages infiltrating tumors are called tumor-associated
macrophages (TAMs). Macrophages have a functional plasticity depending on
the stimuli from microenvironment. M1 macrophages are induced by Th1
cytokines, and exerted anti-tumor function. On the contrary, M2
macrophages are induced by Th2 cytokines, and showed pro-tumor phenotype.
TAMs are considered to shift from M1 to M2 during tumor progression.
However, the mechanism for this M1/M2 switch is poorly understood.
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)/PGE2 pathway is up-regulated in a variety of
cancers including colorectal cancers, and promotes the cancer
progression. COX-2 inhibition shows anti-tumor effect in familial
adenomatous polyposis patients and in Apc knockout mice. Although COX-2
inhibition affects cytokine expression profiles and tumor
microenvironments, the relationship between COX-2/PGE2 pathway and TAM
phenotypes remains unclear.The aim of this study is to uncover the
effects of COX-2 inhibition on TAM phenotypes and cytokine
expression.METHODSCytokine expression and the phenotypes of TAMs
infiltrating the stroma of ApcMin/+ mouse polyps were examined by qRT-PCR
and immunohistochemistry in terms of M1 and M2 dichotomy. Selective COX-2
inhibitor was administered to ApcMin/+ mice, and the effects of COX-2
inhibition on cytokine expression and TAM phenotypes were evaluated.
Furthermore, by using mouse peritoneal macrophages, the direct effects of
COX-2 inhibitor on Th1- or Th2-related cytokines on macrophage phenotypes
were examined.RESULTSTh2 cytokines were predominant in ApcMin/+ mouse
polyps, and TAMs were polarized to M2. Selective COX-2 inhibitor skewed
TAM phenotypes from M2 to M1, accompanied by tumor regression in ApcMin/+
mice. Concomitantly, the expression of M1-related cytokine IFN- was
significantly up-regulated by COX-2 inhibition, although that of
M2-related cytokines IL-4, IL-13, and IL-10 was not significantly
altered. Administration of COX-2 inhibitor alone was insufficient to
alter the phenotypes of mouse peritoneal macrophages from M2 to M1.
However, IFN- treatment polarized the macrophage phenotypes from M2 to M1
even in the presence of M2-related cytokines IL-4, IL-13, and
IL10.CONCLUSIONSOur results suggest that COX-2 inhibition induced
anti-tumor (M1) phenotype of TAMs via the up-regulation of IFN-, and
subsequently, may suppress intestinal tumor progression in ApcMin/+ mouse
polyps.

