Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LRP5: a potential therapeutic target in triple-negative breast
cancer.


Background: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is associated with poor
prognosis, only partial response to chemotherapy and lack of clinically
established targeted therapies [1]. A deregulation of the Wnt signaling
pathway has been described in breast cancers, particularly in TNBC [26].
Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related proteins 5 and 6 (LRP5 and LRP6)
serve as Wnt co-receptors for the canonical beta-catenin pathway. An
overexpression of LRP6 has been reported to enhance Wnt signaling
favoring in vitro cell proliferation and in vivo mammary gland
hyperplasia and tumor growth [5,7,8]. LRP6 has been claimed to be a
potential TNBC therapeutic target [5]. Material and Methods: RNA
microarray analysis and reverse phase protein array were performed on 154
samples including biopsies of the various subclasses of breast cancer.
MDA-MB-468 and HCC38 cell lines were defined as the most representative
in vitro models of the Wnt pathway status found in TNBC biopsies. In
order to study the functions of LRP5 or LRP6 in TNBC, we examined in
these cell lines the effects of their depletions using RNAi technology on
tumorigenesis and on the Wnt3a-induced signaling pathway. Results: Our
transcriptomic and proteomic data revealed that both LRP5 and LRP6 are
overexpressed in TNBC compared to the other breast cancer subtypes i.e.
HER2+/ER-, luminal A and luminal B. Our in vitro studies indicated that
the transcriptional activity of beta-catenin/Tcf was strongly reduced
when LRP6 was silenced and to a lesser extend when LRP5 was depleted. In
accordance with these results, the expression of AXIN2 and other newly
identified Wnt target genes, was mainly down-regulated in cells silenced
for LRP6. LRP5 and LRP6 knockdown impaired colony formation in soft agar
and weakly decreased the number of mammospheres. The inhibition of cell
viability observed after LRP5 depletion was the consequence of a
programmed cell death as revealed by the increase of annexin V-positive
cells, the activation of initiator and effector caspases (8,9,3/7) and
the cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. On the contrary, LRP6
depletion inhibited cell viability without promoting apoptosis as
reported by others [5]. Conclusions: Altogether our data demonstrate that
in TNBC cell lines, LRP5 or LRP6 silencing has an impact on Wnt
signaling, cancer stem cell-like activity, tumorigenic properties and
cell viability. Most importantly, LRP5 silencing promotes apoptosis,
suggesting that LRP5 could represent a promising therapeutic candidate to
target in TNBC.

