Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of NRSF/REST by miR-217; Implications during pancreatic
acinar ductal trans-differentiation.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is believed to arise from exocrine
acinar cells following trans-differentiation to cells with a more
epithelial phenotype. A pancreas enriched cluster of miRNAs
(miR-216a/b-217) is located on chromosomes 2 and 11 in humans and mice,
respectively. These miRNAs are significantly reduced in patient's tumor
specimens and during tumor progression in a transgenic mouse model of
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. To investigate a role for miR-216/-217
during acinar ductal trans-differentiation, we used a model by which
primary mouse pancreatic acini trans-differentiate into epithelial-like
cells when cultured on matrigel. Over a 4 day culture period, the acini
develop an epithelial morphology and display reduced mRNA expression of
the acinar marker amylase, increased expression of the epithelial marker
cytokeratin-19 (KRT19) and reduced expression miR-216/-217. Forced
expression of miR-217 using a lentiviral vector (LV) decreased KRT19 mRNA
expression compared to the empty vector control treated cells on day 4 of
the trans-differentiation. To implicate miR-217 targets in regulating
acinar trans-differentiation, we considered REST/NRSF, a transcriptional
repressor of neuronal genes in non-neuronal tissues. REST mRNA expression
increased during the 4 day trans-differentiation implying regulation of
REST by miR-217. Regulation of REST by miR-217 was validated using a
luciferase assay and western blotting. Furthermore, two REST target genes
were upregulated by the miR-217 LV on day 4 of the trans-differentiation.
Studies are ongoing to determine if this increase in expression results
from miR-217 suppressing REST protein levels. Additionally, miR-217 LV
infection of 3 pancreas cancer cell lines reduced REST protein and caused
significant cell death. Our current focus is to establish a link between
miR-217 suppression of REST and cell death. We report a connection
between reduced miR-217 in several pancreas model systems. We hypothesize
a novel role for REST in pancreas homeostasis and cancer.

