Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AY4, an agonistic anti-death receptor 4 monoclonal antibody,
induces death receptor 4-mediated apoptotic cell death in anaplastic
thyroid cancer cells via downregulation of Bcl-xL with reactive oxygen
species generation.


Background: Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is an aggressive human
tumor with a median survival of 6 months. We previously developed an
agonistic anti-death receptor 4 monoclonal antibody, AY4, and
demonstrated the anti-tumor effects of AY4 in head and neck cancer cells.
Presently, we show that ATC cells are sensitive to AY4 and that the
sensitivity correlates with reduced expression level of Bcl-xL and
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation.Methods: The effects of AY4 in
Thyroid cell lines (C-643, U-HTH7, HTH83 and SW1736) was studied on
apoptosis using MTT assy, Annexin V assay and Western blot analysis and
was examed on the production of reactive oxygen species with DCFDA
staining. HTH83 and C-643 cells were transfected with Bcl-xL siRNA using
Lipofectamine 2000.Results: AY4 induced cell death of C-643, U-HTH 7,
HTH83, and SW1736 cells. To elucidate the role of ROS generation in
AY4-induced apoptosis of ATC cells, U-HTH 7 and SW1736 cells were
pretreated with an anti-oxidant (N-acetyl-cysteine, NAC) followed by AY4
treatment. The cell death was blocked by NAC. AY4-induced cell death was
accompanied by the down-regulation of the anti-apoptotic protein, Bcl-xL.
To examine the link between the apoptotic response and Bcl-xL protein
expression, U-HTH 7 cells were transfected with Bcl-xL plasmid. The
consequence of the over-expression of Bcl-xL appeared to decrease
AY4-mediated cell death by blocking ROS generation in U-HTH 7 cells. In
contrast, Bcl-xL knock-down using small interfering RNA of Bcl-xL
enhanced AY4 sensitivity in HTH83 and C-643 cells, and rendered the cells
sensitive to AY4-induced cell death..Conclusion: The results support the
conclusion that the expression level of Bcl-xL is important in the
AY4-induced apoptosis of ATC cells through ROS generation. AY4 may be a
promising tool for ATC therapy.Keywords: Death receptor 4, agonistic
antibody, apoptosis, ROS, anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC)

