Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the role of N-terminal protein methylation in colon
cancer progression.


We have recently identified the first mammalian N-terminal
methyltransferase, NRMT. NRMT is a highly conserved, ubiquitously
expressed nuclear enzyme that is predicted to methylate more than 300
target proteins, including the proven targets Retinoblastoma Protein
(RB), DDB2, and the oncoprotein SET. N-terminal methylation has been
shown to regulate protein-DNA interactions and has also been implicated
in regulating protein stability. Multiple microarray analyses have shown
that NRMT is overexpressed in human colon cancer, and our preliminary
data indicate the more aggressive the cancer, the higher the NRMT
expression. However, there are currently no commercially available
inhibitors specific for this enzyme and very little is known about the
downstream signaling consequences of NRMT misregulation. We have used in
silico screening of the ZINC small molecule library to identify potential
NRMT-specific inhibitors. Screening of the top 100 candidates produced 10
compounds that could inhibit NRMT methyltransferase activity in vitro.
The top compound of these 10 can also inhibit NRMT methyltransferase
activity in cell culture and specifically stops the growth of colon
cancer cell lines that have high NRMT expression. We are currently
working to optimize this small molecule inhibitor for stability and
solubility, understand its downstream signaling consequences, and test
its efficacy in a murine model system. We are especially interested in
the potential of NRMT inhibitors as a treatment for patients with mutant
kRAS. These patients are often insensitive to anti-EGFR therapy, but
oncogenic RAS seems to require functional RB. Therefore, impairment of
NRMT activity could also impair oncogenic RAS signaling through
destabilization of RB. Data from this study will enhance our
understanding of how colon cancer develops and could lead to novel
treatments for the disease.

