Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nelarabine front-line therapy for adult T-lymphoblastic
leukemia/lymphoma (T-LBL/ALL): preliminary results of a single center
experience.


Background. Precursor T cell LBL/ALL occurs most frequently in late
childhood, adolescence, and young adulthood, with a 2:1 male
predominance; it comprises 15 and 25 percent of childhood and adult ALL,
respectively, and 2 percent of adult non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Nelarabine is
an anticancer prodrug of arabinofuranosylguanine (ara-G); it inhibits DNA
synthesis and leads to high molecular weight DNA fragmentation and cell
death. Nelarabine has showed relevant efficacy in phase II clinical
trials, both in pediatric and in adult LBL/ALLpopulations.Design and
Methods. We report clinical outcome results of 9 newly diagnosed and
younger than 60 years T-ALL patients (median age 29 years, range 22-45
years, 3/6 M/F, 8 T-ALL, 1 T-LBL) treated according to pediatric-like
adapted schedule. Cytogentics data and molecular biologic features will
be provided on site. Induction cycle included Vincristine, daunoblastine,
L-asparaginase and Prednisone. After induction, all the patients received
consolidation therapy with cyclophosphamyde, L-asparaginase, Cytarabine
and 6-Mercaptopurine. Subsequently all the patients receveid Nelarabine
1500 mg/sqm (days 1-3-5 every 21) for two cycles. All the patients shared
the same strategy for intensification, which consisted in allogenic stem
cell transplantation, if available, or additional courses of
consolidation chemotherapy.Durations of complete remission (CR) and
overall survival (OS) were estimated according to the Kaplan-Meier
method. The CR duration was dated from start of CR to first evidence of
disease recurrence.Results. After a single induction course, 9/9 patients
obtained a CR (100%). Eight patients underwent an allogenic bone marrow
transplantation. After a median follow-up of 24 months, 7/9 patients
(78%) are alive in CR. The median CR duration and OS were 13.4 and 24.4
months, respectively. Neurological toxicity of grade 3 has not been
reported. We did not observe grade 3-4 haematological
toxicity.Conclusion. Nelarabine is a promising drug, which induces a
remarkable complete remission rate at the expense of a very low and
manageable toxicity.Acknowledgments. Work supported by European
LeukemiaNet, AIRC, AIL, PRIN, University of Bologna and BolognAIL.

