Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An artificial zinc finger glycosylase causes site-directed DNA
damages and specifically kills the targeted cancer cells via synthetic
lethality.


Synthetic lethality is a new developed therapy, in which PARP inhibitor
selectively kills BRCA-deficient cancer cells. However, BRCA-deficiency
only accounts for a small fraction of cancers. We are interesting in
applying synthetic lethal approach to target all cancers regardless BRCA
statute. As single strand break (SSB) is the start point of the synthetic
lethal, we hypothesized the targeted induction of persistent SSB at tumor
unique sequences (cancer somatic mutation sequences) with assistance of
synthetic lethality would specifically kill cancer cells. To test this
principle we have constructed a six-zinc finger/mutant uracil glycosylase
fusion protein (zinc finger glycosylase, ZFG). Upon binding to a specific
18-bp sequence by ZFG six-zinc binding domain, the mutated uracil
glycosylase will remove a cytosine residue leaving an apyrimidinic site,
which is subsequently convert to SSB by AP-endonuclease cleavage. The SSB
lesion is capable of being repaired, however, upon repair, the zinc
finger binding site is restored and the site-specific ZFG will again
initiate a lesion leading to a persistent SSB. We have transfected ZFGs
into BRCA2-deficient human breast cancer MCF7 and lung cancer A549 cells,
the cells were then treated with PARP inhibitors. We observed increased
killing of the ZFG-transfected cells compare to mock-transfected
controls. Since BRCA2 deficiency causes homologous recombination (HR)
repair defect, we next sought to determine if inhibitors of HR is a
suitable substitute for loss of BRCA2. We are testing this concept by
transfection of ZFG to BRCA2-proficient MCF7 cells with the treatment of
combination of PARP and HR inhibitors, to determine whether 1.
Combination of PARP and HR inhibitors treatments can achieve synthetic
lethality; 2. ZFG constructs can enhance synthetic lethality. We conclude
ZFG coupled with synthetic lethality is a promising direction towards the
development of cancer specifically treatment.

