Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High expression of Krppel-Like Factor 4 (KLF4) and its regulation
by Yin Yang 1 (YY1) in non-Hodgkin's B-cell lymphomas: clinical
implication.


Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL) is a group of different kinds of cancer rising
on the basis of monoclonal expansion of B and T Lymphocytes. Over 90% of
NHL has its origin in B lymphocytes. The causes of NHL are poorly
understood. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), the most common
lymphoma in adults, and Burkitt s lymphoma are highly aggressive forms of
NHL. It is of interest to characterize diverse transcription factors that
are involved in the development of lymphoid progenitors because of their
potential therapeutic applications. Krppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) is a
member of the KLF zinc-finger-containing transcription factor family.
Evidence has established KLF4 as an oncogene or a tumor suppressor.
Recent studies indicated the involvement of KLF4 in the regulation of
apoptosis, proliferation, and differentiation of B cells and B-cell
malignancies. By using a Tissue Micro Array (TMA), we have recently shown
that NHLs have high expression of KLF4. The underlying mechanisms of the
regulation of the expression of KLF4 in NHL are not yet understood. We
have performed a bioinformatics analysis of the KLF4 promoter region and
found that the transcription factor Yin Yang 1 (YY1) has putative binding
sites on the KLF4 promoter, thus, hypothesizing the potential regulation
of KLF4 by means of YY1 in NHL. This hypothesis was tested by various
means: (1) In silico analyses by the CHIP (Chromatin Immunoprecipitation)
experimental technique demonstrated that the KLF4 promoter contains four
putative binding sites for YY1. We confirmed that the -126 site was a
binding site for YY1 by CHIP analysis. (2) Using a reporter system with
the KLF4 promoter, we have found that mutation of the putative binding
site for YY1 (at -126) inhibited KLF4 expression and (3) Treatment of the
Ramos cell line with siRNA for YY1 resulted in dowregulation of KLF4
expression. The clinical implication of YY1 in the transcriptional
regulation of KLF4 was correlated by IHC in a TMA with 73 B-NHL samples
and by western in B-NHL cell lines. The analyses showed that, in all of
the tumor tissues, KLF4 expression had a positive correlation with YY1
expression and this correlation was markedly observed in the Burkitt
subtype. Overall, our findings demonstrated that KLF4 can be
transcriptionally regulated by YY1 in B-NHL. Previous findings
demonstrated that YY1 regulates drug resistance in many cancers including
B-NHL. Hence, the present findings suggest that both KLF4 and YY1 are
prognostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets in NHL.

