Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting of PDGFR with a novel RNA-aptamer inhibits glioma cell
survival, growth, invasion and enhances antitumor activity of an
anti-EGFR aptamer.


The platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) is an important
member of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) family. The activation of PDGFR
signaling pathway induces various cellular responses, including cell
proliferation, migration and angiogenesis. Preclinical studies have not
only shown a central role for the overexpression and deregulated
activation of PDGFR-mediated signaling in development of many tumors,
including glioma, and the maintenance of the malignant phenotype, but
have also demonstrated that the targeted inhibition of signaling cascades
has significant anti-cancer effects. Also, several studies have reported
that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) cross-talk with PDGFR
potentially leads to malignant glioblastoma resistance to anti-EGFR
therapy and that EGFR transactivation contributes importantly to PDGFR
signal transduction. Overall these data indicate that PDGFR represents a
valuable target for tumor therapeutic development. A number of tyrosine
kinase inhibitors under development as anti-tumor agents have been found
to inhibit the PDGFR. However, these compounds are not selective and have
multiple tyrosine kinase targets. Aptamers are single-stranded
oligonucleotides able to bind at high affinity to specific protein by
folding into complex tertiary structures. Their high specificity and low
toxicity render them a valid alternative to antibodies for in vivo
targeted recognition as therapeutics or delivery agents for
nanoparticles, small interfering RNAs, chemotherapeutics and molecular
imaging probes. Here we report a novel PDGFR-specific antagonist that is
a nuclease resistant RNA-aptamer, named Gint4. The aptamer, generated by
cell-SELEX on glioma U87MG cells, specifically binds to the extracellular
domain of the human PDGFR (Kd, 10.4 nM). Following binding, the aptamer
inhibits ligand-dependent receptor activation, including Erk and Akt
phosphorylation, cell growth, migration and invasion. Further, we
demonstrated that stimulation of glioma cells with the PDGFR specific
ligand, PDGF-BB, caused EGFR transactivation that was hampered by
treatment with both the Gint4 aptamer as well as with CL4, the RNA
aptamer that we have previously generated as an high affinity inhibitor
of EGFR. Interestingly, the combined treatment of glioma cells with the
anti-PDGFR Gint.4 aptamer together with the anti-EGFR CL4 aptamer
strongly cooperates in inducing inhibition of cell survival and growth.
Moreover, we demonstrated that Gint4 rapidly and specifically
internalizes within the target cells thus it can be used as cargo for
tissue specific internalization.

