Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prolidase directly binds and activates epidermal growth factor
receptor and stimulates downstream signaling.


Prolidase, also known as Xaa-Pro dipeptidase or peptidase D (PEPD), is a
ubiquitously expressed enzyme that hydrolyzes dipeptides with proline or
hydroxyproline at the carboxy terminus. Unexpectedly, we have found that
recombinant human PEPD directly binds and activates epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), and that EGFR activation by PEPD in turn leads to
activation of multiple signaling molecules downstream of EGFR, including
but may not be limited to AKT, ERK and STAT3. EGFR is a cell surface
receptor that plays a major role in a variety of cellular responses, and
EGFR activation is known to result in increase in DNA synthesis, cell
growth, cell proliferation and cell migration, which perhaps are most
clearly demonstrated in cancer cells. The ability of PEPD to activate
EGFR signaling is neither cell-specific nor dependent on its enzymatic
activity; in the latter case, an enzymatically inactive PEPD mutant was
similarly effective in activating EGFR, AKT, ERK and STAT3. PEPD is also
a novel inducer of cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2), known to play an important
role in cancer, inflammation and other diseases, but Cox-2 induction by
PEPD also depends on EGFR activation. In line with the pro-survival and
pro-proliferation activities of EGFR and Cox-2, PEPD stimulates cell
proliferation and DNA synthesis in cultured cells. However, PEPD could
activate EGFR only when it was present in the extracellular space, as
forced expression of human PEPD via transient gene transfection failed to
activate EGFR and the downstream signaling proteins. This result is
nonetheless consistent with EGFR being a cell surface receptor. Although
PEPD is normally a cytosolic protein, it is apparently released from
injured cells and tissues in vivo, and such release appears to result in
EGFR activation and activation of its downstream signals. PEPD differs
from all known EGFR ligands in that it does not possess an epidermal
growth factor (EGF) motif and is not synthesized as a transmembrane
precursor. Indeed, there are several notable differences between PEPD and
EGF with regard to binding and activation of EGFR and activation of
downstream signaling molecules. In conclusion, PEPD is a new ligand of
EGFR and presents a novel mechanism of EGFR activation.

