Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic changes in breast cancer cells associated with acquired
Tamoxifen resistance.


Estrogen receptor (ER) status remains one of the most important breast
cancer diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers. Roughly two-thirds of all
breast cancers are ER-positive and can be treated with the anti-estrogen,
Tamoxifen, however resistance occurs in 33% of women who take the drug
for more than 5 years.MCF-7 breast cancer cells were previously cultured
with 1 uM Tamoxifen, and after 6 months the clonal lines TMX2-11 and
TMX2-28 with acquired resistance were isolated. TMX2-28 lost ER- gene
expression while a second clonal line, TMX2-11, did not. TMX2-28 cells
are highly invasive in vitro, in contrast to TMX2-11 and the parent cell
line, MCF-7.Studies of endocrine resistance and global gene expression in
Tamoxifen-resistant cell cultures and human tumors have detected
alterations in numerous pathways including ER-signaling, growth factor
receptor signaling, cell cycle, and apoptosis. Aberrant DNA promoter
methylation is a major epigenetic mechanism affecting gene expression in
cancer. Our focus is on its role in Tamoxifen resistance.
Hypermethylation of normally unmethylated cytosines in CpG-rich promoter
regions frequently results in gene silencing, while hypomethylation in
CpGs outside promoter regions leads to genetic instability.To develop a
broad understanding of Tamoxifen resistance and to identify novel
pathways and targets of aberrant methylation, DNA from MCF-7, TMX2-11,
and TMX2-28 was analyzed using the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip.
The three cell lines have similar hypermethylation patterns in 306,000
CpG sites and similar hypomethylation patterns in 132,000 CpG sites
across the genome. A subset of CpG sites was identified where the two
Tamoxifen-selected lines share a methylation pattern distinct from the
MCF-7 parent line. When normalized to MCF-7, TMX2-11 and TMX2-28 share
722 hypermethylated and 65 hypomethylated CpG sites in the promoter
region encompassing 539 and 55 genes respectively. Pathway analysis
indicates the hypermethylated genes are involved in processes relevant to
acquired Tamoxifen resistance. These pathways include cell signaling,
adhesion, transcriptional activation and repression, differentiation,
proliferation, and apoptosis.Ongoing studies on a subset of the genes
found differentially methylated between parental and Tamoxifen-selected
cell lines are aimed at confirming methylation findings and examining
gene expression. Additionally, the cells will be treated with the
demethylating agent 5-aza-deoxycitidine to determine whether reversal of
the hypermethylation restores Tamoxifen sensitivity. Greater knowledge of
the molecular modifications accompanying Tamoxifen-resistance is needed,
as it will lead to discovery of new therapeutic targets and improved
treatment, possibly allowing prediction of resistance from biopsy DNA.

