Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF-beta induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition is
attenuated when the MNK/eIF4E pathway is functionally impaired.


The epithelial-mesenchymal-like transition (EMT) is a process enabling
epithelial cells to gain the motile characteristics of mesenchymal cells,
in a manner resembling metastasis. TGF-beta, via well-defined
transcriptional mechanisms, is considered a master regulator of EMT.
However, the idea that TGF-beta can regulate the translational machinery
to drive EMT remains largely unexplored. The eukaryotic translation
initiation factor eIF4E is known to be overexpressed in breast cancer,
has been linked to increased invasiveness, and is a promising target for
the treatment of breast cancer. Our hypothesis is that phosphorylation of
eIF4E stimulated by TGF-beta is required for inducing EMT and metastasis
in breast cancer. Our novel preliminary data show that TGF-beta can
stimulate eIF4E phosphorylation as normal mammary epithelial cells become
mesenchymal. Silencing of eIF4E attenuates molecular and behavioral
changes associated with EMT. Moreover, decreasing eIF4E levels can impair
TGF-beta induced migration and invasion of ErbB2-expressing breast cancer
cells. In keeping with a role of phosphorylated eIF4E in driving the
metastatic phenotype, we show that chemically and genetically inhibiting
the eIF4E kinase MNK1 attenuates TGF-beta-stimulated EMT. We hypothesized
that the expression of master regulators of EMT could be restricted when
the eIF4E/MNK pathway is functionally impaired, which prompted us to look
at the expression of Twist and Snail in TGF-beta treated eIF4E- and MNK-
silenced cells. Our data shows that TGF-beta-induced Snail protein
expression, but not mRNA level, is repressed when the MNK/eIF4E pathway
is functionally impaired. Our results indicate that MNK and eIF4E are
essential for EMT and suggest that therapeutic inhibition of MNK/eIF4E
pathway may be a useful strategy for the control of tumor invasion and
metastasis.

