Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translating biospecimen science research results to improved
biospecimen practices.


Cancer tissues and blood are collected, processed and stored in different
ways, across the country and across the world. Biospecimen Science is the
study of how different methods of biospecimen collection, processing, and
storage affect downstream analysis. The NCI Biospecimen Research Network
(BRN) program sponsors, conducts, and collaborates on Biospecimen Science
research to better understand how biospecimen pre-analytical factors
influence the molecular integrity of biospecimens, and in turn, how such
variation affects the reproducibility of research results. New data on
how pre-analytical variation affects molecular integrity will support
best practice Standard Operating Procedures for research and clinical
trials biospecimens.This presentation will focus on results from the
first phase of the BRN program and current efforts to translate research
results to evidence-based biospecimen practices. A summary of research
results will be presented from several research studies which have
performed systematic perturbations of blood and tissue collection and
processing procedures, with subsequent molecular analysis. We will also
present an overview of the Biospecimen Research Database (BRD;
https://brd.nci.nih.gov), developed to improve access to the literature
in Biospecimen Science. The BRD is a free and publicly accessible
web-based database that currently contains over 1500 review and research
articles covering a broad range of topics spanning the biospecimen
lifecycle. Articles are meticulously categorized and annotated by a team
of Ph.D. level scientists according to the type of biospecimen and
technology platform used, the experimental variables investigated, and
many other parameters. Progress will be described on a new approach to
perform meta-analyses of the literature evidence related to different
tissue preservation methodologies, such as freezing and temperature
storage methods and formalin fixation and paraffin embedding. In
addition, we will describe current progress on the development of
evidence-based biospecimen practices based on BRN research results,
literature evidence, and expert input.

