Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating MMP contribution to pre-metastatic niche formation.


Metastasis, the fatal progression of solid malignancies, consists of a
complex and multistep process characterized by a series of ordered
biological events. One step in this process occurs when stromal
microenvironmental changes take place at secondary sites before the
arrival of tumor cells. These modified tissue-specific sites are induced
by signals from the primary tumor and further supported by recruitment of
progenitor bone marrow derived cells and are commonly referred to as
pre-metastatic niches. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are crucially
involved in many pathological processes including tumor invasion and
metastasis. Our goal is to determine the roles of MMPs in generation of a
pre-metastatic niche in different target organs, specifically the lung
and liver. Using an MMP proteolytic beacon capable of detecting MMP
activity in situ, we observed increased signal in lungs of mice carrying
pre-metastatic mammary tumors. In a LLC-implantation model, qPCR was used
to profile MMP expression in pre-metastatic tissues versus controls and
indicated that in the lung, MMP9 (gelatinase B) was increased. Further,
we have developed staining and quantitation techniques to define
pre-metastatic niches. These were also based on molecules identified by
Kaplan et al such as VEGFR-1, VLA-4 and fibronectin. Immunofluorescent
analysis of mouse lungs subcutaneously implanted with LLC cells
demonstrated clusters of cells that positively co-stained for VEGFR-1,
VLA-4 and Fibronectin. We also tested whether soluble factors from
metastatic cell lines could induce changes in lungs of mice. Analysis of
MMP-9 levels as well as localization of the known markers both failed to
show any significant changes in the lung, leading us to believe that the
presence of a primary tumor in vivo is required for pre-metastatic niche
formation. We are now working with the well-characterized metastatic
mammary tumor line 4T1 to test whether the changes we have seen with LLC
cells are reproducible in a different cancer type and mouse strain.
Additionally we are testing whether the absence of host MMP-9 affects the
formation of a pre-metastatic niche in either model. The increased
presence of MMP-9 and mentioned factors before tumor cell arrival could
indicate potential roles and markers for metastatic spread, possibly
leading to potential therapeutics for preventing metastasis and
increasing overall cancer survival.Egeblad et al. Journal of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Vol. 36, No. 1, January 2002, pp. 128-137Kaplan et
el. Nature, Vol. 438, No. 7069, December 2005, pp 820-827

