Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional upregulation of NADPH Oxidase 1 (NOX1) by
Interleukin-4 (IL-4) enhances tumor cell proliferation and reactive
oxygen production in human colon cancer cells.


Reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced by the family of NOX genes play a
critical role in cytokine-mediated signal transduction in both normal and
tumor tissue. Human colon cancers, compared to adjacent normal tissues,
overexpress NOX1; and premalignant, chronic inflammatory conditions of
the colon (ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease) are associated with NOX
up-regulation. However, a mechanistic understanding of how cytokines
might increase ROS production and NOX1 expression in colon cancer remains
unclear. We screened a panel of human colon cancer cells with a series of
pro-inflammatory cytokines to evaluate their effects on NOX1 expression
and function, as well as cell proliferation. Cytokine IL-4 significantly
up-regulated NOX1 expression (but not other members of the NOX family) in
HT-29 (as well as other) colon cancer cells while increasing O2
production and growth; decreasing NOX1 expression by 90% in stable,
NOX1-shRNA-containing HT-29 clones blocked IL-4-related enhancement of
cell growth, NOX1 expression, or ROS production. IL-4 up-regulated and
activated the GATA3 transcription factor in addition to the Jak1-Stat6
pathway in HT-29 cells. GATA3 played an important role in the
transcriptional up-regulation of NOX1 by IL-4; RNAi-mediated silencing of
Jak1, Stat6, or GATA3 expression attenuated IL-4-induced NOX1
up-regulation in HT-29 cells. Transient overexpression of GATA3 cDNA in
the presence of IL-4 resulted in a further increase in NOX1 expression
with enhanced ROS activity beyond IL-4 treatment alone. Using an 1139 bp
segment of upstream sequence from the transcription start site of the
human NOX1 promoter as a promoter-reporter assay, we found that IL-4
treatment increased NOX1 reporter gene transcription 4-fold in HT-29
cells. DNA sequence analysis of this upstream promoter suggests the
presence of four putative GATA3 binding, cis-active elements that may be
sufficient for maximal IL-4-enahanced activity of the NOX1 promoter.
Ongoing mutational analysis of the NOX1 promoter will further define the
role of GATA3 in the control of NOX1 transcriptional up-regulation by
IL-4. In summary, our results support a role for IL-4 in producing a
NOX1-dependent pro-oxidant milieu that could increase the growth
potential of colon cancer cells.

