Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel mouse models to investigate the molecular pathogenesis of
metastatic osteosarcoma.


Background: Osteosarcoma (OS) is the primary bone tumor in the pediatric
population with the main determinant for patient prognosis being the
presence of metastatic disease. Approximately 25-30% of patients will
present with metastatic osteosarcoma. Patients with metastatic disease
have long-term survival rates often Background: Osteosarcoma (OS) is the
primary bone tumor in the pediatric population with the main determinant
for patient prognosis being the presence of metastatic disease.
Approximately 25-30% of patients will present with metastatic
osteosarcoma. Patients with metastatic disease have long-term survival
rates often <20%.Objectives: We hypothesize that the molecular
pathogenesis of metastatic osteosarcoma is different from localized
disease. We intend this work to provide a relevant, endogenous model of
metastatic OS that can be utilized to advance our understanding of the
molecular pathogenesis of the disease, insights into novel therapeutic
targets and as a pre-clinical model for investigating the efficacy of
novel therapies.Design: We have developed a tissue-specific alteration of
the p53 status by using osteoblast specific Cre-recombinase expressing
mice to generate progeny that spontaneously form endogenous
osteosarcomas. Through the use of a mutated, gain of function form of
p53, shown previously to be associated with metastatic disease, we have
developed a novel immunocompetent model that significantly enhances the
endogenous development of metastatic OS.Results: Tumor analysis has
revealed genetic insights in the metastatic progression of osteosarcoma.
These include the significant downregulation of Wnt-signaling inhibitors,
such as NKD2, APCDD1 and Wnt5a in the metastatic tumors. Functional
studies have determined that overexpression of NKD2, also downregulated
in several human OS metastatic cell lines, in metastatic mouse OS cell
lines leads to a significant decrease in metastatic lung lesions upon
transplantation into immunodeficient mice. Possible NKD2-dependent
functions include regulation of not only the Wnt signaling pathway, but
also blood vessel formation, regulation of cell migration and cell
adhesion.We have also noted the dysregulation of several critical
microRNAs in metastatic OS, including the upregulation of mir-130b in the
metastatic lesions. This particular microRNA has recently been shown to
have clinical correlation in Ewing's sarcoma, with higher levels of tumor
mir-130b having a significantly poorer outcome. We are actively pursuing
the role of this (and other) microRNA(s) in the molecular pathogenesis of
metastatic osteosarcoma.Conclusion: This novel model has enabled valuable
molecular insights into the development and progression of metastatic OS
that can lead to the identification of novel therapeutic targets.

