Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of nuclear telomere architecture in the transition of
myelodysplastic syndromes to acute myeloid leukemias.


Myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDS) are a group of disorders characterized by
cytopenias, with a propensity for evolution into Acute Myeloid Leukemias
(AML). This transformation is driven by genomic instability and
epigenetic events. However, how genomic instability occurs in this
disease remains unknown. Telomere dysfunction might be the generator of
genomic instability leading to cytopenias and disease progression.
Despite several studies demonstrating the role of telomere dysfunction in
the occurrence of hematopoietic malignancies, little is known about their
role in the evolution of MDS to AML/MDS. Our preliminary data allowed us
to define three-dimensional nuclear telomeric profiles on the basis of
telomere numbers, telomeric aggregates, telomere signal intensities,
nuclear volumes, and nuclear telomere distribution. Using these
parameters, we blindly subdivided the MDS patients into nine subgroups
and the AML patients into six subgroups. We showed distinct telomeric
profiles specific to patients with MDS, AML, and suggested for the first
time a chronological and evolutionary process of telomere dysfunction in
both diseases and the transformation of MDS to AML. To validate the
clinical significance of 3D telomere profiling of MDS-patients and
AML-patients, we are studying new patient cohorts and patients
progressing from MDS to AML over time. Such a longitudinal study will
allow for precise 3D telomeric profiling during disease progression.
Since transformation of MDS to AML can occur over a long period of time,
we are also studying disease progression from MDS to AML using a mouse
model (C57BL/6-Tg(Vava1-NUP98/HOXD13)G2Apla/J). These mice will transform
their MDS-disease to AML disease in a time period of in between 4-14
months. Therefore, we are following the mice monthly up to 14 months. Our
study will allow us to gain an understanding of the 3D telomeric
signatures that predict and accompany the transition of MDS to AML. In
addition, we will define the molecular profiles at disease transition to
improve, once validated, treatment strategies for patients with MDS/AML.

