Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA expression profiling in African American and Caucasian
prostate cancer.


PURPOSE: African American men have almost twice the incidence and death
rates related to prostate cancer compared to Caucasian men. Several
studies have suggested that some of these differences may be attributed
to the elevated expression of different genes. Recently, a new class of
genetic regulators has emerged known as microRNAs. Many reports have
found microRNAs to be implicated in cell growth, cell differentiation and
the onset of many diseases including prostate cancer. We sought to
investigate whether microRNAs are differentially expressed in African
American and Caucasian prostate samples.METHODS: We analyzed the
expression of over 300 microRNAs in 11 African American and Caucasian
cell lines utilizing Affymetrix Microarray Chip. Validations of the most
significant miRNAs were done by qRT-PCR. Methylation analysis of miR-152
promoter region was carried out by performing bisulfite modification and
DNA sequencing. Characterization of the miRNA was carried out by
performing MTT assay, Flow Cytometry, Western Blot, and
Imunoflourescence.RESULTS: We identified 15 microRNAs that were
differentially expressed between the African American and Caucasian cell
lines. Further validations led to the identification of miR-152 which is
significantly expressed among both groups. Bisulfite modification and DNA
sequencing revealed that miR-152 is methylated in aggressive prostate
cancer cell lines. 5-Aza-2/TSA treatment restored miR-152 levels in these
cell lines. MiR-152 is responsible for inhibiting DNA methyltransferase
1, Rictor and TGF-. Our results showed that miR-152 reduced cellular
proliferation in PC-3, DU-145 and LNCaP prostate cancer cell lines. In
addition, miR-152 initiated G2-M cell cycle arrest. Expression of miR-152
in 40 normal-tumor paired prostate tissue samples indicated that its
expression was down-regulated in 67% of tumor samples. Analysis of
African American and Caucasian prostate normal-tumor paired sample
revealed that both normal and tumor prostate samples had lower miR-152
expression in the African American prostate samples compared to the
Caucasian prostate samples.CONCLUSION: These results give evidence that
microRNAs may play a role in the advance progression seen in prostate
cancer in African Americans. Future studies will focus on validating
these results in larger patient sample sizes. Research supported by G12
RR03059-21A1(NIH/RCMI), and CA118623 (NIH/NCI).

