Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liquid chromatography-multiple reaction monitoring mass
spectrometry biomarker quantification for breast cancer patient
assessment.


Introduction: A quantitative mass spectrometry platform has been
developed for measuring biomarkers of protein expression and
phosphorylation in breast cancer. The quantification of numerous
biomarkers from a single tissue specimen has the potential to impact
patient care. Specifically, the focus of initial development was on the
expression and phosphorylation of estrogen receptor alpha (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2
(HER2). However, immunohistochemical assessments of Ki-67 and vimentin
are also widely used for monitoring proliferation in breast cancer. The
integration of tissue quality control measurements, quantification of
proliferation biomarkers, and ER/PR/HER2 evaluation could improve patient
assessment and open novel avenues for patient classification, prognosis,
and selection of therapy in breast cancer.Experimental Procedures: Breast
cancer cell lines MCF7, BT474, and T47D were used to develop
peptide-based quantitative assays, including stable isotope-labeled
standard peptides, (n = 31) for protein expression and phosphorylation
biomarkers using liquid chromatography-multiple reaction monitoring mass
spectrometry (LC-MRM) of digested whole cell lysates or SDS-PAGE
fractionated proteins followed by immunoprecipitation to examine
expression and phosphorylation of ER/PR/HER2 (IP-LC-MRM). Using 2 mg of
total protein, the sample is divided into three parts. Tissue QC
biomarkers and expression levels of Ki67, vimentin, and HER2 are measured
in digests of whole cell lysate or tissue homogenate (1% of sample).
Then, parallel IP strategies are used for HER2 (10% of sample) and ER/PR
(90%) before LC-MRM analysis of expression and phosphorylation. Multiplex
IP of the three proteins was not successful, because the amplification of
HER2 could not be accommodated. The sensitivity of each assay was tested
using serial dilutions of cell lysate to evaluate requirements for
analysis of clinical specimens.Data Summary: LC-MRM assays for both
unmodified and phosphorylated peptides have been developed and
characterized for each protein using cell line models. Assays have been
implemented in cell lines to study Estradiol/EGF stimulation as well as
lapatinib inhibition of HER2. Data has been generated for pre-treatment
frozen tissue specimens from breast cancer patients that are either HER2+
or ER+ (n = 12 per group). The analysis of a larger group of patients and
in clinical scenarios (e.g. comparison of nave and drug resistant tissues
from the same patient) will establish the clinical utility of these
assays.Conclusions: The ability to examine protein expression as well as
phosphorylation status in these biomarkers with quantitative mass
spectrometry has the potential to improve the selection of targeted
therapeutics.

