Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular mechanisms of aggressiveness of osteosarcomas.


Osteosarcomas (OS) are highly aggressive neoplasms of osteoblastic
origin. Evidencing their early proclivity to metastasize, at the time of
diagnosis most OS are already classified as high grade and poorly
differentiated malignancies and about 20% have detectable metastases.
Prognosis is very poor with only about 10% of patients achieving
long-term disease-free intervals. In spite of this, OS aggressivity still
remains to be mechanistically explained. Our work sheds light into this
issue by uncovering a novel function for the retinoblastoma protein (Rb),
a cell cycle repressor mutated in most OS, in promoting cell adhesion.
Our microarrays comparing Rb-expressing with Rb-deficient osteoblasts
showed that Rb regulates a wide variety of cell adhesion genes,
specifically up-regulating the expression of osteoblast -specific
cadherins and integrins, while down-regulating the expression of several
metastasis-associated cell adhesion molecules. Cellular pathway analyses
showed that 8 of the top 10 cellular processes affected by Rb are related
to cell adhesion, with integrin- and adherens junctions-mediated adhesion
having the first and fourth best p-values in the list, respectively. This
regulation was confirmed when we re-introduced Rb into the Rb-null OS
cell line Saos-2 and found an Rb-engendered change in the expression
profile of several cadherins and integrins. Rb also strongly induced
Integrin 10 (Itga10) in MC3T3 osteoblasts, and assays using Itga10
promoter/luciferase constructs showed that this induction is
transcriptional and independent of Rb's phosphorylation status. Point
mutagenesis and progressive deletion of the Itga10 promoter allowed us to
identify an Rb-responsive region from -108 to -55 bp relative to the
transcriptional start site. We also characterized a second mechanism
linking Rb with cell adhesion. This mechanism requires the Rb-mediated
repression of Pak1, a Rac1-binding kinase that destabilizes cell adhesion
when upregulated during carcinogenesis. Rb transcriptionally represses
Pak1, as demonstrated by our nuclear run-on assays. Our Chip analyses
showed an Rb-E2F complex binding to an Rb-responsive site in the Pak1
promoter that is rich in E2F binding sites, showing that Pak1 is an E2F
target and suggesting that Rb's repressive effect on Pak1 consists of
blocking E2F's transactivating activity on Pak1. Taken together, our
results show that Rb promotes cell adhesion by inducing the expression of
the cadherins and integrins necessary for cell adhesion to other cells
and to a substrate, and by antagonizing the E2F-induced expression of
cell adhesion destabilizers such as Pak1. Based on our data, we propose
that Rb loss in OS exacerbates aggressiveness by debilitating cellular
adhesion, which in turn facilitates tumor cell detachment and metastasis.

