Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiogenin enhances proliferation, progression and angiogenesis in
human bladder cancer.


Introduction: Angiogenin (ANG) is a member of RNase A family and
regulates synthesis of various proteins. ANG is reported to act on both
vascular endothelial cells and cancer cells. Although it has been
demonstrated that upregulated ANG plays important roles on cellular
proliferation, migration and angiogenesis in several malignancies, there
are very few reports addressing the relationship between ANG expression
and bladder cancer. The aim of this study is to investigate the
biological function of ANG in bladder cancer.Methods: UROtsa (benign
urothelial cell line), RT4 (urothelial papilloma cell line), KU7
(non-invasive bladder cancer) and T24 (invasive bladder cancer) were used
in this study. ANG-overexpressing stable clones in UROtsa were created
using plasmid DNA transfection and ANG down-regulation in KU7 and T24
were created using siRNA transfection or short-hairpin RNA (shRNA)
transfection. Proliferation assay, migration/invasion assay,
anchorage-independent colony formation assay in soft agar and in-vitro
Matrigel tube formation assay using HUVEC were carried out with
conditioned media. ANG overexpression clone (UROtsa) and ANG shRNA
expressing clones (KU7 and T24) were subcutaneously injected into nude
mice to investigate whether ANG expression increase tumorigenicity and
tumor growth in vivo.Results: Higher level of ANG was expressed in cancer
cell lines, KU7 and T24, compared to non-cancer cell lines, UROtsa and
RT4. Proliferation assay and soft agar assay revealed that ANG expression
was associated with cell growth and anchorage independent growth in the
mediation of dephophorylation of ERK1/2 and JNK/SAPK. Migration was
inhibited significantly by knocking down ANG in KU7 (non-invasive
cancer), while invasion was inhibited in T24 (invasive cancer). An in
vitro Matrigel angiogenesis assay demonstrated that conditioned media
collected from ANG overexpressing stable clones resulted in increased
tube formation as compared to the control clone in UROtsa, while the tube
formation ability was decreased by knocking down ANG in cancer cells. In
tumorigenicity testing in nude mice, tumor growth was correlated with
higher expression of ANG. Four weeks after inoculation of cells in nude
mice, there was a significant difference in tumor size in all the cell
lines (UROtsa control vs ANG overexpression, KU7 control shRNA vs ANG
shRNA, T24 control shRNA vs ANG shRNA), suggesting that ANG expression
supported tumorigenicity and tumor growth.Conclusions: These results
suggest that ANG overexpression enhances tumor growth and progression.
ANG secreted from cancer cells promotes angiogenesis in bladder cancer.
Therefore, ANG may be a potential therapeutic target in bladder cancer.

