Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of basal-like subtype-specific MicroRNAs in lymph
node negative breast cancer .


Background:Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease both clinically and
biologically. With the recent recognition of the many different molecular
subtypes, a desire to more specifically categorize tumors to allow
tailoring of treatment to individual patients has developed. One
particularly aggressive and treatment-resistant group is the basal-like
subtype. However, the molecular events driving this subtype of breast
cancer are largely unknown. Here, we propose to examine whether MicroRNAs
specifically expressed in basal-like breast cancers contribute to their
development and progression.Materials and Methods:Fifty-four formalin
fixed paraffin embedded primary tumour samples from lymph-node negative
breast cancer patients who were participants in a phase III randomized
trial of tamoxifen (Tam) +/- whole breast radiation were collected.
Intrinsic molecular subtyping was determined using semi-quantitative
analysis of ER, PR, Ki-67, HER2, EGFR and cytokeratin (CK) 5/6 on tissue
microarrays (TMAs) constructed from the tumor blocks. Patients were
classified into the following categories: luminal A, luminal B,
luminal-HER2, HER2 enriched or basal-like phenotypes. The median
follow-up for this cohort was 10 years. The expression of 365 miRNAs was
measured in these samples using the qRT-PCR based Taqman low density
array human miRNA panel (Applied Biosystems). Data were validated in cell
line models and further analyzed using level 3 TCGA breast cancer
data.Results:Twenty-three miRNAs were identified at a significantly
different expressed level in basal-like breast cancers (n = 6) compared
with other subtypes (n = 48). This differential expression was validated
in publically available RNA-Seq data generated by the TCGA for 20 of the
23 miRNAs. Eight of these twenty miRNAs were found to correlate with
corresponding copy-number alterations at their genomic loci using the
data generated by TCGA. Further analysis is currently underway to
determine the potential contribution of methylation to the expression
differences observed. The putative target genes and pathways involved
will also be analyzed.Conclusions:MiRNAs are known to play numerous roles
in cancer development and progression. In the current study we report
several miRNAs with distinct expression patterns in basal-like breast
cancers. Further characterization of the phenotypic impact of this
deregulation may lead to a better understanding of this aggressive
subtype and provide valuable insight needed to develop novel targeted
therapies to treat these tumours.

