Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of microRNAs in the development of prostate cancer.


Prostate Cancer (CaP) is the most common non-cutaneous form of cancer in
men. It is also the second leading cause of cancer mortality in men in
the USA. Oncogenic activation of the ETS Related Gene (ERG) as a result
of gene fusions is the most common genomic alteration in prostate cancer
reported to date. ERG has a milieu of transcriptional targets that
regulate genes involved in various cellular processes including
oncogenesis, inflammation, cell invasion, and DNA damage. Moreover,
knockdown (KD) of ERG in TMPRSS2-ERG expressing CaP cells (VCaP)
suppresses the growth and invasiveness of VCaP cells and in xenograft
models. ERG protein has been implicated as a key player in the
progression from pre-invasive to invasive disease status of CaP.
Therefore, understanding mechanisms by which ERG promotes CaP progression
is essential for developing novel prognostic/therapeutic targets for CaP.
Our analyses of miRNA expressions in the human TMPRSS2-ERG fusion
harboring VCaP cells compared to ERG-suppressed (with siRNA against ERG)
VCaP controls indicate altered expression of miRNAs. Interestingly, we
find that ERG suppresses the expression of miR-449a, which has been shown
to regulate proliferation of CaP cells. In silico analyses (IPA and
Genomatix) of cellular pathways targeted by these miRs focus on
regulatory networks that are indicative of EMT and include molecules like
DES (desmin), PDGFRA (platelet-derived growth factor receptor, alpha
polypeptide) and TGFBR1 (transforming growth factor beta receptor 1).
These pathways are potential candidate therapeutic targets. These data
form the basis of new insights into the miRNA alterations in the context
of major oncogenic activation in prostate cancer. Moreover, these miRNAs
will provide novel prognostic marker and therapeutic targets for prostate
cancer and will ultimately define CaP associated miRNAs in the context of
ERG positive and ERG negative prostate cancers.Supported by: United
States Military Cancer Institute [RB] and [SS].

