Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance to selective kinase inhibitors upon epithelial to
mesenchymal transition.


Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a pivotal mechanism
contributing to cancer metastasis and has been associated with resistance
to multiple cancer therapies including targeted kinase inhibitors (TKIs).
EMT has been associated with an acquired resistance to the EGFR TKI
erlotinib independent of known resistance mechanisms such as secondary
mutations T790M or MET amplification. RTK-addicted cancer cell lines that
are induced to undergo EMT with exogenous TGF- become resistant to their
appropriate TKI. In vitro-based assays determined that the resistance is
not due to exogenous TGF-, drug efflux, or autocrine/paracrine growth
factor signaling. To identify potential therapeutic vulnerabilities
specifically within the mesenchymal, TKI resistant cells, we performed a
small molecule screen of approximately 200 agents using the EGFR mutant
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) HCC827 cell line and its corresponding
TGF--induced mesenchymal derivative line. This screen revealed that the
mesenchymal cells are cross-resistant to a variety of small molecules,
including TKIs and chemotherapeutic agents. However, a small number of
agents showed selective growth inhibitory activity against the
mesenchymal cells, with the most potent being the dual Brc-Abl and Src
inhibitor, dasatinib. Within the parental HCC827 cell line, we detected a
non-proliferating vimentin positive sub-population of cells.
Interestingly, when the parental cell line was co-treated with erlotinib
and dasatinib the entire cell population was killed and drug-resistant
clones failed to emerge after prolonged treatment. To determine the
mechanism underlying the resistance observed within the mesenchymal cells
a proteomic analysis was undertaken, which demonstrated that the focal
adhesion kinase, FAK, is the most abundant differentially phosphorylated
protein in the resistant mesenchymal cells that is specifically
suppressed by dasatinib. However, specific gene knock-down of FAK was not
sufficient to kill the mesenchymal cells or revert their sensitivity to
Erlotinib suggesting that FAK alone is not required to maintain
resistance upon EMT. These findings identify dasatinib as a potential
therapeutic for treatment of erlotinib resistance associated with EMT.

