Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-c-Met Nanobody: A potential new drug in cancer treatment.


c-Met is the tyrosine kinase receptor of the hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF). HGF-c-Met signaling is involved in a wide variety of human
malignancies including colon, gastric, bladder, breast, ovarian,
pancreatic, kidney, liver, lung, head and neck, thyroid, and prostate
cancers, as well as sarcomas, hematological malignancies, melanoma and
central nervous system tumors. In recent years, multiple agents have been
developed directed to interfere at different levels in the HGF-c-Met
signaling pathway, and some are currently being tested in Phase II and/or
III clinical trials.Nanobodies are therapeutic proteins based on the
smallest functional fragments of heavy chain antibodies, occurring in the
Camelidae family. Importantly, they retain the full antigen-binding
capacity of the original heavy chain only antibodies and are highly
stable. In this study, we examined the anti-cancer effects of an
anti-c-Met Nanobody in vitro using human multiple myeloma as a model
system. The anti-c-Met Nanobody comprises of two Nanobody moieties, one
targeting c-Met and one binding to human serum albumin for half-life
extension. HGF is thought to contribute to the pathogenesis of multiple
myeloma in different ways, as HGF is a pivotal growth and pro-migratory
factor and inhibits osteoblastogenesis in vitro suggesting that HGF may
contribute to the development of myeloma bone disease. Elevated levels of
HGF in serum of multiple myeloma patients are correlated with a poor
prognosis.We show that the anti-c-Met Nanobody effectively inhibited the
proliferation of ANBL-6 human multiple myeloma cells via inhibition of an
HGF autocrine growth loop, as well as the proliferation of INA-6 cells
induced by exogenously added HGF. In addition, the HGF-induced migration
of INA-6 cells was completely and specifically blocked following
treatment with the Nanobody at a concentration of 1 M. The Nanobody also
inhibited the HGF-induced adhesion of multiple myeloma cells to
fibronectin, but did not affect stromal cell-derived factor-1
alpha-induced adhesion. Furthermore, the Nanobody abolished the
inhibiting effect of HGF on bone morphogenetic protein-2-induced
ALP-activity and the mineralization of human mesenchymal stem cells.
Finally, we show that the Nanobody reduced the HGF mediated
phosphorylation of the c-Met Tyrosine (Y) residues Y1349, Y1234/1235 and
Y1003 and the phosphorylation of the downstream proteins MAPK and Akt in
INA-6 cells.In conclusion, the anti-c-Met Nanobody inhibited c-Met
signaling with high specificity and potency resulting in inhibition of
multiple myeloma cell migration, proliferation and adhesion, and in
blocking of the HGF mediated inhibition of osteoblastogenesis. Given the
potential of Nanobodies to surpass drawbacks of antibodies, this
anti-c-Met Nanobody might represent a potential novel therapeutic agent
in the treatment of multiple myeloma and other cancers driven by
HGF-c-Met signaling.

