Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA 199a*: a potent suppressor of tumor metastasis and
angiogenesis.


The growth of a solid tumor depends on diffusion of nutrients from the
tumor microenvironment through vascular system. Angiogenesis, the new
blood vessels formation is the primary route by which tumor cells get
nutrients as well as exit from primary site and enter into the blood
circulation. The proliferation and migration of vascular endothelial
cells are triggered by angiogenic growth factors secreted by tumor cells,
such as VEGF, TGF- etc. Recent evidences showed HGF also plays an
important role in angiogenesis by enhancing the proliferative activity
and intracellular signaling. HGF/its receptor, c-MET and VEGF/VEGFR1 are
two independent pathways for angiogenesis and metastasis. Thus detection
of a molecule that hits both pathways could be a potent therapeutic agent
that could facilitate the inhibition of improved barrier function.
Recently mir199a* has been shown to target both CD44 and cMET molecule to
block the metastasis in cancer. The present study aim to show that
mir199a* also target HGF, the key modulator of the HGF/c-Met signaling
cascade in epithelial cells to shut off the mesenchymal transition and
VEGFR1 to prevent angiogenesis more effectively.Luciferase 3 UTR assay
was performed to investigate HGF as a target of mir-199a*. HGF mRNA and
protein expression was determined by real time RT-PCR, Western blot
analysis in liver stellate cell line LX2 transfected with mir-199a* and
HGF shRNA. The cultured media of mir-199a* transfected LX2 cells was used
to verify the effect of mir-199a* on HGF induced migration and invasion
ability on metastatic cell lines using Boyden chamber assay with or
without matrigel coated membrane and angiogenesis by tube formation
assay.The mir-199a* binding site was detected by pictar, target scan
analysis of the 3UTR of HGF and VEGFRs. The binding of mir-199a* to the
3UTR of HGF and VEGFR1 were confirmed by luciferase assay, mutagenesis
and western blotting. Down regulation of HGF protein expression in HGF
producing hepatic stellate cell, LX2 was observed by mir-199a*. Addition
of LX2 conditioned media transfected with mir199a* to metastatic cell
reduces the migration and invasion and also block angiogenesis in
endothelial cells.As Mir-199a* could target HGF/cMET, CD44-cMET and
VEGF/VEGFR1 signaling cascade, it could be used as a potential
therapeutic target of HCC.

