Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel role of CD147 in chemoresistance in pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer mortality in the
U.S. with only a 25% one-year survival rate and 100% mortality rate. No
favorable therapeutic strategy has been established in recurrent
pancreatic cancer. The cell surface protein CD147 is a glycoprotein and
plays a central role in chemoresistance of pancreatic cancer and its
upregulation indicates poor prognosis. However, the mechanism by which
this protein is involved in pancreatic cancer is still poorly
understood.Here we show that knockdown of CD147 in pancreatic cancer
cells decelerates tumor growth and sensitizes cells to chemotherapeutic
drugs. To identify the mechanisms involved in the slow growth, we
screened several genes using a luciferase method. We found that knockdown
of CD147 leads to decreased transcription of several genes involved in
cancer progression such as telomerase and VEGFC.Knockdown of CD147 leads
to high sensitivity of pancreatic cancer cells to chemotherapeutics such
as gemcitabine and doxorubicin. Interestingly, the metastatic cell line,
L3.6pL, is more sensitive to both chemotherapeutic drugs than the
non-metastatic cell line, Panc-1. CD147 knockdown also leads to less drug
efflux than control as detected by rhodamine assay. Our hypothesis is
that CD147 may interact and block some membrane transporters, which lead
to an increase of intracellular drug and therefore to chemosensitivity.
We analyzed the transcriptional activity of several membrane transporters
including ABCC5, ABCC10 and ABCA2. We found that there is a decrease in
their transcription levels of approximately 50% compared to the control.
This may suggest that CD147 is involved in drug transport through the
cytoplasmic membrane.We have also determined that depleting CD147 leads
to an increase of sensitivity in pancreatic cancer cells to
chemotherapeutic drugs such as doxorubicin and gemcitabine. Gemcitabine
can create DNA damage such as double stand breaks in cells, followed
rapidly by histone H2AX phosphorylation (H2AX), with foci observed within
the first minute. Using CD147 knockdown cells, we showed that knockdown
of CD147 leads to the depletion of H2AX phosphorylation and to an
increase of apoptosis, in agreement with high drug accumulation. We found
high ROS levels in these cells as measured by the DCF using flow
cytometry. This can explain an increase of apoptosis in cells with CD147
knockdown.Our results indicate that CD147 acts to enhance tumor growth in
several ways and contributes to chemoresistance in pancreatic cancer. We
explored the mechanism of action of CD147, which can be a potential novel
therapeutic target in pancreatic cancer.

