Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic studies of the metastasis suppressor prostaglandin E2
receptor EP1 in breast cancer.


Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), the chief cyclooxygenase-2 enzyme (COX-2)
product in tumors, is the predominant protumorigenic prostanoid and
mediates biological effects by binding to each of four EP receptors
(EP1-4). Each receptor is coupled to different intracellular signaling
pathways with EP1 coupled to calcium mobilization and PKC. EP4, expressed
on malignant breast cells, promotes metastasis, but a role for EP1 in
metastasis has not been investigated. Our published studies indicate that
EP1 was detected in the cytoplasm and nucleus of benign ducts and
malignant cells in invasive ductal carcinomas, and overall survival for
women with tumors negative for nuclear EP1 was significantly worse than
for women with EP1 expression. Pharmacologic antagonism and reduction of
EP1 expression increased metastatic capacity in our murine model of
metastatic breast cancer. These data support our hypothesis that EP1
functions as a metastasis suppressor.We now report that murine metastatic
mammary tumor cell lines 410.4 and 66.1 have decreased EP1 mRNA
expression compared to the non-metastatic cell line 410. We have also
identified the presence of a variant EP1 (EP1v) transcript. EP1v has been
identified previously in murine mast cell line MC/9 and rat uterus but
not in malignant cells. EP1v has a pattern of mRNA expression different
than full-length EP1. Compared to the cell line 410, EP1v expression is
slightly increased in 410.4 and decreased in 66.1 cell lines.In order to
determine the underlying mechanism in which EP1 suppresses metastasis, a
metastasis gene array was performed comparing gene expression in
EP1-vector, and EP1-silenced 66.1 cell lines and several candidate genes
were identified including Fn1, whose protein is altered during
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. qPCR analysis of Fn1 expression in
EP1-silenced and overexpression cell lines revealed an inverse
relationship between EP1 and Fn1 expression. A decrease in EP1 expression
led to a 4-5 fold increase in Fn1 expression; whereas, increased EP1
expression resulted in a 0.50 fold decrease in Fn1 expression. Like full
length EP1, overexpression of EP1v also resulted in a decrease in Fn1
expression.Bioinformatic analysis of the EP1 gene identified several CpG
islands. DNA methylation analysis revealed hypermethylation of the CpG
island nearest to the promoter in normal, non-metastatic and metastatic
murine mammary tumor cell lines. In the quest to identify a clinically
relevant strategy to increase expression of this protective receptor, we
treated 410.4 and 66.1 cells with demethylating agent 5-azacytidine which
resulted in an increase in EP1 expression. Our published studies show
that EP1 acts to suppress metastasis and we are currently exploring the
contribution of EP1v to this mechanism. These findings suggest that EP1
has the potential to be a new therapeutic target in reducing breast
cancer metastasis and increasing overall cancer survival.

