Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NF-B2/p52 induces resistance to enzalutamide possibly by
upregulation of AR-V7.


Introduction and Objective: Despite initial response of prostate cancer
(CaP) to androgen deprivation, clinical observations suggest that
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) develops resistance to the
recently approved anti-androgen, enzalutamide. There is an urgent need to
identify pathways that perpetuate disease progression during AR blockade.
Identification of these resistance pathways will help design co-targeting
strategies to improve the magnitude and duration of benefit of
enzalutamide in CRPC. Our previous studies have demonstrated that
NF-B2/p52 plays an important role in the aberrant activation of AR in
CaP. In this study we tested whether NF-B2/p52 mediates resistance to
enzalutamide in CaP cells.Methods: Cell growth was analyzed in LNCaP
cells stably expressing p52 (LN-p52) and control cells (LN-neo) treated
with enzalutamide. C4-2B cells were transfected with shRNA against p52
and cell growth was monitored. Expression levels of p52 in CaP cells
grown chronically in enzalutamide were analyzed by Western blotting.
Expression of AR variant AR-V7 was examined in LN-p52 and LN-neo cells by
qRT-PCR and Western blotting. Expression of p52 was downregulated in VCaP
and 22Rv1 cells by shRNA followed by treatment with enzalutamide and cell
growth was monitored. Expression of AR-V7 was examined by qRT-PCR and
Western blotting in VCaP and 22Rv1 cells transfected with shRNA against
p52.Results: LN-p52 cells exhibited significantly better growth rates
compared to LN-neo cells in the presence of enzalutamide, indicating that
NF-B2/p52 may enhance the survival of CaP cells treated with
enzalutamide. Downregulation of p52 in castration resistant C4-2B cells
reduced cell survival when treated with enzalutamide, suggesting that p52
may mediate resistance to enzalutamide. Expression levels of p52 were
enhanced in enzalutamide resistant C4-2B cells generated by chronic
treatment with enzalutamide, indicating that increased expression of p52
may facilitate the development of resistance to enzalutamide. We also
found that LN-p52 cells exhibited higher levels of AR-V7 compared to
LN-neo cells. Downregulation of p52 in VCaP and 22Rv1 cells (expressing
endogenous levels of AR variants such as AR-V7) decreased the expression
of AR-V7, demonstrating that p52 may regulate alternative splicing of AR
mRNA.Conclusions: Our findings demonstrate an important role for
NF-B2/p52 in inducing resistance to enzalutamide in CaP cells. Our
results also suggest that NF-B2/p52 may regulate resistance to
enzalutamide via upregulation of AR-V7.

