Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole genome and transcriptome analysis reveals novel genomic
alterations in bladder cancer.


Bladder cancer (BC) is a common malignancy with the highest incidence
rates found in Europe and UnitedStates where it rates as the fifth and
fourth most common malignancy, respectively. There are two clinically
distinct groups of BC, non-muscle invasive (NMIBC) and muscle invasive
bladder tumors (MIBC) accounting at diagnosis for 75% and 25%,
respectively, and demanding very different treatments. NMIBC have the
highest cancer recurrence rate observed (50-70%) and often necessitates
lifelong surveillance, however the prognosis is relatively good. MIBC in
contrast often progresses and develop systemic disease. To improve the
treatment of BC it is essential to understand the disease biology and to
be able to predict disease progression. In this study we applied the
advance of next generation sequencing technology to annotate genomic
mutations and genomic rearrangements to base pair resolution in four
metachronous BC cases (>90% tumor cells) progressing fromTa to T1 or T2,
and matching blood. Furthermore, we explored clonal relationship among
the initial tumor and the progressing tumor. Each sample was sequenced to
40-50 x whole genome coverage, 200 x targeted Exome sequencing, and 65
million paired end reads of whole transcriptome RNA-seq. Eight normal
urothelium biopsies from BPH patients were used as reference for the
RNA-seq. Notably we identified genetic high impact alterations in KDMA6A,
PIK3CA, ZNF233, FGFR3, UBE3C, TMEM128, HOXA11,HOXA2, ELF3, TP53, KAT2B
and DYRK3 (corrected for background mutation rate). We annotated a total
of 559 unique deletions, translocations, insertions and inversions. In
total, 120 of these DNA breaks were selected for validation withPCR and
Sanger sequencing (80% validation rate). Ingenuity pathway analysis
identified 19 canonical pathways significantly affected in four out of 8
samples. Currently we are validating the SNV findings in 50 BC samples
usingExome-Seq and RNA-seq. Furthermore, protein expression of selected
genes are validated by immunohistochemistry on FFPE tissue sections from
the discovery samples and on a tissue microarray containing 290 cores
from Ta and T1 tumors in order to correlate protein expression to disease
specific survival. All sequencing was performed on the Illumina HiSeq
platform. The results reveal promising descriptive and potentially
predictive knowledge that may help determine the genomic fingerprint
facilitating progression of NMIBC to MIBC.

