Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of erlotinib on the pharmacokinetics of irinotecan and its
metabolites: A drug-drug interaction study.


Purpose:Since irinotecan and erlotinib are used in treatment for
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), co-administration of these drugs
might be an effective treatment for NSCLC. However, drug-drug interaction
should be concerned because these drugs are metabolized by CYP3A4 and
excreted into bile by ABC transporters. To clarify the drug-drug
interaction when these drugs are co-administered, we examined the effect
of this co-administration on the pharmacokinetics of irinotecan, its
active metabolite 7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin (SN-38), SN-38
glucuronide (SN-38G) in animal model.Methods:Cytotoxicity of irinotecan
and SN-38 with erlotinib against NSCLC cell line (A549) was assessed. To
elucidate the effect of drug-drug interaction between irinotecan and
erlotinib, male Sprague-Dawley rats were treated with 10 mg/kg irinotecan
and 25 mg/kg erlotinib. The concentrations of irinotecan, SN-38, SN-38G
and erlotinib in plasma, bile, and tissues were analyzed by
high-performance liquid chromatography. Pharmacokinetic parameters were
calculated by non-compartmental model methods.Results:Co-exposured
erlotinib enhanced the cytotoxicity of SN-38 in a dose-dependent manner,
however it did not significantly affect the cytotoxicity of irinotecan
against A549 that is resistant to erlotinib. Additionally,
co-administration of erlotinib resulted in a significant increase of
plasma concentration of irinotecan, SN-38 and SN-38G compared to
irinotecan alone, but decrease in the biliary excretion. Erlotinib
significantly increased the concentration of irinotecan and SN-38G in
kidney and that of SN-38 in lung and jejunum. On the other hand,
co-administration of irinotecan intended to decrease the plasma
concentration of erlotinib but significant differences of pharmacokinetic
parameters were not observed. Also, levels of erlotinib in tissues were
not affected by co-administration of irinotecan.Conclusions:We proposed
the possibility of combination therapy of irinotecan with erlotinib
because the plasma concentration of irinotecan and its active metabolite
SN-38 significantly increased in vivo and the cytotoxicity of SN-38
against NSCLC cell line enhanced. New effective salvage chemotherapy
regimens are needed in patients with NSCLC. We conducted a phase I/II
clinical study of combination chemotherapy with irinotecan and erlotinib
for recurrent NSCLC because our data have shown synergistic/additive
effects between irinotecan and epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine
kinase inhibitor.

