Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of MicroRNAs unique to cancer stem cells by small
RNA deep sequencing.


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are undifferentiated cancer initiating cells
with normal stem cell traits and they are responsible for cancer
progression, tumor relapse and resistance to chemotherapy. While
therapies that target CSCs hold promise in eliminating cancer burden,
normal stem cells are likely to be targeted due to their similarities
with CSCs. Recently we have demonstrated that EpCAM+ AFP+ hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) cells are CSCs. EpCAM and AFP are two cellular proteins
that are highly expressed in fetal livers and are silenced in adult
livers but they are reactivated in a subset of HCC. Since microRNAs play
a key role in the maintenance of normal stem cells and CSCs, we
hypothesized that abnormal microRNA expression could be a unique feature
specific to EpCAM+ AFP+ CSCs but not to normal liver stem cells. In this
study, we used the SOLiD-4 system to perform genome-wide measurement of
small RNA transcriptome. We constructed 16 small RNA libraries derived
from EpCAM+ AFP+ CSCs and corresponding differentiated EpCAM- AFP- tumor
cells from primary HCC clinical specimens and HCC cell lines, human
embryonic stem cells, primary normal liver stem cells and their lineage
restricted hepatoblasts, and differentiated hepatocytes. We generated a
total of 290.9 million reads. Using the RNA2MAP (v0.5) computational
program, the 35 nucleotide-filtered reads were aligned to the reference
human miRBase (v17.0), then to the human genome (hg19). The alignment
yielded an average of 10.3 million high-quality mapped reads, of which
59.3% were aligned to miRBase. Further, we developed an in-house
bioinformatics analysis pipeline to process mapped reads and identified
83.2% of known microRNA hairpins (n=1426) and 71.0% of known mature
microRNAs within the human miRBase (n=1733). Using a stringent comparison
criterion between undifferentiated and differentiated cells as well as
between normal and cancer cells, we identified 10 microRNAs unique to HCC
CSC but not to normal stem cells and 15 microRNAs unique to normal liver
stem cells. We also identified several microRNAs that contain candidate
somatic mutations. These microRNAs may possess unique functions to HCC
CSCs and thus they are strong candidates as therapeutic targets for HCC.
Further investigation would allow us to develop novel therapies to
specifically eliminate CSC without sacrificing normal stem cells to avoid
unwanted side effect.

