Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor PDCD4 inhibits NFB dependent transcription in
human glioblastoma cells by direct interaction with p65.


PDCD4 was first described as a protein induced by apoptotic stimuli that
acts as a tumor suppressor. PDCD4 plays an important role in regulating
translation and transcription. Our previous research showed that
overexpression of PDCD4 leads to decreased anchorage independent growth
in glioblastoma-derived cell lines as well as decreased tumor growth in a
glioblastoma xenograft model. Moreover, PDCD4 positively influences tumor
necrosis factor-induced activation of the transcription factor NF-B in
inflammatory cells. However, the effect of PDCD4 on NF-B transcriptional
activity in cancer cells is still unknown. NF-B acts as an oncogenic
driver in many cancer sites. We studied the effect of PDCD4 on
NF-B-dependent transcriptional activity in malignant human glioblastoma
cell lines by stably overexpressing PDCD4 in GBM U251 and LN229 cells.
Stable Pdcd4 expression inhibits NF-B transcriptional activation measured
by a luciferase reporter in U251 and LN229 cells. The molecular mechanism
by which PDCD4 inhibits NF-B transcriptional activation does not involve
inhibited expression of NF-B p65 or p50 proteins. PDCD4 overexpression
does not inhibit pathways upstream of NF-B including the activation of
IKKalpha and IKKbeta kinases. In addition, PDCD4 does not inhibit
phosphorylation or degradation of IB, events needed for nuclear transport
of p65 and p50. Overexpression of PDCD4 does, however, inhibit
translocation of p65 but not p50 to the nucleus. Pdcd4 protein interacts
directly with p65 protein as shown by co-immunoprecipitation and confocal
imaging. These results suggest that PDCD4 can significantly inhibit NF-B
activity in glioblastoma cells by a mechanism that involves direct
protein-protein interaction rather than the expected mRNA-selective
translational inhibition. These findings may provide novel opportunities
for NF-B targeted interventions to prevent or treat cancer.

