Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of microRNAs related to chemosensitivity in ovarian
cancer using Next Generation Sequencing.


Ovarian cancer is the most common cause of gynecologic malignancy related
mortality in women. The combination of tumor reductive surgery and
chemotherapy is the main therapeutic strategy for ovarian cancer.
However, especially in the most of advanced cases, complete site
reduction is impossible to achieve. In those cases, the sensitivity to
chemotherapy strongly affects their prognoses. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), which
are approximately 22-nucleotide non-coding RNAs, regulate protein
expression by translational inhibition and degradation of their target
mRNAs. The expression of miRNAs is dysregulated in various types of
cancers, suggesting that miRNAs are involved in carcinogenesis and cancer
progression. The purpose of present work was to identify miRNAs which are
related to chemo-sensitivity in ovarian cancer.Using Next Generation
Sequencing (NGS), miRNA profiling was performed in 38 advanced high-grade
serous ovarian cancers (HGSOCs). RNAs including miRNAs were procured from
the epithelial component of the laser microdissected tumor tissue removed
from patients undergoing primary surgery without neo-adjuvant
chemotherapy. A total of 1935 miRNAs and miRNA variants were detected by
NGS and normalized expression data of each miRNAs and miRNA variants were
used for further analyses. Comparing the copy numbers of each miRNAs
between chemo-refractory group (patients with disease progression in the
period of first line chemotherapy, n=7) and chemo-sensitive group
(patients with disease progression in more than 6 months after completion
of first line chemotherapy, n=13) by Mann-Whitney U test, 77 miRNAs and
miRNA variants were found to be dysregulated with significant differences
(pOvarian cancer is the most common cause of gynecologic malignancy
related mortality in women. The combination of tumor reductive surgery
and chemotherapy is the main therapeutic strategy for ovarian cancer.
However, especially in the most of advanced cases, complete site
reduction is impossible to achieve. In those cases, the sensitivity to
chemotherapy strongly affects their prognoses. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), which
are approximately 22-nucleotide non-coding RNAs, regulate protein
expression by translational inhibition and degradation of their target
mRNAs. The expression of miRNAs is dysregulated in various types of
cancers, suggesting that miRNAs are involved in carcinogenesis and cancer
progression. The purpose of present work was to identify miRNAs which are
related to chemo-sensitivity in ovarian cancer.Using Next Generation
Sequencing (NGS), miRNA profiling was performed in 38 advanced high-grade
serous ovarian cancers (HGSOCs). RNAs including miRNAs were procured from
the epithelial component of the laser microdissected tumor tissue removed
from patients undergoing primary surgery without neo-adjuvant
chemotherapy. A total of 1935 miRNAs and miRNA variants were detected by
NGS and normalized expression data of each miRNAs and miRNA variants were
used for further analyses. Comparing the copy numbers of each miRNAs
between chemo-refractory group (patients with disease progression in the
period of first line chemotherapy, n=7) and chemo-sensitive group
(patients with disease progression in more than 6 months after completion
of first line chemotherapy, n=13) by Mann-Whitney U test, 77 miRNAs and
miRNA variants were found to be dysregulated with significant differences
(p<0.05). The 10 most significant miRs identified by NGS were selected
for further validation studies by real-time reverse transcription PCR
(RT-PCR) analysis on the same sample set. To determine whether miRNAs
could be used as a prognostic marker HGSOC, expression levels of those 10
miRNAs were quantified by RT-PCR using 95 HGSOC samples including the 38
samples used in the discovery set. The results showed that mir-625-3p
expression levels were significantly reduced in the chemo-refractory
group compared with the chemo-sensitive group as indicated by the NGS
data (n=20, p=0.029), and by the RT-PCR data (n=63, p=0.004).
Furthermore, Kaplan-Meier survival analysis with log-rank test indicated
that low expression of mir-625-3p (less than mean expression) was
significantly associated with shorter progression-free survival (n=95,
p=0.007) and shorter over-all survival (n=95, pOvarian cancer is the most
common cause of gynecologic malignancy related mortality in women. The
combination of tumor reductive surgery and chemotherapy is the main
therapeutic strategy for ovarian cancer. However, especially in the most
of advanced cases, complete site reduction is impossible to achieve. In
those cases, the sensitivity to chemotherapy strongly affects their
prognoses. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), which are approximately 22-nucleotide
non-coding RNAs, regulate protein expression by translational inhibition
and degradation of their target mRNAs. The expression of miRNAs is
dysregulated in various types of cancers, suggesting that miRNAs are
involved in carcinogenesis and cancer progression. The purpose of present
work was to identify miRNAs which are related to chemo-sensitivity in
ovarian cancer.Using Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), miRNA profiling
was performed in 38 advanced high-grade serous ovarian cancers (HGSOCs).
RNAs including miRNAs were procured from the epithelial component of the
laser microdissected tumor tissue removed from patients undergoing
primary surgery without neo-adjuvant chemotherapy. A total of 1935 miRNAs
and miRNA variants were detected by NGS and normalized expression data of
each miRNAs and miRNA variants were used for further analyses. Comparing
the copy numbers of each miRNAs between chemo-refractory group (patients
with disease progression in the period of first line chemotherapy, n=7)
and chemo-sensitive group (patients with disease progression in more than
6 months after completion of first line chemotherapy, n=13) by
Mann-Whitney U test, 77 miRNAs and miRNA variants were found to be
dysregulated with significant differences (p<0.05). The 10 most
significant miRs identified by NGS were selected for further validation
studies by real-time reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) analysis on the
same sample set. To determine whether miRNAs could be used as a
prognostic marker HGSOC, expression levels of those 10 miRNAs were
quantified by RT-PCR using 95 HGSOC samples including the 38 samples used
in the discovery set. The results showed that mir-625-3p expression
levels were significantly reduced in the chemo-refractory group compared
with the chemo-sensitive group as indicated by the NGS data (n=20,
p=0.029), and by the RT-PCR data (n=63, p=0.004). Furthermore,
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis with log-rank test indicated that low
expression of mir-625-3p (less than mean expression) was significantly
associated with shorter progression-free survival (n=95, p=0.007) and
shorter over-all survival (n=95, p<0.001) as compared with the high
expression group (more than mean expression).Our results strongly suggest
that mir-625-3p might be a prognostic marker that can be used to predict
chemo-sensitivity in patients with HGSOC. Further characterization of
mir-625-3p as a therapeutic target for HGSOC is in progress.

