Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of significant linkage evidence for lethal prostate
cancer on chromosome arm 11p15.


We performed genome wide linkage analysis in a set of high-risk prostate
cancer pedigrees, each with 3 or more sampled cases whose death
certificate indicated a contribution of prostate cancer to death (lethal
prostate cancer). All prostate cancer cases were present in the Utah SEER
Cancer Registry (pathology confirmed); all lethal prostate cancer cases
were also required to have a Utah death certificate indicating prostate
cancer as a contributing cause of death.A set of markers with no linkage
disequilibrium was selected for linkage analysis. We took the
intersection of SNP markers from five Illumina genotyping platforms used
(550K, 610K, 1M,Omni_express (720k), and Omni_1M), resulting in selection
of 301,646 markers. We began with the first marker on each chromosome and
then skipped markers until one satisfied all criteria (min 0.1 cM
distance, heterozygosity 0.35, R-squared We performed genome wide linkage
analysis in a set of high-risk prostate cancer pedigrees, each with 3 or
more sampled cases whose death certificate indicated a contribution of
prostate cancer to death (lethal prostate cancer). All prostate cancer
cases were present in the Utah SEER Cancer Registry (pathology
confirmed); all lethal prostate cancer cases were also required to have a
Utah death certificate indicating prostate cancer as a contributing cause
of death.A set of markers with no linkage disequilibrium was selected for
linkage analysis. We took the intersection of SNP markers from five
Illumina genotyping platforms used (550K, 610K, 1M,Omni_express (720k),
and Omni_1M), resulting in selection of 301,646 markers. We began with
the first marker on each chromosome and then skipped markers until one
satisfied all criteria (min 0.1 cM distance, heterozygosity 0.35,
R-squared < 0.16 -using HapMap's LD files based on CEPH). This resulted
in selection of a set of 25,436 SNP LD-free genome wide markers for
linkage.We have performed genome-wide linkage analysis for 21 of the
genotyped high-risk lethal prostate cancer pedigrees with the 25,436
selected SNP markers. Genome wide hetLODs showed one significant linkage
peak for the recessive model on chromosome 14 (LOD = 4.20). The pedigree
with the highest LOD in this region has a +2.69; we are attempting to
expand sampling for other pedigrees with linkage evidence in this
region.A single pedigree with 16 prostate cancer cases, at least 4 of
whom have already died from prostate cancer and were sampled, provided a
LOD score = +3.56 on chromosome arm 11p15. An 11p15 haplotype inherited
in common from the founder to 6 generations of descendants is shared in
at least 9 of the prostate cancer cases, 3 of whom died from prostate
cancer.The 1-LOD drop defined support interval for the pedigree linked to
chromosome 11 occurs at approximately 34-46 cM and contains 13 currently
documented genomic features, several of which may be reasonable
candidates for lethal prostate cancer including the gene PRMT3 (arginine
methyltransferase 3), DAL-1, NELL1, FANCF (Fanconi anemia,
complementation group F), and GAS2 (growth arrest-specific 2).Sequencing
of multiple haplotype sharing cases in the pedigree is underway.

