Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel genetic alterations driving melanoma
tumorigenesis.


Recent high-throughput sequencing efforts have provided a comprehensive
view of cancer genomes, revealing their complexity and heterogeneity.
However, most of these studies remain descriptive without further
functional and clinical validation of the candidate alterations, mainly
due to the overwhelming number of somatic alterations present. To
discover novel driver mutations of melanoma, massively parallel whole
genome sequencing (WGS) was used to characterize 15 metastatic melanomas
derived from 13 patients. A large number of somatic alterations were
discovered in these tumors and hybridization capture-based validation
confirmed 17,361 tier 1 point mutations, 84 tier 1 indels, and 411
somatic structural variants. As a pilot study to exploit this genomic
data in order to identify novel genetic alterations driving melanoma
tumorigenesis, we performed mutation proximity analysis to select
candidates for further analysis. In this study, we addressed possible
roles of DBC1 (Deleted in Bladder Cancer 1) and RASA1 (RAS p21 protein
activator 1), which showed previously undocumented neighboring mutations.
RASA1 is a GTPase activation protein that acts as a suppressor of RAS
function. RASA1 has been implicated in actin filament polymerization,
vascular development, cellular apoptosis, and cell motility. Our
whole-genome analyses of melanomas identified two somatic missense
mutations, targeting highly conserved neighboring Y472 and L481 in or
around the PH domain in RASA1 in two samples. DBC1, also called BRINP,
DBCCR1, and FAM5A, was previously shown to undergo loss of heterozygosity
at 9q32-q33 in bladder cancer, and methylation silencing in bladder,
breast, and lung cancers. Ectopic expression of DBC1 in bladder and lung
cancer cells was reported to cause cell death and to inhibit cell
proliferation, respectively. We observed six DBC1 missense mutations by
whole genome analyses in four patients, including 2 neighboring mutations
targeting S688 and S690. The shRNA-mediated knock down of DBC1 and RASA1
in melanocyte derived from Ink4a/Arf deletion/BRAF mutation background
promoted proliferation, soft agar colony formation, and invasion. Ectopic
expression of wild type DBC1 and RASA1 in human melanoma cell lines
SKmel28 and WM983C (all with BRAFV600E), respectively, decreased soft
agar colony formation, supporting their tumor suppressive roles. Various
mutant forms of RASA1 and DBC1 were addressed for their roles.
Interestingly, loss of RASA1 conferred decreased sensitivity to BRAF
inhibitor Vemurafenib. In order to address the mutation frequency of DBC1
and RASA1, we analyzed additional melanoma samples and observed mutation
rates of 21% for DBC1 (20/96 patients) and 9% for RASA1 (20/221).
Therefore, our findings support that DBC1 and RASA1 play roles in
melanoma suppression and the utility of genomic data for the
identification of novel genes involved in tumorigenesis.

