Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 2-Methoxyestradiol induces differentiation of epithelial ovarian
cancer-initiating cells sensitizing them to chemotherapy.


Ovarian cancer is the most deadly gynecological malignancy. Its lethality
is mainly due to late diagnosis and acquisition of resistance to
available therapies. Current evidence considers tumor cell heterogeneity
as a cancer hallmark. A subset of cancer cells, named "cancer-initiating
cells" (CICs), possesses stem cell-like capabilities allowing
self-renewal, differentiation and dedifferentiation into other cell
types, some of them evolved to a more invasive and resistant phenotype.
Thus, the existence of CICs allows tumor to overcome therapy and regrowth
as resistant kind over time. Finding therapeutic strategies effective
against this subset of cells remain a major goal in cancer therapeutics.
Previously we have shown that 2-methoxyestradiol (2-ME), an endogenous
estrogen metabolite, induces cell death in ovarian cancer cells.
Objective: In the present work we investigated the potential effects of
2-ME on CICs isolated from either ovarian cancer cell lines or primary
tissue cultures obtained from ovarian cancer patients. Methods: CICs were
isolated from both ovarian cancer cell lines (SKOV3, UCI 101, HEY) as
well as primary tissue cultures established from ascites samples.
Stemness, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and anti-apoptotic
markers were studied by immunoblotting (W-B), RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry in CICs cultured under stem-selection
medium/non-attachment conditions and after treatment with different
concentrations of 2-ME (5 to 10 uM, up to 24h). CICs treated under
similar conditions were then exposed to different concentrations of
chemotherapeutic reagents (i.e. paclitaxel, 0,5-5 uM, for up to 48 h).
Cell death was measured by Tunel assay and PARP cleavage (measured by
W-B). Results: Isolated CICs grow forming ovospheres that express higher
levels of Oct-4, Nanog, Snail, N-Cadherin, CD44, CD133, survivin, and
lower levels of E-cadherin compared with non-selected cell population
(whole cell population, WP). In contrast to WP, CICs did not undergo
apoptosis upon 2-ME exposure (5 uM for 24 h) measured by PARP cleavage.
However, 2-ME treatment results in a decrease of Nanog, N-cadherin,
Snail, Survivin and an increase in E-cadherin protein expression levels.
In addition, a decrease in mRNA levels of Twist, Zeb2 (but not Zeb1) is
observed under similar conditions (5 uM for 6 h). 2-ME pretreatment
increases paclitaxel-induced cell death in CICs compared to those treated
with paclitaxel alone, measured by Tunel assay. Conclusions: 2-ME induces
the loss of stemness and EMT markers in epithelial ovarian CICs. This
differentiating effect induced by 2-ME results in sensitization of this
subset of resistant cells to chemotherapeutic agents. Further studies
might be conducted to assess the clinical usefulness of this combination.
(FONDECYT 1120292, and BMRC CTU06)

