Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying neuroblastoma-specific ligands for cancer targeted
therapy using a one-bead one-compound combinatorial approach.


Neuroblastoma is the most common extra-cranial tumor in children, with
around 700 new diagnoses each year. High-risk patients have poor outcomes
and only 30% survive despite the most intensive therapies available,
which can also harm healthy cells. Thus, we are developing novel targeted
therapies for neuroblastoma to increase treatment efficacy and limit
damage to healthy cells.We utilized the One-Bead One-Compound (OBOC)
combinatorial split-mix method developed by Kit Lam (Lam et al., 1991) to
identify unique ligands against neuroblastoma cells for therapeutic
delivery. The OBOC libraries consist of hundreds to millions of 90 m
Tentagel beads, and each bead displays 1013 copies of a peptide on its
surface. Thus, each bead has one unique compound on its exterior.Twelve
random OBOC libraries with varying peptide lengths (5 to 16 amino acids)
were screened against three human neuroblastoma cell lines (SK-N-BE,
SK-N-DZ, and IMR-32) to determine a library for more stringent screening
of ligands. 37,500 beads from each library were screened against each
cell line and the libraries averaged 2 positive candidates per 18,750
beads within 2 hours of incubation. The results also suggested preference
for longer peptide libraries, but an intermediate length random decamer
library was chosen for further screening due to both a good yield of
positive beads and convenient sequencing.Each neuroblastoma line was
screened against 150,000 beads from the decamer library to identify
potential ligands. Positive beads were selected, retested three times,
and decoded using Edman degradation. Several cancer cell lines (A549 lung
cancer, and Reh and Jurkat leukemia cell lines) were used as negative
controls. Ten beads per cell line displaying high binding affinity were
selected. Candidate beads with positive binding to all three
neuroblastoma cell lines are currently being sequenced and the ligands
will be synthesized. We plan to characterize the ligands for high
affinity and specificity, as well as internalization capacity, and to
identify their receptors.Currently, there are very few targeted therapies
for neuroblastoma. We believe our ligand discoveries can be developed for
future novel targeted therapies in neuroblastoma.

