Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A model of oncogene addiction: BCR-ABL hijacks signaling through a
MEK-dependent process and inhibits growth factor-mediated signal
transduction.


Background: Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is characterized by the
presence of the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome and the fusion gene BCR-ABL,
which has been shown to activate key signaling pathways, including PI-3
kinase, RAS/ERK and STAT5. ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are
highly effective clinical agents that inhibit downstream signaling,
trigger CML cell apoptosis, and provide clinical evidence for the
phenomenon of oncogene addiction," whereby cell survival becomes
critically dependent upon the activity of a particular oncogene product.
TKI therapy has largely failed to achieve the same degree of clinical
success in other activated kinase-driven malignancies, suggesting that
BCR-ABL is relatively unique in its ability to establish a state of
oncogene addiction.Results: To dissect the mechanism by which BCR-ABL
coordinates STAT5 and RAS/ERK signaling to establish a state of oncogene
addiction, JAK2 kinase activity and RAS-GTP levels were assessed in the
CML patient-derived cell line K562. Surprisingly, basal levels of RAS-GTP
were low and JAK2 kinase activity was not detectable. Treatment of K562
cells with erythropoietin (EPO) only very modestly activated JAK2.
Similarly, EPO treatment after one hour of BCR-ABL inhibition also failed
to rescue STAT5 or RAS/ERK activation. However, with more prolonged
BCR-ABL kinase inhibition, we observed a time-dependent increase in the
ability of EPO to rescue STAT5 and ERK phosphorylation. After 24hrs of
BCR-ABL inhibition, EPO treatment led to a significant increase in both
JAK2 activation and the GTP loading of RAS relative to vehicle treated
cells. These data suggest that BCR-ABL kinase activity hampers the
ability of JAK2 to activate STAT5 and RAS/MAPK . Further, 24hr treatment
with the MEK inhibitor PD0325901 allowed for a comparable degree of
EPO-mediated JAK2 activation, suggesting that the negative regulation of
JAK2 is mediated at least in part by a MEK/ERK-dependent mechanism. These
observations were subsequently validated in an isogenic system utilizing
TF-1 cells. Similar to the EPO/JAK2 axis in K562 cells, TF1-BCR-ABL cells
exhibit attenuated GM-CSF signaling relative to control TF1-puro cells,
which was restored only after prolonged BCR-ABL inhibition.
Significantly, we have observed that BCR/ABL-expressing cells
irreversibly commit to apoptosis before growth factor signaling is fully
restored.Conclusions: Our data suggest that BCR-ABL-mediated oncogene
addiction is a consequence of a high level of physiologic negative
feedback mechanisms that dampen growth factor receptor signaling. Our
findings also help reconcile recent evidence that JAK2 inhibition
restores the sensitivity of CML stem/progenitor cells to ABL TKI
treatment in vitro with the observation that JAK2 is completely
dispensable for BCR-ABL-induced myeloid disease in mice.

