Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined treatment of BTK and PI3K inhibitors synergistically
disrupts BCR-signaling, overcomes microenviroment-mediated survival and
drug resistance in mantle cell lymphoma.


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is recognized as an aggressive lymphoma
characterized by overexpression of cyclin D1 as a result of t (11:14)
translocation. It carries poor prognosis due to the emergence of drug
resistance and currently no effective cure is available for this disease.
Dynamic interactions between the lymphoma cell and its microenvironment
play a critical role in lymphoma development and response to therapy.
Recently, inhibitors of BCR signaling have become an area of substantial
clinical interest. B-cell receptor (BCR) provides essential growth and
survival signals to lymphomas. We therefore studied the role of BCR
signal pathways in stroma mediated survival and drug resistance of mental
cell lymphoma.We demonstrate that all mantle cell lymphoma cell lines and
primary MCL cells express key BCR downstream signaling molecules, BTK
(Bruton's tyrosine kinase), AKT and ERK, in activated (phosphorylated)
form. Phosphorylation statutes of pBTK, pAKT and pERK are further up
regulated upon adhesion to lymph node stroma cells. Cell adhesion between
lymphoma cells and tumor stroma cells is essential for tumor cell
survival and drug resistance. Inhibition of BTK by PCI 32765 or PI3K by
CAL101 abolishes intrinsic as well as stroma induced activation of BTK,
AKT, ERK. It also significantly disrupts tumor - stromal cell adhesion
and induces cell apoptosis. Moreover, combined treatment of PCI 32765 and
CAL101 synergetically inhibit BCR signaling and induce cell apoptosis in
absence and presence of HK stroma cells.CXCR4 has been reported to play a
critical role in lymphoma cell homing, migration, and adhesion. We
evaluated CXCR4 expression upon MCL adhesion to stroma cells. We
demonstrate that the CXCR4 level was significantly increased in Jeko-1
and HBL2 cell lines and primary MCL cells when co-cultured with HK stroma
cells. The stroma cells-induced CXCR4 increase was significantly
abolished by BCR signaling inhibitors, PCI 32765 and Cal101.We further
explored the effect of those inhibitors on cyclin D1. We show that cyclin
D1 is constitutively expressed in MCL cell lines and primary MCL cells
and that its expression was further increased when co-cultured with HK
stoma cells. Both PCI 32765 and Cal101 decreased intrinsic cyclin D1
expression in the absence and presence of HK cells. Furthermore, combined
treatment of PCI 32765 and Cal101 more strikingly attenuated cyclin D1
expression than either agent alone.Collectively, Our study demonstrates
(1) the constitutive expression and biological function of BCR signaling
in MCL, (2) the essential role of BCR signaling in microenvironment
(stroma cell) mediated MCL survival, adhesion and drug resistance, and
(3) the therapeutic potential of using novel BCR inhibitors, PCI 32765
and Cal101, in single or combine for MCL therapy.

