Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Olaparib increases antitumor effects on epigenetically
RAD51C-deficient human cancer cells.


Background: The poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor, olaparib,
has been found to have a therapeutic potential for treating cancers that
have an impaired DNA repair ability. RAD51C has been reported to play an
essential role in DNA repair mediated by homologous recombination. In
addition, RAD51C is a gene that affects human cancer susceptibility,
similar to BRCA1 and BRCA2. RAD51C-defective cancers can therefore be
potentially treated with olaparib because DNA damage induced by olaparib
cannot be effectively repaired by HR since RAD51C deficiency interferes
with RAD51-mediated HR.Materials and Methods: We studied the growth
inhibitory effects of olaparib on human cancer cell lines using
clonogenic survival assays. Cell cycle analysis and molecular changed
induced by olaparib were also performed. DNA methylation status in cancer
cells and tumor tissue samples was also determined by using bisulfate
sequencing.Results: Olaparib is effective to RAD51C-defective cells.
Olaparib leads to the accumulation of unrepaired DSBs due to
dysfunctional RAD51 foci formation along with increased caspase
3-dependent cell death and G2/M arrest in RAD51C-defective cells.
Moreover, the growth of RAD51C-deficient SNU601 tumor cells in a
xenograft model decreased significantly following treatment with
olaparib. Furthermore, RAD51C expression was significantly decreased in
cancer and the lack of RAD51C was attributed to DNA methylation and
histone modification. Our findings showed that the loss of RAD51C
expression due to epigenetic silencing leads to olaparib sensitivity in
cancer cells.Conclusion: The loss of RAD51C expression was frequently
associated with human cancers. We used a novel synthetic lethal approach
using PARP inhibitors and observed that RAD51C was a participant in the
DNA repair pathway. Our findings have potential clinical application for
treating cancers with RAD51C deficiencies. Furthermore, we determined
that RAD51C may serve as a novel biomarker for identifying
olaparib-sensitive patients, thereby allowing physicians to select the
most effective modalities for treating these individuals.

