Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Divergent roles of Akt isoforms in insulin-like growth
factor-mediated lung tumorigenesis.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer related mortalities worldwide.
Akt is an important kinase in the PI3K pathway of growth factor
signaling, and increased Akt activation in lung cancer is associated with
poor prognosis. Akt regulates cell growth, proliferation, survival,
metabolism and migration making it an attractive target for molecular
therapies. Akt exists as three isoforms (Akt1-3) and while it was
previously thought they were largely redundant in activity, evidence of
differing roles is emerging. Our lab has generated a
doxycycline-inducible, tissue-specific transgenic mouse model of lung
cancer. Using a surfactant protein C (SPC) promoter, the type I
insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-IR) is overexpressed in type II
alveolar cells which initiates the development of tumors in the lungs.
Following nine months of treatment with doxycycline, macroscopic tumors
are present on 100% of transgenic mice. These lung adenomas typically
present as one or more discrete nodules on the surface of the lung. In
this model, cells expressing high levels of IGF-IR also had higher levels
of activated Akt. To investigate the role of specific Akt isoforms in
lung tumorigenesis, these SPC-IGFIR transgenic mice were crossed with
Akt1 null or Akt2 null mice to generate SPC-IGFIR-Akt1-/- and
SPC-IGFIR-Akt2-/- mice. The Akt1 null SPC-IGFIR mice have reduced tumor
burden compared to their Akt wild-type counterparts. In contrast, the
absence of Akt2 accelerates tumor growth in SPC-IGFIR mice. Tumors formed
in Akt1 null mice maintain the phenotype of distinct nodules. However, in
the advanced tumor progression seen in Akt2 null mice the tumor tissue
appears to permeate the lungs rather than form large nodules. These
tumors are currently being characterized through evaluation of
intracellular signaling as well as rates of proliferation and apoptosis.
Initial results indicate opposing roles of Akt1 and Akt2 in the
development and progression of lung cancer. While pan-Akt inhibitors are
currently in clinical trials, our data suggests targeting Akt1 may be a
more effective therapeutic strategy for lung cancer. However, further
understanding of the function of each Akt isoform in lung cancer is
needed.

