Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fc gamma receptor IIIa polymorphisms correlated with
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC): anti-EGFR
antibodies induced and clinical outcome in metastatic colorectal cancer
patients.


Anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies have shown efficacy in the treatment of
metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). One of the mechanism is the
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) in which Fc region
of the antibody binds to the Fc gamma receptors (FcR) expressed by immune
cells. The present study investigated the association between single
nucleotide polymorphisms of FcRIIa and FcRIIIa, in vitro ADCC and
clinical outcome in mCRC patients treated with anti-EGFR antibodies.
Fifty-five consecutive patients with mCRC were analyzed and the genotypes
were distributed as follow: 38%HH, 47%HR and 15%RR for FcRIIa; 26%VV,
44%VF and 30%FF for FcRIIIa. The genotype frequencies in both were in
Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium. Heterozygosis for FcRIIa-H131R and
FcRIIIa-V158F polymorphisms were the most common genotype detected in
mCRC and in healthy subjects (n=148) . The genotype frequencies of the
H131R and V158F did not significantly differ between the two groups (p=
0.626, p=0.613 respectively). ADCC-cetuximab mediated was evaluate in
HT29 human colon cancer cell line through two in vitro assays (SRB
assayand CytoTox96) demonstrated to be technically comparable.
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) activated PBMCs (LAK) cells of 55 study cases were
used to evaluate in vitro ADCC-cetuximab mediated against HT-29, human
colon cancer cells. Patients carrying the Fc gamma IIIA genotypes V/V or
V/F induced an higher ADCC- cetuximab mediated compared to F/F carrying
patients (average value ADCC with cetuximab-ADCC without cetuximab in
patients carrying VV genotype = 39%, average value ADCC with
cetuximab-ADCC without cetuximab in patients carrying V/F = 21% and
average value ADCC with cetuximab-ADCC without cetuximab in patients
carrying F/F genotype 6% respectively;pAnti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies
have shown efficacy in the treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer
(mCRC). One of the mechanism is the antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity (ADCC) in which Fc region of the antibody binds to the Fc
gamma receptors (FcR) expressed by immune cells. The present study
investigated the association between single nucleotide polymorphisms of
FcRIIa and FcRIIIa, in vitro ADCC and clinical outcome in mCRC patients
treated with anti-EGFR antibodies. Fifty-five consecutive patients with
mCRC were analyzed and the genotypes were distributed as follow: 38%HH,
47%HR and 15%RR for FcRIIa; 26%VV, 44%VF and 30%FF for FcRIIIa. The
genotype frequencies in both were in Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium.
Heterozygosis for FcRIIa-H131R and FcRIIIa-V158F polymorphisms were the
most common genotype detected in mCRC and in healthy subjects (n=148) .
The genotype frequencies of the H131R and V158F did not significantly
differ between the two groups (p= 0.626, p=0.613 respectively).
ADCC-cetuximab mediated was evaluate in HT29 human colon cancer cell line
through two in vitro assays (SRB assayand CytoTox96) demonstrated to be
technically comparable. Interleukin-2 (IL-2) activated PBMCs (LAK) cells
of 55 study cases were used to evaluate in vitro ADCC-cetuximab mediated
against HT-29, human colon cancer cells. Patients carrying the Fc gamma
IIIA genotypes V/V or V/F induced an higher ADCC- cetuximab mediated
compared to F/F carrying patients (average value ADCC with cetuximab-ADCC
without cetuximab in patients carrying VV genotype = 39%, average value
ADCC with cetuximab-ADCC without cetuximab in patients carrying V/F = 21%
and average value ADCC with cetuximab-ADCC without cetuximab in patients
carrying F/F genotype 6% respectively;p<0.001). To investigate the role
of FcRIIIa higher expression in ADCC, FcRIIIa mRNA expression was
determined by quantitative real-time PCR in 34 mCRC patients distributed
for genotype as follows 12VV, 14VF and 8FF. Although the FcRIIIa
transcript level was higher in patients with FcRIIIa-158 V/V or V/F
compared to F/F, analysis of variance showed no statistically significant
differences (p=0.240). The study is currently recruiting consecutive mCRC
patients evaluating FcR polymorphisms, the effective in vitro
cetuximab-ADCC activity and biological tumor features to be evaluated
with a prognostic/ predictive intent.

