Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of candidate gastrointestinal cancer genes with ion
channel functions, identified from Sleeping Beauty transposon-mediated
mutagenesis screens in mice.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in the US. To identify the genetic alterations contributing to
CRC, our labs have used Sleeping Beauty (SB)-transposon-mediated
mutagenesis screens in Apc+/+ and ApcMin mice. These screens have
identified a set of common insertion site (CIS) associated candidate
cancer genes, that when dysregulated, may contribute to CRC development.
Depletion of several CIS genes identified from an SB screen in ApcMin
mice resulted in a significant decrease in human CRC cell viability. The
SB screen in Apc+/+ mice has generated a list of CIS genes including two
ion-channel encoding genes: Kcnq1 (potassium voltage-gated channel,
KQT-like subfamily, member 1) and Cftr (cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator, ATP-binding cassette sub-family C, member 7) which
act together to promote chloride ion secretion in the normal colon. We
hypothesize that these candidate genes, when dysregulated, contribute to
the development of CRC. The function of the candidate genes is being
tested in a mouse model of Kcnq1 haploinsufficiency that was introgressed
into the ApcMin model of GI cancer and in human CRC cell line DLD-1. In
the mouse model, Kcnq1 expression is abrogated by targeted germline
mutagenesis, resulting in a null allele. In cell culture, expression of
each candidate gene is depleted by siRNA knockdown, confirmed by
quantitative real time PCR and followed by measurements of cancer-related
phenotypes which include cell viability measured by the MTT assay. We
found that haploinsufficiency for Kcnq1 significantly enhances
tumorigenesis in ApcMin mice. In support of this result, a 60% knockdown
of KCNQ1 in DLD-1 cells resulted in 1.4x increase in cell viability,
compared with a control siRNA treatment at day seven after transfection.
The normal physiological functions of KCNQ1 indicate it may work with
CFTR to prevent inflammation in the GI tract, thus suggesting that loss
of KCNQ1 or CFTR may be oncogenic via an inflammatory mechanism. To begin
testing this idea, colon tissues of Kcnq1+/+ and Kcnq1/ mice were
compared for expression of the inflammatory mediator Nfkb. Nfkb mRNA
level was increased by 1.6x in Kcnq1/ mice. To begin testing the
potential connections between KCNQ1 and CFTR, CFTR was successfully
depleted by 40% in DLD-1 cells and the effect on cell viability and
inflammatory mediators expression is being determined. In summary, our
results of both in vivo and in vitro studies confirm a tumor suppressor
role for Kcnq1 in the GI tract. Current work is focused on investigating
the model that genetic alterations of KCNQ1 and CFTR promote oncogenesis
by a common pathway, possibly by an inflammatory mechanism.

