Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of MDM2-mediated signaling in context of DNA damage
increases E2F1 expression and enhances cell death in triple-negative
breast cancer cells.


Metastatic breast cancer is highly refractive to current treatment
strategies and new multi-targeted treatments need to be elucidated. In
metastatic disease, blocking key protein-protein interactions with the
murine double minute 2 (MDM2) could be beneficial for developing new
treatment modalities since this signaling pathway is a critical
regulatory point in cancer progression. Inhibition of protein binding to
the hydrophobic pocket of MDM2 by Nutlin-3a can result in increases in
pro-apoptotic proteins such as p53, p73, and E2F1. Since the DNA damaging
agent carboplatin is being studied in clinical trials of triple-negative
breast cancers (TNBCs), our objective was to evaluate the effects of
carboplatin and Nutlin-3a in combination in TNBC cancer in a mutant p53
background. We utilized TMD231 breast cancer cells derived from the
MDA-MB-231 human TNBC cancer line. TMD231 cells are highly metastatic in
vivo and readily metastasize from the primary tumor to the lung.
Combination studies were performed using different ratios of carboplatin
to Nutlin-3a to evaluate the range of carboplatin-mediated DNA damage
required to obtain synergism with inhibition of MDM2 function. A fixed
ratio of 1:1 carboplatin:Nutlin-3a was strongly synergistic with a
combination index of Metastatic breast cancer is highly refractive to
current treatment strategies and new multi-targeted treatments need to be
elucidated. In metastatic disease, blocking key protein-protein
interactions with the murine double minute 2 (MDM2) could be beneficial
for developing new treatment modalities since this signaling pathway is a
critical regulatory point in cancer progression. Inhibition of protein
binding to the hydrophobic pocket of MDM2 by Nutlin-3a can result in
increases in pro-apoptotic proteins such as p53, p73, and E2F1. Since the
DNA damaging agent carboplatin is being studied in clinical trials of
triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs), our objective was to evaluate the
effects of carboplatin and Nutlin-3a in combination in TNBC cancer in a
mutant p53 background. We utilized TMD231 breast cancer cells derived
from the MDA-MB-231 human TNBC cancer line. TMD231 cells are highly
metastatic in vivo and readily metastasize from the primary tumor to the
lung. Combination studies were performed using different ratios of
carboplatin to Nutlin-3a to evaluate the range of carboplatin-mediated
DNA damage required to obtain synergism with inhibition of MDM2 function.
A fixed ratio of 1:1 carboplatin:Nutlin-3a was strongly synergistic with
a combination index of < 0.5. In cell proliferation assays there was
increased sensitivity to the drugs when given together and a significant
reduction in number of colonies in colony formation assays. In order to
understand how DNA damage and inhibition of MDM2 signaling leads to
enhanced cell death, dose-response and time-course studies were
performed. Western analyses demonstrated increases in E2F1 when treated
with carboplatin and Nutlin-3a alone, and a time-dependent increase in
E2F1 following combination treatment at a fixed 1:1 ratio. Following DNA
damage, E2F1 has been shown to promote the transcription of pro-apoptotic
genes and repression of survival genes once E2F1 is released from
interaction with Rb. Here, E2F1 levels correlated with Rb phosphorylation
at serine 780, a phosphorylation site which inhibits binding of E2F1 to
Rb. The E3 ubiquitin ligase Itch, which ubiquitinates p73, increased
following treatment with carboplatin alone or in combination with
Nutlin-3a in a dose- and time-dependent manner but appeared not to
regulate p73 since p73 levels remained unchanged following combination
treatment. Studies are ongoing to further understand how modulation of
DNA damage by blockade of MDM2 results in a robust synergistic response
and how upregulation of E2F1 affects downstream targets. The impact of
the combination of DNA damaging carboplatin and MDM2 blockade by
Nutlin-3a on DNA repair kinetics is currently being evaluated in an
orthotopic TMD231 model. These studies will lead to a better
understanding of how to potentiate DNA damage and may lead to new
clinical therapies in the future.

