Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduced glucose uptake and inhibition of ATP synthase by
mefloquine results in death of glioblastoma multiforme.


A number of studies have shown that increased expression of glucose
transporters (GLUT) facilitates the high level of glycolytic activity
found in most cancers. As well, increased expression of GLUT3 has been
linked to chemoresistance towards temozolomide (TMZ), the current drug of
choice for the treatment of malignant glioma (GBM). This relation between
glucose metabolism on one side, and cancer survival and drug resistance
on the other, demands further interrogation to more precisely dissect the
mechanism(s) driving this cellular adaptation. Insights as to the
relation between tumor metabolism and chemoresistance development can
provide important information in order to exploit this mechanism as a
potential drug target. To this end, we have investigated whether
mefloquine (MQ), an FDA-approved antimalarial agent, can be used to
inhibit the growth of glioma cells expressing high levels of GLUT3.We
evaluated the effects of MQ on cellular viability and proliferation by
MTT assay and colony formation assay. Markers of apoptosis (e.g. cleavage
of caspase 7 and PARP) were analyzed by Western blot, and necrosis was
quantitated by LDH release. The effect of MQ on GLUT3 levels was studied
by Western blot, and the uptake of glucose was analyzed by using
fluorescently labeled 2-deoxy-glucose. Mitochondrial respiration and
glycolytic flux were measured using the Seahorse Extracellular Flux
Analyzer. We also analyzed the effects of MQ on individual complexes of
the electron transport chain.MQ exerted cytotoxic effects on GBM cell
lines, including highly TMZ-resistant variants.Cell death was primarily
necrosis, with only limited involvement of apoptosis. Treatment with MQ
was able to reduce GLUT3 expression, which correlated with reduced
glucose uptake in a dose-dependent manner. Methyl pyruvate treatment
provided only partial protection from MQ mediated cytotoxicity. MQ also
displayed direct inhibition of complex V (ATP synthase) of the
mitochondrial electron transport chain. Overall cellular ATP production
was severely down-regulated by MQ.The cytotoxic potency of MQ on GBM cell
lines, including highly drug-resistant variants, appears to be caused by
drug-induced depletion of cellular energy (ATP), due to decreased
glycolytic flux (as a result of reduced glucose uptake) in combination
with inhibition of mitochondrial respiration (as a result of potent
inhibition of ATP synthase). Exhaustion of cellular ATP precludes
apoptosis, which might explain why MQ primarily triggers necrotic cell
death. Considering the sugar-craving phenotype of most tumor cells, MQ
appears to be well suited to exploit this feature in order to selectively
starve malignant cells to death. Thus, our preliminary data suggest that
MQ should be further investigated for cancer therapeutic approaches aimed
at tumor cell metabolism.

