Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of predictive biomarker gene expression signatures
that associates with drug sensitivity and kinase activation in breast
cancer.


Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease that is commonly divided into 3
specific subtypes. Hormone receptor positive breast cancers that express
either the estrogen or progesterone receptors are commonly treated with
anti-estrogen therapies and have a favorable clinical outcome. HER2
positive breast cancers that overexpress the HER2 oncogene, are treated
with HER2-directed therapies, including Herceptin and Pertuzumab, which
has dramatically improved the clinical outcome in this group. Triple
negative breast cancers lack expression of estrogen receptor,
progesterone receptor and HER2, are treated with chemotherapeutic
regimens and have the worst prognosis in this disease. Recent studies
indicates that key kinase driving events are common within specific
subtypes of breast cancer, for example, the PIK3CA gene encoding
p110-alpha subunit of PI3-kinase, which drives downstream pro-survival
signals, is mutated in 35-40% of hormone receptor positive breast
cancers, implicating potential new treatment strategies. Moreover, as
emerging clinical evidence suggests that anti-tumor activity to targeted
anti-cancer medicines is usually limited to specific patient subsets, the
identification of predictive biomarkers is essential for the clinical
development of new therapeutic agents.Clinical validation of in vitro
derived predictive biomarkers has been largely hampered due to commonly
used formalin fixed, paraffin embedded procedures that results in low
yield and often degraded nucleic acids. In this study, we use the
NanoString nCounter gene expression system to characterize and validate
candidate biomarkers using an in-house derived custom panel of 400 genes,
which includes key breast cancer-related genes, immune-related genes and
pro-survival genes that encompass the PI3-kinse and MAP-kinase pathways.
As a proof-of-concept, we compared the NanoString nCounter to commonly
used platforms including Affymetrix microarray, RNA sequencing and
BioMark in a panel of FFPE extracted breast cancer cell lines. Firstly,
we applied the 400-gene signature to a panel of breast cancer cell lines
to derive gene signatures that correlate with response to anti-cancer
agents such as PI3-kinase, MAP-kinase inhibitors and chemotherapy agents.
Next, we applied our in vitro derived sensitivity signature to a panel of
150 breast cancer FFPE tumors and demonstrate that the sensitivity
signatures derived in vitro are observed, thereby potentially identifying
clinically actionable patient subsets. Finally, we correlated our gene
signature with mutations and copy number alterations commonly altered in
breast cancer. In summary, we show that an in-house derived custom gene
panel identifies biomarkers of response to anti-cancer medicines and
associates with key kinase-driving events, a crucial study for the future
development of targeted anti-cancer medicines.

