Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphatase of regenerating liver-3 (PRL-3): a novel metastatic
taret for prostate cancer.


Prostate carcinoma (PCa) is one of the most frequently diagnosed cancers
in US men causing an estimated 30,000 deaths annually. The primary cause
for deaths related to PCa is the development of metastases. Although
these patients initially respond to traditional androgen ablation
therapy, they invariably develop metastasis and shortened life span
following treatment failure. What causes metastases in PCa patients
remains poorly understood. Recently, Phosphatase of Regenerating Liver-3
(PRL-3) has been discovered as a unique gene involved in the promotion of
metastasis of several cancers including colorectal cancer, ovarian
cancer, breast cancer, cervical cancer, and lung cancer. However, its
involvement in PCa metastases is not yet known. Our current studies
utilizing chromosomal microarray analysis confirmed that PRL-3 gene is
amplified in prostate cancer. Additional studies conducted using
real-time PCR and Western blot analyses confirmed that PRL-3 is
overexpressed in advanced prostate cancer cells. To determine the
functional significance of PRL-3 expression in PCa pathology, we designed
a series of studies (cell proliferation, anchorage-independent growth,
and migration assays as endpoints) to therapeutically target PRL-3
expression using DU145 and PC-3 metastatic cell lines as model systems.
Targeting PRL-3 expression either by RNAi or by pharmacological
inhibition using
5-[[5-bromo-2-[(2-bromophenyl)methoxy]phenyl]methylene]-2-thioxo-4-thiazoli
dinone resulted in substantial reduction of PCa cell proliferation,
anchorage-independent growth and migration ability of these PCa cells.
Furthermore, we identified dibenzoyl methane (DBM), a curcumin analog
present in licorice root, as a potential non-toxic natural inhibitor of
PRL-3 in PCa cells. Specifically, DBM treatment downregulated the
expression of PRL-3 resulting in the inhibition of cell proliferation,
loss of anchorage-independent growth and mitigating the motility of PC-3
and DU145 cells in vitro. Importantly, administration of DBM to nude mice
bearing prostate tumors derived from PC-3 and DU145 cells resulted in
regression of these tumors. To gain further mechanistic insights into how
PRL-3 expression promotes aggressive traits in PCa cells, cell signaling
studies were carried out using panel of PCa cell lines. These studies
revealed that Translationally Controlled Tumor Protein and dsRNA
dependent protein kinase R may be important mediators of PRL-3 aggressive
behavior in PCa cells. Our results for the first time show that PRL-3 may
have a prominent role in the progression of PCa and may serve as a
potential prognostic and therapeutic target for advanced PCa.

