Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and discovery of novel small molecule redox modulators as
therapies for pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic cancer is a complex disease. Late stage detection, poor
prognosis, and resistance to available chemotherapeutics highlight the
need to discover new and potent anticancer agents for its effective
treatment. Altered cellular bioenergetics and oxidative stress are
emerging hallmarks of most forms of cancer including pancreatic cancer.
Cancer cells are more prone to reactive oxygen species (ROS)-mediated
cell death due to their inherent elevated basal oxidative stress as
compared to normal cells. Increased basal ROS levels could represent the
Achilles heel of cancer cells. Even though cancer cells have adapted to
survive in an oxidative stress environment, exogenous oxidative insults
can overwhelm the adaptive antioxidant capacity of cancer cells and
trigger ROS-mediated cell deathWe have identified a novel class of
compounds that act as redox modulators and specifically induce cell death
in cancer cells. Compound 3a was identified through a medium throughput
screen of 1000 highly diverse in-house compounds and chemotherapeutic
agents for their ability to alter cellular bioenergetics using XF 24
extracellular flux analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience, Billerica, MA). Further
structural optimizations led to the discovery of a more potent analog, 3b
that displayed anti-proliferative activities at low micromolar levels in
both drug-sensitive and drug-resistant cancer cell lines. Treatment with
compound 3b causes Akt activation resulting in increased cellular oxygen
consumption, oxidative stress and depletion of cellular antioxidant pool
in pancreatic cancer cells. Akt is a pro-survival kinase that is
upregulated in several forms of human cancers. Hyperactive Akt inhibits
apoptosis induced by numerous stimuli. However, Akt is unable to inhibit
ROS-mediated cell death, and in fact, Akt aids in ROS-directed cell death
by inducing cellular oxygen consumption, promoting ROS generation, and
impairing ROS degeneration.Moreover, oxidative stress induced by 3b
promoted activation of stress kinases (p38/JNK) and resulted in cancer
cell apoptosis. Treatment with antioxidants was able to reduce cell death
confirming ROS-mediated cytotoxicity. In conclusion, our novel class of
compounds are promising leads that by exacerbating oxygen consumption,
ROS production, and reducing the antioxidant capacity of cancer cells tip
the balance towards activation of stress kinases that ultimately leads to
cell death.

