Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SIRT regulates the molecular interaction between c-MYC and HIF-1
in multiple myeloma.


Multiple Myeloma (MM) is an incurable hematologic malignancy
characterized by the accumulation of malignant plasma cells.
Dysregulation of MYC by rearrangement or translocation are common somatic
events described either in early or late stage of the disease, and
transcriptional profiling of MYC pathway activation is observed in more
than 60% of MM cell lines. Hypoxia Inducible Factor-1 (HIF-1)
overexpression has been described in several MM cell lines and in about
30% of MM patients samples. In solid tumours, deregulation of c-MYC has
been associated with HIF-1 up-regulation.In the present study we explored
the interaction between c-MYC and HIF-1 in a panel of MM cell lines. We
had previously shown that treatment with EZN2968, an antisense
oligonucleotide against HIF-1, resulted in a significantly reduction of
HIF-1 protein level as soon as 24h and lasted over 96h. To confirm the
inhibition of HIF-1 activity, MM1S cells were treated with EZN2968 for
24h, lysed, co-precipitated with p300, and incubated with anti-HIF-1
antibody. We showed that HIF-1 was no longer associated p300 in
EZN-treated compared to untreated samples, suggesting an inhibitory
effect of HIF-1 activity. We next observed that treatment with EZN2968
induced a progressive accumulation of cells in S-phase with concomitant
reduction of G2/M phase. By western blot analysis, we observed that p21,
cell cycle check point negatively regulated by c-MYC, was up-regulated in
treated samples. We further verified the effect of HIF-1 inhibition on
c-MYC protein level by western blotting. After treatment with EZN2968,
c-MYC protein expression was reduced in a time dependent manner,
suggesting that c-MYC protein level is associated with inhibition of
HIF-1. To examine whether HIF-1 and c-MYC regulate each other promoter
activity, we performed Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays with
HIF-1 or c-MYC antibodies. HIF-1A and MYC promoter amplification signals,
were present in the controls samples, and decreased after EZN2968
exposure.Recently, it has been shown that SIRT1, a transcription factor
involved in a development and cellular stress responses, can modulate
HIF-1 and c-MYC activity. By Immunoblotting assay, we observed that SIRT1
physically interacts with both proteins and that, after 24h of exposure
to EZN2968, c-MYC and HIF-1 were strongly associated to SIRT1. These
results were also confirmed at the transcriptional level, by ChIP assay
using an anti-SIRT1 antibody. After 24h of treatment with EZN2968, we
observed a significant increase of HIF-1A and MYC promoter amplification
signals in treated compared to untreated samples, suggesting that SIRT1
recruitment at both promoters is dependent on HIF inhibition.We showed
that in MM cells the expression of HIF-1 and c-MYC are linked and
mediated by SIRT1 deacetylase protein. The data suggests a new regulatory
mechanism for controlling c-MYC and HIF-1 activity by SIRT1.Supported by
PRIN.

