Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapamycin-resistant HIF-1 expression in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) cells and high sensitivity of endothelial cells within HCC tissues
to rapamycin.


HIF-1 plays a pivotal role in cancer development via cellular
growth,proliferation, survival, metabolism and angiogenesis. High
expression of HIF-1, a regulatory component of HIF-1, in cancer cells is
due to increased synthesis of HIF-1 via the increased translation of
HIF-1 mRNA under the influence of activated mTORC1 signaling as well as
decreased HIF-1 degradation that is either on oxygen-dependent or
independent mechanism. In mouse hepatocarcinogenesis, our previous data
demonstrated that HIF-1 is overexpressed depending on the PI3K-Akt
pathway from earliest stage and that HIF-1 knockdown by using siRNA
resulted in marked growth retardation and cell death in HCC cells. We
here demonstrated that Akt, 4E binding protein 1 (4EBP1) and p70
ribosomal protein S6 kinase (S6K) were hyperphosphorylated in mouse
hepatic tumors and HCC cells, indicating that the PI3K-Akt-mTORC1 pathway
was activated. However, although rapamycin, an inhibitor of mTORC1,
effectively suppressed phosphorylation of 4EBP1 and S6K in HCC cells, HCC
cells were resistant to rapamycin where HIF-1 continued to be expressed
during rapamycin treatment. This HIF-1 expression was due to de novo
synthesis of HIF-1 during rapamycin treatment as well as HIF-1
stabilization due to binding of HIF-1 to HSP90 that was constitutively
over-expressed in the HCC cells. On the other hand, rapamycin induced
extensive hemorrhagic necrosis in HCC tissues in vivo but not in normal
liver or adenomas (benign lesions). Phosphorylated ribosome protein
subunit 6 (rps6), the downstream phosphorylation target of mTORC1-S6K
pathway, was specifically detected in the endothelial cells within HCCs
but not those in normal liver or adenomas. Furthermore, rapamycin
decreased proliferation of endothelial cells in vitro, reducing HIF-1
expression together with the decreased 4EBP and S6K phosphorylation,
indicating that the endothelial cells within HCCs were especially
sensitive to rapamycin. Dual treatment with inhibitors for mTOR and
HSP90, therefore, could target both HCC cells and endothelial cells
within HCCs, which might be an effective therapy for HCCs.

