Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-Wide Gene Expression analysis and molecular portraits
regulated by NASEp, an inhibitor of CREB and CBP interaction, in
non-small cell lung cancer.


Cyclic-AMP response element-binding protein (CREB)-cAMP response element
(CRE) transcriptional pathway plays a critical role in the growth and
survival of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. Recruitment of CREB
binding protein (CBP) is essential for the transcriptional activity of
CREB. However, there is no specific drug in use blocking CREB-CRE
transcriptional pathway which may become a new therapeutic target in
anti-cancer strategy. Naphthol AS-E phosphate (NASEp) was identified as
an inhibitor of CREB transcriptional activity by binding to the KIX
domain of CBP and blocking its access to the KID domain in CREB. Our
objective was to identify which genes and molecular pathways could be
affected by NASEp that may alter target molecules through the regulation
of a subset of CRE-containing genes. The effects of the CREB inhibitor
NASEp on A549 lung carcinoma cells were examined on an Affymetrix HuGene
1.0 expression microarray and a list of significantly differentially
regulated genes was generated. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) shows
down-regulation of multiple cancer-related pathways including
proliferation, RAS signaling, drug resistance and metastasis. Most
significantly, a strong negative correlation with Rosty Cervical Cancer
Proliferation Cluster, shows that NASEp inhibits the same set of genes
which are up regulated by the E6 and E7 viral oncogenes. These viral
elements are known to interact with CBP, which is the direct target of
NASEp. Since CBP is known to be a cofactor to multiple transcription
factors, we performed an additional round of GSEA using the motif-based
Transcription Factor Targets gene set collection and represented the
results using a Cytoscape network diagram to illustrate the
multifactorial effects of NASEp. Particularly, we focused that several
transcription factors regulating cell cycle-related genes. This study
implicates potential combinational blockage of CREB and cell
cycle-regulated proteins as a cancer therapy.

