Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of androgen receptor (AR) splice variants, AR
somatic mutations and TMPRSS2:ETS fusion genes in prostate cancer FFPET
by qRT-PCR.


Prostate Cancer (PCa) is the third most common cause of death from cancer
in men of all ages. Surgical or medical castration is one of the most
common treatments for patients with advanced PCa; however a majority of
patients develop castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), tumor
relapse, which remains to be the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths of men in the US. Androgen receptor (AR) signaling is shown to
play a critical role in the development and progression of PCa. Genetic
aberrations within AR, including constitutively active AR splice variants
and AR point mutations have been identified in CRPC. The most common AR
splice variants lack the ligand-binding domain (LBD), which is often the
target of CRPC therapies. Therefore, presence of these variants may act
as a mechanism of resistance to AR-targeted therapies leading to the
progression of prostate tumor growth. Additional PCa specific genetic
aberrations include fusions between the androgen-related gene, TMPRSS2
and the ETS transcription factors, ERG (predominant) and ETV1. These
fusion events are frequently associated with more aggressive prostate
cancers leading to poorer prognosis. In this study, we developed TaqMan
qRT-PCR assays to evaluate the presence of several previously identified
AR splice variants, including ARV1, ARV3/V7, ARV567 and ARV8, AR somatic
mutations, including L701H, V715M, H874Y and T877A, along with TMPRSS2
fusion genes, TMPRSS2:ERG and TMPRSS2:ETV1, in two independent PCa FFPET
sample sets. The first sample set consisted of 42 Prostate
adenocarcinomas ranging from stage II to stage IV. Results showed that
ARV1 and ARV3/V7 were the most prevalent variants with 92% of all samples
showing expression of either or both variant. TMPRSS2: ERG was present in
72% of all samples tested, with a high concordance to AR variant
expression, prevalent in later stage (III/IV) PCa samples. The second
sample set consisted of 8 prostate adenocarcinomas, including matched
adjacent normal FFPET. Similar expression of the AR variants was observed
in both the tumor and matched normal samples, however tumor prostate
samples showed a higher and more prevalent expression (66.67%) of the
TMPRSS2: ERG fusion gene than in the matched normal samples (33%). None
of the four AR mutations evaluated were detected in either sample set.
Overall, these findings demonstrate a strong presence of both AR splice
variants and the TMPRSS2: ERG fusion gene in the prostate cancer patient
population, supporting evidence for a functional role of these markers in
PCa diagnosis and disease progression. Furthermore, presence of LBD
negative AR splice variants indicates an attractive biomarker for
stratification of the patient population resistant to AR targeted
therapies.

