Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of musashi-1 in tumor progression in non-small cell lung
cancer.


We have previously developed an in vivo mouse model of metastatic lung
adenocarcinoma by combining a mutant p53 allele (p53R175HG) with a
KrasG12D allele (KrasLA1). From the tumors arising in KrasLA1/+;
p53R172HG/+ mice, we have established lung adenocarcinoma cell lines (KP
cells) with high (344SQ) or low (393P) metastatic potential. The
metastatic potential of KP cells is governed by Zeb-1 and the
microRNA-200 family, which interact through a double-negative feedback
loop. Given that metastatic KP cells exhibit the capacity to form
polarized epithelial spheres in Matrigel and undergo
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in response to extracellular
cues, we hypothesized that stem cell factors serve as drivers of tumor
cell invasion and metastasis in this model. We examined the expression of
13 stem cell factors in metastatic and non-metastatic KP cell lines using
qPCR and found that Musashi-1 (Msi-1) was more highly expressed in
metastatic KP cells, which was confirmed by western analysis. Msi1 is an
RNA-binding protein that plays a central role during nervous system
development, stem cell maintenance, and tumorigenesis. High levels of
Msi1 have been reported in several malignancies including brain tumors,
colon and breast cancer, and associate with poor survival in patients
with breast and colon cancer. We have used a panel of human lung cancer
cell lines and found Msi-1 protein to be expressed in lung adenocarcinoma
and squamous carcinoma cell lines. Further analysis revealed that Msi-1
expression is up-regulated by Zeb-1 and down-regulated by miR-200,
raising the possibility that Msi-1 functions as a downstream mediator of
the Zeb-1/miR-200 axis, which we are currently investigating by carrying
out Msi-1 loss-of-function and gain-of-function experiments and by
analyzing human tissue microarrays to determine whether Msi-1 has
prognostic value in patients. Our data suggests that Msi-1 is a candidate
driver of tumor progression in NSCLC.

