Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemopreventive effects of -santalol on ultraviolet B induced skin
tumorigenesis by modulating cell cycle regulators.


Previous studies from our laboratory have shown chemopreventive effects
of 5% -santalol, a sequiterpene isolated from the sandalwood oil in
ultraviolet-B induced skin tumor multiplicity in SKH-1 hairless mice.
However, this dosage did not have significant effect on tumor incidence.
The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of -santalol
(10%, w/v in acetone) on UVB-induced skin tumor incidence in SKH-1
hairless mouse model and to identify the molecular targets in -santalol
mediated protection. Tumor initiation and promotion were carried out by
UVB radiation (30 mJ/cm2/day for 5 days a week up to 30 week) that is in
the range of human exposure to sunlight that can cause skin cancer.
Topical treatment of mice with -santalol causes a significant reduction
in tumor multiplicity, tumor volume and tumor incidence, and also delayed
tumor development. Histopathological analysis of hematoxylin-eosin
stained skin sections showed that -santalol pretreatment strongly
inhibited UVB-induced epidermal hyperplasia and total thickness of the
epidermis. The proliferation potential of skin and tumor tissue sections
from UVB-induced carcinogenesis protocol was evaluated by
immunohistochemical expression of proliferation marker PCNA. Both
intensity of brown staining as well as the number of positively stained
nuclei were reduced in skin tumors and adjacent skin tissues from
-santalol treated group when compared to control group. Western blot
analysis of skin lysates showed that -santalol decreases the level of
different cyclin-dependent kinases and associated cyclins, Cdc25
phosphatases (Cdc25B and Cdc25C) together with an up-regulation of CDK
inhibitor Cip1/p21. However, the level of Kip1/p27 and p53 did not show a
significant difference. Our data suggested that -santalol (10%, topical)
is a safer and promising skin cancer chemopreventive agent through
targeting different cell cycle regulators. (This work is supported by a
Translational Cancer Center Research Grant, funded by the State of South
Dakota).

