Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and characterization of a large panel of
tumorgraft-based clinically relevant models derived from patients with
kidney, bladder or prostate cancer.


Kidney, bladder and prostate cancers are the 3 prevalent urological
cancers. They represent each year 1 500 000 new cases and 500 000 deaths
worldwide with an incidence increasing steadily by 2-10% per year. At
advanced stages, current first-line therapies are inefficient. One of the
major needs in new drugs development is the availability of a large panel
of clinically pertinent models representing patients heterogeneity. In
addition, our ability to tailor specific drugs to patients is restricted
by the lack of validated biomarkers and might be considered as the most
important barrier for a better clinical response.Kidney, bladder and
prostate tumor tissues at all stages were collected from patients
undergoing surgery, xenografted in nude mice, and serially passaged into
new mice. All tumors were implanted subcutaneously and some of them
orthotopically. Informed consent and clinical history were obtained for
all patients. For all 3 cancer types, tissue samples from the patients
primary tumor and tumors grown in mice through passages were analyzed for
primary tumor-models stability by histopathology, mRNA expression
profiling, growth behavior and response to first-line therapies
(sunitinib/sorafenib/everolimus, cisplatin and docetaxel for kidney,
bladder and prostate cancer respectively). In addition, for each cancer
type and models derived from it, we also analyzed more specific tumor
characteristics for their stability: the VHL status and the genetic
stability by short tandem repeat fingerprinting for kidney cancer; the
expression of interest genes including FGFR3, HRAS or p53 genes for
bladder cancer, and the expression/mutations of the androgen receptor and
the expression of prostate specific antigen and cytokeratin for prostate
cancer. Orthotopic models were followed by infrared imaging after
intravenous injection of the IR780 dye.So far and since 2007, we have
xenografted 380 kidney tumors, 80 bladder tumors and 150 prostate tumors,
out of which we have established 31, 11 and 3 models (passage above 3 and
up to 12 in mice), respectively. The tumor take rate in mice (7.4%
overall success) was significantly correlated with tumor stages, but not
with any other tumor features. Importantly, tumors were stable through
passages at the histopathologic, molecular and genetic levels. In
addition, the responsiveness of tumors grown in mice to current therapies
compounds was similar to patients therapeutic responses, also
highlighting the clinical predictivity of our models. Orthotopic models
developed metastases at classical secondary sites.We developed a unique
platform of well characterized, stable and clinically predictive mouse
xenograft urological cancer models. This is an invaluable tool for the
clinical design of efficient therapies and for the identification of
predictive biomarkers.

