Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Advanced glycation end products of type I collagen promote cell
proliferation and resistance against doxorubicin in HT-1080 cancer cells.


Resistance to apoptosis and chemotherapy is a critical factor in cancer
recurrence and patient relapse. Extracellular matrix via its receptors,
the integrins, has emerged as a major pathway contributing to cancer cell
survival and resistance to chemotherapy (Aoudjit and Vuori, Chemother Res
Pract. 2012;2012:283181). However, the effects of extracellular matrix
advanced glycation end products (AGE) on cell proliferation and
sensitivity to chemotherapy is not well established. In this study, we
investigated whether type I collagen and particularly its AGE are
involved in cell proliferation and resistance to doxorubicin in human
fibrosarcoma HT-1080 cancer cells.Type I collagen was extracted from rats
tail tendons (10 days, 8 and 96 weeks-old) and prepared as already
described (Millerot-Serrurot et al., 2010, Cancer Cell Int, 13: 10-26).
First, we characterized the glycation pattern of the different collagens
using SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and fluorescence spectroscopy. A
significant increase in AGE level has been observed in collagen extracted
from 8 and 96 weeks-old rats. AGE level was significantly higher in
collagen extracted from 96 weeks-old rats when compared to 8 weeks-old
ones. Only collagen extracted from 96 weeks-old rats was able to induce
3-fold increase in proliferation of HT-1080 cells. Western-blot analysis
showed that activation of MAPK/ERK, but not PI3K/AKT, was required for
collagen AGE mediated cell proliferation. The MAPK/ERK inhibitor U0126
abolished this effect. Both collagens were able to inhibit
doxorubicin-induced apoptosis in HT-1080 cells. Moreover, protection
against apoptosis was significantly higher in the presence of collagen
extracted from 96 weeks-old rats.Our data suggest extracellular matrix
AGE signalling as an important promoter of cancer cell proliferation and
that this pathway may contribute to a new mechanism of drug resistance.

