Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SIAH2 modulates focal adhesion and cell junction proteins in
response to oncogenic ERBB/K-RAS activation to promote cancer cell
dissemination, invasion and metastasis.


Oncogenic EGFR/HER2/K-RAS activation is often associated with reduced
focal adhesion, altered cell junctions, increased cell motility and
enhanced cancer cell dissemination, aggressive tumor growth and
metastasis, cancer relapse and drug resistance in human cancer.
Deciphering novel mechanisms that promote invasion/metastasis in human
cancer cells in response to oncogenic ERBB/K-RAS pathway activation and
finding novel means to inhibit tumor invasion and cancer metastasis
remain a paramount important goal in cancer biology. SIAH, which is the
human homologue of a highly conserved family of RING-domain E3 ubiquitin
ligases, is a key downstream signaling component required for proper
ERBB/K-RAS signal transduction. We have shown that SIAH2-insufficiency
impedes proper K-RAS signal transduction, thereby obstructing
tumorigenesis and metastasis. While this suggests that SIAH2 E3 ligase is
critical for K-RAS-dependent oncogenesis, the exact mechanism of SIAH2
function downstream of ERBB/K-RAS signaling pathway in driving cancer
cell dissemination, tumor growth and metastasis has remained unknown. In
this study, we affinity purified and isolated SIAH2-protein complex from
human cancer cells with oncogenic K-RAS activation. Several focal
adhesion and cell junction proteins were proteomically identified as
SIAH-interacting proteins by Mass Spectrometry. Bi-directional
co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) and in vivo ubiquitination assays were
performed to verify and validate that these newly identified SIAH-binding
partners are indeed bona fide new SIAH substrates that play important
roles in cancer cell dissemination, invasion and metastasis. Our
immunofluorescent staining and confocal results showed that focal
adhesion, cell junction and cell motility are severely compromised in the
SIAH-deficient cancer cells while in contrast, the prominent focal
adhesion sites are present in the SIAH-proficient cancer cells.
Importantly, ectopic expression of these focal adhesion and cell junction
proteins can successfully rescue SIAH2-deficient cancer cells from the
pronounced defects in focal adhesion, adherens junction, cell motility,
cell death and tumor growth. Hence, these focal adhesion and cell
junction proteins may represent a new class of SIAH2 substrates. Their
increased expression patterns have been confirmed and verified in human
pancreatic cancer and breast tumor biospecimens. We may have uncovered a
new molecular mechanism of SIAH enzymatic function in human cancer cells.
The discovery that SIAH2 directly modulates focal adhesion, cell junction
integrity and motility may provide a novel molecular mechanism to explain
the well-documented changes in cancer cell dissemination, aggressive
tumor invasion and systemic metastasis in response to oncogenic
EGFR/HER2/K-RAS pathway activation in human cancer.

