Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro tumor extravasation model.


Cancer cell metastasis is a series of biological processes that allow
malignant tumor cells to invade from primary to secondary sites.
Understanding the invasion of the secondary site remote tissue requires
studying the individual steps in metastasis, particularly, those leading
up to and immediately following extravasation of a circulating tumor cell
from a blood vessel into the remote tissue. The platform presented here
mimics the tumor microenvironment in a well-controlled manner, and
provides high resolution imaging of tumor cell extravasation and the
early stages of colonization. We investigate the extravasation step where
tumor cells transmigrate across an endothelial monolayer into a hydrogel
model of the extracellular space. We find tumor cells are more likely to
extravasate soon after contact with the endothelium.We have cultured and
sustained an endothelial monolayer spanning the entire microchannel and
hydrogel surface of the microfluidic system. Two days after seeding of
endothelial cells, we introduced tumor cells into the same microchannel
now covered with endothelium to observe cancer cell extravasation. The
experimental protocol is optimized to ensure the formation of an intact
endothelium prior to the introduction of tumor cells and also to observe
tumor cell extravasation by having a suitable tumor seeding
density.Extravasation is observed for 35% of the tumor cells in contact
with the endothelium within 1 day after their introduction. The region of
interest (ROI) is imaged with confocal microscopy and can determine
whether a cancer cell, labeled green with GFP, has transmigrated across
the endothelium, denoted by VE-cadherin staining, and extravasated into
the gel region. We also measured the permeability of the endothelial
monolayer to monitor barrier integrity as well as the changes induced by
interactions with tumor cells by measuring the diffusion of
fluorescently-labeled dextran across the monolayer. Permeability
increased 3.8 fold 24 hours after introducing tumor cells, suggesting the
endothelial barrier integrity is compromised by the interactions. Average
number of tumor cells in ROIs increased between day 1 and day 3 after
tumor seeding while the percent of ROIs with extravasated cells did not
change significantly. These results suggest that extravasation in our
system occurs predominantly within the first 24 hours of tumor cell
introduction and that proliferation can continue both prior to and after
extravasation.The experimental systems have a major advantage in studying
cancer extravasation; they can mimic aspects of the 3D in vivo situation
in a controlled environment while simultaneously providing in situ
imaging capabilities for visualization. Thus, this model allows
quantitative study of metastatic cancer interactions with the potential
to identify novel metrics of cancer cell invasiveness and suggests
possible use as a platform for drug screening.

