Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coordination of cell cycle repression and reduced cytoskeletal
tension by the small molecule natural product, Schweinfurthin A.


Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors (MPNST) are a frequent cause of
morbidity and mortality in Neurofibromatosis type 1 patients, and arise
in part from loss of the tumor suppressor function of the NF1 gene
product, neurofibromin. We have previously shown that MPNST tumor cell
lines, as well as astrocytoma cell lines, derived from both patients and
a Nf1-/+;Trp53-/+ (NPcis) mouse model are differentially sensitive to the
natural product, Schweinfurthin A (SA). In addition to its
anti-proliferative effects, SA caused dramatic reorganization of the
actin cytoskeleton. When the NF1 Ras-regulatory domain was re-expressed
in an Nf1-/- astrocytoma cell line derived from the NPcis model, these
cells became resistant to the effects of SA. This led us to hypothesize
that SA mediates its effects on the actin cytoskeleton and proliferation
by phenocopying neurofibromin in its regulation of Rho and mitogenic
signaling pathways. Our objective is to understand if and how this is the
case.To further that end, the goal of this study was to begin to probe
the coordination of proliferation and cytoskeletal tension, as has been
previously reported in other studies. We cultured individual SA- and
DMSO-treated MPNST cells derived from the NPcis model onto pre-defined
micropatterns of fibronectin. By constraining cell shape, quantitative
structural properties of cells were revealed that were otherwise masked
when cells were grown on standard coverslips. We observed dose-dependent
increases in the concave curvature of cell edge segments not attached to
the underlying fibronectin. Such curvature is known to represent
decreased cell tension exerted by the actin cytoskeleton. Across the same
SA doses, we measured a decrease in cyclin D1 and cyclin D3 total protein
levels and a decrease in retinoblastoma protein phosphorylation, which
was consistent with flow cytometry data showing a G1 blockade. Thus, we
conclude that proliferation and cytoskeletal tension are coordinated in
cells sensitive to the candidate drug, SA.Funded by NCI Contract No.
HHSN261200800001E.

