Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Somatic mutation analysis pipeline for exome-sequencing data
identifies oncogenic STAT3 mutations in T-LGL leukemia.


Exome-sequencing of matched tumor-normal sample pairs enables the
identification of the full set of somatically acquired mutations that
directly affect protein function in a given tumor. Inferring the
functional significance of coding region mutations is relatively
straightforward compared to mutations occurring in non-coding regions.
Furthermore, exome sequencing enables sufficient sampling depth required
for sensitive detection of somatic mutations in tumor samples. However,
identification of novel driver mutations remains challenging due to the
high levels of sequencing errors observed with current next generation
sequencing technologies and due to passenger mutations which vastly out
number driver mutations in any given tumor. Identification of novel
driver mutations is especially challenging in the absence of cohort
data.To identify driving somatic events in exome sequence data, we
developed an analytical pipeline utilizing a combination of 3rd party
tools for sequence read processing and mutation calling. This was coupled
to an annotation framework that aids prioritization of driver mutation
candidates for downstream validation experiments. The annotation
framework integrates prior knowledge from reference databases on known
cancer genes, sequence level evolutionary conservation and functional
consequence predictions. Gene expression data from RNA-seq of the tumor
sample can also be integrated in the annotations.To test this pipeline,
we performed exome sequencing of a tumor-normal sample pair from an index
patient diagnosed with T-cell derived large granular lymphocytic leukemia
(T-LGL), which is a rare lymphoproliferative disease of previously
unknown pathogenesis. The analysis pipeline identified a high-ranking
candidate mutation in STAT3. Structural analysis indicated that the
mutation resulted in a hydrophobic substitution at the SH2 dimerization
interface, suggesting that the mutation stabilizes the active dimer form
through increased hydrophobic interaction between monomers. Further
validation experiments showed STAT3 SH2 hydrophobic substitutions to be
recurrent in T-LGL and to result in constitutive STAT3 activation [1].
Application of the pipeline enabled identification of a novel class of
oncogenic STAT3 SH2 domain mutations and established STAT3 as a key
driver oncogene in T-LGL.

