Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Achieving complete response to locoregional disease without
toxicity using temperature-sensitive liposomes and ultrasound-mediated
hyperthermia.


By stabilizing doxorubicin within temperature-sensitive liposomes and
repeating delivery twice per week for four weeks, extended survival and
complete response were obtained in syngeneic murine breast tumors.
Further, with the stabilized formulation, cardiac toxicity and leukopenia
were not detected. Liposomes composed of DPPC:MPPC:DSPE-PEG2k, 86:10:4
were prepared in the presence of copper(II) gluconate and triethanolamine
and extruded with 100 nm membrane filters. Cu-liposomes were loaded with
Dox at 0.2 mg-drug/mg-lipid with 100% loading. We studied the efficacy of
CuDox liposomes (CuDox-LTSLs) using the highly invasive neu deletion
(NDL) tumor. Treatment began when the tumor diameter reached 4 mm. The
fluorescence of circulating doxorubicin in blood was quenched after the
digestion of liposomes with Triton X-100, indicating that the circulating
drug remained associated with copper. Dox fluorescence was restored upon
reducing the pH using a citrate-saline buffer.Over the 28 days of the
study, CuDox-LTSLs were administrated intravenously two times per week at
a therapeutic level of 6 mg-drug/kg-body weight. The entire tumor was
insonified with a peak ultrasound pressure of 1.1 MPa at a frequency of
1.5 MHz at 42C for 5 min prior to and 20 min post drug injection. A total
of 30 mice were studied, including groups spanning drug treatment with
ultrasound, ultrasound, drug treatment and no treatment. Although a
single dose administration of CuDox-LTSLs combined with insonation of the
entire tumor suppressed the tumor growth, complete response was achieved
only upon repeated treatment over a period of 28 days. At 30 days after
the last administered dose, none of the mice from the other groups
survive; however, 100% of mice treated with ultrasound combined with
CuDox-LTSLs survive and the remaining tumor is undetectable. In
conclusion, repeated treatment of stabilized temperature sensitive
doxorubicin liposomes is highly effective in the treatment of aggressive
murine tumors.Acknowledgement: NIHR01CA134659 and NIHR01CA103828

