Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating TBK1 as a cancer therapeutic target in cancer cell
lines with activated IRF3.


TBK1 is a non-canonical IB protein kinase that phosphorylates and
activates downstream targets such as IRF3 and cRel and, reportedly
mediates NFkB activation in cancer. We used both genetic and
pharmacological approaches to evaluate TBK1 function in cancer cells. In
oncogenic KRAS mutant lung cancer cell lines, the TBK1 knockdown did not
correlate with reduction in a 2D viability assay. Using TBK1 small
molecule inhibitors, we found that the inhibition of cell growth in 2D
viability assays did not correlate with Kras dependency or RAS genetic
signature. Since the pIRF3(S386) levels in lung lines were too low to
assess TBK1 target engagement, we identified cell lines with high
pIRF3(S386) levels. We discovered a subset of pancreatic and colorectal
cell lines that have high constitutive pIRF3(S386) levels and this
correlated with high levels of pTBK1(S172). TBK1 inhibitors were able to
dose-dependently inhibit pIRF3S386 in pancreatic & colon lines. These
observations indicate that pIRF3(S386) could be used as a biomarker for
direct target engagement of TBK1 in cancer cell lines with activated TBK1
pathway. pTBK1(S172), a phosphorylation site within the TBK1 kinase
domain activation loop, does not decrease upon inhibition with TBK1
inhibitors but, instead increases. This suggests stimulation of a
feedback loop resulting in the activation of an upstream kinase(s)
responsible for activating TBK1 in cancer cell lines. Although several
pancreatic and colon cell lines were identified to have low M sensitivity
to TBK1 inhibitors, TBK1 shRNA knockdown did not impact proliferation in
these cell lines even though pIRF3(S386) levels were reduced. Further
studies using knockdown of the related IKKe homolog in cell lines with
activated pathway are also being pursued to determine if IKKe knockdown
alone or in combination with TBK1 knockdown would result in more
substantial growth reduction. It is likely that inhibition of additional
nodes in the NF-kB pathway and other pathways are needed to achieve
robust anti-tumor efficacy.

