Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enumeration and molecular analysis of circulating tumor cells from
established skeletal metastases.


In recent years a significant body of evidence has confirmed the clinical
relevance of detecting Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs) in the peripheral
blood of patients with epithelial cancers of prostate, breast and colon.
The identification and enumeration of CTCs facilitates early disease
detection and also offers the opportunity for therapeutic monitoring and
evaluation of disease progression. Although CTCs can be found in patients
with primary tumors, their detection in metastatic patients is more
common and usually concerns larger number of cells. Since in many of
these circumstances the primary tumor is effectively treated, the
presence of CTCs in peripheral blood leads to the inevitable conclusion
that cancer cells are able to re-enter the circulation from existing
metastatic lesions, particularly those located in the bone. These cells
could potentially super-seed additional lesions both in the skeleton and
visceral organs through several waves of metastatic dissemination.
Furthermore, their interactions with different tissue microenvironments,
such as the bone marrow, could render these cells more aggressive, alter
their initial organ tropism and dictate the evolution and progression of
metastatic disease. These crucial points can be effectively addressed
only if molecular analyses of CTCs are made possible after their
harvesting from blood. Unfortunately, the isolation of CTCs still largely
depends on antibody enrichment, which produces a biased selection of the
phenotypes studied and the difficulty of recovering genetic material
after cell staining and enumeration.In our study, we used a
microfluidic-based approach to capture CTCs based exclusively on their
physical properties from mice harboring skeletal metastases generated by
human prostate and breast cancer cells. Preliminary experiments showed a
recovery rate of 80% to 96% from blood spiked with a known number of
cancer cells stably expressing Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP).
Successively, fluorescently labeled cancer cells were inoculated in the
left cardiac ventricle of SCID mice and generated bone-metastatic lesions
of progressively larger size. Blood samples (1 ml) collected from these
animals before sacrifice and 2-3 weeks after cell inoculation produced
between 173 and 466 CTCs. The numbers of CTCs were correlated with organ
location, number and size or metastatic lesions visualized in frozen
sections inspected by fluorescence microscopy combined with Nuance
multispectral imaging analysis. In addition, CTCs were analyzed for the
expression profiles of genes involved in metastatic dissemination,
particularly chemokine receptors such as CX3CR1 implicated in the homing
of prostate and breast cancer cells at the skeletal level.

