Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate specific membrane antigen (PSMA) targeting nano-EGCG for
prostate cancer prevention and treatment.


We recently employed the use of nanotechnology to improve the outcome of
bioactive food components for cancer chemoprevention and termed the
concept as nanochemoprevention (Cancer Res. 2009;69(5):1712-6). To
demonstrate the proof-of-principle we encapsulated green tea polyphenol
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) in polylactic acid-polyethylene glycol
(PLA-PEG) nanoparticles and showed that this formulation demonstrates
greater than ten-fold dose advantage over non-encapsulated EGCG in human
prostate cancer (PCa) cells both in vitro and in vivo settings. Emerging
data suggest that EGCG possess cancer preventive as well as
chemotherapeutic potential against PCa. More recently, we also proposed
targeted nanoparticles as novel prototypes for the delivery of EGCG (J
Med Chem. 2011;54:1321-32) for prevention and therapy of PCa. Here, we
extended the work and developed polymeric EGCG-encapsulated nanoparticles
targeted with small molecular entities able to bind to prostate specific
membrane antigen (PSMA), a transmembrane protein that is overexpressed on
PCa cells, and evaluated their efficacy in several in vitro assays using
PCa cell lines of differential PSMA expression status. Biocompatible
polymer PLGA-PEG-COOH was synthesized and used as base to conjugate a
urea-based inhibitor (DCL) or a glutamate-containing molecule (Asp-Glu)
to obtain PLGA-PEG-DCL and PLGA-PEG-Asp-Glu nanoparticles suitable for
targeted delivery to the prostate. Next, to investigate the impact of
DCL- and Asp-Glu-PEGylation on ligand binding, a comparative docking
study on the PSMA active site was performed, and crucial protein-ligand
interactions were analyzed. Prepared nanoparticles were characterized in
terms of morphology, size and zeta potential, encapsulation efficiency,
and in vitro release kinetics. Nanoparticles derived from these three
polymer systems were spherical in shape with a unimodal size
distribution, showing mean diameter ranging from 130 to 250 nm with a
zeta potential of around -30 mV. Cellular binding and uptake of the
fluorescent nanosystems were detected in PC-3, DU-145 and LNCaP cell
lines at two time points and PSMA specific internalization and
accumulation was observed. The antiproliferative efficacy of nano-EGCG,
compared to EGCG alone, was assessed 72 h post treatment using MTT assay.
Both PSMA specific EGCG polymeric nanoparticles lead to an increased
antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic activity in PSMA positive LNCaP cells
as compared to PSMA negative DU145 and PC3 cells. These data suggest that
encapsulated EGCG retains its biological effectiveness, with prostate
specific targeting, for exerting its pro-apoptotic properties, critically
important determinant of chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic effects of
EGCG.

