Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nasal gene expression reflects the physiologic response to
alternate tobacco products.


Rationale:Potentially reduced exposure products (PREPs) are tobacco-based
products that may reduce exposure to the toxins found in tobacco and
thereby potentially reduce tobacco-exposure related harm. There is an
urgent need to develop approaches for evaluating the biological impact of
these products to determine their potential health risks. We have shown
that gene expression profiling of intra- and extra-thoracic airway
epithelium can serve as an indicator of physiological responses to
cigarette smoke exposure. Our goal here is to establish whether this same
approach might identify similarities and differences in the response to
reduced exposure tobacco products. We therefore sought to determine
whether the gene-expression alterations upon switching from traditional
cigarettes to reduced nicotine product (0.09 mg nicotine yield XODUS)
could be detected in readily collected nasal epithelium.Methods:Nasal
epithelial brushings were obtained from 13 active smokers who switched to
XODUS cigarettes for 6 weeks and then became cigarette free for the
remaining 18 weeks. Nasal brushings were obtained at baseline and at 4,
6, 16, and 24-weeks. Self-report was used to determine cigarette use at
baseline, 4 and 6 weeks,and self-report and alveolar CO verified
cigarette abstinence at 16 and 24 weeks. RNA from the nasal brushings was
processed and hybridized to Gene 1.0 ST Arrays. Gene expression
alterations at each time point were identified using a linear mixed
effects model among a set of 78 genes that we previously found to be
altered following smoking cessation.Results:The expression levels of 17
of the 78 smoking cessation-associated genes changed when individuals
switched from usual brand cigarettes to Xodus for 6 weeks
(PRationale:Potentially reduced exposure products (PREPs) are
tobacco-based products that may reduce exposure to the toxins found in
tobacco and thereby potentially reduce tobacco-exposure related harm.
There is an urgent need to develop approaches for evaluating the
biological impact of these products to determine their potential health
risks. We have shown that gene expression profiling of intra- and
extra-thoracic airway epithelium can serve as an indicator of
physiological responses to cigarette smoke exposure. Our goal here is to
establish whether this same approach might identify similarities and
differences in the response to reduced exposure tobacco products. We
therefore sought to determine whether the gene-expression alterations
upon switching from traditional cigarettes to reduced nicotine product
(0.09 mg nicotine yield XODUS) could be detected in readily collected
nasal epithelium.Methods:Nasal epithelial brushings were obtained from 13
active smokers who switched to XODUS cigarettes for 6 weeks and then
became cigarette free for the remaining 18 weeks. Nasal brushings were
obtained at baseline and at 4, 6, 16, and 24-weeks. Self-report was used
to determine cigarette use at baseline, 4 and 6 weeks,and self-report and
alveolar CO verified cigarette abstinence at 16 and 24 weeks. RNA from
the nasal brushings was processed and hybridized to Gene 1.0 ST Arrays.
Gene expression alterations at each time point were identified using a
linear mixed effects model among a set of 78 genes that we previously
found to be altered following smoking cessation.Results:The expression
levels of 17 of the 78 smoking cessation-associated genes changed when
individuals switched from usual brand cigarettes to Xodus for 6 weeks
(P<0.05). XODUS usage resulted in expression levels intermediate between
the normal smoking and no smoking time points for several of these genes
including CYP1A1 and CYP1B1. These genes were enriched in biological
categories including steroid hormone biosynthesis.Conclusion:Our data
suggests that some of the gene expression differences induced by
switching to the PREP product are intermediate between normal cigarette
smoking and cigarette abstinence, consistent with the idea that these
products result in reduced exposure. Our study further demonstrates that
the nasal epithelium can serve as a minimally invasive tool to measure
the responses to alternative tobacco products and can be leveraged to
understand the underlying biological mechanisms that are similar and
different from smoking-cessation.

