Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of tamoxifen sensitivity by a PAK1-EBP1 signaling
pathway in breast cancer.


EBP1, an ErbB3 binding protein isolated in our laboratory, sensitizes
breast cancer cells to tamoxifen in part by decreasing ErbB2 protein
levels. The p21 regulated serine/threonine kinase PAK1, implicated in
tamoxifen resistance, phosphorylates EBP1 in vitro and in vivo at T261.
Phosphorylation of EBP1 at this site induces tamoxifen resistance. We
thus postulated that inhibition of PAK1 activity, by restoring EBP1
function, could ameliorate the hormone refractory phenotype of ErbB2
overexpressing breast cancer cells. Transient transfection studies
indicated that an EBP1 T261E mutant, which mimics EPB1 phosphorylated by
PAK1, increased ErbB2 protein levels. An EBP1 T261A mutant, unable to be
phosphorylated by PAK1, ameliorated PAK1-induced tamoxifen resistance,
suggesting that phosphorylation of EBP1 by PAK1 contributes to tamoxifen
resistance. We then tested if pharmacological inhibition of PAK1 activity
might render hormone resistant cells, which endogenously overexpress PAK1
and ErbB2, tamoxifen sensitive. Transfection of EBP1 sensitized cells to
tamoxifen. The T261A EBP1 mutant more potently sensitized cells to
tamoxifen than wild type EBP1. IPA-3, a specific small MW PAK1 inhibitor,
sensitized cells to tamoxifen only when EBP1 was ectopically expressed.
However, IPA-3 did not further affect sensitivity of T261A overexperssing
cells, suggesting that the phosphorylation of EBP1 by PAK1 played a role
in the EBP1-induced hormone sensitivity. IPA had no effect on tamoxifen
resistance in T47D cells in which EBP1 protein had been ablated by shRNA.
The IPA-induced increase in tamoxifen sensitivity was accompanied by a
decrease in ErbB2 levels in EBP1 overexpressing, but not vector control
cells. These studies suggest that phosphorylation of EBP1 may be a novel
additional mechanism of PAK1-induced hormone resistance. In addition,
strategies that increase the pool of functional EBP1 and decrease PAK1
activity may affect hormone resistant cell growth. Our results also
suggest that PAK1 directed therapies may be more effective in patients
that express high levels of EBP1.*contributed equally to this work

