Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetic monitoring of 5-FU appears beneficial in stage
II-IV colorectal cancer patients treated with different 5-FU-based
chemotherapeutic regimens.


The mainstay of colorectal cancer chemotherapy has been 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU) alone or in combination with other agents. Unfortunately,
therapeutic plasma 5-FU levels are achieved in only 20-30% of patients,
in response to administration of 5-FU doses calculated from the patient's
body surface area. Pharmacokinetic (PK) monitoring of 5-FU has been found
to be beneficial for metastatic colorectal cancer patients. However, its
utility among Stage II and III patients has not been reported. Purpose:
We examined the impact of pharmacokinetic monitoring of 5-FU in
colorectal patients with Stage II- Stage IV disease, receiving different
5-FU-based chemotherapy regimens, in terms of therapeutic response and
safety. Methods: The study involved 73 colorectal cancer patients. The
patients received different 5-FU based regimens; namely, FOLFOX6,
mFOLFOX, FOLFIRI, and capecitabine. Thirty-five patients received 5-FU
doses based on the traditional body surface area (BSA) method, which
takes into account the patient's height and weight. On the other hand, in
38 patients, their 5-FU dose was adjusted based on their plasma 5-FU
levels from their previous cycle. 5-FU plasma levels were measured using
the commercially available OnDose test (Myriad Genetic Laboratories Inc.,
Salt Lake City, UT). The 5-FU levels were monitored per cycle and
administered doses were adjusted accordingly until a target plasma AUC
level of 20-24 mg.h/L was achieved. Results: Pharmacokinetic monitoring
among Stage IV patients (n=17) had a trend toward improved survival. Out
of the 8 patients that needed at least one dose adjustment, 7 of them
involved increasing the 5-FU dose. 5-FU doses were not increased in the
patients that did not have their 5-FU levels monitored. The ability to
maximize the 5-FU dose administered without risking toxicity with PK
monitoring may explain at least in part the trend towards prolonged
survival in patients that underwent pharmacokinetic dose adjustment.
Among Stage II and III patients, toxicities were markedly reduced by
pharmacokinetic dose adjustment of 5-FU. In patients that had their doses
adjusted by the BSA method, 38% experienced (7 out of 18 patients)
dose-limiting toxicities, that included Grade III diarrhea, fatigue,
nausea and vomiting, and cardiotoxicity. In contrast, none of the
patients (n=19) that underwent pharmacokinetic monitoring experienced
dose-limiting toxicity (Fisher's exact test, p=0.0031). The toxicities
observed in the BSA group were not among the patients that received
capecitabine. Conclusions: 5-FU dose adjustment in response to
pharmacokinetic monitoring results in a trend towards improved survival
of Stage IV patients. Moreover, dose-limiting toxicities are reduced in
Stage II and III patients. The results presented point to the benefits of
pharmacokinetic dose adjustment of 5-FU in clinical practice.

