Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multimodal activation of apoptosis by a hydrocarbon-stapled PUMA
BH3 helix.


The BH3 domain of BCL-2 family proteins is a critical interaction motif
that mediates the crosstalk among anti- and pro-death members. We have
applied hydrocarbon stapling to restore alpha-helical structure to
synthetic BH3 domain peptides, recapitulating the architecture observed
in the native context and/or when bound to their physiologic targets. By
generating Stabilized Alpha-Helices of BCL-2 domains (SAHBs) modeled
after the BID and BIM BH3 domains, we previously detected direct,
quantifiable, and functional binding interactions with both anti- and
pro-apoptotic BCL-2 family proteins. Like BIM BH3, PUMA BH3 is well known
to broadly engage the variety of anti-apoptotic targets. However, the
ability of PUMA BH3 to directly bind and activate BAX remains unresolved.
Here, we report the synthesis of PUMA SAHB, a structurally-stabilized
PUMA BH3 helix that, in addition to targeting the complete spectrum of
anti-apoptotic proteins, directly binds to BAX. Structural analysis
revealed that PUMA SAHB engages the 1/6 trigger site of BAX in a manner
analogous to the BIM BH3 helix. PUMA SAHB binding triggers functional BAX
activation as reflected by dose-responsive and sequence-dependent
BAX-mediated liposomal and mitochondrial release. Importantly,
biotin-PUMA SAHB and Flag-PUMA protein pull-downs from cellular lysates
confirm binding to the corresponding native multidomain anti- and
pro-apoptotic targets. As PUMA has been implicated in driving apoptosis
of a variety of neuronal cell types, we explored the therapeutic
potential of PUMA SAHB activity in the context of neuroblastoma.
Treatment of a variety of neuroblastoma cell lines, including SH SY5Y,
Kelly and IMR5, induced dose-responsive caspase 3/7 activation and cell
death. To confirm the on-target effects of PUMA SAHB, genetically
modified cells lacking BAX and BAX were similarly treated, but no caspase
3/7 activation or viability effects were observed. Thus, we find that a
stapled PUMA BH3 helix is a dual anti-apoptotic inhibitor and
pro-apoptotic direct activator that may serve as an effective
pharmacologic trigger of apoptosis in cancers of neural origin.This work
was supported by NIH grant R01 CA050239 to L.D.W. and an NSF Graduate
Research Fellowship to A.L.E.

