Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ectopic expression of an obscurin signaling cassette decreases
migration and invasion of metastatic breast cancer cells.


The obscurins (70-820 kDa) are a family of proteins expressed from the
150 kb OBSCN gene, located on human chromosome 1. Sequencing analysis of
breast and colorectal cancers, as well as melanoma and glioblastoma,
revealed that obscurins are mutated at a substantial frequency and these
mutations may be driving tumor formation. Our work has recently
demonstrated that obscurins are present in normal breast, skin, and colon
cells, but absent in their cancerous counterparts. Downregulation of
obscurins expression is sufficient to allow non-tumorigenic breast
epithelial cells to evade apoptosis induced by etoposide. Furthermore,
absence of obscurins allows increased migration and invasion of breast
epithelial cells. Remarkably though, we observed that ectopic expression
of a fragment of obscurin composed of tandem src homology 3-Rho guanine
exchange factor-pleckstrin homology (SH3-RhoGEF-PH) motifs was sufficient
to decrease monolayer migration and invasion of metastatic breast cancer
MDA-MB-231 cells, which are naturally deficient in obscurins, by >20% and
>70%, respectively. Based on our observations that 1) absence of
obscurins allows increased migration and invasion of breast cells, and 2)
expression of an obscurin cassette mitigates this migratory and invasive
behavior of metastatic breast cancer cells, we postulate that obscurins
may act as metastasis suppressors in breast epithelium. We have therefore
begun to investigate how the tripartite obscurin fragment, SH3-RhoGEF-PH,
can influence the behavior of the cytoskeleton and therefore affect
migration and invasion. We have found that the RhoGEF domain directly
induces guanine nucleotide exchange in RhoA, but not Rac1 or Cdc42. This
activity may be allosterically regulated by the adjacent SH3 domain,
which interacts with the RhoGEF domain in a yeast two-hybrid assay.
Furthermore, the PH domain binds to 3-phosphorylated inositol lipid
headgroups, providing a mechanism for the obscurins to respond to signals
generated at the plasma membrane. Together, this evidence suggests that
the tripartite signaling cassette can recapitulate the full-length
obscurins metastasis-suppressing activity, and may merit development as a
therapy for advanced breast cancer.

