Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An inhibitor of uPA reduces osteosarcoma metastasis by blocking
signaling in tumour cells and the bone marrow microenvironment .


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary malignant bone tumour in
children and adolescents. Pulmonary metastasis is the major complication
of OS and results in just 10-20% long-term survival. We have shown that
metastatic potential is an inherent characteristic of OS, and that the
bone microenvironment contributes to OS metastasis (Endo-Munoz et al.
Cancer Res 70:7063-72, 2010). Specifically, loss of osteoclasts increases
the metastatic potential of OS, and bone marrow cells (BMC) increase the
migration of OS cells. However, the factors regulating inherent and
BMC-mediated metastasis have not been elucidated. We have used a
multi-omics approach to identify genes and proteins that may mediate OS
metastasis. We found very high levels of mRNA and protein expression and
secretion of the urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) and its receptor
(uPAR) exclusively in metastatic OS. Addition of uPA-rich OS conditioned
medium to metastatic OS cells significantly (P Osteosarcoma (OS) is the
most common primary malignant bone tumour in children and adolescents.
Pulmonary metastasis is the major complication of OS and results in just
10-20% long-term survival. We have shown that metastatic potential is an
inherent characteristic of OS, and that the bone microenvironment
contributes to OS metastasis (Endo-Munoz et al. Cancer Res 70:7063-72,
2010). Specifically, loss of osteoclasts increases the metastatic
potential of OS, and bone marrow cells (BMC) increase the migration of OS
cells. However, the factors regulating inherent and BMC-mediated
metastasis have not been elucidated. We have used a multi-omics approach
to identify genes and proteins that may mediate OS metastasis. We found
very high levels of mRNA and protein expression and secretion of the
urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) and its receptor (uPAR) exclusively
in metastatic OS. Addition of uPA-rich OS conditioned medium to
metastatic OS cells significantly (P < 0.007) increased their basal in
vitro migration to levels similar to those observed with recombinant
human uPA. On the other hand, overall migration was significantly (P
Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary malignant bone tumour in
children and adolescents. Pulmonary metastasis is the major complication
of OS and results in just 10-20% long-term survival. We have shown that
metastatic potential is an inherent characteristic of OS, and that the
bone microenvironment contributes to OS metastasis (Endo-Munoz et al.
Cancer Res 70:7063-72, 2010). Specifically, loss of osteoclasts increases
the metastatic potential of OS, and bone marrow cells (BMC) increase the
migration of OS cells. However, the factors regulating inherent and
BMC-mediated metastasis have not been elucidated. We have used a
multi-omics approach to identify genes and proteins that may mediate OS
metastasis. We found very high levels of mRNA and protein expression and
secretion of the urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) and its receptor
(uPAR) exclusively in metastatic OS. Addition of uPA-rich OS conditioned
medium to metastatic OS cells significantly (P < 0.007) increased their
basal in vitro migration to levels similar to those observed with
recombinant human uPA. On the other hand, overall migration was
significantly (P < 0.005) inhibited by addition of a neutralizing mAb
against uPAR or an uPA inhibitor. Silencing of uPAR also abrogated the
response to uPA and decreased metastasis in an orthotopic model,
indicating that uPA/uPAR signaling acts in a positive feedback loop in
the regulation of inherent OS metastasis. To investigate whether BMC
could also be signaling through uPA/uPAR, we performed a comparative
transcriptomic analysis of metastatic and non-metastatic OS cell lines
before and after treatment with BMC conditioned medium, and found that
uPA was the most significantly (FC = 7.97, B = 18.82) upregulated gene
after BMC treatment. Moreover, immunohistochemistry on femurs of mice
bearing OS tumours showed high expression of uPA in the bone marrow as
well as in the leading edges of the tumour. In addition, BMC conditioned
medium containing high levels of secreted uPA also significantly
increased metastatic OS cell migration. Our data indicate that increased
uPA gene expression induced by BMC could contribute to enhanced secretion
of uPA by OS cells, which in turn could augment signaling through uPAR to
increase migration. In addition, BMC secrete uPA into the
microenvironment to further increase migration of OS tumour cells in
close proximity. Finally, we used a therapeutic inhibitor of uPA in an
orthotopic mouse model of OS. The uPA inhibitor reduced metastasis
significantly (P = 0.0004) in the treated group. This opens the
possibility that uPA inhibitors, which are already in clinical trials for
a number of cancers, may also be a useful therapeutic in the treatment
for OS metastasis.

