Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Landscape of DNA copy number alterations of stage III colon cancer
in the ACTS-CC trial (TRICC0706), a phase III trial of adjuvant
chemotherapy with S-1 and UFT/LV in Japan: A comparison with Western data.


Background: The ACTS-CC trial is a phase III study of 1535 patients,
designed to validate the noninferiority of S-1 to UFT/LV as adjuvant
chemotherapy for stage III colon cancer. A genome-wide analysis of DNA
copy number alterations was performed prospectively to identify
predictive biomarkers and prognostic biomarkers. To accurately compare
results between Japanese and Western clinical trials, it is important to
investigate biological differences between Japanese and Western
patients.Purpose: To elucidate DNA copy number alteration profiles of
stage III colon cancer in Japan as compared with those in Western
countries.Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from 779 formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded specimens. After quality assessment by arbitrary primed
PCR, 162 samples were analyzed by high-density single-nucleotide
polymorphism arrays (Affymetrix Human 250K StyI) according to the
manufacturer's protocol. Copy number alterations in colon cancer in our
study, estimated using a circular binary segmentation model, were
compared with those of publically available data for colorectal or
various other cancers in Western countries. First, concordance of the
copy number gain or loss of each cytogenetic band with meta-analysis data
reported by Diep et al. (Genes Chromosomes Cancer, 2006) was assessed by
weighted kappa statistics. Next, copy number alterations of 43 focused
cancer-related genes (APC, BRCA1, DCC, EGFR, FGFR2, MET, hMSH2, TP53,
PTEN, etc.) were compared with those of 19 cancer subtypes (3131 cancer
specimens) as reported by Beroukhim et al. (Nature, 2010)Results: Changes
occurring in at least 15% of cases were losses of 4, 5q, 8p, 15q, 17p,
and 18q and gains of 7, 8q, 13, and 20. Loss of 18q was seen in 80% of
samples. Over 700 colon cancer data in Western countries retrieved from a
meta-analysis were compared with our results according to each
cytogenetic position (total 193 cytogenetic bands). Weighted kappa
statistics, 0.83, indicated that the copy number profiles agreed closely
between Japan and Western countries. Moreover, the strongest correlations
of copy number profiles for 43 focused genes were seen between our
results and colorectal cancers in Western countries, among various cancer
subtypes.Conclusions: This is a preplanned analysis; eventually, clinical
outcomes will be combined with biomarker analysis. Somatic copy number
alteration profiles of stage III colon cancer in the ACTS-CC trial in
Japan closely agreed with the results of previous Western studies.Our
findings will facilitate understanding the characteristics of colon
cancer in Japan and extrapolation of the results of Japanese phase III
trials to Western countries.

