Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of novel breast cancer therapeutics for anti-estrogen
resistant breast cancer.


Breast cancer (BC) is the most common cause of cancer deaths among women
across the globe. About 70% of the BCs express estrogen receptor (ER) and
therapies interfering with estrogen mediated signaling pathways form the
bedrock of ER positive (ER+) BC treatment. However, about 50% of advanced
ER+ BC patients fail to respond and eventually develop resistant to
current anti-estrogen treatments, the selective ER modulators (SERMs eg.,
Tamoxifen) and the selective ER down-regulators (SERDs eg., Fulvestrant).
In this study, we took a new approach to counter hormonal resistance
through a new class of drugs that, in part, replicate a physiological
mechanism for regulation of ER activity. Breast cancer susceptibility
gene-1 (BRCA1) is known to inhibit ER activity and over 10 years of
functional interactions studies, between BRCA1 and ER, from our lab led
us to develop a class of small molecule inhibitors that recapitulate
BRCA1 mediated inhibition of ER activity. We computed a partial structure
for BRCA1 in complex with the E2-bound ER, using the Global Range
Molecular Matching program. Based on BRCA1: E2-bound ER model and
employing stringent criteria suitable binding sites on E2-bound ER for
small molecules were identified and in silico screening of small
molecules was conducted from which top 40 hits out of 1990 compounds were
selected and tested for bioactivity in ER+ MCF-7 BC cells. Of the 6
bioactive compounds, 4 compounds (A2,A7, A11 andB1) were found to inhibit
E2 (10nm) stimulated ER activity, using ERE-TK-Luc reporter assay by 50%
at concentration less than 5M. Furthermore, these compounds showed no
toxicity at concentrations Breast cancer (BC) is the most common cause of
cancer deaths among women across the globe. About 70% of the BCs express
estrogen receptor (ER) and therapies interfering with estrogen mediated
signaling pathways form the bedrock of ER positive (ER+) BC treatment.
However, about 50% of advanced ER+ BC patients fail to respond and
eventually develop resistant to current anti-estrogen treatments, the
selective ER modulators (SERMs eg., Tamoxifen) and the selective ER
down-regulators (SERDs eg., Fulvestrant). In this study, we took a new
approach to counter hormonal resistance through a new class of drugs
that, in part, replicate a physiological mechanism for regulation of ER
activity. Breast cancer susceptibility gene-1 (BRCA1) is known to inhibit
ER activity and over 10 years of functional interactions studies, between
BRCA1 and ER, from our lab led us to develop a class of small molecule
inhibitors that recapitulate BRCA1 mediated inhibition of ER activity. We
computed a partial structure for BRCA1 in complex with the E2-bound ER,
using the Global Range Molecular Matching program. Based on BRCA1:
E2-bound ER model and employing stringent criteria suitable binding sites
on E2-bound ER for small molecules were identified and in silico
screening of small molecules was conducted from which top 40 hits out of
1990 compounds were selected and tested for bioactivity in ER+ MCF-7 BC
cells. Of the 6 bioactive compounds, 4 compounds (A2,A7, A11 andB1) were
found to inhibit E2 (10nm) stimulated ER activity, using ERE-TK-Luc
reporter assay by 50% at concentration less than 5M. Furthermore, these
compounds showed no toxicity at concentrations < 100M. A7 was the most
potent inhibitor, with IC50 and IC80 of 2 and 4M respectively. In
addition, these compounds were specific to ER and did not inhibit
progesterone receptor (PR) activity. These compounds significantly
inhibited E2 stimulated proliferation in ER+ cell lines such as MCF-7 and
Du145, however no effect on the proliferation of MDA MB-231 an ER
negative BC cell line was observed. We further show that A7 significantly
inhibited ER activity and proliferation in LCC2 and LCC9 cells,
anti-estrogen resistant variants of MCF-7. Investigation into the
mechanism of action using chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
revealed that A7 prevents ER binding to estrogen responsive element (ERE)
within E2 inducible pS2 gene promoter. Taken together, these results
indicate the potential new class of compounds that can be developed into
novel drugs to treat the BCs resistant to anti-estrogens, including
Tamoxifen and related drugs, Fulvestrant, and aromatase inhibitors (such
asanastrazole).Citation Format: Yongxian Ma, Anju Preet, Changyan Hu,
Akshay Kumar, James Ma, York Tomita, Eliot M. Rosen. Development of novel
breast cancer therapeutics for anti-estrogen resistant breast cancer.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5574.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5574

