Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lupus antibody-based cancer therapy.


A subset of autoantibodies produced by patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) penetrates into cell nuclei and binds DNA, and we
believe that such antibodies may have applications in cancer therapy. We
have discovered that the cell-penetrating, nuclear-localizing anti-DNA
lupus antibody 3E10 inhibits key steps in DNA single- and double-strand
break repair and has potential for development as a targeted therapy for
tumors harboring deficiencies in DNA repair. 3E10 preferentially binds
DNA substrates with free single-strand tails and interferes with both
base excision repair and homology-directed repair (HDR) in vitro, and HDR
efficiency is reduced in cells treated with 3E10 as measured in the
chromosome-based DR-GFP fluorescent reporter assay. The binding of 3E10
to DNA can be directly visualized under electron microscopy (EM), and EM
studies confirmed that 3E10 interferes with RAD51 filament formation,
which is a critical step in HDR. The 3E10 single chain variable fragment
penetrates into human tumor xenografts in nude mice, and 3E10 sensitizes
cancer cells and tumors to DNA-damaging therapy. In addition, 3E10, by
itself, is toxic to BRCA2-deficient cancer cells but not to
repair-proficient cells, and when combined with a DNA-damaging agent,
3E10 has a very large cytotoxic effect on BRCA2-deficient cancer cells.
The synthetically lethal effect of 3E10 on BRCA2-deficient cancer cells
is consistent with our finding that 3E10 inhibits DNA repair, and it
suggests that 3E10 has potential as a targeted therapy for tumors
harboring deficiencies in DNA repair, such as certain breast, ovarian,
and prostate cancers. Of note, patients with SLE have lower than expected
incidence rates of breast, ovarian, and prostate cancers, and it is
tempting to speculate that the circulating cell-penetrating anti-DNA
autoantibodies provide patients with SLE some protection against the
development of DNA repair-deficient tumors. In summary, our work with the
3E10 antibody has provided proof of principle for the development of a
lupus antibody as a cancer therapy and opened up new avenues for
exploration into the biology of lupus antibodies.

