Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VEGF-A and VEGF-C: potential coregulators in angiogenic event in
thyroid cancer.


Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) promotes growth of blood or
lymphatic vessels, termed angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. These share
several basal mechanisms, including cross-talk between VEGF-A, C and
their receptors, which may be important in the development of
malignancies. Study aimed to identify relationships between VEGF-A,
VEGF-C and their impact in angiogenesis and metastases in thyroid
cancers.We studied VEGF-A and VEGF-C mRNA expression in 123 thyroid
cancers, 40 lymph node metastases and 7 non-malignant thyroid control
tissues using qPCR. Protein expressions for both VEGFs were determined by
immunohistochemistry.VEGF-A and VEGF-C mRNA over-expression was noted in
51% (n=62) and 27% (n=33) of the thyroid cancers respectively. VEGF-A and
VEGF-C protein over-expression was also identified in 70% (n=86) and 62%
(n=76) of the thyroid cancers. ANOVA showed significant expression
differences for VEGF-A and VEGF-C in subtypes of thyroid carcinoma, lymph
node metastasis and normal controls (P=1x10-6 and 1x10-5 respectively).
VEGF-A mRNA was significantly higher in cancers with lymph node
metastases compared to non-metastatic cancers (p=0.001) however, most
metastatic tumors under-expressed VEGF-C (p=0.0002). Similarly, VEGF-A
protein expression was higher in metastases and VEGF-C protein was higher
in non-metastatic lesions, though not significantly. Finally, we used
linear regression analysis to test previous proposals about physiological
interactions of VEGF-A and VEGF-C expression. Our model indicated that in
metastatic cancers, 32% of the expression of VEGF-A could be predicted by
a positive influence of VEGF-C production (model p=0.0002). These
findings add weight to previous hypotheses concerning VEGF-A and C
interaction. Early lymphangiogenic events were proposed to regulate
angiogenesis, and changes to VEGF expression in this cancer population
bear this out, with VEGF-C in early tumors giving way to VEGF-A in
metastases. The commonality of local metastasis in thyroid cancer makes
it a useful model to further examine mechanisms of angiogenesis and
lymphangiogenesis in cancer metastasis. Keywords: thyroid cancer, VEGF-A,
VEGF-C

