Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure activity relationship of a novel chemical class of Dyrk
inhibitors.


Dual-specificity tyrosine-phosphorylated and regulated kinases (DYRK) is
a family of conserved protein kinases which mediate survival and
differentiation in normal tissues like skeletal muscle for Mirk/Dyrk1B or
neuronal cells for Dyrk1A. Among the five Dyrk proteins, Mirk/Dyrk1B has
very low level of expression in most normal cell types but has been found
to be upregulated in solid tumors and to mediate cell survival in colon
cancer, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, rhabdomyosarcomas, lung and
ovarian cancer. Mirk/Dyrk1B expression and abundance varies during the
cell cycle with the highest levels found in quiescent G0 phase where it
mediates G0 tumor cells prolonged survival (through increasing expression
of a cohort of antioxidant genes). Dyrk1A also promotes quiescence and
senescence through DREAM complex assembly by phosphorylating the DREAM
subunit LIN52. The ability of cells to exit from the cell cycle and enter
into the G0 or quiescence state is important for cell differentiation,
tissue development, and prevention of tumorigenesis. Tumors may contain a
fraction of quiescent cells responsible for resistance to chemotherapy
and radiation, serving as a reservoir for tumor repopulation
post-therapy. Thus, pharmacological Dyrk inhibition would reduce the
ability of cells to enter into quiescence and sensitize cancer cells to
conventional chemotherapeutic agents. Exonhit has developed a novel class
of DYRK inhibitors. Lead optimization led to the synthesis of new
chemical entities with subnanomolar kinase inhibitory activities
associated with a high degree of selectivity over 400 kinases. Most
active compounds were evaluated in various cellular models, demonstrating
good correlation between cellular activity and amplification/expression
of Mirk/Dyrk1B. Similarly, in accordance with the expression levels of
Mirk/Dyrk1B during the cell cycle, cellular potency of pharmacological
inhibitors was improved 3 to 11 fold in SW620 quiescent cultures when
compared to cycling cultures. We analyzed the effects of Dyrk inhibitors
alone and in combination with gemcitabine in the Panc1 pancreatic cancer
cell line multicellular tumor spheroid model described to be largely
quiescent and enriched in Mirk/Dyrk1B kinase and confirmed that Dyrk
inhibitors sensitize cells to gemcitabine with a synergistic effect of
the combination. Among the 120 NCEs from this series, we identified lead
compounds having potent in vitro efficacy as Dyrk inhibitors. These
compounds are being further characterized in various cellular studies and
show promising in vivo activities in patient-derived ovarian cancer
ascites spheroids and Panc1 xenografts model without detectable toxicity
in mice, establishing the usefulness of these inhibitors for targeting
cancer cells with high Dyrk kinase activity.

