Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paclitaxel resistance in prostate cancer: rescue of resistance
using HDAC inhibitor SAHA involves apoptosis.


Introduction and Objective: Although Paclitaxel has demonstrated
antitumor activity against several cancers, the acquisition of resistance
during treatment remains a significant problem. Several potential
mechanisms were proposed and the recent studies determined that drug
resistance may involve histone H3 acetylation. Histone deacetylases
(HDACs) are overexpressed in prostate cancer (PCa) and HDAC inhibitors
have greater anti-proliferative activity against prostate and breast
cancer models. We have investigated the interaction of the HDAC
inhibitors Valproic Acid (VPA) and SAHA (Vorinostat) with Paclitaxel in
both susceptible and resistance PCa cell lines. We evaluated
anti-proliferative activity, nuclear morphometry, expression of apoptotic
genes: Caspases 3 and 9 and Annexin A5, and three keratins (8, 18 and 19)
which are involved in cell differentiation.Methods: Four PCa cell lines
PC3, PC3-TxR (Paclitaxel resistant), DU145 and DU145-TxR (Paclitaxel
resistant) were grown in 96 well & 24 well tissue culture plates. After a
day, the cells were exposed to 1.2mM of VPA and 5M of SAHA for 24 hours
followed by treatment with 4.5nM Paclitaxel for 48 hours. WST-1
cytotoxicity assay was performed in the 96 well plates. From the 24 well
plates, RNA was isolated and the real-time PCR for expression of specific
genes was done using gene specific primers and -actin (to calculate
relative expression). Nuclear morphometry was done in Feulgen stained
nuclei using AutoCyteTM Pathology Workstation and QUIC-DNA
software.Results: We found after 24hrs treatment: (i) VPA (1.2mM)
reversed Paclitaxel resistance only in PC3 cell lines (50%) while (ii)
SAHA made all the PCa cell lines more susceptible to Paclitaxel (50-60%).
We observed specific changes in DNA ploidy and in nuclear structure in
Paclitaxel resistant DU145-TxR cell lines when compared to DU145 cells.
Our results showed different patterns of apoptotic and keratin gene
expression occurred in DU145 and DU145-TxR cell lines following treatment
with SAHA but no significant changes in PC3 and PC3-TxR cell lines.
Expressions of Caspase 3, Caspase 9 and Annexin A5 were increased
significantly in SAHA treated DU145-TxR cells, and KRT-8 and KRT-19
(keratins) were significantly downregulated in DU145-TxR cell lines
irrespective of treatment.Conclusions: Hence, resistance to Paclitaxel
can be rescued by HDAC inhibitors VPA and SAHA, but likely by different
mechanisms that are yet to be established. Also, altered expression of
apoptotic biomarkers, but not keratins shows that the rescue by SAHA
involves apoptosis but not epithelial mesenchymal transition.Source of
funding: National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health
through awards funded under Grant number 1U54CA143868-03

