Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computational analysis of microtubule dynamics for personalized
cancer therapy.


Metastatic prostate cancer (PC) is treated primarily by means of
taxane-based chemotherapy with one of the clinically used taxanes:
paclitaxel, docetaxel and cabazitaxel. At the cellular level, the taxanes
bind microtubules (MTs), inhibit MT dynamics and alter the spatial
organization of the MT network. Thereby the taxanes inhibit the
intracellular trafficking of transcription factors critical for tumor
survival. In PC, taxanes are the only chemotherapy class shown to improve
survival, however, the emergence of clinical taxane resistance hampers
their clinical efficacy. In addition, patients resistant to one taxane
often respond to another, yet, currently we do not have the ability to
match individual patients to a specific taxane. In cells, different
taxanes have differential effects on microtubule dynamics which may
ultimately pre-determine their efficacy for each individual patient.
Thus, we hypothesized that the particular pattern of dynamic behavior of
the MT cytoskeleton in individual patients could be exploited
therapeutically. Therefore, we looked into dissecting the concrete
effects of each of the taxanes for several PC cells lines. Preliminary
unpublished data have revealed that PC cells expressing the TMPRSS2-ERG
fusion protein exhibit taxane resistance. In addition, we have recently
shown that the androgen receptor (AR) binds MTs in order to traffic to
the nucleus and that taxane-mediated inhibition of AR nuclear
accumulation correlates with patient clinical response to taxane therapy.
Moreover, we have shown that the two clinically relevant AR splice
variants, ARv567 and ARv7, show differential response to taxane therapy.
Therefore, we set out to investigate the hypothesis that ERG fusion
and/or AR variants might modulate endogenous microtubule dynamics in a
way that determines cellular response to taxane treatment. Xenografts PC
models expressing the ARv7 variant exhibit reduced sensitivity to
docetaxel treatment. In addition, docetaxel's ability to induce MT
stabilization is significantly impaired in ERG+ cells. We have recently
established isogenic PC cell line series with inducible ERG (DU145 ERG+
and ERG-), as well as M12 cells without endogenous AR that stably
express, wt-AR, ARv567 and ARv7. We then tested in a systematic way
endogenous MT dynamics using live cell confocal microscopy of labeled MT
tips following EGFP-EB1 lentiviral transduction. We use computer vision
algorithms to obtain statistically representative results for the effects
of ERG or AR on microtubule homeostasis following treatment with each of
the three taxanes. We measure changes in MT behavior as statistically
significant shifts in different parameters of MT dynamics measured from
>20,000 MTs for each condition. Our preliminary results revealed that the
presence of ERG fusion a correlation between MT dynamics and AR variant
expression in PC cell lines.

