Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activated insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling pathway is a
potential therapeutic target for brain metastasis from lung cancer.


Background: Brain metastasis is a formidable challenge in lung cancer
treatment. The incidence has been increasing recently because of the
advances of treatment which leads to prolonged survival of many
patients.Methods: We established xenograft model of brain metastasis.
Repeated rounds of in vivo selection and ex vivo primary cultures of the
brain metastases resulted in a cell line with a high propensity to
metastasize to the brain. Brain-tropism was confirmed by bioluminescence
study. Gene expression profiles between parental lung cancer cells (PC9)
and brain-tropic cells (PC9-Br) was compared by Agilent Gene Expression
Microarray followed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. The biologic effects
and clinical implications of the candidate molecules were further
investigated.Results: Significant activation of IGF and WNT signaling
pathways was detected in PC9-Br, as compared with the parental cells. We
selected IGF pathway as the first step to explore the potential
therapeutic implication. Western blot and RT-PCR validated the results of
IGF2 overexpression and activated IGF1R (pIGF1R) in PC9-Br cells. In
vitro drug sensitivity tests showed that PC9-Br, in comparison to
parental cells, was more resistant to erlotinib, an EGFR TKI (IC50: 30nM
for PC9 and 189nM for PC9-Br). Knocking down IGF2 expression in PC9-Br
reversed the drug resistance, while adding IGF2 to PC9 enhanced the
resistance. In clinical samples, there was a significantly higher
expression of pIGF1R in 26 brain metastases as compared to their paired
primary lung tumors (mean of H score differences=40.96, 95%
C.I.=10.9670.96, P=0.0094).Conclusions: IGF signaling pathway is
activated in brain-tropic lung cancer cells and could potentially be a
therapeutic target for brain metastasis.Acknowledgement: This study was
supported by Research Grant 101-M2002 from the National Taiwan University
Hospital.

