Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective PERK kinase inhibition triggers a biphasic
concentration-dependent induction of ER stress in multiple myeloma and
B-cell lymphoma.


Plasma cell malignancies, such as multiple myeloma, are characterized by
an extensively developed endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to accommodate the
high secretion rate of immunoglobulins. An adaptive stress response
mechanism, termed the unfolded protein response (UPR), is markedly
elevated in multiple myeloma cells to ensure a homeostatic balance
between ER burden and ER capacity. One branch of the UPR consists of the
activation of PERK under chronic ER stress: PERK phosphorylates and
impairs the function of the translation initiation factor, eIF2, thereby
downregulating global protein synthesis, and reducing the secretory
burden on the ER. To test the therapeutic potential of PERK inhibitors in
multiple myeloma, we identified two chemically diverse PERK inhibitors:
both are sub-nM inhibitors of PERK, and have a >100-fold window against
other kinases (including other eIF2 kinases). These compounds inhibit
phosphorylation of eIF2 at 10-20nM (IC50) in HEK293 cells, incubated with
the ER stressor tunicamycin. Both PERK inhibitors were selectively
anti-proliferative in an ER-stressed epithelial cancer model (A549 cells
with tunicamycin) at nM concentrations, but not in the absence of ER
stress. Furthermore, in the absence of an exogenous ER stressor, both
PERK inhibitors induced ER stress (eg, as evidenced by induction of the
pro-apoptotic CHOP gene) selectively in multiple myeloma cell lines (and
certain B-cell lymphoma lines) at low nM concentrations but not in normal
or malignant epithelial cells (induction of CHOP at 10 M). The magnitude
of this induction was comparable to well-established ER stressors, such
as bortezomib or tunicamycin, and correlated closely with reduced
proliferation in malignant B-cell lines. The potent induction of CHOP
occurred both in vitro and upon oral dosing of mice, with a xenografted
multiple myeloma tumour (JIM-1); however, in both instances, the
induction of ER stress was maximal at a dose corresponding to
approximately 50-75% inhibition of PERK, whereas, remarkably, at dose
levels corresponding to more complete PERK inhibition (as evidenced by
inhibition of P-eIF2), CHOP induction (and ER-stress induction in general
as determined by a genome-wide expression profile) was reduced,
eventually down to baseline levels. Consistently, both PERK inhibitors
resulted in a biphasic concentration-dependent reduction of proliferation
of certain myeloma and B-cell lymphoma lines. Hence, PERK inhibition
triggers a biphasic induction of ER stress and inhibition of cell
proliferation, selectively in B-cell malignancies. The possible
underlying mechanism as well as the therapeutic implications of these
findings will be discussed.

