Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding single cell variability in oncogene induced pathway
aberration in lung cancer.


Progression of normal epithelial cells towards malignancy is marked by
alteration in signaling pathways involved in cellular growth and
development. However, at any given stage of oncogenic progression, it is
unknown to what extent different signaling pathways are altered and
whether the degree of signaling change is similar from cell to cell. A
quantitative survey of signaling alterations that are associated with
common oncogenic changes will allow us to connect the widely observed
signaling heterogeneity in cancer to the genetic changes leading to its
disease states.Here, we study an isogenic series of human bronchial
epithelial cells (HBECs) that have been oncogenically transformed with
the sequential addition of common lung cancer mutations (p53null,
p53null+KRASV12, p53null+KRASV12+c-myc). To quantify the degree of
signaling alteration, we performed immuno-fluorescence assays and
acquired images of HBECs stained with signaling markers representing
important lung cancer pathways including WNT, JAK/STAT, TGF, IFN, MAPK,
AKT and TNF pathways. We extracted intensity-based features from
individual cells using our in-house image analysis platform. This
single-cell analysis revealed a high degree of signaling change within
each of our HBEC populations, suggesting that signaling alteration can be
different from cell to cell and from pathway to pathway.We further
quantified the degree of pathway alteration along our sequential
oncogenic manipulations by using standard machine learning techniques.
Our analysis revealed significant changes in the WNT, TGF and MAPK
pathways upon oncogenic progression. Loss of p53 alone caused a major
shift in TGF signaling; addition of mutant KRASV12 altered the MAPK, TNF
and JAK/STAT pathways; Addition of a third genetic manipulation, C-MYC,
induced dramatic shifts in the WNT and IFN pathways. We are currently in
the process of inferring crosstalk among multiple pathways in HBECs and a
panel of ten lung cancer cell lines. Taken together, our results suggest
that the degree of signaling alteration across diverse signaling pathways
can be correlated with a specific oncogenic state in lung cancer.

