Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cav1 is a key mediator of tumor-stromal interactions in melanoma.


Several lines of experimental evidence have demonstrated the importance
of the tumor microenvironment in controlling melanoma tumor growth and
melanoma metastasis. Caveolin1 (Cav1), the main structural component of
the plasma membrane microdomains termed Caveolae, is emerging as an
important signaling molecule in the stroma of several tumor types.
However, Cav1s function in the melanoma microenvironment of primary
tumors and of metastasis remains largely unexplored. Here, we devise
various experimental approaches to elucidate the function of stromal Cav1
in the development of melanoma in mice. We show that loss of Cav1 (but
not Cav2) in mice promotes the growth of orthotopically implanted
melanoma cells. We use cocultures of fibroblasts and melanoma cells
coupled with cytokine analysis to identify various Cav1 regulated factors
that function in a paracrine fashion in melanoma. Cav1KO fibroblasts
secrete increased amount of ShhN, bFGF, and MMP2/3, cytokines known to
promote proliferation of melanoma cells and remodeling of the tumor
stroma during melanomagenesis. Intradermal xenografts of fibroblasts and
melanoma cells (5:1 ratios) confirmed the tumor promoting role of
fibroblasts lacking Cav1. Interestingly, constitutive inhibition of the
Shh pathway in melanoma cells reverses the growth and tumor-promoting
effects of Cav1KO fibroblasts in co-culture or co-injection experiments
suggesting a Cav1 mediated Shh heterotypic interaction between
fibroblasts and melanoma cells. In summary, these studies reveal
previously undefined functions for Cav1 in the melanoma microenvironment
that could potentially be targeted for therapy.Citation Format: Casey
Trimmer, Franco Capozza. Cav1 is a key mediator of tumor-stromal
interactions in melanoma. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 1631. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1631

