Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput screens identify PARP inhibition as being
synthetically lethal with ERCC1 deficiency in non-small cell lung cancer
cell lines.


Background: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harbors frequent
DNA-repair defects that represent therapeutic opportunities. Notably,
Excision Repair Cross-Complementation group 1 (ERCC1) deficiency has been
described in a subset of tumors and correlated with platinum sensitivity.
The use of mechanism-based approaches, such as synthetic lethality, could
allow targeting more selectively such DNA repair defects, with reduced
systemic toxicity.Methods: To identify ERCC1-selective synthetic lethal
interactions, we adopted an integrated functional and molecular profiling
approach. An isogenic model of ERCC1-deficient NSCLC cells, consisting of
one parental ERCC1-proficient cell line and 3 ERCC1-deficient clones, was
functionally profiled by high throughput drug sensitivity screening using
a library containing commonly used oncology agents as well as a large
number of in-development targeted agents. This was integrated with data
from molecular profiling, including high throughput siRNA
screens.Results: The comparison of functional viability profiles for
ERCC1-deficient models enabled the identification of synthetic lethal
effects that could represent therapeutic opportunities for
ERCC1-deficient tumors. Notably, ERCC1-deficient cells showed increased
sensitivity to several PARP inhibitors, representing promising
preliminary results that could be translated in the clinical setting.
Mechanistic studies revealed a significant delay in double-strand break
repair associated with a G2/M arrest following PARP inhibitor treatment
in the ERCC1-deficient population only. Further in vitro work is
providing deeper insight into the mechanisms underlying this PARP
inhibitors sensitivity and in vivo work is underway.Conclusions:
ERCC1-deficiency sensitizes human NSCLC cell lines to PARP inhibitors. In
vitro and in vivo revalidations of these results and now underway to
further dissect the molecular mechanisms responsible for these
ERCC1-deficient selective effects, which could represent therapeutic
opportunities.

