Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An essential role for neutrophils in lung cancer promotion .


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide, and cigarette
smoking is the principal cause of it. Cigarette smoke-induced lung cancer
is characterized by a deregulated inflammatory tumor microenvironment.
Tumor cells produce various cytokines and chemokines that attract
leukocytes. Leukocytes (innate and adaptive immune cells) can amplify
parenchymal innate immune responses, and have been shown to contribute to
tumor promotion. In addition, smokers with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), an inflammatory disease of the lung, have an increased
risk of lung cancer compared to smokers without COPD. These facts suggest
a strong link between COPD-type inflammation and lung cancer promotion.
In histopathologic specimens of lung and in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
(BALF) from COPD patients, neutrophils and macrophages are prominent.
Neutrophils are among the first cells to arrive at sites of inflammation,
and the increased number of tumor-associated neutrophils is linked to
poorer outcome in patients with lung cancer. We have previously shown
that COPD-like airway inflammation promotes lung cancer in a K-ras mutant
mouse model of lung cancer (CC-LR). This was associated with severe
neutrophilic influx due to increased level of neutrophil chemoattractant,
KC, which was partially inhibited by using a natural non-specific
anti-inflammatory agent, curcumin 1% in diet, and resulted in significant
tumor suppression. To further study the role of neutrophil in lung
tumorigenesis, we depleted neutrophils in CC-LR mice using an
anti-neutrophil antibody, mLy6G, 5mg/kg twice a week by intraperitoneal
injection. This resulted in complete lung neutrophil depletion and 68%
(3.2-fold) reduction in lung surface tumor number. Neutrophil elastase
(NE) is a potent elastolytic enzyme produced by neutrophils at the site
of inflammation. It participates actively in COPD development and might
contribute to tumor progression by activating proteolytic cascades. The
concentration of NE in tumor extracts was also found to be linked to the
invasiveness of lung cancer. Therefore, we crossed the CC-LR mice with NE
knock out (KO) mice. We have found that lack of NE significantly
inhibited lung cancer development by 43% (1.7-fold) without changing the
BALF inflammatory cell component of the CC-LR mice. We further inhibited
the main receptor for neutrophil chemo-attractant KC, CXCR2, using a
selective inhibitor, SB332235Z, 50 mg/kg orally twice daily by gavage.
Similarly, this also resulted in significant suppression of neutrophil
recruitment into the lung of CC-LR mice followed by significant (64%,
2.8-fold) tumor reduction. We conclude that lung cancer promotion by
inflammation partly mediated by activation of IL-8/CXCR2 pathway and
subsequent recruitment of neutrophils and release of neutrophil elastase.
This provides a baseline for future clinical trails using IL-8/CXCR2
pathway or NE inhibitors in patients with lung cancer.

