Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Saracatinib inhibits human prostate cancer cell bone metastases in
a xenograft model.


Background: In advanced prostate cancer (PCa), cells escape from the
primary tumor and enter the bloodstream. These circulating cells
preferentially target the axial skeleton and can form bone metastases.
This results in weakened bones, spinal compressions, and fractures.
Patients experience pain and other bone-related events that increase
mortality and decrease quality of life. Therefore, identifying factors
that lead to cancer progression, such as areas of hypoxia in the tumor
microenvironment, will be crucial to developing strategies to inhibit the
spread of malignant cells to distant sites. Efforts to interfere with
early steps in the metastatic cascade have led to the development of
promising small molecule targeting agents. One such agent is the tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI), saracatinib, shown to inhibit activation of Src
and other kinases thought to be involved in cancer cell dissemination.
The aim of these studies was to use aggressive, human PCa cells (PC-3ML),
selected for their ability to form bone tumors in mice, to investigate
the effects of various agents shown to interfere with metastatic
activity. Methods: PC-3ML cells (a gift from A. Fatatis, Drexel
University), expressing Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) and luciferase
(Luc), were injected into the left ventricle of male nude mice, using a
closed-chest technique, to ensure that they bypass the lungs and
circulate throughout the body. Prior to injection, cells were subjected
to either hypoxia for 6 or pretreated for 24 hr with saracatinib.
Immediately after injection, mice were placed in an in vivo imaging
system (Xenogen IVIS, Caliper Life Sciences) to verify that the cells had
disseminated throughout the body. This ensured that only successfully
injected mice were randomization to treatment groups. Additional images
were collected weekly thereafter to monitor the location and development
of tumor nodules. Three weeks post-injection, mice were euthanized and
tissues expressing Luc were collected, including bones of the legs,
mandible and spine. The bones were fixed and decalcified, followed by
flash freezing in OCT freezing medium. Serial frozen sections were then
evaluated for GFP expressing cells using a fluorescent stereoscope.
Results: Tumor cell deposits were almost always found in bone, frequently
in the tibial-femoral joint, scapula-humerus joint, spine, and mandible.
Mice injected with PC-3ML cells pretreated with saracatinib had fewer
metastases and cells exposed to hypoxia for 6 hr prior to injection had
more metastases, on average, than control cells, as predicted by in vitro
assays. Conclusions: Intracardiac injection of GFP- and Luc- labeled
PC-3ML cells resulted in skeletal metastases that could be monitored in
mice over time using an in vivo imaging system and in tissue sections by
fluorescent microscopy. The studies verified in vitro data showing that
hypoxia can enhance, and saracatinib inhibit, metastatic activity.

