Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dendrogenin A is a newly identified mammalian steroidal alkaloid
that induced autophagic cell death in melanoma cells through an LXRbeta-,
Nur77- and Nor1-dependent way.


Dendrogenin A (DDA) is a steroidal alkaloid that we recently discovered
in mammalian tissues and normal cells. We did not detect DDA in a panel
of melanoma and breast cancer cells, while DDA was present in normal
Human Mammary Epithelial Cells and normal Human Epidermal Melanocytes
suggesting that a deregulation of DDA metabolism may occur during
carcinogenesis. We established that DDA triggered melanoma and breast
cancer cells re-differentiation and death in vitro and in vivo,
demonstrating its anticancer potency. In the present study, we
investigated the molecular mechanisms involved in the cytotoxicity of DDA
in melanoma cells. We found that DDA induced a time- and
concentration-dependent cytotoxicity with the characteristics of
apoptosis in human (SKMEL-28) and mouse (B16F10) melanoma cell lines. DDA
induced the impairment of mitochondrial functions and activated the
executioner caspase 3. However, caspase inhibitors failed to inhibit
cytotoxicity suggesting that other mechanisms were involved. DDA
triggered autophagy in melanoma cells and induced an autophagic flux.
Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of autophagy inhibited DDA
cytotoxicity showing that autophagy was involved in the cytotoxicity,
which contrasts with the classical involvement of autophagy in tumor cell
survival. In the search for cytotoxic effectors, we found that DDA
stimulated the re-expression and re-localization of Nur77 (NR4A1) to the
mitochondria, and the re-expression of Nor1 (NR4A3) in melanoma cells. We
showed that pharmacological inhibition of the nucleo-cytoplasmic
shuttling of Nur77, and the knock-down of Nur77 and Nor1, led to the
inhibition of the cytotoxic autophagy. This establishes that Nur77 and
Nor1 are involved in the induction of cytotoxic autophagy by DDA. Using a
combination of molecular modeling, binding, luciferase gene reporter and
transcriptional assays in tumor cells, we showed that DDA was a ligand of
LXR (NR1H3) and LXR (NR1H2) and a selective modulator of LXR-dependent
gene expression. Interestingly, DDA displayed a specific transcriptional
fingerprint compared to prototypical LXR modulators. Finally, we found
that LXR was required for the stimulation of Nur77 and Nor1 expression by
DDA and the induction of a cytotoxic autophagy. Altogether, these data
established that the newly identified mammalian steroidal alkaloid DDA is
a ligand of LXR that induced cytotoxic autophagy through an LXR-,Nur77-
and Nor1-dependent mechanism in melanoma cells. Thus, DDA constitutes a
promising drug candidate for melanoma treatment through an original
mechanism of action. Since Nur77 and Nor1 expression has been found to be
repressed in a number of aggressive tumors, DDA may represent an
interesting option for the treatment of cancers expressing LXR.

