Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor functions of the zebrafish ink4ab: a novel
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor.


The human INK4b-ARF-INK4a genetic locus encodes two closely related
members of the INK4 family of cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors,
p15INK4b and p16INK4a regulating RB phosphorylation and subsequently cell
proliferation, and a p53 stabilizer, known as ARF. All of the three
products play a pivotal role in tumor suppression and are frequently
deleted or inactivated in a wide spectrum of human cancers. Despite the
critical role of the mammalian INK4b-ARF-INK4a locus in tumor
suppression, its counterpart in zebrafish has not yet been characterized.
Zebrafish is an advantageous vertebrate to model human cancers,
specifically because of the high fecundity, the ease of performing
high-throughput screens, and the genetic conservation with mammals. We
identified a syntenic zebrafish ink4ab locus that consists of a single
gene orthologous to both mammalian CDKN2a (INK4A) and CDKN2b (INK4B), and
functions to activate senescence in response to oxidative stress.
Utilizing morpholino targeted knockdown and zebrafish mutants for the
ink4ab gene, we have developed a zebrafish model for tumorigenesis. We
demonstrate that the zebrafish ink4ab gene functions as a tumor
suppressor by controlling cell cycle regulation under stress. Senescence
was activated by oxidative stress in wild type embryos but not in embryos
with ink4ab deficiency when examined with a whole embryo
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA--gal) assay. Surprisingly,
we find that ink4ab deficient embryos also display significantly higher
levels of apoptosis than controls. We determined that the apoptosis
associated with ink4ab deficiency is p53-dependent. Furthermore, ink4ab
deficiency led to significantly lower survival rates, both overall and
upon radiation. Ink4ab deficient zebrafish had splenomegaly, increased
lymphocyte proliferation, and developed spontaneous tumors including
metastatic melanoma, osteosarcoma, leukemia and myelodysplastic
disorders. Thus, the zebrafish ink4ab protein functions as a tumor
suppressor similarly to the human p15INK4B and p16INK4A. To study the
upstream control of zebrafish ink4ab expression, we investigated the
orchestrated regulation by the Bmi-1 oncogene, and identified bmi-1a as a
repressor of ink4ab expression. Zebrafish heterozygous for both p53 and
ink4ab mutations displayed significantly higher tumor incidence compared
to p53 heterozygotes with wild-type ink4ab, indicating that ink4ab
haploinsufficiency promotes tumorigenesis. To this end, the combined
deficiency of ink4ab and p53 accelerates the latency and broadens the
tumor spectrum including the formation of retinoblastoma. Collectively,
the zebrafish ink4ab model of tumor suppression provides a platform to
perform large-scale screens for small molecules that modulate
tumorigenesis in the ink4ab deficient fish, and permit defining the
genetic pathways of CDKN2a- and CDKN2b-mediated tumor suppression.

