Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined antitumor activity of the epirubicin-incorporating
polymeric micelle NC-6300 and the DACHPt-incorporating polymeric micelle
NC-4016 in mice bearing human gastric cancer xenografts.


Background:Several anticancer agent (ACA)-incorporating polymeric
micelles are known to accumulate effectively in tumors and exert
sufficient antitumor effects via the enhanced permeability and retention
(EPR) effect. These agents are now under clinical evaluation. However,
there have been few reports of the antitumor effects of combinations of
these agents. We evaluated the effects of a combination of the
epirubicin-incorporating micelle NC-6300 and the DACHPt (oxaliplatin
parent complex)-incorporating micelle NC-4016 on human gastric cancer
44As3Luc xenografts.Methods:First, we evaluated the cytotoxic effects of
a combination of NC-6300+NC-4016 or epirubicin+oxaliplatin in vitro in
44As3Luc cells by using the combination index method. Next, to evaluate
the antitumor effects, NC-6300 (8 mg/kg) and NC-4016 (4 mg/kg) or
epirubicin (8 mg/kg) and oxaliplatin (4 mg/kg) were intravenously
administered once a week for 3 weeks to mice bearing 44As3Luc xenografts
implanted subcutaneously or orthotopically. Drug distribution was
analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography or inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometry. To evaluate the typical cumulative toxicity of
each drug, we examined cardiotoxicity and neurotoxicity in the mice by
using echocardiography and by measuring the latency of paw withdrawal in
response to a noxious mechanical stimulus following long-term
administration of each drug.Results:In our in vitro assay the combination
of NC-6300+NC-4016 had more synergistic activity than that of
epirubicin+oxaliplatin. Compared with the conventional anticancer drug
combination, the combination of micelles had significantly greater
antitumor activity against 44As3Luc cells in the subcutaneous tumor model
and prolonged overall survival in the orthotopic tumor model. A high drug
concentration of each ACA was detected in the tumor tissue in the case of
co-administration of the two micelle formulations. Both cardiotoxicity
and neurotoxicity were significantly lower in the micelle treatment group
than in the conventional group.Conclusion:These data warrant the clinical
evaluation of combination therapy with ACA-incorporating micelles.

