Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen signaling promotes effective progesterone receptor
engagement with DNA in breast cancer cells.


Estrogens and progesterone (PROG) are key mediators of breast cancer
aetiology and progression. The predominant actions of these hormones in
the breast are mediated via their respective cognate steroid receptors,
estrogen receptor alpha (ER) and progesterone receptor (PGR). As ER
upregulates PGR expression, both are currently measured in clinical
breast cancer samples to determine the utility of anti-estrogen therapy.
Although the molecular actions of estrogens have been extensively
studied, the role of PROG and PGR need further elucidation, particularly
in the context of activated ER signaling. Here, we treated ZR75-1 cells
with 17-estradiol (E2) alone or in combination with PROG and assessed
global transcriptional responses by microarray expression profiling and
receptor binding profiles by chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing
(ChIP-seq).PROG treatment alone significantly altered the regulation of
only seven genes, whereas long term E2 treatment increased the PROG
transcriptional response altering 785 genes (p value 0.05), and regulated
pathways involved in ErbB signalling and cell proliferation. Consistent
with these findings, ChIP-seq identified 10 times more PGR binding sites
following long term E2 treatment (4566 at equivalent peak threshold)
compared with PROG treatment alone. Candidate PGR ChIP validated these
findings at 100% (12/12) sites tested. The long term E2-treated PGR
cistrome was highly conserved amongst species, and enriched for
progesterone receptor response elements (PREs) and FOXA1 binding sites.
E2 enhancement of PGR binding could be abrogated by long term (72h) but
not short term (4h) tamoxifen co-treatment. In T-47D cells, long term E2
treatment was not required for efficient interaction of PGR with DNA and
FOXA1 silencing resulted in decreased PGR DNA occupancy at several sites.
These data suggests that the combination of E2 and PROG regulated a
distinct transcriptional response in breast cancer cells, perhaps due to
the dependence of PGR on E2 signaling for maintenance of cellular PGR
levels, and via the receptors sharing mutual collaborators and
coregulators, such as FOXA1. ER and PGR collectively shape a mitogenic
response in breast cancer cells that is dependent on the combined
presence of E2 and PROG.

