Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of candidate epigenetic markers for early detection
of nasopharyngeal carcinoma.


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a human malignancy that is particularly
prevalent in Southern China and Southeast Asia, and is strongly related
to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. Since early detection of NPC will
greatly improve the overall survival, screening becomes important for
early NPC diagnosis. In this study, the methylation sensitive-high
resolution melting (MS-HRM) method was established for detection of
promoter DNA methylation using a panel of five tumor suppressor genes
(RASSF1A, WIF1, DAPK1, RAR2, p16), which were top candidates selected
from 13 genes that had been tested in seven NPC cell lines and one
immortalized NP cell line and which, showed highly different methylation
status between cancer and immortalized cells. Biopsy samples from 52 NPC
patients showed methylation for individual genes ranging from 30% to 96%.
The combination of WIF1-RASSF1A, WIF1-DAPK1, and WIF1-RAR2 all reached
detection rates of 98% or above in biopsy samples, validating the
frequent methylation status of these genes in NPC patients. WIF1, an
important secreted Wnt inhibitor, is the most frequently methylated gene
in our panel, as reported in many other cancers. In addition, the
WIF1-RASSF1A combination showed the highest detection rate, reflecting
that both early genetic events in chromosome 3p and the Wnt pathway play
important roles in NPC development. To develop non-invasive methods for
NPC high-risk screening, early diagnosis and prognosis, more NP brushings
and cell-free plasma samples from NPC patients and healthy individuals
have been tested for their methylation status of these candidate markers.
Preliminary data indicate that the sensitivity and specificity reached
more than 90% in certain gene combinations with NP brushings from
patients of early NPC stage. The detection rate of methylation in
cell-free plasma from NPC patients is even higher than the traditional
EBV DNA test, which together show great potential for non-invasive
high-risk screening for early NPC and early detection of local recurrence
after therapy. In conclusion, a MS-HRM panel of multiple methylation
markers is proposed as a complementary test for NPC early detection in
combination with more established EBV-based markers.

