Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MAGE-C2 promotes proliferation and enhances resistance to p53 DNA
damage-mediated apoptosis in multiple myeloma.


Background: MAGE-C2 is member of the MAGE class I family of genes and is
commonly and specifically expressed in Multiple Myeloma (MM). Expression
of MAGE genes is associated with an aggressive clinical course of MM and
resistance to chemotherapy, suggesting that these genes may confer a
survival advantage on myeloma cells. Here, we have analysed on a
molecular level the influence of MAGE-C2 on the malignant phenotype of
myeloma cells.Methods: The biological function of MAGE-C2 was
investigated, by lentiviral shRNA stable gene silencing, in two MM cell
lines (MOLP-8, IM-9) expressing wild-type (wt) p53 and two MM cell lines
(U-266, SK-007) bearing a missense mutant p53 (A161T) that has partially
lost its transcriptional activity. The effects of MAGE-C2 silencing were
examined by assessing cell viability, proliferation and colony formation.
Finally, we investigated the cell cycle distribution and the expression
of key molecules of cell cycle progression and apoptosis using a
real-time PCR array and western blot.Results: We found that
lentivirus-mediated silencing of MAGE-C2 inhibited the proliferation and
anchorage-independent growth of MM cell lines. The anti-proliferative
effect of MAGE-C2 silencing was due to a 50-80% decrease of cells in the
S phase, a cell cycle arrest at both G0/G1 and G2/M transitions, and an
increase in the subG0/G1 diploid population based on an initiation of
apoptotic cell death. Loss of MAGE-C2 expression was associated with an
increase in the phosphorylation of the histone variant H2A.X on Ser139
which is a sensitive indicator of DNA damage. A constitutive
phosphorylation on Ser1981 and Ser428, respectively, of the primary
sensors of DNA damage ataxia telangiectasia mutant (ATM) and Rad3-related
protein kinase (ATR) was detected before MAGE-C2 silencing suggesting the
presence of an ongoing DNA damage in MM cell lines. Downstream of ATM and
ATR, MAGE-C2 silencing led to the activation of CHK2 and/or CHK1 through
phosphorylation at Ser296 and Thr68, respectively, and an increase in the
endogenous level of p53 protein. The stabilization and activation of p53,
through phosposphorylation at Ser20 by CHK1 and CHK2, correlated with an
up-regulation of two transcriptional target genes, p21WAF1 and GADD45A,
known to be essential for p53-induced G1 and G2 arrest, respectively.
Accordingly, MAGE-C2 silencing induced a more than two-fold increase in
the expression of the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 genes such as BAX and BAK,
being the main down-stream mediators of p53-dependant apoptosis following
DNA damage.Conclusions: Our findings support an anti-apoptotic function
of MAGE-C2 in MM through the regulation of key molecules involved in DNA
damage repair pathway and p53-mediated apoptosis. The central role of
MAGE-C2 in the biology of myeloma suggests that this CTA represents a
promising target for myeloma-specific immunotherapies or other targeted
modes of therapy for MM.

