Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of membrane bound versus soluble RANKL:
implications for cancer-induced osteolysis.


The primary site of prostate cancer metastasis is the skeleton with the
resultant metastases containing areas of extensive osteogenesis and
osteolysis. The latter is a process controlled by multinucleated
osteoclasts and receptor activator of nuclear kappa B ligand (RANKL) is
critical for osteoclastogenesis. RANKL is a type II transmembrane
molecule that forms a trimer on the cell surface and mediates its effects
via RANK. We have shown that matrix metalloproteinases-3 and -7 (MMP-3,
MMP-7) can process RANKL to a soluble form, sRANKL. The objective of this
study is to determine the functionality of membrane bound RANKL versus
sRANKL in promoting osteoclastogenesis.Full-length murine RANKL cDNA was
isolated and inserted into the pcDNA 3.1(+) expression construct. In
vitro translation experiments demonstrated that RANKL was being generated
and could be processed by MMP-3 and MMP-7. N-terminal amino acid
sequencing revealed that the site of cleavage occurs in the juxtamembrane
region of RANKL between amino acids 145 and 146. We hypothesized that
cleavage in the juxtamembrane region could generate an active soluble
form of sRANKL. Osteoclastogenesis and resorption assays with myeloid
precursors demonstrated the functionality of sRANKL. To determine whether
RANKL or sRANKL is the major mediator of osteoclastogenesis in vivo we
have generated RANKL mutants that are resistant to cleavage by MMPs and
other proteases. Using a site directed mutagenesis kit we have designed a
number of mutants and found that 158, (deletion of amino acids 71-157)
and, 148, deletion of amino acids 72-147), were resistant to proteolytic
cleavage. We anticipate that the while 158 and 148 are resistant to
cleavage, they will be functional. We will therefore test the
functionality of these two deletion mutants in-vitro by co-culturing
myeloid precursor cells with Cos-7/Cos-1 cells expressing wild type and
mutant RANKL proteins.In conclusion, we have demonstrated that RANKL is
proteolytically cleaved to generate a soluble active form. We have
generated non-cleavable mutant forms of RANKL that will allow us to
assess the role of membrane bound versus soluble RANKL in-vitro and
in-vivo. The results of these experiments will further elucidate the
roles of RANKL and sRANKL in prostate to bone metastases in addition to
being informative for the engineering of future RANKL based therapies.

