Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-22, a protective factor for ovarian cancer during
TNFa-induced apoptosis.


Ovarian cancer is the 5th leading cause of death from cancer in women.
Overall, only 10% of patients with advanced ovarian cancer are curable;
despite the advances in chemotherapy the 5-year survival is still less
than 30%. Interleukin-22 (IL-22), a member of the IL-10 family of
cytokines is part of the innate immune system and is expressed by the
Th17 cells. IL-22 has been shown to regulate several processes such as
the acute-phase response, activation of the innate immune system, cell
migration, differentiation and gene expression. However, its role in
cancer immunology, especially in ovarian cancer has not been studied. The
aim of this study is to investigate the expression and the role IL-22 in
human ovarian cancer.In our work, we analyzed the expression of IL-22
protein in human ovarian cancer tissues and ascites samples using
immunohistochemistry and ELISA; we tested the expression of IL-22
receptor on human ovarian cancer cells via Western Blot, and determined
the association between disease outcome and IL-22 gene expression
(Affymetrix)in patients with human ovarian cancer. We evaluated the
effect of IL-22 on cellular proliferation using MTT assay and we assessed
the effect of IL-22 on TNF-a induced apoptosis using caspase 3/7 activity
(Caspase Glo) assay and 7AAD staining on multiple human ovarian cancer
cell lines.Here we demonstrate that IL-22 was expressed in human ovarian
cancer tissue (mostly in the stroma) and that the receptor for IL-22 was
expressed on human ovarian cancer cells. We found that high expression of
IL-22, as well as the IL-22-receptor in the tumor tissue leads to poor
disease outcome in ovarian cancer patients. On the contrary, high
expression of IL-22-binding protein (antagonist of IL-22) was associated
with better survival in ovarian cancer patients. We showed that treatment
with human recombinant (hr) IL-22 protein induced the activation of
Stat-3, as well as increased the proliferation of human ovarian cancer
cell lines. We also found that treatment with hr IL-22 at 100, 50 or even
at 10 ng/mL concentrations inhibited TNF-a induced apoptosis in OVCAR-5
ovarian cancer cell line, and these results were reversed by the addition
of IL22 binding protein to the culture.We conclude that interleukin-22 is
an important factor in the tumor microenvironment of ovarian cancer; it
promotes tumor growth by increasing proliferation and serves as a
protective factor for ovarian cancer during TNF-s induced apoptosis.
These data suggest that IL-22 is a potential therapeutical target and/or
biomarker in human ovarian cancer.

