Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from subchronic exposure to
butylated-hydroxytoluene (BHT) inhibits gap junctional communication in a
toll-like receptor 4-dependent manner.


Subchronic dosing of BHT in mice is a well-known model used to discretely
study the tumor promotion stage of lung adenocarcinoma. Using this model,
we have previously shown that functional toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) is
protective against inflammatory sequelae and primary tumor formation in
the mouse lung. Gap junctional intercellular communication (GJIC) has
been shown to regulate the signal transduction pathways of cells, and
inhibition of this communication by toxicant exposure has been linked to
dysregulation and eventual carcinogenic endpoints. As part of our
research on the protective nature of TLR4 during tumor promotion, we
utilized the BHT subchronic model (4 weekly i.p. doses of BHT) to examine
the early effects on BALF in both BALB/c (BALB; Tlr4 sufficient) and
C.C3H-Tlr4Lps-d mice (BALBLps-d-d; Tlr4 mutant). Analysis of the BALF 24
hours after the final dose for protein content and cytology was
indicative of an inflammatory profile in all mice treated with BHT.
Magnitude of response to BHT was highest in the BALBLps-d mice; the BALB
appeared resistant. In an effort to further characterize the response of
the pulmonary epithelium, the BALF samples were used to treat cultured
C10 cells, a murine immortalized line derived from BALB/c alveolar type
II cells, which are a precursor cell type for adenocarcinoma. Using the
scrape-load dye transfer assay, a well-defined method to measure GJIC, we
demonstrated marked inhibition of cellular communication after a 4 hour
exposure to cell-free BALF that is both treatment and strain dependent.
The direction and magnitude of effect is in parallel with that of the
direct analysis of the BALF, i.e. we observed more inhibition in BALF
from BALBLps-d compared to BALB mice. In addition, quantitative PCR
(QPCR) analysis of C10 cells exposed to cell-free BALF for 24 hours
indicates alterations in the transcription patterns in genes of innate
immunity that are also treatment and strain dependent. These novel
findings suggest endocrine signaling from the inflammatory milieu are
complicit in the inhibition of GJIC during the promotion phase of
carcinogenesis. Furthermore, these data establish a link between active
gap junctions, tumor promotion, and the protective nature of TLR4 in an
ex vivo model which will facilitate a mechanistic examination of these
protective effects at the molecular level. Funded by ACS
RSG-10-162-01-LIB (AKB).

