Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-375 regulates tumor invasion and metastasis phenotypes
and is associated with poor outcome in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a highly invasive
cancer, with a five-year survival rate of around 50%. Our goal is to
improve patient outcome through understanding the mechanisms determining
HNSCC invasiveness. Our research group identified miR-375 as the most
consistently down-regulated miRNA in tumor samples when compared to
paired normal samples. Patients in the lowest quartile of miR-375
expression had significantly decreased disease-specific survival,
increase incidence of loco-regional recurrence and distant metastasis.
The highly significant association of lower miR-375 expression in
patients with poor prognosis and distant metastasis led us to investigate
the mechanism by which miR-375 expression causes alterations to the
invasive properties of HNSCC. Stable transductant cell lines with
increased expression of miR-375 have been generated from two oral cavity
cell lines, UMSCC1 and UMSCC47, utilizing lentiviral constructs driving
expression of the miR-375 precursor. We have not seen a significant
change in proliferation rate for either of the miR-375 expressing lines
compared to the empty vector control expressing lines. We have observed
diminished invasion properties in vitro correlates with increased miR-375
expression. We have also identified that miR-375 expression in HNSCC
result in impaired chemotactic migration properties and suppressed matrix
degradation properties. To identify proteins regulated by miR-375, we are
utilizing stable isotope labeling of cells in cell culture (SILAC) to
identify candidate miRNA target proteins to identify differentially
expressed proteins in control and miR-375 over-expressing lines.
Candidate target proteins will be validated as targets of miR-375 and
tested for involvement in the diminished invasive properties of HNSCC as
a result of miR-375 expression. In conclusion, miR-375 represents a
potential prognostic marker of poor outcome and metastasis in HNSCC and
may function by suppressing the expression of genes and proteins which
are involved in the invasive properties of HNSCC.

