Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive ex vivo drug sensitivity testing combined with in
depth molecular profiling of AML patients cells provides individualized
treatment strategies and reveals mechanisms of drug resistance.


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive, heterogeneous disease with
few options for targeted therapy. Here, we describe a novel translational
strategy termed Individualized Systems Medicine (ISM), in which we
profile primary AML patient cells functionally, molecularly and
clinically to identify novel treatment strategies for patients, monitor
and predict disease progression and follow-up therapies, and elucidate
drug response and resistance mechanisms.We developed a comprehensive ex
vivo drug sensitivity and resistance testing (DSRT) strategy to screen
AML patient blast cells ex vivo against a set of 202 conventional
chemotherapeutic and targeted approved (n=119) and investigational (n=83)
drugs. Quantitative leukemia-selective drug sensitivity scores for each
drug were determined by comparing the area under the dose response curve
from the patient cells to that of healthy control mononuclear cells.
Analysis of consecutive samples from the same patients with DSRT and
next-generation sequencing was applied to infer clonal evolution and
potential mechanisms of drug response and resistance.Twenty-four samples
from 16 recurrent and refractory AML patients were profiled by DSRT,
sequencing and proteomic approaches. Several approved and late stage
clinical investigated targeted drugs including multi-kinase inhibitors
(e.g. dasatinib, sunitinib), TORC1 inhibitors (e.g. temsirolimus), JAK
inhibitors (e.g. ruxolitinib) and MEK inhibitors (e.g. trametinib,
selumetinib) showed selective leukemic-specific responses in 10-30% of
AML samples from patients with recurrent disease. In two refractory AML
cases where dasatinib, sunitinib and temsirolimus showed selective
responses, the clinical administration of these compounds resulted in
complete and partial remission, but was followed by resistance to the
applied drugs. Re-sampling and DSRT retesting of cells confirmed
diminished sensitivities to the administered drugs, but also indicated
new acquired drug sensitivities. Exome and RNA sequencing of the serial
samples from both patients revealed diverse subclonal populations
characterized by multiple somatic mutations, which were either lost or
gained during disease progression and represented drug sensitive or
resistant subclones.In conclusion, our results suggest that an ISM
strategy based on consecutive cancer sampling, ex vivo DSRT and analysis
of clonal evolution could facilitate the rapid design of improved
combinatorial therapies for AML. This strategy can also help tailor
optimized therapies for patients, and prioritize introduction of new
drugs for clinical testing.

