Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IMCgp100: a novel bispecific biologic for the treatment of
malignant melanoma.


Despite significant advances in the treatment of metastatic melanoma
long-term remission for the majority of patients remains elusive. Kinase
inhibitors provide potent but short-term responses for a significant
proportion of patients and immunotherapy elicits long-term responses but
only in a minority.IMCgp100 is a novel bi-specific immunotherapy
comprising a soluble, affinity-enhanced, T cell receptor (TCR) specific
for the melanoma-associated antigen gp100, fused to an anti-CD3 specific
antibody fragment (scFv). The engineered TCR portion of the drug targets
the gp100 peptide 280-288 antigen, which is over-expressed and presented
by HLA-A2 on the surface of melanoma cells, thereby effectively coating
these cells with CD3-specific antibody fragments. The anti-CD3 scFv
portion captures and redirects T cells in physical contact with the
melanoma cell to kill it. In vitro IMCgp100 potently redirects T cells
from the blood of late stage cancer patients to target melanoma cells
exhibiting substantial HLA-down regulation, even in the presence of high
numbers of regulatory T cells. Target cell killing is observed within
hours, and is associated with the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines
and dendritic cell cross-presentation of gp100 and other
melanoma-specific antigens. Thus, IMCgp100 demonstrates the potential to
elicit potent short-term responses and trigger longer-term anti melanoma
activity.As part of a Phase 1 dose-finding study in HLA-A2 positive
patients with advanced melanoma, 18 patients have received single IV
infusions of 5, 15, 45, 135, 270 or 405ng/Kg of IMCgp100. Seven patients
have subsequently received weekly IMCgp100 infusions for 6 weeks, with a
brief clinical response in 1 patient at 270ng/Kg.To date, the most
frequent drug related toxicities observed are rash (12 patients),
pruritus (7), hypotension (5) and oedema (7), starting at the 45ng/Kg
dose level. The frequency, severity and duration of adverse events
demonstrate a clear dose response relationship. Pharmacodynamic data show
a transient reduction in peripheral lymphocyte count 24h after dosing,
consistent with the proposed mechanism of action of IMCgp100.
Pharmacokinetic analysis indicates a linear dose relationship, with Cmax
at 4h and T1/2 of approximately 9h. IMCgp100 is well-tolerated, with
evidence of T-cell trafficking after dosing. Toxicity to date has been
consistent with on target effects.

