Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metronomic cyclophosphamide enhances antitumor immune response
induced by a DepoVaxTM-based peptide vaccine.


Advanced cancers utilize several mechanisms to escape immune-mediated
detection and destruction thus reducing the effectiveness of cancer
therapeutics on multiple levels. Low dose cyclophosphamide (CPA) has been
investigated as an immune modulator to potentiate active immune response
towards tumor cells, but a single bolus injection of CPA has been
ineffective at boosting response to cancer vaccines in most clinical
trials. We sought to determine if a metronomic regimen of low dose CPA
(mCPA) could enhance the efficacy of a peptide-based vaccine formulated
in DepoVaxTM (DPX). DPX is a novel vaccine platform comprised of
liposomes in oil that is formulated with an adjuvant, universal T-helper
peptide and specific tumor peptide antigens. Using a murine tumor model
(C3) we tested the benefit of combining mCPA and vaccination for
controlling well established subcutaneous solid tumors in vivo. Mice were
treated starting 5 days after C3 tumor implantation with mCPA
administered in drinking water in a one week on/ off schedule and
vaccinated every 3 weeks. In this model, neither mCPA nor vaccine
treatments alone were sufficient to eradicate advanced tumors. However,
combining mCPA with vaccination provided effective tumor control. Ex vivo
analysis of immune response after a single treatment of mCPA combined
with vaccine showed a significant increase in antigen-specific IFN-
release by ELISPOT, which became more pronounced after multiple rounds of
treatment in tumor bearing mice. This immune response was accompanied by
a corresponding increase in antigen-specific cytotoxic T cell activity as
measured by in vivo CTL assay. Dextramer analysis of the antigen-specific
CD8+ T cells in the vaccine-draining lymph node revealed that while the
total number of CD8+ T cells decreased with mCPA treatment, the number of
antigen-specific CD8+ T cells was increased by vaccination and not
reduced by mCPA. Flow cytometric analysis of splenocyte cell populations
did not show any significant reduction in CD4+CD25hiFoxP3+Treg
populations due to mCPA treatment, as previously reported by others, but
we did find an increase in myeloid-derived suppressor cells due to mCPA
treatment that was decreased in mice treated with both mCPA &
vaccination. Finally, adoptive transfer of T cells from tumor bearing
mice treated with mCPA & vaccination significantly reduced tumor growth
in tumor challenged recipients. Overall, our data indicate that mCPA
combines with a peptide based DPX vaccine to enhance the T cell response
to antigen that ultimately results in an improved immunotherapy for
cancer. The immune-enhancing effects of mCPA in this model are
multi-faceted and augment the T cell responses independent of direct
cytotoxic effects on the tumor. The results of this pre-clinical study
have assisted in the designing of a phase II clinical trial for
DPX-Survivac vaccine in combination with mCPA in ovarian cancer patients.

