Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Superoxide modulates tumor cell survival in response to hypoxia
and metabolic stress: role of p53 status.


Background: Cancer cells from solid tumors become metabolically stressed,
when nutrients are insufficient within poorly vascularized regions.
Metabolic stress resulting from severe deprivation of glucose and
serum-derived growth factors can promote cell death, partly through
excessive reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. As possible sources
of oxidative stress, NADPH oxidases (NOX) are centrally involved in the
control of the malignant state: activated NOX enzymes use NADPH as an
electron donor to reduce molecular oxygen generating superoxide anion
radical (O2), which can act extracellularly as an autocrine/paracrine
regulator or intracellularly as a signaling messenger in a variety of
mammalian cells. Excessive superoxide can be dismutated to H2O2. by
superoxide dismutases (SOD). Objectives: To investigate whether chemical
inhibition of NOX or removal of extracellular superoxide by exogenous SOD
influences tumor cell survival depending on p53 status or metabolic
stress. Experimental: Genetically-matched human melanoma cells with
unequal p53 mutational status were exposed to glucose or serum starvation
under normoxia, physical hypoxia and/or chemical hypoxia .Differential
cell survival was assesed by live-dead fluorometric assays or crystal
violet staining. Mechanisms influencing response to glucose limitation
were studied by specific immune blotting. Results: Lower cell
proliferation under normoxia in 1 % serum was attenuated by chemically or
enzymatically decreasing superoxide or by exposing them to hypoxia.
Diphenylene iodonium preferentially restored the metabolic activity of
mutant p53 cells in 1 % serum, whereas SOD acted preferentially on wt p53
cells under comparable conditions.Apoptosis-associated PARP cleavage
under normoxia in 2.5 mM glucose and 5 % dialyzed serum was counteracted
by SOD only in wt p53 cells. Cell death induced by CoCl2 preconditioning
in the absence of physical hypoxia was preferential for mut p53 C8161
melanoma and reversed by SOD. Conclusions: Our results support a
cytotoxic role for Nox-mediated free radical production in cancer cell
death under metabolic stress, and suggests that p53 mutation increases
superoxide-mediated toxicity during limitation of intracellular glucose
and/ serum-derived growth factors.

