Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sunitinib inhibits AXL phosphorylation in tumor cells.


Background Sunitinib is a multi-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI),
that is used for treatment of patients with advanced renal cell cancer
(RCC) Drug resistance to sunitinib is a major clinical problem. We
recently reported that continuous exposure to sunitinib causes acquired
resistance of tumor cells. The receptor tyrosine kinase Axl has been
implicated in acquired resistance to multiple TKIs, including erlotinib
and lapatinib. In addition, sunitinib was previously reported to be a
potential inhibitor of Axl catalytic activity. We therefore investigated
the potential role of Axl in sunitinib resistance. Methods 786-O cells
resistant to sunitinib were obtained by continuous exposure to the drug
as previously published (Gotink et al. Clin Cancer Res 2011). AXL
expression was studied in 786-O cell lines and EC-RF24 endothelial cells
by RT-PCR and Western blot. Sunitinib and AXL inhibitor R428 sensitivity
of cells transfected with siRNAs against AXL or scrambled siRNAs was
determined by MTT cell viability assays. For kinase activity experiments
recombinant AXL and tyrosine peptide arrays (PamGene, s Hertogenbosch,
the Netherlands) were used. Phospho-AXL and total AXL in cell lysates
were measured by ELISA. Results Axl phosphorylation in vitro in both
786-O and EC-RF24 cells was dose-dependently inhibited by sunitinib, with
a 50% inhibitory concentration of 5 M. Activity of recombinant Axl kinase
was measured on tyrosine containing peptide arrays in presence of 0, 1 or
4 M sunitinib or 2 M R428. Sunitinib induced dose-dependent inhibition of
Axl activity, where 2 M R428 blocked all peptide phosphorylations. In
addition, 786-O sunitinib resistant cells (786-O SUN) showed a 4-fold
overexpression of Axl protein compared to 786-O parental cells. However,
gene silencing of AXL in 786-O SUN cells by RNA interference did not
sensitize the cells to sunitinib. Sunitinib resistant cells were shown to
be cross-resistant to the Axl inhibitor R428 with respective IC50 values
of 0.9 M (0.1 M) and 1.8 M (0.1 M). Conclusion Phosphorylation of Axl is
inhibited by sunitinib in both 786-O RCC and EC-RF24 endothelial cells.
Despite its overexpression in sunitinib resistant cells, gene silencing
of AXL did not sensitize 786-O resistant cells to sunitinib, indicating
that sunitinib resistance is not mediated by AXL.

