Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel conditional knockout of VHL in the kidney leads to
precancerous lesions that exhibit an inflammatory response.


Mutations of the tumor suppressor gene von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) can lead
to benign and malignant tumors, including the devastating cancer
clear-cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). Using a Cre mouse strain that is
driven by the Hoxb7 gene promoter, we have generated a novel Vhl
conditional knockout strain that exhibits prominent precancerous lesions
in the mutant mouse kidneys. Hoxb7-Cre is expressed in collecting ducts
in embryonic and adult kidneys, as well as in the convoluted distal
tubules in adult kidneys. Pre-cancerous kidney lesions are observed in as
early as 2 month old homozygous viable mice, which are not seen in
wild-type littermates. Investigation of H&E sections showed that lesions
contained dilated kidney tubules (mini-cysts), cell piling-up, clear
cells, and infiltrating immune cells. Collagen accumulation was observed
in these lesions indicating fibrosis. Lesions are also dysplastic
distinguished by breakdown of the basement membrane and expression of
mesenchymal markers. Consistent with the known ccRCC phenotype, increased
blood vessel accumulation in Vhl knockouts was also observed when
compared to wild-type littermates. Importantly, hyperplasia (presence of
Ki67-positive cells) is also prominent. An abundance of macrophages are
detected in lesions starting at 2 months and in older mice the immune
cell population in lesions expanded to B-cells and T-cells. The
pre-cancerous lesion state in our mutants also provides us an opportunity
to analyze the potential role of inflammation in ccRCC progression. These
lesions co-express well known pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1
(IL-1) and IL-6 in tubules surrounding precancerous lesions. One of the
major functions of VHL is to act as an E3 ubiquitin ligase, in which its
major target for proteasomal degradation is hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF). HIF target genes glucose transporter (Glut1) and carbonic
anhydrase IX (CAIX), were expressed in lesion tubules, thus suggesting
HIF contribution to the fibrotic defects we have seen. Mechanistically it
can be suggested that dual knockdown of HIF-1 or -2 and VHL would restore
kidneys to be similar to wild-type littermates. Indeed the frequency of
lesions was greatly reduced in double knockouts of VHL HIF1- and VHL
Hif-2. IL-1 and IL-6 cytokine activity is known to simulate Janus kinase
(JAK)-signaling, which has recently emerged as an important promoter of
tumor growth. Specifically JAK2 expression is increased in VHL mutant
renal cell carcinoma cell lines and has been shown to promote cell
invasion. VHL conditional knockouts treated with a JAK2 inhibitor
revealed a decrease in the frequency of lesions, suggesting this
mechanism is involved in lesion development. Taken together these results
suggest a prominent role of the inflammatory response in the early onset
of ccRCC.

