Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells is mediated
by tumor suppressor microRNA.


Background: Breast cancer is the second most common type of cancer in
women, and the fifth most common cause of cancer related deaths in the
world. Several drugs are being used for treatment, but it is seen that
after prolonged use tumor cells develop resistance to these drugs
rendering them ineffective. Identifying alternative and effective
treatment options is crucial to improve the life expectancy of breast
cancer patients. Resveratrol, a dietary agent found in grapes is being
considered as a potential drug candidate due to its pro-apoptotic
properties against cancer cells. Simultaneously, microRNAs (miRNAs) which
are small non-coding single stranded RNA molecules are gaining ground as
novel cancer therapeutics due to their capability to alter cell functions
including apoptosis. Objective: The overall objective of this study is to
elucidate that resveratrol-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells
occurs via tumor-suppressor miRNA. Experimental setup: Breast cancer cell
lines MCF-7 (Estrogen Receptor positive) and MDA-MB-231 (Estrogen
Receptor negative) were treated with different doses of resveratrol (0,
50, 100, 200 M). Total RNA was isolated and miRNA analysis was performed
using a breast cancer specific miRNA array to screen for miRNA known or
predicted to have altered expression during breast cancer initiation or
progression. A real-time PCR based on the SYBR Green technology was
performed on these samples to study the expression profiles of 84 miRNAs
using this method. Results: Analysis of cells after resveratrol treatment
clearly showed an apoptotic effect on the cells in a dose dependent
manner. Cell viability assay showed that the 50 M dose had a protective
effect with cells being more viable as compared to the control cells, but
at consecutively higher doses resveratrol had a very distinct apoptotic
effect. MiRNA data analysis revealed several miRNAs to be regulated in
breast cancer cells. Hsa-miR-613 was found to be upregulated at both
doses whereas hsa-miR-199b-5p was upregulated at 50 M and downregulated
at 200 M in MCF-7. Similarly, for MDA-MB-231 cells hsa-miR -129-5p,
hsa-miR-199b-3p and hsa-miR-199a-5p were upregulated at both doses
whereas hsa-miR-214-3p was down regulated at 50 M and upregulated at 200
M. Interestingly, several members of the let-7 family were altered in
both cell types. Several miRNAs associated with drug-resistance and ER
dependence were also identified in both the cell types. Conclusion:
Resveratrol induces apoptosis in breast cancer cells via the action of
several miRNA. Therefore, treatment with resveratrol in conjunction with
miRNAs that are altered by resveratrol has the potential to be a good
therapeutic model to induce tumor suppression and ultimately destroy the
tumors.

