Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of tumor-specific antibodies from sentinel lymph nodes
of breast cancer patients using hybridoma technology.


The field of targeted therapy is providing an entirely new generation of
highly active anticancer drugs. For example, addition of a targeted drug
to a chemotherapy regimen has shown improved survival in the treatment of
breast cancer (Herceptin) and colorectal cancer (Avastin). Main problems
with this kind of therapy are that many patients are not candidates
because their tumors do not overexpress the drug target and that patient
develop resistance to the targeted drug. A method to rapidly develop
different sets of therapeutic antibodies (Abs) would greatly contribute
to the field of targeted anticancer therapy. Even more novel would be
methods that can develop Abs derived from individual patients. The
rationale behind this concept is solidly supported by a large number of
SEREX studies demonstrating that the sera of cancer patients do contain
autoantibodies against their own tumors. These autoantibodies may show
greater cancer specificity as tolerance mechanisms usually inhibit Ab
production against normal cells. We generated hybridomas from the
sentinel nodes of 29 breast cancer patients. Surgically removed fresh
breast tumors and sentinel nodes were used for this study. Sentinel lymph
node cells were harvested by either scraping the cut surface or by
removing a 2 mm slice of the nodes. Lymph nodes were mechanically
disaggregated and sieved before Ficoll gradient centrifugation. The yield
of lymphocytes varied from 0.5 to 50x106 cells. Following stimulation,
mononuclear cells were fused with plasmacytoma P3X63.Ag8.653 under
hypo-osmolar condition, using BTX Electro Cell Manipulator and microslide
electrodes. Each immunoglobulin secreting clone was evaluated with ELISA
for binding to a panel of breast cancer cell lines representing the 4
subclasses of breast cancer, and 2 non-cancer breast epithelial cell
lines. Tumor cell lysate-binding was observed in 28% of the hybridoma
clones. The lysate-binding clones were further evaluated with whole cell
imaging, flow cytometry, and Western blotting. Approximately 10% of the
tumor-binding clones were found to bind whole tumor cells with unique
binding patterns. These clones were also found to bind to the patient's
own tumor. Thus, we have identified several tumor-specific autoantibodies
from breast cancer patients. Successful outcome of these experiments
demonstrate the feasibility of rapidly generating human monoclonal Abs
that have a great potential for tumor target discovery and their use in
cancer therapy and diagnosis. The innovative aspect of this strategy is
the exploitation of the cancer patient's own immune repertoire for
generating therapeutic Abs. This is in contrast to most of the currently
available therapeutic Abs for clinical use, which are derived from
chimerization and humanization of rodent Abs. No currently available
antibody is developed through the selective and regulatory processes of
the human immune system.

