Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a novel anti-insoluble-fibrin chimeric
antibody (AFCA) for cancer stromal target (CAST) therapy and diagnosis.


Background: A large body of clinicopathological evidence supports the
conclusion that abnormal coagulation occurs in a variety of cancers. In
the non-malignant condition, fibrin clots (insoluble fibrin) form only at
the onset or active state of disease and subsequently disappear because
of plasmin digestion or replacement with collagen within a few weeks.
However, in cancer, fibrin clot formation and subsequent replacement with
collagen continue for as long as cancer cells survive in the body. In
this context we considered that the fibrin clot could be a
pathophysiologically specific target in cancer and accordingly developed
an anti-insoluble-fibrin chimeric antibody (AFCA). Here, we characterize
AFCA and demonstrate its potential as a tool for drug delivery to the
cancer stroma.Method: The specificity of AFCA was evaluated by ELISA
using insoluble fibrin, fibrinogen (the precursor of fibrin), soluble
fibrin, and D-dimer (the degradation product of insoluble fibrin) as
antigens. To compare AFCA with commercially available anti-fibrin
antibodies, we performed ELISA with insoluble fibrin, fibrinogen, and
D-dimer as antigens. We also conducted western blotting with native
fibrinogen and denatured fibrinogen. To evaluate the accumulation of AFCA
in tumors, we gave fluorescence-labeled AFCA to transgenic mice with
pancreatic cancer.Results: AFCA recognized only insoluble fibrin, not any
fibrin-related proteins. AFCA had higher specificity against insoluble
fibrin than did commercially available anti-fibrin antibodies. Western
blotting analysis revealed that AFCA reacted with denatured fibrinogen
but not native fibrinogen. AFCA, but not isotype control IgG, accumulated
in the pancreatic cancer tissues.Conclusion: These findings imply that
the epitope of AFCA is a distinctive sequence that is uncovered only on
the fibrin clot. Because lasting asymptomatic fibrin clot formation is a
cancer-specific phenomenon, AFCA should be a useful tool for drug
delivery to insoluble fibrin present around cancers.

