Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Itraconazole and arsenic trioxide inhibit hedgehog pathway
activation and tumor growth associated with acquired resistance to
vismodegib.


Recognition of the multiple roles of Hedgehog signaling in cancer has
prompted intensive efforts to develop targeted pathway inhibitors, most
recently culminating in the FDA-approval of vismodegib (Genentech/Roche)
for the treatment of locally advanced or metastatic basal cell carcinoma.
Vismodegib and other hedgehog pathway antagonists currently being
evaluated in the clinical setting are small molecules that act by binding
to a common site within Smoothened (SMO), a critical pathway component.
Acquired mutations in SMO that map to these overlapping binding pockets
compromise the potency and clinical efficacy of vismodegib and other
clinically relevant agents in this space through an apparent class
effect. As a consequence there are currently no visible therapeutic
options for maintaining profound on-target efficacies in patients that
present with recurrent disease harboring these point mutations.We report
here that itraconazole and arsenic trioxide, two FDA-approved agents
recently reported to inhibit Hedgehog signaling through mechanisms
distinct from that of current SMO antagonists, maintain potent inhibition
of hedgehog signaling in the face of acquired SMO mutations, both as
single agents and when used in combination. Using a preclinical mouse
model of medulloblastoma that mimics clinical mechanisms of
vismodegib-associated acquired resistance, we demonstrate that
itraconazole and arsenic trioxide inhibit pathway activation,
proliferation, and tumor growth of medulloblastoma harboring SMO-D477G
mutation, both in vitro and in vivo. These drugs act as effectively in
syngeneic models of medulloblastoma demonstrating constitutive signaling
through wild-type SMO. Combination of itraconazole and arsenic trioxide
further suppress tumor growth and improves survival in an orthotopic
model of vismodegib-resistant medulloblastoma compared to either single
agent alone. Furthermore, itraconazole and arsenic trioxide retain
activity in all reported drug-resistant SMO mutants, including those
reported in relation to NVP-LDE225 (Novartis).Taken together, these
results support clinical evaluation of itraconazole and arsenic trioxide
for the treatment of Hh-dependent tumors, most notably those with
acquired resistance to cyclopamine-mimics. These readily available
FDA-approved agents have well defined pharmacokinetic and toxicity
profiles. Our data support the rapid entry of itraconazole and arsenic
trioxide into clinical testing to address patient populations for which
vismodegib may not be available or is no longer efficacious.

