Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduced expression of histone demethylase KDM6B promotes
pancreatic cancer progression through downregulation of C/EBP.


It has become increasingly clear that epigenetic aberrations are involved
in the pathogenesis of various cancer. In pancreatic cancer, however, the
implication of epigenetic alteration remains elusive. In our screening
analysis for epigenetic regulators that affect the phenotype of
pancreatic cancer, we identified KDM6B/JMJD3, a H3K27me3 demethylase, as
a candidate gene. KDM6B/JMJD3 activates INK4a/ARF locus during
oncogene-induced senescence, thus it is supposed to suppress
tumorigenesis; however, its role in established cancer remains unclear.
In this study, our aim is to clarify the role of KDM6B in the progression
of pancreatic cancer and to understand the underlying mechanisms.We
generated pancreatic cancer cell lines stably knocked down for KDM6B by
shRNAs. Matrigel invasion assay, soft agar colony formation assay, tumor
sphere formation assay revealed increased invasiveness,
anchorage-independent growth and tumorigenicity of KDM6B-knockdown (KD)
cells, respectively. To confirm these phenotypic changes in vivo, these
cells were xenotransplanted into nude mice. In intrasplenic injection
experiments, mice injected with KDM6B-KD cells showed significantly
shorter survival. When tumor cells were orthotopically implanted into the
pancreas, mice injected with KDM6B-KD cells developed massive peritoneal
dissemination with hemorrhagic ascites, while no mice injected with
control cells developed peritoneal dissemination.To identify genes
responsible for the phenotypic change, we performed cDNA microarray
analysis. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed significant
expression change of C/EBP-target genes upon KDM6B ablation. Among the
C/EBP transcription family members, the downregulation of CEBPA, a
putative tumor suppressor gene, was confirmed in KDM6B-KD cells. ChIP
assay showed specific increase of H3K27me3 levels in the upstream region
of CEBPA gene after KDM6B depletion. Notably, enforced expression of
CEBPA rescued the increased invasiveness and tumorigenicity of KDM6B-KD
cells, indicating that reduction of KDM6B expression in pancreatic cancer
enhances its aggressiveness through downregulation of C/EBP.Notably, we
identified a cell surface protein reflective of KDM6B expression and
tumorigenic potential of pancreatic cancer cells; flow cytometry analysis
revealed that cells with higher expression of this molecule expressed
lower KDM6B and showed increased tumorigenicity. Immunohistochemical
analysis of pancreatic cancer specimen showed a positive correlation
between this marker expression and tumor grade, while KDM6B and C/EBP
expression was seldom observed in high grade tumor.Collectively, these
data suggest a role for the KDM6B-CEBPA axis in the regulation of
tumorigenictiy of pancreatic cancer cells, providing a link between
epigenetic change and pancreatic cancer progression.Citation Format:
Keisuke Yamamoto, Keisuke Tateishi, Yotaro Kudo, Miwako Kakiuchi, Shinzo
Yamamoto, Koji Miyabayashi, Yoshinari Asaoka, Hideaki Ijichi, Masao
Omata, Kazuhiko Koike. Reduced expression of histone demethylase KDM6B
promotes pancreatic cancer progression through downregulation of C/EBP.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2982.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2982

