Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlates of clinical response following autologous stem cell
transplant and adoptive immunotherapy with engineered T cells expressing
an affinity-enhanced T cell receptor in patients with mutliple myeloma.


Background: Adoptive immunotherapy for cancer has been limited by lack of
antigen specificity, low levels of target expression, and failure to
break self-tolerance. We are conducting an early phase clinical trial
(NCT01352286) attempting to overcome these barriers using T cells
engineered with an HLA-A0201 restricted, affinity-enhanced TCR that
recognizes an epitope expressed by the NY-ESO-1 and LAGE-1 cancer testis
antigens; these cells are infused in the setting of profound
lymphodepletion that accompanies high-dose chemotherapy with autologous
stem cell transplant (aSCT) for patients with high risk or relapsed
multiple myeloma (MM).Methods: Inclusion criteria include: 1) eligibility
for aSCT, 2) PS of 0-2, 3) high risk MM or relapse after prior therapy,
4) HLA-A0201 positive, and 5) NY-ESO-1 and/or LAGE-1 positive tumor by
PCR. CD25 depleted T cells are activated and expanded using anti-CD3/28
antibody conjugated microbeads, and genetically modified with a
lentiviral vector. T cells are administered four days after high dose
melphalan and two days following auto-SCT. Patients are evaluated for MM
responses in accordance with the IMWG criteria at 6 weeks, and 3 and 6
months. At 3 months, patients with adequate marrow function start
lenalidomide maintenance. Blood and marrow are monitored for persistence
of engineered cells by qPCR and by surface expression of the NY-ESO-1 /
LAGE-1 TCR using dextramerTM reagents. NY-ESO-1 and LAGE-1 antigen
expression in marrow was assessed by qRT-PCR at baseline and post
infusion.Results: As of November 2012, 21 patients have been enrolled, 15
have been infused; 4 were taken off study prior to infusion due to
disease progression. An average of 2.7 x 109 engineered T cells were
administered per patient (range 8.3 x 108-4.2 x 109), and the average
transduction efficiency was 33% (range 30%-45%). More than 50% (8/15) of
patients have high risk chromosomal abnormalities, and 3 (20%) have
received prior aSCT. At 3 months post aSCT, 73% of patients were in a
very good partial response (VGPR) or better. Gastrointestinal toxicity
resulting from autologous GVHD (aGVHD) occurred in a subset of patients
at a higher rate than reported following aSCT alone or aSCT and T cell
infusion, and was resolved in all cases. Infused T cells typically showed
peak expansion in blood at day 14, followed by durable persistence in
blood and marrow at 6-12 months in all but one patient. Disease
progression is typically accompanied by very low levels or loss of
engineered T cell persistence or loss of target antigen on
tumor.Conclusions:We report for the first time that possible correlates
of clinical response in this study include persistence of engineered T
cells and loss of antigen, suggesting specific activity of the infused
cells. Infusions are well tolerated with a possible risk of manageable
aGVHD.

