Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phase 2 study investigating the safety, efficacy and surrogate
biomarkers of response of 5-azacitidine (5-AZA) andentinostat (MS-275) in
patients with triple-negative advanced breast cancer.


Background:In preclinical breast cancer models, combination epigenetic
therapy with a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor (DNMTI) and a histone
deacetylase inhibitor (HDACI) yield superior estrogen receptor (ER)
re-expression and greater restoration of tamoxifen responsiveness than
either agent alone. We conducted a multicenter phase II clinical trial to
evaluate the DNMTI 5-azacitidine (5-AZA) and the HDACI entinostat in
women with advanced breast cancer.Methods:Women with advanced
HER2-negative, either triple-negative (TN; ER/progesterone receptor
[PR]/HER2-negative) or hormone-resistant breast cancer received 5-AZA 40
mg/m2 (SQ, days 1-5, 8-10) and entinostat 7 mg (PO, days 3,10) every 28
days. Primary endpoint: objective response rate (ORR) in each group.
Secondary endpoints: safety, tolerability, survival, clinical benefit
rate. Exploratory endpoints: pharmacokinetics, pharmacogenetics, change
in candidate gene re-expression/methylation in circulating DNA and
mandatory tumor samples. Patients are offered ongoing study therapy at
progression with addition of hormonal therapy (optional continuation
phase). Sample size: Simon two-stage design with interim analysis after
13 patients per cohort (1st stage). If 1 response, accrual will continue
for total of 27 per cohort (2nd stage). Null hypothesis: ORR at most 5%
against alternative hypothesis that is at least 20% with type I error 4%
and power 90%. Preclinical TN/ ER-positive xenograft studies assessing
5-AZA impact were also performed.Results:Thirteen evaluable patients were
enrolled in 1st stage of TN cohort. Median age was 47 (31-67), median
prior chemotherapies 3 (1-5), 77% white/33% black, 77% visceral disease.
Median cycles received 2 (1-4). Therapy was well tolerated, most common
grade 3/4 treatment related adverse events leucopenia and neutropenia
(23% each). No responses observed following 1st stage and this cohort was
closed. Median 1.5 additional cycles (optional continuation phase)
received by 4 patients with no responses to date. Exposure to 5-AZA
(Cmax=11341670ng/mL; AUCINF=939724 ng*h/mL) was slightly higher than
previous studies, entinostat (Cmin=0.780.65ng/mL) was similar.
Hormone-resistant cohort proceeded to 2nd stage as 1 partial response
observed. Final results will be reported once accrual complete. Ongoing
preclinical studies suggest that ER-positive is more sensitive than TN
breast cancer to 5-AZA.Conclusion:Combination epigenetic therapy with
agents, dose and schedule described was well tolerated but not associated
with clinical activity in advanced TN breast cancer. Correlative analyses
will be presented at meeting. Promising preclinical findings suggest
epigenetic therapy may be efficacious in ER-positive breast cancer.

