Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endometrial thickness and risk of sex hormone-related cancers in
the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial.


Background: Higher endogenous circulating estrogen levels have been
linked to elevated risk of breast and endometrial cancers among
postmenopausal women, and may also increase risk of ovarian and
colorectal cancers. In the endometrium, excess estrogen relative to
progesterone produces a net proliferative stimulus, which may result in
endometrial thickening. Previous studies have found that risk factors
such as body mass index (BMI) and menopausal hormone use, that appear to
operate through estrogenic mechanisms, are directly related to
endometrial thickness. Therefore, we tested the hypothesis that
endometrial thickness is associated with risk of several sex
hormone-related cancers.Methods: Postmenopausal female participants, aged
55-74 years, enrolled at the Pittsburgh site of the Prostate, Lung,
Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial who were screened by
transvaginal ultrasound and had known baseline endometrial thickness
measurements were included for study (N=1,272). Serial endometrial
thickness measurements were available for a subset of women at one
(n=1,018), two (n=869) and three years (n=641) after baseline. We modeled
endometrial thickness as a baseline measure, a time-varying covariate,
and as a change in endometrial thickness since the most recent
ultrasound. Cox proportional hazards regression, with age as the time
metric, was used to estimate relative risks (RRs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) for the association between endometrial thickness and
cancer risk, adjusted for potential confounders.Results: This subcohort
(N=1,272) included 91 breast, 14 endometrial, 10 ovarian and 17
colorectal cancers diagnosed after baseline. Median follow-up time was
12.5 years (range: 0.7-13.8 years). At the baseline screen, median
endometrial thickness measures were 4.0 millimeters (mm) for breast, 4.5
mm for endometrial, 3.0 mm for ovarian and 4.0 mm for colorectal cancer
cases compared to 3.0 mm among women who did not develop cancer. Baseline
endometrial thickness, modeled continuously, was associated with risk of
breast cancer (RR: 1.08, 95% CI 1.02, 1.14) and endometrial cancer (RR:
1.13, 95% CI 1.02, 1.25) in models adjusted for baseline BMI,
hypertension, diabetes, uterine fibroids, marital status, and menopausal
hormone use. Similar associations were noted when modeling endometrial
thickness as a time-varying covariate [breast cancer (RR: 1.07, 95% CI
1.00, 1.15), endometrial cancer (RR: 1.13, 95% CI 1.00, 1.28)]. No
significant association between endometrial thickness and risk of ovarian
or colorectal cancer was observed. The change in endometrial thickness
since the most recent ultrasound was not associated with cancer
risk.Discussion: Our data suggest that transvaginal ultrasound
assessments of endometrial thickness, even among asymptomatic women, may
be useful in risk prediction of breast and endometrial cancer.

