Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor ADAM23 mediates the HPV-associated carcinogenesis.


High risk human papillomaviruses (HPV) are known to cause or are closely
associated with the development of human cervical, anal and some types of
head and neck cancers. Integration of HPV DNA into host genome and
subsequent expression of viral oncogenes, such as E6 and E7, are critical
initial events for the HPV-associated cancer development; however, HPV
infection alone is not sufficient to convert normal cells to malignant
phenotypes, suggesting that other additional genetic and/or epigenetic
events in the HPV-infected cells are required. The aim of the current
study is to identify molecular determinants that are functionally linked
to the pathogenesis of the HPV-associated cancers. We used HPV-16
harboring immortalized but non-transformed oral epithelial cells
(HOK-16B), infected with high-throughput Decode RNAi lentiviral screening
pools containing about 70,000 shRNAmir constructs capable of knocking
down the target genes individually (3-4 constructs per gene), and
selected them in DMEM-based high calcium/serum media in which HOK-16B
cells are not permissive to survive. From the surviving colonies, we have
identified several putative tumor suppressors including A Disintegrin and
etalloproteinase domain-containing protein 23 (ADAM23). The function of
ADAM23 was further validated such that singly knocking down in HOK-16B
cells (HOK16B/ADAM23i) acquired proliferative potential in DMEM-based
medium. HOK16B/ADAM23i cells also gained resistance to ionizing radiation
(IR), cisplatin treatment, and differentiation as demonstrated by
colonogenic assay, MTT assay, and the 3-dimensional raft culture systems,
respectively. More importantly, the expression is largely diminished in
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cell lines but more so in HPV-harboring
SCC. We further found that ADAM23 expression is high in normal human oral
epithelial tissues but low or none in HPV-positive OSCC tissue specimens
as determined by immunohistochemical staining. Our data suggest that
ADAM23 may play a role in development of HPV-associated cancers.

