Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human papillomavirus genotyping in urine samples of women with
squamous intraepithelial lesions of cervix.


Human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most frequent microorganism sexually
transmitted and is the causal agent of cervical carcinoma were it could
be found in 99.7% of cases. The detection of HPV en women with or without
lesions of cervix is generally performed in biopsies and cytobrush, which
are invasive samples; therefore many patients do not attend to health
care to get HPV test. The aim of this study was to develop a technique
capable of detect and genotype HPV in urine samples of women with
squamous intraepithelial lesions of cervix.For this study, 87 urine
samples from patients with normal epithelia of cervix (25), low grade
squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) (24), high grade squamous
intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) (38) were collected from women who attended
to gynecological care in a public health center in Temuco, Chile. DNA
extraction was performed with a manual method. For protein precipitation,
Phenol-Chloroform and ammonium acetate were used. DNA precipitation was
performed with absolute ethanol. HPV detection and genotyping was
performed with the kit HPV Typing (patent pending) which is capable of
detect 18 more frequent HPV types and beta globin gen as control of DNA
integrity.20% of urines from normal epithelia women were positive for
HPV. Three genotypes were found in normal samples: HPV52, HPV42 and
HPV53. LSIL there was a 92% of HPV positivity and the most frequent
genotypes were HPV16 and HPV18. In HSIL, 95% of urine sample were
positive for HPV. HPV16, HPV18 and HPV31 were the most frequent genotypes
in HSIL. Genotypes found in urine samples were similar to world
reports.Using the DNA extraction described before and HPV easy typing kit
it is possible to detect and genotype HPV in urine samples. These results
suggest that is possible a HPV primary screening test in non-invasive
sample, complementing PAP smear in order to determinate which women have
a higher risk of developing preneoplastic and neoplastics lesions.Grant
Support: Proyect CORFO N 09CN14-5960 (CEGIN). CI is recipient of grants
from FONDECYT Postdoctoral Proyect N 3130630. PB is recipient of grants
from FONDECYT Postdoctoral Proyect N 3120141.

