Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC4 knockdown induces cellular senescence in head and neck cancer
cells.


The limited effectiveness of therapy for patients with advanced stage
Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC) or recurrent disease is a
reflection of an incomplete understanding of the molecular basis of HNSCC
pathogenesis. Cellular senescence is an extremely stable form of cell
cycle arrest that limits the proliferation of damaged cells and may act
as a natural barrier to cancer progression. MUC4, a high molecular weight
glycoprotein, is overexpressed in many cancers and is implicated in cell
proliferation, adhesion, anti-apoptosis, cell cycle regulation, migration
and invasion of various carcinomas, but nothing is known about its
clinical relevance and the mechanism through which it regulates cancer
progression in HNSCC. Therefore, the present study was aimed to
investigate clinical relevance and a potential role of MUC4 in cellular
senescence in HNSCCs.Using immunohistochemical analysis, we observed a
significant up regulation of MUC4 in 79% (68/86) of HNSCC tissue samples
compared to only 10% (1/10) of benign tissues. Further, we observed high
expression of MUC4 in a majority of HNSCC cell lines tested. Knockdown
(KD) of MUC4 with specific shRNA in HNSCC cells markedly decreased cell
proliferation. The doubling time increased from 26 h to 36 h and 34 h to
42 h in MUC4 silenced UMSCC-1 and SCC-10B cells, respectively as compared
to their control counterparts. MUC4 KD in UMSCC-1 and UMSCC-10B cells
resulted in accumulation of cells at the G0/G1 phase with concomitant
decrease in the expression of cell cycle regulating proteins like
Cyclin-E and Cyclin-D1, and decrease in BrDU incorporation. More
importantly, MUC4 KD resulted in the induction of cellular senescence in
both cell lines as indicated by an increase in the number of flat,
enlarged and senescence-associated -galactosidase (SA--Gal) positive
cells. Further,MUC4 KD resulted in the inhibition of FAK signaling, and
decreased motility and invasive behavior in both UMSCC-1 and UMSCC-10B
cells. Mechanistic dissection of senescent response to MUC4 silencing
indicated decreased acetylated histone enrichment at Cyclin-E/Cyclin-D1
promoters, leading to their downregulation. Further, both cell lines
UMSCC-1 and UMSCC-10B underwent a P16 and P21 dependent cellular
senescence in response to MUC4 KD that requires inactivation of Akt and
ERK signaling. In conclusions, these findings suggest a novel role of
MUC4 in regulating cellular senescence and provide evidence of the
functional role of MUC4 in the proliferation, motility and invasion of
HNSCC cells. Therefore, downregulation of MUC4 may be a promising
therapeutic approach for Head and Neck cancer treatment.

