Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An E2F signature predicts benefit of adjuvant chemotherapy in
early-stage non-small cell lung cancer.


Early-stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is primarily treated by
surgical resection. Unfortunately, after resection, one-third to one-half
of early-stage patients will die of metastatic recurrence. Adjuvant
chemotherapy (ACT) improves the survival of patients with early-stage
disease and has become the standard treatment for patients with resected
stage II-III NSCLC. However, the five-year survival advantage of ACT is
only 4%-15% suggesting that many patients do not benefit. Given the
morbidity associated with ACT, it is imperative to develop new prognostic
tools to identify those patients with a high probability of relapse.
Toward this end, we have used small inhibitory RNAs targeting multiple
E2F pathway components to derive an E2F gene expression signature in
vitro. This signature was refined by filtering for its components that
were altered in non-small cell lung cancers compared to normal tissue.
Principle component analysis was then used to represent the signature
which was tested for correlation to overall survival in two large
cohorts. The first of the two cohorts was the Molecular Classification of
Lung Adenocarcinoma (MCLA) from the Director's Challenge Consortium and
the second was a novel database on 444 lung adenocarcinomas treated as a
part of Moffitt's Total Cancer Care Network. The E2F signature is
strongly prognostic in both cohorts with P values Early-stage non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is primarily treated by surgical resection.
Unfortunately, after resection, one-third to one-half of early-stage
patients will die of metastatic recurrence. Adjuvant chemotherapy (ACT)
improves the survival of patients with early-stage disease and has become
the standard treatment for patients with resected stage II-III NSCLC.
However, the five-year survival advantage of ACT is only 4%-15%
suggesting that many patients do not benefit. Given the morbidity
associated with ACT, it is imperative to develop new prognostic tools to
identify those patients with a high probability of relapse. Toward this
end, we have used small inhibitory RNAs targeting multiple E2F pathway
components to derive an E2F gene expression signature in vitro. This
signature was refined by filtering for its components that were altered
in non-small cell lung cancers compared to normal tissue. Principle
component analysis was then used to represent the signature which was
tested for correlation to overall survival in two large cohorts. The
first of the two cohorts was the Molecular Classification of Lung
Adenocarcinoma (MCLA) from the Director's Challenge Consortium and the
second was a novel database on 444 lung adenocarcinomas treated as a part
of Moffitt's Total Cancer Care Network. The E2F signature is strongly
prognostic in both cohorts with P values <0.0001. Additionally, using
data in the JBR.10 trial (GSE14814) for patients who either did or did
not receive ACT we were able to determine that patients having a high E2F
signature benefit from ACT (have increased overall survival), whereas
patients with a low E2F signature do not. Overall, these results suggest
that this approach could be optimized in the clinical setting to
distinguish patients likely to benefit from ACT from those who will not.

