Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors induce TGF-2 expression in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines as a mechanism of acquired
resistance.


Worldwide, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the 6th most
common cancer. Because the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is
overexpressed in about 90% of HNSCC tumors, molecularly targeted therapy
against EGFR was thought to hold promise for HNSCC treatment. Cetuximab,
a monoclonal antibody against EGFR, has been approved to treat HNSCC in
the US. Still the 5-year survival rate for HNSCC is only 40-50%, despite
the use of cetuximab in the clinic. The modest effect of cetuximab on
survival indicates that EGFR inhibition alone will not be effective in
treating HNSCC. The efficacy of cetuximab in treating HNSCC may be
limited by acquired resistance or the activity of alternative dominant
growth factor pathways in HNSCC. Previously, our lab has shown that in
addition to EGFR signaling, the fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) and its
receptors (FGFRs) participate as an important autocrine signaling pathway
in some gefitinib-insensitive HNSCC cell lines, further indicating that
inhibiting the EGFR pathway alone will not be effective in treating
HNSCC. To identify genes that change in response to EGFR-specific
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and to FGFR-specific TKIs that may
mediate acquired resistance, we performed an Affymetrix GeneChip screen
in which the cell lines UMSCC25, 584-A2, and Ca9-22 were treated for 4
days with 0.3M AZ8010, a TKI selective for FGFRs, and/or 0.1M gefitinib,
an EGFR-selective TKI. We found that in all three cell lines, TGF-2 mRNA
was upregulated following blockade of the dominant receptor pathway. Both
ELISA and qRT-PCR were used to validate this induction of TGF-2 in these
three cell lines. Treatment with a small molecule inhibitor of TGF-
receptor I (TGFRI) provided an additive reduction of clonogenic growth
when combined with EGFR and/or FGFR TKIs. Additionally, silencing TGF-2
with shRNA in UMSCC25 cells lead to an additive decrease in clonogenic
growth in combination with EGFR and/or FGFR TKIs. Furthermore, we
observed an induction of NF-B activity in the cell lines following
treatment with EGFR and/or FGFR TKIs. This induction was mitigated by the
use of a TGF-2 neutralizing antibody, suggesting that TGF-2 is signaling
through a non-canonical pathway in our model. In addition to observing a
rapid increase in TGF-2 expression, the cell line UMSCC25 was chronically
adapted to increasing concentrations of gefitinib over the course of
several months. We observed a sustained increase in TGF-2 expression in
the resistant cells compared to the control cells. This data suggests
that TGF-2 induction may provide a novel mechanism of acquired resistance
to TKIs, and supports the hypothesis that combination therapy will be
more effective than monotherapy in treating HNSCC.

