Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole genome sequencing of SHH medulloblastomas predicts molecular
groups of responders and non-responders to SMO-inhibition .


Recently, we and others analyzed large series of pediatric
medulloblastomas (MB) and identified a number of recurrent aberrations in
each of the four major subgroups (WNT, SHH, Group 3 and Group 4).
However, due to their infrequent occurrence not much is known about
genetic aberrations in adult MBs. We now have analyzed a large series of
adult SHH MBs (age 16) by whole genome sequencing and compared them with
pediatric SHH MBs. We sequenced tumor and blood of 26 adult SHH MBs and
compared them with 30 pediatric SHH MBs. A replication cohort of 28 adult
and 29 pediatric SHH MBs was sequenced for 414 genes by targeted
sequencing. We also performed expression profiling and DNA methylation
analyses on most of these cases. Whole genome sequencing revealed a clear
correlation between mutation rate and age of the patient (r = 0.69).
Furthermore, the genomic data showed that SHH MBs can be split up in
three distinct subgroups: infants, children and adults. They all have
mutations in the SHH pathway, mostly in PTCH1 (infants and adults), SUFU
(infants) and SMO (adults). Children almost completely lack the classical
upstream SHH pathway mutations but instead have more downstream
aberrations such as MYCN and GLI2 mplifications, and have frequent TP53
mutations, often in the germline, whilst all of these were
extraordinarily rare in infants and adults. We also identified several
recurrent mutations in adult MBs that were not found in pediatric MBs.
Moreover, the three SHH subgroups were different in their transcriptome
and methylome with the TP53 mutated SHH MBs in children being more
similar to adult MBs. Collectively, this data will help to better
understand the biology of pediatric and adult SHH-medulloblastoma, but
most importantly may help selecting patients for targeted SHH inhibition
and new treatment strategies for TP53 mutated SHH MBs in a clinical
setting.

