Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase inhibitors: Potential epigenetic therapeutic
drugs for cholangiocarcinoma.


Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA), a cancer of biliary epithelium, is a rare tumor
with poor prognosis which has been increasing markedly worldwide in the
past decade. The surgical resection remains a potentially curative
treatment of CCA. Due to the late clinical presentation, a small number
of patients can undergo for surgery. Adjuvant therapy such as
chemotherapy and radiotherapy has been used for CCA. Although various
chemotherapeutic agents e.g. 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), gemcitabine, and
cisplatin, either alone or in combination, have been widely used in CCA,
the response rate is very poor with a partial response approximately
10-20%. Therefore, new agents and innovative approaches of therapy are
important subjects focusing in effective treatment of CCA. Histone
deacetylases (HDACs) mediate deacetylation of acetylated histones
resulting in chromatin condensation and transcriptional repression. HDAC
inhibitors (HDACIs) inhibit the deacetylation of histones and weaken the
histone-DNA interactions, thereby permitting a more relaxed conformation
of chromatin which contributes to increasing gene transcription and
enabling to induce differentiation, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis of
tumor cells. Recently, HDACIs are emerging as an exciting new class of
potential anticancer agents for the treatment of solid and hematological
malignancies with relatively resistant in normal cells. According to
chemical structures, HDACIs can be classified into several groups such as
sodium butyrate, valproic acid (VPA), suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid
(SAHA) and trichostatin A (TSA). The authors aimed to investigate the
mRNA expression of HDACs1-10 in a panel of CCA derived cell lines (M213,
M214 and KKU-100) and an immortal biliary cell line (MMNK1) using
semi-quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. The
inhibitory effect of VPA and SAHA, either as a single agent or
combination with classical chemotherapeutic drug, 5-FU on cell
proliferation was determined by sulforhodamine B assay.The result showed
that HDACs 1-10 were expressed in all cell types studied suggesting that
histone deacetylation is one of epigenetic mechanisms mediating
aberrantly silenced genes in CCA. Both VPA and SAHA inhibited cell
proliferation in a dose-dependent manner. Interestingly, KKU-100 which
was less sensitive to 5-FU showed highly sensitive to both VPA and SAHA.
Simultaneously combined sub-toxic doses of HDACIs and 5-FU significantly
inhibited cell proliferation in CCA cell lines compared to single agent
treatment (P 0.01), while sequentially combined treatments exhibited
lower responsiveness. This study suggests the prospective administration
of HDACIs as potential epigenetic therapeutic drugs for CCA treatment
efficacy.

