Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of BRCAness by treatment with histone deacetylase
inhibitors sensitizes human triple negative breast cancer cells to PARP
inhibitor and cisplatinum.


During DNA damage response (DDR), stability and activity of ATR and CHK1
is essential for the cell cycle arrest and subsequent DNA repair through
BRCA1-regulated homologous recombination (HR). We have previously
reported that ATR and CHK1 are hsp90 client proteins and treatment with
hsp90 inhibitor sensitizes cancer cells to DNA damage. In the present
studies, we determined that treatment with pan-HDAC inhibitors vorinostat
(VS) and panobinostat (PS) induced hyper-acetylation and inhibition of
chaperone function of nuclear hsp90, leading to proteasomal degradation
and depletion of ATR, CHK1 and BRCA1. This led to inhibition of DDR and
DNA repair following ionizing radiation (IR) through destabilization of
ATR-CHK1 and BRCA1 proteins. Specific siRNA-mediated knockdown of HDAC3
but not of HDAC1 or HDAC2 also induced hyper-acetylation of the nuclear
hsp90 and depletion of ATR and CHK1, indicating that among the class I
HDACs, HDAC3 is the deacetylase for the nuclear hsp90. We next determined
whether, by depleting DDR proteins and BRCA1 and inducing BRCAness,
treatment with VS would sensitize the triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC) SUM159PT and MB-231 (lacking BRCA1 mutation) as well as BRCA1
mutant HCC1937 cells to the PARP inhibitor ABT888 (veliparib). Indeed,
combined treatment with VS or PS and ABT888 (10 to 20 M) for 48 hours
synergistically induced apoptosis (combination indices (CI) by
isobologram analysis being During DNA damage response (DDR), stability
and activity of ATR and CHK1 is essential for the cell cycle arrest and
subsequent DNA repair through BRCA1-regulated homologous recombination
(HR). We have previously reported that ATR and CHK1 are hsp90 client
proteins and treatment with hsp90 inhibitor sensitizes cancer cells to
DNA damage. In the present studies, we determined that treatment with
pan-HDAC inhibitors vorinostat (VS) and panobinostat (PS) induced
hyper-acetylation and inhibition of chaperone function of nuclear hsp90,
leading to proteasomal degradation and depletion of ATR, CHK1 and BRCA1.
This led to inhibition of DDR and DNA repair following ionizing radiation
(IR) through destabilization of ATR-CHK1 and BRCA1 proteins. Specific
siRNA-mediated knockdown of HDAC3 but not of HDAC1 or HDAC2 also induced
hyper-acetylation of the nuclear hsp90 and depletion of ATR and CHK1,
indicating that among the class I HDACs, HDAC3 is the deacetylase for the
nuclear hsp90. We next determined whether, by depleting DDR proteins and
BRCA1 and inducing BRCAness, treatment with VS would sensitize the triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) SUM159PT and MB-231 (lacking BRCA1
mutation) as well as BRCA1 mutant HCC1937 cells to the PARP inhibitor
ABT888 (veliparib). Indeed, combined treatment with VS or PS and ABT888
(10 to 20 M) for 48 hours synergistically induced apoptosis (combination
indices (CI) by isobologram analysis being < 1.0) of TNBC cells with
(HCC1937) or without BRCA1 mutation (MB-231 and SUM159PT cells). As
compared to treatment with each agent alone, co-treatment with VS and
ABT888 also induced significantly more DNA strand breaks, as demonstrated
by higher -H2AX levels. Combined treatment also induced markedly greater
tail moment, as determined by the comet assay that evaluates the SYBR
Green-stained DNA tails by fluorescent microscopy. Co-treatment with VS
and ABT888 also induced more BH3 domain-only pro-death protein BIM, while
knockdown of BIM by shRNA significantly reduced the apoptosis induced by
co-treatment with VS and ABT888. It is noteworthy that treatment with VS
also sensitized the TNBC cells to cisplatin (2.0 to 10 M)-induced
apoptosis. Moreover, co-treatment with VS and ciplatin synergistically
induced apoptosis of TNBC cells (CIs During DNA damage response (DDR),
stability and activity of ATR and CHK1 is essential for the cell cycle
arrest and subsequent DNA repair through BRCA1-regulated homologous
recombination (HR). We have previously reported that ATR and CHK1 are
hsp90 client proteins and treatment with hsp90 inhibitor sensitizes
cancer cells to DNA damage. In the present studies, we determined that
treatment with pan-HDAC inhibitors vorinostat (VS) and panobinostat (PS)
induced hyper-acetylation and inhibition of chaperone function of nuclear
hsp90, leading to proteasomal degradation and depletion of ATR, CHK1 and
BRCA1. This led to inhibition of DDR and DNA repair following ionizing
radiation (IR) through destabilization of ATR-CHK1 and BRCA1 proteins.
Specific siRNA-mediated knockdown of HDAC3 but not of HDAC1 or HDAC2 also
induced hyper-acetylation of the nuclear hsp90 and depletion of ATR and
CHK1, indicating that among the class I HDACs, HDAC3 is the deacetylase
for the nuclear hsp90. We next determined whether, by depleting DDR
proteins and BRCA1 and inducing BRCAness, treatment with VS would
sensitize the triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) SUM159PT and MB-231
(lacking BRCA1 mutation) as well as BRCA1 mutant HCC1937 cells to the
PARP inhibitor ABT888 (veliparib). Indeed, combined treatment with VS or
PS and ABT888 (10 to 20 M) for 48 hours synergistically induced apoptosis
(combination indices (CI) by isobologram analysis being < 1.0) of TNBC
cells with (HCC1937) or without BRCA1 mutation (MB-231 and SUM159PT
cells). As compared to treatment with each agent alone, co-treatment with
VS and ABT888 also induced significantly more DNA strand breaks, as
demonstrated by higher -H2AX levels. Combined treatment also induced
markedly greater tail moment, as determined by the comet assay that
evaluates the SYBR Green-stained DNA tails by fluorescent microscopy.
Co-treatment with VS and ABT888 also induced more BH3 domain-only
pro-death protein BIM, while knockdown of BIM by shRNA significantly
reduced the apoptosis induced by co-treatment with VS and ABT888. It is
noteworthy that treatment with VS also sensitized the TNBC cells to
cisplatin (2.0 to 10 M)-induced apoptosis. Moreover, co-treatment with VS
and ciplatin synergistically induced apoptosis of TNBC cells (CIs < 1.0).
These findings indicate that treatment with pan-HDAC inhibitors VS or PS
creates BRCAness, and in combination with a PARP inhibitor or cisplatin
synergistically induces apoptosis in human TNBC cells. These findings
support a compelling rationale to confirm whether the combination of VS
or PS with ABT888 and cisplatin would be a highly active treatment of
human TNBC, irrespective of its expression of mutant BRCA1.

