Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor cells selected for resistance to an antibody-drug conjugate
retain sensitivity to ADCs with modified linkers and payloads.


Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) enable targeted delivery of therapeutics
to cancer cells and offer potential for more selective therapy. Several
ADCs are demonstrating promising clinical efficacy, however due to the
complexity of human cancer, tumors become refractory to most drug
treatments. We hypothesized that cultured tumor cells chronically treated
with an ADC would acquire mechanisms of resistance unique to ADC-based
therapy. Human breast cancer cell lines were exposed to multiple cycles
of an anti-Her2 trastuzumab-maytansinoid conjugate (TM) at IC80
concentrations for 3 days followed by 1 week without treatment to
simulate a maximally tolerated dose followed by recovery. After 2 months,
significant resistance developed in JIMT1 and MDA-MB-361 cell lines. The
potency of TM conjugate on drug-selected cell lines was reduced to the
activity observed on Her2-negative cells (>20 & >270X in JIMT1 & 361 cell
models, respectively). Flow cytometry revealed 58% and 25% decreases in
Her2 receptor number in JIMT-TM & 361-TM, respectively. Proteomic
profiling of surface proteins in JIMT-TM cells demonstrated significant
increases in proteins involved in post-translational modification (e.g.,
ubiquitinating enzymes, kinases, and phosphatases), as well as elevated
levels of endosomal and vesicle proteins (e.g., RAB family members), and
proteins mediating microtubule and actin dynamics. Notably, ABC drug
transporters were not altered in JIMT-TM cells. In 361-TM cells, an
increase in ABCC1 (MRP1) was observed, but no changes in ABCB1 (MDR1)
which typically effluxes tubulin inhibitors. These data suggest the
acquisition of complex resistance mechanisms upon ADC treatment. The
cross-resistance profile of these ADC refractory models was evaluated.
Minimal or no resistance (1 - 6X) was observed to free drugs, including
maytansine or other standard-of-care tubulin or DNA targeted
therapeutics. In JIMT-TM cells, cross-resistance was observed to other
trastuzumab-based ADCs, including those containing either non-cleavable
or cleavable linkers, and delivering payloads with various biological
mechanisms of action. In contrast, 361-TM cells (which were made
resistant to an ADC delivering a tubulin inhibitor via a non-cleavable
linker) retained significant sensitivity to ADCs containing cleavable
linkers, even those containing other tubulin inhibitor-based payloads.
Moreover, both 361-TM and JIMT-TM resistant cell lines retained
sensitivity to ADCs delivering payloads with alternative (non-tubulin)
mechanisms of action. Therefore, despite the reduction in antigen levels
observed in both cell lines, modification of the linker and/or the
payload was able to overcome resistance mediated by the initial ADC
therapy. These data offer the potential to treat refractory tumors with
ADCs containing the same antibody vehicle, but delivering alternative
linkers or payloads.

