Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human TCF-4 isoforms regulate apoptosis through upregulating
Bcl-xL expression in a SxxSS motif-dependent manner.


Background: The T-cell factor (TCF)-4 is a key transcriptional protein
activated by Wnt/-catenin signaling. Previously we identified 14 TCF-4
isoforms derived from human HCC cell lines. The TCF-4J and K pair have
been characterized based on the presence (K) or absence (J) of a SxxSS
motif. Furthermore, we have shown that TCF-4J predominantly expressed in
poorly differentiated HCC tissues and conferred high tumorigenic
potential to HCC cells (Koga et al., PLoS ONE 2012). In contrast, TCF-4K
showed low tumorigenic potential, which is an important feature of cancer
stem cells (CSCs). Another characteristic of CSC is robust resistance to
anticancer agents. Among the agents, doxorubicin (DXR) has been a key
drug applied to HCC treatment through a unique nanoparticle-mediated drug
delivery system. Thus, we aimed to assess if TCF-4J and K differentially
contributed to resistance to DXR-induced HCC cell apoptosis, focusing on
the expression profile of Bcl-xL, since the -catenin/TCF-4 complex is
known to up-regulate Bcl-xL gene expression.Methods: The human HCC cell
line HAK-1A was used. TCF-4K mutants (269A, 272A, and 273A) were prepared
with conversion of serine (S) in the SxxSS motif to alanine (A) by
site-directed mutagenesis. Stable cell clones overexpressing TCF-4J (J
cells), K (K cells), and K-mutants (269A, 272A, and 273A cells,
respectively) were established. The cells were incubated with DXR at 0,
100, 500, and 1000 ng/mL over 4 days. A MTS assay and Western blot
analysis were performed to evaluate cell proliferation and the
apoptosis-related protein levels of cleaved PARP, cleaved caspase-3, and
Bcl-xL, respectively. Flow cytometric analysis was employed to determine
the sub-G1 population.Results: Dose-dependent apoptotic effects were
verified by PARP cleavage, caspase activation, and increase in the sub-G1
population. Unexpectedly, K cells, harboring the SxxSS motif, were most
resistant to DXR. Under 1000 ng/mL of DXR treatment, the absorbance ratio
of viable cells at Day 3 to that at Day 0 in control cells, J cells, and
K cells were 1.15, 1.53, and 1.76, respectively. However, the K-mutant
269A cells lost high resistance, and the ratio fell to 1.11. Consistent
with the results, the expression level of Bcl-xL was highest in K cells.
The Bcl-xL protein level of 269A mutant cells was found similar to that
of mock DNA transfected cells.Conclusions: The findings suggest that the
SxxSS motif of TCF-4 is involved in resistance to DXR, by modulating the
expression level of Bcl-xL. We suggest that phosphorylation at serine 269
in the TCF-4K isoform is critical to promote anti-apoptotic potential
through increasing the Bcl-xL expression in HCC.

