Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HOXB7 functions as a co-activator of estrogen receptor in the
development of tamoxifen resistance.


Background: Multiple factors including long term treatment with tamoxifen
are involved in the development of selective estrogen receptor modulator
(SERM)-resistance in ER positive breast cancer. Increased expression of
HER family members can also directly alter cellular responses to
tamoxifen, but the mechanism underlying the increased expression of the
HERs is not clear. In this report we show that HOXB7 is an upstream
regulator of HER2 and ER expression.Results: Overexpression of HOXB7
results in upregulation of HER2 and ER target genes, while knockdown of
HOXB7 with siRNA in tamoxifen-resistant cell lines causes decrease of
HER2 and ER target genes expression and loss of tamoxifen resistance. To
mediate upregulation of HER2 and ER-target genes occurring in tamoxifen
resistance, the HOXB7-ER complex recruits ER coactivators and promotes
HER2- and ER-target genes transcriptional activity through direct binding
to the HER2 enhancer and regulatory regions of ER target genes. However,
depletion of HOXB7 negatively affects the binding affinity of its
cofactors to the HER2 enhancer element and ER-binding sites. Also, it is
likely that miR196a controls HOXB7 expression; reducing miR196a levels in
tamoxifen-resistant cells causes an increase of HOXB7 expression.
Overexpression of miR196a sensitizes MCF-7 tamoxifen resistant cells to
tamoxifen through downregulation of HER2 and ER-target genes while
inhibition of miR196a by anti-miR196a inhibitors increases tamoxifen
resistance through the upregulation of HER and ER target genes in MCF-7
cells. Further, miRNA 196a is regulated by c-MYC which undergoes
stabilization through the EGFR-HER2 signaling pathway. Depletion of c-MYC
by MYC shRNA enhances tamoxifen sensitivity by increasing the level of
miR196a transcripts. Also, by c-MYC ChIP assay, we found that c-MYC
inhibits miR196a expression through direct binding to its promoter
region.Conclusions: Overexpression of HOXB7 is a key event in the
initiation and maintenance of tamoxifen resistance. These studies suggest
that HOXB7 acts as a key regulator orchestrating two major groups of
target molecules, ER and HER2, in the oncogene hierarchy. Blocking MYC
expression or reexpression of miR196a in TAM-R cells may provide novel
strategies for reversing SERM-resistance. Therefore, we have provided
additional evidence that supports the thesis that functional antagonism
of HOXB7 has the potential to circumvent tamoxifen resistance.

