Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silymarin, a phytochemical from milk thistle, inhibits UVB-induced
immune suppression through DNA repair-dependent activation of dendritic
cells and stimulation of effector T cells .


Ultraviolet (UV) radiation-induced immunosuppression has been implicated
in the risk of skin cancers, including melanoma and non-melanoma. Topical
treatment of mouse skin with silymarin, a bioactive phytochemical from
milk thistle (Silybum marianum L. Gaertn.), inhibits UVB
radiation-induced skin tumor development and immunosuppression in mice.
To identify the molecular mechanisms underlying its effect on immune
system, we used an adoptive transfer approach in which dendritic cells
(DCs) from the draining lymph nodes of donor mice that had been
UVB-exposed and sensitized to 2,4,-dinitrofluorobenzene (DNFB) were
transferred into nave recipient mice. The contact hypersensitivity (CHS)
response of the recipient mice to DNFB was then measured. When DCs were
obtained from UVB-exposed donor mice that were not treated with
silymarin, the CHS response was suppressed confirming the role of DCs in
the UVB-induced immunosuppression. CHS response is considered as a
prototypic T-cell mediated immune response. Silymarin treatment of
UVB-exposed donor mice relieved this suppression of the CHS response in
the recipients. Silymarin treatment was associated with rapid repair of
UVB-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) in DCs and silymarin
treatment did not prevent UV-induced immunosuppression in xeroderma
pigmentosum complementation Group A (XPA)-deficient mice which are unable
to repair UV-induced DNA damage. The CHS response in mice receiving DCs
from silymarin-treated UV-exposed donor mice also was associated with
enhanced secretion of Th1-type cytokines and stimulation of T cells.
Adoptive transfer of T cells revealed that transfer of either CD8+ or
CD4+ cells from silymarin-treated, UVB-exposed donors resulted in
enhancement of the CHS response. Cell culture study showed enhanced
secretion of IL-2 and IFN by CD8+ T cells, and reduced secretion of Th2
cytokines by CD4+ cells, obtained from silymarin-treated UVB-exposed
mice. These data suggest that DNA repair-dependent functional activation
of DCs, a reduction in CD4+ regulatory T-cell activity, and stimulation
of CD8+ effector T cells contribute to silymarin-mediated inhibition of
UVB-induced immunosuppression in mice. This property of silymarin can be
used as an alternative strategy to augment immune system and that may
help to prevent or delay the risk of skin cancers in high-risk human
population.

