Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of recurrences of experimental brain tumors after
irradiation by blocking the activity of SDF-1 (CXCL12) using the
Spiegelmer NOX-A12.


With current treatment of glioblastomas 85% of the tumors recur within
the field of high dose radiation. This tumor recurrence requires
formation of new blood vessels. We have developed a new therapeutic
paradigm based on the dual origin of tumor blood vessels: Angiogenesis -
the sprouting of endothelial cells from nearby blood vessels, and
vasculogenesis - the formation of blood vessels from circulating cells.
Because tumor irradiation abrogates local angiogenesis the tumor must
rely on the vasculogenesis pathway for regrowth after irradiation. We
have previously demonstrated that the post-irradiation recurrence of
human glioblastomas implanted intracranially in the mouse brain can be
delayed or prevented by inhibiting circulating blood vessel forming cells
by blocking the interaction of the chemokine receptor CXCR4 with its
ligand SDF-1 (CXCL12)1. However, SDF-1 has a second receptor, CXCR7,
which has been implicated in endothelial cell migration, is present on
tumor vasculature, and is potentially also able to activate
vasculogenesis. To block both receptors we have therefore used NOX-A12,
an L-enantiomeric RNA oligonucleotide (Spiegelmer), which inhibits SDF-1
with subnanomolar affinity. We have tested the effect of this inhibitor
on the response to irradiation of the U251 human GBM in nude mice and on
ENU-induced brain tumors in the Sprague-Dawley rat.In the mouse model we
found that inhibition of SDF-1 post-irradiation was highly effective in
enhancing tumor response to a single dose of 20 Gy whole brain
irradiation. In the rat model the pups from ENU-treated pregnant mothers
begin to die of brain tumors from approximately 120 days of age. We
performed two studies with this model: In the first we delivered a single
dose of whole brain irradiation (20 Gy) on day 115 of age and began
treatment with NOX-A12 immediately following irradiation and continued
every 2 days with either 5 or 20 mg/kg injected subcutaneously for either
4 or 8 weeks. These doses and times were chosen as equivalent to human
doses and times that based on existing data have been found to be safe
and well tolerated in human volunteers and which are effective in
inhibiting the action of SDF-1. We found a marked prolongation of life of
the rats that was dependent both on drug dose and length of treatment. In
the second study we measured the size of the tumors post-irradiation
using MRI and again found a pronounced enhancement of the efficacy of
irradiation that was superior to the addition of temozolomide at doses
equivalent to those used with concomitant radiotherapy in treating GBM.
We believe that these encouraging data justify a human trial in first
line glioblastoma patients.1. Kioi M, Vogel H, Schultz G, Hoffman RM,
Harsh GR, Brown JM: Inhibition of vasculogenesis, but not angiogenesis,
prevents the recurrence of glioblastoma after irradiation in mice. J Clin
Invest 120:694-705, 2010

