Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CYLD downregulation induces aerobic glycolysis in human oral
squamous cell carcinoma cells.


Purpose: The hypermetabolic nature of cancer cells, especially their
increased reliance on aerobic glycolysis which has been associated with
more aggressive phenotype, is considered metabolic hallmarks of cancer
cells including oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells. However, its
precise mechanisms remain unknown. Cylindromatosis (CYLD) is recognized
as a tumor suppressor gene whereas little is available about its impact
on cancer progression. Our unpublished data showed that lower CYLD
expression was associated with poor prognosis in OSCC patients. The
objective of our study was to address specific contributions of CYLD to
the signature metabolic features of OSCC cells.Materials and methods: We
determined the level of glucose consumption as well as lactate production
to evaluate the effects of CYLD knockdown by siRNA on aerobic glycolysis
in human OSCC cell lines. In addition, we measured extracellular
acidification and oxygen consumption rates in OSCC cells by using XF
Extracellular Flux Analyzers.Results: Downregulation of CYLD
significantly suppressed cell proliferation through cell cycle arrest
while it inhibited apoptosis induced by serum withdrawal in vitro. In
addition, loss of CYLD led to the increase in both of glucose consumption
and lactate production in several OSCC cell lines. Consistently, culture
medium became more acidic by CYLD nockdown,compared with the control.
Furthermore, glycolysis was promoted by CYLD downregulation whereas no
significant difference was found in mitochondrial
respiration.Conclusions: Dysfunction of CYLD may contribute to aerobic
glycolysis without apparent influence on mitochondrial respiration.
Further investigation on the advantage of such increased glycolysis and
the change in metabolome profiling may lead to development of effective
therapeutic strategies for OSCC and other malignancies.

