Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-associated endothelial cells promote tumor metastasis by
chaperoning circulating tumor cells and protecting them from anoikis.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most frequent
cancer worldwide and five-year survival rates (Head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most frequent cancer worldwide and
five-year survival rates (<50%) are among the lowest of the major
cancers. The high mortality associated with advanced HNSCC is in large
part due to the metastatic spread to vital organs. Although our
understanding of the molecular and biological events that contribute to
tumor progression has increased considerably over the last decade, we
still know very little about the role of tumor- accessory cells in
promoting tumor metastasis. It is estimated that from a 1 cm primary
tumor as many as 2 million tumor cells can be shed each day into the
circulation, though very few of these tumor cells ever form metastases.
Most of the cancer cells, particularly squamous cancer cells, have very
low survival rates in circulation and undergo rapid anoikis. In addition
to circulating tumor cells, increased levels of circulating endothelial
cells are also observed in cancer patients with progressive disease.
Interestingly, in this study we have observed a marked increase in Bcl-2
positive circulating endothelial cells in the blood samples of head and
neck cancer patients. These results raise an intriguing question about
the biological significance of these circulating endothelial cells. In
this study, we performed a series of experiments to examine if
tumor-associated endothelial cells could promote tumor cell metastasis by
binding to circulating tumor cells and chaperoning these tumor cells to
distal sites. Our results demonstrate that endothelial cells
overexpressing Bcl-2 (EC-Bcl-2) show significantly higher E-selectin
expression and exhibit enhanced tumor cell binding. In addition, tumor
cells showed a significant decrease in anoikis when co-cultured with
EC-Bcl-2. EC-Bcl-2-tumor cell binding and anoikis resistance was mediated
by the E-selectin adhesion molecule and Src-FAK survival signaling. We
further examined the role of Bcl-2 in tumor cell metastasis using two
SCID mice models. In the first model, tumor cells were co-implanted with
EC-Bcl-2 or EC-VC (GFP labeled) in the flanks of SCID mice. Tumor cells
co-implanted with EC-Bcl-2 showed significantly higher lung metastasis as
compared to EC-VC group. Interestingly, blood and lung samples from these
animals showed the presence of EC-Bcl-2 cells (GFP-labeled, primary tumor
origin) thereby demonstrating that tumor-associated endothelial are
released from the primary tumors. In the second in vivo model, we
examined the chaperone function of EC-Bcl-2. Animals co-injected with
tumor cells and EC-Bcl-2 via the tail vein showed significantly higher
lung metastasis as compared to tumor cell and EC-VC or tumor cell alone
group. Taken together, these results suggest a novel role for
tumor-associated endothelial cells in binding to tumor cells, protecting
them from anoikis and chaperoning them to distal sites.

