Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutations in the p53 gene family reveal conservation of
structure-function in the L1 and L3 loops and a response element code for
transcriptional specificity.


The p53, p63 and p73 family of sequence-specific transcription factors
share similar biochemical properties and structural features resulting in
the recognition of DNA with identical amino acids and similar binding
affinity. However, loss of individual members results in very different
phenotypes in mice as well as humans. We have addressed functional
relationships between p53 family proteins using a combination of mutants,
target response elements (REs) and sequence-specific transactivation
assays based in yeast and human cells. p53 alleles exhibiting enhanced
transcriptional activation and altered promoter selectivity were
previously identified in the L1 and L3 loop of the DNA binding domain of
the protein. Included was S121F that results in defective p21 induction
and confers a strong apoptotic phenotype in mammalian cells. Guided by
result with p53-S121F, -T123A and -S240N mutants, the corresponding p63
and p73 alleles were investigated for ability to drive transactivation at
over fifty p53 REs in isogenic yeast reporter strains. The phenotypes
observed with p53 alleles were reproduced with the p63- and p73- alleles.
Focusing on p73-S139F (corresponding to p53-S121F) transactivation at
many RE sequences, we identify and experimentally confirm an RE target
sequence code that predicts enhanced or reduced transactivation
potentials. The correlation is particularly strong for induction at p53
targets within promoters of genes associated with apoptosis. Furthermore,
p73 S139F showed an enhanced DNA-binding cooperativity in vitro, and loop
L1 shows conformational changes in the crystal structure of the
protein-DNA complex. The altered function phenotype was confirmed not
only in gene reporter assays but also for endogenous gene expression in
the p53 null HCT116 human cell line, suggesting that target recognition
can predict relative changes in transcription rates at different loci.
Based on the correlation between RE code and associated gene functions,
we propose the selection during evolution of an RE sequence code within
target promoters that can affect intrinsic conformational flexibility /
DNA binding affinity of p53 proteins thereby modulating in vivo
selectivity, specifically favoring the activation of apoptotic target
genes

