Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Different patterns of Akt and ERK feedback activation in response
to allosteric and active-site mTOR inhibitors in comparison to metformin
in pancreatic cancer cells.


The mTOR pathway is aberrantly stimulated in many cancer cells, including
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), and thus it is a potential
target for therapy. However, the mTORC1/S6K axis also mediates negative
feedback loops that attenuate signaling via insulin/IGF receptor and
other tyrosine kinase receptors. Suppression of these feedback loops
unleashes over-activation of upstream pathways that potentially
counterbalance the antiproliferative effects of mTOR inhibitors. Here, we
demonstrate that treatment of PANC-1 or MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells
with allosteric mTOR inhibitors (rapamycin and everolimus) or active-site
mTOR inhibitors (KU63794 and PP242) suppressed p70S6K and S6
phosphorylation induced by insulin and the GPCR agonist neurotensin.
Rapamycin and everolimus caused a striking increase in Akt
phosphorylation at Ser473 while the active-site inhibitors of mTOR
completely abrogated Akt phosphorylation at this site. Conversely,
active-site inhibitors of mTOR cause a marked increase in ERK activation
whereas rapamycin and everolimus did not have any stimulatory effect on
ERK activation. Exposure to the compound A66, a selective inhibitor of
the 110 catalytic subunit of PI3K, did not prevent enhancement of ERK
activation in response to exposure to either KU63794 or PP242, implying
that KU63794 and PP242 enhance ERK via a novel PI3K-independent pathway.
These results suggest that active-site inhibitors, in contrast to mTORC1
allosteric inhibitors, enhanced ERK through a PI3K-independent pathway.
In contrast, metformin which potently inhibited the mTORC1/S6K axis did
not cause over-stimulation of Akt phosphorylation on Ser473 and inhibited
mitogen-stimulated ERK activation in PDAC cells. Thus, the effects of
metformin on Akt and ERK activation are strikingly different from
allosteric or active-site mTOR inhibitors in PDAC cells, though all these
agents potently inhibited mTORC1/S6K. Metformin is emerging as a
potential novel agent in cancer chemoprevention. We propose that the
favorable effects of metformin on preventing over-activation of
pro-oncogenic pathways, such as Akt and ERK, may contribute to its
beneficial anticancer effects.

