Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of a pyrrole-imidazole polyamide in three tumor
xenograft models.


Background: Pyrrole-imidazole polyamides are synthetic minor groove
binders with modular sequence recognition. We developed a polyamide that
targets the DNA sequence 5-WGWWCW-3 (W=A/T). This molecule is cytotoxic
in a number of cancer cell lines including LNCaP (prostate cancer), DU145
(prostate cancer), and A549 (lung cancer). Data in cell culture suggests
that this molecule interferes with RNA polymerase 2 activity resulting in
proteasome-mediated degradation of the RNA Polymerase 2 large subunit,
activation of p53 and induction of p53 target genes, and apoptosis. This
polyamide demonstrates no detectable DNA damage by alkaline comet assay
nor does it induce detectable phosphorylation of H2A.X, ATM, DNA-PKcs,
p53, or Chk2. This polyamide circulates in mice after intravenous and
subcutaneous injection in saline vehicle.Methods: Male immune compromised
mice were implanted with LNCaP, DU145, or A549 tumors. Tumors were
allowed to grow until approximately 100 mm3 and then stratified into
vehicle (5% DMSO/PBS) and treatment arms (1 mg/kg polyamide, in vehicle).
Treatment was administered via subcutaneous injection every three days,
for a total of three cycles (LNCaP), eight cycles (DU145), or six cycles
(A549). At the experimental endpoint, tumors were resected and weighed
immediately. For LNCaP xenografts, serum PSA pre- and post-treatment were
also measured. In parallel, a group of immune compromised mice without
xenografts were treated with an identical regimen for eight cycles and
subsequently observed for three months.Results: Tumors resected from
polyamide-treated mice were statistically smaller than those of
vehicle-treated mice. The effect was greatest on LNCaP tumors (n=12,
Treated (T)/Control (C): 32%, p=1.6E-5). DU145 tumors (n=6, T/C: 34%,
p=0.013), and A549 tumors (n=8, T/C: 62%, p=0.047) were also affected.
Post-treatment serum PSA in the polyamide-treated mice with LNCaP
xenografts were lower than for the vehicle treated mice (p = 0.024).
Statistical differences between treated and control groups were
determined using two-tailed t-tests. Polyamide treatment resulted in no
significant weight loss or observable distress in tumor-free mice and
these mice appeared healthy for at least three months after treatment was
complete.Conclusions: The polyamide demonstrated in vivo antitumor
activity in this panel of tumor xenografts with limited host toxicity.

