Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole body irradiation extends the duration of antitumor immunity
toward established prostate tumors by adoptively transferred CD8+ T cells
in TRAMP mice.


Adoptive T cell transfer following whole body irradiation (WBI) can
induce dramatic tumor regression in a subset of metastatic melanoma
patients. We previously found that this approach also eliminates
established autochthonous SV40 T-antigen induced murine brain tumors.
However, the broader utility of this immunotherapy approach has not been
systematically evaluated in solid tumors of different tissue origin.
Here, we assessed the efficacy of applying WBI with adoptive T cell
transfer to an SV40 T-antigen driven murine model of prostate cancer
(TRAMP) previously shown to rapidly tolerize tumor-specific CD8+ T cells.
TRAMP mice bearing established prostate tumors were treated with 475cGy
WBI followed by adoptive transfer of T-antigen-specific T cell receptor
transgenic CD8+ T cells. Accumulation, phenotype and function of the
transferred T cells were monitored by flow cytometry, while therapeutic
impact on mouse prostate tumors was assessed by histological scoring.
Transferred T cells proliferated in both irradiated and non-irradiated
TRAMP mice, but accumulated to significantly higher levels and persisted
longer in the secondary lymphoid organs and prostate of irradiated mice.
WBI also significantly increased the proportion of T cells that produced
the effector molecule granzyme B. Prostate-infiltrating T cells in both
treatment groups exhibited an effector differentiated phenotype, although
neither developed a significant population of IFN-producing cells. Gross
observations revealed that the urogenital tract in irradiated TRAMP mice
was significantly smaller than that of non-irradiated mice two weeks
after transfer, corresponding with a modest but statistically significant
drop in pathological score. By three weeks after transfer, when
prostate-infiltrating T cells had dramatically contracted in irradiated
TRAMP mice, cumulative histological scores were generally equivalent
although only mice in the non-irradiated treatment group had progressed
to adenocarcinoma. Our results suggest that the addition of irradiation
extends the persistence of functional tumor-specific T cells in the
highly tolerogenic microenvironment of the TRAMP prostate. T cell
accumulation was associated with a short-term delay in progression of
established tumors.

