Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MLN0128, an investigational selective TORC1/2 kinase inhibitor,
demonstrates potent antitumor activity in preclinical models of soft
tissue sarcoma.


Sarcomas, cancers of mesodermal origin, represent a heterogenous group of
malignancies with limited treatment options currently available. The
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a serine-threonine protein kinase,
consists of two distinct multi-protein complexes, TORC1 and TORC2, which
regulate protein synthesis, cell proliferation, and metabolism.
Rapamycin, a TORC1 inhibitor, and its analogs (rapalogs) have been
disappointing in sarcoma clinical studies but inhibitors of TORC1/2
kinase have the potential of resulting in better outcomes. MLN0128, an
investigational potent small molecule TORC1/2 inhibitor, has shown
promising results in preclinical studies of breast and other cancer
types. We tested the in vitro anti-proliferative activity of MLN0128 in a
panel of sarcoma cell lines including malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor, synovial, Ewing's and osteosarcoma. Our results indicate that when
compared to rapamycin, MLN0128 is highly efficient in blocking
proliferative activity of all the sarcoma cell lines tested at nanomolar
concentrations irrespective of the tumor subtype. We also carried out
western blot analysis to test the efficacy of MLN0128 in blocking TORC1/2
signaling pathway. Inhibition of TORC1 pathway by rapamycin in sarcomas
has been shown to release negative feedback inhibition of receptor
tyrosine kinases like IGF1-R and activate AKT (p-AKT). Our data suggest
that MLN0128, unlike rapamycin, effectively blocks both the
phosphorylation of S6 and 4EBP1, the downstream substrates of TORC1, and
specifically inhibits AKT phosphorylation at Ser473, the downstream
substrate of TORC2. This superior in vitro activity of MLN0128 may be
attributed to its apparent improved TORC1 inhibition. Taken together, our
data supports further clinical research of MLN0128 in sarcoma. Targeting
TORC1/2 pathways using MLN0128 either alone or in combination with
inhibitors of receptor tyrosine kinases could provide a new therapeutic
approach in this disease.

