Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycosylation dependence in MUC16/CA125 expression in ovarian
cancer..


CA125 antigen is an established characteristic of human ovarian cancer.
Yet its function remains largely unknown. The cloning of MUC16, encoding
the CA125 antigen, has opened the door to additional functional
exploration. MUC16 has a molecular size of over 14,000 amino acids and
consists of a 31 amino acid cytoplasmic domain, a 25 amino acid
transmembrane region, a 58 amino acid ectodomain (proximal to the
putative cleavage site) and an external domain of up to 60 tandem
repeats. As previously reported, as little as 114 AA of MUC16 from the
carboxyterminus will traffic to the membrane and induce an altered, more
aggressive phenotype, and longer elements from the carboxyterminus with
multiple CA125 antigenic tandem repeats were not substantially different.
When A2780, SKOV3 or 3T3 cell lines expressed these short elements (both
the c114 and the c344) of the MUC16 gene carboxyterminus, they had
substantial increases in soft agar colony formation, matrigel invasion
and increased phosphorylation of AKT and ERK signaling. Associated with
these alterations in signal transduction are changes in gene expression
including upregulation of fibronectin, IL-1, MMP7, and MMP9. While
expression of these MUC16 fragments does not change in vitro growth, when
placed in nu/nu mice, the transformed tumors were more aggressive with a
more disseminated phenotype and statistically significant more rapid
tumor growth. Examination the c114 fragment for functional areas has been
undertaken. Deletion of the ectodomain (c80) completely blocks these
effects and is similar to the vector only controls for invasion, soft
agar colony formation and xenograft growth. In contrast, loss of the
intracellular domain (c86) has no effect and is similar to the c114
transformants. However, coprecipitation experiments did not yield
specific partners. We hypothesized that the ectodomain function was
related to glycosylation. Cell surface MUC16 interacts with key growth
factor receptors via lectins like Galectin 3 to alter cell surface
expression, receptor recycling, and phosphorylation to promote growth and
invasion. Using our paired isogenic, MUC16+/- cell lines (3T3 and SKOV3),
N-glycosylation site mutant were created and these mutants inhibited the
matrigel invasion, lowered activation of AKT and ERK and also inhibited
tumor growth in nude mice. We explored this phenomena and created shRNA
knock down of MGAT5 (the first enzyme in protein glycosylation) or
Galectin 3 (amplified in many high grade serous cancers) and expressed in
SKOV3 and 3T3 cell lines. These lines completely reversed the effect of
MUC16 expression of matrigel invasion, soft agar growth, ERK /AKT
activation, EGFr phosphorylation, and xenograft growth, confirming that
intact glycosylation is required for MUC16 effects on oncogene
activation, matrigel invasion and in vivo growth.Mucins expression in
malignant cells are associated with an enhanced tumor aggressiveness
through N-glycosylation.

