Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neurropilin-1 high monocytes play an important role in trastuzumab
mediated antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity in HER2 positive breast
cancer cell lines.


PurposeNeuropilin-1 (NRP-1) was initially characterized as a neuronal
receptor for specific secreted members of the semaphorin family involved
in axon repulsion. However, it was recently reported to play an important
role in the immune system. This study aimed to investigate the role of
NRP-1 expression on monocytes in trastuzumab-mediated antibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) targeting the HER2-positive human breast
cell line SKBR3.MethodsPeripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from
healthy volunteers were prepared using Lymphoprep. The cells were stained
with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated anti-CD14 and
allophycocyanin (APC)-conjugated anti-NRP-1 antibodies, and an NRP-1high
and NRP-1low monocyte subset was sorted using FACSAria. These cells were
used as effector cells in a conventional ADCC assay using SKBR3 as target
cells and trastuzumab as an antibody. Target cell cytotoxicity was
measured using the LDH cytotoxic test kit. A CD107a degranulation assay
was also used to determine the role of NRP-1 expression on monocytes in
ADCC. PBMCs were co-cultured with target SKBR3 cells and trastuzumab for
2 h, stained with APC-conjugated anti-NRP-1 and PE-Cy5-conjugated
anti-CD107a antibodies, and analyzed by flow cytometry.ResultsThe LDH
cytotoxic test revealed significantly higher target cancer cell
cytotoxicity in sorted NRP-1 high monocytes (12%) than in NRP-1 low
monocytes (4%). Interestingly, microscopic findings showed that most
NRP-1 high monocytes covered trastuzumab-treated target cancer cells
(showing higher cellular cytotoxicity) while NRP-1 low monocytes did not
cover the target cells but changed their morphology from a round to a
dendritic shape (showing less cellular cytotoxicity) during ADCC.
Moreover, the degranulation assay showed a higher expression of CD107a in
NRP-1 high monocytes (17.4%) than in NRP-1 low monocytes (1.16%). Mean
fluorescence intensity of CD107a in NRP-1 high and NRP-1 low monocytes
was 92.6 and 26.3, respectively.ConclusionsThese data suggest that NRP-1
high monocytes exhibit higher trastuzumab-mediated ADCC than NRP-1 low
monocytes in HER2-positive breast cancer cell lines. It may therefore be
possible to differentiate HER2-positive breast cancer patients for whom
trastuzumab will be less effective by testing for monocyte NRP-1
expression levels.

