Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of Metformin on microtentacle formation and
stabilization in breast cancer cells.


Metastasis is one of the main causes of mortality in women with breast
cancer. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has emerged to be a
key mediator of breast cancer metastasis. It has previously been shown
that EMT can stabilize and increase microtentacles (McTNs) in breast
cancer cell lines and enhance their metastatic potential. McTNs are
dynamic, microtubule-enriched plasma membrane extensions that are
stabilized with the exposure of a carboxy-terminal glutamic acid residue
in alpha-tubulin (Glu-tubulin). McTN stabilization has been shown to
promote tumor cell aggregation and reattachment in vitro. In this study,
we investigated the effect of EMT suppression on McTN formation and
stabilization in breast cancer cells by the dimethyl biguanide,
Metformin. While it is widely used to treat type 2 diabetes, Metformin
has more recently been shown to inhibit EMT in multiple breast cancer
cell lines. We show here that Metformin decreased mesenchymal markers,
such as N-cadherin and vimentin, in a dose-dependent manner in MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells. Confocal and fluorescent microscopy was used to
visualize and quantify McTN formation in these cells. There was a
significant decrease in McTNs in MDA-MB-231 cells treated with 5mM
Metformin for 24 hours. We correlated the decrease in the number of McTNs
with a decrease in Glu-tubulin protein levels, which suggests that
Metformin also inhibits McTN stabilization. The decrease in McTN
formation and stabilization was also associated with diminished tumor
cell reattachment in vitro. In addition, Metformin was able to protect
MDA-MB-231 cells from increased McTN formation induced by the microtubule
stabilizing agent, Taxol. Metformin's mechanism of action on breast
cancer cells to elicit these cytoskeletal modifications has yet to be
elucidated. However, these results suggest a role for Metformin at
multiple stages of tumor progression to protect breast cancer patients
from clinical spread of disease.

