Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Concurrent genes signatures for breast cancers with Han Chinese
origin.


We performed genome-wide characterization of Han Chinese breast cancer at
molecular level by integrating two microarray technologies: comparative
genomic hybridization (CGH) for DNA copy number variations (CNV) and
expression arrays. Concurrent gains and losses from the same subject
across genomic and transcriptional levels may be a better approach to
explore potential biomarkers for breast cancer and to identify possible
candidates for target therapy. Oncogenesis of breast cancer could
originate from chromosome level manifesting as CNV and persist through
transcription in gene expression profiles. Genes with coherent patterns
at chromosomal and transcriptional level are more likely to serve as
potential biomarkers for Han Chinese breast cancer and deserve meticulous
evaluation.A total of 23 array CGH and 81 gene expression microarrays (21
samples with data from both platforms) were performed. Potential targets
of cancer therapy were revealed by Genomic Identification of Significant
Targets in Cancer (GISTIC) from 23 array CGH. Genes with coherent
patterns between CNV and gene expression profiles were identified from 21
samples with both platforms assayed. We used these concurrent genes as
well as genes with significant GISTIC scores to derive signatures
associated with ER, HER2 and event-free survival.Distributions of
signature genes were strongly associated with chromosomal locations:
chromosome 16 for ER and 17 for HER2. 37 and 13 genes were differentially
expressed between distinct ER and HER2 status and were used for
classifier development in our 81 samples. Predictive accuracy as high as
90% for ER and 80% for HER2 was reported during leave-one-out
cross-validation while much compromised performance was observed in an
independent test dataset (GSE5460). Consensus genes between our dataset
and 125 Chinese breast cancers (GSE5460) were identified, and a 28 genes
and a 9 genes signature for ER and HER2 was developed in combined dataset
of 206 microarrays with the best predictive accuracy of 92% and 94% for
ER and HER2 respectively. Breast cancer risk predictive model was built
based on supervised principle components from two genes (RWDD3 and
ZBTB44) and distinct survival patterns were observed between high- and
low-risk groups from a combined dataset of 408 microarrays (combination
of our 81 samples with GSE20685). The risk score was significantly higher
in breast cancers with recurrence, metastasis or mortality than those
remained event-free (0.438 versus 0.17, pWe performed genome-wide
characterization of Han Chinese breast cancer at molecular level by
integrating two microarray technologies: comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) for DNA copy number variations (CNV) and expression
arrays. Concurrent gains and losses from the same subject across genomic
and transcriptional levels may be a better approach to explore potential
biomarkers for breast cancer and to identify possible candidates for
target therapy. Oncogenesis of breast cancer could originate from
chromosome level manifesting as CNV and persist through transcription in
gene expression profiles. Genes with coherent patterns at chromosomal and
transcriptional level are more likely to serve as potential biomarkers
for Han Chinese breast cancer and deserve meticulous evaluation.A total
of 23 array CGH and 81 gene expression microarrays (21 samples with data
from both platforms) were performed. Potential targets of cancer therapy
were revealed by Genomic Identification of Significant Targets in Cancer
(GISTIC) from 23 array CGH. Genes with coherent patterns between CNV and
gene expression profiles were identified from 21 samples with both
platforms assayed. We used these concurrent genes as well as genes with
significant GISTIC scores to derive signatures associated with ER, HER2
and event-free survival.Distributions of signature genes were strongly
associated with chromosomal locations: chromosome 16 for ER and 17 for
HER2. 37 and 13 genes were differentially expressed between distinct ER
and HER2 status and were used for classifier development in our 81
samples. Predictive accuracy as high as 90% for ER and 80% for HER2 was
reported during leave-one-out cross-validation while much compromised
performance was observed in an independent test dataset (GSE5460).
Consensus genes between our dataset and 125 Chinese breast cancers
(GSE5460) were identified, and a 28 genes and a 9 genes signature for ER
and HER2 was developed in combined dataset of 206 microarrays with the
best predictive accuracy of 92% and 94% for ER and HER2 respectively.
Breast cancer risk predictive model was built based on supervised
principle components from two genes (RWDD3 and ZBTB44) and distinct
survival patterns were observed between high- and low-risk groups from a
combined dataset of 408 microarrays (combination of our 81 samples with
GSE20685). The risk score was significantly higher in breast cancers with
recurrence, metastasis or mortality than those remained event-free (0.438
versus 0.17, p<0.001). In summary, we built a breast cancer risk
predictive model and distinct survival patterns were observed in Han
Chinese breast cancers.

