Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intermittent hypoxia stimulates capillary growth and branching in
an in vitro model of tumor angiogenesis.


Introduction: The complex heterogeneity of the tumor microenvironment,
including a structurally and functionally abnormal vasculature, impacts
oxygen tension leading to intermittent hypoxia (IH). While it is known
that chronic hypoxia modulates tumor development in vivo, including
mechanisms of angiogenesis and resistance to radiotherapy, our
understanding of IH remains limited. We hypothesized that IH would
stimulate vasculogenesis and lead to a larger and more branched network
of vessels consistent with the vessel network in tumors. Using a
fabricated oxygen control system, we explored the effects of chronic and
intermittent hypoxia on in vitro vascularized tissues.Materials and
Methods: A co-culture of endothelial colony forming cell-derived
endothelial cells (ECFC-ECs) from cord blood and normal human lung
fibroblasts was distributed in a fibrin gel, and incubated for 7 days at
constant 20% O2 (ambient condition), constant 5% O2 (physiological
condition), constant 1% O2 (hypoxia conditions), and multiple IH
conditions all of which had a mean value of 5% O2. The resulting vessel
networks were quantified for total vessel network length and number of
junctions. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) production was
measured over the course of the 7 days.Results and Discussion: Decreasing
oxygen tension from 20% to 5% O2 limits vessel formation in vitro, and 1%
O2 stopped vessel formation completely. Tissues exposed to IH, however,
exhibited significantly more developed and branched vascular networks
compared to the constant 5% O2 counterparts (total vessel network length:
5%: 5.4 0.8 mm, IH: 10.7 1.6 mm; (number of junctions: 5%: 32.7 10.6 mm,
IH: 99.2 23.1), suggesting a role in tumor angiogenesis. Indeed, VEGF
production was upregulated as well in the IH conditions, which may
contribute to the enhanced blood vessel formation. We conclude that IH
conditioning generates vascular networks in vitro that more structurally
and functionally resemble tumor vascular networks in vivo.

