Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative cell surface proteome profiling of CD4+ T cells to
identify potential therapeutic targets for adult T-cell leukemia (ATL).


Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is one of retroviruses known
as the causative agent of adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) and
HTLV-I-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP), both
of which develop after a long latency period over 30 years. ATL develops
in HTLV-1-infected individuals at the prevalence of 5%, who exhibit only
20% overall 5-year survival rate. Recently, ATL treatment using
Mogamulizumab showed 58 % of response rate in the clinical studies.
However, adverse reactions were reported for all cases during the
treatment. Moreover no effective treatment has been developed for the
Mogamulizumab-resistant ATL patients. The objective of the present study
is to discover molecular treatment targets for antibody therapies against
ATL. For effective isolation of the therapeutic targets, comprehensive
cell surface proteome profiling was performed. Since most of cell surface
proteins are glycosylated, a glycopeptide enrichment technology IGEL
(Isotopic Glycosidase Elution and labeling on Lectin column
chromatography) was employed to focus on the cell surface proteins. The
IGEL was previously developed in our group, which based on 96-well
modified lectin column chromatography (Mol Cell Proteomics.
2010,9(9),1819). 1 106 of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were
lysed, reduced and alkylated followed by tryptic digestion. In this
study, we used ConA lectin beads to enrich glycopeptides, which
specifically recognized -mannosyl or -glucosyl residues of N-glycans. The
eluates were lyophilized and subjected to LC/MS/MS analysis. The LC/MS/MS
analysis identified 594 peptides derived from 268 proteins including 510
glycosylated peptides. Gene Ontology analysis revealed that 73.6% of
identified proteins were assigned as the membrane associated proteins.
For the therapeutic target screening experiment, CD4+ T cells were
isolated from PBMCs derived from 16 uninfected volunteers, 25
asymptomatic carriers, 26 HAM/TSP patients, and 15 ATL patients. To
perform relative quantification and subsequent statistical analysis of
over 100,000 peptides among 82 samples, we employed the Expressionist
proteome server system (Genedata AG). Although recent high-end mass
spectrometers allow in-depth and comprehensive analysis of any proteomes,
improvement of data processing infrastructures, such as Expressionist,
should be essential for future clinical proteomics studies analyzing
hundreds of specimens. Here we introduce a systematic workflow to
identify ATL-specific cell surface antigens, accompanying further
FACS-based replication experiments. In particular, our strategy could be
useful for exploring any proteomic changes on cell surface, which include
malignant transformation, metastasis, or cell development.

