Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The levels of Prion protein and its ligand HOP modulate
glioblastoma proliferation and predict a lower survival outcome.


A main concern in glioblastoma (GBM) therapy is the resistance of these
tumors to current treatment protocols. The identification of molecules
that can be target to treat these tumors is of major interest. The prion
protein (PrPC) is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored protein very
abundant in neurons and astrocytes and its interaction with a diverse
number of ligands modulates cell survival and differentiation. One of
these ligands is the secreted co-chaperone Hsp70-Hsp90 organizing protein
(HOP), which reaches the extracellular space in exosome-like
microvesicles. HOP is secreted by a number of cancer cells and seems to
be a relevant biomarker in ovarian tumors. However, the role of PrPC-HOP
complex in tumor biology is largely unknown. Herein, 185 cases o gliomas
(33 grade I, 46 grade II, 15 grade II and 91 GBM) arranged in tissue
microarrays were evaluated for the expression of PrPC and its ligand HOP.
Both proteins were highly expressed in GBM when compared to tumors of
grade I, II or III and also when compared to non-tumor samples (pA main
concern in glioblastoma (GBM) therapy is the resistance of these tumors
to current treatment protocols. The identification of molecules that can
be target to treat these tumors is of major interest. The prion protein
(PrPC) is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored protein very abundant
in neurons and astrocytes and its interaction with a diverse number of
ligands modulates cell survival and differentiation. One of these ligands
is the secreted co-chaperone Hsp70-Hsp90 organizing protein (HOP), which
reaches the extracellular space in exosome-like microvesicles. HOP is
secreted by a number of cancer cells and seems to be a relevant biomarker
in ovarian tumors. However, the role of PrPC-HOP complex in tumor biology
is largely unknown. Herein, 185 cases o gliomas (33 grade I, 46 grade II,
15 grade II and 91 GBM) arranged in tissue microarrays were evaluated for
the expression of PrPC and its ligand HOP. Both proteins were highly
expressed in GBM when compared to tumors of grade I, II or III and also
when compared to non-tumor samples (p<0.05 for all comparisons). High
expression levels of both proteins in GBMs were direct correlated with a
higher tumor proliferation, measured by the number of cells positive for
Ki-67. Patients with high levels of both proteins presented a lower
survival than those with high levels of HOP but lower levels of PrPC
(p=0.017). The treatment of a human GBM cell line U87MG, which presents
high expression of PrPC, with soluble HOP increases proliferation by
three times however any effect was observed when cells were treated with
a soluble HOP lacking the PrPC binding site (HOP230-245). Both HOP or
HOP230-245 have no effect in U87MG cells whose PrPC expression was
knocked down by 98%. In accordance, the intra-tumor infusion of HOP, but
not HOP230-245, increased tumor growth in nude mice bearing U87MG
orthotopic xenografts. Remarkably, U87MG cells in which PrPC expression
was knocked down were unable to growth tumors in nude mice. Together
these results demonstrated that PrPC and HOP are significantly expressed
in GBMs and higher levels of these proteins are associated to the patient
group presenting a lower survival. The manipulation of PrPC and HOP
interaction in cell cultures or in vivo affects tumor growth indicating
that the interference with their engagement may represent a therapeutic
target in GBMs.Supported by The State of So Paulo Foundation.

