Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predicting anti-tumor responses to phosphatidylserine targeting
antibodies using tumor imaging.


Phosphatidylserine (PS) is a phospholipid normally residing in the inner
leaflet of the plasma membrane and becomes exposed on tumor vascular
endothelial cells and tumor cells in response to chemotherapy,
irradiation and oxidative stresses in the tumor microenvironment. Binding
of antibodies targeting PS on the tumor endothelial cells and tumors
induces the recruitment of immune cells and engages the immune system to
destroy tumor vasculature. The antibodies also enhance anti-tumor
immunity by blocking the immunosuppressive action of PS. A chimeric
PS-targeting antibody, bavituximab, is being used in combination with
chemotherapy to treat patients with solid tumors in Phase II trials.
Fully human antibody PGN635 binds PS through the interaction of
beta-2-glycoprotein 1 (2GP1) in the same manner as bavituximab. Using
human PC-3 prostate tumor xenografts in SCID mice, we demonstrate that
targeting of PS in tumors by PGN635 is enhanced by chemotherapy.
Combination of PGN635 with docetaxel inhibited tumor growth compared to
the control IgG plus docetaxel group (pPhosphatidylserine (PS) is a
phospholipid normally residing in the inner leaflet of the plasma
membrane and becomes exposed on tumor vascular endothelial cells and
tumor cells in response to chemotherapy, irradiation and oxidative
stresses in the tumor microenvironment. Binding of antibodies targeting
PS on the tumor endothelial cells and tumors induces the recruitment of
immune cells and engages the immune system to destroy tumor vasculature.
The antibodies also enhance anti-tumor immunity by blocking the
immunosuppressive action of PS. A chimeric PS-targeting antibody,
bavituximab, is being used in combination with chemotherapy to treat
patients with solid tumors in Phase II trials. Fully human antibody
PGN635 binds PS through the interaction of beta-2-glycoprotein 1 (2GP1)
in the same manner as bavituximab. Using human PC-3 prostate tumor
xenografts in SCID mice, we demonstrate that targeting of PS in tumors by
PGN635 is enhanced by chemotherapy. Combination of PGN635 with docetaxel
inhibited tumor growth compared to the control IgG plus docetaxel group
(p<0.05). Near-infrared optical imaging of PS in tumors with PGN650, an
F(ab)2 antibody fragment of PGN635, showed tumor growth inhibition in
mice treated with docetaxel correlates with PS expression levels in the
tumors. Maximal uptake of the PS imaging was observed when chemotherapy
was given 24 hours before the imaging probe.

