Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Beta-endorphin neuron transplants suppress mammary tumor growth
and progression: role of immune cells.


We have recently identified that a set of hormone secreting nerve cells
in the hypothalamus, called beta-endorphin (BEP) neurons, have the
ability to prevent the growth, progression and metastasis of mammary and
prostate tumors in laboratory animals. How these neuronal cells prevent
tumor cell growth and progression is not apparent. In order to better
understand the mechanism by which endorphin neurons control tumor growth,
we determined the growth and clearance of breast cancer derived MADB106
cells in Fisher rats, which are immune intact, and in athymic Nude rats,
which are T cells deficient. Adult female Fischer rats or Nude rats were
transplanted with either BEP neurons or cortical neurons (control) in the
hypothalamus for 4 weeks and then inoculated with MADB106 cells in the
jugular vein or under the skin in the back. These animals were sacrificed
after 6 weeks to determine the volume of the tumor at the site of
inoculation for determining the growth of tumors and the number of other
tumors at the distant sites for determining tumor metastasis. Tumors were
also collected for histopathology. Blood samples were collected and used
for measurements of cytokines and immune cells. In Fischer rats, after
tumor inoculation, animals with control cell transplants had tumor
colonization in the lung and some on the skin at the site of cell
injection. However, BEP neurons treated Fischer rats had no tumor
colonization in the body. In the Nude rats, tumor colonization occurred
both at the site of injection and at the distant site under the skin as
well as in the lung of control transplanted rats. In BEP neurons
transplanted Nude rats, tumor colonization only occurred at the site of
inoculation. The mean volume of tumor at the inoculation site was smaller
in BEP neurons transplanted rats than in control cells transplanted rats.
In BEP neurons transplanted rats, corticosterone and inflammatory
cytokines levels were lower, whereas anti-inflammatory cytokines and
chemokines levels were higher. In addition, NK cell and macrophage cell
numbers and their cytolytic functions in peripheral blood of BEP neurons
transplanted rats were elevated. These data suggest that the antitumor
action of BEP neuron transplants is due to the activation of primarily NK
cells and macrophages and also in lesser extent T cells. The data also
identify the potential use of BEP cell therapy for cancer prevention.
(Supported by R37 AA08757)

