Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stable transfection of the osteosarcoma cell line SaOs2,
genetically transformed MSCs and osteoblasts with insulin-like growth
factor 2 receptor.


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most commonly seen primary malignant bone tumor
in children and adolescents. With neo-adjuvant chemotherapy and other
treatment regimens developed, event-free survival has increased to 70%,
but the prognosis remains poor for those patients with unresectable or
metastatic tumors or less responsive tumors. Insulin-like growth factor 2
(IGF2) and its receptor (IGF2R) are known to be over-expressed in several
cancers including OS and have roles in regulating cellular growth and
proliferation. Although IGF2R is thought to be a tumor suppressor, the
research results in different experimental systems are variable.Our
recent studies have demonstrated that IGF2R is consistently
over-expressed, relative to other known transmembrane receptors on the
cell surface across, 4 standard and 10 patient-derived OS cell lines. To
further elucidate the effects of IGF2R in OS, the OS cell line SaOS2 and
two cell lines which were genetically transformed, as follows;
mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) and osteoblasts (OB) with human telomerase
reverse transcriptase and SV40Tag (MSC-TS and OB-TS) were transformed
with IGF2R by lentiviral transfection. Drug resistant colonies were
picked up 21 days after selection to obtain stably transfected SaOS2,
MSC-TS, and OB-TS cell lines now named, SaI, MSC-TSI and OB-TSI,
respectively. After cloning, the highest and the lowest IGF2R expression
clones were selected from these different cell lines via real-time PCR
and western blot for further analysis. The comparison between the lines
and characterizations are underway. Initial results suggest introduction
of IGF2R changes the phenotype by enhancing cellular motility. Further
studies will be presented and include the following: 1) cell
proliferation assays, 2) motility and migration assays, 3) subcutaneous
tumorigenicity assays, 4) expression profiling, and 5) differentiation
assays. In the context of osteosarcoma introduction of IGF2R enhances
motility, which is unexpected given prior expectations based on the
non-signaling nature of this receptor.

