Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of histone deacetylases (HDACs) 1, 2, 3 and 7 in
pancreatic cancer cell lines: The role of indole-3-carbinol.


Pancreatic cancer has the poorest prognosis of most cancers, mainly due
to its resistant phenotype. Early or late biomarkers are greatly needed
in this cancer. Scientists have shown that epigenetic mechanisms may be
involved in the etiology and progression of pancreatic cancer. Epigenetic
changes involve modification of the DNA through hyper- and
hypo-methylation, histone modification and modulation in expression of
microRNAs. Histone deacetylases modify tails on the histones, which can
result in repressive chromatin formation and inactivation of specific
genes. This study, using real-time PCR, examined the level of HDACs 1, 2,
3 and 7 in four pancreatic cancer cell lines (BXPC, CFPAC,ASPC and MIA).
The highest level of expression of HDAC 1 and 3 was found in CFPAC and
MIA cells compared to BXPC and ASPC cells. Indole-3 carbinol, in
previously published studies from our laboratory, have shown several
anti-cancer activities, including the re-expression of p16 in MIA cells
(Lyn-Cook et al, 2010 Anticancer Res., 30:4907-4914). The current study
demonstrated that indole-3-carbinol at concentrations of 20 M and 100 M
significantly decreased expression of HDAC 3 by 2-fold and 3-fold in MIA
cells, respectively. Results further showed that indole-3 carbinol
decreased expression of HDAC 1 in CFPAC cells and HDAC 7 in BXPC cells by
2-fold. No change in expression was shown in any of the cell lines on
HDAC 2. This study showed that indole-3-carbinol may exert histone
deacetylase inhibitory effects. Further studies are needed to confirm
these results. Specific HDACs as potential targets for pancreatic cancer
are growing among the scientific community. HDACs are known to be
regulators of growth, differentiation and cell death and dysfunction of
transcriptional repression mediated by HDACs may lead to the development
of cancer.

