Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methaneseleninic acid and -tocopherol combination inhibits
prostate tumor growth in a xenograft model .


Prostate Cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in American males. Several in vitro and in vivo studies have
suggested that vitamin E as well as selenium possesses potential in the
management of PCa. However, results from the large-scale Selenium and
Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT) found that vitamin E
(-tocopheryl acetate; 400 mg) and/or selenium (L-selenomethionine; 200 g)
were ineffective in preventing PCa. Based on these seemingly
contradictory outcomes, we believe that the dose and formulation of both
these agents were sub-optimal in the SELECT trial, and may be critical in
providing appropriate biological response in PCa. Thus, additional
studies are needed to define the most appropriate formulations of vitamin
E and selenium as well as the optimal dosages of these two agents.
Following a careful analysis of literature, we evaluated the effect of
methylseleninic acid (MSA in sterile water; oral gavage) and/or
-tocopherol (T in tocopherol-stripped corn oil; oral gavage), at a dose
much lower than used in SELECT, against prostate tumors in an
immunecompromised mouse model. Sixty Nu/J mice were implanted with 22R1
cells, tumors were allowed to grow to an average volume of 36 mm3,
followed by treatment in 6 groups (10 animals each): 1) Control (vehicle
alone); 2) MSA (41 g/kg); 3) T (20.8 mg/kg); 4) T (41.7 mg/kg); 5) MSA
(41 g/kg) + T (20.8 mg/kg); and 6) MSA (41 g/kg) + T (41.7 mg/kg). The
mice were treated for 2 weeks (5 days per week) and followed for tumor
growth. At the end of experiment, the mice were sacrificed and further
studies were done. Our data demonstrated that the combination of T (20.8
mg/kg) and MSA (41 g/kg) resulted in a significant decrease in i) serum
prostate specific antigen levels, ii) tumor volume and tumor wet weight,
and iii) Ki-67 proliferation index. We found that this combination also
resulted in i) an up-regulation of pro-apoptotic Bax coupled with a
down-regulation of the pro-survival protein Bcl2, thereby resulting in an
increased Bax/Bcl2 ratio, and ii) an increase in pro-apoptotic protein
Bad. Further, T and MSA combination modulated levels of apolipoprotein E,
selenoprotein P and Nrf2 in a fashion that favors anti-proliferative
responses in PCa. Interestingly, we found that the combination using a
lower dose of T was much more effective than the higher dose, in most of
the parameters evaluated. In the most effective treatment group, the
approximate daily human equivalent dose for T was 72 mg/day
(corresponding to 20.8 mg/kg in mouse) and for MSA is 142 g/day
(corresponding to 41 g/kg in mouse), which is significantly lower than
the doses used in SELECT. Overall, our study suggests that T and MSA, at
the lower dose regimen, could be useful in PCa management. However,
further studies with additional formulations and doses in more relevant
animal model(s) are needed to confirm our findings.

