Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immuno-sensitization of malignant gliomas by natural polyphenols.


Malignant gliomas are the most common primary brain tumors with
approximately 22,000 cases per year. In spite of aggressive surgery,
radiotherapy and chemotherapeutic regimens, the median survival of
patients with malignant gliomas is a dismal 15 months. The objective of
our study was to explore the adjuvant therapeutic potential and
associated molecular mechanisms of natural polyphenols stilbenes in
malignant gliomas. Recent studies have demonstrated the efficacy of
stilbenes in extracranial tumor models. Stilbenes, including resveratrol,
were bioavailable in the brain even after low dose oral administration
and there was no toxicity to normal tissue. On the contrary, these
compounds were found to be neuroprotective in Alzheimer's disease models.
Mechanistically, stilbenes modulate NF-B, STAT3, wnt/-catenin signaling
and also inhibits antiapoptotic protein Bcl-xl. While these molecules are
critical in imparting chemoresistance, they are also pivotal in inducing
immune-resistance and pro-tumor immune infiltration in gliomas. We
hypothesized that stilbenes enhance the efficacy of chemotherapy while
also inhibiting immune-suppression and -resistance in malignant gliomas
via overlapping molecular mechanisms. We observed significant positive
interaction between Temozolomide and Resveratrol for inhibition of glioma
proliferation. Resveratrol induced apoptosis in gliomas via inhibition of
Bcl-2 and Bcl-xl, while STAT3 activity was also inhibited. Importantly,
Resveratrol significantly enhanced the expression of TRAIL-R2 and MIC A/B
in gliomas, making them vulnerable to lysis by CTLs and NK cells. Studies
are underway to determine combined effect of DC-based immunotherapy and
stilbenes against malignant gliomas using syngeneic, orthotopic mouse
glioma models. The results can have significant impact in developing
novel adjuvant studies to improve survival in patients with malignant
gliomas.

