Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rational dose and schedule selection for the combination of
paclitaxel and the investigational agent alisertib in recurrent ovarian
cancer: optimization of therapeutic index based on translational
hematological toxicity and exposure-efficacy modeling.


Alisertib (MLN8237), an investigational selective small molecule Aurora A
kinase inhibitor, combined with taxanes (docetaxel or paclitaxel),
demonstrated durable antitumor activity in multiple in vivo xenograft
models. Based on these findings, a Phase I/II study was initiated to
evaluate the safety and antitumor activity of alisertib administered BID
on Days 1-3, 8-10 and 15-17 of 28-day cycles with weekly paclitaxel in
recurrent ovarian cancer patients (study C14008).As neutropenia is a
common dose-limiting toxicity for taxanes and alisertib, a
semi-mechanistic pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) model was
developed to predict the time course of plasma PK versus absolute
neutrophil count (ANC), to aid in dose and schedule selection for this
combination. These models account for the time delay between drug
exposure and decrease in ANC since the drugs affect the progenitor cells
rather than the neutrophils directly. The model was fitted to PK and ANC
data from Sprague-Dawley rats dosed over multiple days with alisertib
and/or docetaxel. Differences in plasma protein binding and CFU-GM IC50s
were used to correct for human-rat interspecies variation. This model of
neutropenia predicted that decreasing the weekly paclitaxel dose from 80
to 60 mg/m2 would allow achievement of higher alisertib doses, a finding
which was corroborated by the clinical experience. In addition, the model
predicted that skipping alisertib dosing in the second week would further
mitigate neutropenia, thereby providing an alternative dosing schedule
for continued dose escalation of alisertib in the setting of
dose-limiting neutropenia.As multiple maximum tolerated doses (MTDs) were
achieved in the C14008 study (e.g. alisertib with 80 or 60 mg/m2 weekly
paclitaxel), an exposure-efficacy model was developed to interpret the
achieved MTDs in the context of preclinical antitumor efficacy.
Isobolograms relating alisertib and paclitaxel exposures to tumor growth
inhibition were generated from in vivo efficacy studies in tumor-bearing
mice. The clinically achieved exposures of alisertib and paclitaxel from
the C14008 study were mapped onto the isobologram by correcting for
mouse-human variation in plasma protein binding and maximum tolerated
exposures for both agents. These isobolograms provided support for the
choice of 60 mg/m2 weekly paclitaxel over 80 mg/m2, for the phase 2
portion of the C14008 study.Taken together, the simultaneous application
of predictive hematological toxicity modeling and exposure efficacy
modeling using isobolograms provides a powerful basis for therapeutic
index optimization and rationalizing dose selection for development of
combination regimens.

