Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathogenesis and treatment of rhabdomyosarcoma in a susceptible
murine model.


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma of
childhood. While the establishment of standard multi-modal therapy has
led to improved survival, new therapeutic approaches are desperately
needed to improve outcomes in patients with metastatic and recurrent
disease. Our objective was to develop a highly penetrant mouse model of
RMS to study the molecular pathways of the disease and to evaluate novel
anticancer agents for the treatment of RMS. The hedgehog (Hh) pathway has
been demonstrated to be activated in embryonal RMS. Communication between
Hh and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways provides a rationale for the study of mTOR
inhibitors such as rapamycin in RMS therapy. We developed a novel RMS
mouse model by breeding Ptch6-7 knockouts onto a tumor susceptible SKH1
genetic background. We employed these animals (n=20/group) to study the
effects of mTOR inhibitor, rapamycin, on the growth and progression of
RMS tumors. We found that 42% of the Ptch1+/SKH1 mice receiving no
treatment developed RMS. These tumors were confirmed to have embryonal
RMS morphology. These animals spontaneously develop RMS with embryonal
histology predominantly in the hind limbs. The tumors developed at
approximately 20 weeks of age; thereafter they grew very prolifically.
Molecular studies demonstrated high expression of both Myogenin and Myf5.
The tumors also manifested Hh pathway activation. The RMS bearing animals
were divided into two groups with a third group of Ptch+/+ mice acting as
a wild-type control group. Group-I animals receiving no treatment served
as positive controls. The increase in tumor size in these animals was
compared with the tumor growth of animals treated with rapamycin. The
treatment resulted in a significant decrease in the rate of tumor growth
as compared to the control group (pRhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most
common soft-tissue sarcoma of childhood. While the establishment of
standard multi-modal therapy has led to improved survival, new
therapeutic approaches are desperately needed to improve outcomes in
patients with metastatic and recurrent disease. Our objective was to
develop a highly penetrant mouse model of RMS to study the molecular
pathways of the disease and to evaluate novel anticancer agents for the
treatment of RMS. The hedgehog (Hh) pathway has been demonstrated to be
activated in embryonal RMS. Communication between Hh and PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathways provides a rationale for the study of mTOR inhibitors such as
rapamycin in RMS therapy. We developed a novel RMS mouse model by
breeding Ptch6-7 knockouts onto a tumor susceptible SKH1 genetic
background. We employed these animals (n=20/group) to study the effects
of mTOR inhibitor, rapamycin, on the growth and progression of RMS
tumors. We found that 42% of the Ptch1+/SKH1 mice receiving no treatment
developed RMS. These tumors were confirmed to have embryonal RMS
morphology. These animals spontaneously develop RMS with embryonal
histology predominantly in the hind limbs. The tumors developed at
approximately 20 weeks of age; thereafter they grew very prolifically.
Molecular studies demonstrated high expression of both Myogenin and Myf5.
The tumors also manifested Hh pathway activation. The RMS bearing animals
were divided into two groups with a third group of Ptch+/+ mice acting as
a wild-type control group. Group-I animals receiving no treatment served
as positive controls. The increase in tumor size in these animals was
compared with the tumor growth of animals treated with rapamycin. The
treatment resulted in a significant decrease in the rate of tumor growth
as compared to the control group (p<0.05). This treatment also reduced
the expression of AKT and Hh pathways, which was consistent with the
tumor inhibitory response seen on a gross level. Decreases in markers of
tumor invasiveness and VEGF expression were also noted. We conclude that
the Ptch1+/ Skh1 mouse represents a novel murine model for aggressive
embryonal RMS that recapitulates the pathobiology of human disease.
Rapamycin effectively inhibits the growth of Ptch1+/ Skh1 RMS tumors
providing insight into the mechanism underlying RMS tumorigenesis. mTOR
inhibition with possible Hh pathway cross talk inhibition represents a
promising target in the treatment of RMS in this murine model.

