Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel techniques for identifying apoptosis with pSIVA-IANBD in
live and fixed cells.


Historically, flow cytometry has been the primary technique for
identifying individual cells undergoing apoptosis. However, imaging is
becoming increasingly important for analyzing cell death and underlying
mechanisms in living cell populations. In this study, we developed new
techniques for using the polar sensitive pSIVA-IANBD Annexin XII probe to
identify apoptosis in mixed populations of cells by multiple imaging of
viable primary neuronal cultures over 0-72h. The pSIVA-IANBD probe was
added to living cultures at time=0. pSIVA-IAND binds to exposed
phosphatidylserine (PS) residues and fluoresces (in the FITC channel)
only when bound to cells. Cultures were fixed and permeabilized at the
end of their respective time courses and immunostained with MAP2 or NeuN
neuronal markers to identify neurons, and counterstained with Hoeschst
dye to visualize nuclei.The results were imaged by an IFL multichannel
inverted digital microscope (EVOS; AMG Inc, USA). They showed that bound
pSIVA-IANBD was fixation resistant and the single (pSIVA-IANBD), double
(pSIVA-IANBD + Hoescht) and as well as the triple (pSIVA-IANBD + Hoescht
+ antibody) stained cells were readily identifiable in the mixed cell
population. They suggested that pSIVA-IANBD enables detection of PS, a
hallmark of apoptosis by imaging of viable as well as post-fixed cells.
Furthermore, since pSIVA-IANBD is not toxic to cells and does not require
a washing step, it can be maintained in cultures with only a single
application and no medium change for up to 72h. This allows continuous
live monitoring of cells for apoptosis, cells can then be fixed and
labeled with additional biomarkers of interest and imaged. These features
render pSIVA-IANBD a particularly useful tool for toxicological studies
of novel drugs in cell-based assays. pSIVA-IANBD is also suitable for
flow cytometry and may supercede the widely used Annexin V-FITC PS probe
which has has limited applications outside of flow cytometry.

