Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human colon mucosal crypts in culture: a model to assess colon
chemoprevention.


Introduction: In order to advance a primary cell culture model of human
colonic carcinogenesis we developed methods for the isolation and in
vitro maintenance of intact colonic crypts from normal human colon tissue
and adenomatous polyps.Methods: Fresh biopsy samples were transported in
culture medium containing 1.5mM Ca2+ and antimicrobials. The
mucosa/submucosa was surgically separated from the muscularis propria and
incubated in 10mM dithiothreitol followed by 8mM
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid. Crypts were agitated free, washed with
slow spins, and immediately embedded in a 3-dimensional environment at a
density of 50 crypts/50l Matrigel. After 3 hours, media was replaced to
remove non-viable cellular products. Serum-free medium, containing low
Ca2+ (0.15mM), was used to maintain crypt cultures. Cell proliferation
and differentiation were assessed with markers Ki67 and E-cadherin by
confocal microscopy. The fluorescence signal was quantified for the
bottom 1/3 of the crypts (35 cells from base on one crypt edge) using
morphometric imaging software. In parallel studies, abnormal crypt-like
structures were isolated from adenomatous polyps/adenocarcinoma and
maintained in a similar culture system.Results: At day-1 in culture, Ki67
expression was strong in the proliferating cells at the crypt base, with
E-cadherin staining increasing towards the crypt apex. By day-3,
E-cadherin expression became much more prominent and Ki67 decreased
dramatically. This culture system preserved the in vivo phenotype of the
crypts and allowed for the colonic epithelial cells to follow the
physiological sequence of progression from proliferation to
differentiation. Adenomatous tissue in culture at day-1 showed expression
for Ki67 and E-cadherin but lacked spacial organization.Conclusion:
Intact colonic crypts from normal and abnormal human mucosa can be viably
maintained in 3-D culture for 72 hours. This primary human in vitro 3-D
model may be used to model efficacy of colonic cancer chemopreventives.
Epithelial Cell Proliferation and Differentiation in Cultured Human
Crypts (fold changes)

