Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multidrug resistance transcriptome analysis highlights compounds
that sensitize resistant hepatocellular carcinoma through increased
histone acetylation.


No effective systemic therapy exists for patients with advanced
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Surgery is the mainstay treatment for
patients with early stage HCC tumors. Either resection or transplantation
is advocated if the HCC is within the Milan criteria. Nonsurgical
treatments including percutaneous ethanol injection, radiofrequency
ablation, and transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) are used as
adjuvant therapy to surgery but also to treat unresectable HCC. Although
a meta-analysis showed a beneficial survival effect for patients with
intermediate HCC treated by TACE using doxorubicin and cisplatin, the
survival benefit of systemic chemotherapy for the treatment of liver
cancer is marginal at best. Although Sorafenib, a multi-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, is becoming established as the first line of therapy for
advanced HCC, it was recently shown to be a substrate of ABCB1 and ABCG2,
two major transporters involved in multidrug resistance (MDR) and
expressed in hepatocytes. In this study, the MDR transcriptome was
analyzed in a cohort of 38 patients using TaqMan-based qRT-PCR, with the
aim of finding ways to sensitize this intrinsically MDR cancer. The study
reveals a 45-gene signature, validated using an independent cohort of 53
patients, that predicts overall survival (OS). We used the Connectivity
Map tool, designed to reveal connections among drugs, genes, and
pathological states, to identify three compounds that converted the gene
expression profile of HCC cell lines from one matching patients with poor
OS to one with good OS. These compounds increased histone acetylation,
resulting in the sensitization of tumor cells to conventional
chemotherapy including cisplatin, sorafenib and 5-FU. This work provides
new treatment strategies based on gene expression profiling and
connectivity data for a disease for which no effective systemic
treatments exist. More importantly, the current study reveals a new
strategy to sensitize any type of refractory cancer to chemotherapy.

