Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A transgenic mouse model for the Hedgehog pathway effector GLI1
induced mammary gland tumors.


Increased expression of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway effector GLI1
in breast cancer patients has been shown to correlate inversely with
disease free and overall survival. Activation of the Hh signaling pathway
is known to promote proliferation of breast cancer cells and stimulate
mammosphere formation. In addition, the Hh signaling pathway has been
reported activated in CD44 positive breast cancer stem cells. Despite the
evidence supporting a role for Hh signaling in breast cancer development
and maintenance, the model systems to study the Hh pathway in breast
carcinogenesis are limited.We used a transgenic mouse model to show that
GLI1 expression in the mammary gland cause tumor formation. The GLI1
induced primary tumors showed different histological characteristics,
suggesting that the GLI1 expression influenced the tumor initiating
cells. The GLI1 induced primary tumors were orthotopically transplanted
on NOD/SCID mice and we have established serial transplantable tumor
lines. The different histological characteristics of the individual
primary tumors have been maintained for >10 serial transplantations in
NOD/SCID mice. The stem cell marker CD44 is expressed in the mouse
mammary gland ducts. The CD44 positive cell population is increased in
the GLI1 induced tumors. The G protein coupled receptor (GPCR) like
protein Lgr5 has been suggested as a stem cell marker in several tissues,
including mammary gland. We show that cells in the basal layer of the
adult mammary gland ducts express Lgr5. The Lgr5 positive cell population
is increased in the GLI1 induced tumors, suggesting a basal like
characteristic of these tumors.Taken together, our data show that
expression of GLI1 in the mammary gland result in formation of mammary
gland tumors with heterogeneous histological characteristics. The cell
populations identified by the stem cell markers CD44 or Lgr5 are
increased in the GLI1 induced tumors compared with the normal mammary
gland. Furthermore, we have established serial transplantable GLI1
induced mammary gland tumor lines. These serial transplantable tumor
lines are novel tools to address the role of GLI1 expression in breast
carcinogenesis.

