Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional RNAi screen identifies novel cytokine and growth factor
receptors critical for the growth of leukemia patient samples.


Background: Cytokine and growth factor receptors contribute to cancer
pathogenesis by regulating variety of signaling pathways. However,
additional investigation is needed to understand the functional and
therapeutic implications of cytokine and growth factor receptors in
cancer. Here we present a novel RNAi-based screen to uncover the
functional and prognostic relevance of growth factor/cytokine receptors
for leukemia pathogenesis. This assay enables us to discover novel
mechanisms of leukemogenesis involving various non-kinase
receptors.Methods and Results: We have designed a novel RNAi based
functional screen targeting 188 growth factor receptors that were found
highly expressed in primary leukemia specimens by gene microarray
analysis. We have tested primary cells from 72 leukemia patients with
AML, ALL and MPN and 8 leukemia cell lines for dependence on these
receptors. Novel candidate targets found in primary patient samples
include CD24, NCOA4, IL1R1, IL2R and IL15R. In many cases, we found that
these targets have genetic abnormalities ranging from splice variation
(IL2R) to intron retention (IL15R). In a few cases, the receptor was
found to serve as a scaffold for regulating downstream oncogenic
signaling. Importantly, we show proof-of-principle data where IL2R is a
potential target in the JAK3 A572V mutation positive AML cell line (CMK).
Validation experiments demonstrated that knockdown of IL2R significantly
reduces the viability of CMK cells (90% decrease) and abrogates
phosphorylation of JAK3 and downstream signaling molecules, STAT5, MAPK
and the pS6 ribosomal protein. Intriguingly, the absence of IL2R in
murine bone marrow completely abrogated the clonogenic potential of JAK3
A572V as compared to IL2R-wild type marrow. These effects can be rescued
by co-expressing IL2R with JAK3 A572V but not by co-expressing IL2R with
JAK3 Y100C, a FERM domain inactivating mutation. Additionally,
overexpression of IL2R made JAK3 A572V cells less sensitive to the JAK
family inhibitor, JAK Inhibitor I. Mechanistically, IL2R contributes to
constitutive JAK3 mutant signaling by increasing JAK3 protein levels and
phosphorylation. Conversely, mutant but not wild type JAK3 increased the
expression of IL2R, indicating IL2R contributes to constitutive JAK3
signaling through a feedback mechanism. Overall these results demonstrate
an oncogenic potentiating role of IL2R.Conclusions: RNAi-based functional
screening for AML cell dependence on non-kinase cytokine and growth
factor receptors led to the identification of novel oncogenic etiologies
for AML. This assay can identify genes that are crucial for malignant
cell growth, regardless of the mutational status both in cell lines and
in primary samples. These findings underscore the importance of targeting
cytokine and growth factor receptors in leukemia pathogenesis.

