Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant DNA methylation of RUNDC3B in lymphoid malignancies.


Pathological research of epigenetic regulation provides a unique insight
into disease formation. Heritable changes to DNA conformation can have
significant impacts on gene expression without altering the DNA sequence.
The RUN domain containing 3B gene (RUNDC3B) has been shown to be
differentially expressed in caner types such as, acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. This differential expression has been linked to methylation of
the gene. The hypothesized function of RUNDC3B is a Rap-2 binding protein
which operates regulates GTPases to create biological switches in
signaling pathways, such as the Ras signaling pathway. Therefore,
aberrant methylation of RUNDC3B could adversely affect Ras signaling and
contribute to cancer formation.Combined bisulfite restriction analysis
and methylation specific PCR were used to determine the methylation
status of RUNDC3B. This analysis was completed in cell lines from
lymphoid malignancies, myeloid malignancies, various solid tumor cancers,
and unaffected cell lines. We evaluated 5 regions spanning a CpG island
(CGI) in the proximal promoter region of RUNDC3B. Greater than 70% of the
regions analyzed in lymphoid malignancies were found to be methylated,
whereas, 13.3% of myeloid malignancies, 34.3% of solid tumors, and 10.0%
of healthy lymphocyte regions were found to be methylated. This suggests
that RUNDC3B may be a useful biomarker for diagnosis and/or prognosis in
lymphoid malignancies. Furthermore, this aberrant epigenetic modification
may be a significant contributor to pathogenesis of lymphoid
malignancies.To determine the effect of aberrant DNA methylation on
RUNDC3B expression, real-time PCR was utilized. Consistent with the
methylation data, the lymphoid malignancies were found to be expressed at
significantly lower levels than other unmethylated samples. In addition,
the methylation of Region 5 of the CGI related strongly with RUNDC3B
repression, suggesting a specific set of CpG dinucleotides may be
responsible for RUNDC3B silencing.The function of RUNDC3B is hypothesized
based on the presence of a RUN domain. Sequence analysis of RUNDC3B was
performed to expand on the hypothesized physiological role. Establishing
conserved portions of the promoter region of RUNDC3B supported the
conclusion that regulation of this gene is not evolutionarily novel.
Analysis across a diverse set of species revealed conservation in
transcription factor binding sites, CG content, and RUNDC3B-Rap2
interaction domains.The data from our experiments has built upon the
knowledge of epigenetic regulation of RUNDC3B in cancer. The aberrant
methylation leading to RUNDC3B repression is more prevalent in lymphoid
malignancies than in several other types of cancer. This provides a
clinical role of the gene as a biomarker. As the RUNDC3B gene codes for a
regulatory element of the Ras pathway, aberrant epigenetic repression may
contribute to the pathogenesis of lymphoid malignancies.

