Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A clinical study of ABT-806, a humanized recombinant anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibody, in patients with recurrent glioblastoma multiforme.


Background: Glioblastoma (GBM), the most common primary CNS malignancy,
has a dismal prognosis with a median survival of under 15 months.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is commonly amplified,
overexpressed, and mutated in GBM and has been implicated in tumor growth
and resistance to therapy. ABT-806 is a humanized recombinant IgG1k
monoclonal antibody that binds to a unique EGFR epitope exposed only in
the untethered, (activated) state of EGFR or when the de2-7 (EGFRvIII)
deletion mutation is present. ABT-806 has shown significant antitumor
activity over other EGFR antibodies in both in vitro and in vivo models
of GBM. We evaluated the safety, pharmacokinetics (PK), and antitumor
activity of ABT-806 in a cohort of recurrent GBM patients treated at the
recommended phase 2 dose determined from the dose-escalation portion of
this phase 1 study.Methods: Patients with recurrent, EGFR-amplified GBM
and measurable disease by RECIST (v1.1) were included. ABT-806 was
administered at 24 mg/kg intravenously every other week until disease
progression or study withdrawal. Tumor response by MRI or CT was assessed
every 8 weeks. Adverse events (AEs) were graded by NCI CTCAE v4.0. Serum
samples for determination of ABT-806 concentration and antidrug antibody
were collected at multiple time points throughout the study. Archival
tumor analysis for EGFR amplification/mutation was also
performed.Results: Among 11 patients; median age was 60 years (range 39
to 69) and 9 were male. Median number of prior therapies was 2 (range 1
to 7). Six patients had prior bevacizumab exposure. No patients required
dose modification. Hypophosphatemia was the only treatment-related
emergent AE that occurred in 2 or more patients. Best responses were n=3
stable disease, n=7 progressive disease. One patient withdrew consent
prior to the first post-baseline tumor assessment. Median time to disease
progression and median progression free survival [95% CI] were 43 [22,57]
and 29 [25,57] days, respectively. PK and EGFRde2-7 data were not
available at the time of abstract submission.Conclusions: While ABT-806
related AEs were infrequent, there was little evidence of a clinical
benefit in this refractory GBM population. Whether the lack of
significant anti-tumor effect was due to poor binding to intracranial
tumors, lack of response to the mechanism of action, or the refractory
population is to be determined. A study is ongoing to evaluate the
biodistribution of 111Indium-labeled ABT-806 in pts with advanced solid
tumor types, including GBM. Further preclinical efforts to increase the
potency of ABT-806 are also ongoing.

