Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of mutated peptides/proteins driving cancer
phenotype utilizing improved shotgun proteomics and data analysis
approaches.


Background: Mutations in cancer can either abolish or alter protein
function. In the latter case, mutated proteins may rewire regulatory
networks to promote tumor growth or metastasis. Identifying and
understanding the role of potential mutated oncogenes is important for
developing effective therapies for individual patients. Unfortunately,
detecting mutated proteins in tumors is challenging because the level of
mutated proteins is typically low and identification of potential
mutations is challenging due to limited database search engines.
Utilizing analytical methods incorporating modified protein search
engines can facilitate detection of protein variants.Methods: Bottom up
proteomics was performed on colorectal cancer cell line HCT-116, whereby
five million cells were harvested and cell lysates/protein fraction was
fractionated ten-fold using a gel-based approach. Unbiased discovery-mode
LC-MS analysis was performed in LTQ Velos-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer for
all the fractions using nano LC-MS/MS. A novel computational approach
integrated into the MassMatrix search engine has been developed to
analyze the pooled tandem MS dataset and identify significant variant
peptides/proteins. Peptide and protein level FDR was carefully controlled
to yield variant candidates. Selected peptides with mutations of interest
were then synthesized and analyzed in the same instrument for validation
purposes.Results: Analysis of the HCT-116 cell line data returned 14000
peptides overall, indicating satisfactory proteome mining. By utilizing
the new variant detection pipeline, we have identified variant proteins
in HCT-116 compared to the reference sequence database, including 43 SNPs
and 12 mutations. Based on close manual evaluation of the quality of the
tandem MS spectra, six candidates were selected for validation. These
variant peptide sequences were confirmed by comparing them to the
synthesized peptide MS/MS patterns. The specific mutations in all of
these proteins, including PTPN11, FYN, DUSP23, PRPF8, FUBP1 and RRM2B,
have been reported in earlier gene sequencing studies. We have also
examined public HCT-116 RNAseq data to further validate expression of
these mutated sequences.Conclusions: We have created a novel
proto-genomic variant detection pipeline developed on top of existing
protein search engines. This method can be married with popular search
engines such as MassMatrix, and shows great potential for variant peptide
detection. The identified mutated proteins in this study represent
targets of immense biological interest for rewiring of the HCT-116
regulatory landscape. Functional studies to understand the molecular
basis of the phenotype are ongoing, specifically we are testing the
potential gain or loss of function of these proteins due to mutations,
and we are probing the likely roles they play in maintaining the tumor
phenotype.Citation Format: Gurkan Bebek, Giridharan Gokulrangan, Hua Xu,
Mark R. Chance. Identification of mutated peptides/proteins driving
cancer phenotype utilizing improved shotgun proteomics and data analysis
approaches. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of
the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington,
DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr
3217. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3217

