Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential potentiation of temozolomide and camptothecin by the
PARP inhibitors olaparib and veliparib in relationship with their
PARP-DNA trapping abilities, and lack of impact of PARP inhibitors on
cisplatin activity.


We recently showed that poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors act
by a novel allosteric mechanism of action that involves the trapping of
PARP-DNA complexes in addition to their previously established
NAD-competitive catalytic inhibitory mechanism). We also demonstrated
that PARP inhibitors differ in their ability to trap PARP-DNA complexes,
with olaparib being more effective than veliparib in spite of their
comparable potency as catalytic PARP inhibitors). Here, by using PARP
knockout cells, olaparib and veliparib, we tested the role of PARP
trapping in the potentiating effect of PARP inhibitors with the
alkylating agent temozolomide and the topoisomerase I inhibitor,
camptothecin. Using isogenic chicken DT40 cells, we show that
PARP-dependent potentiation of temozolomide is markedly greater for
olaparib than veliparib, and goes beyond knocking out PARP-1. On the
other hand, in the case of camptothecin, knocking out PARP-1 has a
greater effect than veliparib or olaparib. In human DU145 prostate cancer
and SF295 glioblastoma cells, olaparib is markedly more potent than
veliparib in potentiating the cytotoxicity of temozolomide whereas both
olaparib and veliparib are almost comparable in the case of camptothecin.
By measuring cellular PARP-DNA complexes), we find that in the case of
temozolomide, olaparib is a least 10-fold more potent than veliparib at
trapping PARP-DNA complexes. On the other hand, in the case of
camptothecin, neither olaparib nor veliparib produced detectable trapping
of PARP-DNA complexes. Finally, olaparib fails to sensitize DT40, DU145
or SF295 cells to cisplatin and does not induce detectable PARP-DNA
complexes in cisplatin-treated cells. These results suggest that, in the
case of temozolomide, olaparib trapping of PARP-DNA complexes is more
toxic than inactivating PARP catalytic activity, which is not the case
for topoisomerase I-induced DNA damage, where catalytic inactivation of
PARP appears to be the sole enhancing mechanism.

