Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of deregulation of Pol III-dependent transcription in
phenotypic alteration.


The products of RNA polymerase III (Pol III)-dependent genes, such as
tRNAs and 5S rRNA, are elevated in both transformed and tumor cells
suggesting that they play a crucial role in tumorigenesis. An increase in
Brf1 (TFIIIB-related factor 1), a subunit of TFIIIB in Pol III
transcription machinery, augments Pol III gene transcription and is
sufficient for cell transformation and tumor formation (1). We have
demonstrated, for the first time, that enhancement of Brf1 expression and
Pol III gene transcription are correlated to liver tumor formation in
mice (2). This implies that Brf1 may be a key molecule during liver tumor
development. Our early study demonstrated that MSK1 (mitogen- and
stress-activated protein kinase 1) mediates H3S28ph (3), Our recent study
have indicated that reduction of H3S28ph (histone H3 phosphorylation at
serine 28) results in repression of Brf1 and Pol III gene transcription
(4). Blocking MSK1 inhibits cell transformation (5) and tumor formation
(6). To further determine the role of Brf1 and the signaling and
epigenetic regulating events in phenotypic alteration induced by DEN
(diethylnitrosamine) which is a chemical carcinogen and is used to induce
liver tumor (7), we utilized DEN (200g/ml) to treat AML-12 cells, an
immortalized mouse hepatocyte line to extract cell lysates and total RNA.
Our results indicate that DEN treatment increased Brf1 expression and Pol
III gene, tRNALeu and 5S rRNA, transcription. DEN strongly induced
phosphorylation of MSK1 at serine 376 and Threonine 581. DEN also induces
H3phs at both H3S10ph and H3S28ph in AML-12 cells. Interestingly,
DEN-induced H3ph in tumor stem cells of mouse liver is significantly
stronger than in non-tumor AML-12 cells. MSK1 chemical inhibitor, H89
decreased the induction of Pol III genes. DEN increased the rate of
AML-12 cell proliferation. Furthermore, DEN induced colony formation of
AML-12 cells in soft agar. Repression of Brf1 by its siRNA reduced Pol
III gene transcription and inhibited the cell transformation by DEN.
Taken together, these results demonstrate that DEN activates MSK1 and
induces H3ph, which in turn mediate Brf1 expression to upregulate RNA Pol
III transcription, resulting in increasing in cell proliferation and cell
transformation. These studies will allow us to further uncover a novel
molecular mechanism of hepatocellular carcinoma by using MSK KO mice and
conditional Brf1 KO mice.[This project was supported by NIH grant
AA017288 and AA021114 to Shuping Zhong.]

