Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cysteine (C)-X-C receptor 4 undergoes transportin 1 dependent
nuclear localization and is functional at the nucleus of metastatic
prostate cancer cells.


The G-Protein coupled receptor (GPCR) Cysteine (C)-X-C Receptor 4 (CXCR4)
plays an important role in prostate cancer (PCa) metastasis. To date,
considerable evidence support the presence of GPCRs at the plasma
membrane (PM), or within the perinuclear/nuclear compartments of cells
and have been suggested to regulate a number of physiological processes
including cell proliferation, survival, inflammatory responses and
tumorigenesis. In accordance with previous clinical observations in
diverse tumor tissues, we observed ubiquitous expression of CXCR4 in
metastatic PCa tissues and several PCa cells lines. Additionally, Gi
immunoprecipitation and calcium mobilization studies elucidated that
nuclear CXCR4 was functional and participated in G-protein signaling.
However, a mechanism by which CXCR4 is translocated to the nucleus is
poorly understood.An initial search of the CXCR4 sequence via the PSORT
II NLS prediction software program revealed a putative, nontraditional
nuclear localization sequence (NLS), RPRK in CXCR4.Additionally,the
members of karyopherin beta () family, Karyopherin-2 or Transportin 1
(TRN1) were reported to be involved in transportation of various cargos
into the nucleus, including the chemokine GPCRs. Collectively, based on
our results and previous studies, we suggest that the NLS, RPRKand TRN1
play a role in translocation of CXCR4 into the nucleus of advanced PCa.
To determine the involvement of RPRK," manipulations of the NLS revealed
that single point mutations of basic resides within the NLS was
insufficient to eliminate to abrogate nuclear translocation of CXCR4.
However, when the NLS was deleted, nuclear CXCR4 was not detected.
Additionally, TRN1 immunoprecipitation and siRNA-TRN1 studies delineated
an association between CXCR4 and TRN1,and that nuclear translocation of
CXCR4 depended on TRN1. Little information is available about nuclear
GPCRs and nuclear CXCR4 in cancer. Thus, the significance of the study is
that since CXCR4 is a major signaling receptor involved in PCa
metastasis, the dualistic localization pattern and function at the
nucleus may encourage recurrence,metastasis and poorer prognosis after
tumors have been treated with therapy that targets CXCR4.In conclusion,
our studies will provide insight to the development of therapeutics
towards CXCR4 and transport mechanisms, as current therapy targets
membrane receptors, which may be ineffective if CXCR4 is translocated and
functional inside of the cell.

