Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation changes during epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition in ovarian cancer cells.


Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a required step in the
process of metastasis and has been linked to cancer cell stemness. We
hypothesized that aside from defined genetic changes associated with EMT,
epigenetic mechanisms are also involved. We determined DNA methylation
changes in SKOV3 ovarian cancer (OC) cells undergoing TGF-induced EMT by
using the Infinium HumanMethylation450 array. Methylation of sites was
expressed as -values ranging from 0 (completely unmethylated) to 1
(completely methylated). Methylation of 468 and 390 sites changed
significantly (PEpithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a required
step in the process of metastasis and has been linked to cancer cell
stemness. We hypothesized that aside from defined genetic changes
associated with EMT, epigenetic mechanisms are also involved. We
determined DNA methylation changes in SKOV3 ovarian cancer (OC) cells
undergoing TGF-induced EMT by using the Infinium HumanMethylation450
array. Methylation of sites was expressed as -values ranging from 0
(completely unmethylated) to 1 (completely methylated). Methylation of
468 and 390 sites changed significantly (P<.01, ANOVA and FDR1.25-fold.
The majority of changes (66%) reflected TGF-induced demethylation.
Methylation of 160 sites changed similarly at 48 and 120h indicating that
approximately 40% of changes were sustained. PCA analysis demonstrated
that the removal of TGF was associated with reversal of DNA methylation
changes at most sites and restitution of the baseline methylome. Pathway
analysis identified DNA methylated genes involved in functional networks
relevant to EMT and cancer progression, including: 1) cell morphology and
development (39 genes), 2) cell growth and proliferation, and cell death
and survival (34 genes), 3) cellular assembly and organization (22
genes), 4) DNA replication, recombination and repair (17 genes), and 5)
gene expression, cell signaling, and cellular movement (15 genes).
Validation of the relevant genes is ongoing. Treatment of OC cells with
the DNA methyl transferase inhibitor SGI-110 prevented TGF-induced EMT
and reduced by two-fold the number of cells with stem cell
characteristics (ALDH1+). These results demonstrate that DNA methylation
is a dynamic process involved in regulation of genes implicated in EMT
and metastasis.

