Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) in the tumor
microenvironment.


Glioblastomas, the most malignant form of gliomas, harbor multiple cell
types. In particular, microglial cells can contribute up to 30% of a
brain tumor mass, and can promote glioma cell growth and dispersal. The
purpose of the present study was to test the hypothesis that glioma cells
recruit nearby microglia through an MCP-1-mediated mechanism and enhance
their production of MCP-1 in the tumor microenvironment. We evaluated the
role of MCP-1 on glioma cell proliferation and invasion. Consistent with
previous studies in rat models (Platten et al., 2003), we found that U-87
and A-172 human glioma cells promote microglial migration towards the
glioma environment using a modified Boyden chamber migration assay.
Furthermore, this effect was decreased after immunoneutralization of
MCP-1 released from glioma cells. Additionally, using an antibody array
we found that U-87 or A-172 glioma cell conditioned medium stimulates a
7-10 fold increase of MCP-1 release by microglia by 24 hours. We next
analyzed the consequences of elevated MCP-1 on the invasiveness and
proliferation of glioma cells. Using standard invasion assays with or
without microglia in a lower compartment, we demonstrated that microglia
significantly increased invasion of glioma cells, but this effect was not
blocked by MCP-1 immunoneutralization. This suggests that the stimulatory
effect of microglia on glioma invasion was due to some other factor such
as release of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). In contrast, microglia
increased U-87 and A-172 glioma cell proliferation within 72 hours and
MCP-1 immunoneutralization reversed this proliferative effect of
microglia in both cell lines.Based on these results, we propose that
glioma cells release low levels of MCP-1 to recruit nearby microglia and
enhance the production of MCP-1. This increased secretion of MCP-1 from
microglial cells recruits more microglial cells into the tumor and
stimulate glioma progression. A variety of substances released by
microglia in tumor microenvironment, including cytokines, growth factors,
proteases and extracellular matrix components could lead to increased
proliferation and invasiveness of glioma cells.Supported by G11 HD052352,
G12 RR03035, 8G12MD007583-27, U54 NS039408 and by the UCC Pilot Project
Program

