Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The functional interplay between activated Stat5 and Stat3 in
breast cancer formation and progression.


Cancer cells with stem cell-like characteristics are defined as cancer
stem cells (CSCs) that are proposed to drive tumor initiation,
progression and recurrence. Recent studies show the significance of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in the induction of CSCs and
their metastatic dissemination. Growth and colonization of the migrating
stem cells require their re-differentiation and the reversal of EMT,
mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET), at the site of distant
metastasis. We study the functional interplay between two related
transcription factors, signal transducer and activator of transcription 5
(Stat5) and Stat3 in the genetic and epigenetic regulation of
non-metastatic and metastatic breast cancer cells. Simultaneous activity
of both Stats is observed in high percentage of human luminal breast
cancers. In both normal and malignant cells, Stat5 activity is associated
with cell proliferation, differentiation and survival, however, its
activity in tumors is defined as a good prognostic marker due to response
to antiestrogen therapy. During postlactational gland regression, called
involution, P-Stat3 regulates lysosomal-mediated cell death, which is in
contrast to its strong oncogenic function during mammary tumorigenesis.To
gain insights into oncogenic functions of Stat5, we established a new
mouse model which allows the investigation of genetic and epigenetic
contributions in the initiation and progression of mammary tumors. In
this model we used genetic manipulation of mammary stem cells (MaSCs)
derived from primary tissue and the reconstitution of functional
epithelium through transplantation into cleared fat pads to generate
transgenic glands. The persistent activation of Stat5 during
post-lactational involution resulted in the induction of non-metastatic
adenocarcinomas, resembling human luminal-A breast cancer subtype. These
tumors could be serially transplanted in BALB/c wild-type recipient mice
and contain a small fraction of Lin-CD24lowCD44high tumor initiating
cells. Both primary and secondary tumors show simultaneous activity of
Stat5 and Stat3 and express estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER+PR+)
and their downstream target genes like amphiregulin, RANKL and Wnt4. We
performed microarray gene expression analysis of tumor tissues and
P-Stat5 transgenic grafts and studied potential target genes, which can
explain Stat5 oncogenic functions in tumor formation in contrast to its
suppression effects on tumor cell migration. We are now studying the
relative contribution of Stat5 and Stat3 in the regulation of metastatic
process and transient EMT-MET changes. Our tumor model allows the
identification of new genetic and epigenetic biomarkers, which are
necessary for a better diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer and the
prediction of invasive relapse.

