Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antisense oligonucleotide depletion of the mitotic kinesin Eg5 by
direct delivery to the brain could be a useful strategy for treating
glioma tumors.


To date, all approved chemotherapeutic agents which target the mitotic
cell division interfere with spindle microtubule dynamics, leading to
mitotic arrest and apoptosis. While effective, these drugs are subject to
resistance mechanisms and they are also associated with a variety of side
effects, including neurotoxicity. Their use in treating nervous system
tumors is therefore not warranted.One strategy to target mitosis, without
damaging microtubules in non-dividing neurons, would be to inhibit key
mitotic components, such as the mitotic kinesin Eg5, which is required
for establishing a normal bipolar mitotic spindle. We have shown that
glioblastoma cells depleted for Eg5 arrest in the next mitosis. After a
prolonged arrest, they may slip out and become multinucleated, which will
likely prevent further successful divisions or they may go into
apoptosis. Further, mitotic arrest and induction of apoptosis in Eg5
depleted glioblastoma cells occur independent of p53, Rb-signalling and
the PI3K-pathway suggesting that Eg5 is a potential therapeutic target
for glioblastoma patients with different underlying genetic
abnormalitiesWe have also tested the clinical feasibility of using a cell
cycle targeting antisense oligonucleotide based therapy delivered
directly to the central nervous system (CNS) as a novel treatment for
glioblastoma tumors.This work has demonstrated that intraventricular
administration of ASOs can efficiently target cells in the CNS and be
delivered to glioma-initiating neural stem cells transplanted into the
cortex of nave mice as well as to glioblastoma tumors in a genetically
predisposed mouse model. This strategy is therefore a potential route of
administration for treating glioblastoma tumors which originate in the
CNS. Direct targeting of mitotic components in the brain should have a
limited toxicity to non-cycling neurons and as a benefit, as long as the
blood-brain barrier is intact direct CNS delivery should have minimal
dose-limiting toxicity outside of the CNS. Ongoing studies will determine
the effect of Eg5 inhibition on glioblastoma growth in vivo.

