Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HnRNP I interacts with lncRNA UCA1 and regulates its stability.


Background: The human genome also makes a large number of non-coding RNAs
including long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and microRNAs in addition to
protein-coding genes. While microRNAs are well characterized, little is
known about lncRNAs. Emerging evidence has implicated lncRNAs in gene
regulation; and they are often aberrantly expressed in a variety of human
diseases, in particular cancer. The heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein I (hnRNP I) is a member of the large hnRNP family and
has been implicated in mRNA splicing, stability and translational
regulation of certain RNA transcripts. During screening for
lncRNA-interacted proteins, we identified hnRNP I as a binding partner
for UCA1. However, it remains unclear how hnRNP I interacts with UCA1 and
whether such an interaction impacts UCA1-mediated cell growth and
responsiveness to anti-cancer drugs.Methods: To determine cell growth and
response to doxorubicin, we performed MTT assays as well as cell counting
assays. Protein levels from treated cells were analyzed by western blot.
Real-time RT-PCR was used to determine relative expression of genes.
Interaction between hnRNP I and UCA1 was confirmed by RNA
co-immunoprecipitation and RNA pulldown. RNA stability was determined by
treating MCF-7 cells with actinomycin D, followed by real-time RT-PCR.
hnRNP I was knock down by transient transfection of hnRNP I
siRNAs.Results: We found that UCA1 induced proliferation and increased
resistance to doxorubicin in MCF-7 cells. RNA pulldown assays revealed
that UCA1 RNA directly interacted with hnRNP I. This interaction was
further confirmed by RNA immunoprecipitation by hnRNP I antibody.
Real-time RT-PCR revealed that knockdown of hnRNP I by RNAi reduced the
level of UCA1 in MCF-7 cells and it also repressed the induction of UCA1
by doxorubicin. Further experiments suggested that hnRNP I impacts the
UCA1 stability. We showed that half-life of UCA1 was about 12 h but was
decreased to about 6 h in the presence of hnRNP I siRNAs. We further
showed that the phosphorylated form of hnRNA I, predominantly in the
cytoplasm, was a major form that interacts with UCA1.Conclusion: Taken
together, these results suggest that hnRNP I plays a role in regulation
of the stability of UCA1. Since previous work implicates the involvement
of UCA1 in tumor cell growth and chemoresistance, a better understanding
of the underlying mechanism will provide new insight of targeting UCA1 in
cancer therapy.

