Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biocompatible nanocarrier mediated delivery of STAT-6 siRNA to
cancer cells.


Signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT-6) is a
transcription factors that is highly expressed in various types of
cancers including lung cancer and its expression was reported to be
significantly correlated with tumor progression. Several studies showed
that down-regulation of STAT-6 using short interfering RNA (siRNA) leads
to the induction of apoptosis and inhibition of tumor growth. The use of
siRNA for cancer therapy represents a promising approach for STAT-6
silencing due to its efficient knockdown of targeted genes compared to
other conventional anti-cancer therapies. Despite this huge therapeutic
potential, the clinical utility of siRNA therapy has been greatly
hampered due to its poor cell penetration, rapid degradation, short
half-life and non-specific effects.To overcome these limitations, we
herewith propose to formulate STAT-6 siRNA (S6S) as a nanotherapeutic by
encapsulating them within the gelatin nanocarrier (GNC) to achieve its
successful intratumoral delivery. The nanoformulation was prepared by two
step desolvation technique and characterized exhaustively for loading
efficiency, size, charge, release kinetics, stability and cytotoxicity
performance. The stability of S6S-GNC was assessed under conditions of
varying pH and serum level to determine the stability of developed
formulation. The S6S-GNC was incubated in a phosphate buffer (pH 6.4, 7.4
and 8.4) to assess the influence of pH on charge and size of the GNC.
Additionally, the stability was also accessed using an electrophoretic
assay. In vitro cytotoxicity was evaluated against A549 lung cancer cells
following MTT cytotoxicity assay. The developed formulation contained
10,000 GNC/ml, and the average particle size and surface charge was
observed to be 69.66.5 nm and +101.5 mV, respectively. The optimized
S6S-GNC formulations showed an encapsulation efficiency of 854%. S6S-GNC
showed an insignificant (p>0.05) change in the size in the presence of
buffer solutions (pH 6.4 to 8.4) and FBS (10% v/v). A549 cells were
treated with native S6S, S6S-lipofectamine, placebo GNC and S6S-GNC using
untreated cells as a control. It was observed that cell viability was
decreased significantly with S6S-GNC by 554 % (p97% viability of cells
demonstrating non-toxicity and safety of GNC formulation The increased
cytotoxicity with S6S-GNC can be attributed to the accumulation of
positively charged GNCs through electrochemical diffusion. Overall, these
results suggest FDA approved gelatin polymer based nanocarriers may be a
more robust, stable and biocompatible strategy to deliver S6S via
parenteral route with the potential to develop them as cancer targeted
nanocarrier by subsequently anchoring them to cancer specific ligands
(such as RGD, Folate etc) via freely available amine and carboxy
terminals of gelatin.

