Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human melanoma cells resist oxidative stress due to overactive
MEK/ERK and AKT/mTOR pathways and overproduction of melanin.


Melanoma is considered as one of the most aggressive and less treatable
cancers. While various models of mechanisms have been proposed, the
transformation from tranquil melanocytes to invasive melanoma cells
remains an enigma. Alteration of cellular redox status has been suggested
to be associated with cellular transformation. We compared primary human
melanocytes and melanoma cells and their responses to oxidative stress.
Both cells were treated with H2O2 at doses between 5 and 250M.
Microscopic data showed that melanoma cells are more resistant to H2O2
treatment. Western blot and confocal microscopic data showed that in
melanoma cells, H2O2 does not induce CRT translocation which is
considered as a mechanism through which melanocytes surrender to
oxidative stress and induces immunogenic cell death. Furthermore, Western
blot analysis showed that melanoma cells express EGFR, responsive to EGF
treatment and have constitutive activation of AKT and mTOR, which are all
related to better survival. In contrast, in the primary human
melanocytes, EGFR expression is almost undetectable. And confocal
microscopic data confirm this observation. Treatments of cells with
MEK/ERK inhibitor U0126 and PI3K/AKT inhibitor LY294002 attenuates S6
phosphorylation. We also observed that in melanoma cells, but not in
melanocytes, low dose (5 to 250M) of H2O2 induces melanin production that
is recognized to protect from further oxidative stress. Collectively, our
data suggest that active MEK/ERK and AKT/mTOR pathways and up-regulation
of melanin production contribute to the resistance of melanoma cells to
oxidative stress and attribute to the aggressiveness of melanoma. Our
data provides insights into the understanding of the molecular mechanisms
of the transformation from melanocytes to melanoma and support the notion
from the most recently published proteomic studies that EGFR remains one
of the most important targets for better clinical management of
melanoma.Citation Format: David Calianese, Garrett Cammarata, Gabriella
Brum, Kevin Szulak, Charles Best, Katelyn Higgins, Yinsheng Wan. Human
melanoma cells resist oxidative stress due to overactive MEK/ERK and
AKT/mTOR pathways and overproduction of melanin. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5247.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5247

