Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor microenvironment modulates the delivery and activation
of liposomal encapsulated irinotecan, MM-398.


MM-398 is a stable nanotherapeutic encapsulation of the pro-drug
irinotecan with an extended plasma half-life and higher intratumoral
deposition in animal models compared with free-irinotecan. MM-398 is
currently in multiple clinical trials, including a Phase 3 trial for
patients with advanced gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic cancer
(NAPOLI-1). By using a systems pharmacology approach, we have previously
identified the important determinants for MM-398 activity differentiating
it from free irinotecan.One of the critical parameters identified in the
model is activity of the tumor carboxylesterase (CES) as an important
correlate to the MM-398 preclinical response. Our data also shows that
tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) are the dominant cell type for
phagocytosis of MM-398 in the tumor microenvironment. To validate these
findings we used a perturbation strategy involving manipulation of TAMs
with the anti-CSF1 antibody 5A1. Depletion of macrophages with 5A1
resulted in a strong size reduction of CD11b+F4/80+ mature macrophage
populations in HT29, MC38 and LLC tumor models. Furthermore, other
myeloid and non-myeloid cell populations showed tumor model and mouse
strain-dependent changes in population size and liposome uptake. The
overall impact of 5A1-mediated macrophage depletion was a reduction of
the total cellular liposomal load within the tumors. Anti-CSF1 treatment
also modulated the systemic clearance of MM-398 due to changes in the
macrophage populations in the liver and spleen of the animals. To capture
this complex interplay of systemic and local depletion events we have
expanded our mechanistically-based PK model to include separate tumor
macrophage and tumor cell compartments.The computational model also
identified tumor permeability to MM-398 as a rate-limiting factor for
drug deposition and in vivo activity. To assess the degree of variability
in tumor permeability, we measured the levels of irinotecan and SN-38
using HPLC in six different xenograft models. A high degree of
variability in irinotecan and SN-38 levels was seen across these models
and between tumors from different mice bearing xenografts of the same
cell lines. We then investigated the inter-relationship between tumor
permeability, macrophage content, CES enzyme activity and SN-38
accumulation by assessing the levels of these markers in multiple
human-derived primary xenograft models across different indications.In
summary, we demonstrated the impact of TAM modulation on overall tumor
levels of irinotecan and SN-38 following treatment with liposomally
encapsulated irinotecan. We outline differences in permeability of
xenografts to MM-398 and the capacity to convert irinotecan into SN-38.

