Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of G-protein coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) inhibits
ELT-3 uterine leiomyoma cell proliferation.


Uterine leiomyomas are ovarian hormone-responsive tumors originating in
the smooth muscle layer of the uterus called the myometrium. These benign
tumors require surgery or other clinical intervention in 25% of all
premenopausal women in the United States. Despite the high frequency and
clinical impact of these tumors, the pathogenesis of uterine leiomyomas
is not understood. The estrogen-responsive growth of uterine leiomyomas
has been well established, however the role of G protein-coupled estrogen
receptor (GPER) in leiomyoma cell regulation has not been studied. The
membrane bound estrogen receptor GPER, formerly known as GPR30, is a
7-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptor that is activated by
17-estradiol (E2). A role for GPER has been previously established in
cancers that originate in E2-dependent tissues such as the breast and
uterus. Other reports show that GPER is expressed in myometrial cells and
activation of GPER modulates myometrial contraction suggesting an
important regulatory role for this receptor in the myometrium. Based on
these reports, we hypothesized that GPER regulates uterine leiomyoma
cells and may represent a putative therapeutic target for this tumor
type. The Eker rat model-derived uterine leiomyoma (ELT-3) cell line was
used as a model system to study GPER in uterine leiomyoma cells. First,
the expression of GPER in uterine leiomyoma cells was determined using
RNA and protein samples from ELT-3 cells and real-time PCR and immunoblot
analysis. Our findings indicate that GPER transcript and protein were
expressed in ELT-3 cells. To determine if activation of GPER regulated
uterine leiomyoma cell proliferation, ELT-3 cells were treated with G1, a
GPER-specific ligand, or vehicle control and counted 5 days after
treatment. Data from these experiments indicated that G1 treatment, and
potentially GPER activation, reduced the number of cells over time
compared to vehicle control. GPER activation is known to result in the
accumulation of pERK and intracellular free Ca2+ and such accumulation is
used as a biomarker for GPER activation. Upon G1 treatment, pERK and
intracellular free Ca2+ were elevated compared to vehicle treatment in
ELT-3 cells suggesting that GPER is functional in uterine leiomyoma cells
and is activated by G1. In an effort to determine the mechanism of
inhibition of uterine leiomyoma cell proliferation by G1 treatment, we
hypothesized that treatment of estrogen-stimulated ELT-3 cells with G1
would inhibit the characteristic E2-induced proliferation of this cell
type. Growth curve experiments were performed and data obtained in these
experiments suggested that G1 treatment resulted in the inhibition of
E2-induced ELT-3 cell proliferation. Taken together, these data suggest
that GPER is an important regulator of uterine leiomyoma cell
proliferation and is a putative target for novel molecular therapeutics
for this tumor type.

