Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression profiling of laser micro dissected prostate cancer
cells delineates genes associated with biochemical recurrence after
radical prostatectomy.


A distinct feature of localized prostate cancer (PC) is the high
prevalence of indolent cancer. This feature raises the dilemma of
treatment in this group of patients since a large part of this group will
not benefit from surgery. Finding markers of progression to help guide
treatment decision will have a great impact on the management of
localized prostate cancer. In this study we performed genome-wide
expression profiling of 40 cancer samples and 10 samples of normal
prostate tissue with the intent to find transcripts that delineate
aggressive and indolent cancer. Twenty-four patients with biochemical
recurrence (BR) after radical prostatectomy and 16 patients with at least
5-year recurrence free survival were included. Tissue and clinical data
have been collected prospectively in the Aarhus PC-project. All prostate
samples were fresh frozen and cancer lesions were laser micro dissected.
Nugen pico RNA amplification system was used for amplification and
Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 whole genome expression arrays were used. A
publicly available PC gene expression dataset was used for validation
(GEO accession number GSE10645). Supervised analysis comparing recurrent
and non-recurrent disease resulted in only 4 transcripts that reached
significance following correction for multiple testing. Next, we
therefore performed unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis in order
to discover molecular subgroups associated with aggressiveness of the
disease. One sample cluster showed an overrepresentation of recurrent
cases (p=0.022, chi2 test) and a cluster of 64 genes showed high
expression levels in the group of patient with aggressive disease and low
expression in the group of patient with non-aggressive disease. Eighteen
of these genes were included in the gene panel tested in the validation
set, in which 13 also showed significant association with BR after
prostatectomy. Multivariate analysis of IGFBP3 in the validation samples
showed an OR of 1.9 (p=0.002), SFRP4 OR=2.1 (p=0.009) and MSR1 OR=2.4
(p=0.014). Using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis we demonstrated that
several previously identified molecular signatures associated with
aggressiveness were significantly enriched in the molecular subgroup
containing tumors from patients with aggressive disease. We have
identified novel candidate markers associated with BR after radical
prostatectomy and the findings have been successfully validated in an
independent patient cohort. Currently, we are using TMAs for additional
validation of our markers, and these results will be presented at the
meeting. Following further independent validation, these candidate
markers may guide treatment decisions for patients with localized
prostate cancer in the future.

