Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expressionprofiling of stem cell signaling alters with spheroid
formation in CD133high/CD44high prostate cancer stem cells.


Introduction: Cancer stem cell (CSCs) theory provides new insight into
the formation of tumors. Characterization of the pathways which regulate
CSCs activity will facilitate the development of targeted therapies.
Isolation of CSCs from multiple tumor types differentiate both in vivo
and in vitro when cultured in serum, yet the factors responsible for
their differentiation have not yet been identified. Current challenge is
the enrichment of CSCs from established cell lines variety of solid
tumors has been developed as three-dimensional (3D) cell culture. 3D
spheroid model is a new technique for propagation of cells in-vitro using
serum free medium and cultured low-adherence conditions and present a
convenient model to investigate differentiating cancer cells. The
objective of this study is to identify CD 133high/ CD44 high prostate
CSCs and compare these profiles with non-sorting cells as bulk
counterparts of the population. These two populations have been continued
to be 3D multicellular spheroids and differentiation has been
investigated with stem cell related genomic characteristics. Since CSCs
are proliferate in a trice in tumor mass, our aim is to reveal the
changes of cellular profile and heterogeneity of proliferated cells in 3D
multicellular tumor spheroids.Material and method: CSCs and non- CSCs
were sorted with FACS and PCR array analysis of cell cycle regulation,
embryonic and mesenchymal cell lineage related markers, TERT and Notch
signaling were performed in both monolayer and spheroids.
Immunohistochemistry of CD117, Notch1, Jagged1, Delta1, Sox2, C-myc,
Oct4, KLF4, CD90 and SSEA1 were determined in groups.Results and
discussion: Most significant gene alteration observed CD 133high/ CD44
high population when in monolayer cells continued as spheroid. In this
group remarkable up regulation was determined in Collagen type 9 alpha1
(COL9A1), Islet1 (ISL1) and Cyclin D2. Jagged1, DLL3 and Notch1 were
respectively up-regulated genes in Notch signaling. According to
immunoreactivity staining density of Jagged1, Sox2, Oct4 and Klf-4
increased significantly in sorting spheroids when compared non-sorting
monolayer cells.Conclusion: Isolated CSCs in human tumors could be
altered their cellular characterization in the course of time and display
a differentiation with maintaining their former surface antigens at a
level of transcription or translation. In this study we have indicated
this differentiation theory by using in-vitro 3D- spheroid model. It was
observed that the cells alter their gene expression profiles during this
process. Our hypothesis was supported by the observation that most
significant gene alteration was in CD 133high/ CD44 high population when
monolayer cells were allowed to grow as spheroid. In fact, this
differentiation could be a principal mechanism which is responsible from
malign process and tumor growth.

