Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exomic landscape of somatic variation in uterine leiomyomas.


Uterine leiomyomas, or fibroids, are benign tumors for which the lifetime
risk in women by the age of 50 has been estimated to be nearly 70%.
Fibroids arise from smooth muscle cells of the myometrium. Regardless of
their benign nature, leiomyomas can cause difficult symptoms, such as
excessive bleeding, abdominal pain, pregnancy complications, and
infertility. They are also the most common cause for hysterectomy.
Considering the prevalence of these lesions, relatively little is known
about the mechanisms of their growth and tumorigenesis. We have
previously showed by exome sequencing that mediator complex subunit 12
(MED12) exon 2 is mutated in approximately 70% of sporadic uterine
leiomyomas. The aim of this study is to examine molecular genetic
background of MED12 mutation positive lesions, as well as to identify
additional recurrent somatic variants from those fibroids that do not
harbor MED12 mutations and cannot be explained for example by mutations
in fumarase hydratase (FH) which has already previously been associated
with the predisposition to uterine leiomyomas. We performed whole exome
sequencing of 28 uterine leiomyomas and their corresponding myometrium
pairs. Exome sequencing data of the uterine leiomyomas was filtered
against data from the respective normal tissue, the 1000Genomes Project
(93 FIN samples, Phase 1 release v2), rs-coded SNPs taken from the
Database of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (dbSNP, Build 132), and 70
in-house control exomes to exclude germ line variation from the analysis.
Both exomic regions and sequences within two base pairs of the
exon-intron boundaries were analyzed. Synonymous coding and intronic
variants were not included to the study. All potentially significant
mutations and their somatic status were validated by Sanger sequencing.
Based on our results, uterine leiomyomas harbor less mutations than
malignant tumors. We have not identified mutations in genes, such as TP53
or PTEN, which are associated with tumor malignancy. In addition to
MED12, there are no other recurrent point mutations or small
insertion-deletion type of mutations in sporadic uterine leiomyomas. Our
results emphasize the major role of MED12 in tumorigenesis of these
lesions.

