Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-angiogeneic glycotherapy tunicamycin induces ER stress
mediated unfolded protein response in beast cancer cells.


Tumor growth is angiogenesis dependent. Most of the current therapeutics
targets either the tumor cells or the microvasculature but not
necessarily the both. As a consequence, the patients enjoy disease free
survival only for a limited period of time, irrespective of a good
initial prognosis and pathological response rates. Aberrant glycosylation
has been observed in experimental and human tumors and we have
hypothesized that a good asparagine-linked (N-linked) protein
glycosylation inhibitor could target both endothelial cells and tumor
cells and eliminate the tumor progression. Our objective is therefore to
test the efficacy of such an inhibitor, tunicamycin. The results support
that tunicamycin inhibits angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo, and the
breast tumor microvasculature. There is cell cycle arrest followed by
apoptosis due to ER (endoplasmic reticulum)stress-mediated unfolded
protein response (upr). To evaluate the intracellular protein status
under upr, the proteome was analyzed by Raman spectroscopy focusing on
bands at 1672, 1684 and 1694 cm1, which are characteristics of proteins
and originate from C=O stretching vibrations of mono-substituted amides.
In tunicamycin-treated cells these bands decreased in area. Thus, in the
presence of tunicamycin, newly synthesized protein chains fail to arrange
properly into their final secondary and/or tertiary structures, and the
random coils they form had undergone further degradation. Tunicamycin
treatment (i) prevents the colony formation, and (ii) fails to reverse
the inhibition of angiogenesis by VEGF165. VEGF-specific protein tyrosine
phosphorylation in capillary endothelial cells is also inhibited. When
tested, tunicamycin indiscriminately inhibited the progression of a
double negative (MDA-MB-435) and a triple negative (MDA-MB-231) breast
cancer by 55-65% in three weeks in athymic nude mice, Balb/c(nu/nu). High
GRP-78/Bip expression evidenced ER stress in tumor tissue. To evaluate
the specificity and efficacy of tunicamycin on tumor cells, five
different breast cancer cell lines with distinct genotypic and phenotypic
characteristics were analyzed. Cellular proliferation of MDA-MB-231,
MDA-MB-468, BT-20, BT-474 and ZR-731 cells is inhibited almost to the
same extent and the cells also failed to colonize. High protein and mRNA
levels for GRP-78/Bip in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells indicate ER
stress. Down regulation of cyclin D1 expression indicates cell cycle
impairment irrespective of high F2F1, Bcl-2 and phospho-p53 expression
with no change in CDK4. Total Rb is increased in tunicamycin treated
cells but pRb is down-regulated. Cell death due to apoptosis was
evidenced and concluded that upr signaling causes a translational
attenuation in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Supported in part by
grants from Susan G. Komen for the Cure BCTR0600582 (DKB) and NIH/NIMHD
8G12MD007583 (KB).

