Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 5-flanking sequences of the NANOG pseudogene 8 (NANOGP8) plays
roles in sphere formation, clonogenicity, and tumor growth in mice
xenograft model of prostate cancer cells.


The expression of NANOGP8 has been documented in several cancers and
related to cell proliferation and tumor development. However, the
regulatory pathways that allow for NANOGP8 rather than NANOG expression
have not been investigated. In this study, we hypothesized that NANOGP8
transcription in prostate cancer cells could be controlled by its
5-flanking sequences and that cells with activation of these sequences
should exhibit NANOGP8 function in cell growth and tumor development.We
first examined whether or not the 5-flanking sequences of NANOGP8 on
Chromosome 15 have a promoter-like function. We cloned a 5kb fragment of
the 5-flanking region of NANOGP8 from a PAC clone containing the whole
NANOGP8 gene and inserted the fragment into the pEGFP vector so as to
replace the CMV promoter. The EGFP expression plasmid driven by the
5-flanking sequence was then transfected into DU145 cells. After
selection with G418, stable cell lines were established. The EGFP
positive cells were separated from EGFP negative cells by flow cytometry,
and the expression of NANOG was analyzed with real-time RT-PCR in the two
populations. The RNA expression of NANOG in EGFP positive cells was 3.5
fold higher than in EGFP negative cells. The colony formation in the EGFP
positive DU145 subset was 24% compared to 13.4% in the EGFP negative
subset. Similarly, sphere formation in the EGFP positive DU145 subset was
40% higher than that in the EGFP negative subset. Interestingly, in the
spheres formed from the EGFP negative subset, about 50% became EGFP
positive. Of the total spheres formed from both subsets, 82% were EGFP
positive and only 18% spheres were EGFP negative. These results suggest
that sphere culture condition activated the 5-flanking region of NANOGP8,
in turn promoted sphere formation. To examine the role of activating
5-flanking sequence of NANOGP8 in tumor initiation and development,
stably transfected DU145 cells were injected subcutaneously on the flank
of SCID/beige male mice at 200 cells /mouse. With EGFP positive cells, a
tumor was found in all 14 mice (100%) after 15 weeks; while with EGFP
negative cells, a tumor was found in 11 of 14 mice (78%). Analyses of
tumor volume and weight showed that tumor volume and weight with EGFP
positive cells was 5.3 and 7.5 fold higher than with EGFP negative cells,
respectively. Further evaluation of EGFP expression in collected
xenograph tumor revealed that all analyzed tumor samples from mice
injected with EGFP negative cells became EGFP positive. In conclusion,
the activation of 5-flanking sequence of NANOGP8 could play a role in the
regulation of the stem-like properties of cancer stem cells and prostate
tumor initiation and development. The mechanisms of the activation of
5-flanking sequence of NANOGP8 is under investigation but could provide
potential therapeutic targets.

