Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 6-oxo-cholestan-3,5-diol (OCDO) is a metabolite produced in tumors
by cholesterol epoxide hydrolase activity and a tumor promoter: OCDO
inhibition contributes to the anti-tumor activity of tamoxifen and
dendrogenin A.


Cholesterol Epoxide Hydrolase (ChEH) selectively catalyses the hydrolysis
of 5,6-epoxy-cholesterol (5,6-EC) and 5,6-epoxy-cholesterol (5,6-EC) into
cholestane-3,5,6-triol (CT). We recently reported that the ChEH activity
is carried out by the anti-estrogen binding site (AEBS), formed by
3-hydroxysterol-7-reductase (DHCR7) and 3-hydroxysterol-8-7 isomerase
(D8D7I) (de Medina et al, PNAS, 2010). In the early 70s, 5,6-ECs were
reported to be carcinogenic and mutagenic, but these data were then
refuted, and recently we confirmed that 5,6-ECs are stable and
non-alkylating substances. Interestingly, it was reported that CT was
genotoxic under strong oxidative stress conditions in yeast. This
suggested to us that the inhibition of ChEH may protect cells against
cytotoxic insults and may contribute to the anti-proliferative and
chemopreventive properties of AEBS/ChEH inhibitors such as tamoxifen
(Tam), raloxifene or docosahexaenoic acid that accumulated 5,6-ECs at
therapeutic doses. These different data suggested a potential role of
ChEH activation in cancer. We have explored this hypothesis in the
present study. We show here that the activity of ChEH generated an
unexpected metabolite from CT in a large panel of cancer cells. By using
RP-HPLC and GC-MS, we determined this unknown metabolite to be the
oxysterol: 6-oxo-cholestan-3,5-diol OCDO). We showed that OCDO stimulated
the growth and invasiveness of different tumor cell lines (1.4-fold and
6-fold respectively for MCF7 cells) and the growth and invasiveness of
thyroid tumors (TT) or breast cancers (TS/A, MCF7) grafted into mice.
Immunohistology of OCDO-treated tumors showed there was an increase in
the expression of the proliferation marker Ki67 compared with control
tumors. Interestingly, OCDO formation in tumor cells and tumors grafted
into mice was strongly inhibited by ChEH inhibitors known to have
anti-tumor activity such as Tam, PBPE or Dendrogenin A (DDA), a steroidal
alkaloid discovered in our laboratory. The anti-tumor activity of Tam or
DDA against breast tumors implanted into mice was completely reversed by
co-treatment with OCDO, indicating that inhibition ofChEH and OCDO
production contribute to the anti-tumor mechanism of action of these
molecules.In conclusion, the present study identifies OCDO as being an
oxidative metabolite of CT with an uncharacterized role of tumor
promoter. The inhibition of OCDO production contributes to the anti-tumor
activity of Tam and Dendrogenin A. Thus, the use of these ChEH inhibitors
appears as a relevant strategy to block the production of this tumor
promoter that may be produced during oxidative stress conditions and
inflammation driven carcinogenesis.

