Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of pancreatic cancer cell growth by NISC-6 through
activation of Par-4 and death receptor 5.


Pancreatic cancer is one of the deadliest cancers, with a median survival
of 6 months and a 5 year survival rate of 3-5%. The poor prognosis of
pancreatic cancer is attributable to its tendency for late presentation,
aggressive local invasion, early metastases, and poor response to
chemotherapy. Currently used drugs result in marginal survival advantage
and are associated with multiple adverse events and drug resistance.
Thus, there is a need for novel therapeutic agents and strategies
involving less toxic agents that can sensitize pancreatic cancer cells to
chemotherapy. Through extensive structure-activity relationship studies,
we have recently developed an Akt pathway inhibitor, NISC-6, designed by
incorporating an isoselenocyanate (-N=C=Se) functionality into
naphthalimide structure, rendering it lethal to cancer cells at a dose
that is non-toxic to normal cells. Our hypothesis is that the Akt
inhibitor, NISC-6, in conjunction with Prostate apoptosis response
protein 4 (Par-4), will induce apoptosis in pancreatic tumor cells
through the TRAIL pathway. This is based on the observation that Par-4
causes apoptosis in cancer, but not in normal, cells, often in response
to an apoptotic agent and is often inactivated in cancer cells through
interaction with Akt1. In pancreatic cancer, Par-4 expression is often
reduced through deletion of a chromosome segment containing 12q21, the
location of the PAR-4 gene. Activation of Par-4 through inhibition of Akt
by NISC-6 thus holds promise as a possible strategy for pancreatic cancer
treatment. Our studies have shown NISC-6 to be effective in reducing cell
proliferation in three different pancreatic cancer cell lines e.g.
MiaPaCa-2, Panc-1, and BxPC-3. The treatments of NISC-6 for 48 h reduced
the cell viabilities of pancreatic cancer cells with an IC50 of between
1-2.5 M. In addition, treatment of MiaPaCa-2 cells with NISC-6 for 24 h
showed significant activation of Par-4 and death receptor 5 (DR5). This
activation was associated with the down-regulation of anti-apoptotic
protein Bcl-xL and Survivin. Furthermore, NISC-6 potentiated the
apoptotic effects of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL/APO-2L). Taken together, these results
suggest that NISC-6 may represent a novel therapeutic agent to sensitize
pancreatic cancer cells to TRAIL and chemotherapeutic drugs. Detailed
results of these investigations will be presented.

