Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance to growth inhibition by transforming growth factor-beta
is associated with activation of the PI3K-Akt pathway in
HPV16-immortalized human keratinocytes at late stages of in vitro
progression.


Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-) plays a vital role in embryonic
development, cell proliferation, inflammation and wound repair. The Smad
proteins are the central mediators of TGF- signal transduction. However,
recently several non-Smad pathways (ex., Erk, Jnk, p38 MAPK, PI3K-Akt)
have been determined to play key roles in TGF- signaling. TGF- signaling
is often disrupted in cancer, including cervical cancer. Human
papillomavirus (HPV) is the main etiological agent in cervical cancer.
HPV type 16 (HPV16)-immortalized human keratinocytes (HKc/HPV16) are
initially very sensitive to growth inhibition by TGF-. However, HKc/HPV16
become increasingly resistant to TGF- during in vitro progression, and
are completely resistant to TGF--induced growth inhibition at late-stages
of transformation, when they exhibit a differentiation resistant
phenotype (HKc/DR). Although HKc/DR are completely resistant to the
growth inhibitory effects of TGF-, some Smad signaling remains. A
reporter construct containing tandem repeats of Smad binding elements was
induced by TGF- in HKc/DR at about 50% of the level observed in
HKc/HPV16. Furthermore, TGF- was capable of inducing
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in HKc/DR. To further explore
TGF- signaling in HKc/HPV16 and HKc/DR, we used phospho specific antibody
microarrays from Full Moon BioSystems. These arrays feature phospho and
non-phospho pairs of specific antibodies pertinent to the TGF- pathway.
Protein extracts from HKc/HPV16 and HKc/DR untreated or treated for 90
min with 40 pM TGF- were compared on the antibody microarrays. Activation
of the Akt pathway by TGF- was observed in HKc/DR but not in HKc/HPV16.
Similarly, PI3K and mTOR showed activation by TGF- in HKc/DR but not
HKc/HPV16. We conclude that TGF- signals primarily through Smad-dependent
pathways to inhibit cell proliferation in HKc/HPV16, but that
non-canonical (non-smad) signaling through the PI3K-Akt-mTOR axis
predominates in HKc/DR.

