Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A LIM protein ajuba suppresses malignant mesothelioma cell
proliferation via Hippo signaling cascade.


Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is a highly aggressive neoplasm which is
associated with asbestos exposure and around 50% of MM tumors have a
mutation of the NF2 tumor suppressor gene. NF2 encodes merlin, a member
of the ezrin/radixin/moesin protein family, and merlin is an upstream
regulator of the Hippo signaling cascade. Activation of the Hippo pathway
induces the activation of serine/threonine kinases LATS1/2, which
phosphorylate and inactivate a transcriptional coactivator, YAP. The
Hippo pathway activation negatively regulates tissue growth and its
inactivation is involved in carcinogenesis.We previously found that,
besides NF2 mutation, a subset of MM tumors harbor LATS2 mutation or YAP
oncogene amplification. However, there are yet other MM cases that don't
have any of these gene mutations, leading us to hypothesize that other
components of this pathway might be altered. Recently, the LIM protein
Jub in Droshophila was shown to activate Yoki (ortholog of human YAP)
through suppression of the Hippo pathway. To determine whether the human
ortholog of Jub, Ajuba, is involved in the Hippo signaling downregulation
in MM, we analyzed 20 MM cell lines for the alteration of Ajuba.We found
that the expression of Ajuba was significantly downregulated in 6 of 20
MM cell lines compared to an immortalized normal mesothelial cell line,
Met-5A. Interestingly, three of the 6 cell lines with low Ajuba
expression showed YAP activation, whereas Met-5A cells showed high Ajuba
expression and YAP inactivation, both of which suggested that Ajuba might
act as a tumor suppressor instead of oncogenic protein in mesothelial
cells. We infected Ajuba-expressing lentivirus into these MM cell lines
and found that exogenous Ajuba induced YAP phosphorylation and inhibited
MM cell proliferation. Since the CCND1 and connective tissue growth
factor (CTGF) genes are well-known transcriptional targets of YAP, we
conducted a dual-luciferase reporter assay using these promoter regions
to see if Ajuba affects their transcriptional activities. The
dual-luciferase assay demonstrated that Ajuba suppressed the promoter
activity of these genes and that the suppression of them was attenuated
by LATS2 knockdown. These results indicated that Ajuba negatively
regulates YAP through activation of LATS2. Our results suggest that the
inactivation of Ajuba is one of the mechanisms for constitutive
activation of YAP, which results in deregulation of MM cell proliferation.

