Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breaking metastatic dormancy during surgical resection of a
primary tumor and implications for treatment strategies.


At the time of a cancer diagnosis, most patients have localized tumors.
Despite elaborate staging schemas for each cancer type in an attempt to
stratify patients, the vast majority of patients that die will do so from
metastatic disease. We hypothesized that surgery augments the already
ongoing activation and mobilization of bone marrow-derived progenitor
cells that are critical to colonizing tumor cells at distant sites. These
bone marrow-derived cells, by inducing a local inflamed tumor
microenvironment, provide survival signals to these seeding tumor cells.
Our data show increased metastatic burden in the lung after surgical
resection of the primary tumor using two murine cancer models, B16
melanoma and E0771 breast carcinoma. In these models, we also show a
surge in hematopoietic and endothelial progenitor cells in the hours and
days immediately following resection of the primary tumor, which is not
similarly observed in control mice, where surgery was performed in the
absence of the primary tumor. We also confirmed that a factor specific to
the plasma of the tumor-bearing mice is responsible for this mobilization
by using in vitro migration assays, whereby plasma from tumor-bearing
mice and surgically resected mice induced an increased migration of
lineage negative bone marrow cells compared to the plasma of wild type
mice. We confirmed increased levels of MCP-1 and MCSF, both known to
mobilize progenitor cells, in the plasma of mice with surgical resection.
Additionally, targeting these bone marrow derived hematopoietic and
endothelial progenitor cells with Pazopanib prevents the surge in bone
marrow-derived cells into the circulation, abolishes the enhanced
metastatic spread in mice undergoing surgical resection of the primary
tumor, and provides a significant prolongation of survival. Finally, we
correlated these data to a cohort of breast cancer patients where
circulating levels of progenitor cells were analyzed at time points
before and after surgery, which confirmed the mobilization of progenitor
cells with surgery. Together, these results provide evidence for the
increased risk of metastatic spread after surgical resection of the
primary tumor and suggest that blocking progenitor cell mobilization by
adjuvant treatment during or immediately following surgery, the incidence
of metastatic recurrence may be reduced.

