Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of chemotherapy on tumor hypoxia measured with 18-F-FAZA
PET/CT and compared to FDG-PET/CT in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC).


IntroductionHypoxia in tumors is associated with resistance to
chemotherapy. 18-F-FAZA is a PET tracer developed to characterize
intratumoral hypoxic regions. Tumor metabolism is measured with 18-F-FDG
PET. Goal of this study is to investigate hypoxic changes in relation to
metabolic alterations in patients with advanced NSCLC during
chemotherapy.MethodsPET-CT with 18-F-FDG and 18-F-FAZA tracers were used
prior to the first cycle and after the second cycle of chemotherapy.
Volumes of interest were manually drawn on visual inspection. For FAZA,
mean and maximum (max) tumor to background (FAZAT/B) ratios, and for FDG,
SUVmax and SUVmean, were calculated. Measurements were corrected for
partial volume using a NEMA image quality phantom. The fractional hypoxic
volume, defined as the tumor fraction with a T/B ratio above 1.2 was
calculated. The hypoxic and metabolic distribution within the primary
tumor was studied with skewness and kurtosis. Differences between
baseline and second measurement were calculated with the Wilcoxon signed
rank test.ResultsFDG and FAZA scans were performed in 9 patients. Median
FAZAT/Bmax was 2.8 (1.9-4.7) at baseline and 3.3 (1.3-5.5) and after 2
cycles, respectively, while SUVmax was 14.8 (5.8-32.5) at baseline and
14.6 (1.9-24.9) after 2 cycles. Fractional hypoxic volume was 78%
(17-100%) at baseline and 74% (0-100%) after 2 cycles of therapy. No
significant changes in hypoxia or metabolism were observed during
chemotherapy. Hypoxic and metabolic heterogeneity within the primary
tumor remained unchanged. At baseline skewness was different between FDG
and FAZA (p=0.02). After 2 cycles this difference did not persist
(p=0.31). There was no difference at baseline or after 2 cycles in
kurtosis between FDG and FAZA. Tumor response measured with CT was 2 PR,
5 SD and 2 PD.ConclusionIn this exploratory study the fractional hypoxic
volume and the heterogeneity of hypoxic and metabolic areas remained
unchanged during chemotherapy. The intratumoral difference in FAZA and
FDG distribution changed from baseline to that after 2 cycles of
chemotherapy.

