Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High fat diet induces the expression of IL-6 and MCP1 exclusively
in the rostral portion of the parametrial fat pads in SKH-1 mice.


Sunlight-induced non-melanoma skin cancer is a major cancer in the United
States. How obesity contributes to skin cancer, and the molecular changes
induced by obesity that promote skin cancer development remain poorly
understood. Our previous study showed that surgical removal of the
parametrial fat pads from mice fed a high-fat diet inhibited UVB-induced
skin carcinogenesis, but this was not observed in mice fed a low-fat chow
diet (PNAS. 109: 9065-9070, 2012). These results indicate that dietary
high fat caused the parametrial fat pads to secrete high levels of
proinflammatory cytokines that may promote UVB-induced skin
carcinogenesis.Female SKH-1 mice were fed a 60% kcal high fat diet for 6
months, and the mice were sacrificed at various time intervals. The
parametrial fat pads were removed and dissected into rostral (the loose
end proximal to the caudal zone) and caudal portion (attached to the
uterus). Half of the fat were fixed in formalin for histopathology, and
other half of the fat was homogenized, place into a hanging insert of a
dual-chamber and incubated in minimal essential medium for 4 hours at
370C. Proteins that were released from the fat passed through the 0.4 m
pore in the insert to provide fat cell-derived medium that was collected
and used for adipokine analysis by an antibody array.Our results showed
that among the 38 adipokines measured, treatment of mice with a 60% kcal
high fat diet time-dependently increased the level of IL-6 (0.5, 1.0,
10.3 and 27.8 fold) and MCP1 (0, 0, 1.5 and 21.2 fold) at 0.5, 1.5, 3 or
6 months of treatment, respectively. Several other adipokines (ICAM1,
IGFBP6, Leptin, SerpinE1 and TIMP1) were also increased. Interestingly,
the high fat diet-induced the expression of IL-6 and MCP1 almost
exclusively in the rostral, but not in the caudal portion of the
parametrial fat pads. IL-6 and MCP1 were not detected in control mice fed
a low fat chow diet. In addition, the rostral fat from the mice fed the
high fat diet had an increased number of dead adipocytes, macrophages,
apoptotic cells, and mast cells when compared to the caudal fat.Surgical
removal of the whole parametrial fat pads from mice fed the high fat diet
resulted in a marked decrease in the levels of IL-6 and MCP1 in the
compensatory fat that returned 6 months after the surgery when compared
to that of the sham-operated control. In a separate study, we found that
mice fed a 40% kcal high fat diet rich in omega-6 fatty acids for 3
months had a significant increase in IL-6 protein expression in the
rostral portion of the parametrial fat pads compared to mice fed the same
amount of calories from a high fat diet rich in omega-3 fatty acids.Our
results suggest that the high fat diet-induced increases of IL-6 and MCP1
protein expression mainly in the rostral portion of the parametrial fat
pads may help explain why removal of the parametrial fat pads from mice
fed a high fat diet resulted in a decrease in UVB-induced skin
carcinogenesis.

