Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutations in Rad51C in colon tumors.


Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare inherited chromosomal instability genetic
disorder characterized by congenital musculoskeletal abnormalities, bone
marrow failure and cancer susceptibility. At the genetic level,
monoubiquitination of FANCD2 and I by an FA core complex (FANCA, B, C, E,
F, G M and L) is impaired. Monoubiquitinated FANCD2 and I co-localize
with DNA damage response proteins such as Rad51C (FANCO) to mediate
homologous recombination (HR) repair. Defects in Rad51C have been
documented as the cause of FA complementation group O (FANCO) disorder.In
cells the effects include chromosomal instability, hypersensitivity to
DNA damaging agents and defective DNA damage repair. Germline mutations
for Rad51C gene in patients have been reported in breast and ovarian
cancers. Although germline mutations for Rad51C gene are known to cause
an FA like phenotype, somatic mutations for Rad51C in colon or other
tumors have not been previously described.We evaluated 40 formalin fixed
paraffin embedded (FFPE) colorectal adenocarcinomas by an
immunofluorescence based triple staining method (FATSI) that we have
developed to assess for potential somatic functional deficiency of the FA
pathway. Thirteen of the 40 (33%) FFPE samples had been noted to lack
FANCD2 foci formation. Among the 40 tumors, we analyzed 31 available
frozen tumors that included all 13 foci negative tumors and matching
non-tumor tissues for mutations in Rad51C coding region. The tumor and
non-tumor tissue samples were procured following an IRB protocol of the
Ohio State University. RNA and DNA were isolated from the fresh frozen
tissue samples with TRIzol reagent. Direct sequencing of PCR amplicons
was performed.Two of the 31 tumor DNA samples contained point mutation at
the codon 319 (from CGA to TGA, a stop codon) which technically results
in a truncated FANCO protein. The Rad51C protein domain shows amino acid
125 to132 (exon 2 to 5) is important for exerting single stranded DNA
dependent ATPase activity, a functional nuclear localization signal
located from aa 366 to 370 (exon-9). The mutation substitutes arginine at
codon 319 to a premature stop codon terminating the protein abruptly,
without producing a full length Rad51C protein. Thus the altered protein
is unable to localize in the nucleus. Of interest, both tumors with
RAD51C mutations lacked formation of FANCD2 foci by FATSI staining. In
both cases, the mutation was absent from the matched non-tumor tissues,
suggesting a somatic mutation. The underlining molecular alterations that
cause deficiency in FANCD2 foci formation in other 11 foci negative
tumors are still under investigation currently.Given that the FA pathway
plays essential role in response to DNA interstrand cross-link damage
agent, and that cancers with defective FA pathway are expected to be more
sensitive to cross-link based therapy, our findings have the potential
significance of identifying a subpopulation among colorectal cancer
patients specially susceptible to these type of treatments.

