Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockdown of Annexin A2 by liposomal formulation of Annexin A2
small hairpin RNA induces apoptosis and inhibits angiogenesis in lung
cancer stem cells.


Recent studies support the existence of small populations of pluripotent
stem-like cancer cells capable of self-renewal. These cancer stem cells
(CSCs) are attributed to the resistance phenotype occurring in many
tumors such as invasion and metastasis. Annexin A2 (Anxa2) overexpression
is associated with invasion, metastasis and drug resistance in many
cancers. We investigated the effect of Anxa2 knockdown by a liposomal
(nanosome) formulation of Anxa2 shRNA (shAnxa2) on growth and metastasis
in H1650 CSCs. H1650 CSCs were maintained on basement membrane-coated
supports in DMEM:F12 media enriched with growth factors. Nanosomes were
prepared by solvent evaporation and bath sonication. H1650 CSCs were
transfected with lipoplexes of shAnxa2 and varying amounts of nanosome in
serum-free media. After 4 hrs of incubation, the medium was replaced with
regular media and knockdown of Anxa2 analyzed after 48 hrs by Western
blot. Inhibition of H1650 CSC sphere formation over 7 days was
investigated in lipidure plates following treatment with lipoplexes for 4
hrs. CSCs were assessed for induction of apoptosis after treatment with
lipoplexes (4 hrs) by acridine orange-ethidium bromide staining. The
effect of Anxa2 lipoplexes on proliferation, migration and capillary-like
tube formation was investigated in human primary pulmonary artery
endothelial cells (HPAEC). The effect of Anxa2 lipoplexes on the
expression of Anxa2, EGFR, VEGF, and NFk was evaluated by Western blot.
Efficient loading of shAnxa2 in nanosomes was achieved with high
transfection efficiency compared to lipofectamine. Anxa2 shRNA lipoplex
was cytotoxic to H1650 CSC spheroids, inhibiting spheroid growth by
30-60% between day 3 and 7. Early and late apoptosis induction was
observed after treatment with shAnxa2 with a 2-fold increase of cells
undergoing apoptosis compared to shAnxa2-lipofectamine 2000 complex.
Anxa2 knockdown (90%) was observed in H1650 CSCs parallel to decreases in
EGFR, VEGF, and NFk expression as shown by Western blot. High loading and
enhanced transfection of shAnxa2 was achieved with the nanosome
formulation. Anxa2 knockdown was achieved in parallel with inhibition of
H1650 CSC spheroid growth, angiogenesis and induction of apoptosis. These
results altogether support evidence that Anxa2 could be a therapeutic
target for treatment of non-small cell lung cancer and that nanosome
formulation enhances delivery of shAnxa2 as an anticancer agent.

