Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel inhibitors of nicotinamide phosphoribosyl transferase
(NAMPT).


Nicotinamide phosphoribosyl transferase (NAMPT) is the enzyme that
catalyzes the rate limiting step in the salvage pathway of Nicotinamide
Adenine Dinucleotide (NAD) biosynthesis. NAMPT is reported to be
overexpressed in a number of cancer and inflammatory indications. Because
of the requirement of NAD as a co-factor or substrate for a number of key
biochemical pathways including those catalyzed by PARP1, Sirtuins and
ADP-ribosyl cyclase, inhibition of NAMPT has been shown to result in
anti-tumor efficacy in preclinical models. Two NAMPT Inhibitors
FK866/APO866 and GMX1778 are currently in clinical trials for oncology
indications. In the presence of these clinical agents, cultured cell
lines show development of resistance due to mutations underscoring the
potential need for inhibitors from distinct chemical series.Here, we
report a structure-guided drug design based approach for identification
of lead compounds from two chemical series selectively targeting NAMPT.
Determination of co-crystal structures with several de novo designed hits
greatly aided in the identification of lead compounds that exhibited
potent inhibition of NAMPT against both wild type and resistance mutants
(G217R and H191R) Lead compounds were highly active in inhibiting
proliferation that correlated well with cellular NAD depletion in several
cancer cell lines. Normal cells and selected cancer cell lines have an
NAMPT independent salvage pathway for biosynthesis of NAD, which is
dependent on nicotinic acid phosphoribosyltransferase (NAPRT) and
Nicotinic acid (NA). The anti-proliferative activities were fully rescued
in NAPRT- proficient cell lines with the addition of NA, confirming the
mechanism of action through specific NAD depletion. Lead compounds from
both series exhibited excellent drug-like properties including
solubility, metabolic stability and permeability, and desired exposure in
pharmacokinetic studies. Anti-tumor activities of these compounds
including NA rescue in NAPRT-proficient tumor models are currently being
evaluated in preclinical models.

