Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-218 suppresses invasion and migration via inhibition of ZEB2
and N-Cadherin in colon cancer.


The great majority of cancer deaths are due to metastasis. A hallmark of
cancer metastasis is the process of epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT), in which cells alter their gene expression program resulting in
loss of their epithelial characteristics and gain of typical mesenchymal
properties. Recently, microRNAs have been shown to play key roles in the
dynamic process of EMT, orchestrating a coordinated multi-target
repression of genes and, together with master transcription factors, act
in regulatory networks to alter cell function. We used a miRNA-microarray
platform to identify differentially expressed microRNA genes in primary
tumor, distant metastatic and corresponding normal samples in a cohort of
resected patient tissues. From our list of differentially regulated
microRNAs we focused on miR-218 as so far very little information has
been accumulated regarding its function in cancer. In our microarray
analysis, miR-218 was significantly downregulated in tumor/metastatic
tissue compared to normal colon tissue. We validated miR-218 expression
in an additional series of 42 colorectal cancer patient tissues, where we
found a significant downregulation of miR-218 in tumor as compared to the
corresponding normal tissues in over 80% of cases. Furthermore, ectopic
expression of miR-218 significantly reduced in vitro invasion and
migration of invasive colorectal cancer cell lines and upregulated the
key epithelial marker E-cadherin, while silencing of miR-218 lead to
enhanced migration and invasion. In addition, we identified two novel
miR-218 target genes that are associated with EMT including ZEB2, a
zinc-finger transcription factor, and N-Cadherin, using reporter gene,
RT-PCR and Western blot analysis. In our present study, we show that
miR-218 is a direct suppressor of EMT by its ability to downregulate ZEB2
and N-Cadherin expression and represents an additional molecule
contributing to the complexity of the EMT regulatory network.

