Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNase-L modulates transcriptional and post-transcriptional
responses to mitogenic stimuli through serum response factor and
tristetraprolin.


RNase-L is an endoribonuclease that functions in a range of important
physiologic activities including the innate immune response and control
of cell proliferation and is dysregulated in pathologic conditions
including cancer. RNase-L is tightly regulated and requires the binding
of 2,5-linked oligoadenylates (2-5A: px5A(2p5A)n; x=1-2;n>2) to induce
oligomerization and enzymatic activity. Activated RNase-L cleaves
single-stranded regions of cellular and pathogen RNAs, and distinct
profiles of RNA are targeted by RNase-L to mediate its biologic functions
in different cellular contexts. Therefore an understanding of the
mechanism(s) by which specific RNAs are targeted for RNase-L cleavage is
essential to modulate its substrate selection and biologic activity for
therapeutic applications. Towards this goal, we identified the RNA
binding protein tristetraprolin (TTP) as a novel RNase-L interacting
partner. TTP binds to A-U-rich elements (AREs) in the 3-untranslated
region (3UTR) of target mRNAs, including its own mRNA, to promote their
degradation. We hypothesize that TTP functions to direct RNase-L cleavage
of a subset of ARE mRNAs. Consistent with this prediction, RNase-L
interacted with TTP mRNA, and decreased steady-state levels and increased
half-life of TTP mRNA in RNase-L-/- fibroblasts. In addition to this
direct effect on basal TTP mRNA stability, RNase-L inhibited the
transcriptional induction of TTP primary transcripts following serum
stimulation. In this context, we determined that RNase-L targeted the
mRNA encoding serum response factor (SRF), a transcription factor that
induces the expression of proliferation and tumorigenesis-associated
genes. The TTP promoter contains SRF binding sites suggesting that the
RNase-L-mediated downregulation of SRF indirectly reduced TTP
transcription; experimental validation of this regulation is in progress.
Together these data support a model in which following mitogen
stimulation, RNase-L constrains the transcriptional induction of
proliferation-associated genes via its regulation of SRF and interacts
with TTP to post-transcriptionally downregulate an overlapping set of
mRNAs. The RNase-L-dependent regulation of TTP, which itself functions to
limit the mitogenic response, suggests that RNase-L contributes to
proliferative homeostasis through the regulation of both positive and
negative effectors. These findings have implications for the therapeutic
targeting of RNase-L-mediated cleavage in regenerative repair and
tumorigenesis.

