Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of HIF-1 and Notch pathway in radio-resistance of non
small lung cancer cell lines.


Background: Notch pathway regulates cell-fate determination in
multi-cellular organisms and aberrant activation of Notch pathway has
been reported in tumorigenesis of many cancers. We previously reported
that Notch3 and its downstream effector, HEY1, were upregulated by
radiation in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines. Furthermore,
we demonstrated that g-secretase-inhibitor (GSI), when combined with
radiation therapy significantly suppressed the growth of lung cancer
cells compared to either GSI or radiation alone by a potential mechanism
that GSI suppressed radiation-induced Notch activation and its resultant
radio-resistance. Since the expression of Notch was reported to be
activated via HIF under hypoxia, we, in this study, hypothesized that HIF
would be involved in radiation-induced Notch activation in NSCLC and thus
HIF inhibitor (YC-1) would have an anti-tumor effect when combined with
radiation therapy as is the case with GSI.Materials and Methods: Two
Notch-expressing lung cancer cell lines (H460 and H1793) were used. We
first examined, by Western Blotting (WB) and real time RT-PCR, the
changes in expressions of HIF-1 and Notch family after treatment by
radiation under hypoxia. We then repeated the same experiment while using
SiRNA targeting HIF-1, in an attempt to examine the role of HIF-1 on
Notch pathway and its downstream proteins. Finally, we investigated an
antitumor effect of YC-1, using a MTT proliferation assay and a
clonogenic assay, when combined with radiation treatment.Results: Under
hypoxia, treatment by radiation up-regulated protein expression of HIF-1
at 6 hours and that of Notch3 as well at 24 hours, but not of other Notch
family. As expected, specific suppression of HIF-1 by siRNA
down-regulated Notch3 activation associated with radiation; however, did
not affect other Notch family and its downstream effectors, including
HES1. An anti-tumor effect of YC-1 was evident only when radiation
treatment was concurrently applied, but not when sequentially applied, in
the growth of lung cancer cells and also colony formation.Conclusions:
Radiation-induced up-regulations of HIF-1 and Notch pathway may be
therapeutic targets for more effective radiation therapy in NSCLC.

