Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acetylation of intracellular protein induces apoptotic cell death
in Aspirin-treated human breast cancer cells.


Acetylation is one of the dynamic post-translational modification of
lysine residues on protein determining the structure, function and
intracellular localization that plays an important role in the signal
transduction pathways related to diverse cell functions - proliferation,
cell death, and differentiation as well as transcriptional regulation.
Recently, it has been reported that acetylating agents including chemical
histone deacetylase inhibitors and plant polyphenols lead to the
increased acetylation of histone and non-histone proteins, which induces
to rapid cancer cell death. In this present study, we are focused on
molecular mechanism of cell death in two Aspirin-treated human breast
cancer cells, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231. Trichostatin A (TSA) treatment was
combined for maintaining acetylation of intracellular proteins at 0.1 M
concentration, which was not caused cell death itself. It was observed
that Aspirin/TSA treatment caused the significant inhibition of cell
growth in a dose- and time-dependent manner in both MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7
cells. The induced cell death in MDA-MB-231 by Aspirin/TSA treatment was
associated with several specific features of apoptosis, which were proved
by biochemical assays containing DNA fragmentation, Annexin V staining
and cell cycle analysis. On the other hand, the exposure of MCF-7 to
Aspirin/TSA caused necrotic rather than apoptotic mechanism judged by DNA
fragmentation assay. These results suggest that different cell death
pathway in two breast cancer cell lines is implicated in acetylated
protein mediated signals. Previous reports suggest sporadic tumor cell
necrosis is associated with extracellular release of cellular protein
such as the high mobility group box 1 and may activate innate immune
system. Interestingly, we confirmed secretory protein in cell-culture
supernatant by immunoprecipitation using anti-acetyllysin antibody.
Secretion of the acetylated protein was elevated dose- and time-
dependent manner after Asprin treatment. Although extracellular role of
the secretory protein in response to acetylation has not been clearly
identified yet, this acetylated protein may be involved in initiation of
apoptotic cell death signals and/or activating innate immune response.
Taken together, theses results indicated that acetylated protein plays an
essential role in anti-tumorigenesis in response to acetylating agent
such as Aspirin.Citation Format: Yu Ran Lee, Byeong Hwa Jeon, Sunga Choi.
Acetylation of intracellular protein induces apoptotic cell death in
Aspirin-treated human breast cancer cells. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of
the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2942. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2942

