Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential effects of functionalized and non-functionalized
short multi-wall carbon nanotubes on survival and cell signaling in
pancreatic cancer cells.


Pancreatic cancer is an aggressive type of cancer with poor prognosis and
low five-year survival rate. Because chemotherapeutic and radiation
treatments are not effective, new treatments for this cancer are needed
to improve its prognosis. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) constitute one novel
and important nanomaterial extensively examined for potential biomedical
applications (e.g., drug delivery vehicles and diagnostic agents).
Modification of CNTs with functional groups improves solubility and may
serve as attachment site of other molecules and/or drugs. This study
elucidated the cytotoxicity induced by CNTs and the underlying
mechanisms. We employed MTT assay to determine survival of PANC1 cells
treated with different concentrations of short-multi-wall CNTs (SMWCNTs)
or SMWCNTs-COOH for 24, 48, and 72 hrs. Our results suggested that
functionalization with carboxyl group to SMWCNTs lowers their
cytotoxicity. Therefore we hypothesized that the induced cytotoxicity by
both SMWCNTs and SMWCNTs-COOH is a result of either up-regulation of
apoptotic pathways or down-regulation of cellular
survival/proliferation/differentiation pathways or a combination of both.
We carried out western-blot analysis to examine the effects of CNTs on
ERK, phospho-ERK, AKT, phospho-AKT signal transduction pathways and on
the NF-B pathway. PANC1 cells were treated with 2, 20, and 200 g/ml
SMWCNTs-COOH or SMWCNTs for 48hrs. The expressions of phospho-ERK were
decreased in cells treated with 2 g/ml SMWCNTs-COOH. However, as the
concentration of SMWCNTs-COOH increased from 2 to 200 g/ml, the
phospho-ERK expression was increased: however, the total ERK expression
was unaffected. The NF-B expression in the cells was increased compared
to control group as the concentration of SMWCNTs-COOH increased from 2 to
200 g/ml. Our study demonstrates that both SMWCNTs and SMWCNTs-COOH
induced cytotoxicity in pancreatic cancer cells and functionalization
with carboxyl group lowered their cytotoxicity. One mechanism underlying
their cytotoxicity may be the altered regulation of cellular
survival/proliferation pathways such as ERK. Thus, our results may have
implications in cytotoxicity of SMWCNTs in pancreatic cells and in
designing therapies for pancreatic cancer.

