Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Strategies for molecularly enhanced chemotherapy in endometrial
tumors with mutant p53 .


Serous uterine endometrial carcinomas are aggressive type II cancers with
a poor outcome and for which new treatment strategies are urgently
needed, in particular strategies that augment sensitivity to the
established chemotherapy regimen of carboplatin and paclitaxel. The tumor
suppressor gene TP53 is dysregulated in more than 50% of serous tumors.
Distinct p53 mutations have different properties such that some mutations
result in expression of a non-functional protein, whereas others alter
binding to transcriptional targets to yield a gain-of-function (GOF)
oncogenic protein. Our previous work revealed that endometrial cancer
cells with inactivated p53 but not GOF p53 are exquisitely sensitive to
treatments that abrogate the G2/M checkpoint, such as the combination of
an EGFR inhibitor and paclitaxel. Since endometrial cancer cells express
multiple angiogenic tyrosine kinase receptors, we hypothesized that
anti-angiogenic agents also induce G2/M arrest and mitotic catastrophe
when combined with paclitaxel in endometrial cancer cells with
non-functional p53. This study utilizes BIBF1120, an investigational
VEGFR, PDGFR, and FGFR multi-tyrosine kinase inhibitor with established
anti-angiogenic activity in the vascular endothelium. Using endometrial
cancer cells with either non-functional or GOF mutations in p53, we
examined the impact of combining BIBF1120 and paclitaxel on expression of
G2/M checkpoint controllers, cell cycle progression, and cell viability.
. When combined with paclitaxel, BIBF1120 abrogated the G2/M checkpoint
in p53-null endometrial cancer cells but not in cells with p53 GOF
mutation. The mechanism of synergy in the p53-null cells included
activation of G2/M checkpoint regulators Cdc25C, Wee1, Myt1 and Cdc2,
followed by induction of mitotic cell death. Interestingly,
paclitaxel-resistant cells with loss of functional p53 retained
sensitivity to the BIBF1120 and paclitaxel combination treatment. In
endometrial cancer cells with p53 GOF mutation, sensitivity to the
paclitaxel and BIBF1120 combination was restored by the histone
deacetylase inhibitor (HDAC) LBH589 or Wee-1 inhibitor MK-1775. These
findings reveal that, in addition to anti-angiogenic activity, the
angiokinase inhibitor BIBF1120 restores sensitivity to paclitaxel and
induces mitotic cell death by targeting multiple growth factor receptors
expressed in endometrial cancer cells with p53 loss of function mutation.
Our data also identify novel strategies for overriding the G2/M
checkpoint and achieving chemosensitization in cells with the oncogenic
p53 GOF mutation. These preclinical data serve as a critical platform for
the creative design of future clinical trials utilizing molecularly
enhanced chemotherapy.

