Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation profiles at precancerous stage cluster lung
adenocarcinomas into subclusters associated with carcinogenetic pathway,
clinicopathological aggressiveness and patient outcome.


Background: We have reported DNA methylation alterations in non-cancerous
lung tissue obtained from lung cancer patients. These previous data drew
our attention to DNA methylation alterations at precancerous stage of
lung adenocarcinoma (LADC). However, the impact of DNA methylation
alterations at precancerous stage on the characteristics of established
LADCs has been unclear. The purpose of this study is to clarify the
significance of DNA methylation profiles during lung carcinogenesis.
Methods: Using single-CpG resolution Infinium array, genome-wide DNA
methylation analysis was performed in 36 samples of normal lung tissue
(C), 139 samples of non-cancerous lung tissue (N) obtained from patients
with LADCs, and the corresponding 139 samples of tumorous tissue (T) as a
learning cohort. As a validation cohort, the 50 paired samples of N and
the corresponding T were obtained from patients with primary
LADCs.Results: 3,621 probes showed significant differences in DNA
methylation levels between the 36 C and 139 N samples in the learning
cohort, suggesting that N was at precancerous stage with DNA methylation
alterations. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering using DNA methylation
levels of N on 26,447 autosomal probes subclustered 139 patients of the
learning cohort into Cluster A (n=32), B (n=35) and C (n=72). Most of
patients in Cluster A were heavy smokers and frequently showed severe
pleural anthracosis which mainly reflects smoking history. LADCs in
Cluster A were locally invasive tumors which develop in emphysematous
lung tissue associated with inflammation. Most of patients in Cluster B
were non-smokers and LADCs in Cluster B showed less aggressive features.
Most of patients in Cluster C were light smokers and LADCs in Cluster C
showed more frequent lymph node metastasis and higher
Tumor-Node-Metastasis (TNM) stages. The cancer-free and overall survival
rates of patients in Cluster C were significantly lower than those of
Cluster B. We indetified 21, 26 and 35 probes as markers which
characterize Clusters A, B and C, respectively. In the validation cohort,
DNA methylation levels of Cluster A, B and C marker probes were
significantly correlated with pleural anthracosis, never-smoking history,
and lymph node metastases and higher TNM stages, respectively, i.e.
correlation between DNA methylation profiles and each clinicopathological
parameter were validated in the validation cohort.Conclusion: DNA
methylation profiles of Clusters A and C at precancerous stage may be
established by the effects of smoking through or not thorough
inflammation, respectively, whereas those of Cluster B may be associated
with carcinogenesis in non-smokers. DNA methylation profiles at
precancerous stage may underlie distinct pathways of lung carcinogenesis
and determine tumor aggressiveness and patient outcome.

