Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The development of non-covalent non-peptide inhibitors of the
proteasome: exploring a series of proteasome-inhibiting pyrazoles.


The purpose of this study was to develop reversible, non-peptide,
non-covalent inhibitors of the 20S proteasome. The FDA approval of the
peptide-based proteasome inhibitors bortezomib and carfilzomib in 2003
and 2012, respectively, has validated the proteasome as an important
target in the treatment of multiple myeloma. Additionally, these
inhibitors have demonstrated in vitro as well moderate in vivo efficacy
in preclinical models of solid tumors. Despite this, clinical trials
utilizing these drugs for the treatment of solid tumors have shown
disappointing results. Although the reasons for these failures remain
unclear, one possibility is that existing proteasome inhibitors such as
bortezomib and carfilzomib lack the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
properties needed to sufficiently inhibit proteasomes in solid tumors .
With this in mind, it has been postulated that reversible, non-peptide
proteasome inhibitors could be developed with improved properties and
that these inhibitors could serve both as novel tools to advance our
understanding of the proteasome and as potential therapeutic options for
the treatment of solid tumors. In order to identify novel proteasome
inhibitors with non-peptide scaffolds, we conducted an in silico screen
of more than 340,000 structures followed by in vitro assays using
purified proteasomes. This screening effort lead to several novel
non-peptide hits. One hit, a substituted pyrazole derivative, was used as
the lead compound to synthesize a small library of analogs. These
compounds were evaluated for their ability to inhibit proteasome
catalytic activity using specific fluorogenic substrates and a
structure-activity relationship was developed. In vitro cell viability
assays were conducted against three non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
cell lines. The in vivo antitumor activity of the most promising analog
was also determined using a NSCLC xenograph model. Our lead compound was
found to have reversible inhibitory activity against the
chymotrypsin-like subunits of the 20S proteasome and immunoproteasome
with single-micromolar IC50 values. We found that our lead compound was
equipotent against three NSCLC cell lines despite varied sensitivity to
bortezomib and carfilzomib. IC50 values against these cell lines were
less than 10 M. Using an analog with improved potency and promising
drug-like properties, inhibition of in vivo tumor growth was also
observed. Studies designed to validate the proteasome as the target of
this series of compounds are ongoing.

