Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel therapy for esophageal cancer: improved thoracoscopic
esophagectomy and analysis of 361 cases.


Esophageal cancer is one of the common cancers worldwide, and Anyang and
Linzhou areas in Northern China are the highest incidence areas of
esophageal cancer. The prognosis is poor and five-year survival is very
low. Several therapeutic strategies have been used for decades;
esophagectomy is still the best way to treat esophageal cancer. In the
past several years, a novel therapy for esophageal cancer - thoracoscopic
esophagectomy has been developed, which has minimal invasion and less
operative time and complications, compared to conventional esophagectomy,
but there are also some limitations. This report is to introduce a
modified thoracoscopic esophagectomy for esophageal cancer therapy
recently developed in our hospitals. We also analyzed the outcomes of the
361 esophageal cancer patients. The widely used thoracoscopic
esophagectomy needs two holes locating at the eighth and ninth
intercostal, respectively, for observation and operation simultaneously.
In our procedure, first, we put patient at prone position, we cut 4
holes, one 1-cm hole for observation is located at the 8th or 7th
intercostal of right chest axillary line, one 2-cm hole for operation is
located at the 9th or 8th intercostals of the subscapularis. Two
additional holes are cut for auxiliary operation, one is located at 6th
intercostals of subscapularis; another one is located at 4th intercostal
of axillary line. The esophagus is separated using ultrasound knife,
mediastinal lymph nodes are cleaned, thoracic duct is tied. Second, we
put the patient into supine position, separate the stomach using a small
cut right next to the midline of the upper abdomen, and make a tubular
stomach. Finally, we cut a hole at the front of the right neck
sternocleidomastoid, and connect the residual esophagus and stomach neck
using anastomosis. We have used the modified method on 300 esophageal
cancer patients. The operative time is 2 - 4 h, significantly reduced the
operative time. Blood loss is between 100-400 ml. There are only 34 cases
of post-operation complication, including 11 anastomosis leaking, 7
thoracic duct leaking, 7 recurrent laryngeal nerve injury, and 3
respiratory infection. No any death occurs. Conclusion: surgical
esophagectomy is the first option for esophageal cancer, and the modified
thoracoscopic esophagectomy with 4 holes provides more observation
fields, facilitate dissection. The minimal invasive operation reduces
operative time and hospital stay time, minimizes post-operation
complication. Thus, the improved thoracoscopic esophagectomy will benefit
to esophageal cancer patients, particularly to senior patients and the
patients with poor physical conditions. The limitation is that this
method is good for the patients without distance metastasis or obvious
extra-esophagus invasion.Citation Format: Weimin Zhang, Jianbin Hou,
Xiansheng Fan, Kefeng Shi, Ran Yang, Xiaodong Zheng, Wancai Yang. A novel
therapy for esophageal cancer: improved thoracoscopic esophagectomy and
analysis of 361 cases. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 1379. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1379

