Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The BH4 domain of Bcl-2 is sufficient to induce RNA expression
profile changes in human prostate cancer cell lines.


Bcl-2 is the archetypal gene and first characterized member of the family
bearing its name. Prostate cancer was the first solid tumor malignancy in
which an elevation of cellular Bcl-2 levels was associated with advanced
disease. It is thought that the anti-apoptotic activity of Bcl-2
contributes to the uniformly lethal nature of castration-resistant
advanced prostate cancer. Bcl-2 is a validated target for cancer
therapies. Current small molecule drug inhibitors mimic the BH3 domain of
pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members, binding to a pocket composed mainly
of Bcl-2 homology (BH) domains 1-3, and only partially BH4. Surprisingly,
while these agents are effective inducers of apoptosis, they do not
inhibit the oncogenic functions of the BH4 domain. The BH4 domain is
essential for the antiapoptotic functions of Bcl-2, and appears to
mediate interactions with proteins not part of the Bcl-2 family. This
explains the small but significant body of evidence supporting an
oncogenic signaling role for Bcl-2 driven by the BH4 domain. The full
extent of the non-apoptotic roles of Bcl-2, including the contribution of
the BH4 domain, has yet to be clarified. Our work aims to address this in
prostate cancer cells, developing and utilizing a system that will
implicate both the full length gene product and the BH4 domain.
Eukaryotic expression constructs were designed to contain the full length
Bcl-2 gene built to co-express with GFP, or a fusion gene composed of the
Bcl-2 BH4 domain, GFP, and the Bcl-2 C-terminal transmembrane domain.
These plasmids were then transfected into the 22Rv1, LNCaP, and LAPC4
human prostate cancer cell lines to generate stable expression clones.
The clones were validated for protein expression by western blot prior to
a determination of classical functionality by treatment with
apoptosis-inducing agents. RNA was then isolated from the clones for
expression array analysis. We successfully generated human prostate
cancer cells stably overexpressing Bcl-2 and the Bcl-2 BH4 domain. These
clones displayed enhanced resistance to apoptosis induction. Bcl-2
overexpression also induced expression profile changes in these clones.
This was mimicked by expression of the BH4 domain alone. We have
developed a useful system to help enhance our understanding of Bcl-2 by
highlighting changes in RNA expression profiles induced by the gene's
overexpression. We also show that the BH4 domain drives much of this
function. The mechanisms responsible for these Bcl-2/BH4-induced changes
warrant further investigation.

