Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CARP-1 functional mimetics (CFMs): a novel class of small molecule
inhibitors (SMIs) of medulloblastoma cell growth.


Medulloblastomas (MBs) are an aggressive class of intracranial pediatric
tumors. Current multimodality treatments for MBs include surgery,
ionizing radiation, and chemotherapy. Toxic side effects of therapies
coupled with high incidence of recurrence and the metastatic spread
warrants development of more effective, less toxic therapies for this
disease. CARP-1/CCAR1 is a peri-nuclear phospho-protein that is a
co-activator of the cell cycle regulatory anaphase promoting
complex/cyclosome (APC/C) E3 ligase. CARP-1 functional mimetics (CFMs)
are a novel class of small molecule compounds that interfere with CARP-1
binding with APC/C subunit APC-2, and suppress growth of a variety of
cancer cells in part by promoting apoptosis. Here we investigated MB
growth inhibitory potential of the CFM-1, 4, and 5, and found that CFMs
inhibit growth of MB cells. CFM suppression of MB cell growth involved
elevated CARP-1 expression, activation of pro-apoptotic stress-activated
protein kinase (SAPK) p38, and apoptosis. Gene-array-based analysis of
the CFM-4-treated Daoy MB cells indicated down-regulation of a number of
key cell growth and metastasis-promoting genes including cell motility
regulating small GTP binding protein p21Rac1, and extracellular matrix
metallopeptidase (MMP)-10. Moreover, CFM-4 treatment stimulated
expression of a number of growth inhibitory and apoptosis-inducing
molecules such as neurotropin (NTF)3, while knock-down of NTF3 interfered
with MB growth inhibitory effects of CFM-4. CFMs also attenuated
biological properties of the MB cells by blocking their abilities to
migrate, form colonies in suspension, and invade through the
matrix-coated membranes. Together our data support anti-MB properties of
CFM-4, and provide a proof-of-concept basis for further development of
CFMs as potential anti-cancer agents for MBs.

