Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The alternatively spliced PRMT1 isoform PRMT1v2 promotes breast
cancer cell survival and invasiveness.


Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in women.
Despite intensive treatment to overcome this disease, recurrence is
common and often incurable due to the highly aggressive nature of the
recurrent tumour. Protein arginine methylation is catalyzed by protein
arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) and plays an important role in many
cellular processes. Aberrant PRMT expression has been observed in several
common cancer types, however their precise contribution to the cell
transformation process and cancer progression is not well understood.
Previously, we reported that the PRMT1 gene generates several
alternatively spliced isoforms and our initial biochemical
characterization of these isoforms revealed that they exhibit distinct
substrate specificity and sub-cellular localization. Here we have focused
on the PRMT1v2 isoform, which is the only predominantly cytoplasmic
isoform and has increased relative expression in breast cancer cell lines
and tumours. Specific depletion of PRMT1v2 using RNA interference caused
a significant decrease in breast cancer cell survival due to an induction
of apoptosis. Furthermore, depletion of PRMT1v2 in MDA-MB-231, an
aggressive breast cancer cell line, resulted in significantly decreased
cell invasion. Alternatively, PRMT1v2 overexpression in a non-aggressive
breast cancer cell line, MCF7, was sufficient to enhance their
invasiveness. This novel activity is specific to PRMT1v2, as
overexpression of other isoforms did not enhance invasion. It also
requires both proper subcellular localization and methylase activity.
Consistent with an invasive phenotype, PRMT1v2 overexpression caused
altered cell morphology and reduced cell-cell adhesion. Finally, we
observed a significant reduction in -catenin protein levels, a critical
cell-cell adhesion protein, and show that this reduction is pivotal to
PRMT1v2-enhanced cell invasion. Our study underscores the importance of
characterizing the distinct functional differences between PRMT1
isoforms. Overall, we demonstrate a specific role for PRMT1v2 in
promoting breast cancer cell survival and invasion, and propose that it
may represent a promising therapeutic target.*RMB is a Postdoctoral
Fellow of the Canadian Institute of Health Research

