Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LHRH receptor targeting as mechanism of anti-tumor activity for
cytotoxic conjugates of Disorazol Z with the LHRH receptor agonistic
peptide D-Lys6-LHRH.


BackgroundFor drug-targeting aimed at the treatment of LHRH receptor
overexpressing cancers the LHRH receptor agonistic peptide D-Lys6-LHRH
has been conjugated to the novel highly cytotoxic natural compound
Disorazol Z. As shown previously by early proof of concept in an ovary
cancer xenograft model, differentially linked conjugates possess a high
potential regarding the treatment of LHRH-R positive tumors [1]. Here we
present further characterization of these conjugates with respect to
PK/PD parameter and provide evidence that LHRH receptor targeting
significantly contributes to their mechanism of action.Materials and
MethodsLHRH-R competitive binding, calcium release and cytotoxic activity
were measured by Tag-Lite technology (Cisbio), and Fluo-4 (Invitrogen) or
Resazurin-based detection, respectively. PK parameter were assessed by
standard procedures followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. For the xenograft
studies, tumor fragments were transplanted subcutaneously in female nude
mice and treatment was started at a tumor size of approx. 100
mm3.ResultsDisorazol Z - D-Lys6-LHRH conjugates showed varying cytotoxic
activity from single digit nanomolar to higher submicromolar EC50 values
but comparable LHRH receptor binding and activation in the low nanomolar
EC50 range. Comparison in ovarian and triple negative breast cancer
xenograft models revealed potent inhibition of tumor growth for the
conjugates, whereas equimolar dosing of Disorazol Z failed to reach
statistical significance.PK analysis showed substantial plasma levels for
the conjugates with only minor release of Disorazol Z, pointing to
stabilization by conjugation and demonstrating reasonable half-life of
the intact conjugates as prerequisite for tumor targeting.In the same
tumor models, competition by previous administration of D-Lys6-LHRH
provides evidence for LHRH receptor targeting as mechanism of action.
Increased sensitivity of LHRH receptor overexpressing cells towards
conjugate cytotoxicity, i.e. leading to about 30 fold decreased EC50
values for the conjugate AEZS-125, further supports the LHRH-R dependency
of conjugate efficacy.ConclusionsThe presented LHRH receptor-dependent
efficacies of Disorazol Z - D-Lys6-LHRH conjugates in vitro and in mouse
xenograft models support the principle of tumor targeting by the LHRH
receptor as already employed by the drug candidate AEZS-108, which is
currently in phase II clinical studies. Preclinical development of
Disorazol Z conjugates will be started in the first half of 2013.

