Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small GTPase R-Ras promotes normalization of tumor vasculature: a
potential oxygen-sensing independent mechanism.


Newly formed blood vessels in tumors fail to mature into fully functional
vessels due to the chronically angiogenic microenvironment. The
functional impairment of these vessels hampers drug delivery, thereby
diminishing the efficacy of anti-tumor therapies. Excessive vessel
permeability associated with tumors also causes clinical complications
such as cerebral edema in brain cancer patients. The ability to control
vessel maturity in tumors, therefore, provides a potential therapeutic
opportunity.We show that R-Ras is essential for the establishment of
mature, functional blood vessels in tumors. R-Ras is a small GTPase of
the Ras family with antiangiogenic activity. We found that malformation
and malfunction of tumor vessels are exacerbated by genetic disruption of
R-Ras. R-Ras-deficient vessels exhibited severely impaired pericyte and
basement membrane supports, disrupted adherens junctions, and excessive
blood leakage in tumors. Tumor cell penetration into the blood
circulation increased in R-Ras-deficient mice, supporting a role for
R-Ras in controlling tumor vessel permeability. Decreased blood perfusion
of tumor vessels in R-Ras-deficient mice elevated tumor hypoxia, which in
turn led to decreased efficacy of radiotherapy in these mice. In contrast
to R-Ras disruption, R-Ras gain-of-function improved vessel structure and
blood perfusion and blocked plasma leakage by enhancing endothelial
barrier function and pericyte association with nascent blood vessels. The
studies of cell type-specific expression of R-Ras revealed that R-Ras in
endothelial cells and in pericytes both contribute individually to the
vessel regulation. For instance, endothelial R-Ras limits vascular
permeability by inhibiting VE-cadherin internalization induced by VEGF
without affecting VE-cadherin gene expression level. These findings
indicate that R-Ras is critical for controlling blood circulation and
vascular permeability in solid tumors.It has been shown that
haplodeficiency of the oxygen-sensor PHD2 leads to normalization of tumor
vasculature through stabilization of endothelial HIF-2 and consequent
upregulation of soluble VEGFR1 and VE-cadherin gene expression in
endothelial cells. Our studies of endothelial cells in hypoxia and
normoxia indicate that R-Ras is not involved in oxygen-sensing mechanisms
of vessel regulations mediated by the PHD2/HIF-2 pathway. There are
important differences between the vessel regulations by PHD2/HIF-2 and by
R-Ras. PHD2 haplodeficiency does not affect vessel density, area, or
vessel dilation while it normalizes the endothelial barrier and
stability. In comparison, R-Ras does normalize all of these vessel
parameters while halting angiogenic sprouting. Our observations suggest
that an alternative, oxygen sensing-independent vascular normalization
phenomenon.

