Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lymphocyte cytosolic protein 1 (LCP1) is a membrane-associated
molecular target in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and is activated in
microenvironment signaling.


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is an incurable accumulation of
malignant B-cells in peripheral circulation, which home to supportive
leukemic microenvironments. Critical to the pathogenesis of CLL are
membrane-associated antigens since they facilitate leukemic cell
signaling, microenvironment homing, proliferation, and survival.
Targeting these CLL surface molecules is a current focus of CLL
therapeutic development. Rituximab, alemtuzumab, and ofatumumab are
commonly used antibody-based therapeutics that proved to be effective at
targeting CLL membrane associated antigens. Despite enhanced patient
survival, targeting of non-obligate antigens ultimately leads to antibody
resistance. In addition, off target expression often produces
unacceptable toxicity. Immunosurveilance antigens may provide a key to
overcome these obstacles. A number of relevant tumor antigens such as
p53, EGFR, WT1, BCR-Abl and ROR1 elicit robust autoimmune responses in
cancer patients due to high levels of ectopic expression, high relative
immunogenicity and obligate oncogenic signaling that forces expression
despite autoimmune recognition. In many cases, autoantibody signatures
were realized long after identification of the oncologic target antigens;
however, the convergence of these two datasets implies that such
signatures could be utilized to identify novel targets. To further
explore this possibility, we interrogated anti-tumor humoral reactivity
specifically directed against autologous CLL membrane antigens.
Immunoreactive leads were identified by mass spectrometry. Potential
membrane antigens were further confirmed using immunoblot and ELISA. Our
analysis revealed Lymphocyte Cytosolic Protein 1 (LCP1), a membrane
associated lymphocyte-specific target that is constitutively expressed on
CLL and ectopically expressed in various cancers. Confirmatory assays
unveiled robust LCP1-specific IgG autoimmune responses in CLL patients
despite a profound absence of reactivity to common viral and vaccine
antigens. LCP1 plays a critical role in B-cell biology by cross linking
f-actin filaments, thereby solidifying cytoskeletal structures and
providing a scaffold for CLL-critical signaling pathways such as PKC.
Transwell assays confirmed that LCP1 activity contributed to the
migration of CLL cells towards CXCL12. We further utilize a novel
xenograft model to demonstrate LCP1 involvement in CLL pathogenesis. We
have also characterized LCP1 expression within cancer derived exosomes
revealing a previously unknown function of this gene. Our data reveals
that LCP1 is a novel membrane associated target antigen in CLL with
evidence of differential immune response as compared to common vaccine
antigens. We also demonstrate that LCP1 plays a role in CLL
microenvironment signaling and progression.

