Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Self-guided migration of cancer epithelial cells in confined
environment.


Cancer epithelial cells often migrate away from the primary tumor to
invade into the surrounding tissues. Their migration is commonly assumed
to be guided by pre-existent spatial gradients of chemokines and growth
factors in the target tissues. Blocking the migration of cancer cells in
these guiding gradients could help reduce cancer ability to invade and
metastasize. However, identifying and measuring the cancer cell guiding
gradients in vivo is extremely difficult due to technological limitations
and substantial complexity of the biochemical environment around tumors.
To this end, in vitro systems have the advantage of better control over
the biochemical conditions of invasion. Unexpectedly, using a novel
microscale in vitro assay, we observed that the guided migration of
cancer cells from various cell lines is possible even in the absence of
pre-existent chemical gradients. We discovered that single cancer cells
can exit along the shortest path from microscopic mazes that are
uniformly pre-filled with standard cell culture media. Up to 80% of the
single cancer cells entering the mazes can exit in less than 24 hours,
two orders of magnitude more cells than expected from random migration in
the maze (chemokinesis) or haptotactic guidance by the walls of the maze.
These unexpected results are highly suggestive for a novel, self-guidance
strategy during which cancer cells generate their own guiding cues. We
confirmed that the self-guidance strategy is independent from
cytokine/chemokine signaling and could be perturbed by removing EGF from
the media or by inhibiting signaling through EGF-receptors.
Interestingly, only the ability to steer towards the exit but not the
speed of migration is perturbed by the interference with EGF signaling.
Furthermore, using biophysical models and quantitative microfluidic
experiments, we determined that the self-guidance strategy depends on the
balance between three simultaneous processes: EGF uptake by the cells,
restricted diffusion of EGF in the microstructured environment, and cell
chemotaxis toward the EGF gradients. Three major implications of this
self-guiding strategy are emerging. (1) Cancer cell do not require
pre-existing chemical gradients for guidance and thus cancer migration is
not bound by the spatial limits of any gradient. (2) By simultaneously
producing the gradients and responding to them, cancer cells can lock
themselves into a self reinforcing loop and persistent migratory
phenotype from which they cannot escape. (3) The self-guidance strategy
can take place with cancer cells from human tumors, supporting the
relevance of our findings to human disease. Overall, our findings suggest
that new strategies are needed for delaying cancer cell invasion and
stopping cancer metastasis.

