Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-6 (IL-6) as a therapeutic target in prostate cancer.


Interleukin-6 or IL-6 is a pleiotropic cytokine which is implicated in
the regulation of immune response, but is also involved in regulating the
growth of various malignant tumors. Mounting evidence suggests that IL-6
contributes to prostate cancer progression. Activated IL-6 has been shown
to be elevated in the sera from patients with metastatic prostate cancer
and it appears that the prostate tissue itself is a source of IL-6 and
its receptor. Experimental data suggests that the IL-6/IL-6R signaling
axis is an autocrine and paracrine growth factor in androgen independent
prostate cancer cell lines and can activate a variety of signal
transduction cascades, some of which may activate androgen receptor
activity. In the present study we examined the role of IL6-induced Stat3
activation in the development and progression of prostate cancer and its
possible role as a target for the treatment of prostate cancer using the
prostate-specific conditional targeting PTEN knockout mouse model. In
PTEN-mutant mice, elevated levels of IL6/IL-6R correlated with increased
cellular proliferation in non-castrate and castrate prostate cancer
(CRPC). Similar to human prostate cancer, mice with CPRC showed elevated
levels of IL-6 and IL6-R in both serum and prostate tissue. To establish
a therapeutic role for IL6/IL6R inhibition, we conducted a series of
pharmacodynamic studies using an anti-mouse IL-6R antibody (MR-16) in
tumor bearing homozygous PTEN-mutant mice. Our data shows that STAT3
activation was inhibited in a dose dependent manner during acute IL6-R
blockade. Inhibition of STAT3 activity after chronic IL-6R blockade was
transient. However, at day 45 of treatment, tumor cell proliferation was
inhibited and apoptosis was induced. These findings show that this mouse
model is relevant for the study of Stat3 signaling and tumor progression
and inhibition of Stat3 transcriptional activation by upstream signal
blockade may be a promising approach for molecularly targeted therapeutic
strategies in human prostate cancer. Thus this study will serve as the
foundation for future drug intervention studies designed to assess the
efficacy of targeting the JAK/STAT signal pathway using targeted
monotherapy and combination drug therapy models.

