Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance to the histone deacetylase inhibitor romidepsin is
associated with degradation of Bim following MAPK pathway activation.


Inhibition of histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes represents a promising
therapeutic approach in clinical oncology, as aberrant gene expression
and alterations in histone acetylation due to HDACs have been implicated
in tumor development and progression. Even though several histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDIs) are currently in clinical trials, so far
only the HDIs romidepsin and vorinostat have been approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma (CTCL). During clinical trials with romidepsin in CTCL, disease
progression was noted in some patients who initially responded to
therapy, while the disease in other patients did not respond to therapy
suggesting that both de novo and acquired resistance to romidepsin were
observed. To identify molecular determinants of resistance, we selected
HuT78 CTCL cells with romidepsin in the presence of inhibitors of
P-glycoprotein (Pgp) to prevent upregulation of Pgp as a mechanism of
resistance. Resistant sublines were approximately 250- to 385-fold
resistant to romidepsin; the Pgp inhibitor tariquidar did not
significantly reverse resistance. The sublines also exhibited resistance
to apoptosis following treatment with the HDIs apicidin, belinostat,
entinostat, panobinostat, and vorinostat. A custom gene-expression array
detected elevated expression of insulin receptor (INSR) in romidepsin
resistant cells compared to parental cells. Immunoblot analysis of
downstream effectors of the IR pathway demonstrated a 4- to 8-fold
increase in mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase (MEK)
phosphorylation. Even though resistant cells did not respond to 48 h
treatment with inhibitors of the insulin receptor, they exhibited
exquisite sensitivity to treatment with as little as 1 nM of the MEK
inhibitor PD0325901. Sensitivity to MEK inhibition in resistant cells was
associated with restoration of the pro-apoptotic protein Bim. Combined
treatment of romidepsin with MEK inhibitors also significantly yielded
greater apoptosis in resistant cells compared to romidepsin and MEK
inhibitor treatment alone. Gene expression analysis of circulating tumor
samples obtained from patients with CTCL enrolled on the NCI 1312 Phase
II romidepsin study suggested interaction of romidepsin with the MAPK
pathway, indicated by altered expression of genes demonstrated to be
under its control. These findings implicate activation of MEK as a
resistance mechanism to romidepsin, and suggest combination of romidepsin
with MEK inhibitors in clinical trials.

