Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved molecular characterization of circulating tumor cells.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) of epithelial origin are present in the
blood of carcinoma patients at very low frequency (Circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) of epithelial origin are present in the blood of carcinoma
patients at very low frequency (< 10 / ml blood). In order to
characterize CTCs, they need to be enriched from large volumes of blood
(7.5 mLs). The CELLSEARCH Circulating Tumor Cell (Epithelial) assay uses
magnetic particles conjugated to anti-epithelial cell adhesion molecule
(EpCAM) to selectively capture CTCs. After enrichment, the sample
contains CTCs and a number (1000 - 5000) of white blood cells (WBCs). The
presence of WBCs in the CTC enriched sample may interfere with the
molecular analysis of CTC biomarkers that may be co-expressed by WBCs. We
have improved the molecular characterization of CTCs by selectively
depleting WBCs following the enrichment of CTCs. Normal donor blood was
spiked with tumor cell lines and the CTCs enriched using the CELLSEARCH
Profile Kit. Contaminating WBCs were labeled with antibody to the
leukocyte marker CD45 conjugated to fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC).
Samples were then incubated for 1 hour in microtiter plates coated with
anti-FITC antibody. The WBCs bound to the anti-FITC on the microtiter
plates and the unbound cells, containing the CTCs, were removed with the
supernatant fluids. The unbound cells were counted and analyzed by flow
cytometry and molecular methods. Flow cytometric results show greater
than 85% of the CTCs were recovered in the supernatant fluids, while
greater than 80% of WBCs had been depleted; demonstrating a substantial
improvement in CTC purity. For molecular analysis, normal donor blood was
spiked with a range (0, 10, 50, or 150) of Vertebral-Cancer of the
Prostate (VCaP) cells and enriched as above using the CELLSEARCH Profile
Kit. Enriched cells from parallel samples were either lysed immediately
for RNA isolation (non-depleted sample) or subjected to the CD45
depletion method (depleted samples) and then lysed for RNA isolation. To
measure efficacy of depletion, RNA was also isolated from the cells that
adhered to the microtiter plate during depletion (adherent fraction).
RT-PCR results of the WBC specific markers PTPRC (CD45) and BST1 in WBC
depleted samples show differences in cycle threshold ( Ct) values of 2.5
and 2.4 PCR cycles, respectively, compared to non-depleted samples. These
measurements correspond to 80% reduction in WBC specific RNA load and are
consistent with the flow cytometric observations. VCaP cell specific
markers TMPRSS2:ERG and AR show Ct values of only 0.04 and 0.02 cycles
(or 3% reduction in VCaP-specific RNA load). This demonstrates that the
cell population following WBC removal is significantly depleted of WBC
with minimal loss of cancer cells. The method thus has a potential to
improve detection of tumor-specific markers in clinical samples enriched
for the presence of circulating tumor cells.

