Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Positive or negative clinical implications of PI3K/Akt/mTOR
pathway activation for predicting patient response to targeted therapy
using multiplexed protein imaging of tumor tissue.


Background: In this ongoing clinical exploratory study, FFPE tissue
sections are probed for protein biomarkers along the PI3K/Akt/mTOR
pathway. A panel of assays was developed using Layered
Immunohistochemistry (L-IHC). L-IHC allows for concurrent measurement of
6-8 proteins (total and/or phosphorylation sites) using a single tissue
section. The goal was to discover applications of the technique based on
complementary rationales about the implications of pathway activation.
Those were: 1) in a scenario where the test indicates drug target
activation, analysis for a positive response to an mTOR-targeted tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (everolimus and/or temsirolimus) in kidney cancer; or 2)
analysis for predicting no response to a HER2-targeted drug (trastuzumab)
in breast cancer, assuming a scenario where the test would indicate
activation of a functional by-pass pathway.Methods: FFPE pre-treatment
tissue samples from patients (pts) with advanced renal cell carcinoma
(aRCC) treated with temsirolimus and/or everolimus, and trastuzumab
treated HER2-positive breast cancer pts were studied. In L-IHC
tissue-transfer layers, the intensity of specific protein biomarker
signals in the cancer regions is visually scored. The expression levels
are then summed and correlated with the patient's clinical outcome
status.Results: In the trastuzumab study, four biomarkers were determined
to correlate with patient response. A total of 32 responders and 13
non-responders have been analyzed to date. The sum score for a
4-biomarker panel discriminated between responders and non-responders.
The test correctly identified 28/32 responders and 10/13 non-responders
for a sensitivity of 87%, specificity of 76%, and an accuracy of 81%.In
the mTOR inhibitor study, 35 RCC cases were analyzed, and a composite
score based on 6 biomarkers was found to correlate to patient response.
11/14 OR/SD pts (sensitivity 79%) and 18/21 PD pts (specificity
86%).Conclusions: These results indicate that multiplexed protein
analysis of tumor tissue is capable of providing scenario-specific
information, which could help guide targeted therapy with either a
positive or a negative clinical significance.Funding source: Supported in
part by NCI Grant 5R44CA123994-06 and by 20/20 GeneSystems.

