Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the neuroinflammatory response in a mouse
model of brain metastatic inflammatory breast cancer.


Inflammatory Breast Cancer (IBC) is a rare form of breast cancer,
accounting for approximately 2% of all breast cancer cases worldwide.
While rare, it is extremely progressive and has a high propensity for
metastatic spread and decreased overall survival compared to non-IBC
breast cancers. IBC has a five-year overall survival rate of 30%; the
median age at diagnosis is 57 years of age. Approximately 15% of IBC
patients develop brain metastasis, and most of the brain metastasizing
IBC tumors are triple negative (ER-, PR- and HER2-) or Her-2
overexpressing. The goal of this study was to investigate the
neuroinflammatory response of SUM190 cells, a Her-2 overexpressing IBC
cell line, in a mouse model of brain metastasis. The SUM190 brain
metastatic mouse model of IBC was developed following three-sequential
rounds of injection of cells into the left cardiac ventricle, isolation
of metastatic tumor cells from the brains of the mice, and growth in
tissue culture to maintain brain metastatic potential of the cell line.
In this model, brain metastases were widely disseminated throughout the
neuroparenchyma. The lesions were round, and measured 0.5-1 mm in maximal
diameter, with a central area of necrosis characterized by shrunken
hypereosinophilic epithelial cells with karryorhectic or absent nuclei.
There was no significant difference in vascular proliferation in the
peritumoral microenvironment compared to the unaffected neuroparenchyma
(p=0.57) following quantitative immunofluorescent analysis. However,
there was a 4-fold increase in GFAP-positive astrocytes (p=Inflammatory
Breast Cancer (IBC) is a rare form of breast cancer, accounting for
approximately 2% of all breast cancer cases worldwide. While rare, it is
extremely progressive and has a high propensity for metastatic spread and
decreased overall survival compared to non-IBC breast cancers. IBC has a
five-year overall survival rate of 30%; the median age at diagnosis is 57
years of age. Approximately 15% of IBC patients develop brain metastasis,
and most of the brain metastasizing IBC tumors are triple negative (ER-,
PR- and HER2-) or Her-2 overexpressing. The goal of this study was to
investigate the neuroinflammatory response of SUM190 cells, a Her-2
overexpressing IBC cell line, in a mouse model of brain metastasis. The
SUM190 brain metastatic mouse model of IBC was developed following
three-sequential rounds of injection of cells into the left cardiac
ventricle, isolation of metastatic tumor cells from the brains of the
mice, and growth in tissue culture to maintain brain metastatic potential
of the cell line. In this model, brain metastases were widely
disseminated throughout the neuroparenchyma. The lesions were round, and
measured 0.5-1 mm in maximal diameter, with a central area of necrosis
characterized by shrunken hypereosinophilic epithelial cells with
karryorhectic or absent nuclei. There was no significant difference in
vascular proliferation in the peritumoral microenvironment compared to
the unaffected neuroparenchyma (p=0.57) following quantitative
immunofluorescent analysis. However, there was a 4-fold increase in
GFAP-positive astrocytes (p=<0.0001) and CD11b-positive microglia
(p=0.001) and a 3-fold increase in F4/80-positive macrophages (p=0.001)
in the tumor microenvironment compared to the unaffected neuroparenchyma.
CD3+ T cells were widely disseminated throughout the tumor
microenvironment. The influx of inflammatory cells in brain metastases
associated with IBC is greater than that of other brain-tropic breast
cancer cell lines including MDA-MB-231-BR, and may explain the increased
incidence of metastasis in IBC patients. This research was supported by
the NIH Intramural Research Program and a grant from the Inflammatory
Breast Cancer Research Foundation.

