Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DDX31 regulates p53 tumor suppressive activity in renal cell
carcinomas.


Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common cancer of the kidney, and
up to 30% of patients with RCC present with metastatic disease, yet its
oncogenic origins are poorly understood. At an early stage, RCC can be
cured by surgical resection, which is the most effective treatment for
localized RCC tumors .Moreover, cytokine therapies, such as interleukin-2
or IFN-a, are widely used as a first-line treatment for metastatic
disease. Therefore, it is highly important to develop a new molecular
target agent(s) against RCC. However, these treatments can be associated
with severe toxicity. Therefore, it is highly important to develop a new
molecular target agent(s) against RCC. To identify therapeutic targets
for cancer and understand the detailed molecular mechanism of
carcinogenesis, we analyzed the expression profiling of clear cell RCC
(ccRCC), which is a major histologic type of RCC, and identified DEAD
(Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp) box polypeptide 31 (DDX31), a novel member of the DEAD
box protein family, which is frequently up-regulated in the vast majority
of human RCCs. Immunohistochemistry analysis indicated that DDX31
positivity was an independent prognostic factor for RCC patients.
RNAi-mediated knockdown of DDX31 significantly suppressed RCC cell
growth. Concordantly, expressing exogenous DDX31 promoted the growth of
HEK293 cells. We also found that endogenous DDX31 interacted and
colocalized with nucleophosmin (NPM1), involved in ribosome biogenesis
and regulation of p53HDM2 pathway, in nucleoli. Knockdown of DDX31 or
NPM1 decreased pre-ribosome RNA biogenesis. Interestingly, in
DDX31-knockdown cells, NPM1 was translocated from nucleoli to the
nucleoplasm or cytoplasm, and then bound to HDM2, which prevented HDM2
from interacting with the p53 protein, resulting in p53 stabilization by
inhibiting p53 ubiquitination. Our findings suggest that the DDX31NPM1
complex plays critical roles in cell proliferation of RCC.

