Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting IGF-1R for inhibition of pancreatic cancer metastasis by
pomegranate fraction.


Patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma have the lowest 5-year survival
rate with more than 95% of the patients dying within 5 years and median
survival of Patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma have the lowest
5-year survival rate with more than 95% of the patients dying within 5
years and median survival of <6 months. The incidence of pancreatic
cancer is also increasing by 1.5% per year since 2004. At present, there
are limited treatment options and no early detection strategies for the
disease. Although 20% of patients are eligible for surgical and
chemotherapy intervention, these patients typically die of metastasis.
Therefore, the prevention of these metastases would greatly improve
patient care. Insulin-like growth factor receptor 1 (IGF-1R) is commonly
over-expressed in metastases as compared to primary tumor. The aggressive
forms of tumors overexpress the receptor when compared to less
aggressive, non-metastatic tumors. In order to test this concept, we
tested two metastatic pancreatic cell lines, S2VP10 and S2CP9 and three
non-metastatic cell lines, Panc-1, AsPc-1 and MiaPaCa-2. Immunoblotting
revealed the overexpression of IGF-1R specifically in the metastatic
pancreatic cell lines. Pomegranate has recently gained much attention for
its chemopreventive efficacy. We had previously demonstrated that the
less-polar pomegranate component of the peel target IGF-1R signaling
pathway in prostate cells. To test the efficacy of the pomegranate
component against pancreatic cancer cells, we treated the highly
aggressive S2VP10 cells with fractions derived from different parts of
pomegranate. The water-insoluble fraction of pomegranate peel was most
efficacious with an IC50 of 62 g/ml. Molecules related to IGF-1R
signaling were analyzed by immunoblotting. IRS-1, a docking protein for
the receptor decrease significantly in a dose-dependent manner. A
dose-dependent decrease of phosphorylation of the IGF-1R receptor was
also observed. Dose-dependent decreased protein levels of BCL2 and
increased levels of caspase 9 confirmed the effect of pomegranate
fraction on apoptosis; and increased levels of p21 protein and decreased
levels of cyclin D1 confirmed the effect on cell proliferation. Thus, we
hypothesize that targeting IGF-1R signaling axis with pomegranate
fraction will decrease survival of pancreatic tumor cells and decrease
metastasis. Studies are currently underway to assess the anti-metastatic
effect in vivo.

