Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of cancer cell populations by isolated single colonies
for the identification of drug-tolerance inducing factors.


[Background] Functional heterogeneity within cancer cell populations
plays an important role in responses to genotoxic stresses caused by
anticancer agents. We have characterized 2,400 colonies derived in the
presence of anticancer drugs using human cancer cell lines by newly
introduced colony lysate array technique (CoLA). In the present study, we
attempted to identify molecular components that could induce anticancer
drug-tolerance phenotypes.[Materials and Methods] Using five cancer cell
lines and four anticancer agents, CoLA was produced using 2,400
drug-tolerant colonies, followed by protein expression analysis employing
specific immunodetection and using a panel of primary antibodies.
Transcriptional products that may be important to the formation of
colonies in the presence of anticancer drugs were identified by DNA
microarray. Candidate genes were examined to determine whether they were
associated with the suppression of colony formation, using gene knockdown
by siRNA.[Results] This study revealed that CoLA is capable of analyzing
lysates from individual colonies in a quantitative manner, by a panel of
protein markers. Colonies that expressed pluripotent and CSC markers
tended to express low levels of epithelial proteins. However, individual
protein expression levels were not well-associated with drug
concentrations, suggesting that the phenotypes of drug-tolerant colonies
were not necessarily induced by drugs, and emerged spontaneously.
Subsequent analysis identifying molecular fractions important to
drug-tolerant phenotypes revealed that transcriptional products play an
important role in developing these phenotypes. DNA microarray analysis
allowed for the narrowing down of 12 genes that are potentially
associated with these phenotypes. A gene knockdown by siRNA identified
two out of 12 candidate genes as involved in the suppressed colony
formation of MCF7 human breast cancer cell line in the presence of
cisplatin.[Discussion] CoLA assay revealed that a number of CSC
marker-negative colonies exist in the presence of anticancer drugs,
suggesting that drug-tolerant cells may not always be associated with
CSCs. In the context of drug-tolerant phenotype acquisition, protein
expression may merely be a handy marker, whereas transcriptional control
may be more critical. Further functional analysis of candidate genes for
colony suppression in the presence of anticancer drugs is necessary.
Together, de novo drug-tolerance inducing factors are possibly involved
in the heterogeneity of cancer cell populations.

