Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amplification of GEP at chromosome 17q21 and its overexpression in
human liver cancer.


Amplification of GEP at chromosome 17q21 and its overexpression in human
liver cancerHermann M.K. Yung, Wallace C.W. Yip, Phyllis F.Y. Cheung and
Siu Tim CheungDepartment of Surgery, The University of Hong
Kong.Introduction:Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the 3rd most lethal
cancer worldwide. Curative treatments, such as surgical resection, are
limited to only a small group of patients. Granulin-epithelin precursor
(GEP), which is a secretory growth factor, has been shown to enhance the
growth, invasion, metastasis and chemo-resistance of HCC. GEP was found
to overexpress in tumors compared to the non-tumor counterpart, and the
overexpression correlates to poor prognosis in HCC patients. Antibody
targeting GEP inhibited tumor growth in vivo. However, the overexpression
mechanisms in HCC are not clear.Hypothesis:Gene amplification may be one
of the mechanisms for GEP overexpression as its locus, 17q21, is
frequently amplified.Method:Quantitative Microsatellite Analysis (QuMA)
was used to determine the copy number alteration of the GEP gene locus.
In this method, quantitative PCR was used to quantify the GEP and
microsatellite loci. The genomic stable microsatellite loci were used as
reference. Copy number variations were determined by normalization of HCC
data to the copy numbers of blood samples from healthy donors, which were
defined as diploid 2N. GEP mRNA level was quantified by real-time RT-PCR.
Correlations between GEP copy number and its mRNA expression level were
analyzed.Results:GEP DNA copy numbers were quantified in a panel of
clinical HCC (n=60). Amplification of GEP locus was observed in 30%
(20/60) HCC, and the amplification frequency was comparable to published
reports on chromosome 17q. Overall, GEP copy number correlated to the
mRNA overexpression levels (n=60, r=0.267, P=0.039). For HCC with GEP
gene locus amplification (n=20), tight correlation with GEP expression
levels were observed (r=0.646, P=0.002).Summary:We showed that GEP gene
was frequently amplified in HCC, and this amplification correlates to the
expression level of GEP. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) will be
performed to further investigate the amplification status.

