Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF- drives tumor-progression via JAK/STAT3-signaling in advanced
HCC.


Background: More than 80% of Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients
present at advanced stages not amenable to curative therapies. Currently
existing palliative therapies achieve a minimal survival benefit of 3
months. Hence, there is an urgent need for novel therapeutic strategies.
Tumor Growth Factor- (TGF-) is a potent tumor suppressor via its Smad2/3
signaling axis. Inactivation of this axis has been implicated in
hepatocarcinogenesis. In patients with advanced HCC, TGF- serum
concentrations are elevated and correlated to disease stage, metastases
and worse prognosis. Our aims were to evaluate the status and function of
the TGF-/Smad2 signaling axis in advanced HCC.Material and Methods:
Immunohistochemical analysis for pSer465/467-Smad2 in human HCC samples
was performed using Tissue Micro Arrays. In vitro studies were performed
using established human HCC cell lines (HepG2, Hep3B, PLC/PRF/5, HUH-7,
SNU-398, SNU-449). Pathway activation following TGF- stimulation was
evaluated by immunoblot analysis and immunofluorescence microscopy. Cell
proliferation was assessed by cell quantification and MTS-assay.
Apoptosis was quantified morphologically by DAPI stain and fluorescence
microscopy, and biochemically by caspase-3/7 assay. Migration was
assessed by gap closure assay, and invasion by Matrigel invasion
assay.Results: Intranuclear pSer465/467-Smad2 was identified in up to 51%
of advanced HCC (n=73) and in 89% of HCC metastases (n=9). In 50% of
human HCC cell lines, TGF- treatment (10 ng/mL) resulted in
Ser465/467-phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of the transcription
factor Smad2. Exclusively in HCC cells with an intact
TGF-/Smad2-signaling cascade, TGF- stimulation induced
Tyr705-phosporylation of the transcription factor STAT3. TGF- induced
STAT3 Tyr705-phosporylation is inhibited by Smad2-directed gene
silencing. Further, pyridine 6 mediated Janus Kinase-1/2 (JAK1/2)
inhibition prevented TGF- induced Tyr705-phosporylation of STAT3. Cell
proliferation of HCC cells was inhibited by TGF-. However, TGF- treatment
significantly induced invasion and migration in HCC cell lines with
intact TGF-/Smad2 signaling. Further, TGF- induced resistance to
TRAIL-induced apoptosis in these cells. However, co-treatment with the
STAT3-inhibitor Stattic (10 nM) completely abrogates TGF- mediated HCC
cell migration and invasion, and sensitizes these HCC cell lines to
TRAIL-mediated apoptosis.Conclusion: In advanced HCC, the TGF-/Smad
signaling axis is constitutively activated in the majority of primary HCC
tumors and HCC metastases. The function of TGF-/Smad2 in human HCC cell
lines has switched from tumor inhibitor to a driver of tumor progression
via JAK/STAT3 signaling. STAT3-inhibition reverses the TGF-
tumor-promoting effects. Hence, JAK/STAT3 targeting might be a promising
new strategy to restore TGF- tumor suppressor function in advanced HCC.

