Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired therapeutic resistance is mediated by deregulation of
multiple pathways.


The HER2-directed antibody, trastuzumab combined with chemotherapy, has
markedly improved outcome of patients with HER2-amplified breast cancer,
yet both de novo and acquired resistance occur in a substantial subset of
patients. To study the molecular underpinnings of acquired resistance, we
have developed a panel of 30 unique HER2+ cell lines that have been
cultured to become resistant to lapatinib, trastuzumab and the
combination treatment. Each of these models underwent next-generation
sequencing to elucidate mechanisms of resistance to HER2 therapies. We
hypothesized that resistance may be mediated by modulation of particular
pathways - rather than by individual genes. With this idea in mind, we
performed a PARADIGM pathway analysis that integrates information from
multiple genomic data types to calculate pathway activity scores. The
PARADIGM SuperPathways represent 1321 cell signaling pathways curated
from sources such as KEGG, BioCarta, and Reactome. We populated the
networks with the copy number (ExomeSeq) and expression (RNAseq) datasets
that had been normalized to identify contrasts between parental and
resistant lines. For each pathway, we computed a Pathway Activity Score
as the sum of the absolute value of each node in the pathway, normalized
by the total number of pathway nodes. Nearly 30% of the curated pathways
(361/1321) are strongly deregulated in at least one of the network
models, whereas a much smaller subset (3%) were strongly deregulated
across multiple resistance cell line models. Frequently deregulated
pathways include hemoglobin chaperone, ATM mediated phosphorylation of
repair proteins, the HIF2alpha transcription factor network and the PLK
signaling events in the cell cycle. All together, these findings indicate
that resistance is mediated through many signaling mechanisms.
Furthermore, the acquired resistance-related aberrations suggest possible
second-line treatment strategies that may be effective.

