Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Photochemical internalization of VEGF121/rGel: a strategy for
optimizing tumor-vasculature targeting.


Photochemical internalization (PCI) is a modality for intracellular
delivery of drugs which lack an effective transport mechanism into the
cell. Such drugs are taken up by means of endocytosis and are transported
to the lysosomes where they are degraded before they have exerted their
biological effect. PCI utilizes photosensitizers which accumulate in the
membranes of these endo/lysosomal compartments. Light exposure causes
rupture of these membranes and subsequent cytosolic release of the drug
which freely can interact with its target.PCI of the conventional
cytostatic drug Bleomycin has been shown to be highly effective in vivo
and is currently evaluated in clinical trials with promising results.
Bleomycin is, however, probably not optimal for PCI mediated delivery,
and therefore cannot fully take use of the technology. Recombinant
targeted toxins may be designed to possess all characteristics for an
optimal drug to be delivered by PCI: (1) Exclusive uptake in tumor cells,
(2) Intracellular target, (3) Not able to penetrate the plasma membrane,
(4) Suboptimal escape from endocytic compartments without PCI, (5) Able
to diffuse into the tumor tissue.We here present PCI of a recombinant
fusion toxin composted of VEGF121, and gelonin, a type I ribosome
inactivating protein toxin. VEGF121/rGel administration has previously
been shown to be effective in suppressing tumor xenografts and
metastasis. Severe adverse effects may, however, limit the possibilities
to obtain complete responses with VEGF121/rGel monotherapy. PCI was shown
to increase the selectivity of VEGF121/rGel in VEGFR1 and VEGFR2
transfected porcine endothelial cells (PAE) in vitro. The PCI treatment
also resulted in a dramatic reduction in the dosage of VEGF121/rGel to
1/100 as measured by a LD90 of 10 nM for the fusion toxin alone compared
to 100 pM with the PCI treatment in VEGFR2 expressing PAE cells. For in
vivo experiments the murine colon cell line CT26.CL25 was injected
subcutaneously in the left hip of BALB c mice and PCI of VEGF121/rGel was
administered one week after implantation. By day 24 after PCI all animals
in the non-treatment control group were sacrificed due to tumor size
(>1000m3),while a 50% complete response (CR) was found with PCI of
VEGF121/rGel. The animals were followed up to day 60 when the experiment
was terminated. No tumor regression was observed in CR animals in this
time-frame. About 50%CR was also detected in PCI of bleomycin-treated
animals. Animals receiving PCI of bleomycin showed an average weight loss
of 15% compared to no significant weight loss in the PCI of the
VEGF121/rGel treated group. This is the first report on PCI of a tumor
vascular targeting drug. In conclusion, the present results indicate PCI
of VEGF121/rGel as a highly selective method for destroying tumor
vasculature.The project is supported by the Norwegian Cancer Society.
Research was conducted, in part, by the Clayton Foundation for Research

