Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design of GRP78 inhibitors as novel therapeutics for breast cancer.


Cancer cells exploit cellular stress response mechanisms, such as the
unfolded protein response, to survive through cytotoxic treatments. A key
mediator of the unfolded protein response, the 78kDa glucose regulated
protein (GRP78) chaperone, has frequently been found to be overexpressed
in breast cancer. In addition to providing a growth advantage to cancer
cells, GRP78 induction leads to drug resistance. Suppressing GRP78 levels
using siRNA has been shown to slow cancer cell progression and overcome
drug resistance. Another approach to inactivating GRP78 is by inhibiting
its ATPase activity. Currently, there are only few selective GRP78
inhibitors in development despite ample evidence of its critical role in
cancer cell survival and drug resistance. Here, we report a novel class
of small-molecule inhibitors of GRP78 ATPase activity. We designed a
focused library of compounds based on a structure-based docking approach
and screened for inhibition of GRP78 ATPase activity. Based of the
initial hit, we further optimized several analogues with more potent
activity and selectivity for GRP78 inhibition (IC50 Cancer cells exploit
cellular stress response mechanisms, such as the unfolded protein
response, to survive through cytotoxic treatments. A key mediator of the
unfolded protein response, the 78kDa glucose regulated protein (GRP78)
chaperone, has frequently been found to be overexpressed in breast
cancer. In addition to providing a growth advantage to cancer cells,
GRP78 induction leads to drug resistance. Suppressing GRP78 levels using
siRNA has been shown to slow cancer cell progression and overcome drug
resistance. Another approach to inactivating GRP78 is by inhibiting its
ATPase activity. Currently, there are only few selective GRP78 inhibitors
in development despite ample evidence of its critical role in cancer cell
survival and drug resistance. Here, we report a novel class of
small-molecule inhibitors of GRP78 ATPase activity. We designed a focused
library of compounds based on a structure-based docking approach and
screened for inhibition of GRP78 ATPase activity. Based of the initial
hit, we further optimized several analogues with more potent activity and
selectivity for GRP78 inhibition (IC50 <5M). The lead compound, KR-240,
induced CHOP significantly under conditions of ER stress and activated
the pro-apoptotic arm of the unfolded protein response. KR-240 showed
moderate cytotoxicity against a panel of breast cancer cell lines and
increased sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents, further supporting the
role for GRP78 in cancer survival and drug resistance. Overall, our
results indicate that our novel GRP78 inhibitor, KR-240 has the potential
for further development as an anticancer agent.

