Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fat intake interacts with cigarette smoking to alter lung cancer
risk.


Although cigarette smoking is the primary cause of lung cancer, it alone
cannot explain large difference in risk of this malignancy worldwide.
During the last three decades, age-adjusted male lung cancer mortality
rates have been remarkably higher in Hungary than in Japan, but per
capita cigarette consumption has remained lower in Hungary than in Japan.
A similar pattern of difference has been observed between other Asian and
western countries, (e.g., China, South Korea, Poland, and the US). It
remains unclear why this lung cancer paradox occurs. Lung cancer
incidence is generally high in countries with high intake of saturated
fat. In addition, animal studies revealed a synergistic effect of fat and
tobacco carcinogens on the development of lung tumors. Therefore, it is
possible that different types of fat interact with cigarette smoking to
modulate lung cancer risk. We sought to investigate this hypothesis in a
hospital-based case-control study conducted from 2000 to 2005 in Nagoya,
Japan. Cases (n=500), ages 20-79, were patients pathologically diagnosed
with lung cancer at the Aichi Cancer Center. Controls (n=500) were
recruited from visitors to the outpatient department of the same
institution, and matched to cases by age (within 5 years) and sex. Fat
intake was assessed with a validated food frequency questionnaire, and
cigarette smoking was evaluated with a pre-tested risk factor
questionnaire. Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI)
were calculated using unconditional logistic regression. After adjustment
for age, sex, BMI, energy intake, and alcohol drinking, lung cancer risk
among heavy smokers (40 pack-years) decreased with increasing intake of
monounsaturated fat (MUFA). Compared with never or light smokers (20
pack-years), ORs (95% CI) were 8.44 (4.53, 15.7), 4.34 (2.32, 8.13), and
3.63 (1.84, 7.04) for heavy smokers who were in the 1st(lowest), 2nd, and
3rd tertiles of MUFA intake, respectively. A similar pattern of
interaction was present for intake of polyunsaturated fat (PUFA) and for
moderate smokers (20-39 pack-years). To our knowledge, the present study
is among the first to show that intake of unsaturated fat modifies the
association between cigarette smoking and lung cancer risk, and thereby
sheds new light on the etiology and prevention of this malignancy.

