Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reprogramming of mature astrocytes by abrogation of Rb tumor
suppression leads to astrocytoma initiation in GEMMs.


Astrocytomas are the most common malignant brain tumors which maintain a
poor survival rate despite decades of research effort. Understanding the
initiation process and identifying astrocytoma cell(s) of origin have
been of immense interest. Genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) are
ideal for studying the initiation process compared to evolved human tumor
cells. Our lab has developed an adult inducible GEMM that alters key
human glioblastoma (Grade IV) pathways. Inactivation of Rb tumor
suppression (TS) by expressing N-terminal 121aa of large T antigen (T121)
under GFAP promoter is sufficient to initiate grade II astrocytoma.
Addition of mutant KrasG12D leads to grade III and further PTEN deletion
to glioblastomas. KrasG12D activation and PTEN deletion alone or in
combination failed to initiate astrocytomas, suggesting that Rb TS
inactivation is essential for its initiation. Studies from several
cancers have identified tumor-initiating cells, a subset of tumor cells
with stem cell-like properties responsible for generating the entire
tumor mass. Their origin remains a mystery. We hypothesize that Rb TS
inactivation reprograms astrocytes into stem/progenitor-like state
generating potential cell(s) of origin for astrocytoma. Immunostaining of
progenitor and proliferation markers (e.g. nestin and Ki-67) showed their
co-expression in the cortex with T121, suggesting a possible
reprogramming of mature astrocytes. Moreover, astrocyte differentiation
marker S100beta was downregulated in T121 cells. To rule out the
possibility of migration resulting in the observed cortical progenitor
cells, focal induction of T121 in cortex using lenti-cre injection was
performed. We found expression of Ki-67 and nestin and reduced expression
of S100beta, suggesting that the reprogramming was independent of the
germinal zones in the brain. Furthermore, cortical T121 expressing
astrocytes were able to generate neurospheres but astrocytes from
wildtype cortex failed to do so. These cells also showed
self-renewability and multilineage ability, emphasizing their
dedifferentiated status upon Rb-TS inactivation. We were able to achieve
in-vitro reprogramming of mature astrocytes upon T121 expression
suggesting that the reprogramming does not require brain
microenvironment. Sphere assays using cortical cells from mice where
individual Rb family member was inactivated suggests that loss of
individual Rb family members alone is insufficient in reprogramming the
mature astrocytes. With the Rb pathway known to be altered in more than
75% of glioblastomas, our results are a step in the direction of
unraveling the process of tumor initiation for this deadly disease.

