Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HOXB7 promotes tumor progression via activation of the
transformation growth factor- signaling pathway.


Our previous studies have shown that overexpression of Hoxb7 delays
tumors onset, but promotes tumor progression and metastasis in oncogene
Her2/neu-induced mammary tumorigenesis, which is reminiscent of the dual
role of TGF- in breast cancer. To investigate whether HOXB7 directly or
indirectly regulates the TGF- signaling, we examined the phosphorylation
levels of SMAD3, an important mediator of TGF-beta signaling, in primary
mammary tumors derived from the Hoxb7 and Her2/neu double-transgenic mice
and the Her2/neu mono-transgenic mice. Phosphorylation of SMAD3 is
detected in a higher percentage of primary tumor tissues from double
transgenic mice than that from Her2/neu mono-transgenic mice (69.2%
versus 15.4%, p Our previous studies have shown that overexpression of
Hoxb7 delays tumors onset, but promotes tumor progression and metastasis
in oncogene Her2/neu-induced mammary tumorigenesis, which is reminiscent
of the dual role of TGF- in breast cancer. To investigate whether HOXB7
directly or indirectly regulates the TGF- signaling, we examined the
phosphorylation levels of SMAD3, an important mediator of TGF-beta
signaling, in primary mammary tumors derived from the Hoxb7 and Her2/neu
double-transgenic mice and the Her2/neu mono-transgenic mice.
Phosphorylation of SMAD3 is detected in a higher percentage of primary
tumor tissues from double transgenic mice than that from Her2/neu
mono-transgenic mice (69.2% versus 15.4%, p < 0.05), suggesting that
Hoxb7 may activate TGF-/Smad signaling in breast tumor tissues. In line
with this finding, overexpression of HOXB7 induces expression of TGF-
ligands in both mouse and human breast cancer cell lines, leading to
increased cell motility and invasiveness. The acquainted phenotypes in
HOXB7-overepressing cells can be reversed by pharmacologic inhibition of
TGF- signaling. Promoter deletion analysis and
Chromotin-immunprocipiration assay further demonstrated that HOXB7 can
directly bind to and activate the promoter of TGF2. More importantly,
expression of HOXB7 and TGF2 is strongly correlated in primary breast
cancer tissues and associated with advanced stages of tumor progression
and reduced survival rate. Taken together, our results suggest that HOXB7
may promote tumor migration, invasion and possibly metastasis through
activation of the TGF- signaling pathway.Citation Format: Shou Liu,
Hongmei Zhang, Hexin Chen. HOXB7 promotes tumor progression via
activation of the transformation growth factor- signaling pathway.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3104.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3104

