Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotherapy-induced immunogenic modulation of tumor cells
enhances killing by cytotoxic T lymphocytes and is distinct from
immunogenic cell death.


Certain chemotherapeutic regimens trigger cancer cell death while
inducing dendritic cell maturation and subsequent immune responses.
However, chemotherapy-induced immunogenic cell death (ICD) has thus far
been restricted to select agents. In contrast, several chemotherapeutic
drugs modulate antitumor immune responses, despite not inducing classic
ICD. In addition, in many cases tumor cells do not die after treatment.
Here, using docetaxel, one of the most widely used cancer
chemotherapeutic agents, as a model, we examined phenotypic and
functional consequences of tumor cells that do not die from immunogenic
cell death. Docetaxel treatment of tumor cells did not induce ATP or
HMGB1 secretion, or cell death. However, calreticulin exposure was
observed in all cell lines examined after chemotherapy treatment. Killing
by CEA, MUC-1, or PSA-specific CD8+ CTLs was significantly enhanced after
docetaxel treatment. This killing was associated with increases in
components of antigen-processing machinery, and mediated largely by
calreticulin membrane translocation, as determined by functional
knockdown of calreticulin, PERK, or calreticulin-blocking peptide. A
docetaxel-resistant cell line was selected (MDR-1+, CD133+) by continuous
exposure to docetaxel. These cells, while resistant to direct cytostatic
effects of docetaxel, were not resistant to the chemomodulatory effects
that resulted in enhancement of CTL killing. Here, we provide an
operational definition of immunogenic modulation, where exposure of tumor
cells to nonlethal/sublethal doses of chemotherapy alters tumor phenotype
to render the tumor more sensitive to CTL killing. These observations are
distinct and complementary to immunogenic cell death and highlight a
mechanism whereby chemotherapy can be used in combination with
immunotherapy.

