Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of nuclear receptor HNF4 repression in human pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma cells.


HNF4 transcription factor is an orphan nuclear receptor that belongs to
the hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) group. HNFs are essential for
differentiation and functionality of liver, pancreas, intestine and
kidney during ontogenesis.A number of studies revealed that HNF4 is a key
regulator of HNFs transcription control network in hepatocytes.
Derangement of HNF4 expression is crucial for the development and
progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC); restoration of HNF4
expression in dedifferentiated HCC cells results in partial reversion of
their malignant properties. Also HNF4 acts as a tumor suppressor in
kidney and intestinal epithelium cells, but it's functions in pancreatic
cells are very poorly investigated.HNF4 expression is regulated by two
independent promoters, P1 and P2. Resulting HNF4P1 and HNF4P2 groups of
isoforms differ by distinct expression pattern in various epithelial
tissues and trans-activation ability. In normal pancreatic tissue HNF4P2
isoforms are predominant. We have shown that development of pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), the most aggressive type of pancreatic
tumors, is accompanied by derangement of HNF4 expression. Similar
patterns of HNF4 isoforms expression were described in PDAC cell lines
and clinical samples of pancreatic tumor tissue. Highly differentiated
PDAC cells are characterized by retaining of HNF4P2 isoforms expression,
whereas extrinsic HNF4P1 isoforms are activated in moderately
differentiated cells and poorly differentiated cells lack the expression
of both groups of HNF4 isoforms. To find out the role of HNF4
deregulation in PDAC progression we have studied the biological impact of
HNF4 knock-down in human moderately differentiated PDAC cell line
AsPC1.Using lentiviral infection we have obtained AsPC1 cell cultures
constitutively expressing shRNAs to HNF4 (AsPC1-sh cells). HNF4
downregulation in AsPC1-sh cells resulted in diminished expression of
HNF1, direct target gene of HNF4 and important regulator of pancreatic
cells differentiation. Cells with repressed HNF4 expression demonstrated
drastic increase in their ability for directional migration and induction
of N-cadherin expression. On the other hand, AsPC1-sh cells exhibit lower
colony formation ability and significant decrease in proliferation and
DNA synthesis.These results indicate that deregulation of HNF4 expression
is frequent event in pancreatic carcinogenesis. The repression of HNF4 in
PDAC cells exerts complex alterations of biological properties of PDAC
cells, which include both promotion and attenuation of certain cell
characteristics that determine the degree of malignant cell phenotype
manifestation.The work was partly supported by grants from RFBR
(13-04-02080) and grant from Russian ministry of education and science (
8066, code 2012-1.1-12-000-1002-064).

