Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deregulated microRNA expression in the progression of salivary
gland cancer.


Salivary gland cancer constitutes one of the five main subsets of cancer
in the head and neck region. Nonresectable malignant tumors demonstrate a
low 20-year survival rate due to radioresistance and a high propensity
for metastasis. The molecular mechanisms underlying pathogenesis of
salivary cancer remains poorly elucidated, and thus necessitates further
investigation. MicroRNAs (miRNA) are small noncoding RNAs that are
predicted to regulate up to 30% of protein-encoding genes. Signature
miRNA expression profiles have been identified in various malignancies,
implicating miRNAs in the progression of human cancer. In order to better
understand the role of miRNAs in the progression of salivary cancer, we
profiled the miRNA expression levels of normal salivary tissue, benign
salivary tumor, and salivary cancer. A total of 17 formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded salivary tissues, including 4 normal, 4 pleomorphic
adenoma (PA), 3 squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), 3 mucoepidermoid carcinoma
(ME) and 3 adenocarcinoma (AC), were collected and the endogenous
expression of 95 miRNAs was analyzed by microarray. A large number of
miRNAs were observed to be aberrantly expressed and generally
down-regulated in salivary cancer and salivary tumor tissues with respect
to normal salivary gland tissues. An unsupervised clustering and a
student t-test were performed with a threshold p-value less than 0.05,
resulting in the identification of 22 miRNAs differentially expressed at
a statistically significant level. Eight candidate miRNAs were selected
and further validated by RT-qPCR. The results suggest three miRNAs in SCC
(miR-200a, let-7-family, and miR-192) and three miRNAs in AC (miR-107,
miR-15b and miR-200a) to be highly involved in the carcinogenetic process
of salivary cancers. Furthermore, the up-regulated expression pattern of
miR-203 is indicative of a tumorigenetic function in salivary tumors.
Interestingly, miR-200b was found to be consistently and significantly
down regulated (p=0.01, 19.03 fold decrease) in the three types of
salivary cancer under investigation. Recent studies have implicated
miR-200b in EMT and invasion in cancer cells by directly targeting
E-cadherin transcriptional repressors. The miRNAs identified in this
study may serve as potential biomarkers and targets for future miRNA
based therapy.

