Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inflammation of the tumor microenvironment is regulated by myeloid
derived suppressor cell and macrophage crosstalk.


Myeloid-Derived Suppressor Cells (MDSC) polarize macrophages to a Type II
tumor-promoting phenotype via MDSC-macrophage crosstalk. We previously
demonstrated that MDSC produce IL-10 which inhibits macrophage production
of IL-12, and MDSC production of IL-10 is dependent on TLR4 and enhanced
by cell-cell contact with macrophages. However, the role of inflammation
in MDSC-macrophage crosstalk is not well defined. To determine the role
of inflammation, we utilized wild type, IL-6-/-, and IL-10-/- mice
bearing syngeneic 4T1 mammary carcinoma. IL-10 is classically an
anti-inflammatory cytokine. In contrast, IL-6 is a pro-inflammatory
cytokine that is secreted by activated Type 1 macrophages, is found at
higher levels in tumor-bearing patients, and is an inducer of MDSC.
4T1-induced MDSC and macrophages express both IL-6 and IL-10 receptors,
suggesting that they have the potential to respond to both cytokines. To
determine if IL-6 and IL-10 contribute to tumor progression by modulating
MDSC-macrophage crosstalk, MDSC from wild type or IL-10-/- mice bearing
4T1 tumors were cultured with macrophages from wild type or IL-6-/-
BALB/c mice. Although MDSC are typically pro-inflammatory cells, they
significantly decreased macrophage production of IL-6, suggesting that
MDSC can also function as anti-inflammatory cells. IL-6 levels are
important in vivo since primary 4T1 tumors grow more slowly in
IL-6-deficient mice, and these mice have significantly extended survival
compared to wild type BALB/c mice. Anti-inflammatory effects are further
exacerbated by macrophages themselves, since their production of IL-6
increases MDSC production of IL-10. However, macrophage-produced IL-6
affects MDSC indirectly, as incubation of MDSC with exogenous IL-6 in the
absence of macrophages does not increase IL-10 production. Although IL-10
is classically considered as an anti-inflammatory cytokine, it
contributes to tumor progression because 4T1-bearing IL-10-/- mice have
delayed primary tumor progression and extended survival vs. wild type
mice. These data demonstrate that MDSC have both pro-inflammatory and
anti-inflammatory effects and that MDSC-macrophage cross-talk contributes
to the overall milieu of IL-10 and IL-6 within the tumor
microenvironment. Since IL-6 is a signature cytokine of anti-tumor
M1-like macrophages, these data also suggest that although MDSC may
decrease inflammation through their production of IL-10, this effect
neither promotes the development of tumoricidal macrophages nor decreases
tumor progression.Supported by NIH R01 CA115880, RO1CA84232, and DOD BCRP
W81XWH-11-1-0115

