Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibronectin facilitates extracellular matrix assembly and vascular
morphogenesis .


Tumor growth is facilitated by oxygen and nutrients supplied by tumor
blood vessels. Recently, we reported that de-cellularized extracellular
matrix (ECM) deposited by co-cultures of fibroblasts with breast cancer
cell lines supported vasculogenesis of endothelial cells (ECs). The most
robust changes in vasculogenesis and phenotype were attributed to ECM
deposited by co-cultures with metastatic MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.
We have utilized this co-culture set up to investigate how fibronectin, a
matrix protein involved in angiogenesis and breast tumor progression,
influences vasculogenesis of ECs grown on de-cellularized ECM. Based on
our previous study, MDA-MB-231 and human neonatal foreskin fibroblasts
were grown at a 1:1 ratio for 9 days followed by de-cellularization using
50mM NH4OH and 0.4% triton-X. Following ECM de-cellularization, we found
that ECM proteins collagens I and IV, laminin and tenascin-C were highly
co-localized with a fibrillar fibronectin matrix and absent in regions
where the fibrillar fibronectin matrix was lacking. Through use of a
fibronectin inhibitor peptide, pUR4B (Dr. Jane Sottile, University of
Rochester), reported to prevent fibronectin accumulation in the matrix,
we were able to eliminate fibronectin assembly in the matrix.
Interestingly, the deposition of collagen I and tenascin-C in the matrix
could not be detected with the addition of the fibronectin inhibitor
pUR4B. Examining vasculogenesis of ECs on de-cellularized ECM, we found
that the presence of fibronectin was increased both intra-and
extra-cellularly following vascular morphogenesis. Moreover, the vascular
network appeared to degrade laminin and collagens I and IV in the
de-cellularized ECM. Up-regulated expression of the gelatinases and
collagenases MMPs 1,2 and 9 and MT1-MMP was observed in ECs which had
formed a vascular network on ECM, a mechanism likely contributing to
decreased laminin and collagens I and IV after vasculogenesis. Blocking
fibronectin integrins 51 and v3prevented vascular formation of ECs on
intact, de-cellularized ECM, suggesting that fibronectin is important for
EC attachment and subsequent vasculogenesis. Inhibition of fibronectin
assembly into the matrix during vasculogenesis of ECs on intact,
de-cellularized ECM reduced vascular formation, but did not abrogate EC
attachment to the ECM, implicating a contribution from EC-derived
fibronectin during vasculogenesis. In vivo experiments are being
performed to elucidate the role of fibronectin in the assembly of the
tumor ECM and in the growth of tumor vessels during the progression of
human xenograft breast tumors. Together, these results suggest that
fibronectin is a critical component of the ECM, facilitating the assembly
of a number of matrix proteins and promoting vasculogenesis on
de-cellularized ECM.

