Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mouse models for cancer research available from The Jackson
Laboratory Repository.


The Jackson Laboratory Repository serves as a centralized facility for
the development, rederivation, distribution and cryopreservation of mouse
models. Hundreds of new strains are added annually to one of the largest
collections of characterized mouse strains available to the international
biomedical research community.This poster features a detailed description
of recently added mouse lines having cancer research applications across
multiple therapeutic areas. A wide range of models are ideally suited for
studies related to cellular cancers, solid tumors, and
conditional/inducible cancer-associated gene expression. To highlight
transplantation/engraftment and "humanized" mice research, several mouse
lines with improved engraftment and specialized human cell colonization
are also described. Such animals complement our NSG (NOD scid IL2rc-/-)
and NRG (NOD Rag1-/- IL2rc-/-) mice as ideal tools for engraftment with a
wide range of malignant or non-malignant human or mouse tissues, as well
as a diverse spectrum of cell lines. In addition, newly available
Cre-lox, Tet-On/Tet-Off, and fluorescent tool strains are illustrated.An
essential infrastructural component to The Jackson Laboratory Repository
is a robust quality control program that surveys allele identity and
genetic background, and excludes unwanted alleles. In addition, The
Jackson Laboratory's Rare and Orphan Disease Center is a new initiative
that focuses on partnering with scientists, foundations, and other
experts to enable the development, standardization, optimization, and
rapid distribution of preclinical models for drug discovery.The Jackson
Laboratory Repository maintains a searchable online resource to find mice
(JAXMice database: www.jaxmice.jax.org/query). Anyone wishing to donate
their mouse strains for cryopreservation/distribution may submit them
using our online submission form (www.jax.org/donate-a-mouse). The
Jackson Laboratory Repository is supported through our NCI designated
Cancer Center and other NIH mechanisms, The Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, The Ellison Medical Foundation and several private charitable
foundations.Please stop by for a detailed list of recently added mouse
lines with cancer research applications across multiple therapeutic
areas. Please also visit our cancer-related strains website at:
http://jaxmice.jax.org/cancer/index.html

