Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptomic landscape of Ewing sarcoma based on RNAseq.


Ewing sarcoma is the second most common primary bone tumor in children,
constituting 3% of all pediatric tumors. The 5 year survival rate is 59%
to 76% for children younger than 15 years and from 20% to 49% for those
aged 15 to 19 years. 85% of Ewing sarcoma are characterized by a
chromosomal translocation between the Ewing sarcoma gene (EWS) breaking
point and the ETS family of transcription factor FLI1, which creates a
new type of fusion transcription factor with novel functions. While
EWS-FLI1 is the predominating translocation event, other types of
translocations between EWS and other ETS transcription factors have been
reported. Mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) are thought to be the cell of
origin for Ewing sarcoma. The molecular mechanisms of transformation of
hMSCs with ectopic EWS-FLI1 expression has been extensively studied,
however, a complete transformation of hMSCs into Ewing sarcoma tumor
cells is not yet achieved suggesting there are other elements required
for the transformation of hMSCs.RNAseq has proved to be a powerful new
method for capturing multiple arrays of information simultaneously such
as gene expression, nucleotide variation, alternative splicing patterns
and fusion transcripts. RNAseq has been used only once in the literature
in identification of a novel fusion transcript in Ewing sarcoma tumor
cells. Here we obtained RNAseq data from Ewing sarcoma patients and cell
lines to gather novel insight into the pathogenesis of Ewing sarcoma. We
obtained sequencing data from two Ewing sarcoma cell lines (A673 and
SK-PN-DW); human brain vascular pericytes (HBVP), 8 patient tumors and 3
matched normal control tissues. Initial data analysis was performed
through an in-house developed pipeline that uses publicly available
software and further data analysis was performed using R with various
packages. We describe the gene expression changes in patients compared to
normal tissues as well as HBVP. We also discovered a group of novel
fusion transcripts that we subsequently confirmed with RT-PCR. Since EWS
is also an RNA splicing protein, changes in alternative splicing are also
described.

