Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using paired tissue and serum samples to characterize human lung
cancer metabolomics with 1H HRMAS MRS.


Purpose: We used high resolution magic angle spinning proton MRS to
identify metabolomic profiles of lung cancer tissue and serum samples.
Previous studies have reported that profiles for lung cancer tissue may
be predictive of the profiles of matched serum samples. We further
searched correlations of metabolomic data with traditional histopathology
from the same tissue samples, and identified serum lung cancer
metabolomic markers based on matched tissue analysis.Methods: Paired
tissue and serum samples from 107 patients of adenocarcinoma (AC) and
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and 29 serum samples from control subjects
without lung disease, were analyzed. MR experiments were carried out on a
Bruker AVANCE spectrometer operating at 600 MHz (14.1T) and pre-cooled to
4C. A 4mm zirconia rotor was used with inserts to create a 10l sample
space, and D2O was added for 2H field locking. Rotor spinning rate was
regulated and verified by measuring the inter-SSB distances from spectra
with an accuracy of 1.0Hz. A repetition time of 5s and 128 transients
were used to acquire each spectrum. Spectra were collected with a
spinning rate of 3600Hz, with a rotor synchronized CPMG filter to reduce
broad resonances. Spectra were analyzed by an in-house MatLab based
program. After spectroscopy, tissue samples were fixed in formalin,
embedded in paraffin, cut into sets of 5m sections at 100m intervals, and
stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Volume percentages of histological
features (cancer, stroma, necrosis, lymphatic structures, and cartilage)
were quantified by a pathologist.Results: We used Lasso, a feature
selection method using L1 regularized linear regression, to select a
subset of peaks from the spectral results to build a linear model to
predict AC/SCC readings. A 2-peak model (peaks at 2.14-2.10 and 0.89-0.89
ppm) has been identified as the most optimal model, and the predicted
probability from this model agrees well with the AC/SCC readings. We used
the same procedure to build predictive models for quantitative
histopathology readings from serum and tissue samples. Out of the four
histopathology readings (%Cancer, %Fibrosis/ Inflammation, %Necrosis and
%Cartilage), we were able to build a model for %Fibrosis/Inflammation (p
=1E-5) using 3 peaks from serum samples (peaks at 2.09-2.03, 1.33-1.32
and 3.27-3.24), and a model for %cancer cells (p =0.002) using one peak
from tissue samples (peak at 3.73-3.71). Further data analyses are still
underway.Conclusions: These preliminary results, showing the potential to
predict AC/SCC status with metabolomic profiles from serum, could have
important implications in the screening for lung cancer. If patients
could be identified by suspicious serum metabolomic profiles, and
subsequently undergo more advanced imaging, lung cancer could be
diagnosed at an earlier stage where effective treatment and a good
prognosis is more likely.

