Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The metabolomic signature of Rhodiola rosea L. extracts- (SHR-5)
treated mouse bladder cancer in the UPII-mutant Ha-ras transgenic model.


Rhodiola rosea has been used for centuries in the traditional medicine
for reducing depression, enhancing work performance, and preventing high
altitude sickness. We have recently shown that Rhodiola rosea L. extract,
SHR-5, markedly inhibited the growth of bladder cancer and the survival
of mice in the UP-II-mutant Ha-ras transgenic model via inhibition of the
mTOR pathway. The purpose of this study was to further investigate the
effects of SHR-5 on bladder tumor metabolism. The global metabolic
profiles were compared for bladder tumors from mice that were fed with
normal drinking water (n=7), 1.25 (n=7) or 6.25 (n=7) mg/ml SHR-5 in
water for about five months. The analysis was conducted at Metabolon Inc.
with a combination of high-throughput LC- and GC-based MS method. From a
metabolomics library consisting of more than 2,000 standards, a total of
341 named metabolites were detected. Phenolic metabolites, such as
phenylpropionylglycine, hydroxycinnamate and catechol sulfate, were
increased, while prostaglandin metabolites, such as prostaglandins A2, D2
and E2, were decreased in tumors treated with SHR-5. This observation
suggested the potential anti-inflammation effect of SHR-5 in bladder
tumors. Neurotransmitters GABA, taurine, NAA and 2-oxoindole-3-acetate
was more abundant; whereas kynurenine, histamine and aminoadipate were
less abundant with SHR-5 treatment. This result is consistent with
mood-improving effects of SHR-5. In addition, SHR-5 treatment resulted in
increased levels of glucose and glycogen metabolites (e.g. maltotriose,
maltose), as well as two glycolysis intermediates (3-phosphoglycerate and
2-phosphoglycerate) and the citric acid cycle (TCA) intermediates
(fumarate and malate) compared to control treatment. These patterns
suggest that SHR-5 may increase mobilization of glycogen for energy
production in glycolysis and TCA cycle. These effects of SHR-5 may be
mediated by differential effects on the mTOR pathway. Taken together, we
show that global metabolomic profiling provides a unique and efficient
tool for studying mechanisms of complex herb extracts action.

