Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improvement of tumor cell transduction with lentiviral vectors
using chemical and cell targeting approaches.


Although lentiviral transduction methods are widely used in cancer
research their application is frequently hindered by the low transduction
efficiency seen for a number of different cell types, in particular
primary cells. We have previously reported that a mixture of poloxamer
synperonic F108 and polybrene combines reduced toxicity and increased
lentiviral gene delivery into a range of different primary cell cultures
(1). We now report further improvement in efficiency through a novel
combination of the poloxamer-based adjuvant with a modified lentiviral
envelope. The envelope was rendered cell specific by fusing monoclonal
antibody fragments directed against specific cell-surface epitopes with
the viral attachment glycoprotein VSV-G.For specific cellular targeting
we inserted chimeric antiCD30 or antiEGFR antibody-VSV-G fusion proteins
into the lentiviral genome. The combination of VSV-G-fused antibody
fragments against specific tumor cell antigens and the improved adjuvant
resulted in a 3-fold higher transduction rate using a GFP reporter
containing lentivirus in CD30-positive lymphoma and EGFR-positive
epithelial breast cancer cells. The combination of optimized transduction
enhancer molecules and retargeted lentiviral vectors enabled quantitative
transduction of previously hard-to-transduce cell types. When mixtures of
antigen-negative and antigen-positive tumor cells were selected the
modified lentivirus particles showed a preference for infecting
antigen-positive cells by a factor 4.These results demonstrate that
improvements in both chemical charge protecting adjuvants and membrane
targeting can lead to increased transduction efficiency without a loss of
specificity. The combination of chemical adjuvant and envelope design can
lead to the optimization of lentiviral transductions in large-scale
systems.*1. Hfig I, Atkinson MJ, Mall S, Krackhardt AM, Thirion C,
Anastasov N. Poloxamer synperonic F108 improves cellular transduction
with lentiviral vectors. J Gene Med. 2012 Aug;14(8):549-60.

