Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential response of epithelial cells from colorectal adenomas
and adjacent nonneoplastic colonic mucosa to aspirin and atorvastatin in
Apc+/Min-FCCC mice.


Although various agents have been identified that are efficacious in
inhibiting colorectal adenomas in humans, the precise mechanisms
responsible for their antitumor activity remain ill-defined. Significant
insight into the use of agents for the prevention and treatment of
colorectal cancer can be gained by examining the biological response of
nonneoplastic colonic mucosa and colorectal adenomas to drug exposure.
The present study compared the gene expression profile of neoplastic and
nonneoplastic colonic epithelial cells following short-term
administration of aspirin and atorvastatin to a strain of mice that
uniquely develop multiple colorectal adenomas (Apc+/Min-FCCC).
Tumor-bearing male Apc+/Min-FCCC mice (70 days of age) received either
control Teklad 2018SX diet or diet supplemented with aspirin (300 ppm) or
atorvastatin (100 ppm) for 7 days. At euthanasia, the colon was examined
for gross lesions and matched pairs of colorectal adenomas and adjacent
normal mucosa were frozen in OCT for gene expression analyses. Colonic
epithelial cells were laser microdissected from pairs of
pathologically-confirmed colorectal adenomas and nonneoplastic mucosa
(4/treatment group). Amplified RNA was subjected to gene expression
profiling using Agilent Mouse Whole Genome 4 X 44K microarrays. Genes
differentially expressed in colon tissue from untreated vs. drug-treated
mice were identified using LIMMA methodology and filtered (p = 0.01). The
number of unique genes differentially expressed in neoplastic epithelial
cells exposed to aspirin was 1052, while a much smaller set of genes
(N=74) was altered in the nonneoplastic epithelium. Functional enrichment
analyses revealed that the pathways modulated in nonneoplastic cells
(i.e. protein folding, posttranscriptional regulation, DNA damage
response, vascular permeability) were distinct from those altered in
adenomas (i.e. cell adhesion, DNA repair, TOR signaling, apoptosis,
glucose transport). In contrast, fewer genes were differentially
expressed in neoplastic cells (N = 286) than in the adjacent
nonneoplastic colonic mucosa (N = 749) following exposure to
atorvastatin. The majority of the cellular processes modified in
nonneoplastic cells by atorvastatin (i.e. DNA damage, cell death, immune
function, cilium assembly) differed from those affected in neoplastic
cells (i.e. lipid metabolism, apoptosis, cell cycle control, DNA repair).
These data suggest that the mechanisms responsible for the protection
conferred to nonneoplastic cells by aspirin or atorvastatin vary from
those that lead to inhibition of tumor growth. Further mining of these
expression data when combined with endoscopic monitoring of individual
lesions during drug exposure should significantly enhance our
understanding of the cellular processes responsible for their activity.
(Supported by NIH N01 CN43309)

