Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol inhibits oxidative stress and prevents
estrogen-induced breast carcinogenesis via activation of NRF2-mediated
protective pathways.


The importance of estrogens in the etiology of breast cancer is widely
recognized. Estrogen-induced oxidative stress has been implicated in this
carcinogenic process. Resveratrol, a natural antioxidant phytoestrogen
has chemopreventive effects against a variety of illnesses including
cancer. The objective of the present study was to characterize the
mechanism of resveratrol-mediated protection against estrogen-induced
breast carcinogenesis. Female ACI rats were treated with 17-estradiol
(E2), resveratrol, and resveratrol + E2 for 8 months. Co-treatment of
rats with resveratrol + E2 significantly increased tumor latency and
reduced E2-induced breast tumor development. Resveratrol treatment
upregulated nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) expression
and inhibited E2-mediated changes in activities of antioxidant enzymes in
the mammary tissues. Resveratrol upregulated NRF2-regulated antioxidant
genes NQO1, SOD3, and OGG1 a gene involved in protection against
oxidative DNA damage. Resveratrol also prevented E2-mediated inhibition
of detoxification genes flavin monooxygenase 1, aldehyde oxidase 1 and
monoamine oxidase b1. Resveratrol treatment upregulated NRF2 expression
by inhibiting E2-mediated alterations in NRF2 promoter methylation
pattern and by reverting E2-mediated increased expression of NRF2
targeting micoRNA miR-93. Resveratrol treatment induced apoptosis and
inhibited E2-mediated increase in 8-OHdG levels, a marker of oxidative
DNA damage. Decreased colony formation, mammosphere formation and cell
migration in resveratrol-treated MCF-10A cells further suggest protective
role of resveratrol against E2-induced mammary carcinogenesis. Taken
together, these results suggest that resveratrol inhibits E2-induced
breast carcinogenesis through inhibition of oxidative stress and
activation of NRF2-mediated protective pathways.

