Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and functional characterization of novel splicing
variants of the immunoproteasome catalytic subunits B1i and B2i.


Background: The immunoproteasome is an alternative form to the standard
proteasome containing a distinct set of catalytic subunits, 1i, 2i and
5i. Beyond its well-known role in antigen presentation, the
immunoproteasome has been recognized to have important functions in the
pathogenesis of cancer and other inflammatory diseases. Alternative
splicing is a crucial mechanism for generating protein diversity and
functional changes under stress conditions. While it was reported that
cancer cells express a nonfunctional splicing variant of 5i, splicing
variants of 1i or 2i have not yet been described.Methods: Using RT-PCR
and direct sequencing, we examined whether cancer cells express splicing
variants of 1i or 2i. Qualitative and quantitative RT-PCRs were performed
using specific primers designed to amplify the wildtype or the variant
forms identified. To examine their biological significance, we
investigated whether 1i or 2i variants can be incorporated into the
assembled proteasome complex. Specifically, we performed
co-immunoprecipitation assays using antibodies against other components
of the assembled proteasome, 2 and POMP (proteasome maturation
protein).Results: RNA analyses of multiple cancer cell lines detected the
presence of 1i and 2i variants, arising from exon skipping or intron
retention. The 1i variant lacks exon 3, leading to the deletion of an
internal 44 amino acids. The 2i variant is truncated at the C-terminus,
as a result of intronic retention between exons 6 and 7. RT-PCR results
showed that 1i and 2i variants are expressed at varying levels in cell
lines from multiple types of cancer, as well as clinical tumor samples
(e.g. colon, pancreatic cancer). Furthermore, quantitative RT-PCR results
indicate that the expression of variants can be upregulated by
interferon- , a known inducer of the immunoproteasome. Using cell lysates
transfected with expression plasmids containing the variant coding
sequences fused with a myc/FLAG tag, co-immunoprecipitation results
suggested that the variant forms of 1i and 2i can be incorporated into
the assembled proteasome complex.Conclusion: We report the identification
of two novel splicing variants of the immunoproteasome subunits 1i and
2i. Our results indicate that 1i and 2i variants are expressed in cancer
cells and can be incorporated into the assembled proteasome. These
findings suggest that 1i and 2i variants may consequently have an impact
on the overall catalytic function of the immunoproteasome. Further
investigations are ongoing to assess the proteolytic activity of
immunoproteasomes containing 1i and 2i variants using subunit-selective
probe substrates. Taken together, our findings may provide further
insights into mechanisms by which cancer cells regulate the expression
and function of the immunoproteasome.

