Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reovirus is oncolytic towards organ specific and highly metastatic
lung cancer cells: Possible mechanisms of action.


Introduction: Metastasis from lung adenocarcinoma can occur rapidly to
multiple organs within months of diagnosis. Despite early diagnosis and
surgical removal, lung adenocarcinoma can relapse within months
dispersing to other organs such as lymph nodes, contra-lateral lung,
adrenal glands, the bones and the brain. Thus, there is a desperate need
for novel therapeutics to target this disease. The oncolytic potential of
reovirus towards lung cancer cell lines under in vitro and in vivo
conditions has previously been demonstrated by us. However, reovirus's
efficacy towards organ specific and highly metastatic lung cancer
sublines and its oncolytic mechanism within this histology has not been
elucidated yet. Here we demonstrate for the first time that reovirus has
similar oncolytic potential towards parental and organ specific lung
cancer cell lines and reovirus oncolyses these via apoptosis.Methods: To
generate organ specific cells, H1299- luc2 cells (Parental or PAR) were
introduced into the arterial circulation of athymic (nu/nu), beige
(NIH-III) mice. These cells metastasized to various sites, including
adrenal gland (ADR), bone (BONE), and ovary (OVA). Cells derived from
metastatic lesions were harvested, expanded in vitro, and then
reintroduced into NIH-III mice. When compared to the parental, cells
obtained from metastatic deposits demonstrated a highly enhanced organ
specificity and metastatic capacity. Parental and organ specific (ADR,
BONE and OVA) cells were incubated with live (LV) or UV-inactivated (DV)
reovirus at a multiplicity of infection of 40 for 24, 48, and 72 hours.
Viable cell counts, apoptosis and autophagy were assayed using flow
cytometry utilizing flow count beads/7-AAD, Annexin V/7-AAD and active
caspase 3 and cyto ID-dye respectively.Results: Remarkably, parental and
organ specific lung cancer cells (ADR, OVA, BONE) showed significant
cytopathic effects with LV but not with DV treatment. A dramatic decrease
in viable cell counts were seen with all cell lines (including H23 and
H460) at 48 hours post virus infection and this number declined further
at 72 hours. Notably, a significant increase in active caspase 3 and
annexin V expression was seen in all lung cell lines with LV treatment
but not with DV treatment. No difference in median channel fluorescence
of cyto-ID was seen in DV or LV treated cells indicating minimal changes
in autophagy.Conclusion: Given the inherent variability of the parental
and organ specific cell lines in terms of expression of various
metastasis related signaling molecules, it was of interest to note that
reovirus had similar oncolytic activity towards them. This has important
implications for the future use of reovirus as a therapeutic for
metastatic lung cancer as presently two reovirus lung cancer clinical
trials are underway. Currently research is underway to evaluate the in
vivo efficacy of reovirus using organ specific cells.

