Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of different genotypes of Human Cytomegalovirus in
breast cancer patients.


Background: Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is an endemic herpes virus that
re-emerges in cancer patients enhancing oncogenic potential. Recent
studies have shown that HCMV infection is associated with certain types
of cancer morbidity such as glioblastoma; Although HCMV has been detected
in breast cancer tissues. The ability of HCMV to infect diverse organs
and cell types in vivo has been attributed to strain variations in
certain genes of the virus. The relationship between genetic variants of
the envelope glycoprotein genes of HCMV and disease outcome has been
studied recently, among these variable genes HCMV ORF UL73 (envelope
glycoprotein N).Aims: The aims of the present study were to 1) Screen for
the infection of Human cytomegalovirus infection in inflammatory versus
non-inflammatory breast cancer patients and 2) test the frequency of
occurrence of multiple genotypes of HCMV glycoprotein N in IBC versus
Non-IBC patients, to determine if there is any mixed infections by
multiple genotypes in paired clinical specimens obtained from
patients.Material and Methods: A total 93 (62 Non-IBC and 31 IBC) women
diagnosed with breast cancer by clinical examination, ultrasound,
mammography, and confirmed by biopsy (tru-cut) were enrolled into this
study from Ain Shams university Hospitals. During modified radical
mastectomy or conservative breast surgery carcinoma and non carcinoma
tissues with peripheral blood were collected to detect the presence of
Human cytomegalovirus DNA using nested PCR. HCMV glycoprotein N
polymorphism (gN) was detected using multiplex PCR by using specific
primers to each gN genotype which enable us to detect any mixed genotypes
infection.Results: Analysis of the HCMV nested PCR to the carcinoma
tissues showed that 63% of non-IBC carcinoma tissues were HCMV-DNA
positive and 37% were HCMV-DNA negative. In IBC 80% of carcinoma tissues
were HCMV-DNA positive and 20% were HCMV-DNA negative. Application of
multiplex PCR for gN gene on HCMV positive carcinoma tissues (25 IBC and
32 Non-IBC) revealed that gN-1 genotype was detected in 25% of the
non-IBC patients and 32% of the IBC patients, While gN-3b was detected in
6.25% of non-IBC patients and 4% of the IBC patients. Genotype gN-4a was
detected in 9.38% of Non-IBC patients and in 4% of the IBC patients,
while gN-4b\c was detected in 59.37% of Non-IBC patients and in 60% of
the IBC patients. Also revealed mixed infection of gN-1+ gN-4b\c, gN-3b +
gN-4b\c and gN-4a + gN-4b\c in Non-IBC patients and gN-1+ gN-4b\c, gN-3b
+ gN-4b\c in IBC patients.Conclusion: The frequency of HCMV infection in
IBC was higher than Non-IBC patients; however the most dominant HCMV gN
genotypes in IBC and Non-IBC are similar.Citation Format: Hossam Taha
Mohamed, Mohamed El-Shinawi, Islam A. El-Ghonaimy, Abdel-Rahman Bashtar,
El-Said Tarek abdel Salam, Robert J. Schneider, Mona Mostafa Mohamed.
Detection of different genotypes of Human Cytomegalovirus in breast
cancer patients. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting
of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 4788. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4788

