Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stem cells and their signals during skin tumor regression.


Basic mechanisms of tissue development and regeneration are often
hijacked during Cancer. A subset of skin squamous cell carcinoma is known
to be able to spontaneously self-regress. These tumors are commonly
referred as Keratoacanthoma and thought to arise from the skin hair
follicle. Because skin hair follicles undergo continuous growth and
regression, we hypothesized that the molecular mechanisms that regulate
hair follicle regression drive Keratoacanthoma self-regression. In order
to test this hypothesis we ask 1) what is the cellular origin of
Keratoacanthoma, 2) and what signaling mechanisms are responsible for
Keratoacanthoma self-regression.First, in order to understand the
cellular origin of Keratoacanthoma, we utilize a genetic lineage tracing
approach in combination with a DMBA-based chemical carcinogenesis
protocol that recapitulates human Keratoacanthoma growth and
self-regression in mice. Given that the location and identity of hair
follicle stem cells has been identified, we utilize a spatially
restricted Tamoxifen inducible CreER mouse line that specifically label
hair follicle stem cells and their descendants (K19CreER;GFPr). By these
means, we found that GFP labeled cells are observed within
Keratoacanthoma tumors, thus suggesting that hair follicle stem cells
contribute to the development of the self-regressing Keratoacanthoma
tumors. Second, in order to identify the molecular mechanisms that drive
Keratoacanthoma self-regression, we use a parallel approach of both human
and mouse transcriptional analysis of Keratoacanthoma during either
growth or regression. By focusing on signaling pathways that regulate
hair follicle regression, we found that Wnt signaling is switched off
during Keratoacanthoma self regression in both human and mouse
Keratoacanthomas by immunofluorescence and real time PCR approaches. We
are currently testing 1) whether Wnt is sufficient and/or required for
Keratoacanthoma regression behavior and 2) what is upstream of Wnt
down-regulation during the regression phase by genetic and sequencing
approaches.The identification of the cells and signals that regulate
Keratoacanthoma tumor growth and regression will provide key clues on the
relevant cell populations and signaling that will likely be proper
targets in other tumors beyond Keratoacanthomas, and allow for the design
of treatment strategies that exploit stem cell regression pathways to
switch off stem cell populations in cancerous tissues.Acknowledgements:
New York Stem Cell Foundation (NYSCF) Postdoctoral Fellowship Grant (GZ)
and ACS grant #121966-RSG-12-059-01-DDC (VG).

