Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New water-soluble and stable N-mustard-benzeneconjugates with
potent antitumor activity, BO-2094, generated via leadoptimization by
bioisostere approach.


The water solubility of drug candidate plays an important determinant of
the bioavailability and supports whether a drug candidate can be
successfully developed for clinical application. Previously, we have
synthesized a series of water-soluble N-mustards, in which the phenyl
N-mustard pharmacophore is linked to a benzamide moiety containing a
hydrophilic side-chain at the meta- or para-position of the carboxamide
function via a urea spacer. Of these derivatives, the water-soluble
BO-1055 HCl exhibits a broad spectrum of antitumor activity and potent
therapeutic efficacy against various human solid tumor (such as breast
MX-1, colon HCT-116, and prostate PC-3) xenografts. To optimize the
antitumor activity of BO-1055 via structural modification by bioisostere
approach, we synthesized a series of new N-mustard-benzene conjugates, in
which the phenyl N-mustard pharmacophore is linked to a benzene moiety
via a urea linker, which can reduce the reactivity of the reactive
N-mustard moiety. The benzene ring contains a variety of
-N,N-dialkylaminoalkylamide or -cyclicaminoalkylamide side-chains at the
meta- or para-position of the ureido linker. The tertiary amino function
on the side-chain can be converted into a variety of water-soluble salts
with inorganic or organic acids. The newly synthesized conjugates were
subject to antitumor studies both in vitro and in tumor xenograft model.
The results showed that these water-soluble conjugates exhibit a broad
spectrum of antitumor activity against a panel of human leukemia and
solid tumor cell growth in culture. Among these derivatives, BO-2094
[N-(4-(3-(4-(bis(2-chloroethyl)amino)phenyl)ureido)phenyl)-2-(diethylamino)
acetamide], was revealed to be more cytotoxic than BO-1055 in inhibiting
various tumor cell growth in vitro. It also showed that this agent is
more potent than BO-1055 against human colon HCT-116, prostate PC3, and
lung cancer H460 xenografts in mice. Studies on the mechanism of action
revealed that BO-2094 is able to induce DNA cross-linking and cell arrest
at G2/M phase. The present investigations conclude that BO-2094, a new
water-soluble N-mustard-benzene conjugated with more potent therapeutic
effect than BO-1055, has high potential to be selected as a candidate for
preclinical antitumor studies.

