Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-93-directed down-regulation of Dab2 defines a novel oncogenic
pathway in lung cancer.


Introduction. The Disabled homolog 2 (DAB2) gene is located on human
chromosome 5p13 and expresses a mitogen-responsive phosphoprotein.
Previous studies have indicated that DAB2 is a tumor suppressor gene and
is down-regulated in multiple cancer types, suggesting that repressed
DAB2 expression plays an important role in oncogenesis. Loss of Dab2
protein expression has also been observed in lung cancer. The molecular
and clinical consequences of loss of Dab2 expression in lung cancers,
however, have not been fully evaluated, and the mechanisms of its
dysregulation in cancers need to be defined.Aims and Methods. We aim to
determine the role of DAB2 in lung tumorigenesis, and the role of
microRNAs (miRNAs) in regulating Dab2 expression in lung cancer cells.
Using in silico and in vitro approaches, we identified DAB2 as a direct
target of miR-93. Using in vitro approaches, we investigated the function
of Dab2 and miR-93 in regulating lung cancer cell growth. To investigate
the clinical significance of DAB2 and miR-93 dysregulation in lung cancer
patients, we examined the correlation of miR-93 and DAB2 tumor levels
with lung cancer patient survival, and investigated the correlation
between miR-93 and DAB2 expression in lung tumor specimens.Results and
Conclusions. We show that Dab2 overexpression significantly arrests cell
growth in lung cancer cells in vitro, and that low DAB2 mRNA levels in
human lung tumor specimens are significantly correlated with poor patient
survival. These results indicate that Dab2 is a potent tumor suppressor
in lung cancer and that DAB2 levels may be an important factor in
determining lung cancer progression and prognosis. We show that miR-93
directly targets the 3UTR of DAB2 mRNA, and that miR-93 levels are
negatively correlated with DAB2 mRNA levels in lung cancer specimens. We
also show that high miR-93 levels are correlated with poor patient
survival. Together these results support the clinical importance of the
miR-93/Dab2 regulatory pathway in lung cancer. Overall, our study
identifies a novel oncogenic pathway in lung cancer mediated by
over-expression of miR-93 and subsequent down-regulation of its target
DAB2. The significant correlations of both DAB2 and miR-93 expression
with patient survival highlight the critical role of this pathway in lung
tumorigenesis. Future studies are needed to investigate whether
therapeutic tools targeting this pathway could be developed for lung
cancer treatment, and whether this pathway provides a valuable prognostic
biomarker for lung cancer patient survival.

