Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An alternative tetramerization domain of p53 for exclusive
homo-oligomerization and potent tumor suppression.


The tumor suppressor p53 is mutated in more than 50% of all cancers. Our
data have shown that swapping the tetramerization domain (TD) of p53 with
an alternative oligomerization domain enhances the utility of p53 for
cancer gene therapy. Previously, we have swapped the tetramerization
domain of p53 with the coiled-coil (CC) domain from breakpoint cluster
region (Bcr). This alteration of the oligomerization motif of the tumor
suppressor allowed for our construct, namely p53-CC, to evade
hetero-oligomerization with endogenous mutant p53 commonly found in
cancer cells. This proves to be critical since mutant p53 has a
transdominant inhibitory effect over wild-type p53 upon
hetero-oligomerization. A co-immunopreciptation (co-IP) experiment in
human breast ductal carcinoma (T47D) cells validated our hypothesis that
endogenous p53 interacts directly with exogenous wild-type p53, which is
due to hetero-oligomerization via their TDs. In contrast, p53-CC, which
lacks the TD, evaded binding to endogenous p53. Furthermore,
overexpression of a potent mutant p53 (contains three hotspot mutations;
R175H, R248W, and R273H) significantly impaired the function of exogenous
wild-type p53, while the tumor suppressor activity of p53-CC was not
affected. To further increase the apoptotic potential of p53-CC, rational
design of mutations in the CC domain were investigated for two purposes:
first to increase the dimerization affinity of CC, and second to prevent
any potential interaction with endogenous Bcr. Leucine at residue 62 of
the CC domain forms a critical hydrophobic pocket at the dimeric
interface. Therefore, mutating this residue into the more hydrophobic
isoleucine (with similar molecular weight),, should increase CC
dimerization affinity. Results from a standard mammalian two-hybrid assay
will be presented to validate the binding affinity of our mutant CC
compared to the native CC. Furthermore, two additional mutations on the
CC domain (R55E and E34K) were carried out to prevent any potential
interaction of our construct with endogenous Bcr. These two mutations
introduce a salt bridge that promotes homo-dimerization of mutant CC as
well as preventing hetero-dimerization with native CC representative of
endogenous Bcr. This will be confirmed using another co-IP experiment
that shows no interaction between mutant CC and endogenous Bcr. Finally,
two apoptotic assays were carried out to verify that introducing the
aforementioned mutations did not cause any loss of tumor suppressor
activity of our enhanced p53-CC variant. In summary, a p53 with altered
TD has been designed for exclusive homo-dimerization and has potent
activity as a tumor suppressor. Our ultimate goal is to use this version
of p53 as a new gene therapeutic, capable of bypassing the dominant
negative effect in cancers with mutated or mislocalized p53.

