Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of human T cells directed against an agonist epitope of
a transcription factor involved in epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT).


Purpose: The T-box family transcription factor Brachyury is overexpressed
in a variety of human carcinomas, including lung, breast, colon, ovarian
and prostate. Brachyury has been shown to promote epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) in tumor cells, a critical step in the path
to metastasis. An HLA-A2 epitope of Brachyury has been shown to expand
human T cells that are capable of lysing Brachyury-expressing tumor cells
in an HLA-dependent manner. This study sought to define an agonist of
this epitope in order to increase T cell activation and tumor
lysis.Experimental Design: A novel agonist epitope of Brachyury was
generated by residue substitution of the native epitope. Characterization
of this epitope as an agonist included; comparison of HLA binding
affinity and stability, interferon production by epitope-specific T cell
lines, as well as Brachyury-and HLA-specific lysis of tumor cells. The
presence of Brachyury-specific T cells that would recognize the agonist
peptide, within the circulating PBMC of cancer patients, was determined
by ELISPOT.Results: The agonist epitope was shown to bind HLA-A2 with
higher affinity and stability than the native. T cell lines generated
from both the native and agonist epitopes produced higher levels of
interferon in response to stimulation with the agonist epitope. The
agonist-specific T cell line was able to lyse a variety of
Brachyury-expressing tumor cells more efficiently than the T cell line
generated with the native epitope, and specificity of lysis was confirmed
by cold-target inhibition and HLA-A2 blocking. Tetramer staining revealed
Brachyury agonist-specific T cells in the PBMC of a prostate cancer
patient after in vitro stimulation with the agonist peptide. PBMC from
colon and ovarian cancer patients reacted to the agonist peptide in an
interferon ELISPOT assay.Conclusions: An agonist epitope for Brachyury
has been identified, which increased T cell activation and function as
compared to the native epitope. T cells that react to the agonist peptide
were detected in patients with carcinomas known to express high levels of
Brachyury. This study supports the use of Brachyury as a cancer vaccine
strategy, including the Brachyury agonist epitope.

