Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A panel of in vitro kinase assays developed using a novel
detection technology to predict and monitor EGFR inhibitor efficacy.


The efficacy of kinase inhibitors, a highly studied class of drugs used
to treat many forms of cancer, remains difficult to predict or tailor to
individual specific carcinomas. Monitoring multiple biomarkers in the
course of drug development may lead to more successful therapeutic design
and patient treatment regimens. Here we discuss the generation and use of
assays to measure a panel of kinase biomarkers using Acoustic Membrane
Microparticle (AMMP) technology on the VIBE workstation to efficiently
monitor both on- and off-target effects of kinase inhibitors directed
against the EGFR family of tyrosine kinase receptors. These results may
be used to better predict the roots of drug resistance.Two cell lines
were selected for use in this study on the basis of EGFR expression. The
epidermoid carcinoma A431 cell line is a high expressor of the
endothelial growth factor class of receptors and, therefore, subject to
EGFR inhibition. This line was used to evaluate on-target effects of the
selected EGFR inhibitors. In contrast, the MCF-7 breast cancer cell line,
a low expressor of EGFR class of receptors, should be much less
susceptible to EGFR inhibition, and was used to better understand the
off-target effects of the EGFR inhibitors.Cells were preincubated at
reported IC50 concentrations of EGFR inhibitors gefitinib and neratinib,
then stimulated by EGF, lysed, and assessed for cell surface receptor
(EGFR and HER3) and cytosolic kinase (MEK, ERK, p38, JNK and AKT)
activity. As expected, EGF stimulated a large phosphorylation event of
EGFR, HER3, MEK and ERK in the A431 cell line, with little observable
change for the MCF-7 cell line. A significant increase in the
phosphorylation of p38 but little change in JNK was seen in both
lines.The phosphorylation of EGFR and HER3 in the A431 cells appeared
unaffected by gefitinib, but completely inhibited by neratinib.
Unexpectedly, no downstream inhibition of EGF-stimulated MEK or ERK
phosphorylation was observed in the A431 cell line for either inhibitor.
In contrast, EGF-induced p38 phosphorylation was significantly inhibited
in both the A431 and the MCF-7 cell lines.Here we have constructed a
panel of assays that may be used to better predict biological activity,
not only at the target site of a kinase drug, but also downstream of that
site. This panel demonstrated that EGF was still able to activate both
MEK and ERK despite failing to phosphorylate either the EGFR or HER3
receptors, revealing that EGF may be acting through other receptors.
Consequently, blocking of this class of receptors may only be partially
effective in preventing EGF-induced activity. Further, preventing the
phosphorylation of the EGF class of receptors may not be sufficient to
completely inhibit the ligand induced phosphorylation of the Mitogen
Activated Kinase pathway.

