Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of an agonistic antibody against the human T-cell
costimulatory receptor CD27 as a potential immunotherapeutic tool.


Immunotherapy of cancer has reached a mature and exciting stage. Clinical
activity of monoclonal antibodies (mAb) against the T-cell inhibitory
receptors CTLA-4 and PD-1 indicate that cancer patients often have latent
tumour-specific T cells that can be mobilized by blocking these
receptors. Activation of the T-cell costimulatory receptor CD27, a member
of the TNF receptor family, provides another opportunity to promote
cytotoxic T cell (CTL)-based anti-tumor immunity. To generate agonistic
mAb against human (h)CD27, we used our unique B-cell selection and
immortalization technology. Various novel anti-hCD27 mAb were generated
and tested for their agonistic properties. We used in vitro read-out
systems detecting CD27 (co-)stimulatory function on the basis of NF-B
activity, T cell division and survival. One mAb hCD27.15 (KD 1 nM),
induced CD27 receptor activation (EC50 1 nM) without the need of
cross-linking. Similar to its natural ligand CD70, our hCD27.15 mAb
showed bona fide costimulatory properties. hCD27.15 strongly promoted
CD8+ T cell expansion under conditions of suboptimal T-cell receptor
(TCR) stimulation. hCD27.15 did not stimulate T cell function in absence
of TCR engagement. hCD27.15 mAb demonstrated different binding kinetics
and a unique epitope, compared to other antibodies that depend on
cross-linking to activate CD27. Importantly, hCD27.15 retained its
agonistic properties when expressed as a human IgG1 or IgG4 chimera.
hCD27.15 was shown to bind and activate primate CD27 with similar
potency, providing a rationale for pre-clinical safety testing. In
conclusion, to our knowledge we have developed the first mAb to hCD27
that mimics ligand function without the need for cross-linking. Data from
mouse models strongly support the application of CD27 agonism to enhance
CTL-based anti-tumor immunity, by promoting the generation and survival
of CTL, as well as their memory function. We propose therefore that
hCD27.15 mAb is a promising tool for cancer immunotherapy.

