Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Succinate dehydrogenase mutation underlies global epigenomic
divergence in gastrointestinal stromal tumor.


Although driver mutations in signal transduction kinases such as KIT are
found in the majority of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST), a subset
of GISTs lack these mutations and instead exhibit loss-of-function
defects in the mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) complex, a
component of the Krebs cycle. To examine the effects of this metabolic
defect on the epigenome, we used Illumina GoldenGate and 450K Infinium
microarray technology to profile DNA methylation in GIST samples and
uncovered markedly divergent global DNA methylation between SDH-null GIST
(N=24) versus KIT or related tyrosine kinase pathway mutated GIST (N=39).
When compared to reference normal tissues including intestinal smooth
muscle (N=10) and neuronal tissue (N=13), SDH-deficient GIST was found to
have an order of magnitude greater global hypermethylation than the
kinase-pathway mutant group (84.9K vs. 8.4K targets, respectively). In a
histologically distinct SDH-deficient tumor system, methylation
divergence was further found among SDH-mutant
paraganglioma/pheochromocytoma (N=29) using an adrenal tissue (N=15)
reference baseline. These data expose an essential role for succinate
metabolism in the maintenance of DNA methylation programming and tumor
suppression. Because defects in other Krebs cycle enzymes are also
oncogenic, we further sought to determine whether this phenomenon was
confined to SDH-deficient tumors. Analysis of SDH-mutant GIST and
isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)-mutant gliomas revealed comparable
quantities of global hypo- and hypermethylated targets. We propose that
this phenomenon may result from a failure of maintenance demethylation,
secondary to inactivation of the TET2 5-methylcytosine dioxgenase system
by the inhibitory metabolites succinate (in SDH deficient tumors) or
2-hydroxyglutarate (in IDH mutant tumors). While the biological
ramifications of this distortion of the epigenome remain to be
elucidated, this study clearly implicates the Krebs cycle as
mitochondrial custodian of the methylome in diverse cancers.

