Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors activate TBK1 in a -arrestin-1
dependent manner to promote NSCLC growth.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of death in the United States. Non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 85% of total lung cancer cases and
demonstrates a strong association with tobacco use. Nicotine, an active
component of tobacco smoke has been found to induce proliferation,
invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition in NSCLC cell lines and
promote the metastasis of NSCLC in mouse models. Nicotine induces cell
proliferation and EMT utilizing a scaffolding protein, -arrestin-1, which
translocates to nucleus and associates with E2F1 transcription factor in
response to nicotine stimulation. TBK1, a non-canonical IB kinase has
been shown to couple pathogen surveillance to induction of host defense
mechanisms and contribute to inflammation as well as oncogenesis. These
findings raise the possibility that TBK1 contributes to the onset as well
as progression of NSCLCs through cell autonomous pathways in cancer
cells, and indirectly through activating the inflammatory pathways in the
tumor microenvironment. Since nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR)
signaling is thought to augment Ras mediated cell proliferative pathways
and confers resistance to apoptosis, attempts were made to assess whether
TBK1 is induced by nAChR stimulation. Here we report that activation of
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors leads to activation of TBK1 and
-arrestin-1 was required for this. Antagonists of alpha 7 subunit of
nAChR such as bungarotoxin or inhibitor of 3/2 and 4/2 subunit DhE
abrogated nicotine induced TBK1 phosphorylation; further, depletion of
-arrestin-1 using siRNAs prevented the nicotine-mediated activation of
TBK1. Inhibition of Src using dasatinib also could inhibit nicotine
induced TBK1 phosphorylation. Interestingly, treatment of NSCLC cell
lines with TBK1 inhibitor BX-795 resulted in significant inhibition of
nicotine induced S phase entry as seen by BrdU incorporation assays.
Cotransfection of TBK1 along with E2F1 significantly enhanced E2F1
mediated induction of E2F target promoters in transient transfection
assays. Additionally, in an orthotopic lung cancer model in SCID-beige
mice, implantation of A549-luciferase stable cells lacking -arrestin-1
showed a decrease in primary tumor growth and also resulted in
significantly lower levels of nicotine-induced metastasis when compared
to controls. Mouse lung tissue sections with -arrestin-1 depleted cells
showed low levels of phosphorylated TBK-1 as compared to lung sections
where control cells were implanted. Taken together, these data suggest
that TBK1 contributes to nicotine induced growth and progression of NSCLC.

