Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphoglycerate mutase 1 coordinates glycolysis and biosynthesis
to promote tumor growth.


The current understanding of the Warburg effect consists of an increase
in aerobic glycolysis in cancer cells. The connection between glycolysis
and PPP/biosynthesis is based upon a model in which glycolytic
intermediates can be diverted into PPP and biosynthesis pathways as
precursors. However, it remains unclear how cancer cells coordinate
glycolysis and biosynthesis to fulfill the request of rapidly growing
tumors. We found that glycolytic enzyme phosphoglycerate mutase 1
(PGAM1), commonly upregulated in human cancers due to loss of TP53,
regulates anabolic biosynthesis by controlling intracellular levels of
its substrate 3-phosphoglycerate (3-PG) and product 2-phosphoglycerate
(2-PG). Our co-crystal structure based analysis revealed that 3-PG binds
to and inhibits 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase in the oxidative pentose
phosphate pathway (PPP) as a competitive inhibitor, while 2-PG activates
3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH) to provide feedback control of
3-PG levels. Inhibition of PGAM1 by shRNA results in increased 3-PG and
decreased 2-PG levels in cancer cells, leading to significantly decreased
glycolysis, PPP flux and biosynthesis, as well as attenuated cell
proliferation and tumor growth. These findings uncover that PGAM1
controls the intracellular 3-PG and 2-PG levels to serve as a novel link
between glycolysis, biosynthesis, cancer cell proliferation and tumor
development.Moreover, we screened and developed novel small molecule
PGAM1 inhibitor (PGMI)-004A, which effectively inhibits PGAM1 enzyme
activity, resulting in aberrant cancer cell metabolism with reduced
glycolysis and PPP/anabolic biosynthesis, as well as attenuated cell
proliferation in diverse human cancer cell lines, but not control normal
human proliferating cells including human dermal fibroblasts and human
foreskin fibroblasts. PGMI-004A treatment attenuates tumor growth in
xenograft nude mice with minimal toxicity in vivo. Furthermore, PGMI-004A
inhibits cell proliferation of primary leukemia cells from human AML, CML
and B-ALL patients, but not control CD34+ cells isolated from bone marrow
samples or mononucleocytes isolated from peripheral blood samples from
healthy donors, suggesting minimal toxicity of PGMI-004A in human
cells.These results together provide proof of principle for the
development of PGAM1 inhibitors as anti-cancer agents.

