Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Notch pathway inhibits TGF- signaling in breast cancer through
HEYL-mediated crosstalk.


Acquired resistance to Transforming growth factor- (TGF-) is a key step
in the early stages of tumorigenesis. Mutations of TGF- signaling
components, often found in other cancers, are rare in breast cancer, and
little is known about the development of this resistance in breast
cancer. On the other hand, activation of Notch pathway is known to play a
substantial role in promoting breast cancer development. We hypothesized
that crosstalk between these two pathways occurs through HEYL, a basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, and a known direct target
of Notch. We found that HEYL is overexpressed in 40% of breast cancers.
Expression of Notch increased HEYL expression while knockdown of RBP-J, a
critical mediator of Notch, reduced HEYL expression in HS578T and
MDAMB-231 breast cancer cells. Taking into account the contradictory
biological effects of Notch and TGF- signaling, we sought to examine
whether HEYL inhibits the TGF- pathway. TGF- treatment or Smad3
overexpression significantly increased the luciferase activity of the
TGF- responsive reporter vector, p3TP-Luc, and the P15 (CDKN2B) gene
promoter, but this transactivation was strongly inhibited by HEYL.
Bimolecular fluorescence complementation assays confirmed the interaction
between Smad 3 and HEYL; immunoprecipitation assays with deletion
constructs showed that the Basic domain of HEYL interacts with the MH2
domain of Smad3, and that their interaction is necessary for HEYL to
inhibit TGF- signaling. In addition, using a tet-off inducible breast
cancer cell model, HEYL was shown to transcriptionally up-regulate many
genes that drive metastasis and tumor angiogenesis. Supporting this
concept, HEYL/HER2 double transgenic mice showed nearly 50% increase in
lung metastasis (20% vs 46%) compared to HER2/neu mice. Similarly, lung
colonization occurred in 100% of mice injected with MDAMB231 while
HEYL-shRNAs reduced incidence to 50%. Therefore, HEYL promotes breast
cancer growth and metastasis in Smad-dependent and Smad-independent
mechanisms.

