Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and in vivo characterization of protein biomarkers of
metastasis in melanoma.


Metastasis is a major cause of death in cancer patients. We report here
the use of a multiplex proteomic analysis approach to in vitro and in
vivo identify biomarkers involved in melanoma invasion/metastasis. An in
vitro quantitative profile of the secretome (>200 proteins) was done on
non-metastatic melanoma cell lines (A375, LH, M14, DM.6, Lox, and
WUmel19) and their metastatic RhoC-expressing counterparts (A375-RhoC,
LH-RhoC, M14-RhoC, DM.6-RhoC, Lox-RhoC, and WUmel19-RhoC). A heat map
cluster analysis was performed to characterize protein expression levels
on metastatic vs. the non-metastatic melanoma cells and identify secreted
markers with significantly altered expression that may be involved in
tumor invasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis. An in vivo
characterization, using an animal model of human melanoma pulmonary
metastasis, has identified differential expression of tissue and
circulating protein biomarkers in tumor and sera, respectively. Moreover,
use of species-specific assays has allowed us to dissect the contribution
of stroma (mouse) and tumor (human). Increased expression of a panel of
markers, including IL-8, PLGF, FGF-2, follistatin, MMP-1, MMP-9, TIMP-1,
TIMP-2, GDF15, NSE, OPN, and MIF was detected in vivo in both tumor and
sera, indicating their roles in inducing angiogenesis, tumor invasion and
metastasis. Cell signaling pathway multiplex analyses revealed the
activation of PI3K/mTOR pathway in the tumor. Elevated levels of
phosphorylated targets of PI3K/mTOR pathway, p70S6K (pT412), GSK3 (pS21),
GSK3 (pS9), RPS6 (pS235/236), TSC2 (pS939) and mTOR (pS2448) were
detected in the pulmonary tumor metastasis. Hence this human melanoma
pulmonary metastasis model may prove to be a useful animal model for
studying the actions of PI3K/mTOR inhibitors in melanoma metastasis.
Altogether, these in vitro and in vivo studies using multiplex proteomic
analysis may assist in the discovery of biomarkers and therapeutic
targets for human melanoma interventions.

