Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IKK-Epsilon, a novel factor identified by proteomics, contributes
to prostate cancer cell-induced osteoclast activity in vitro.


Prostate cancer preferentially metastasizes to skeleton resulting in
osteoblastic lesions with underlying osteoclast activity. Novel
strategies to inhibit the tumor skeletal metastasis involve targeting not
only tumor cells but also bone microenvironment which is composed of
osteoclasts, osteoblasts and stromal cells that include fibroblasts,
immune and inflammatory cells, adipocytes, glial cells, smooth muscle
cells, and resident and recruited vascular cells. The microenvironment
can exert both stimulatory and inhibitory influences on proliferation and
malignant properties of tumor cells. In this study, we intended to
identify factors that may play key roles in this bidirectional and
dynamic interaction between tumor cells and bone microenvironment. First,
we fractionated the prostate cancer PC3 cell conditioned media by the
molecular weight of proteins in media using centricon column. Then we
applied the fractions to culturing osteoclast precursor RAW 264.7 cells
in vitro. We repeated and scaled up the above steps to collect enough
conditioned media, and concentrated the fractions of interest. The
fractions that showed activity of osteoclast induction were determined by
mass spectrometry. We found that the conditioned media contained a large
amount of IKK-Epsilon, a subunit of PMA-inducible IKK (I-KappaB Kinase)
complex. We further observed that recombinant IKK-Epsilon could induce
osteoclast activity in vitro, but unexpectedly it had no effect on the
activation of NF-kappa-B by TNF or IL-1 in these cells. Together with the
findings that several identified factors in the conditioned media such as
MCP-1 and IL-8 that induced osteoclast activity, in vitro validation of
the identified factor IKK-Epsilon was confirmed by using neutralizing
antibody on the functional assays. We have not yet identified unknown
factors in the current study, however it is clear that unknown factors in
the conditioned media may also play key roles in the tumor-induced
osteoclast activation since blocking MCP-1, IL-8, and IKK-Epsilon did not
completely block the tumor-induced osteoclast activity. We conclude that
IKK-Epsilon, a novel factor identified by proteomics, may contribute to
prostate cancer cell-induced osteoclast activity in vitro. Supported by
NSF key project 81130046; NSF projects 81171993 and 81272415; Guangxi
projects 201201ZD004 and 2012GXNSFCB53004.

