Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Astrocytes decrease the radiosensitivity of glioblastoma stem-like
cells.


Radiotherapy remains a primary treatment modality for glioblastoma (GBM).
However, despite their extensive biological heterogeneity, although some
GBMs respond better than others, they all essentially fail radiotherapy.
This relatively homogeneous clinical response in a background of
inter-tumor heterogeneity suggests that the microenvironment may play a
significant role in determining their radioresponse. Data now suggest
that glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) play a critical role in GBM
development and maintenance. Therefore, towards developing a model system
for investigating the role of the microenvironment in GBM radioresponse,
we have used human GSCs grown in co-culture with human astrocytes. For
these studies GSCs were seeded into the lower compartment of Boyden
chambers with astrocytes in the upper compartment. GSC numbers were
determined at times out to 18 days after seeding according to ATP
content. The proliferation rate of GSCs in co-culture was similar to that
obtained when astrocytes were not included in the upper chamber,
indicating that astrocytes had no effect on the growth rate of GSCs. To
determine whether astrocytes influence GSC radiosensitivity, 48h after
co-culture initiation GSCs were irradiated with doses up to 6 Gy; ATP
content of the cells were defined 11 days later and radiation survival
curves generated. The resulting survival curves showed that the GSCs
irradiated under co-culture conditions were significantly less sensitive
than those irradiated in the absence of astrocytes. To begin to address
the mechanisms responsible for the increased radioresistance of
co-cultured GSCs, radiation-induced -H2AX nuclear foci were defined in
GSCs grown with and without astrocyte co-culture. The initial level of
-H2AX foci in GSCs was reduced significantly in co-cultures as compared
to GSCs cultured in the absence of astrocytes suggesting the induction of
fewer DNA double strand breaks. In addition, gene expression profiles
generated from GSCs grown in co-culture were significantly different from
control GSCs suggesting that astrocytes induced phenotypic modifications.
Finally, profiling of astrocyte conditioned media revealed increased
levels of a variety of chemokines/growth factors, including a number of
which that have already been linked to radioresponse such as HGF, IL-6
and EGF. Taken together, these results are consistent with an
astrocyte-mediated radioprotection of GBM cells and provide additional
support for a critical role of the microenvironment in contributing to
GBM radioresistance.

