Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGF1 receptor signaling regulates adaptive radioprotection in
glioma stem cells.


Background: Cancer stem cells play an important role in disease
recurrence after radiation treatment as a result of intrinsic properties
such as quiescence and high DNA repair capability. It is unclear,
however, how cancer stem cells further adapt to escape the toxicity of
the repeated irradiation regimens used in clinical practice. Here, we
have exposed a population of murine glioma stem cells (GSCs) to
fractionated radiation in order to investigate the associated adaptive
changes, with the ultimate goal of identifying a targetable factor that
regulates acquired radioresistance.Methods: Initial tumors were formed by
implantation of Ink4a/Arf -/- neural stem cells overexpressing H-RASV12
into the forebrain of wild-type mice. GSCs purified from the tumors were
then grown as tumorspheres (TS), with a subgroup, TS-RR, surviving
repeated radiation (12x 5Gy). The two types of cells, their subclones and
allografts were compared to identify differentially expressed factors
that underlie acquired radioresistance.Results: TS-RR were more resistant
than TS to further radiation, both in vitro and in vivo. Analysis of the
subclones showed that even the most resistant TS subclones did not reach
the radioresistance level of TS-RR, suggesting that TS-RR may have
acquired radioresistance de novo during the repeated irradiation.
Analysis of the molecular changes induced in TS during fractionated
radiation revealed an increase in IGF1 secretion and a gradual
up-regulation of the IGF type 1 receptor (IGF1R). Interestingly, IGF1R
up-regulation exerted a dual radioprotective effect: in the resting
state, continuous IGF1 stimulation ultimately induced down-regulation of
Akt/ERK and FoxO3a activation, which resulted in slower proliferation and
enhanced self-renewal. In contrast, after acute radiation, the abundance
of IGF1R and increased secretion of IGF1 promoted a rapid shift from a
latent state towards activation of Akt survival signaling, protecting
GSCs from radiation toxicity. Treatment of tumors formed by the
radioresistant GSCs with an IGF1R inhibitor resulted in a marked increase
in radiosensitivity.Conclusion: Our results show that GSCs can evade the
damage of repeated radiation not only through innate properties, but also
by establishing an IGF1-IGF1R autocrine trophic loop, which results in
acquired resistance to radiation. Elucidation of stem-cell-specific
adaptive radioprotection mechanisms and identification of targetable key
factors are crucial to the refinement of radiosensitizing strategies and
prevention of tumor relapse.

