Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficient cancer cell separation using size and deformability
based filtration.


Break-free cancer cells in the blood stream are statistically larger
(mainly >15 microns) than the majority of normal cells (5-11 microns).
Therefore, filters with engineered pores, for example, 8 m circular
pores, could be used to isolate rare cancer cells from billions of
hematologic cells in the blood sample. Size exclusion based filtration,
however, is not immune to methodological constraint. Loss of cells
smaller than the size cutoff and failure of separating cancer cells from
normal cells of similar sizes have been the problems. Incorporating a
second separation parameter by controlling cell deformability during the
enrichment process could minimize the cell loss and increase the purity
of the product. Recent advances using column-wall or crescent-post
microfluidic chips have demonstrated the potential of utilizing cell size
and deformability based separation techniques for rare cell enrichment.
In this paper, we propose an innovative filter that aims to provide
similar enrichment effect at quicker time (minutes/mL blood) and lower
manufacturing cost. The key to realize efficient filtration process is
the pattern design of highly dense pores. The effect of pore size on cell
separation was first studied using rectangular shaped
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) microchannels, which were microfabricated by
the technique of soft lithography. In the experiments, intact breast
cancer cells (MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-453) or human leukocytes were guided
through the PDMS channels of different sizes. The flow rates and pressure
drop were monitored. The deformation of the cells was visualized using a
high-speed camera. The optimal pore size was selected to be the
microchannel size that most leukocytes passed through, but not for the
majority of the cancer cells, at high flow rate and low pressure-drop. As
a second step, the effect of pore shape on cell separation was studied.
We used the method of focused ion beam (FIB) to micromill pores into a
thin polymer membrane, which have the size equal to or smaller than the
optimal size obtained and a variety of shapes. FIB is an electron/ ion
dual beam system, in which high-speed ion flow carries high momentum to
engrave micro-sized pattern into substrate materials with high precision.
The micromilled membrane was then integrated into a microfluidic flow
chamber for cell separation. Pressure drop and cell deformation were
recorded during the translocation of cells on the membrane. We conclude
that both pore size and shape affect the size cutoff of cells to be
separated. Under the pressure conditions that preserve the cell integrity
and viability, cancer cells can be separated from normal cells at high
flow rate, purity (>70%) and recovery (>80%). Our results could provide a
detailed guidance for developing an efficient cell filter that can be
used for rapid enrichment of rare cancer cells in blood for cancer
detection and characterization.

