Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and quantification of human DNA repair protein
NEIL1 by liquid chromatography/isotope-dilution tandem mass spectrometry
as a potential cancer biomarker.


Accumulated evidence points to DNA repair capacity as an important
therapeutic factor in cancer in predicting patient response to
DNA-damaging agents such as chemotherapeutic drugs and ionizing
radiation. Recent findings suggest that some types of malignant tumors
possess increased DNA repair capacity that may affect the therapy and
outcome of cancer. Thus, the knowledge of the over-expression or
under-expression levels of DNA repair proteins in tumors and disease-free
tissues will help develop and guide treatment strategies that will likely
lead to the best treatment results for patients. In this context, DNA
repair proteins are becoming predictive, prognostic and therapeutic
factors in cancer, and also promising drug targets for cancer treatment
as DNA repair inhibitors are being developed to increase the efficacy of
cancer therapy. We developed assays for the mass spectrometric
measurement in tissues of the human DNA repair protein NEIL1 (hNEIL1),
which is involved in base excision and nucleotide excision repair
pathways of oxidatively induced DNA damage. There is strong evidence for
a critical role of NEIL1 in maintaining the genetic stability and in
prevention of diseases such as cancer and metabolic syndrome. We applied
liquid chromatography/isotope-dilution tandem mass spectrometry
(LC-MS/MS), using the fully 15N-labeled analogue of hNEIL1 (15N-hNEIL1)
as an internal standard, which we produced, purified and characterized.
Both hNEIL1 and 15N-hNEIL1 were hydrolyzed with trypsin. Eighteen tryptic
peptides of each protein were identified by LC-MS/MS on the basis of
their full-scan mass spectra. These peptides matched the theoretical
peptides expected from trypsin hydrolysis of hNEIL1, and provided a
statistically significant protein score that would unequivocally identify
hNEIL1. The product ion spectra of the tryptic peptides of both proteins
were recorded and the characteristic product ions were defined.
Selected-reaction monitoring was used to analyze mixtures of hNEIL1 and
15N-hNEIL1 on the basis of product ions. We also showed the detection of
these proteins following their separation by gel electrophoresis and
in-gel trypsin digestion. Our results suggest that the assays developed
would be highly suitable for the positive identification and accurate
quantification of hNEIL1 in tissues in vivo as a potential cancer
biomarker..

