Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The increased frequency of ERG oncoprotein expression in high
grade prostate cancers in Caucasian American in comparison to African
American men.


Introduction & Objectives: ERG is one of the most commonly over expressed
oncogene (50-70%) in prostate cancer (CaP) due to TMPRSS2-ERG gene
fusion. Prior studies suggested that the fusion is more common in
Caucasian American (CA) than in African Americans (AA) men with CaP.
Previous studies from our laboratory have also shown that in AA patients
the higher grade index tumors were predominantly ERG negative. We sought
to quantify the association between race and ERG expression in a cohort
of high grade CaP patients. We then examined whether the prevalence of
ERG has prognostic significance for CaP disease-specific
outcomes.Materials & Methods: The CPDR multi-center national database was
queried to identify patients with high grade CaP who underwent radical
prostatectomy between 1994 and 2011. Sixty-three AA patients were
age-matched with 63 CA patients (n=126). Immunohistochemistry was
performed to detect fusion status in representative whole mount prostate
specimens using an ERG monoclonal antibody (9FY). Tumors were classified
as ERG positive or negative and compared by race. Multivariate analysis
and Kaplan-Meier curves were used to evaluate the clinical significance
of ERG oncoprotein positivity.Results: The frequency of ERG-positive
index tumors in high grade CaP was significantly greater among CA
patients compared to AA patients (49% vs.16%, P Introduction &
Objectives: ERG is one of the most commonly over expressed oncogene
(50-70%) in prostate cancer (CaP) due to TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion. Prior
studies suggested that the fusion is more common in Caucasian American
(CA) than in African Americans (AA) men with CaP. Previous studies from
our laboratory have also shown that in AA patients the higher grade index
tumors were predominantly ERG negative. We sought to quantify the
association between race and ERG expression in a cohort of high grade CaP
patients. We then examined whether the prevalence of ERG has prognostic
significance for CaP disease-specific outcomes.Materials & Methods: The
CPDR multi-center national database was queried to identify patients with
high grade CaP who underwent radical prostatectomy between 1994 and 2011.
Sixty-three AA patients were age-matched with 63 CA patients (n=126).
Immunohistochemistry was performed to detect fusion status in
representative whole mount prostate specimens using an ERG monoclonal
antibody (9FY). Tumors were classified as ERG positive or negative and
compared by race. Multivariate analysis and Kaplan-Meier curves were used
to evaluate the clinical significance of ERG oncoprotein
positivity.Results: The frequency of ERG-positive index tumors in high
grade CaP was significantly greater among CA patients compared to AA
patients (49% vs.16%, P < .0001) by chi-squared analysis. This
observation persisted when all ERG-positive tumor foci were assessed
between CA and AA patients (59% vs. 33%, P = .0042). Neither ERG
prevalence nor race was predictive of biochemical recurrence in this
cohort.Conclusions: This study examined the prevalence of ERG oncoprotein
expression in high grade CaP patients stratified by race. ERG expression
(predominantly due to TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion) is significantly more
common in high grade CaP of CA compared with AA patients. Genetic
alterations in high grade CaP in the AA population need to be further
determined. This study underscores that typing of prostate tumors for ERG
may enhance our understanding of biological differences between ethnic
groups.

