Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HH/GLI signaling as a new therapeutic target governs the stemness
of head and neck cancer stem cells.


Patients with advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) show
poor prognosis to current therapy and tumor recurrence and metastasis are
frequently observed. The discovery of cancer stem cell (CSC) markers is
crucial for developing novel therapeutic strategies by targeting these
CSCs. To address this issue, we used sphere culture method to enrich CSCs
from their isogeneic adherent cultured HNSCC cells. Compared with
adherent cultured HNSCC cells, the microspheres of HNSCC cells were more
clonogenic in nude mice, and expressed higher levels of shh and Gli-2,
and Gli-2 translocated into the nuclear of the spheres, which showed that
hedgehog signal pathway was activated in the cancer stem cells like
subpopulations of HNSCC. Further study found that Gli-2, one of the main
transcriptional activators of HH/GLI signal, was expressed in 60 (44%) of
the 136 HNSCC samples and the expression was significantly associated
with poor clinical outcomes. Only 44% of the patients whose tumors
expressed Gli-2 survived at 5 years after surgery compared to 77% of
those whose tumors lacked the Gli-2 expression (P Patients with advanced
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) show poor prognosis to
current therapy and tumor recurrence and metastasis are frequently
observed. The discovery of cancer stem cell (CSC) markers is crucial for
developing novel therapeutic strategies by targeting these CSCs. To
address this issue, we used sphere culture method to enrich CSCs from
their isogeneic adherent cultured HNSCC cells. Compared with adherent
cultured HNSCC cells, the microspheres of HNSCC cells were more
clonogenic in nude mice, and expressed higher levels of shh and Gli-2,
and Gli-2 translocated into the nuclear of the spheres, which showed that
hedgehog signal pathway was activated in the cancer stem cells like
subpopulations of HNSCC. Further study found that Gli-2, one of the main
transcriptional activators of HH/GLI signal, was expressed in 60 (44%) of
the 136 HNSCC samples and the expression was significantly associated
with poor clinical outcomes. Only 44% of the patients whose tumors
expressed Gli-2 survived at 5 years after surgery compared to 77% of
those whose tumors lacked the Gli-2 expression (P < 0.0001). Both
cyclopamine and GANT61 effectively inhibited Gli expression, slowed cell
growth, promoted G1 arrest, increased apoptosis and inhibited migration
of HNSCC cells. Together with the findings, we conclude that activation
of HH/GLI pathway plays an important role in maintaining the stemness of
HNSCC, and strongly associates with HNSCC progression, suggesting that a
subset of OSCC patients may benefit from anti-HH/GLI therapies.

