Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA expression profile of astrocytoma in archived
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded brain tumor samples.


Astrocytomas, a tumor derived from astrocytic glial cells, are the most
common type of adult primary central nervous system (CNS) neoplasms,
representing around 76% of all primary brain tumors. The World Health
Organization (WHO) classified astrocytomas into four histological grades
spanning from grade I, a benign tumor, to grade IV, a highly malignant
tumors. This classification is somewhat subjective and more reliable
molecular markers for tumor grading are necessary. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are
small (22-nucleotide) noncoding RNAs that, in mammals, regulate genes at
the translational level by binding to loosely complimentary sequences in
the 3-UTR of target mRNAs. There is increased in vitro and in vivo
evidence that various miRNAs are deregulated in a variety of cancer
including astrocytoma. The aim of this study was to assess miRNAs
dysregulated in astrocytoma according to its grade using archived
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples. Total RNA was isolated,
labeled, and hybridized to Affymetrix miRNA arrays. Images were analyzed
using the PARTEK software. Eighty-five miRNAs were differentially
regulated in grade II, 72 miRNAs in grade III and 118 miRNAs in GBM;
compared with control samples. Several non-previously described miRNA in
astrcoytoma were identified in this study. The most differentially
expressed miRNAs in each tumor grade, were selected for further
validation by TAqMan-based real-time PCR. Particularly, miR-92b was
upregulated in all astrocytoma grades. Opposite, miR-548p, a miRNA
regulating antiapoptotic molecules, was downregulated in GBM tumor
tissues, and in well-established GBM cell lines. However, the role of
these miRNAs in GBM cells has not been studied. We are currently
performing in vitro studies to clarify the role of some of these
microRNAs in the cell proliferation of GBM cells.

