Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting of Voltage-gated sodium channel NaV1.5 inhibits cell
proliferation and colony formation in breast and ovarian cancer cells.


Breast cancer is the most common and the second leading cause of death in
women worldwide while ovarian cancer is the leading cause of
gynecological cancers. Breast and ovarian cancer cells have increased
proliferation, invasion/metastasis and resistance to programmed cell
death due to mutations, altered signaling pathways and deregulated of
control mechanism. One of the differences between normal and cancer cells
is the changes in the regulation and the function of ion channels. Ion
channels are important signaling molecules expressed in a wide range of
tissues where they have significant involvement in determining a variety
of cellular functions: solute transport, volume control, enzyme activity,
secretion, invasion, gene expression, excitation-contraction coupling and
intercellular communication. During the malignant transformation, a
series of genetic alterations occur, which may also affect the expression
and activity of ion channels. This abnormal ion channel activity has been
hypothesized to support cell proliferation and tumor growth.
Voltage-gated sodium channels (VGNaC) are classically described as
critical elements of action potential initiation and propagation in
excitable cells. Recent studies showed that VGNaC expression was
significantly up-regulated in metastatic human breast cancer cells and
tissues, and VGNaC activity potentiated cellular directional motility,
endocytosis and invasion. However, the mechanisms of the VGNaC and its
functional relevance to breast cancer proliferation are currently not
well-known. In this study, we investigated that the effects of
downregulation NaV1.5 channel expression by specific RNA interference (ie
siRNA) in breast and ovarian cancer cells in vitro. In our work, we first
determined the effects of Adult NaV1.5 siRNA and analyzed the effects of
Adult and Neonatal (neonatal splice variant of NaV1.5) NaV1.5 silencing
by siRNA in BCa cells by Real-Time PCR. Our Real-Time PCR results showed
that Adult NaV1.5 channel siRNA reduced the level of NaV1.5 mRNA for
MDA-MB-231 BCa cells. We found that knockdown of NaV1.5 channel by siRNA
significantly inhibited MDA-MB-231 breast and SKOV3-IP1, SKOV3-TR and
HEYA8 ovarian cancer cell proliferation and colony formation. We are
currently investigating downstream cellular pathways involved in NaV1.5
mediated proliferation and other cellular functions. In conclusion, our
results demonstrate that targeting of NaV1.5 in breast and ovarian cancer
cells decreases cell proliferation and colony formation and it may be
used as a new therapeutic target in these cancers.

