Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of community-based breast cancer education intervention in
New York State Capital Region.


Objectives: We conducted a community-based education intervention among
targeted understudied groups in the New York State Capital Region to
assess baseline knowledge of breast cancer and determine the
effectiveness of newly developed educational tools in improving
knowledge.Methods: We recruited 417 students from five participating
colleges/universities and 67 women from four community group
organizations. Educational intervention involved about an hour-long
lecture on breast cancer using Microsoft PowerPoint presentations
tailored to each of the two participating groups of colleges/universities
and community group organizations. Baseline and post-education knowledge
was assessed via self-administered questionnaires. In addition to
multiple choice questions, pre- and post-education questionnaires
designed for college/university students also contained an open-ended
question soliciting their suggestions for public health preventive
actions against breast cancer. The effectiveness of our education
intervention in improving breast cancer knowledge was estimated using a
paired t-test. Descriptive and qualitative analyses of demographic
variables and answers to the open-ended questions were also
conducted.Results: Our analyses revealed a statistically significant
improvement (PObjectives: We conducted a community-based education
intervention among targeted understudied groups in the New York State
Capital Region to assess baseline knowledge of breast cancer and
determine the effectiveness of newly developed educational tools in
improving knowledge.Methods: We recruited 417 students from five
participating colleges/universities and 67 women from four community
group organizations. Educational intervention involved about an hour-long
lecture on breast cancer using Microsoft PowerPoint presentations
tailored to each of the two participating groups of colleges/universities
and community group organizations. Baseline and post-education knowledge
was assessed via self-administered questionnaires. In addition to
multiple choice questions, pre- and post-education questionnaires
designed for college/university students also contained an open-ended
question soliciting their suggestions for public health preventive
actions against breast cancer. The effectiveness of our education
intervention in improving breast cancer knowledge was estimated using a
paired t-test. Descriptive and qualitative analyses of demographic
variables and answers to the open-ended questions were also
conducted.Results: Our analyses revealed a statistically significant
improvement (P<0.0001) in mean percentage of correct answers among both
participating groups of college/university students (from 39.9% at
baseline to 80.8% post-education) and community group members (from 43.5%
at baseline to 77.8% post-education). The effectiveness remained
statistically significant in stratified analyses (by demographic
variables as well as by other variables such as being or knowing a breast
cancer survivor or having attended a breast cancer lecture or seminar in
the past). Analysis of the answers to the open-ended questions revealed a
shift in the attitudes of college/university students, brought about by
our education intervention, regarding preventive efforts. While secondary
prevention was the major theme pre-education (mentioned by 51% of
respondents), primary prevention emerged as the major theme
post-education (mentioned by 80% of respondents).Conclusions: This
community-based education intervention was motivated by lack of a readily
available breast cancer educational tool as well as lack of information
about baseline knowledge of breast cancer among communities in the New
York State Capital Region. Our findings of low levels of both baseline
knowledge and prior attendance in a breast cancer lecture/seminar by
participants in our study underscore the importance of education
interventions. Our community-based education intervention was effective
in increasing knowledge about breast cancer among college students and
community group members in upstate New York. Our findings provide leads
for public health prevention strategies.

