Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the role of epigenetic mechanisms upon aberrant
signaling network activation.


Growth factor (GF) stimulation of quiescent cells activates critical
receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling pathways as well as waves of
downstream gene expression to drive cell proliferation, survival, and
migration. Aberrant activation of RTK signaling networks is a root cause
of the uncontrolled cell growth and cell survival seen in cancer. In this
study, we aim to uncover the role of epigenetic mechanisms in controlling
the dynamic gene expression changes that occur as a cell is activated
from a quiescent state, in normal and oncogenic cellular contexts. In
order to compare controlled RTK signaling with hyperactive RTK signaling
cellular states, we created a cell culture system to modulate the
duration and intensity of RTK activation. We genetically deleted the
Sprouty (Spry) genes, a family of negative feedback inhibitors of RTK
signaling that function as putative tumor suppressors. The Spry deficient
cells are hypersensitive to several GFs and show significantly enhanced
and prolonged activation of several critical RTK signaling pathways,
including the Ras-MAPK pathway. Additionally, the Spry deficient cells
possess accelerated cell growth and increased tumorigenic potential
compared to their wild-type counterparts. To determine whether this
deregulated signaling results in aberrant gene expression, quiescent Spry
wild-type and deficient cells were stimulated with GFs, and microarrays
were used to profile changes in gene expression over time. Deregulated
RTK signaling due to the absence of Spry leads to abnormal expression of
a large subset of genes. Specifically, many genes display display not
only changes in the level of expression, but aberrant patterns of
response to GF stimulation. We determined that genes with deregulated
activation in Spry deficient cells display significant differences in
histone tail modifications at promoter regions and distal regulatory
elements. Interestingly, these changes are evident in the quiescent
cellular state as well as upon GF-mediated RTK network activation. Our
work suggests that dynamic changes in a cell's epigenetic landscape
contribute to the deregulated activation of genes upon hyperactive RTK
signaling. Our study will provide a comprehensive view of how epigenetic
mechanisms contribute to aberrant gene expression in oncogenic cellular
contexts.

