Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A role for c-Rel in Np63/v-RASHA-driven carcinogenesis?.


The p63 isoform Np63 is expressed in basal keratinocytes and
overexpressed in human squamous cell carcinomas, but the mechanisms
whereby this p53 homologue contributes to cancer pathogenesis have yet to
be elucidated fully. In mimicking the overexpression of Np63 observed in
squamous cell carcinomas using transient adenoviral transduction of
primary murine kerationcytes, we showed that overexpression of Np63
inhibits Ca2+-mediated growth arrest and biochemical differentiation. We
previously reported that this block in growth arrest is mediated via the
NF-B subunit, c-Rel, which accumulates in a phosphorylated form in the
nucleus of Np63-overexpressing cells and physically associates in a
phosphorylation-dependent manner with Np63. Consistent with the observed
effects on growth regulation, Np63:c-Rel complexes bind to a p63 binding
site on the cdk inhibitor p21WAF1. To explore the biological impact of
long-term Np63 overexpression in primary murine keratinocytes,
lentiviruses were developed. Consistent with our transient adenoviral
vector studies, keratinocytes expressing lenti-Np63 have enhanced
proliferation rates over 15 days in culture relative to lenti-GFP
controls. Using a nude mouse grafting model that allows distinction
between normal, benign, and malignant growths, we previously reported
that lenti-GFP keratinocytes expressing oncogenic v-rasHa form well
differentiated papillomas at the graft site, while keratinocytes
expressing lenti-Np63 in combination with v-rasHa form undifferentiated
carcinomas. To expand this model system to study c-Rel we first confirmed
that lentivirus-driven Np63 overexpression results in sustained nuclear
accumulation of the NF-kB subunit c-Rel, consistent with our observations
using the adenovirally transduced cultures. In the lenti-Np63 expressing
cultures, enhancement of c-Rel is observed beginning at day 5
post-infection and is maintained through the latest time point tested, 14
days. Lentiviral c-Rel shRNAs have been developed to assess the
contribution of altered nuclear c-Rel expression to Np63-mediated growth
regulation in vitro and in vivo and have been successfully used to
knockdown c-Rel to the latest time point tested, 28 days. Taken together,
these data support a role for Np63 in facilitating keratinocyte
transformation and provide a model system for elucidating the
contribution of NFkB/c-rel to Np63 /v-rasHa-driven carcinogenesis.

