Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant phospholipid signalling in EBV-associated nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) associated
malignancy that is particularly prevalent in Asia. The main challenges in
the management of NPC include late presentation and severe side effects
of chemo-radiotherapies due to the close proximity of tumours to vital
structures. Two bioactive lipids, lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) and
sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), which signal through G protein-coupled
receptors, regulate many biological processes associated with tumour
development and progression. Therefore, LPA and S1P have emerged as
potential targets in cancer therapies, but the roles of these lipid
molecules in the pathogenesis of NPC have not been investigated.
Microarray analyses revealed differential expression of several key
regulators of LPA and S1P metabolism in NPC cells compared to
non-malignant nasopharyngeal epithelium. Imunohistochemical studies
showed that autotaxin and SPHK1, the key enzymes involved in the
production of LPA and S1P, respectively, were expressed by the tumour
cells in primary NPC tissues. QPCR analyses demonstrated that an
EBV-positive NPC cell line, C666-1, expressed higher levels of autotaxin
and SPHK1 as compared to six EBV-negative NPC cell lines, suggesting that
EBV infection might contribute to the de-regulation of phospholipid
signalling in NPC. The microarray data showed that LPA receptor 5 (LPA5)
was significantly down-regulated in primary NPC tissues and, similarly,
LPA5 protein expression in tumour cells was weak or absent in 17/22
primary NPC cases. Consistent with these findings, LPA5 mRNA levels were
significantly lower in a panel of six EBV-infected cell lines than in
non-infected controls. By treating NPC cell lines with exogenous LPA, we
showed that LPA enhanced the migration of NPC cells in vitro. Given that
NPC is characterised by prominent lymphocyte infiltration, the effect of
LPA on cells within the NPC tumour microenvironment was examined by
treating several clones of EBV-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) in
vitro. LPA inhibited the secretion of IFN- from peptide stimulated CTLs
in a dose-dependent manner, indicating that LPA could inhibit CTL
function. Collectively, our results demonstrate that LPA and S1P
signalling are de-regulated in NPC. Aberrant LPA production may promote a
more aggressive phenotype in NPC and EBV infection might contribute to
the aberrant LPA signalling by down-regulating LPA5. Targeting LPA and/or
its signalling pathways might represent a novel therapeutic strategy with
which to improve the efficiency of EBV-based CTL therapy in NPC patients.

