Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myb contributes to pancreatic cancer growth and metastasis.


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a disease of insidious progression. In most
cases, it is diagnosed late at a stage when it is either locally advanced
or has already metastasized to distant sites, resulting in a poor
prognosis of the patients. Therefore, there is an urgent need to identify
novel molecular targets regulating PC progression and metastasis, so that
an effective treatment strategy can be developed against this devastating
disease. In this study, we investigated the role of Myb in pancreatic
cancer pathogenesis. Myb/c-Myb, a cellular progenitor of v-Myb oncogenes,
is amplified in a sub-set of PC and encodes for a transcription factor.
Myb confers its oncogenic activity by regulating the expression of
several target genes. To examine the pathological significance of Myb in
pancreatic cancer, we silenced its expression in Myb-overexpressing
pancreatic cancer cell lines (Panc1 and MiaPaCa), and ectopically
overexpressed it in a poorly-tumorigenic low Myb-expressing cell line
(BxPC3). Our data showed that short-hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated stable
silencing of Myb in Panc1 and MiaPaCa cells led to diminished growth and
clonogenic ability as compared to their respective scrambled-transfected
control cells. Furthermore, Myb-silenced Panc1 and MiaPaCa cells also
exhibited reduced, motility and invasion as compared to their respective
controls. Accordingly, enhanced growth, clonogenicity, motility and
invasion were observed in Myb-overexpressing BXPC3 cells as compared to
vector only-transfected cells. Immunoblot analyses demonstrated altered
expression of cell cycle- and apoptosis- associated proteins in
Myb-silenced and overexpressing pancreatic cancer cells. Moreover, loss
of mesenchymal and gain of epithelial markers was observed in
Myb-silenced Panc1 and MiaPaCa cells, whereas Myb overexpressing BXPC3
cells exhibited an opposite pattern. These changes were also associated
with actin reorganization, thus suggesting a role of Myb in epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) of PC cells. In vivo studies in orthotopic
mouse model of pancreatic cancer demonstrated decreased tumor growth and
metastasis of the Myb- silenced MiaPaCa cells, while an increase was
observed in Myb-overexpressing BXPC3 cells as compared to their
respective control cells. Altogether, our studies provide the first
experimental evidence for a functional role of Myb in progression and
metastasis of pancreatic cancer.

