Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cluster of apoptotic signaling molecule-enriched rafts (CASMER) as
a new target in the mechanism of action of the antitumor
alkylphospholipid analogue edelfosine and cancer chemotherapy.


Lipid rafts are cholesterol- and sphingolipid-rich liquid ordered
microdomains that float within the liquid disordered bilayer in cell
membranes, and can coalesce upon clustering of their components. Proteins
located in rafts are limited in their ability to freely diffuse over the
plasma membrane. Thus, lipid rafts can form concentrating platforms for
signaling molecules. Edelfosine
(1-O-octadecyl-2-O-methyl-rac-glycero-3-phosphocholine) is the prototype
molecule of a family of unnatural lipids, collectively known as synthetic
alkylphospholipid analogs, which promotes apoptosis in a variety of tumor
cells. Our in vitro and in vivo studies showed the preferential uptake of
edelfosine by tumor cells, accumulating in lipid rafts, and promoting the
intracellular activation of Fas/CD95 death receptor and its recruitment,
together with downstream signaling molecules, in lipid rafts (1,2). This
led us to define the concept of CASMER (cluster of apoptotic signaling
molecule-enriched rafts) (3), which functions as a novel supramolecular
entity in the triggering of apoptosis. Clusters of rafts, containing
recruited Fas/CD95, FADD, and procaspase-8, forming the so-called
death-inducing signaling complex (DISC), were shown to be involved in
edelfosine-induced apoptosis of human T-cell leukemia Jurkat cells
through genetic, biochemical and ultrastructural approaches.
Co-immunoprecipitation and electron microscopy analyses revealed that
edelfosine induced the clustering of DISC-containing rafts (4).
Edelfosine-induced apoptosis in hematologic cancer cells involved both
extrinsic and intrinsic pathways of apoptosis (5), as follows: drug
accumulation in rafts raft reorganization Fas/CD95 recruitment in rafts
DISC Bid cleavage mitochondrial cytochrome c release cell death. We have
further extended the involvement of lipid rafts in the anticancer
activity of additional antitumor agents, including resveratrol (6).
Altogether, our data reveal that cholesterol-containing lipid rafts are a
novel and efficient therapeutic target in blood malignancies, opening a
new avenue in cancer treatment. These data also identify edelfosine as
the first raft-targeted antitumor drug, thus behaving as a lead compound
in the search of new agents for this raft-targeted therapy. These results
provide the proof-of-principle and rationale for further clinical
evaluation of edelfosine as well as of this new raft-targeted therapy to
improve patient outcome in cancer.

