Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Study on the germline mutation and protein expression of hMLH1 and
hMSH2 gene in Chinese HNPCC probands.


BACKGROUND&AIMS: Compare with sporadic colorectal cancer (SCRC),
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) shows its own
characteristcs associated with the molecular mechanism,clinical
features,the methods for treatment and management of HNPCC kindreds. The
molecular genetics basis of HNPCC was the mutation of mismatch repair
(MMR) gene. Some HNPCC families which can found the mutation of MMR gene
didn't fulfil any clinical criteria while more than fifty percent
suspected HNPCC patients can't found mutation of MMR gene. Therefore, the
tumorigenesis of HNPCC must be associated with other disease genes which
have not been credited. The expression of hMLH1 and hMSH2 protein in 50
HNPCC probands fulfilling defferent clinical criteria and the germline
mutation of hMLH1 and hMSH2 gene in 26 probands were analysed. Methods:
The peripheral blood was collected from the probands of 26 HNPCC families
fulfilling different clinical criterial, of which 7 families fulfilled
AC, 19 kindreds fit BG. Genomic DNA was extracted following the
manafacturer's protocol and used as the template to amplify 35 exons of
the 2 genes by PCR. PCR products were purified and used as the template
for direct DNA sequencing. The results of sequencing were analysed by
different bioanalysis software. To further investigate the pathological
effects of detected missense mutations, we analyse the same exon of hPMS2
gene using PCR-based sequencing in 130 healthy persons without family
history. IHC envision two step method was performed.Results: 8 germline
mutation of hMLH1 and hMSH2 was found in 26 HNPCC probands families. 4
fulfilled AC and 4 fulfilled BG..17 probands was found to be hMLH1 and
hMSH2 protein deficient. Conclusion: The rate of germline mutation and
protein expression was 30.8% and 34%. AC are the most sensitve clinical
creteria to predict mutations. Immunohistochemical staining are reliable
screening method with high predictive value for the detection of
mutation. Some suspected HNPCC patients can't found mutation of MMR gene.

