Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting of CXCR4 in NOG mice model of human acute
myeloid leukemia.


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a complex disease with a high mortality
rate despite chemotherapy and allogeneic stem cell transplantation. It is
well established that interactions between leukemic cells and the bone
marrow stroma play a key role in determining whether and how any given
leukemic cells will develop. Thus, many cellular and molecular elements
of the microenvironment are emerging as attractive targets for
therapeutic strategies.Using mouse model of AML, previous studies
reported that targeting the CXCL12/CXCR4 axis by CXCR4 inhibition in vivo
could overcome the resistance of AML cells. However, these leukemic
models obtained through engraftment of leukemic cell lines or transgenic
cells exhibited significant levels of CXCR4 and do not represent all the
heterogeneity of human AML with regard to CXCR4 expression. Indeed, we
first demonstrated that AML patients are heterogeneous for CXCR4
expression and CXCL12 responsiveness suggesting that the efficiency of
CXCR4 targeting might vary among patients. To evaluate whether CXCR4
inhibition could be a therapeutic option in human AML development in
vivo, we first establish of spectrum of murine models using the NOG
immunodeficient mice transplanted with primary patient cells
characterized by a unique level of CXCR4 expression.Seventeen sets of
leukemic mice were generated using primary AML patient cells. Strikingly,
xenotransplanted cells retained the fundamental biological
characteristics of the original disease including the patient specific
pattern of CXCR4 expression and CXCL12 mediated chemotaxis allowing
addressing the roles of CXCR4 in the context of the disease
heterogeneity. When high levels of CXCR4 are expressed at the surface of
AML cells, blocking the receptor function with small molecule inhibitors
could promote leukemic cell death and reduce NOG leukemia-initiating
cells (LICs). Conversely, these drugs had no efficacy when AML cells do
not express CXCR4 or when they do not respond to CXCL12. Thus, our study
identified two groups of AMLs according to their positive or negative
response to CXCR4 inhibitors, and demonstrates for the first time that
CXCR4 blocking agents effectively antagonize CXCL12-promoted leukemic
development in selected patients characterized by high CXCR4 expression
and CXCL12 migratory response. These finding also showed that our
leukemic xenograft models may serve as relevant tools for preclinical
evaluation of novel strategies based on CXCR4 inhibition and for
development of new therapeutic approach targeting the interactions
between AML cells and their microenvironment.

