Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Signaling phenotypes in non-small cell lung cancer and normal lung
defined by kinase activity profiling and phosphoproteomics.


Introduction: Novel treatments are an unmet clinical need for lung
adenocarcinoma patients, particularly for those who have K-RAS mutations
or completely lack known oncogenic driver mutations. This study seeks to
improve our understanding of signaling processes in lung tumors and
normal lung. Complementary proteomic approaches have been applied to
study both kinase activity level and phosphorylation of substrates to
reveal landscapes of signaling in lung cancer and adjacent normal lung
tissue as well as patient-specific portraits. The ultimate goal is to use
these datasets to suggest novel therapeutic interventions along with the
appropriate companion biomarkers for clinical implementation.Experimental
Procedures: Frozen specimens from lung adenocarcinomas and adjacent
normal tissue resected from the same lobe of the lung were selected and
analyzed for comparative phenotyping. An aliquot of each tissue sample
was processed for phosphorylation analysis using phosphotyrosine
immunoprecipitation (Cell Signaling Technologies) followed by SCX
fractionation of the flowthrough and IMAC enrichment of serine/threonine
phosphopeptides and LC-MS/MS peptide cataloging. Differentially
phosphorylated peptides were discovered by MaxQuant label-free analysis,
and selection based on 4-fold differences in ion signal and significant
p-values for t-tests comparing tumor and normal tissue. Another aliquot
was used for activity-based protein profiling (ActivX probes, Thermo)
using ATP-mimics to target active kinases. These samples were analyzed by
LC-MRM to enable targeted kinase detection.Data Summary: These
experiments enabled quantitative comparison of 300 tyrosine
phosphorylation sites, >2,000 serine/threonine phosphorylation sites, and
160 ABPP-labeled peptides that report the activity levels of specific
kinases. Using this information, the overall changes in signaling in
these adenocarcinomas were determined and mapped to pathways; then, the
signaling in tumors from each patient was also examined using the same
techniques. These data indicate common signaling features that can be
disrupted with targeted therapy. As an example, phosphotyrosine
signatures identify conserved changes from tumor to normal (IRS, DDR1,
etc.). In addition, unique phosphosignatures are identified for each
patient that yield insights into their unique driver pathways and explore
signaling networks to explain drug sensitivity, synergy, and
resistance.Conclusions: The combination of phosphoproteomics and kinase
activity profiling provides insight into common upregulated cancer
signaling pathways, which can assist in the selection of targeted
therapeutics. This approach is the first step in defining novel targeted
therapies and the appropriate companion biomarkers that can be assessed
in patient biopsies for individualized lung cancer treatment.

