Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential mechanisms of green tea polyphenols-induced apoptosis
in human prostate cancer cells: Role of p53.


Tumor suppressor gene p53 is frequently inactivated in a variety of human
cancers including prostate cancer and is associated with therapeutic
resistance. We have previously demonstrated that green tea polyphenols
(GTP) induces apoptosis in prostate cancer cells irrespective of p53
status (Carcinogenesis 33:377-84, 2012). However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying these observations are not properly understood. In
the present study we investigated the mechanisms of GTP-induced apoptosis
in human prostate cancer cells with and without functional p53. Human
prostate cancer LNCaP cells were stably transfected with short hairpin-53
(LNCaPshp53) and control vector (LNCaPshV), exposed to GTP in dose and
time dependent manner. GTP exposure induced p53 stabilization and
activation of downstream targets p21/waf1 and Bax in dose-dependent
manner specifically in LNCaPshV cells. However, GTP-induced FAS
upregulation through the activation of c-jun N-terminal kinase resulting
in FADD phosphorylation, caspase-8 activation and truncation of BID
leading to apoptosis was common in both LNCaPshV and LNCaPshp53 cells. In
parallel, treatment of cells with GTP resulted in inhibition of survival
pathway, mediated by Akt deactivation and loss of BAD phosphorylation
more prominently in LNCaPshp53 cells. These distinct routes of cell death
converged to a common pathway leading to loss of mitochondrial
transmembrane potential, cytochrome c release and activation of terminal
caspases resulting in PARP cleavage. GTP-induced apoptosis was attenuated
with JNK inhibitor, SP600125 in both cell lines; whereas PI3K-Akt
inhibitor, LY294002 resulted in increased cell death in LNCaPshp53 cells,
establishing the role of two distinct pathways of GTP-mediated apoptosis.
Furthermore, GTP exposure resulted in the inhibition of class I HDAC
protein, accumulation of acetylated histone H3 in total cellular
chromatin resulting in increased accessibility to bind with the promoter
sequences of p21/waf1 and Bax irrespective of p53 status of cells,
consistent with the effects elicited by HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A.
These results demonstrate that GTP induces prostate cancer cell death by
two distinct mechanisms irrespective of p53 status, thus identifying for
the first time through defined molecular targets for their
chemopreventive and/or therapeutic actions.

