Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous inhibition of EGFR, HER2 and HER3 by an antibody
mixture provides broad and potent tumor inhibition.


Deregulation of HER family members plays an important role in the
development and progression of human cancer, and EGFR and HER2 are also
clinically validated targets in many cancer indications. Accumulating
evidence indicates, however, a high degree of HER family cross-talk and
compensatory signaling leading to resistance upon therapeutic
intervention with one of the receptors. Simultaneous targeting of more
than one HER family receptor in vivo is frequently able to overcome
resistance to the initial drug and the combined treatment is often also
more efficacious than single-receptor targeting alone. Blocking of
signaling from more than one HER family member may thus be necessary to
effectively treat cancer and limit drug resistance.We have generated
Sym013, a mixture of monoclonal antibodies specifically targeting EGFR,
HER2 and HER3. Preclinical testing has shown that Sym013 displays potent
growth inhibitory activity in a broad range of cell lines of diverse
tissue origin and genetic background, including cell lines with acquired
resistance to cetuximab, trastuzumab, or pertuzumab. Sym013 effectively
inhibits all three targets simultaneously and thus prevents compensatory
receptor up-regulation/activation, a commonly observed cellular response
that can lead to drug escape when a single receptor is targeted.
Furthermore, Sym013 is highly efficacious in the presence of EGFR and
HER3 ligands, indicating that it is capable of overcoming acquired
resistance due to increased ligand production. Overall, simultaneous
targeting of three receptors provides broader efficacy than targeting of
a single receptor or any combination of two receptors in the HER family.
The ability to simultaneously inhibit EGFR, HER2 and HER3 in cancer cells
in vitro also translates into broad and efficacious tumor growth
suppression in vivo. All three target specificities have been
demonstrated to contribute to the efficacy of Sym013 in vivo, and there
is a clear benefit of combining HER family target specificities compared
to single-receptor targeting. Sym013 is also highly efficacious in
hard-to-treat KRAS mutated patient-derived pancreatic cancer models, and
is frequently able to overcome resistance to HER family targeted
therapeutics.Our data suggest that a mixture of antibodies, which
simultaneously inhibits EGFR, HER2 and HER3, is superior to existing
targeted therapies in dealing with both primary and acquired resistance
due to intra-tumor heterogeneity and plasticity in terms of HER family
dependency.

