Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization of a Seneca Valley Virus (SVV) 3C protease substrate
for virus-directed enzyme prodrug therapy.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of death among cancer patients, killing
more than prostate, breast, and colon cancers combined. Extensive stage
small cell lung cancer (ES-SCLC) has a median survival time of less than
12 months with current cytotoxic therapies. Therefore, new and more
effective therapies are desperately needed. Recently, a novel cancer
therapeutic has emerged using oncolytic viruses to selectively kill
cancer cells.Seneca Valley Virus (SVV), a newly discovered picornavirus,
was found to selectively infect cancers with neuroendocrine features,
such as SCLC and pediatric brain tumors. Although its method of tropism
is still unknown, SVV has been shown to be highly effective in the
eradication of both solid tumors and pre-formed metastases in multiple in
vivo models. SVV is being tested as a therapy in SCLC and pediatric brain
tumors in clinical trials currently. Neutralizing antibodies are
generated against the virus one to three weeks after initial treatment,
yet the virus has been shown to persist intratumorally for at least a
month after administration. To further increase the eradication of tumor
cells by SVV infection, we are designing and studying a prodrug which
will be activated selectively by the virus own protease.Once SVV infects
a tumor cell, the viral genome is replicated, transcribed, and translated
into a single polyprotein. The SVV 3C protease, one of the mature viral
proteins which cleaves the viral polyprotein, is generated in large
amounts within and around the infected tumor during the virus life cycle.
Using fluorogenic FRET proteins separated by both endogenous and
exogenous protease substrates, we have identified the optimal peptide
substrate specific for the SVV 3C protease. We determined that two of the
ten proposed endogenous 3C substrates were efficiently cleaved in vitro
by a recombinant SVV 3C protease. Surprisingly, the fastest native
substrate, L/VP4, did not contain the picornavirus consensus QGP motif.
We substituted proline for the P2 asparagine in L/VP4, based on the
hypothesis that more closely mimicking the consensus sequence could
further augment efficiency. In fact, this new substrate, L/VP4.1,
demonstrated a 9 fold increase of kcat/KM over the endogenous substrate,
L/VP4. Truncation analysis of L/VP4.1 determined that although the P6
amino acid is not essential for efficient cleavage, additional truncation
significantly decreases or even abolishes proteolysis. This peptide
substrate will be tested in cellular assays to characterize the kinetics
of proteolysis during an SVV infection. The L/VP4.1 optimized substrate
will be used as the basis for generating candidate peptide prodrugs for
use in combination with SVV.

