Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Towards breast cancer drug repurposing based on a pathway modeling
approach.


Molecular connectivity maps between drugs and proteins in specific
disease contexts, especially breast cancer, can be particularly valuable,
offering an opportunity to gain global perspectives on both the
therapeutic and toxicological profiles of drugs. To assess drug
pharmacological effects, we assume that ideal drugs for a patient can
treat or prevent disease by modulating gene expression profiles of the
patient to the similar level with those in healthy people. Starting from
this hypothesis, we build comprehensive disease-gene-drug connectivity
relationships with drug-protein directionality (inhibit/activate)
information based on a computational connectivity maps (CMaps) platform.
In this work, we develop a novel approach based on integrative pathway
modeling using breast cancer as a case study. We identify and rank breast
cancer related drugs/compounds with their overall drug-protein
connectivity map profile. First, we retrieve breast cancer associated
proteins through the CMaps platform by using breast cancer as a query
term. Second, we retrieve breast cancer related pathways by using breast
cancer associated proteins as input and searching in the Human Pathway
Database (HPD), PAGED, and the PubMed. Third, we integrate the breast
cancer related pathways into unified pathway models, from which we
categorize the pharmaceutical effects of candidate drugs on all breast
cancer associated proteins as either therapeutic or toxic. Expression
values are given to all relevant proteins on the pathway. Potential drugs
and targets are retrieved from C-Map, DrugBank, and MetaDrug. Finally, we
transform the integrated pathway into network models and rank drugs based
on the network topological features of drug targets, drug-affecting
genes/proteins, and curated disease-associated proteins. The case studies
correlated very well with the known pharmacological profiles of cancer
drugs, highlighting the significance of the platform that we developed.
Ongoing research can potentially change future drug discovery practices.

