Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ascorbic acid synergistically potentiates antimetastatic effect of
natural products on 4T1 tumors.


Our main objective was to determine the differential response of female
gulonolactone oxidase (Gulo) mice challenged with 4T1 to vitamin C
deficient, subclinical vitamin C sufficient, or vitamin C combined with
other additional natural products (EQC) diets against 4T1 secondary
growth phase metastasis to lungs, kidneys, and liver. Live murine 4T1
cells (5x105) were administered subcutaneously to the right flank of
female Gulo (-/-) mice (n=27) 35-40 weeks of age and 18 age matched
female wild-type mice. Tumors were established for an additional 2 weeks
on subclinical vitamin C (100mg/L in water) in the Gulo (-/-) group, or
with regular food and water in the wild-type vitamin C-generating mice.
Tumor measurements were taken and the Gulo (-/-) mice were distributed
into 3 groups (n=9 in each) to ensure average tumor burden was equivalent
before therapy. Mice were then maintained for an additional 2 weeks on
either subclinical vitamin C in water, subclinical C water + vitamin C
(equivalent to that provided by 0.5% EQC supplemented diet), and
subclinical C water + 0.5% EQC supplemented diet. Wild-type mice received
an additional 2 weeks of either regular murine diet or 0.5% EQC
supplemented food and regular water. At the endpoint, serum was
collected, lungs, livers, and kidneys were evaluated for metastatic
burden, and tissues collected for histology. Tumors were also harvested,
weighed, and sectioned for histology. EQC exhibited the strongest
anti-metastatic effect upon the second growth phase in scorbutic Gulo
(-/-) mice as well as wild type vitamin C generating mice. Gulo (-/-)
mice maintained throughout the study on subclinical vitamin C presented
with the worst outcomes, including novel renal involvement. Vitamin C in
diet equivalent to that in 0.5% EQC afforded only protection against
novel renal pathology, but the metastatic burden was similar to that in
subclinical C group. 0.5% EQC abrogated the cases of moderate to severe
metastasis in scorbutic Gulo (-/-) mice by 16% compared to subclinical
vitamin C group. In wild-type mice, 0.5% EQC abrogated the cases of
moderate to severe metastasis by 37%. This study demonstrates that 0.5%
EQC is superior to vitamin C alone in reducing metastasis from a primary
4T1 tumor and that prior scurvy is deleterious upon host resistance to
primary tumors and reduces the efficacy of subsequent therapy against
metastasis. Prior endogenous vitamin C generation in wild-type mice
before tumor inoculation and continuous vitamin C generation during
therapy with 0.5% EQC suggests that vitamin C both enhances host
resistance and synergistically potentiates the effect of additional
therapy. Tumor mass itself was not related to metastatic burden,
suggesting that differing biochemical composition of the stromal and
tumor structures are responsible for a metastatic or non-metastatic tumor
of equal size.

