Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Mayo Clinic Biobank - A growing resource for cancer related
studies.


BACKGROUND: Biobanks collect and store biological samples and data from
participants for use in research by multiple investigators. The Mayo
Clinic Biobank was established by the Mayo Clinic Center for
Individualized Medicine with a goal to support a wide array of
health-related research studies at Mayo Clinic, including cancer studies.
The Biobank is not focused on any particular disease, however, through
annotation by questionnaires, the Mayo electronic medical record (EMR),
and the Mayo Cancer Registry, it is a useful clinical research resource
for cancer related studies.METHODS: Recruitment started in April 2009.
Our goal is 50,000 enrollees. Eligible subjects are adult Mayo Clinic
patients, U.S residents, and able to consent. Mailed invitations were
sent to patients with appointments in certain Mayo Clinic departments.
Each participant completed a health history questionnaire including a
wide variety of health information as well as whether they or their
1st-degree relatives had ever been diagnosed with specific cancers. For
self-reported cancers, subjects were asked to provide the age they were
first diagnosed. Subjects also provided a blood sample and granted
research access to clinically collected specimens and data from their
Mayo Clinic record, at enrollment and into the future. All research
projects utilizing samples from this resource are required to return to
the Biobank the data generated from their projects.RESULTS: In the first
three years, 21736 subjects consented to participate (30% response rate).
Participants are 58% female, 95% White, and range in age from 18 to 97
with a median age of 62. At enrollment, 74% were residents in Minnesota,
6% in Iowa, 4% in Wisconsin, and 15% in the other states. Twelve percent
reported being a current smoker, while 59% were never smokers. The most
common self-reported cancers at baseline were non-melanoma skin cancer
(n=2950), prostate cancer (n=1107), breast cancer (n=941), melanoma
(n=692), colorectal cancer (n=296), cervical cancer (n=240), sarcoma
(n=233), urinary/bladder (n=211), lymphoma (n=187), thyroid cancer
(n=186), endometrial cancer (n=170), kidney cancer (n=163), lung cancer
(n=145). Excluding non-melanoma skin cancer, 16188 (74%) (6516 male, 9672
female) self-reported being cancer free at baseline. Data will be
presented on the frequency of incident cancers diagnosed since enrollment
in the Biobank. To date, the Biobank has served as a source of controls
for 17 cancer related studies on genetic susceptibility, including
studies of the breast, colon, myeloma, brain, lung, pancreas,
endometrium, and kidneys.CONCLUSIONS: The Mayo Clinic Biobank has quickly
been established as a valuable resource for cancer researchers at Mayo
Clinic - primarily as a source of controls for genetic studies. As the
Biobank continues to grow in sample size and length of follow-up, it will
also serve as a cohort study of cancer incidence embedded within an EMR
of a large health organization.

