Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential inhibitory effects of galeterone, abiraterone,
orteronel and ketoconazole on CYP17A1 and steroidogenesis.


Prostate cancer growth is dependent on androgens. Because the CYP17A1
enzyme plays a central role in converting progestogens to androgens,
inhibitors of CYP17A1 have been developed to treat castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC). CYP17A1 has both hydroxylase and lyase catalytic
functions. However, hydroxylase inhibition causes build-up of
progestogens and mineralocorticoids while also reducing cortisol. This
syndrome, referred to secondary mineralocorticoid excess, causes edema,
hypokalemia and hypertension and is treated clinically with concomitant
steroids. We analyzed four inhibitors for their effects on CYP17A1
hydroxylase and lyase activities, and more globally on the steroidogenic
pathway. Human CYP17A1 expressed in yeast microsomes was incubated with
pregnenolone or 17-hydroxypregnenolone and products quantitated using
LC/MS/MS. Galeterone, abiraterone, orteronel or ketoconazole were added,
and hydroxylase or lyase IC50 values calculated. In a separate
experiment, H295R human adrenocortical carcinoma cells were incubated
with a range of drug concentrations between 0.316 nM and 10 M for 24
hours and media was analyzed for steroid production by LC/MS/MS. We
observed that all drugs inhibited CYP17A1. However, potency and
selectivity for hydroxylase and lyase varied significantly. Galeterone
was the most potent CYP17A1 lyase inhibitor that also exhibited
selectivity (3x more selective for lyase than hydroxylase). In contrast,
abiraterone most selectively inhibited CYP17A1 hydroxylase (by 1.7-fold),
while orteronel and ketoconazole were less potent lyase inhibitors than
galeterone. In the cell-based assay, all drugs at 1 M inhibited
testosterone synthesis by 94%. However, while galeterone produced only
moderate changes in cortisol (decreased 14%) and other intermediate
precursors, evidence of hydroxylase inhibition for the other inhibitors
was supported by significant elevation of progesterone (increased
293-fold by abiraterone), mineralocorticoids (orteronel increased DOC
74-fold), or reductions in cortisol (abiraterone, orteronel, ketoconazole
reduced by 91%, 70% and 94%, respectively). Steroid changes across a
range of drug concentrations from 0.316 nM to 10 M showed evidence of
different potencies for CYP17 hydroxylase and lyase, as well as potential
off-target effects on other enzymes in the steroidogenic pathway. In
summary, we found that galeterone is a selective and potent CYP17A1 lyase
inhibitor that also antagonizes and degrades the AR, and exhibits minimal
evidence of deleterious steroid changes associated with secondary
mineralocorticoid excess. These experimental data recapitulate the Phase
1 clinical experience where no mineralocorticoid excess was observed, or
prednisone required in CRPC patients receiving galeterone therapy.
ARMOR2, a phase 2 clinical study in CRPC, is being initiated in 2012.

