Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prolonged antiangiogenic therapy with oral metronomic topotecan
and pazopanib in pediatric solid tumor mouse model.


Background: We have previously observed that the combination of daily
oral Low Dose Metronomic (LDM) Topotecan (TP) and Pazopanib (PZ)
significantly delayed the tumor growth and enhanced the survival in
neuroblastoma (NB) mouse models (Kumar et al, 2011). However, this
combination (TP+PZ) did not stop tumor growth and the animals eventually
died due to disease during the course of therapy. Therefore, we planned
to investigate the factors contributing to resistance to this
antiangiogenic therapy in NB mouse model.Objectives: To investigate the
effect of prolonged TP+PZ therapy on angiogenesis by testing the effect
of therapy at different durations in NB mice xenograft model.Methods:
Mice bearing subcutaneous SK-N-BE(2) NB xenografts were treated with
either of the four regimens, daily, orally: vehicle (untreated), PZ (150
mg pazopanib), TP (1.0 mg/Kg topotecan), TP+PZ (combination of topotecan
and pazopanib, same doses as single agents). Durations of treatment
planned for each regimen were 28 days, 56 days and 80 days. Animals were
sacrificed after these durations or upon end point, whichever was
earlier. The criteria for end point are tumor sizes exceeding 2.0 cms in
diameter or animals showing signs of morbidity.Results: The animals in
control, PZ, TP reached the end point after 23d, 28d and 46d
respectively. TP+PZ halted the tumor growth for up to 40 days, after
which gradual growth was observed. The mean tumor diameters in the third
TP+PZ group reached 1.8 cms at the day 80. CD31 immunofluorescence
revealed that all the three durations of TP+PZ significantly lowered
microvessel densities compared to the control (P= 0.02, 0.04 and 0.009
respectively for 28, 56 and 80 days respectively). However the ratio of
CD31 to - smooth muscle actin (pericyte marker) stained areas were
significantly higher in animals treated with TP+PZ for 56 and 80days,
compared to control (P=0.0006; 56d and 0.004; 80d) indicating higher
pericyte coverage. TP+PZ (28d) showed signs of necrosis and cell cycle
arrest (Ki67 staining), which were not observed in later durations (56
and 80 days) with TP+PZ. Long-term TP+PZ therapy also increased the
levels of HIF-1 alpha, VEGF and Oct-4 within the tumor tissue.Conclusion:
This study indicates that even though prolonged TP+PZ therapy
demonstrates sustained antiangiogenic activity, it encounters resistance
in NB, potentially mediated by pericyte coverage. Long-term TP+PZ therapy
may also increase tumor stemness.

