Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CEA: A therapeutic target for the treatment of advanced colorectal
cancer.


Introduction: Advanced colorectal cancer (CRC) remains the second most
common cause of cancer mortality worldwide. Carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA) represents one of the few biomarkers approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA). Ectopic expression of CEA induces CRC
metastases, potentially indirectly through activation of STAT3,
stimulating production of IL-6, IL-10 and others. Yet until recently a
clear mechanism of CEA in tumorigenesis has remained elusive. Our study
demonstrated that CEA inactivates the tumor suppressive arm of
transforming growth factor- (TGF-) signaling, providing crucial new
mechanistic information for CEA in promoting aggressive CRC. Moreover, we
previously found that deletion of Smad3/4 adaptor 2SP results in loss of
TGF- signaling, with dramatic and spontaneous formation of CRC,
presenting a strong mouse model of CRC. We hypothesized that CEA
interacts through a specific site targeting the TGF- pathway potentially
TGF-RI leading to aggressive colorectal cancers. Impeding this
interaction by using specific antibodies or peptide inhibitors may be
used as a therapeutic agent to treat advanced CRC.Methods & Results: We
observed that CEA interacts directly with the transforming growth factor-
(TGF-) receptor 1 (TGF-R1) and causes inhibition of downstream TGF- tumor
suppressor signaling. Targeting CEA with either an anti-CEA specific
antibody or siRNA-mediated CEA silencing restores the tumor suppressive
properties of TGF- signaling. Detailed analysis of this interaction
revealed the D7 fragment of CEA responsible for binding with TGF-
receptor I and capable of inhibiting tumor suppressor function of TGF-
signaling as evident by the ability of D7 fragment to reduce phospho
-Smad3 level upon TGF- stimulation. In human CRC, increased CEA levels
are associated with loss of TGF- signaling. Immunohistochemical analysis
of the CRC revealed induction of phospho STAT3 level compared to normal
colon tissue. To impede the CEA mediated suppression of growth inhibitory
TGF- signaling we are currently using antibodies which block this
interaction and reinforce tumor suppressor TGF- signaling.Conclusions:
Our results demonstrate that CEA induces CRC metastasis through
interacting with TGF-R1 and suppressing growth inhibitory TGF- signaling
pathway which is mediated by the D7 fragment of CEA. Inhibiting the
interaction of CEA and TGF-R1 using peptide inhibitors/antibodies /small
molecule inhibitors will be very useful in preventing CRC cell growth and
proliferation. Thus the study holds promise to generate novel therapeutic
agents for the treatment of lethal metastatic CRC.

