Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying the role of TGF in osteogenic prostate cancer to bone
metastases; an integrated biological/mathematical modeling study.


Approximately 90% of patients that succumb to prostate cancer will have
evidence of bone metastasis. Prostate to bone metastases are incurable
with patients often experiencing intense pain. In bone, prostate cancer
cells derive factors necessary for growth and survival by manipulating
bone forming osteoblasts and bone resorbing osteoclasts, resulting in
areas of excessive bone formation/osteogenesis and osteolysis,
respectively. Our group and others have defined transforming growth
factor beta (TGF) as being a key factor in the progression of bone
metastases. Therapeutic inhibition of TGF however, presents a dilemma
since TGF can have differential effects on various cell types in the
tumor-bone microenvironment. Furthermore, the straightforward nature of
current biological assays does not accurately reflect the complexity of a
heterogeneous tumor and the potential impact that TGF inhibition may have
on other cellular components, either individually or in tandem. Our in
vitro experimental results show that prostate cancer-derived conditioned
media promotes osteoblast migration in a TGF-dependent manner and also
stimulates osteoblast proliferation, suggesting that TGF may play a role
in prostate tumor-induced osteogenesis. Using an osteogenic intratibial
PAIII model, we have observed that inhibition of TGF prevented prostate
cancer progression in bone. To determine the mechanism, an integrated
approach where experimental results inform a predictive mathematical
model, allowing for exploration of complex interactions mediated by TGF.
Our model is based on the evolutionary game theory (EGT) paradigm where
the interactions between key cell types and their role on the
evolutionary dynamics of the tumor can be studied. We consider a
heterogeneous tumor made of three subpopulations: TGF ligand- and
receptor-producing cells, TGF receptor producing, and TGF independent,
and also incorporates resident stromal cells osteoblasts and osteoclasts.
Crucially, the fitness of each of cell type as mediated by TGF can
readily be explored. This model suggests that TGF inhibition can hinder
tumor growth but, in some instances, can lead to tumors that become less
reliant on TGF. However, TGF inhibition may prevent prostate
cancer-induced osteogenesis/osteolysis by regulation of
osteoblast/osteoclast precursor recruitment. Histological analyses will
determine the robustness of the mathematical approach and the impact of
TGF inhibition on the tumor-bone microenvironment. The goal of these
studies is to develop a method to predict the efficacy of therapeutically
targeting TGF in prostate to cancer bone metastases.

