Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression and clinical significance of Ezrin in colorectal
cancer metastasis.


Introduction: Colorectal Cancer(CRC) metastasis to distant organ sites is
a major cause of CRC-related death. To date, there are no effective
anti-metastatic therapies available. The purpose of this study was to use
a proteomics-based approach to identify and characterize molecular
targets associated with CRC metastasis.Methods: GFP-labeled GEO human CRC
cells were used to generate subcutaneous xenografts in BALB/c nude mice,
which in turn were orthotopically implanted. This model allows for
reproducible quantitative analysis of metastasis to liver and lungs.
Primary and liver metastases were collected and a 2D-DIGE proteomics
approach was used to characterize the global protein expression in the
primary tumors and the corresponding liver metastases. Tissues were
labeled with CyDye DIGE fluors and analyzed on a single multiplexed gel.
DeCyder in-gel analysis software was used to compare all protein spots
and protein expression ratios between the primary tumor and liver
metastasis were generated. Differential spots were selected, in-gel
digested and peptide mass fingerprints were obtained. Gene microarray
analysis using the Illumina platform was also performed on primary and
metastatic tumors. Westerns were performed to confirm protein expression.
Survival signaling in GEO cells is dependent on the IGF1R pathway and
thus, an IGF1R monoclonal antibody, MK-0646 was used to assess downstream
effects.Results: Differential expression of Ezrin was identified, as it
was increased in liver metastases compared to primary tumors. This was
validated by microarrays and westerns. Ezrin, a protein belonging to the
Ezrin-Radixin-Moesin (ERM) family plays important roles in cell motility,
invasion, tumor progression and metastasis. We also observed that T567
hyperphosphorylation of Ezrin was correlated to CRC metastasis by western
blot analysis of primary tumor with liver metastases. This was further
confirmed by IHC on human CRC patient specimens. Moreover, inhibition of
the IGF-1R signaling pathway by mAb MK-0646 in mouse GEO CRC subcutaneous
xenografts resulted in inhibition of Ezrin phosphorylation at T567,
indicating that Ezrin signaling is downstream of the IGF-1R signaling
pathway. SiRNA knockdown of Ezrin significantly downregulated XIAP, which
is a metastasis gene in this model. Therefore, XIAP is downstream of
IGF-1R-Ezrin signaling.Conclusions: Using a proteomics approach, we
identified ezrin as a potential biomarker for metastasis in CRC. We show
for the first time that Ezrin activation at T567 is downstream of the
IGF-1R signaling pathway and contributes to cell survival in CRC
metastasis. Thus, ezrin might be a novel target that could be utilized
for the development of effective anti-metastatic therapies against CRC.

