Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination therapy of human multiple myeloma using proteosome and
CRM1 inhibitors.


Purpose. Despite improved treatments using proteosome inhibitor- and
immunomodulator-based (thalidomide) therapies human multiple myeloma (MM)
still remains an incurable disease. New therapeutic targets or unique
drug-combinations are needed to further improve treatment outcomes. Our
purpose was to investigate the use of small-molecule inhibitors of the
nuclear export (SINE) in combination with proteosome inhibitors (PI),
bortezomib (BTZ) and carfilzomib (CFZ) as a potential treatment for MM
both in vitro and ex vivo. Methods. Previously, we reported that blocking
nuclear export of topo II with SINE sensitized MM cells to topo II
poisons. In this study, we used SINE inhibitors developed by Karyopharm
Therapeutics, KPT-185, -249 and a new clinical compound KPT-330. In
addition we investigated the use of KOS-2464 (BMS), an effective and
relatively non-toxic analog of the known CRM1 inhibitor LMB. To test the
efficacy of these inhibitors, we treated human MM cell lines, RPMI-8226,
U266B1 and NCI-H929 with SINE +/- PI. MM cell lines or MM patient bone
marrow aspirates were placed at high-density conditions and treated for
20 hours with KPT-drugs (300 nM) or KOS-2464 (10 nM), either concurrently
or sequentially with 10-40 nM BTZ or CFZ. Cells were then assayed for
cell viability by an automated CellTiter-Blue (Promega) analysis.
Additional experiments were performed to investigate time-course of drug
action and dose-dependence. In addition, treated cell lines or
CD138+/light chain+ patient MM cells were assayed for induction of
apoptosis by cleaved caspase 3 staining and flow cytometry. To determine
if the SINE blocked CRM1-mediated export, treated cells were separated
into nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions and assayed for export of p53 and
topo II. Immunofluorescent microscopy was used to confirm fractionation
results. In addition, CRM1 expression levels were measured in all treated
cell lines by both Western blot and quantitative PCR. Results. SINE used
in combination with PI were highly effective against both MM cell lines
and patient MM cells. We found that SINE blocked nuclear export of both
p53 and topo II as shown by nuclear/cytoplasmic fractionation and also by
immunocytochemical staining. Using the CellTiter-Blue assay, we found
that all SINE tested had low IC50 values (nanomolar) as single agents and
functioned synergistically with BTZ and CFZ (CI Purpose. Despite improved
treatments using proteosome inhibitor- and immunomodulator-based
(thalidomide) therapies human multiple myeloma (MM) still remains an
incurable disease. New therapeutic targets or unique drug-combinations
are needed to further improve treatment outcomes. Our purpose was to
investigate the use of small-molecule inhibitors of the nuclear export
(SINE) in combination with proteosome inhibitors (PI), bortezomib (BTZ)
and carfilzomib (CFZ) as a potential treatment for MM both in vitro and
ex vivo. Methods. Previously, we reported that blocking nuclear export of
topo II with SINE sensitized MM cells to topo II poisons. In this study,
we used SINE inhibitors developed by Karyopharm Therapeutics, KPT-185,
-249 and a new clinical compound KPT-330. In addition we investigated the
use of KOS-2464 (BMS), an effective and relatively non-toxic analog of
the known CRM1 inhibitor LMB. To test the efficacy of these inhibitors,
we treated human MM cell lines, RPMI-8226, U266B1 and NCI-H929 with SINE
+/- PI. MM cell lines or MM patient bone marrow aspirates were placed at
high-density conditions and treated for 20 hours with KPT-drugs (300 nM)
or KOS-2464 (10 nM), either concurrently or sequentially with 10-40 nM
BTZ or CFZ. Cells were then assayed for cell viability by an automated
CellTiter-Blue (Promega) analysis. Additional experiments were performed
to investigate time-course of drug action and dose-dependence. In
addition, treated cell lines or CD138+/light chain+ patient MM cells were
assayed for induction of apoptosis by cleaved caspase 3 staining and flow
cytometry. To determine if the SINE blocked CRM1-mediated export, treated
cells were separated into nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions and assayed
for export of p53 and topo II. Immunofluorescent microscopy was used to
confirm fractionation results. In addition, CRM1 expression levels were
measured in all treated cell lines by both Western blot and quantitative
PCR. Results. SINE used in combination with PI were highly effective
against both MM cell lines and patient MM cells. We found that SINE
blocked nuclear export of both p53 and topo II as shown by
nuclear/cytoplasmic fractionation and also by immunocytochemical
staining. Using the CellTiter-Blue assay, we found that all SINE tested
had low IC50 values (nanomolar) as single agents and functioned
synergistically with BTZ and CFZ (CI <0.5). SINE/PI combination therapy
also induced apoptosis in MM cell cultures and patient MM cells (ex
vivo), as shown by caspase 3 cleavage and flow cytometric analyses.
Conclusions. We found that specific, small-molecule CRM1 inhibitors,
sensitized MM cells to BTZ and CFZ as shown by apoptosis and cell
viability assays. Sensitization was found to be synergistic. In addition,
CRM1 inhibiting activity was verified by nuclear/cytoplasmic
fractionation and immunocytochemical staining in MM cells. This
combination therapy may be an effective treatment for multiple myeloma.

