Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 2B3-201, glutathione pegylated liposomal methylprednisolone,
prevents chemotherapy-induced neuropathic pain.


Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy is a dose-limiting
debilitating symptom that can affect many patients treated with
anticancer treatments. The resulting neuropathic pain is thought to be a
peripheral symptom, however, central sensitization has recently been
suggested as a possible causal mechanism for chronic pain conditions;
nociceptive neurons in the dorsal horns of the spinal cord become
sensitized by a neuroinflammatory response through chronic peripheral
tissue damage or inflammation [Zhuo, 2012]. Centrally active
anti-inflammatory therapies, such as methylprednisolone (MP), may
therefore have beneficial therapeutic properties, but its effective use
is limited by several (severe) acute and chronic side effects or highly
invasive local delivery routes. Systemic administrations of encapsulated
MP in glutathione PEGylated liposomes (2B3-201) have recently resulted in
superior efficacy and reduced side effects compared to the free MP in
rodent models with neuroinflammation [Gaillard, 2012]. Therefore, 2B3-201
was hypothesized to have therapeutic value in preventing chemo-induced
neuropathic pain as well.2B3-201 was initially investigated in a
pharmacokinetic and biodistribution study and compared to free MP,
showing an enhanced plasma circulation (half life of 7 hours vs. several
minutes for free MP), and higher sustained levels of 2B3-201 in brain and
spinal cord. Furthermore, 2B3-201 did not result in psychotic-like
behavioral effects in rats, as were caused by free MP. Also, repeated
weekly administrations of 2B3-201 were well tolerated in rats, while the
same weekly doses of free MP were causing side effects.The efficacy of
2B3-201 was investigated at WuXi AppTec (Shanghai, China) in two
chemo-induced neuropathic pain models with demonstrated spinal cord
pathology as a consequence of repeated bortezomib or paclitaxel
administrations. Rats received paclitaxel (1 mg/kg/day, 8x) or bortezomib
(0.2 mg/kg/day, 8x), and the effect of 2B3-201 on mechanical allodynia
was evaluated at three dose levels (10, 20, or 30 mg/kg). Rats were
monitored daily and allodynic measurements were taken at baseline and
from days 4 to 8 after treatment start.The body weight gain of the rats
was slightly inhibited by paclitaxel and bortezomib, and co-therapy with
2B3-201 showed a dose-dependent larger inhibition of weight gain. Despite
the increased signs of chemotherapeutic side effects on body weight,
2B3-201 dose-dependently relieved neuropathic pain in both models. At the
highest dose, the significant effect of 2B3-201 on neuropathic pain was
no longer observed, which was probably due to the more severe
chemotherapeutic side effects.In conclusion, the positive treatment
effect of 2B3-201 against chemotherapy-induced neuropathic pain, in
combination with a good PK, biodistribution and safety profile, warrant
the further development of 2B3-201 for this indication.

