Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Airway necrosis after salvage esophagectomy.


Background: Recently definitive chemoradiotherapy (CRT) without surgery
has been accepted as an alternative treatment for esophageal cancer.
However, unfortunately, the tumors of 5-33% patients were resistant to
CRT and persistent disease was detected soon after treatment, and 16-54%
patients initially showed a response but locoregional disease was
discovered later. Salvage esophagectomy is the sole curative intent
treatment for patients with persistent or recurrent locoregional disease
after definitive CRT for esophageal carcinoma. However, salvage
esophagectomy is a very high-risk operation, and airway necrosis is a
fatal complication.Methods: Between 1997 and 2007, 49 patients with
thoracic esophageal squamous cell carcinoma underwent salvage
esophagectomy after definitive CRT. All patients received more than 50 Gy
of radiation plus concurrent chemotherapy for curative intent. We
retrospectively compared patients with and without airway necrosis.
Additionally, airway necrosis was categorized primary necrosis and
secondary necrosis according to the cause of necrosis, and operative
procedures related to airway necrosis were investigated.Result: Overall
23of 49 patients had at least one complication (morbidity: 46.9%), and 5
died during their hospitalization (mortality: 10.2%). Airway necrosis
occurred in five patients (10.2%), of four patients (80%) died during
their hospitalization. Airway necrosis seemed to be closely related to
operative procedures, such as resection of bronchial artery (BA),
cervical and subcarinal lymph node dissection (LND) and reconstruction
route. Primary necrosis occurred in 3 patients with resection of BA,
cervical LND, or subcarinal LND. And bronchogastric fistula following
necrosis of gastric conduit occured in 2 patients reconstructed through
posterior mediastinal route.Conclusions: Airway necrosis is a highly
lethal complication after salvage esophagectomy. It is important in
salvage esophagectomy to take airway blood supply into consideration
sufficiently and to reconstruct through retrosternal route to prevent
bronchogastric fistula.

