Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of genetic interactors of BRCA2 in mouse embryonic
stem cell model.


Breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer in women worldwide and
mutations in breast cancer susceptible genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the
genetic factors conferring highest risk (40-70%) of developing breast
cancer. Although BRCA proteins are known to maintain genomic stability
mainly by homologous recombination-mediated DNA repair, detailed
mechanisms of how BRCA loss induces tumorigenesis remain unclear.
Interestingly, while inactivation of both alleles of BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes
is necessary for tumor development, their loss in embryonic cells affects
cell viability. To explain this paradox, we hypothesize that cells
lacking BRCA1 or 2 are able to survive and are predisposed to
tumorigenesis due to mutations in other genes such as those involved in
cell cycle regulation or DNA damage response. In the current study, we
propose to identify such genes using a mouse embryonic stem (mES)
cell-based insertional mutagenesis screen. In mES cells with one mutant
allele of Brca2 and the other flanked by loxP sites, cell death can be
induced by Cre-mediated loss of the conditional allele. To identify genes
whose up-regulation can rescue BRCA2 loss-induced cell death, we
transduced these mES cells with murine stem cell retrovirus (MSCV)
expressing Cre recombinase. We obtained Brca2-null ES cells that were
rescued by the viral insertion and used them to clone the viral
insertional sites. We identified several candidate genes that were
upregulated in viable ES cells. One of these genes encodes a PDZ
domain-containing protein, GIPC3. Expression of Gipc3 was elevated 3 to
4-fold in the rescued clone. Furthermore, we rescued the lethality of
Brca2-null ES cells by overexpressing Gipc3. The rescued cells were
hypersensitive to DNA damaging agents and exhibited an overall increase
in genomic instability. Mechanistically, we found DNA damage-induced p21
expression to be attenuated in GIPC3 over-expressing clones. Because p21
is a key mediator of BRCA2 loss-induced cell death, we hypothesize that
GIPC3 overexpression may inhibit p21 expression resulting in viable
Brca2-null ES cells. We are now studying the detailed signaling pathway
of how GIPC3 affects p21 expression. In addition, we are examining if
Gipc3 overxpression can rescue the lethality of Brca2ko/ko embryos and
contribute to tumorigenesis in Brca2ko/+ mice. We are also examining the
expression of GIPC3 in human BRCA2-deficient tumors.

