Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of calmodulin enhances TRA-8-induced apoptosis in
pancreatic cancer cells .


Current chemotherapy and radiotherapy are not curative for pancreatic
cancer. Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand or
agonist antibodies for death receptor 4/5 have been shown to be a
promising cancer therapy. TRA-8, a humanized activating antibody for the
death receptor 5 (DR5), is a potent apoptosis-inducing reagent for cancer
cells. However, several pancreatic cell lines are resistant to
TRA-8-induced apoptosis. We have previously demonstrated that calmodulin
(CaM) antagonists enhance the Fas death receptor-mediated apoptosis
pathway. Therefore, we investigated whether inhibition of CaM might
affect DR5-induced apoptotic signaling in pancreatic cancer cells.We
found that CaM antagonists, trifluoperazine (TFP) and tamoxifen (TMX),
dose dependently enhanced TRA-8-induced apoptosis of the TRA-8-resistant
PANC-1 pancreatic cells. Consistently, TFP and TMX increased
TRA-8-induced activation of caspase 8, caspase 9 and caspase 3.
Pretreatment of PANC-1 with Z-IETD-FMK, the caspase-8 inhibitor,
decreased TFP-enhanced apoptosis by 2 fold, and markedly decreased
caspase 3 activation. Immunoprecipitation analysis of the DR5-induced
death inducing signaling complex (DISC) identified the interaction of CaM
with DR5. Activation of DR-5 by TRA-8 increased the recruitment of CaM
into the DISC, which was inhibited by TFP. In addition, TFP decreased the
recruitment of the adaptor protein, FADD, and other DISC proteins that
regulate cell survival, including Src and the caspase-8 inhibitory
protein FLIP. Collectively, these results support an important role for
CaM in DR5-induced DISC formation, thus regulating DR5-mediated survival
and apoptotic signaling in pancreatic cancer cells.In summary, we have
demonstrated that CaM antagonists sensitize pancreatic cancer cell to TRA
8-induced apoptosis, and that CaM binding to DR5 regulates DR5-induced
DISC formation. Defining the function of CaM in regulating DR5-induced
signaling pathways may lead to novel therapeutic strategies including the
use of CaM antagonists with TRA-8 as combination therapy for pancreatic
cancer.

