Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactive oxygen species and p21Waf1/Cip1 are essential for
radiation-induced accelerated senescence of head and neck cancer cells.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the fifth leading cause
of cancer worldwide and often requires complex, multimodality therapy,
frequently including radiation therapy. The majority of deaths from HNSCC
are due to loco-regional failure, which is largely dependent on the
response of a tumor to external beam radiation therapy (EBRT).Currently,
there are no biomarkers predictive of radio-sensitivity in HNSCC. One
potential biomarker is TP53, the most commonly altered gene in HNSCC,
whose alterations have shown to be prognostic of poor survival. Since
TP53 plays a key role in response to DNA damage, a mechanism of EBRT, we
hypothesized that HNSCC cell lines having mutant p53 (mutp53) or lacking
wild-type p53 (wtp53) expression will be more resistant to EBRT. To test
our hypothesis, we used isogenic paired cell lines with endogenous wtp53
and mutp53 genes and also, generated isogenic cell lines harboring either
wtp53 or 12 different p53 mutants in a p53 null HNSCC cell line
background. Clonogenic assays showed that the 4Gy surviving fraction
(SF4) in cells with mutp53 was significantly higher compared to HNSCC
cells with wtp53.This radio-resistance was associated with a lack of
radiation-induced senescence. Staining with senescence associated
-galactosidase (SA--gal), showed that after treatment with EBRT, wtp53
cells had an average of 50% positive staining compared to Head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the fifth leading cause of cancer
worldwide and often requires complex, multimodality therapy, frequently
including radiation therapy. The majority of deaths from HNSCC are due to
loco-regional failure, which is largely dependent on the response of a
tumor to external beam radiation therapy (EBRT).Currently, there are no
biomarkers predictive of radio-sensitivity in HNSCC. One potential
biomarker is TP53, the most commonly altered gene in HNSCC, whose
alterations have shown to be prognostic of poor survival. Since TP53
plays a key role in response to DNA damage, a mechanism of EBRT, we
hypothesized that HNSCC cell lines having mutant p53 (mutp53) or lacking
wild-type p53 (wtp53) expression will be more resistant to EBRT. To test
our hypothesis, we used isogenic paired cell lines with endogenous wtp53
and mutp53 genes and also, generated isogenic cell lines harboring either
wtp53 or 12 different p53 mutants in a p53 null HNSCC cell line
background. Clonogenic assays showed that the 4Gy surviving fraction
(SF4) in cells with mutp53 was significantly higher compared to HNSCC
cells with wtp53.This radio-resistance was associated with a lack of
radiation-induced senescence. Staining with senescence associated
-galactosidase (SA--gal), showed that after treatment with EBRT, wtp53
cells had an average of 50% positive staining compared to <5% SA--gal
staining in mutp53 cells. In addition, radiation treatment of wtp53 cells
led to induction of CDKN1A (p21Waf1/Cip1), and knockdown of endogenous
p21 in wtp53 cells inhibited EBRT-induced senescence of HNSCC cells,
indicating the critical role of p21 in the therapeutic response to
radiation.In addition to causing double stranded DNA breaks, thus
activating the p53 cascade, EBRT also generates reactive oxygen species
(ROS) which have been implicated in causing senescence. The use of DCFDA,
a fluorescent intracellular marker of ROS, showed a significantly higher
initial burst of ROS levels after ERBT in wtp53 cells compared to mutp53
cells. In addition, the senescence seen after ERBT could be abrogated by
use of the antioxidant, N-acetyl cysteine. Furthermore, the treatment of
wtp53 HNSCC cells with hydrogen peroxide caused a significant level of
SA--gal staining and increased p21 protein levels. Taken together, these
findings suggest a model of EBRT induced ROS leading to p21 induction and
subsequent senescence that is disrupted by the loss of wtp53 expression.
Therefore, treatments which could induce p21 expression in HNSCC cells
deficient of wtp53 may potentially sensitize these radiation-resistant
cells to EBRT. In preliminary studies, we have found that the HDAC
inhibitor, Vorinostat, can upregulate p21 transcription independent of
p53, and sensitize mutp53 cells to ERBT.

