Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spontaneous time-dependent accumulation of interferon-regulatory
factor 9 induces chemo-resistance in colon carcinoma cells independently
of STAT1 signaling.


Spontaneous time-dependent accumulation of interferon-regulatory factor 9
induces chemo-resistance in colon carcinoma cells independently of STAT1
signalingIryna Kolosenko1, Mrten Frykns2, Hanif Rassoolzadeh1, Paola
Pellegrini1, Slavica Brnjic1, Per Johnsson1, Giuseppe Di Lernia1, Dan
Grandr1, Rolf Larsson2, Katja Pokrovskaja Tamm1, Stig Linder1, Angelo De
Milito11 Cancer Center Karolinska, Dep. Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden2 Division of Clinical Pharmacology,
Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University Hospital, 751 85
Uppsala, SwedenSolid tumors contain microenvironments characterized by
hypoxia and limited availability of nutrients. Such metabolically
compromised environments show an increased level of resistance to many
chemotherapeutic agents. Multicellular tumor spheroids (MCS) contain
hypoxic and nutrient-starved cell populations and provide a model to
study multicellular therapy-resistance. We here used 3D cultures of
HCT116 colon cancer cells as a model to identify factors related to
multicellular drug-resistance. Microarray analysis revealed a dramatic
increase in the expression of interferon-alpha (IFN)-regulated genes in
the 3D as compared to 2D cultures. This finding is of significance since
an IFN-related gene signature has previously been associated with therapy
resistance in several human cancers. IFN is known to regulate gene
transcription through transcription complex ISGF3 consisting of STAT1,
STAT2 and IRF9, as well as through STAT1 homodimers. We found that IRF9,
but not STAT1, was consistently induced in colon cancer cell lines grown
in 3D as compared to the 2D cultures. Upregulation of IFN-induced genes
was observed during crowding of monolayer HCT116 cultures, providing both
mechanistic insight as well as a convenient experimental model. STAT1
knock-down experiments showed that induction of IRF9 occurred
independently of STAT1. Interestingly, over-expression of IRF9 rendered
monolayer 2D HCT116 cells significantly more resistant to cisplatin,
docetaxel and etoposide. Vice versa, inhibition of IRF9 expression
significantly increased drug-sensitivity of monolayer HCT116 cells to
cisplatin. Our data further support an association of IFN-related gene
signature and drug resistance and suggest an important role for the
STAT1-independent IRF9 upregulation associated with therapy resistance in
cancer.

