Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Steroid receptor reprogramming of the chromatin landscape:
crosstalk at the genomic level.


Crosstalk between the estrogen receptor (ER) and the glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) plays an important role in controlling many cellular
processes. Physiological interactions between ER and GR are not only
important for the development of certain tissues, such as the uterus and
bone, but also may play an important role in breast cancer. Recent
studies have shown that the GR and ER status in breast cancer is a
significant factor for determining the outcome of the disease. However,
the mechanistic details defining the cellular interactions between ER and
GR are poorly understood. Since the regulation of receptor binding to
response elements controls the transcriptional output in response to
hormones, it is logical to suspect that co-treatment of cells with
corticosteroids and estradiol would have an effect on the genome-wide
binding landscapes for GR and ER. Therefore, using chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing we
investigated the changes in genome-wide binding of ER and GR upon
co-activation and revealed that there is global re-arrangement of steroid
receptor binding. Furthermore, we unveiled a novel mechanism dictating
the molecular interplay between ER and GR. Genome-wide sequencing of
DnaseI hypersensitive sites upon induction of GR shows that GR
facilitates selective access of ER to specific sites in the genome by
maintaining an accessible configuration at these response elements. In
addition, activation of ER can affect chromatin structure at novel GR
binding sites, resulting in a new class of GR binding elements. Further
studies show that at the sites where ER binding is facilitated by GR,
binding to these newly accessible sites is not dependent on the direct
binding of ER to its response element. Instead ER is brought to these
sites through interactions with other factors, such as AP1. Overall,
these studies define genome level interactions between ER and GR whereby
the activation of multiple steroid receptors has a dramatic impact on
controlling which regulatory elements are accessible to each receptor.
The unveiling of this mechanism is important for understanding the
molecular interplay between ER and GR in development and in cancer and
may represent a general mechanism for crosstalk between receptors.

