Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC1 and HIF-1 signaling interactions modulate glucose flux in
pancreatic cancer.


MUC1, a type-I transmembrane protein, is significantly overexpressed in
pancreatic cancer. High expression of MUC1 in pancreatic cancer
correlates with poor prognosis. Pancreatic tumors demonstrate significant
hypoxia, which causes stabilization of HIF-1, a key modulator of
glycolytic gene expression. Recently, we observed that MUC1 occupies
multiple HIF-1regulated glycolytic gene promoters. By performing in vitro
and in vivo studies we observed that MUC1 overexpression causes
up-regulation of glucose uptake, lactate release and expression of genes
involved in glucose metabolism in pancreatic cancer cell lines. Based on
these data we hypothesized that MUC1 regulates the stabilization/activity
of HIF-1 to facilitate the glycolytic phenotype in pancreatic cancer. To
investigate the regulation of HIF-1 by MUC1, we performed lentiviral
shRNA-mediated knock down of HIF-1 in MUC1-overexpressing S2-013 and
Capan1 pancreatic cancer cells and assayed for glucose uptake, lactate
release and glycolytic gene expression. We observed that knocking down
HIF-1 abrogated the MUC1-induced up-regulation of glucose metabolism. To
investigate if MUC1 physically interacts with HIF-1, we performed
co-immunoprecipitation assays by utilizing a mAb against the cytoplasmic
tail of MUC1. Our results indicated significant interaction between MUC1
and HIF-1. Additionally, by performing chromatin immunoprecipitation we
observed that MUC1 co-occupies the promoter regions of ENO1 and PGM2
glycolytic genes along with HIF-1. MUC1 also increased HIF-1 activity by
facilitating P300 recruitment and resultantly enhancing histone3 lysine9
acetylation on the MUC1-occupied promoters. By performing 1H-13C HSQC NMR
experiments on the methanol extracts from MUC1-overexpressing or control
S2-013 cells cultured with 13C-glucose, we observed an increased
glycolytic flux and faster glucose turnover in pancreatic cancer cells.
Furthermore, MUC1 overexpression caused a reduction in the levels of
2-oxoglutarate, a substrate for prolyl hydroxylases that regulate HIF
stability. Thus, MUC1-mediated reduction in 2-oxoglutarate levels
indirectly stabilizes HIF-1 by reducing the activity of prolyl
hydroxylases. Overall, our results demonstrate that MUC1 serves as a
novel metabolic regulator in pancreatic cancer that facilitates
glycolytic flux by increasing HIF-1 stability and activity.

