Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel, small molecule DNA methylation inhibitor SGI-110 as an
ovarian cancer chemosensitizer.


Background: Ovarian cancer (OC) progression is associated with
accumulation of epigenetic changes leading to transcriptional silencing
of tumor suppressor and chemo-responsiveness associated genes. We
recently demonstrated for the first time in a clinical trial that
therapeutic interventions targeting the OC methylome reverse drug
resistance and induce meaningful clinical responses. While the
FDA-approved demethylating agent decitabine is prone to deamination by
cytidine deaminase, SGI-110 (Astex Pharmaceuticals, Inc.), a dinucleotide
analogue of decitabine, is more stable, less toxic, and a promising
alternative to restoring silenced TSG expression in cancer cells by
reversal of DNA methylation. Our previous preclinical evaluation
demonstrated that SGI-110 resensitized platinum-resistant OC cell lines
to cisplatin (CDDP) (3-fold reduction in IC50) and reduced the CDDP IC50
by >2-fold in the A2780 platinum sensitive OC cell line. SGI-110
treatment induced significant demethylation and subsequent
transcriptional derepression of tumor suppressors and
differentiation-associated genes in A2780 ovarian cancer cells. In
addition, non-tumor bearing mice tolerated SGI-110 alone or in
combination with CDDP. Methods: In the current study, we assessed the
activity of SGI-110 in combination with CDDP to retard the growth of
platinum sensitive or drug resistant human ovarian cancer xenografts.
Mice were injected with SGI-110 (2 mg/kg or 5 mg/kg, SQ.) or CDDP (2
mg/kg or 4 mg/kg, IP.) treatment or in combination in a biweekly or QD5
regimen. Results: Significant antitumor activity was observed in the
single SGI-110 and SGI-110 + CDDP treatment in both the biweekly and QD5
regimen mice bearing a subcutaneous A2780 OC xenograft. The effect of
SGI-110 treatment alone was greater than CDDP treatment alone.
Pyrosequencing analysis was use to reaffirm global demethylation by
SGI-110 treatment, based on significant demethylation of LINE1 in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells. As expected, SGI-110 treatment
resulted in derepression of TSGs (MLH1 and RASSF1A), HOXA10 and HOXA11
(differentiation-associated genes), CSNK1D (DNA repair), IL2RG (receptor
subunit in Jak/STAT pathway), and STAT5B (transcription factor) in tumors
(as observed in the in vitro study). To test the hypothesis that SGI-110
treatment influenced DNA adduct formation and repair of cisplatin-DNA
damage, we are currently analyzing the amount of platinum-DNA damage
induced by CDDP treatment using mass spectrometry. Conclusions: The
results of our preclinical study support our recently activated clinical
trial using SGI-110 in combination with carboplatin in patients with
recurrent, platinum-resistant OC.

