Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inactivation of activin signaling pathway accelerates the
development of pancreatic intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms in
vivo.


The association of TGF- pathway with human tumorigenesis has been
rigorously demonstrated. However, little is known about activin
signaling, part of the TGF- family, in pancreatic tumorigenesis. We have
previously reported sporadic mutations of the Activin receptor type 1B
(ACVR1B) in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). To investigate
the significance of ACVR1B in pancreatic tumorigenesis, Acvr1bflox/flox;
Pdx1-Cre mice were generated and examined. Chronic pancreatitis-like
histological changes such as inflammatory cell infiltration, acinar to
ductal metaplasia, and fibrosis were observed in Acvr1b mutant alone mice
older than 8 months of age. In combination with mutant KrasG12D in the
pancreas, Acvr1b deletion accelerated the development of pancreatic
intraductal papillary mucious neoplasms (IPMN), but not the pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasias (PanINs). The IPMN progressed to invasive and
metastatic cancer was observed in this model. The expressions of Cox-2
and phospho-PDK1 are dramatically increased in preneoplastic and
neoplastic lesions, but activated Notch4 expression is exclusively
observed in the IPMN lesions by immunohistochemistry, suggesting that
Notch4 signaling may play a role in the formation or maintenance of the
mucin-rich ductal phenotype in this model. Interestingly, the progression
of IPMN to invasive cancer appears to require additional p16 loss in this
double mutant mouse model. In human IPMN, loss of p16 expression is
associated with increasing grade. Our data provide the first evidence
that Acvr1b acts as a tumor-suppressor in vivo and that activin signaling
plays a predominant role in the development of pancreatic
IPMNs.Significance: PDAC can arise from PanINs or IPMN. It has been
reported previously that disruption of TGF- signaling promotes the
progression of PanIN toPDAC in the TGFRII knockout background. In
contrast, here we present that activin signaling deficiency favors the
development of IPMNs and enhances their progression to PDAC. This
phenotype overlaps with those observed in the Smad4 knockout background,
suggesting that the involvement of activin signaling in the IPMN to PDAC
sequence is Smad4-dependent. Together these data demonstrate that TGF-
superfamily ligands play critical roles in regulating the IPMN-derived
versus PanIN-derived carcinogenesis.

