Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SMURF1 modulates BMP signaling and maintenance of HNSCC cancer
stem cells.


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) possess capabilities for long-term survival
(quiescence), self-renewal and differentiation. In addition, they are
highly implicated in drug resistance and tumor recurrence, which are
associated with treatment failures for many malignancies, including head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP) signaling pathways are involved in orchestrating diverse biological
functions, as well as regulation of embryogenesis, cell differentiation,
proliferation, migration, and apoptosis. BMP signaling is regulated by
SMAD specific E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1 (SMURF1), which has been
implicated in invasiveness in several malignancies. The roles of BMP
signaling and SMURF1 regulation in HNSCC CSC phenotypes and
chemoresistance are not known. Objectives: In this study, our objectives
were to enrich CSC populations from HNSCC cell lines and to characterize
molecular mechanisms promoting CSC survival and drug resistance. Methods:
Enrichment of HNSCC CSCs was performed using long-term
anchorage-independent sphere forming growth under serum-free and low
oxygen conditions. Sphere-forming cells were then characterized for
CSC-like phenotypes using qRT-PCR and immunoblotting for known CSC
markers. Sphere cells also were tested for CSC-like characteristics,
including long-term survival and self-renewal using a sphere reformation
assay, ability to undergo adipogenesis, and chemoresistance. Results: We
determined that sphere-forming cells mimic characteristics previously
attributed to CSCs, showing increased expression of CD44 and BMI1. Sphere
cells also showed markedly higher SMURF1 expression than their monolayer
counterparts cultured under standard anchorage-dependent differentiating
growth conditions, suggesting that these sphere-forming cells may have
reduced BMP signaling, differentiation, and growth. Consistently, BMP
receptor downstream signal transduction was inactivated, as indicated by
decreased phosphorylation of SMAD1/5/8 and down-regulation of downstream
BMP target genes, including ID1 and ID2. Other BMP signaling inhibitors,
BMPER and BAMBI, were upregulated in sphere cells. Resistance to the
anti-cancer agent, cisplatin, was also higher in sphere cells. Knockdown
of SMURF1 expression by shRNA did not affect initial sphere formation and
resistance to cisplatin, but it reduced long-term sphere renewal (or
maintenance) and enhanced adipogenesis. Sphere cells with high SMURF1
expression showed low or no adipogenic differentiation. Conclusion: Our
data suggest that SMURF1 inhibits BMP signaling in HNSCC to maintain the
CSC niche by controlling stemness and quiescence of the CSC population,
but it has no direct effect on chemoresistance. Targeting SMURF1 may
therefore provide a long-term benefit for HNSCC treatment to reduce
resistant CSC populations and disease recurrence.

