Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endocan is upregulated on tumor vessels in invasive bladder cancer
and mediates VEGF-A-induced angiogenesis.


Tumor-associated blood vessels differ from normal vessels at the
morphological and molecular level. Proteins that are only present on
tumor vessels may serve as biomarkers and as therapeutic targets for
inhibition of angiogenesis in cancer. To identify factors contributed by
the tumor-associated endothelium, we performed immuno-laser capture
microdissection (i-LCM) of blood vascular endothelial cells in
conjunction with transcriptional profiling from surgically harvested
cancer and normal matched bladder tissue of five patients with invasive
bladder cancer. Comparing the transcriptional profiles of blood vascular
endothelium from human invasive bladder cancer and from normal bladder
tissue, we found that endocan (endothelial cell-specific molecule-1) was
highly elevated on tumor vessels and associated with the filopodia of
angiogenic endothelial tip cells in invasive bladder cancer. Notably,
endocan expression on tumor vessels strongly correlated with the tumor
stage and invasiveness and predicted a shorter recurrence-free survival
time in non-invasive bladder cancers. Furthermore, both endocan and
VEGF-A levels were significantly higher in plasma of patients with
invasive bladder cancer (n=53) compared to healthy individuals (n=60).
Using cultured blood vascular endothelial cells and an in vivo transgenic
mouse model we found that endocan expression was strongly upregulated by
VEGF-A activation of VEGFR-2. RNA interference-mediated knockdown of
endocan in cultured blood vascular endothelial cells revealed that
endocan was required for the promotion of cell migration and tube
formation by VEGF-A. Furthermore, we found that endocan potentiates
VEGFR-2 phosphorylation in response to VEGF-A. Therefore, blocking the
interaction of endocan with either VEGFR-2 or VEGF-A might represent a
promising approach for inhibiting tumor angiogenesis. Endocan might also
serve as a novel biomarker for monitoring disease progression and the
efficacy of VEGF-A-targeting therapies in patients with bladder cancer.

