Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel role of soluble E-selectin as a chemoatractant to human
leukocytes through the PI3kinase signaling pathway in breast cancer.


Solid tumors are multicellular complexes where the tumor stroma that is
comprised of endothelial cells, pericytes, fibroblasts and immune cells,
all of which orchestrate to assist in cancer cell growth, angiogenesis
and invasion. The tissue infiltration of immune cells is mediated by a
multistep adhesion cascade and involves the selectin family of
calcium-dependent cell surface glycoproteins Among this family,
E-selectin (CD62E, ELAM-1 or LECAM-2) is exclusively expressed on the
surface of endothelial cells in a highly inducible manner in response to
inflammatory cytokines, and consequently an elevated E-selectin
expression has been reported in many types of diseases including cancer.
Endothelial E-selectin (eE-sel) assists in the initial adhesion of
circulatory leukocytes to the surface of vascular endothelium by
interacting with its ligands (sLeX, sLeA and CD44). The external domain
of E-selectin can be cleaved off and shed into the circulation as soluble
E-selectin (sE-sel). sE-sel is present in the serum of cancer patients
and is associated with occurrence of metastases and poor survival in
breast and colorectal cancers. However, the biological relevance of
sE-sel is not clearly understood. In this study, we aim to identify the
biological role of sE-sel in breast cancer growth. We have demonstrated
that sE-sel enhances the adhesion and tissue migration of leukocytes into
breast tumor both in vitro through the activation of PI3 kinase and its
downstream signaling cascade. We have also demonstrated that 7 times more
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) migrate into breast tumor when
pre-incubated with sE-sel as compared to untreated condition. Therefore,
we conclude that sE-sel serves as a chemoattractant that enhances the
tissue migration of leukocytes, which lead to the development of solid
tumor stroma that enhances the growth of breast tumor and invasion.

