Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure/function characterization of SBi4225, a novel inhibitor
of the calcium-binding protein S100B.


The S100 family of proteins displays no enzymatic activity but has been
shown to play roles in an array of biological functions such as calcium
homeostasis, cellular growth, inflammation, and metabolism. The influence
of these homodimeric proteins is mediated through protein-protein
interactions in a typically calcium dependent manner and aberrant
expression of S100 proteins has been linked to a variety of cancers,
cardiomyopathies, and neurological disorders. Of particular interest,
S100B is highly over-expressed in many cancers, including malignant
melanoma (MM). In MM, S100B is used as prognostic indicator in evaluating
treatment success and in predicting relapse. Studies now show that S100B
is more than a clinical marker, and that it binds wild-type p53 in a
calcium-dependent manner, sequestering it, and promoting its degradation.
This results in the loss of p53-dependent tumor suppression activities.
As inhibition of S100B expression by RNA interference restores both
wild-type p53 protein levels and normal transcriptional
activation/apoptosis activities, we have made it our long-term goal is to
specifically inhibit the S100B-p53 interaction in order to restore the
p53 tumor suppression function as a potential therapy for malignant
melanoma. Although we have succeeded in identifying many S100B inhibitors
(also known as SBiXs), optimization studies are a necessary part of the
development of drugs with useful therapeutic activities. Included amongst
these optimization studies are characterizations of structure-activity
relationships (SAR). Our initial SAR studies have resulted in the
development of a second series of SBiXs. Amongst this series is the novel
S100B inhibitor, SBi4225. As part of the cyclical process of SAR studies,
the binding of SBi4225 to S100B has been investigated using X-ray
crystallography. As described within, SBi4225 binds to S100B in a
position and orientation analogous to its predecessors, SBi4211 and SBi1.
NMR data including chemical shift perturbations of 15N isotopically
labeled protein backbone were consistent with the X-ray crystal
structures and demonstrated the relevance of the SBi4225-S100B complex in
solution. This new understanding of the SBi4225 structure/function
relationship will undoubtedly impact the development and optimization of
future SBiXs.

