Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated molecular analysis of ovarian cancer cells identifies
the ATR signaling axis central to cisplatin resistance.


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy due primarily
to the high percentage of women diagnosed at advanced stage. Although
most patients initially respond to treatment, recurrence is common and
second-line treatment is less effective, particularly in
platinum-resistant disease. An integrated molecular analysis of an
ovarian cancer cell line, A2780, and its isogenic cisplatin resistant
line, A2780-CP20, was conducted utilizing next generation sequencing of
the exome and the transcriptome (RNA-seq), along with a comprehensive
analysis of the proteome and the phosphoproteome. Integration of these
data revealed a number of differentially expressed candidates at the
level of the proteome, the mechanistic nature of which could be explained
by mutational status or differential splicing. We focused our attention
on the ataxia telangiectasia mutated and Rad3-related (ATR) kinase. ATR
activity is induced by DNA damage when single strand DNA results from
persistently stalled replication forks. The gene and transcript for ATR
were observed as mutated, alternatively spliced or altered at the
transcript level in A2780-CP20 versus A2780 cells. The gene product was
identified and validated to be 50-fold elevated in A2780-CP20 relative to
A2780 cells. We hypothesized that inhibition of ATR would sensitize
ovarian cancer cells to cisplatin-induced DNA lesions. To test this
hypothesis undifferentiated (A2780, A2780-CP20) and papillary serous
ovarian cancer cells (OV90 and OVCAR3) were challenged with cisplatin in
the presence and absence of a selective ATR small molecule inhibitor (5 M
ATRi, ETP46464). The results demonstrate significantly increased
cisplatin sensitivity in all cell lines tested by 54-99%. We further
evaluated the ATR signaling axis, and repeated the cisplatin challenge
experiments with a selective small molecule inhibitor against the
serine/threonine kinase Chk1 (LY2603618), a downstream target that is
phosphorylated by activated ATR. Similarly to what we observed with
inhibition of ATR, these data reveal significant sensitization of ovarian
cancer cells to cisplatin when co-cultured with the Chk1 inhibitor. To
evaluate the selectivity of this sensitization response, the ovarian
cancer cells were co-cultured with a selective inhibitor to the
serine/threonine kinase Chk2
(2-(4-(4-Chlorophenoxy)phenyl)-1H-benzimidazole-5-carboxamide), which
revealed no change in cisplatin sensitivity. We conclude that selective
inhibition of ATR or Chk1, but not Chk2, significantly sensitizes ovarian
carcinoma cell lines to cisplatin. Furthermore, we suggest that ATR and
Chk1 represent key signaling nodes that are centrally involved in
cisplatin resistance in ovarian cancer, and therefore represent
attractive candidates for molecularly targeted therapy in the setting of
resistant/recurrent ovarian cancer.

