Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Appropriate conditioning of CD4+T cells for antitumor
immunotherapy.


It is now evident that lymphodepleting cytotoxic regimens augment
antitumor immunity. We and others have demonstrated that transfer of nave
T cells after sublethal whole body irradiation induces antitumor effector
T cells and inhibits tumor progression. We recently reported that
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Treg) largely increased after whole
body irradiation and suppressed the development of antitumor immune
responses during recovery from lymphopenia. Depletion of these
radio-resistant Treg following lymphodepletion significantly enhanced
antitumor immunity (Baba J, et al. 2012, Blood). The combination of
lymphodepletion and transfer of nave T cells seems to be a promising
approach for antitumor immunotherapy. But harvesting sufficient number of
T lymphocytes from tumor-bearing patients is difficult. To obtain enough
number of T cells that were capable of recognizing tumor-antigens, we
expanded nave T cells in vitro with culturing in CM containing several
cytokines. CD4 or CD8 T cells from nave spleens were activated with
immobilized anti-CD3 mAbs for 2 days. Stimulated cells were maintained in
CM with the combination of IL-2 (16 U/ml), IL-7 (10 ng/ml), IL-15 (10
ng/ml) and IL-23 (2 ng/ml) for additional 7 days. TCR-V expressions of
cultured T cells revealed that they maintained TCR diversity. To evaluate
antitumor effects of these cells, mice were irradiated with 500 cGy to
deplete lymphocytes and were transferred i.v. with the cultured T cells
(4 x 107). On the same day, mice were inoculated s.c. with MCA205 tumor
cells (1 x 105). We found that expanded CD4+ T cells mediated regression
of s.c. tumors. In contrast, CD8+ T cells alone did not have therapeutic
effects even combined with depletion of Treg. Next, we examined T cells
proliferation by labeling with the CFSE and evaluated IFN- production
after stimulation with specific tumor cells. Cultured CD4+ T cells
proliferated rapidly and developed into tumor-specific effector T cells
after transfer into lymphopenic hosts. Because CD4+ T cells from OT-II
mice, that recognize Ovalbumin peptide specifically, did not show any
antitumor effects after transfer into lymphopenic mice, this antitumor
activity of CD4+ T cells is more likely to be tumor-antigen specific.
Interestingly, using irradiated Rag-2 knockout mice as recipient
abrogated antitumor effects of transferred cultured CD4+ T cells. Our
results indicated that the combination of lymphodepletion and transfer of
in vitro expanded CD4+ T cells has a potent antitumor efficacy, and
recipient cells from irradiated hosts play a role in this treatment model.

