Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of a cell cycle inhibitory peptide fused to
elastin-like polypeptide on pancreatic cancer cells with hyperthermia and
its combination with gemcitabine.


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth most common cause of death in United
States. Gemcitabine, a pyrimidine nucleoside analogue similar to
cytarabine, has been used as a first line treatment for pancreatic cancer
since 1997. However, its use has been limited by the side effects such as
myelosuppression. So far, many efforts have been made to combine
gemcitabine with other drugs, but have failed to prove superior to
gemcitabine alone. This work describes the effects of genetically
engineered elastin - like polypeptide (ELP) with the p21 Waf1/Cip1 -
derived cell cycle inhibitory peptide (p21) on pancreatic tumor cells
with or without gemcitabine. ELP is a thermally responsive polypeptide
carrier that are soluble in aqueous solutions at physiological
temperature (37 C), but aggregate when the temperature is raised above
its transition temperature (Tt, 42 C). This allows it to be a promising
thermally responsive therapeutic carrier that may be actively targeted to
solid tumors by application of focused hyperthermia. For this study, we
designed p21-ELP conjugates modified with the cell penetrating peptide,
Bac, on the C-terminus of ELP. The anti-proliferative activity of
p21-ELP-Bac was greater in with the presence of hyperthermia, and the
combination therapy with gemcitabine showed the synergism on three
pancreatic cancer cells - S2013, Panc-1, and Mia PaCa-2 in vitro. The
reduced phosphorylated Rb level and the decrease of S- phase population
in tumor cells treated with p21-ELP-Bac conjugates proves that the
cytotoxicity which is based on cell cycle inhibition. In the S2013
pancreatic xenograft model, p21-ELP-Bac showed significant tumor growth
inhibition in the presence of local hyperthermia; and this tumor growth
inhibition was further enhanced upon co-treatment with gemcitabine. This
combinatorial effect is expected to alleviate the toxicity of gemcitabine
by reducing the dose in the clinics. Overall, our data suggest that
thermal targeting of ELP-based therapeutic peptides to the pancreatic
cancer cells is an effective and promising treatment strategy, especially
in combination with gemcitabine.

