Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Compound 1, a quinoxaline-based small molecule, regulates the
cancer cell proliferantion by the down-regulation of maternal embryonic
leucine zipper kinase gene expression in brain tumor cells.


Maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase (MELK), a member of the
snf1/AMPK family of serine-threonine kinase, was indicated in stem cell
renewal, cell cycle progression. Recently, several groups reported that
MELK expression level is highly correlated with malignancy of a variety
of tumors and its expression in the cancer cells is a negative factor of
radiotherapy in cancer patients. Therefore, MELK can be a good target for
cancer drug development. Previously, we tested the neuronal cell
differentiation by the compound-1, a quinoxaline-based small molecule,
with rat mesenchymal stem cells, and we found that the gene expression
level of MELK is dramatically decreased in the differentiated cells in
comparison with the parental stem cells. Based on this phenomenon, we
checked the MELK gene expression in the several central nerve system
cancer cell lines such as U87MG, XL498 and SNB19, and examined the change
of the gene expression level by treatment of compound 1. All the cancer
cells tested in this study expressed the MELK gene and its expression
level is significantly decreased by the treatment of 20 uM compound 1. To
confirm the relationship between the MELK gene expression and cell
proliferation in brain tumor cells, we transfected the MELK gene to the
U87MG cells and tested the cell growth rate in the presence or absence of
compound 1 in comparison with parental cells. The cell growth rate of
MELK gene-transfected cancer cells increased in comparison with the
non-transfected control cells, and its overexpression can recover the
down-regulation of the cell proliferation by treatment of compound 1.
Meanwhile, the treatment of MELK gene siRNA decreased the cell
proliferation rate of the U87MG cells in time dependent manner. In the
cell cycle analysis, compound 1 induced both the increase of apoptotic
cell rate from less than 5% to 22% and the decrease of G0/G1 phase U87MG
cells in comparison with control. Meanwhile, the S and G2/M phase is not
changed by the treatment of compound 1 in the U87MG cells. These results
support MELK has an effect on regulation of cancer cell proliferation,
and it may be a good target for cancer drug development.

