Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein pathway activation mapping analysis of metastatic breast
cancer reveals potential new targets for personalized therapy.


Introduction: It is well known that the development of distant metastasis
is the strongest prognostic factor associated with cancer mortality.
Recent genomic and proteomic studies have demonstrated that the molecular
profile of the metastatic lesions significantly differs from the primary
tumor. For this reason, to improve response to therapy the identification
of new drug targets needs to be based on the molecular profile of the
metastatic lesions rather than the primary tumor. Since most targeted
therapies work by modulating hyperactivated protein kinase signaling, the
aim of this study was to utilize reverse phase protein arrays (RPPA) to
quantitatively measure the drug target signaling architecture to identify
new therapeutic options for Stage IV breast cancer patients based on the
molecular profile of the metastatic lesion. Methods: Snap frozen material
collected from 25 metastatic breast cancer patients enrolled in a
prospective phase II trial (Side Out 1) were used for this study. Sites
of metastasis were: liver (n=12), skin (n=5), lymph nodes (n=5), breast
(n=2), and pelvis (n=1). All samples were subjected to Laser Capture
Microdissection (LCM) and RPPA whereby the activation/phosphorylation
level of 55 drug targets and linked substrates for FDA
cleared/experimental therapies were measured. Results: Unsupervised
hieratical clustering analysis revealed distinct patient subgroups driven
largely by pathway activation more than by site of metastasis. Based on
the activation level of the drug targets and the downstream effectors,
three major clusters were identified. Each cluster appeared to be driven
by a specific subset of drug targets: a) pan-HER family members, b)
EGFR/SRC/ERK/mTOR, and c) IGFR/RAF/MEK/PLK1. Conclusion: This is the
first study evaluating the activation status of FDA approved/experimental
drug targets and downstream effectors in a relatively large number of
breast cancer metastatic lesions. This type of approach provides a unique
opportunity for identifying new drug targets for this group of patients
and provides initial insights on which pathways should be considered in
the delivery of targeted therapy to this group of patients.1. A Pilot
Study Utilizing Molecular Profiling by IHC, FISH, DNA Microarray, and
Reverse Phase Protein Microarray (RPMA) of Patients Tumors to Find
Potential Targets and Select Treatments for Patients with Metastatic
Breast Cancer, sponsored by the Side Out Foundation

