Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HDAC inhibition induces Bim expression and apoptosis in breast
cancer cells undergoing paclitaxel or antiestrogen treatment.


Paclitaxel functions by preventing microtubule degradation, leading to
mitotic arrest and apoptotic death. Of particular interest,
paclitaxel-induced death in breast cancer cells is dependent, in part, on
the levels of BimEL, a pro-apoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family of
proteins. In addition, our recent studies demonstrated that BimEL is
required for 4-hydroxytamoxifen-induced apoptosis of estrogen receptor
positive (ER+) MCF-7 breast cancer cells [Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Mar
19;14(2):R52]. In contrast, we demonstrated low-level BimEL expression in
ER+ T47D breast cancer cells that do not undergo antiestrogen-induced
apoptosis. Thus, low-level BimEL expression in ER+ breast cancer may
predict a poor apoptotic threshold which ultimately would facilitate the
development of acqured resistance to paclitaxel, as well as antiestrogen
therapy. Based on the ability of HDAC inhibitors to increase the
transcription of pro-apoptotic genes, we hypothesized that the HDAC
inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) would increase BimEL
expression in T47D breast cancer cells and induce a robust apoptotic
response to paclitaxel chemotherapy and antiestrogen treatment. In this
study, we now demonstrate that SAHA does significantly up-regulate BimEL
expression in T47D cells, as well as in MCF-7 cells. Concomitant with
BimEL upregulation, SAHA sensitizes T47D and MCF-7 cells to
paclitaxel-induced apoptosis. Similarly, SAHA sensitizes T-47D cells to
antiestrogen-induced apoptosis, while augmenting the level of
antiestrogen-induced apoptosis in MCF-7 cells. These studies indicate
that the pro-apoptotic protein BimEL is required for SAHA-induced
sensitization of breast cancer cells to paclitaxel and/or
antiestrogen-induced apoptosis. Currently, siRNA studies are being
conducted to determine if BimEL is a key death effector in response to
SAHA treatment and if the increased death from SAHA and paclitaxel or
SAHA and antiestrogens is synergistic or additive. Our results provide
strong support for the use of HDAC inhibitors when designing novel
combination therapies to reduce the emergence of acquired resistance in
breast cancer cells undergoing chemo- or antihormonal
therapy.Acknowledgement: this work was supported by teh MCG foundation
and NIHRO1 CA121438 to P.V.S.

