Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Birinapant, a novel bivalent Smac mimetic drug, is superior to
monovalent Smac mimetics in inhibition of NF-kB by targeting TRAF2-bound
cIAP1 and cIAP2.


A variety of Smac-mimetic drugs have been developed to target the
inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) proteins including X chromosome-linked IAP
(XIAP), cellular IAP proteins (cIAP1 and cIAP2) and ML-IAP whose gene
mutations, amplifications and chromosomal translocations have been
implicated in various malignancies. The IAPs also play an important role
in multiple signaling pathways including the TNF-mediated NF-kB and MAPK
pathways (inflammatory responses) and pattern recognition receptor
signaling pathways (innate immunity). Smac-mimetics have been designed to
mimic the IAP-binding motif of the second mitochondria-derived activator
of caspase (Smac). The IAP-binding motif consists of four amino acids
(AVPI) that serve as an endogenous IAP antagonist. Structurally different
Smac-mimetic compounds have been published and showed different binding
affinity to IAP proteins. These differences in structure and binding have
important consequences in terms of biological activity. Here, we present
evidence that bivalent Smac-mimetics are superior to monovalent
Smac-mimetics in their ability to inhibit NF-kB in cells stimulated with
TNF. Over 300 monovalent and 300 bivalent Smac-mimetics, including
compounds whose structures have been published, were tested for ability
to degrade cIAP1 and cIAP2, and inhibit NF-kB in cell-based assays.
Inhibition of NF-kB by bivalent Smac-mimetics correlated (R=0.78) with
the degradation of cIAP1 over a range of four logs, while monovalent
Smac-mimetics did not (R=0.20). Furthermore, monovalent Smac-mimetics
degraded TRAF2-bound cIAP1 and cIAP2 less effectively (1/10-1/100 fold)
compared to bivalent Smac-mimetics. While bivalent Smac-mimetics
effectively degraded cIAP1 and cIAP2, birinapant (TL32711), a bivalent
Smac-mimetic currently in Phase 2 clinical trials, was unique in its
ability to preferentially degrade TRAF2-bound cIAP1 and cIAP2. Inhibition
of NF-kB by birinapant was further characterized by the ImageStream
cytometry, which showed that the nuclear translocation of p65 in response
to TNF stimulation was blocked in both HeLa and HL-60 cells. These data
demonstrate that bivalent Smac-mimetics are superior to monovalent
Smac-mimetics in degrading TRAF2-bound cIAPs, in inhibition of NF-kB and
efficiently mediating cell death. Furthermore, the unique profile of
birinapant versus other bivalent Smac-mimetics may explain its
preclinical and clinical safety profile.

