Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation in skin cancer: global DNA methylation
profiling in DMBA/TPA induced mice.


Hypermethylation of CpG islands in the promoter regions of tumor
suppressor genes is postulated to be the most relevant epigenetic changes
resulting in gene silencing of tumor suppressor gene in cancer.
Transcriptionally repressed genes by epigenetic regulation can be
reactivated by epigenetic modifications because these silenced genes are
still genetically intact. Thus, it is relevant to profile global DNA
methylation changes that occur in early stages of carcinogenesis (Jones &
Baylin, 2002). To begin addressing this issue, we conducted global
profiling of DNA methylation changes in a well-established multistage
skin carcinogenesis model using methylated DNA immunoprecipitation
(Medip) coupled with CpG island microarray. Tumorigenesis was induced by
sequential topical application of mutagen 7,12-Dimethylbenz(a)anthracene
(DMBA), and promoting agent 12-O-tetra-decanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA),
on the dorsal skin of normal CD-1 mice. After 12 weeks, animals were
sacrificed and DNA extracted from papillomas. Methylation enriched DNA
fragments were pulled down and hybridized to CpG microarray covering
16,030 CpG islands (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) The results show that
significant changes in DNA methylation profile between normal skin and
DMBA/TPA induced papilloma, analyzed by Genespring and Bioconductor.
After normalization of probe with the gene, 186 genes from 9,867 of
up-regulated methylation genes showed at least average 2-fold changes and
these include some DNA damage and repair, oxidative stress and
inflammatory genes such as Gadd45b and Arnt2. In summary, DMBA/TPA
induced mouse skin papilloma undergo extensive aberrant CpG island
hypermethylation. Genes detected from Medip-chip assay may be utilized as
a potential epigenetic tool to study skin cancer.Jones, P. A., & Baylin,
S. B. (2002). The fundamental role of epigenetic events in cancer. Nature
Reviews Genetics, 3, 415-428.

