Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quality and feasibility of a protocol for simultaneous isolation
of RNA, DNA and tissue for IHC from needle core lymph node biopsies in
DLBCL adapted for multi-center trials.


Introduction: Personalized medicine strategies targeting specific
aberrations unique to an individual tumor, are promising to become a new
paradigm in the fight against cancer. Such tailored approaches rely on
the thorough profiling of malignant tissues by high-throughput
technologies followed by selection of appropriate treatment targeting
tumor-specific aberrations. One fundamental challenge, whose resolution
is necessary for any successful personalized medicine endeavor, is
isolation of useful amounts of good quality molecular material for
reliable tumor characterization in downstream assays. Here, we describe
our standardized protocol for biopsy collection and results from a
multi-center phase II clinical trial investigating the use of
panobinostat with or without rituximab in relapsed diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (NCT01238692).Results: Biopsies are performed with patient
consent, before treatment initiation and after 15 days of treatment, in
patients with safely accessible lesions. Four needle core biopsies are
collected at each time point using standard operating procedures to limit
pre-analytical variability. Of these, one is preserved in formalin for
immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses, while the remaining three are pooled
together in RPMI 1640 media. These samples are sent to a central
laboratory for further processing. The needle cores in RPMI 1640 undergo
B-cell purification using a negative selection kit (StemCell
Technologies). Isolation of tumor RNA and DNA is performed using a
commercially available kit (Qiagen).Of the 23 patients currently
enrolled, 16 (70%) have had a pre-treatment biopsy performed and of
these, 7 (44% of those biopsied, 30% of all patients) have also had a
post-treatment biopsy, demonstrating the feasibility of tissue collection
at participating sites. We assess the effect of transport on the quality
and yield of RNA and DNA as well as differences in quality and yield
between pre-treatment biopsy vs. biopsies at day 15. The material
isolated from these biopsies is evaluated for suitability in downstream
applications, namely IHC, gene expression microarray and DNA exome
sequencing.Conclusions: The development of standard operating procedures
for the collection and processing of biospecimens is essential to control
for pre-analytical variability inherent to multicenter trials. Our
experience shows that this is both feasible and crucial to understanding
of tumor molecular profile changes associated with treatment. Our
protocol allows extraction of RNA and DNA of sufficient quality and
quantity to permit downstream multi-dimensional analysis. Patient
acceptance of research biopsies has been high although the rate of
pre-treatment biopsies is greater than that of post-treatment biopsies.
Finally, our work demonstrates that the timing of post-treatment biopsies
is critical.

