Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NQO1-dependent anticancer action with combination -lapachone and
ionizing radiation in the head and neck cancer.


The number of new cases of oral cavity, pharynx and larynx cancers is
estimated be 52,610 in 2012 with an expected 11,500 deaths. Despite
progressive improvements in outcome, current treatment approaches still
result in an overall survival rate of approximately 50% at five years for
locally advanced head and neck cancer (HNC). Additional therapeutic
approaches are needed to further enhance outcomes. NAD(P)H:quinone
oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) is a two-electron oxidoreductase that reduces
quinones to hydroquinones and has been shown to be overexpressed in a
number of solid tumors. For the first time, our studies in 45 HNC cell
lines identified NQO1 overexpression in more than 70% of HNC cell lines.
Furthermore over-expression of NQO1 has been shown to be a critical
determinant for tumor-selective therapy using -lapachone (-lap), a
substrate of NQO1 that undergoes partial reduction and spontaneous
reversion, creating a futile cycle that produces very high levels of
reactive oxygen species. HNC cell lines that overexpress NQO1 are
significantly killed by treatment with -lap. The anti-cancer action of
-lap in HNC cells is initiated and processed through five essential
downstream mediators: (i) reactive oxygen species (ROS), particularly
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2); (ii) DNA single strand breaks (SSBs) induced by
ROS; (iii) hyperactivation of poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase-1 (PARP1) and
accompanying poly(ADP-ribose)-PARP1 (PAR) formation; (iv) dramatic
NAD+/ATP depletion; and (v) programmed necrosis (necroptosis). In
combination with ionizing radiation (IR), -Lap radiosensitized NQO1(+)
HNC cells under conditions where nontoxic doses of either agent alone did
not achieve threshold levels of DNA lesions and /or SSBs required for
PARP-1 hyper-activation. Furthermore, combination therapy with -lap and
IR significantly enhanced -H2AX and 53BP1 foci formation and PARP-1
hyper-activation which was associated with ATP loss and induction of
programmed cell death. Furthermore, the anticancer effects of combination
-Lap and IR were blocked by the NQO1 inhibitor dicoumarol. Our findings
offer a strategy for the clinical utilization of -lap as a
radiosensitizer in HNC.

