Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteasome inhibition as a strategy for non-small cell lung
carcinoma via inhibition of DNA double strand break repair.


Background: Each year, 60,000 US patients are diagnosed with locally
advanced non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). Despite optimal radiation
therapy (RT), chemotherapy +/- surgery, over 30% of patients fails
locoregionally. The addition of concurrent chemotherapy to RT adds only
5% absolute survival benefit. Novel radiosensitizers may improve the
therapeutic index. To identify the best potential targets, we performed
whole genome RNAi screens that identified several proteasome subunits
among top genes whose knockdown increased NSCLC cytotoxicity.Materials
and Methods: Cytotoxicity was assessed by luminescent cell viability and
clonogenic assays. Homologous recombination (HR) and non-homologous
end-joining (NHEJ) were assessed using NSCLC cell lines transduced with
reporter constructs that express GFP upon repair of I-SceI-induced DNA
double strand breaks (DSBs). DNA damage-induced focus formation was
assessed by immunofluorescence, scoring % of cells showing 5 foci. In
vivo radiosensitization by proteasome gene knockdown was assessed using
NCr nude mice injected with 1x106 NCI-H460 cells stably transfected with
inducible PSMA1 shRNA. Once tumors reached 3 mm, knockdown was induced
with doxycycline, and then one week later, RT to a dose of 20 Gy in 5
fractions was initiated.Results: Radiation and proteasome inhibition
showed synergistic cytotoxicity. Irradiation of A549 cells with 1 Gy x 3
decreased clonogenic survival by 58% compared to control, while ionizing
radiation (IR) plus 10 nM bortezomib decreased survival by 74% compared
to bortezomib alone. Similar results were seen in NCI-H460. Proteasome
inhibition via bortezomib or PSMA1 siRNA knockdown resulted in 80-90%
decreased HR and NHEJ. Additionally, bortezomib or PSMA1 shRNA knockdown
resulted in 50% decreases in BRCA1, FANCD2 or RAD51 IR-induced focus
formation. Treatment of NCI-H460 xenografts with RT in the setting of
PSMA1 knockdown showed marked improvements in survival; at 100 days post
treatment initiation, only 20% of RT-only treated mice and 30% of
doxycycline-treated mice (for PSMA1 shRNA knockdown in tumors) survived,
compared to 100% following dual treatment (n = 10 per arm). There was a
statistically significant difference in survival between mice with tumors
treated with RT alone vs. RT + PSMA1 knockdown, with median survivals of
43 days vs. not reached, P = .0003 by the log-rank test.Conclusions:
Proteasome inhibition has emerged as a promising target in NSCLC
radiosensitization with evidence indicating the mechanism is through
inhibition of DNA DSB repair pathways HR and NHEJ.

