Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical candidate galeterone (VN/124-1 or TOK-001) induces the
degradation of full-length and splice variant androgen receptors in human
prostate cancer cell lines via PI3K-Akt-Mdm2 pathway: implications for
prostate cancer therapy.


Galeterone (VN/124-1; TOK-001;
3-hydroxy-17-(1H-benzimidazol-1-yl)androsta-5,16-diene) is a proprietary
oral small molecule under clinical development for the treatment of
castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Galeterone (hereafter
referred to as gal) disrupts androgen receptor (AR) signaling through a
unique triple mechanism of action, including inhibition of CYP17
(androgen synthesis inhibition), AR antagonism and degradation of AR.
Although we have previously unraveled the mechanisms of CYP17 inhibition
and AR antagonism, the mechanism of AR degradation is still being
elucidated. Here, we report for the first time the mechanism of gal
-induced AR degradation, interestingly, gal also depletes splice variant
AR in human prostate cancer cells. We evaluated the effects of gal on
full-length (wild-type and mutant) and truncated (splice variant) AR in
LNCaP, LAPC4 and CWR22Rv1 cells. Real-time PCR analysis of AR mRNA levels
led to the hypothesis that gal's effect on AR occurs through a
post-translational mechanism(s). The 26S proteasome inhibitor (MG132)
blocked the effect of gal on AR depletion, thus suggesting that gal
induces AR degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. In addition,
gal caused increased phosphorylation of Akt and Mdm2, and pretreatment
with the PI3K inhibitor, wortmannin, robustly inhibited gal-dependent AR
depletion. Targeted knockdown of Mdm2 with siRNA also inhibited the
depletion of AR. Antibody pull-down data also indicated that gal
treatment enhanced the formation of complex between Akt, Mdm2 and AR
which promote phosphorylation-dependent AR ubiquitination and its
degradation by proteasome. The possible involvement of the
proteasome-independent pathway (caspase-dependent) was eliminated because
AR protein was reduced by gal to similar extents in the presence or
absence of the pan caspase inhibitor, z-vad-fmk. Thus, in prostate cancer
cells, our data support a model where gal induces phosphorylation of AR
and Mdm2 through the PI3K/Akt pathway. AR then undergoes ubiquitination
by Mdm2 E3 ligase followed by AR degradation by proteasome. Using Western
blot analyses and MTT cell viability assays, gal exhibited strong
correlation between its ability to deplete AR and reduce cell viability.
We also show for the first time that gal and some new analogs can degrade
both full-length and truncated AR3 in CWR22Rv1. In conclusion, because
gal is currently being evaluated for clinical use against CRPC, its
mechanism of AR degradation is of considerable clinical relevance. These
discoveries of gal should generate excitement because it appears to be
the only agent currently in clinical trial targeting CRPC progression
driven by both full-length and splice variants AR.

