Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of CTC-based pharmacodynamic biomarkers in NCI clinical
trials of targeted anticancer therapeutics.


Circulating tumor cells (CTC) potentially represent a substitute for
biopsy in assessing drug effects on targets. We have previously reported
development and validation of CTC-based pharmacodynamic (PD) biomarker
assays that directly examine drug-induced responses (e.g. a DNA damage
marker H2AX, and a tumor suppressor marker p16/INK4a). Here, we summarize
our results to date and assess utility of CTC-based biomarkers in
patients undergoing clinical trials of targeted anti-cancer therapeutics.
Across eight NCI Phase 1 and 2 trials in a variety of solid tumors, the
portion of the population statistically evaluable is approximately 30%
for all trials; the CTC biomarker statistical evaluation is limited by
the total number of CTCs collected from each tube of blood. From data
obtained from multiple trials of topoisomerase1 and PARP inhibitors, the
H2AX-positive CTC baseline level was less than 20% in 34 of 50 patients.
The fraction of CTCs expressing H2AX independent of changes in the total
CTC count, increased in patients following treatment with different
topoisomerase 1 inhibitors alone or in combination with other drugs.
Furthermore, correlations between H2AX levels and overall responses were
demonstrated in patients with refractory cancer in a phase II randomized
trial of the combination of Veliparib with metronomic oral
cyclophosphamide. Pharmacodynamic studies measuring re-expression of the
tumor suppressor p16 in response to the epigenetic therapy regimen of
5-fluoro-2-deoxycytidine plus tetrahydrouridine yielded similar results
on the number of patients evaluable using CTCs in the NCI intramural
patient population. Given the limitations of surface molecule-based CTC
methods, we are developing and evaluating an antibody-independent CTC
capture technology to analyze biomarkers, starting in small animals using
lower blood volumes and in patients with a variety of advanced epithelial
and non-epithelial cancers. Our studies indicate that assessment of
CTC-based PD biomarkers has value for rapidly assessing proof of
mechanism in the clinical development of molecularly targeted anticancer
therapeutics. Funded by NCI contract # HHSN261200800001E

