Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caboxylic acid esters as inhibitors of the MEK1/2 and MEK5
signaling cascades.


The purpose of the current study is to examine how structural variation
on methyl anthranilates can differentially affect specific branches of
the MAPK signaling cascade. The specific goal is to correlate the role of
MEK1/2 versus MEK5 in breast cancer proliferation and migration modeled
by the profile of pERK isoforms in treated BT-474 (ER+/PR+/HER2high) and
MDA-MB-231 (ER/PR/HER2low) human breast cancer cell lines. The MAPK
signaling pathway is a complex interconnected signaling cascade activated
by extracellular stimuli, including growth factors, cytokines, and
mechanical and chemical stressors, to elicit appropriate cellular
responses including cell survival, proliferation, differentiation, and
apoptotic cell death. The interconnected nature of these pathways permits
a single external stimulus to be interpreted in the context of the
immediate metabolic demands of the cell. The singularly specific and
parallel event is phosphorylation of ERK by its corresponding activating
kinase or MEK. In the course of examining small molecules with the design
goal of developing selective inhibitors of the MEK5 isoform, we
identified a simple substituted methyl anthranilate derivative that
unexpectedly and specifically inhibited ERK1/2 activation but had little
effect on ERK5 activation. We subsequently explored structural variations
and prepared structure assisted new compounds from this initial find. In
the BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines, western blot analysis was performed
to determine the expression and activation of ERK1/2 and ERK5 following
treatment with the novel MEK-specific inhibitors. An MTT assay was used
to assess changes in cell proliferation following kinase inhibition,
while scratch and invasion assays were performed to assess the effect of
the carboxylic acid esters on cell migration and invasion in these cell
lines. The data obtained from these studies indicate methyl anthranilate
derivatives warrant further investigation as potential inhibitors of
tumor proliferation and migration in breast cancer.

