Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-1 blockade combined with TEGVAX (TLR agonists-enhanced GVAX)
can induce regression of established palpable tumors.


Background: Cell-based vaccines have been developed for several types of
tumors, but these vaccines have two critical shortcomings that weaken
their clinical efficacy. The first of which is a limited capability to
activate antigen presenting cells. Second, they fail to address critical
immune checkpoint molecules that dampen the subsequent T-cell response
against the established tumor. In order to optimize the activation of
antigen presenting cells capable of marshaling both an innate and
adaptive immune response against the tumor, we formulated a GM-CSF
secreting tumor cell vaccine with multiple TLR agonists. To address the
immune checkpoint signaling pathway, we combined our formulated vaccine
with a blocking PD-1 antibody in two mouse models of established tumor -
one with melanoma and the other with tongue cancer.Methods: To optimize
in vivo efficacy of anti-tumor T-cell response, we engineered TEGVAX, a
GM-CSF secreting cell-based tumor vaccine formulated with GLA (TLR4
agonist) and R848 (TLR7/8 agonists), molecules that are amenable for
clinical translation. We then combined TEGVAX with PD-1 blocking antibody
(G4 clone) in the murine B16 melanoma and SCCFVII tongue cancer model.
Furthermore, we studied immunological parameters that correlated with in
vivo anti-tumor response.Results: In both B16 and SCCFVII treatment
models, TEGVAX demonstrated statistically significantly (pBackground:
Cell-based vaccines have been developed for several types of tumors, but
these vaccines have two critical shortcomings that weaken their clinical
efficacy. The first of which is a limited capability to activate antigen
presenting cells. Second, they fail to address critical immune checkpoint
molecules that dampen the subsequent T-cell response against the
established tumor. In order to optimize the activation of antigen
presenting cells capable of marshaling both an innate and adaptive immune
response against the tumor, we formulated a GM-CSF secreting tumor cell
vaccine with multiple TLR agonists. To address the immune checkpoint
signaling pathway, we combined our formulated vaccine with a blocking
PD-1 antibody in two mouse models of established tumor - one with
melanoma and the other with tongue cancer.Methods: To optimize in vivo
efficacy of anti-tumor T-cell response, we engineered TEGVAX, a GM-CSF
secreting cell-based tumor vaccine formulated with GLA (TLR4 agonist) and
R848 (TLR7/8 agonists), molecules that are amenable for clinical
translation. We then combined TEGVAX with PD-1 blocking antibody (G4
clone) in the murine B16 melanoma and SCCFVII tongue cancer model.
Furthermore, we studied immunological parameters that correlated with in
vivo anti-tumor response.Results: In both B16 and SCCFVII treatment
models, TEGVAX demonstrated statistically significantly (p<0.01) enhanced
anti-tumor responses in comparison to the parental cell vaccine in vivo.
For tumor bearing mice treated with TEGVAX, these potent anti-tumor
responses were correlated with a statistically significant increase in
CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells that secrete IFN in the tumor microenvironment.
TEGVAX treated mice also had significantly higher levels of tumor antigen
p15E-specific cell mediated killing in vivo. Blockade of the PD-1 immune
checkpoint pathway further augmented the therapeutic potential of TEGVAX
and induced the regression of established B16 and SCCFVII
tumors.Conclusion: When combined with PD-1 antibody, TEGVAX was able to
induce regression of established B16 and SCCFVII tumors. Our results with
these combinatorial immunotherapeutic strategies provide preclinical
evidence to support the translation of these reagents for HNSCC or
melanoma patients that are refractory to standard treatment modalities.

