Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced induction of apoptosis by PLK1 inhibition and radiation
is associated with the additive, but not supra-additive, killing effect
of the combined treatment.


Chemoradiotherapy has been employed to improve the clinical outcomes of
cancer patients. The rationale for the combined usage of
chemotherapeutics and radiation is the benefits of the additive or
synergistic (supra-additive) effect of the two agents, leading to better
treatment efficacy. Recent studies have shown that inhibition of
Polo-like kinase1 (PLK1) function can sensitize head-and-neck squamous
cell carcinoma and medulloblastoma cells to radiation. PLK1 is an
important regulator of mitotic functions that is over-expressed in many
cancers. It also plays a role in DNA double-strand break repair through
phosphorylation of Rad51 recombinase. Therefore, PLK1 presents as an
attractive target and we set out to determine if PLK1 inhibition can be
used as a general strategy for radiosensitization.The half-maximal
inhibitory concentrations (IC50) of the PLK1 inhibitor BI2536 were first
determined for various cancer cell lines as indicators of sensitivity
using XTT assay. The IC50 values of six different cancer (breast, lungs,
pancreas, and colon) cell lines were Chemoradiotherapy has been employed
to improve the clinical outcomes of cancer patients. The rationale for
the combined usage of chemotherapeutics and radiation is the benefits of
the additive or synergistic (supra-additive) effect of the two agents,
leading to better treatment efficacy. Recent studies have shown that
inhibition of Polo-like kinase1 (PLK1) function can sensitize
head-and-neck squamous cell carcinoma and medulloblastoma cells to
radiation. PLK1 is an important regulator of mitotic functions that is
over-expressed in many cancers. It also plays a role in DNA double-strand
break repair through phosphorylation of Rad51 recombinase. Therefore,
PLK1 presents as an attractive target and we set out to determine if PLK1
inhibition can be used as a general strategy for radiosensitization.The
half-maximal inhibitory concentrations (IC50) of the PLK1 inhibitor
BI2536 were first determined for various cancer cell lines as indicators
of sensitivity using XTT assay. The IC50 values of six different cancer
(breast, lungs, pancreas, and colon) cell lines were < 6 nM while that of
primary human fibroblasts was 25 nM. Results of western blots suggest
that the protein levels of PLK1 do not correlate with sensitivity.
Clonogenic assays were performed to evaluate if synergistic effect
(radiosensitization) exists with combined treatment of BI2536 and
radiation. Cells were treated with BI2536 for 24 hr before irradiation
with various dosages. Additive killing effect was observed with all the
cell lines tested; however, radiosensitization (supra-additive) effect
was observed in only some cell lines. To determine if the additive or
supra-additive killing is associated with apoptosis, cells treated with
BI2536 and radiation were incubated with a caspase 3/7 substrate that
emits a fluorescent signal upon cleavage. The induction of the
fluorescent signal was followed for 72 hrs and the results suggest that
enhanced induction of apoptosis occur in all cell lines exposed to the
combined treatment. Therefore, enhanced induction of apoptosis is
associated with additive, but not supra-addictive, killing of the
combined treatment.PLK1 inhibition causes synergistic radiosensitization
in some, but not all, cancer cell lines. However, additive killing of the
combined treatment was observed with all the cancer cells tested. Our
current effort is to decipher why some cancer cells are radiosensitized
synergistically by PLK1 inhibition while some are not. We hope the
results will give further insights into the mechanism of
radiosensitization and identify novel targets for chemoradiotherpy.

