Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recurrent SETBP1 mutations in atypical chronic myeloid leukemia
abrogate an ubiquitination site and dysregulate SETBP1 protein levels.


Atypical Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (aCML) shares clinical and laboratory
features with Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML), but it lacks the
pathognomonic BCR-ABL1 fusion. The molecular pathogenesis of this disease
has remained elusive and the outcome dismal. To investigate the molecular
pathogenesis of aCML, we applied exome sequencing and RNA-SEQ to aCML,
with the aim of identifying novel recurrent driver mutations. Whole-exome
sequencing of 9 aCML patients(pts) revealed the presence of 70 unique
mutations, including recurrent alterations of SETBP1 in 3 cases: 2 cases
with a G870S and a case with a D868N alteration were found. Targeted
resequencing in 70 aCMLs, 574 pts with different hematological
malignancies and 344 cell lines, identified SETBP1 mutations in 17/70
aCML (24.3%; 95% CI: 16-35%), 4/30 (13%) MDS/MPN-u, 3/82 (3.6%) CMML and
0/100 MDS. aCML pts with SETBP1 mutations had higher white blood cell
counts (p=0.008) and worse prognosis (p=0.01) when tested in multivariate
analysis. The SETBP1 gene encodes for a predominantly nuclear protein
with a predicted MW of 170kDa. Germline mutations of SETBP1 were
previously described in pts affected by the Schinzel-Giedion syndrome
(SGS), a rare disease characterized by bone, muscle and cardiac
abnormalities and neuroepithelial neoplasms. The vast majority of aCML
SETBP1 mutations (85%) was located between residues 858 and 871 and were
identical to the germline changes seen in pts with SGS. This region may
be critical for ubiquitin binding and for subsequent protein degradation,
since the Eukaryotic Linear Motif identified a putative functional site
(aa. 868-873) for beta-TrCP, the substrate recognition subunit of the E3
ubiquitin ligase. The prediction was experimentally validated using
biotinylated, phosphorylated peptides encompassing this region (aa
859-879): while the wild type (wt) peptide could efficiently bind
beta-TrCP, a peptide presenting G870S was incapable of binding this
subunit, indicating a possible alteration in SETBP1 protein stability
caused by the mutation. In line with the known binding model of
beta-TrCP, dephosphorylated peptides failed to bind beta-TrCP, therefore
confirming the specificity of the interaction. In agreement with these
findings, TF1 cells transduced with SETBP1 G870S showed increased SETBP1
and SET protein levels, decreased PP2A activity and increased
proliferation rates when compared to cells expressing the wt SETBP1 gene.
Mutated SETBP1 represents a novel oncogene specifically present in aCML
and closely related diseases. These data allow for a better understanding
of the molecular pathogenesis of this disease; they provide evidence that
SETBP1 mutations might be a new biomarker for future diagnosis and
classification of aCML and related diseases, and indicate a potential
strategy to develop new treatment modalities for malignancies caused by
mutated SETBP1.

