Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical improvement of symptomatic advancing chronic lymphocytic
leukemia following mifepristone therapy despite normal serum levels of
the immunomodulatory protein the progesterone induced blocking factor
(PIBF).


Recently a sensitive ELISA assay been created to detect serum levels of
the immunomodulatory protein, the PIBF. One of the 34 kDa forms of PIBF
increases markedly after exposure to progesterone (P) and inhibits
natural killer (NK) cytolytic activity by stabilizing perforin granules
and causes of shift from thymic helper (TH)1 to TH2 dominance thus
diminishing the activity of the cellular immune system. The 34 kDa form
is secreted by gamma/delta T cells and is considered a vital step in
preventing immune destruction of the fetal semi-allograft. Evaluation of
mRNA for PIBF and PIBF protein found that 29 of 29 human leukemia cell
lines over-expressed mRNA for PIBF but only 3 of the lines expressed the
PIBF protein. Adding P to the culture up-regulated PIBF protein
expression whereas adding the P receptor antagonist mifepristone caused
down-regulation of PIBF expression. Mifepristone treatment has been
demonstrated to show significant palliative effects on a wide variety of
murine and human cancers many of which are not known to be P receptor
positive. The hypothesized mechanism is that these tumors either secrete
PIBF or direct secretion by gamma/delta T cells in the tumor
microenvironment and thus inhibit NK cell cytolytic activity. The
inhibition is abrogated by inhibiting P receptors and thus a local form
of P secretion by the tumor is hypothesized. The objective of this study
was to determine if mifepristone will only help inhibit cancer growth in
those individuals who have an increased PIBF level present in their
serum. An 81 year old woman with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)
started more rapid advancement and became very symptomatic. She refused
chemotherapy when she almost had a lethal complication to oral
chlorambucil. She requested mifepristone. Her serum PIBF level of 34.9
ng/mL was in the same range as controls without cancer. However within a
month of taking 200mg daily of mifepristone orally she showed a dramatic
improvement in her CLL with her white blood cell count dropping from
28,000 to 8,000. Her platelet count increased from 40,000 to 240,000 and
2 lung nodules thought to represent possible primary lung cancer (but
possibly nodules from her CLL) completely disappeared on repeat CT scan.
Also her energy markedly improved and her persistent cough stopped. The
serum PIBF did not decrease with mifepristone therapy - 48.3 ng/mL one
month later. These data demonstrated that failure to see a marked
increase in serum PIBF in a patient with cancer does not predict failure
to respond to mifepristone. Though mifepristone has ameliorated murine
leukemia in AKR mice this is the first case report of this drug improving
human leukemia. The 34-36 kDa PIBF found in cytoplasm of cancer cells may
either not be secreted in the serum or may be immunologically different
from serum PIBF found after P exposure.

