Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Studies of castrate resistant 22Rv1 cells identifies AR regulated
interrelated networks of transcription factors, co-regulators, chromatin,
and nuclear scaffolding proteins.


Prostate cancer development, progression and acquisition of castrate
resistance are reliant on the activity of the androgen receptor (AR), a
transcription factor that governs the proliferation of prostate cancer
cells. Multiple studies have focused on the principle components that are
critical for cell cycle transversal and these studies have identified
members of the E2F/RB family, c-Myc, cyclins and cyclin dependent kinase
inhibitors as key proteins that are instrumental in prostate cell
proliferation and development of castrate resistance. But the mechanism
by which the AR dominates this process is unclear. To identify the link
between the AR and cell cycle control we used 22Rv1 cells which are
castrate resistant due to the expression of low molecular weight AR forms
that are missing the ligand binding domain. However, a siRNA mediated
decrease in AR expression induces a growth arrest confirming that
proliferation is AR dependent. RNA-seq analysis of gene expression at
castrate levels of androgen and following AR ablation identified
transcripts that were AR dependent. This methodology reduced the number
of AR regulated transcripts, by excluding transcripts regulated by
super-physiological levels of androgens. The AR regulated transcripts
included previously identified genes (PMEPA1, C1orf116, PCDH7, APP)
including NFAT a gene shown to be regulated by a low molecular weight AR
isoform. The analysis also revealed that interrelated networks of
transcription factors and co-factors were AR transactivated or repressed.
These included proteins such as the LBR, LMNB, TMPO and SATB1 that do not
directly promote transcription, but rather link chromatin to the nuclear
membrane or scaffolding, suggesting that the AR may modulate gene
expression through epigenetics mechanisms. Network analysis showed
connections between these proteins and cell cycle components including
E2Fs and Myc where a number of the regulated transcripts are known E2F or
Myc targets. In addition, this analysis identified a number of non-coding
RNAs; some that have been previously described and some that have yet to
be annotated. qPCR studies found that a number of the transcripts
regulated in 22Rv1 cells are also AR regulated in LNCaP cells. Coupled
with ChIP-seq data, the study characterizes the link between the AR and
the cell cycle machinery and chromatin modulating proteins.

