Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of HPV-derived CD4+ T-helper epitopes for improving
therapeutic anti-HPV vaccine potency.


Persistent infection with high-risk types of human papillomavirus (HPV)
can lead to malignant transformation and the development of various human
malignancies, such as cervical cancer, anal cancer or a subset of
oropharyngeal carcinomas. Fortunately, most HPV infections are
successfully eradicated by the immune system. Accumulating evidence
suggests that both CD8+ and CD4+ T cell responses play a pivotal role in
the clearance and control of HPV infection. Up to now, therapeutic
anti-HPV vaccines have mostly been developed to elicit CD8+T cell
responses. The exclusive targeting of HLA class I-restricted HPV epitopes
might be insufficient, as HLA class I surface expression may be reduced
as a result of HPV immune evasion strategies. In contrast, HLA class II
molecules are expressed in high-grade cervical lesions and cervical
cancer. Therefore in this study, we aim to identify novel E2-, E5-, E6-
and E7-derived CD4+ T cell epitopes that bind to multiple HLA class II
alleles, are naturally processed and presented, and immunogenic.We
started with in silico epitope predictions using several web-based
prediction algorithms. 15-mer candidate epitopes from the HPV16 E2, E5,
E6 and E7 proteins were determined for seven HLA class II alleles -
DRB1*0101 (DR1), DRB1*0301 (DR3), DRB1*0401 (DR4), DRB1*0701 (DR7),
DRB1*1101 (DR11), DRB1*1501 (DR2b), and DRB1*0901 (DR9); together
providing >90% population coverage. To identify promiscuous epitopes, the
average binding score to multiple HLA-DR alleles was calculated and
peptides ranked accordingly. To assess immunogenicity of HPV-derived
candidate peptides, IFN--ELISPOT assays were conducted with lymphocytes
isolated from healthy donors. T cells isolated from the majority of
healthy donors responded to at least one HPV-derived peptide. The most
reactive HPV-derived peptides were further investigated in long-term T
cell cultures. Significant production of IFN- as well as T cell
proliferation was observed in nearly 100% of tested individuals against
this panel of epitopes.As the above immunoreactivities most likely
represent memory responses that led to viral clearance in healthy donors,
we conclude that the identified CD4+ T-helper epitopes are candidates for
the development of comprehensive epitope-specific HPV immunotherapy
approaches.

