Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary intake of nitrate and nitrite, nitrate in drinking water,
and ovarian cancer risk among postmenopausal women in Iowa.


Background: Nitrate and nitrite are precursors of N-nitroso compounds,
known animal and human carcinogens. Nitrate and nitrite are common in
foods, such as vegetables and processed meats, and nitrate is a
contaminant of drinking water. We previously reported an increased
ovarian cancer risk associated with higher nitrate intake in public water
supplies in the Iowa Women's Health Study. Here, we report results based
on an additional 12 years of follow-up and we present results for dietary
nitrate and nitrite intake.Methods: Among 28,555 postmenopausal women
aged 5569 y at baseline, we identified 315 incident epithelial ovarian
cancers between 1986 and 2010. Dietary nitrate and nitrite intakes were
assessed using a food frequency questionnaire at baseline. Information on
drinking water source was obtained in 1989. Nitrate-nitrogen (NO3-N)
levels in public water supplies (average level 1955-1988) and water
sources (finished surface or ground water) were from a database of
monitoring data for Iowa water utilities. Cox proportional hazards
regression generated hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals
(CI). Because disinfection by-products (DBP) are higher in surface water
and have been associated with increased risk for certain cancers, we
determined whether the association between nitrate intake from drinking
water and ovarian cancer risk differed by water source.Results: Neither
total dietary nitrate nor nitrite intake was associated with ovarian
cancer risk after adjusting for age, energy intake, family history of
ovarian cancer, number of live births, and history of unilateral
oophorectomy. Nitrate and nitrite intakes from animal or plant sources,
or processed meats were not associated with ovarian cancer risk. Among
women who drank public water, we observed an increased risk for ovarian
cancer with higher average levels of NO3-N (ptrend=0.004). Compared with
women in the lowest quartile of NO3-N levels (2.5 mg/L) quartiles,
respectively. Ovarian cancer risk among private well water drinkers was
elevated (HR=1.52, 95% CI=0.91-2.53) but not statistically significantly
different from the referent group. When stratified by water source, the
positive association between NO3-N levels in public water and ovarian
cancer risk was confined to women who drank water from surface sources
(ptrend=0.007; pinteraction=0.04).Conclusions: Dietary nitrate or nitrite
intake was not associated with ovarian cancer risk. Our findings for
nitrate intake from public water supplies suggest that nitrate intake
from drinking water may increase ovarian cancer risk, particularly in the
likely presence of other contaminants found in surface water. Further
evaluation of DBP and other water contaminant levels on ovarian cancer
risk in this population is warranted.

