Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel therapy of liver metastases of cancer using Abraxane loaded
into Multi-Stage Nanovector.


Purpose; To investigate whether the Abraxane loaded within Multi-Stage
Nanovector (MSV) system (MSV-ABX) is more effective in therapy of liver
metastases of breast and colorectal cancer as compared to Abraxane
(ABX).Experimental Design; MTT assay was performed to evaluate
sensitivity of 4T1, murine breast cancer cells and CT26, murine colon
cancer cells to ABX or MSV-ABX in vitro. Experimental liver metastases
were produced by intra-splenic injection of 4T1 or CT26 cells in Balb/C
mice. The mice bearing liver metastases were treated with intravenous
injection of (1) control (PBS), (2) ABX or (3) MSV-ABX. Then the mice
were sacrificed and liver weight was measured to evaluate the therapeutic
efficacy. To evaluate the biological the effects of therapeutics, we
performed histological and immunohistochemical analysis of the tumor
specimens. Apoptosis of 4T1 and CT26 tumor cells were evaluated by TUNEL
staining, and proliferation of the tumor cells were stained using
antibody to Ki67. Tumor diameter was measured in H&E stained
sections.Results; There was no significant difference in the sensitivity
of 4T1 and CT26 cancer cells to ABX and MSV-ABX, in vitro. All the mice
injected with 4T1 or CT26 cells developed multiple liver metastases. The
liver weight was significantly lower in the mice treated with MSV-ABX as
compared to those in the other groups. The tumor diameters in the liver
were significantly smaller in the mice treated with MSV-ABX as compared
to those in the other two groups. Immunofluorescent analysis revealed
that MSV-ABX inhibited proliferation and increased apoptosis of 4T1 and
CT26 tumor cells in the liver significantly more than ABX.Conclusions;
These studies demonstrate that MSV-ABX is more effective than ABX in
therapy of the liver metastasis of breast and colorectal cancer in our
mouse models. These data can be translated into the clinic for planning
novel clinical trials using MSV-ABX.

