Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Warburg effect increases intracellular oxygen concentration and
determines membrane localization of Ras and other prenylated proteins.


The Warburg effect is a famous cancer-related phenomenon which describes
a metabolic shift from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis and
fermentation in a cancer cell. Many studies suggest that the Warburg
effect is in response to changes (mutation, deletion, and depletion)
within the mitochondrial genome. We previously showed that poorly
differentiated prostate cancer cells have reduced mitochondrial genome
content and are more influenced by the Warburg effect than well
differentiated prostate cancer cells. The reduction of mitochondrial
genome content induced overexpression and activation of proto-oncogenic
Ras, which is responsible for the activation of AKT and ERK, leading to
advanced phenotypes of prostate cancer. Farnesylation (membrane
localization) of Ras was required for Ras activation and was induced by
the overexpression of 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA reductase (HMGR),
the rate-limiting enzyme of the mevalonate pathway, through inhibition of
hypoxia-dependent degradation of HMGR. We hypothesize that increased
intracellular oxygen concentration due to the Warburg effect responding
to the reduction of mitochondrial genome content determines membrane
localization of Ras via induction of farnesylation mediated by
overexpression of HMGR. In the poorly differentiated prostate cancer
cells such as LNCaP (intracellularly normoxic cells), Ras localized in
both the plasma membrane and Golgi, whereas in well differentiated
prostate cancer cells such as PC-3 (intracellularly hypoxic cells), Ras
is prominent in the cytosol. Exogenous hypoxic conditions eliminated Ras
localization in the membrane in PC-3, possibly through inhibition of the
farnesylation of Ras. In contrast, exogenous hyperoxic condition
increased membrane localization of Ras in LNCaP. Next, we demonstrated
the localization of other prenylated proteins, such as Rab5a and prelamin
A. In the PC-3, Rab5a and prelamin A were localized in the early
endosomes and the nuclear membrane, respectively. In LNCaP, they were
present throughout the cytosol and inside of the nucleus. Similar to Ras,
the localization of Rab5a and prelamin A was reversible with changes in
exogenous oxygen concentration. Our results revealed a coherent mechanism
that directly links changes in intracellular oxygen concentration,
determined by the mitochondrial genome, with the progression of prostate
cancer.

