Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Critical role of MMP-2 and GATA-1 nuclear interaction in the
regulation of ionizing radiation (IR)-induced IL-10/Stat3-mediated
invasion and migration in glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most lethal human brain tumor with
high recurrence rates despite the existence of multimodal treatments
including chemotherapy and radiation after surgical tumor resection.
Augmented tumor metastasis after irradiation (IR) has been attributed to
enhanced extracellular protease levels in tumors. Secreted or cleaved
matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) levels were reported to be elevated in
irradiated tumors. Interestingly, previous in silico prediction analyses
identified the presence of a putative nuclear localization signal (NLS)
in MMP-2 and reported the cleavage of PARP by nuclear-MMP-2. However,
MMP-2 nuclear localization in possible correlation with tumor progression
has not been identified to date. In addition to membrane and cytoplasmic
expression of MMP-2, we observed prominent MMP-2 nuclear localization,
which is further elevated in IR (8 Gy)-treated human glioma xenograft
cells 4910 and 5310. Interestingly, The protein-transcription factor (TF)
interaction arrays using 4910 nuclear extracts revealed the potential
binding of nuclear-MMP-2 with several transcription factors including
CEF-2, c-Rel, FOXO4, GAS, GATA-1, MUSF-1, p300, PARP and RREB1. Co-IP
experiments showed the direct binding between MMP-2/GATA-1 in glioma.
Further, we also observed the presence of MMP-2 in the GATA-1 DNA-binding
complex and its recruitment onto the promoter of IL-10, a GATA-1 target
gene. ChIP-cloning with anti-MMP-2 antibody confirmed the specific
binding of MMP-2 with GATA-1 consensus elements. We also observed that
the MMP-2/GATA-1 nuclear co-localization was elevated in correlation with
increasing GBM pathological grades. Downregulation of MMP-2 inhibited the
GATA-1 expression and DNA-binding activity and abrogated IR-induced
migration and invasion in these cells. Conversely, treatment with
recombinant MMP-2 protein elevated the GATA-1 DNA-binding activity and
increased IL-10 and phospho-Stat3 expression in correlation with
increased invasion and migration. In vivo orthotopic experiments with
MMP-2.siRNA decreased tumor growth in nude mice and inhibited nuclear
MMP-2 and GATA-1 expression levels in tumors. To our knowledge, this is
the first study demonstrating significant IR-induced nuclear
translocation of MMP-2 and shows the functional association between
MMP-2/GATA-1 in the regulation of IL-10/Stat3-mediated migration and
invasion. Our results suggest the potential therapeutic efficacy of
targeting MMP-2/GATA-1 liaison in glioma treatment.

