Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design, synthesis and biological evaluation of substituted
monocyclic pyrimidines as potent microtubule targeting antitumor agents
that circumvent Pgp and III-tubulin-mediated resistance.


Tubulin binding agents are the most effective drugs in p53 resistant
cancer cell lines. Although microtubule disrupting agents like paclitaxel
are highly successful, they have major limitations against multidrug
resistance (MDR) tumors. Overexpression of P-glycoprotein (Pgp) and/or
III-tubulin can severely limit their clinical utility as cancer
chemotherapeutic agents. Antitubulin agents like paclitaxel and other
taxoids also have poor water solubility, and this hampers their
administration to patients since these compounds must be formulated with
polyethoxylated castor oil. This medium can cause hypersensitivity
reactions and requires prolonged administration times. Recently, we
reported analogs with the pyrrolo[3,2-d]pyrimidine scaffold that
circumvent these drawbacks. To explore the structure-activity
relationships of these compounds, including simplification of the
pyrrolo[3,2-d]pyrimidine scaffold, we designed conformationally flexible
substituted monocyclic N-methyl-4-methoxyanilino pyrimidines 1-6 from the
corresponding 4-chloro analogs by treatment with
N-methyl-4-methoxyaniline followed by N6-alkylation for 2-6 . Compounds
1-6 inhibited tubulin assembly (4, IC50 = 1.5 0.2 M) and binding of
colchicine to tubulin (4, 75% inhibition at 1 M, 95% at 5 M with 5 M
[3H]colchicine). Four of these compounds inhibited the growth of human
cancer cells in culture with nanomolar IC50s from 15 to 62 nM. These
compounds are also active in paclitaxel resistant tumor cells
overexpressing either III-tubulin or Pgp, thus apparently overcoming two
important mechanisms associated with clinical resistance to paclitaxel.
Thus, we have identified simplified substituted monocyclic pyrimidines
containing a novel structural scaffold for inhibition of tubulin assembly
and colchicine binding and which have potent cytotoxic activity against
human cancer cells in culture.

