Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation in SYK, GSTP1, & FHIT genes: associations with
parity and time since birth.


Introduction: Breast cancer risk is transiently increased following
pregnancy; these tumors, referred to as pregnancy associated breast
cancer (PABC) have poorer prognosis. As more women delay pregnancy until
older age this increase in risk following pregnancy is projected to mean
increased numbers of PABCs. Epigenetic events are important in the
development and progression of cancer. Methylation status of specific
genes may potentially be useful as screening targets in clinical
practice. We examined DNA methylation for three genes of interest, Spleen
tyrosine kinase (SYK), a non-receptor protein tyrosine kinase expressed
in hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic breast epithelial cells,
exhibiting tumor suppressor qualities, Fragile histadine triad (FHIT),
encoding a protein involved in cell differentiation and apoptosis, and
Glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1), a phase II detoxification enzyme in
most cell types acting on carcinogens, environmental pollutants, and
drugs. We compared DNA methylation in these genes in breast tissues from
healthy premenopausal women by parity status and time since last birth
(nulliparous, 10 years) to understand changes in methylation associated
with recent pregnancy.Methods: DNA samples were obtained from fresh
frozen tissues of 81 premenopausal women undergoing reduction mammoplasty
with no prior history of cancer except non-melanoma skin cancer. Genomic
DNA was modified using EZ DNA Methylation Gold Kit and sequenced using
Pyro Q-CpGTM Software. Two-sample t-tests and 1-way Analysis of Variance
were used to examine differences in mean methylation in the three genes
by parity status and time since last birth. Generalized linear regression
models were used to compare mean methylation levels adjusted for age,
race, menopausal status, and family history of breast cancer.Results:
Parous healthy premenopausal women had a higher adjusted mean methylation
in all three genes than their nulliparous counterparts. Mean percent
methylation of SYK (0.98 vs. 0.87; P=0.56) and FHIT (2.08 vs. 1.85,
P=0.50) were 12% higher in parous versus nulliparous women. Methylation
of GSTP1 was 7% higher among parous versus nulliparous women (0.70 vs.
0.65; P=0.82); however, differences were not statistically significant.
For GSTP1, there was a suggestion of higher mean percent methylation
among women who gave birth more recently (10 years: 0.64) or nulliparous
women (0.69; P=0.64). There were no clear differences by recency of birth
for FHIT or SYK.Conclusions: Mean percent methylation of SYK, GSTP1, and
FHIT may be suggestive of changes in methylation among parous women, and
for GSTP1, particularly higher DNA methylation among women who gave birth
more recently. Given the small sample size, these findings are
preliminary, and additional studies are needed to better understand
methylation in PABC risk.

