Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Salivary proteome as an in vivo model to study breast cancer
progression.


Background: To date, because of the complexity and heterogeneity of
breast cancer, no individual model recapitulates all aspects of this
disease. Since both the mammary and salivary glands are exocrine glands
and that the literature has shown cross-talk between the two glands, we
hypothesize that, secondary to breast cancer, the malignancy's rapid
growth alters the proteomic content of the tissue microenvironment and
that these changes may manifest in up or down regulation of salivary
protein concentrations, which can be used as a sentinel body fluid for
breast cancer modeling. Verification that salivary proteomic content can
be used to model breast cancer progression employing HER2 biology would
provide strong support for immediate translational testing in clinical
trial settings that would further be accelerated with the use of
saliva-based testing as one of the most easily accessible body
fluids.Objective: The objective of this study was to compare the salivary
protein profiles of pooled saliva specimens from individuals diagnosed
with ductal carcinoma of the breast with and without HER2/neu
overexpression as a potential alternate to current HER2/neu assessment
methodologies.Methods: Pooled (n=10 subjects/pooled specimen) stimulated
whole saliva specimens from women were analyzed. One pooled specimen was
from healthy women, another was from women diagnosed with Stage IIa
(T2N0M0) invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) without positive HER2/neu
receptor status. A third pooled specimen was from women diagnosed with
Stage IIa (T2N0M0) IDC with a positive HER2/neu receptor status.
Isotopically tagging proteins in the tumor groups and comparing them to
the healthy control group measured differential expression of proteins.
Experimentally, saliva from each of the pooled samples was trypsinized
and the peptide digests labeled with the appropriate iTRAQ reagent.
Labeled peptides from each of the digests were combined and analyzed by
reverse phase (C18) capillary chromatography on an LC-MS/MS mass
spectrometer equipped with an LC-Packings HPLC. Results: The results of
the analyses yielded approximately 174 differentially expressed proteins
in the saliva specimens. There were 20 proteins unique to HER2/neu
positive receptor status and 28 proteins that were unique to HER2/neu
negative status. Conclusions: The study suggests that saliva is a fluid
suffused with solubilized by-products of oncogenic expression and that
these proteins may be differently expressed in the presence of HER2/neu
positive receptor status. It also provides support to the novel idea of
using salivary secretions to study breast cancer progression

