Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of calibrators and controls as quality control tools
for clinical implementation of quantitative immunofluorescence assays for
pharmacodynamic biomarkers of molecular targeted agents in tumor biopsies.


The application of robust pharmacodynamic (PD) assays as part of clinical
trial design is valuable for confirming putative drug mechanisms in
patients. Our group supports the development, validation and clinical
implementation of these PD assays including quantitative
immunofluorescence (qIFA) measurements in formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) human tissue biopsies. One such assay is a
multiplex qIFA method for evaluating histone H2AX phosphorylated at
serine 139 (H2AX), activated caspase 3 (cCasp3), Ki67, and DAPI (referred
to as Rx1-IFA4) in response to DNA-damaging agents. Integral PD quality
control tools were developed as part of the Rx1-IFA4 and included
xenograft tissue calibrators, which are used as visual and quantitative
reference standards representing a range of biomarker expression levels
for drug effect on tumor, and mouse testis and jejunum tissues, which are
used as positive or negative controls for endogenous tissue expression
for each biomarker. Rx1-IFA4 tissue calibrators were prepared with tumor
quadrants derived from human breast MDA-MB-231 xenografts treated with
vehicle, low, or high doses of a cIAP inhibitor. Xenografts were
prescreened for levels of each biomarker, and tissues containing defined
ranges of biomarker expression were re-embedded in a block to represent
each of the treatment groups. Use of tumor quadrants as opposed to
biopsies allows for a large number of calibrator slides to be produced
from a single qualified block. Qualification of each lot of calibrator
slides includes qIFA analysis of representative slides from which
specifications for acceptable ranges of biomarker expression for that lot
are determined. Whole fluorescent slide imaging using Aperio was
performed to document distribution patterns of the biomarkers within each
tumor quadrant. Staining analysis of control tissues also enabled
performance assessment of all assay antibodies applied on each clinical
slide without the need for duplicate slides as controls. Application of
tissue calibrators and controls to the qIFA assay, as opposed to the more
typical use of cell pellet-derived controls provides many advantages.
Biomarker expression levels with drug treated cells rarely correlate with
expression levels in vivo. Additionally, quantitative image analysis for
this assay utilizes image analysis software and custom macros that
require the appropriate selection of a representative area of background
for each analyzed image and tissue context is critical for accurate
quantitation. These quality control tools are effective for monitoring
the performance of the qIFA assay across laboratories and clinical assay
runs. The first three authors listed contributed to this work equally.
Funded by NCI Contract No HHSN261200800001E.

