Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative immunoassays to measure total Akt-1 and
phospho-Akt(Ser473) in cell and tissue lysate models.


Akt1, Akt2, and Akt3 kinases are critical effectors of the activated
tyrosine receptor kinase/phosphoinositol 3-kinases, influencing cell
growth, proliferation, and survival. Akt1-specific substrates have been
implicated in cell cycle progression and cell motility, processes that
underlie increased proliferation and metastatic spread of cancer cells.
In this study, we report development and analytical validation of
singleplex immunoassays for quantification of total Akt1 and
phospho-Akt(Ser473) using fit-for-purpose and CLSI principles. We also
demonstrate the ability of these assays to quantify total Akt1 and
phospho-Akt(Ser473) in tumor-derived cell lines and mouse xenograft tumor
lysates. These assays allow cancer researchers to correlate
characteristics of cancer cells with absolute protein levels.The Akt1
singleplex assays were developed using MSD's MULTI-ARRAY technology. A
monoclonal mouse antibody specific for total Akt1 was used to capture
Akt1 in the solid phase, and MSD SULFO-TAGTM-labeled antibodies specific
for an alternate epitope of total Akt1 or phospho-Akt(Ser473) were used
as assay-specific reporters. Both assays were calibrated using full
length recombinant human Akt1 protein expressed in baculovirus and
phosphorylated in vitro by sequential incubation with
phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1 (PDK1) and MAP
kinase-activated protein kinase 2 (MAPKAPK2). Akt calibrator
concentrations were assigned following multi-day testing. Akt1
concentrations were confirmed by amino acid analyses, and units of
phosphorylation (UP473) were assigned. The functional performance of the
Akt1 calibrator was verified to be equivalent across three lots.Both
assays demonstrated excellent sensitivity (lower limits of detection were
0.028 pg total Akt/well for the total Akt1 assay and 0.005 UP473/well for
the phospho-Akt(Ser473) assay) and inter-plate reproducibility
(coefficients of variation were below 12.1% for both assays). Calibration
with recombinant protein enabled the absolute quantification of both
total and phospho-Akt(Ser473) levels in cultured cell lysates, including
MCF-7, Jurkat, NIH3T3, rat L6, and COS7, as well as epithelial, renal
cell, and kidney carcinomas. Dilutional linearity and spike recovery
testing demonstrated minimal matrix effects and accurate quantitation in
these samples. (Recovery values in the range of 80-120% of the expected
values were observed.) The assays showed no significant cross-reactivity
with Akt2 or Akt3 or with the active forms phospho-Akt(Ser472) and
phospho-Akt(Ser474).These assays can accurately quantify total Akt1 and
phospho-Akt(Ser473) in multiple cell models.

