Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cells and dedifferentiation: the stromal match-point.


Bypassing all the research advances in the last decades, cancer remains
as a major public health problem affecting more than 1.5 million (M) new
individuals each year just in the USA, and killing more than 0.5 M.
Recent research emphasized the major role of cancer stem cells (CSCs) in
the metastatic disease, the main cause of cancer patients mortality. CSCs
drive tumorigenesis and differentiation, contributing to tumors
heterogeneity and to their relative chemo- and radiotherapy resistance
and eventually relapse. Following CSCs identification, targeted
therapeutic approaches have been developed to abolish them. However, CSCs
can reemerge through dedifferentiation of tumor-committed stromal cells
condemning this therapeutics. The mechanisms behind dedifferentiation are
still unclear and are the main focus of our investigation.Lung cancer is
one of the main causes of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Its prevalence
is increasing due to the widespread smoking habits and increasing
accumulation of atmosphere pollutants. In this work hexavalent chromium
[Cr(VI)] was selected as a model of cancer carcinogenesis mainly due to
is increasing occupational relevance. The non-malignant human bronchial
epithelial cell line BEAS-2B was malignantly transformed into the RenG2
system using low density culture in the presence of Cr(VI). A parallel
control cell line (Cont1) was produced under the same conditions, though,
in the absence of Cr(VI). Two additional cell lines (DRenG2 and DDRenG2)
were attained following serial rounds of injection in nude mice.
Metabolic studies using [18F]fluoro-2-deoxyglucose) and nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy performed in all the cell lines revealed a more
glycolytic phenotype for the derivatives (DRenG2 and DDRenG2), compatible
with a quiescent phenotype. Subsequent karyotype and real time PCR-based
cellular characterization identified different cellular sub-populations
within each cell line, strengthening the hypothesis on the CSCs presence.
The sphere-formation assay, used to search for CSCs presence, revealed
the presence of CSCs only DRenG2 and in DDRenG2 cell lines. This
suggested that a dedifferentiation process featured the formation of CSCs
during RenG2 derivation in nude mice. The involvement of mice stroma in
this process was uncovered by surgical isolation of mouse stromal cells
of the subcutaneous compartment and subsequent co-culture with RenG2
cells for 30-60 days (time needed to induce tumors in mice with RenG2),
which resulted in the emergence of a CSCs sub-population. A cytokine
multiplex array analysis performed in the conditioned medium of the
co-cultured cells in parallel with comparative genome hybridization array
(aCGH) analysis performed in all the cell lines under study revealed a
panel of potential paracrine orchestrators of this stromal-induced
dedifferentiation process.

