Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediabetic and diabetic levels of glucose enhance the
proliferation of normal and malignant breast epithelial cells via
increased leptin signaling and activation of mTOR.


Introduction: It is now well-appreciated that diabetes and obesity
increase the risk of breast cancer in women and result in worse disease
progression once breast cancer is diagnosed. Moreover, breast cancer
rates are increasing worldwide and breast cancer is now the most common
malignancy in women across the globe. However, the exact etiology behind
increased breast cancer incidence and severity observed in
overweight/diabetic patients remains to be fully elucidated. Many experts
now concede that diabetes/obesity have reached epidemic proportions
globally. Therefore, it is particularly important to understand how these
two chronic diseases promote and enhance the development of breast
cancer, as well as, other common forms of cancer.Methods: A normal breast
epithelial cell line (MCF10A) and two malignant breast epithelial cell
lines (MCF7, MB-MDA-231) were treated with three different glucose
concentrations: normal (5.5mM), prediabetic (10mM), and diabetic (25mM).
The effects of increasing glucose on cell proliferation and intracellular
signaling were assessed at 24hr, 48hr, and 72hr. MTS assay was used to
monitor cell proliferation and Annexin V/propidium iodide staining was
used to monitor apoptosis/cell death. Intracellular signaling
intermediates were assessed via Western blot.Results: Prediabetic and
diabetic glucose enhanced proliferation of both normal and malignant
breast cells. Normal cells exhibited the greatest increase in cell
growth. No major changes in apoptosis or cell death were observed for
either normal or malignant cells. The three most abundant leptin receptor
isoforms were significantly upregulated with increasing glucose in both
normal and malignant cells. Likewise, GRB2, PTP1B, and SOCS3 were
significantly upregulated with increasing glucose. Transient increases in
JAK2 phosphorylation also occurred in all three cell lines with
increasing glucose. In contrast, STAT3 phosphorylation was not
significantly altered in malignant cells but was transiently increased in
normal cells with increasing glucose. Transient but significant increases
in mTOR phosphorylation were also observed for all three cell lines with
increasing glucose and this generally corresponded with transient
suppression of AMPK phosphorylation.Conclusions: To our knowledge, we
demonstrate for the first time that in the absence of hyperleptinemia or
hyperinsulinemia increasing glucose levels can, by themselves, directly
impact leptin-receptor signaling in breast epithelial cells. Our results
implicate leptin-receptor signaling in the pathogenesis of hyperglycemia
in both normal and malignant cells. Components of this pathway may be
useful targets for the prevention and treatment of diabetes, obesity, and
ultimately breast cancer.

