Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Measuring the Fc effector function of therapeutic antibody in
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity using a bioluminescent
cell-based reporter bioassay.


Primary peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) or the sub-population
of natural killer (NK) cells are used to quantify antibody drug
biological activity in antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity
(ADCC) in classic ADCC bioassays. However, cell acquisition and
preparation is labor intensive and those ADCC bioassays have high
inherent variability, resulting primarily from the primary effector cell
source. This variability has been challenging for acceptance of classic
ADCC bioassays for use in lot release potency determination and
stability-testing for antibody drugs. Here, we developed a cell-based
bioassay that can quantify potency of Fc effector function of target
cell-bound monoclonal antibody in pathway activation in effector cells
that leads to ADCC. For this, Jurkat T-cell lines that stably express
NFAT-luciferase reporter and either human FcRIIIa(V158) or FcRIIIa (F158)
were generated to replace primary PBMCs or NK cells as effector cells in
ADCC bioassay while retaining measurement of pathway activation mediated
by Fc effector functionality of antibody drugs. Cells were developed in
thaw-and-use format, to minimize assay variability due to cell culture
and handling. The resultant bioluminescent reporter-based bioassay
outperforms classic ADCC bioassays in several key ways: it has good assay
precision (low variability), high accuracy, and is simple, robust and
specific. In addition, we have demonstrated that the ADCC reporter
bioassay is able to quantify potency of rituximab, trastuzumab, and
cetuximab, which are on-market monoclonal antibody drugs for cancer using
a variety of suspension or adherent target cells, and that this bioassay
is stability-indicating for these antibody drugs after heat-treatment.
These performance characteristics demonstrate suitability of the ADCC
reporter bioassay for lot release potency determination and stability
monitoring of antibody drugs. Furthermore, new antibody drugs with
enhanced binding affinity to Fc receptors and improved ADCC efficiency
are being developed to address improvement of drug efficacy in patient
populations. Many of these enhanced ADCC antibodies differ structurally
in the N-glycan moiety. By testing blended mixtures of intact and
glycan-modified antibody drugs in the ADCC reporter bioassay, we have
demonstrated the linear correlation between relative antibody biological
activity and the percentage of Fc N-glycan modification. The ability of
this bioassay to quantifiably differentiate such differences in Fc
effector functionality due to N-glycan moiety structural differences
demonstrates its suitability as a tool for biosuperior antibody drug
research and development.

