Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The potential tumor-suppressive role of Krppel-like factor 9 in
colorectal cancer.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) remains the third leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in the United States. Recent attention has focused on several
members of the Krppel-like family (KLF) of transcription factors in
pathogenesis of CRC. Published studies in mouse models have demonstrated
that Krppel-like Factors (KLF) 4 and 6 are important suppressors, while
KLF5 is a promoter of CRC development and growth. Our and other
laboratories have implicated KLF9 as another KLF with putative
tumor-suppressive roles in colon and rectum. However, a causal role for
KLF9 as a tumor suppressor has not been evaluated in vivo. In the present
study, we generated C57BL/6J mice with two (wild-type, WT) and one
(heterozygous, HET) Klf9 alleles within the ApcMin/+ model of intestinal
cancer. At 16 weeks of age, male (by 2.5-fold, P=.0015) and female (by
1.5 fold, P=.002) Klf9 HET mice exhibited more colon tumors than WT
(n=13-20 mice per gender/genotype). Further, HET females, but not males,
showed increased (P=.011) colon tumor incidence compared to WT. Moreover,
male HET exhibited greater numbers (P=.03) of large (>3mm diameter) colon
tumors while corresponding female HET only showed a trend (P=.099),
compared to WT. No significant difference was observed in the number of
small intestine tumors in either males or females. Mean colon tumor size
between genotypes of either sex was also comparable. Mice of both
genotypes did not differ in body weights within specific female and male
groups. Excised colon tumors and matched mucosa from male mice were
embedded and subjected to immunohistochemistry. No significant
differences in immunostaining intensity for -Catenin were found in tumors
nor in matched mucosa between the genotypes. A similar lack of
differences in immunostaining for Lgr5, a surface marker for intestinal
stem cells was noted in tumors or mucosa between the two genotypes. Since
the ApcMin/+ model of intestinal cancer normally displays greater numbers
of tumors in the small intestine than in the colon, results suggest a
colon-specific contribution of KLF9 loss-of-expression to tumor
development. Further, given that KLF9 is a unique thyroid
hormone-inducible KLF family member, our results implicate the possible
use of thyroid hormone or thyroid hormone receptor agonists in the
prevention and/or treatment of CRC. Our collective findings provide early
evidence for a tumor-suppressive role of KLF9 in the colon and rectum,
the mechanism of which warrants further investigation. Supported by
1F31CA165665-01 and NIH RO1 CA136493.

