Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of ischemia time on mRNA and microRNA expression in
surgical liver tissue.


Human frozen tissues are one of the best sources for molecular analyses
such as microarrays, qPCR or Next-Generation-Sequencing. In addition,
frozen tissues are particularly valuable for biomarker identification.
Several biobanks comprising non-fixed frozen tissues have been
established alongside with corresponding clinical data repositories to
facilitate biomarker studies relevant for clinical diagnostics. Apart
from proteomic approaches, mRNA- and microRNA-expression profiles have
shown to be highly valuable for biomarker studies. Since RNA is generally
a fragile molecule, RNA integrity in tissue specimens has tremendous
impact on gene expression analyses, requiring a rigorous quality
assessment of biobank tissue samples. To address this issue, we
established a tissue quality test system based on RNA integrity and
differential gene expression. We used normal liver tissue, that was snap
frozen after various periods of ischemia time. The RNA was isolated and
the quality was assessed in four steps: First, the RNA was quantitated by
spectrophotometry (NanoDrop) and total RNA quality was determined by
on-chip electrophoresis (Experion). Second, the degree of RNA degradation
and the maximum length of RNA molecules available for downstream
applications was determined by amplicon length analysis using PCR
amplification. Third, the RNA expression levels of selected genes were
determined and correlated to the time and condition of ischemia. The
genes analysed comprised highly regulated genes, signaling pathway genes
and genes induced by hypoxia or apoptosis. Fourth, the expression of
selected miRNAs involved in signaling pathway regulation was determined
by quantitative PCR.Taken together we analysed mRNA and miRNA stability
in correlation to the time of warm and cold ischemia and its impact on
signaling pathway regulation in liver tissue samples. The results enabled
us to establish a RNA-based quality assessment procedure of tissue
specimen for frozen tissue biobanks. This study may facilitate and
optimise the logistics of biobanking processes.

