Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hsp27 is an essential effector of EGF-induced epithelial to
mesenchymal transition in prostate cancer.


Introduction: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common cancer and the
second leading cause cancer death in North American men. An important
determinant for metastasis is epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)
which is known to be correlated to castrate resistant prostate cancer
(CRCP). Previous report demonstrated the overexpression of Hsp27 and its
phosphorylated form in poor diagnosis prostate cancer. In addition, both
epidermal growth factor (EGF) and its receptor (EGFR) are upregulated in
PCa during progression to CRPC. However, the role of EGF and EGFR in PCa
progression remains unclear. Our objective is to establish that Hsp27 is
a central node for several signaling pathways activated by EGF and known
to modulate EMT.Methods: To assess the role of Hsp27 in EMT, gain and
loss of Hsp27 function has been conducted in LNCaP cells with or without
EGF stimulation. EMT markers expression has been evaluated at the protein
(WB) and mRNA level (qRTPCR). Furthermore, invasion, migration assays in
addition with MMP9 activity have been done to evaluate the migratory
capacity of those cells. Also, to better understand the molecular
mechanism involved in EMT induction, transactivation and Chip assays have
been performed. The in vitro results have been confirmed with an in vivo
study using an Hsp27 antisense oligonucleotide (OGX-427) in a murine
model.Results: We found that Heat shock protein 27 (Hsp27) is upregulated
with CRPC progression and drives EMT in PCa cells by decreasing
epithelial cell markers, upregulating mesenchymal markers and enhancing
cell migration and MMP9 activity. Hsp27 knockdown induces sequestration
of betacatenin in the cytoplasm by increasing its binding to GSK3beta and
abrogating EGF induced betacatenin nuclear translocation. Additionally,
by decreasing the nuclear translocation of beta-catenin, Hsp27 knockdown
decreases the binding of betacatenin to slug promoter thereby lessening
its transcriptional activity. As Slug is known to be a critical key in
EMT induction, we confirmed the role of EGF and Hsp27 in EMT induction
and our capacity to abrogate the EGF-induced EMT effect by Hsp27
knockdown. Finally, targeting Hsp27 using antisense oligonucleotide
OGX-427 in vivo, significantly reduced tumor cell metastasis in a PCa
murine model.Conclusion: This study shows that EGF through Hsp27 induces
modifications in gene expression and morphology toward a mesenchymal
phenotype. The mechanism involving Hsp27, -catenin, nuclear -catenin/TCF
and EGF signaling cascades described in the present study contribute to
the comprehension of mechanisms driving metastasis in aggressive
castration-resistant prostate cancer. This study reveals that Hsp27 is a
crucial effector of EGFdependent and independent EMT and suggests that
targeting Hsp27 holds promises for a new strategy in metastatic PCa.

