Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CARD11 is critical for in vitro and in vivo growth of ABC-DLBCL
cells.


Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common form of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and can be divided into three distinct subtypes.
The activated B cell-like (ABC) subtype is the most aggressive and is
characterized by constitutive activation of the NF-B pathway. CARD11 is a
scaffolding protein and plays a critical role in the NF-B pathway by
coordinating IB kinase activity and downstream pathway activation.
Previous studies have revealed that ABC-DLBCL cell lines are dependent on
the NF-B pathway (Davis et al., 2001). Furthermore, activating mutations
in CARD11 occur in approximately 10% of ABC-DLBCL patient tumors and
result in constitutive activation of the NF-B pathway (Lenz et al.,
2008).Using a combination of genetic and pharmacological tools we have
further demonstrated that CARD11 is a critical node of the NF-B pathway
essential for B cell lymphoma growth in vitro and in vivo. Using a
variety of pharmacological inhibitors, we demonstrate that
anti-proliferative activity of each compound corresponds with its ability
to inhibit the NF-B pathway in an ABC-DLBCL cell line, TMD-8, engineered
to express luciferase under the control of an NF-B responsive promoter.
Next, using doxycycline-inducible shRNAs targeting CARD11, we confirm the
dependency of TMD-8 cells on CARD11 in vitro. The effects of CARD11
knockdown can be rescued by reactivation of the NF-B pathway downstream
of CARD11 by addition of TNF- to a TMD-8 line engineered to express the
TNF receptor. After validation of CARD11 dependency in vitro, we
generated tumor xenografts using TMD-8 cells transduced with
doxycycline-inducible shRNAs against CARD11. Upon treatment with
doxycycline, TMD-8 tumor xenografts showed stasis or regression as a
result of CARD11 knockdown. This inhibition of tumor growth also
corresponded with significant down-regulation of the NF-kB responsive
genes IL-6 and IL-10.Together these data demonstrate that ABC-DLBCL cells
and tumors require CARD11 for growth in an NF-kB dependent manner.

