Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis and antiproliferative activity of novel
17-acetyl-testosterone-7-platinum(II) hybrids designed for the treatment
of human prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer is a major public health problem worldwide. In the
United-States, prostate cancer is ranked first of all new cancer cases
diagnosed in men and it is the second most lethal cancer. Antiandrogens
are normally used in clinic to slow down the progression of
androgen-sensitive (AR+) prostate cancer inducing prolonged remission
without definite cure. In general, 10 years after the initial treatment
of early prostate cancers, 19% of patients will experience local tumor
progression, 15% distant metastases and 10% will die. Furthermore,
advanced prostate cancers quickly (18 to 24 months) become
androgen-insensitive (AR-) and antihormone therapy becomes ineffective.
At this point, the median survival of approved drug combination
treatments is then under 20 months. Consequently, the search for new,
more selective and efficient treatments is still a subject of intense
research.To that end, we used the natural tropism of testosterone for
prostate tissues to target platinum(II) complexes to prostate cancer
cells. The platinum complexes were linked to the 7 position on
testosterone as it is located between the 3-carbonyl and 17-hydroxyl
groups involved in key hydrogen bonds essential for androgen receptor
interactions. L- and D-2-pyridylalanine, L-histidine and
L-4-thiazolylalanine derivatives were linked to 17-acetyl-testosterone
selected to chelate platinum(II). Four new amino acid platinum(II)
complexes were prepared (compounds 1a-1d), characterized and evaluated
for their antiproliferative activity on LNCaP (AR+), PC3 (AR-) and DU145
(AR-) human prostate adenocarcinoma cancer cell lines.The new
testosterone-platinum(II) complexes exhibited antiproliferative
activities at the micromolar level on all prostate cancer cell lines
tested. Structure-activity relationships show that the stereochemistry of
amino acids (compounds 1a, b) does not affect the antiproliferative
activity. Moreover, the replacement of a pyridinyl moiety by an
imidazolyl group (compound 1c) decreased the activity by up to 10 fold
whereas the replacement by a thiazolyl group (compound 1d) showed an
antiproliferative activity between 2.5 to 8.0 times higher than that of
cisplatin.The innovative design and the significant activity of our
testosterone-platinum(II) complexes toward AR+ and AR- prostate cancer
cells suggest that they might be useful for treatment of advanced
prostate cancers.

