Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profiling (GEP) reveals Epithelial Mesenchymal
Transition (EMT) genes selectively differentiating eribulin sensitive
breast cancer cell lines.


Objectives: Eribulin mesylate (ERI) is a simplified synthetic macrocyclic
ketone analog of the marine sponge natural product halichondrin B and an
inhibitor of microtubule dynamics. In this study, we investigated whether
selective signal pathways were associated with ERI activity compared to
paclitaxel (PTX), which stabilize microtubules, based on GEP using 3
cancer cell line panels in vitro.Methods: In vitro anti-proliferation
activity (IC50) was determined in 27 breast, 19 endometrial and 21
ovarian cancer cell lines treated with ERI and PTX. We performed GEP for
the same cancer panels treated for 24 hours at conc. of 10 x IC50 using
Affimetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 arrays. We applied paired t-test
(p1.5) to identify genes significantly altered between treatments.
Pathway enrichment was performed using Metacore and Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis software. Cell lines were clustered by hierarchical clustering
based on Pearson correlation.Results: We determined the sets of genes
differentially altered between ERI and PTX treatments in 3 cancer panels.
Regardless of cancer panels, several tubulins (TUBA1B, TUBA1C, TUBA3D,
TUBA4A, TUBB2C, TUBBG1, TUBB3, TUBB2A, TUBB2C, TUBB and TUBB6) had
significantly lower expression in cell lines treated with ERI, compared
to PTX. Our analysis revealed that expression profiles of the gene sets
correlated with drug sensitivity in cancer panels (p=0.004 for ERI in
breast cancer, p=0.06 for PTX in endometrial cancer, p=0.05 for ERI in
ovarian cancer). Pathway enrichment analysis of the gene revealed that
the common pathways altered between 2 treatments in 3 cancer panels were
related to cytoskeleton remodeling (p1.5) to identify genes significantly
altered between treatments. Pathway enrichment was performed using
Metacore and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software. Cell lines were
clustered by hierarchical clustering based on Pearson
correlation.Results: We determined the sets of genes differentially
altered between ERI and PTX treatments in 3 cancer panels. Regardless of
cancer panels, several tubulins (TUBA1B, TUBA1C, TUBA3D, TUBA4A, TUBB2C,
TUBBG1, TUBB3, TUBB2A, TUBB2C, TUBB and TUBB6) had significantly lower
expression in cell lines treated with ERI, compared to PTX. Our analysis
revealed that expression profiles of the gene sets correlated with drug
sensitivity in cancer panels (p=0.004 for ERI in breast cancer, p=0.06
for PTX in endometrial cancer, p=0.05 for ERI in ovarian cancer). Pathway
enrichment analysis of the gene revealed that the common pathways altered
between 2 treatments in 3 cancer panels were related to cytoskeleton
remodeling (p<0.002) and role of NEK in cell cycle regulation (p1.5) to
identify genes significantly altered between treatments. Pathway
enrichment was performed using Metacore and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
software. Cell lines were clustered by hierarchical clustering based on
Pearson correlation.Results: We determined the sets of genes
differentially altered between ERI and PTX treatments in 3 cancer panels.
Regardless of cancer panels, several tubulins (TUBA1B, TUBA1C, TUBA3D,
TUBA4A, TUBB2C, TUBBG1, TUBB3, TUBB2A, TUBB2C, TUBB and TUBB6) had
significantly lower expression in cell lines treated with ERI, compared
to PTX. Our analysis revealed that expression profiles of the gene sets
correlated with drug sensitivity in cancer panels (p=0.004 for ERI in
breast cancer, p=0.06 for PTX in endometrial cancer, p=0.05 for ERI in
ovarian cancer). Pathway enrichment analysis of the gene revealed that
the common pathways altered between 2 treatments in 3 cancer panels were
related to cytoskeleton remodeling (p<0.002) and role of NEK in cell
cycle regulation (p<0.0005). We also identified pathways specific to
cancer types. EMT was enriched in genes with significantly altered
expression between the two drugs for breast (p=3.4e-07) and endometrial
cancer (p=0.001), but not for ovarian cancer. Expression of genes from
EMT pathway correlated with breast cancer ERI sensitivity (p=0.1) and
endometrial cancer PTX sensitivity (p=0.07). In breast cancer most genes
from the EMT signature were up-regulated in ERI resistant cluster,
allowing us differentiate cell line sensitivity based on expression. In
addition, we found selective signaling pathways were associated to drug
sensitivity in breast cancer panels among clustered 394 pathways based on
GEP (13 and 4 pathways for ERI and PTX respectively, p1.5) to identify
genes significantly altered between treatments. Pathway enrichment was
performed using Metacore and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software. Cell
lines were clustered by hierarchical clustering based on Pearson
correlation.Results: We determined the sets of genes differentially
altered between ERI and PTX treatments in 3 cancer panels. Regardless of
cancer panels, several tubulins (TUBA1B, TUBA1C, TUBA3D, TUBA4A, TUBB2C,
TUBBG1, TUBB3, TUBB2A, TUBB2C, TUBB and TUBB6) had significantly lower
expression in cell lines treated with ERI, compared to PTX. Our analysis
revealed that expression profiles of the gene sets correlated with drug
sensitivity in cancer panels (p=0.004 for ERI in breast cancer, p=0.06
for PTX in endometrial cancer, p=0.05 for ERI in ovarian cancer). Pathway
enrichment analysis of the gene revealed that the common pathways altered
between 2 treatments in 3 cancer panels were related to cytoskeleton
remodeling (p<0.002) and role of NEK in cell cycle regulation (p<0.0005).
We also identified pathways specific to cancer types. EMT was enriched in
genes with significantly altered expression between the two drugs for
breast (p=3.4e-07) and endometrial cancer (p=0.001), but not for ovarian
cancer. Expression of genes from EMT pathway correlated with breast
cancer ERI sensitivity (p=0.1) and endometrial cancer PTX sensitivity
(p=0.07). In breast cancer most genes from the EMT signature were
up-regulated in ERI resistant cluster, allowing us differentiate cell
line sensitivity based on expression. In addition, we found selective
signaling pathways were associated to drug sensitivity in breast cancer
panels among clustered 394 pathways based on GEP (13 and 4 pathways for
ERI and PTX respectively, p<0.01).Conclusion: GEP analysis showed that
gene sets altered with ERI and PTX were correlated to drug sensitivity in
vitro anti-proliferative activity among 3 cancer panels. Breast cancer is
the best target to differentiate ERI sensitivity based on GEP compared to
PTX and EMT genes are selectively related to ERI sensitivity.

