Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Signature MicroRNAs involved In transition of androgen sensitive
prostate cancer cells to androgen-insensitive ones during androgen
deprivation therapy.


Because of the clinical efficacy, androgen blockade therapy has become
the mainstay for advanced prostate cancer. However, prolonged androgen
blockade either by androgen deprivation or by the use of androgen
receptor antagonists, leads to activation of various adaptive mechanisms,
which promotes development of hormone-refractory prostate cancer (HRPC).
Microarray analysis revealed an increasingly complex profile of gene
expression in prostate cancer with respect to the status of androgen
sensitivity or refractoriness but the process of progression to androgen
insensitivity is not well understood. Recently, role of MicroRNAs (miRNA)
has been demonstrated in regulation of gene expression for cancer
progression. Aberrant expression of miRNAs has been correlated with tumor
differentiation, metastasis, and resistance to therapeutic strategies.
However, the role of miRNAs in progression of androgen sensitive prostate
cancer to HRPC has not been clearly defined. In this study, we examined
changes in the expression profiles of miRNAs at the genome level during
development of HRPC. Androgen sensitive LNCaP prostate cancer cells were
subjected to androgen deprivation until a subset of cells remained, which
survived in the absence of androgen. Samples were collected at different
time points along the treatment and expression of 1,113 miRNAs were
monitored through qRT-PCR. Initial analysis identified 140 miRNas that
had more than three-fold reduction in expression and 137 miRNAs that had
more than three-fold elevated expression compared to untreated samples.
Of these, 100 miRNAs were selected for further validation, and finally 41
miRNAs were chosen that displayed the most significant changes with
treatment. Using online tools and databases we determined potential mRNA
targets of these miRNAs based on sequence homology. MRNA targets with the
highest binding scores and especially those that were targeted by
multiple miRNAs were further investigated. We found many of these
putatively down regulated mRNAs code for transcriptional regulators or
were involved in pro-apoptotic signaling. In contrast many of the
putatively up regulated mRNAs code for oncoproteins and proteins involved
in mitogenic signaling. Western blot analysis confirmed that the
expression profiles of these proteins are indeed in correlation with the
expression profiles of the miRNAs identified. Our results provide
important insight into the development of HRPC and additionally, identify
potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets for management of advanced
prostate cancer.

