Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Derivation and characterization of endometrial cancer cells
resistant to phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) pathway inhibitors.


Endometrial cancer remains the most common gynecologic malignancy in the
United States with an estimated 43,000 cases annually. Limited options
exist for patients with recurrent endometrial cancer after tumor
progression following platinum/taxane combinations, and newer therapies
are needed. Endometrial cancers have among the highest rates of oncogenic
aberrations in the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) pathway with
frequencies approaching 75%, and clinical trials targeting components on
the PI3K pathway are ongoing. Despite the clinical observation that many
responses to PI3K inhibitors are short lived an understanding of the
molecular mechanisms of resistance is lacking. We have derived
endometrial cancer cell lines resistant to a panel of PI3K/AKT/mTOR
inhibitors in clinical development in an effort to understand molecular
mechanisms and signaling changes underlying resistance to PI3K-targeted
therapy. All lines have previously undergone mutational analysis of the
PI3K and RAS-ERK pathways. Representative compounds inhibiting each node
in the canonical class I PI3K signaling cascade have been chosen. These
agents have been synthesized base on the published structures and include
a pan-p110 inhibitor, an allosteric AKT inhibitor, a dual p110-mTOR, and
a MEK inhibitor. Using parallel high-throughput intracellular
phospho-kinase and phospho-receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) arrays for
screening we have identified candidate common resistance mechanisms to
inhibition of signaling nodes in the PI3K pathway. The phospho-screening
approach has highlighted the interplay between PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling
and the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathways in the development of resistance. We
have begun to validate ERK upregulation as an activated escape pathway in
patient samples from an AKT inhibitor clinical trial. Conserved
resistance profiles may ultimately be used to define a subset of
endometrial cancer patients unlikely to respond to PI3K/Akt/mTOR
inhibitors and may inform more rational early phase combination
strategies.

