Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical antitumor activity of novel small molecule glutaminase
inhibitors in triple-negative breast cancer.


Many tumor cells are dependent on glutamine (Gln) and Gln-derived
metabolites to meet bioenergetic and biosynthetic demands. A key cellular
reaction in the utilization of Gln is its deamidation by the enzyme
glutaminase to yield glutamate (Glu). We have developed a series of
potent and selective small molecule glutaminase inhibitors for evaluation
as novel cancer therapeutics. These inhibitors exhibit 5-20 nM potency
against the broadly-expressed form of glutaminase (GLS) with minimal
activity against the liver form of the enzyme (GLS2). Expression analysis
(see below) has identified triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) as a
potential clinical target population for GLS inhibitors. TNBC is a poor
prognosis breast cancer subtype lacking estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR) and the growth factor receptor Her2. TNBC is
insensitive to approved targeted therapies (ER antagonists and anti-Her2
agents) and is currently treated with conventional cytotoxic drugs.
Therefore, TNBC represents a critical unmet medical need for which new
targeted therapeutics are urgently needed.Analysis of a primary breast
tumor mRNA expression dataset (The Cancer Genome Atlas; n=756) revealed
that low ER, PR, and Her2 expression is associated with high GLS
expression and low expression of both GLS2 and glutamine synthetase, an
enzyme that opposes the action of glutaminase by synthesizing Gln from
Glu. This expression pattern, together with published work on the Gln
dependence of breast tumor cell lines [Kung et al. (2011) PLOS Genet
7:e1002229] suggests that TNBC may be particularly dependent on GLS. To
test this hypothesis, we evaluated the anti-tumor activity of our GLS
inhibitors on a panel of breast tumor-derived cell lines (n>25) that
included a mixture of TNBC and ER-positive subtypes. The TNBC subtype
displayed the greatest sensitivity to GLS inhibitor treatment (IC50s
ranging from 5-100 nM) and this sensitivity correlated with a dependence
on extracellular Gln for cell growth. In the TNBC cell line MDA-MB-231
the antiproliferative effect of the GLS inhibitor was associated with a
dose-dependent accumulation of Gln and depletion of Glu. Additionally,
GLS inhibition showed additive in vitro activity in combination with
paclitaxel, a standard-of-care treatment in TNBC. In a mouse orthotopic
tumor xenograft model with MDA-MB-231 cells implanted in the mammary fat
pad, oral delivery of a GLS inhibitor caused an accumulation of tumor
Gln, a reduction in tumor Glu, and enhanced the anti-tumor efficacy of
the paclitaxel. Experiments aimed at expanding this observation with
other TNBC xenograft models are in progress. Overall, these results
demonstrate that a selective inhibitor of GLS, either as a single agent
or in combination with standard-of-care chemotherapeutics, may be
effective as a targeted therapeutic in TNBC.

