Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Constitutively active signal transducer and activator of
transcription-3: an oncogene that increases gap junctional intercellular
communication.


Gap junctions are specialized intercellular channels that connect the
cytoplasm of adjacent cells and mediate the direct exchange of small ions
and molecules between them. Gap junctional intercellular communication
(GJIC) is usually blocked, or downregulated, in cells transformed by
oncogenes, such as Src. One of the Src effector pathways leading to
transformation and GJIC suppression is the Ras/Raf/MEK (mitogen-activated
protein kinase)/ERK (extracellular signal-regulated kinase) pathway that
has a prominent etiological role in cell proliferation, differentiation
and cell survival; inhibition of this pathway in vSrc transformed cells
restores GJIC. In addition, the distinct downstream effector of Src that
is obligatory for neoplasia is the signal transducer and activator of
transcription-3 (Stat3). Stat3 has the intrinsic characteristic of being
upregulated in a range of tumors, and a modified version, the
constitutively active form of Stat3 (Stat3C), has been shown to function
as an oncogene. Conversely, inhibition of Stat3 can suppress tumor
growth. To examine the role of Stat3 upon the Src-mediated, GJIC
suppression, Stat3 was downregulated in rat liver epithelial T51B cells
expressing activated Src through treatment with the CPA7, Stat3
inhibitor, or through infection with a retroviral vector expressing a
Stat3-specific shRNA. The extent of GJIC was determined by
electroporating the fluorescent dye, Lucifer yellow, into cells grown on
two co-planar electrodes of electrically conductive, optically
transparent, indium-tin oxide, followed by observation of the migration
of the dye to the adjacent, non-electroporated cells under fluorescence
illumination. The results demonstrate that, contrary to inhibition of the
Ras pathway, Stat3 inhibition in cells expressing activated Src does not
restore GJIC. On the contrary, Stat3 inhibition in normal cells with high
GJIC levels eliminated junctional permeability. Interestingly, our
results also demonstrate that expression of Stat3C in T51B cells and
human lung cancer SK-LuCi6 cells, which have extensive communication and
low Src levels, increased GJIC. Therefore Stat3, although it is generally
growth promoting and in an activated form can act as an oncogene, its
function is actually required for and increases junctional permeability.

