Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological inhibition of fatty acid synthase regulates
BH3-only proteins and sensitizes breast cancer cells to a small molecule
Bcl-2/Bcl-xL inhibitor to induce apoptosis.


Fatty acid synthase (FASN), the key enzyme in de novo lipogenesis, is
significantly upregulated and activated in many carcinomas, including
breast cancer. Pharmacological inhibition of FASN induces apoptosis of
FASN expressing cancer cells. However, the mechanism is still unclear.
Inhibition of FASN in breast cancer cells induces a dose dependent
increase in apoptotic cell death with a concomitant upregulation of the
pro-apoptotic BH3-only proteins Noxa, Bim and Puma (mRNA and protein).
Blockage of the BH3-only protein expression using specific small
interfering ribonucleic acid (siRNA), significantly diminishes the
apoptotic effect induced by the inhibition of FASN. Moreover, addition of
palmitate, the end product of FASN, protects the cells from the
proapoptotic effects of FASN inhibition by suppressing expression of
Noxa, Bim and Puma. These data indicate that Noxa, Bim and Puma are
essential for the apoptotic effect induced by the inhibition of FASN.
Combination therapeutic regimens have received growing attention for the
possibility of higher efficacy with reduced toxicity. Thus, we
investigated the combinatorial effect of pharmacological inhibition of
FASN and Bcl-2/Bcl-xL. While a small molecule Bcl-2/Bcl-xL inhibitor
alone did not induce apoptosis, co-treatment of the small molecule
Bcl-2/Bcl-xL inhibitor with a synthetic FASN inhibitor significantly
surpassed the apoptotic effect of the synthetic FASN inhibitor alone.
Accordingly, combined treatment of a FASN inhibitors and Bcl-2/Bcl-xL
antagonists represents a new rational combination that merits further
consideration in FASN overexpressing tumors.Citation Format: Chandra
Mohan Kurapaty Venkatapoorna, Ingrid Espinoza, Scott H Kaufmann, Ruth
Lupu. Pharmacological inhibition of fatty acid synthase regulates
BH3-only proteins and sensitizes breast cancer cells to a small molecule
Bcl-2/Bcl-xL inhibitor to induce apoptosis. [abstract]. In: Proceedings
of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer
Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer
Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1737. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1737

