Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CTGF is overexpression in asbestos-induced malignant mesothelioma
and promotes beta-catenin-T-cell factor/Lef signaling.


It is a well-known fact that malignant mesothelioma is primarily caused
by the exposure to asbestos. Due to the widespread use of asbestos, cases
of malignant mesothelioma are increasing at a dramatic rate.
Histopathological examinations have revealed different subtypes of
malignant mesothelioma. Based on cellular morphology, it is classified
into epithelial (EM), sarcomatous (SM) and biphasic (BM) (containing a
mixture of epithelial and sarcomatous cells) subtypes. Although
sarcomatous mesothelioma is not as common as epithelial mesothelioma, it
is recognized as the most aggressive type of malignant mesothelioma and
patients diagnosed with this type of mesothelioma usually have a
remarkably short survival period. Driven by the interest to know what are
the molecular mechanisms underlying the relatively more aggressive
phenotype of sarcomatous mesothelioma, we have initiated our study.From
the microarray results, we have singled out a candidate gene (connective
tissue growth factor, CTGF) whose expression is significantly increased
in SM samples compared to the EM and normal control. We found CTGF
regulated mesothelioma cells, especial SM cells proliferation, migration,
invasion via activating -catenin-T-cell factor/Lef signaling pathway.
Mesothelioma cells decreased proliferation, migration, invasion after
knockdown CTGF. We injected mesothelioma cells or CTGF-knockdown
mesothelioma cells into nude mice. The tumor size of CTGF-knockdown
mesothelioma injection is significant smaller than non-treated
mesothelioma, especially in SM. We also found a causal association
between high CTGF expression and the poor prognosis of sarcomatous
mesothelioma and that the underlying molecular mechanism is related to
the promotion of EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal transition) by CTGF. Many
EMT regulators including Slug, Snail and Twist have been activated when
over-expressed CTGF in EM. Conversely, the MET also is found when
knockdown CTGF in SM.Our study is expected to have a great impact by
offering novel therapeutic targets which are urgently needed at present.
Our preliminary data appears to be very promising and we are highly
confident that through the manipulation of our candidate gene, we will be
able to at least greatly reduce the malignancy of sarcomatous subtype of
mesothelioma and extend patient's lifespan, if not fully cure it.

