Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclin-dependent kinase 1 regualtes HIF-1 expression to promote
tumorigenesis.


Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a major mediator of tumor
physiology, and its activation is correlated with tumor progression,
metastasis, and therapeutic resistance. HIF-1 is activated in a broad
range of solid tumors due to intra-tumoral hypoxia or genetic alterations
that enhance its expression or inhibit its degradation. As a result,
decreasing HIF-1 expression represents an attractive strategy to
sensitize hypoxic tumors to standard or targeted therapies. Here, we show
that cyclin dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) regulates the expression of HIF-1,
independent of its known regulators, such as VHL, p53, and prolyl
hydroxolases. Inhibition of CDK1 enhances the proteasomal degradation of
HIF-1, reducing its half-life and steady state levels. In vitro kinase
assays reveal that CDK1 directly phosphorylates HIF-1 at a previously
unidentified regulatory site, Ser668, to regulate its basal levels and
rate of turnover. Mutation of HIF-1 Ser668 to an alanine (S668A)
significantly decreased the half-life and steady state levels of HIF-1,
where as mutation to a glutamic acid (S668E) enhanced HIF-1 expression
and stability. Importantly, constitutive phosphorylation of HIF-1 at
Ser668 was sufficient to stabilize HIF-1 under normoxic conditions,
resulting in the transcription of HIF-1 target genes and increased tumor
cell invasion in vitro. Furthermore, in vivo xenograft tumor models of
HCT116 and RKO colorectal cancer cell lines revealed that stable
expression of a phospho-mimetic of HIF-1 this site (S668E) significantly
increased tumor proliferation and angiogenesis, resulting in dramatically
enhanced tumor volume compared to cells expressing wild-type HIF-1. Taken
together, these findings provide new insights into the regulation of
HIF-1 expression and suggest a novel mechanism that may promote HIF-1
deregulation in tumorigenesis.Our results demonstrating CDK-dependent
HIF-1 stabilization raise the question of whether the expression of HIF-1
is controlled in a cell cycle-dependent manner during tumorigenesis, even
prior to the evolution of significant hypoxia associated with bulky tumor
growth in vivo. This finding has previously unrecognized implications for
a critical connection between CDK activity and tumor growth, beyond the
cell cycle engine. HIF-1 is frequently highly expressed in tumors,
independent of hypoxia or its known regulators. The identification of
Ser668 phosphorylation as an important regulator of HIF-1 provides a
novel mechanism to explain the constitutive expression of HIF-1 in some
tumors, most of which also have increased CDK1 and CDK4 activity. It has
been well established that HIF-1 inhibition sensitizes solid tumors to
radiation, standard chemotherapies and targeted agents. Therefore,
inhibition CDK1/4 represents a novel strategy for the treatment of cancer
cells with constitutively active HIF-1.

