Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a highly potent, selective and orally available
RET inhibitor with antitumor efficacy in RET-dependent tumor models.


The RET proto-oncogene encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase that is mainly
expressed in neural crest-derived tissues where it plays an important
role in cell differentiation, growth and survival. Germline activating
point mutations of RET are associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 2 (MEN2), an inherited cancer syndrome characterized by development
of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), pheochromocytoma and parathyroid
hyperplasia and are present in circa 50% of sporadic cases of MTC. More
recently, a chromosomal rearrangement of the RET gene was identified in a
subset of lung adenocarcinomas (1-2%) which is reported to result in
expression of a fusion protein containing constitutively active RET
kinase domain fused to the N-terminal portion of the kinesin KIF5B.We
recently presented data on NMS-173, a very potent RET inhibitor
characterized by an excellent in vivo activity profile upon i.v.
administration. Here we describe the identification and the preclinical
characterization of NMS-616, a novel analogue belonging to the same
chemical class, suitable for oral administration. NMS-616 is a highly
potent (IC50: 2 nM), ATP competitive RET inhibitor, characterized by high
selectivity when tested against a panel of more than 50 kinases. NMS-616
potently blocked proliferation of MTC cell lines, such as the TT human
cell line, which endogenously harbours constitutively activated RET,
concomitant with abrogation of RET autophosphorylation and signaling
pathway activation. The compound also inhibited the IL-3 independent
proliferation of RET-driven Ba/F3 cells, with down-modulation of RET
autophosphorylation and downstream signalling pathways. NMS-616 is
characterized by a good in vitro ADME profile and in vivo pharmacokinetic
parameters in the mouse, including oral bioavailability. When tested in
vivo in a murine subcutaneous xenograft model employing TT cells, NMS-616
displayed dose-dependent tumor growth inhibition following daily oral
administration at 50 and 100 mg/Kg, with tumor regression observed at
both dose levels. In addition ex vivo analysis demonstrated
dose-dependent target modulation following a single administration and
the maintenance of RET phosphorylation inhibition for at least 24 hours.

