Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Refined molecular subtyping of GBM discovers both shared and
unique therapeutic targets.


Background: Glioblastoma is the most common primary brain tumor in
humans, which also carries a very dismal prognosis of median survival
time of 14 months. TCGA consortium profiled >580 glioblastoma samples for
various genomic and molecular characterizations, and has shown that the
single histopathologically diagnosed cancer can be classified into four
different molecular subtypes (classical, mesenchymal, proneural, and
neural); these exhibit distinct characteristics, such as high expression
of oligodendrocytic development genes in the proneural subtype and high
necrosis and inflammation responses in the mesenchymal subtype. Our own
analysis of TCGA data further sub-classified mesenchymal and proneural
GBM subtypes with distinct genomic as well as survival characterization.
Since treatment efficacy and outcome are highly dependent on tumor
subtype, there is an unmet need to develop a computational method to
tailor therapy to a particular subtype.Method: In our study, we aimed to
identify genes that can serve as unique drug targets for two of our own
GBM subtypes. One is enriched with mesenchymal subtype (ME) and the other
with proneural subtype (PE). To this end, we developed a network-based
approach that takes as input the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in
one subtype. and produces a prioritized list of candidate drug targets
specific to a subtype. Network-based methods score candidates by their
overall proximity in existing pathways (MetaCore) to the DEGs, and
high-scoring candidates are considered likely to cause the observed
transcriptional changes. Resulting drug targets were compared in order to
identify genes that are unique to each subtype and those that are
common.Results: Among top 500 targets identified for each subtype, 381
were shared between two subtypes, leaving 119 high-confidence drug
targets predicted as unique to each subtype. Pathway enrichment analysis
revealed that drug targets unique to the ME subtype were enriched in
multiple immune-related and stem-cell differentiation-related pathways.
Drug targets unique to the PE subtype showed enrichment for cell
adhesion, cell cycle, and development pathways. Strikingly, disease
biomarker enrichments for unique ME drug targets resulted in a wide
variety of neurological disorders, but no cancer in the top ranks. On the
other hand, we found glioblastoma, glioma, and astrocytoma to be highly
enriched for the drug targets unique to the PE subtype, indicating that
these drug targets predominantly represent our current knowledge on
glioblastoma vulnerability.Conclusions: The identification of
subtype-specific drug targets for glioblastoma is crucial for developing
novel therapeutic approaches. Our network-based approach identified a
number of drug targets that are unique to the ME and the PE subtypes.
These candidate drug targets can be tested in vivo and may lead to
subtype-specific therapy. (Supported by NIH CA U01CA168397)Citation
Format: Dorothea Emig, Seungchan Kim, Lee Lancasjore, Yuri Nikolsky,
Michael E. Berens, Marina Bessarabova. Refined molecular subtyping of GBM
discovers both shared and unique therapeutic targets. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2892.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2892

