Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of endocytic pathway in vorinostat-induced EGFR
degradation.


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is frequently overexpressed or
aberrantly activated in various malignancies. As a result, EGFR is
considered an important target in cancer therapeutics. Strategies of EGFR
targeting include blockade of its activation, inhibition of downstream
signaling or induction of EGFR downregulation and/or degradation. Histone
deacetylases (HDACs) inhibitors were previously shown to deplete EGFR
through numerous mechanisms varying from suppression of EGFR
transcription, attenuation of its mRNA stability and disruption of
chaperone activity of HSP90. In this work, we are studying alteration of
EGFR vesicular trafficking as another mechanism that may be involved in
HDAC inhibitors-induced EGFR depletion. Cytotoxic and EGFR-degrading
effects of vorinostat, a pan-HDAC inhibitor, were investigated in the
EGFR-overexpressing cell lines, DU-145 (prostate cancer cells) and
MDA-MB-231 (breast cancer cells). Using different experimental designs,
dose- and time- effects of vorinostat were studied in both cell lines.
Proliferation assay, annexin V staining, PARP and caspase 7 cleavage were
used to evaluate overall cellular toxicity. Effects on total EGFR protein
level and relevant ERK phosphorylation were also investigated by
immunoblotting. Moreover, accumulation of acetyl--tubulin was verified
through immunoblotting and immunofluorescence imaging. Finally,
serum-starved vorinostat-treated cells were stimulated with EGF in order
to elucidate effect of vorinostat on EGF-induced EGFR degradation, an
endocytic trafficking-dependent process. As presented in this study,
vorinostat exerted potent cytotoxic effects on DU-145 and MDA-MB-231
cells manifested by a dose-dependent decrease in proliferation and
increase in percentage of apoptotic cells. In addition, vorinostat caused
a dose-dependent cleavage of both PARP and caspase 7, two markers of
apoptotic cascade activation. Furthermore, vorinostat elicited a dose-
and a time-dependent depletion of EGFR total protein in both cell lines
with a corresponding decrease in ERK activation. Add to that, vorinostat
caused accumulation of acetyl--tubulin and promoted EGFR degradation upon
EGF stimulation denoting accelerated endocytic trafficking. In
conclusion, vorinostat demonstrated a potent anti-tumor activity against
EGFR-overexpressing cell lines. Such activity was accompanied by EGFR
depletion that may be contributed in part by vorinostat-induced
deregulated vesicular trafficking.

