Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tunneling nanotubes connect melanoma cells and mediate transfer of
mitochondria and GRP78.


Background: Recently, exciting reports have outlined the existence and
function of very thin, membranous conduits between cells that span
significant distances, termed tunneling nanotubes (TnTs). TnTs have been
observed in neoplastic and normal cells, and may transport soluble
proteins, such as P-glycoprotein (MDR1), lipids, and whole organelles,
including mitochondria and Golgi vesicles, between cells. Furthermore,
TnTs mediate intercellular Ca2+ signals and transmit electrical
potentials. However, their functional characterization remains
incomplete.Objectives: Our objective is to describe TnT formation and
function in melanoma cell lines and primary tumor samples.Methods: We
describe the presence and composition of TnTs between cells in the
melanoma cell lines SK-Mel-31, DM440, DM443, DM738, and DM598 in vitro
with a combination of brightfield and fluorescent microscopy techniques.
TnT formation is assessed in response to hypoxia, glucose stress, and low
pH. Bulk intercellular transport of mitochondria is quantified via flow
cytometry using MitotrackerTM dyes, and GFP-GRP78 fusion proteins are
used for studies of protein transport. Additional flow cytometric studies
include JC-1 staining to measure mitochondrial membrane potential,
annexin V binding to measure apoptosis, and 7-AAD exclusion for live/dead
staining. Fluorescent ATP assays are used to measure general metabolic
capacity, and confocal microscopy of primary melanoma specimens is
performed using melanosome-specific (P100) and dsDNA (H33342)
stains.Results All tested cell lines formed TnT-like structures with
variable F-actin and tubulin composition. Mitochondria and Golgi vesicles
were visible within live and fixed TnTs, which were formed constitutively
and were further induced by hypoxia, glucose stress, and low pH. In an
actin-dependent process, cells rapidly transferred labeled mitochondria,
achieving homogeneity within 24 h as measured by flow cytometry. Transfer
of healthy mitochondria from unstressed cells significantly mitigated the
acute toxicity of chemotherapeutically damaged cells. GRP78 was also
rapidly transferred between cells, and the transfer of GRP78 from healthy
donor cells rescued cells damaged by chemotherapeutics as measured by a
decreased apoptotic rate.Conclusions: Here, we report for the first time,
the characterization of TnTs between melanoma cells. Moreover, melanoma
cells acquired primary and secondary chemotherapeutic resistance to
alkylating agents melphalan and temozolomide and the BRAFV600E inhibitor,
vemurafenib, via bulk intercellular transfer of functional mitochondria
and the ER stress protein, GRP78. TnT inhibitors would represent a novel
class of chemotherapeutics with implications for invasion, metastasis,
and chemotherapeutic resistance.Citation Format: Gustaaf G. de Ridder,
Rupa Ray, Salvatore V. Pizzo. Tunneling nanotubes connect melanoma cells
and mediate transfer of mitochondria and GRP78. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5248.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5248

