Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Receptor tyrosine kinase plasticity as a mechanism of acquired
resistance to cetuximab in vitro: potential for co-targeting with
antibody mixtures.


Cetuximab is an EGFR-blocking antibody that belongs to the first
generation of monoclonal antibodies approved for treatment of head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma and metastatic colorectal cancer. Although
anti-EGFR therapy is clinically successful, development of cetuximab
resistance is an increasing problem in the clinic. Thus, a better
understanding of the mechanisms responsible for development of cetuximab
resistance is valuable for development of the next generation of antibody
therapeutics.Here we report the establishment of a number of
cetuximab-resistant clones derived from the cetuximab-sensitive head and
neck squamous carcinoma cell line HN5. Initial characterization of the
cetuximab-resistant cells shows that the total level of EGFR is lower
compared to the parental cells, but that the cetuximab binding is
unaltered. However, cetuximab resistant clones remain dependent on EGFR
for growth and proliferation, as a mixture of antibodies targeting
non-overlapping epitopes on EGFR is able to partially overcome the
cetuximab-induced resistance. Inititial results indicate that the
antibody mixture overcomes cetuximab resistances by inducing efficient
EGFR internalization followed by lysosomal degradation of the receptor.
Removal of EGFR from the cell surface blocks interactions of EGFR with
other receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and intracellular proteins as
compensatory response to cetuximab inhibition.The observed level of
inhibition of the resistant clones by the anti-EGFR antibody mixture did
not, however, induce as efficient growth inhibition as in the parental
cells, indicating additional resistance mechanisms. Indeed we were able
to show that adding antibodies to other RTKs to the anti-EGFR antibody
mixture restored sensitivity of the resistant cells to a level similar to
parental cells.In conclusion, our results demonstrate that cetuximab
resistant clones remain partially dependent on EGFR for growth and
proliferation. Additional RTKs are activated as a compensatory response
to the EGFR inhibition, demonstrating the plasticity of the RTK family.
Our results provide a rationale for targeting multiple RTKs to overcome
acquired resistance to currently approved mAbs or to delay the emerge of
resistance if used upfront.An update will be presented.

