Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation-induced autophagy is dependent on Sirtuin 3.


Sirtuin family members (Sirtuin 1 to 7) are highly conserved proteins,
both structurally and functionally, and have either NAD+ dependent
enzymatic activity (Sirtuin 1,2, 3, 5 and 7) for deacetylation of
proteins or ADP ribosyl transferase activity (Sirtuin 4 and 6). Their
functions in metabolic processes and chromatin remodeling have been
conserved throughout evolution. Sirtuin 1 and Sirtuin 2 have been shown
to be linked with several neurological disorders. The role of other
Sirtuins in neurodegenerative disorders is not known. Radiation therapy
(RT), one of the preferred and widely accepted treatments for
intracranial primary and secondary metastatic tumors, may lead to
long-term irreversible neurotoxicity in susceptible individuals with
cognitive dysfunction similar to that observed in other neurodegenerative
disorders. There are ample data which demonstrate that aberrant
autophagic process and dysfunctional mitochondria are important factors
leading to several neurological diseases, such as Huntington's disease
and Parkinson's dementia. Among the Sirtuins, Sirtuin 3, 4 and 5 are
localized within mitochondria, however, their role in radiation-induced
neurotoxicity has not been evaluated.Using Sirtuin 3 knockout (KO) mice
generated through genomic deletion allowed us the opportunity to study
its role in autophagy and mitochondrial function during exposure to
radiation. Preliminary reports show Sirtuin 3 in the adult mouse brain to
be localized primarily within hippocampus and subcortical plate. Through
flow cytometry and immunofluorescence stainin of mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from Sirtuin 3 KO mice, we demonstrate that
loss of Sirtuin 3 alters rates of basal autophagy. Furthermore,
immunoblot analysis of autophagic marker LC3B I &II in the presence and
absence of hydrolase inhibitors (E64d & Pepstatin A) exhibits that loss
of Sirtuin 3 stimulates autophagy. Radiation treatment of Sirtuin 3
wild-type and knockout MEFs exhibited dose dependent induction of
autophagy. Staining with mitotracker red and JC1 illustrates that MEFs
lacking Sirtuin 3 retain mitochondria with abnormal morphology and
disturbed membrane potential which can further enhanced by radiation
treatment and exposure to the ionophore Carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenyl
hydrazone (CCCP). Enrichment of lower form of LC3B in Sirtuin 3 KO cells
upon treatment with CCCP and radiation suggests that loss of Sirtuin 3
sensitizes cells towards enhanced autophagy via mitophagy. Taken
together, this study indicates that Sirtuin 3 is an important player in
deciding cell fate via mitophagy during radiation treatment and has
important implications in further studies of radiation-induced
neurotoxicity.

