Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCL25-CCR9 axis mediates pancreatic cancer progression through
beta-catenin activation.


Background: Expression of the chemokine receptor CCR9 is elevated in
select solid organ cancers; and may contribute to drug resistance.
However, there is no data for the role of CCR9 in GI cancers, aside from
our prior work which demonstrated elevated expression in pancreatic
cancer. Our current studies have uncovered activation of a novel
CCR9-mediated molecular pathway and suggest that CCR9 may play a critical
role in cancer progression through the aberrant activation of
-catenin.Methods: Immunohistochemistry and western blotting were used to
assess CCR9 expression. We exposed human pancreatic cancer cell lines to
CCL25 and evaluated levels of activated -catenin and phosphorylated AKT
via western blot. Proliferation and invasion were measured using an
ATP-based assay and a Boyden chamber assay, respectively. IC50 of
gemcitabine was determined using an acid phosphatase assay.Results: We
have previously shown that CCR9 is expressed in human and murine PanIN
lesions and in a human pancreatic cancer cell line. Here we expand upon
these findings to show CCR9 expression in human pancreatic cancer tissue
samples and in multiple cell lines. We determined that stimulation of
CCR9 by its ligand, CCL25, signals through AKT and -catenin to increase
cell proliferation and invasion in pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Following treatment with CCL25, cell proliferation was increased by an
average of 20% across all cell lines (pBackground: Expression of the
chemokine receptor CCR9 is elevated in select solid organ cancers; and
may contribute to drug resistance. However, there is no data for the role
of CCR9 in GI cancers, aside from our prior work which demonstrated
elevated expression in pancreatic cancer. Our current studies have
uncovered activation of a novel CCR9-mediated molecular pathway and
suggest that CCR9 may play a critical role in cancer progression through
the aberrant activation of -catenin.Methods: Immunohistochemistry and
western blotting were used to assess CCR9 expression. We exposed human
pancreatic cancer cell lines to CCL25 and evaluated levels of activated
-catenin and phosphorylated AKT via western blot. Proliferation and
invasion were measured using an ATP-based assay and a Boyden chamber
assay, respectively. IC50 of gemcitabine was determined using an acid
phosphatase assay.Results: We have previously shown that CCR9 is
expressed in human and murine PanIN lesions and in a human pancreatic
cancer cell line. Here we expand upon these findings to show CCR9
expression in human pancreatic cancer tissue samples and in multiple cell
lines. We determined that stimulation of CCR9 by its ligand, CCL25,
signals through AKT and -catenin to increase cell proliferation and
invasion in pancreatic cancer cell lines. Following treatment with CCL25,
cell proliferation was increased by an average of 20% across all cell
lines (p<0.01). Pre-treatment with the PI3K inhibitor, LY294002,
inhibited the CCL25-mediated increase in proliferation. We further show a
CCL25-mediated increase in invasion. Using a modified Boyden chamber
matrigel invasion assay, we determined that CCL25 as a chemoattractant
heightened the invasive abilities of our pancreatic cancer cell lines by
3-fold. Inhibiting PI3K activation blocked this increase. In addition,
exposure to CCL25 led to reduced gemcitabine sensitivity. Pre-treatment
with CCL25 increased the IC50 of gemcitabine by 7-fold in PANC-1 cells,
from 0.1M to 0.77M (p=0.005) and 5.5-fold in AsPC-1 cells from 17.7M to
96.7M (p=0.008), indicating a drastic decrease in the effectiveness of
gemcitabine when CCL25 is present.Conclusions: The current paucity of
effective therapies for pancreatic cancer presents a significant clinical
challenge. This highlights the need to identify and study mechanisms and
pathways involved in pancreatic cancer progression. Determining the role
of CC9R in pancreatic cancer and targeting the CCL25-CCR9--catenin
pathway may therefore present an innovative, clinically significant
therapeutic target for pancreatic cancer.

