Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated bioinformatic analysis to elucidate molecular
mechanisms associated with reversal of osteosarcoma malignancy induced by
CD99.


Introduction: CD99 is a transmembrane glycoprotein which is
physiologically involved in several biological processes, such as cell
migration, adhesion, and differentiation. High levels of CD99 have been
reported in mesenchymal stem cells and osteoblasts. In contrast, the
molecule has been shown to be absent in osteosarcoma (OS), in which it
acts as a tumour suppressor. The molecular mechanisms responsible for its
functions are however still poorly defined. In this study we used
bioinformatic studies to integrate gene expression and miRNA data to
identify crucial mediators.Methods: Forced expression of CD99 was stably
induced in Saos-2 OS cell line. Microarray analyses of gene or miRNA
expression were performed and integrated by using different bioinformatic
approaches. TargetScan, Miranda, Diana-microT and PicTar prediction
databases were used to identify miRNA targets.Results:
CD99-overexpressing cells displayed a massive down-regulation of gene
expression. Only 19 probes were found to be significantly up-regulated in
CD99 transfectants compared to parental cells. In contrast, 231 probes
were found to be down-regulated, thus suggesting gene modulation by
epigenetic mechanisms. We thus examined miRNA profile of these cells. A
significant up-regulation of miR-1225-3p, miR-1238, miR-1305, miR-191*,
miR-34a, and miR-425* was observed in CD99 overexpressing cells.
Enrichment analyses pointed out an involvement of TGF signalling.
Interestingly, SMAD-2 and -4, which emerged as targets of miR-34a, were
among the main down-modulated genes. miR34 mimics confirmed the
association between miR34a and SMAD-4. Functional studies are on-going to
establish associations with osteosarcoma malignancy.Conclusions: Besides
inhibiting osteosarcoma malignancy, CD99 expression in osteosarcoma cells
determines massive gene expression repression, likely due to changes in
miRNA profile. Up-regulation of miR-34a together with down-regulation of
TGF signalling mediators seem to be critical players.Studies are granted
by AIRC 10452 and Ministry Health RF-2009 to KS.

