Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ascorbic acid combined with a cytostatic inhibitor of glycolysis
synergistically induces apoptosis in non-small lung cancer cells.


Purpose An exceptional characteristic of many cancer cells is increased
glucose uptake and elevated glycolysis with a concomitant reduction in
oxidative respiration, also known as the Warburg effect. The increase in
basal levels of reactive oxygen species (primarily, H2O2) and their
increased dependence on glycolysis for their survival make tumor cells
more susceptible than normal cells to treatment with a combination of
pro-oxidant agents and chemotherapy. This common feature of tumor cells
has been targeted for the development of new cancer therapeutics.
Ascorbic acid (AA) has been shown to have cancer curative potential, at
clinically achievable doses that have minimal or no toxic effects on
normal cells. We have previously shown that some cancer cell lines are
significantly more sensitive to treatment with ascorbic acid at
concentrations where it may function as a pro-oxidant. In the present
case, we investigated the effects of AA alone or in combinations of AA
with the glycolysis inhibitor
3-(3-pyridinyl)-1-(4-pyridinyl)-2-propen-1-one (3-PO) on the viability of
three non-small lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines vs immortalized lung
epithelial cell line.Results Cell viability assays showed that combined
treatment of AA and 3-PO caused a synergistic increase in cell death in
all the NSCLC cell lines at concentrations well below the IC50
concentrations for each compound alone, while no synergistic cytotoxic
effect was observed in immortalized lung epithelial cells. Key markers
such as DNA fragmentation, PARP cleavage, annexin-V binding, and caspase
activity indicated that AA-induced cell death is caused via the
activation of apoptosis. Metabolomic analysis revealed a decrease in
NAD/NADH in the combination treatment that correlated well with the
synergistic cell death observed in the viability results. The importance
of NAD/NADH depletion in the synergistic response was confirmed by rescue
experiments showing addition of NAD to the culture protected cells from
the combination treatment. The major significance of these studies is
that, we show for the first time that AA selectively synergizes with a
glycolytic inhibitor in killing NSCLC cells and that pharmacologic AA
treatment (either alone or combined with any other chemotherapeutic agent
or glycolytic inhibitors used in the treatment of cancer) may be a
promising therapy for non-small lung cancer and other challenging
to-treat cancers.

