Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sunitinib prevents tumor-induced immunotolerance in novel murine
model of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) through modulating
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells via TGF- signaling.


The high rate of mortality, frequent incidence of recurrence, and limited
benefit of current therapies for hepatocellular carcinoma underline the
urgent need for new therapeutic approaches. Immunotherapy has been
demonstrated to be a promising strategy for this lethal disease. However,
tumor progression induced immunotolerance abrogates effective immune
responses and prevents the development of successful immunotherapeutic
strategies. In this study, we evaluated the role of sunitinib, a FDA
approved chemotherapeutic agent, in preventing tumor-induced
immunotolerance and investigated the underlying cellular and molecular
mechanisms. Recently, we've established a novel fibrotic and orthotopic
murine model of HCC through seeding of tumorigenic hepatocytes from SV40
T antigen (Tag) transgenic MTD2 mice into the livers of syngeneic C57BL/6
mice followed by carbon tetrachloride treatment. This model mimics human
HCC progression and recapitulates typical histologic, biologic, and
immunologic features of this disease. Using this model, we've
demonstrated that the treatment of sunitinib, a small molecule receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (RTKI), restrains the tumor growth in advanced
HCC. Interestingly, sunitinib treatment also induces the proliferation
and differentiation of tumor antigen-specific CD8 T cells in tumor
bearing mice, evidenced by significantly higher portion of CD8 T cells
that produced IFN- and TNF- in response to tumor antigen stimulation.
Subsequent findings revealed that sunitinib treatment led to the
reduction in the frequency of CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ Treg and decrease in TGF-
expression. In vitro experiments indicated that Tregs in tumor-bearing
mice express higher level of TGF- and strongly suppress the function of
CD4 and CD8 T cells in a dose-dependent manner compared to that in
tumor-free mice. Tregs in tumor-bearing mice treated with sunitinib
exhibited reduced suppressive function compared to that in tumor-bearing
mice treated with vehicle. Further, the suppressive function of Tregs
from tumor-bearing mice can be partly inhibited by blocking TGF- with
anti-TGF- antibody. In addition, we've demonstrated that tumor lysate
drives CD4+CD25- nave T cells differentiation into CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ Tregs
and this differentiation could be partially neutralized with anti-TGF-
antibody.In conclusion, our findings indicated that sunitinib treatment
prevents tumor-induced immunotolerance through reducing the frequency and
suppressive function of Tregs via TGF- signaling pathway.

