Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultrasound-mediated delivery of a novel nanoparticle-microbubble
platform.


Ultrasound-mediated delivery of a novel nanoparticle-microbubble
platform. A major obstacle in delivery of nanoparticles (NPs) to tumor
cells is the low uptake and heterogeneous distribution of the NPs in
tumor tissue. Ultrasound (US) may improve the delivery of encapsulated
drug in various ways depending on the frequency and intensity applied, by
inducing heating, radiation force or cavitation. We have developed a
novel multimodal, multifunctional drug delivery system consisting of
microbubbles stabilized by polymeric NPs to be used in US-mediated
delivery of NPs. Miniemulsion polymerization was used to prepare NPs of
the biocompatible and biodegradable polymer poly(butyl-2-cyanoacrylate)
(PBCA). The NPs were coated with PEG to improve the circulation time and
biodistribution. Microbubbles stabilized by these NPs were prepared by
mixing the NP dispersion with proteins and air using an ultra-turrax. The
aim of the present work was to study the cellular uptake of the NP in
vitro and the microdistribution of the NP in tumor tissue in vivo. Human
prostate cancer cells were incubated with fluorescently labeled (Nile red
and DiR) NPs and the cellular uptake measured by flow cytometry and
confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). Prostate cancer xenografts
were grown subcutaneously on the leg of athymic mice, and NP alone or NPs
stabilizing microbubbles were injected intravenously. The particles
circulated for 5 min or 24 hr, before the tumors were exposed to US, thus
the effect of US both on extravasation and penetration through the
extracellular matrix could be studied. The tumors were exposed to a
focused US beam at low (300 kHz or 1 MHz) or high (5 MHz) frequency,
applying various intensities. The blood vessels were visualized by
injection of FITC- tomato lectin 5 min before euthanizing the mice. The
distribution of NPs was studied by CLSM, imaging frozen tumor sections
along a radial track from the periphery of the tumor sections. The
biodistribution of NPs comparing the uptake in normal and tumor tissue,
was studied by whole animal optical imaging. The cellular uptake of the
NPs in vitro depended on the length and type of PEG used. In vivo,
ultrasound enhanced the uptake and improved the distribution of the NPs
in the extracellular matrix. In untreated tumors only small amounts of
NPs were observed and they were located close to the blood vessels. In
the US-exposed tumors, the uptake was enhanced and the NP had penetrated
further away from the blood vessels compared with unexposed tumors. US
administered 5 min after NP-injection was more efficient than US given
after 24 h. This demonstrates that the effect of US on extravasation is
more important than the effect on penetration of NPs through the
extracellular matrix. A prerequisite for successful cancer therapy is
that the cytotoxic drugs reach all the cancer cells. The present results
demonstrate that US improves the delivery of NPs, and mainly by
increasing the permeability of the capillary wall.

