Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Formation of transient membrane channels targets doxorubicin
resistance.


Poor accumulation of anti-cancer drugs in tumor cells is a major
limitation in clinical cancer therapy. The main barrier for a drug to
traverse through the body and reach its intracellular target is the
plasma membrane. A typical (candidate) drug is therefore small,
amphiphilic and of limited charge. Still, membrane traversal remains a
highly inefficient and impeding process. In clinical oncology in
particular there is an urgent need for new ways to improve drug efficacy
and reduce toxicity.We have elucidated a mechanism that effectively
accelerates membrane translocation of the stereotypical and widely used
amphiphilic drug, doxorubicin. Well-defined short-chain sphingolipids,
when co-inserted into the membrane, diminish the barrier for doxorubicin
translocation. In vicinity of doxorubicin, the lipid analogues rapidly
self-assemble at nanosecond timescale, and form a small, transient
membrane channel. As a result, the doxorubicin drug readily translocates
the membrane, thereby reducing the energetic barrier significantly by
two-fold. Monte-Carlo based full-atom simulations revealed the structure
and dynamics of channel formation at molecular detail.By means of a
high-throughput screening approach of classical and targeted anti-cancer
agent libraries, we identified various anti-cancer drugs in addition to
doxorubicin, which share critical molecular characteristics, like defined
amphiphilicity. Short-chain sphingolipids enhance cellular accumulation
of these anti-cancer compounds similar to doxorubicin.Guided by these
mechanistic insights, we applied the concept of facilitated doxorubicin
traversal in genetically engineered WAPcre;EcadF/F;p53F/F mouse models
for breast cancer. These tumors are multi-drug resistant to conventional
and targeted anti-cancer agents. Co-administration of the sphingolipid
analogue GC with liposomal doxorubicin effectively overcame drug
resistance. While toxicity and normal tissue exposure reduced, GC caused
elevated levels of intracellular doxorubicin in the tumor, improved tumor
growth inhibition and significantly prolonged survival. Thus, a strategy
of GC-mediated doxorubicin translocation was the only therapeutic
approach that generated a sustained doxorubicin anti-tumor
response.Notably, enhanced doxorubicin translocation was strongest over
membranes of the tumor, a spectacular observation confirmed in vitro. We
demonstrate that composition and local organization of the plasma
membrane determine the efficiency of membrane channel formation.In
conclusion, transient membrane channels target the tumor cell membrane to
overcome multi-drug resistance. Our results illuminate a critical role of
the (tumor) plasma membrane in restricting the efficacy of anti-cancer
drugs and its contribution to multi-drug resistance. Moreover, our
findings present a mechanism to address these limitations of (candidate)
drugs in a clinically applicable way.

