Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the molecular heterogeneity of circulating
tumour cells in metastatic prostate cancer.


Purpose: CTCs represent an alternative source of tumor material
potentially usable as a surrogate tissue marker in the context of
targeted treatments. The objective of the present study was to
characterize the status of key molecular markers such as ERG gene
rearrangement, and AR and c-myc amplifications, according to epithelial
and/or mesenchymal marker expression in CTCs of patients with metastatic
prostate cancer (PCa).Patients and Methods: CTCs were isolated from the
blood of 40 patients at day 0 and day 30 of abiraterone treatment. CTCs
were detected using two methods, CellSearch (Veridex LLC, Raritan, NJ,
USA) and ISET (Isolation by Size of Epithelial Tumor cells). Molecular
characterization of CTCs was performed on ISET filters by combining four
color immunofluorescent staining and Filter Adapted-Fluorescent In situ
Hybridization (FA-FISH). To optimize pan-keratin detection, four
pancytokeratin antibodies, including AE1/AE3, KL1, C11, and A45-B/B3,
were tested on the LnCAP prostate cell line spiked in normal blood cells
and on PCa CTCs enriched by ISET. Epithelial (cytokeratins, E-cadherin,
EpCAM (Epithelial Cell Adhesion Molecule)), mesenchymal (vimentin,
N-cadherin), PTEN, androgen receptor (AR) and Ki67 marker expression was
detected by immunofluorescent staining on ISET filters according to a
method we previously established. FA-FISH was optimized for the detection
of ERG gene rearrangement and AR and c-myc amplification or gain of copy
number. A two step method combining immunofluorescent staining and
FA-FISH was established on an ARIOL automated scanner (LEICA) to
precisely relocate FISH signals in phenotypically different CTC
subsets.Results: Higher CTC levels were detected by ISET compared to
CellSearch. Quantitative analysis of the intensity values for each tested
pan-keratins antibodies showed that KL1 and A45-B/B3 clones gave the
strongest immunofluorescent signals both on the LnCAP cell line and PCa
CTCs. CTCs expressing epithelial, mesenchymal and hybrid (both epithelial
and mesenchymal) markers were detected in most patients suggesting the
existence of CTCs at different stages of the epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) process. The loss of PTEN expression was also observed
using hematopoietic cells present on ISET filters as a positive control
of PTEN expression. ERG gene rearrangement, AR and c-myc amplifications
were detected. The presence of these markers within CTC subsets
expressing epithelial and/or mesenchymal markers is currently
studied.Conclusion: Several molecular markers such as ERG gene
rearrangement, AR and c-myc amplifications were detected in PCa CTCs. The
presence of these markers in CTCs according to their EMT status will be
presented.

