Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Foxo3a regulates cell cycle arrest through the regulation of p53,
p21 and GADD45 signaling activity in Quercetin-treated MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells.


Forkhead box O (FoxO) transcription factors play an important role in
multiple signaling pathways and physiological and pathological processes
including apoptosis, proliferation metabolism, immunity, and
tumorigenesis. Activation of the FoxO subfamily in cells can upregulate
cell-cycle inhibitors p21Cip1 and p27Kip1 and downregulate the cell-cycle
regulator cyclin D1/2, consequently leading to G1/S arrest of
cells.Recently, quercetin has attracted much attention in relation to its
anticancer activities in many cancer models, however, molecular
mechanisms underlying quercetin-mediated cellular responses remain poorly
defined. We have previously observed that apoptosis of breast cancer
cells in response to quercetin was mediated by transcriptional activation
of Foxo3a. In addition, C-Jun N-treminal kinase (JNK) regulated the
activation of FoxO3a, leading to apoptosis. However, early apoptotic
cells stained with Annexin V were not enough to illustrate the whole
amount of decreased cell viability as detected by MTT assay.To clarify
this point, we analyzed changes of their cell cycle after stimulation of
20M quercetin and detected obvious cell cycle arrest at S and G2/M phases
leading to delay in their progression. Treatment of quercetin resulted in
3 fold induced population of S phase and 2 fold induced population of
G2/M phase, along with 35 % reduced population of G1 phase. Using
luciferase reporter assay, MDA-MB231 cells treated with quercetin
represented highly increased level of p53, p21 and GADD45 signaling
activity, which control cell cycle of breast cancer cells. Moreover,
reporter activities of p53, p21 and GADD45 were not stimulated when the
expression of Foxo3a was abolished using transfection of Foxo3a shRNA.
Since the activation of Foxo3a coincided with increased phosphorylation
of JNK after treatment of quercetin, signaling pathways for cell cycle
were analyzed in the presence of inhibitor for JNK (SP600125). SP600125
reversed the activation of p53, p21 and GADD45 signaling as well as the
activation of Foxo3a. Flow cytometry revealed that quercetin-induced cell
cycle arrest of MDA-MB231 cells was partially abrogated when cells were
treated with SP600125.Taken together, our data show that cell cycle
arrest of breast cancer cells in response to quercetin is dependent upon
Foxo3a activation regulated by JNK, resulting in the activation of p53,
p21 and GADD45 signaling pathways. These results suggest that an
understanding of precise molecular mechanisms for anti-cancer property of
quercetin .

