Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of chromobox homolog 7 (Cbx7) is associated with poor
prognosis in ovarian clear cell adenocarcinoma via regulating
TRAIL-induced apoptotic pathway.


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy, and among them,
clear cell adenocarcinoma of the ovary (OCCA) has relatively worse
prognosis associated with chemoresistancy. Chromobox (Cbx) 7 is a
component of the polycomb repressive complex 1 that prolongs the lifespan
of normal human cells via down-regulating the expression of INK4a/ARF and
thus related with cell-cycle progression. However, recent reports
studying the relationship between Cbx7 expression and the patient's
survival differs among the cell origins of the tumors, and the precise
role of Cbx7 in human carcinomas remains obscure. In this study, we
analyzed the expression of Cbx7 by immunohistochemistry in 81 OCCA
patients and evaluated the association with their clinical outcome. Both
overall survival and progression-free survival of the patients were
significantly shorter in Cbx7-positive than Cbx7-negative (POvarian
cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy, and among them, clear
cell adenocarcinoma of the ovary (OCCA) has relatively worse prognosis
associated with chemoresistancy. Chromobox (Cbx) 7 is a component of the
polycomb repressive complex 1 that prolongs the lifespan of normal human
cells via down-regulating the expression of INK4a/ARF and thus related
with cell-cycle progression. However, recent reports studying the
relationship between Cbx7 expression and the patient's survival differs
among the cell origins of the tumors, and the precise role of Cbx7 in
human carcinomas remains obscure. In this study, we analyzed the
expression of Cbx7 by immunohistochemistry in 81 OCCA patients and
evaluated the association with their clinical outcome. Both overall
survival and progression-free survival of the patients were significantly
shorter in Cbx7-positive than Cbx7-negative (P<0.05) tumors in OCCA. Cbx7
knockdown experiments using two OCCA cell lines, TOV21G and KOC-7C,
revealed that the viability of the cells were significantly reduced
compared to control (POvarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic
malignancy, and among them, clear cell adenocarcinoma of the ovary (OCCA)
has relatively worse prognosis associated with chemoresistancy. Chromobox
(Cbx) 7 is a component of the polycomb repressive complex 1 that prolongs
the lifespan of normal human cells via down-regulating the expression of
INK4a/ARF and thus related with cell-cycle progression. However, recent
reports studying the relationship between Cbx7 expression and the
patient's survival differs among the cell origins of the tumors, and the
precise role of Cbx7 in human carcinomas remains obscure. In this study,
we analyzed the expression of Cbx7 by immunohistochemistry in 81 OCCA
patients and evaluated the association with their clinical outcome. Both
overall survival and progression-free survival of the patients were
significantly shorter in Cbx7-positive than Cbx7-negative (P<0.05) tumors
in OCCA. Cbx7 knockdown experiments using two OCCA cell lines, TOV21G and
KOC-7C, revealed that the viability of the cells were significantly
reduced compared to control (P<0.001). Expression microarray analysis
revealed that apoptosis-related genes, especially TRAIL, were
significantly upregulated in Cbx7 knockdown cells (POvarian cancer is the
most lethal gynecologic malignancy, and among them, clear cell
adenocarcinoma of the ovary (OCCA) has relatively worse prognosis
associated with chemoresistancy. Chromobox (Cbx) 7 is a component of the
polycomb repressive complex 1 that prolongs the lifespan of normal human
cells via down-regulating the expression of INK4a/ARF and thus related
with cell-cycle progression. However, recent reports studying the
relationship between Cbx7 expression and the patient's survival differs
among the cell origins of the tumors, and the precise role of Cbx7 in
human carcinomas remains obscure. In this study, we analyzed the
expression of Cbx7 by immunohistochemistry in 81 OCCA patients and
evaluated the association with their clinical outcome. Both overall
survival and progression-free survival of the patients were significantly
shorter in Cbx7-positive than Cbx7-negative (P<0.05) tumors in OCCA. Cbx7
knockdown experiments using two OCCA cell lines, TOV21G and KOC-7C,
revealed that the viability of the cells were significantly reduced
compared to control (P<0.001). Expression microarray analysis revealed
that apoptosis-related genes, especially TRAIL, were significantly
upregulated in Cbx7 knockdown cells (P<0.01). We further confirmed that
Cbx-7 knockdown resulted in TRAIL-induced apoptosis in OCCA cells. Thus,
in this study, we showed for the first time that Cbx7 is associated with
worse prognosis in OCCA. We also successfully demonstrated that the TRAIL
pathway is a novel target of Cbx7 in these cells, and therapeutic agents
utilizing the TRAIL pathway may be specifically effective targeting
OCCA.Citation Format: Yoriko Yamashita, Kanako Shinjo, Eiko Yamamoto,
Shinya Akatsuka, Takashi Takahashi, Hiroaki Kajiyama, Fumitaka Kikkawa,
Shinya Toyokuni. Expression of chromobox homolog 7 (Cbx7) is associated
with poor prognosis in ovarian clear cell adenocarcinoma via regulating
TRAIL-induced apoptotic pathway. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 3111. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3111

