Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The protein phosphatase 2 subunit PR48 is a novel melanoma tumor
suppressor gene.


Cutaneous melanoma cell proliferation is a strong prognostic factor for
distant metastasis free survival (DMFS). In the current study we tested
if aberrant expression of a regulator both DNA replication and cell cycle
progression, i.e. the protein phosphatase 2A subunit PR48, could be a
driver of melanoma proliferation and progression. Quantitative analysis
of PR48 mRNA expression revealed a strong correlation between low levels
of expression and poor DMFS in a multivariate analysis (n=49, p=0.0007).
In line with this, no or low PR48 protein expression was associated with
poor overall survival in three independent samples sets of melanoma
(n=339, PCutaneous melanoma cell proliferation is a strong prognostic
factor for distant metastasis free survival (DMFS). In the current study
we tested if aberrant expression of a regulator both DNA replication and
cell cycle progression, i.e. the protein phosphatase 2A subunit PR48,
could be a driver of melanoma proliferation and progression. Quantitative
analysis of PR48 mRNA expression revealed a strong correlation between
low levels of expression and poor DMFS in a multivariate analysis (n=49,
p=0.0007). In line with this, no or low PR48 protein expression was
associated with poor overall survival in three independent samples sets
of melanoma (n=339, P<0.001), and reduced PR48 expression correlated with
increased proliferation (P=0.0023). Functional analysis using over
expression and knock down strategies in melanoma cell lines demonstrated
that PR48 alters cdc6-cdt1 complex formation, regulates pRb
phosphorylation status, and entry into the S-phase of the cycle
progression. Ectopic PR48 expression decreased tumorigenicity of melanoma
cells, and shRNA-mediated reduced PR48 expression increased tumor take
and growth in nude mice. Our data demonstrate that PPP2R3B is a novel
tumor suppressor gene in melanoma, whose loss of expression contributes
increased proliferation and poor survival.

