Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel chemoresistance mechanism: HuR post-trancriptionally
regulates WEE1, the mitotic inhibitor, upon DNA damage in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cells.


Introduction: We explored HuR's (an RNA binding protein) significance in
the DNA damage response (DDR) in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA)
cells.Experimental Procedures: We treated PDA cells with DNA damaging
agent's mitomycin C (MMC), oxaliplatin, cisplatin, carboplatin,
gemcitabine and a PARP inhibitor (ABT-888). HuR subcellular localization
was assessed by immunoblotting. Additionally, we measured H2AX foci, a
marker of DNA damage, by immunofluorescence. Drug sensitivity assays were
performed in isogenic PDA cells that differed in HuR expression (siRNA
oligos against HuR, cDNAs encoding HuR for overexpression, and
appropriate controls). A BrdU/PI pulse chase experiment monitored the
cell cycle progression after treating cells with low (150nM) and high
(1M) doses of MMC. Ribonucleoprotein-immunoprecipitation (RIP) assays
were used to isolate mRNAs bound to HuR to identify HuR targets in the
DDR.Results: Enhanced-HuR cytoplasmic protein expression was observed in
PDA cells exposed to all DNA damaging agents. Under high doses of certain
DNA damaging agents (e.g., MMC) HuR was cleaved in a caspase-dependent
manner. To assess HuR's role in the DDR, isogenic PDA cells lines
manipulated with HuR levels were treated with MMC (150nM) for 2 hrs. H2AX
foci assay revealed a 3-fold increase in foci number with MMC treatment
in the HuR depleted cells, as compared to the control cells, suggesting
that DNA repair was delayed in the absence of HuR. Cell cycle analyses
demonstrated that HuR-depleted PDA cells progressed through the G2/M
checkpoint and into mitosis upon MMC treatment. A combinatorial approach
with RIP-sequencing and an siRNA library screen for genes resistant to
DNA damaging agents was performed, and WEE1, a mitotic inhibitor kinase,
was identified as a novel HuR target. A separate RIP-qPCR experiment
validated WEE1 as an HuR binder with 56-fold more expression upon MMC
stress, compared to an IgG control-IP. WEE1 protein expression and Cdk1
(a target of the WEE1 kinase and G2/M phase regulator) phosphorylation
was reduced in HuR depleted cells, validating HuR as an upstream
post-transcriptional regulator of WEE1 and an indirect inhibitor of the
cdk1-cyclin complex in the face of DNA damage.Conclusions: We demonstrate
that HuR-deficiency allows PDA cells to enter the cell cycle more
efficiently upon DNA damage. This event is dependent on HuR's regulation
of WEE1 leading to activation of the CDK1-cyclin complex. These data
support a model where HuR is integral to the G2/M checkpoint, forcing a
cell cycle recovery response which is critical for PDA cells to avoid DNA
damage. Therefore, HuR promotes survival of PDA cells through its acute
activation of the DDR pathway. Disruption of HuR's molecular interaction
with WEE1 represents a therapeutic opportunity to enhance clinically
utilized chemotherapeutic DNA damaging agents for PDA.

