Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel biliary tract cancer stem cell biomarker TAGLN2 regulates
migration via c-met signaling cascades in biliary tract cancer cells.


Background/Aims : Biliary tract cancer is one of the lethal malignancy.
Most biliary tract cancer is diagnosed at advanced stages and have poor
prognosis. Currently, there are no standard biomarkers and
chemotherapeutic agents for biliary tract cancers. In order to find the
biomarkers and therapeutic targets for biliary tract cancer, we have
focused on the cancer stem cells (CSCs) with tumor initiating/self
renewing/metastatic capacity and chemo/radio-resistance. In this study,
we investigated the function of biliary tract CSC related biomarker
TALGN2 discovered from comparision of cDNA microarray between sphere and
adherent cell populations of biliary tract cancer cell lines.Methods :
Analysis using cDNA microarray between sphere and adherent cell
populations and selection of CSC specific biomarkers were performed.
Among them, we selected TAGLN2 as a biliary CSC related gene. TAGLN2
expression was confirmed by RT-PCR, western blot and
immunohistochemistry. To evaluate the function of TAGLN2 in biliary
carcinogenesis, we performed targeted knockdown via siRNA in SNU1196
biliary tract cancer cell line.Results : The expression of stemness and
c-met signaling cascades were up-regulated in sphere cells compared with
adherent cells. TAGLN2 was also up-regulated in sphere cells. TAGLN2 was
highly expressed in most of biliary tract cancer cell lines and biliary
tract cancer tissues. TAGLN2 knockdown cells showed decreased cell
migration and increased chemosentitivity compared with mock cells. In
addition, we found that c-met signaling cascades including PI3K and MAPK
were inactivated in TAGLN2 knockdown cells.Conclusions : These results
suggest that biliary tract CSC biomarker TAGLN2 is implicated in biliary
tract cancer progression and TAGLN2 may be a potential biomarker and
therapeutic target for biliary tract cancer.

