Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oligoclonal characterization of tumor-infiltrating plasma cells in
breast cancer: Germ cell expansion and immunity .


Breast cancer is the most common invasive cancer in women in the United
States and many other parts of the world. About 80% of all the breast
cancers are Invasive Ductal Carcinomas (IDC). Breast cancers often show
detectable lymphocytic infiltrates, and only about one-fourth of them
contain moderate to heavy infiltration of B-cells and plasma cells. B
cells are the effector cells of humoral immunity and can terminally
differentiate into antibody secreting plasma cells. In the present study,
we have analyzed the immunoglobulin variable genes of tumor-infiltrating
plasma cells from IDC patients. This was done to determine the clonal
character of the plasma cells and their possible role in the tumor
immunity. Fresh malignant breast tumors were obtained following surgery,
and their frozen sections were screened for the lymphocytic infiltration.
The tumor samples from patients which showed good plasma
cell-infiltration were used for this study. Both malignant breast tumors,
A55 (estrogen receptor-positive 80%; progesterone receptor-positive >90%)
and A91 (estrogen receptor positive 70%; progesterone receptor positive
90%), were categorized as invasive ductal carcinomas. Using a laser
capture microdissection technique (PALM Microlaser Technologies AG,
Bernried, Germany), single and small clusters of plasma cells in the
tumors were collected. The tumor plasma cells were processed for human
immunoglobulin variable gene analysis using appropriate RT-PCR primer
sets for heavy and light chains. A set of B- cells from healthy volunteer
blood was also run as a RT-PCR quality control. The analyses of variable
regions (VHeavy and VLight) of immunoglobulin genes show a very limited
number of plasma cell clones in both the tumors. These results indicate
their origin from a possible B-cell germ center within the tumor. These
plasma cells may be secreting antibodies relevant to the tumor antigens.
In order to confirm this, we plan to clone these VH and VL genes and
produce antibodies in vitro and examine their binding to the tumor from
which they were derived. The work will be extended to study the effects
of these antibodies on breast cancer cell proliferation.

