Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characteristic DNA methylation signature in sporadic colorectal
cancer and in premalignant lesions.


BACKGROUND: DNA methylation plays a crucial role in the carcinogenesis of
proximal colon, however distal colorectal cancer and its premalignant
lesions have scarcely been studied.AIMS: Our aim was to study DNA
methylation in multiple genes during adenoma-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence
in distal colon and to identify a characteristic methylation pattern and
to confirm it on FFPE samples. Our further aim was to correlate DNA
methylation levels with mRNA levels.METHODS: For DNA methylation analysis
20 healthy colonic, 12 low-grade dysplasia (LGD), 10 high-grade dysplasia
(HGD), 20 colorectal cancer (CRC) samples were endoscopically removed
from the distal colon, 14 samples were matched CRC and LGD samples. DNA
methylation percentages of 96 genes were determined using
methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme-based quantitative array PCR
(EpiTect Methyl qPCR Array System (Qiagen). For validation,
methylation-specific high resolution melting analysis (MS-HRM) analysis
was performed for SFRP1, SFRP2 and MAL genes in fresh frozen and FFPE
tissue specimen after automatic DNA isolation by the MagNA Pure 96 system
(Roche). For mRNA expression analysis 49 healthy colonic, 25 LGD, 24 HGD
and 24 CRC samples were applied for Whole Genome Expression Profile
Microarray (Affymetrix).RESULTS: Analysis of 96 genes revealed
hypermethylation of 8 genes in all 62 samples, additionally 34 genes were
hypermethylated in LGD, 50 genes in HGD and 30 genes in CRC. A
characteristic panel of 10 hypermethylated genes (e.g. ALDH1A3, MAL,
SFRP1, SFRP2, SLIT2) significantly distinguished LGD, HGD and CRC from
normal tissue (pBACKGROUND: DNA methylation plays a crucial role in the
carcinogenesis of proximal colon, however distal colorectal cancer and
its premalignant lesions have scarcely been studied.AIMS: Our aim was to
study DNA methylation in multiple genes during
adenoma-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence in distal colon and to identify a
characteristic methylation pattern and to confirm it on FFPE samples. Our
further aim was to correlate DNA methylation levels with mRNA
levels.METHODS: For DNA methylation analysis 20 healthy colonic, 12
low-grade dysplasia (LGD), 10 high-grade dysplasia (HGD), 20 colorectal
cancer (CRC) samples were endoscopically removed from the distal colon,
14 samples were matched CRC and LGD samples. DNA methylation percentages
of 96 genes were determined using methylation-sensitive restriction
enzyme-based quantitative array PCR (EpiTect Methyl qPCR Array System
(Qiagen). For validation, methylation-specific high resolution melting
analysis (MS-HRM) analysis was performed for SFRP1, SFRP2 and MAL genes
in fresh frozen and FFPE tissue specimen after automatic DNA isolation by
the MagNA Pure 96 system (Roche). For mRNA expression analysis 49 healthy
colonic, 25 LGD, 24 HGD and 24 CRC samples were applied for Whole Genome
Expression Profile Microarray (Affymetrix).RESULTS: Analysis of 96 genes
revealed hypermethylation of 8 genes in all 62 samples, additionally 34
genes were hypermethylated in LGD, 50 genes in HGD and 30 genes in CRC. A
characteristic panel of 10 hypermethylated genes (e.g. ALDH1A3, MAL,
SFRP1, SFRP2, SLIT2) significantly distinguished LGD, HGD and CRC from
normal tissue (p<0.05) and was detected in 95% of the analyzed
premalignant and malignant lesions. Hypermethylation of SFRP1, SFRP2 and
MAL genes was confirmed by MS-HRM on fresh frozen and FFPE specimens and
their methylation levels inversely correlated with mRNA
expression.CONCLUSIONS: A characteristic methylation signature was
identified in sporadic distal CRC and premalignant lesions. Our results
suggest that some epigenetic alterations accumulate in precursor lesions.
Hypermethylation was detected with DNA methylation analysis based on
restriction enzyme digestion and MS-HRM in biopsy, fresh frozen and FFPE
tissue samples.

