Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Just how noisy is xenograft data? Using growth rate modeling and
bootstrapping to optimize xenograft study design.


The evaluation of tumor growth inhibition in xenograft models, generated
by subcutaneous implantation of human cancer cell lines, is an integral
component of the drug discovery and development process. While xenograft
data is ubiquitous, and opinions on its utility are just as common,
systematic examinations of signal-to-noise ratio, overall precision of
xenograft data and the best metric to report tumor growth inhibition are,
remarkably, absent from the literature.To this end, we present a thorough
retrospective analysis of xenograft studies from a large in-house
database of 225 human xenograft efficacy studies performed from 2006 to
present, using a wide range of anti-neoplastic drugs. Individual
xenograft tumor growth curves were fit to an exponential model, and a
novel measure for data analysis was developed (the model-fitted T/C ratio
on Day 21). This novel measure possesses several advantages over a
traditional (raw) T/C ratio, notably the use of all available data (not
just Day 21), the absence of bias due to informative right-censoring
(nonrandom removal of mice in the control group whose tumor volume
reached a pre-defined humane endpoint), and the absence of bias due to
the inherent slowing of growth kinetics in the control group.The
model-fitted T/C ratio on Day 21 was then compared to the raw T/C ratio.
For each pair of comparisons between treatment group and control,
bootstrapping was used to determine the mean () and standard deviation ()
of the T/C ratio (either model-fitted or raw). A Z-score measure, (1-)/,
was computed as a measure of the signal-to-noise ratio of the xenograft
studies, for 1167 comparisons. For xenograft studies conducted with 10
mice per group over 21 days, the model-fitted T/C ratio outperformed the
raw T/C ratio in terms of median Z-score (7.1 and 5.4 respectively). When
the number of mice in each group was reduced to 6, and the study length
was decreased from 21 to 14 days, a high Z-score (5.1) was still achieved
for the model-fitted T/C ratio. The power of xenograft study comparisons
for T/C in the range of 0.35 to 0.45 was examined and found to be 0.95
for studies with 6 animals per group using the model-fitted T/C measure.
Finally, the misclassification frequency (fraction of comparisons where
the treatment was misclassified using a binary cutoff of efficacious vs.
non-efficacious) was calculated, and found to be 0.04 using the
model-fitted T/C.Our calculations demonstrate that switching to a
model-fitted T/C makes more efficient use of the data, yielding
considerable cost savings while maintaining a high power and low
misclassification rate. The exact degree of benefit from this novel
measure and alternative design may vary for other animal facilities,
since the noise levels could vary. However, the methods developed here to
evaluate potential designs should still be widely applicable, and
represent a general approach for the optimization of xenograft studies.

