Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular subtypes of gastric cancer show systematic differences
in response to PI3K inhibitors and fluorouracil.


Background & Aims: Gastric cancer is the second leading cause of cancer
death worldwide, killing >730,000 people every year. Almost all gastric
cancers are adenocarcinomas, which exhibit considerable heterogeneity
between patients. We sought to identify subtypes of gastric
adenocarcinomas that have particular biological properties and responses
to cytotoxic drugs. Methods: Robust unsupervised clustering of 248
gastric tumors based on global gene expression revealed three major
subtypes. We developed a classifier, GC-Class ("Gastric Cancer
Classifier") for the three subtypes and validated it in a second set of
70 tumors. We then determined the distinct genomic and epigenomic
properties and drug sensitivities of the subtypes. We determined drug
sensitivities of primary tumors by multivariate Cox proportional hazard
modeling using clinical survival data. We determined drug sensitivities
in cell lines using previously reported data and high-throughput
screening of 158 compounds in 23 gastric cancer cell lines. Results:
There are three major subtypes of gastric adenocarcinoma: invasive,"
proliferative," and metabolic. The subtypes show systematic differences
in genomic and epigenetic characteristics and in drug response.
Proliferative-subtype tumors show high genomic instability and DNA
hypomethylation. Metabolic-subtype cancer cell lines are preferentially
sensitive to fluorouracil, and, in two independent groups, patients with
the metabolic-subtype tumors benefited significantly from fluorouracil
treatment. Invasive-subtype tumors have characteristics in common with
cancer stem cells, and cell lines in this subtype are particularly
sensitive to PI3K/AKT/mTOR inhibitors. Conclusions: The molecular
classification of gastric cancers reported here is reproducible and
biologically and therapeutically meaningful, and it holds promise as a
basis for selecting and developing therapies tailored to particular
subtypes.

