Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Germline ablation of candidate forerunner gene, P2RY5, in a mouse
model.


Our prior studies have suggested that genes mapping around the tumor
suppressor RB1 termed forerunner (FR) genes were silenced by methylation
or mutations in in situ phases of urothelial carcinogenesis and were
potentially driving the development of clonal mucosal field effects. In
order to verify these correlative observations, we have developed a mouse
ablation model of a candidate FR gene, P2RY5 mapping within intron 17 of
RB1 and encoding G protein receptor.In order to facilitate a germline
ablation of P2RY5, a knock-out construct was generated to delete the
P2RY5 reading frame. The construct was inserted into mouse embryonic stem
cells and the gene was ablated by mating the animals with CMV-cre mice.
The effect of P2RY5 deletion on cell proliferation was assessed on
cultured fibroblasts derived from embryos with P2RY5 ablation (P2RY5-/-)
and from control embryos (P2RY5 +/+). The effect of P2RY5 ablation in the
urothelium was assessed on bladders of P2RY5-/- and P2RY5 +/+ mice. The
bladders were fixed in formalin and the proliferation status in the
urothelium was assessed by immunohistochemical and immunoflourescent
staining for Ki67and PCNA. The status of the urothelium was assessed by
immunohistochemical and immunoflourescent staining for cytokeratins 5,
14, and 18. In addition, the effect of silencing P2RY5 on global gene
expression patterns was evaluated on mouse embryonic fibroblasts using
Illumina mouse cDNA expression microarrays.P2RY5-/- embryonic fibroblasts
showed dramatically increased proliferation and colony formation rates as
compared to P2RY5 +/+ cells. cDNA micro analysis shows that silencing
P2RY5 activated several important oncogenic pathways including NFB and
STAT3. Similarly, P2RY5-/- urothelium contained nearly three times more
proliferating cells as compared to P2RY5 +/+ urothelium. The increased
proliferation rate was associated with the striking expansion of the
peribasal layer as documented by staining for cytokeratin 5 and 14. In
the P2RY5 +/+ urothelium the cytokeratin 5 and 14 positive cells formed a
sparse single basal layer. In contrast, in the P2RY5-/- urothelium, these
cells formed irregular mounds overcrowded with peribasal cells.Taken
together, our observations show that the silencing of P2RY5 increases the
growth rate of mouse embryonic fibroblasts via the activation of several
oncogenic pathways and causes an increase in the proliferation rate in
the urothelium resulting in urothelial hyperplasia recapitulating
incipient events of urothelial carcinogenisis.

