Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of antitumor effect of human papillomavirus E6
siRNA-loaded polymeric micelles on human cervical cancer.


Small interfering RNA (siRNA) therapies administered by intravenous
injection have great potential for cancer treatments. E6 and E7 oncogenes
of human papillpmavirus (HPV) are known to cause human cervical cancer,
because E6 degrades tumor suppressor proteins such as p53, and E7
inactivates the performance of pRB tumor suppressor protein. Thus E6 and
E7 oncogenes of HPV are supposed to be good targets of gene therapy
against cervical cancers. However, therapeutic siRNA requires a delivery
system for transport from the bloodstream into the cytoplasm of cancer
cells to perform the function of gene silencing because siRNA is a large
water-soluble polyion that can't easily diffuse across cell membrane.
Furthermore, enzymatic activity in blood stream causes degradation of
siRNA. Macromolecular carriers are supposed to improve the performance of
drugs by prolonged blood circulation and preferential tumor accumulation
due to the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect. We applied
nanosized polymeric micelles that deliver siRNA to solid tumors and
elicit a therapeutic effect. Stable multifunctional micelle structures of
45 nm in size formed by spontaneous self-assembly of poly(ethylene
glycol)-block-poly(L-lysine) (PEG-b-PLL) block copolymers and the
cyclo-Arg-Gly-Asp (cRGD) peptide on the PEG terminus were used to
incorporate with HPV E6/E7 siRNAs. To evaluate the in vivo antitumor
effect of E6/E7 loaded siRNA micelles (E6siRNA/m), subcutaneous xenograft
models were established by transplanting human cervical cells (Hela and
CaSki) into nude mice. In vivo toxicity of E6siRNA/m was estimated by
weight of mice. The accumulation of E6siRNA/m into tumor and circulation
of micelles in blood flow were evaluated by intravital real-time confocal
laser scanning microscopy (IVRTCLSM). E6siRNA/m injected intravenously
into mice with cervical cancer xenografts demonstrated gene silencing in
the tumor mass and showed significantly stronger inhibition of tumor
growth compared to control siRNA-loaded micelles (control). Also there
was no significant difference in the weight of mice between control and
E6siRNA/m groups. IVRTCLSM revealed that E6siRNA/m had prolonged blood
circulation and enhanced accumulation into tumors. This new technology of
gene delivery using micellar nanoparticle could potentially expand the
utility of siRNA-based systemic gene therapies for cervical cancer
treatments.

