Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole genome bisulfite sequencing reveals tissue-specific DNA
methylation in a normal mouse.


Epigenetic alteration is a hallmark of cancer. In particular, compared to
normal cells, the DNA methylomes of cancer cells often exhibit two
contrasting phenomena: 1) hypomethylation of large regions of the genome,
notably at regions of late replicating DNA; and 2) hypermethylation of
focal sites, frequently at CpG-island containing promoters. While this
epigenetic variation between cancer cells and normal counterparts has
been well documented, the variation between different normal cell types
is still unknown. In an effort to better understand the epigenetic
variation of a normal individual, we profiled DNA methylation using whole
genome bisulfite sequencing in 16 tissues isolated from an individual
mouse. We observed a unique distribution of CpG methylation for each
tissue, which cluster based on cell lineage and type. Most somatic
tissues exhibit a small but consistent decrease in methylation at
late-replicating regions of the genome, suggesting the beginnings of
global hypomethylation. Our global analysis identified only one-eighth of
the genome as tissue-specific differentially methylated regions.
Remarkably, the vast majority of these regions exhibit hallmarks of
cis-regulatory activity, including: small size (Epigenetic alteration is
a hallmark of cancer. In particular, compared to normal cells, the DNA
methylomes of cancer cells often exhibit two contrasting phenomena: 1)
hypomethylation of large regions of the genome, notably at regions of
late replicating DNA; and 2) hypermethylation of focal sites, frequently
at CpG-island containing promoters. While this epigenetic variation
between cancer cells and normal counterparts has been well documented,
the variation between different normal cell types is still unknown. In an
effort to better understand the epigenetic variation of a normal
individual, we profiled DNA methylation using whole genome bisulfite
sequencing in 16 tissues isolated from an individual mouse. We observed a
unique distribution of CpG methylation for each tissue, which cluster
based on cell lineage and type. Most somatic tissues exhibit a small but
consistent decrease in methylation at late-replicating regions of the
genome, suggesting the beginnings of global hypomethylation. Our global
analysis identified only one-eighth of the genome as tissue-specific
differentially methylated regions. Remarkably, the vast majority of these
regions exhibit hallmarks of cis-regulatory activity, including: small
size (<500 bp), DNase I hypersensitivity, enhancer chromatin
modifications (H3K4me1/H3K27ac), and evolutionary conservation. Our
results reveal that most somatic cells are primed for global
hypomethylation in regions of the genome that are typically
hypomethylated in cancer cells, supporting previous observations that
hypomethylation may be an indicator of cell age. In addition, our results
in normal tissue suggest that hypomethylation in cancer cells could alter
transcriptional regulation through disruption of cis-regulatory activity.

