Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targetome profiling, pathway analysis and genetic association
study implicate miR-618 in follicular lymphomagenesis.


Background. The advent of small non-coding RNAs as important modulators
of cancer susceptibility and progression has gained widespread
recognition in recent years. This growing interest has fueled a
considerable number of molecular and epidemiological undertakings to
elucidate the role of miRNAs in human cancers, leading to an enhanced
understanding of miRNA function in human carcinogenesis. However, efforts
to engage the subject using high-throughput methods remain lacking. In
this study, we demonstrate the viability of using a high-throughput
target-screening approach to complement more traditional epidemiological
methods in elucidating the lymphomagenic role of miR-618, the altered
expression of which has been found in multiple cancers.Methods. We first
performed a high-throughput, transcriptome-wide RIP-Chip-based assay to
identify members of the miR-618 targetome, followed by network-based
analysis to investigate disease-relevant networks. A germline mutation
(rs2682818) in the miR-618 precursor was then genotyped in a population
of non-Hodgkin lymphoma cases and population-based controls, followed by
a vector-based in vitro assay to examine the functional impact of this
mutation on miR-618 processing efficiency.Results. Our transcriptome-wide
target screening identified 28 potential members of the miR-618
targetome, which we subsequently validated using a luciferase reporter
assay. Interrogating identified targets for functional interrelatedness
using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis tool revealed a molecular network
highly enriched for both B- and T-cell NHL-relevant molecules, including
TP53 and BRCA1. Consistent with this observation, we found the presence
of the germline polymorphism (rs2682818) in the stem-loop structure of
the pre-miRNA to be significantly associated with both follicular (OR =
1.65, 95% CI: 1.05 - 2.60) and T-cell NHL (OR = 5.12, 95% CI: 1.23 -
21.40) in a population of 455 NHL cases and 527 population-based
controls. Finally, a vector-based in vitro analysis of rs2682818s
functional impact revealed that the variant allele resulted in reduced
levels of miR-618, possibly by attenuating pre-miRNA processing
efficiency. This suggests that the presence of the variant allele may act
to disrupt miR-618s capacity to inhibit target mRNA transcripts,
ultimately leading to the dysregulation of TP53 and BRCA1
lymphoma-relevant pathways.Conclusion. Taken together, our findings
implicate miR-618 in follicular and T-cell lymphomagenesis, identify
rs2682818 as a potential biomarker for follicular and T-cell non-Hodgkin
lymphoma, and illuminate a potential mechanism by which disease may be
conferred. Moreover, we demonstrate the value of applying a
high-throughput target screening technique to complement more traditional
epidemiological methods in miRNA cancer biomarker identification.

