Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Childhood cancer and traffic-related air pollution exposure in
pregnancy and early life.


Background: The literature on traffic-related air pollution and childhood
cancers presents a mixture of findings, likely due to variations in
exposure assessment methods, differing time periods in the children's
lives that were considered with regard to exposures, and often, small
sample sizes which necessitated the grouping together of disparate cancer
types. To date, few studies used a sophisticated emissions-based model to
assess pollution exposures in pregnancy and early childhood.Methods: The
present study included children younger than age 6 identified in the
California cancer registry (born 1998-2007) who could be linked to a
California birth certificate (N=3590). Controls were selected at random
from California birthrolls (N=80,224). CAlifornia LINE Source Dispersion
Modeling, version 4 (CALINE4) was used to generate estimates of local
traffic exposures at the child's residence during each trimester of
pregnancy and in the first year of life. Model inputs were based on local
traffic emissions of both gasoline vehicles and diesel trucks within a
1500m radius buffer, and included traffic volumes, roadway geometry,
vehicle emission rates, and meteorology. Unconditional logistic
regression was used to estimate cancer risk.Results: A per interquartile
range increase in exposure to traffic-related pollution from CALINE4 was
associated with increases in acute lymphoblastic leukemia, germ cell
tumors, and retinoblastoma, particularly bilateral. CALINE4 estimates
were highly correlated across trimesters and the 1st year of life
(r0.96-0.98), making it difficult to discern the most important period
for exposure.
Cancer risk with one interquartile increase of CO (ppm) in the 2nd
trimesterConclusions: Our findings support a relation between traffic
pollution and several childhood cancers. As this is the first study to
report upon traffic pollution in relation to retinoblastoma or germ cell
tumors, and both are rare, these findings require replication in other
studies.

