Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using Nanog expression to identify breast cancer stem cell
populations.


Many tumors have been demonstrated to contain a subpopulation of cancer
stem cells (CSC) whose epigenetic modifications convey resistance to
conventional therapies. Furthermore, tumor expression of genes associated
with pluripotent embryonic cells, such as Oct-4, Sox-2 and Nanog, often
correlates with poor prognosis. We hypothesized that expression of
transcription factors that are required for induction and maintenance of
pluripotency (Oct-4, Sox-2 and Nanog) would be a possible alternative to
cell surface phenotype for identification of CSC populations. Therefore
we evaluated Nanog expression in 4T1.2 murine breast carcinoma cells, as
a biomarker for CSC sub-populations. Introduction of a Nanog promoter
reporter that drives destabilized GFP into 4T1.2 cells resulted in a
stable expression of GFP in about 1% of the cells. These GFP+ cell could
be easily isolated by FACS cell sorting. On subsequent in vitro cell
culture of GFP+ populations, up to 80% of the cells became GFP- over a
period of 4 weeks. This would be consistent with a subsequent
differentiation of these cells. By contrast GFP- populations remained
100% GFP-. In vitro CSC surrogate assays show that Nanog-GFP+ cells
produced more spheroids in soft agar and under non-adherent growth
conditions. More importantly, in vivo cell transfer studies demonstrated
that Nanog-GFP+ cells were more efficient at generating experimental lung
metastases when compared to Nanog-GFP-cells. Interestingly Nanog-GFP+
cells were more resistant to the chemotherapeutic drugs paclitaxel and
bortezomib. However targeting the extrinsic apoptosis pathway with a
combination of bortezomib and agonist antibodies to the TRAIL death
receptor DR5 was equally effective against both Nanog-GFP+ and Nanog-GFP-
cells. These findings suggest that Nanog promoter activity is a robust
marker of highly metastatic 4T1.2 CSC subpopulations, and suggests that
eradication of such cells may be required for improved anti-cancer
therapies.Funded by NCI Contract HHSN261200800001E

