Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophages as independent prognostic factors in small T1 breast
cancers.


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of death by cancer in women in
the United States. The occurrence of high numbers of macrophages in the
tumor stroma has been associated with tumor progression and poor
prognosis in breast and other solid malignances. However, macrophage
numbers in tumors have not been validated as a prognostic factor in
clinical practice. The present analysis was designed as a pilot study
aimed at determining whether the presence of CD68+ macrophages is an
independent prognostic factor in small T1 ER+ breast cancers across three
different ethnic groups, i.e. African American, Latinas and Caucasian
women. A retrospective pilot analysis of 30 T1 breast cancers cases
encompassing these three ethnic groups was carried out. AfricanAmerican
and Latina women present with less incidence but more aggressive breast
cancer disease and therefore proportionally higher death rates. Using
immunohistochemistry, we sought to find out whether there was any
association between the presence and density of CD68+ macrophages and
standard prognostic markers with overall survival in these groups. Our
data showed that overall survival did not differ significantly for the
occurrence or density of CD68+ macrophages in T1 ER+ tumors. There were
also no significant differences in overall survival for the occurrence of
CD68+ macrophages across ethnicities, although macrophage numbers were
significantly higher in tumors from African American and Latinas than in
Caucasian patients. Interestingly but not surprisingly, the absence of PR
associated very strongly with decreased overall survival. This pilot
project shows that CD68+ macrophages are not pivotal in determining tumor
prognosis in early T1 breast cancers. New studies are presently being
conducted to assess the value of different macrophage markers and
macrophage activation profiles as prognostic factors in breast cancers of
different clinical stages, using a larger number of patients among these
three different ethnicities.

