Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of plasma metabolites as biomarker candidates for
the diagnosis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).


Background and objective: Pancreatic cancer (PDAC) is characterized by
very poor prognosis mostly caused by late diagnosis. Although modern
imaging techniques have pushed the detection limit to lesions below 10mm.
The combination of diagnostic imaging and biomarkers can distinguish
between PDAC and chronic pancreatitis in only 67% (Carriere et al. J Eval
Clin Pract. 2009). We have therefore conducted discovery and confirmation
studies to identify metabolite plasma biomakers for the detection of
pancreatic cancer and the differentiation from chronic pancreatitis.
Material and method:The retrospective study was conducted in three
phases: An initial pilot study on plasma samples was followed by analysis
of a second plasma sample collection and a serum sample collection from
pancreatic cancer, chronic pancreatitis and liver cirrhosis patients as
well as blood donors. Metabolomic profiles of plasma and serum samples
were generated applying a high throughput polar and lipid GC-MS and
LC-MS/MS technology (MxP Broad Profiling). In addition, targeted
platforms for steroids and lipids (MxP Steroid, MxP Lipids) were applied.
Up to 477 metabolites were analyzed semi-quantitatively or quantitatively
per study, 90% of them with an identified chemical structure. Statistical
data analysis was done by linear models (ANOVA) on log10 transformed data
considering age, gender, BMI and sample storage time as fixed effects. A
panel of metabolites was selected for the creation of a diagnosis
biomarker. The predictive ability of the biomarker was evaluated through
the estimation of ROC characteristics and AUC values from Bootstrap-based
Cross-Validation. Result within the three consecutive studies,
sphingolipids (sphingomyelins and ceramides) were consistently and
significantly increased in the pancreatic cancer group relative to the
corresponding pancreatitis group whereas certain amino acids, amino acid
related metabolites and coenzyme Q9 were consistently and significantly
decreased. A multi-marker panel consisted of 10 metabolites and provided
an AUC=0.85 when discriminating between pancreatic cancer and
pancreatitis. When the CA19-9 data was included in the analysis, an AUC=
0.92 was reached. Conclusions: The results from the metabolomics study
indicate that a plasma metabolite biomarker panel can be used to
distinguish between pancreatic cancer and chronic pancreatitis with a
high degree of accuracy. The most discriminating metabolites showed
robustness with respect to transferability of their diagnostic potential
from plasma to serum. A multicenter validation study has now been
initiated to establish a diagnostic assay with a targeted negative
predictive value (NPV) > 95%. Such a test would allow the exclusion of
suspicious patients from further more invasive diagnostic procedures.

