Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of combination of oncolytic herpes virus HF10 with
bevacizumab in the treatment of human breast carcinoma xenograft.


Background: Breast cancer is the most common cancer in females, and the
second leading cause of cancer death in women. A more specific and
effective multimodal therapy is thus urgently needed. Oncolytic HSVs are
good candidates because of broad host range and tumor selectivity. HF10
is a spontaneous mutant strain of HSV-1 and its replication ability would
be better than other oncolytic viruses which were genetically modified.
Studies using oncolytic HSV have shown enhanced angiogenesis and
increased micro-vascular density after the HSV-1 treatment.
Anti-angiogenic adjuvant treatment is therefore expected to improve
oncolytic HSV-1 treatment results. Bevacizumab, a monoclonal antibody
against VEGFA, is generally accepted as a good treatment option because
it inhibits angiogenesis and slows tumor growth. In our study,
combination of HF10 and Bevacizumab is evaluated in the treatment of
human breast carcinoma xenograft model. Here we present our preliminary
data.Method: The VEGFA gene transcription and protein expression was
measured in human breast cancer cell line (MCF-7, T47D and MDA-MB-231) by
RT-PCR, Western blot and ELISA. The MTT analysis was performed to
evaluate the efficiency of combination therapy in vitro. The effect of
various doses of Bevacizumab on viral replication was evaluated by PCR
and tittering of the virus replicating. The in vivo study is designed to
consist of 192 female BALB/c nude mice that will be inoculated with 107
cells into the mammary fat pad. Control group (N=32) will receive no
treatment. HF10 group will receive 108 pfu of HF10 intratumorally.
Bevacizumab group (N=32) will receive 5mg/kg Bevacizumab
intra-peritoneally twice a week. Combination group (N=96) will receive
both HF10 (108 pfu) and Bevacizumab (5mg/kg). Tumor volume will be
measured twice a week. Two days after the last dose of the treatment,
tumors will be collected and analyzed histopathologically, including CD31
staining for microvascular density, TUNEL assay for apoptosis, and
immunostaining for HSV antigen.Results: Among the three candidate cell
line, MDA-MB-231 has the highest level of VEGFA expression, while T47D
has the lowest VEGFA expression. The in vitro cytotoxic effect of HF10 is
both time and dose dependent. Combination therapy did not affect the
viral replication in vitro. Our in vivo study is ongoing, and we expect
the combination strategy would increase viral distribution, decrease
angiogenesis, and enhance the antitumor effects.Conclusion: It is
considered that enhanced angiogenesis effect following viral treatment
remains an obstacle for oncolytic viral therapy. We expect that
Bevacizumab enhances the viral distribution by antagonizing vascular
permeability and decreasing tumor interstitial pressure, and as a result,
oncolytic effect is increased. The oncolytic viral therapy in combination
with angiogenesis inhibitor can be a promising cancer treatment.Citation
Format: Gewen Tan, Hideki Kasuya, Tevfik T Sahin, Toshio Shikano, Suguru
Yamada, Akiyuki Kanzaki, Kazuo Yamamura, Tsutomu Fujii, Hiroyuki
Sugimoto, Shuji Nomoto, Yoko Nishikawa, Paeng Noriko, Shin Takeda,
Akimasa Nakao, Yasuhiro Kodera, Maki Tanaka. The effect of combination of
oncolytic herpes virus HF10 with bevacizumab in the treatment of human
breast carcinoma xenograft. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 476. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-476

