Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting PI3K-coupled MEK/ERK pathway for therapy in pediatric
B-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia.


Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common hematological
malignancy diagnosed in children and B cell type is prevalent among
pediatric ALL. At present, cytotoxic agents are the major components for
chemotherapy against ALL, which are limited by their severe side effects.
PI3K was found to be over activated in most B cell type leukemia, and one
of its inhibitor CAL-101 (GS-1101) is in active clinical trials for B
cell type acute or chronic leukemia with promising outcomes. However, the
mechanism of action of PI3K inhibitor against B-ALL needs to be further
studied to optimize the therapeutic success. Herein, for the first time
we found that blockade of PI3K-coupled MEK/ERK pathway by a novel PI3K
selective inhibitor X-370 is essential for its efficacy against B cell
acute lymphocytic leukemia. X-370, which was obtained through rational
design and screening displayed potent activity against PI3K (IC50=7 nM),
while sparing class II/III PI3Ks as well as a panel of protein kinases
representative of the human kinome. X-370 selectively blocked
constitutively activated and stimuli-induced PI3K signaling among four
isoforms of class I PI3Ks. X-370 abrogated both Akt and Erk signaling in
human B cell leukemia cells, which is accompanied with induction of cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis. Mechanism studies revealed that X-370
obstructed PDK1 from binding to and/ or phosphorylating MEK in a
PI3K-dependent manner. Accordingly, forced expression of constitutively
activated MEK attenuated the antiproliferative activity of X-370.
Furthermore, X-370 preferentially inhibited the survival of primary B-ALL
cells containing PI3K-coupled Erk phosphorylation, which were obtained
from pediatric B-ALL patients.In summary, with a novel PI3K selective
inhibitor X-370, we found that inhibition of PI3K led to abrogation of
ERK signaling via an atypical PI3K/ PDK1/ MEK/ Erk signaling cascade.
Inhibition of PI3K-coupled Erk by a PI3K inhibitor may predict its
efficacy against B cell acute lymphocytic leukemia. These findings
support the rationale for clinical testing of PI3K inhibitor for the
treatment of pediatric B-ALL and provide insight to optimize therapeutic
strategy for such treatment.

