Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase expression and metabolic changes
following dichloroacetate exposure in anoxia in human colorectal cancer
cells.


Introduction: While glycolysis is a suboptimal metabolic strategy used by
cells under hypoxic conditions, many cancer cells preferentially utilize
glycolysis for energy production in the presence of abundant oxygen, a
phenomenon known as the Warburg Effect. Dichloroacetate (DCA) is a small
molecule metabolic modulator that shifts cellular metabolism to glucose
oxidation by inhibition of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK), an
enzymatic inhibitor of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH). Furthermore, DCA has
been shown to induce apoptosis in cancer but not normal cells. Our
previous work showed that some human colorectal cancer (CRC) cells are
protected from anoxia-induced apoptosis upon exposure to DCA, through as
yet unclear mechanisms.Hypothesis: It is hypothesized that differential
expression of PDK isoforms will correlate with the ability of different
cancer cells to withstand the apoptotic effects of DCA in anoxia.Methods:
SW480, LS174T (CRC) and IEC-18 (normal intestinal epithelial) cell lines
were exposed to 10 mM DCA in either normoxic (20% O2) or anoxic
(Introduction: While glycolysis is a suboptimal metabolic strategy used
by cells under hypoxic conditions, many cancer cells preferentially
utilize glycolysis for energy production in the presence of abundant
oxygen, a phenomenon known as the Warburg Effect. Dichloroacetate (DCA)
is a small molecule metabolic modulator that shifts cellular metabolism
to glucose oxidation by inhibition of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase
(PDK), an enzymatic inhibitor of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH).
Furthermore, DCA has been shown to induce apoptosis in cancer but not
normal cells. Our previous work showed that some human colorectal cancer
(CRC) cells are protected from anoxia-induced apoptosis upon exposure to
DCA, through as yet unclear mechanisms.Hypothesis: It is hypothesized
that differential expression of PDK isoforms will correlate with the
ability of different cancer cells to withstand the apoptotic effects of
DCA in anoxia.Methods: SW480, LS174T (CRC) and IEC-18 (normal intestinal
epithelial) cell lines were exposed to 10 mM DCA in either normoxic (20%
O2) or anoxic (< 0.1% O2) conditions for 24 hours. Following treatment,
expression of different PDK isoforms was determined through qRT-PCR and
western blotting. Phosphorylation of PDH at Ser293 and Ser300 was
assessed through western blotting. Glucose consumption and lactate
production was determined using a colorimetric-based assay. Changes in
mitochondrial function were quantified through Mitotracker staining and
subsequent flow cytometry. Cell viability was assessed using the neutral
red assay.Results: In all three cell lines: A) PDK isoforms 1 and 3 are
highly expressed relative to isoforms 2 and 4, B) DCA and/or anoxic
treatment induced a greater effect on PDH phosphorylation at Ser300 than
Ser293, and C) DCA had minimal effect on glucose consumption in either
normoxia or anoxia.Conclusions: Altered PDK expression and PDH activation
may not fully explain the differences in resistance to DCA-induced
apoptosis observed in human CRC cells. Investigating the mechanisms by
which certain cancer cells are protected from DCA-induced apoptosis will
lead to a better understanding of cancer metabolism and thus provide
better therapeutic opportunities.

