Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HOXA1 drives melanoma tumor growth and metastasis and elicits an
invasion gene expression signature that prognosticates clinical outcome.


The majority of cutaneous melanoma patients present with no evidence of
metastasis at diagnosis. For those patients, primary tumor excision
generally confers a favorable prognosis. However, approximately 15% of
these patients will eventually succumb to the aggressive, lethal
metastatic disease. Currently we possess a limited understanding of the
genetic events driving progression of melanoma, particularly those
responsible for its metastatic propensity and much effort is focused on
identifying pro-metastatic genetics aberrations or perturbed signaling
networks that constitute potential new therapeutic targets. To address
this question we recently reported an oncogenomics-guided screening
approach designed to identify genetic drivers of early-stage melanoma
metastasis.We functionally validated and assessed the mechanism-of-action
by which homeobox transcription factor A1 (HOXA1), the top-scoring
enhancer of cell invasion identified by our screen, contributed to
melanoma progression by in vivo and in vitro biochemical and genetic
assays. Transcriptome and pathway profiling analyses of cells expressing
HOXA1 revealed up-regulation of factors involved in diverse cytokine
pathways that include the TGF signaling axis, which we further
demonstrated to be required for HOXA1-mediated cell invasion.
Transcriptome profiling also showed HOXA1s ability to potently
down-regulate expression of microphthalmia-associated transcription
factor (MITF) and other genes required for melanocyte differentiation,
suggesting a mechanism by which HOXA1 expression de-differentiates cells
into a pro-invasive cell state concomitant with TGF activation. Our
analysis of publicly available datasets indicated the HOXA1-induced gene
signature successfully categorizes melanoma specimens based on metastatic
potential and, importantly, is capable of stratifying melanoma patient
risk for metastasis based on expression in primary tumors independent of
current pathological staging characteristics.We identified putative HOXA1
effector genes by defining the HOXA1 targetome via an integrated analysis
of HOXA1 transcriptome and ChIP-SEQ data. We will leverage our collection
of 32,000 sequence-verified cDNA clones and molecular barcoding
technology to perform pooled genetic screens for enhancers of in vitro
cell invasion and in vivo tumorigenesis. We will then validate top
scoring HOXA1 effector candidates and investigate their
mechanisms-of-action in the context of metastatic melanoma.Together,
these validation data and mechanistic insights suggest that patients
whose primary tumors express HOXA1 are among a high-risk metastasis
subgroup that should be considered for anti-TGF therapy in adjuvant
settings. Moreover, further analysis of HOXA1 target genes in melanoma
may reveal new pathways or targets amenable to therapeutic intervention.

