Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TMPRSS2-ERG regulation of miRNA in prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer is the cause of the second highest number of cancer
related deaths in men in the United States, with the highest number of
new estimated cases every year. In addition, the survival rate in
localized and regional prostate cancer is 100%, while metastatic prostate
cancer is about 29%, with a wide spectrum of biological deregulations.
MicroRNA (miRNA) is a small non-coding RNA, about 22 nucleotides long,
that mostly targets the 3UTR of a gene for translational repression or
mRNA degradation. More recently, miRNAs have been shown to play an
important role in tumorigenesis, cancer progression, and metastasis.
MiR-200c is one of the miRNA widely studied in cancer, as it has a role
in regulating epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). One of the ways in
which miR-200c inhibits EMT is through its ability to downregulate ZEB1,
an EMT activator that primarily functions by repressing E-cadherin. ERG
is a transcription factor that is often fused with TMPRSS2 in prostate
cancer and promotes cancer progression. In our study, we investigated the
interaction of ERG and miR-200c, two factors that play important role in
cancer progression, in prostate cancer.First, we identified ERG regulated
miRNAs through utilizing miRNA profiling in LNCaP cells that were
overexpressing ERG and in VCaP cells that have ERG knocked down. We
selected miRNAs that are repressed upon ERG overexpression and
derepressed upon ERG knockdown and also overlapped the results with ERG
ChIP-seq data to identify ERG regulated miRNAs. Through this process we
discovered that miR-200c is a good ERG-targeted miRNA. To validate the
bioinformatics results, we used ERG overexpression in LNCaP and ERG
knockdown in VCaP to measure mature miR-200c levels by miRNA assay. In
addition, ERG ChIP-qPCR and miR-200c promoter luciferase assays showed
that ERG binds at the miR-200c promoter. Next, to identify functional
roles of miR-200c in ERG overexpressed cells, we performed invasion and
migration assays to show that miR-200c plays an important role in the
inhibition of ERG-mediated cancer progression.This study identifies an
important factor, miR-200c, whose loss mediates the progression of
TMPRSS2:ERG fusion-positive prostate cancer. According to our results, it
might be possible to use miR-200c as a future therapeutic for ERG
positive patients. This work was supported in part by the Research
Scholar Award RSG-12-085-01 (to J.Y.) from the American Cancer Society,
Department of Defense PC080665 (to J.Y.) and NRSA pre-doctoral fellowship
T32 CA080621 (to J.K.).

