Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of UCN2 and its receptor CRHR2 in colorectal cancer growth
and metastasis.


Background and aims: Colorectal cancer (CRC) represents the third most
common form of cancer worldwide and is associated with chronic colonic
inflammation. Inflammation is partially regulated by the Corticotropin
Releasing Hormone (CRH) family of neuropeptides and their receptors CRHR1
and CRHR2 which are expressed in CNS and periphery including the
gastrointestinal tract. However, the effect of CRH system on
tumorigenesis is poorly studied and controversial. Up-to-date there are
no studies implicating the CRH family of peptides in CRC development and
progression. Here, we aim to identify the role the CRH family members
play in CRC growth and metastasis in vitro and in vivo and explore the
underlying molecular mechanism. Methods: mRNA levels of CRH family
members were monitored by qRT-PCR in 46 and 56 normal human colon and CCA
biopsies, respectively, as well as in 7 CCA cell lines. CCA cell lines
were lentivirally transduced for CRHR2 expression (CRHR2+). The parental
and CRHR2+ cells were tested for expression of UCN2, IL-6 and IL-6R using
qRT-PCR. Tumor progression was assessed in vitro by proliferation,
invasion and migration assays after treatment with IL-6, astressin 2B or
Ucn2. Single cell colony formation was assessed by soft agar assay.
Expression of pSTAT3 and EMT markers was determined by western blot
analysis. An orthotopic transplantation mouse model was used for
validation of metastasis in vivo. Results: CCA biopsies and cell lines
had almost lost expression of CRHR2 and elevated levels of its selective
agonist UCN2, compared to their normal counterparts. CRHR2+ clones had
reduced endogenous UCN2 and pro-inflammatory cytokine mRNA levels
including IL-6 and its receptor IL-6R. These effects were more pronounced
in highly metastatic CRC cell lines and after exogenous administration of
UCN2. CRHR2+ clones with downregulated IL-6R levels showed a
significantly reduced pSTAT3 levels compared to parental cells, followed
by decreased cell proliferation, colony formation, invasion and
migration. The above events were able to be reversed by the selective
CRHR2 antagonist, astressin 2B, indicating that they were CRHR2 specific.
EMT markers were also significantly dysregulated in CRHR2+ clones,
suggesting EMT as a downstream target of CRHR2 signaling in CRC. The
decreased metastatic potential of CRHR2+ clones, observed in vitro is
currently validated in vivo. Conclusions: This is the first demonstration
of the protective role of CRHR2 in preventing CRC growth rates and
aggressiveness and a novel molecular evidence linking chronic
inflammation and CRC through modulation of the Stat3 signaling pathway.
Furthermore, monitoring CRHR2 and Ucn2 levels in CRC tissues may benefit
early diagnosis of metastasis, and might serve as a novel drug target for
prevention and treatment of advanced stages of CRC.

