Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PKC epsilon is activated by ionizing radiation in a reactive
nitrogen species dependent manner in tumor endothelial cells.


PKC is activated by ionizing radiation in a reactive nitrogen species
dependent manner in tumor endothelial cells.Ionizing radiation (IR) has
been shown to increase angiogenic markers and migration in endothelial
cells involving reactive oxygen/nitrogen species and eNOS, but the exact
mechanism is poorly understood. This activation of endothelial cells can
increase angiogenesis post radiation and confer cytoprotection to tumor
cells. Thus targeting this IR induced activation of endothelial cells
should increase therapeutic efficacy of radiation therapy. Protein Kinase
C Epsilon is a molecule that has been shown to be important in cancer
cell motility, proliferation, hormone sensitivity and angiogenesis. PKC
activates downstream pathways involved in tumorigenicity such as Akt and
Stat3. PKC has also been shown to be nitrated in response to NO donors
and inflammatory conditions in cardiac myocytes. During inflammation,
hypoxia and irradiation, levels of reactive nitrogen species are elevated
due to uncoupling of Nitric Oxide Synthase (NOS). NOS can be recoupled
with tetrahydrobiopterin precursor (sepiapterin) which decreases RNS/ROS
in cells. We have shown in 2H11 cells (mouse tumor endothelial cells)
that PKC levels are increased due to exposure to clinically relevant
doses of ionizing radiation or levels of NO found in chronic inflammatory
conditions. Also in these cells PKC is nitrated in response to reactive
nitrogen species which leads to its activation and activation of Stat3
and Akt. Using sepiapterin, we have shown decreased levels of PKC, Stat3
and Akt. We have also blocked ionizing radiation induced migration in
vitro in 2H11 cells using sepiapterin and a PKC inhibitor. We hope to
show that PKC is nitrated at specific residue(s) after ionizing radiation
and activates tumor endothelial cells to promote the survival of the
tumor. We believe sepiapterin with ionizing radiation therapy will result
in increase cytotoxicity in a spontaneous mouse model of lung cancer, by
decreasing endothelial activation, migration, proliferation and
angiogenesis.Citation Format: Asim Alam, Chris Rabender, Ross Mikkelsen.
PKC epsilon is activated by ionizing radiation in a reactive nitrogen
species dependent manner in tumor endothelial cells. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 443.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-443

