Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A sensitive cell-based assay for the evaluation of prostate cancer
cells in urine.


Introduction: The current prostate cancer (CaP) screening in the United
States includes the prostate specific antigen (PSA) test and the digital
rectal exam (DRE). Abnormal results lead to a prostate biopsy, pathologic
evaluation and diagnosis. The PSA test has high sensitivity, but low
specificity, leading to a high percentage of unnecessary biopsies.
Therefore, there remains an urgent need for a specific and sensitive,
non-invasive assay for CaP detection. Our objective was to develop an
assay for the detection of CaP cells in post-DRE urine.Methods: Urine CaP
(UCaP) assay development was performed by spiking CaP cell lines (VCaP,
LNCaP, and NCI-H660) into normal urine and optimizing cell stability,
recovery, and biomarker detection by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Cells
were recovered from the urine by translucent membrane filtration. Using
the filter as the assay platform, retained cells were assessed for the
detection of selected protein markers (ETS related gene [ERG]-CaP marker;
alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase [AMACR]-CaP marker; PSA-normal prostate
marker). As a clinical assessment, post-DRE urine from patients
undergoing diagnostic biopsy was analyzed for the presence of CaP
cells.Results: Assay sensitivity was enhanced by maximizing the
percentage of cells recovered following filtration. To assess enhanced
cell recovery of the UCaP assay over currently reported methods
(cytospin, centrifugation), low numbers of cultured prostate cancer cells
(10 or 100 cells) were spiked into centrifuged urine samples. Cells
captured on the filter membrane were stained with DAPI nuclear dye and
counted. Between 70% and 85% of cells were recovered after spiking VCaP,
LNCaP and NCI-H660 CaP cells. Cells were recovered 100% of the time, even
when spiking in as little as a single cell. This is in contrast to
published cell recovery studies that require at least 1,000 cells spiked
into urine for consistent detection. Furthermore, detection of ERG,
AMACR, and PSA protein expression was demonstrated by IHC in cells
recovered from post-DRE urine. A feasibility test of ten patients was
conducted. Our assay confirmed the presence of CaP marker positive cells
in all biopsy positive patients (3 of 3). We also detected the presence
of CaP cells in two patients whose biopsy results were
negative.Conclusions: This novel yet simple cell capture platform for CaP
cell detection and characterization yielded enhanced assay sensitivity.
In a clinical feasibility test the assay confirmed positive biopsy
results, and detected CaP cells in some urine specimens potentially
missed by biopsy. A larger study is in progress for further evaluations
of the UCaP assay.

