Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Directly Detect High Risk HPV Oncogenes E6/E7 mRNAs from Pap Smear
Samples without RNA Purification and RT-PCR.


Cervical cancer is one of the most common cancers in women, with about
450,000 new cases diagnosed each year. Nearly all the cervical cancers
are from Papillomaviruses (HPV) infection. HPV are DNA-based viruses that
infect the skin and mucous membranes of humans and many other animals.
Most cancers of the vulva and vagina are induced by oncogenic HPV types.
In precancerous lesions, most HPV genomes persist in an episomal state
whereas, in many high-grade lesions and carcinomas, genomes are found
integrated into the host chromosome. Two viral genes, E6 and E7, are
invariably expressed in HPV-positive cancer cells. Their gene products
are known to inactivate the major tumour suppressors, p53 and
retinoblastoma protein (pRB), respectively. In addition, E6 oncoprotein
is also capable to up regulate the expression of inhibitors of apoptosis,
and E6 and E7 cooperate to effectively immortalise primary epithelial
cells. It has been demonstrated that HPV E6/E7 expression level plays a
key role in the progression of invasive carcinoma of the uterine cervix
via the deregulation of cellular genes controlling tumour cell
proliferation. HPV E6/E7 oncogenes have been proved to be good biological
markers for prognosis assessment and specific therapy of the disease. We
have developed a sandwich nucleic acid hybridization assay using branched
DNA to amplify the signals. The assay can simultaneously detect E6/E7
mRNAs of all 14 high risk HPV subtypes directly from Pap smear samples
without RNA purification and RT-PCR. All HPV mRNA targets are captured
through cooperative hybridization of multiple probes and probe set design
determines the specificity of each HPV subtype of E6/E7 mRNA. Probe set
oligonucleotides bind a contiguous region of the target E6/E7 mRNAs and
selectively capture target RNAs to a solid surface during hybridization.
Signal amplification is performed via sequential hybridization of
Pre-Amplifier, Amplifier and label probe. The assay is highly specific
and sensitive, which can detect as low as 50 transcript molecules.

