Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted next generation sequencing of FFPE lung cancer tissue.


In view of a personalized medicine, the screening of somatic mutations in
an individual tumor that predict therapeutic outcome has become an
increasing need in the clinical and molecular diagnostics. In most
laboratories, Sanger sequencing has become an accepted standard, but due
to the limited screening throughput and the increasing demand for
targeted sequencing, the application of next-generation sequencing in the
molecular diagnostic has turned into focus. Whole-genome or whole-exome
sequencing approaches provide a comprehensive view of an individual tumor
mutation load, but the current high costs and the excess of information
without a direct clinical implication limit the routine use of this
technology. In this study, we evaluated a targeted resequencing approach
that focuses on somatic hotspot cancer mutations based on semiconductor
sequencing. We especially took attention on the reliability of the method
concerning sample quality, mutation type and reproducibility. We used DNA
extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) tumor tissues
(biopsy and resection) of different tumor degree and overall quality that
were previously screened for the presence of EGFR mutations (exon 18-21)
by Sanger sequencing. 190 amplicons covering hotspot mutations in 46
genes were generated in a multiplex PCR reaction (AmpliSeqTM), barcoded
and 8 samples were run on a single IonTorrent 318 chip. We were able to
successfully sequence all samples with a mean coverage rate of 670.000
reads (AQ20:560.000) and an average read depth of 2947 AQ20 reads /
amplicon. In all but one sample, variant calling identified the EGFR
mutation, missing only one low level 9bp insertion in exon 20. Moreover,
we identified additional 43 mutations in 17 genes and uncovered three
previously unknown EGFR amplifications. Taken together, amplicon-based
semiconductor sequencing is a powerful and cost-effective method working
with low-quality DNA material, enabling routine diagnostic
next-generation sequencing.

