Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumor heterogeneity in clear cell renal cell carcinoma
(ccRCC): Multi-region sequencing redefines the mutational landscape of
ccRCCs.


Background: Current efforts to define the genomic landscapes of solid
tumours are based on the analysis of single tumour biopsies. We recently
demonstrated through multi-region exome sequencing (M-seq) of 2 ccRCC
that these cancers are genetically heterogeneous (Gerlinger et al. NEJM,
2012). Thus, single biopsy approaches are likely to underestimate the
genetic complexity and the incidence of driver gene mutations.Methods: We
applied M-seq and copy number profiling to an average of 7 regions from
each of 7 advanced ccRCCs to reveal the genomic landscapes and to
reconstructed the life histories of these tumours through phylogenetic
analysis.Results: M-seq identified approximately 100 non-synonymous
somatic mutations per case on average; twice as many mutations than
revealed on average in a single biopsy or the 54 mutation found on
average in single biopsies of metastatic ccRCCs analysed by The Cancer
Genome Atlas. M-seq revealed that all tumours were heterogeneous with
more than 50% of non-synonymous somatic mutations and copy number
aberrations not present across all analysed tumour regions. The
mutational spectrum and chromosomal instability scores differed between
regions of individual tumours. Phylogenetic reconstruction showed
branched evolution in all cases. Loss of chromosome 3p and mutations in
the VHL and PBRM1 genes were the only ccRCC drivers which were altered
ubiquitously throughout all regions in all tumours where they occurred.
These were the only known ccRCC driver mutations which were recurrently
located on the trunk of the phylogenetic trees, indicating that these
truncal genetic events are sufficient for tumour initiation. All other
known ccRCC driver mutations and the vast majority of chromosomal driver
aberrations were confined to spatially separated subclones, represented
as branches on the phylogenetic trees. Thus, genetic alterations of VHL,
PBRM1 and chromosome 3p appear to initiate the generation of genetic
diversity and the acquisition of additional driver events promoting
expansion of spatially separated subclones. The truncal driver mutations
were similar across all tumours but clinical outcomes differed
significantly between patients, indicating that subclonal drivers may
determine clinical outcomes.Conclusions: M-seq revealed intra-tumour
heterogeneity and parallel evolution of multiple subclones in each of 7
metastatic tumors, indicating that these are common characteristic of
ccRCCs. VHL, PBRM1 and chromosome 3p were the only recurrent truncal
driver events identified. All other driver mutations were heterogeneous
and these are likely to influence clinical outcome. Thus, M-seq reveals
complex heterogeneous genomic landscapes in ccRCCs and demonstrates that
the detection of subclonal driver mutations may be highly relevant for
personalized cancer medicine approaches.

