Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the Hedgehog pathway to inhibit osteosarcoma growth
through dual effects on tumor and microenvironment cells.


In addition to serving crucial roles in bone development, Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling contributes to the development and progression of many cancers,
making it an attractive candidate for treatment of bone-resident cancers.
Recent data suggest that Hh-targeted agents exert pluripotent effects on
host bone microenvironment cells through both cell-intrinsic and
paracrine mechanisms, interrupting the vicious cycle of tumor cell,
osteoblast (OB), osteoclast (OC), and bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC)
interactions in bone metastatic breast cancers. Here, reciprocal
stimulation between tumor cells and bone cells enhance both tumor growth
and bone pathology. Similarly, development of osteosarcoma (OS), the most
common primary bone cancer, is strongly influenced by conditions within
surrounding microenvironment providing additional points for therapeutic
intervention.The 5-year survival rate for metastatic OS is under 30%,
highlighting the need for novel and targeted treatments. We have
demonstrated that mice deficient in the tumor suppressor ARF (p19ARF;
p14ARF in humans) have enhanced rates of bone turnover, mimicking the
adolescent growth period in which OS is prevalent. By crossing Arf-/-
mice with those expressing Tax, an HTLV-1 oncogene that results in
osteolytic tumors, we developed a model of high penetrant spontaneous OS
that recapitulates many aspects of human disease. Here, suppression of
bone turnover with the bisphosphonate zoledronic acid prevented the
development of OS, suggesting that enhanced OC activity may stimulate OS
growth. In agreement, we found that Tax+Arf-/- OS had increased
RANKL-to-OPG ratios resulting in increased osteoclastogenic ability.
Compared to normal osteoblasts and mesenchymal stem cell precursors,
Tax+Arf-/- OS cells have increased expression of Hh pathway genes and
exhibit increased susceptibility to Hh inhibitors (SMO antagonists). In
particular, Tax+Arf-/- OS cells express high levels of the Hh ligands
Sonic (SHH) and Indian (IHH), suggesting they may stimulate surrounding
cells in a paracrine fashion. Notably, BMSC derived from non-tumor
bearing Tax+Arf-/- mice also exhibit increased expression of
pro-tumorigenic factors (including IL-6 and IGF), generating a fertile
soil. SHH or conditioned media from Tax+Arf-/- OS cells enhanced OC
activity and BMSC cell production of pro-tumorigenic growth factors.
Furthermore, the increased OB and OC differentiation and activity present
in Tax+Arf-/- cells could be abrogated with SMO inhibitors. We have
established an OS cell line from Tax+Arf-/- mice (TAN) with the ability
to form mineralized tumors upon intratibial injection. Using this model,
we hypothesize that treatment with SMO antagonists will decrease OS
growth due to both tumor cytotoxic effects and direct effects on host
bone microenvironment cells that abrogate the pro-tumor microenvironment.

