Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thiostrepton synergizes with paclitaxel and cisplatinum in ovarian
cancer cell lines.


Objective:Drug-resistance is a common problem in the up-front treatment
of certain subtypes of epithelial ovarian cancer (clear-cell) and also
for recurrent disease, resulting in high-mortality rates for these
patients. Identification of new cytotoxic drugs and drugs that improve
the efficacy of current chemotherapeutics is vital to overcoming this
issue. Thiostrepton is a thiazole antibiotic that targets cancer cells by
inactivating the oncogenic transcription factor, forkhead box M1 (FOXM1).
Aberrantly activated FOXM1 leads to uncontrolled cell proliferation and
dysregulation in the FOXM1 transcription network occurs in 87% of ovarian
cancer cases. We seek to determine the combinatory effects of adding
thiostrepton to treatment with paclitaxel and cisplatinum.Methods:Three
human ovarian cancer cell lines (SKOV3, 429, and ES-2) were inoculated
into 96-well plates at 5,000-10,000 cells/well. After incubation for 24
hours, cells were treated with single drug or in combination with
thiostrepton. Cells were then incubated for 48 hours after which the
sulforhodamine B assay was used to assess cytotoxicity. Drug combination
effects were determined by calculating the combination index (CI) values
using the Chou and Talalay method; CI 1.10 = antagonism. Quantitative
RT-PCR and western blot assays were performed to determine changes in
FOXM1 expression.Results:FOXM1 mRNA expression was increased 11-, 28-,
and 42-fold compared to normal ovarian tissue in the cell lines 429,
SKOV3, and ES-2, respectively. RT-PCR and western blots in the SKOV3 cell
line confirmed decrease in FOXM1 expression and protein levels upon
thiostrepton treatment. Dose-response curves were generated for each drug
and for combination therapy and all curves conformed to the principle of
mass-action, r-values >0.92. Based on these curves, synergy between
paclitaxel and thiostrepton was seen in all three cell lines, CI
0.33-0.87. Cisplatinum and thiostrepton showed synergistic effects in
SKOV3, CI 0.34-0.77, and additive effects in ES-2 and 429, CI
0.92-1.09.Conclusion:The addition of thiostrepton improves the cytotoxic
effects of both paclitaxel and cisplatinum in ovarian cancer cells. The
ES-2 cell line is of the clear-cell histology and our data suggests
thiostrepton may improve the efficacy of the current treatment regimen
for these patients. Synergistic effects seen in the serous ovarian cancer
cell lines SKOV3 and 429 predict that thiostrepton may also be used to
reduce drug-resistance for patients with recurrent disease. Thiostrepton
may also be used to decrease the dose of the taxane or platinum agent in
up-front treatment to minimize toxicity yet still achieve clinical
efficacy. Continued research on thiostrepton activity in vivo is an
important next step in the development of this drug into a novel ovarian
cancer treatment.

