Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cabazitaxel antitumor activity in docetaxel-resistant
patient-derived prostate cancer xenograft models.


Introduction: The first line of chemotherapy for castration resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC) patients is docetaxel treatment. Continued
treatment after progression on docetaxel with cabazitaxel can be very
strenuous for patients. Clearly, selection of patients that will benefit
from either docetaxel or cabazitaxel treatment would be an essential
asset to the management of CRPC. Therefore docetaxel-resistant, CRPC
xenografts PC339-DOC and PC346C-DOC were developed. These xenografts were
tested for sensitivity to cabazitaxel as an initial step to develop a
biomarker gene expression profile of docetaxel resistance and cabazitaxel
sensitivity in CRPC.Materials and Methods: PC339 (low sensitivity to
docetaxel, log cell kill 0.7) and PC346C (moderate sensitivity to
docetaxel, log cell kill 1.0) bearing mice were treated with bolus
injections of docetaxel (33 mg/kg) every two weeks until the tumor became
resistant. Cabazitaxel efficacy was tested in the resistant xenografts by
treating PC339-DOC and PC346C-DOC bearing mice with a single bolus
injection cabazitaxel (33 mg/kg). Body weight and tumor volume (TV) were
monitored up to 160 days post-treatment. Log cell kill was calculated as
measure of antitumor activity, taken into account the tumor growth delay
induced by the treatment and the tumor doubling time of the tumor (log
cell kill= tumor growth delay / tumor doubling time x 3,32). Log cell
kill values of 2.8) while cabazitaxel lacked antitumor activity in
PC346C-DOC (log cell kill 0.20).Conclusion: Cabazitaxel was highly active
in a docetaxel-resistant PC339DOC xenograft. Low antitumor activity in
PC346C-DOC suggests different mechanisms of resistance in both resistant
models and potential cross-resistance between taxanes. The differences
between PC339-DOC and PC346C-DOC will allow the development of a
biomarker profile to specifically select CRPC patients that could benefit
from continued treatment with taxanes.

