Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nano-scale proteomic profiles of response to targeted therapy in
patients with RCC.


Novel agents that inhibit targets in the hypoxia and MTOR pathways can
achieve response rates of 30-60% in renal cell carcinoma (RCC); however,
biomarkers have not yet been identified to measure degree of target
inhibition and mechanism of biologic response in individual patients. We
developed the use of a high-throughput, nanoscale immunoassay (NIA,
Nanopro1000 Instrument, Protein Simple) to profile hypoxia pathways and
downstream signaling in serially sampled clinical specimens from patients
with RCC. NIA uses charge-based separation to distinguish multiple
charged modifications of individual proteins, and measure relative ratios
of individual unphosphorylated and phosphorylated isoforms. We first
developed and optimized assays to measure therapeutic targets and
proteins in hypoxia, proliferation and metabolic pathways (including
CaIX, HIF, VEGFR, ERK, AKT, MYC, glutaminase) to analyze frozen surgical
specimens, fine needle aspirates (FNA's) and blood PBMC specimens from
patients with RCC. Next, we analyzed more than 200 FNA's from solid
tumors, comparing RCC with paired adjacent non-tumor tissue and other
epithelial malignancies. Basal MAPK signaling across the samples ranged
across 3 logs for both normal and tumor tissue, demonstrating the
difficulty in setting a threshold predictive of response based on a
single pre-treatment measurement. To test whether analysis of serial
specimens could detect changes, we prospectively collected and analyzed
blood peripheral mononuclear cells from 20 RCC patients before and during
treatment with standard targeted therapies including MTOR and tyrosine
kinase inhibitors. We report for the first time that targeted inhibitors
can preferentially inhibit or activate specific protein phospho-isoforms
in patients with RCC. Our studies demonstrate that rapid and quantitative
nanoproteomic profiling in very small amounts of serially sampled
clinical specimen may accelerate translational studies for predictive
proteomic biomarkers of response to targeted therapy.

