Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AS1411 activity is regulated by epidermal growth factor receptor
signaling pathway.


The anticancer AS1411 agent is a G-rich phosphodiester
oligodeoxynucleotide, which forms a stable quadruplex structure and binds
specifically to nucleolin as an aptamer. It efficiently inhibits
proliferation and induces cell death in many types of cancer cells, but
has little effect on normal cells. We have also shown that AS1411 is
taken up by macropinocytosis and stimulates further macropinocytosis by a
nucleolin-dependent mechanism in several cancer cells. AS1411 activity
correlates with stimulated macropinocytosis, suggesting this
hyperstimulation of macropinocytosis may explain the unusual cancer cell
death caused by AS1411. Macropinocytosis is a ligand-independent
endocytic pathway that is normally activated by growth factor receptor
stimulation. On the other hand, nucleolin has been reported that can
enhance growth factor signaling by binding directly to some growth factor
receptors. Therefore in this study, we determine the participation of
growth factor signaling pathway in AS1411-induced macropinocytosis and
cell death. Pre-incubation of DU145 cells with a specific EGFR inhibitor,
but not PDGFR or JAK2 inhibitors, significantly inhibited the stimulation
of AS1411-mediated macropinocytosis, suggesting that AS1411 activates
EGFR signaling pathways. This was confirmed by observing that DU145 cells
treated with AS1411 induced tyrosine phosphorylation of EGFR and
activation of its downstream effectors, including p38, PI3K and Rac1.
Furthermore, AS1411 seem to induce the interaction between EGFR and
nucleolin in accord with EGFR activation. We also found that the
activation of EGFR signaling pathway by AS1411 might regulate its cancer
cellular response. Simulation of macropinocytosis by AS1411 was
significantly inhibited in DU145 cells pre-treated with pharmacological
inhibitors of Rac1 or PI3K, but not by Src inhibitor. Moreover the
ability of AS1411 to inhibit cell proliferation and induce cell death was
reduced by an EGFR-neutralizing antibody (cetuximab) or by downregulating
the expression of Rac1 using siRNAs. These results indicate that AS1411
mediates the activation of EGFR signaling pathway to induce cancer cell
death, and suggest that AS1411 might redirect EGFR signaling pathway from
a cell survival signal to a cell death signal.

