Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The roles of novel tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) in invasion
and metastasis of pancreatic cancer.


Background: Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a lethal disease due to its
systemic metastasis. In the recent years, compelling evidence has emerged
that the complex crosstalk between stromal cells and cancer cells in the
tumor microenvironment may regulate tumor growth, invasion and
metastasis. The tumor microenvironment of PC consists mainly of a dense,
desmoplastic stroma rich in collagen fibers, extracellular matrix
proteins, fibroblasts, and infiltrating inflammatory cells. M2
macrophages, so-called tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), infiltrate
and interact with cancer cells. However, the interaction between PC and
TAMs are not fully understood underlying mechanism. Our evidence suggests
that the expression of FR is limited to activated macrophages in human
malignancy, such as PC. Recently, we are trying to investigate the role
of FR+ TAMs in PC. The aim of this study is to investigate how PC cells
cooperate with FR+ TAM infiltration in the invasive front.Methods: Tumor
samples were obtained from 76 patients with PC. None of these patients
had received any preoperative chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Both FR+ and
tumor-infiltrating (CD68+) macrophages were examined in each tumor
specimen by immunohistochemical and immunofluorescence staining using a
newly developed anti-human FR monoclonal antibody and CD68
antibody.Results: 1) FR+ macrophages showed a heterogeneous distribution
with foci of high density in PC. In contrast, they were rarely observed
in noncancerous pancreatic tissues. Compared with CD68+ macrophages, a
larger population of FR+ macrophages existed in the invasive
front.Although the numbers of CD68+ and FR+ macrophages were both higher
in the invasive front compared to the central portion of pancreatic
tumors, the proportion of FR+ macrophages to CD68+ macrophages in the
invasive front (71.8%) was significantly higher than that in the central
portion (44.6%). 2) We evaluated the expression of VEGF in
tumor-infiltrating macrophages by double immunofluorescence staining. The
majority of FR+ macrophages showed distinct VEGF expression. By contrast,
lower numbers of CD68+ macrophages showed VEGF expression. The mean
proportion of FR+ macrophages with VEGF expression (70.1%) was
significantly higher than that of CD68+ macrophages with VEGF expression
(40.5%). 3) A high number of FR+ macrophages showed a positive
association with high MVD, high incidence of hematogenous metastasis and
a poor prognosis in PC patients.Conclusions: Our findings revealed for
the first time that FR+ macrophages are a novel subset of TAMs in PC and
may play an important role in the tumor microenvironment in association
with systemic metastasis through the interaction with tumor cells and
vessels. Therefore, FR+ macrophages may be promising a targeted therapy
for PC.

