Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of miRNAs associated with DNA repair capacity in women
with breast cancer.


MicroRNAs (miRNA) are endogenous, short (19-24 nucleotides)
non-protein-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression at the
post-transcriptional level via binding to 3-untranslated regions of
protein-coding transcripts. A low DNA repair capacity (DRC) is an
important risk factor for breast cancer (BC). We are currently
investigating whether miRNAs expression is associated with dysregulation
of DRC in women with BC. To that effect, we obtained plasma from 30 BC
cases and 30 controls selected based on their DRC levels. DRC was
measured in lymphocytes using a host cell reactivation assay. Samples
were analyzed for miRNA expression utilizing protocols from Applied
Biosystems (Life Technologies). After QA/QC, 27 BC cases and 29 controls
whose DRC data was available from our cohort study were selected and
miRNAs isolated from plasma. The miRNA expression profiling was performed
utilizing the RT-PCR TaqMan Array Human MicroRNA A Cards v 2.0 (Applied
Biosystems). Single-stranded cDNA was synthesized from 200 ng of total
RNA in 8 Multiplex RT primer pool reactions containing stem-looped RT
primers that were specific to mature miRNAs. U6 snRNA-001973 was selected
for normalization based on our own experimental validations. To quantify
the association of the miRNA expression the fold change () was estimated
for every detector with the p-values based on the t-test. Significant
candidate miRNAs were determined with the false discovery rate of 4%. The
results showed that twelve miRNAs are underexpressed in patients with BC
relative to controls. These candidate miRNAs were associated with the
expression of twenty seven DNA repair genes. Two of these genes (RPA3,
MMS19L) are part of the NER pathway which has recently been linked to
breast carcinogenesis. Our pilot study data suggests that differential
expression of some miRNAs might be associated with dysregulation of DRC
in women with BC.Supported by grants S06 GM008239-20, MBRS-RISE GM082406
[NIH-NIGMS] and 1SCA157250-2 from the NCI Center to Reduce Health
Disparities, and NIH-MBRS Program (NIGMS).

