Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GABA but not baclofen prevents gemcitabine resistance induced by
low dose nicotine in pancreatic cancer xenografts.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarinoma (PDAC) is a leading cause of cancer
deaths in developed countries. The nucleoside analog Gemcitabine, which
induces apoptosis, is widely used for the therapy of pancreatic cancer.
Smoking and alcoholism are risk factors for pancreatic cancer. Nicotine
replacement therapy often accompanies chemotherapy while the GABA-B
receptor (GABA-B-R) agonist Baclofen has recently been suggested as an
effective agent for the treatment of alcohol dependence. Our laboratory
has shown that the proliferation and migration of PDAC and pancreatic
duct epithelial cells in vitro is regulated by the nicotinic
receptor-mediated synthesis and release of stress neurotransmitters that
bind to beta-adrenoreceptors (beta-ARs). We have additionally shown that
nicotine in the drinking water at a high dose (432 mole/L) comparable to
nicotine exposure in heavy smokers significantly stimulated the growth of
PDAC xenografts whereas identical exposure of mice to low dose nicotine
(1 mole/L) reduced gemcitabine-induced apoptosis, thus significantly
increasing resistance to gemcitabine. In the current study, we have
investigated the potential prevention of nicotine-induced gemcitabine
resistance by -aminobutyric acid (GABA) and Baclofen in PDAC xenografts.
We found that GABA significantly reduced nicotine-induce drug resistance.
By contrast, Baclofen failed to reduce nicotine-induced resistance to
gemcitabine while even slightly increasing xenograft growth in mice not
exposed to nicotine. Investigation of xenograft tissues for the
expression levels of the GABA-B-R, intracellular cAMP and signaling
proteins associated with cell proliferation, apoptosis and metastasis by
immunoassays and western blots revealed effective inhibition of
cAMP-dependent signaling in xenografts of mice treated with GABA. By
contrast, Baclofen did not inhibit cAMP-dependent signaling and decreased
the protein expression of the GABA-R, suggesting downregulation of the
receptor. Our findings identify GABA as a promising agent for the
prevention of nicotine-induced resistance to gemcitabine in PDAC. On the
other hand, our data suggest that treatment of alcohol dependence by
Baclofen should be avoided in PDAC patients. Supported by grants
RO1CA130888 and RO1CA042829 with the National Cancer Institute.

