Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling evolution of resistance in patient-derived xenografts:
resistance to the BRAF inhibitor PLX4720.


A major hurdle for targeted cancer therapies is the development of
resistance, with many agents showing promising initial results but not
providing significant overall survival benefits. To address resistance we
need to know the genetic and epigenetic alterations that drive
resistance. This knowledge will contribute to modified treatment
protocols, new targets, and predictive biomarkers. We are working on a
system to model evolution of tumor resistance in a the patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) mouse system. Compared to xenografts, PDXs are closer to
the tumor biology of the patient, having a higher degree of molecular
subtypes and intratumor heterogeneity, and a mixture of human and mouse
stroma. In this study, we implanted 1-3mm chunks from a primary
colorectal cancer tumor carrying the BRAF V600>E mutation into
immunosuppressed NOD/SCID CB.17 mice. Once the tumors were established
(100-150mm3 tumor burden), the mice were stratified into two groups,
control and fed chow containing the BRAF inhibitor PLX4720, 417 mg/kg
(Scientific Diets). The tumors in most of the PDXs in the group fed
PLX4720 chow regressed and became very small by day 77. In several cases
PDXs that were allowed to develop beyond day 77 became resistant to
PLX4720 treatment.To identify mechanisms of PLX4720 resistance we
sequenced DNA and RNA from two resistant PDXs, one untreated control PDX,
and a sample of the original patient tumor. We used the Ion AmpliSeq
Comprehensive Cancer Panel from Life Technologies to sequence exons from
409 cancer related genes on the Ion Torrent PGM. Additionally, we
performed SOLiD 5500 paired-end (50x25 nt) next generation sequencing
(NGS) of the whole transcriptome of these samples. Since the stromal
component of the PDXs is a mixture of cells of human and mouse origin,
and sequence reads of mouse origin could contribute to false positive
mutation calls or skew expression analysis of the resistant data, we
needed to develop a method for filtering mouse reads out of our
sequencing data. To this end, we have developed and applied a read
filtering protocol that sorts reads that align to the human genome into
three groups, better in human, better in mouse, or ambiguous. 97.7% of
the reads from human tissue were defined as better in human with the
remaining 2.3% being ambiguous, or better in mouse. PDX derived reads had
between 8% and 13% of reads being better in mouse. Only reads defined as
better in human were used for expression analysis and SNP calling in this
work. In one of the two resistant tumors analyzed this method has
identified a candidate resistance mutation, NRAS G13>D. The NRAS mutation
is seen in both the RNA-seq and DNA-seq data, and is not seen in the
original patient tumor, the control untreated PDX, or in the second
resistant tumor. Based on these findings, we feel that PDX provide a
powerful model system for examining the evolution of resistance to
targeted agents.

