Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment of EBV-positive nasopharyngeal carcinoma xenografts with
the HDAC-inhibitor Abexinostat: synergy with cis-platinum.


Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) related nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is the
third leading cause of virus-related human malignancy. On average, NPCs
are more radiosensitive and chemosensitive than other head and neck
tumors. However, local relapse and distant organ metastases still raise
serious therapeutic problems. The aim of this study was to investigate
the potential of the novel pan-HDAC inhibitor Abexinostat (S78454) for
the treatment of NPC. Three types of EBV-positive NPC cells have been
used as targets for in vitro and in vivo treatments. C666-1 and C17 cells
were first xenotransplanted from the patients to nude mice and, in a
second stage, adapted to permanent in vitro culture. In contrast, C15
cells are still propagated exclusively as xenografts; however, they can
be used in short term culture assays. S78454 was applied to these cells
either alone or in combination with cis-platinum. All three types of NPC
cells - C666-1, C15 and C17 - were sensitive to the cytotoxic effects of
Abexinostat with IC50 of 220, 150 and 200 nM, respectively. Combined
treatment of Abexinostat with cis-platinum resulted in a synergistic
effect with Bliss additivism index of 34, 33 and 19, respectively. In the
next step, we used xenografted NPC cells for in vivo assessment of
Abexinostat. Tumor-bearing mice were treated for 3 weeks. The compound
was administered by intra-peritoneal injections, twice a day; 4 days a
week, at a dose of 12.5 mg/Kg. Cis-platinum (2mg/Kg) was delivered once a
week. In these experimental conditions, cis-platinum had no effect on
tumor growth when used as a single agent. In contrast, Abexinostat by
itself induced a significant decrease in tumor growth. This clinical
effect was accompanied by a substantial decrease in the concentrations of
Rad 51 and Rad 23B proteins in xenografted NPC cells for all 3 tumor
lines. An increase in the concentration of acetylated tubulin was
observed for only one type of xenografted NPC (C666-1). A strong
synergistic anti-tumor effect was obtained when Abexinostat was combined
with cis-platinum. It was manifested clinically by a spectacular
inhibition of tumor growth and at histological examination by extensive
areas of fibroblast proliferation segmenting and pushing residual tumor
areas. These results support implementation of phase I/II clinical trials
of Abexinostat for the treatment of NPC, especially in association with
cis-platinum. The fact that Abexinostat was active against NPC xenografts
at a relatively low dose (25mg/kg/day) suggests that it might have a
better therapeutic index in NPC patients than in patients bearing other
types of carcinomas. Down-regulation of Rad51 in tumor cells seems to be
more consistent that the increase in acetylated tubulin. Additional
investigations will be required to determine whether this change is
predictive of a long term favourable tumor response to Abexinostat.

