Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of AKT-FoxO signaling by PKG2 inhibits colon cancer
cell growth.


Signaling through cGMP has emerged as a potentially important suppressor
of tumorigenesis in the colon, but the mechanism is poorly defined.
Studies of guanylyl-cyclase (GCC) knockout mice indicate that cGMP
signaling suppresses proliferation in the colon epithelium, and more
recently that inhibition of AKT has an important role. Type-2
cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG2) is a central effector of cGMP in the
colon epithelium and is a likely mediator of the homeostatic effects of
cGMP signaling. The present study sought to determine whether PKG2 can
regulate AKT signaling in colon cancer cells and in the colon mucosa.
Activation of PKG2 in LS174T and HT29 colon cancer cells inhibited cell
proliferation and increased G1 arrest. PKG2 activation also inhibited AKT
activity in these cells as determined by immunoblotting for phospho-AKT
and downstream phospho-S6. Suggestive of a mechanism, analysis of
upstream components revealed that PKG2 increased the levels of
phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN). Central to the growth-promoting
role of AKT signaling is the inactivation of forkhead transcription
factors (FoxO), which regulate growth-inhibitory and pro-apoptotic target
gene expression. Consistent with the inhibition of AKT signaling,
activation of PKG2 significantly increased luciferase reporter activity
driven by FoxO-responsive elements in colon cancer cells. This activation
was associated with increased levels of several FoxO target genes,
including catalase, p27kip. The regulation of AKT/FoxO pathway by PKG2 in
vivo was supported by increased phospho-AKT levels, and reduced FoxO
target gene expression in the colon mucosa of Prkg2-/- mice compared to
wild type siblings. Moreover, activation of cGMP signaling in the colon
mucosa led to increased expression of FoxO targets, and suppression of
both proliferation and redox stress. Taken together these data define a
novel signaling pathway in the colon epithelium, where of PKG2 leads to
activation of FoxO. The established tumor suppressor role of the FoxO
proteins highlights the potential therapeutic role for cGMP signaling in
the prevention of colon cancer.

