Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recurrent fusion of NTRK1 in glioblastoma multiforme.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive form of brain tumor,
yet with no targeted therapy with substantial survival benefit. Recent
studies on many types of solid tumors showed that fusion genes often play
driver roles and are promising targets for pharmaceutical intervention.
To survey potential fusion genes in GBM, we analysed RNA-Seq data from
162 GBM patients available through The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). From
the analysis, we identified recurrent fusion of neurotrophic tyrosine
kinase receptor type 1 (NTRK1, also called TrkA) to the genes highly
expressed in neuronal tissues, neurofascin (NFASC) and brevican (BCAN).
NTRK1 is a mediator of the pro-survival signaling of nerve growth factor
(NGF) and is a known oncogene, found commonly altered in human cancer.
While GBMs largely lack NTRK1 expression, the fusion-positive GBMs
express fusion transcripts in high abundance that retain NTRK1 kinase
domain in frame. Analyses of the matching Exome-Seq data indicated that
NFASC-NTRK1 fusion occurred through DNA-level rearrangement, whereas
BCAN-NTRK1 fusion presumably occurred at RNA-level. As analogous
NTRK1-fusions with thyroid-expressed genes were previously shown to drive
thyroid cancer, NTRK1-fusion in GBM might have a similar role. Consistent
with this hypothesis, the GBMs that harbor the NTRK1-fusion showed
elevated NGF/NTRK1 pathway activity. About 1% of GBM patients are
estimated to have NTRK1-fusion; these patients might benefit from
potential NTRK1 inhibition therapies.Citation Format: Jinkuk Kim, Hee-Jin
Cho, Gye-Hyun Cho, Young-Hyeh Ko, Soonmyung Paik, Do-Hyun Nam. Recurrent
fusion of NTRK1 in glioblastoma multiforme. [abstract]. In: Proceedings
of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer
Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer
Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1765. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1765

