Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Host-tumor interactions that promote liver metastasis of
colorectal cancer.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most frequent cancer in the United
States. Metastases is the major cause of death, reducing the five-year
survival to less than 12%, with liver as the frequent target organ.
Metastasis occurs due to productive collaborations between tumor cells
and host-derived cells in the tumor microenvironment. Molecular signals
from the primary tumor mediate long distance communication with the
hematopoietic compartment and stimulate immune cell mobilization to the
primary tumor and target organ environments. These interactions promote
invasiveness of tumor cells in the primary lesion and the establishment
of a pre-metastatic niche in the distant organ where cancer cells can
attach and develop into a metastatic lesion. Therefore, understanding
these interactions can provide us with valuable opportunities for early
diagnosis of metastasis or blocking its progression by disengaging the
cancer cells from their metastasis promoting networks.To understand these
interactions and identify the molecular regulators, particularly at the
early stages, we established an orthotopic mouse model of liver
metastasis of CRC that can recapitulate all stages of tumor growth and
metastasis. We used in vivo selection to isolate a highly metastatic cell
line, CT26-FL3, from CT26 colon adenocarcinoma cells. Tumors derived from
CT26-FL3 were more proficient in inducing a metastasis-friendly host
environment compared to CT26 cells. These suggest that transition from
CT26 to CT26-FL3 might be due to genetic alterations resulting from
interactions between tumor cells and the host environment. We
hypothesized that molecules secreted by the primary tumor can direct
genetic changes in the liver microenvironment creating a fertile niche
for invading cancer cells. Identifying these alterations in both the
tumor cells and the host microenvironment, will allow us to understand
the mechanisms by which host-tumor interactions promote liver metastasis
of CRC.We carried out microarray analyses to determine the genetic
signatures of the parental CT26 and highly metastatic CT26-FL3 cells, and
to determine the genetic changes in the liver microenvironment in mice
bearing CT26-FL3 tumors prior to metastasis. The results identified genes
in signaling, cancer, metabolic, and various pathways that were
differentially expressed between CT26 and CT26-FL3, and between liver
from tumor-bearing and non-tumor bearing mice. More importantly, several
genes in the chemokine and the cytokine-cytokine receptor pathways were
expressed up to 50-fold or higher in CT26-FL3 cells or in the liver
microenvironment of tumor-bearing mice. The gene products are likely
mediators of the complex cross-talk between the primary tumor and the
liver microenvironment. Using our orthotopic mouse model, we will assess
their potential alone or in combination as viable markers for early
diagnosis or as therapeutic targets to alleviate metastatic disease.

