Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a proteolytically activatable EGFR Probody for
cancer therapy.


Antibodies directed to specific disease-related antigens have proven to
be very successful therapeutics for a variety of disease indications. In
spite of their high affinity and specificity for target antigen,
target-mediated toxicity constitutes a major limitation for the
development of antibodies to certain targets. We have addressed this type
of on-target toxicity by developing a new class of targeting antibodies
(Probody therapeutics) that remain in an inert, masked form until
proteolytically activated at the site of disease. As a proof-of-concept
for the construction of a Probody, we used cetuximab as a starting point.
Cetuximab is an EGFR-targeted antibody approved for the treatment of
colorectal and head-and-neck cancers that produces an on-target toxicity
in the form of a skin rash that afflicts 88% of patients treated with the
antibody. We engineered an EGFR Probody by incorporating an inhibitory
masking peptide fused to the antibody light chain. Masking of the Probody
is achieved through a linker that also incorporates a substrate that is
cleaved by one or more proteases up-regulated in cancer. In vitro, EGFR
binding and cell-based activities of the masked Probody were diminished
compared to those of cetuximab, but treatment with exogenous target
proteases activated the Probody and restored activity comparable to
cetuximab. Using tumor xenograft models in mice, we demonstrated that the
Probody remained masked in systemic circulation but was activated and
accumulated in the tumor microenvironment. Tumor activation of the
Probody translated to efficacy similar to that seen with cetuximab.
Consistent with our results in mice, the Probody remained efficiently
masked in non-human primates and did not cause skin toxicity such as that
observed in animals treated with cetuximab. Together, these results
demonstrate that antibody activity can be specifically targeted to
diseased tissue by utilizing locally overexpressed proteases as
activating agents, suggesting that a variety of antigens not previously
amenable to an antibody therapeutic approach may be successfully
addressed with Probodies.

