Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct biological effect of inhibiting the metabolic pathway
using active compounds derived from Chinese medicinal herbs in non-small
cell lung cancer cells with different EGFR mutational profiles.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide. Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) mutation(s) is/are common in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) in Eastern Oriental population, resulting in
constitutive activation of EGFR downstream anti-apoptotic signaling and
lung tumor formation. Molecular targeted therapy using tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) targeting EGFR shows promising initial response, however,
drug resistance and relapse are universal, making the treatment outcome
undesirable. Drug resistance could be due to additional EGFR mutation or
activation of alternative survival pathways. Therefore, it is important
to identify new inhibitors and new molecular targets to tackle
TKI-resistance. Chinese Medicinal Herbs (CMHs) has been used to treat
variety systemic diseases for many years in China, including diabetes,
neurodegenerative disease and cancer. The multi-targeting nature and
potential alternation effects on metabolic pathways of CMHs could be a
new era for novel cancer drug discovery.Hence, we have reviewed the
literature and selected ten single purified compounds derived from CMHs
which exhibited the highest potential of cancer suppression effect in
NSCLC. We have recruited three EGFR-dependent NSCLC cell lines for drug
screening using cytotoxicity assay. A549 is used as EGFR wild-type
control. Two TKI-resistant NSCLC cell lines were used, H1975 harbors
double mutation (EGFRL858R+T790M) and H1650 harbors EGFRexon 19 deletion
with activation of alternative cell survival pathway. H2228 is a NSCLC
cell line which harbours EML4-ALK fusion gene and was used as
EGFR-independent cell line control. MTT assay revealed that six out of
ten candidate agents showed significant cancer-inhibiting effects in
H1650, H1975 cells. Three compounds exhibited IC50 value at micro-molar
levels while another three compounds exhibited IC50 at as low as
nano-molar levels. One compound exhibited specificity on EGFR-dependent
NSCLC cell lines, which showed 10-fold more selective than the
EGFR-independent H2228 cells.Cell cycle analysis and western blot showed
that one effective compound altered the metabolic pathway of glucose
metabolism and induced cell cycle arrest at G1 phase in NSCLC with EGFR
mutation. However, the anti-proliferative effects were distinct in NSCLC
cell lines with different EGFR mutation patterns. Our compound
significantly induced cell cycle arrest in four NSCLC in EGFR mutant cell
lines but the inhibiting effect was not significant in EGFR wild-type
cell line. Immunobloting assay revealed that glycolytic enzymes and cell
cycle regulatory gene expression were altered after 72 hr compound
treatment in the responsive cells. Further investigation is required to
elucidate the underlying reason of drug selectivity and the treatment
mechanism of these compounds.

