Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of paired mutant B-raf,
vemurafenib-sensitive and -resistant patient-derived xenograft models.


Background: Vemurafenib is a recently approved anticancer therapy for
B-RafV600E metastatic melanoma. Treatment with this agent increases
overall patient survival compared with dacarbazine; however, most
patients receiving vemurafenib progress within a year and are left with
limited treatment options. Few validated screening tools exist to
evaluate potentially beneficial therapies for these resistant/refractory
patients. To address this deficiency we have generated a panel of paired
mutant B-Raf vemurafenib-sensitive and -resistant patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) models of metastatic melanoma and colorectal cancer. Each
parent model was screened for activating mutations and all evaluated in
vivo against vemurafenib. In addition, select model pairs were subjected
to whole genome sequencing and RNA analysis to identify differences in
genetic and expression profiles.Methods: Establishment of parent models
was previously described. Vemurafenib-resistant PDX models (PDX-VR) were
generated by in vivo administration of clinical-grade vemurafenib at
increasing concentrations over limited tumor passages. Parental
vemurafenib-sensitive models were screened for activating mutations of
fifty-two known cancer genes using a PCR-based assay with customized
primers. DNA and RNA was extracted from select model pairs and profiled
and compared for alterations.Results: To date we have generated six
B-RafV600E PDX-VR models (3 melanoma + 3 colorectal) with additional
B-RafV600E and B-RafV600K PDX-VR models in development. In vivo studies
evaluating vemurafenib in parent models reported notable tumor growth
inhibition in all but one colorectal model (ST428), including tumor
regressions in melanoma. PDX-VR models reported tumor growth similar to
untreated controls at vemurafenib concentrations up to 150 mg/kg/day.
Comparative analysis of paired models revealed some differences in DNA
and RNA profiles.Conclusion: We have generated a panel of paired mutant
B-raf vemurafenib-sensitive and -resistant patient-derived xenograft
(PDX) models representing metastatic melanoma and colorectal cancer
available as validated screening tools to evaluate potentially beneficial
therapies for vemurafenib-resistant/refractory patients.

