Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral chitosan/IL-12 neoadjuvant to tumor resection is safe
and generates tumor specific immunity.


Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a potent antitumor cytokine that exhibits
significant clinical toxicities after systemic administration. Local
delivery strategies capable of maintaining high concentrations of IL-12
in the tumor microenvironment while minimizing systemic exposure are
under investigation. We have previously shown that intratumoral
injections of IL-12 co-formulated with a solution of chitosan
(chitosan/IL-12) can eliminate established primary tumors. Chitosan is an
abundant, natural polysaccharide derived primarily from the exoskeletons
of crustaceans. Chitosan has been shown to maintain high local
concentrations of protein antigens and cytokines through viscous,
electrostatic and bioadhesive interactions.Because of IL-12s well
documented ability to generate tumor-specific cell-mediated immunity, we
are exploring the anti-metastatic potential of intratumoral
chitosan/IL-12 immunotherapy in a highly metastatic model of breast
cancer (4T1). Previously, we have shown that intratumoral chitosan/IL-12
neoadjuvant prior to tumor resection confers long-term survival benefits
and reduces metastasis. Recent studies reveal that chitosan/IL-12 is safe
and generates tumor-specific systemic immunity to confer long-term
survival benefits. Specifically, splenocytes from long term survivors
demonstrated anti-tumor immunity in a cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL)
killing assay. After 1 week of in vitro stimulation, splenocytes were
found to lyse approximately 40% of target tumor cells at an effector:
target ratio of 50:1. In addition, toxicological studies reveal that
chitosan/IL-12 does not adversely affect leukocyte levels or hematocrit.
Based on data obtained thus far, intratumoral chitosan/IL-12 shows
promising potential as a neoadjuvant immunotherapy to reduce metastatic
disease while minimizing the toxicities that hindered the progress of
IL-12 based cancer immunotherapy.

