Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The antiangiogenic effect of two drugs loaded nanocarriers and its
potential application for cancer metronomic treatment.


Purpose: To synthesize and evaluate the antiangiogenic effect of
individual and mixed paclitaxel (PTX) and rapamycin (RAP) conjugated
micellesMethods: RAP or PTX were conjugated to
poly(ethyleneglycol)-block-poly(aspartate-hydrazide) utilizing a
pH-sensitive linker based on hydrazone prodrug strategy. The synthesized
drug-polymer conjugates were characterized using NMR and gel permeation
chromatography (GPC). RAP and PTX polymer conjugates, PEG-RAP and PEG-PTX
respectively were assembled into individual and mixed micelles. The size
of these micelles was determined using dynamic light scattering. The
micelle drug content was quantified by RP-HPLC. The antiangiogenic effect
of individual and mixed micelles was evaluated in in vitro Human
Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells (HUVEC) model through proliferation,
tube formation and migration assays. The HUVEC cell proliferation was
evaluated by the CellTiter-Blue Cell Viability Assay, the tube formation
was evaluated by measuring the total area covered by the HUVEC capiliary
formation while the HUVEC cell migration was determined by xCELLigence
System.Results: PEG-RAP and PEG-PTX were successfully synthesized and the
molecular weight of the polymers was determined by GPC and NMR. The
number of drug molecules attached to the polymer for RAP and PTX were 22
and 25 respectively. PEG-RAP and PEG-PTX were assembled into individual
and mixed micelles as mono dispersed populations in the range of
40-100nm. The IC50 of PEG-RAP and PEG-PTX individual micelles were 12M
and 2nM respectively. The mixed micelles showed synergistic effect in
inhibiting the HUVEC cell proliferation. Individual and mixed micelles
inhibited HUVEC tube formation and migration with the mixed micelles
showing a synergistic effect.Conclusions: We were successful in
synthesizing new conjugates of RAP and PTX with a pH-sensitive linker.
These polymers were formulated into individual and mixed micelles.
Antiangiogenic effect was observed with individual and mixed micelles.
The antiangiogenic effect was synergistically enhanced with the use of
mixed micelles.

