Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of sensitivity to treatment with the PDK1 inhibitors
HCI-1680 and HCI-1708.


The phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (PDK1) is a serine/threonine
kinase that has been considered a promising potential oncology drug
target because of its role as an important regulator in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway. PDK1 phosphorylates highly conserved Ser or Thr residues in the
activation loop of several AGC super family kinases including PKC, SGK,
PKB/Akt, p70S6K, and PDK1 itself. Approximately, 40-50% of all tumors
involve mutations in the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) protein,
which results in elevated levels of PIP3 and enhanced activation of
PKB/AKT, p70S6K, and SGK. It has been proposed that inhibitors of PDK1
could provide a valuable therapeutic approach to targeting cancer,
particularly those with PTEN deficiencies. Using a fragment-based design
strategy, we screened a collection of 1100 low molecular weight (The
phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (PDK1) is a serine/threonine kinase
that has been considered a promising potential oncology drug target
because of its role as an important regulator in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway. PDK1 phosphorylates highly conserved Ser or Thr residues in the
activation loop of several AGC super family kinases including PKC, SGK,
PKB/Akt, p70S6K, and PDK1 itself. Approximately, 40-50% of all tumors
involve mutations in the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) protein,
which results in elevated levels of PIP3 and enhanced activation of
PKB/AKT, p70S6K, and SGK. It has been proposed that inhibitors of PDK1
could provide a valuable therapeutic approach to targeting cancer,
particularly those with PTEN deficiencies. Using a fragment-based design
strategy, we screened a collection of 1100 low molecular weight (< 250
MW) fragments against the PDK1 kinase and identified 9 fragments with
moderate inhibitory activity against PDK1 (IC50 values from 45-82 M).
Subsequent molecular docking studies using a crystal structure of PDK1
allowed for the structural rationalization of how these fragments bound
in the ATP-binding pocket (hydrogen bonding to S160/A162 hinge residues)
and provided insight for further optimization. Synthesis and follow-up
screening led to the discovery of HCI-1680 and a related compound
SGI-1708, as potent PDK1 inhibitors with IC50 values of 80 and 94 nM,
respectively. We used a large cell line panel of over 100 cancer cell
lines to examine the ability of these compounds to kill cancer cells.
Both HCI-1680 and SGI-1708 demonstrated remarkable selectivity for cell
killing in several cell lines (KATO3, KG-1, MV4-11, Kasumi-1, MFE296 and
AN3CA) in the low nanomolar range compared to all of the remaining cell
lines in which the compounds showed low micromolar activity. Based on the
known mutations in these cell lines we determined that HCI-1680 and
SGI-1708 were more active in cells with PTEN deletion/silencing as well
as activation of PIK3CA through activating mutations in PIK3CA or Ras
proteins. Our compounds from this series were also shown to inhibit the
activation of AKT and other downstream signaling molecules. We have
explored the effects on gene expression Moreover, the lead compounds had
high ligand efficiency with promising solubility and permeability
parameters. Early animal studies examining pharmacokinetics and efficacy
in xenograft models of human cancers have suggested that HCI-1680 and
SGI-1708 have properties and activity to be developed as potential
clinical candidates. We hypothesize that tumors, which have inactivated
PTEN through mutations or silencing and also harbor mutations that
activate PI3K define a population of cancer cells that are uniquely
sensitive to PDK1 Inhibition. By inhibiting PDK1 activity we will block
signaling from the PI3K pathway and lead to inhibition of cell
proliferation and survival of these cancer cells.

