Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation between cytidine deaminase single nucleotide
polymorphisms and in vitro drug sensitivity, DNA methylation and outcome
in normal karyotype acute myelogenous leukemia.


Background: De novo AML with normal karyotype (NK-AML) comprise a large
group of patients without common cytogenetic alterations but with a large
variation in treatment response. New tools such as the analysis of
nucleophosmine 1 (NPM1), FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) and
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (CEBPA) mutations has emerged as clinical
markers of prognosis, but there is still a need for additional tools to
explain the variation in outcome. Cytarabine (Ara-C), a cornerstone in
AML chemotherapy, is activated intracellularly by deoxycytidine kinase
(dCK), and deactivated by cytidine deaminase (CDA) and poor treatment
outcome or development of chemotherapy resistance can be due to altered
activity of these enzymes. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of CDA
genes have previously been reported to result in lower CDA allelic
expression and to affect the outcome of treatment. In addition,
pharmacological inhibition of CDA has been shown to reduce the degree of
DNA methylation. DNA methylation may be an important regulatory mechanism
for the expression of genes related to drug effect, and we therefore
aimed to investigate the relationship between CDA polymorphisms and
outcome in NK-AML, DNA methylation, and in vitro drug cytotoxicity.
Method: 207 Swedish NK-AML patients were genotyped for the CDA SNPs 79A>C
(rs2072671) and -451C>T (rs532545) and the results were correlated to
treatment response and overall survival (OS) in the material as a whole
as well as stratified based on FLT3 and NPM1 status. Cells from a subset
of the patients were also investigated for genotype association with in
vitro drug cytotoxicity (n=56) and global DNA methylation (n=82).
Results: CDA 79C/C or -451T/T genotype was associated to a shorter OS
compared to other genotypes (0.44 vs. 1.86 years, p=0.004; and 0.45 vs.
1.79 years, p=0.051) for FLT3-ITD+ patients, and this was even more
pronounced in the FLT3-ITD+/NPM1+ cases. There was significantly less DNA
methylation in cells heterozygous for both polymorphisms (A/C+C/T)
compared to homozygous A/A+C/C cells (p=0.018). There was also a lower
degree of methylation in homozygous C/C+T/T cells, but due to the small
number of samples in this group significance was not reached. An altered
in vitro sensitivity towards topoisomerase inhibitory drugs, but not
towards nucleoside analogues was seen for both CDA SNPs with homozygous
C/C or T/T cells being more sensitive. Conclusions: We found a
significant correlation between CDA genotype and OS in NK-AML, the degree
of DNA methylation in AML cells, and in vitro drug sensitivity. The
change in methylation related to CDA genotype may be associated with
differences in drug activation and subsequent sensitivity, making these
polymorphisms potential markers of use for future individual chemotherapy
decisions such as dose adjustments.

