Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-148a overexpression reduces TRAIL resistance and tumorigenesis
in NSCLC.


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of death from
cancer throughout the world. Although some advances have been made in
lung cancer therapy, patient survival is still poor. Tumor-necrosis
factor related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) has been shown to induce
apoptosis in malignant cells without inducing significant toxicity in
normal cells. However, several carcinomas, including lung cancer, remain
resistant to TRAIL. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs of 24 nt
that can block mRNA translation and/or negatively regulate its stability.
miRNAs are often aberrantly expressed in cancer and their function is
linked to the regulation of oncogenes and/or tumor suppressor genes
involved in cell signaling pathways. Several miRNAs have been implicated
in increasing susceptibility or resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis by
inhibiting key functional proteins.In order to identify the miRNAs
involved in TRAIL resistance in NSCLC, we evaluated the differential
expression of miRNAs in H460 sensitive cells compared with H460R cells
that have acquired TRAIL-resistance. MiR-148a was the most downregulated
miR in the acquired resistant cells compared to the sensitive cells.
Treatment of NSCLC cells with TRAIL after miR-148a overexpression
decreased cell viability and increased apoptosis. Furthermore, miR-148a
overexpression induced downregulation of matrix metalloproteinase 15
(MMP15) and Rho-associated kinase 1 (ROCK1) by targeting their 3
untranslated regions as analysed by Western blot and luciferase reporter
assay. Previous studies have shown that MMP15 acts as an anti-apoptotic
factor involved in TRAIL resistance in cancer cells. Both, MMP15 and
ROCK1 have been reported to be activators of tumor invasion and
migration. Our preliminary functional studies using small interference
RNA (siRNA) knockdowns of these genes in NSCLC cells support these data.
A better understanding of the tumor-supressive role of miR-148a could be
the key to developing an effective prognostic and therapeutic tool for
treating NSCLC.

