Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crosstalk between breast cancer and stromal cells occurs via
exosomes and gap junctions in bone metastatic breast cancer.


Breast cancer preferentially metastasizes to the bone, where the
five-year relative survival rate falls from 90% to Breast cancer
preferentially metastasizes to the bone, where the five-year relative
survival rate falls from 90% to <10%. Although the precise mechanism
underlying preferential metastasis is unknown, the bone likely provides a
hospitable environment that both attracts breast cancer cells and allows
them to colonize and grow. Besides affects osteoblast and osteoclast
properties, we have evidence that metastatic breast cancer cells further
create a unique bone niche by orchestrating extensive crosstalk with
osteoblasts that may be involved in creating a niche permissive for
breast cancer cell dormancy.MC3T3-E1 murine osteoblasts were grown to
confluence, then MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells added at a ratio of
1 breast cancer cell to 10 osteoblasts. Co-cultures were subsequently
fixed and stained for Cx43 expression. Next, MC3T3-E1 cells and
MDA-MB-231 cells were grown to confluence. Culture supernatants were
removed and processed through a series of ultra-centrifugation,
purification, and concentration steps to purify for exosomes. Finally,
MC3T3-E1 cells were grown to various stages of maturity: 4 (growth) and
10 days (early differentiation) and incubated with conditioned medium
from human MDA-MB-231 cells. qPCR was used to assay for changes in
osteoblast-derived inflammatory cytokine expression.Expression of the gap
junction protein Cx43 was localized between breast cancer cells and
osteoblasts. Both MC3T3-E1 and MDA-MB-231 cells expressed exosomes, which
were visualized using a transmission electron microscope.
Osteoblast-derived cytokines increased in the presence of MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cell conditioned medium included MCP-1 (CCL2), LIX (CXCL5),
LIF, and NFATc2.Overall, these data suggest that suggest there is
extensive crosstalk directly between osteoblasts and breast cancer cells,
and that osteoblasts are an important source of cytokines in breast
cancer bone metastasis. Thus, these findings implicate the bone
microenvironment and cancer cell manipulation thereof in orchestrating
metastatic tumor cell dormancy, colonization, and survival. Supported in
part by the National Institutes of Health; 1RC1 CA146381, 1R01NS06994,
P50 CA083639 for FCM; Ruth L. Kirschstein Institutional Research Service
Award (NRSA) T32 CA079448 for KMB.

