Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in estrogen receptor signaling in normal mammary
epithelial cells and ER-positive primary breast tumors and metastases.


Background: The estrogen receptor (ER) is expressed in 70% of sporadic
breast cancer and activates genes driving cell proliferation and
tumorigenesis. We have previously performed genome-wide analysis of ER
binding sites in MCF-7 breast cancer cells and identified distinct
mechanisms of tumorigenic ER signaling. Using EpCAM and CD49f as markers
to enrich for ER-positive (ER+) cells obtained from primary non-malignant
breast tissue, we seek to elucidate differences in ER signaling between
normal and primary and metastatic ER+ breast cancer cells.Methods: Viable
breast epithelial cells were obtained from patients undergoing reduction
mammoplasties, and ER+ breast cancer cells from primary tumors and
metastatic effusions. Following dissociation into single cells, EpCAM+
cell subpopulations were isolated and stimulated with estradiol. Gene
expression microarray analysis, chromatin immunoprecipitation and DNA
sequencing (ChIP-seq) on transcription factors and histone modifications
as well as DNAse I hypersensitivity assays (DHS) were performed, and
compared to MCF-7 breast cancer cells.Results: Triplicates of normal, ER+
breast cancers, and metastatic ER+ cancer were analyzed. Gene expression
profiles revealed differences in estradiol regulated genes between
primary normal, breast tumor, and metastatic ER+ breast cancer cells.
Genes that promote cell cycling and cell proliferation were downregulated
in non-malignant tissue but were upregulated in breast cancer cells. Our
ChIP-seq results showed differential binding of ER between normal and ER+
breast cancer with little common overlap, and motif analysis of these
binding sites demonstrated the enrichment of ERE motifs in common sites,
TCF12 motifs in unique normal sites, and FOXA1 motifs in unique breast
cancer sites. Analyses of the distribution of histone modifications and
DHS regions demonstrated distinct patterns at shared, normal, and breast
cancer ER binding sites, suggesting functionality and further validating
differential ER binding.Conclusions: There are contrasting differences in
ER signaling between normal mammary and ER+ breast cancer cells, with
estrogen appearing to have anti-proliferative effects in normal luminal
cells compared to pro-proliferative effects in BC. ER ChIP-seq has
identified unique motifs, distribution of histone modifications, and DHS
regions specific to unique normal, cancer and shared ER binding sites.
Our studies point to TCF12 as a potential ER pioneer cofactor in
non-malignant breast tissue and provide more data in support of FOXA1 as
an important ER coregulator in ER+ breast cancer. Our data provides
evidence for key alterations in ER-signaling during tumorigenesis and
could lead to the identification of novel strategies to target breast
cancer specific ER signaling.

