Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COSMIC: Exploring the world's knowledge of somatic mutations in
cancer.


COSMIC, the Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations in Cancer
(http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/), is the world's largest database of curated
somatic mutations. The current version (v62, Nov 2012) has over a million
mutations across 800000 samples from 15327 peer-reviewd publications,
online data portals such as TCGA, ICGC, the IARC p53 database and the
Cancer Genome Project (CGP) at the Sanger Institute, UK. The project aims
to build a comprehensive catalogue of somatic mutations prioritized by
the Cancer Gene Census
(http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cancergenome/projects/census/), allowing
users to explore correlations between cancer phenotypes and mutant
genotypes. At present, a full distribution of somatic mutations have been
curated across 116 known cancer genes and 169 gene fusion pairs. A focus
on cancer genomes has recently emerged from the rapid expansion of whole
genome/exome resequencing, as shown by our "COSMIC Genomes" website
(http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cancergenome/projects/studies/), already
comprising over 4500 tumours across a variety of cancer types.There are a
number of ways to examine the data within COSMIC. A newly released
website provides an intuitive interface for users to scrutinize the data
through numerous filters, including mutation types, histology and tissue
types. This is supplimented with statistical summaries presented in many
graphs and charts. The website includes a COSMIC genome browser for views
across combined cancer genomes, including all mutation types in one
graphical window. Many other resources are designed for bioinformatic
access including a Biomart, and FTP downloads in a variety of formats
(ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.uk/pub/CGP/cosmic/). We actively seek to integrate
with the wider bioinformatics community and are integrated within the
UCSC and Ensembl genome browsers.COSMIC both documents mutation trends in
known cancer genes, and combines distributed information to allow
substantial mining of these data for discovery of novel correlations.
COSMIC can aid discovery of novel recurrence patterns between variants,
genes and tissues in different mutant genotypes and cancer phenotypes.
The most frequently mutated gene in COSMIC (v62, Nov 2012), is JAK2 with
the p.V617F mutation observed in 36% of all blood cancers examined. This
is followed by TP53 with a variety of truncating mutations observed at a
total frequency of 29.7%, and KRAS, found mutated in 21% of cancers, most
frequently p.G12D in pancreatic tumours. Focusing particularly on the
4571 whole genomes, the most mutated gene is unsurprisingly TP53 at
27.57% (followed by TTN, MUC16, PIK3CA, CSMD3). Many techniques may
identify putative novel cancer genes outside the cancer gene census. For
instance, in Lung cancer the most mutated genes (correcting for CDS
length) are TPTE, FAM5C, CDH10 and KEAP1. The rapid combination of
increasingly large datasets in COSMIC ensure its future relevance in
discovery of new trends in cancer genetics.

