Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hematogenous metastasis in ovarian cancer: Importance of the
ErbB3/NRG axis.


Background: Ovarian cancer is predominantly thought to metastasize by
intraperitoneal spread. Here, we report unexpected findings related to
hematogenous ovarian cancer metastasis with strong tropism for the
omentum.Study methods and results: To investigate the potential patterns
of metastasis from circulating ovarian cancer cells, we established a
novel parabiosis model, where 2 mice are surgically fused to allow a
common circulation. Using this model, we found that ovarian cancer cells
can indeed metastasize hematogenously and predominantly localize to the
omentum. Cells propagated from this model are called SKOV3-OM3. To
understand potential mechanisms, we carried out integrated genomic and
human Phospho RTK arrays, which pointed to ErbB3/NRG1 as a dominant
activated pathway. NRG1 stimulated migration (40%) and invasion (60%) of
SKOV3-OM3 cells. NRG1 stimulation consistently induced downstream
signaling pathways such as PI3K-AKT axis and Src activation in the cells
with predilection for omental metastasis. We also showed that EMT
modulating genes (eg. Vimentin and E-cadherin) are regulated by ErbB3 and
PI3K in SKOV3-OM3 cells. In parallel approaches to determine the
requirement of the ErbB3/NRG1 pathway for hematogenous metastasis of
ovarian cancer to the omentum, both immune-deficient and immune-competent
models were used. Upon intracardiac (IC) injection of SKOV3-OM3 cells
(nude mice) and IG10-OM2 cells (C57BL/6 mice), tumor development and
metastasis was followed by weekly luciferase imaging; tumors were
harvested for histopathology and downstream molecular analyses. ErbB3
silencing using siRNA incorporated in DOPC nanoliposomes resulted in
substantially decreased tumor growth and metastasis compared with control
siRNA in both models (P Background: Ovarian cancer is predominantly
thought to metastasize by intraperitoneal spread. Here, we report
unexpected findings related to hematogenous ovarian cancer metastasis
with strong tropism for the omentum.Study methods and results: To
investigate the potential patterns of metastasis from circulating ovarian
cancer cells, we established a novel parabiosis model, where 2 mice are
surgically fused to allow a common circulation. Using this model, we
found that ovarian cancer cells can indeed metastasize hematogenously and
predominantly localize to the omentum. Cells propagated from this model
are called SKOV3-OM3. To understand potential mechanisms, we carried out
integrated genomic and human Phospho RTK arrays, which pointed to
ErbB3/NRG1 as a dominant activated pathway. NRG1 stimulated migration
(40%) and invasion (60%) of SKOV3-OM3 cells. NRG1 stimulation
consistently induced downstream signaling pathways such as PI3K-AKT axis
and Src activation in the cells with predilection for omental metastasis.
We also showed that EMT modulating genes (eg. Vimentin and E-cadherin)
are regulated by ErbB3 and PI3K in SKOV3-OM3 cells. In parallel
approaches to determine the requirement of the ErbB3/NRG1 pathway for
hematogenous metastasis of ovarian cancer to the omentum, both
immune-deficient and immune-competent models were used. Upon intracardiac
(IC) injection of SKOV3-OM3 cells (nude mice) and IG10-OM2 cells (C57BL/6
mice), tumor development and metastasis was followed by weekly luciferase
imaging; tumors were harvested for histopathology and downstream
molecular analyses. ErbB3 silencing using siRNA incorporated in DOPC
nanoliposomes resulted in substantially decreased tumor growth and
metastasis compared with control siRNA in both models (P <0.001). ErbB3
silencing resulted in significant reduction of proliferation and increase
in apoptosis for both experiments. These data indicate that ErbB3 plays a
functionally significant role in omental metastasis.Conclusion: This
study provides a new paradigm regarding ovarian cancer metastasis in that
ovarian cancer cells have a parallel path of spread to the omentum
hematogenously. As such, these findings have significant clinical
implications.

