Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Connexin might be involved in anti-cancer combination effect of
sunitinib and sodium butyrate.


Sunitinib (SU) is a multi-targeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(TKI). It is more effective for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) treatment than
conventional immunotherapy, but it causes the resistance and severe side
effects in some cases. As a combination therapy might be one solution for
them, we paid attention to sodium butyrate (NaBu). It is classified into
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor and it is reported HDAC inhibitors
can enhance anti-cancer effect of existent drugs including TKI. So, we
examined combination effect of SU and NaBu. And to reveal the target of
this combination, we examined effects of SU and NaBu on connexin (Cx),
which is a component of gap junction (GJ) and tumor suppressors.We
assessed effect of SU and NaBu combination on ACHN (human RCC cell line)
cell proliferation by MTT assay and this combination exhibited a
synergistic anti-proliferative effect. By real-time PCR, we detected
up-regulation of Cx32 mRNA by NaBu. Moreover, NaBu depicted the
up-regulated Cx32 protein expression, which was observed by confocal
fluorescence microscope. Hemi-channel (Cx hexamer) function was assessed
by propidium iodide (PI) uptake into cells. We found both SU and NaBu
enhanced PI uptake significantly. GJ function was assessed by
scrape-loading. It was confirmed GJ didn't function in ACHN cells and
neither SU nor NaBu affected its function. So, it was suggested NaBu
could up-regulate Cx32 expression and both SU and NaBu could enhance
hemi-channel function. However, we couldn't reveal whether GJ was related
to enhancing SU sensitivity. So, we used GJ positive or negative H28
(human malignant mesothelioma cell line) to reveal this matter. As a
result, GJ positive cells were more sensitive to SU than negative ones.
On the other hand, inhibition of GJ function didn't restore viability of
GJ positive cells.In conclusion, we demonstrated the combination therapy
of SU and NaBu had synergistic anti-proliferative effect, so it could be
a prominent therapy for RCC. Furthermore, we found Cx could be involved
in this combination effect, which might be performed in GJ-independent
manner.

