Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Platinum-based cancer chemotherapeutics inhibit STAT signaling by
blocking the SH2 domain.


Platinum-based drugs form the corner stone of many treatment schedules in
cancer. Their main mechanism of actions is the covalent binding to DNA,
leading to the formation of platinum-DNA adducts and thereby inducing
apoptosis. Recently, other so called off-target effects of these drugs
have been described. These include the induction of immunogenic cell
death and the downregulation of inhibitory molecule Programmed
Death-Ligand 2 by inactivation of signaling molecule/transcription factor
STAT6, a member of the Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription
(STAT) protein family. STAT proteins play crucial roles in the
pathogenesis and progression of cancer and much research is being
conducted to identify inhibitors of STAT signaling for use in cancer
treatment.Here, we investigated the potential of platinum-based
chemotherapeutics to inhibit STAT signaling. We found that treatment of
tumor cells of various origins with platinum drugs inhibit the activation
of STAT proteins and leads to loss of cytokine-induced and constitutive
STAT protein phosphorylation. Concurrently, a decrease of STAT protein
nuclear accumulation was evident by confocal microscopy analysis. This
resulted in a downregulation of STAT-regulated tumorigenic genes such as
Bcl-xL, MCL-1, VEGF and survivin. Non-STAT target genes were not
affected. Analysis of the known STAT inactivation pathways showed that
these were not activated nor enhanced by treatment with platinum drugs.
Finally, using a biochemical alphascreen-based assay, we demonstrated
that platinum compounds directly interact with STAT proteins and inhibit
binding to the SH2 domain.These findings provide novel insight into the
mechanism of action of platinum drugs and show for the first time that
these clinically used compounds directly affect important cellular
signaling pathways. These results indicate that part of the efficacy of
these drugs may be derived from their inhibition of STAT signaling and
they provide important leads for the development of novel innovative
treatment schedules in cancer that exploit the STAT-inhibiting effect of
platinum drugs, for example by potentiating targeted therapies or
immunotherapy.

