Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CTP-221, a deuterated S-enantiomer of lenalidomide, is greatly
stabilized to epimerization and results in a more desirable
pharmacokinetic profile than racemic lenalidomide.


IMiD-class compounds, including thalidomide, lenalidomide, and
pomalidomide, have been developed as racemic mixtures of S- and
R-enantiomers. The isolated enantiomers of thalidomide are known to have
distinct biological activities. For example, the well-documented sedative
effects of thalidomide are correlated with the R-enantiomer (Eriksson et
al., 2000), whereas S-thalidomide exhibits enhanced potency for TNF-
inhibition compared to the R-enantiomer (Wnendt et al., 1996; Moreira et
al., 1993). We have demonstrated that S-lenalidomide is more potent than
racemic or R-lenalidomide in biological activities that are believed to
be important for clinical efficacy of lenalidomide. Due to facile in vivo
conversion, isolated S-enantiomers of IMiDs have not been developed
clinically. Lenalidomide (Revlimid) is a racemic mixture of S- and
R-enantiomers that interconvert through epimerization. Revlimid is
labeled for the treatment of 5q-myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and
multiple myeloma.CTP-221 is a deuterium-modified analog of S-lenalidomide
containing deuterium atoms at key positions including lenalidomide's
chiral center. Deuterium modification has the potential, albeit
unpredictably, to alter the metabolic fate and hence the pharmacokinetic
disposition of drugs, especially those that are biotransformed via the
cleavage of carbon-hydrogen bonds (Fisher et al, 2006). The effect of
deuterium modification on the epimerization rate and pharmacokinetic
profile of CTP-221 was investigated in vitro and in vivo in mice, rats
and monkeys.The rates of epimerization of CTP-221 and S-lenalidomide were
compared in vitro in whole blood from mouse, rat, monkey, and human. It
was found that CTP-221 was 2- to 3-fold more stable to epimerization than
S-lenalidomide in the four species. To compare the in vivo
pharmacokinetic profiles of CTP-221 and racemic lenalidomide, the
compounds (10 mg/kg, PO) were administered to mice, rats and monkeys. In
all three species, the exposure (AUC) of S- and R-lenalidomide following
administration of racemic lenalidomide was about 50-57% and 43-50%,
respectively, of the sum of the AUC of the individual enantiomers.
However, when CTP-221 was administered, the AUC of CTP-221 and the
deuterated R-enantiomers formed in vivo were about 96-99% and 1-4%
respectively, of the sum of the AUC of the two enantiomers. Thus, CTP-221
epimerizes to a minimal extent in vivo and its administration provides
exposure to very low levels of the R-enantiomer.In conclusion, the
stabilization of CTP-221 via deuterium substitution resulted in maximal
exposure to the more potent S-enantiomer and minimal exposure to the
R-enantiomer. As a result, CTP-221 has the potential for improved potency
and therapeutic index in comparison to racemic lenalidomide.

