Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genetically engineered mouse model of de novo pancreatic
carcinogenesis .


Multistep models of PDAC development converge on both abnormalities in
KRAS and E2F activation, which are part of the Rb/E2F pathway, and
dysfunction of p53, which is associated with the MDM2/p53 pathway. Recent
progress in the understanding of the protective roles of the Rb/E2F and
MDM/p53 pathways against carcinogenesis showed that cross talk and
complementary actions of these pathways are present in many types of
cancers. In this study, we addressed directly questions regarding the
collaborative roles of the Rb/E2F and MDM2/p53 pathways in suppressing
the progression of multistep PDAC carcinogenesis by generating TKC
(loxP-geo-STOP-loxPtemperature-sensitive SV40 T antigen (tsTAg)),
loxP-STOP-loxP-KrasG12D, and Pdx1-Cre) mice which exhibit impairment of
both pathways and K-rasG12D expression in pancreatic epithelial cells.
The PDAC induced in TKC mice exhibited rapid development and absence of
inflammation or PanIN formation, which occurred by de novo
carcinogenesis. The tumors resembled human PDAC at the histological and
molecular level. In in vitro study, we established PDAC cell lines from
TKC mice and immortalized pancreatic ductal cell lines from TC mice,
Cytokeratin 19 expression with which was applied to select cells as
pancreatic ductal cell differentiation. In collagen gel 3D culture, PDAC
cells formed atypical gland structures the same as in subcutaneous
transplanted tumor in nude mice, while the Cytokeratin 19 positive
immortalized ductal cell lines from TC mice formed ductal structures
similar to either intralobular or interloblar pancreatic ducts. The
results of the analysis of the highlighted molecular mechanisms suggest
that the synthetic interaction among mutated Kras, uncontrolled E2f
activation, and dysfunction of p53 results in de novo pancreatic
carcinogenesis. This model represents an important tool to explore
molecular targets for diagnostics and cancer therapy for PDAC via de novo
pancreatic carcinogenesis.This work was supported by grants from the
Program for Promotion of Basic Research Activities for Innovative
Biosciences (PROBRAIN) and New Energy and Industrial Technology
Development Organization (NEDO) of Japan, and supported in part by
Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Priority Area (21590454,
24590498, and 24108006 to Y. I.) from the Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science and Technology of Japan.

