Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interrogating the role of NOX4 in colon cancer metastasis.


Colon cancer is a major cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide.
Adjuvant chemotherapy significantly reduces mortality in stage III colon
cancer; however, it is only marginally effective in stage II patients.
Molecular biomarkers are used to partition tumors into a poor prognosis
group that is likely to metastasize and a good prognosis group that has a
higher probability to be relapse-free. These biomarkers for relapse risk
are of clinical interest, and lead to insight into how a tumor progresses
to metastasis.There is increasing evidence that cancer of the ascending
(right-side) colon is different from the descending (left-side) colon.
There are site-specific differences in histological and molecular
characteristics and different signaling pathways have been shown to
dominate progression to relapse in right and left-side colon cancer. We
have observed that the genes altered in expression between the poor
prognosis and good prognosis tumors vary significantly depending on
whether the malignancy originates on the right or left side of the colon.
We have identified NADPH oxidase 4 (NOX4) to be highly predictive of
relapse in stage II and stage III left-side colon cancer where elevated
expression of NOX4 is correlated with relapse. Furthermore, NOX4
expression is greatly elevated in the human colon cancer derived
metastatic cell line SW620 compared to human cell lines derived from
primary adenoma or carcinoma colon tumors. NOX4 silencing using RNA
interference results in decreased levels of reactive oxygen species
(ROS). The NOX family of genes has been implicated in cancer development
in several types of cancer while overproduction of ROS has been
implicated in tumor metastasis.We are exploring the newly identified role
of NOX4-mediated ROS generation in metastatic colon cancer. To
investigate the underlying molecular mechanism we are analyzing the
effect of NOX4 silencing via RNA interference and NOX4 inhibition using
pharmacological NOX inhibitors on global protein expression patterns in
metastatic-derived SW620 cells. Proteomic changes are being assessed by
iTRAQ labeling and mass spectrometry. Bioinformatics and cluster analysis
will be used to identify the functional role of redox responsive and ROS
regulative proteins in colon cancer metastasis. The role of NOX4 as a
prognostic biomarker in colon cancer makes it an important target for
research in cancer biology and therapeutics.

