Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive genomic analysis of murine small cell lung carcinoma
uncovers recurrent Pten alterations that drive tumor progression and
alter tumor genome evolution.


Small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) is a highly lethal tumor for which few
targetable genetic alterations have been identified. SCLC is tightly
associated with an extended history of tobacco use, and recent DNA
sequencing studies have revealed highly mutated SCLC cancer genomes.
Interestingly, two studies analyzing the human SCLC genome report
distinct sets of putative driver mutations, highlighting the challenge of
identifying functional events in highly mutated cancers. In the absence
of environmental mutagens, a previously established genetically
engineered mouse model of SCLC initiated by combined loss of Trp53 and
Rb1 recapitulates the salient clinical features of human SCLC including
tumor histologic progression and frequent distant metastases. This model
has been shown to acquire DNA copy number alterations shared with human
SCLC, suggesting that cross-species cancer genomics may identify a subset
of driver events in human cancers.In order to characterize the spectrum
of acquired events in murine SCLC and identify evolutionarily conserved
drivers of SCLC progression, we define the somatic genome and
transcriptome of a large panel of murine SCLC at single nucleotide
resolution using exome, genome and RNA sequencing. We uncover complex
subclonality in primary murine SCLC tumors and detect evidence for clonal
selection during metastatic spread. As expected in the absence of
environmental mutagens, we demonstrate a low somatic mutation frequency
in murine SCLC. Using integrative genomic analyses we uncover alterations
in chromatin remodeling enzymes and identify Pten as a critical tumor
suppressor in this model. Engineered Pten deletion in murine SCLC
dramatically accelerates tumorigenesis and fundamentally alters the
genomic evolution of these tumors. This work represents the first
large-scale comprehensive genomic characterization of a genetically
engineered mouse cancer model at single nucleotide resolution, has
implications for the nature of tumor evolution in mouse cancer models and
identifies a potential therapeutic target in a subset of human SCLC.

