Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caspase 2 short isoform interacts with membrane-associated
cytoskeleton proteins to inhibit apoptosis.


Caspase-2 (casp-2) is the most conserved caspase across species, and is
one of the initiator caspases activated by various stimuli. The casp-2
gene produces several alternative splicing isoforms. The exclusion of
exon 9 results in the dominant casp-2 long isoform (casp-2L) mRNA, while
the inclusion of exon 9 leads to the inclusion of an in-frame stop codon
in casp-2, resulting in a short isoform (casp-2S) mRNA. It is believed
that casp-2L promotes apoptosis, whereas casp-2S inhibits apoptosis.
However, the effect of casp-2S on apoptosis is still controversial, and
the underlying mechanism for casp-2S-mediated apoptosis inhibition is
unclear. Here, we analyzed the effects of casp-2S on DNA damage induced
apoptosis by gain-of-function and loss-of-function effects in ovarian
cancer cell lines. We have clearly demonstrated that over-expression of
casp-2S inhibited, while knockdown of casp-2S promoted, the
cisplatin-induced apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells, as revealed by the
detection of PARP cleavage and Annexin V staining. To explore the
mechanism for casp-2S-mediated apoptosis inhibition, we analyzed proteins
interacting with casp-2S in cells by using mass spectrometry (MS) and
immunoprecipitation (IP). We have identified two cytoskeleton proteins,
Fodrin and -Actinin 4, associated with casp-2S in HeLa cells and
confirmed this interaction by reciprocal IP. Furthermore, we have
demonstrated that casp-2S primarily resides in the cytoplasm, and
inhibits DNA damage-induced cytoplasmic Fodrin cleavage independently of
cellular p53 status. Given that Fodrin cleavage is critical to the
apoptotic membrane blebbing, we hypothesized that casp-2S may inhibit the
blebbing during apoptosis. Interestingly, immunofluorescence studies did
show that over-expression of casp-2S inhibited the cisplatin-induced
membrane blebbing. Taken together, our data suggest that casp-2S
interacts with the membrane-associated cytoskeleton protein Fodrin,
protecting it from cleavage, to affect the formation of membrane blebbing
and apoptosis. (Supported by NIH grant CA151248 to QEW, and CA93413 to
AAW)

