Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of response to oxaliplatin by wnt/-catenin in colon
cancer cell lines.


Background: Oxaliplatin is the standard treatment chemotherapy agent in
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. However, most patients
developed the progressive disease after treatment with oxaliplatin due to
chemotherapy resistance. Unfortunately the mechanism of resistance of
oxaliplatin is unclear. Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway may play a role in
oncogenesis in many cancer and also involve in the control the cancer
progression and metastasis throughout the interaction with the tumor
microenvironment. In this study, we investigated the response to
oxaliplatin regulated by wnt/-catenin pathway in colon cancer cell
line.Method: We used SNU-C2A and HCT116 human colon cancer cell lines.
After comparing -catenin expression in SNU-C2A and HCT116 cells through
western blot, we exposed these two cell lines to gradient concentrations
of oxaliplatin for 48hrs to examine the sensitivity. The viability was
determined by Neutral Red uptake assay (NR assay). To construct a gene
silenced cell line, a siRNA against -catenin was transfected in HCT116
cells. Besides, we stimulated SNU-C2A cells with human recombinant Wnt3a
(rhWnt3a) protein to up regulate the -catenin and estimated the change of
sensitivity for oxaliplatin,respectively. We also constructed a
HCT116-cis cell line which showed oxaliplatin-resistance. It has been
made by long-term exposure to oxaliplatin.Result: -catenin was highly
expressed in HCT116 cell line relatively higher than in SNU-C2A cell
line. Through the sensitivity test to oxalipatlin, we confirmed that
SNU-C2A cells were more sensitive to oxaliplatin than HCT116 cells. When
we transfected -catenin siRNA into the HCT116 cell line, the cell
viability was decreased about 20-50% after oxaliplatin treatment. After
rhWnt3a treatment,we confirmed the expression of -catenin and c-myc was
up regulated in SNU-C2A cell line by western blot. After treatment with
oxaliplatin, we found that the cell viability was reduced in SNU-C2A
cells with -catenin overexpressing. Moreover,HCT116-cis,
oxaliplatin-resistance induced cell line, showed not only the increased
protein level of -catenin but also the upper viability for oxaliplatin
compared with HCT116.Conclusion Based on our data, -catenin is one of the
crucial factors to determine the resistance for oxaliplatin in colon
cancer cells. Currently we are conducting the analysis with human tissue,
and exploring the possible mechanism of resistance developmend to
oxaliplatin.

