Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dendritic cell-based immunotherapy targeting WT1 and MUC1 for
advanced biliary tract cancer.


Objectives:Despite intensive chemotherapy for biliary tract cancer (BTC),
the outcome is not enough. Dendritic cells are the powerful
antigen-presenting cells that have attracted attention from the efficacy
of DC-based immunotherapy against many types of cancers. The objective of
this study was to clarify the safety and efficacy of dendritic cell
therapy for BTC.Methods: This retrospective study selected patients who
underwent DC-based vaccine for BTC between May of 2009 and February of
2012. The safety of this treatment, median survival time (MST), 1-year
survival rate, objective response rate (ORR), and disease control rate
(DCR) were evaluated. The univariate and multivariate analyses were
performed to identify the efficacy of DC by a Cox proportional hazards
analysis.Results:Twenty-seven patients were selected for the study. The
patients, and all but one patient had previous therapy, 13 patients had
undergone prior surgical resection, and 21 patients went on to receive
chemotherapy. No serious treatment-related adverse events were observed
during the study period. One-year survival rate from 1st vaccination was
22 % and from the initial diagnosis was 67%. The MST from 1st vaccination
and from the initial diagnosis were 8.2 months and 18.5 months,
respectively. DCR and ORR were 37% and 11%,respectively. None of 27
patients showed complete response (CR), but we have found out 3 cases of
partial responses (PR) and 7 cases of stable disease (SD).Furthermore,
LDH, CRP, DTH, Performance Status (PS), combination with
lymphokine-activated killer, chemotherapy were found to be statistically
significant independent risk factors in multivariate analysis.Conclusion:
DC-based immunotherapy for BTC was safe and prolonged the MST of the
patients with BTC compared to chemotherapy alone,comparing the result
from UK ABC-02 trial. DC-based immunotherapy for BTC may another option
for BTC patient who has no chance for curative surgery.

