Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biotransformed soybean extract (BSE) inhibits melanoma cell growth
and viability through activation of the extrinsic apoptotic pathway.


Melanoma is recognized as one of the most aggressive cancers with
relatively high propensity for metastasis. The prognosis of melanoma
remains poor in spite of treatment advances, emphasizing the importance
of additional preventive measures. Isoflavonoids have become not only
potential chemopreventive, but also important therapeutic natural agents.
In this study, employing A375 melanoma cells, we evaluated the
antiproliferative and proapoptotic properties of biotransformed soybean
extract (BSE). Chromatographic analysis and ninhydrin-based assays
demonstrated that the concentration of daidzein, genistein and
aminoacids/peptides present in BSE, fermented by Aspergillus awamori is
much higher than in the non biotransformed extract (NBSE). Initial
experiments comparing the efficacy of the extracts in preventing cancer
cell growth showed that treatment of highly invasive melanoma cells (A375
and 451Lu) with BSE resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of growth and
viability, 24 h post-treatment, as assessed by
3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl] 2,5-diphenyl tetrazoliumbromide assay. In
contrast, treatment with similar doses of NBSE failed to inhibit melanoma
cell viability. Further studies in A375 melanoma cells showed that
decrease in cell viability with BSE (1.5-1.9 mg/ml; 24 h) treatment was
associated with induction of apoptosis. Immunoblot analysis revealed that
BSE treatment resulted in (i) induction of PARP cleavage and activation
of caspase-3, -7, and -8; (ii) decreased FLIPL; and (iii) increased
expression of TRAIL and its receptor DR4. BSE did not activate the
intrinsic apoptotic pathway in A375 melanoma cells, as no change was
observed in caspase -9 expression. In addition, the expression of Bcl-2
family of apoptotic proteins such as Bax, Bcl-2 remained unaffected with
BSE treated cells. BSE treatment increased the phosphorylation and
activation of IKK, IB degradation and p65/NFB translocation to the
nucleus suggesting that NFB signaling may be involved in BSE mediated
apoptosis. Taken together, our findings indicate that the
biotransformation of soybean plays a crucial role in the anti-cancer
effect of the extract observed in melanoma cells and further studies are
warranted to define the active agent present in BSE and define its
mechanism.Citation Format: Fernanda Maria Pinto Vilela, Deeba N. Syed,
Jean-Christopher Chamcheu, Laura C. Castro, Vanessa S. Fortes, Maria Jose
V. Fonseca, Hasan Mukhtar. Biotransformed soybean extract (BSE) inhibits
melanoma cell growth and viability through activation of the extrinsic
apoptotic pathway. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 607. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-607

