Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput imaging and high content analysis of disease
relevant lncRNAs examined by RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization (RNA
FISH).


The genome is extensively transcribed, yet more than 50 % of RNA
transcripts lack protein coding potential. In recent years, long
noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been shown to play extensive roles in all
the central aspects of gene function including imprinting, epigenetic
regulation, transcription, splicing and nuclear/cytoplasmic trafficking,
translation and RNA stability, with wide ranging effects on cell cycle
and differentiation. Due to the increasingly central role of lncRNAs in
gene transcription and disease states, it is important to develop tools
to allow direct visualization and quantification of lncRNAs that could be
useful both in the basic science arena and in the clinical setting with
possible uses both in diagnostics and prognostics.We recently streamlined
both the design and synthesis of fluorescently labeled probe sets
containing multiple tiled 20-mer GC-balanced oligonucleotides for use in
RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization (RNA FISH). In contrast to
traditional cell-disruptive RNA analyses (e.g. northern blotting and
qPCR) that report relative population averages of RNA content, single
molecule RNA FISH affords specific and sensitive detection of RNAs and
quantitatively establishes the intracellular localization of the target
lncRNAs.We have validated an imaging based platform to perform RNA FISH
in both manual (coverslip) and automated (384 well) formats that allows
tremendous multiplexing and throughput using high throughput microscopy.
Moreover, we developed high content analysis routines that permit
quantification of RNA particles at the single cell level and determine
their localization and pattern (texture). As specific lncRNAs (e.g.
MALAT1) are known to target specific intranuclear domains (e.g. splicing
speckles) we developed classification methods based upon sets of
intensity and texture features to compare intracellular patterns of
novel/less characterized ncRNAs. Moreover, this framework will also
permit to address changes in lncRNA expression and patterns during the
cell cycle since large number of cells can be analyzed simultaneously. We
are now expanding our analysis to primary tumor tissues where lncRNAs
patterns will be correlated with known FISH-compatible biomarkers, thus
providing a picture simultaneously for intra- and inter-cell variation.In
summary, the results and tools presented here will enable the study of
disease related lncRNAs in a high content, high throughput mode. These
efforts will enable gaining better understanding of how expression and
localization of lncRNAs may contribute to the diseased phenotype, and add
a large selection of novel biomarkers that can be interrogated for
improved diagnosis, prognosis, and therapeutic choice.

