Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular ATP mediated intracellular ATP increase: Evidence
for transport of extracellular ATP into cancer cells.


ATP as a most common cofactor of enzymatic reactions and a universal
source of bioenergy transfer plays central metabolic and signal
transduction roles in normal and cancer cells. Almost all cancer cells
switch from the highly efficient mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation
to low efficiency glycolysis for ATP synthesis, a phenomenon called the
Warburg effect that remains to be fully understood. Despite the low
efficiency glycolysis, cancer cells appear to have no shortage of ATP
under any circumstance examined. Different from cell culture media, high
concentrations of extracellular ATP is present in the blood and in
cancer. Although ample evidence indicates intratumoral (extracellular)
ATP concentration is higher than other parts of the body, it is presently
unclear about the sources and fates of intratumoral/extracellular ATP and
how they affect intracellular ATP. ATP is not known to cross plasma
membrane and there is no known plasma membrane associated ATP
transporter. We previously reported drastic increases of intracellular
ATP concentration and rescue of glucose deprived A549 human lung cancer
cells by addition of extracellular ATP.1 We hypothesized that the
increased intracellular ATP is a result of extracellular ATP taken up by
cancer cells. To test this hypothesis, we studied extracellular
ATP-induced intracellular ATP increase in A549 lung and other cancer and
non-tumorigenic cells using the ATP assay. Here we report (i)
Extracellular ATP increased intracellular ATP of A549 cells in a dose-
and time-dependent manners. (ii) The ATP increase was also observed even
when cells mitochondrial ATP synthesis and/or glycolysis were blocked.
(iii) Extracellular ATP at 3 mM also induced a sharp and temporary ATP
surge (peak) several hours after the inhibition described in (ii) and the
surge was absent in the nontumorigenic cell lines under the same
conditions. (iv) The timing of the surge appeared to be dependent upon
extracellular ATP concentration. (v) Extracellular ATP led to changes in
energy status sensing protein AMPK and its phosphorylation. All these
results indicate that extracellular ATP exerts profound effects on
intracellular ATP and suggest a possible direct ATP transport mechanism
into cancer cells. These results strongly suggest that cancer cells
supplement their ATP need with extracellular ATP and extracellular ATP
may play some vitally important but previously unrecognized roles in the
Warburg effect and tumorigenesis. These new findings challenge the
current view that extracellular ATP functions only through plasma
membrane receptors and force us to rethink the roles of extracellular ATP
played in cancer metabolism, energy homeostasis, as well as the symbiotic
relationship between cancer cells and between cancer and normal / stromal
cells. They also imply a new strategy for cancer treatment.1. Liu, Y., et
al., Mol. Cancer Ther. 2012, 11:1672-1682.

