Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of lysine acetylation in the tumor cell response to
stress.


Solid breast tumors contain heterogenous microenvironments where tumor
cells are often exposed to metabolic stress (e.g., hypoxia due to poor
blood supply). Such environments select for tumor cells that can adapt
metabolically to survive, while other cells fail to adapt and undergo
cell death. The survival of cells through periods of hypoxia can promote
chemoresistance and metastasis (1). Thus, it is critical that we develop
therapeutic strategies to enhance metabolic-stress-induced tumor cell
death. One promising strategy is the modulation of lysine acetylation
pathways by HDAC inhibitors that potently promote cell death in response
to various stimuli, including hypoxia/glucose withdrawal. Given the
relatively non-specific nature of chemical HDAC inhibitors, the precise
acetylation-regulating enzymes and pathways that govern cell death in
these settings have yet to be fully elucidated. Our goal is to identify
the cellular factors that link acetylation to cell death in response to
hypoxia and other metabolic stresses, with the hope that such factors
could be exploited therapeutically in cancer.Previous studies have
implicated protein lysine acetylation in the coordination of cellular
metabolism to the available nutrient supply (2). In line with this idea,
our preliminary data suggest that lysine acetylation pathways dictate
whether breast tumor cells survive (through metabolic adaptation) or die
in response to hypoxia and glucose deprivation. Moreover, we have
observed that general increases in protein lysine acetylation precede the
activation of pro-apoptotic caspases in response to these stresses. In
addition, our proteomics efforts have shown that breast tumors that are
sensitive to hypoxia/glucose withdrawal exhibit significant increases in
acetylation across the proteome, whereas resistant cells show very little
change. Together, our data suggest that lysine acetylation pathways play
a role in metabolic adaption and survival under conditions of
hypoxia/glucose withdrawal. We are currently using an RNAi approach to
target all known deacetylases, acetyl-transferases, and metabolic enzymes
that modulate acetylation (e.g., acetyl-CoA synthetase) in order to
identify the specific acetylation-regulating factors that govern tumor
cell susceptibility to metabolic stress.

