Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of Enolase1 as key drug target in breast cancer by
the Berg Interrogative Biology platform.


Breast cancer is characterized by subtypes of various expression of
her2/neu, estrogen receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PR) markers.
The metabolic drivers and correlation to glycolytic intermediates that
contribute to breast tumor phenotypes are not fully understood. The Berg
Interrogative Biology discovery platform was used to delineate distinct
molecular signatures which reflect the oncogenic mechanistic chain of
events. Human Enolase-I was identified as a critical node (hub) in the
Berg cancer systems network output. Causal association of ENO1 and other
proteins with diverse biological roles such as regulation of gene
expression, genomic integrity, mRNA/microRNA processing, protein and ECM
stability, and cytoskeleton organization provides a powerful snap shot of
molecular events modulated by ENO1. As a key glycolytic enzyme, Enolase I
has been implicated in tumor growth, cell death, and drug resistance. To
further unravel the metabolic regulation by Eno1 in breast cancer, we
generated lentivirus mediated stable human enolase I knockdown and
overexpression breast cancer cell lines which were subjected to
functional assays. The metabolic assessments using Seahorse XF96 analyzer
revealed decreased glycolysis in Eno1 knockdown cells and increased
glycolysis in Eno1 overexpressing breast cancer cells, confirming the
functional perturbation induced by Eno1 protein levels. Bioenergetic
profiling showed corresponding changes in OCR in both basal and uncoupled
states in Eno1 overexpressing breast cancer cells, suggesting these cells
underwent metabolic remodeling in response to Eno1 activity/levels.
Proliferation assays using DNA quantification and cell viability revealed
significant inhibition of cancer cell growth with Enolase I knockdown,
while the Eno1 overexpression promoted proliferation of breast cancer
cells normoxic/hypoxic conditions, congruent to expression changes of
proliferation markers. Moreover, in response to perturbation of Eno1
mediated energy metabolism, various breast cancer cells displayed altered
phosphorylation/activation of AMP-activated protein kinase, which
mediated Eno1 induced proliferation change in different breast cancer
cells. The approach in conjunction with multi-omic technologies and data
integration using the Berg BNI (BayesianNetwork Inference) leverages the
robust biological output of the networks with an agnostic, unbiased
analytical tool to truly gain insight into the underlying pathophysiology
of breast cancers. Ongoing efforts to overlay this novel insight into
combination strategies with chemotherapy will advance the understanding
to realize data-driven biomarker and therapeutic end-points. Taken
together, the data suggest that Enolase1 is a novel disease target breast
cancer and serves as a fulcrum point in the metabolic governance of
breast tumor development and progression.

