Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel DNA methylation markers to track patient's
response to DNA demethylation agents.


The successful use of DNA methyltransferase inhibitors (DNMTis) in
Myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDS) therapy has brought epigenetic drugs to
the forefront of cancer management. However it has been difficult to find
a consistent association between patients outcome and DNA methylation
changes. This could be attributed to a variety of factors including the
choice of DNA methylation markers to track the response to
treatment.LINE-1 methylation changes are widely studied as a marker
predictive of genome-wide DNA methylation changes; however recent reports
have shown that its methylation levels are variable across tissues. In
addition, we have found that LINE-1 remethylation after DNMTis withdrawal
occurs faster than that of other regions, suggesting that LINE-1
methylation changes might not reflect the overall demethylation effects
of DNMTis. Thus, it is imperative to find more sensitive DNA methylation
markers to accurately track the methylation change that occurs after
DNMTi treatment. Ideally, such markers could be applied to various tumor
types and to samples collected by invasive and non-invasive methods. To
find improved DNA methylation markers, we took advantage of the
well-established Infinium DNA methylation platform and found 1429 probes,
which were consistently methylated in both normal/tumor bladder tissue
samples as well as white blood cells from healthy donors. The
remethylation pattern of those 1439 probes was investigated in the T24
bladder cancer and HL60 leukemia cell lines treated with 5-Aza-CdR for 24
hours. Probe consensus clustering yielded a group of 79 probes that
significantly responded to the demethylation treatment and remained
demethylated beyond 30 days. In silico analysis of the DNA methylation
patterns of the top two probes show consistent hypermethylation in both
normal and tumor samples. As a proof of principle, we tested the DNA
demethylation levels of these two markers in urine sediments from 7 MDS
patients treated with Azacitidine using pyrosequencing. Our results
showed that the two markers were significantly demethylated; in contrast,
LINE-1 methylation showed no clear decreasing trend. Demethylation of
these two markers was also observed in peripheral blood samples from MDS
patients treated with Azacitidine. We are in the process of testing more
samples to find the association between marker demethylation and
patient's outcome. In summary, we have identified and validated two DNA
methylation markers, which unlike LINE-1, show consistent demethylation
in response to the DNMTi treatment irrespective of the type of sample
tested. The wider range of demethylation provided by these markers may
offer a more accurate representation of the patient's response to
treatment.

