Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell of origin in radiation-induced premalignant thymocytes with
differentiation capability in mice conditionally losing one Bcl11b allele.


Mouse thymic lymphoma (TL) has been used for study of radiation
carcinogenesis because of its high incidence. The lymphoma or leukemia is
a mouse model of human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALL),
which is a malignant clonal expansion of thymocytes that accounts for
about 15% of ALL cases. Ionizing radiation can damage DNA, and the cells
with damaged DNA are assumed to be the cells of origin in tumors.
However, which cell in the thymus or the bone marrow leads to TL remains
obscure. Bcl11b gene encodes zinc-nger transcription proteins, mutations
or deletion of which has been found in 10-16% of T-ALL. Bcl11bKO/+
heterozygous mice are susceptible to thymic lymphomas when -irradiated,
and irradiated Bcl11bKO/+ mice generate clonally expanding or
premalignant thymocytes within atrophic thymus. Resembling clonal
expansion of thymocytes was reported in the T-ALL model overexpressing
LMO2 oncogene. Interestingly, LMO2-induced clonally expanding thymocytes
persist long-term and comprise cells with the stem cell-like self-renewal
property that function for the bone marrow stem cells before TL
development. In this study, we developed Bcl11bflox/+;Lck-Cre and
Bcl11bflox/+;CD4-Cre mice, in which loss of one Bcl11b allele occurs in
thymocytes at the immature CD4CD8 stage without expression of CD4 and CD8
cell surface markers and at the CD4+CD8+ double-positive (DP) stage,
respectively. Those mice were subjected to -irradiation of 3Gy at 8 weeks
of age and their thymocytes were characterized of clonal expansion,
differentiation and cell number. The clonal expansion was observed in
only the former mice, suggesting the origin of the premaligant thymocytes
not in the DP cells, the cell type seen in a majority of TL. The clonally
expanded thymocytes possessed common rearrangement sites at the TCR locus
but they underwent rearrangement at various different sites at the TCR
locus, and their majority showed mature phenotypes, a higher expression
of TCR and the CD8 expression. This suggests the presence of a
subpopulation of immature thymocytes that is capable to rearrange DNA at
the TCR locus in DP cells to continuously produce further differentiated
thymocytes. We also found the decrease in thymocyte number in irradiated
Bcl11bflox/+;Lck-Cre mice. This probably reflects the reduced
proliferation of bone marrow-derived progenitors, and this reduction may
weaken the competition in niche with premaligant thymocytes and help for
them to survive and proliferate.

