Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A randomized, double-blind, multicenter trial evaluating the
chronotherapeutic role of concomitant melatonin in the treatment of stage
IIIB and IV non-small cell lung carcinoma.


Background: A recently published meta-analysis suggests that melatonin
administered concurrently with chemotherapy leads to significant
improvements in tumor response and survival in solid tumors, however, the
role of melatonin in cancer treatment still remains disputable. We
investigated the impact of chronotherapeutic administration of melatonin
on tumor response and overall survival in stage IIIB and IV non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients undergoing conventional
chemotherapy.Methods: Veteran Affairs Medical Center (VAMC) and Cancer
Treatment Centers of America at Midwestern Regional Medical Center
(MRMC), a non-VA site, entered 42 patients each. The patients were
randomized to receive placebo 8 am and placebo 8 pm (arm 1; n=29), or
melatonin 20 mg 8 am and placebo 8 pm (arm 2; n=27), or placebo 8 am and
melatonin 20 mg 8 pm (arm 3; n=28). All study participants received
treatment with cisplatin (25 mg/m2/day) followed by etoposide (100
mg/m2/day) chemotherapy. Patient survival was defined as the time between
the study start date and date of death from any cause/date of last
contact. Kaplan-Meier analysis with log-rank test was used to evaluate
the equality of survival distributions across the three treatment arms.
Tumor response was evaluated using the RECIST guidelines.Results: 64
patients had stage IV while 20 had stage IIIB disease. 65 patients were
males while 19 were females. All patients had expired at the time of this
analysis. Mean age at study entry was 61.3 years (57 years for MRMC
versus 65.7 for VAMC). There were no significant differences in the three
treatment arms with respect to age, gender, tumor stage and performance
status. Median survival time in the 3 treatment arms was 10.4 (arm 1),
6.8 (arm 2) and 8.0 (arm 3) months respectively (log rank p=0.81).
Similarly, there was no significant difference in the treatment arms with
regard to tumor response, such that 48.3%, 37.0% and 32.1% patients had
stable disease in arm 1, arm 2 and arm 3 respectively (Chi-square
p=0.49).Conclusions: Contrary to the recently reported meta-analysis, we
found that neither the addition nor the timing of a high oral dose of
melatonin added therapeutically to the combination of cisplatin and
etoposide. The melatonin dose used in this study is at least 20x the
usual replacement dose and this may have resulted in melatonin being
inappropriately present in the circulation during both day and night, an
un-physiologic state, which might be responsible for the apparent lack of
efficacy of this particular regimen.

