Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA profiling of breast ductal lavage fluid.


Introduction: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been detected in tumors as well as
in serum, plasma, and other body fluids. We are investigating whether we
can detect miRNAs in the breast ductal lavage (DL) fluid and whether
miRNA profiling of the fluid can be used as a marker for early detection
of breast cancer (BC). Emerging data are showing that miRNAs have a great
potential as cancer biomarkers: miRNAs are aberrant in cancers,
exceptionally stable in various biological specimens, and are tissue
specific.Approach: We are evaluating the miRNA profiles in DL fluid
samples and primary tumors that have been obtained from 22 patients with
DCIS and Invasive BC. The DL samples were collected in the operating room
from patients with confirmed diagnosis, prior to their surgery. For each
patient, two DL samples were obtained: one from the affected breast and
the other from the contralateral normal breast (control). Each patient
served as her own control. Post surgery, a primary tumor specimen was
obtained. Total RNA was extracted from 250ul ductal lavage samples and
from primary tumors using the Qiagen miRNeasy kit and the Ambion
RecoverALL Total Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit for FFPE, respectively, and
the quantity of RNA was assessed using a Thermo Scientific NanoDropTM
Spectrophotometer. Micro RNA profiling was done using the TaqMan(R) Human
MicroRNA Array Set v3.0 (Applied Biosystems), a quantitative real time
PCR based array containing 742 human miRNAs, 3 endogenous controls to aid
in data normalization and one assay not related to humans as a negative
control. Integromics StatMiner was used to analyze the data, and 2-ddCt
method was applied. The data were first cleaned by filtering out those
miRNAs with 75% of samples having Ct values more than 36. Thereafter
cleaned Ct values were normalized to the reference control miRNA to get
deltaCt values, and then normalized by median center method. Paired
t-test was used to test the significance of three comparisons, DL from
cancerous breast (LT) vs. DL from normal breast (LC), primary tumor (PT)
vs. LC and PT vs. LT, each comparison resulted in a miRNA listResults: To
date, we completed the analysis of samples from 12 of the 22 study
subjects. For each subject we evaluated 2 DL samples and a primary tumor
sample, 36 samples in total, to identify significantly differentially
expressed miRNAs. Based on the analysis, we identified 2 miRNAs that
discriminated between the DL from the cancerous breast vs. the normal
control. These 2 miRNAs are also differentially expressed in the primary
tumors compared to the control fluid.Conclusion: Our data show that miRNA
analysis is feasible in breast ductal lavage fluid. Furthermore, two
miRNAs have been identified to be differentially expressed in the DL
fluid from affected breasts. Our findings suggest that miRNA analysis is
potentially useful for detection of BC using ductal fluid analysis and
justify a larger study to confirm these preliminary results.Supported by
a Grant from the Avon Foundation for Women

