Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the mTORC2/HIF-2alpha/p53 pathway in clear cell renal
cell carcinoma.


Inactivating mutations in the von Hippel Lindau (VHL) tumour suppressor
gene leads to both hereditary and sporadic clear cell renal cell
carcinoma (ccRCC). Loss of VHL function results in stabilisation of
hypoxia inducible factors 1 and 2 (HIF-1 and HIF-2) with HIF-2 critical
for renal tumour progression, angiogenesis and resistance to radiotherapy
and chemotherapy. Previous work in VHL defective RCC cell lines that
express HIF-2 has shown that loss of HIF-2, either with siRNA or by
reintroduction of VHL, increases phosphorylation and stabilisation of p53
which restored sensitivity to radiation and chemotherapy. Furthermore, as
recent evidence suggests that mTORC2 is required for HIF-2 protein
synthesis in VHL defective cells, we investigated the effects of
pharmacological inhibition of HIF-2 with the mTORC1/2 kinase inhibitor
pp242 alone or in combination with DNA damaging agents. Phosphorylated
p53 and total p53 levels were significantly elevated in VHL competent RCC
cells lacking HIF-2 as compared with VHL defective cells, confirming a
role for HIF-2 mediated inhibition of p53. We analysed the effects of the
mTORC1/2 kinase inhibitor pp242 on HIF-2 protein levels by Western blot.
pp242 inhibited phosphorylation of both mTOR and its substrate p70S6K and
significantly reduced protein levels of HIF-2 as compared with the mTORC1
inhibitor rapamycin, which had no effect on HIF-2. Since the DNA damaging
agent camptothecin (CPT) is a potent inhibitor of HIF-1 we also
determined its effects on HIF-2 expression. CPT reduced HIF-2 protein
levels in VHL defective RCC cells and increased p53 stabilisation, which
was significantly augmented in VHL competent cells following complete
loss of HIF-2. Consistent with its inhibition of the p53 pathway, HIF-2
prevented both spontaneous and CPT induced apoptosis of RCC cells as
demonstrated by FACS analysis of cells in sub G1 and Western blot
analysis of cleaved PARP. Taken together these results confirm that HIF-2
negatively regulates p53, confers resistance to DNA damage induced
apoptosis in VHL defective RCC cell lines and that further studies
investigating the pharmacological inhibition of HIF-2 mediated by
mTORC1/2 kinase inhibitors alone or in combination with DNA damaging
agents for the treatment of ccRCC are warranted.

