Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microsomal prostaglandin E2 synthase-1 may provide a novel
specific therapeutic target in neuroblastoma.


Background: Neuroblastoma (NB) cells are enriched in the omega-6 fatty
acid arachidonic acid, the substrate for the cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes
and prostaglandin biosynthesis. The inducible isoform, COX-2 is
overexpressed in NB and NB cells produce prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) that
acts as an autocrine and/or paracrine survival and proliferation factor.
Downstream of the COX enzymes, specific synthases are responsible for the
production of the respective prostaglandins. Microsomal prostaglandin E2
synthase-1 (mPGES-1) specifically converts PGH2 to PGE2 and is thought to
primarily couple to COX-2. The aim of this study was to investigate if
inhibition of mPGES-1 could represent an alternative therapeutic approach
to COX- inhibition in NB.Methods: Western blot and immunohistochemistry
were used for protein detection. Cell viability of seven NB cell-lines
treated with the mPGES-1 inhibitor CAY1052 was determined by MTT-assay.
Stable mPGES-1 knockdown SK-N-BE2 clones were established using shRNA and
the clonogenic capacity was analysed by clonogenic assay. To study the in
vivo effect of COX inhibition, four week old homozygous TH-MYCN mice were
treated with 10mg/L diclofenac for two weeks. Ex vivo analyses of
COX-metabolites in tumors were performed by LC-MS/MS.Results: Expression
of mPGES-1 in human NB tumors and in NB cell lines could be detected.
Inhibition of mPGES-1 reduced NB cell growth in vitro and knockdown of
mPGES-1 significantly reduced the clonogenic capacity. Expression of
COX-1, COX-2 and mPGES-1 in TH-MYCN tumors could be detected and
treatment with the dual COX-inhibitor diclofenac significantly reduced
tumour weight, compared to untreated animals. Ex vivo analysis of tumor
tissues from treated animals revealed a significantly decreased level of
COX metabolites compared to controls. The expression of mPGES-1was not
affected by the treatment. Furthermore, cells staining positive for
cleaved caspase-3 were more prevalent in treated tumors indicating
apoptosis Induction.Conclusion: We found that mPGES-1 is expressed in NB,
with a potential role for PGE2 synthesis and tumor growth. mPGES-1
represents an alternative therapeutic target for inhibiting NB growth
through specific PGE2 inhibition and the TH-MYCN model is well suited for
in vivo studies with this purpose.

