Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An experimental study of folic acid coupled nano-paclitaxel for
targeted treatment of ovarian cancer.


To study the effect of folic acid coupled nano-paclitaxel in vivo and in
vitro targeted treatment of ovarian cancer and preliminarily elucidate
its therapeutical mechanism. Methods: The folic acid coupled
nano-paclitaxel drug were prepared by the co-incubation method; The folic
acid receptor-positive ovarian cancer cell lines were screened by
immunohistochemical staining method; the targeting effect of the drug on
SKOV3 cells were assessed qualitatively by fluorescence microscopy and
quantitatively by flow cytometry (FCM). The killing effect of the drug on
SKOV3 cells and SKOV3/TAX cells were monitored in vitro by plotting cell
growth curve, the MTT method, FCM measurement, and electron microscopy;
Tumor-burdened nude mice were administered with the drug by
intraperitoneal and iv injection, the amounts of tumors were compared.
The tumor killing effect of the drug in treating celiac metastases were
examined qualitatively by electron microscopy and quantitatively by FCM.
Results: (1) The particle size and encapsulation efficiency of folic acid
coupled nano-paclitaxel drugs were (140.510.3)nm and 97% respectively;
(2) Both SKOV3 cells and SKOV3/TAX cells were folic acid receptor
positive; (3) Folic acid coupled nano-paclitaxel drugs demonstrated
targeted killing effect on SKOV3 cells by the mediation of the folic acid
receptor. The intracellular drug concentration gradually increases along
with the incubation time. (4)The effects of folic acid coupled
nano-paclitaxel drugs on SKOV3 cells and SKOV3/TAX cells were
significantly better than the nano-paclitaxel, but the effects was
similar when the concentrations were 0.2 and 2 g/ml. The resistance index
of SKOV3 / TAX cells was decreased in the course of treatment; (5) The
cell apoptosis rates of the three groups after treatment were 84.63% in
abdominal group,35.23% in veinal group,and 10.12% in control group
respectively (p 0.05). Conclusions: Folic acid coupled nano-paclitaxel
drugs have better therapeutical effects in treating both drug-sensitive
and drug-resistant ovarian cancer lines. The drugs administered through
intraperitoneal injection showed better results than via iv
injection.Citation Format: Hongxia Li. An experimental study of folic
acid coupled nano-paclitaxel for targeted treatment of ovarian cancer.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5668.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5668

