Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NLG919, a novel indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO)-pathway
inhibitor drug candidate for cancer therapy.


The IDO pathway mediates immunosuppressive effects through the
metabolization of tryptophan (Trp) to kynurenine (Kyn), triggering
downstream signaling through GCN2, mTOR and AHR that can affect
differentiation and proliferation of T cells. Expression of the IDO1 gene
by tumor cells or host APCs can inhibit tumor-specific effector CD8+ T
cells and enhance the suppressor activity of Tregs, and high expression
of IDO correlates with worse clinical prognosis in patients with a
variety of malignancies. Therefore, targeting the IDO pathway via
inhibition of the IDO enzyme or blocking its downstream signaling effects
is a prime target for small-molecule immunomodulatory drugs in
cancer.Here we describe the pharmacological and biological properties of
NLG919, a novel small-molecule IDO-pathway inhibitor. NLG919 potently
inhibits this pathway in vitro and in cell based assays (Ki=7 nM; EC50
=75 nM). It is orally bioavailable (F>70%); and has a favorable
pharmacokinetic and toxicity profile. In mice, a single oral
administration of NLG919 reduces the concentration of plasma and tissue
Kyn by 50%. Using IDO-expressing human monocyte-derived DCs in allogeneic
MLR reactions, NLG919 potently blocked IDO-induced T cell suppression and
restored robust T cell responses with an ED50=80 nM. Similarly, using
IDO-expressing mouse DCs from tumor-draining lymph nodes, NLG919
abrogated IDO-induced suppression of antigen-specific T cells (OT-I) in
vitro, with ED50=120 nM. In vivo, in mice bearing large established
B16F10 tumors, administration of NLG919 markedly enhanced the anti-tumor
responses of nave, resting pmel-1 cells to vaccination with cognate
hgp100 peptide plus CpG-1826 in IFA. In this stringent established-tumor
model, NLG919 plus pmel 1/vaccine produced a dramatic collapse of tumor
size within 4 days of vaccination (95% reduction in tumor volume compared
to control animals receiving pmel-1/vaccine alone without NLG919).In
conclusion, NLG919 is a potent IDO pathway inhibitor with desirable
pharmacological properties, suitable for the treatment of
immunosuppression associated with cancer.

