Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic analysis of treatment-resistant, stem-like cancer cells.


Valid data supports the cancer stem cell theory for solid tumors and it
appears that tumor cells responsible for failure after successful initial
therapy exhibit stem cell properties, including self-renewal, potent
tumorigenic activity, an undifferentiated state and resistance to chemo
or radiation therapy. We investigated the existence and characteristics
of such cells in mouse neuroblastoma.Mouse neuroblastoma and Neuro2A
cells line were harvested and cultured in DMEM + 10% FBS or NeuroCult
complete media specific for the proliferation of neural stem cells. As a
positive control for normal stem cells, the adult mouse subventricular
zone was dissected and adult neural stem cells isolated/cultured into
neurospheres in NeuroCult complete media. Tumorigenicity was assessed in
vivo with inoculation of 5x103 neuroblastoma tumorspheres and committed
cells. Tumorspheres and committed cells were subjected to radiation
(2.5Gy) followed by viability assays and Annexin-V/7-AAD staining to
assess apoptosis. Similarly, cell types were treated with varying doses
of Doxorubicin and Sunitinib malate to assess sensitivity. Total protein
was extracted and subjected to mass spectrometry.In vitro assays showed
neuroblastoma stem-like cells grow as tumorspheres in serum free media
and are capable of eliciting self-renewal capacity and multi-lineage
differentiation. We show that tumorspheres are remarkably resistant to
chemo, radiation and small molecule therapy.However, compared to
committed cells, tumorspheres proliferate slower in vitro and in vivo.
Proteomic profiling revealed that tumorspheres differ significantly from
murine subventricular zone (SVZ) stem cells and also lack the classic
markers of cells undergoing EMT.More importantly, compared to committed
cells, tumorspheres showed up-regulation of proteins involved in small
molecule biochemistry (indicating high metabolic activity), RNA post
translational modification, and energy production. In addition,
tumorspheres exhibited significant up-regulation of potent tumorigenic
proteins including PDGFRB and survivin. Interestingly, survivin was
significant up-regulation in both tumorspheres and adhered cells after
radiotherapy.Our pathway exploring analysis [Ingenuity Pathway Assist
(IPA)] showed downstream targets of ERBB2 are indeed up-regulated in
tumorspheres.These observations define a stress induced (serum deprived)
transitional tumor cell with stem-like qualities and enhanced malignant
properties. We further propose that both tumorspheres and committed cells
respond to the stress of radiotherapy by up-regulating survivin, perhaps
as a survival mechanism to evade radiation-induced apoptosis. We propose
that a stressor to the primary tumor will induce the transitional cell
phenotype and may account for both the resistant late recurrences and
metastatic deposits observed in high-risk tumors.

