Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential protein signatures in cancer cell lines after dosing
with anticancer molecules in vitro and in vivo.


Using a sensitive proteomics platform that can precisely and
simultaneously measure 1129 distinct proteins (SOMAscan), we profiled the
proteomic changes in cancer cell lines and xenograft models following
exposure to several oncological agents. Our goals were to identify novel
biomarkers and drug targets, and to map out pharmacological MOA, with the
ultimate goal of assessing the translatability of in vitro and
preclinical models to human patients. We have generated multiple
successful examples of using our platform in this manner. We treated a
breast cancer cell line MCF-7 with eight pharmacological agents,
including TamoxifenTM and TaxolTM. We have assessed PKC- resistant and
sensitive lung cancer cell lines with a PKC- inhibitor, and profiled
protein changes in response to these compounds. To assess how well in
vitro models translate to preclinical models, we profiled protein changes
in HCC827 (sensitive) or H1299 (resistant) cell lines treated with
erlotinib (TarcevaTM), and NOD/SCID mice implanted with HCC827 cells and
dosed with erlotinib. We observed good concordance of the protein changes
in the HCC827 cell-lines and the xenograft models, which included cyclin
A and p27KIP1 expression levels (proteins previously associated with
erlotinib sensitivity) as well as additional protein changes with highly
plausible connections to erlotinib's mode of action. These newly
identified proteins may have implications for treating patients that
develop resistance to erlotinib in the clinic, and suggest new targets
for drug development. A human clinical study is underway to explore how
the proteomic changes seen in this study translate to erlotinib treatment
of NSCLC patients in the clinic.Citation Format: Robert Swift, Deb Ayers,
Ying Chang, Darryl Perry, Sheri Routt, Sheri Wilcox, Bridget Lollo, Nick
Saccomano. Differential protein signatures in cancer cell lines after
dosing with anticancer molecules in vitro and in vivo. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2501.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2501

