Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting MGAT5B-mediated glycosylation of kinase receptors for
the treatment of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors and RAS-related
malignancies.


Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) are aggressive soft
tissue sarcomas that occur either sporadically or in patients with
Neurofibromatosis type I. Surgery is the main stay of treatment, however,
due to the invasive growth, propensity to metastasis, limited sensitivity
to chemotherapy and radiation, 5-year survival rates is only 20%-50%.
Recent work has identified several altered intracellular signal
transduction cascades and deregulated kinase receptors, posing the
possibility of personalized, targeted therapeutics. Kinase receptors
depend on the glycosylation for stabilization, maturation, transportation
onto the cell surface, phosphorylation and activation, and aberrant
glycosylation to stabilize the expression of kinase receptors on the cell
surface is associated with cancers. The appropriate and accurate
modification of glycan to proteins mainly depends on the action of highly
specific and precisely located enzymes known as glycosyltransferases and
glycosidases in different tissues and cells. In this report,
glycoproteins were highly expressed in MPNST cell lines compared with
normal Schwann cells (NSC). Human Glycosylation PCR Array was used to
profile the expression of 84 key genes encoding enzymes to regulate the
glycosylation of proteins. Compared with NSC, we did not find any change
in the mRNA expression levels of glycosidases, however, multiple
glycosyltransferases (B4GALT5, FUT8, MGAT3, MGAT4A, MGAT5, MGAT5B,
GALNT13, GALNT14, POMT1, ST8SIA2) were overexpressed in some MPNST cell
lines, especially MGAT5B, one of glycosyltransferases to promote N-linked
or O-linked glycosylation of proteins was highly expressed in MPNST cell
lines and clinical specimens, and colon and pancreatic cancer cell lines
with K-ras mutations. Exogenous expressing K-ras (G12V) significantly
upregulated the expression of MGAT5B. The expression levels of MGAT5B
were correlated with RAS kinase activity. We also found AKT interacted
with MGAT5B and phosphorylation of S192 of MGAT5B promoted transportation
from the cytoplasm into the Golgi apparatus and mutated MGAT5BS192A
expression was distributed in the ER and cytoplasm. Experimental tumor
lung metastasis was significantly inhibited in MPNST cells expressing
MGAT5BS192A. Furthermore, we found that transient or stable knockdown of
MGAT5B significantly attenuated the glycosylation and phosphorylation of
kinase receptors to block their signaling, arrested cells in G1 phase and
altered the morphology of MPNST cell lines. Taken together, these data
suggest that RAS-driving the expression of MGAT5B plays a critical role
in promoting glycosylation of kinase receptors to mediate their
intracellular signaling and targeting MGAT5B-mediated glycosylation of
kinase receptors may open a new therapeutic window for MPNSTs and
RAS-related malignancies

