Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential use of polyethyleneimine as a gene delivery vehicle for
breast cancer.


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death in US women,
after lung cancer. A major impediment in advancing gene therapy
approaches to breast cancer is the resistance of cancer cell membrane to
transport DNA/RNA. Viral vectors are efficient to deliver target genes;
however, they are associated with the risk of immune response, random
integration into the host genome or recombination with other wild type
viruses. In contrast, non-viral vectors, that include lipoplex and
polyplex forming carriers, are more advantageous as they are less
expensive, easier to manufacture, and can carry large molecules of DNA.
Polyethyleneimine (PEI) has emerged as a very effective gene transfection
agent. PEI is water soluble, positively charged, and can envelope
negatively charged DNA and protect it from lysosomal degradation.
However, gene transfection efficacy of PEI for breast cancer cells
remains poorly understood. In addition, information on the relationship
between the polymer structure and its biological function, such as DNA
condensation, toxicity and transfection efficacy is still limited. In
this study, we evaluated the transfection efficiency of PEIs differing in
molecular weight and branching. pGL3 control plasmid (5256 bp) containing
a coding for the firefly luciferase gene driven by the SV40 promoter was
used for this study. pGL3 complexed with different PEIs was tested for
gene transfection study in breast cancer cells, using luciferase activity
measurements with a luminometer. Cytotoxicity was measured by trypan blue
exclusion assay. Static and dynamic laser light scattering was used to
determine the ability of PEIs to condense plasmid DNA to nanoparticles
and determine the size of the nanoparticles. Our results showed maximum
transfection efficiency with 22 kDa linear PEI at N/P
(nitrogen/phosphorus) ratio of 4.8 to 6. Linear and branched 25 kDa PEIs
were less efficient than 22 kDa PEI. Low molecular weight (0.6 and 1.2
kDa) PEIs had negligible effect in transporting plasmid DNA, whereas 10
kDa PEI showed some activity. Cytotoxic effects of the PEIs were
suppressed by DNA complexation. Both branched and linear PEIs condensed
plasmid DNA to nanoparticles (hydrodynamic radius: 155 nm). Taken
together, these results demonstrate structure-function relationships of
PEIs in condensing and transporting plasmid DNA. Our results might be
useful in selecting and improving the properties of PEI as a gene
delivery vehicle for breast cancer.

