Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genetic mouse model of head-and-neck squamous cell carcinoma
using targeted deletion of E-cadherin and TGF receptor II.


We previously observed that 70% of esophageal tumors demonstrated
coordinated loss of E-cadherin and TGFRII. When grown in
three-dimensional organotypic reconstruct cultures, cells lacking
E-cadherin and TGFRII demonstrate fibroblast-dependent invasion into the
underlying matrix. Therefore, we hypothesized that coordinated loss of
CDH1 (E-cadherin) and TGFBR2 (TGFRII) will induce tumorigenesis in vivo.
We developed a mouse model targeting CDH1 and TGFBR2 loss in the
oral-esophageal epithelium using the Epstein-Barr virus L2 promoter,
ED-L2. For spatio-temporal control of CDH1- and TGFBR2 gene expression,
we also generated an inducible mouse model using Cre-ERT(tam) under the
control of the keratin 14 promoter. Few mouse models focusing on genetic
alterations of oral and head-and-neck cancer exist. We show that the loss
of E-cadherin and TGF receptor II without carcinogen treatment is
sufficient to induce invasive HNSCC and forestomach tumors. Double
knock-out animals succumb to the disease between 1 and 1.5 years of age
and show invasive tumors in the oral cavity and tongue, as well as the
forestomach. Advanced tumors metastasize to the lung. The tumors are
characterized by Ki67-positive and p63-positive staining and show
disruption of adherens junctions with loss of -catenin and
mislocalisation of p120 to the cytoplasm. Additional genetic
modifications frequently described for HNSCC are the upregulation of
c-myc and cyclin D1. We could show that the oral mouse tumors are
positive for these markers allowing us to conclude that this animal model
recapitulates HNSCC at the pathologic and molecular levels. Furthermore,
the forestomach is an extension of the squamous epithelium of the
esophagus in the mouse. Known genetic alterations causing esophageal
squamous cancer are amplification of EGFR, cyclin D1 and mutations in p53
in addition to the loss of E-cadherin and TGFRII. The analysis of the
forestomach tumors recapitulates these events in the mouse model as a
result of CDH1 and TGFBR2 loss. This tumor model will provide us with a
unique tool for testing therapeutic approaches.

