Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSI-1 synergizes with LDE225 in ovarian cancer cells by inhibiting
the proteasome.


Background: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) have been implicated in the
development and recurrence of chemoresistant tumors in multiple
malignancies. Previous research has suggested that targeting stem cell
pathways, such as Notch and Hedgehog, may aid in overcoming the
chemoresistant properties of these cells. However, attempts to target the
Notch and Hedgehog pathways synergistically have had mixed results using
different inhibitors, and the mechanism through which these inhibitors
act is not fully known.Objective: To explore the potential synergy of
concurrent targeting of the Notch and Hedgehog pathways and the mechanism
through which this may occur.Methods: The Notch pathway was targeted with
GSI-1 and GSI-XXI, and the Hedgehog pathway was targeted with the
Smoothened small molecule inhibitor LDE225. The proteasome inhibitor
Bortezomib was used alone and in combination with LDE225. Effects of
these drugs on three pairs of chemosensitive and chemoresistant ovarian
cancer cell lines were examined: SKOV3ip1 and SKOV3TRip2
(taxane-resistant), HeyA8 and HeyA8MDR (multi-drug resistant), and
A2780ip2/A2780cp20 (platinum resistant). Cell viability was determined by
the MTT assay. PI staining and PARP cleavage were used to assess cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis. Proteasome activity was determined by the
Proteasome-glo chymotrypsin-like cell-based assay.Results: GSI-1
significantly decreased cell viability alone and synergized with LDE225
in SKOV3TRip2 cells. However, GSI-XXI did not reduce cell viability or
exhibit synergy with LDE225. In addition, specific inhibition of Notch
via siRNA-mediated downregulation did not result in synergy with LDE225,
suggesting a Notch-independent mechanism of synergy with GSI-1. To
elucidate differences between GSI-1 and GSI-XXI, we examined effects of
these drugs on the proteasome. GSI-1 inhibited the proteasome to the same
extent as the conventional proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, while GSI-XXI
did not affect proteasome activity. Combination treatment with bortezomib
and LDE225 also resulted in synergy in SKOV3TRip2 cells. Monotherapy with
both GSI-1 and bortezomib decreased transcription of the hedgehog target
genes Patched, Gli1, and Gli2. This effect was enhanced when these drugs
were combined with LDE225. Combination therapy also resulted in arrest of
cells in the G2/M and S phases (60% of cells in S/G2/M with combination
therapy vs. 38% of control, pBackground: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) have
been implicated in the development and recurrence of chemoresistant
tumors in multiple malignancies. Previous research has suggested that
targeting stem cell pathways, such as Notch and Hedgehog, may aid in
overcoming the chemoresistant properties of these cells. However,
attempts to target the Notch and Hedgehog pathways synergistically have
had mixed results using different inhibitors, and the mechanism through
which these inhibitors act is not fully known.Objective: To explore the
potential synergy of concurrent targeting of the Notch and Hedgehog
pathways and the mechanism through which this may occur.Methods: The
Notch pathway was targeted with GSI-1 and GSI-XXI, and the Hedgehog
pathway was targeted with the Smoothened small molecule inhibitor LDE225.
The proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib was used alone and in combination
with LDE225. Effects of these drugs on three pairs of chemosensitive and
chemoresistant ovarian cancer cell lines were examined: SKOV3ip1 and
SKOV3TRip2 (taxane-resistant), HeyA8 and HeyA8MDR (multi-drug resistant),
and A2780ip2/A2780cp20 (platinum resistant). Cell viability was
determined by the MTT assay. PI staining and PARP cleavage were used to
assess cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Proteasome activity was
determined by the Proteasome-glo chymotrypsin-like cell-based
assay.Results: GSI-1 significantly decreased cell viability alone and
synergized with LDE225 in SKOV3TRip2 cells. However, GSI-XXI did not
reduce cell viability or exhibit synergy with LDE225. In addition,
specific inhibition of Notch via siRNA-mediated downregulation did not
result in synergy with LDE225, suggesting a Notch-independent mechanism
of synergy with GSI-1. To elucidate differences between GSI-1 and
GSI-XXI, we examined effects of these drugs on the proteasome. GSI-1
inhibited the proteasome to the same extent as the conventional
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, while GSI-XXI did not affect proteasome
activity. Combination treatment with bortezomib and LDE225 also resulted
in synergy in SKOV3TRip2 cells. Monotherapy with both GSI-1 and
bortezomib decreased transcription of the hedgehog target genes Patched,
Gli1, and Gli2. This effect was enhanced when these drugs were combined
with LDE225. Combination therapy also resulted in arrest of cells in the
G2/M and S phases (60% of cells in S/G2/M with combination therapy vs.
38% of control, p<0.001), as well as an increase in apoptosis and PARP
cleavage.Conclusion: The Notch inhibitor GSI-1 acts synergistically with
Hedgehog inhibition through a Notch-independent decrease in proteasome
activity. Similar synergy was noted with the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib. This synergistic combination appears to be working through
S/G2/M phase arrest. Combined Hedgehog and proteasome inhibition offers a
promising approach to targeting chemoresistant cells in ovarian
malignancies.

