Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of Chk1 critical for Piperine induced cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis in melanoma cells.


The National Cancer Institute estimates that about 76,250 new cases of
melanomas will be diagnosed in 2012 in the United States leading to at
least 9810 related deaths. Therefore, novel strategies to control and
treat melanoma are of prime importance. In this study, we determined the
cytotoxic effects of Piperine, a major constituent of black (Piper nigrum
Linn) and long pepper (Piper longum Linn), in melanoma cell lines.
Piperine treatment inhibited the growth of SKMEL-28 and B16-F0 cells in a
dose and time-dependent manner. The growth inhibitory effects of piperine
were mediated by cell cycle arrest of both the cell lines in G1 phase.
The G1 arrest by piperine was correlated with the down-regulation of
cyclin D1 and induction of p21. The growth arrest was associated with DNA
damage as indicated by phosphorylation of H2A.X at Ser139, activation of
ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related protein (ATR) and checkpoint
kinase 1 (Chk1). The G1 arrest by piperine was also associated with the
down-regulation of E2F1 and decreased phosphorylation of retinoblastoma
protein (Rb), hence indicating the inhibition of the dynamic
transcription complex. In addition, apoptosis induced by piperine was
associated with down-regulation of XIAP and Bid (uncleaved) and cleavage
of Caspase-3 and PARP. Pretreatment of SK-MEL-28 with AZD 7762, a Chk1
inhibitor not only abrogated the activation of Chk1 but also piperine
mediated G1 arrest. Silencing of Chk1 in SK-MEL28 cells with Chk1 siRNA
completely protected the cells from G1 arrest induced by piperine
treatment showing the involvement of Chk1. Through immunofluorescence of
Phospho Chk1 (Ser 256), we found significant activation of Chk1 in the
cells that were treated with piperine hence, establishing the role of
Chk1 activation. Furthermore, our results showed that piperine treatment
caused ROS generation in melanoma cells. Blocking ROS generation by Tiron
pre-treatment prevented the cells from piperine mediated cell cycle
arrest. Moreover, western-blotting results showed that Tiron pre
treatment prevented the activation of Chk1 hence, confirming the role
played by Chk1 in piperine mediated cell cycle arrest. Taken together,
our results demonstrate that piperine induced G1 phase cell cycle arrest
by generating ROS and inducing DNA damage with activation of Chk1 being a
critical event. [Supported in part by R01 grants CA106953 and CA129038
(to S.K.S) awarded by the National Cancer Institute].

