Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ARHI-induced autophagy enhances chemosensitivity to cisplatin in
ovarian cancer cell lines and xenografts.


Autophagy can protect or kill tumor cells depending upon the context. Our
group has found that autophagy and tumor dormancy can be regulated by an
imprinted tumor suppressor gene, ARHI (DIRAS3), which is downregulated in
60% of ovarian cancers. Re-expression of ARHI induces autophagy by
inhibiting PI3K and mTOR signaling, displacing Bcl-2 from Beclin to form
the autophagy initiating complex, inducing ATG4 and decorating the
autophagosome membrane, co-localizing with LC3II. Re-expression of ARHI
in cell culture produces cell death within 72 hours, whereas
re-expression of ARHI in xenografts produces cell growth arrest and tumor
dormancy. When ARHI levels are reduced after 6 weeks of induction,
xenografts grow promptly. Outgrowth can be delayed if dormant cancers are
treated with chloroquine, a functional inhibitor of autophagy, suggesting
that autophagy is a survival mechanism in this context. Our current
experiments were designed to determine whether autophagic cells could be
eliminated more or less readily by treatment with cisplatin with or
without chloroquine. In short-term or long-term cell culture, induction
of ARHI enhanced the cytotoxic effect of cisplatin and tumor cell killing
was further enhanced by the addition of chloroquine. In xenografts,
treatment with cisplatin slowed the outgrowth of dormant autophagic
ovarian cancer cells, but the addition of chloroquine did not further
inhibit xenograft growth. In cell culture, caspase 3/8 release and Anexin
V expression on the surface of ovarian cancer cells can account for
enhancement of caspase dependent apoptosis observed when autophagic
ovarian cancer cells are treated with cisplatin. Treatment of
ARHI-induced autophagic ovarian cancer cells with chloroquine and
cisplatin downregulated the expression of survivin, XIAP and Bcl-2.
Re-expression of ARHI induced caspase dependent apoptosis and autophagic
cell death in the absence of cisplatin. ARHI-induced apoptosis and
autophagic cell death could be blocked by Z-VAD that inhibits caspase
mediated apoptosis and by stable knockdown of ATG5 that inhibits
autophagy. In this context, induction of autophagy enhanced platinum
toxicity. Additional treatment with chlorooquine produced additional
cancer cell cytotoxicity in cell culture, but not in dormant xenografts.
These preclinical studies do not support the addition of chloroquine to
platinum based chemotherapy for ovarian cancer in the clinic, but do
support the association of autophagic cell death with apoptosis.

