Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Poly(ADP-ribose)glycohydrolase (PARG) is a novel therapeutic
target in breast cancer.


Poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase (PARP) is an enzyme responsible for catalyzing
the addition of poly(ADP-ribose) chains onto target proteins in a process
known as PARylation. This post-translational modification has been
implicated in numerous cellular processes including gene expression,
chromatin remodeling, apoptosis and DNA damage repair. In particular, the
role of PARP activation in response to DNA damage has been intensely
studied. BRCA mutated tumors are highly sensitive to DNA breaks and are
therefore critically dependent on alternative repair mechanisms involving
PARP. This forms the basis for a synthetic lethal therapeutic approach
that has been met with much success in the clinic. BRCA mutated breast
and ovarian tumors, in particular, are acutely sensitive to PARP
inhibitors. Currently, it is unclear from in vitro and clinical studies
to what extent PARP inhibitors can be used as chemotherapeutics to treat
tumors beyond those harboring BRCA mutations. Due to the insensitivity of
most solid tumors to PARP inhibitors, we have begun to study the role of
the dePARylating enzyme poly(ADP-ribose)glycohydrolase (PARG), as a
possible target in cancer therapy. PARG, like PARP, maintains a critical
role in DNA repair and can therefore be a target in cells with defective
repair mechanisms (e.g. BRCA mutant cells). We further hypothesize that
targeting this factor may activate the expression of tumor suppressor
genes, thus limiting cell proliferation. Thus far, we have novel data
indicating that targeting PARG may indeed have therapeutic benefit. We
show that PARG knockdowns of the T47D and MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cell
lines have dramatically reduced rates of cellular proliferation. Gene
expression analyses of the knockdown cells indicated that cell cycle
related pathways may be affected. As such, we examined cell cycle
profiles by BrdU and PI staining and found that PARG knockdown cells were
arrested in S phase. These results are particularly striking given that
these cells show resistance to PARP inhibition. Subsequent studies using
the PARG inhibitor gallotannin successfully reconstituted the results
obtained with the PARG knockdowns. Overall, our data illustrates that
PARG has great potential as a new anti-cancer target.

