Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oct4 interaction with Hmgb2 regulates Akt signaling and the
pluripotent gene expression signature.


Akt signaling impacts multiple cellular functions associated with the
hallmark characteristics of pluripotency such as cell cycle progression,
cell growth, and enhanced cellular survival. Constitutive Akt activation
promotes the pluripotent state and has also been implicated in several
forms of cancer. Recent studies have suggested that while Akt activation
may be a positive factor, the active nuclear form of Akt is associated
with poor prognosis for many cancers, including lung cancer. Here, we
describe a novel transcriptional regulatory feedback loop between Oct4,
Hmgb2, and Akt. We show that Akt signaling promotes Oct4 phosphorylation
and stability. This maintains interaction with Akt, Hmbg2 and other
members of the SET complex such as Nme1 and Set. Upon differentiation,
when Akt is inactive, their decreased interaction is observed. A
functional genomics approach was therefore employed to determine the
relevance of Oct4 interaction with Hmgb2 in maintaining the pluripotent
state. Despite its previously described role in Polycomb group
recruitment and transcriptional repression in Drosophila, we find that
Hmgb2 knockdown results in decreased Akt signaling and decreased
expression of many Oct4 transcriptional targets including genes
implicated in cell cycle regulation, DNA repair, chromatin structure, as
well as the pluripotency regulators Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog. Taken
together, our results suggest that Oct4, Hmgb2, and the SET complex
participate in a PTM-dependent feed forward regulatory loop that promotes
active Akt signaling and the pluripotent gene expression signature.
Future work will be focused upon dissecting the role of this network in
maintaining constitutive nuclear Akt activation and promoting the
primitive epigenetic state found in cancer. These findings may provide
insight into the role of Akt in lung cancer chemoresistance and suggest
alternate targets for more efficacious treatment.

