Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel, biologically relevant, G-quadruplexes
formed within the critical promoter of kRAS as promising molecular
targets.


To date, kRAS is one of, if not the, most established oncogenic anomalies
identified. It is either upregulated or mutationally activated in a
variety of cancers, most notably pancreatic adenocarcinoma, non-small
cell lung and colon cancers. Pancreatic cancer carries the highest
mortality rate of all cancers, with only a 3-6 month median survival, and
a 5-year survival of To date, kRAS is one of, if not the, most
established oncogenic anomalies identified. It is either upregulated or
mutationally activated in a variety of cancers, most notably pancreatic
adenocarcinoma, non-small cell lung and colon cancers. Pancreatic cancer
carries the highest mortality rate of all cancers, with only a 3-6 month
median survival, and a 5-year survival of <5%. Lung and colon cancers
harboring a mutant kRAS are associated with a worsened prognosis and
shorter disease-free survival, and such mutations are independent factors
for poor prognosis. To date no attempts to modulate kRAS activity,
localization, or signaling have produced clinically active moieties;
there is a desperate need for new, kRAS-focused therapeutics. Various
silencing technologies have demonstrated that decreasing kRAS expression
is sufficient to produce cancer cell kill, and the presented works
describe a novel target to downregulate kRAS expression - secondary
structures within the proximal promoter, which contains a unique string
of G-rich DNA. Negative superhelicity induced by transcription results in
this region opening up to form unique secondary structures called
G-quadruplexes (G4s). These G4s most often act as silencer elements,
forming globular structures that mask binding sites for transcriptional
factors, allowing for specific molecular targeting by small molecule
drugs, modulating transcription, and protein expression. The G-rich
region of the kRAS promoter is extensive, containing three separate
putative G4-forming regions. Initial works described the near G4 as a
unique kinked structure, as well as described two compounds that
stabilize different isoforms of this structure, but do not appear to
contribute much to the transcriptional control of kRAS. Further
elucidation of promoter activity has highlighted new, and more
biologically important, G4s existing more distally from the
transcriptional state site. Stabilization of this region in a plasmid
system significantly decreases luciferase expression, and the
mid-G4-forming region forms several stable, complex, structures. These
formations have been examined by EMSA, polymerase stop, and footprinting
methods. From these data, the elucidated predominant structures are
currently the target of further studies with the ultimate goal of
describing a new molecular structure, and its dynamic regulation, for
future drug development.

