Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel series of metabolic activators of PKM2 alter
oncogene-meditated changes in tumor cell metabolism.


Rather than relying on oxidative phosphorylation for the generation of
ATP, human tumor cells primarily utilize aerobic glycolysis to metabolize
glucose (the Warburg effect). Pyruvate kinase is a metabolic enzyme that
converts phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) to pyruvate, catalyzing the
rate-limiting step of glycolysis. The M1 isoform of pyruvate kinase
(PKM1) that is the principal isoform in most adult differentiated
tissues, while the PKM2 splice variant is the main isoform in embryonic
tissues and in all cancer cells. Unlike the M1 splice form (PKM1), which
is found in its tetrameric active form in cells, PKM2 is found in cells
as an inactive dimer under normal physiological conditions.
Tetramerization of PKM2 requires binding of the allosteric activator
fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (FBP), an upstream glycolytic intermediate,
resulting in a fully active enzyme. Regulation of PKM2 activity in cancer
cells may allow glycolytic intermediates to be diverted into other
biosynthetic pathways necessary for biomass production. PKM2 expression
enhances tumorigenicity of cells while PKM1 expression represses it. This
suggests that activators of PKM2 may have anti-tumor properties by
forcing PKM2 to act more like PKM1. We have a series of small molecule
PKM2 activators that exhibit low nM activation activity in biochemical
and cell-based assays. These compounds increase pyruvate kinase activity
in cancer cells and lead to an increase in pyruvate and ATP production.
Our studies show that PKM2 activators inhibit the growth of lung cancer
cell lines in vitro and in vivo and can reverse the metabolic changes
induced by oncogenes such as k-Ras and c-Myc in lung cancer cells. The
current lead compound was tested in established subcutaneously implanted
A549 lung adenocarcinoma xenografts, where we observed a statistically
significant 54% decrease in tumor growth, with no observable toxicity.
These data suggest that this class of PKM2 activators is effective as
tumor cell metabolic regulators with anti-tumor activity for lung cancer
and potentially other malignancies.

