Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Galectin-3 in invasive and apoptotic properties of
neuroblastoma cells.


Background: Neuroblastoma (NB) is a childhood cancer derived from the
neural crest stem cells. It generally progresses to an aggressive therapy
resistant, fatal metastatic tumor. MYCN over-expression and
amplification, and increased BDNF/TrkB signaling are used as signatures
of high-risk NB. However, only about 25% of malignant tumors display
these features. Thus, the identification of additional biomarkers and
therapeutic targets is essential. Up-regulation of Galectin 3 (Gal-3), a
multifunctional, carbohydrate binding cytokine has been extensively
correlated with highly malignant behavior and poor prognosis of many
cancers. However, the role of Gal-3 in NB is largely unknown. In this
study, we investigated the expression pattern of Gal-3 in a panel of NB
cell lines and examined whether silencing of Gal-3 expression by means of
a siRNA approach decreases their invasive properties, and increases their
sensitivity to pro-apoptotic chemotherapeutic drug, fenretinide (4-HPR),
a synthetic retinoid derivative.Materials and Methods: We utilized RT-PCR
gene expression analysis, RNA interference approaches, western blot and
immunofluorescence analysis, scratch technique, transwell Boyden chamber
migration assay, colony forming assay, and cytokine antibody array
screening to address these studies.Results: Gal-3 expression is
differentially regulated in TrkB-positive, MYCN-amplified (SMS-KCNR and
SK-N-BE) and TrkB-negative, non-MYCN-amplified (SK-N-AS, SK-N-SH, and
SH-SY5Y) NB cell lines. Gal-3 expression was significantly higher in
SK-N-AS cells that are of glial sub-lineage. Gal-3 was expressed both in
cytoplasm and membrane. On the other hand, Gal-3 expression was
relatively lower in less invasive, non-tumorigenic SK-N-SH cells.
Silencing of Gal-3 by a small-interfering RNA against Gal-3 (Gal-3-SiRNA)
decreased the colony forming potential, in vitro migratory and angiogenic
abilities of SK-N-AS cells. Pre-treatment with Gal-3 SiRNA increased the
sensitivity of SK-N-AS cells to 4-HPR induced apoptosis. Furthermore,
exogenous Gal-3 treatment in neuroblast like Neuro-2a cells resulted in
the up-regulation of IL-6 and phosphorylation of the pro-survival
molecule AKT.Discussion: Our data suggest that Gal-3 mediates migratory
and invasive phenotype of non-MYCN amplified NB derived cells possibly
via regulating the IL-6 signaling and Akt phosphorylation. Silencing of
Gal-3 may be potentially useful to suppress the resistance of NB cells to
apoptosis.

