Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC1 transcriptionally regulates COX-2 gene in pancreatic cancer
cells.


Introduction: Pancreatic Cancer (PC) is the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the United States. Over 80% of human pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinomas (PDA) overexpress MUC1, a transmembrane mucin
glycoprotein. MUC1high tumors are aggressive and patients with such
tumors have poor prognosis. Interestingly, MUC1high PDA tumors
overexpress cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), an inducible pro-inflammatory
enzyme known to promote tumor progression and metastasis. Since the
cytoplasmic domain of MUC1 (MUC1-C) is critically involved in the signal
transduction cascade that promotes tumor progression and metastasis, we
hypothesize that MUC1 induces its effect via regulating COX-2 expression
and function. Thus, we aim to establish the relationship between MUC1 and
COX-2 expression and determine the mechanism by which MUC1 regulates
COX-2 expression.Cell lines:Human BxPC3 and mouse Panc02 PC cell lines
that express low endogenous MUC1 were stably transfected with full length
MUC1 (MUC1), empty vector (Neo), or full length MUC1 with all 7 tyrosine
residues of MUC1 CT mutated to Phenylalanine (Y0). Other cell lines:
human HPAFII and Capan-1 and mouse KCM cells that express high endogenous
MUC1; and mouse KCKO cells that genetically lack Muc1.Method:We measured
the level of COX-2 mRNA and protein by RT-PCR and Western blot
respectively. MUC1 was transiently knocked down using a smart pool of
MUC1 specific siRNA in MUC1high cells. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was
performed on tumor sections to determine the in situ expression of COX-2
and MUC1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay was conducted to
evaluate binding of MUC1 CT to the promoter of COX-2 gene.Results:
Significantly higher levels of COX-2 mRNA and protein were detected in PC
cells expressing high MUC1 compared to cells with low MUC1. This was
recapitulated in vivo with higher COX-2 expression in MUC1high versus
MUC1low tumors. A subsequent decrease in COX-2 protein was observed upon
MUC1 knock down in the MUC1high PC cells. Thus, a direct correlation
exists between MUC1 and COX-2 expression in PC cells. Importantly, this
correlation was lost in the Y0 cells in which COX-2 expression was
significantly decreased even though there was high MUC1 expression. Data
clearly suggests that signaling through the tyrosine residues of MUC1 CT
is essential for MUC1 induced COX-2 gene expression.Further, in the
MUC1high cells, MUC1 CT associates with the COX-2 promoter around 1000 bp
upstream of the transcription start site. This association does not occur
in the Y0 cells suggesting that an intact CT is necessary for this
interaction. Interestingly, MUC1 CT interacts with the COX-2 promoter
around the same gene locus where NF-kB associates with the COX-2
promoter. This raises the possibility that MUC1 CT associates with NF-kB
via its tyrosine residues and the MUC1/NFkB complex acts as a
transcriptional regulator of the COX-2 gene.

