Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting STAT3 in vitro and in vivo reveals a novel therapeutic
strategy to sensitize colorectal cancer cells to chemoradiotherapy.


Introductory sentence:Increased activity of signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is common in human malignancies,
including colorectal cancers. Recently, we reported that STAT3 expression
correlated with resistance to 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) based
chemoradiotherapy. This is of considerable clinical relevance, because a
large proportion of rectal cancers are resistant to preoperative
multimodal treatment. We therefore examined whether STAT3 contributes to
resistance to chemoradiotherapy.Experimental procedures:STAT3 mRNA and
protein expression levels were determined in 12 colorectal cancers cell
lines. STAT3 was inhibited using two different siRNAs and a
small-molecular inhibitor (STATTIC) in the cell lines SW480 and SW837.
Successful RNAi-mediated silencing of STAT3 or inhibition of
phosphoSTAT3(Tyr705) was detected by Western blot and reduction of
transcription factor activity was measured by a luciferase reporter
assay. Additionally, we established doxycycline-inducible stable shRNA
single cell populations and a non-silencing shRNA (shNEG) in SW480. To
test the influence of STAT3 knock down or inhibition, clonogenic survival
assays were performed. Therefore, RNAi or inhibitor treated cells were
exposed to chemoradiotherapy using 3M 5-FU and X-ray-irradiation at 1, 2,
4, 6, and 8 Gy. Finally, we tested the effect of a chemoradiotherapy
combined with STATTIC treatment in a SW837 xenograft model in NMRI nude
mice. To verify the sensitizing effect of STATTIC, tumor growth was
recorded and growth delay assays were performed.Data:STAT3 was
overexpressed in resistant cells at mRNA and protein level. siRNA
transfected SW480, SW837, and SW480shRNA single cell clones showed a
significant reduction of STAT3 protein and transcription factor activity
after 96 hours. STATTIC inhibition led to a decreased phosphorylation of
STAT3 after 1 hour. The silencing/inhibition resulted in a significantly
increased chemoradiosensitivity with dose-reduction factors of 1.3 to 2.5
at a surviving fraction of 0.37. In vivo, additional STAT3 inhibition
during chemoradiotherapy led to a profound chemoradiosensitization effect
and a significant tumor growth delay in STATTIC treated mice. Survival of
these mice was also enhanced, if compared to the control
group.Conclusions:STAT3 is highly overexpressed in resistant colorectal
cancer cells, and silencing or inhibition of STAT3 leads to a
significantly increased chemoradiosensitivity in vitro and in vivo. This
highlights the potential relevance of STAT3 for mediating treatment
resistance and provides a first proof of concept that STAT3 represents a
novel molecular target in rectal cancer to sensitize a priori resistant
colorectal tumor cells to chemoradiotherapy.

