Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: uPAR and cathepsin B knockdown-induced nuclear translocation of
JNK inhibits migration and induces apoptosis in glioma-initiating cells.


Treatment for glioblastoma (GBM) remains essentially palliative due to
the aggressive infiltration of GBM cancer cells into normal brain tissue.
In addition, the existence of a small subpopulation of highly resistant
cells known as glioma-initiating cells (GICs), which escape radiation and
chemotherapy-induced cell death, makes GBM currently incurable.
Proteases, such as uPAR and cathepsin B that are responsible for cancer
invasion and metastasis, are often detected in higher amounts in
malignant tumors. In the present study, shRNA-mediated knockdown of uPAR
and cathepsin B (pUC), alone or in combination with radiation,
simultaneously inhibited migration and induced apoptosis of 5310 and 4910
non-GICs and GICs by regulating the JNK-MAPK pathway. Immunoblot and
immunocytochemical analyses showed pUC treatment resulted in an increase
in the levels of the phospho-JNK (p-JNK), which was mostly localized to
the nucleus. We also observed an increase in the levels of p-JNK with
radiation and with full-length uPAR and cathepsin B; however, it was
confined to the cytoplasm of the cells. Depletion of cytosolic p-JNK with
pUC treatment and/or with the JNK inhibitor decreased migration by
downregulating the expression of the migratory molecules.
Immunoprecipitation analysis and co-localization studies further
confirmed the involvement of the cytosolic p-JNK in promoting migration
of the glioma cells. The increase in the expression of nuclear p-JNK with
pUC treatment increased the expression of apoptotic molecules, as
observed by the western blot analysis. MTT assay revealed that non-GICs
and GICs were rescued from pUC-induced cell death when treated in
combination with a JNK inhibitor, which further confirms the importance
of nuclear JNK in eliciting an apoptotic signal. In summary, cytosolic
p-JNK aids cell migration while nuclear p-JNK drives cells toward cell
death. As such, pUC treatment induced the translocation of p-JNK from
cytoplasm to the nucleus, thereby simultaneously inhibiting migration and
inducing apoptosis of non-GICs and GICs.

