Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Iodine regulates miR-19-mediated inhibition of Smad4 and restores
TGFBeta responsiveness in BRAF-activated thyroid cells.


Background: BRAF mutation (T1799A) is the most prevalent genetic
alteration in thyroid malignancy, associated with aggressive and poor
prognosis thyroid cancer. Iodine excess exerts anti-proliferative effects
in thyroid cells associated to TGF pathway enhancement, although
refractoriness to TGF inhibitory signal is observed in thyroid cancer. We
previously showed that high iodine dose protects thyroid cells from
BRAF-induced genomic instability and also, delays oncogenic effects of
RET/PTC3 oncogene. MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs that regulate
protein levels by pairing to 3-UTR of mRNA and blocking translation.
MiR-19 belongs to cluster miR-17-92 which attenuates several
tumor-suppressor genes and is predicted to target TGF pathway components.
Therefore, we aim to analyze the influence of iodine on microRNA-mediated
TGF signaling in BRAFT1799A activated thyroid follicular cells. Methods:
BRAF9-6 cells, derived from normal rat thyroid follicular cell, which
express BRAFT1799A under doxacyclin stimulation were treated with
iodine-containing medium at 10-5M (NaI group) for 5 days. Dox treatment
was performed for 2 days (Dox-group), in the absence or presence of
iodine (Dox+NaI-group). Control was performed without Dox/NaI. MiR-19
expression was performed by real-time qPCR and Smad4 target validation
was performed by Western-blotting and luciferase-assay. TGF
responsiveness was evaluated by analyzing cell cycle of TGF-treated cells
using flow-cytometry. Results: BRAFT1799A induction in thyroid cells
increased miR-19a and miR-19b levels in 634.3-fold/141.6-fold,
respectively (Dox vs Control), while adding iodine prior to BRAFT1799A
induction resulted in 2.36-fold/0.66-fold levels (Dox+NaI vs Control).
Iodine per se treatment did not change miR-19 levels. BRAFT1799A
induction reduced Smad4 protein which was restored by iodine treatment.
In parallel to the low Smad4 levels during BRAFT1799A-activation, we
observed an impairment of responsiveness to recombinant TGF treatment.
Moreover, the iodine-containing medium restored the inhibitory signal and
rendered cells arrested in G1-phase. Bioinformatic search for miR-19
potential targets revealed Smad4 as a predicted target which was
validated by luciferase-assay that showed reduced luminescence of Smad4
3-UTR plasmid in the presence miR-19. Conclusion: Iodine is a modulator
of oncogene activated mir19 expression, which target Smad4 and regulates
the efficiency of TGF anti-mitogenic action on the BRAFT1799A induced
thyroid follicular cells (Supported by FAPESP and CNPq Grant).

