Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-content live-cell imaging analysis of therapeutic monoclonal
antibody binding and potency across 240 genomically defined cancer cell
lines.


OncoPanelTM is a collection of 240 genomically and histologically diverse
cancer cell lines that comprise an unparalleled platform for multiplexed
high-content imaging analysis of potential therapeutic targets in
oncology. High-content imaging is ideally suited to detect binding,
localization, and trafficking of therapeutic antibodies, adding an
important level of resolution when interpreting drug response data.
Moreover, understanding relative antigen expression is important both to
define the patient population most likely to benefit from therapy as well
as to define the antigen expression threshold needed to elicit biologic
response. Here we describe the high-throughput parallelization of
quantitative, comparative therapeutic antibody binding measurements and
drug response profiling across the OncoPanel using high-content imaging.
High-quality binding data for monoclonal antibodies was achieved by
analysis of referenced, background-subtracted fluorescence intensities on
a per cell basis. Binding studies were performed on living cells to best
recapitulate natural antigen-antibody interactions, and results were
quantified and expressed as potency (EC50 values), total molecules bound
per cell, and spatially analyzed to yield a reliable estimate of antigen
density. Observed binding intensities were internally referenced against
calibrated fluorescent antibody-conjugated microspheres to yield a direct
correlation between fluorescence intensity and number of antibodies
bound. Cellular areas were independently measured by a non-specific
fluorescent counterstain of the plasma membrane, and cell count
determined by nuclear staining with DAPI. The therapeutic antibodies
Vectibix, Erbitux, and Herceptin were profiled against the OncoPanel,
providing a rank-ordering of cell surface expression of EGFR and
ErbB2/Her2 across 240 cancer cell lines, and defining thresholds of
antibody binding needed to inhibit cell proliferation. Compared to mRNA
expression by microarray, quantitative antibody binding was a superior
predictor of biologic response. Moreover, we demonstrate that genomic
analysis of the response to therapeutic antibodies is significantly
improved when only antigen-positive cells are considered. Using the power
of binding and genomics data gained from the screening of OncoPanel,
targeted studies may be optimized to determine the most relevant cancer
subtypes and conditions under which the activity of any monoclonal
antibody is likely to be most effective.

