Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer bioactive peptide potentiates cisplatin chemotherapy
efficacy to improve the quality of life in xenografted nude mice bearing
human gastric cancer.


A great challenge of cancer chemotherapy is to eliminate cancer cells and
concurrently maintain the quality of life (QOL) for cancer patients. We
previously found that anticancer bioactive peptide (ACBP) alone exhibited
anti-tumor activity without measurable side effects. Thus, we hypothesize
that ACBP and combined chemotherapy could lower the drug dose and improve
the efficacy of treatment, leading to a better QOL. In this study, ACBP
was isolated and purified from goat liver, and designated as ACBP-L. The
anti-tumor activity of ACBP-L was titrated on human gastric cancer
MGC-803 cell line in vitro by MTT assay, and its effect on cell
morphology was observed through light and scanning electron microscopy.
In vivo, MGC-803 tumors were grown in a xenograft nude mouse model, the
body weight, food intake, volume and weight of tumors were measured. 18F-
FDG PET/CT scan was used to examine the biological activity in tumors of
live animals. Expression of Bcl-2, Bax, Caspase 3 and Caspase 8 in the
tumor specimens was examined by RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. Herein,
we showed that ACBP-L inhibited MGC-803 cells in a dose and time
dependent manner in vitro. In the MGC-803 xenograft nude mouse model,
ACBP-L alone significantly inhibited tumor growth in vivo without
measurable side effects. Treatment with the full dosage of Cisplatin
alone (5mg/kg every 4 days) strongly suppressed tumor growth; however,
the QOL in these mice had been significantly affected when measured by
food intakes and body weight. The combinatory regiment of ACBP-L with a
fewer doses of Cisplatin (5mg/kg every 10 days) resulted in a similar
anti-tumor activity with improved QOL. The tumor tissues were harvested
after treatment, and ACBP-L suppressed Bcl-2, and induced Bax, Caspase 3,
and Caspase 8 protein expression more significantly than in the tissues
harvested from Cisplatin alone treatment as detected by
immunohistochemistry. The combinatory regiment induced stronger gene
expression of Bax and Caspase 8. Our data demonstrated that ACBP-L could
lower Cisplatin dose to achieve a similar anti-tumor efficacy as the
higher dose of Cisplatin alone. This combined regiment improved QOL in
the xenograft gastric cancer model through the modulation of apoptotic
molecules.

