Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acetyl coA carboxylase1 and its role in prostate cancer initiation
and progression.


The alteration of cellular metabolic processes is a common event in the
initiation and progression of several cancer types. One metabolic
hallmark of cancer cells is an increase in de novo lipogenesis. The
enzymes responsible for de novo fatty acid synthesis are overexpressed in
cancer, suggesting that these enzymes may be appropriate targets in
efforts to inhibit or treat disease. Specifically, Acetyl CoA Carboxylase
1 (ACC1), the cytosolic enzyme that catalyzes the rate limiting step of
de novo fatty acid synthesis through the ATP and biotin-dependent
carboxylation of acetyl-CoA to malonyl-CoA, has received attention as a
potential target for cancer treatment. Pharmacological inhibition and
siRNA mediated knockdown of ACC1 has been shown to selectively kill
prostate cancer cells in vitro by denying cells of adequate amounts of
fatty acids needed to proliferate and survive. Although ACC1 has been
implicated in cancer, its role has not been examined in a spontaneous
model of cancer. To address this issue, we first generated mice with
prostate-specific deletion of exon 22 of the Acetyl CoA Carboxylase 1
(ACCL/L) gene by breeding with Probasin-Cre mice. Loss of ACC1 activity
did not appear to affect prostate function as survival, prostate weight,
histology, and breeding was similar between ACCL/L Cre+ and ACCL/L Cre
mice. To determine the role of ACC1 in prostate cancer, the ACC+/L mice
were crossed with PtenL/L; Cre+ mice. To our surprise, ACC1 activity was
not required for prostate cancer development or progression in vivo,
despite its apparent requirement in vitro. Total prostate weight and
individual lobe weight did not differ among ACC+/L; PtenL/L; Cre+ mice,
ACCL/L; PtenL/L; Cre+ mice and ACC1+/+; PtenL/L; Cre+ mice. These early
studies suggest that ACC1 activity, and perhaps the fatty acid synthesis
pathway, may not be required for prostate cancer development. The role of
ACC1 in redox modulation, rescue of impaired de novo fatty acid synthesis
by circulating and dietary fatty acid, and the potential compensation for
ACC1 activity by ACC2 in prostate cancer are possible explanations for
this unexpected phenotype. These results could have significant impact on
the development and use of anti-cancer therapeutics that target the fatty
acid synthesis pathway.

