Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibiting base excision repair synergistically enhances
beta-lapachone-mediated kiss of death for tumor-selective therapy of
pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic cancer will be the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in the US by 2020, where 5-year survival is Pancreatic cancer will
be the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the US by 2020,
where 5-year survival is <6%. Current standard of care therapies offer
little selectivity and high toxicity. Novel, tumor-selective approaches
are desperately needed. Nearly 90% of pancreatic cancers have elevated
levels (10- to 40-fold) NQO1 and we recently showed that beta-lapachone
(beta-lap) was efficacious against pancreatic cancers in an
NQO1-dependent manner (Li et al., Clin. Cancer Res., 2011). Beta-Lap is
reduced by NQO1 like most quinones, but unlike most, its hydroquinone
form is unstable and spontaneously redox cycles in a futile manner where
one mole of beta-lap generates 120 moles of superoxide in two mins.,
inducing predominately DNA base and single strand break (SSB) damage.
This results in PARP1 hyperactivation and programmed necrosis, killing
NQO1+ cancer cells independent of: i, p53; ii, cell cycle; iii, all known
oncogenic drivers; and iv, apoptotic/antiapoptotic gene expression (e.g.,
Bax, Bak, Bcl2). This NQO1 bioactivatable drug is tumor-selective and a
perfect candidate for improving efficacy of pancreatic cancer therapy.To
improve its efficacy, we examined the synergistic effects of adding the
AP site-modifying drug and base excision repair (BER) inhibitor,
methoxyamine (MeOX), with beta-lap against NQO1 over-expressing
pancreatic cancer cells. MeOX + beta-lap synergy resulted in: a, enhanced
lethality of sublethal doses of beta-lap, reducing the shoulder (Dq),
increasing the lethality rate (Do), and inducing apoptosis (TUNEL+) in
NQO1+, but not in NQO1-, MIA PaCa-2 cells; b, increased DNA lesion
formation; c, dramatic losses in ATP levels, with little recovery; and d,
dramatic suppression of glycolysis. These data strongly suggests that
MeOX enhances PARP1 hyperactivation and synergistic cell killing of
beta-lap. Similar results were noted in shRNA-XRCC1 knockdown cells.
Mechanistically, our data suggests that PARP1 detects MeOX-AP modified
sites or SSBs, allowing PARP1 hyperactivation and synergistic cell death.
Since MeOX is a nontoxic agent, and both agents are currently in clinical
trials (i.e., beta-lap as Arq761, Arqule, Boston, MA), combination
therapies for the treatment of pancreatic, as well as other NQO1
over-expressing solid cancers could be rapidly developed. An AACR
Innovator Award from the George and June Block Foundation to DAB
supported this work.

