Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kisspeptin stimulates invasiveness of ER -negative human mammary
epithelial and breast cancer cells.


Recently, we have shown that KP-10 stimulates invasion of estrogen
receptor (ER)-negative breast cancer cells via transactivation of the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) [Zajac et al. (2011) PLoS ONE
6(6): e21599]. Here we report that KP-10 stimulated cell motility and
invasiveness of ER-negative non-malignant mammary epithelial MCF10A cells
that endogenously expressing KISS1R, and MCF10A cells stably expressing
KISS1R using three-dimensional (3D) Matrigel cultures. Additionally,
exogenous expression of KISS1R in ER-negative SKBR3 breast cancer cells
stimulated invasion in 3D cultures and induced extravasation in vivo
using chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assays. Exogenous KISS1R expression
in MCF10A and SKBR3 cells also induced a partial
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition like phenotype as evidenced by the
acquisition of a spindle-shaped morphology, intracellular localization of
the epithelial marker E-cadherin, increased stress fibre formation and
elevated levels of the mesenchymal markers, Snail/Slug, vimentin and
N-cadherin. In contrast, KP-10 had no effect on migration and invasion of
the ER-positive T47D and MCF7 breast cancer cells and failed to
transactivate EGFR in the ER-positive cells. This suggested that ER
negatively regulates KISS1R-dependent breast cancer cell migration,
invasion and EGFR transactivation. In support of this, we found
KP-10-stimulated cell migration, invasion and EGFR transactivation were
ablated upon stably expressing ER in the ER-negative MDA-MB-231 cells.
Lastly, we found that KISS1R was localized at the leading edge of motile
cells, where it co-localized with the actin scaffolding protein, IQGAP1.
We have identified IQGAP1 as a novel binding partner of KISS1R and have
demonstrated that KISS1R regulates EGFR transactivation in breast cancer
cells in an IQGAP1-dependent manner. Overall, our data strongly suggest
that the ER status of mammary cells will dictate whether the KISS1R
signaling pathway may be a novel clinical target for the treatment of
breast cancer metastasis.

