Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Age-dependent association between protein expression of the
embryonic stem cell marker Cripto-1 and survival of glioblastoma patients.


Aggressive tumor cells can show characteristics similar to normal
embryogenic progenitor cells, and de-regulated embryonic developmental
signaling networks have been linked to cancer initiation and progression.
Thus, cell fate regulation in embryonic development and cell
transformation during oncogenesis may share common signaling pathways.
Several tumor types have been suggested to be initiated from stem-like
cells. Exploring in tumors, the re-emergence of embryonic signaling
pathways involved in stem cell self-renewal can produce new insight into
the initiation and progression of cancer and may lead to development of
new therapeutic strategies.The Nodal pathway is required for maintenance
of undifferentiated embryonic stem cells. Nodal is a morphogen that
belongs to the TGF-beta family. Its signaling can be regulated by
co-factors such as the Epidermal Growth Factor - like member, Cripto-1
and another TGF-beta member, Lefty. Nodal and Cripto-1 are critical in
embryonic development and is generally poorly detected in differentiated
tissues. However, an increased expression has been detected in different
human tumor types.The dismal prognosis of glioblastomas calls for
increased biological knowledge and novel therapeutic targets. Gene
expression studies in a glioblastoma xenograft model, where multicellular
spheroids from glioblastoma patient biopsies were generated and implanted
intracranially in nude rats and where highly infiltrative non-angiogenic
tumors can switch to angiogenic tumors upon in vivo intracranial
passaging, has revealed importance of gene ontology categories connected
to development and negative regulators of differentiation. In this model
we detected several significant overrepresented morphogenesis categories,
and we hypothesized that increased activity in Nodal signaling also could
be found in human glioblastomas.We assessed the gene expression of Nodal,
Cripto-1 and Lefty in microarrays of infiltrative and angiogenic
xenograft samples developed from four glioblastoma patients. The genes
were expressed both in the infiltrative and angiogenic xenografts.
Further we examined Nodal, Cripto-1 and Lefty expression in 199 primary
glioblastomas by immunohistochemistry, and assessed their potential
clinical relevance by analyzing the association between their protein
expression and patient survival.A weak to moderate protein expression of
Nodal and Lefty and a stronger expression of Cripto-1 was found in the
patient samples. Interestingly a significant association between patient
age, Cripto-1 expression and survival was demonstrated, where higher
Cripto-1 scores were associated with poorer survival in younger patients.
These findings suggest that Cripto-1 may represent a novel negative
prognostic marker in younger glioblastoma patients and also a potential
therapeutic target in this patient group.

