Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Examining early events in carcinogenesis by profiling premalignant
lesions in the airways of patients with lung squamous cell carcinomas.


Little is known about the mechanisms involved in the initiation and
progression of lung cancer, even though lung cancer contributes to the
most cancer-related deaths in the world. Lung squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) is the second most common histological subtype, and often arises
centrally from a large airway, usually a bronchus. It is believed that
squamous lung cancer develops through a series of genetic and epigenetic
changes that alter the normal epithelium from squamous metaplasia, to
dysplasia, then carcinoma in situ, and finally to invasive SCC. Although
there have been studies devoted to discovering the genetic and molecular
changes observed in the tumor, few studies have contributed to the
investigation of squamous metaplasia or dysplasia. To better understand
carcinogenesis in the lung, especially those steps involved in the early
and precancerous stages, a precise study of the biology of premalignant
lesions is needed. To achieve this, we used laser capture microdissection
to specifically isolate normal airway basal cells, premalignant cells,
and tumor regions within individual patients with squamous lung cancer.
The RNAs obtained were successfully sequenced using Next Generation
Sequencing. Using two different statistical models of linear mixed
effects and edgeR (empirical analysis of digital gene expression data in
R), we identified a list of genes that were differentially expressed in
the premalignant lesions and in tumors when compared to the normal basal
cells. We were able to validate at RNA and protein levels several of the
genes identified to have higher expression in premalignant lesions and
tumors than in normal basal cells. We performed a gene network analysis
and found that some of these genes are known to be involved in the
development of other squamous tumors, cell cycle progression, cell death
and survival, and cellular assembly, while some genes are uncharacterized
or novel to cancer development. We also discovered that, even though TP53
RNA expression was not significantly different among normal,
premalignant, and tumor cells, several proteins that were upregulated in
the premalignant lesions were known to target TP53 protein for
degradation, cytoplasmic localization, or disruption of its function.
This suggests that the disruption of TP53 pathway began at the
premalignant stage of carcinogenesis, and persisted through the formation
of invasive carcinoma. This is the first comprehensive gene expression
profiling of airway premalignant lesions and allows us to study the
biology behind these lesions in the setting of carcinogenesis.

