Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of four subgroups of Triple Negative Breast Cancer
(TNBC) by genomic profiling.


Poorly defined molecular heterogeneity and a lack of effective molecular
targets hinder advancements in the treatment of ER-/PR-/HER2- breast
cancer (TNBC). Meta-analyses of public datasets have revealed new
subgroups, but these studies are plagued by samples collected from
multiple protocols and poor reproducibility. We aimed to identify stable
subsets that could be treated with targeted therapy by employing
integrated genomic profiling of a large number of TNBC cases (confirmed
by IHC) from a single protocol before applying those subgroups to
publicly available TNBC sets.We employed non-negative matrix
factorization on two independent gene expression datasets (Discovery n =
84 and Validation n = 118) using the top 1000 variant genes in each set.
Cophenetic, dispersion, and silhouette metrics revealed 4 clusters, with
significant enrichment of differentially expressed (DE) genes in each
subgroup among both sets (all comparisons Fisher Exact p Poorly defined
molecular heterogeneity and a lack of effective molecular targets hinder
advancements in the treatment of ER-/PR-/HER2- breast cancer (TNBC).
Meta-analyses of public datasets have revealed new subgroups, but these
studies are plagued by samples collected from multiple protocols and poor
reproducibility. We aimed to identify stable subsets that could be
treated with targeted therapy by employing integrated genomic profiling
of a large number of TNBC cases (confirmed by IHC) from a single protocol
before applying those subgroups to publicly available TNBC sets.We
employed non-negative matrix factorization on two independent gene
expression datasets (Discovery n = 84 and Validation n = 118) using the
top 1000 variant genes in each set. Cophenetic, dispersion, and
silhouette metrics revealed 4 clusters, with significant enrichment of
differentially expressed (DE) genes in each subgroup among both sets (all
comparisons Fisher Exact p < 2.2E-16). A parsimonious gene centroid
signature of 480 total genes was selected based on Goeman's Global Test
BH-adjusted p-values and fold change of only the Discovery Set. Subgroups
were assigned by Pearson Correlation in the Discovery (Rand Index = 0.97)
and Validation Sets (RI = 0.84), as well as an External Set made up of
214 IHC-confirmed cases of TNBCs, and another 5 publicly available
studies with clinical outcome data for TNBCs. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
was carried out separately on DE genes from each dataset (BH adjusted p
Poorly defined molecular heterogeneity and a lack of effective molecular
targets hinder advancements in the treatment of ER-/PR-/HER2- breast
cancer (TNBC). Meta-analyses of public datasets have revealed new
subgroups, but these studies are plagued by samples collected from
multiple protocols and poor reproducibility. We aimed to identify stable
subsets that could be treated with targeted therapy by employing
integrated genomic profiling of a large number of TNBC cases (confirmed
by IHC) from a single protocol before applying those subgroups to
publicly available TNBC sets.We employed non-negative matrix
factorization on two independent gene expression datasets (Discovery n =
84 and Validation n = 118) using the top 1000 variant genes in each set.
Cophenetic, dispersion, and silhouette metrics revealed 4 clusters, with
significant enrichment of differentially expressed (DE) genes in each
subgroup among both sets (all comparisons Fisher Exact p < 2.2E-16). A
parsimonious gene centroid signature of 480 total genes was selected
based on Goeman's Global Test BH-adjusted p-values and fold change of
only the Discovery Set. Subgroups were assigned by Pearson Correlation in
the Discovery (Rand Index = 0.97) and Validation Sets (RI = 0.84), as
well as an External Set made up of 214 IHC-confirmed cases of TNBCs, and
another 5 publicly available studies with clinical outcome data for
TNBCs. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis was carried out separately on DE genes
from each dataset (BH adjusted p < 0.01). There was overwhelming
statistical agreement for all subgroups between the Discovery,
Validation, and External Sets. Subgroup 1 was defined by Intermediate
Grade LumB tumors and overexpression of ESR1, HER-2, and AR, with
activated downstream signaling of ESR1 despite being ER- by IHC. In
subgroup 2, CDKN2A and TP53 appeared activated while MYC was inhibited.
Dozens of immune cell signaling pathways were downregulated in the third
subgroup, a basal-like set of TNBCs, which was driven by inhibition of
cytokine gamma-IFN. Disease-free and Overall Survival was the worst for
subgroup 3 (log rank p = 0.041 and 0.039). The final subgroup (4) was
found to be p53 inactivated, a known feature of TNBC but specific to this
second basal-like subgroup. Analysis of 84 and 58 cases with
corresponding copy number profiling data from the Discovery and
Validation Sets revealed subgroup specific copy number changes in
addition to known TNBC patterns. Most notably, loss of chr 6 was unique
to subgroup 1, while all other tumors shared common loss of chr 5.We have
described four molecular phenotypes of TNBC in two independent sets from
the same protocol, and a third set composed of public data. These
subgroups have strong agreement of DE genes, pathways, and regulators,
and are additionally supported by DNA events and prognostic differences
between subgroups. We suggest several promising druggable targets based
on overexpressed genes in each subgroup.

