Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a multiplex panel of biomarkers to assess energy
metabolism in cancer.


Background: Cancer cells have an altered glucose metabolism, which not
only permits them to survive under hypoxic conditions but confers a
distinct growth advantage by sustaining higher proliferation rates,
invasiveness, and subsequent distant metastasis. This unique difference
in glucose metabolism from healthy cells opens up a selective mechanism
by which to kill cancer cells, bypassing normal healthy cells. Several
enzymes in glucose metabolism are attractive targets for development of
first-in-class therapeutic agents. We have undertaken development of a
multiplex panel involving biomarkers involved in glucose metabolism to
support drug development and to interrogate glycolytic pathway in cancer
patients. Methods: The panel includes quantitative determinations of
protein levels of hexokinase-2 (HK2), pyruvate kinase isoform-2 (PKM2),
lactate dehydrogenase alpha (LDHa), and phosphorylated pyruvate
dehydrogenase E1-alpha (phospho-PDHE1a). The sandwich immunoassays were
built on the Luminex xMAP technology platform using MagPlex magnetic
beads and cloned proteins are employed as calibrators. The panel is
designed to measure protein concentrations in fractionated cell extracts
from flash frozen tumor biopsies. Results: We have completed development
of three sandwich immunoassays for HK2, PK-M2, and LDHa on Luminex
platform. Suitable capture antibodies as well as phycoerythrin labeled
detection antibodies have been identified and tested for sandwich
formation and multiplexing using recombinant calibrators and cell
lysates. The multiplex is currently standardized for optimal assay
performance. Known pharmacological modulators (3-bromopyruvate,
bortezumib, oxamate, dichloroacetate) of HK2, PKM2, LDHa, and PDHE1a were
used in vitro to demonstrate expected directional changes in biomarkers
in the panel. Conclusions: We have developed a multiplex panel to measure
protein levels of three key molecules involved in energy metabolism in
cancer cells. The multiplex panel provides a critical tool, in the
clinical setting, to support ongoing therapeutic strategies aimed at
targeting the energy provision pathway in cancer patients. Importantly,
the panel can be used to survey metabolic phenotype of different tumors
to identify type and stage of cancer most susceptible to inhibition of
glycolysis. Funded by NCI Contract No HHSN261200800001E.

