Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the expression and role of miRNAs-221 and -222 in
stem cells derived from breast cancer cell line MCF-7.


Background: A small population of breast tumor cells, named
tumor-initiating cells or cancer stem cells (CSCs), is highly tumorigenic
when injected into immunodeficient mice. These CSCs, characterized by
positive CD44 expression and low or undetectable levels of CD24
(CD44+CD24/low), contribute to tumor metastasis as well as to drug
resistance. Some miRNAs are differentially expressed in stem cells,
suggesting they may play a role in stem cell regulation. Aim: This study
has shown that miRNAs -221 and -222 are upregulated in breast CSCs when
compared to differentiated cells. Our aim is to contribute to the better
understanding of the biology of breast cancer cell line-derived CSCs,
including the role of miRNAs -221 and -222 in these cells. Methods:
Breast cancer cell line MCF-7 were grown as suspension cells in
conditions that induce the formation of mammospheres, which are spheroid
cell structures enriched with CSCs. Stem cell markers were analysed by
Real Time PCR. The percentage of CD44+CD24/low population was determined
by FACS analysis. Overexpression of miRNAs -221 and -222 in mammospheres
was done using lentivirus carrying plasmids of interest for
overexpression of miR-221 or miR-222 and the control group were
transducted by a plasmid with a random sequence. Analysis of mammosphere
forming was done through mammosphere formation efficiency (MFE) assay.
Placlitaxel resistance was firstly evaluated by MTT assay. Capase 3/7 is
being used for apoptosis assay. Results: In this study we show that stem
cell properties, such as the expression of OCT-4, NANOG and SOX2 were
increased in mammosphere cultures (respectively 14-fold, 20-fold and
7-fold) and an enrichment of CD44+CD24/low population was observed in
mammosphere cultures when compared to adherent cell cultures.
Furthermore, we found that miRNA-221 and miRNA-222 were upregulated in
mammospheres by approximately 4-fold and 5-fold, respectively, when
compared to adherent cells. Overexpression of miRNAs -221 or -222
increases the mammosphere formation efficiency (MFE) and death resistance
to paclitaxel when compared to controls. Conclusions: The increased
expression of miRNAs -221 and -222 in MFC-7 mammospheres could indicate
that these molecules may play a role in regulatory pathways of breast
CSCs. Moreover the overexpression of these miRNAs could increase
mammosphere-forming capacity and confers paclitaxel resistance in breast
CSCs.

