Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nucleolin phosphorylation mediated regulation of gene expression
in determining cellular fate during the DNA damage response (DDR).


The phosphoprotein nucleolin integrates several critical cellular
processes, such as cell growth, proliferation, cell cycle arrest,
apoptosis as well as DDR. Elevated levels of nucleolin are found in
highly proliferative cells including a variety of tumors. Nucleolin is
highly phosphorylated at the N-terminus by two major kinases: interphase
casein kinase 2 (CK2) and mitotic cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk). Earlier
we have demonstrated that the N-terminus of nucleolin associates with
Hdm2 to stabilize p53 protein and causes p53-mediated apoptosis.
Additionally, nucleolin via its RNA-binding properties has been
demonstrated to regulate the stability of several mRNAs and enhance
translation. Besides, nucleolin post-translational modifications are
linked to its role as an RNA-binding stress-responsive protein. Based on
these studies, we hypothesize a role for nucleolin phosphorylation in
regulating mRNA stability of different target genes during DDR.To test
this we have engineered a novel system with tet-off promoter in human
osteosarcoma cells to express 3xFlag-tagged nucleolin-wt or
phospho-mutant [6/S*A, defective in undergoing phosphorylation at six
consensus CK2 sites] that allow us to control expression of nucleolin
using doxycycline. Cell proliferation assays with these inducible cells
indicated that although nucleolin phosphorylation by CK2 was required for
cell proliferation in unstressed cells, a hypo-phosphorylated nucleolin
mutant caused higher cell viability upon genotoxic stress. Further,
nucleolin phospho-variants differentially elevated p53 protein levels and
hypo-phosphorylated nucleolin associated with p53 even under non-stressed
conditions. Our co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) assays also showed that
nucleolin associated with poly(A)-specific ribonuclease (PARN), an mRNA
decay enzyme that controls mRNA stability of different genes during DDR.
Importantly, hypo-phosphorylated nucleolin mutant decreased PARN
deadenylase activity in vitro. Interestingly, nucleolin also interacted
with cellular p53-mRNA as detected by RNA immunoprecipitation assays with
nucleolin antibodies followed by qRT-PCR. Our data for the first time
provides evidential support that nucleolin phosphorylation can play a
regulatory role in driving the cell cycle and controlling gene expression
during DDR. Direct associations of nucleolin with p53 and PARN probably
affect p53-signaling as well as PARN-deadenylase activity. Understanding
the control of gene expression that is regulated by nucleolin
phosphorylation during DDR, will provide valuable insights into the
mechanism(s) behind the cellular decisions of cell survival or death upon
DNA damage.

