Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The hyperinsulinemia caused by PI3K inhibitors attenuates their
antineoplastic efficacy, but can be minimized by co-administration of
metformin.


As phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling is often
inappropriately activated in cancer, targeting this pathway is the goal
of many drug development programs. PI3K activation provides an important
proliferative and antiapoptotic signal for many normal and transformed
cell types, but in tissues such as liver, muscle and fat that are
involved in regulation of blood glucose, PI3K activation is a consequence
of insulin receptor activation, and leads to cellular glucose uptake and
reduction in circulating glucose concentration. Therefore, effective
pharmacologic PI3K blockade perturbs glucose homeostasis, leading to
insulin resistance associated with hyperglycemia and/or compensatory
hyperinsulinemia. In some patients, PI3K blockade leads to
hyperinsulinemia with normoglycemia, suggesting that elevation of insulin
level overcomes pharmacologic PI3K inhibition in insulin-responsive
tissues to an extent sufficient to normalize blood glucose. To
investigate the possibility that increased insulin stimulation can also
attenuate the antiproliferative effect of PI3K inhibitors in cancer
cells, we first developed an in vivo model which demonstrated that
conventional antineoplastic doses of GDC-0941 (a potent and selective
inhibitor of class 1 PI3K) leads to insulin resistance and compensatory
hyperinsulinemia (20 min post 2 g/kg glucose IP, serum glucose rises from
5.1 0.4 to 15 1.8 mM in control conditions, but from 12.4 1.2 to 29.2 1.8
mM with GDC-0941 treatment). Next, we showed that the activity of
GDC-0941 on a variety neoplastic cells in vitro, in terms of suppression
of both proliferation and signaling downstream of PI3K, is attenuated
when insulin concentration is raised (75 nM GDC-0941 reduces
proliferation by 50%, 36%, 29% when insulin is 2, 6, or 12 nM,
respectively). Metformin, which is often administered clinically to
patients on PI3K inhibitors to reduce hyperglycemia, abolished
GDC-0941-induced hyperinsulinemia. Thus, PI3K inhibitor-induced
hyperinsulinemia (a) represents pharmacodynamic evidence of target
inhibition (at least in tissues concerned with glycemia regulation), (b)
attenuates antineoplastic efficacy, particularly when inhibitor
concentrations are suboptimal and (c) may be minimized by
co-administration of metformin. These findings are relevant to ongoing
clinical trials of PI3K inhibitors, and indicate that the magnitude of
the input signal to PI3K influences the degree of blockade achieved by
PI3K inhibitors.

