Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mathematical model of the cell cycle to determine mechanism of
action and optimize dosing schedule.


A mechanistic understanding of a drug's biological effect can have
significant implications for selection of clinical dosing schedule,
combination partners, as well as biomarker selection. In this context, a
question often faced from target validation to the end of Phase I is how
much of a drug's antitumor effect is through altering cell-cycle
progression or through the induction of cell death. Here we demonstrate
the utility of a mathematical model of the cell-cycle for determining the
effect of a drug on cell-cycle kinetics, as an objective and quantiative
interpretation of DNA flow cytometry and cellular growth rate data. The
model uses periodic measurement of DNA content as analyzed by flow
cytometry to determine the percentage of cells in G0/G1, S, and G2/M
phases of the cell cycle, as well as continuous readouts of cell
confluence over the course of treatment to assess growth rates. The model
is then fitted to the data to extract effective cell cycle transition
rates demonstrating the effect of the drug on cell cycle progression.To
demonstrate of the approach, we applied the model to data acquired during
treatment of A375 melanoma cells with the investigational drug TAK-733,
an allosteric MEK 1/2 inhibitor hypothesized to cause a G1 arrest. Rather
than an arrest at G1, the model predicted that the G1-to-S transition
rate was reduced, and that much of the change in cell cycle data was due
to an increase in the S-to-G2/M and G2/M-to-G0/G1 transition rates. These
model predictions were then tested with video microscopy and both
predictions (increased time spent in G0/G1 as well as reduced time spent
in mitosis) were supported by experimental data.The model was then used
to test whether the cell cycle activity of the compound has any
implications for optimization of dosing schedule. By varying the schedule
of drug treatment in the simulation, we find that for the biologically
relevant concentration range the compound is schedule independent (i.e.
effect is proportional to AUC). This finding suggests that there is no
need to maintain constant pathway inhibition to see efficacy in tumor
volume reduction. To test this prediction, we compare the results with
the outcome of experiments in an A375 xenograft model with different
dosing schedules and verify directly that AUC was indeed a better
predictor of efficacy than Cmin.With this example, we demonstrate that
mathematical modeling can be used to aid in interpretation of cell cycle
data, often generated to describe the cell killing activity of oncology
compounds. In addition, the model provides a method of interpreting the
mechanism of action for early development decision making around schedule
selection. This work demonstrates an approach that can be extended to
other compounds to provide an integrated measure of the total
contribution of cell death and/or cell cycle arrest, to help provide a
mechanistic rationale for schedule selection with single agent and
combination therapies.

