Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-JunNH2-teminal kinase 1 plays a crucial role in vitamin
D-mediated cancer cellmaturation through interacting with vitamin D
receptor.


Vitamin D is chemopreventive against colorectal carcinogenesis in vivo
and in vitro. The protective effects of vitamin D against colonic
carcinogenesis are most probably mediated through the vitamin D receptor
(VDR). When bound to the hormonally active form of vitamin D,
1,25(OH)2-D3, VDR transactivates genes that inhibit proliferation, or
promote differentiation and apoptosis. Previous studies showed that
stress-activated protein kinase JNKs (c-Jun NH2-terminal kinases) and p38
cooperated to activate VDR and increase vitamin D3-dependent growth
inhibition in breast cancer cells. To determine whether vitamin
D-mediated maturation is associated with JNK1 and VDR in colorectal
cancer cells, we treated the human colon cancer cell HT29 with
1,25(OH)2-D3, and found that 1,25(OH)2-D3 significantly inhibited cell
proliferation and induced apoptosis, which was associated with induction
of phosphorylated JNK1 (p-JNK1) and p21,p27, which was also associated
with increased the expression of PARP and cleaved Caspase 3. In the JNK1
knockout mouse model in which tumor spontaneously formed in intestinal
tract, we found that VDR was significantly reduced or not expressed in
mouse intestinal epithelial cells, compared to those in the wild-type
mice. Further, we found that VDR transcriptional activity was lower in
JNK1-/- mouse embryonic fibroblast cells (MEFs), assayed by transfection
with VDR-element-Luc reporter. When the JNK1-/- MEFs were treated with
calcitriol, the induced of VDR transcriptional activity was also
attenuated, compared to that in JNK1+/+ MEFs. Moreover, increasing
expression of activated JNK1 by transfection with pcDNA3-Flag-MKK7
(activated JNK1) in HT29 colon cancer cells, VDR-element-Luc was
significantly increased, and VDR expression levels were also increased.
Finally, we co-transfected HEK239 cells with pcDNA3-HA-VDR and
pcDNA3-Flag-MKK7 plasmids and conducted co-immunoprecipitation assay, we
found that VDR was physically binding to JNK1. Taken together, JNK1
interacted with VDR and affected VDR at transcriptional and translational
levels. Thus, the status of JNK1 may play a critical role in vitamin
D-medicated cancer prevention through modulating vitamin D receptor.
Whether JNK1 affects VDR polymorphisms and then influences cancer
prevention efficacy of vitamin D is under further
investigation.*Supported by National Natural Science Foundation Of China
(81272251)

