Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the MEK5/ERK5 pathway can redirect
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-treated human AML cells from monocytic to
granulocytic lineage of differentiation.


Induced differentiation of malignant cells presents a treatment
alternative less toxic than the conventional therapeutic approaches. In
particular, Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) cells have been shown to
differentiate along the monocytic lineage when treated with the active
form of vitamin D3 (1,25D), and along the granulocytic lineage after
exposure to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). While induced differentiation
of human AML cells is associated with cell cycle blocks and cessation of
cell proliferation, whether treated with 1,25D or ATRA, 1,25D-induced
monocytic differentiation is accompanied by somewhat increased cell
survival during drug-elicited cellular stress, which counters the
therapeutic objective of malignant cell elimination. In contrast,
granulocytic differentiation leads to cell death, suggesting that this is
the preferred mode of differentiation in a therapeutic setting. In the
current study we have observed that inhibition of the MEK5/ERK5 MAPK
pathway in 1,25D-treated human AML cells switches the phenotype from
monocytic to granulocytic, as evidenced by decreased expression of
monocytic markers CD14 and Monocyte Specific Esterase (MSE), concurrent
with an increase in general myeloid/granulocytic markers CD11b and CD11c,
as well as NBT positivity. On the molecular level, the switch from the
monocytic to granulocytic phenotype was accompanied by reduced levels of
phosphorylation of transcription factor (TF) C/EBPb but increased
phosphorylation of C/EBPa. The requirement for activated ERK5 in
monocytic differentiation was also shown by the use of Bix 02189, a
specific inhibitor of MEK5 kinase activity, and by the transfection of
siRNA to ERK5. Inhibition of ERK1/2 activity by PD098059 reduced
monocytic differentiation, but did not alter the 1,25D-induced monocytic
phenotype, showing that ERK1/2 and ERK5 serve different functions in
differentiation signaling. Importantly, ERK5 appears to control the
activation of the TF c-jun/AP1, previously shown to be required for 1,
25D- induced monocytic differentiation, and of the TF MEF2C, not
previously linked to 1,25D action or to monocytic differentiation. Thus,
our results suggest that ERK5 inhibitors should be evaluated as
potentiators of the therapeutic effects of vitamin D analogs in the
proposed clinical trials of AML therapy, and raise the possibility that
ERK5 inhibitors may also augment the granulocytic differentiation induced
by ATRA in the treatment of APL. (Supported by the NIH grant
R01-CA-077422-22 from the National Cancer Institute).

