Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MULT1E/mIL-12: A novel bi-functional protein for NK cell
activation.


Natural killer (NK) cells have the potential to be very effective killers
of tumor cells. They are closely governed by inhibitory and activating
receptors like NKG2D, whose ligands are normally upregulated in cells
that are stressed, like cancer cells. Advanced cancer cells, however,
have found ways to reduce these ligands, leaving them less detectable by
NK cells. Along with these receptors, NK cells also require activating
cytokines, like IL-12, to function. The infusion of high doses of IL-12
is effective in activating an immune response against tumor cells but is
usually toxic. The goal of this study is to develop a novel bi-functional
fusion protein for enhanced NK cell activation. The proposed fusion
protein combines the extracellular domain of the NKG2D ligand MULT1
(MULT1E) and mouse IL-12 (mIL-12). It is hypothesized that when expressed
by tumor cells, the protein will activate NK cells using the NKG2D
receptor, and also deliver mIL-12 to the NK cells where it can interact
with the IL-12R and enhance NK cells cytotoxicity.The fusion gene was
constructed using the cDNA sequence encoding MULT1E and a short linker
sequence at the 3 end to replace the start codon and the signal sequence
of mIL-12 and cloned into a mammalian expression vector. The vector was
transfected into mouse TC-1 lung carcinoma cells. After characterizing
the levels of protein expression using RT-PCR, qRT-PCR, fluorescent
microscopy, ELISA, and FACS, three stable clones expressing high,
moderate, or low levels of the protein were selected for study. To assess
the biological activity of the protein in vitro, mouse NK cells were
cultured with the stable clones and NK cell activation was measured by
the production of interferon- (IFN-) using ELISA. NK cells cultured with
clones expressing high or moderate levels of the protein expressed
significantly higher levels of IFN- than the regular TC-1 cells.
Interestingly, the clone expressing a moderate amount of the protein
induced a significantly higher level of IFN- production than the clone
expressing a high amount or a clone expressing mIL-12 alone. Furthermore,
this clone showed a reduction in cell growth that was not observed in the
other clones. Similar results were seen when the NK cells were cultured
with regular TC-1 cells with the addition of supernatant from each clone.
To examine the in vivo antitumor effects of the protein, C57BL/6 mice
were injected intravenously with the clones. The results show that
although there was no significant difference, clones expressing high and
moderate levels of the protein grew slower than clones expressing either
a low level or mIL-12 alone as assayed by lung tumor nodule count and
total lung weight. It is also of note that all the clones grew
significantly slower than the regular TC-1 cells in vivo. Although the
study is preliminary and further studies are needed, the data suggest
that the MULT1E/mIL-12 bi-functional fusion protein is an effective
activator of NK cells for cancer treatment.

