Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Manipulation of hypoxia-NFB pathway to target breast cancer stem
cells.


Background Although the existence of cancer stem cells (CSCs) is still
debatable, it is widely accepted that the cancer cells expressing CSC
markers are highly resistant to chemo-radiation therapy. Up to 60% of
locally advanced solid tumours exhibit hypoxia. Accumulated evidence
demonstrates that hypoxia induces epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
and CSCs phenotypes in cancer cells. The pathways between hypoxia and
CSCs are still largely in the dark. NFB is a transcription factor being
involved in chemo-radiation resistance. Activation of NFB by hypoxia in a
wide range of cells in inflammatory conditions has been identified for
more than a decade. Recently, emerging evidence demonstrates that NFB is
also a key factor maintaining the stemness in breast CSCs. Therefore NFB
may mediate and be involved in hypoxia-induced CSCs phenotypes. Our
previous studies show that disulfiram (DS), an anti-alcoholism drug,
reverses chemoresistance of a variety of anticancer drugs in several
types of cancer.In this study, we used an in vitro model to investigate
the relationship between hypoxia-NFB pathway and CSC phenotypes in two
breast cancer cell lines (T47D and MCF7). The effect of DS on hypoxia-NFB
pathway and the cytotoxicity of conventional anticancer drugs
(paclitaxel, gemcitabine and doxorubicin) in CSCs were also
observed.RESULTS A huge proportion of hypoxic cells were detected in
mammospheres. NFB activation (AKT phosphorylation, IB degradation, p65
nuclear translocation, phosphorylation and NFB transactivation) was
detected in the CSCs. The percentage of breast cancer cells with CSC
markers (ALDH+, CD24low/CD44high) is significantly increased in the NFB
p65 transfected cell lines. The transfected cell lines are highly
resistant to doxorubicin, paclitaxel and gemcitabine. In contrast, breast
CSCs do not show any resistance to DS. The cytotoxicity of DS is
copper-dependent and cancer specific with no cytotoxicity in normal cell
lines. CI-isobologram analysis demonstrates that DS significantly
enhances cytotoxicity of conventional anticancer drugs (doxorubicin: 8 -
11-fold; gemcitabine: 1.2 - 23.5-fold; paclitaxel: 4 - 10-fold). DS
simultaneously activates ROS-JNK pathway and blocks p65 nuclear
translocation. The effect of DS on stemness of breast cancer cell lines
is confirmed by its elimination of ALDH+VE CD24Low/CD44High population in
mammospheres. To prolong the half-life of DS in bloodstream, we recently
developed a liposome encapsulated DS. The liposomal DS shows very strong
anticancer activity in an animal cancer model.CONCLUSIONS Our results
demonstrate that hypoxia-NFB pathway is involved in maintaining the
stemness and chemoresistance in breast CSCs. DS is highly cytotoxic to
breast CSCs and enhances cytotoxicity of conventional anticancer drugs.
This may be caused by simultaneous induction of ROS and inhibition of
NFkB pathway.Citation Format: Peng Liu, Sarah Brown, Vinodh Kannappan,
Angel L. Armesilla, John L. Darling, Weiguang Wang. Manipulation of
hypoxia-NFB pathway to target breast cancer stem cells. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 227.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-227

