Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A molecular characterization of the anaplastic prostate carcinomas.


Molecular markers that identify clinically meaningful, biologically
based, subsets of PC are lacking. This results in inefficient clinical
trial designs and suboptimal therapy selection off-protocol. The androgen
receptor (AR)-negative small cell PC (SCPC) is an often-unrecognized
morphological variant of the disease found on repeat biopsies during the
castrate-resistant (CR) progression of PC. Its presence predicts for a
poor response to hormonal therapies, a distinct clinical behavior and a
short survival. Characteristic clinical features of SCPC are frequently
present in patients with CRPC, constituting a clinical syndrome termed
anaplastic PC. We hypothesized that the anaplastic PC share underlying
biology with SCPC, irrespective of morphology. Preclinical studies show
that SCPC are characterized by loss of tumor suppressors and AR
signaling, as well as overexpression of mitotic genes and proneural
transcription factors. To test our hypothesis we used
immunohistochemistry to analyze the expression of markers in these
pathways, in tumor biopsies from chemotherapy-nave men with anaplastic PC
participating in a prospective phase II clinical trial. To date we have
analyzed 6 markers in 25 samples (6 with pure or mixed SCPC morphology)
from prostate biopsies (n=10), transurethral resections of prostate
tumors (n=4), bone marrow or bone biopsies (n=9), lymph node (n=1) or
brain (n=1). Results are shown in Table 1.
Immunohistochemistry Anaplastic PCOf the 17 samples that had 10% RB1+
cells, 10 had 10% AR+ cells and 9 had >10% UBE2C+ cells. Of the 11
samples that had 10% AR+ cells, 10 also had 10% RB1+ cells and 6 had >10%
UBE2C+ cells. These data support our hypothesis that the anaplastic
prostate carcinomas are characterized by loss of tumor suppressors and
overexpression of mitotic genes. Updated results in additional samples
and of additional markers will be presented.

