Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic alterations associated with pancreatic cancer-induced
cachexia.


Cachexia, a metabolic syndrome, leads to loss of muscle weight and fat
tissues. Cancer-induced cachexia accounts for nearly 20% of all
cancer-related deaths and is most prevalent in patients with gastric,
pancreatic, colon and lung cancer. Although association of cachexia with
various types of cancers has been known for a long time, the molecular
mechanism of cancer-induced cachexia is still not well understood. Better
understanding of the cancer-related cachexia syndrome may provide novel
therapeutic targets and improved health care for cancer patients. By
culturing differentiated C2C12 and 3T3-L1 cells in the presence of
pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell or immortalized epithelial cell
supernatants, we established cell culture-based cachexia model systems to
investigate the depletion of muscle mass and fatty acid storage.
Progressive physiological and biochemical alterations during muscle fibre
breakdown and adipocyte fat depletion were assayed by utilizing western
blotting, real-time PCR and cell imaging. We then investigated
metabolomic alterations in C2C12 and 3T3-L1 cell lines in response to the
cachectic factors secreted by the tumor cells. We performed differential
metabolomic analyses on tumor cell supernatant-treated or control treated
differentiated C2C12 muscle fibers and 3T3-L1-derived adipocytes by
utilizing 2D 1H-13C HSQC NMR technique. Alterations in metabolic pathways
were also investigated by evaluating the expression of metabolic genes in
the corresponding pathways by performing quantitative real-time PCR. To
obtain further insights into the metabolic alterations that trigger
cachexia, we extended our studies to in vivo mouse orthotopic xenograft
models and investigated alterations in metabolic gene expression and
metabolite flux in muscle and fat tissues of tumor-bearing mice. Our
results identify crucial nodes in metabolite flux that can be targeted to
regulate cell growth, proliferation, and turnover in muscle and fat
tissues during cancer-induced cachexia.

