Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of polyphenols on selenoprotein expression in human
colon cancer cells.


Selenium, an essential micronutrient, is recognized as a cancer
protective agent that functions through low-molecular weight
selenocompounds, and, importantly, through selenoproteins. Previous
studies suggest that the 15 kDa selenoprotein (Sep15), a gene polymorphic
in humans, has an important role in colon cancer in vivo, and that
reduction of Sep15 in human HCT116 colon cancer cells reverses their
cancer phenotype. Our diet contains a wide array of nutrients, and it is
conceivable that these share molecular targets with selenium and regulate
selenoprotein expression. The selenoproteins Thioredoxin Reductase 1
(TR1) and Glutathione Peroxidase (GPx) 2 are regulated by the
transcription factor Nrf2, whereas GPx1 is not. Some dietary compounds,
e.g., Sulforaphane, are known Nrf2-inducers, impacting expression of TR1
and GPx2. However, the effect of Sulforaphane and many polyphenols on
other selenoproteins, or, how other polyphenols influence TR1 and GPx2
remains to be elucidated. Using HCT116 cells, we are investigating the
effects of polyphenols and Sulforaphane on selenoprotein expression.
Cells with wild type or down-regulated expression of Sep15 were exposed
to 5 M Sulforaphane or 20 M 5,7-Dimethoxyflavone (5,7-DMF) for 48 hours.
Subsequently, mRNA was isolated and examined with real-time RT-PCR. Our
preliminary results suggest that, Sulforaphane exposure resulted in a
slight increase of TR1 mRNA in both control and shSep15 cells, but not
GPx2. Interestingly, 5,7-DMF exposure resulted in increased GPx1 (P0.05)
mRNA in control cells. Surprisingly, GPx2 mRNA appeared significantly
down-regulated (P0.05) mRNA in control cells. Surprisingly, GPx2 mRNA
appeared significantly down-regulated (P<0.01) in shSep15 cells compared
to DMSO treated cells, whereas GPx1 mRNA appeared unaffected. Western
blotting and activity measurements are currently underway to support
these results.

