Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Matrilysin cleavage of perlecan produces bioactive fragments
acting as a molecular switch to alter prostate cancer cell behavior.


Perlecan/HSPG2[PLN], a large heparan sulfate (HS) proteoglycan, is
expressed in the basement membrane (BM) underlying epithelial and
endothelial cells. During prostate cancer (PCa) cell invasion, a variety
of proteolytic enzymes are expressed that digest BM components including
PLN. After proteolysis, fragments of PLN can be released into
circulation. A sandwich ELISA with antibodies generated across PLN
detected fragments of PLN from IG-repeat domain IV in PCa patient serum.
An enzyme upregulated in invasive PCa cells, matrilysin/matrix
metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7), was examined as a candidate for PLN
proteolysis both in silico and in vitro. Purified PLN showed high
sensitivity to MMP-7 digestion even when fully decorated with HS or when
embedded with other BM proteins. MMP-7 fragments of PLN were detected as
limit peptides by western blot. While not predicted in silico, MMP-7
cleaved every subpart of recombinantly generated PLN domain IV. The
resultant MMP-7 generated PLN Dm IV fragments were identified by mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS and MALDI) and Edman degradation N-terminal
sequencing. Other PCa relevant enzymes had limited ability to cleave PLN
including prostate specific antigen, hepsin and fibroblast activation
protein. To determine if PLN digestion affects metastatic PCa cells,
C4-2B cells were seeded on plates coated with different forms of PLN.
Cells on intact PLN formed large clusters of poorly adherent cells, while
those on PLN digested with MMP-7 or heparitinase to remove the HS chains
attached and spread within 30 minutes. Immunohistochemistry of PCa
patient tissue indicates MMP-7 and PLN are in direct contact at
interfaces in the stroma. We conclude that enzymatic processing of PLN in
the BM and stroma as occurs in the tumor microenvironment can alter PCa
cell behavior and favor cell dispersion and invasiveness.

