Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Choosing the right preclinical model for cancer immunotherapy: The
SyngenOmic toolbox..


Recent FDA approvals of ipilimumab and sipuleucel-T for the treatment of
metastatic melanoma and castrate-resistant prostate cancer respectively
have validated the approach to modulate the immune system for the
clinical treatment of cancer. MedImmune Oncology, has an extensive
pipeline and expertise in investigational Immune Mediated Therapy in
Cancer (IMT-C) drugs (e.g. tremelimumab and MEDI4736), and is heavily
invested in this novel era of cancer therapeutics. Pre-clinical
assessment of the validity of potential IMT-C drugs can be enabled by the
use of syngeneic tumours established in immuno-competent animals.
MedImmune's pharmacology team has lead efforts to develop such models, to
a point that a panel of 15 different validated syngeneic tumour types is
available in house for studies to progress projects. The intention of
selecting relevant models and of minimizing animal experimentation,
reduces the number of models tested for each project, and allows for
detailed genetic and proteomic characterization of treatment dependent
effects within our models. Utilising both in vitro and in vivo
approaches, we have generated transcriptomic and genomic data for our
cell lines, the resulting implanted tumours and for the relevant
lymphatic organs (draining lymph node and spleen). Using key
proteomic/cell markers through IHC and FACS analysis, we are also
evaluating the immune profile/status of our tumour bearing animals in
parallel. Finally, in order to establish the disease relevance and
prognostic value of our models we are analyzing our cell panel for the
presence of somatic mutations in 50 genes previously implicated in human
cancers. Once completed, the resulting dataset will hopefully help
pre-clinical scientists to refine their in vivo plans and deliver more
clinically-relevant pharmacology packages for the progression of cancer
immunotherapy drug candidates.

