Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A unique acquired resistance mechanism to agents that target GLI
(GANT61) in the Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway in human colon cancer
cells.


In normal cellular processes, the HH signaling pathway has critical roles
in embryonic development, tissue patterning, stem cell function, and
differentiation. Canonical HH signaling engages the transmembrane
receptor PTCH, the intermediary signaling molecule SMO, and the
transcriptional regulators of target genes and the HH signaling response,
GLI1 and GLI2. In colon cancers, GLI is aberrantly regulated by oncogenic
signaling pathways, driving cell survival and genomic instability
involved in oncogenesis, progression and metastasis. Using the small
molecule inhibitor of GLI1/GLI2 transcription, GANT61, we have
demonstrated that inhibition of HH signaling at the level of GLI induces
extensive cell death in human colon carcinoma cell line models in
contrast to targeting SMO. Cells with acquired resistance to SMO
inhibitors also remain highly sensitive to GANT61, underscoring GLI as a
critical target in colon cancer. We have now identified a previously
undescribed, novel mechanism by which cancer cells evade cell death
following protracted, targeted exposure of GLI by GANT61. The classic
pharmacologic approach of stepwise increasing drug selection did not
produce a proliferative colon cancer cell line resistant to GANT61,
confirming the critical importance of GLI genes to cell survival. In
contrast, prolonged exposure (1-3 weeks) of HT29 cells to semi-lethal
concentrations of GANT61 (10 M; HT29-G10), induced GLI1/GLI2 inhibition,
reduced proliferation, decreased appearance of H2AX nuclear foci, and
increased methylation of histone H3K9 (H3K9me1-3) within the GLI1 and
GLI2 promoters. Methylation of H3K9 lysine residues is correlated with
either an inactive or silent state of gene expression, and can exist in
mono-, di-, or tri- methylated states. It has been demonstrated by others
that methylation at H3K9 in the promoters of p53, p21Waf1 or DHFR genes,
can regulate cell proliferation or function at the G1/S transition. In
addition to GLI1 and GLI2, H3K9 methylation was also observed in HT29-G10
cells in the promoter regions of FOXM1 and CDC6, G1/S regulatory genes.
These are GLI target genes, which regulate the G1/S transition, or
PreReplication Complex assembly at initiation of DNA replication,
respectively. Data suggest that the GLI2->GLI1->FOXM1->CDC6 promoters are
coordinately regulated by H3K9 methylation in a pathway to promote gene
silencing, reduce gene transcription, and reduce cell cycle transition at
G1/S, constituting a unique mechanism of acquired resistance to drugs
that target GLI. It is anticipated that these approaches will provide new
insight into critical targets that determine HH-dependent survival, and
lead to the translation of agents that target or regulate GLI function.

