Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor p15Ink4b determines cell fate of hematopoietic
progenitors: Implications for development of human blood disorders.


Red blood cells (RBCs) are a vital component of mammalian blood. Since
they are short lived, they must be continuously replenished by
erythropoiesis, a stepwise commitment of blood stem and progenitor cells
to mature erythrocytes. The anemia due to the loss of RBC is a life
threatening condition, often accompanying blood diseases such as
leukemias and myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). A striking 60-80% of these
diseases have deleted or silenced expression of p15INK4B. An increased
understanding of the factors that drive erythroid lineage commitment in
progenitor cells is critical for developing new treatments for blood
disorders. Previous examination of p15Ink4b knock-out mouse models,
revealed skewing of hematopoietic progenitor differentiation towards
myeloid lineage (granulocytes, macrophages). Here, we demonstrate a novel
function for p15Ink4b in driving commitment to the erythroid lineage.
Mice lacking p15Ink4b have lower numbers of primitive RBC progenitors and
died shortly after induction of hemolytic anemia by phenylhydrazine
injection. Expression of p15Ink4b in blood progenitors induced dynamic
changes at the molecular level that rendered multi-lineage cells more
permissive to erythroid commitment and less permissive to myeloid
commitment. Noticeably, we found that p15Ink4b regulates a switch that
controls the balance between myeloid and erythroid differentiation
through activation of MEK/ERK signaling. In a time-coordinated manner
expression of p15Ink4b induced rapid phosphorylation of MEK/ERK that led
to rapid degradation of GATA-2 and activation of the GATA-1 transcription
factors. Subsequently, the active GATA-1 executed lineage commitment
through activation of the Erythropoietin receptor (EpoR), the master
regulator of erythroid differentiation. The p15Ink4b mediated increase in
GATA-1 expression, also resulted in decreased expression of the myeloid
specific transcription factor PU.1, suppressing myeloid differentiation.
In summary, we have defined a framework that determines how multipotent
progenitors coordinate the balance between myeloid and erythroid
differentiation. Central to this activity is p15Ink4b, which promotes
erythroid fate while suppressing myeloid cell formation, a function that
is particularly important in rapid RBC replenishment following stress.
Our finding has implications not only for MDS and myeloid leukemia, where
loss of tumor suppressor p15INK4B is a common event, but also for other
forms of human refractory anemia.

