Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome sequencing identifies oncogenic microRNA signatures
related to NF-kB, TP53 and Notch family members in head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma.


MicroRNA dysregulation has been shown to be nearly universal in cancer
biology, driving oncogenic signaling networks. However, microRNA mediated
global regulatory mechanisms underlying malignant phenotypes of head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) remain unclear. In this study, we
have performed genome-wide small RNA sequencing on a panel of nine HNSCC
cell lines and three normal primary oral keratinocyte cell lines, as well
as matched primary tumor and normal tissues using the SOLiD parallel
sequencing platform. A panel of microRNAs with altered expression was
identified, including several novel oncogenic microRNAs which are
upregulated in parallel with altered activation of NF-KB c-REL, TP53
family members Np63 and TAp73, and potentially involved in the
down-modulation of p53 and Notch1, two genes most often mutated or
inactivated in HNSCC. To examine the hypothesis that these microRNAs
could potentially be regulated by NF-KB and p53 pathways, NF-KB inducer
TNF- was used to treat an HNSCC cell line with high expression of mtTP53,
Np63 and TAp73. Genome-wide small RNA sequencing revealed significant
changes in microRNA expression modulated by TNF- that overlaps with the
panel of constitutively dysregulated microRNAs in HNSCC. Furthermore,
genome-wide ChIP-sequencing revealed that TNF- modulated DNA binding
activities of c-REL, Np63 and TAp73 aligned within the regulatory regions
of several differentially expressed microRNAs. Modulation of these
microRNAs with anti-miR repression altered cell cycle and reduced
proliferation in HNSCC cell lines, which confirmed the oncogenic activity
of the microRNAs and their potential for therapeutic targeting.Citation
Format: Anthony D. Saleh, Han Si, Xingping Yang, Jamie Coupar, Zhong
Chen, Carter Van Waes. Transcriptome sequencing identifies oncogenic
microRNA signatures related to NF-kB, TP53 and Notch family members in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3050. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3050

