Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The use of a novel in vivo orthotopic imaging model of AML for
assessment of drug efficacy.


One of the major challenges facing drug discovery programs is the
development and validation of clinically relevant preclinical models to
allow meaningful efficacy testing of potentially therapeutic agents. In
standard sub cutaneous (s.c.) xenograft studies, engraftment and disease
progression is measured using callipers. However, orthotopic and
metastatic models, although more clinically relevant, are more difficult
to measure in vivo, requiring larger group sizes and additional satellite
groups for the study of terminal end points. Classically in non-solid
tumours, such as Acute Myeloid Leukaemia (AML), terminal end points such
as hind limb paralysis have been used, alongside FACS analysis, to assess
leukemic disease burden in animals. However, this type of model does not
lend itself to longitudinal study of disease burden and low levels of
engraftment are hard to assess. With the use of in vivo optical imaging
we can now follow disease progression at orthotopic sites, and in the
case of non solid tumours, monitor systemic disease burden in the same
animal over time. Here we describe the use of intrafemoral (i.f.) cell
transplantation, in which cells are implanted directly into the
biological niche of interest, the bone marrow, correlating with the
environment in which disease develops in patients. Luciferase labelled
KASUMI-1 pHR-SLIEW AML cells were injected into the bone marrow cavity of
the femur of severely immunocompromised NOG (NOD/Shi-scid/IL-2Rynull)
mice via the knee joint. These animals were monitored over eight weeks
from time of initial transplantation, and disease burden followed and
quantified using bioluminescent detection. Once engraftment was evident,
animals were administered treatment with either vehicle, etoposide, or
cytarabine, and progression of disease monitored weekly by optical
imaging. The model consistently gave rise to leukemic disease
disseminating from the site of initial transplantation. Etoposide or
cytarabine were shown to abrogate disease, compared to control, in a dose
dependent manner. This orthotopic model has advantages over standard, s.c
xenograft models, including the ability to quickly identify engrafted
animals and the consistent, predictable development of disease allows for
therapeutic intervention at an early stage, extending the treatment
window. Disease burden can be measured in each individual animal for the
duration of the study and treatment efficacy can be easily followed by
optical imaging. This model provides an attractive, clinically relevant
option for the preclinical assessment of novel therapeutics and
combination treatment regimens.

