Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Flt-4 expression on tumor cells and its autocrine mechanism with
VEGF-C/contactin-1 stimulate progression of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.


Background: Tumor cell-derived VEGF-C has been considered to promote
lymphangiogenesis by activating Flt-4 (VEGFR-3) expressed on lymphatic
endothelial cells via a paracrine mechanism in tumor microenvironment.
Recent studies have shown that Flt-4 is expressed not only in endothelial
cells but also selectively in certain subsets of a variety of cancer
cells. In addition, the VEGF-C/Flt-4 autocrine loop on lung
adenocarcinoma cells was reported to enhance cell motility and
invasiveness through up-regulation of the neural cell adhesion molecule
Contactin-1 (CNTN-1), although little of such mechanism is known in head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Present study was aimed to
examine Flt-4 expression and VEGF-C/Flt-4 autocrine loop in HNSCC cells,
and clinicopathological significance of the expressions of Flt-4, VEGF-C,
and CNTN-1 in the tumor specimens of the patients with HNSCC. Methods: We
examined expression of Flt-4 in HNSCC cell lines using quantitative
real-time PCR, RT-PCR, and immunocytochemistry. The role of the
VEGF-C/Flt-4 axis in Flt-4-positive HNSCC cells in vitro was investigated
by stimulating or blocking Flt-4. Immunohistochemical studies were
performed on 56 oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC) specimens. The
associations of the immunohistochemical expressions of Flt-4, VEGF-C, and
CNTN-1 with the clinicopathological factors were statistically analyzed.
Results: Real-time PCR detected Flt-4 mRNA expression in several HNSCC
cells, which was further confirmed by RT-PCR and immunocytochemistry in
SAS and HO1U1. Stimulation of Flt-4 using recombinant VEGF-C up-regulated
expression of CNTN-1 and VEGF-C itself in SAS, whereas blocking using
neutralizing anti-Flt-4 antibody or Flt-4 inhibitor down-regulated
expression of CNTN-1 in both SAS and HO1U1, and that of VEGF-C itself in
SAS. Immunohistochemical analyses using TSCC specimens found significant
correlation of CNTN-1 expression with both VEGF-C and Flt-4 expressions,
but not between VEGF-C and Flt-4. With regard to clinicopathological
factors, expressions of all the three molecular markers in tumor cells
significantly correlated with lymph node (LN) metastasis, which was also
correlated with T classification and lymphatic invasion in univariate
analysis. Multivariate analysis elucidated that T classification
(p=0.003), lymphatic invasion (p=0.024), and expression of Flt-4 in tumor
cells (p=0.046) were independent predictors of LN metastasis.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that VEGF-C activates FLt-4 expressed
not only on lymphatic endothelial cells but also selectively on subset of
HNSCC cells, resulting in VEGF-C/Flt-4 autocrine mechanism that
up-regulates CNTN-1 and VEGF-C itself in tumor cells. Therefore, both
paracrine and autocrine mechanisms of VEGF-C/Flt-4 may contribute to
progression of HNSCC including LN metastasis.

