Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation profiling of ovarian tumors by methylation
ligation-dependant macroarray.


Background: Ovarian cancer is the gynecological disease with the highest
death rate. Efforts towards ovarian cancer research are needed to develop
early detection tools, better therapies, cures and to prevent the
disease. DNA methylation profiling of a large set of putative cancer
biomarkers may help to identify relevant biological aspects of ovarian
cancer.Materials and Methods: We selected 106 patients diagnosed for
ovarian cancer (35 serous, 30 endometrioid, 32 mucinous and 8 germinal
tumors) for which clinicopathological informations were available and 17
histologically normal ovarian tissues as control. In order to identify
methylation signatures, a method called Methylation Ligation-dependant
Macroarray (MLM) and developed in our laboratory was applied to DNA
extracted from microdissected formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue
sections. The MLM technology, derived from a multiplex ligation assay
coupled with an array-based analysis of uniform size amplification
products, permits the methylation status analysis of 60 promoter regions
at the same time.Results: Each of the 106 ovarian tumor samples analyzed
had a unique methylation profile. Hierarchical clustering identified
mainly two groups of patients with distinct methylation profiles. The
first group of tumors contained low levels of methylation, whereas the
second group had higher methylation levels. The group 1 included normal
ovarian tissues as well as a large number of ovarian serous tumors.
Endometrioid and mucinous tumors were more represented in the group 2.
When looking at the gene level, the highest methylation frequency was
detected in the TAC1, SPARC, ADAMTS12 and hTERT promoter genes. The
promoter of the BORIS/CTCFL cancer testis-antigen gene was found
hypomethylated in several tumors, mainly in serous and germinal types.
Located in the X-chromosome, the DAX1 promoter gene, which is partially
methylated in normal ovarian tissues, was found hypomethylated or
hypermethylated in tumors. Interestingly, the difference between the
hypo- and hyper-methylated groups concerned mainly genes belonging to the
WNT pathway.Conclusion: The marked differences in methylation profiles
independently of histological subtypes underscore the importance of
characterizing tumors at the molecular level. Further investigations are
needed to evaluate the role of the WNT signaling pathway as a marker and
putative target for cisplatin chemosensitivity in ovarian tumors.

