Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel assay to predict susceptibility to tobacco-induced disease.


Background: Tobacco misuse is the leading preventable cause of morbidity
and mortality in the world. Tobacco-induced DNA damage is one of the main
mechanisms contributing to the pathogenesis of cancer, stroke, heart and
pulmonary diseases. Tobacco-induced DNA damage is modulated by genetic
and epigenetic factors, as well as life-style choices, and is expected to
be a major determinant of the individual susceptibility to
tobacco-induced diseases.Technical limitations allow only a few types of
DNA damage to be quantified in human samples. Recently, we filled a major
methodological gap in the field of DNA damage by developing a novel and
highly sensitive primer-anchored DNA damage detection assay (PADDA) to
map and quantify in vivo levels of DNA damage.Aims: (1) To standardize
PADDA for the detection of oxidative DNA damage, one of the main types of
tobacco-induced damage. (2) To define the levels of persistent DNA damage
in the oral mucosa of smokers. (3) To determine if persistent nucleotide
damage at p53 co-localizes with tobacco-induced cancer mutational
hotspots.Methods: To standardize the assay, PADDA was used on a
high-throughput setting to quantify DNA damage in oral cell lines exposed
to very low doses of hydrogen peroxide. DNA damage was mapped and
quantified on the p53 gene by PADDA in oral epithelial cells collected
from smokers and non-smokers by oral scrapings. The location of p53
nucleotide damage was compared with reported tobacco-induced p53 cancer
mutational hotspots. Saliva cotinine levels were used to confirm smoking
status. Data were analyzed by chi-square goodness of fit and exact
non-parametric tests.Results: Our data documented PADDA's ability to
detect dose-dependent increase in DNA damage in human oral cells. DNA
damage was significantly higher in smokers than in non-smokers. Moreover,
we documented for the first time that the persistent DNA damage in the
oral mucosa of smokers has significantly higher mutagenic potential than
that present in non-smokers and persists mainly at p53 nucleotides that
are hotspots for mutation in tobacco-induced cancers.Conclusion: PADDA
detects dose-dependent DNA damage response, a crucial test of its
accuracy and a prerequisite for its use in biomonitoring. PADDA documents
the extent of tobacco-induced DNA damage in vivo, and reinforces the
importance of smoking cessation. Of major clinical importance, we show,
for the first time, that tobacco-induced DNA damage persists
preferentially in p53 nucleotides that are hotspots for mutation.
Application of this assay to large series of smokers and former smokers
has a major potential to establish biomarkers of susceptibility to
tobacco-induced disease, which can guide preventive and diagnostic
strategies.Funding: This work was supported by the Oklahoma Tobacco
Research Center and the Oklahoma Center for the Advancement of Science &
Technology. Dr. Queimado holds a Presbyterian Health Foundation Endowed
Chair in Otorhinolaryngology.

