Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of microRNA networks in pancreatic cancer stem
cells.


Background. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is a highly lethal disease, which
is usually diagnosed in advanced stages for which there are little or no
effective therapies. It has the worst prognosis of any major malignancy
(3% 5-year survival) and is the fourth most common cause of cancer death
yearly in the United States. Recently there have been several reports
that the presence of cancer stem cells (CSCs) was related to the high
refractoriness in pancreatic cancer. CSCs have two characteristics,
self-renewal and differentiation, for maintenance of cancer tissues
(Nature, 2001). Given that chemotherapies target generally against
differentiated non-CSCs, small populations of CSCs survive and the
recurrence of tumor growth will occur. Nevertheless, the underlined
mechanism, which links between chemoresistance and stemness, remains to
be elucidated. Considering that microRNAs are number-limited, functional
nucleotides, those should be beneficial for efficient diagnostic and
therapeutic approaches of pancreatic cancer.Matherials and Methods.
Pancreatic cancer Panc1 cells were cultured in the medium containing
increasing amounts of gemcitabine (GEM) to obtain several GEM-resistant
clones. To identify the microRNAs, which play a critical role in the
chemoresistance in pancreatic CSCs, we performed the serum-free floating
culture of embryoid body-like structures by quick re-aggregation method
(SFEBq), as a tool for separating CSCs; The SFEBq is the method for
culture and concentration of neural stem cells, which can concentrate
CSCs successfully in several types of cancer. The chemoresistance was
studied by the MTT assay. RNAs were extracted, the genome-wide
transcriptome was identified and networks were studied between stemness
and chemoresistance.Results. The study of original Panc1 cells and four
representative, independent GEM-resistant clones (R1, R2, R3 and R4)
allowed the identification of CSC-specific and GEM-specific signal
transduction pathways. The data were verified among four resistant
clones. By utilizing specific inhibitors including small-molecule
compounds and anti-microRNAs, we studied the network cross-talking CSCs
and chemoresistance. Even if the SFEBq-enriched CSC clones were not
exposed to GEM, their similarity to chemo-specific pathway reinforces
that the small populations of CSCs would pre-exist as an innate
resistance before treatment in patients. Such cross-talking pathway would
be eligible to sensitize pancreatic cancer to chemotherapy, and to
eradicate tumors.Conclusion. The data demonstrate the successful
molecular dissection of stemness and chemoresistant pathways, and the
present study provides the rationale for novel therapeutic approaches
such as modified nucleotide medicines to target the pre-existing CSCs.

