Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant expression of trefoil factor 3 (TFF3) is associated with
tumor progression and an unfavorable prognosis in patients with
colorectal cancer .


Background. Trefoil factor 3 (TFF3) is predominantly expressed by goblet
cells of the small intestine and colon and its expression is maintained
throughout the colon adenoma-carcinoma sequence. Aberrant TFF3 expression
in tumor cells has been reported to be involved in tumor progression and
unfavorable prognosis of certain human malignancies. In colorectal cancer
(CRC), the association between TFF3 expression and tumor progression
remains uncertain.Aim. We aimed to investigate the expression of TFF3 in
tumor cells using immunohistochemistry and to evaluate its clinical and
prognostic values in patients with colorectal cancer (CRC).Materials and
methods. Three hundred (n=300) samples of CRC patients were investigated
for the expression of TFF3 in tumor cells using standard
immunohistochemistry (IHC). The IHC score of TFF3 in tumor cells was
determined on the basis of both staining intensity and the percentage of
positive cells. The IHC score was dichotomized at the cutoff value
predictive of overall survival using a non-parametric receiver operating
characteristic analysis. The association between the expression of TFF3
in tumor cells and clinicopathological features was analyzed. Impact of
TFF3 expression in tumor cells on overall survival (OS) was also analyzed
using univariate and multivariate analysesResults. TFF3 was expressed in
all goblet cells of adjacent normal tissue. In adjacent normal colonic
crypt, immunoreactive TFF3 protein was localized mainly in the cytoplasm
or supranuclear cytoplasm of epithelial cells. Colorectal cancer cells
showed an aberrant cytoplasmic TFF3 staining. By use of our dichotomous
scoring system, 110 tumors (66%) were low and 190 (34%) were high for
TFF3 immunostaining. Decreased expression of TFF3 was significantly
associated with larger tumor size (Background. Trefoil factor 3 (TFF3) is
predominantly expressed by goblet cells of the small intestine and colon
and its expression is maintained throughout the colon adenoma-carcinoma
sequence. Aberrant TFF3 expression in tumor cells has been reported to be
involved in tumor progression and unfavorable prognosis of certain human
malignancies. In colorectal cancer (CRC), the association between TFF3
expression and tumor progression remains uncertain.Aim. We aimed to
investigate the expression of TFF3 in tumor cells using
immunohistochemistry and to evaluate its clinical and prognostic values
in patients with colorectal cancer (CRC).Materials and methods. Three
hundred (n=300) samples of CRC patients were investigated for the
expression of TFF3 in tumor cells using standard immunohistochemistry
(IHC). The IHC score of TFF3 in tumor cells was determined on the basis
of both staining intensity and the percentage of positive cells. The IHC
score was dichotomized at the cutoff value predictive of overall survival
using a non-parametric receiver operating characteristic analysis. The
association between the expression of TFF3 in tumor cells and
clinicopathological features was analyzed. Impact of TFF3 expression in
tumor cells on overall survival (OS) was also analyzed using univariate
and multivariate analysesResults. TFF3 was expressed in all goblet cells
of adjacent normal tissue. In adjacent normal colonic crypt,
immunoreactive TFF3 protein was localized mainly in the cytoplasm or
supranuclear cytoplasm of epithelial cells. Colorectal cancer cells
showed an aberrant cytoplasmic TFF3 staining. By use of our dichotomous
scoring system, 110 tumors (66%) were low and 190 (34%) were high for
TFF3 immunostaining. Decreased expression of TFF3 was significantly
associated with larger tumor size (<0.05), poorly differentiated
histology (Background. Trefoil factor 3 (TFF3) is predominantly expressed
by goblet cells of the small intestine and colon and its expression is
maintained throughout the colon adenoma-carcinoma sequence. Aberrant TFF3
expression in tumor cells has been reported to be involved in tumor
progression and unfavorable prognosis of certain human malignancies. In
colorectal cancer (CRC), the association between TFF3 expression and
tumor progression remains uncertain.Aim. We aimed to investigate the
expression of TFF3 in tumor cells using immunohistochemistry and to
evaluate its clinical and prognostic values in patients with colorectal
cancer (CRC).Materials and methods. Three hundred (n=300) samples of CRC
patients were investigated for the expression of TFF3 in tumor cells
using standard immunohistochemistry (IHC). The IHC score of TFF3 in tumor
cells was determined on the basis of both staining intensity and the
percentage of positive cells. The IHC score was dichotomized at the
cutoff value predictive of overall survival using a non-parametric
receiver operating characteristic analysis. The association between the
expression of TFF3 in tumor cells and clinicopathological features was
analyzed. Impact of TFF3 expression in tumor cells on overall survival
(OS) was also analyzed using univariate and multivariate analysesResults.
TFF3 was expressed in all goblet cells of adjacent normal tissue. In
adjacent normal colonic crypt, immunoreactive TFF3 protein was localized
mainly in the cytoplasm or supranuclear cytoplasm of epithelial cells.
Colorectal cancer cells showed an aberrant cytoplasmic TFF3 staining. By
use of our dichotomous scoring system, 110 tumors (66%) were low and 190
(34%) were high for TFF3 immunostaining. Decreased expression of TFF3 was
significantly associated with larger tumor size (<0.05), poorly
differentiated histology (<0.01), advanced T stage (T4) (p=0.02),
synchronous liver metastasis (p=0.03), and advanced UICC stage (stage 4)
(p=0.02). In univariate analysis, decreased tumoral TFF3 was
significantly associated with poor prognosis [p=0.02, hazard ratio
(HR)=2.13, 95 % CI, 1.15-3.97]. In multivariate analysis, decreased
tumoral TFF3 showed a trend toward being an independent prognostic factor
for CRC patients [p=0.09, hazard ratio (HR)=1.76, 95 % CI,
0.92-3.37].Conclusions. Decreased TFF3 expression was associated with
colorectal tumor progression. Decreased or lack of TFF3 expression in
tumor cells may have a potential prognostic value in CRC patients.

