Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AKT inhibitor MK-2206 induces necrotic cell death of uterine
leiomyoma cells in vitro and reduces tumor volume in vivo.


Uterine leiomyomas (UL), benign tumors of the myometrium, are the number
one indication for hysterectomies in the U.S. due to a lack of effective
therapy. ULs show increased phosphorylation of the pro-survival protein
AKT compared to normal myometrium indicating that AKT signaling is
increased in UL. However, substantial data directly linking AKT to UL
cell survival is lacking. We hypothesized that AKT promotes UL cell
survival and that it is a viable drug target for inhibiting UL growth. We
utilized the AKT inhibitor MK-2206 (MK), currently in phase II trials, on
cultured primary human UL cells. MK-2206 effectively reduced
phosphorylation of AKT and PRAS40, an AKT substrate. MK-2206 did not
affect cell proliferation but caused cell death. We observed a lack of
apoptosis in dead UL cells by Annexin V staining. Additionally, MK-2206
was able to induce UL cell death in the presence of pan-caspase
inhibitor, Z-VAD-FMK, indicating that MK-2206 mediated cell death is
caspase independent and non-apoptotic. Given that caspases did not
modulate cell death, we explored necrosis. MK-2206 induced HMGB1
cytoplasmic localization and mitochondrial disruption indicating possible
leiomyoma necrosis. We next explored programmed necrosis, a form of
non-apoptotic cell death mediated by RIP kinases (RIPK). However, MK-2206
was able to induce cell death in the presence of RIPK inhibitors,
necrostatin-1 and necrosulfonamide, indicating that programmed necrosis
is not the mechanism of MK-2206 mediated UL cell death. We are actively
exploring alternate necrotic cell death pathways as the mechanisms of
MK-2206 induced UL cell death. Lastly, in-vivo MK-2206 treatments reduced
tumor volume of human UL cells implanted under the kidney capsule of NSG
mice. Xenograft sections from mice treated with MK-2206-2206 contained
dying cells in the absence of cleaved caspase 3 supporting the in-vitro
results. This is the first report of non-apoptotic cell death in UL and
the first time that AKT has been targeted in-vivo for UL therapy. Our
data provides molecular evidence for the involvement of AKT in UL cell
survival and suggest that AKT inhibition by MK-2206 may be a viable
option for the future treatment of UL. This work was funded by NIH
P01HD057877.

