Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autocrine/paracrine RANKL-RANK signaling promotes cancer bone
metastasis and establishes premetastatic niche recruiting bystander
cancer cells to participate in the metastatic process.


RANKL-elicited RANK activity plays critical roles in many biological and
pathological conditions, including osteoclast differentiation/bone
remodeling, lymph node/thymic development, central thermoregulation and
progesterone-driven mammary gland maturation, differentiation and
carcinogenesis. RANKL can be derived from osteoblasts, infiltrating
inflammatory cells and stromal fibroblasts. We previously showed that
malignant prostate cancer (PCa) cells expressed RANKL and that its
expression was correlated with clinical PCa progression and bone
metastasis. The present study examined whether PCa-derived RANKL acts on
RANK+ PCa cells to promote PCa bone metastasis. We demonstrated several
interesting key findings for RANKL-RANK signaling in PCa cells: 1) RANKL
overexpression in human PCa LNCaP and ARCaPE cells results in increased
RANKL-RANK signaling within PCa cells and confers PCa bone and soft
tissue metastases in a tumor cell RANK-dependent manner since RANK
knockdown in RANKL-expressing PCa cells fails to induce bone colonization
or metastasis. 2) RANKL amplifies downstream signaling by activating
RANKL and c-Met expression through a common transcription factor complex,
c-Myc/Max, which was identified by site-directed mutagenesis and
transcription factor deletion/interference assays. 3) Even a few RANKL+
PCa cells are sufficient to initiate the in vivo metastatic cascade by
recruiting non-tumorigenic RANKL PCa cells to participate in the
metastatic process via downstream signaling amplification. This is
supported by the observation that recombinant RANKL protein alone is
sufficient to induce bone colonization and growth of RANKL and
non-metastatic PCa cells. 4) RANKL also promotes EMT and confers stem and
neuroendocrine (NE) cell properties on participating cancer cells
determined by changes in their specific markers. 5) In support of the
roles of RANKL-RANK signaling in PCa bone metastasis, RANKL expression at
the single cell level in primary PCa specimens predicts PCa patient
survival. Collectively, these results demonstrated that
autocrine/paracrine RANKL-RANK signaling in PCa cells establishes a
premetastatic niche through a vicious cycle," inducing RANKL and c-Met
expression via activation of c-Myc/Max, and this promotes PCa EMT
progression, stem and NE cell properties, and PCa bone and soft tissue
metastases. RANKL expression status therefore offers new insights for
dissecting the mechanism by which PCa cells exhibit propensity for bone
colonization/metastasis.(Funding supported in part by R01 CA122602 and
P01 CA098912 grants)

