Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating miRNAs as potential biomarkers in prostate cancer
pathogenesis.


Introduction: According to the American Cancer Society, prostate cancer
(PCa) is a major health concern for U.S. men and is expected to result in
approximately 241,740 new cases and about 28,170 deaths in 2012. African
American (AA) men have a 60 percent higher incidence rate and twice the
death rate of Caucasian men (CA). Whereas metastasis is the most common
cause of death, no specific markers have been assigned to the severity
and ethnic biasness of the disease. Deregulation of miRNAs has been
observed in various human tumors which emphasize their role in cancer
pathogenesis, progression and metastasis. This study was aimed to
investigate potential miRNAs involved in PCa. The study also aims to
identify potential biomarkers and/or their therapeutic targets which can
provide insight into the severity and ethnic biasness of disease.Methods:
Study was divided into three phases: (I) Candidate serum miRNAs were
detected by using PCR microarray (learning set of 6 AA and 6 CA PCa
patients). (II) Discriminating performance of candidate miRNAs were
validated by real-time RT-PCR in serum [AA (20 PCa patients and 16
controls) and CA (16 PCa patients and 16 controls). (III) Functional
studies on candidate miRNA(s) were subsequently performed using gain-and
loss-of-function approach in cellular assays.Results: In the discovery
phase we obtained 5 miRNAs which were differentially expressed in the AA
prostate cancer patients. After careful examination miR-212 and few
others were selected for future validation. In the validation set there
was an overall high expression of miR-212 in serum of PCa patients as
compared to normal individuals (p=0.0110). Subdivision on the basis of
ethnicity showed serum expression levels of miR-212 in AA were
significantly modulated (p=0.034) as compared to CA PCa patients.
Functional validation of miR-212 was done in PC3 and LnCap cell
lines.Conclusion: Our results showed a potential role for miR-212 in the
regulation of gene expression which in turn can define the aggressiveness
associated in African American PCa patients.

