Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of bevacizumab and dexamethasone on plasma ultrafiltrate
(UF) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pharmacokinetics (PKs) of carboplatin
in a non-human primate (NHP) model.


Background: Bevacizumab and dexamethasone are commonly administered to
patients with brain tumors, and may alter the central nervous system
penetration of concurrently administered chemotherapeutic agents by
affecting vascular permeability and blood brain barrier (BBB)
composition. We compared plasma UF and CSF PKs of intravenously (IV)
administered carboplatin given alone and in combination with
dexamethasone or bevacizumab in a non-tumor bearing NHP model, that has
been predictive of human PKs of anti-cancer drugs.Methods: Carboplatin
(8.75 mg/kg IV over 1 hour) combined with bevacizumab (12.5 mg/kg IV over
1 hour immediately prior to carboplatin) or dexamethasone (0.4 mg/kg IV
bolus given 24 hours and immediately prior to carboplatin), was
administered on separate occasions to each of three adult rhesus monkeys.
Each monkey received carboplatin alone as control. Serial paired plasma
and CSF samples were obtained over 24 hours. Plasma UFs were prepared
immediately. Platinum was quantified using a validated atomic absorption
spectroscopy assay with a lower limit of quantitation of 0.03 M. Area
under concentration x time curves (AUC) were derived using the linear
trapezoidal method. CSF penetration (ratio of CSF AUC0-: plasma UF AUC0-)
and CSF penetration relative to control (ratio of the CSF penetration of
carboplatin with bevacizumab or dexamethasone to the CSF penetration of
carboplatin alone) were calculated.Results:
Cmax = maximal concentration, AUC = area under the concentration x time
curve, T1/2 = terminal half lifePlasma UF and CSF PK parameters for
carboplatin (median and range)Conclusions:Plasma UF and CSF PK of
carboplatin in NHP were similar to previous reports and showed limited
inter-subject variability. Bevacizumab and dexamethasone consistently
decreased the CSF penetration of carboplatin (median decrease 22% and 12%
respectively). In patients with brain tumors and disrupted BBB, these
differences may be larger and could be clinically relevant.

