Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of androgen receptor splicing in prostate cancer cells.


Prostate tumors develop resistance to androgen deprivation therapy (ADT)
involving multiple mechanisms, one of which is expression of the
constitutively active androgen receptor (AR) splice variants, which lack
the ligand-binding domain. AR-V7 is the most abundantly expressed of the
constitutively active AR-splice variants. In the VCaP human prostate
cancer cell line as well as several human prostate cancer xenografts that
do not have intragenic AR gene rearrangements, AR-V7 is expressed in
response to ADT, suggesting that AR-splicing may occur in association
with AR gene transcription initiation and elongation rate. Inhibition of
transcription in VCaP cells was examined using actinomycin D (ActD),
benzimidazole (DRB) or trichostatin A (TSA). ActD and DRB eliminated,
while TSA weakened, ADT's capability in inducing AR full-length (ARfl)
and AR-V7 mRNA, indicating association of AR-splicing with AR gene
transcription initiation and elongation rate. The decision as to which
splicing site is excised is determined by both the regulatory RNA
sequences (cis-elements) and their associated RNA splicing proteins
(trans-elements). Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays with
primers amplifying pre-mRNA regions that correspond to the 5 and 3 splice
regions for ARfl and AR-V7 we identified trans-splicing elements
recruited by ADT as well as ADT induced recruitment of U1A, U2AF, ASF/SF2
and p54nrb to intron splice sites for generation of AR-V7. Similar
recruitment of these splicing factors to the splice sites was not seen in
LNCaP cells in which ADT does not increase AR-V7. To locate potential RNA
sequences (cis-elements) that are responsible for AR-V7 splicing, we
screened exon 3B and its flanking region using the Splicing Rainbow and
ESEfinder 3.0 programs. One intronic splicing enhancer (ISE) and one
exonic splicing enhancer (ESE) near the 3ss of exon 3B were identified.
Pull-down assays with oligos for the ISE demonstrated binding to hnRNP I
and U2AF65, while the ESE bound ASF/SF2. The activity of these two motifs
was confirmed using an AR-V7 minigene. When the various splicing motifs
were mutated, AR-V7 was not generated. These RNA-protein interactions are
also regulated by ADT. siRNA knock-down of hnRNP I, U2AF65, and ASF/SF2
suppressed AR-V7 expression in VCaP cells in response to ADT. These data
indicate that ADT-induced AR gene transcription rate and splicing factor
recruitment to AR pre-mRNA contribute to the enhanced AR-7 levels
detected in prostate cancer cells.Pacific Northwest Prostate Cancer
SPORE, National Cancer Institute (XD and SRP); Canadian Institute of
Health Research (XD, MOP-97934); Department of Defense plus Veterans
Administration Grants (SRP).

