Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Zinc and prostate cancer: a systematic review.


Background: Zinc is involved in many essential cellular functions. It has
been shown that the prostate contains high concentrations of zinc, but
zinc levels decrease in prostate cancer tissues. Although, experimental
evidence implicates zinc in the pathogenesis of prostate cancer,
epidemiological data are inconsistent. We conducted a systematic review
of the literature to summarize the evidence regarding the association
between zinc and prostate cancer.Methods: Relevant studies were
identified by searching PubMed and the Cochrane Library databases through
November 2012 and reviewing reference lists of retrieved articles.
Inclusion criteria were original and peer-reviewed publications reporting
the association between zinc intake or status and prostate cancer
outcomes (diagnosis, progression). No reviews, editorials, or comments
were included. Two investigators abstracted study information and
evaluated quality independently using standardized forms.Results: Sixteen
studies met inclusion criteria, including 3 cohorts, 2 nested
case-control, 10 case-control, and 1 randomized clinical trial, with a
total of 111,288 participants and 11,681 cases of prostate cancer. All
studies measured the association between zinc levels and prostate cancer.
In most studies, regardless of the study design or source of zinc, the
highest dose of zinc was associated with a modest elevation of odds of
prostate cancer. Four studies had decreased odds of prostate cancer for
the highest dose of zinc but the confidence interval crossed one. There
was evidence of a dose-response relationship and subgroup analysis
revealed a protective effect of high zinc intake among advanced prostate
cancer cases.Conclusions: Although the level of zinc in prostate cancer
tissue is reduced, studies assessing the association of zinc intake and
prostate cancer have yielded inconsistent results. We performed a
systematic review to assess the role of zinc in prostate cancer. As a
result of this systematic review, the evidence is still insufficient to
recommend zinc supplementation for cancer patients in clinical practice.

