Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altering the expression levels of CRABPII and FABP5 by curcumin
sensitizes MDA-MB231 mammary carcinoma cells to retinoic acid mediated
growth suppression.


Although great progress has been made in the treatment of breast cancer,
drug resistance is a major problem in breast cancer patients, promoting
the need to understand the molecular mechanisms involved in the disease
and identify future targeted therapy. Curcumin, a hydrophobic polyphenol
extracted from the plant, Curcuma Longa, has been reported to possess
anti-tumorigenic properties in several different cancers. Curcumin has
been widely used in combination with other therapies to enhance apoptosis
and promote anti-carcinogenic activities. In this study, we explore the
effect of curcumin on retinoic acid binding proteins, cellular retinoic
acid binding protein II (CRABPII) and fatty acid binding protein 5
(FABP5). Retinoic acid (RA) can inhibit carcinoma cell growth by
activating nuclear retinoic acid receptors (RAR) but enhances cell
proliferation and survival by activating a different nuclear receptor,
namely PPAR/ (peroxisome proliferator activated-protein /). The hormone
is either targeted to RAR by CRABPII, or delivered to PPAR/ by FABP5.
Hence, RA exerts anticarcinogenic activities in cells that express a high
CRABPII/FABP5 ratio but facilitates the growth of carcinoma cells in
which this ratio is low. We investigated whether curcumin can alter the
ratio of CRABPII/FABP5 and promote retinoic acid mediated growth
suppression in RA resistant MDA-MB231 mammary carcinoma cells. Using
quantititive real-time PCR, we report that 30 M curcumin suppresses the
mRNA level of FABP5 and PPAR/, while concomitantly enhances CRABPII mRNA
expression by 3-fold. Additionally, we performed western blot analysis
and demonstrated that in addition to the downregulation of FABP5
mRNA,curcumin downregulates the protein expression of FABP5 by
approximately 50%. Interestingly, we have observed that curcumin
sensitizes MDA-MB231 cells to retinoic acid mediated growth suppression
by using MTT assay. The combination of curcumin with RA suppresses
mammary carcinoma growth of MDA-MB231 cells by 30-40% in comparison to
curcumin alone. Thus, altering the expression level of CRABPII and FABP5
by curcumin diverts the RA signalling from the proliferative FABP5/PPAR/
pathway to the growth inhibitory CRABPII/RAR path and sensitizes
MDA-MB231 cells to RA-mediated growth suppression.

