Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of inhibitors of apoptosis (IAP) family members in
human breast and ovarian cancer models of non-MDR1 taxane resistance.


Four breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, BT-549, MDA-MB-231 and T-47D) and
four ovarian cancer cell lines (1A9/A2780, ES-2, MES-OV and OVCAR-3) were
selected for taxane resistance by exposing cells to either docetaxel or
paclitaxel in the presence of the P-glycoprotein inhibitor, PSC-833
(valspodar, 2 M). All of these co-selected variants are MDR1/ABCB1(-),
and the resistance to taxanes is not transporter-mediated. We have
previously reported elevated class III -tubulin (TUBB3), reduced BRCA1,
elevated CDKN1A (p21), and altered epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) genes in the majority of the non-MDR1 taxane variants. Inhibitors
of apoptosis (IAP) proteins directly bind and inhibit several caspases,
and may play a critical role in determining cell fate after exposure to
chemotherapeutic agents. In this study, we profiled the expression of IAP
proteins and found elevated content in this panel of taxane-resistant
human breast and ovarian cancer cell lines. In both the paclitaxel- (TP)
and docetaxel-selected (TxTP) ovarian cancer cell lines we observed
significantly overexpressed cIAP1 (BIRC2), cIAP2 (BIRC3), XIAP (BIRC4),
and Livin (BIRC7) relative to parental cell lines. Expression of cIAP2
was undetectable in OVCAR-3 and its taxane resistant cell lines,
OVCAR-3/TP20 and OVCAR-3/TxTP5. Elevated cIAP1 and XIAP levels were
detected in the human breast cancer variant BT-549/TxTP50, and Livin was
overexpressed in all taxane-resistant breast cancer cell models. Survivin
(BIRC5) is highly expressed in cancers and has been associated with
taxane resistance via its effects on apoptosis and the cell cycle. We
observed reduced Survivin content in the majority of the variants
established in our laboratory except for the ovarian ES-2/TP80 cell line
where we found slightly elevated expression resulting from paclitaxel
selection relative to its parental control. In addition to these
alterations in IAP content, we observed elevated Bcl-2 in ovarian
(MES-OV/TP40 and MES-OV/TxTP50) and breast (MCF-7/TxTP50, BT-549/TxTP50,
and MDA231/TxTP50) cancer cell lines at the transcript level by rt-PCR
and confirmed by immunoblotting. Specific gene silencing by RNAi and
treatment with small molecule inhibitors will test the functional
significance of IAP alterations in these models of taxane resistance.

