Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IG-001 - Evaluation as next generation nanoparticle paclitaxel
against poorly perfused tumors.


Study Purpose: nab-paclitaxel (Abraxane), though a breakthrough in
paclitaxel formulation, has inherent problems associated with any
biologics. IG-001, being a chemical polymer bound nanoparticle paclitaxel
instead of biological polymer, is being developed as the next generation
nanoparticle paclitaxel. Its target indications are difficult to perfuse
hypoxic tumors such as pancreatic cancer, taking advantage of its ability
to rapidly deliver paclitaxel to the targeted tissue via albumin mediated
transport. This presentation details the identification of
characteristics necessary for activity of nanoparticle paclitaxel and
comparison between IG-001 and nab-paclitaxel.Methods: Preclinical and
clinical PK of the various formulations were compared to define the
defining characteristics of an effective nanoparticle paclitaxel ie.
nab-paclitaxel. The pharmacokinetic parameters were estimated by using
the noncompartmental open model and the WinNonlin program (Pharsight
Corp., Mountain View, CA). Descriptive statistics were computed for PK
assessment. Regression analysis of AUCinf vs. dose was performed to gain
an appreciation of dose proportionality. Tumor xenografts studies against
Melanoma (B16F10), Breast (MDAMB435S, MX-1), Ovarian (SKOV3), and
Pancreatic (MIA PaCa-2, PANC-1) were also examined. Tumor inhibition
relative to Taxol was used to normalize across tumor types.Results: The
defining characteristics of nab-paclitaxel are its rapid tissue
penetration such that tumor/plasma drug ratio was greater than Taxol with
1.9 fold advantage for nab-paclitaxel. Formulations with tumor
accumulation greater than Taxol without corresponding high tumor/plasma
ratio were ineffective. IG-001 and nab-paclitaxel exhibited the similar
profiles: high tissue penetration, high tumor/plasma ratio, dose
proportional PK in human, higher MTD in tumor xenograft studies, higher
MTD during phase I dose escalation study in human. Correspondingly IG-001
and nab-paclitaxel have similar activities in tumor xenografts models-
higher MTD and better efficacy at equitoxic dose versus Taxol. More
importantly, IG-001 exhibited activity against poorly perfused pancreatic
xenografts (MIAPaCa-2, PANC-1).Conclusions: A non-albumin-based
paclitaxel formulation (IG-001) was found to have similar properties to
the albumin-based paclitaxel formulation (nab-paclitaxel). Its clinical
development could give us the next generation paclitaxel nanoparticle
formulation that can be more readily modified than nab-paclitaxel
(Abraxane). More importantly, this model could be used to develop other
nanoparticle drugs against difficult to perfused tumors such as
pancreatic cancers.

