Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive metabolic profiling of hepatocellular carcinoma and
pancreatic tumors by capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry.


(Background) Most cancer types have been widely known to generate energy
primarily by glycolysis rather than oxidative phosphorylation even under
normoxia (Warburg effect). However, inadequate blood supply resulting
from defective angiogenesis is often observed in different kinds of
cancer tissues, and their microenvironment is considered nutritionally
unfavorable. How these cancer cells generate ATP is therefore still
unclear. We previously reported enhanced glycolysis and significant
accumulation of all amino acids except glutamine in both colon and
stomach cancer tissues (Hirayama A, et al Cancer Res 2009). (Methods)
Here, we investigated the metabolic microenvironment of hepatocelluar
carcinoma (HCC)(n=28, HBV-positive (B) 7, HCV-positive (C) 6, NonBnonC
(NBNC) 15), and pancreatic tumors (n=40, Invasive ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC) 21, Intraductal papillary mucinous adenoma (IPMA) 5, Intraductal
papillary mucinous carcinoma (IPMC) 14), using capillary
electrophoresis-mass spectrometry (CE-MS). (Results) The amount of
glucose were more than ten times higher in liver tissues, which indicates
that liver tissue exist in nutritionally favorable microenvironment even
in tumor tissue compared with pancreas tissue. Significant lactate
accumulation was found in all cancer tissues (HCC, IPMC, and PDAC), which
imply enhanced glycolysis. However, significant organ-specific
differences were found in the levels of amino acids. Organ and
etiology-specific difference were found in intermediates of TCA cycle.
For example, citrate was increased in B-HCC, malate was decreased in
NBNC-HCC, fumarate was decreased in B-HCC, NBNC-HCC, and PDAC, citrate
was decreased in IPMC, iso-citrate was decreased in PDAC, compared to
normal tissue, significantly. The concentration of most amino acids were
not changed between normal and tumor tissues in HCC and pancreatic
tumors, which suggests that these type of cancers do not depend on
autophagy for their amino acid source. (Conclusions)Overall, these
results provide metabolic phenotypes of different cancer tissues that
reflect the tumor microenvironment.

