Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The DNA-PK inhibitor, NU7441, sensitises cancer cells to
microtubule-targeting agents and modulates vincristine efflux in
multidrug resistant cells.


Microtubules are involved in the formation of the mitotic spindle, and
correct separation of the sister chromatids at mitosis is essential for
maintaining genomic stability. Microtubule-targeting drugs arrest
rapidly-dividing cells and are important chemotherapeutic agents, but the
development of multidrug-resistance (MDR) is a serious clinical problem.
Along with its role in DNA double-strand break repair, DNA-dependent
protein kinase (DNA-PK) has also been shown to play an important role in
stabilising spindle formation and preventing mitotic catastrophe (Shang
et al, Cancer Res. 2010). In light of this novel finding, we hypothesised
that inhibition of DNA-PK would sensitise cells to microtubule-targeting
agents. Pilot studies showed that inhibition of DNA-PK by the selective
inhibitor, NU7441, caused greater sensitisation to vincristine in
multidrug-resistant cells compared to parental cells. Here, we further
investigate the role of DNA-PK in response to microtubule-targeting drugs
using a novel series of NU7441 analogues, and investigate whether these
inhibitors interact with the efflux transporter, P-glycoprotein.In growth
inhibition studies, CCRF-CEM leukaemia cells were sensitised 1.4-fold to
vincristine by NU7441 (1M) whereas their vincristine-resistant derivative
CCRF-CEM VCR/R cells were sensitised 8-fold to vincristine.
DNA-PK-deficient M059J glioblastoma cells were 2-fold more sensitive to
docetaxel than DNA-PK-proficient cells, and NU7441 sensitised only
DNA-PK-proficient M059J-Fus1 cells to docetaxel. CCRF-CEM VCR/R cells
have a higher basal level of autophosphorylation of DNA-PKcs (Western
blotting) than the CCRF-CEM cells and autophosphorylation in response to
vincristine was abrogated by NU7441.To investigate the effects of NU7441
on drug transport, a doxorubicin fluorescence assay showed that in
P-glycoprotein-overexpressing canine kidney MDCKII-MDR1 cells, 1M NU7441
increased doxorubicin cellular fluorescence 16-fold by blocking drug
efflux via P-glycoprotein. NU7441 and 3 structurally-related compounds
(NU7742 (inactive NU7441 analogue), DRN1 (DNA-PK-inhibitory atropisomeric
NU7441 derivative) or DRN2 (DNA-PK non-inhibitory atropisomeric NU7441
derivative)) all increased intracellular vincristine accumulation in the
CCRF-CEM VCR/R cells to a level similar to verapamil, as measured by
LC-MS. However, the non-inhibitory compound NU7742 was 5-fold less
effective at sensitising CCRF-CEM VCR/R cells to vincristine than NU7441
(p=0.008).The novel finding that DNA-PK inhibition sensitises cells to
microtubule-targeting agents suggests that along with its function in DNA
repair, this enzyme plays a role in the mitotic spindle checkpoint.
Additionally, in multidrug-resistant cells, NU7441 is able to block drug
efflux via interaction with P-glycoprotein.

