Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNA-mRNA regulatory networks by integrating miRNA and mRNA
expression profiling of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.


Background: miRNA expression profiling of esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma(ESCC) has identified some miRNAs related to the clinical
diversity of the disease and this potentially provides novel diagnostic
and prognostic tools for ESCC therapy. In order to further understand the
associations between miRNA expression and their target mRNA in ESCC, we
performed integrating miRNA and mRNA expression profiling in ESCC.
Material & Methods: Eight esophageal squamous carcinoma of Stage T2N1MO
matched with their corresponding normal tissues was included in the
study. Microdissection was performed to assure that more than 70% tumor
components were selected for RNA extraction. Microarray technology
(Agilent Human miRNA microarray and Agilent whole Human gene expression
microarray) was used for miRNA expression and genome wide mRNA profiling.
Integrated analysis of miRNAs and their target mRNAs by multi-step
bioinformatics methods. Seven important differentiate expressed miRNAs
(miR-21, miR-196b, miR-1, miR-29c, miR-125b, miR-195, let-7c) and 4
predicted target mRNAs(CDK-6, VEGFA, IGF1, and FLNC) were selected for
future validation in an extended cohort of 50 ESCC by qRT-PCR. The
relationship of the miRNA and genes were calculated by their
differentiate expression values, and according to the interactions of
MicroRNA and genes in Sanger MicroRNA database to create the
MicroRNA-Gene-Network by the bioinformatic tools. Results:Compared to
esophageal normal tissues, there were 67 differentiately expressed miRNAs
and 2992 mRNAs in ESCC. The differentially expressed miRNAs and mRNAs
were confirmed by real-time PCR. These differentiated miRNAs and their
target genes were associated with many biological processes such as
signal transduction, angiogenesis, cell proliferation, cell-cell
signaling, response to drug. In the MicroRNA-Gene-Network, the
significant pathways were Pathways in cancer, Cell cycle, TGF-beta
signaling pathway, p53 signaling pathway, MAPK signaling pathway, mTOR
signaling pathway and Jak-STAT signaling pathway. Conclusions: It is the
first large-scale study to identify miRNA-mRNA regulatory networks in
ESCC by combining expression profiles and bioinformatics analysis
demonstrating that miRNA expression is highly associated with the
proliferation, prognosis and metastasis of ESCC. Our findings provided a
valuable source for future studying the differentially expressed miRNAs
and their promising target genes, pathways and processes that may be
useful for diagnostic or therapeutic applications in ESCC.

