Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of mTOR pathway in metastatic brain tumors.


Metastatic dissemination to the brain occurs in almost forty percent of
all cancers, and is ten times more common than primary brain tumors.
Mammalian target of Rapamycin (mTOR), an atypical PI3K related kinase,
exists in two distinct multiprotein complexes (mTORC1 and mTORC2).
mTORC1/2 regulate various cellular functions and are shown to be
activated in primary brain tumors such as glioblastoma and
medulloblastoma. In addition, metastatic tumor cells possess a unique
reprogramming resulting in a stem cell like phenotype with invasive,
migratory and proliferative potential similar to that seen in
glioblastoma, where mTOR appears to play an essential role. However, the
involvement of the mTOR pathway in metastatic brain tumors remains to be
elucidated. This study aimed to test the hypothesis that the mTOR pathway
plays a critical role in metastatic brain tumors. In order to achieve our
goals, expression of mTOR and its components (Raptor and Rictor) were
studied in metastatic brain tumors using immunohistochemical analysis.
Further, the function of mTOR in relation to proliferation, migration,
and cell spreading was studied in a metastatic breast cancer cell line
(MBA-MD 231). The expression of epithelial marker E-Cadherin and
meschenchymal marker Vimentin following the inhibition of mTOR using
pharmacological inhibitors (Rapamycin and PP242) as well as short
interfering RNA (mTOR, Raptor and Rictor) was examined by
immunofluorescence analysis. Results demonstrated that a significant
number of metastatic brain tumors expressed mTOR, Raptor, and Rictor; 50%
expressing all three components. The metastatic potential showed that
migration of cancer cells was inhibited significantly by mTORC1
inhibition (Rapamycin) and mTORC1/2 inhibition (PP242) by 29% and 64%,
respectively. Utilizing the EdU incorporation technique, S-phase cell
cycle entry analysis rendered a 52% decline in proliferation after
Rapamycin treatment. Cell spreading/attachment analysis exhibited total
attachment of control cells within 20 minutes of plating. This effect was
prevented by pretreatment with Rapamycin or PP242. Immunoflourescence
analysis showed that E-cadherin underwent forced nuclear localization
following acute inhibition of mTOR, using Rapamycin or siRNA treatments.
These results were substantiated by Western blotting, suggesting its role
in cellular reprogramming, namely Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition or
its counterparts. However, Vimentin expression remained unaltered. In
conclusion, these results provide evidence that mTOR is enhanced in
metastatic brain tumors, suggesting its critical role in achieving a
metastatic potential to the brain. Importantly, these findings underscore
the therapeutic value of mTOR inhibition in the management of patients
with metastatic brain tumors.

