Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of hPaf1/PD2 in pancreatic cancer stem cells
results in stemness and drug resistance: a novel target for pancreatic
cancer therapy.


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) or side-population (SP) constitute a
sub-population of cells in a tumor which are responsible for the
maintenance of several cancers, including pancreatic cancer (PC). In the
process of identification of a CSC maintenance marker for PC, we have
focused on the human polymerase association factor 1 (hPaf1) or
pancreatic differentiation 2 (PD2) due to its critical role in
self-renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) through the
interaction with Oct3/4, a gatekeeper of pluripotency and self-renewal
for ESCs. Furthermore, PD2 has been found to be highly overexpressed in
poorly differentiated PC compared to well-differentiated PC due to gene
amplification in the 19q13 locus. Additionally, ectopic overexpression of
PD2 led to the oncogenic transformation of NIH3T3 immortalized cells. An
essential property of stem cells is its ability to self-renew, which is
also an important property of CSCs. Based on the aforementioned work, we
hypothesize that PD2 is involved in the maintenance of self-renewal and
drug resistance of pancreatic CSCs. To test our hypothesis, SP and Non-SP
were isolated from pancreatic tumors as well as from cell lines using
Hoechst 33342 exclusion assay followed by FACS analysis. SP and NSP were
characterized using both in vitro and in vivo tumorigenicity assays. In
vitro assays such as tumorsphere assay revealed that SP maintained its
colony formation and formed large tumorspheres whereas the NSP cells were
dispersed and formed smaller spheres. Both confocal and western bolt
analysis revealed that SP overexpressed PD2 as well as CSC markers
(CD133, ALDH1) and self-renewal markers (Shh and -catenin). In vivo
assays such as subcutaneous and orthotopic injection of 5000 SP and NSP
cells into athymic nude mice were performed. SP injected mice produced a
larger tumor as compared to NSP injected mice. Gemcitabine treatment
enriched the SP cells thereby increasing PD2 expression compared to NSP
cells. Furthermore, we carried out transient knockdown of PD2 by specific
siRNA against PD2 in pancreatic CSCs and subsequently treated with
gemcitabine which resulted in reduced viability thereby indicating a
novel role of PD2 in CSC mediated drug resistance. Also, it was further
corroborated by the downregulation of CD133 and multidrug resistance gene
2 expressions in SP. Further, analysis of PD2 expression along with CSC
markers in PC progression mouse models revealed co-expression of PD2 and
CSC markers in specific cells. Altogether, our results propose a novel
role of PD2 in CSC maintenance as well as in drug resistance, which could
be anticipated to be developed as a novel targeted therapy against
pancreatic CSCs.

