Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibiting the ALK1/BMP9 signaling pathway with dalantercept as an
antiangiogenic therapy.


Activin receptor-like kinase 1 (ALK1) is an endothelial cell-specific
receptor for bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) 9 and 10, and is a key
regulator of angiogenesis and vascular morphogenesis. Preclinical data
suggest that the BMP9/ALK1 pathway is operating in the resolution and
maturation stage of angiogenesis, which is distinct from the VEGF/VEGFR
pathway which drives the initiation stage of angiogenesis. Dalantercept
is an ALK1 extracellular domain-Fc fusion protein that inhibits the
BMP9/ALK1 pathway. Thus, dalantercept may prove useful either as a
monotherapy to inhibit tumor angiogenesis or in combination with VEGFR
inhibitors to target different phases of vascular network formation and
potentially to overcome acquired resistance to anti-VEGF therapy.To test
this hypothesis, the A498 renal cell carcinoma xenograft model was used
to test dalantercept efficacy either alone or in combination with
sunitinib. In this model, tumor progression was defined as a 2 mm
increase in tumor length. In the placebo group, mean ( SD) tumor
progression was 5.8 0.6 days. Treatment with dalantercept delayed tumor
progression to 10.8 1.7 days (pActivin receptor-like kinase 1 (ALK1) is
an endothelial cell-specific receptor for bone morphogenetic proteins
(BMP) 9 and 10, and is a key regulator of angiogenesis and vascular
morphogenesis. Preclinical data suggest that the BMP9/ALK1 pathway is
operating in the resolution and maturation stage of angiogenesis, which
is distinct from the VEGF/VEGFR pathway which drives the initiation stage
of angiogenesis. Dalantercept is an ALK1 extracellular domain-Fc fusion
protein that inhibits the BMP9/ALK1 pathway. Thus, dalantercept may prove
useful either as a monotherapy to inhibit tumor angiogenesis or in
combination with VEGFR inhibitors to target different phases of vascular
network formation and potentially to overcome acquired resistance to
anti-VEGF therapy.To test this hypothesis, the A498 renal cell carcinoma
xenograft model was used to test dalantercept efficacy either alone or in
combination with sunitinib. In this model, tumor progression was defined
as a 2 mm increase in tumor length. In the placebo group, mean ( SD)
tumor progression was 5.8 0.6 days. Treatment with dalantercept delayed
tumor progression to 10.8 1.7 days (p<0.01 vs placebo) and sunitinib
delayed tumor progression to 13.8 2.5 days (pActivin receptor-like kinase
1 (ALK1) is an endothelial cell-specific receptor for bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMP) 9 and 10, and is a key regulator of angiogenesis and
vascular morphogenesis. Preclinical data suggest that the BMP9/ALK1
pathway is operating in the resolution and maturation stage of
angiogenesis, which is distinct from the VEGF/VEGFR pathway which drives
the initiation stage of angiogenesis. Dalantercept is an ALK1
extracellular domain-Fc fusion protein that inhibits the BMP9/ALK1
pathway. Thus, dalantercept may prove useful either as a monotherapy to
inhibit tumor angiogenesis or in combination with VEGFR inhibitors to
target different phases of vascular network formation and potentially to
overcome acquired resistance to anti-VEGF therapy.To test this
hypothesis, the A498 renal cell carcinoma xenograft model was used to
test dalantercept efficacy either alone or in combination with sunitinib.
In this model, tumor progression was defined as a 2 mm increase in tumor
length. In the placebo group, mean ( SD) tumor progression was 5.8 0.6
days. Treatment with dalantercept delayed tumor progression to 10.8 1.7
days (p<0.01 vs placebo) and sunitinib delayed tumor progression to 13.8
2.5 days (p<0.01 vs placebo). The combination treatment of dalantercept
plus sunitinib had a greater beneficial effect with a delay in tumor
progression to 35 12.6 days (p=0.01 vs sunitinib).We used
immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis to evaluate effects of dalantercept
on tumor vasculature and to look for potential biomarkers of response to
treatment in A498 tumors. Id1 is a transcription factor expressed in
endothelial cells and is known to be regulated via the BMP9/ALK1/SMAD
pathway. We observed a decrease in Id1 protein expression in endothelial
cells of A498 xenografts treated with dalantercept, consistent with our
previous experiments. Because BMP9 is one of the main target ligands of
dalantercept, IHC analysis of archived human tumor samples was performed
to determine BMP9 expression levels in various tumor types. In squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck it was shown that out of 28 tumor
samples 79% had high or medium levels of BMP9 staining, with little to no
staining in normal tissues. Data from BMP9 expression in renal cell
carcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma will also be presented.In a Phase
1 study in patients with advanced, refractory solid tumors, dalantercept
was generally well tolerated and exhibited signs of clinical activity
including patients with objective response and prolonged stable disease.
Dalantercept is currently being tested in several Phase 2 oncology
studies, including a study of dalantercept in combination with the
anti-VEGFR TKI axitinib in second-line advanced renal cell carcinoma.

