Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of pancreatic cancer cell and tumor growth using MET
inhibitors in combination with inhibitors of downstream signaling
mediators, MEK and PI3K.


Oncogenic signaling through the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) MET has
been implicated in driving tumor cell invasive growth. High expression of
MET or its cognate ligand, the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) have been
associated with poor prognosis in multiple cancer types, including
pancreatic cancer. MET has also been implicated in co-operative signaling
with other RTKs, including those in the HER family. We examined the
expression of MET and HGF in a panel of pancreatic cancer cell lines and
examined the impact of MET activation on cell signaling. While most lines
were uniformly positive for MET protein, 6/12 lines not co-expressing HGF
and MET, and all sub-lines of the autocrine KP4 line, demonstrated
constitutive phosphorylation of MET (p-MET) in normal growth conditions.
All lines were positive for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
protein and had basal levels of phosphorylated-EGFR (p-EGFR) with
evidence of downstream activity in the MAPK and PI3K signaling pathways.
Treatment of some lines expressing constitutive p-MET with the small
molecule MET inhibitor GDC-0712 resulted in suppression of both p-MET and
p-EGFR. However, treatment of these same lines with erlotinib resulted in
no inhibition of p-EGFR or p-MET, strongly suggesting that MET activates
EGFR phosphorylation. Co-suppression of MET with GDC-0712 or onartuzumab
(MetMAb) and erlotinib resulted in greater inhibition than either agent
alone. We assessed whether anti-tumor activity could be further improved
by targeting downstream molecules of MET or EGFR signaling, including
modulators of the Ras or PI3K pathways, in combination with MET
inhibitors. Improved cell inhibition was seen with combinations of MET
inhibitors and the MEK inhibitor GDC-0973 compared with either agent
alone, with greater activity than combinations of MET and EGFR
inhibitors. Analysis of the combination of MET inhibitors with GDC-0973
revealed that Ras signaling contributed to the stability of total MET
levels, resulting in lower total p-MET burden when MEK was inhibited. The
combination of MET and MEK inhibitors produced greater suppression of
downstream signaling through ERK and the ribosomal S6 kinase, which
resulted in better induction of the pro-apoptotic mediator Bim and
induction of cleaved caspase 3. These effects were not seen with
combinations of MET and PI3K inhibitors in vitro. Lastly, MET inhibitors
were evaluated in combination with MEK, PI3K or EGFR inhibitors in
pancreatic xenograft tumor models. The combination of MET and MEK
inhibitors resulted in additive anti-tumor activity whereas there was
little to no apparent increase in activity with combinations of MET and
PI3K or EGFR inhibitors. These data provide evidence for an interplay
between MET and mutant Ras signal transduction and provide a rationale
for combination of MET and MEK inhibitors in the treatment of pancreatic
cancer.

