Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining GSK3 inhibition and Vitamin D as a differentiation
strategy for AML.


Vitamin D has widely been considered a promising therapy for cancer,
particularly Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML), due to its ability to
terminally differentiate leukemic cells. Despite the promise of Vitamin D
in preclinical studies, clinical trials have been disappointing likely
due to dose limiting hypercalcemia that occurs at relatively low doses.
We have identified that the kinase GSK3 is a major regulator of the
Vitamin D receptor (VDR) and that targeting GSK3 can sensitize leukemic
cells to low concentrations of Vitamin D that may be achievable
clinically.Utilizing cell and animal based models, we found that GSK3
inhibition can significantly enhance the anti-leukemic effects of Vitamin
D. By inhibiting GSK3 with both small molecules and shRNA, we found that
targeting GSK3 leads to a significant sensitization in AML cells derived
from multiple AML subtypes to Vitamin D-mediated differentiation.
Differentiation induction can be seen through immunophenotyping for cell
surface markers, functional differentiation as measured by NBT reduction,
and changes in morphology. For example, treatment of HL-60 cells with low
doses of Vitamin D (5nM) or a GSK3 inhibitor SB415286 (10uM) leads to
only moderate differentiation (Vitamin D has widely been considered a
promising therapy for cancer, particularly Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML),
due to its ability to terminally differentiate leukemic cells. Despite
the promise of Vitamin D in preclinical studies, clinical trials have
been disappointing likely due to dose limiting hypercalcemia that occurs
at relatively low doses. We have identified that the kinase GSK3 is a
major regulator of the Vitamin D receptor (VDR) and that targeting GSK3
can sensitize leukemic cells to low concentrations of Vitamin D that may
be achievable clinically.Utilizing cell and animal based models, we found
that GSK3 inhibition can significantly enhance the anti-leukemic effects
of Vitamin D. By inhibiting GSK3 with both small molecules and shRNA, we
found that targeting GSK3 leads to a significant sensitization in AML
cells derived from multiple AML subtypes to Vitamin D-mediated
differentiation. Differentiation induction can be seen through
immunophenotyping for cell surface markers, functional differentiation as
measured by NBT reduction, and changes in morphology. For example,
treatment of HL-60 cells with low doses of Vitamin D (5nM) or a GSK3
inhibitor SB415286 (10uM) leads to only moderate differentiation (<50%)
while the combination of these agents leads to greater than 95%
differentiation as measured by the upregulation of the differentiation
associated marker, CD11b. In addition to differentiation induction, GSK3
inhibition also significantly enhanced the ability of Vitamin D to cause
irreversible growth inhibition as measured by colony assays and slowed
the progression of AML in a mouse model system.Mechanistic studies have
revealed significant insights into how GSK3 modulates Vitamin D
signaling. GSK3 was found to bind and phosphorylate VDR which negatively
regulates VDR activity as measured by luciferase based reporter assays.
The mechanism through which GSK3 appears to regulate VDR activity is
through impacting its interactions with co-repressors and co-activators.
These co-modulators are known to play a predominant role in regulating
VDR activity. Utilizing co-immunoprecipitation and mammalian two hybrid
assays, we determined that GSK3 inhibition can impair the interaction of
VDR with the co-repressor NcoR, and enhance its interaction with the
co-activator, SRC-3. Overall, our studies suggest the potential of
Vitamin D and GSK3 inhibition as a strategy to improve the efficacy of
AML treatment and provide a mechanistic framework to explain the
promising activity of this combination regimen..

