Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastatic tumor evolution delineates clinically important
oncogenic drivers in diffuse gastric cancer.


We conducted a detailed genetic and functional analysis of personalized
tumor evolution in a case of diffuse gastric cancer. Leveraging the
unique genetics of an individual with a confirmed germline mutation in
the causative CDH1 tumor suppressor gene, we identified candidate drivers
for a primary tumor in the stomach and a metastatic recurrence in the
left ovary, referred to as a Krukenberg tumor. Using genome sequencing,
we demonstrate that the primary and metastatic tumors share the majority
of cancer driver events including biallelic CDH1 and TP53 mutations
consistent with a common genetic origin. The primary gastric cancer
displayed amplification of FGFR2, a gene that encodes the fibroblast
growth factor (FGF) receptor 2 with multiple small molecule inhibitors in
clinical therapy development. Tumor evolution and genetic divergence was
clearly evident with the ovarian metastasis lacking the FGFR2
amplification and displaying its own subset of mutations and genomic
aberrations. Namely, the metastatic tumor had unique biallelic events
affecting TGFBR2, a critical gene in the TGF- (tumor growth factor)
signaling pathway that has not previously implicated in diffuse gastric
cancer. To determine the independent oncogenic attributes of these
separate pathways, we used a diffuse gastric cancer cell line and
organoid model system to replicate and study the context of the known and
candidate drivers found in the index patient's primary versus metastatic
sites. We demonstrated that in the context of biallelic CDH1 and TP53
functional loss, the addition of either FGFR2 or TGFBR2 drivers
independently lead to gastric cancer. This result supports the
independent cancer driver roles of the FGF and TGF- signaling pathways in
metastatic tumor evolution in diffuse gastric cancer. Our study has
implications regarding personalized cancer medicine approaches in
patients with metastatic gastric cancer.

