Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy and unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling regulates
progression of apoptosis in mammary gland involution.


Progression of local benign mammary lesions to invasive breast cancer is
known to involve processes that are necessary for normal mammary gland
development. Post-natal mammary gland is capable of undergoing repeated
cycles of proliferation and cell death, most strikingly when fully
differentiated (lactating) gland degenerates to a pre-lactation state
during involution. Involution involves extensive cell death and tissue
remodeling, which may temporarily increase breast cancer risk.
Accumulation of milk proteins in the secretory epithelium creates the
stress signal that triggers involution; however it is largely unknown
whether the well-defined stress pathways, UPR and autophagy, are involved
breast involution regulation. Using published gene expression array
datasets from different phases of mouse mammary gland development we
demonstrate that UPR, autophagy and apoptosis genes grouped in separate
clusters. Next, in time-course experiments we show that autophagy and UPR
signaling are tightly co-regulated during mammary involution. Early UPR
signaling events such as GRP78 and phospho-eIF2 were elevated during
early involution, i.e. the first 24 - 48 hours (h; reversible phase),
while late UPR signaling events such as ATF4 and CHOP were upregulated
during 72 h - 7 days of involution. An increase in AMPK was observed
during early involution potentially preventing TORC1-mediated autophagy
inhibition. Correlating with these observations, increased LC3-GFP
punctate and decreased p62 expression were observed at 24 h when compared
to 72 h post weaning, suggesting increased autophagy. Apoptosis was
increased 48-72 h, peaking at 72 h involution, as measured by TUNEL.
Increased apoptotic markers, such as cleaved caspase-7 and cleaved PARP
were observed during these time points, with increased antiapoptotic BCL2
family members (BCL-XL and BCL-W) expressed from 24-48 h. To confirm the
causal and inverse relationship between autophagy and apoptosis
signaling, we performed involution time-course experiments using both
low-dose drug interventions and an autophagy-related gene 7 (ATG7)
deletion mouse model. Inhibition of autophagy by chloroquine, or genetic
deletion of one ATG7 allele, enhanced the progression of mammary
involution into an irreversible phase, characterized by earlier induction
of apoptosis. In contrast, stimulation of autophagy by low dose
tunicamycin treatment reduced apoptosis and extended the reversible phase
of mammary involution by sustaining the secretory epithelium, suggesting
a possible therapeutic use of autophagy stimulators in promoting
lactation and nursing. Taken together these data indicate that UPR and
autophagy play a key role in the regulation between survival and
apoptosis during normal mammary gland involution and homeostasis, and,
thus, if deregulated could contribute to breast cancer progression.

