Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Murine model of chordoma: Sonic Hedgehog promoter-driven Cre
activation of Brachyury (T) expression induces spinal disk abnormalities
and perinatal lethal developmental defects.


Introduction: Chordoma is a rare malignancy arising in the axial skeleton
from notochord remnants. The T-box transcription factor, Brachyury (T),
is associated with familial chordoma, is expressed in over 90% of
chordomas, and is a driver of cell growth in cultured chordoma cells.
Suppression of T expression or function in vitro results in
down-regulation of cell growth pathways and reduction in matrix
formation. To further understand the mechanisms of T's oncogenic
properties, we sought to generate a murine model of constitutive,
notochord-directed T expression.Methods: To produce elevated expression
of T in the notochord-derived (ND) cells, we generated a murine
transgenic animal in which a cassette (T/GFP) containing the -actin
promoter, a transcriptional stop sequence flanked by LoxP sites (FS), the
murine T cDNA, an intragenic ribosomal entry sequence and a GFP cDNA was
homologously recombined into the ROSA26 locus. We termed these animals
FS-T/GFP mice. FS-T/GFP mice were mated to mice with Cre expression
regulated by the developmentally-timed and tissue-specific control of the
Sonic Hedgehog promoter (Shh-Cre mice).Results: Excision of the FS
sequence by Cre was confirmed to result in constitutive expression of T
and GFP in 293 cells prior to transgenic creation, and subsequently in
cultured fibroblasts from ear punches of the transgenic animals. Mice
containing homozygous FS-T/GFP at ROSA26 were healthy with no apparent
physiologic or developmental defects and with the expected Mendelian
ratios of sex and genotype. A cross of FS-T/GFP with Shh-Cre mice
resulted in T/Cre pups that died perinatally with grossly evident heart,
lung and kidney defects. In addition, these animals showed incomplete
fusion of the vertebral bodies, and dysmorphic spinal disks. Elevated T
protein levels and GFP co-expression in disk cells was demonstrated by
immunofluorescent detection in tissue sections.Summary: Constitutive
expression of T in ND lineage cells results in alteration of the
morphology of intervertebral disks possibly indicative of a proliferative
effect of Brachyury on ND cells. Expression of T in off-target tissues
that express Sonic Hedgehog likely results in perinatal death.Citation
Format: David A. Alcorta, Jennifer A. Maier, Brian D. Harfe, Michael J.
Kelley. Murine model of chordoma: Sonic Hedgehog promoter-driven Cre
activation of Brachyury (T) expression induces spinal disk abnormalities
and perinatal lethal developmental defects. [abstract]. In: Proceedings
of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer
Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer
Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 352. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-352

