Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of reactive oxygen species in anticancer effects of
diallyl trisulfide, a bioactive component of garlic.


Diallyl trisulfide (DATS) is a bioactive component of processed garlic
with in vivo activity against chemically-induced as well as
oncogene-driven cancer in rodent models. However, the mechanisms
underlying anticancer effects of DATS (eg, growth inhibition, apoptosis
induction, and suppression of migration in cancer cells) are not fully
understood. The present study reveals a critical role for reactive oxygen
species (ROS) in cellular anticancer responses to DATS. Exposure of human
breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7) as well as a cell line derived
from spontaneously developing mammary tumor of a MMTV-neu transgenic
mouse (BRI-JM04) to DATS resulted in dose-dependent inhibition of cell
viability and apoptosis induction. Interestingly, a non-tumorigenic
normal human mammary cell line (MCF-10A) was resistant to growth
inhibition and apoptosis induction by DATS. The DATS-induced apoptosis in
MDA-MB-231, MCF-7, and BRI-JM04 cells was associated with ROS production
as evidenced by fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry using a
chemical probe (MitoSOX Red). Ectopic expression of Cu,Zn-superoxide
dismutase (Cu,Zn-SOD) as well as Mn-SOD conferred significant protection
against DATS-induced ROS production and apoptotic cell death. The DATS
treatment caused activation of Bax and Bak, and activation of Bak was
nearly fully abolished by overexpression of Mn-SOD. Likewise, inhibition
of MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cell migration resulting from DATS treatment was
partially but statistically significantly attenuated by stable
overexpression of Cu,Zn-SOD and Mn-SOD. This protection against
inhibition of cell migration was attributable to abrogation of
DATS-mediated induction of E-cadherin and suppression of vimentin. These
results indicate that ROS play an important role in anticancer effects of
DATS at least in human breast cancer cells. This study was supported by
grant CA113363-07 awarded by the National Cancer Institute.

