Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the Maternal Embryonic Leucin zipper Kinase (MELK) in
gastric cancers.


Gastric cancer (GC) is the fourth most common cancer, and the second
leading cause of cancer-related death in the world. The high mortality
rate of gastric cancer is due to late-stage diagnosis and unpredictable
outcome with empiric treatments. There are no tools to stratify therapies
for ERBB2-negative GC (90% of patients). Even in ERBB2-positive patients,
much better therapies are desirable. To identify novel GC drivers and
therapeutic targets, we conducted a whole-transcriptome RNA-seq analysis
in Caucasian cancers and paired normal gastric tissues. We identified 879
differentially expressed genes with FDR2. We next compared our results
with those of Cui J. et al. (Nucl. Acids Res. 2011) which identified
differential expressions in 80 tumor-normal pairs of Asian GC. With an
FDR 2, we found 308 genes overlapping, including 30 kinases. Among the
kinases, we found consistent high expression of the Maternal Embryonic
Leucine zipper Kinase (MELK), the only member of the member of the
Snf1/AMPK serine/threonine kinase family not regulated by LKB1 kinase,
but rather through autophosphorylation. MELK is putatively involved in
mitotic progression, inhibition of mRNA splicing, cytokinesis, and
apoptosis. MELK overexpression has been found in other cancers, including
human glioblastoma and breast cancers where it promotes tumorigenesis and
portends to worse outcome. The precise in vivo regulation, function and
crystal/NMR structures of MELK are still unknown; however the evidence
that three MELK substrates are critical regulators of the mitotic entry,
underscores the hypothesis that MELK inhibition may offer important novel
therapeutic strategy. We investigated MELK protein expression in a panel
of 30 gastric cell lines, and found high levels of MELK protein in 14/30.
Similar results were observed in a panel of 22 colon carcinoma lines.
MELK blockade using siRNA affected cytokinesis with the formation of
polynucleated cells and aberrant mitotic spindle. Ongoing in vitro and in
vivo investigations include cells with MELK knockdown by shRNA as well as
MELK -/-, MELK +/+ cells, and MELK point mutation cells generated by Zinc
Finger Nuclease Technology, and cells carrying MELK kinase dead; and
identification of novel small compounds inhibiting MELK activity. Because
of the increased expression in a broad spectrum of cancer sites, and the
putative role in orchestrating mitotic entry, we believe that MELK offers
important targeted therapeutic windows: 1) it will enhance the efficacy
of antineoplastic drugs targeting mitosis; 2) by hindering the ability of
tumor initiating cells to proliferate, it will impact the repopulation
phase following chemo-radiation therapy, and therefore could be
incorporated into molecular targeted strategies circumventing resistance
to conventional therapy in MELK positive cancers.Citation Format: Julie
G. Izzo, Kevin N. Dalby, Han Liang, Hui Yao, Brian P. James, Saira Ahmed,
Xiuping Liu, Chang-Gong Liu, Yon Hui Kim, Garth Powis. Targeting the
Maternal Embryonic Leucin zipper Kinase (MELK) in gastric cancers.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2157.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2157

