Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The androgen metabolite-dependent growth of hormone
receptor-positive breast cancer as a possible aromatase inhibitor
resistance mechanism.


Introduction: Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) have been reported to exert
their anti-proliferative effects not only by reducing estrogen production
but also by unmasking the inhibitory effect of androgens such as
testosterone (TS) or dihydrotestosterone (DHT) in postmenopausal women
with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer. The behavior of androgens
in AI-resistance mechanisms is not sufficiently understood.
5-Androstane-3,17-diol (3-diol) generated from DHT by 3-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1 (3-HSD type 1: HSD3B1) has androgenic activity and
substantial estrogenic activity, representing a potential mechanism of AI
resistance.Methods: To investigate these issues, ERE-GFP-transfected
MCF-7 cells (E10 cells) were cultured for 3 months under
steroid-depleted, TS supplemented conditions. Among the surviving cells,
two stable variants (V1 and V2 cells) showing ER activity depending on
androgen metabolites were selected by monitoring GFP expression. Using
these variant cell lines, we investigated the process of adaptation to
androgen-abundant conditions and the role of androgens in AI-resistance
mechanisms.Results: The variant cell lines showed increased growth and
induction of estrogen-responsive genes rather than androgen-responsive
genes by androgens or 3-diol. Further analysis of these cell lines
suggested that increased expression of HSD3B1 and reduced expression of
androgen receptor (AR) provide adaptability to androgen-abundant
conditions, as proved by increased conversion of DHT into 3-diol by 3-HSD
type 1 and AR signal reduction. Corresponding to these hypotheses, in
parental E10 cells, ectopic expression of HSD3B1 or inhibition of AR
resulted in adaptation to androgen-abundant conditions. In coculture with
stromal cells mimicking the local estrogen production from androgen,
these cell lines showed lower sensitivity to an AI compared with parental
E10 cells. Immunohistochemistry on 9 pairs of primary and recurrent
tissue samples from AI-resistant breast cancer revealed the decrease of
AR protein expression in all cases.Conclusion:In the present study, we
successfully cloned two stable variants that show ER activity depending
on androgen metabolites. Investigation of these cell lines suggested that
the increased expression of HSD3B1 and reduced expression of AR might
decrease the sensitivity to aromatase inhibitors as proved by enhancement
of androgen metabolite-induced ER activation and growth mechanism. The
androgen metabolite-dependent growth of hormone receptor positive breast
cancer possibly plays a certain role as an aromatase inhibitor-resistance
mechanism.

