Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR2 plays critical roles in colitis and colitis-associated
cancer through trafficking of myeloid-derived suppressor cells.


A large body of evidence indicates that chronic inflammation is a risk
factor for colorectal cancer (CRC). However, all of the mechanisms by
which inflammation promotes CRC development are not fully understood. Our
lab previously showed that PGE2 promotes CRC progression through
angiogenic chemokine CXCL1 (Wang et al., 2006). CXCL1 exerts its
downstream functions via binding to its receptor, CXCR2, which is a
G-protein-coupled receptor. Our previous study showed that CXCR2
expression is also elevated mainly in endothelial and immune cells of
human colorectal carcinomas. CXCR2 is expressed on neutrophils and
involved in neutrophil trafficking. These results prompted us to
hypothesize that CXCR2 may be one of mediators connecting inflammation
and CRC. To address this question, preliminary experiments were performed
to determine whether CXCR2 is involved in inflammation-enhanced CRC
progression.Our results revealed that deletion of CXCR2 significantly
attenuated AOM/DSS induction of chronic colonic inflammation and tumor
burden, suggesting that CXCR2 is required for promoting chronic
inflammation and tumor formation and growth in the colon. Among
immunocytes we tested, loss of CXCR2 only significantly suppressed a
massive infiltration of MDSCs (CD11b+Ly6G+) into the colonic mucosa in
both normal (water treatment) and chronic inflammatory (DSS treatment)
conditions. We further found that the status of CXCR2 did not affect MDSC
populations in the bone marrow of mice treated with either water or DSS.
Interestingly, treatment with DSS more dramatically reduced MDSC
populations in the circulatory system of WT mice than of CXCR2 knockout
mice, suggesting that CXCR2-deficient MDSCs have less ability to migrate
to local organs. Our in vitro results further demonstrated that treatment
with CXCL1 or CXCL5 were able to induce chemotaxis of WT-mice derived
MDSCs but not MDSCs isolated from CXCR2-/- mice. Collectively, these
results suggest that CXCR2-expressing MDSCs contribute to chronic
inflammation and colitis-associated tumor formation and growth. Our
findings are novel and provide a rationale for development of new
therapeutic approaches to subvert tumor-induced immunosuppression by
using CXCR2 antagonists and neutralized antibodies.

