Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Malignant transformation associated with repetitive Ras/Rac1
activation, increased production of superoxide anion, and global DNA
methylation alterations.


Driver mutations in N-Ras and BRAF, and more recently in Rac1, were
described in melanomas. Using a malignant transformation model of murine
melanocytes developed in our laboratory, in which melanoma cell lines
were obtained after submitting the melanocyte lineage melan-a to
sequential cycles of anchorage blockade, we identified dysfunction in
both N-Ras and Rac1 during stressful condition. Our group has already
showed increased global DNA methylation as well increased DNA
methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1) protein level few hours after anchorage
blockade. This increase seems to be related with elevated amounts of
superoxide anion. Previous works have showed that both Ras may regulate
superoxide level as Ras activation may affect DNA methylation. Therefore,
we aimed to study the relation among Ras/MEK/ERK signaling pathway,
oxidative stress and DNA methylation during melan-a anchorage blockade.
We showed that Ras, Rac1 and ERK are activated few hours after melan-a
anchorage blockade and inhibiting this activation abrogates superoxide
increase. Furthermore, global DNA methylation levels decrease during
anchorage blockade after treating cells with superoxide scavenger or Ras
inhibitor (FTI). Dnmt1 protein level is also decreased after treating
melan-a cells during anchorage blockade with FTI or ERK inhibitor
(U0126). Ras/MEK/ERK pathway seems to be regulated by and regulates
superoxide production during melan-a anchorage restriction. In this way,
superoxide anion depletion impairs Ras and ERK activation and FTI or
U0126 treatment decreases superoxide during adhesion impediment. This
aberrant signaling seems to have a significant impact in melanoma genesis
since the malignant transformation was drastically compromised when
melan-a melanocytes were pre-treated with superoxide scavenger before
each anchorage impediment cycle. Elucidating the relation among oxidative
stress, epigenetic changes and melanocyte malignant transformation may
provide novel avenues to develop alternative therapeutic approaches.

