Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt signaling as chemotherapy sensitivity marker of triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC).


Background: Triple negative breast cancer is characterized by an
unfavorable prognosis. While patients do not benefit from endocrine or
Her2 targeted therapies except chemotherapy, there is an increased
response (pCR) to taxane-/anthracycline-containing therapy compared to
other breast cancers. However, molecular determinants of chemotherapy
specifically in TNBC remain largely unknown. Current research suggests an
increased Wnt Pathway activity in TNBC while Wnt pathway activity has
been shown to play an important role in breast cancer pathogenesis.
Material and Methods: Differentially expressed genes in TN vs. non-TN
breast cancers of patients treated with neoadjuvant
taxane-/anthracycline-containing chemotherapy were identified and
validated in an independent AffymetrixU133A gene chip dataset (Hess et
al. 2006). Genes were tested for correlation with relapse-free survival,
response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy and Ki67 expression. The effects of
siRNA mediated knockdown of SFRP1 and treatment with small molecule
XAV939 (specific inhibitor of Wnt signaling) were analyzed in TNBC cell
lines MDA-MB 468, MDA-MB 231, HCC 1806 and luminal cell line MCF7 on
chemo sensitivity. Results: Our list of over expressed genes in TNBC vs.
non-TNBC contains several genes which are already discussed as potential
markers for TNBC like B-crystallin and transcription factor FOXC1.
Furthermore, a few Wnt pathway associated genes (i.e. SFRP1, TCF7L1,
TCF7L2, SOX10) occur in this list, which was validated in an independent
dataset. While SFRP1 expression was not associated with relapse-free
survival in TNBC, it was significantly correlated with a pCR.
Importantly, no correlation to Ki67 expression could be demonstrated.
mRNA knockdown of Wnt pathway inhibitor SFRP1 in two different TNBC cell
lines (MDA-MB 468 and HCC 1806) resulted in an increased resistance to
paclitaxel, doxorubicin and cisplatin. Treatment with Wnt inhibitor
XAV939 resulted in TNBC cell lines MDA-MB 231, MDA-MB 468 and in luminal
cell line MCF7 increased chemo sensitivity to paclitaxel and doxorubicin.
Conclusion: We suggest Wnt Signaling and/or SFRP1 expression as a novel
maker of chemotherapy sensitivity to taxane-, anthracycline and/or
platinum-containing chemotherapy in TNBC in vitro that is independent of
Ki67 expression.

