Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sulfasalazine sensitizes glioblastoma cells to radiation treatment.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is a lethal cancer with a limited response to ionizing
radiation. Recent studies suggest that Sulfasalazine (SAS), a drug used
to treat inflammatory bowel disease, inhibits the Xc antiporter system in
glioma cells, thereby blocking their uptake of cystein. Since the
availability of cystein is a rate limiting step in intracellular
antioxidant production, we wanted to investigate whether sulfasalazine
sensitizes glioma cells to radiation.Expression of xCT, the catalytic
subunit of system Xc, was found in 30 patient GBM biopsies. SAS effect on
glioma cell growth was investigated using an electric cell substrate
impedance sensing (ECIS) instrument. All glioma cell lines showed altered
growth curves in response to SAS treatment. To assess the effect of
blocking the antiporter, intracellular levels of the antioxidant
glutathione were measured. With increasing doses of SAS, glutathione
levels decreased in a dose response manner. In addition, cysteine was
added to the medium to see if the toxic effects of SAS could be
counteracted. Furthermore, accumulation of reactive oxygen species upon
SAS treatment was measured. Glioma cells were also treated with
escalating doses of SAS, alone or in combination with radiation (8 Gy).
The presence of double stranded breaks increased markedly in the
irradiated samples and also somewhat with increasing doses with SAS. In
addition, cell death, viability and clonogenicity were investigated using
live/dead staining, the MTS assay and the clonogenic assay.All treatment
groups exhibited increased rates of cell death compared to untreated
controls. A combination of SAS and radiation resulted in higher levels of
cell death, than radiation or SAS administered alone. Furthermore we
continued with implantation of human GBMs into the brain of Nude rats.
These animals were treated with Gamma Knife Radiosurgery alone or in
combination with SAS. SAS were administered as a pre-treatment for three
days before Radiosurgery. The rats receiving the combination treatment
lived significantly longer compared to either treatment alone.
Interestingly, the animals only receiving pre-treatment with SAS for
three days lived significantly longer compared to the untreated controls,
although this was not statistically significant. We are currently
preparing a clinical trial for patients with GBM recurrences combining
pre-treatment with Sulfasalazine and Gamma Knife Radiosurgery.

