Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical feasibility study of a novel cytometry-based-system for
the detection of circulating tumor cells of patients with lung cancer.


Enumeration and characterization of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are,
as "liquid biopsy," expected to provide useful clinical information on
prognosis, cancer staging, drug choice, and therapeutic efficacy. We have
developed a novel flow-cytometry-based CTCs detection and sorting system
(On-Chip Sort) independent of EpCAM expression of tumor cells. In a
preclinical study, various kinds of cell lines were spiked into human
blood and the sensitivity in detection was evaluated. Enumeration of the
spiked tumor cells was linear over a range of 10 to 1000 cells, with a
recovery rate of 90%. A significantly higher recovery rate was observed
with our system (90 - 102%) than with CellSearch (0%) when EpCAM-negative
PC-14 cells were spiked, suggesting a superior sensitivity of our system
in capturing EpCAM-negative tumor cells. Here we report the results of a
clinical feasibility study on the detection of CTCs in patients with
advanced lung cancer.16mL of peripheral blood was drawn from each case.
In our assay, 4mL of samples were hemolyzed and eliminated CD45+
leucocytes by magnetic beads coated with anti-CD45 antibody. After
negative CTC enrichment, samples were fixed and labeled with
FITC-cytokeratin, PE-EpCAM and Alexa700-CD45 antibodies, and analyzed by
using our flow-cytometry-based CTC detection system. 22 advanced lung
cancer patients and 3 healthy donors were recruited at National Cancer
Center Hospital. The results of the CTC enumeration were compared with
those by CellSearch.In 22 blood samples from patients, CTCs detected by
our system ranged from 0 - 18 CTCs (median, 6.5), and 77.3% (17/22) of
the samples were above the threshold level ( 4 / 4mL). On the other hand,
with CellSearch, only 27% of the samples had a 2 / 7.5 mL threshold
level. In 2 blood samples from the healthy donors, our system detected 0
and 3 CTCs, and CellSearch detected 0 and 1 CTC. In the sample from a
healthy donor spiked with 18 EpCAM-negative PC-14 cells, our system was
able to detect 10 cells; however, CellSearch could not recover even one
cell.These results of a clinical feasibility study showed our system to
be significantly more sensitive for CTC enumeration in advanced lung
cancer.Presently, we are developing a novel approach for molecular
analysis of CTCs via sequential immunomagnetic enrichment and FACS
sorting to isolate CTCs, followed by real-time PCR analysis using
Scorpion Amplified Refractory Mutation System technology. For methods
validation, PC-9 and 11_18 cells spiked into normal blood were isolated,
and profiled the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations status
correctly. In the near future, we plan to apply this approach to clinical
samples of lung cancer patients and investigate the correlation of EGFR
mutations in sorted CTCs, circulating free DNA and primary lesions.(Data
to be updated prior to presentation)

