Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic profiling of platinum based anticancer drugs.


Carboplatin, cisplatin and oxaliplatin are structurally similar
anticancer drugs and their mechanism of action is permanent coordination
to DNA and interfering with DNA repair. However, these drugs have
different anticancer activities in human tumors, adverse effects and dose
limiting toxicities. Therefore, we performed complex proteomic profiling
in order to characterize cellular effects of all three platinum based
anticancer drugs. To identify the molecular basis of different
pharmacological properties, expressional characteristics of cells exposed
to vincristine and daunorubicin were used in parallel as prototypes of
drugs with different mechanism of action. T-lymphoblastic leukemia
CCRF-CEM cells were treated with 5x IC50 concentrations of individual
drugs for time equivalent to half-time to induction apoptosis. Untreated
(control) cells were cultured with heavy amino acid labeled media in
order to enable relative quantification of peptide expression using SILAC
technology, LC-MS/MS and LC-MALDI-TOF/TOF. Results were processed by
Proteinscape software equipped by Mascot and Phenyx analytical
algorithms. We identified 646 133 proteins by ESI and 312 85 proteins by
MALDI in average of all fifteen replicates. Identified results were
further processed by in-house written script to remove outlier peptides
and to normalize individual runs. All replicates were summed, and
statistic analysis was done. To see up- and down- regulated proteins, the
hierarchical clustering and PCA analysis was performed. Hierarchical
clustering revealed that cisplatin and carboplatin shares the same
cluster what is conclusive with literature. Surprisingly, the cluster of
daunorubicin and vincristine was close to cisplatin and carboplatin and
the oxaliplatin was in the separated cluster from rest of four drugs. PCA
analysis revealed 30 proteins with contribution higher than 1 %. The
highest contribution (7.5 %) to drug clustering have proteins involved in
DNA remodeling. These proteins could be used as specific biomarkers of
therapy by platinum based compounds.

