Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone marrow adipocyte-derived CXCL1 and CXCL2 in prostate tumor
progression in bone.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common cause of death from
cancer in men. Bone is a primary site for tumor metastasis and obese and
overweight men have a three-fold higher risk of progression to metastatic
disease compared to normal-weight men receiving the same treatment.
Recent epidemiological evidence suggests that obesity is an independent
prognostic contributor to the development of distant metastases and death
from PCa. Obesity leads to adipocyte accumulation within the bone marrow,
which stimulates infiltration of inflammatory cells, particularly
macrophages, and promotes inflammation. Many of the inflammatory
cytokines released by both adipocytes and macrophages are involved in
increased tumor growth, neovascularization, and cell survival. CXCL1 and
CXCL2 are two such chemokines that have been implicated in prostate,
breast, and ovarian tumorigenesis. Therefore, we hypothesized that
obesity-induced bone marrow adiposity and inflammation would alter
prostate tumor behavior in the bone via CXCL1- and CXCL2-dependent
mechanisms. Histological evaluations confirmed that mice fed high fat
diet (HFD) had increased adipocyte accumulation within the bone.
PC3-DsRed cells intratibially injected into HFD mice progressed
strikingly faster and grew much larger than those injected into mice on
normal (LFD) diet. RT PCR analyses revealed an induction of several
inflammatory genes, including CXCL1 and CXCL2, in the marrow of obese
mice, and these levels were further increased in tumor-bearing tibiae of
HFD hosts. In vitro short-term exposure of tumor cells to media
conditioned by primary bone marrow derived adipocytes (Adipo CM) led to
increased growth and invasiveness. This effect was further potentiated by
chronic exposure to Adipo CM. CXCL1 and CXCL2 expression and secretion
increased in co-culture of tumor cells with bone marrow macrophages in
the presence of adipocyte-derived factors. Studies are currently underway
to determine the role of obesity-induced marrow CXCL1 and CXCL2 in
osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption. We are also investigating
additional inflammatory mediators that sustain the upregulation of CXC1
and CXCL2 in the tumor microenvironment. Collectively, the results of our
studies demonstrate that adipocyte-induced upregulation of CXCL1 and
CXCL2 may play a critical role in promoting prostate tumor aggressiveness
and survival in the bone metastatic niche.

