Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor reversion: From bench to potential clinical applications
using sertraline and thioridazine.


This presentation aims at summarizing today's knowledge on tumor
reversion (ref.1) with recent applications and new findings for potential
cancer treatment. In order to study the molecular program of tumor
reversion we have provided with a series of biological models. In this
approach, we derived revertant cells from tumor cell lines ranging from
leukemia to solid tumors such as breast, colon, lung cancer and melanoma.
Using differential gene profiling, between the parental tumor cells and
the revertants, over 300 genes were identified, as implicated in
reversion such as Siah-1, TSAP6, PS1 and most importantly Translationally
Controlled Tumor Protein (TPT1/TCTP) (ref. 2). Notably TPT1/TCTP is
highly expressed in the tumor cells and almost undetectable in the
revertants. Knocking down TPT1/TCTP reorganized breast cancer cells into
ductal structures reminiscent of normal breast morphology. More recently,
we identified a strong reciprocal repressive feedback loop between
TPT1/TCTP and p53 (ref.3). P53 represses the transcription of TPT1/TCTP
by binding to the promoter of TPT1/TCTP. Conversely, TPT1/TCTP interacts
directly with p53, Numb and MDM2. TPT1/TCTP competes with Numb.
Importantly, TPT1/TCTP stabilizes MDM2, promoting hereby MDM2-dependent
ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of p53. Screening of a large
cohort of breast cancer patients (508) shows high expression of TPT1/TCTP
in the most aggressive G3 tumors, predicting poor prognosis. TPT1/TCTP is
also highly expressed in normal and cancer breast stem cells. Decreasing
TPT1/TCTP by siRNA in a mammosphere assay significantly reduces the
colony forming efficiency. Thus, TPT1/TCTP also regulates the stem cell
compartment. We found two drugs, Sertraline and Thioridazine, which bind
and inactivate TPT1/TCTP, restoring elevated levels of wild type p53.
Pilot studies on ex vivo cells derived from AML-patients indicate that
Sertraline and Ara-C act synergistically in reducing the viability of AML
cells. The implication of tumor reversion in reprogramming cancer cells
and in disclosing new therapeutic targets as well as its potential role
in tumor heterogeneity will be discussed.

