Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myeloperoxidase as a determinant for activity of etoposide (VP-16)
and other phenolic and non-phenolic anticancer agents: implications for
drug-induced leukemogenesis.


Clinical utilization of the phenolic anticancer agent etoposide (VP-16)
is limited in selected malignancies due to its ability to induce acute
myeloid leukemias causally linked to MLL gene rearrangements. Previously,
we demonstrated that myeloperoxidase (MPO) found in myeloid precursors
converts VP-16 to its phenoxyl radical [Mol. Pharm. 79: 479-87, 2011],
which can redox cycle leading to enhanced DNA topoisomerase II (topo
II)-mediated strand cleavage, and resultant MLL translocations. In the
present study, we utilized MPO shRNA in myeloid leukemia HL-60 cells to
further examine MPO dependency for VP-16-induced: 1) inhibition/poisoning
of topo II isoforms; 2) DNA damage; 3) formation of reactive oxygen
species; 4) generation of a VP-16 ortho-quinone GSH adduct; 5)
antiproliferative/cytotoxic activity. In MPO knockdown cells, mature MPO
expression was reduced to 6% and enzyme activity was reduced to 18% of
the level found in shRNA controls. Topo II alpha and beta, and DNA
topoisomerase I (topo I) levels were similar in MPO knockdown and control
cells. VP-16 (0-100 M) induced a progressive increase in DNA double
strand breaks in MPO+ HL-60 cells which was attenuated in MPO-knockdowns.
Direct VP-16-induced topo II alpha and beta complexes with genomic DNA
were reduced in MPO knockdown cells compared to shRNA controls. Using
3-(p-hydroxyphenyl) fluorescein (HPF), pro-oxidant activity of VP-16 was
demonstrated in MPO+ HL-60 cells which converted to anti-oxidant effects
in MPO knockdowns. Mass spectrometric analysis indicated that the level
of inactive VP-16 ortho-quinone GSH adducts in MPO knockdown cells was
reduced to 33% of that in control cells. Paradoxically, cytotoxicity of
VP-16 and additional topo II poisons mAMSA, and mitoxantrone was
decreased in MPO+ cells compared to MPO knockdown cells. Podophyllotoxin,
the non-phenolic natural product related to VP-16, and camptothecin were
equally cytotoxic in MPO knockdown and control cells. Hydroquinone and
the dietary flavonol quercetin were more cytotoxic in MPO+ cells compared
to knockdowns. Together results suggest that MPO conversion of VP-16 to a
pro-oxidant, which leads to genotoxicity/carcinogenicity, may
simultaneously protect cells from cytotoxicity, in part due to subsequent
production of inactive GSH conjugates. The consequences of MPO activity
on mAMSA and mitoxantrone metabolism, topo II poisoning, and MLL gene
rearrangements are currently under investigation as are the redox-related
activities of dietary flavonoids dependent on MPO activity. Support: NIH
CA090787.

