Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44 expression in Ewing sarcoma is associated with reduced
chemosensitivity in vitro.


CD44 is the primary hyaluronate (HA) receptor in a variety of cell types
and has been implicated in several processes, such as cell-to-cell and
cell-to-extracellular matrix interactions, cell migration and invasion,
as well as metastasis and drug resistance. Even though CD44 expression
has been studied in various types of cancer, such as prostate and lung
cancer, little is known about its role in Ewing sarcoma, the second most
common malignancy of bone and soft tissue in children and adolescents. We
assessed the expression of CD44 in 25 cases of Ewing sarcoma by
immunohistochemistry and found that CD44 is expressed in 40% of them.
Furthermore, we noticed that in 4 out of 10 patients CD44 expression
increased in one or more subsequent recurrent or metastatic biopsy
samples. Therefore, we hypothesized that CD44+ cells in Ewing sarcoma
represent cell clones, which are resistant to treatment and lead to tumor
relapses. In order to study the role of CD44 in Ewing sarcoma, we
cultured tumor cells for 24 to 72 hours in anchorage-independent sphere
forming culture conditions, (low attachment plates), which are known to
induce CD44 expression and compared them to adherent cells. CD44 mRNA and
protein expression was induced in the anchorage-independent group as
early as 24h in all 7 Ewing sarcoma cell lines. We then measured mRNA
levels of ABCB5 and ABCC1, members of the superfamily of ATP-binding
cassette (ABC) transporters related to drug resistance by real time PCR
and found them increased. These data were corroborated by our finding of
significantly increased efflux of the fluorescent DNA binding dye,
Hoechst 33342, in the anchorage-independent group, indicating that the
cells that overexpress CD44 are more effective in effluxing the
chemotherapeutic drugs, thus becoming more resistant to chemotherapy.
Finally, changes in the expression of efflux proteins were associated
with increased resistance to doxorubicin-induced apoptotic cell death
documented by increased expression of annexin V. In summary, our data
indicate that CD44 is involved in drug resistance in Ewing sarcoma and
may be clinically useful in making therapeutic decisions.

