Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of STAT-3 by piperlongumine induces anoikis in melanoma
cells in vitro and blocks tumor formation potential in vivo.


The National Cancer Institute estimates that about 76,250 new cases of
melanomas will be diagnosed in 2012 in the United States leading to at
least 9810 related deaths. Metastasis of melanoma is the major challenge
leading to the failure of its therapy. Hence, novel strategies to prevent
metastasis are of prime importance. Anoikis is an anchorage independent
cell death. Resistance to anoikis is one of the key features of a
metastatic cell. In the current study, we show induction of anoikis by
piperlongumine, a component of black pepper, by inhibition of STAT-3.
Treatment of various melanoma cell lines in low attachment conditions
with piperlongumine reduced the anoikis resistance in a concentration
dependent manner. This decrease in anoikis resistance was associated with
decrease in expression of STAT-3 and its phosphorylation at Y705.
Significant down-regulation of Bcl-2 and Mcl-1, which are under the
transcriptional regulation of STAT-3, was also observed by piperlongumine
treatment indicating the role of STAT-3 in anoikis. Concentration
dependent cleavage of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) was observed by
piperlongumine treatment in melanoma cells. AG 490, an inhibitor of
STAT-3 phosphorylation, alone induced anoikis in melanoma cells further
indicating the role of STAT-3. IL-6 treatment not only increased the
phophorylation of STAT-3 at Y05 but also abrogated the anoikis induced by
piperlongumine. Silencing STAT-3 by shSTAT-3 sensitized the cells to
piperlongumine treatment. On the other hand, over-expression of STAT-3 in
SK-MEL28 and SK-MEL-2 cells conferred resistance to anoikis induced by
piperlongumine. STAT-3 -/- SK-MEL-28 cells were highly sensitive to
anoikis upon piperlongumine treatment. Finally, our in vivo studies
established that melanoma cells treated with piperlongumine in suspension
condition lost their potential to form tumors in mice. Taken together,
our study suggests that the decrease in anoikis resistance induced by
piperlongumine was mediated by STAT-3 inhibition. Notably, STAT-3 has
been shown to be constitutively upregulated in melanoma rendering it
resistant to chemotherapy and potential to metastasize. [Supported in
part by R01 grant CA129038 (to S.K.S) awarded by the National Cancer
Institute].

