Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profiling identifies characteristic oncogenetic
pathways in age-related Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive B-cell
lymphoproliferative disorders.


Age-related EBV-associated B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder
(AR-EBVLPD) is newly classified as a subtype of diffuse large cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) according to the WHO classification. AR-EBVLPD cases
have poor prognosis compared to that of EBV-negative DLBCL patients.
Until now, its molecular pathogenesis remains largely unknown. We
investigated gene expression profiling to identify molecular genetic
characterization of AR-EBVLPD. Total RNA was extracted from fresh-frozen
tumor samples of five AR-EBVLPD and eight EBV-negative DLBCL cases.
Expression profiling was studied using the Agilent 44K human
oligonucleotide microarray. Genes highly expressed in AR-EBVLPD included
inflammatory and immune-related genes. Gene set enrichment analysis and
gene ontology analysis showed that gene sets of the JAK-STAT and NF-kB
pathways were enriched in AR-EBVLPD cases. In vitro analysis showed that
high activation of JAK-STAT and NF-kB pathways was induced by EBV
infection into DLBCL cell lines. The immunoprecipitation assay confirmed
that the NF-kB pathway was activated in EBV-infected cell lines compared
to EBV-nave cell lines. The protein expression level of phosphorylated
STAT3 increased in an EBV-infected cell line according to western blot
analysis. A total of 61 patients (25 AR-EBVLPD and 36 EBV-negative DLBCL)
were analyzed immunohistochemically for pSTAT3. Protein expression of
phospho-STAT3 was frequently observed in lymphoma cells of AR-EBVLPD
clinical samples using immunohistochemistry [AR-EBVLPD: (80.0%, n=20/25)
vs. EBV-negative DLBCL: (38.9%, n=22/36), p=0.001]. These results
suggested that STAT3 and NF-kB activation was characteristic of
AR-EBVLPD, which may reflect the nature of EBV-positive tumor cells.
Targeting these pathways as therapies might improve clinical outcomes of
AR-EBVLPD.

