Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intestinal glutathione peroxidase (GPx2) promotes differentiation
of colorectal cancer stem cells by modulating the rate of protein
synthesis.


Primary colorectal tumors and liver metastases can be established in
vitro as colonosphere cultures. These 3D cultures are enriched in cancer
stem cells (CSCs) and create phenocopies of the original patient tumor
upon transplantation into mice. We have performed proteomics analysis of
a series of colonosphere cultures and show high expression of the
Wnt-target gene intestinal glutathione peroxidase (GPx2). GPx2 is a
member of the GPx family of ROS scavenging enzymes but its function in
colorectal cancer is not known. Excess oxidative damage in normal and
cancer stem cell (SC) populations can lead to (C)SC exhaustion.
Therefore, we tested whether GPx2 may play a role in colorectal CSC
maintenance. We found that GPx2 is predominantly expressed by
differentiated tumor cells in human colorectal tumors. A construct in
which the GPx2-promoter drives GFP expression revealed that GPx2high
cells express differentiation markers and proliferate rapidly, while
GPx2low cells express stem cell markers (Oct4, Nanog, Sox2, OLFM4) and
proliferate slowly. To study the function of GPX2 in CSC maintenance we
generated GPx2 knockdown (kd) cultures. Depletion of GPX2 greatly
increased the fraction of immature CSCs and inhibited cellular
differentiation. GPx2-kd cells formed slowly growing tumors with high CSC
content, while GPx2 overexpression resulted in the formation of rapidly
proliferating well-differentiated tumors with low CSC content. Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) using gene expression profiles of two
independent series of colorectal tumors showed that GPx2 expression was
inversely correlated with published gene signatures for immature cells
(Nanog, Oct4 and Sox2 target genes) and for cell proliferation. Low
expression of GPx2 also correlated with poor patient survival. To explore
how GPX2 affects CSC maintenance we performed gene ontology analyses and
found that GPx2 expression is most strongly correlated with genes
governing protein synthesis. GPx2 knockdown resulted in strongly reduced
ribosomal gene expression and reduced protein synthesis. Strikingly,
chronic cycloheximide-mediated suppression of protein synthesis in
colonosphere cultures also increased the pool of slow-cycling CSCs,
similar to GPx2 knockdown. Taken together, our results identify the rate
of protein synthesis as a critical new determinant of the CSC phenotype.
By stimulating protein synthesis GPx2 drives the differentiation,
proliferation and exhaustion of colorectal CSCs. Complete elucidation of
this pathway may identify targets for differentiation-stimulating
anti-cancer therapy.

