Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human gut microbiome and risk of colorectal cancer, a case-control
study.


Introduction: Inflammatory responses play a decisive role in colorectal
cancer etiology, yet specific causes remain unclear. Our hypothesis is
that gut microbial alterations promote colorectal carcinogenesis,
possibly through inflammation. To test this hypothesis, we conducted a
case-control study of the gut microbiome in 47 histologically confirmed
colorectal cancer cases and 94 non-cancer controls (matched by gender and
body mass index) who were previously recruited (Schiffman et al, 1989).
Demographic and clinical information was assessed by questionnaire and
medical chart review, and lyophilized fecal biospecimens for gut
microbiome analysis were obtained before initiation of any
treatment.Methods: Ribosomal 16S rRNA genes in fecal DNA were amplified
by universal primers, bar coded and sequenced by 454 FLX technology. 16S
rRNA bacterial gene sequences were binned into operational taxonomic
units (OTUs) with 97% identity and aligned to fully sequenced microbial
genomes (IMG/GG GreenGenes) in the QIIME pipeline. We performed t-tests
and nonparametric Wilcoxon signed-rank tests to compare differences
between colorectal cancer cases than controls on alpha diversity
(Shannon's diversity index) and relative abundance of specific taxa,
respectively, unadjusted for multiple comparisons.Results: From 141 fecal
samples, we have obtained 794,217 16S rRNA gene sequence reads. Shannon's
diversity index was significantly lower in cases (p=0.02; 7.86 for cases;
8.33 for controls). In taxonomy-based analyses, Fusobacterium genus was
significantly enriched in the colorectal cancer cases compared with
control group (p=0.003). Relative abundance of Fusobacterium sequences
ranged from 0-28.9% in cases (median 0.072%) compared to 0-1.3% in
controls (median 0.027%). We also noted a relative decrease in abundance
of Clostridia (p=0.01, class) and Actinobacteria (p=0.03, phylum) in the
colorectal cancer group compared with controls.Conclusion: This first
study of the gut microbiome in colorectal cancer patients compared with
non-cancer controls suggests that the differential abundances in stool of
Fusobacteria, and possibly Clostridia and Actinobacteria, are associated
with risk of colorectal cancer. Consistent with our results, two recent
studies reported that Fusobacterium sequences were enriched in human
colorectal tumor tissue compared to adjacent normal tissue (Kostic et al,
2012 and Castellarin et al, 2012). Fusobacterium is an anaerobic,
Gram-negative bacteria, with invasive and proinflammatory characteristics
through lipopolysaccharides. Further study is needed to define its role
in colorectal carcinogenesis.

