Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative study of dysregulated genes in translocated
ALK-positive non-small cell lung cancer and personalized targeted therapy
resistance.


Background: Recent studies revealed that ALK (anaplastic lymphoma kinase)
2p23 translocation, most commonly fused with echinoderm
microtubule-associated protein-like 4 (EML4), is a novel driver oncogene
in about 5% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). ALK 2p23 fusion (ALK+)
can be diagnosed by dual color break-part ALK FISH assay to inform
personalized targeted therapy using the ALK inhibitor crizotinib.
However, the underlying mechanisms of ALK oncogenic signaling and more
importantly ALK inhibitor crizotinib resistance are not well
understood.Materials and Methods: To understand the mechanism of
oncogenic ALK signaling, an ALK+ NSCLC microarray dataset was retrieved
from NCBI-GEO data repository (GSE31210) and analyzed using data-mining
bioinformatics approaches. This dataset includes the gene expression
profiles of 11 ALK+ NSCLC and 20 normal lung tissue samples. Statistical
analysis was carried out to identify altered genes in ALK+ NSCLC and
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software was deployed to uncover their
network interactions. To study the resistance mechanism of the ALK+ H3122
human NSCLC cell line against the specific ALK inhibitor TAE684,
real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), cell viability assay and
immunoblotting were performed using standard techniques.Results: We
identified a set of 1,656 genes that were significantly altered in ALK+
NSCLC, consisting of 662 upregulated and 994 downregulated. The principal
component analysis (PCA) based on the top 51 of these dysregulated genes
evidently separated ALK+ and normal lung tissue samples, implicating that
these genes could represent potential genomic signature of ALK+ NSCLC.
The IPA analysis revealed 35 canonical pathways linked to ALK signaling,
including beta-adrenergic and angiopoietin signaling pathways. The
results of qRT-PCR, cell viability assay and immunoblotting showed that
in translocated ALK+ H3122 human NSCLC cell line, HGF (hepatocyte growth
factor) overexpression could activate ALK downstream signaling via
activation of MET receptor kinase pathway, thus potentially bypassing the
oncogenic ALK signaling under ALK inhibitor TAE684 treatment. Hence,
alternative direct activation of ALK downstream signaling molecules via
MET/HGF axis activation may potentially contribute to ALK inhibitor drug
resistance.Conclusion: Using bioinformatics data-mining, we have
identified dysregulated genes and pathways in ALK+ NSCLC, many of which
are novel biomarkers not previously reported. We also verified the
relevance and potential key role of MET/HGF signaling axis in ALK
inhibitor resistance. Taken together, our results highlighted the
cross-talk between ALK and MET signaling in NSCLC and shed new insights
into possible pitfalls of potential specific ALK targeting inhibitor
drugs.

