Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Widespread endothelial cell infection and tumor cell apoptosis
after intravenous injection of oncolytic vaccinia virus JX-594 into
RIP-Tag2 mice.


Replication-competent oncolytic viruses are being developed as a
promising strategy for treating certain types of cancer. JX-594 is an
oncolytic vaccinia virus that lacks thymidine kinase and expresses human
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (hGM-CSF). Replication
of JX-594 is promoted by EGFR/Ras pathway signaling in cancer cells. In
addition to having direct oncolytic effects on tumor cells and recruiting
an immune response, JX-594 has been found to cause rapid reduction of
tumor blood flow in preclinical models and in clinical trials. To
understand the mechanism of this vascular effect, we injected
mouse-adapted JX-594 vaccinia virus (mJX-594, on Western Reserve backbone
and expressing hGM-CSF) intravenously into RIP-Tag2 transgenic mice and
examined the pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors at 6 hours or 1, 2, or 5
days after injection. Dot-like vaccinia immunoreactivity was widespread
in endothelial cells of tumor vessels at 6 hours. Scattered endothelial
cells had intense staining. Vaccinia immunoreactivity in tumor blood
vessels was still widespread at 1 day, but at 5 days, most tumor vessels
were narrowed, some appeared fragmented, and tumor vascularity was
reduced by 40%. Normalization of tumor vessels, as observed after
inhibition of VEGF signaling, was not found at any time examined.
Intratumoral hypoxia was evident as diffuse regions of pimonidazole
staining at 6 hours. Pimonidazole staining increased from 1 to 5 days,
and was especially strong in regions of vascular pruning. Extravascular
vaccinia immunoreactivity was located in scattered cells at 1 day and
increased with time. At 5 days, most tumors had large patches of
vaccinia-positive cells. This staining was not present in the surrounding
normal acinar pancreas. Apoptotic cells stained for activated caspase-3
were scattered throughout tumors at 6 hours. Most of these apoptotic
cells were endothelial cells. Apoptotic tumor cells were sparse at 6
hours, but at 5 days apoptotic cells were 23-fold more numerous than at
baseline and even more widespread than vaccinia immunoreactivity, and
tumors tended to be smaller than corresponding controls. These findings
are consistent with oncolytic virus mJX-594 causing rapid infection of
tumor vascular endothelial cells in RIP-Tag2 mice. Endothelial cell
infection is followed by regression of tumor blood vessels, exaggeration
of intratumoral hypoxia, and oncolytic actions on tumor cells that lead
to widespread tumor cell apoptosis.

