Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitors of telomerase and of poly(ADP-Ribose)polymerases
synergize to limit the lifespan of pancreatic cancer cells.


Telomerase is required for the unlimited lifespan of cancer cells.
Pancreatic cancers are almost always positive for telomerase activity and
inhibiting telomerase in these cells could limit their lifespan. In this
project, we have characterized the biology of telomeres in a panel of 11
pancreatic cancer cell lines and have examined the effects of GRN163L
(Imetelstat), a potent telomerase inhibitor, on these cells. GRN163L
inhibited telomerase in all 11 pancreatic cancer cell lines, with IC50
ranging from 50 nM to 200 nM. Continuous exposure of AsPC-1, CAPAN1 and
CD18 cells to 1 M GRN163L resulted in telomere shortening, induction of
crisis, and loss of the cultures. Crisis In these cells was accompanied
by activation of a DNA damage response (-H2AX) and evidence of both
senescence (SA--galactosidase) and apoptosis (Floating cells, sub-G1 DNA
content, PARP1 cleavage). In L3.6 cells, continuous GRN163L exposure led
to the emergence of a GRN163L-resistant sub-population of cells. Over the
last year, these cells have been expanded at successively higher
concentrations of GRN163L and are still dividing in the presence of 10 M
GRN163L. To shorten telomeres and limit the lifespan of these cells, an
alternate approach was to use inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose)polymerases
(PARP) to block the parsylation of TRF1 and TRF2, thereby enhancing the
telomerase-inhibitory activity of the Shelterin complex. Our results show
that combining GRN163L with the general PARP inhibitor 3-aminobenzamide
(3AB) was sufficient to shorten telomeres and limit the lifespan of the
GRN163L-L3.6 resistant cells. These experiments were then repeated in the
parental L3.6 cells to determine if 3AB could be used to block the
development of GRN163L-resistance. Whereas 3AB alone was not sufficient
to induce crisis, 3AB did synergize with GRN163L to accelerate the timing
of crisis and block the emergence of GRN163L resistant cells. These
results raise the possibility that inhibitors of
poly(ADP-ribose)polymerases could be exploited in the clinic to
accelerate the effects of anti-telomerase therapies.

