Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pilot study of oral microbiome and risk of pancreatic cancer.


Previous studies showed that periodontitis and tooth loss are associated
with increased risk of pancreatic cancer, suggesting possible role of
oral bacteria in the pancreatic cancer etiology. We evaluated whether
oral microbiome is associated with risk of pancreatic cancer and
pancreatitis.Oral wash samples were collected from 13 pancreatic cancer
patients, 3 pancreatitis patients and 12 healthy controls at NYU Langone
Medical Center, New York. Ribosomal 16S rRNA genes from oral wash DNA
were amplified by universal primers, barcoded, and sequenced with 454 FLX
technology. The bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequences were binned into
operational taxonomic units (OTUs) with 97% identify and further
classified by taxonomy. Non-parametric Wilcoxon Mann Whiteney U test and
Kuskal-Wallis test were conducted to compare the relative abundance of
taxa across pancreatic cancer, pancreatitis and control groups.A total of
250,008 sequence reads (average 8,928 reads per sample) were observed.
Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and Actinobacteria are major phyla, accounting
for 96.5% of oral microbiota. We found that bacteroides genus was
significantly more abundant in both pancreatic cancer patients (p =
0.002) and pancreatitis patients (p = 0.004) compared with control group.
Further, BLAST search results indicate that the species most closely
represented by the Bacteroides OTUs were oral pathogen. In addition,
Corynebacterium (p = 0.033) and Aggregatibacter (p = 0.019) were less
abundant in pancreatic cancer and pancretitis groups compared with
controls.Data from this pilot study of oral microbiome and pancreatic
cancer suggest that the differential abundance in bacteriodates and
possibly Corynebacterium and Aggregatibacter, are associated with risk of
pancreatic cancer. Bacteroides, Gram-negative bacillus bacteria, plays an
important role in oral inflammation, including periodontitis. Further
larger studies are warranted to confirm these preliminary findings.

