Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The TNF-/ROS/HIF-1-mediated upregulation of FoxM1 expression
promotes proliferation, resistance to apoptosis and indicates poor
prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma.


Background and aims: Inflammatory microenvironment plays a critical role
in promoting hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression. Among the
factors secreted by cancer-associated inflammatory cells, tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-) has been identified as a master regulator of
inflammation and a potential mediator in inflammation-related cancers.
Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is a key cell cycle regulator of the transition
from the G1 to the S phase and the progression to mitosis. We previously
reported that FoxM1 promotes metastasis and indicates poor prognosis in
HCC. However, the critical regulatory mechanism linking TNF- to FoxM1
activation in inflammation-induced HCC progression remains unclear. In
this study, we aim to investigate the mechanism by which FoxM1 is
regulated by TNF-, and the potential role of FoxM1 in
inflammation-associated HCC. Methods: Luciferase reporter, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, and electrophoretic mobility shift assays were used
to measure the transcriptional regulation of FoxM1 promoter by TNF-. The
clinical significance of TNF-/ROS/HIF-1/FoxM1 pathway in a cohort of 406
HCC patients who underwent curative resection was assessed by
Kaplan-Meier analysis and Multivariate Cox proportional hazards model.
Results: TNF- induced FoxM1 expression and transactivated its promoter
activity in hepatoma cells. Serial 5 deletion and site-directed
mutagenesis revealed that the induction of FoxM1 expression by TNF- was
dependent upon the HIF1-1 and HIF1-3/4 binding sites within the FoxM1
promoter. Furthermore, at the transcriptional level, the stabilization of
HIF-1 via reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation led to the binding of
HIF-1 to the FoxM1 promoter and resulted in increased FoxM1 expression.
The inhibition of both HIF-1 expression and ROS generation significantly
decreased TNF--induced FoxM1 expression. Consequently, the upregulation
of FoxM1 promoted the proliferation of hepatoma cells and enhanced their
resistance to TNF--induced apoptosis, whereas downregulation of FoxM1
dramatically attenuated these effects. TNF- expression was positively
correlated with HIF-1 and FoxM1 expression in human HCC tissues. Patients
with positive coexpression of TNF- and FoxM1 had shorter overall survival
and higher recurrence rates than those with negative coexpression of TNF-
and FoxM1. Simarily, patients with HIF-1(+)/FoxM1(+) expression had
shorter overall survival and higher recurrence rates than those with
HIF-1(-)/FoxM1(-) expression. Conclusions: We report a new molecular
mechanism by which FoxM1 expression is regulated by the TNF-/ROS/HIF-1
pathway, and this mechanism results in the proliferation of hepatoma
cells and their resistance to apoptosis. Thus, TNF-/ROS/HIF-1/FoxM1
pathway may provide a target for clinical intervention in HCC.Citation
Format: Limin Xia, Daiming Fan, Yongzhan Nie, Kaichun Wu. The
TNF-/ROS/HIF-1-mediated upregulation of FoxM1 expression promotes
proliferation, resistance to apoptosis and indicates poor prognosis in
hepatocellular carcinoma. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2862. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2862

