Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The microtubule cytoskeleton in the dynamic regulation of
translation: implications for taxane therapy.


Microtubule (MT)-targeting drugs, and in particular the MT-stabilizing
drug Taxol, are the most widely used and most effective class of drugs in
clinical oncology. However, certain tumor types are refractory to
MT-based therapy, and even responsive tumors often acquire drug
resistance. Today, 20 years following Taxol's FDA approval we still fail
to understand the molecular basis of taxane clinical response.
Traditionally, taxane activity has been attributed solely to their
anti-mitotic effects; however, we and others have shown that interphase
MT functions are the true taxane targets mediating clinical activity. In
support of this hypothesis we identified a novel mechanism of
MT-dependent RNA translation. We found that MTs are intricately involved
in regulating hypoxia inducible factor (HIF-1) translation. Taxol-induced
MT stabilization released HIF-1 mRNA from polysomes, and enriched HIF-1
mRNA in Argonaute 2 (Ago2)-containing P-bodes, where HIF-targeting miRNAs
were also recruited. MT repolymerization allowed HIF mRNA to re-enter
active translation, suggesting that MTs exert a tight control over HIF-1.
Our data have revealed a previously unexplored role for MTs in cancer
cell biology and identified an unconventional link between the MT
cytoskeleton and HIF protein synthesis. Interestingly, our work suggests
that other mRNAs are also regulated in a MT-dependent manner. Polysome
profiles in several cancer cell lines consistently showed a striking
increase in the 80S monosomal peak following MT disruption, a hallmark of
translation inhibition. In addition, taxane treatment resulted in P-body
recruitment of two miRNAs not predicted to target HIF-1, suggesting that
other mRNAs are also repressed following MT disruption. Therefore, it is
crucial to determine which other mRNAs, important for cancer cell
survival, are affected by taxane treatment. To identify MT-dependent
messages, we are currently performing polysome profiling coupled with
RNA-Seq to identify which mRNAs change translational status following
taxane treatment. In parallel, we are also performing RNA-Seq of
Ago2-associated mRNAs to identify which mRNAs are enriched in P-bodies
following taxane treatment. Preliminary polysome profiling experiments in
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells yielded 116 transcripts with 2-fold or
greater repression of translation upon Taxol treatment, including Aurora
A kinase and several cyclin-dependent kinases, which has been validated
at the protein level. Importantly, we found that a substantial fraction
of the mRNAs that become untranslated are also among those most highly
bound by Ago2 upon Taxol treatment, assessed by gene set enrichment
analysis (GSEA). Our work has the potential to identify additional mRNAs
whose translation is MT-dependent, and therefore lead to novel target
discovery whose therapeutic exploitation can synergize with existing
taxane-based chemotherapy.

