Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nonclinical safety evaluation of MEDI0639 (Anti-DLL4 Mab) to
support first time In human: linking DLL4-notch signaling blockade to
exaggerated pharmacology effects in cynomolgus monkeys.


Delta-like ligand 4 (DLL4)-Notch signaling regulates several key stages
of angiogenesis. MEDI0639 is a human IgG1 antibody that blocks the
binding of DLL4 to the Notch receptor and is being developed as a
potential anticancer therapy for patients with solid tumors. Cynomolgus
monkeys were selected as a pharmacologically relevant species for
toxicologic evaluations of MEDI0639. The results of these studies showed
dose-dependent MEDI0639-related serious adverse effects associated with
possible gastrointestinal bleeding and heart failure. In general, these
adverse effects were monitorable, reversible and consistent with the
likely pharmacologic effects on vascular homeostasis. Pathologic changes
were observed in liver, heart, lung, and thymus. Changes in clinical
pathology parameters, such as decreased red blood cell (RBC) mass, were
consistent with possible blood loss and responsive erythropoiesis.
Elevations in levels of liver enzymes were indicative of hepatocellular
injury and were consistent with histopathologic findings in liver. Due to
the adverse cardiovascular (CV) findings from repeat-dose toxicity
studies, the effects of MEDI0639 on the CV system were characterized in a
dedicated CV safety pharmacology study in cynomolgus monkeys. Notable
findings from this study were increased levels of C-reactive protein
(CRP), blood pressure (BP), and heart rate (HR) which tended to return to
baseline levels during an 8-week dose-free recovery period.In addition to
the evaluation of these toxicity parameters, the potential
pharmacodynamic (PD) effects of MEDI0639 on circulating endothelial cells
(CECs) in whole blood and on RNA expression levels of selected genes in
the DLL4 and angiogenesis pathways in samples of colon tissue were
assessed. Results showed that mRNA expressions levels of DLL4 and Notch4
were up-regulated when normalized to housekeeping genes while expression
levels of Jagged1, Hey1, and Hes1 were down regulated when normalized to
the EC surface marker PECAM (CD31) in all MEDI0639-treated groups. The
effects of MEDI0639 on EC were confirmed by the observed increase in
expression of PECAM in colon tissue and the increased numbers of total,
proliferating, and apoptotic CECs in whole blood of MEDI0639-treated
animals.Overall, MEDI0639-related adverse effects were monitorable,
reversible and consistent with exaggerated pharmacology effects - that is
DLL4 blockade is expected to lead to the formation of immature,
disorganized blood vessels with inadequate mural cell coverage. This data
was used to determine an appropriate starting dose for a FTIH Phase 1
clinical study of MEDI0639 in cancer patients.

