Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Epstein-Barr virus in nasopharyngeal carcinoma under
metabolic stress.


Most nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) biopsies contain a human pathogen
named as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). EBV infection is considered as an
early event involved in the pathogenesis of NPC. However, the close
association of EBV with NPC is a paradox. EBV infection is common that
occurs in 95% of the world's population, yet the incidence rate of NPC is
rare worldwide and is only seen in Cantonese speaking ethnic groups in
Southern Asia. The mechanisms that regulate EBV infection of
NPC/pre-malignant NP cells including the events involved in latency and
lytic activation (either in vitro or in vivo) are not well-defined.
Expressions of latent and lytic EBV genes have been shown to have
variable effects on the biology and malignant properties of EBV-infected
cells. Hypoxia and nutrient-starvation are common physiological stresses
within tumours and may have impact on regulation of latent and lytic EBV
infection in NPC cells.Here we report that the levels of
hypoxia-inducible factor, HIF-1 protein, a prime hypoxic-stress
responsive marker for mammalian cells, are higher in EBV-infected
NPC/pre-malignant NP cell lines under hypoxia than their non-infected
counterparts, which may imply an enhanced survival ability of
EBV-infected NP cells. The alteration in gene expression profiles of host
cells and expression of EBV genes observed in infected cells may be
responsible for the stabilization of HIF-1 and vice versa. Moreover, EBV
infection enhances the tumour growth rate and size of NPC cells
xenografts in nude mice. The main stem of this study is to examine
whether there is a differential response between EBV-infected and
non-infected NP cells towards various metabolic stresses. Through
studying this project, the mechanism and function of HIF-1 stability by
EBV infection will be explored, which is expected to help characterizing
the role of EBV in transformation of epithelial cells and how EBV
infection may enhance NPC cells to survive inside a tumour core.Citation
Format: VMY Lau, SW Tsao. Role of Epstein-Barr virus in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma under metabolic stress. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1512. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1512

