Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unraveling the complexity of tyrosine kinase inhibitor-resistant
populations by ultra-deep sequencing of the BCR-ABL kinase domain in
Philadelphia-positive leukemias.


Background & Aims - In chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and
Philadelphia-positive (Ph+) acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy may select for drug-resistant BCR-ABL
mutants, routinely assessed by Sanger sequencing (SS). We took advantage
of ultra-deep sequencing (UDS) in order to: 1) resolve qualitatively and
quantitatively the complexity of mutated populations surviving TKIs; 2)
investigate their clonal structure and evolution in relation to time and
treatment.Methods - We retrospectively performed a longitudinal analysis
of 111 samples from 32 CML or Ph+ ALL patients who had received
sequential treatment with multiple TKIs and had experienced sequential
relapses accompanied by selection of TKI-resistant mutations. All samples
had already been scored by SS. UDS of the BCR-ABL KD was done using Roche
454 technology (lower detection limit, 0.1%). Seqnext software was used
for alignment and variant identification; Jalview and Figtree softwares
were used for haplotype and phylogenetic reconstruction.Results - UDS
showed that SS often misclassifies or underestimates BCR-ABL KD mutation
status. In more than half of the cases, UDS revealed that up to five
minor mutations with 1-20% abundance were present, either in samples
scored as wild-type by SS or in samples already bearing one or more
dominant mutations. The high degree of complexity was even more evident
when the clonal relationships of multiple mutations were reconstructed
and the relative abundance of all mutant subclones coexisting at each
timepoint was assessed. This revealed that identical mutations may be
acquired in parallel by independent subclones (e.g., one wild-type and
one already harboring a mutation), via the same or different nucleotide
changes leading to the same amino acid substitution (convergent
evolution). Longitudinal quantitative follow-up showed that the landscape
of all competing mutant subclones is highly dynamic, and that dominant
subclones may be replaced as quickly as within one month in case of
selective pressure change. Earlier identification of emerging
TKI-resistant mutants was made possible by UDS.Conclusions - 1)
sequential changes in the selective pressure exerted by TKIs may result
in a heterogeneous mosaic of subclones harbouring different mutations or
mutation combinations2) The ecosystem of mutant subclones is highly
dynamic: acquisition of additional mutations dictates quick shrinkage or
expansion of subclones over time3) Inherent sensitivity to a specific TKI
is necessary but not sufficient to determine the fitness of a mutant
subclone: competition with coexisting subclones also concurs to shape its
fate4) Reasoning on the basis of mutations detectable by SS may not
always be sufficient to predict responsiveness to a TKI.Supported by
Fondazione CARISBO, PRIN, IGA MZCR NT11555.

