Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biliverdin inhibits head and neck cancer cell growth via
activation of retinoblastoma signaling pathway.


Head and neck cancer patients often present with advanced disease and,
despite advances in chemoradiation treatment protocols, continue to have
a poor prognosis while experiencing severe treatment induced toxicity.
There is an increased demand for natural, and non-toxic agents for
treatment, which can be either used alone or in combination with our
therapies. In this study, we are using biliverdin (BV), an antioxidant
bile pigment, which is oxidized from bilirubin. As a potent antioxidant,
accumulating data from observations in experimental and human studies
indicate that the BV may be protective against certain diseases,
including cancer. Based on our own observations that BV suppresses cell
proliferation in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells and
clinical observations finding a lesser incidence of cancer in healthy
individuals with slightly elevated serum bilirubin levels, we
hypothesized that BV might suppress tumor cell proliferation. The present
study looks to evaluate whether BV treatment can suppress cell
proliferation in HNSCC cells in vitro and in vivo, and to elucidate the
potential mechanism through which it exerts this effect.HNSCC cell lines,
with varying resistance to chemoradiation, and a mouse model with human
HNSCC xenografts were used in this study. As potential effectors, we
analyzed key proteins that are involved in apoptosis and cell cycle
progression. In vitro, we investigated the effect of BV on five HNSCC
cell lines and the signaling pathways involved in BV action on tumor cell
proliferation using western blots. We also analyzed the antiproliferative
effects of the BV by the colorimetric
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay
and cell cycle analysis where BV caused cell cycle arrest by
hypophosphorylation (activating) of the retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor
suppressor protein in HNSCC cells. Ex vivo, we found significant
suppression of xenograft tumor growth in HNSCC cells pretreated with BV
before intradermal injection in nude mice as compared to controls. In
vivo, tumor growth was assessed in BALB/c nude mice bearing HNSCC
xenografts that were treated with BV. The signaling pathway responsible
for this action included dephosphorylation of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR), Akt, NF-B, and hypophosphorylation of the Rb tumor
suppressor protein as well as caspase activation.Our study provides a
rationale for a novel therapeutic approach using exogenous BV, a nontoxic
antioxidant product of heme catabolism, as an anti-cancer agent against
HNSCC through its effect on the Rb/Akt/NF-B signal transduction pathway.
Our findings indicate that BV's actions on these key tumorogenic pathways
may extend its therapeutic potential to head and neck cancer.

