Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discoveries from whole exome sequencing of medulloblastomas.


Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumour in children and
survivors suffer from serious long-term effects due to current treatment.
More advanced molecular markers are desirable to aid in
diagnosis/prognosis as well as to guide treatment. Moreover,
identification of new targets for development of more efficient
therapeutic agents is highly needed.As part of a comprehensive program to
detect candidate genes and signaling pathways disrupted in
medulloblastoma and brain tumour stem cells (BTSC) we are performing
whole exome sequencing on paired tumour and blood samples. So far samples
from 21 patients have been analyzed and the results show that damaging
somatic small scale mutations in the coding regions are relatively rare
in medulloblastoma genomes, in average 12 per patient. Few genes are
recurrently mutated in the data set but interestingly, despite the low
number, several candidate genes have been found to converge in the same
developmental and oncogenic pathways. WNT, SHH and Notch as well as mTOR
and AKT are examples of affected pathways already known to be implicated
in medulloblastoma. Furthermore, we find damaging mutations among
components of the BMP/TGF-beta and RAC/Rho signaling cascades in
different subset of tumours. These are important neuronal developmental,
differentiation and motility pathways not yet well studied in this
pediatric malignancy.Significant findings are also a few mutations in DNA
and histone methylation associated genes. The success of generating DNA
copy number profiles from the sequencing data have further increased our
understanding of the studied samples and several tumour suppressor genes
have shown mutation of one allele and loss of the other, as PTEN, KDM6A
and DULLARD.The relatively few events per sample may add support to the
proposal that medulloblastomas could arise from stem/progenitor cells
that are present in normal neuronal development and importantly, already
possess the capacity of self renewal and proliferation and therefore
might need fewer hits for malignant transformation. Overall these results
contain several interesting candidate genes as well as describe the
heterogeneity of the disease but also the possibility of being able to
pinpoint aberrant pathways in the tumors depending on the genetic
status.Additional analyses will be done, including integrating the
mutation data with results from RNA-seq, Methyl-seq and ChIP-seq.
Comparing genetic and epigenetic status of established BTSC with primary
tumours and perform functional studies and evaluation of selected drugs
on BTSC is also planned. As targeted therapies are being developed based
on new genetic and biology knowledge it is likely that
(epi)genomic/genetic analysis will be increasingly implemented in the
clinic to aid in diagnosis and treatment choice. This personalized
medicine approach should be of great benefit for children with brain
tumours as increased survival and quality of life will follow.

