Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovering cancer biomarkers using a novel cytokine screening
panel.


Cytokines and chemokines that are produced in the tumor micro-environment
play major roles in tumorigenesis, tumor progression, and apoptosis. They
are involved in the modulation of angiogenesis and consequently, in tumor
growth and metastases. Cytokine/chemokine expression by tumor cells leads
to tumor proliferation and enhances tumor cell survival. Profiling these
biomarkers may be useful for cancer diagnosis. For example, biomarkers
such as IFN, TNF, IL-1, MCP-1, and IL-8 are overexpressed in breast
carcinoma; IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-16, and TARC are associated
with prostate cancer; and increased expression levels of TNF, IL-6, and
IL-1 are implicated in colon cancer.We have developed and validated
multiplexed panels of 30 assays that allow users to simultaneously detect
cytokines and chemokines with high precision and accuracy in different
human matrices. These panels detect IFN, IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8,
IL-10, IL-12p70, IL-13, TNF, IL-5, IL-7, GM-CSF, IL-1, IL-17A, IL-15,
IL-16, IL-12/IL-23 p40, TNF, and VEGF MIP-1, MIP-1, Eotaxin, Eotaxin-3,
IP-10, TARC, IL-8 (high abundance), MDC, MCP-1, and MCP-4.The MSD
platform has the ability to quantitate these biomarkers in multiple
sample types with superior sensitivity and performance, quantifying many
low abundance analytes at levels below 0.5 pg/mL.A challenge with current
multiplex assays is a lack of analytical validation and lot-to-lot
reproducibility. These new multiplex panels were developed with highly
characterized and qualified reagents, and the assays were developed in
accordance with industry guidelines. The panels demonstrated suitable
spike recovery and dilution linearity performance in different biological
matrices. Diluents, other kit components, and an optimized assay protocol
are provided to achieve optimum performance. Each assay in the panel is
well characterized and shows low non-specific binding. Each has been
evaluated for potential assay and analytical interference. Controls are
available for each panel.These panels are suitable tools for accurately
quantitating cytokines and chemokines in various tumor samples. Data are
presented for samples from normal subjects as well as samples from benign
prostatic hyperplasia and prostate cancer patients (serum), cirrhosis and
liver cancer patients (serum), kidney cancer patients (plasma), and colon
cancer patients (serum).

