Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An undesired effect of chemotherapy: gemcitabine promotes
pancreatic cancer cell invasiveness through upregulation of CXCR4.


Pancreatic cancer (PC) remains a therapeutic challenge with a rising
incidence and unabated mortality. Gemcitabine (GEM), the current standard
of care drug, is largely ineffective due to chemoresistance, thus
underscoring the need for a refined understanding of the molecular
mechanisms that drive drug-resistant nature of this malignancy. Recently,
we have shown that CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling axis is involved in conferring
chemoresistance to PC cells. Here, we explored the effect of GEM on this
resistance mechanism and its functional consequences. Our data
demonstrated that GEM upregulated CXCR4 expression in two PC cell lines
(MiaPaCa and Colo357) in a dose- and time- dependent manner. GEM-induced
CXCR4 expression was dependent on generation of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) as it was abrogated upon pre-treatment of PC cells with radical
scavenger N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC). CXCR4 upregulation by GEM correlated
with time-dependent accumulation of p65/NF-B and HIF-1 in the nucleus. An
enhanced binding of p65/NF-B and HIF-1 to the CXCR4 promoter was observed
in chromatin immunoprecipitation assay in GEM-treated PC cells, while
their silencing by RNA interference suppressed GEM-induced CXCR4
expression. ROS induction upon GEM treatment preceded the nuclear
accumulation of p65/NF-B and HIF-1 and suppression of ROS diminished
these effects. Effect of ROS on p65/NF-B and HIF-1 was mediated through
activation of ERK1/2 and Akt and their pharmacological inhibition also
suppressed GEM-induced CXCR4 upregulation. Lastly, our data demonstrated
that GEM-treated PC cells were more motile and exhibited significantly
greater invasiveness against a CXCL12 gradient. Altogether, these
findings reinforces the role of CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling in GEM resistance
and point toward an undesired effect of chemotherapy that is potentiation
of invasion and spread of resistant tumor cells.

