Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast Cancer Antiestrogen Resistance 3 (BCAR3) promotes cell
motility by regulating actin cytoskeletal and adhesion remodeling in
invasive breast cancer cells.


Metastatic breast cancer is currently incurable and associated with a
5-year survival rate of only 23%. Thus it is critical to develop a better
understanding of the molecular mechanisms that regulate metastasis and
the underlying process of cell motility in order to improve patient
survival. The adaptor molecule Breast Cancer Antiestrogen Resistance 3
(BCAR3) functions in cellular processes that contribute to cell motility.
Previous work from our group has shown that elevated BCAR3 protein levels
enhance breast cancer cell motility, while depletion of BCAR3 decreases
cell motility and invasion in vitro. Here, we show BCAR3 controls
membrane protrusion, Rac1 activity, and adhesion disassembly in invasive
breast cancer cells in response to adhesion signals. Conversely, RhoA
signaling pathways appear to predominate when BCAR3 is depleted from
these cells, as evidenced by an increase in ROCK-mediated myosin light
chain phosphorylation and the presence of stress fibers and large
ROCK/mDia1-dependent focal adhesions. Thus, through its ability to tip
the balance in favor of Rac1 signaling, BCAR3 functions as a positive
regulator of cytoskeletal remodeling and adhesion turnover in invasive
breast cancer cells, thereby promoting a more invasive, pro-migratory
phenotype. Interestingly, we demonstrate that BCAR3 also controls actin
cytoskeletal and adhesion remodeling in invasive breast cancer cells in
response to epidermal growth factor. Considering that BCAR3 protein
levels are elevated in advanced breast cancer cells lines, we propose
that BCAR3 functions in the transition to advanced disease by triggering
intracellular signaling events that are essential to the metastatic
process. BCAR3 function is intimately linked to two other proteins, the
adaptor molecule p130Cas (Cas) and the non-receptor tyrosine kinase
c-Src. While BCAR3 protein levels have yet to be thoroughly assessed in
human breast tumors, high expression of Cas and/or c-Src is associated
with more aggressive breast cancer behaviors. Future work will determine
whether this BCAR3/Cas/c-Src signaling network serves as a useful
biomarker for invasive disease, and whether BCAR3 promotes breast tumor
progression and metastasis in mouse models of human breast cancer.

