Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unraveling the mechanism of action: drugs that activate the tumor
suppressor 2A .


The tumor suppressor 2A (PP2A) is a multi-enzyme complex that targets a
variety of oncogenic signaling cascades such as Raf, MEK and AKT.
Numerous reports have now emerged indicating that the inhibition of PP2A
leads to the development of tumors including breast, gastric and lung and
a range of hematological malignancies such as chronic and acute myeloid
leukemia (CML and AML, respectively). We and others have shown that
inhibition of PP2A is crucial for the oncogenic effects of leukemia
associated receptor tyrosine kinases such as BCR/Abl, c-KIT and FLT3.
Importantly when PP2A is reactivated using pharmacological agents (FTY720
and AAL(S)), growth and survival of these cells is inhibited. This
approach targets molecules downstream of these oncogenic kinases and thus
PP2A reactivation is designed to avoid resistance associated with kinase
inhibitor therapy. As the mechanism of action of these PP2A activators is
unknown, it is essential that we now determine the molecular targets of
these compounds to generate more effective drugs. Using a chemical
proteomics approach incorporating click chemistry linking the drugs to
beads, unbiased pull down assays were performed in myeloid leukaemia
cells and protein isolates were identified by mass spectrometry. Using
this approach we have identified a novel cellular target, which is known
to be overexpressed in a range of cancers, including leukemias. We have
also shown that this protein associates with PP2A complexes in these
cells, and thus may act as an endogenous inhibitor of PP2A activity. We
have also performed phospho-proteomics and co-immunoprecipitation studies
to identify protein changes in myeloid leukemia cells in response to PP2A
activators. In addition to identifying known PP2A targets, such as Akt
and ERK, we have also identified a number of novel protein changes,
including altered expression of the SET oncoprotein. SET is a known
inhibitor of PP2A, suggesting that FTY720 may act via inhibition of SET.
Other PP2A regulatory proteins such as CIP2A, PME-1 and PP2A-B56alpha are
also affected by FTY720/AAL(S) treatment. Our research findings are thus
providing the vital clues necessary for determining the mechanism of
action of clinically relevant PP2A activators, thereby moving us towards
the provision of novel anti-cancer treatment regimes.

