Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of bioluminescence orthotopic
pancreatic-ductal-adenocarcinoma (PDAC) mouse models from primary PDAC
cells as a new tool for therapeutic discovery.


Pancreatic-ductal-adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains a major unsolved health
problem, and most drugs that successfully pass preclinical tests fail in
the patients. The aim of this study was to establish orthotopic PDAC mice
models from primary pancreatic tumor cells engineered for bioluminescent
imaging as appropriate platform for development/screening of effective
anticancer-drugs.Early passages of four primary PDAC-cultures (PDAC-1,
PDAC-2, PDAC-3 and PDAC-8) were successfully transduced with lentiviral
vectors containing mCherry/Firefly-luciferase (Fluc), and
CFP/Gaussia-luciferase (Gluc), as detected by fluorescence microscope and
FACS analysis, and then injected orthotopically into the pancreas of at
least 3 immunosuppressed athymic mice. The intensities of
bioluminescence-signals (BLI), Fluc or Gluc, were monitored for 60 days
by CCD camera and in blood samples, using Xenogen IVIS Lumina system and
an illuminometer, respectively. In particular, BLI intensities of Fluc
signals were increased within the range of 105-109 p/s/cm2/sr in PDAC-8
and 107-1011 p/s/cm2/sr in PDAC-2. Similarly, the Gluc signal in blood
samples was increased overtime in all the developed PDAC-mouse-models.
Additional imaging analyses to define tumor spatial characteristics were
performed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and
Echo-Doppler.Histopathological and immunohistochemical analyses were
performed on paraffin-embedded slices of pancreas, as well as on
metastatic lesions in liver, lungs and lymph nodes, while genetic
characteristics of the xenografts were compared to the originator tumor
and primary tumor cells using array-based
comparative-genomic-hybridization (Agilent Human CGH Microarray 4x180K
platform), in frozen specimens after laser-microdissection with the Leica
LMD6000 instrument. These models presented extremely similar
histopathological and genetics profile compared to their originator human
tumors. The immunohistological analyses showed the overexpression of
c-Met and phospho-c-Met in one tumor model (PDAC-3). Therefore, we tested
the activity of the c-Met inhibitor crizotinib, alone or in combination
with gemcitabine. Crizotinib significantly reduced tumor growth compared
to untreated mice, while increasing gemcitabine concentrations, as
monitored in blood and tissues samples with a LC-MS/MS validated
method.In conclusion, we developed orthotopic PDAC mice models enabled
for bioluminescent imaging, showing similar genetic and histopathological
features compared to their originator primary pancreatic tumors.
Moreover, we demonstrated that these models provide a platform to monitor
the effectiveness of targeted innovative anticancer drugs, representing a
step toward personalized treatment in PDAC.

