Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of personalized paclitaxel therapy (IG-001) for
ovarian cancer.


Introduction: IG-001, like nab-paclitaxel, is a polymer bound
nanoparticle paclitaxel. It is being developed for difficult to perfuse
hypoxic tumors such as pancreatic cancer and ovarian cancer. IG-001 has
shown promising activity against ovarian cancer in phase II clinical
trials. In the planned phase III trial of IG-001, serum biomarkers as
well as blood paclitaxel will be monitored to as prognostic indicators of
response. The goal of this study is to developed point-of-care testing
devices for PD biomarkers including CA125, B-type natriuretic peptide
(BNP), Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH) and blood paclitaxel.Methods:
Serum samples collected at time of diagnosis of ovarian cancer were
tested using rapid and quantitative point-of-care (POC) devices for blood
biomarkers (CA125, FSH, BNP, and paclitaxel) and the data were evaluated
using JMP9 statistical analysis software.Results: 41 ovarian cancer
patients were analyzed for CA125 prior to surgery of which 3 (7%), 11
(27%), and 27 (66%) were clear cell carcinoma, cystadenocarcinoma and
adenocarcinoma, respectively. CA125 was not diagnostic of ovarian cancer.
However, incidence of elevated (BNP > 25 pg/ml) was higher for patients
(14 of 19, 74%) vs. normal controls (3 of 10, 30%, p = 0.02, Chi-square).
FSH level was higher (median=151.6 mU/ml) vs. normal controls (median of
13.4 mU/ml, p = 0.01, Wilcoxon). Paclitaxel POC device was developed to
monitored paclitaxel level down to 20ng/mL for paclitaxel.Conclusions:
Rapid and quantitative point-of-care tests for PD biomarker testing and
paclitaxel PK therapeutic drug monitoring have been developed for use in
conjunction with IG-001 development against ovarian cancer. IG-001 is
ideal for paclitaxel therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) due to its dose
proportional PK. Paclitaxel TDM should allow for more effective dosing of
the patients and thereby improving effectiveness of IG-001. These POCTs
are also patient-centric, inviting better compliance and patient
participation in personalizing his/her treatment. Plasma or serum samples
obtained via repetitive venipuncture represent the accepted gold standard
for monitoring the pharmacodynamics (PD) and pharmacokinetics (PK) of
anticancer agents. Unfortunately for research subjects, the burden of
frequent venipuncture is high; and, for researchers, venipuncture samples
require immediate processing and storage facilities with freezers. The
work presented here resolved the operational difficulty associated with
personalized therapy in general and IG-001 in specific.

