Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Data-driven computational modeling to identify biomarkers of
response to lenvatinib (E7080) in melanoma.


Background: Lenvatinib is an oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor targeting
VEGFR1-3, FGFR1-4, RET, KIT and PDGFR. Anti-tumor activity has been
observed in melanoma patients in Phase I studies. We applied an
integrative supercomputer-driven analysis approach to identify biomarkers
of lenvatinib treatment response in melanoma patients.Methods: Clinical
data sets including tumor response data (RECIST), progression free
survival (PFS), pharmacokinetic parameters (PK) and molecular data sets
including baseline tumor gene expression (Affymetrix U133Plus2) and BRAF
and NRAS mutational status, were collected from 18 patients with
metastatic melanoma who received lenvatinib 10 mg orally twice daily in
28-day cycles. These clinical and molecular data sets were used to
generate computational models developed using REFS (Reverse Engineering
and Forward Simulation) modeling platform, which utilizes Bayesian
network inference and simulations. Simulations were performed to identify
biomarkers of lenvatinib treatment response. These potential predictive
biomarkers were then tested for their ability to predict response to
lenvatinib in preclinical models.Results: Using a model comprising gene
expression, mutational status and PK data, REFS identified a panel of 18
potential predictive biomarkers of lenvatinib treatment response.
Identified biomarkers were able to predict up to 89% of the observed
variance in the tumor response data. A total of 32 identified genes
including 6 candidate predictive biomarkers (TARBP2, CACNA1, C7ORF,
RAP2A, SHMT1, IL22RA2) were further validated in a preclinical melanoma
model system (n=12) and tissue bank samples with matched normal adjacent
tissue (n=21). Expression of 14 genes correlated with relative tumor
volume (r>0.35 or r2).Conclusions: Potential predictive biomarkers of
lenvatinib treatment response in melanoma patients were identified by
computational modeling and validated in a preclinical model system and
tumor tissue bank samples. The identified biomarkers will be tested for
their predictive value in an ongoing Phase 2 trial.

