Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discrepancy between MMP-9 and its fibronectin-like domain in tumor
growth and invasion.


Tumors are often compared to wounds that do not heal, where the crosstalk
between tumor cells and their surrounding stroma is crucial at all stages
of development from the initial primary growth to metastasis. Similar to
wound healing, fibroblasts in the tumor stroma differentiate into
myofibroblasts, also referred to as cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs),
primarily, but not exclusively, in response to transforming growth
factor- (TGF-). Myofibroblasts in turn enhance tumor progression by
remodeling the stroma. Among molecules implicated in stromal remodeling,
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), and MMP-9 in particular, play a
prominent role. However, the mechanisms that regulate MMP-9 activation
and function remain poorly understood. Recent evidence indicates that
tumor cell surface association of MMP-9 is an important event in its
activation, and more generally in tumor growth and invasion.Based on
these observations, we addressed the potential association of MMP-9
activity with cell-surface recruitment on human fibroblasts. We show for
the first time that recruitment of MMP-9 to the MRC5 fibroblast cell
surface occurs through the fibronectin-like (FN) domain, found only in
MMP-9 and MMP-2. Functional assays suggest that the active form of MMP-9
triggers -smooth muscle actin (SMA) expression in resting fibroblasts
that reflects myofibroblast differentiation, possibly through TGF-
activation.Xenograft experiments using HT1080 fibrosarcoma or MDA-MD231
breast adenocarcinoma cells stably expressing the FN domain of MMP-9 in
NOD/SCID mice revealed no changes in primary tumor growth. However, in
the context of metastasis, expression of the FN domain by these same
tumor cells dramatically increases their metastatic proclivity whereas
expression of wt MMP-9 either promotes no change or actually reduces the
number of metastases. Curiously, xenografts of SW480 colorectal
adenocarcinoma cells stably expressing the FN domain of MMP-9 display
reduced growth at both the primary (subcutaneous) injection site and the
lungs, in experimental metastasis assays, of NOD/SCID mice. This
discrepancy is believed to be due to the FN domain that may modulate
MMP-9 activity and TGF- activation in different ways, depending on the
tumor cell type.These observations suggest a dual role of MMP-9 and its
FN domain in primary tumor growth and metastasis, underscoring the notion
that the effect of MMP-9 on tumor cells may depend on their response to
TGF- activation and highlighting possible protective effects of MMPs in
tumor progression and invasion.

