Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CRLX101, a nanopharmaceutical in phase 2 clinical trials, is
synergistic with antiangiogenic treatment through HIF-1 inhibition in an
ovarian cancer xenograft model.


Antiangiogenic drugs reduce blood flow to tumors and thereby inhibit
tumor growth by starving tumors of oxygen and nutrients. However,
antiangiogenic agents have achieved limited success as monotherapies.
This may be in part because the reduced blood flow that follows this
therapy induces tumor hypoxia and up-regulates hypoxia-inducible factor 1
(HIF-1), well implicated in the promotion of tumor angiogenesis,
invasion, and metastasis. We investigated whether the efficacy of
antiangiogenic drugs could be improved by combining them with an
inhibitor of HIF-1. Previous investigators showed that HIF-1 can be
inhibited by camptothecin (CPT). Therefore, we sought to demonstrate that
CRLX101, a self-assembling nanopharmaceutical that delivers the
topoisomerase-1 inhibitor CPT, is an inhibitor of HIF-1 and that CRLX101
efficacy is synergistic with antiangiogenic treatment. CRLX101 is
designed to deliver therapeutically relevant concentrations of CPT to
tumors over an extended period of time. We have previously presented data
demonstrating dramatic CRLX101-mediated inhibition of tumor growth in 20
different xenograft models and CRLX101 is currently being evaluated in
phase 2 clinical trials as a monotherapy for NSCLC, ovarian and gastric
cancer and in combination with bevacizumab in renal cell carcinoma.
First, we demonstrated that CRLX101 is an inhibitor of HIF-1. A single
administration of CRLX101 inhibited HIF-1 protein in 7/8 different
xenograft models tested, representing ovarian, lung, renal, colorectal
and prostate tumor types. In the HCT-116 colon xenograft tumor, for
example, HIF-1 was inhibited up to 90% for at least 7 days. Treatment by
CRLX101 also decreased the mRNA of all HIF-1-regulated genes analyzed,
including VEGF, CA9, GLUT-1, GLUT-3 and CD31. Inhibition of these genes
occurred only in tumors in which HIF-1 levels were inhibited. Second,
combining CRLX101 with bevacizumab (BEV) demonstrated a synergistic
effect on tumor growth inhibition and improved survival in the A2780
ovarian xenograft tumor model. Specifically, CRLX101 alone, at a
sub-maximal dose of 5 mg/kg, produced 2/10 complete responses (CRs), BEV
alone at 5 mg/kg produced 2/10 CRs and the combination of the two
resulted in 6/9 CRs. BEV alone increased HIF-1 protein, consistent with
BEV-induced hypoxia, whereas CRLX101 alone inhibited HIF-1 protein. When
the two drugs were combined, inhibition of HIF-1 was significantly
greater than CRLX101 monotherapy. The synergistic activity of CRLX101 in
combination with bevacizumab suggests that CRLX101 may be able to
overcome HIF-mediated acquired resistance to antiangiogenic drugs through
inhibition of HIF-1, in addition to its topoisomerase 1 inhibition. These
findings support the use of CRLX101 in combination with antiangiogenic
drugs as an exciting new paradigm for the treatment of cancer.

