Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel microRNA-based test demonstrates 92% accuracy in the
classification of metastatic tumors from patients diagnosed with
carcinoma of unknown primary .


Background:Cancers of unknown primary origin (CUP) constitute 3%-5%
(50,000 to 70,000 cases) of all newly diagnosed cancers per year in the
United States. Including cancers of uncertain primary origin, the total
number increases to 12%-15% (180,000 to 220,000 cases) of all newly
diagnosed cancers per year in the United States. CUP is a major
diagnostic and clinical challenge, since identifying the tissue-of-origin
of metastases is crucial for selecting optimal treatment. MicroRNAs are a
family of non-coding, regulatory short RNA molecules that are stable in
clinical samples and are tissue-specific, consequently they have a great
potential to be excellent biomarkers for cancer tissue-of-origin
diagnosis. The goal of the study was to assess the performance of a
microRNAs-based assay to diagnose the tissue of origin on a well
annotated cohort of real CUP patients.Methods: A pre-developed
microarray-based test that measures the expression of 64 microRNAs was
employed to identify the tissue of origin of metastatic tumors of CUP
cases. A cohort of 93 resected metastatic lesions with adequate tissue
sample from 92 patients diagnosed with CUP was studied. 85 samples (84
patients) were processed successfully; eight samples failed due to
inadequate RNA quality. Test results were compared with clinical
presentation including imaging, pathological data (histology and IHC) and
therapeutic response.Results: Overall, in 92% of the patients the assay
results were fully concordant with the final clinical diagnosis based on
all other clinical, pathologic and outcome data. There was a 22%
improvement in agreement of the test results from the clinical Diagnosis
at presentation to the final clinical Diagnosis (based on additional data
gathered with patients treatment and follow up), which is a strong
indication of the degree in which the assay facilitates the diagnostic
process from early stages of patient's management.Conclusions: In a
cohort of metastatic lesion samples from CUP patients, a previously
developed test based on the expression profile of 64 microRNAs allowed
accurate identification of tissue of origin in the vast majority of the
cases. The high accuracy of this test in identifying the tissue of origin
of metastasis of unknown primary has been validated by this study and
demonstrates its clinical utility. The high concordance of the test
results to the final diagnosis of the patient demonstrates the importance
of the test to yield additional data valuable for patient's management at
an early stage of patient's journey. This predictive ability could be
associated with a change of clinical management, including administration
of more effective chemotherapy combinations and targeted agents, in many
of the patients in this study.

