Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis of heterocyclic compounds as anticancer agents.


Cancer is a very complex disease, linked with different initiating
causes, cofactors and promoters, and several types of cellular damages.
There is a strong correlation between chronic inflammatory conditions in
a particular organ and cancer specific to that organ. The longer the
inflammation persists, the higher the risk of associated carcinogenesis.
Drug discovery process has changed dramatically over the past decade as
there is an increasing demand to obtain more drug candidates and decrease
attrition during drug development. Chromone scaffold
[(4H)-1-benzopyran-4-one] has been recognized as a pharmacophore of a
large number of bioactive molecules of either natural or synthetic
origin. Until now, numerous biological effects such as anti-inflammatory,
antitumoral, and antimicrobial activities especially in popular medicine,
have been attributed to this benzo--pyrone nucleus. Compounds of this
type also possess inhibition properties towards different enzymes such as
oxidoreductases, kinases, tyrosinases, lipoxygenases and cyclooxygenases.
Chemotherapeutic agents like tetrahydropyridine (THP) analogs exhibit
diverse biological activities like analgesic and anti-inflammatory
effects. Our earlier research results indicated that some of the THP
derivatives showed COX-2 inhibition and anti-inflammatory activities on
rat paw edema assay studies. Incorporation of THP moiety might enhance
biological activity of the chromone derivatives. Herein, we report the
synthesis of substituted
N-(5,6-dihydropyridin-1-(2H)-yl)-4-oxo-4H-chromene-2-carboxamide as
anticancer and anti-inflammatory agents.The starting material
4-oxo-4H-chromene-2-carbonyl chloride was obtained by the reaction of
4-oxo-4H-chromene-2-carboxylic acid, dissolved in 1,2-dichloroethane and
SOCl2 containing few drops of DMF under reflux for 4h. The crude acid
chloride obtained by removing the excess of SOCl2 and solvent under
vaccum, was used immediately for next step. Reaction of the acid chloride
with substituted N-amino pyridinium salt in anhydrous tetrahydrofuran
gave stable ylides. This was followed by reduction with sodim borohydride
in absolute ethanol, which furnished the target compound. These compounds
were evaluated for their cytotoxic effects on MCF-7 ER positive breast
cancer cells, MDA-MB ER receptor negative breast cancer cells, and
Ishikawa cell line using the CellTiter-Glo (CTG) luminescent cell
viability assay.
N-(4-tert-butyl-5,6-dihydropyridin-1(2H)-yl)-6-chloro-7-methyl-4-oxo-4H-chr
omene-2-carboxamide showed the cytotoxicity with an IC50 values of 73.28
M on MDA-MB-231 cell lines.This research was supported by the National
Center for Research Resources and the National Institute of Minority
Health and Health Disparities of the National Institutes of Health
through Grant Number 8 G12MD007582-28.

