Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide kinase and phosphatase siRNA screen identifies
clinically relevant targets in IGF1R signaling-mediated antiestrogen
resistance in breast cancer.


Antiestrogen resistance of breast cancer has been linked to increased
growth factor receptor signaling such as invoked by the insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF-1) receptor (IGF1R). We have previously shown that
increased IGF1R signaling by ectopic IGF1R overexpression in MCF7 cells
(MCF7-IGF1R) directly drives an estrogen receptor (ER)-independent cell
proliferation in MCF7 cells that leads to antiestrogen resistance. To
identify components of the downstream IGF1R signaling pathways that
mediate antiestrogen resistance, we have performed a human genome-wide
kinase and phosphatase siRNA screen under tamoxifen resistance condition
(1 M 4-OH-tamoxifen, 1 nM estradiol, and 100 ng/ml IGF-1) in MCF7-IGF1R
cells. We identified 174 kinases and phosphatases that increased or
decreased tamoxifen resistance. Of these, 14 significantly correlated
with the time to disease progression of metastatic breast cancer patients
treated with first-line tamoxifen monotherapy, including ADRA1B, BMPR1B,
CDK10, CDK5, EIF2AK1 and MAP2K5. Low expression of these six genes in
patients correlated with short time to disease progression and silencing
of these genes in MCF7-IGF1R cells further increased proliferation under
tamoxifen resistance condition. Low expression of the other eight genes
in patients correlated with longer time the time to disease progression
and silencing of these genes in MCF7-IGF1R cells decreased proliferation
under tamoxifen resistance condition Therefore, these latter genes may
represent novel drug targets that may be useful to restore tamoxifen
sensitivity in breast cancer. Knockdown of two of these genes suppressed
IGF1R-mediated effects and restored the anti-proliferative effect of
tamoxifen in a dose dependent manner, suggesting synthetic lethality
between the knockdowns and tamoxifen. Further study of one of these genes
revealed that stable knockdown inhibits proliferation and
three-dimensional growth under tamoxifen resistance condition,
accompanied with an increase in G1/G0 arrest and mild induction of
apoptosis. These effects are independent of PI3K/AKT and MAPK/ERK
signaling pathways, and suggest that an as yet unknown pathway plays a
decisive role in tamoxifen resistance induced by IGF1R signaling.

