Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-epileptic drug targets Ewing sarcoma.


Ewing sarcoma is a highly aggressive and metastatic bone or soft tissue
tumor that affects children and adolescents. It is characterized by
chromosomal translocations involving EWS gene and one of the ETS
(Erythroblastosis virus E26 transformation-specific) families of
transcription factors (ERG, FLI1, ETV1, ETV4, E1AF and FEV). All of the
fusion genes juxtapose the EWS gene to an ETS related gene. Previously
our laboratory has discovered several ETS oncogenes that have shown to
play major roles in human cancers. ERG (ETS Related Gene), an important
member of the ETS family genes, discovered by Drs. Reddy and Rao is shown
to be involved in Ewing sarcoma. Our laboratory has previously
demonstrated that ERG protein functions as a sequence specific
transcriptional activator. Our preliminary results have shown that ERG
and aberrant EWS-ERG proteins inhibit RXR transcriptional activation and
apoptosis. These results suggest that transcriptional inhibition may play
a major role in apoptosis function. Using a cell based assay system
developed in our laboratory that measures the inhibitory activities of
ERG proteins, we screened for known drugs that can reverse the inhibitory
effects of RXR transcriptional activity. Since HDACs regulate nuclear
receptors, we hypothesized that anti-epileptic drug, valproic acid and
trichostatin-A (HDAC inhibitors) may reverse the inhibitory properties of
EWS-ERG oncoprotein on RXR transcriptional activity and they can be used
as therapeutic agents in Ewing sarcoma. Methods: Cell based assays were
used to measure the RXR transcriptional activation function and in vivo
assays were used to study the cell viability and apoptosis activity.
Results: (1) Anti-epileptic drugs, valproic acid (VPA) and trichostatin-A
(TSA) have shown to reverse the inhibitory effect of EWS-ERG on RXR
transcriptional activity. (2) VPA and TSA inhibit the cell growth of
Ewing sarcoma cells expressing EWS-ERG onco-protein. (3) VPA induce
apoptosis in Ewing sarcoma cells. (4) VPA induce the expression of RXR
target genes. Conclusion: Ewing sarcoma requires highly intensive
chemotherapy along with surgery and/or radiation. Current therapies are
associated with significant short and long term side effects. Hence new
therapeutic approaches are needed. The above results suggest that the
anti-epileptic drug VPA could be used as a potential treatment option for
regulation of the function of EWS-ERG onco-protein. Thus, a promising
drug with a new potential will have profound impact on prevention,
management and treatment of Ewing family of cancers.

