Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caveolin-1 as an oncopromoter in solidtumors: A role mediated by
STAT3 in vitro.


IntroductionCaveolin-1(Cav-1) is a multifunctional scaffolding protein
essential structural constituent of caveolae, regulating multiple
processes in cancer.A growing body of evidence links elevated expression
of Cav-1 to an aggressive phenotype of cancer cells and to a poor
prognosis in several tumors. The molecular mechanisms underlying the
pro-survival and tumor-promoting functions of Cav-1 and the down-stream
mediators of Cav-1 functional role in metastatic cancer have jet to be
fully identified. The aim of the present work was to prosecute the
investigation on such molecular pathways in solid tumors, based on our
recent data obtained in cell lines from SCLC (SCLC-R1) and NSCLC (RAL)
and from glioblastoma (A-172) where we demonstrated an oncopromoter
activity of Cav-1 through the activation of STAT3 signaling pathway. Here
we present the data obtained in a cell line from osteosarcoma (143B),
where Cav-1 was highly expressed.MethodsCav-1 was knocked-down by siRNA
using the transfection reagent oligofectamine. Cell proliferation was
assessed by Trypan Blue exclusion test and by MTT test. Protein
expressions were evaluated by Western Blotting.ResultsThe siRNA-mediated
down-regulation of Cav-1 caused the arrest of proliferation in the cell
line, which remains stable up to 24 h after the removal of siRNA and then
gradually returns to normal levels. Interestingly, both Cav-1 expression
and proliferation goes down and turn up in the same way and at the same
extent. A marked reduction of cyclin D1 and of CDK4 expression was
evident in the cells transfected with Cav-1 siRNA and consequently of
phosphoRb. The down-stream effector was STAT3 in the 143B osteosarcoma
cell line, due to a significant induction of SOCS-1.ConclusionsTogether,
our findings obtained in malignant tumors like SCLC, NSCLC, glioblastoma
and osteosarcoma indicate that Cav-1 silencing induces an arrest of
proliferation in vitro in each of them by inhibiting the pathway mediated
by STAT3, through different upstream molecules depending on tumor: AKT
and ERK in metastatic lung cancer, c-Src and p38 alpha in glioblastoma
and SOCS-1 in osteosarcoma. These results confirm that Cav-1 exerts a
role as a promoter of cancer proliferation and its activity strictly
depends on cell/tumor type. They indicate the necessity to study this
protein's function in each specific tumor context and provide new
insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the pro-survival and
tumor-promoting functions of Cav-1.Grants from MIUR (RFO,PRIN), Roberto
Pallotti's Legacy and Cornelia Pallotti's Legacy for Cancer Research,
University of Bologna, Italy

