Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel functions of the homeoprotein SIX2 in mediating anchorage
independence and metastasis in breast cancer.


Homeobox genes encode for transcription factors that are master
regulators of embryogenesis, and their misexpression has been implicated
in multiple cancers. The role of the homeoprotein Six2 in developing
kidney has been well demonstrated; however, its role in cancer
progression is largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate, for the first time,
that Six2 is causally involved in mammary tumor progression. When Six2 is
knocked down (KD) in the 66cl4 mammary carcinoma cells, lung metastasis
is significantly decreased compared to control KD; however, Six2 KD
conferred no significant effect on growth of the primary tumor or on
tumor-associated angiogenesis/lymphangiogenesis, in contrast to its
closely related family member, Six1, which has been implicated in all the
aforementioned properties; suggesting that Six2 may participate in later
stages of the metastatic cascade. Expression of Six2 in the 4TO7 mammary
carcinoma cell line (a cell line that is syngeneic with 66cl4, but
expresses very low levels of endogenous Six2) led to changes in cell
morphology, increased growth in soft agar, increased resistance to
anoikis, and significantly enhanced lung metastasis in Balb/c mice. To
determine the mechanism by which Six2 mediates metastasis, microarray
analysis was performed on 4TO7-control and Six2 expressing cells.
Interestingly, genes which have been implicated in lung metastasis (MMP,
ANGPTL4, VCAM1) are significantly up-regulated in Six2 overexpressing
4TO7 cells; while the epithelial marker, E-Cadherin, is dramatically
decreased. Finally, analysis of SIX2 expression from public microarray
datasets indicates that SIX2 is increased in breast cancers compared to
normal breast tissue. In addition, high expression of SIX2 correlates
with poor prognosis (distant metastasis free survival, overall survival
and relapse free survival) in 1881 human breast tumors examined using the
GOBO (Gene Expression-Based Outcome for Breast Cancer Online) database,
and upon further investigation we found that SIX2 expression is
particularly associated with poor prognosis in luminal A, normal-like and
ER-positive breast tumors. Together, our studies define a novel role of
Six2 in breast cancer metastasis.

