Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Talin-1 phosphorylation promotes invasion and migration of
prostate tumor cells through activation of 1 integrins.


Integrins have been shown to play a critical role in cell survival. We
recently demonstrated that integrins are constitutively activated in
highly metastatic prostate cancer cell PC3-mm2. Activation of integrins
increases their binding affinity with extracellular matrix, resulting in
increased migration and cancer metastasis. Talin is a 270 kDa
cytoskeletal protein that has been shown to regulate integrin activity.
Previous reports showed that the S425 residue in the N-terminal domain of
talin was phosphorylated by Cdk5 to increase talin stability. In this
study, we determined whether talin S425 phosphorylation regulates 1
integrin activation. We found that 1 integrin activation in prostate
tumor cells correlates with talin S425 phosphorylation but not total
talin levels. To examine the role of talin-pS425 in 1 integrin
activation, endogenous talin-1 in PC3-mm2 cells was knocked down by
shRNA, followed by re-expression of a phosphorylation-deficient S425A or
phosphorylation-mimicking S425D talin-1 mutant. Re-expressing
phosphorylation-deficient S425A-talin-1 in talin-1-knockdown PC3-mm2
cells showed reduced activation of 1 integrins, and decreased migration
and invasion, compared to cells re-expressing wild type talin-1. In
contrast, re-expressing the phosphorylation-mimicking S425D mutant in
talin-1-knockdown PC3-mm2 cells restored 1 integrin activation and
increased migratory and invasive properties of these cells. Inhibition of
Cdk5 by roscovitine, a Cdk5 inhibitor, decreases talin-1 S425
phosphorylation and also inhibits downstream integrin signaling,
including FAK and Src phosphorylation. Treatment of PC3-mm2 cells with
roscovitine decreases 1 integrin activation and migration of PC3-mm2
cells. These results suggest that phosphorylation of talin-1 at S425
plays a role in promoting 1 integrin activation, leading to increased
metastatic potential of prostate tumor cells.

