Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The lipogenic phenotype of HER2/neu-positive breast cancer cells.


15 - 30 % of all breast cancer cases are classified as HER2/neu-positive,
a very aggressive form of breast cancer that correlates with a poor
prognosis, reduced survival time and increased incidence of metastasis.
Kourtidis et al. (2010) have recently shown that the HER2-positive breast
cancer cell line BT474 relies on a unique Warburg-like metabolism for
survival and aggressive behavior. These cells are dependent on fatty acid
synthesis, presumably as a means to regenerate NAD+ for aerobic
glycolysis. The nuclear receptors NR1D1 and PPAR enable these cells to
upregulate de novo fatty acid synthesis while avoiding palmitate-induced
lipotoxicity by storing neutral fats (TAGs). The cells show markedly
increased levels of stored fats compared to other breast cancer cell
lines and disruption of the synthetic process results in apoptosis of
BT474 cells. Metabolomic analysis of NR1D1 overexpressing cells compared
to normal cells reveals profound differences in their metabolite
profiles. This metabolic phenotype is operating at its limits in
HER2-positive cells, as addition of exogenous palmitate results in cell
death, whereas HER2-normal cells are not affected by this treatment.
Microarray analysis suggests that palmitate induces an ER-stress response
in the HER2-positive cells, ultimately resulting in cell death.
Preliminary results suggest that this response is CHOP-dependent.
Combination treatments with palmitate and HER2-targeted therapeutic
compounds show synergistic effects and markedly increase the cytotoxic
effects of either compound alone. The uptake of exogenous fatty acids as
well as the de novo fatty acid synthesis are dependent on the essential
co-factor coenzyme A (CoA), which is generated from the precursor
pantothenate (vitamin B5). Based on our genomic analysis we predicted
that HER2-positive breast cancer cells are more sensitive to changes in
intracellular CoA levels. Our results show that HER2-positive breast
cancer cells are sensitive to shRNA-mediated knockdown of coenzyme A
pathway enzymes whereas MCF-7 cells are not. We observe the same pattern
of sensitivity using the competitive CoA pathway inhibitor
homopantothenate. Interestingly, limiting the supply of CoA in
HER2-positive cells reduces the toxicity of exogenous palmitate.Our data
suggest that HER2-positive breast cancer cells are metabolically
different from other breast cancer cell lines and that these differences
offer new possibilities for therapeutic applications.

