Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of PAK 1 is a favorable prognostic biomarker in
malignant melanoma.


The incidence of malignant melanoma, the most lethal form of skin cancer,
is increasing. Approximately 76,000 new cases of invasive melanoma and
9,000 deaths from the disease are anticipated in 2012. Melanoma, a
heterogeneous and multistep disease, is one of the most frequent cancers
in young adults 20-30 years of age. Identification of prognostic factors
for melanoma patients and a better understanding of melanoma progression
are needed. An initial radial growth phase of melanomas is followed by a
vertical growth phase. Although metastatic capacity is thought to be
acquired during the vertical growth phase, metastases occur in some
patients with primary melanomas having a radial growth pattern. In this
study of 40 melanoma patients we examined immunohistochemically detected
cytoplasmic and nuclear expression of p21-activated kinase 1 (PAK 1) in
FFPE archived surgical specimens of the four major subtypes of cutaneous
melanoma (superficial spreading melanoma, nodular melanoma, lentigo
maligna melanoma, and acral lentiginous melanoma), as well as benign nevi
and normal skin, in relation to clinical outcome. The highest expression
of both nuclear and cytoplasmic PAK 1 was found in superficial spreading
melanomas (which comprise 70% of melanoma cases in the US) and was
significantly increased relative to normal skin (P The incidence of
malignant melanoma, the most lethal form of skin cancer, is increasing.
Approximately 76,000 new cases of invasive melanoma and 9,000 deaths from
the disease are anticipated in 2012. Melanoma, a heterogeneous and
multistep disease, is one of the most frequent cancers in young adults
20-30 years of age. Identification of prognostic factors for melanoma
patients and a better understanding of melanoma progression are needed.
An initial radial growth phase of melanomas is followed by a vertical
growth phase. Although metastatic capacity is thought to be acquired
during the vertical growth phase, metastases occur in some patients with
primary melanomas having a radial growth pattern. In this study of 40
melanoma patients we examined immunohistochemically detected cytoplasmic
and nuclear expression of p21-activated kinase 1 (PAK 1) in FFPE archived
surgical specimens of the four major subtypes of cutaneous melanoma
(superficial spreading melanoma, nodular melanoma, lentigo maligna
melanoma, and acral lentiginous melanoma), as well as benign nevi and
normal skin, in relation to clinical outcome. The highest expression of
both nuclear and cytoplasmic PAK 1 was found in superficial spreading
melanomas (which comprise 70% of melanoma cases in the US) and was
significantly increased relative to normal skin (P < 0.0001). High
nuclear and cytoplasmic expression of PAK 1 relative to normal skin was
found in some (8-17%) of the other forms of melanoma. Overexpression of
PAK 1 was not found in lymph node or lung metastases from 13 patients.
Overexpression of cytoplasmic PAK 1 in the primary tumors from 28
patients was associated with increased survival (P = 0.03). Only 25% of
patients with uniformly high (3+) cytoplasmic expression of PAK 1 in
their primary tumor died compared to 67% of patients with less
cytoplasmic PAK 1. Similarly only 22% of patients with more than trace
expression of PAK 1 in 50% of the nuclei in their primary tumor died
compared to 61% of patients with less nuclear PAK 1. The difference in
survival between 28 patients with high and low nuclear PAK 1 in their
primary tumor approached significance (P = 0.062). Overall, patients with
superficial spreading melanoma had not only the highest cytoplasmic and
nuclear PAK 1 expression in their tumor, but also tended to have better
survival than patients with other forms of melanoma (P = 0.07). PAK 1 has
multiple cellular effects including effects on growth factor signaling,
cytoskeletal signaling, oncogenic transformation and survival, and
chromatin and nuclear signaling. Our data indicate that PAK 1
overexpression in primary melanomas portends increased survival for the
melanoma patient, possibly reflecting the relevance of PAK 1 to the
radial vs. the vertical phase of melanoma progression.

