Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defects of homologous recombination repair in breast cancer:
Identification of a novel RAD51-associated protein complex.


Cells are continuously challenged by genotoxic agents from endogenous and
exogenous sources. Severe DNA lesions, including DNA double-strand breaks
(DSBs), have to be appropriately repaired for cell survival. Homologous
recombination (HR) is particularly important for the repair of DSBs due
to its ability to accurately restore genetic information. Cancer is a
disease of DNA repair. The breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and
BRCA2 encode DNA repair factors acting in the specific HR repair pathway.
Germline mutations in many HR components, including BRCA1, BRCA2 and
PALB2, are associated with cancers including breast cancer. Therefore, it
is urgent to understand how HR repair is regulated in normal cells and
how human cancers are defective in HR mediated repair.The RAD51
recombinase plays a central role in HR. To further study HR process, we
performed tandem affinity purification of RAD51. Here, we report the
identification of a new RAD51-binding protein FIGNL1 (fidgetin-like 1).
Our experiments showed that FIGNL1 specifically interacts with RAD51 via
its conserved RAD51-binding domain. Cells depleted of FIGNL1 show
defective HR repair and hypersensitivity to Camptothecin and ionizing
radiation, common regimens for cancer treatment. However, FIGNL1 is
recruited to sites of DNA damage in a manner that is independent of
BRCA2, RAD51 and RAD51 paralogs. Conversely, FIGNL1 depletion does not
affect the loading of RAD51 onto single-strand DNA. Our experiments also
uncovered KIAA0146 as a binding partner of FIGNL1 and established that
KIAA0146 acts together with FIGNL1 in HR repair. More interestingly, our
further study revealed that FIGNL1 and KIAA0146 protein level is
dramatically reduced in some breast cancer cell lines.Altogether, our
study reveals a sub-pathway of HR repair with newly identified components
FIGNL1 and KIAA0146 and suggests their possible defects in breast cancer,
therefore provides new potential directions for cancer diagnosis and
therapy.

