Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular signatures of in vitro drug response in lung cancer.


We are developing in vitro drug response signatures based on profiling of
mRNA (Illumina WG6-V3 arrays), DNA mutation (COSMIC and deep sequencing),
DNA copy number (Illumina Human1M-Duov3 SNP array) and DNA methylation
(Illumina HumanMethylation450) from lung cancer cell lines to predict
which drugs a patient's tumor is most likely to respond to. We have
generated drug response phenotypes (MTS colorimetric assays) for 25
standard, targeted, and new chemotherapy agents and combinations for 100
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) lines. All assays were done in
triplicates or more and were very reproducible over time (r > 0.8). More
than 10,000 MTS assays were generated and we designed a high-throughput
database software named DIVISA (Database of In VItro Sensitivity Assays)
for the purpose of storing and analyzing these assays. Some drugs showed
a wide range of sensitivities (> 10,000-fold in IC50 values) and IC50
clustering indicates that drug response phenotypes can be grouped
according to drug types. As part of a joint NCI SPORE, NCI SPECS, and DOD
PROSPECT effort we have collected 275 clinically annotated frozen tumors
with drug response information including 94 that represent lung cancer
resection followed by adjuvant treatment. These specimens have also been
profiled on Illumina expression arrays to formally test the clinical
relevance of the tumor cell line signatures, and to verify that the
signatures predict for response only in the presence of treatment and
thus are not prognostic of survival in the absence of treatment. In
addition, we have 3 primary tumor datasets totaling 96 specimens with
EGFR mutation information, thus providing a validation set for EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor signatures. Using a weighted voting
classification, cell line signatures predicted drug response in primary
tumors with accuracies of 65% for targeted therapy (EGFR) but with
somewhat lower accuracies for platin/taxane therapies suggesting that
cell line predictive signatures may be better suited for targeted drugs.
To facilitate translation to clinical trials we are working with High
Throughput Genomics (HTG) to develop quantitative mRNA profiles that are
performed on formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) material on a
platform that can be transferred to a CLIA certified environment. These
studies thus provide a preclinical human tumor model platform for
systematically testing new drugs and for developing signatures to guide
their most efficient use in early clinical tests. Funded by University of
Texas SPORE in Lung Cancer (P50CA70907) and NCI SPECS Lung Cancer
(CA114771).

