Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of compounds modifying radiation-therapy using a
3D-microtissue technology.


The two key issues in chemo- and radiation therapy is the development of
tumor resistance as well as toxic effects on normal tissue. In this sense
new strategies are required to increase efficacy of radiation to improve
the therapeutic impact and reduce toxicological side effects. The
performance of 3D cell culture systems over classical 2D culture systems
has been shown to provide a closer representation of tissue-level
biology. This has led to the rapid adoption of 3D systems for both drug
discovery and toxicology. InSphero has developed a highly reproducible
hanging drop technology able to generate monotypic cell spheroids
(microtissues) in a 96-well format. The innovative 3D-microtissue plate
technology has been adapted for analysis of the cellular response of
radioresistant T47D breast cancer cells to combined radio-chemotherapy
(RCTx). We have validated the model by comparing the treatment of
microtissues with 10 different chemotherapeutic compounds, each tested
alone and in combination with an acute 2Gy radiation exposure. The T47D
cells were stably transduced with GFP-lentiviral vector enabling faster
high throughput quantification of 3D microtissue growth assessment using
an Operetta working Software and detection system Harmony 3.0
(PerkinElmer, USA). We studied the ability of RCTx to modify
3D-microtissue growth 3, 6 and 10 days after treatment. Results for five
compounds (Actinomycin D, Staurosporine, Docetaxel, Doxorubicin and
Vinblastine) showed that the IC50 values were improved by the addition of
the single 2Gy radiation dose, indicating that they are capable of
inducing a radiosensitation effect on radioresistant breast cancer cells.
Panels of commercial secondary functional assays were adapted to the
3D-microtissue high throughput assay. Cellular viability and cytotoxicity
were measured directly in microtissues using the CellTiter-Glo Reagent
(Promega, USA). Apoptosis was measured using an ELISA based
M30-Apoptosense assay (TECOmedical AG, Switzerland). These results all
confirm that the assay operated with the 3D-microtissue model system is
able to detect compounds that modulate tumors cell survival after
irradiation.

