Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of an alkalizing antibody-enzyme conjugate for NSCLC
treatment that is in Phase I clinical testing.


Many solid human tumors generate an acidic and hypoxic microenvironment
as a result of altered metabolic pathways and aberrant tumor vasculature.
In certain tumors, the chronic exposure to acidic extracellular
conditions has been reported to promote invasiveness and metastatic
behaviour. In addition, the lower pH may promote resistance to weakly
basic chemotherapeutic agents by altering their partitioning coefficient
between the extracellular and intracellular compartments. L-DOS47, an
immunoconjugate cancer therapeutic, has been developed to target this
unique tumor microenvironment. L-DOS47 is a conjugate of a lung
adenocarcinoma specific single domain antibody and a urease enzyme. The
antibody serves as a targeting agent to deliver the enzyme to the
affected site while the urease enzyme coverts urea, an abundant
metabolite, into ammonia and generates a local pH increase. The combined
effect of ammonia toxicity and pH increase is cytotoxic to cancer cells
as shown both in culture and in xenograft models. In vitro experiments
showed that L-DOS47 also dramatically potentiated the cytotoxicity of a
number of chemotherapeutics. Imaging studies using A549 xenografts and
labelled L-DOS47 applied intravenously showed that the drug molecule
preferentially accumulated and persisted at the tumor site. L-DOS47 has
been studied in a number of tissue-cross reactivity studies to identify
suitable animal species for toxicological studies. Cryosections of normal
human, cynomolgus monkey, Sprague-Dawley rat, and CD-1 mouse tissues were
compared. L-DOS47 produced specific staining to control material (BxPC-3
cells) and those tissues that are known to express CEACAM6 - an antigen
for L-DOS47. Both cytoplasmic and membrane bound staining were observed.
Results of these studies suggest that the primate and both rodent species
are suitable for animal toxicological studies. Pivotal GLP compliant
animal toxicological studies in cynomologus monkey and rat together with
several non-GLP pilot animal studies were done. In the primate GLP study,
L-DOS47 (0, 17, 26, and 35 g/kg) was administered by IV infusion on Days
1, 8, 15 and 22, followed by a 28-day recovery period. Main study animals
were sacrificed on Day 25 and recovery animals on Day 50. Standard
toxicology parameters were evaluated. In addition, toxicokinetics,
cytokine stimulation and immunogenicity were also evaluated. A separate
cardiovascular safety pharmacology study was also conducted. No treatment
related clinical signs were observed for the animals treated with 17 or
26g/kg of L-DOS47. Adverse signs were observed in some but not all of the
high dose (35 g/kg) treated animals. Based on adverse clinical signs
observed at 35g/kg, the NOAEL was determined to be 26 g/kg/day in this
study. Currently L-DOS47 is approved for phase I/II studies in Europe and
the U.S.A. Patient enrollment has begun in Poland and first patient has
been dosed.

