Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acute regulation of human reduced folate carrier by folates as a
novel adaptive mechanism to folate deprivation.


The reduced folate carrier (RFC) is the major tissue folate transporter
in mammalian cells. RFC is essential for providing folates for
biosynthetic pathways leading to nucleotides and amino acids. Clinically
relevant antifolates including methotrexate (Mtx), pemetrexed, and
pralatrexate are all substrates for RFC and RFC levels and function are
key determinants of antitumor activities. While recent reports have
described the development of novel 6-pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine antifolates
with selectivity for cellular uptake and tumor targeting by the
proton-coupled folate transporter, RFC levels are nonetheless important
determinants of antitumor activities for these agents, by impacting
cellular folate pools which compete for polyglutamylation and binding to
intracellular enzyme targets. Human RFC is subject to complex
transcriptional and posttranscriptional controls. RFC forms
homo-oligomers, providing another potential level of regulation, as a
dominant-phenotype results with mutant-wild type RFC mixtures. This
reflects impaired intracellular trafficking of oligomeric RFC from the
endoplasmic reticulum to the plasma membrane surface. To explore the
question of whether folates can acutely regulate RFC levels or activity,
RFC-null HeLa cells were stably transfected with RFCMyc-his10 in pCDNA3
plasmid. Transfectants were cultured without folate (10 d), then with
(6R,S)5-formyltetrahydrofolate (leucovorin (LCV)) from 0.5 to 200 nM (5
d). Cells were assayed for RFC transcripts and total cellular RFC
proteins. Membrane surface RFC was measured by
sulfo-N-hydroxysuccinimide-SS-biotin labeling and the formation of
homo-oligomers was assessed by cross-linking with 1,1-methanediyl
bismethanethiosulfonate. Finally, RFC transport was assayed with [3H]Mtx
at neutral pH. Levels of RFC transcripts and total cell RFC protein
progressively increased with increasing LCV up to 200 nM. Conversely,
surface RFC and [3H]Mtx transport were maximal at 2 nM LCV, then deceased
(2-3-fold) with increasing LCV. These effects were maximal at 20 nM LCV.
RFC plasma membrane targeting was confirmed by immunofluorescence
staining and confocal microscopy. RFC protein was completely localized to
the plasma membrane at low ( 2 nM) LCV concentrations, however, at higher
concentrations, significant intracellular RFC was detected. There were no
changes in ratios of RFC homo-oligomer over monomer in response to
changes in extracellular LCV. Our results suggest a novel acute
regulation of RFC in response to changes in extracellular folate
concentrations involving (i) increased RFC transcripts and proteins,
possibly due to differences in transcript stability, and (ii) increased
cytosolic RFC due to impaired intracellular trafficking and membrane
targeting. The net effect would be enhanced RFC-mediated folate and
antifolate accumulations under conditions of folate deprivation.

