Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel injectable polymer liquid that self-assembles into
radioactive seeds for brachytherapy.


Brachytherapy seeds are made by sealing radionuclides in metal or other
non-degradable material (resin or glass) and surgically implanted into
the tumor tissue. Brachytherapy has shown some efficacy in the clinic for
the treatment of solid tumors. However, its application and efficacy is
limited due to the side effects caused by seed migration locally and
systemically, limited antitumor efficacy because of spatial heterogeneity
of the dose distribution, and complicated surgical procedure for
implantation and seed removal. In an attempt to overcome these drawbacks,
using thermally sensitive elastin-like polypeptide (ELPs), we have
developed an injectable polymer that is attached to a radioactive
isotope, and that upon injection as a liquid into a tumor spontaneously
assembles into a radioactive seed and destroys the tumor by radiation
from the inside-out. To do so, we designed and synthesized an ELP for
this study that is soluble at room temperature but rapidly collapses into
a viscous coacervate upon warming to body temperature. Our latest study
results revealed the following advantages of this ELP radionuclide seeds
for an alternative formula for brachytherapy. 1) The fluorescence imaging
of ELP seeds in tumors exhibited a uniform distribution of ELP seeds in
the tumor interstitium and showed that all the ELP seeds were limited
within the tumor mass when ratio of the tumor to injection volume was not
more than 2.5. This result indicates that the tumor coverage or leakage
of ELP seeds is partially dependent on the injection volume; 2) there is
no less than 50% of the injection 131I radioactivity in this ELP seeds
retained in tumor one week after infusion; 3) the brachytherapy of the
ELP radionuclide seeds achieved a significant tumor efficacy in both FaDu
and PC-3 human tumor in nude mice, leading to > 67 % tumor cure, even
when the initial tumor size was up to 500 mm3 when a bolus intratumoral
administration of 131I-ELP seeds at a dose of 2000 Ci/150mm3; 4) it had
minimal toxicity, because no animal body weight lost >15% of the initial;
5) it showed no evidence of either systemic or local leakage of the seeds
or seed migration, because no any important organ or skin or muscle
surrounding tumor had > 0.5% ID/g 24 hr. post-infusion in biodistribution
study. In addition, in an orthotopic prostate model, the ELP seeds
achieved markedly antitumor efficacy and had no evidence showing severe
toxicity. In summary, these ELP seeds are injectable as a radioactive
liquid that self-assemble in vivo into viscous seeds that remain within
the tumor mass, irradiate the tumor from the inside-out with good
efficacy in multiple tumor models, and biodegrade within a week to a
month with non-toxic amino acid by-products that are resorbed. These
features suggest them as a compelling alternative to current approaches
to brachytherapy.

