Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deciphering mechanisms of drug sensitivity and resistance to
Selective Inhibitors of Nuclear Export (SINE).


AbstractSINE are novel small molecules in human phase I clinical trials
for advanced cancers. SINEs inhibit nuclear export through covalent
binding to Exportin 1 (XPO1/CRM1) leading to forced nuclear retention of
major tumor suppressor proteins (TSPs) such as p53, FOXO, PTEN, pRB and
IKB, leading to selective death of cancer cells. Resistant cells were
created by treating the sensitive fibrosarcoma cell line HT1080 with
increasing concentrations of SINE over 12 months. Gene chip analysis of
parental-sensitive and drug-resistant cells that were treated with SINE
resulted in activation of distinct pathways that mediate mechanisms of
response and drug resistance.MethodsResistant cells were generated by
selection in increasing concentrations of SINE. Cell viability was
assayed by MTT. Immunofluorescence was used to compare nuclear export of
TSPs. FACS, qPCR and immunoblots were used to measure effects on cell
cycle, gene expression and cell death. RNA from nave and drug treated
sensitive/resistant cells was analyzed by Affymetrix
microarrays.ResultsTreatment of SINE-sensitive fibrosarcoma cell line
HT1080 (IC50 = 13.6nM) with gradually increasing concentrations of SINE
for 1 year resulted with > 100 fold decrease in sensitivity to SINE
cytotoxicity (IC50 = 1.7M). Resistant cells displayed prolonged cell
cycle (72 vs 24hrs) compared to parental cells. Resistant cells did not
show increased PgP activity, suggesting that resistance to SINE was not
the result of the induction of the multidrug resistance mechanism.
Sequencing of CRM1 from the SINE resistant cells revealed no mutations in
the SINE / cargo binding pocket including the reactive Cys528. Upon
exposure to SINE, resistant cells had reduced nuclear accumulation of
p53, p21, FOXO1A, IKB and p27 compared with SINE-sensitive cells.
Interestingly, in SINE-sensitive cells, but not in resistant cells, SINE
treatment resulted in potent pRB dephosphorylation (growth suppressive
form of pRB), nuclear localization and the activation of p53 as measured
by the induction of p53-downstream targets p21 and MIC1 (GDF15). In
addition, SINE reduced levels of the anti-apoptotic protein Mcl-1, and
induced the apoptotic markers Caspase 3 and PARP cleavage in sensitive
but not in SINE resistant cells. Genes involved in cell adhesion,
cytoskeleton formation, tight junctions, vesicle transport, cell cycle,
and apoptosis were identified as key pathways correlating with drug
response and resistance.ConclusionsThis study identified key pathways and
genes that are likely mediating response and resistance to SINE
antagonists. The extensive selection time (1 year) needed to achieve drug
resistance suggests that generation of resistance may be difficult and
that drug response may be prolonged.

