Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTBP1-mediated aberrant splicing of a brain-specific exon in ANXA7
promotes brain tumorigenesis.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and malignant type of
brain tumor in adults and is nearly uniformly fatal, with a median
survival of one year. Diffuse infiltration, extensive neo-angiogenesis,
uncontrolled cellular proliferation, presence of necrotic regions and
resistance to apoptosis are all hallmark features of these tumors. The
complex nature of GBMs is worsened by an incomplete understanding of its
cellular origin and of the molecular determinants of its aggressiveness.
This has contributed to make this cancer one of the most difficult to
treat.Alternative splicing of pre-mRNA is an important mechanism to
increase the diversity of protein functions; its dysregulation leads to
the aberrant expression of specific protein isoforms, often associated
with cancer. A relatively small number of splicing factors regulates the
production of different splice variants of many proteins. In cancer,
alterations in the expression of few splicing factors may lead to the
aberrant splicing of several targets including oncogenes and tumor
suppressors, which may contribute to the transformed cellular
phenotype.Here, we investigate the tumorigenic role of the heterogeneous
nuclear ribonucleoprotein PTBP1, a splicing factor commonly overexpressed
in GBM.In the present study we used RNA immunoprecipitation and Exon Trap
assay to describe how PTBP1 drives the aberrant splicing of a
brain-specific exon in the membrane-binding tumor suppressor Annexin A7
(ANXA7). By differential overexpression of ANXA7 splice variants in tumor
cell lines, we showed that expression of ANXA7 variant B, normally
expressed in brain, controls EGFR pathway; conversely, the tumor variant
ANXA7-vA does not stop EGFR activation cascade. Immunostaining
experiments demonstrated that, compared to ANXA7-vB, ANXA7-vA reduces the
endosomal targeting of EGFR and prolonging the activation of its
signaling pathway. Knocking down PTBP1 in tumor cell lines restored the
expression of ANXA7-vB and mimicked the effect of ANXA7-vB overexpression
on EGFR trafficking and pathway activation. Furthermore, we performed in
vivo experiments to show that PTBP1 increased expression has a general
effect on tumor aggressiveness as it drives angiogenesis and promotes
invasiveness. Finally, we assessed the association of PTBP1 expression
and clinical outcome and we found that patients with high PTBP1
expression had a significantly worse survival rate.Our study highlights
the important role the splicing factors play in cancer. In fact, the
mechanism we describe here could represent a common paradigm of malignant
transformation which could possibly lead to the development of new
therapeutic strategies for GBM treatment.

