Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyperactivation of FOXM1 drives ovarian cancer growth and
metastasis independent of the G2-M cell cycle checkpoint.


Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) is a TP53- and phosphorylation-dependent
transcription factor that plays a critical role in cell cycle
progression. Recent analyses by the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) consortium
indicate that FOXM1 overexpression may be a key, early event driving the
growth of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). However, this hypothesis has
not been critically tested.Using RT-qPCR, we examined the expression of
each of the known FOXM1 splice variants. We found that levels of FOXM1c
but not FOXM1b or the translationally inactive FOXM1a are significantly
higher in specimens of EOC (n=5) than normal ovary (n=3) or fallopian
tube (n=3). By western blot, we found that FOXM1 is highly phosphorylated
in EOC, suggesting that its hyperactivation is a consistent feature of
ovarian cancer. When FOXM1 expression was targeted in TP53-wt HEYA8,
TP53-mutated OVCAR8, and TP53-deficient SkOViP31 ovarian cancer cells by
siRNAs, we found that ovarian cancer cell lines with reduced FOXM1
expression grow much more slowly than control cultures transfected with a
non-targeting siRNA control and that a loss of FOXM1 results in G2-M cell
cycle arrest that can be detected by flow cytometry using propidium
iodide stained cells. Reduced FOXM1 expression also inhibited migration
and invasion when OVCAR8 and HeyA8 cells were evaluated using standard
Boyden chamber assays. Using qPCR and Western blot, we examined the
ability of FOXM1 to directly regulate >19 gene products that are highly
expressed in EOC. Despite the fact that FOXM1 regulates many of these
genes (Cyclin B1, Plk1, and CENPF) in other cells and tissues, levels of
their expression were not observed when FOXM1 was knocked down SKOV3ip1,
HEY8 and OVCAR8 cells. Therefore, we analyzed patterns of gene expression
from 581 TCGA ovarian cancer specimens using serial linear regression
with L1 normalization (Lasso analysis) to test for correlations with
FOXM1 expression. These analyses identified multiple gene products whose
expression is potentially regulated by FOXM1 in ovarian cancer. Altered
levels of expression for multiple gene products identified by these
analyses have been examined by qPCR and Western blot in ovarian cancer
cell lines transfected with shRNA targeting FOXM1 expression. These
included multiple gene products, including VEGF-B and -C known to
regulate angiogenesis. To explore the in vivo impact of targeting FOXM1
expression, a xenograft model was established by inoculating Fox1Nu mice
with OVCAR8 cells stably transfected with either shRNA targeting FOXM1
and a non-targeting control.Collectively, these results indicate that
hyperactivation of FOX1-mediated transcriptional activity is a consistent
feature of EOC and plays a critical role in regulating ovarian cancer
metastasis in addition to proliferation. FOXM1 may be a valuable
therapeutic target for overcoming the genetic heterogeneity that limits
current ovarian cancer treatments.

