Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unraveling the complex regulatory relationship between PI3K
signaling and metabolic transformation in breast cancer.


Cancer cells exhibit a metabolic phenotype characterized by high rates of
glucose uptake and lactate production, known as the Warburg effect. While
the Warburg effect and normal proliferative metabolism appear similar,
important molecular differences exist. We hypothesize that molecular and
metabolic drivers of the Warburg effect can be modulated to impede cancer
proliferation without substantial effects on normal tissue growth.
Intracellular networks exhibit a variety of emergent non-linear behaviors
and, as a result, the use of experimental intuition alone will not be
enough to identify these drivers. Using a combination of experimental and
theoretical methods, we developed a model of breast cancer progression
that includes metabolism and the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K)
signaling pathway, an important regulator of carbon metabolism. A key
component of our model is a detailed logic network of molecular
interactions associated with PI3K signaling as well as regulatory
connections to central carbon metabolism, including the ATP/AMP ratio,
GLUT receptor activation, hexokinase activation, and changes in the
catalytic activity of pyruvate kinase. To validate our model, a series of
phospho Western blot analyses were performed using a normal-like breast
cell line and a diverse set of breast cancer cell lines exposed to PI3K
pathway inhibitors. From these data, a series of predictive network
models were constructed representing distinct stages of breast cancer
progression. We also generated detailed metabolic flux maps for each cell
line using metabolic flux analysis (MFA), a method that relies on
carbon-13 tracers, mass-spectrometry, and measurements of extracellular
flux to infer intracellular flux. In agreement with recent studies, we
found an increase in the reductive carboxylation of glutamine derived
alpha-ketoglutarate in cells constitutively adapted to hypoxia. We also
identified a potentially important metabolic vulnerability in aggressive
breast cancers. Moreover, we found important PI3K network differences at
the RNA and protein levels, some of which were isoform specific. Together
our data indicate that very different system-level properties are
associated with distinct stages of breast cancer progression and
metabolic transformation. Our model is suitable for performing in silico
molecular perturbations to predict a normal as well as tumor level
response to a targeted therapy or combination of therapies. Our approach
also serves as a prototype for the use of systems biology methods in
personalized medicine where molecular and metabolic data collected from a
patient's biopsied tumor is input into a predictive model designed to
develop a strategic treatment plan for the patient. The use of predictive
models to integrate data from an individual patient will have a profound
impact on cancer care decisions and patient outcomes in the future.

