Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of NK cell exhaustion in melanoma at different
stages.


BACKGROUND: The concept of CD8+ T cell exhaustion in the context of
metastatic cancer has been reinforced by the recent success of
immunotherapies targeting the exhaustion markers CTLA-4 and PD-1 in
advanced melanoma. Exhausted T cells are characterized by: 1) an over
expression of inhibitory receptors or exhaustion markers such as CTLA-4,
PD-1 and Tim-3; 2) a loss of function (cytotoxicity, cytokine production
and proliferation); 3) a down-regulation of cytokine receptors, rendering
them refractory to cytokine stimulation; and 4) changes in transcription
factors, including downregulation of T-bet expression. T cell exhaustion
has been extensively studied in the context of chronic infectious
diseases and different types of cancer, however little is known about
exhaustion of NK cells in the same background. NK cells, innate immune
cells that eliminate tumors through cytotoxicity and IFN- production,
have a key role in immune surveillance of tumors, including melanoma. In
this study, we characterize and compare the phenotype of NK cells from
patients with melanoma of different stages (I, II, III, IV) and healthy
donors.METHODS: We compared NK cells from 10 patients with melanoma at
each stage of presentation (I, II, III, IV) and from 20 healthy donors as
it relates to membrane expression of activating (NKG2D and NKp46) and
inhibitory receptors (KIRB1 and KIRNKAT2), function (cytotoxicity, IFN-
production and proliferation) and the intracellular expression of the
transcription factor T-bet. NK cells cytotoxicity was measured by Lamp-1
expression using K562 cells as target cells. IFN- production was measured
after 4h stimulation with rhIL-12. Proliferation was quantified by CFSE
after 6 days in the presence of rhIL-2.RESULTS: As the stage of the
melanoma advanced we observed a pattern of gradual increase of inhibitory
receptors (with a higher difference between stage II and stage III) and a
concomitant decrease of activating receptors (with a higher difference
between stage III and stage IV). With regard to the three most important
NK cell functions, IFN- production and proliferation were impaired
beginning with stage I and advancing to stage IV, while cytotoxicity was
reduced only at stage III and stage IV. Similarly, T-bet expression also
began to decrease at stage III.CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that NK
cells from melanoma patients gradually develop a phenotypic and
functional profile consistent with exhaustion, beginning with stage I and
advancing to stage IV. The exhaustion phenotype begins with initial loss
of IFN- production and proliferation ability, and finally cytotoxicity.
Therefore, the concept that NK cells also become exhausted make them an
interesting population to target therapeutically. Furthermore, as the
exhaustion phenotype is acquired progressively through the stages, and
not exclusive to stage IV, it may be possible to intervene early in the
course of tumor progression.

