Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole genome profiling to identify novel metastasis regulators in
colorectal cancer.


Colorectal cancer is the second most common cancer and the second leading
cause of cancer related death in men and women in Germany according to
the Robert Koch Institute. The leading cause for cancer related mortality
is the development of metastasis.In our study, we aim to identify novel
regulators of the metastatic process in colorectal cancer. To this end we
employed next generation whole genome sequencing of resected tissues from
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. In particular, we sequenced
samples from primary tumor, corresponding normal colon mucosa, metastasis
and normal tissue from the metastatic site. The DNA from one patient was
thereby sequenced on two different platforms, one being Illumina HiSeq
the other Complete Genomics (CG). Additionally, we sequenced the
transcriptome of this patient to correlate mRNA expression with genetic
aberrations. This abstract focusses on the first results regarding
metastatic aberrations.The average read coverage for the samples
sequenced with the Illumina platform was between 50-60x and for the
samples sequenced with CG between 105-135x. In total 3607 SNVs were
identified in coding regions in the metastasis with both platforms, 40 of
these were in exonic regions and classified as high confidence with both
platforms.We also sequenced samples from an additional two patients on
one sequencing platform each. One of the patients also presented with
liver metastasis, the other one with a lung metastasis. These data were
also compared to the data from the first patient to identify possible
common aberrations as well as possible differences between the different
metastatic sites. We identified several copy number changes occurring in
the same chromosomal regions in different patients. Similarly, several
genes affected by SNVs were common in two of the patients, while only
high confidence APC mutations were common to all three patients. Seven
additional genes were affected by high confidence SNVs in the two
patients sequenced using the CG platform and three on the Illumina
platform, two of which have not yet been characterized in the context of
cancer or metastasis.

