Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatic retinoid signaling in mouse hepatocarcinogenesis models.


Retinoids are known to possess anti-cancer effects and a clinical trial
of a synthetic retinoid for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is ongoing
recently in Japan. Hepatic retinoid metabolism is usually impaired during
development of liver diseases. Loss of retinoid-containing lipid droplets
upon hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation is one of the first events in
the development of liver diseases and retinoid stores are progressively
lost from HSCs leading to hepatic fibrosis, cirrhosis, and HCC. In the
present study, we employed two types of genetically-modified mice for
investigating hepatic retinoid metabolism and signaling in
diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced mouse hepatocarcinogenesis models. One
is lecithin:retinol acyltransferas (LRAT) knockout (KO) mouse which lacks
HSC lipid droplets and has much less hepatic retinoid stores, and the
other is a transgenic mouse which expresses dominant negative form of
retinoic acid receptor (dnRAR) to block retinoid signaling in the liver.
Male 15 day-old mice were given intraperitoneal injections of DEN (25
mg/kg body weight). Eight-month-old DEN-treated Lrat KO mice showed lower
liver tumor incidence and dnRAR transgenic mice showed higher incidence
than that of respective control mice. In the acute phase after DEN
injection, dnRAR transgenic mice exhibited higher hepatic levels of
inflammatory cytokines. Two days after DEN injection, lower serum levels
of alanine aminotransferase and decreased hepatic levels of cyclin D1
were observed in Lrat KO mice. Lrat KO mice also exhibited increased
levels of retinoic acid-responsive genes, including p21, lower levels of
cytochrome P450 enzymes required for DEN-bioactivation, and higher levels
of the DNA repair enzyme O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT).
Our results indicate that Lrat KO mice, instead of almost no hepatic
retinoid storage, are less susceptible to DEN-induced
hepatocarcinogenesis due to increased hepatic retinoid signaling which is
accompanied by higher expression of p21 in the liver. In conclusion,
retinoid signaling plays a key role in these hepatocarcinogenesis models.

