Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of loss of IGF2 genomic imprinting and colorectal cancer
risk in Puertorrican Hispanics.


Background:Loss of genomic imprinting (LOI) of IGF-2 has been proposed as
an independent risk factor for colorectal cancer (CRC) for Non-Hispanic
Whites (NHW) and Asians. However, whether the same association between
LOI of IGF2 and CRC risk exist in Hispanics is unknown.Aim:This study
aimed at determining the association of LOI of IGF2 in peripheral blood
lymphocytes and CRC risk in Hispanics. As a secondary aim we evaluated
the clinicopathological characteristics of LOI-positive CRC patients
compared to the LOI-negative CRC individuals.Methods:Prospectively
recruited patients were classified as informative (heterozygosity for Apa
I DNA polymorphism) using TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assay (Applied
Biosystems) on gDNA extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes. cDNA was
synthesized and the imprinting status of IGF2 gene was determined using
the same methodology in informative all patients. Demographic, clinical
and pathological characteristics were evaluated including: age at
diagnosis, gender, tumor size, TNM stage, and differentiation.
Statistical analysis was performed using conditional multiple logistic
regression models, Odds Ratios (OR) and 95% CI were calculated using
STATA 10.0.Results:A total of 587 patients were recruited and analyzed.
The cohort was comprised of 359 controls (61.26%) and 227 CRC patients
(38.74%) with a mean age 62.1 (range 21-85); and 385 (65.5%) female). Apa
1 analysis identified 222 informative subjects of which 66 individuals
had LOI of IGF2 in their PBLs. LOI of IGF2 was not statistically
associated with colorectal neoplasia (OR=1.07, 95% CI:0.57-1.99).
Furthermore, gender, age at diagnosis of CRC, tumor location, development
of prostate, breast or other cancers, and family history of other cancers
is not associated with LOI of IGF2. Multiple logistic regression model
analysis for the association of CRC and LOI showed that family history of
CRC was independently associated with having a personal history of CRC
(OR=1.82,95% CI:1.02-3.25).Conclusion: LOI of IGF2 was not independently
associated with CRC, colonic adenomas or any of the other cancers
examined in this Hispanic cohort. Family history of CRC was the only
independent risk factor associated with personal history of CRC. Perhaps
other genetic/epigenetic, environmental factors than the ones considered
in this study may play a role in the pathogenesis on CRC in the Puerto
Rican Hispanic population. Further analysis on genomewide methylation
panels is underway to examine the role of epigenetics among Hispanics
with CRC.

