Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel molecular mechanism for estradiol-induced apoptosis that
contrasts with cytotoxic chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in breast cancer.


Clinical studies support the use of physiologic estrogens in the
treatment of estrogen receptor (ER) positive postmenopausal breast cancer
as a salvage therapy [Ellis et al. JAMA. 2009 Aug 19;302:774-80].
Additionally, the use of conjugated equine estrogens in hysterectomised
postmenopausal women reveals consistent reduction in the incidence and
mortality from invasive breast cancer.[Anderson,GL,et al. Lancet Oncol
2012, 13:476-486]. Laboratory studies have demonstrated that estradiol
(E2) induces apoptosis in long term estrogen deprived MCF-7 cells [Lewis
et al. J Natl Cancer Inst 2005, 97:1746 - 1759]. However, the process of
E2 induced apoptosis appears to be a slow process. We have recently
identified the sequential mechanism that lies behind E2 induced apoptosis
using long term estrogen deprived breast cancer cells [Arazi et al. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011]. However, very little is known about the
apoptotic effect of cytotoxic chemotherapy in these cells. Our goal here
is to elucidate the critical trigger point for estradiol induced
apoptosis and explore differential gene expression in comparison to
cytotoxic chemotherapy induced apoptosis. To determine the critical
trigger point for E2 induced apoptosis, we used 4OHT to block the
apoptotic effect of E2 and we discovered that unlike chemotherapy the
trigger for apoptosis occurs after 24 hours of E2 exposure. Paclitaxel is
mitotic spindle inhibitor used extensively in the treatment of breast
cancer[Qin YY et al. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e26946]. Using cell proliferation
assays, we have shown that paclitaxel rapidly inhibits the growth of
MCF7:5C cells by 24 hours while E2 only causes growth inhibition of these
cells after 72 hours. Differential regulation of apoptotic gene
expression in response to paclitaxel in comparison to E2-induced
apoptosis with a particular interest to the critical trigger time point
was interrogated using polymerase chain reaction arrays. Identified genes
related to apoptosis showed that paclitaxel selectively activated the
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily including TNF receptor
superfamily, member 10a (TNFRSF10A)and TNFRSF10B which are known to be
activated by the ligand TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand
(TNFSF10/TRAIL),after 12hrs of treatment and causes death through the
extramitochondrial pathway. Furthermore death receptor genes FAS, TNF and
other TNF super family genes; LTA,LTB are activated at 24 hrs treatment
with paclitaxel . In contrast E2 induces apoptosis by activating
initially the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis, which is evidenced by
increased expression of BCL211; BIM) at 36 hrs of treatment. Following 48
hrs of treatment, the gene expression expands to involve p53 and death
receptor genes FAS, TNFRSF21 and TNF. The involvement of both intrinsic
and extrinsic mechanism in E2 induced apoptosis may play a role in the
delayed apoptosis observed with E2.

