Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted massively parallel sequencing identifies a limited number
of clinically actionable variants in women with early onset breast cancer.


Approximately 5-10% of breast cancers are likely attributable to single
gene mutations. Multiple breast cancer susceptibility genes have been
identified; however, there is insufficient information on the clinical
benefit of testing for variants in many of these genes outside of BRCA1,
BRCA2, TP53 and PTEN. To obtain further information on the spectrum of
variants in breast cancer susceptibility genes, we performed massively
parallel sequencing using targeted capture of 28 known or proposed breast
cancer susceptibility genes in over 250 patients with breast cancer
diagnosed under age 40, negative clinical BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing and no
personal or family history of ovarian cancer. Sixty-five percent of the
patients had a family history of breast cancer. Breast cancers were
triple negative in 26% of the patients; 70% of the patients presented
with Stage II or greater disease. Positive control mutations in BRCA1,
BRCA2, PALB2, CHEK2, MSH2 and BRCC3 were identified using the targeted
panel. In analysis of the first 98 study patients, 46+/8 total variants
were identified on average per patient with a median read depth of 131.
Of the 4,483 total variants identified in the 98 patients, ten variants
that are known to be or are likely functionally significant were
identified in ten patients (10%). One patient had the CHEK2 1100delC
mutation, and another the known deleterious TP53 mutation, P151T. Four of
the functionally significant variants are novel frameshift or nonsense
mutations in ATM, BRIP1, BARD1 and MRE11A. Four variants predicted to
affect splicing, located within the first two nucleotides within the
intron, were identified in CHEK2 (3) and MUTYH (1) and are therefore
likely to be functionally significant. In addition, 29 patients (29%)
were found to carry 27 variants predicted to be deleterious missense
variants by multiple variant calling software programs and found at less
than 1% frequency in the control population, but are of unclear
functional significance as they are either novel or functionally
untested. These potentially deleterious variants were identified in ATM
(4), RAD50 (3), BRCA2 (3), BARD1 (2), BRCA1 (2), MLH1 (2), NBS (2), BRIP1
(1), CHEK2 (1), MCPH1 (1), MRE11A (1), MSH6 (1), PMS1 (1), and PMS2 (1).
These data show that massively parallel sequencing has the ability to
identify multiple potentially causative variants in known breast cancer
susceptibility genes in patients who present with early onset breast
cancer. However, only rare patients, 1% in our initial sample, which will
be reported in full, have actionable mutations given current clinical
management guidelines. Given the difficulty in determining the functional
significance of novel variants, outside of truncating mutations, there is
a great deal of uncertainty about how these findings can be translated
into improvements in patient care.

