Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Repair of DNA double strand breaks by 20-1000 bp patches derived
from distant genomic regions.


It has been suggested that errors in the repair of DNA double strand
breaks (DSB) can result in gross chromosomal rearrangements (GCR). To
study DNA DSB repair in vivo, we generated a vector with the EF1a
promoter driving expression of the herpes simplex thymidine kinase
(HsTK); interspersed between the EF1a promoter and Hstk was the
recognition site for the meganuclease I-SceI. The EF1aTk vector was
introduced into U937 cells and a clone (designated F5) with a single copy
of the vector was isolated. Transfection of F5 cells with an I-SceI
expression vector, followed by ganciclovir (GCV) selection, identified
clones that lost expression of HsTK. We recovered no GCR, as most of the
GCV-resistant clones had deletions of the EF1a promoter or the HsTK.
However 10% of the clones had insertions (47-756 bp) of DNA sequences
derived from distant regions of the genome; all inserted fragments were
derived from gene and/or retrotransposon repeat elements such as LINE or
SINE sequences. Therefore, we hypothesized that the inserted sequences
used to patch the DNA DSB could be based on reverse transcription of an
RNA template. Since sequences derived from human RNA and human genomic
DNA are identical (with the exception of RNA splice events, poly-A tails,
and RNA-edited nucleotides), we co-transfected the F5 cells with murine
RNA and an I-SceI expression vector to determine if patches at the DNA
DSB sites could be derived from RNA. We identified 121 independent
sequences which represented insertions of 20-609 bp at the I-SceI
cleavage site. Of these 121 insertions, 6 were vector or E. coli capture
events and 7 were too short to identify. The chromosomal origin of 5
insertions could not be assigned as these insertions consisted of 5 or 6
bp tandem repeat sequences; 3 had a (CCCTAA)n repeat, identical to a
mammalian telomere repeat. Of the remaining 103 insertions, 94 were
derived from a single genomic loci, and 9 samples contained sequences
from more than 2 distinct genomic regions. The sequences were derived
from 22 of the 24 human chromosomes. 65% of the sequences were found to
contain sequences from a transcribed gene region, and 52% contained
repeat sequences such as LINE, SINE, or LTR. The involvement of
retrotransposon sequences, which are known to be reverse transcribed and
integrated into the genome, supports the hypothesis that at least some of
the insertions may be templated from RNA. Although most insertions were
derived from human sequences; 9 insertions matched murine sequences, and
were derived from the co-transfected mouse RNA. All of these were derived
from gene and/or retrotransposon sequence.Taken together, these findings
demonstrate that I-SceI-induced DNA DSB can be repaired by patches
derived from distant regions of the genome, and suggest that transcribed
mRNA and retrotransposons can play an important role in the repair of DNA
DSB and preservation of genomic integrity.

