Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-129 is a potential tumor suppressor in colorectal cancer by
regulating apoptosis and modulating fluropyrimidine based
chemosensitivity.


Resistance to fluoropyrimidine based chemotherapy is the major reason for
the failure of treating advanced colorectal cancer. The lack of ability
for tumor cells to undergo apoptosis after genotoxic stress is the key
contributor to such intrinsic mechanism. Mounting evidence has
demonstrated that non-coding microRNAs (miRNAs) are crucial regulators of
gene expression, in particular, under acute stress. However, there is
still very limited knowledge about the role of miRNAs in apoptosis. In
this study, we discovered a novel mechanism mediated by miR-129 directly
inducing apoptosis by suppressing a key anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2.
Ectopic expression of miR-129 promotes apoptosis, inhibits cell
proliferation and causes G2-cell-cycle arrest in colon cancer cells in
vitro. The intrinsic apoptotic pathway triggered by miR-129 is activated
by cleaving caspase-9 and caspase-3. The expression of miR-129 is very
significantly down-regulated in colorectal cancer tissue specimens
compared with the paired normal control samples (pResistance to
fluoropyrimidine based chemotherapy is the major reason for the failure
of treating advanced colorectal cancer. The lack of ability for tumor
cells to undergo apoptosis after genotoxic stress is the key contributor
to such intrinsic mechanism. Mounting evidence has demonstrated that
non-coding microRNAs (miRNAs) are crucial regulators of gene expression,
in particular, under acute stress. However, there is still very limited
knowledge about the role of miRNAs in apoptosis. In this study, we
discovered a novel mechanism mediated by miR-129 directly inducing
apoptosis by suppressing a key anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2. Ectopic
expression of miR-129 promotes apoptosis, inhibits cell proliferation and
causes G2-cell-cycle arrest in colon cancer cells in vitro. The intrinsic
apoptotic pathway triggered by miR-129 is activated by cleaving caspase-9
and caspase-3. The expression of miR-129 is very significantly
down-regulated in colorectal cancer tissue specimens compared with the
paired normal control samples (p<0.00001). More importantly, we
demonstrated that miR-129 functions synergistically with 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU) in vitro and in vivo to enhance 5-FU cytotoxicity. These results
suggest that miR-129 is a major regulator of apoptosis in colorectal
cancer. Therefore, miR-129 may be a potential tumor suppressor in
colorectal cancer and a novel candidate for developing miR-129 based
therapeutic strategies.

