Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSTP1-activated nitric oxide-releasing/PARP inhibitor hybrid
prodrugs induce cancer cell death through ROS/RNS, DNA damage, ER stress,
and apoptosis.


Poly [ADP-ribose] polymerase (PARP) has been recognized as a potential
molecular target in cancer therapy. PARP inhibitors have been evaluated
in clinical trials, both in combination with DNA damaging chemotherapy,
and also as single agents in patients with BRCA deficiencies. However,
there are problems associated with the clinical applicability of PARP
inhibitors that include theoretical genotoxicity of these DNA damage
repair inhibitors, and increased toxicity in combination with
chemotherapy. Therefore targeted delivery of PARP inhibitors selectively
to cancer cells would be clinically beneficial.Diazeniumdiolate-based
nitric oxide (NO)-releasing prodrugs developed in our laboratory have
proven effective as anticancer agents in a number of in vitro and in vivo
models. The lead prodrug JS-K exhibits a multifaceted mechanism of action
that includes generation of oxidative/nitrosative stress and DNA damage.
We hypothesized that inhibiting PARP may increase effectiveness of JS-K.
More importantly, creating a PARP inhibitor prodrug that is activated
specifically in the cancer cell could diminish dose-limiting adverse
events observed in clinical trials.Using structure-based molecular
modeling approaches we have designed and synthesized novel
diazeniumdiolate/PARP inhibitor hybrid prodrugs that are activated by
glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1), an enzyme frequently overexpressed
by cancer cells. This GSTP1-catalyzed activation allows for the selective
delivery of nitric oxide and PARP inhibitor simultaneously to the cancer
cell. Biological evaluation of the prodrugs in vitro in lung
adenocarcinoma and leukemia cells reveals that their mechanism of action
involves oxidative/nitrosative stress associated with NO release and
depletion of cellular GSH, leading to DNA strand break damage. The
compounds induce aryl-mediated crosslinking glutathionylation of cellular
thiols that is irreversible, and may lead to observed endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. The tumor suppressor p53 pathway is involved in
cells bearing wildtype p53. We have also observed the activation of
stress kinases p38 and SAPK/JNK. All of the above events led to
initiation of apoptosis through both intrinsic and extrinsic
pathways.Cancer cells often exhibit specific stress-related phenotypes,
caused by insults such as reactive oxygen species, DNA damage, metabolic
stress, or ER stress, and agents that further enhance these stresses
could be developed as potential therapies. GSTP1-activated
diazeniumdiolate/PARP inhibitor hybrid prodrugs selectively induce cancer
cell death through ROS/DNA damage and ER stress overload, leading to
apoptosis.

