Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic role of Runx2 in the development of osteosarcoma.


Osteosarcoma (OS) is a potentially fatal bone malignancy principally
affecting adolescents or young adults, and comprises about 3-4% of all
pediatric tumors. Although the overall survival rate has approached 70%
in patients with localized disease, outcomes are still inferior compared
to most other pediatric malignancies and significant improvements have
been difficult to obtain over the past 20 years. Current treatment for OS
includes a combination of neoadjuvant chemotherapy and surgery, with
patients being monitored for recurrence following treatment. The etiology
of OS is not well defined; however, most OS tumors arise sporadically,
and exhibit high genome instability and chromosomal abnormalities. One
gene often found abnormally expressed in osteosarcoma is the
transcription factor Runx2. Runx2 is the master regulatory protein of
bone development, and activates the transcription of the genes necessary
for osteoblast differentiation. Due to this obvious importance in normal
bone development, we have hypothesized that Runx2 also has a pronounced
role in osteosarcoma development and progression. Evidence to support
this hypothesis include: (1) a report that Runx2 was the most
significantly gained gene in copy number, resulting in a 9-fold
over-expression in human osteosarcoma tumors; (2) patients with tumors
expressing higher amounts of Runx2 have an overall poorer survival rate.
Dysregulation of Runx2 results in constitutively high protein levels,
however, the consequence of over-expression of Runx2 in osteosarcoma
remains unclear. Our studies have focused on investigating the biological
and functional role of Runx2 in OS. We have shown that the
transcriptional activity of Runx2 is increased in osteosarcoma cells when
compared to normal osteoblasts. Additionally, we have shown that the
knockdown of Runx2 results in reduced OS cell and tumor growth in vitro
and in vivo, respectively. Our functional data is corroborated by gene
expression analysis, which shows Runx2 regulates multiple cellular
pathways involved in cell cycle regulation, cell death, and
proliferation. Moreover, our gene expression analysis reveals that Runx2
regulates pathways involved in drug metabolism, and we have shown that
knockdown of Runx2 sensitizes cells to treatment with chemotherapeutics.
We have provided a mechanism for the dox-induced apoptosis in our Runx2
knockdown, and have shown that c-Myc plays a role in the activation of
caspase-3 after dox treatment, and inhibition of c-Myc results in a
significant decrease in apoptosis in shRunx2 cells when compared to
control cells. Thus, we have shown a novel role chemoprotective role for
Runx2 in OS, and suggest that inhibitors of Runx2 are an encouraging
therapeutic prospect for patients with OS.Citation Format: Alison Roos,
Jason T. Yustein, Larry Donehower. Oncogenic role of Runx2 in the
development of osteosarcoma. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 5036. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5036

