Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: T cell lymphoblastic leukemia in survivin TCR transgenic mice.


Survivin has been considered a potential tumor antigen due to high
expression in most cancers and limited expression in normal tissues. To
explore whether survivin reactive TCRs mediate antitumor effects in mice,
we generated TCR transgenic (Tg) mice with specificity for the H-2b
restricted immunodominant epitope of survivin. Survivin reactive T cells
were CD8+ and mediated immune reactivity toward survivin peptide pulsed
targets. Some antitumor reactivity was observed, but it was not potent,
and the survivin TCR Tg+ cells did not mediate objective tumor regression
of survivin bearing tumors. Surprisingly, spontaneous T cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) was observed beginning at 4-6 months of
age in Tg+Rag+/- and Tg+Rag-/- mice. By one year of age, all survivin Tg+
mice succumbed to T-cell ALL. The leukemic cells were CD3+, survivin
TCR+, and CD8+ or CD4-/CD8-Occurrence in 3 founders suggests that the
transgene itself, rather than insertional mutagenesis, is causative.
Given that survivin is expressed in the thymus, we postulated that the
TCR-Tg serves as an oncogene via recognition of survivin peptides, which
expands early thymic progenitors. In support of this, premalignant
survivin TCR Tg+ thymi show expanded CD4-CD8-CD44-CD25- thymocytes and
increased BrdU incorporation and leukemia incidence was significantly
diminished TCR-Tg+2m-/- mice. Subsequent to expansion of early thymic
progenitors in response to TCR triggering, survivin TCR Tg+ cells acquire
NOTCH mutations and upregulate CD25, implicating NOTCH signaling as a 2nd
hit in this oncogenic process. At least one NOTCH1 mutation was found in
all leukemias, with PEST (8/8), 5 deletions (19/25) and
heterodimerization mutations observed. T-ALL with NOTCH mutations was
also observed at reduced frequencies, in TCR Tg mice with specificity to
WT1 and gp100. We conclude that genetic engineering aimed at endowing
hematopoietic or T lymphoid progenitors with the capacity to recognize
tumor antigens expressed in the thymus could pose a risk for neoplasia,
independent of insertional mutagenesis.Citation Format: Yongzhi Cui,
Masahiro Onozawa, Haiying Qin, Terry Fry, Peter Aplan, Crystal L.
Mackall. T cell lymphoblastic leukemia in survivin TCR transgenic mice.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3309.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3309

