Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of miR-21 induces differentiation of
chemo-resistant colon cancer cells and enhances susceptibility to
therapeutic regimens.


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous posttranscriptional modulators that
negatively control the expression of their target genes and play an
important role in the development and progression of colorectal
carcinoma. In particular, microRNA-21 (miR-21), whose expression is
greatly increased in chemotherapy-resistant (CR) colon cancer cells that
are enriched in undifferentiated cancer stem/stem-like cells
(CSCs/CSLCs). We hypothesize that miR-21 plays a critical role in
regulating differentiation of colon cancer (CR cells). Indeed, we
observed that downregulation of miR-21 in CR colon cancer HCT-116 cells
by anti-sense-miR-21 induced differentiation, as evidenced by marked
increases in CK-20 (cytokeratin-20) expression and alkaline phosphatase
activity. These changes were accompanied by a significant reduction in
the expression of colon CSC/CSLCs marker CD44, colonospheres formation
and TCF/LEF activity and increased expression of the pro-apoptotic gene
PDCD4. Induction of differentiation greatly increased the sensitivity of
CR cells to the growth inhibitory effects of all three regimens tested:
5- FU+ Oxaliplatin (FUOX), difluorinated curcumin (CDF), an analog of
curcumin and the combination of CDF and FUOX. However, the magnitude of
inhibition of growth by either CDF (75%) alone or CDF + FUOX (80%) was
much higher than that observed with FUOX (40%). Growth inhibition by CDF
and CDF + FUOX in differentiating CR colon cancer cells was associated
with a 98-99% reduction in the expression of CD44 and EGFR. The current
observation suggest that CDF as well as CDF + FUOX are highly effective
in inhibiting growth and reducing colon CSCs/CSLCs in anti-miR-21-induced
differentiating CR colon cancer cells, which supports our contention that
differentiating cells become susceptible to conventional and
non-conventional therapeutic regimen.

