Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of potent, dual PIM/FLT3 kinase inhibitors for AML
treatment.


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a highly heterogeneous disease with
numerous signaling pathways that contribute to its pathogenesis. Advances
in our understanding of molecular mechanisms of AML pathogenesis and
prognosis so far did not translate into significant clinical
improvements. AML is still the highest unmet medical need within
hematological malignancies area, particularly in case of the elderly
patients. FLT3 inhibitors were investigated in the recent years as
possible therapeutic agents, however to date the clinical trials of FLT3
inhibitors have yielded disappointing results. On the other hand, PIM
kinases have been identified in the last years as critical downstream
components of FLT3 signaling, especially in the case of oncogenic FLT3
mutants. PIM kinases are being overexpressed in a range of hematopoietic
malignancies and solid cancers and the overexpression of PIMs is
associated with a poor prognosis and decreased survival of patients
suffering from cancer. In many cases also, PIM overexpression was
associated with development of drug resistance. As dual and simultaneous
inhibition of various pathway components is an emerging therapeutic idea,
exemplified by several compounds in development for cancer treatment, we
have developed a series of dual PIM/FLT3 small molecule inhibitors to
investigate this concept. Similarly to examples of small molecule
inhibitors from the JAK/STAT or PI3K/AKT pathways, where compounds are
being developed as a way to improve efficacy, resistance development and
overcoming the negative feedback loops, often seen after single target
inhibition, we have observed increased potency of compounds developed in
this series of dual PIM/FLT3 inhibitors. Synthesized inhibitors showed
higher activity towards mutated FLT3 (FLT3-ITD and other FLT3 mutants)
than wild type kinase and the selectivity profile on a panel of 450
kinases was comparable to best clinical examples of kinase inhibitors. In
contrast to selective PIM inhibitors, the treatment with dual PIM/FLT3
inhibitors showed potent apoptosis induction as a results of Erk and S6
phosphorylation inhibition. The in vitro activity in FTL3-ITD positive
cells was also confirmed in vivo in a PK/PD xenograft experiment, where
sustained biomarker inhibition was observed already after single
compounds administration. Oral administration of dual PIM/FLT3 inhibitors
led to potent effect in vivo and in certain cases also to remissions in
subcutaneous xenograft models. Observed activity profile and synergistic
effects observed with other targeted therapies and standard of care
compounds, makes dual PIM/FLT3 inhibitors an exciting approach for
treatment of FLT3-mutant positive AML patients with high chances of
clinical success.

