Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) down-regulation
correlates with platinum resistance in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).


Background: NSCLC is the most common cause of cancer-related death.
Platinum-based chemotherapy is the mainstay of treatment, but a variety
of mechanisms lead to platinum-resistance. ATF3 is a transcription
factor, activated in response to a wide variety of stress signals
including DNA damage and hypoxia. We recently demonstrated a role for
ATF3 as an important regulator of platinum-induced cytotoxicity. In this
study, we hypothesize that ATF3 expression correlates with
platinum-sensitivity/resistance in NSCLC.Methods: ATF3 induction was
examined by Western blots and real-time RT-PCR in isogenic sets of
platinum- sensitive (S) or induced resistant (R) NSCLC cell lines. A 1200
compound library was screened to identify platinum-sensitizers in both
sets of cell lines. Complete RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was performed in
parental (S) and resistant (R) derived cell lines comparing expression
patterns of either untreated or platinum treated cells. Similarly,
platinum R and S tumors were identified by screening NSCLC patients
clinical records and expression patterns compared with RNA-seq
analysis.Results:Both mRNA and potein levels of ATF3 were induced 35-120
fold (mRNA) by cisplatin treatment in S cell lines, but only 1-12 fold
(mRNA) in the corresponding R lines. The 1200 compound library screen of
FDA approved compounds identified several commonly used chemotherapeutic
agents as sensitizers of platinum cytotoxicity, as well as vorinostat, a
histone deacetylase inhibitor that sensitized only S but not R cell
lines. An analogue of this agent, M344, enhanced ATF3 induction and
cisplatin cytotoxicity in the S lines but not in the R lines. Comparing
RNA-seq results of the S and R lines revealed up-regulation of GADD45A,
ATF3 and DDIT3/CHOP in the S but not R cell lines. Comparing samples of S
and R NSCLC tumors by RNA-seq demonstrated ATF3 to be among the five
genes significantly up-regulated in the S tumors compared to the R
tumors.Conclusions: Stress-induced ATF3 is correlated with
platinum-sensitivity in NSCLC cells. Tumor ATF3 levels represent a
potential predictive marker of response to platinum-based treatment in
NSCLC. Revealing the mechanism of ATF3 induction by platinum may lead to
the identification of novel platinum-sensitizing therapeutic targets.

