Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of CTGF is associated with chemoresistance in
esophageal adenocarcinoma.


Esophageal adenocarcinoma is the most rapidly increasing solid malignancy
with an overall 5-year survival of only 19%. Neoadjuvant chemoradiation
is standard practice in most large centers but results in a complete
pathologic response in only 21%, although this subset has an improved
5-year survival. In this study, connective tissue growth factor (CTGF),
which is associated with increased cell migration, tissue invasion, and
angiogenesis, was evaluated for its role in chemoresistance in esophageal
adenocarcinoma. CTGF was found to be overexpressed in 33.3% (5 of 15;
mean 3.1-fold) of esophageal adenocarcinomas on oligonucleotide
microarray relative to Barrett's metaplasia. Elevated expression of CTGF
was also found in 5/5 advanced stage IV esophageal adenocarcinomas on
Western blot. Overexpression of CTGF was observed in 70.6% of
chemoresistant esophageal adenocarcinomas (n=17) as determined using
qRT-PCR and was significantly higher compared to chemo-nave esophageal
adenocarcinomas (n=102; pEsophageal adenocarcinoma is the most rapidly
increasing solid malignancy with an overall 5-year survival of only 19%.
Neoadjuvant chemoradiation is standard practice in most large centers but
results in a complete pathologic response in only 21%, although this
subset has an improved 5-year survival. In this study, connective tissue
growth factor (CTGF), which is associated with increased cell migration,
tissue invasion, and angiogenesis, was evaluated for its role in
chemoresistance in esophageal adenocarcinoma. CTGF was found to be
overexpressed in 33.3% (5 of 15; mean 3.1-fold) of esophageal
adenocarcinomas on oligonucleotide microarray relative to Barrett's
metaplasia. Elevated expression of CTGF was also found in 5/5 advanced
stage IV esophageal adenocarcinomas on Western blot. Overexpression of
CTGF was observed in 70.6% of chemoresistant esophageal adenocarcinomas
(n=17) as determined using qRT-PCR and was significantly higher compared
to chemo-nave esophageal adenocarcinomas (n=102; p<0.0005). Stable
inhibition with an shRNA against CTGF in the esophageal adenocarcinoma
cell line Flo, which expresses endogenous CTGF, led to a significantly
increased response to the chemotherapeutic agents 5-FU (9.4-fold
increase), cisplatin (5.5-fold), and etoposide (4.4-fold) at 24 hours
(pEsophageal adenocarcinoma is the most rapidly increasing solid
malignancy with an overall 5-year survival of only 19%. Neoadjuvant
chemoradiation is standard practice in most large centers but results in
a complete pathologic response in only 21%, although this subset has an
improved 5-year survival. In this study, connective tissue growth factor
(CTGF), which is associated with increased cell migration, tissue
invasion, and angiogenesis, was evaluated for its role in chemoresistance
in esophageal adenocarcinoma. CTGF was found to be overexpressed in 33.3%
(5 of 15; mean 3.1-fold) of esophageal adenocarcinomas on oligonucleotide
microarray relative to Barrett's metaplasia. Elevated expression of CTGF
was also found in 5/5 advanced stage IV esophageal adenocarcinomas on
Western blot. Overexpression of CTGF was observed in 70.6% of
chemoresistant esophageal adenocarcinomas (n=17) as determined using
qRT-PCR and was significantly higher compared to chemo-nave esophageal
adenocarcinomas (n=102; p<0.0005). Stable inhibition with an shRNA
against CTGF in the esophageal adenocarcinoma cell line Flo, which
expresses endogenous CTGF, led to a significantly increased response to
the chemotherapeutic agents 5-FU (9.4-fold increase), cisplatin
(5.5-fold), and etoposide (4.4-fold) at 24 hours (p<0.005). These
findings suggest that CTGF may be important in mediating chemoresistance
in esophageal adenocarcinoma and that inhibition of CTGF could be useful
in modulating chemoresistance to current neoadjuvant regimens in
esophageal adenocarcinomas overexpressing CTGF.

