Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel high-sensitive assay for detection of EGFR T790M mutation
using high resolution melting analysis with mutant-enriched COLD PCR.


[Background] Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation is a
predictive marker for clinical outcome of EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) treatment in non-small lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Approximately
80 % of NSCLC patients with EGFR mutation show good responsiveness to
EGFR-TKI treatment. However, resistance acquisition to EGFR-TKIs occurs
in most cases and a half of EGFR-TKIs resistances are caused by EGFR
T790M mutation. We and others have previously reported that high
sensitive assays such as mutant-enriched PCR could detect minor T790M
mutant allele in NSCLC tumors even before EGFR-TKI treatment, suggesting
early detection of T790M mutation may enable to propose subsequent
therapy such as next generation EGFR-TKIs. In this study, we developed a
novel high-sensitive assay for detection of T790M mutation using high
resolution melting (HRM) analysis combined with mutant-enriched and COLD
PCRs, and evaluated its sensitivity and frequency of T790M mutations in
NSCLCs.[Material and Method] We determined EGFR mutational status in 50
NSCLCs that were surgically resected at our institute. EGFR exon 19
deletions and L858R mutations were determined using mutant-enriched PCR
assays. EGFR T790M mutation was examined by HRM analysis with or without
mutant-enriched PCR and/or COLD PCR. A mutant-enriched PCR enhanced
mutant alleles by treating conventional PCR product with a restriction
enzyme that specifically digested wild-type alleles. A COLD PCR enhanced
mutant alleles by decreasing denature temperature utilizing difference of
melting temperature between mutant and wild-type amplicons. The
sensitivity of each assay was determined using variable proportion of
mixture DNAs of human bronchial epithelial cell with wild-type EGFR and
NCI-H1975 with EGFR L858R and T790M mutations.[Result] EGFR exon 19
deletion or L858R mutation was found in 13 out of 50 NSCLCs. Conventional
HRM, COLD HRM, mutant-enriched HRM, and mutant-enriched COLD HRM could
detect one T790M mutant allele out of 10, 100, 1000, and 10000 wild-type
alleles, respectively. Although conventional HRM and direct sequencing
could not detect any T790M mutation in 50 NSCLCs, mutant-enriched COLD
HRM found T790M mutation in one NSCLC patient harboring L858R
mutation.[Conclusion] Mutant-enriched COLD HRM assay is very sensitive to
detect minor T790M allele among vast amount of wild-type alleles,
suggesting that this assay may predict T790M-related EGFR-TKIs resistance.

