Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apigenin suppresses IKK activation and downstream signaling
leading to prostate cancer inhibition.


Inhibitor of Nuclear Factor-B kinase (IKK) complex is the master
regulator of the NF-B signaling pathway. IKK complex activation
contributes to major cellular processes and plays a key role in the
pathogenesis various human malignancies including prostate cancer.
Recently, catalytic IKKs represent attractive targets for intervention
with small molecule kinase inhibitors. We aimed to develop apigenin, a
plant flavone, as a potent inhibitor of the IKK-kinase domain. IKK
complex consist of structurally similar IKK and IKK kinases. Both
contains a kinase domain, a leucine-zipper motif through which the
catalytic subunits dimerize, and a helix-loop-helix domain followed by a
C-terminal tail that, when unphosphorylated interacts with IKK, the
non-catalytic subunit. Screening of human prostate tumors demonstrated an
increase in IKK in low and high Gleason grade, whereas, IKK was higher in
benign and low grade tumors. Phosphorylation of IKK (Ser176/180) and IKK
(Ser177/181) was significantly increased in prostate tumors compared to
benign tissues. Treatment of human prostate cancer 22Rv1 and PC-3 cells
to apigenin resulted in a decreased phosphorylation of IKK/ in
dose-dependent fashion, which correlated with lower proliferation and
invasiveness. Ex Vivo IKK complex pull down assay using sepharose beads
also confirmed direct binding of apigenin with IKK complex. In vivo
studies with PC-3 and 22Rv1 xenografts in athymic nude mice further
demonstrated that oral intake of apigenin at doses of 20 and
50g/mouse/day over an 8-wk period resulted in a marked reduction in tumor
growth, IKK activity, IKK phosphorylation, and NF-B/p65 at both doses of
apigenin. Furthermore, 3D structural in silico modeling analysis with
PS1145, a known IKK inhibitor and apigenin were assessed for IKK and IKK
separately for protein-ligand docking studies using glide score. Apigenin
was well anchored by hydrogen bonds with amino acid resides in the IKK
complex protein at both ends. All three hydroxyl groups of apigenin were
favorably oriented around different hydrogen bond acceptor atoms in the
protein. Glide score generated by apigenin and PS1145 docking to IKK-
were -8.40 and -5.79, whereas IKK- were -11.07 and -9.11; lower glide
score represents better binding to IKK complex pocket. These results
suggest that inhibition of cell proliferation and decrease in tumor
growth by apigenin are mediated, at least in part, by its ability to
suppress IKK complex and NF-B signaling pathways.

