Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of dietary carbohydrates and exercise on prostate cancer
progression in LNCaP xenograft model.


Introduction: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of death
among North American men. There are many risk factors for PCa, dietary as
well as physical activity play a role in the development and progression
of the disease. Our lab has previously reported that increased intake of
dietary carbohydrates was associated with increased tumor growth and
activation of signaling pathways distal to the insulin receptor in a
murine model of prostate cancer. In humans, one of the most potent
stimulants for insulin production is glucose consumption and carbohydrate
restriction reduces serum insulin and IGF-I levels to a greater extent
than dietary fat restriction. Numerous studies have also found an inverse
relationship between exercise and PCa progression. For example, a study
by Barnard et al (2003) demonstrated that regular physical activity in
PCa patients decreased serum insulin and IGF-I levels, and also elevated
IGF binding protein I. However, the exact relationships between diet,
exercise and PCa, as well as their underlying mechanisms, are unclear.
Herein we aim to investigate the effect of sustained aerobic exercise on
PCa tumour growth in animals placed on a high carbohydrate diet.Methods:
Athymic (6 -8 week old) nude mice (n=40) were inoculated subcutaneously
with 1 million LNCaP cells. Mice were fed ad libitum with a
high-carbohydrate (HC) diet or a low-carbohydrate (LC) diet. Animals were
randomized into four groups: HC with and without exercise, LC with and
without exercise. Exercise was implemented for 5 days/week (3 x 15 mins;
2-min breaks between cycles; 2.0-10.0 m/min) using a forced exercise
wheel. Exercise was performed for a period of 10 weeks. Body weights,
tumour volumes, and food consumption were recorded tri-weekly. Blood
samples were obtained by sephenous vein bleeding at various times during
the study period. Comparisons between groups over time were performed
using RANOVA Type 3 Tests of Fixed Effects.Results: There were no
significant differences in animal weight and food consumption between
groups. Tumour growth, wet tumour weights were not significantly
different between groups. However it was very interesting to note that
animals from the exercise group had a slower tumour growth rate compared
to animals from the no exercise group.

