Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depleted uranium-induced leukemia: Epigenetic and genetic changes.


Epigenetic and genetic changes are associated with leukemia development.
Depleted uranium is used in military missions and U.S. military personnel
have been wounded with DU shrapnel. In vivo studies have demonstrated
that DU is leukemogenic. To further understand DU leukemogenic effects in
vivo, we used a murine model to characterize and compare the DU-induced
epigenetic and genetic changes in a variety of tissues including, spleen,
hind limb muscle, thymus, and kidney. DU exposure (high and low dose) was
evaluated in five groups of males and females: control group, DU-low
dose, and DU-high dose. To determine the status of DNA methylation in
female and male mice after DU exposure, the sensitive HpaII-based
cytosine extension assay was used. The data from samples from DU-exposed
animals demonstrated that low dose DU exposure for 3 months was
associated with a 2.2- to 4.5- fold increase in the [3H]dCTP
incorporation in female and male spleen, muscle, and thymus indicative of
hypomethylation of DNA. Similarly data from high dose DU exposed mice
indicated that DU was associated with a 4.6- to 11.5- fold increase in
the [3H]dCTP incorporation in murine spleen, muscle, and bone marrow.
These observations are important since the spleen and thymus are
important components of hematopoietic and lymphatic systems and are
significantly affected in lymphomas and leukemias. These data support the
hypothesis that DNA hypomethylation is one possible mechanism involved in
the development of DU-induced leukemia.To assess gene expression changes
associated with DU internalized exposure in vivo kidneys from three
DU-exposed and three age-matched control mice were subject to RNA
extraction and Affymetrix analysis with the MoGene-1_0-st-v1.na32.mm
array. Data were analyzed with GeneSpring software.There was a clear
distinction in kidney mRNA expression between DU-exposed and control
mice. As compared to the control mice, the DU-exposed mice showed a
decrease in expression of genes related to fatty acid metabolism and the
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) pathway. From a subset
of 49 genes involved in the metabolism of fatty acids, 86% of genes were
down-regulated. Additionally, 45 different members of the solute carrier
family of genes displayed differential expression, with 84% of the
changes being down-regulation as compared to the controls. These results
indicate that further gene expression studies are warranted to better
understand the functional impact of these DU-effects.Both these results
support the hypothesis that DU exposure leads to genome destabilization
and further studies are necessary to fully understand the epigenetic and
genetic effects of DU exposure.

