Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative measurements of EGFR pathway signaling and modulation
in pleural effusion samples from non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients using single cell network profiling (SCNP).


Background: SCNP is a multiparametric flow cytometry-based assay that
quantitatively and simultaneously measures, at the single cell level,
both extracellular surface markers and activation levels of intracellular
signaling proteins in response to modulation. SCNP has been successfully
applied to hematologic malignancies in both prognostic and predictive
analyses. Previous work using bladder washes from bladder cancer patients
(pts) established the feasibility of applying SCNP to the functional
characterization of epithelial cell signaling and response to modulation
and targeted kinase inhibition in non-conventional samples.Objectives:
Assess the feasibility of applying SCNP to detect and functionally
characterize epithelial cells, including sensitivity to targeted kinase
inhibition, in pleural effusion (PE) samples from NSCLC pts.Methods: PE
from confirmed NSCLC pts (n=4) were collected at the NSUH and shipped
overnight to Nodality for processing on day of receipt. Antibodies to
CD45, CytoKeratin (CK), EpCAM, and cPARP were used to differentiate
non-apoptotic epithelial cells from leukocytes. DNA aneuploidy was
evaluated using the lymphoid population in the patient samples as a
diploid G0/G1 reference. Signaling in PI3K and MAPK pathways was
quantified through measurement of p-AKT and p-ERK levels at baseline and
after in vitro exposure to EGF +/- PI3K inhibitor GDC-0941. The
epithelial bladder carcinoma cell line HT-1376 was used as a positive
control for epithelial phenotypic staining and EGF-induced
signaling.Results: In 3 of 4 PE samples, epithelial cells (DAPI+, CD45-,
CK+, and EpCAM+) were identified (range 0.35% to 15.87% of all nucleated
cells). Epithelial cells had a DNA index >1.3, indicating aneuploidy and
therefore tumor origin. The majority of epithelial cells were cPARP
negative (>80%) and suitable for SCNP analysis. In all 3 samples with
epithelial cells: 1) EGF modulation induced increased p-AKT and p-ERK; 2)
Pre-treatment with GDC-0941 inhibited EGF induced p-AKT but not p-ERK; 3)
Constitutive activation of the PI3K pathway in the tumor epithelial cells
was suggested by reduction in p-AKT levels compared to basal (no EGF
exposure) following GDC-0941 treatment.Conclusion: This study
demonstrates the feasibility of applying SCNP to the functional
characterization of PE samples from NSCLC pts. Ongoing analyses will
expand upon these data, including both additional NSCLC PE samples and
the evaluation of compounds targeting alternative signaling pathways
relevant to NSCLC (eg: MAPK, EGFR). The feasibility of extending such
SCNP analyses to other solid tumor indications, using alternative tissue
sources and circulating tumor cells, is under further investigation for
both prognostic and response predictive utility.[S.Z. Fields and H.
Raftopoulos are senior co-authors.]

