Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SNDX-275 synergistically inhibits the growth of sarcoma cells when
combined with AKT inhibitors, platinum drugs and Topo II poisons.


The number of effective drugs available for the treatment of soft tissue
and bone sarcomas is limited to a small group of antineoplastic agents.
Previously, we have identified synergistic anti-tumor activities when the
HDAC inhibitor Vorinostat was used in combination with FDA approved
chemotherapies. With newer and more selective HDAC inhibitors entering
clinical trials we examined the effectiveness of SNDX-275, an inhibitor
of HDAC I, II & III when combined with Akt inhibitors and other FDA
approved drugs. CT-Blue cell viability experiments were performed to
first obtain IC50s for 72 hour treatments. IC50s for SNDX-275 ranged from
0.84 to 11.4 M (Table). SNDX-275 alone and in combination with the drugs
listed in the Table showed synergistic cooperativity in viability
experiments. Using Chou and Talalay's Combination Index (CI) analyses (ED
levels of 0.7, 0.9 & 0.95), a synergistic or strongly synergistic
reduction in cell viability (CI The number of effective drugs available
for the treatment of soft tissue and bone sarcomas is limited to a small
group of antineoplastic agents. Previously, we have identified
synergistic anti-tumor activities when the HDAC inhibitor Vorinostat was
used in combination with FDA approved chemotherapies. With newer and more
selective HDAC inhibitors entering clinical trials we examined the
effectiveness of SNDX-275, an inhibitor of HDAC I, II & III when combined
with Akt inhibitors and other FDA approved drugs. CT-Blue cell viability
experiments were performed to first obtain IC50s for 72 hour treatments.
IC50s for SNDX-275 ranged from 0.84 to 11.4 M (Table). SNDX-275 alone and
in combination with the drugs listed in the Table showed synergistic
cooperativity in viability experiments. Using Chou and Talalay's
Combination Index (CI) analyses (ED levels of 0.7, 0.9 & 0.95), a
synergistic or strongly synergistic reduction in cell viability (CI <0.7)
was observed in most combinations tried in the majority of cell lines.
Synergy was observed over a wide dose range and remained synergistic when
as little as 0.5 M of SNDX-275 was used in the combination. Ongoing
experiments are underway to identify the effects of SNDX-275 combinations
on apoptosis and the effect of drug sequencing on growth inihibition. The
results of this study indicate that a drug combination including SNDX-275
may be an effective treatment regimen for sarcoma patients. Funded by the
Pediatric Cancer Foundation.Table. IC50s and Chou and Talalay Combination
Index (CI) Synergy Analysis. Inhibitory concentration of SNDX-275
required for 50% reduction in viable cells after 72 hour treatment
(IC50). CI values represent the level of synergy resulting from
concurrent SNDX-275 plus indicated combination treatment. +/- symbols
indicate calculated CI synergy level.


