Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caspase activation as an approach to treat multiple myeloma.


Apoptosis is a cell death program that is essential for normal organ
development. Defects in apoptosis lead to uncontrolled cell accumulation
resulting in cancer such as multiple myeloma (MM), an incurable plasma
cell disorder. MM patients have defective apoptosis machinery largely due
to the overexpression of anti-apoptotic proteins such as BCL-2, MCL-1,
cIAP1, cIAP2 and XIAP. We are investigating a novel class of procaspase-3
activators as a strategy to activate apoptosis in myeloma cells. The
Procaspase Activating Compounds (PAC), PAC-1 and its analog L14R8, were
synthesized by Dr. Hergenrother's lab (U. of Illinois, Urbana, IL) and
are being developed for clinical application by Vanquish Oncology. PACs
convert the inactive zymogen procaspase-3 to caspase-3 which activates
apoptosis. Mechanistically, PACs activate procaspase-3 by chelating
inhibitory zinc ions thus allowing procaspase-3 to auto-activate to
caspase-3. Our hypothesis is that targeting procaspase-3 with PAC agents
will bypass inhibitory activity of the anti-apoptotic proteins and induce
cell death in myeloma cells. In initial experiments, we examined
procaspase-3 expression in a panel of 9 myeloma cell lines and observed
that it was expressed in all the cell lines suggesting that PAC agents
will be active in myeloma cells. Our investigations with PAC-1 and L14R8
demonstrated that L14R8, but not PAC-1, induced cell death in myeloma
cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Treatment with 10 M L14R8 for
24 hours induced >80% apoptosis in U266 and MM.1S cells. Furthermore,
L14R8 activity was inhibited by exogenous addition of zinc confirming
that the mechanism of L14R8 action is through zinc chelation. The
activation of procaspase-3 resulted in the cleavage of its target PARP
and decreased the levels of the anti-apoptotic proteins MCL-1 and XIAP.
10 M L14R8 was also effective in inducing >80% cell death in myeloma
cells grown in the presence of protective microenvironment as
demonstrated by co-culture experiments with NKtert stromal cells. In
addition, when myeloma cells were grown in the presence of exogenous
growth factors such as hepatocyte growth factor (50 ng/ml) or
interleukin-6 (10 or 50 ng/ml), L14R8 was still able to induce apoptosis
(> 60% with 10 M L14R8 treatment in the presence of either growth
factor). Finally, L14R8 was effective in inducing apoptosis in cells
resistant to lenalidomide, a standard treatment for myeloma patients. Our
future plan is to examine the effectiveness of this drug in primary
CD138+ plasma cells (representing malignant myeloma cells). These studies
demonstrate that targeting procaspase-3 with L14R8 is an effective
strategy to induce myeloma cell death.

