Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Negative regulation of bcl-2 transcription by DNA damage-binding
protein complex in human ovarian cancer cells.


Elevated expression of the anti-apoptotic factor Bcl-2 is believed to be
one of the contributing factors to an increased relapse rate associated
with multiple cisplatin-resistant cancers. DNA damage-binding protein 2
(DDB2) has recently been revealed to play an important role in
sensitizing human ovarian cancer cells to cisplatin-induced apoptosis
through the down-regulation of Bcl-2, but the underlying molecular
mechanism remains poorly defined. Here, we report that DDB2 functions as
a transcriptional repressor for Bcl-2. DDB2 binds to a specific response
element at the 5-end of bcl-2 P1 promoter, concomitant with marked losses
of histone H3 acetylation along the bcl-2 promoter and enhancer regions.
Quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that HDAC1
was locally enriched in the bcl-2 P1 core promoter following DDB2
over-expression. Lysine 244 in DDB2 is essential for the transcriptional
regulation of bcl-2, evidenced by the fact that the K244E mutant failed
to inhibit bcl-2 promoter activity. Interestingly, the simultaneous DDB1
knock-down and DDB2 over-expression are required to potentiate bcl-2
promoter activity in the human ovarian cancer cell line CP70, while the
knockdown of DDB1 alone failed to produce any significant effect.
Furthermore, quantitative analysis of DDB2 and Bcl-2 expression in
ovarian cancers provides clinical evidence that DDB2 and Bcl-2 are
inversely correlated. Collectively, our data supports a model in which
DDB2 and DDB1 function cooperatively in repressing bcl-2 transcription by
recruiting HDAC1 to deacetylate histone H3 across bcl-2 regulatory
regions, with DDB2 being responsible for binding to a specific cis-acting
element in the bcl-2 P1 promoter. These findings have immediate
implications for clinical trial designs of DDB2-based therapies for
diverse cisplatin-resistant malignancies.(Supported by NIH grant CA151248
to QEW, and CA93413 to AAW)

