Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA-200c mediates the tumor suppressive effects of Wnt
inhibitory factor 1 in human malignant salivary gland cells.


Background: The important role of Wingless-type (Wnt)/-catenin pathway is
well established in various human tumors. Previously, we have
demonstrated that Wnt inhibitory factor 1 (WIF1) is significantly
downregulated in human salivary gland tumors. The tumor suppressor
microRNA, miR-200c, is downregulated in many cancers and is known to
repress migration and invasion of cancer cells.Aims: To determine the
tumor suppressive effects of WIF1 and delineate the mechanisms by which
WIF1 regulates microRNAs in human malignant salivary gland cells.Methods:
Human malignant salivary gland cells (Carcinoma ExPleomorphic adenoma,
CaExPA79) were transiently transfected with either empty vector or pCI
blast-WIF1 and cell proliferation was determined by MTT assay at various
time points. CaExPA79 cells transfected with WIF1 for 48 h were used for
total RNA isolation and gene expression studies. To determine the effect
of WIF1 restoration on salivary gland cancer cells, CaExPA79 cells were
treated with 50 M of 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (DAC), a demethylating agent,
for 4 days. After DAC treatment, the cells were either used for cell
cycle analysis or total RNA isolation and real-time RT-PCR analysis. To
determine the effect of WIF1 on miR-200c, CaExPA79 cells were transfected
with pCI blast-WIF1 along with miR200c-Luc reporter vector and Renilla
luciferase expressing plasmid pRL-TK for 24 h. Luciferase activity was
determined using Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System.Results: WIF1
significantly inhibited the proliferation of CaExPA79 at 24, 48 and 72 h.
Treatment with DAC increased the WIF1 mRNA expression and resulted in a
significant accumulation of cells in S phase. DAC treatment also resulted
in a significant increase in miR-200c expression. WIF1 over-expression
resulted in a significant increase in miR-200c expression and led to a
significant reduction in the expression of miR-200c targeted genes as
documented by luciferase reporter gene assays. Conclusions: WIF1 inhibits
salivary gland cancer cell proliferation and induces cell cycle arrest.
Most importantly, our findings suggest that WIF1 is a positive
transcriptional regulator of the tumor suppressor microRNA miR-200c and
leads to a corresponding downregulation of its downstream targets. Taken
together, this study reveals a novel mechanism by which WIF1 elicits it's
tumor suppressive effects on salivary gland cancer cells.Grant support:
This work was supported by the Oklahoma Center for the Advancement of
Science & Technology (LQ) (HR08-018). LQ holds a Presbyterian Health
Foundation Endowed Chair in Otorhinolaryngology.

