Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single-walled carbon nanotubes for delivery of siRNA: Antitumor
efficacy comparing formulated complexes in EGFR overexpressing A431
xenografts.


siRNA has the potential to be a selective targeted cancer therapy but
currently lacks an adequate delivery mechanism. Ensysce has been
exploring the use of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT) as delivery
vehicles for siRNA and has previously reported on the safety, in vitro
and in vivo efficacy of this platform. We have determined that
siRNA/SWCNT complexes are well tolerated, and can be administered in a
multi-weekly intravenous (i.v.) dosing schedule over extended periods of
time. The pharmacokinetics and distribution of the SWCNT in animals have
been examined. The goal of the current study was to determine an optimal
formulation of siRNA/SWCNT that provides maximal tumor accumulation and
antitumor efficacy. siRNA/SWCNT complexes were formulated in aqueous
solutions with PEG-lipid analogues and the circulation and tissue
distribution were evaluated. All solutions prepared were examined by
atomic force microscopy (AFM), dynamic light scattering (DLS) and for
z-potential. siRNA payloads were quantified and siRNA/SWCNT complexes
were examined for stability in serum and systemic efficacy. Solutions of
siRNA/SWCNT formulated complexes were administered i.v. to C57Bl6 mice or
to nu/nu mice bearing MiaPaCa human pancreatic or A431 human epidermoid
carcinoma tumors. Mice were sacrificed at various times after i.v.
administration. Blood and tissues were collected and SWCNT concentrations
were determined by measuring near infrared fluorescence using NS2
Nanospectralizer. The presence and persistence of SWCNT in the tissues
was determined. Animals bearing A431 xenografts were treated with
SWCNT/siEGFR/PEG-lipid analogue complexes and tumor growth control was
compared to that produced by erlotinib. Data to be presented will include
details of the analytical characterization of the SWCNT, circulating
half-life (t1/2) and tissue concentrations versus time of administration.
Tumor and tissue SWCNT content were found to depend on the t1/2 of the
formulation of preparations that were delivered. Microscopic examination
of tumors indicated that SWCNT presence in tumor increased with the
increasing t1/2. The siRNA target knockdown in tumor xenografts of up to
90% was observed with complexes comprised of a number of siRNA payloads
including siKRAS, siEGFR and siTRX. Antitumor activity has also been
demonstrated with complexes targeting one or two growth driving proteins.
Formulations providing t1/2 of 13 hr for the circulating SWCNT were
evaluated with siEGFR against A431 EGFR overexpressing cells, with the
optimal formulation showing tumor growth delay of 16 to 20 days versus
the free siRNA treated control. In summary, SWCNT offer a novel approach
to deliver oligonucleotides safely and effectively and formulation of the
complexes can offer a means to control the siRNA biodistribution.

