Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and validation of methylation markers for early
detection of endometrial cancer.


Background: Endometrial cancers account for over 46,000 cases and 8,100
deaths annually in the U.S. Endometrial cancers that are confined to the
uterus portend an excellent prognosis, suggesting that development of
early detection methods for these tumors could reduce mortality. To
identify and validate markers with potential utility in early detection
of endometrial cancers, we compared DNA methylation profiling data for
endometrial cancer tissues collected in a population-based
epidemiological study and a comparison set of benign endometrial tissues,
and replicated promising candidates in a separate clinical study.Methods:
We used the Illumina Golden Gate platform to profile DNA methylation of
CpGs at 1536 sites (807 genes) using fixed tissues from 148 endometrial
cancers included in the population-based Polish Endometrial Cancer Study
(cases) and 23 benign endometrial tissues collected at Magee Women's
Hospital (controls). Tissue cores (1.0-mm) removed from target-rich areas
of blocks were used for DNA extraction, bisulfite treatment and
profiling. We replicated top candidate markers by applying pyrosequencing
assays to endometrial brushings performed prior to hysterectomy among 38
women with endometrial cancer and 37 with benign gynecological diseases
treated at the Mayo Clinic and calculated odds ratios comparing the
highest tertile of methylation values in controls for each marker with
middle and low tertiles. In addition, we assessed discrimination across
the whole range of cutoffs using Receiver Operator Characteristics (ROC)
curves.Results: Methylation profiling identified 114 CpG sites with
differential methylation levels between cases and controls (P10-7). Eight
genes (ADCYAP1, ASCL2, HS3ST2, HTR1B, MME, NPY, and SOX1) which showed
large case-control differences in methylation levels ( 0.4), and low
values in controls (Background: Endometrial cancers account for over
46,000 cases and 8,100 deaths annually in the U.S. Endometrial cancers
that are confined to the uterus portend an excellent prognosis,
suggesting that development of early detection methods for these tumors
could reduce mortality. To identify and validate markers with potential
utility in early detection of endometrial cancers, we compared DNA
methylation profiling data for endometrial cancer tissues collected in a
population-based epidemiological study and a comparison set of benign
endometrial tissues, and replicated promising candidates in a separate
clinical study.Methods: We used the Illumina Golden Gate platform to
profile DNA methylation of CpGs at 1536 sites (807 genes) using fixed
tissues from 148 endometrial cancers included in the population-based
Polish Endometrial Cancer Study (cases) and 23 benign endometrial tissues
collected at Magee Women's Hospital (controls). Tissue cores (1.0-mm)
removed from target-rich areas of blocks were used for DNA extraction,
bisulfite treatment and profiling. We replicated top candidate markers by
applying pyrosequencing assays to endometrial brushings performed prior
to hysterectomy among 38 women with endometrial cancer and 37 with benign
gynecological diseases treated at the Mayo Clinic and calculated odds
ratios comparing the highest tertile of methylation values in controls
for each marker with middle and low tertiles. In addition, we assessed
discrimination across the whole range of cutoffs using Receiver Operator
Characteristics (ROC) curves.Results: Methylation profiling identified
114 CpG sites with differential methylation levels between cases and
controls (P10-7). Eight genes (ADCYAP1, ASCL2, HS3ST2, HTR1B, MME, NPY,
and SOX1) which showed large case-control differences in methylation
levels ( 0.4), and low values in controls (<0.2) were chosen for
replication by pyrosequencing in pre-hysterectomy patients. In the
replication study, higher methylation levels were found for 7 of 8 genes
in endometrial brush samples from women with cancer as compared to women
without cancer. In the replication study, odds ratios for association of
methylation markers with endometrial cancer ranged from 3.6 (95%-CI:
1.35-9.47) for HTR1B to 10.9 (95%-CI: 3.23-36.91) for ASCL2.
Discrimination of cases and controls was best for ADCYAP1 (area under ROC
curve=0.89; 95% CI: 0.80-0.97), CDH13 (0.87; 95% CI: 0.80-0.97), and MME
(0.87; 95% CI: 0.78-0.97).Conclusions: Analysis of DNA methylation
markers in endometrial brushings is strongly associated with prevalent
endometrial cancer at hysterectomy. Development and validation of a
robust early detection marker panel for endometrial cancers, including
non-endometrioid cancers and precursor lesions is ongoing.

