Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protooncogenic TLR4 induces NANOG-mediated oncogenic signaling via
synergistic interaction with STAT3 pathway in experimental and clinical
tumor-initiating cells.


[Background] TLR4 signaling activated by alcohol/obesity-associated
endotoxemia, induces the stem cell marker Nanog to generate
tumor-initiating stem-like cells (TICs) and liver tumors in the HCV
nonstructural protein Ns5a transgenic (Tg) mice but not in wild type or
Ns5a Tg mice deficient in TLR4 (Machida and Tsukamoto, PNAS, 2009).
However, it is unknown whether the TLR4-NANOG pathway serves as a
universal oncogenic signaling in the genesis of TICs and HCC in other
etiological animal models and patients or how TLR4-NANOG signaling
promotes oncogenesis and self-renewal Sin TICs. [Aim] We aimed to
determine whether TLR4 is a putative proto-oncogene for TIC in liver
oncogenesis due to different etiologies and how TLR4 is regulated at the
transcriptional and epigenetic levels. [Methods] Genome-wide
NANOG-binding sites were analyzed by ChIP-seq in CD133+/CD49f+ TICs
isolated from HCC developed in HCV Core Tg mice fed alcohol. We generated
Tg mice with liver-selective overexpression of constitutively active (ca)
TLR4 using LAP promoter-driven tTA and Tet-caTLR4. TICs were also
isolated from diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-treated mice and alcoholic
patients with or without HCV infection. [Results] TLR4 or NANOG silencing
with shRNA attenuates tumor initiating property of TICs. Hepatocyte
specific expression of caTLR4 results in spontaneous development of HCC
in 35% of the mice. Genome-wide NANOG-binding site analysis (ChIP-seq) in
TICs shows similarity to STAT3 binding motifs. STAT3 silencing reduces
NANOG promoter reporter activity in TICs. Genome-wide NANOG-binding site
analysis also shows that NANOG regulates oxidative phosphorylation and
-oxidation in mitochondria. Simultaneous real time analysis quantifying
mitochondrial respiration and glycolysis demonstrates that NANOG inhibits
mitochondria-mediated energy production, leading to promotion of
self-renewal in TICs. TLR4 expression and promoter activity are further
reduced by a silencing of LIN28 or expression of Let7. Overexpression of
LIN28 and NANOG transforms primary liver progentior cells through
activation of TLR4-NANOG pathway. [Conclusions] These results demonstrate
that CD133+/CD49f+ cells are TLR4/NANOG-dependent TICs in both
experimental and clinical HCC. TLR4 is induced by LIN28 signaling and is
a universal proto-oncogene responsible for the genesis of TLR4-NANOG
dependent TICs through integration of NANOG pathway with STAT3 signaling,
and this pathway serves as a novel therapeutic target for HCC.

