Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional drug sensitivity and resistance profiling of AML
patient cells defines a disease-specific combination of druggable signal
addictions.


Numerous underlying molecular events have been described in acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), but still, the fundamental disease mechanisms are poorly
understood. Several targeted therapies have been investigated for
improved AML therapy but have not succeeded to date, likely due to the
inability to identify the patient subgroups that are most likely to
benefit.Here, we describe functional profiling of AML patient cells ex
vivo with a drug sensitivity and resistance (DSRT) platform in order to
distinguish disease- and patient-specific molecular vulnerabilities and
individualized therapeutic strategies. The oncology drug collection
covers 306 anti-cancer agents including 131 approved, 107 investigational
and 68 experimental compounds. Each compound is tested in a dose response
series allowing for calculation of drug sensitivity scores. The
functional exploration of AML patient samples was accompanied with
comprehensive molecular profiling and clinical background data to link
drug sensitivities to molecular aberrations and predictive
biomarkers.Comparison of the drug sensitivity profiles of 24 AML patient
and 5 control samples revealed that targeted inhibitors often exhibit no
to little effect in the controls and the majority of AML patient samples
with only a subset of patients showing very selective responses,
indicating that cancer specific vulnerabilities can be detected with the
DSRT platform. Clustering of the drug responses among patient and control
samples identified distinct subgroups of patients and drugs. Each of
these groups could be defined by a separate drug class, implying that the
linked samples were addicted to the corresponding signaling networks.
Specifically, we saw select addictions to drug classes such as
dasatinib/VEGFR TKIs, MEK inhibitors, rapalogs, JAK inhibitors, mTOR
inhibitors in 6 (25 %), 5 (21%), 5 (21%), 5 (21%), and 6 (25%) of the
patients, respectively.Together, these sensitivities highlight a set of
disease-specific and individualized signaling nodes that can serve as
starting points for personalized combination therapy strategies in AML.
Further, integration of DSRT results with molecular and clinical
profiling link some of the selective drug responses to clinically
actionable markers. For example, dasatinib sensitivity was found to be
predominant in AML M5 patients, suggesting that this drug is a promising
therapeutic candidate for relapsed and refractory AML M5 patients.In
conclusion, the DSRT platform can be used as a functional interrogation
of patient cells leading to the identification of druggable
vulnerabilities that can be used for personalized medicine strategies.
Furthermore, insight into disease-specific signal addictions and
establishment of how these are linked can aid in deconvoluting the
complex molecular disease mechanisms of cancers and generate strategies
for novel drug development.

