Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of microRNA-100 on cell proliferation and apoptosis is
associated with dysregulation of Plk1 in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.


The microRNAs (miRNAs) are a family of small non-coding RNAs that
negatively regulate gene expression by degrading mRNA and by inhibiting
translation of protein. Numerous studies have demonstrated the critical
roles of miRNA in physiological and pathological procedures, including
cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis, and in carcinogenesis.
Recent studies have particularly reported that miR-100 is aberrantly
expressed in multiple cancers, including colorectal, lung, prostate,
ovarian, thyroid, pancreatic, liver, breast, cervical and nasopharyngeal
cancers. It has also been reported that reduction of miRNA-100 is
associated with poor prognosis. But the effects of miRNA-100 on human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells and its potential mechanisms are largely
unknown. In the present study, we transfected miRNA-100 analogue into
human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2 cell, employed
quantitative RT-PCR, immunoblotting, immunofluorescence, flow cytometry
and other approaches, and found that the expression of miRNA-100 was
markedly lower but polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) was higher in the HCC cell
line and fetal liver, compared to those in the normal hepatocytes and
adult liver, respectively. Moreover, increasing miRNA-100 expression in
HepG2 cells inhibited cell proliferation, caused cell cycle arrest and
promoted apoptosis. Mechanistic and correlation studies revealed that the
anti-cancer effects of miRNA-100 were associated with downregulation of
Plk1 expression at mRNA and protein levels. Factually, bioinformatic
analysis has predicted that Plk1 could be a target of miRNA-100. In
conclusion, our results have shown that miRNA-100 has a tumor suppressor
function in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells, which may be associated
with downregulation of Plk1, and implicate the potential application of
miR-100 in connection with Plk1 for targeted gene therapy of
hepatocellular carcinoma.

