Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide CpG island methylation analysis identifies tumor
specifically methylated genes in non-small cell lung cancer patients.


DNA methylation is part of the epigenetic gene regulation complex and it
has been shown that methylation of certain genes occurs frequently in
non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC). We performed a genome-wide search
for methylated CpG islands in primary tumors and corresponding
non-malignant lung tissue samples of 101 stage I-III NSCLC patients by
combining methylated DNA immunoprecipitation and microarray analysis
using NimbleGen's 385K Human CpG Island plus Promoter arrays
(MeDIP-chip). To test for differences in methylation between tumors and
corresponding non-malignant lung tissues, we calculated paired
t-statistics with permutation adjusted p-values for step down multiple
testing. Overall, we identified 2.414 genomic positions differentially
methylated between tumor and corresponding non-malignant lung tissue
samples by MeDIP-chip analyses. Ninety-seven % of them were found to be
tumor-specifically methylated. Annotation of these genomic positions
resulted in the identification of 477 tumor-specifically methylated
genes. These genes were classified according to Gene Ontology (GO)
categories and over-representation of certain GO terms was calculated.
Interestingly, we found that a large number of tumor-specifically
methylated genes act as regulators of gene expression or mediate
homophilic cell adhesion. Tumor-specific methylation of selected genes
was confirmed by methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting analysis
and ROC curve analyses revealed that primary tumors may be distinguished
from non-malignant lung tissue samples by methylation of certain genes.
In addition, in the majority of tumors methylation of certain genes was
associated with loss of their protein expression determined by
immunohistochemistry. Moreover, treatment of NSCLC cells with
epigenetically active drugs resulted in upregulated expression of many
tumor-specifically methylated genes analysed by gene expression
microarrays. In conclusion, we identified a large number of
tumor-specifically methylated genes in NSCLC patients. Expression of many
of them is regulated by methylation. Overall, our findings emphasize the
impact of methylation on the pathogenesis of NSCLCs.

