Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Manipulating the tumor microenvironment for therapeutic benefit:
identifying mechanisms of buffer resistance.


The acidic microenvironment is a common physiological phenomenon of most
solid tumors that can be attributed to increased fermentative metabolism
combined with poor perfusion. Acidic niches provide a highly selective
environment promoting carcinogenesis and malignancy. We previously
demonstrated that neutralizing acidosis with buffers reduced spontaneous
or experimental metastasis in-vivo. This effect is due to buffering,
because by reducing the buffering capacity of lysine five-fold by
titrating the solution from pH 10 to pH 8.4 (below the second of three
pKa's), we observed a correlating decrease in efficacy in-vivo. In these
studies, some tumor types, notably LL/2 and B16-F12 cells are resistant
to buffer therapy. To examine the mechanisms that lead to resistance, we
first determined their metabolic profiles using a Seahorse XF96 to
measure glucose-dependent acidification rates (ECAR) and oxygen
consumption rates (OCR). Contrary to our hypothesis, these data showed
that the resistant lines, LL/2 and B16-F12 had significantly higher basal
OCR and lower glucose-stimulated ECAR, compared to PC3M cells (buffer
sensitive). PC3M cells also had low spare glycolytic capacity, suggesting
they are at or near maximal glycolysis in their basal state. Glucose
consumption assays confirm increased rates of glucose consumption by PC3M
cells, confirming a glycolytic phenotype. Hence, resistance to buffer
therapy is not simply a consequence of higher metabolic proton production
rates. Acidosis has been shown to stimulate lysosomal redistribution and
protease secretion in-vitro. Thus, an alternative hypothesis is that
protease activation may be a mechanism by which low pH stimulates
metastasis in-vivo. To observe protease activity in vivo, MMPsense 680
and Prosense 750EX activatable probes, which measure MMP and cysteine
cathepsin activity respectively, were injected intravenously into nu/nu
mice bearing bilateral LL/2 and PC3M tumors. Mice were provided either
tap water or 200 mM lysine, ad lib for the duration of the experiment.
Mice were imaged 24 hours following probe's injection using a
Perkin-Elmer FMT 2500. LL/2 tumors (buffer resistant) had significantly
higher basal cysteine cathepsin activity than PC3M tumors in control
mice, and these decreased upon lysine treatment. MMP activity between
LL/2 and PC3M tumors was not different in control mice, however, MMP
activity increased significantly in LL/2 tumors with buffer therapy. In
vitro 3D-DQ-collagen IV degradation assays correlate with protease
activity seen in vivo. These data suggest that buffer-sensitive cells
rely on acid production from glycolysis for metastatic potential, whereas
resistant lines metastasize through a pH-independent proteolytic
mechanism.

