Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative sequencing following PCR-driven library preparation
with internal standard mixtures has improved analytical performance and
lower cost.


Background: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is amenable to a multitude
of clinical applications by virtue of its automated and highly
parallelized analysis of nucleic acid templates. However, prior studies
have identified non-systematic biases introduced during preparation of
NGS libraries as the primary source of technical variation preventing
immediate application for measuring nucleic acid abundance in the
clinical setting. We reasoned that a PCR-based NGS library preparation
protocol that incorporated competitive internal amplification control
(IAC) mixtures (i.e. internal standards) would control for the majority
of bias introduced during NGS library preparation, enabling clinical
laboratories to offer cost effective moderately complex diagnostic panels
from quantitative NGS data. Methods: In order to test this approach, we
obtained reference material RNA titration pools used in the FDA-sponsored
Sequencing Quality Control (SEQC) project that have been characterized
for nucleic acid abundance by multiple qPCR, Microarray and NGS
platforms. Using Multiplex-PCR with primers and competitive IAC for
150-gene targets we prepared NGS libraries from: 1) gDNA to test general
analytical performance, and 2) cDNA from reverse transcribed SEQC project
reference material to determine accuracy in detecting fold change. Using
gDNA mixed with serially titrated IAC mixtures as input, we observed a
linear dynamic range over 106 orders of magnitude, with an average R2 =
0.995 (0.993 0.997; 95% CI). There was a high correlation coefficient
(R2= 0.96) between measured values for copies of nucleic acid abundance
in two separate library preparations (separate reverse transcriptions and
Multiplex PCR-based library preparations) from the same reference RNA
material (FDA SEQC project Sample A). Because the SEQC project RNA
Samples C and D represent a known cross titration between SEQC project
RNA Samples A and B, by comparing measured to expected values for
expression of each gene in Samples C and D it is possible to determine
accuracy of the method. In preliminary studies, the correlation
coefficient of expected versus observed for Sample C was R2 = 0.96, with
an ROC curve-determined accuracy to detect a 3-fold change of 97% (95
99%; 95% CI). Inter-platform and inter-laboratory comparisons are
ongoing. Conclusion: The approach described here overcomes key sources of
non-systematic bias introduced during NGS library preparation. This
should enable reproducible inter-laboratory and inter-platform
quantitative NGS results, and a clear path to regulatory approval for
clinical diagnostic applications.

