Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequent BRCA1 promoter methylation and low 53BP1 status in
sporadic triple-negative breast cancer.


Purpose: BRCA1 plays a key role in DNA repair and cellular stress
response. Inhibitors of PARP show promising clinical activity in
metastatic, triple-negative BRCA-mutated breast cancer. P53 binding
protein 1 (53BP1) is a protein involved in DNA damage checkpoint
activation and DNA repair that is involved in both non homologous
end-joining and homology-mediated repair of double-strand DNA breaks.
When both BRCA1 and 53BP1 are lost, homology-mediated repair appears to
be restored and the sensitivity to DNA damaging agents is reduced. Loss
of 53BP1 leads to resistance to cis-platinum and PARP inhibitors in
BRCA1-deficient cells, suggesting that 53BP1 is a critical modulator of
repair choice in BRCA1 mutant, and possibly epigenetically inactivated
cells. Reduced 53BP1 expression has been reported in sporadic basal-like
and triple-negative and BRCA-associated breast cancers. It thus appears
important to simultaneously evaluate 53BP1 status altogether with BRCA1
mutation/methylation in order to estimate the homology-mediated
functionality in breast cancer tumors.Methods: We investigated cytosolic
53BP1 levels and BRCA1 gene promoter hypermethylation profile in 151
surgical tumor samples from patients treated in our institution between
January 2006 and November 2009 and evaluated their statistical
association with classical breast cancer predictive and prognostic
factors. DNA methylation patterns in the CpG islands of BRCA1 gene
promoter were determined by a methylation specific PCR distinguishing
unmethylated from methylated alleles in a given gene on the basis of
sequence changes produced following bisulfite treatment of DNA. Cytosolic
53BP1 level was evaluated using a commercially available assay
kit.Results: Median age was 54 years (range 29-75 years). Median 53BP1
protein level (pg/mg of cytosolic protein) was 9.5. Using this cut-off,
low 53BP1 levels were significantly associated with negative ER and PR
status, triple-negative profile, low cytosolic PARP activity, BRCA1
promoter hypermethylation and absence of nodal metastases. The
hypermethylation status was significantly associated with UPA and PAI-1
levels, SBR grade, SBR Mitotic count score, ER, PR and HER-2 negative
status, and then conversely triple negative (ER, PR and HER-2 negative)
profile. Twenty nine percent of the triple negative tumors presented a
hypermethylated status, comparing to 5 and 2% for HR+/HER-2- and HER-2+
tumors respectively. In the triple negative population (N=48), only 2 of
the 13 tumors with BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation, presented high (>9.5
pg/mg) 53BP1 protein levelsConclusion: Triple negative breast cancers
harboring simultaneously a high level of 53BP1 and BRCA1 promoter
hypermethylation are a putative target population for development of
drugs targeting DNA repair. However, this population appears to be
restricted to a small subgroup of triple negative breast cancers.

