Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-stimulation of IL-12 gene delivery plus doxorubicin induces
NKG2D-dependent CD8+T cell infiltration to tumors and inhibition of tumor
progression.


Chemotherapeutic agents were conventionally viewed as agents that can
only eradicate tumor cells and have no impact on the immune system.
However, recent work has identified a novel function of chemotherapeutic
agents, which is to prevent an immunosuppressive effect in the tumor
microenvironment and even facilitate the infiltration of immune effector
cells into tumors and sensitize tumor cells to immune cell attack. In
fact, immune response induced by chemotherapeutic agents may become a
predictor of therapeutic outcome in cancer patients. In agreement with
these observations, some chemotherapeutic agents when combined with
immunotherapy promote anti-tumor immune response, resulting in an
improved anti-tumor efficacy. Despite these progress, it remains unclear
how to properly and effectively combine immune stimulatory gene therapy
and chemotherapy to boost anti-tumor efficacy.This study reveals
upregulation of NKG2D in CD8+T cells may serve as a valuable end point
for selecting such a proper immune- and chemo-therapy combination. This
conclusion is based on the fact that IL-12 immunogene therapy plus
doxorubicin-induced expression of natural killer group 2, member D
(NKG2D) in CD8+T cells, increases NKG2D-dependent CD8+T cell localization
into tumors and anti-tumor efficacy. This NKG2D upregulation and
localization into tumors after the co-stimulation of IL-12 plus
doxorubicin is CD8+T cell specific because this observation occurs in
wild-type mice and NK deficient mice, but not in T cell deficient mice.
The depletion study confirmed this statement because depletion of NK
cells did not affect the detection of NKG2D upregulation and NKG2D
positive CD8+T cell localization in tumors by the co-stimulation, but
depletion of CD8+T cells completely abolish the detection of CD8+T cells
in tumor microenvironment subjected to the same stimulation. Consistent
with these result, blocking NKG2D receptor using a neutralizing antibody
impaired doxorubicin plus IL-12 gene delivery-mediated tumor eradication
in vivo and reduced cytolytic activity in vitro.In summary, we have shown
in vivo evidence that Dox plus IL-12 gene delivery induces CD8+T
cell-specific NKG2D upregulation. This upregulation facilitates the
infiltration of these NKG2D-expressing CD8+T cells into the tumor site.
The significance of this study is to elucidate that doxorubicin plus
IL-12-induced CD8+T cells infiltrating into tumors is dependent on NKG2D
expression and this NKG2D upregulation can be used as an end point for
this combination therapy for measuring anti-tumor immune response. Our
study is also significant for CAR-based T cell therapy, because our data
suggests that IL-12 plus doxorubicin treatment may promote NKG2D-based
CAR-T cell therapy by possibly causing tumor specific infiltration.

