Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A preclinical model of laparoscopy demonstrating the feasibility
of detecting PSMA positive cells with a NIR fluorophore (YC-27):
implications for strategies to decrease positive margins during
prostatectomy.


Introduction:Depending on the stage there is approximately a 4-54%
positive surgical margin (+SM) following prostatectomy. Patients with +SM
face the associated expense and impaired functional outcomes of salvage
radiotherapy. To circumvent this, a low-molecular weight urea-based near
infrared (NIR) fluorophore (YC-27) was developed to target the prostate
specific membrane antigen (PSMA) for use in intraoperative imaging. PSMA
is a transmembrane protein expressed in normal prostate and upregulated
in cancer. PSMA expression correlates with Gleason score, advanced stage
and PSA. We optimized dosing and timing in a small animal model for
laparoscopic resection of PSMA positive tumors. Secondly, we demonstrate
the feasibility of applying such a system in a porcine model.Methods:PSMA
positive and negative tumors were established contralaterally on the
flank of athymic male nude mice. YC-27 was administered intravenously at
varying doses (9.5, 19.1, 39.7 [ug/Kg]) and sequentially imaged using a
custom built laparoscopic system to obtain probe kinetics (1, 2, 3, 4, 6,
8, 10, 24 hrs post IV injection). Arbitrary pixel count was used to
evaluate dosing and timing for signal to noise ratio. NIR guided
laparoscopic resection was performed on mice with established PSMA
positive and negative tumors 6 hrs post injection of 39.7 ug/Kg YC-27. In
a porcine model, prestained human xenografts generated in a murine host
were implanted behind the peritoneum of the abdominal cavity, and
exploratory NIR laparoscopy was performed. In a porcine model, the kidney
was observed with our laparoscopic NIR system after intravenous YC-27
administration.Results:In a murine model, the highest signal to noise
ratio was determined to occur 6 hrs after injecting 39.7 ug/Kg YC-27.
Using these parameters, NIR guided laparoscopic surgery facilitated full
resection of the xenograft. In a porcine model, exploratory laparoscopy
with our NIR system allowed detection of a prestained tumor implanted
behind the peritoneum. In another experiment, strong fluorescent signal
was observed from the porcine kidney immediately after IV injection of
YC-27 which may be attributed to specific binding to PSMA, renal
clearance, or a combination of both.Conclusions:YC-27 allows
intraoperative localization of PSMA in real time using a prototype NIR
guided laparoscopic surgical system. Pilot studies in large animals
demonstrated excellent potential for clinical translation.

