Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of TP53 splicing mutations in colorectal tumors.


Background & Aim: The tumor suppressor TP53 gene is one of the most
frequently mutated in different types of human cancer. Particularly in
colorectal cancer (CRC), it is believed that TP53 mutations play a role
in the adenoma-carcinoma transition of tumors during pathological
process. Alternative splicing expands the diversity of RNA transcripts
and plays an important role in tissue-specific differentiation, what can
be misregulated in diseases. The high value of silent mutations found in
TP53 databases is much more than what would be expected if synonymous
mutations were effectively neutral. Previous in silico studies suggested
that p53 synonymous mutations colocalized with splicing sites. The
purpose of this study was to determine the correct splicing patterns and
to understand if synonymous mutations may affect TP53 function in tumoral
processes by analyzing the complete coding region of TP53 mRNA searching
for mutations involved with splicing mechanisms. Methods: Tumor samples
from 101 patients with sporadic CRC from AC Camargo Hospital in Brazil
were evaluated. RNA and DNA were isolated from frozen tumor tissue using
Trizol and phenol/chloroform based protocol. TP53 sequences were
evaluated by Sanger sequencing. Results: There were detected four
deletions and four insertions. Of these, two deletions (c.159del1,
c.792_796del5) and two insertions (c.672_673ins5, c.398_399ins4) were
detected, to our knowledge, for the first time and submitted to GenBank.
In addition, two deletions and one insertion lead to splicing variants or
splicing errors, as the region deleted or inserted contains sequences
that could be used as alternative splicing sites. The insertion results
from a synonymous mutation. The other samples do not contain another
mutation in RNA sequence that could be related to splicing errors.
Considering the total number of alterations found, of the 42 types of
alterations, 3 (7.1%) of them represent splicing variants, rate seven
times higher than what was shown on TP53 IARC Database. The higher
frequency could be explained by the strategy adopted for the screening,
as the use of cDNA sequencing facilitated the detection of possible
splicing variants that might have been underestimated in previous
analyses using genomic approaches. Conclusion: The analysis of the whole
transcript sequence of TP53 mRNA is important to determine the specific
contribution of the alterations found. Synonymous mutations may alter p53
function. The findings strongly suggest that particular splicing
modifications are associated with CRC and that there is considerably more
transcript complexity than previously appreciated.

