Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LKB1 downregulation in head and neck cancer is independent of
promoter methylation or FOXO3 expression.


Cancers of the head and neck comprise a diverse group of tumors with
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) as the predominant form. Epidemiological
data suggest that the etiology and pathogenesis of HNSCC are influenced
by environmental and life-style-related factors, such as tobacco use,
dietery factors and exposure to toxic substances. However, only a small
fraction of tobacco users develop HNSCC suggesting that genetic factors
may play a key role in the development of HNSCC. Therefore, genetic
abnormalities in HNSCC have been studied extensively. The genetic changes
associated with HNSCC affect a variety of different pathways and vary
from point mutations to chromosomal aberrations which impair the function
or expression of both oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes.Liver Kinase
B1 (LKB1) is one of the recently identified tumor suppressor genes which
is mutated in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. It codes for a well-conserved
serine-threonine kinase and regulates multiple biological processes and
signaling pathways including the control of cell-cycle arrest,
p53-mediated apoptosis, Wnt signaling, TGF--signaling, ras-induced cell
transformation and energy metabolism. Somatic LKB1 alterations have been
reported in a variety of carcinomas. Different studies have shown that
the LKB1 protein can be inactivated by a wide spectrum of mutations that
are scattered all over the protein or by promoter methylation in
different types of cancer. Recently, it has been reported that LKB1 is
transcriptionally regulated by binding of the FOXO3 protein to the
cis-regulatory elements in the promoter region of the LKB1 gene. The FOXO
proteins can affect a wide range of biological processes such as cell
cycle, stress resistance, development, reproduction, and ageing.In this
study we investigated the effect of FOXO3 in the silencing of LKB1
expression in head and neck cancer. For this purpose LKB1 and FOXO3
expression levels and methylation status of the LKB1 promoter were
analyzed by real-time PCR and methylation-specific PCR in LKB1-mutant and
wild-type HNC tumor samples and matched normal tissue from 49 patients
with HNSCC. The average decrease in FOXO3 mRNA expression in the tumor
samples was 40%. Downregulation of LKB1 mRNA expression was also observed
in a similar fraction of the patients (44%). However, the association was
not statistically significant. We observed partial promoter methylation
only in 3 of the tumor samples. LKB1 mRNA was downregulated particularly
in grade IV tumors indicating that alterations of LKB1 take place during
the later stages of HNC carcinogenesis. Our results suggest that LKB1
downregulation is not the result of promoter methylation or modulation by
FOXO3. Therefore, the exact understanding of the regulation of LKB1 and
FOXO3 in HNSCC requires further studies.

