Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Ikaros tumor suppressor regulates transcription of genes
involved in cell signaling in human leukemia.


The IKZF1 gene encodes Ikaros, a DNA binding zinc finger protein that is
essential for normal hematopoietic differentiation. Deletion or mutation
of Ikaros has been associated with a both T and B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), as well as acute and chronic myelogenous
leukemias (AML and CML). Deletion of an Ikaros allele has also been
identified as a poor prognostic marker in childhood B-ALL. Thus, Ikaros
is established as a major tumor suppressor in hematopoietic malignancies.
The Ikaros protein can activate or repress target gene expression via
chromatin remodeling. The specific mechanisms by which Ikaros exerts its
tumor suppressor activities are unknown. We have defined genome-wide
occupancy of Ikaros in human leukemia using ChIP-SEQ and identified a
large number of potential Ikaros target genes. The quantitative Chromatin
Immunoprecipitation assay (qChIP) was used to identify genes whose
expression is directly regulated by Ikaros. Using this technique we show
that Ikaros binds to the promoter region of a gene that is part of a
pro-oncogenic pathway, as well as a tumor suppressor gene. Both genes are
essential components of cell signaling pathways. The promoter regions of
the two novel target genes were cloned into luciferase reporter
constructs and used to transiently transfect HEK 293T cells that were
co-transfected with Ikaros or empty vector (as a control). Luciferase
reporter assays demonstrate that Ikaros suppresses transcription of the
gene that is involved in oncogenic transformation, while it positively
regulates transcription of the tumor suppressor gene. In summary, we have
identified two novel Ikaros target genes. Our results suggest that Ikaros
exerts its tumor suppression function by regulating the expression of
target genes involved in pro-oncogenic and tumor suppressor signaling in
leukemia cells. These data identify mechanisms of the tumor suppressor
activity of Ikaros in leukemia.

