Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Antioxidant heme oxygenase 1 promotes proliferation and
survival of Flt3-ITD-positive AML.


Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) afflicts 12,330 new patients per year in
the United States. Regrettably, only 25% of patients will survive five
years past diagnosis. The most common mutation in AML is internal tandem
duplication (ITD) of the juxtamembrane domain of the fms-like tyrosine
kinase receptor-3 (Flt3), which renders it constitutively active.
Flt3-ITD regulates proliferation and survival, and also increases the
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which act as secondary
messengers for oncogenic signaling. ROS can cause the induction of a
number of molecules, however, one protein, heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1), a
well-known antioxidant, has been connected to both proliferation and drug
resistance of various cancers. We hypothesized that Flt3-ITD-dependent
signaling and ROS production increase constitutive expression of HO-1,
leading to the activation of antioxidant and anti-apoptotic pathways,
resulting in proliferation and drug resistance in AML. Western blotting
revealed a two-fold increase of HO-1 protein in Flt3-ITD+ cells as
compared to Flt3-WT; a four-fold up-regulation of HO-1 mRNA was noted by
quantitative real-time PCR suggesting transcriptional control. To
determine if this up-regulation was due to the altered redox status of
Flt3-ITD+ cells, the flavonoid inhibitor diphenylene iodonium (DPI) was
used. Consistent with published results implicating the flavonoid protein
complex NADPH oxidase (NOX) as a primary source of ROS in these cells,
DPI reduced ROS levels as early as two hours post treatment. This ROS
reduction coincided with a decrease in HO-1 protein, suggesting that NOX
may be involved in HO-1 up-regulation. Our previous results in chronic
myeloid leukemia suggest that a Rac1-dependent isoform of NOX controls
HO-1 expression, however, in Flt3-ITD+AML, dominant negative inhibition
of Rac1 was insufficient to alter HO-1 expression suggesting that either
a Rac1-independent NOX isoform is involved or that another flavonoid
protein modulates HO-1 expression in this leukemia subtype.
Interestingly, when HO-1 expression was knocked down using RNAi, there
was a 50% reduction of proliferation and 40% reduction of viability as
measured by trypan blue exclusion in Flt3-ITD+AML cells. These data
suggest that the function of HO-1 up-regulation is to promote survival
and proliferation of Flt3-ITD+AML. Additionally, we have created a model
of acquired resistance to lestaurtinib, a Flt3 kinase inhibitor, by
treating with increasing doses of the drug over time. Preliminary results
suggest that HO-1 is further elevated in these resistant cells as
compared to parental Flt3-ITD cells; thus, we will use this model to test
the functional role of HO-1 in acquired resistance. Together, our data
suggest that HO-1 is a growth and survival factor in Flt3-ITD+AML;
therefore, targeting HO-1 or the mechanisms that control its expression
may prove therapeutically valuable.

