Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vav3 enhances androgen receptor splice variant activity and is
critical for castration resistant prostate cancer growth and survival.


Advanced or metastatic prostate cancer is treated by androgen
deprivation; however, patients inevitably relapse with castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) that grows independently of androgen.
However, CRPC remains dependent on androgen receptor (AR) signaling,
which includes constitutive, ligandindependent action of naturally
occurring AR splice variants. For example, the AR splice variant AR3
(also termed ARV7) is expressed in CRPC and is linked to poor prognosis.
Vav3, a Rho GTPase guanine nucleotide exchange factor, is an AR
coactivator that is upregulated in human prostate cancer as compared to
benign tissue as well as in preclinical models of CRPC. Vav3 confers
castrationresistant growth to androgendependent human prostate cancer
cells and increased expression has been linked to increased clinical
biochemical relapse. Despite the importance of AR coactivators in
promoting CRPC, the potential role of these regulatory proteins in
modulating AR splice variant activity is unknown. We examined the
contributions of Vav3 to AR activity in two CRPC cell lines that
naturally express relatively high levels of Vav3 and AR3. Vav3 or AR3
knockdown greatly attenuated cell proliferation, soft agar growth and
ligandindependent AR activity. Vav3 potently enhanced the transcriptional
activity of AR3 and another clinically relevant AR splice variant
ARv567es. Furthermore, Vav3 enhanced AR splice variant activity through a
distinctly different mechanism than Vav3 coactivation of full length AR.
Vav3 knockdown resulted in lowered nuclear AR3 levels while total AR3
protein and mRNA levels remained static. Conversely, overexpression of
Vav3 resulted in increased nuclear AR3. Coimmunoprecipitation revealed
that AR3 and Vav3 interact. These novel data demonstrating physical and
functional interactions between Vav3, a unique AR coactivator, and an AR
splice variant provide insights into the mechanisms by which Vav3
exploits and enhances AR signaling in the progression to CRPC.

