Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the E2F2 and ID3 transcription factors in colon tumour
growth and cellular dissemination.


In order to identify molecular markers prognostic of initiation and/or
progression of human colon cancer (CC), a genome-wide analysis was
performed and highlighted a micro-deletion at the 1p36.11-12 region in
23% (n = 115) and 47% (n = 59) of adenomas and carcinomas, respectively.
This region contains the E2F2 and ID3 genes, which are known to regulate
the cell cycle and cell differentiation, respectively. In addition, E2F2,
is described as either oncogenic or tumour suppressor, depending on the
tissue or cell type. The micro-deletion incidence depends on tumour
stages (60% in early stages whereas only 34% in metastatic stages and
further clinical analysis showed that patients with deleted E2F2 had a
lower rate of recurrence and a better overall survival. Also, RT-QPCR
evidenced that E2F2 and ID3 transcript expression levels decrease in
human CC. Therefore, to assess the role of the deletion in tumour growth
and metastatic activity, we evaluated the functional consequences of the
loss of these genes both in vitro in human colon cancer cells that were
transiently depleted of either E2F2 or ID3 and in vivo in immunodeficient
mice.Both gene transcript expressions were down-regulated by transient
siRNA transfection in the human epithelial CC cell line Caco-2/TC7.
Consequences were evaluated by immunocytochemistry for proteins involved
in the cell architecture and in cell-cell and cell-matrix junctions, and
at the expression level by RT-QPCR and Western Blot analyses. Functional
analyses were assessed for the migratory potential with the wound healing
assay, for proliferation with the MTS assay, and for adhesion on
substrates such as laminin, collagen I and fibronectin. The in vivo
metastastic potential was evaluated with E2F2- and ID3-silenced cells
that were intra-splenically implanted.E2F2 down-regulation and that of
ID3 at a lesser extend, reduced proliferation and induced severe
morphological modifications, associated with relocalization of structural
members of adherens junctions (beta-catenin, APC), tight junctions
(Claudin-1, ZO-1) and cytoskeleton (F-Actin, Cytokeratin-19). The
integrins alpha5, alphaV, alpha2 and beta-1, were downregulated and the
adhesion properties on laminin-111, but not on collagen I or fibronectin
were lost. Moreover, inhibition of E2F2 and ID3 expression leads to a
decreased migratory potential. The intra-spenic injection in
immunodeficient mice of HT29 cells stably transduced to underexpress E2F2
and ID3, leads to lower / slower development of liver metastases.In
conclusion, for a clinical aspect, the micro-deletion of the 1p36.11-12
region is a good prognosis for the event-free survival, and from a more
basic and functional aspect, the loss of E2F2 and ID3 expression
regulates tumor growth and dissemination through functions involving
migration and adhesion.

