Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of 9-cis-retinoic acid on proliferation, differentiation,
and apoptosis of LNCaP prostate cancer cells.


Prostate cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancer types in US
men. Consequently, there is an urgent need to identify preventive agents
which can inhibit the prostate carcinogenesis process. 9-cis-retinoic
acid (9cRA) is a naturally occurring retinol metabolite and pan retinoic
acid receptor agonist which is of interest as a potential chemopreventive
compound. Previous studies have demonstrated preventive activity against
breast and prostate cancer in animal models and inhibitory effects on
growth of cancer cell lines of this retinoid, but the mechanisms by which
9cRA can influence growth of prostate cancer cells remains unclear. In
this study we used LNCaP cells to investigate the effects of 9cRA on cell
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. Cells were cultured with
and without 1010 or 109M dihydrotestosterone and treated with 9cRA at
non-cytotoxic concentrations ranging from 108M to 105M. After 3 and 6
days of incubation, we determined cell growth, 3H-thymidine
incorporation, and secretion of prostate specific antigen (PSA), and
performed cell cycle analysis and apoptosis assays. Cell growth assessed
by cell counts was inhibited on 3 and 6 days in a dose-dependent manner
by treatment with 9cRA, and 3H-thymidine incorporation was reduced,
reaching a maximum at day 3. PSA secretion was increased in a
dose-related fashion after 6 days of treatment, suggesting a
differentiation effect. Treatment with 9cRA increased the number of
apoptotic cells observed microscopically by staining with H33258 by 3 to
7-fold peaking on day 3. When apoptosis was measured using flow cytometry
and staining with PI and FITC-Annexin V, a maximal increase of apoptotic
cells was observed on day 6. A cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry
revealed up to a 70% increase in cells in S-phase and a decrease in cells
in G0/G1 after 3 and 6 days of 9cRA treatment. The results suggest that
9cRA acts on LNCaP cells by interfering with the completion of S-phase or
S to G2-phase transition and inducing cellular differentiation and
apoptosis. These observations together indicate that the growth
inhibitory mechanism of 9cRA on LNCaP prostate human cancer cells is a
combination of the ability of 9cRA to inhibit cell proliferation, promote
differentiation, and induce apoptosis. Although these findings suggest
that 9cRA may be an attractive treatment for option for the prevention of
prostate cancer development, this is limited by its human toxicity. A
search for 9cRA analogues or other selective retinoid acid receptor
modulators with similar anti-prostate cancer activity is thus warranted.

