Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulated microRNAs in salivary rinse from patients with head
and neck squamous cells carcinoma.


Head and neck Squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a disease with high
incidence and mortality, and the sixth most common cancer worldwide. The
diagnosis is usually made late, after the appearance of visible lesions.
The discovery of altered epigenetic profiles in cancer awakened to new
paradigms by which molecular mechanisms contribute significantly to
carcinogenesis. To date, approximately 1000 miRNAs have been described
and it is estimated that they may influence the expression of up to one
third of human genes. The deregulation of the expression of miRNAs can
directly influence cell proliferation and differentiation and therefore,
they can act as oncogenes or tumor suppressors. The aim of this study is
to compare the miRNAs expression profiles in saliva samples from patients
with HNSCC and normal controls in order to identify potential diagnostic
markers for this cancer. Comprehensive miRNA profile was done in 4
salivary rinse samples from HNSCC patients and 3 samples from healthy
donors using a Megaplex TaqMan Low Density miRNA Arrays (TLDA) to assess
the expression status of miRNAs. 101 miRNAs differentialy expressed were
identified. From that, 21 were upregulated in the HNSCC samples while 80
were downregulated in these samples. After a deep revision of the
information available from them, we selected candidates to be validated
in an independent group of 100 salivary rinses collected from HNSCC
patient at diagnoses. A preliminary result indicated that four selected
miRNA were down regulated with 90-91% of specificity and 53-64% of
sensibility. Our hypothesis is based on the fact that the down regulation
confirmed in our results may be related to the potential of tumor
suppressor activity of these miRNAs; Besides the validation obtained by
our tests, important studies in the literature show agreement with this
hypothesis and may add relevant data in developing this study.Supported
by Fapesp (Grant 2011/15122-9).

