Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Folate metabolism defect induce invasion and Gefinitib resistance
in lung cancer.


Folate, act as an one-carbon units donator or acceptor, participate in
numerous biochemical reactions. Because mammals can't synthesize folic
acid de novo, obtain from diet or from microbial breakdown in the gut is
essential. Pathological study revealed that tumor cell expressing high
level of folate receptors (FR) comparing to normal tissue. Therefore,
exploring the application of folate-related physiological properties as
an anticancer strategy arose worldwide interesting. Previous studies in
lung cancer revealed a positive correlation in folate receptors
overexpression and efficacy of antifolate chemotherapy. Here we describe
prolong Alimta treatment would prompt lung cancer cell's malignancy.
Cultivation of lung cancer CL1-0, CL1-5, and A549 in low dose Alimta
(15-30 ng/mL) for 2-3 weeks would dramatically cause cell morphology
change . Compare to control cell with round and flat epithelial like
morphology, low dose Alimta treated cells showed mesenchymal to amoeboid
phenotype. Further examination of epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) markers showed the expression level of N-cadherin, matrix
metalloproteinase 1 (MMP-1) and matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2)
increased. Associated with morphology and EMT marker changed, cell
migration and invasion ability of those Alimta treated cells were 3 folds
higher than control cells. Besides, evaluated drug sensitivity by
sulforhodamine B (SRB) method showed that those alimta treated cells were
more resistant to gefitinib. These prominent events provoked our
interesting to investigate the mechanism involving in the oncogenic
effect induced by low dose Alimta treatment. While examing EMT-related
transcription factors, both Slug and SOX-9 expression increased
significantly. These evidences indicated that the folate metabolism
defect induced metastasis could through the SOX-9 and Slug
mechanism.Citation Format: Chun-Te Ho, Tsan-Zon Liu, Yu-Ting Chou,
Shih-Hsin Hsiao, Jun-Jen Liu. Folate metabolism defect induce invasion
and Gefinitib resistance in lung cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of
the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 4970. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4970

