Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of tumor-infiltrating macrophages in humanized
mouse model of prostate cancer.


Macrophage infiltration is observed in many types of human and mouse
malignant tumors. Though some studies reported anti-tumor activity of
tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) the majority of reports revealed
contribution of TAM to tumor growth, invasion and metastasis. The
phenotype and functions of TAM in prostate cancer are not well known.
However, their abundance in the tumor suggests an important role in the
course of malignant progression. In our novel humanized mouse model of
prostate cancer, the expression of human HLA-DR*1501 (DR2b) transgene
drastically impairs immune response to prostate tumor and induces
excessive accumulation of TAM, which predominate in tumor tissue. In
parallel, substantial accumulation of CD4+CD25+FOXP3+ T cells is observed
in the tumor mass. The initial gene expression profiling of TAM in DR2b+
mice revealed their mixed M1/M2 phenotype since these cells expressed
typical M2-associated genes TGF, IL10, arginase I, stabilin-1 and
M1-associated genes IL1, TNF and IL6. Moreover, TAM strongly expressed
chemokines CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, CCL5 and CXCL10, which are capable to
recruit myeloid, NK and T cells as well as immune checkpoint receptor
PDL-1. Interestingly, compared to DR2b- mice, TAM from DR2b+ animals had
reduced expression of important NK and T cell survival factor IL15.
Immunohistochemical investigation of the tumor tissue revealed that CD68+
TAM co-localized with T cells on the periphery of the tumor and expressed
M2-associated marker stabilin-1. Moreover, T cells were found exclusively
on the tumor periphery, whereas TAM were observed inside tumor mass.
Altogether, present data suggest that TAM in DR2b model of prostate
cancer have potential to recruit various immune cells to the tumor mass.
However, elevated expression of immunosuppressive factors TGF, IL10,
arginase I, PDL-1 and close association between TAM and T cells on tumor
periphery may impair T cell activation and induce generation of Tregs.

