Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor- coordinates the unfolded protein
response,autophagy, and reactive oxygen species generation to regulate
breast cancer survival.


Of the almost 240,000 new breast cancers diagnosed in 2011 within the
USA, approximately 70% of these cases express the estrogen receptor-
(ER). ER targeted therapies such as tamoxifen (TAM) or faslodex (ICI) are
often used to treat this breast cancer subtype. However, the curative
potential of these interventions is frequently limited in patients due to
resistance. Understanding how antiestrogen resistance occurs could lead
to improved approaches to eradicate ER+ breast cancers. Increased
unfolded protein response (UPR, an endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway)
or autophagy (a self eating process used to clear dysfunctional protein
or organelles) was previously shown to promote antiestrogen resistance in
ER+ breast cancer. Using the antiestrogen sensitive MCF7-LCC1 (LCC1) and
resistant MCF7-LCC9 (LCC9) cell lines, we determined the effect of
antiestrogens and ER on autophagy and UPR signaling. Suprisingly,
ablation of ER through RNAi potentiated LCC1 to antiestrogen-mediated
cell death and resensitized LCC9 cells to endocrine therapy. While ICI
stimulated both autophagy and UPR signaling, RNAi knockdown of ER in LCC1
and LCC9 cells inhibited ICI-mediated UPR signaling and concurrently
stimulated autophagy. Furthermore, we showed that ER knockdown stimulated
ROS production and potentiated the cell death response to antiestrogen
therapy. ER knockdown, but not ICI treatment, reduced nuclear Nrf2 (a
UPR-induced antioxidant signaling protein) and increased cytosolic KEAP1
(an inhibitor of Nrf2), which may lead to the observed increase in ROS
production. Autophagy inhibition through ATG7 silencing increases cell
death and apoptosis in LCC1 ER knockdown cells, showing that autophagy
induction by antiestrogens is prosurvival in this context. These data
suggests that UPR and autophagy stimulated by antiestrogen therapy
results from two different mechanisms of ER regulation. We show that
antiestrogens promote the accumulation of ER in the cytosol that is
associated with increased UPR signaling, while the inhibition of ER
promotes prosurvival autophagy. The inherent stimulation of resistance
mechanism signaling through antiestrogen treatment suggests that
combining autophagy or UPR inhibitors with anti-estrogens may greatly
reduce the development of acquired antiestrogen resistance in breast
cancer.

