Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I study of safety and pharmacokinetics of fruquintinib, a
selective inhibitor of VEGF receptor-1, -2, and -3 tyrosine kinases in
patients with advanced solid tumors.


Background: Fruquintinib is a novel oral small molecule compound
discovered and developed by Hutchison MediPharma that selectively
inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFR) 1, 2, and 3
and has demonstrated potent inhibitory effects on multiple human tumor
xenografts. This first-in-human study was conducted to assess the maximum
tolerated dose (MTD) and dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs), safety and
tolerability, pharmacokinetics (PK), and preliminary anti-tumor activity
of fruquintinib.Methods: This phase I study used a 3+3 design for
dose-escalation of fruquintinib given once daily continuously (QD) or 3
weeks on and 1 week off in 28-day cycles in patients with solid tumors
who had failed standard therapies. Endpoints included safety, PK, and
preliminary efficacy measurements.Results: Forty patients were enrolled
in 5 dose cohorts of 1-6 mg QD and 2 dose cohorts of 5mg and 6mg 3 wks
on/1 wk off, with age 18-70 yr, 40% male, ECOG 0-1 and heavily pretreated
cancers. Tumor types included CRC (12), breast (8), NSCLC (7), thyroid
(3), gastric (2) and others (8). The most common adverse events (all
grades) were hand-foot syndrome (HFS), elevation of serum thyroid
stimulating hormone (TSH), stomatitis, hypertension, white blood cell
decreased, proteinuria, hoarseness, fatigue, and diarrhea, each observed
in 30% pts. Grade 3/4 AEs were relatively uncommon, with HFS and
hypertension the only AEs occurred in 10% pts (15% for each). Only 6 pts
terminated study treatment due to related AEs. 6 DLTs were observed: 2
grade 3 HFS both at 6mg, 1 grade 3 HFS and 1 grade 3 thrombocytopenia
with subcutaneous bleeding at 5mg, 1 grade 3 hyperbilirubinemia at 4mg
and 1 grade 3 fatigue at 6mg 3wks on/1 wk off. MTD was determined as 4mg
QD or 6mg 3wks on/1 wk off. PK analysis showed good and rapid absorption
followed by slow terminal elimination with a half-life of approximately
42 hours which was consistent across all dose groups. Both Cmax and AUC
exhibited good dose proportionality over the studied dose range with low
inter-patient variability following single and multiple doses. 34
patients were evaluable for tumor response, including 13 with confirmed
partial response (PRs: 4 NSCLC, 3 CRC, 2 breast, 1 gastric, 1 pNET, 1
glandula submandibularis and 1 nasopharyngeal); and 15 with stable
disease (SDs: 14 were 3-9 months). Conclusions: Fruquintinib was well
tolerated at doses up to 4mg QD or 6mg 3wks on/1 wk off, and demonstrated
excellent pharmacokinetic properties. Impressive clinical activity
including durable PR and SD was observed in majority of patients with
various heavily pre-treated advanced cancers. These promising results
warrant further clinical development of fruquintinib.

