Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-211 expression inhibits MMP-9-induced phenotype and tumor
growth in lung adenocarcinoma cancer stem cells in vitro and in vivo.


MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs that post-transcriptionally modulate
gene expression by degrading or repressing the translation of target
messenger RNAs (mRNA). MicroRNAs play fundamental roles in diverse
biological and pathological processes, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis, and carcinogenesis. MicroRNAs have been
revealed to be involved in various stages of cancer development, showing
that abnormal miRNA expression plays a critical role in modulating
expression of known oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes during cancer
progression. In the present study, we observed that miR-211 expression
was significantly lower in human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) than
their matched normal tissue samples, and we elucidated the tumor
suppressor role of miR-211 using in vitro and in vivo models. We
demonstrated that the expression of precursor of miR-211 (p-mir-211)
inhibits radiation-induced invasive nature and tumor progression of
NSCLC-initiating cells (NSCLC-ICs) in vitro and in vivo. Overexpression
of miR-211 in NSCLC-ICs inhibited radiation-induced MMP-9 expression and
invasive nature. Overexpression of miR-211 also inhibited epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT), which caused a decline in the mesenchymal
markers vimentin, beta catenin and TGF-beta signaling molecules while
increasing the epithelial marker, E-cadherin. Further, miR-211-treatment
inhibited pre-established tumors in orthotopic mouse models. In addition,
MMP-9 immunoreactivity decreased in tumor sections from mice that
received miR-211 treatment as compared to tumor sections from mice that
received control treatments. Finally, the apoptotic population was
significantly increased in tumor sections from mice that received miR-211
treatment. Our data suggest miR-211 as a novel approach for the
inhibition of radiation-induced invasion and tumor growth in NSCLC-ICs.

