Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of new N-Arylbenzamides as STAT3 dimerization
inhibitors.


The association of aberrant STAT3 activation with many types of human
malignancies and solid tumors makes STAT3 an attractive molecular target
for the development of novel cancer therapeutics. STAT3 dimerization via
two reciprocal phosphotyrosine (pTyr)-Src-homology 2 (SH2) interaction is
required for its binding to specific DNA-response elements in the
promoters of target genes. This dimerization process offers a potentially
selective way to directly target STAT3. Nevertheless the design of small
molecules capable of disrupting protein-protein interactions remains a
significant challenge to medicinal chemistry. We describe the development
of a new class of small molecule capable of disrupting the STAT3:STAT3
protein-protein interaction. We identified the STAT3 inhibitor S3I-201
(NSC-74859) from the NCI chemical collection by using structure-based
virtual screening with a model based on the X-ray crystal structure of
the STAT3 homodimer. We developed a series of phosphonic and salicylic
acids based on the structure of S3I-201 incorporating an N-arylbenzamide
scaffold. The series of phosphonic and salicylic acids with a shorter
amide linker lacking the O-tosyl group has improved STAT3 inhibitory
activity [as measured by a competitive, fluorescence-polarization
(FP)-based assay]. The equivalent in vitro potencies observed by the
replacement of phosphonic acid moiety of with 5-amino-2-hydroxybenzoic
acid group validates 5-amino-2-hydroxybenzoic acid as a phosphotyrosine
mimic in this series. The binding mode of selected compounds, as
predicted by molecular modeling, will be discussed. Our docking studies
indicated that the phosphonic and salicylic acid groups interact in the
pTyr-705 binding site in a broadly similar manner, while the other
substituents occupy the STAT3 pY+1 and pY-X hydrophobic pockets. One of
the most potent compounds in vitro (in the FP assay) inhibits STAT3
dimerization in intact cells and suppresses malignant transformation in
human cancer cells that depend on STAT3. The in vitro and cell based
potency of the N-arylbenzamides warrants further development of this
scaffold as STAT3 inhibitors.

