Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of thymidylate synthase in genomic instability and
tumorigenesis.


Thymidylate synthase (TS) is a well-established chemotherapy target
frequently overexpressed in cancer. Multiple clinical studies
demonstrated that high levels of TS correlate with the disease stage and
resistance to fluoropyrimidine chemotherapy. Previous studies from our
laboratory reassessed the paradigm of TS as a passive proliferation
biomarker by providing evidence towards its tumor-promoting capabilities
(Cancer Cell 2004; Oncogene 2007). We demonstrated that ectopic TS
overexpression combined with loss of tumor suppressor genes significantly
enhances the rate and severity of tumorigenesis; however the underlying
mechanism of this process remained unclear. TS fuels DNA replication and
repair through dTMP and folate biosynthesis. We hypothesized that TS
overexpression could become a strong tumor-promoting force by inducing
nucleotide imbalance that results in DNA misincorporation and damage. In
this study, we analyze effects of TS overexpression in context of
aberrant DNA repair and cell cycle misregulation by using Ink4/Arf/-
genetically engineered mouse model. We show that ectopic TS
overexpression markedly enhances tumorigenesis in hTS/Ink4/Arf/- mice
compared to Ink4/Arf/- control resulting in more aggressive tumors. HPLC
analyses of mouse tumor-derived cell lines confirmed significant
nucleotide imbalance and increase in dTMP, dTDP and dTTP levels in
hTS/Ink4/Arf/- mice compared to control. Analysis of chromosomal changes
by spectral karyotyping demonstrated 4 to 5 fold increase in chromosomal
aberrations and aneuploidy in hTS positive tumor cell lines. Chromosomal
translocations were only found in hTS/Ink4/Arf/- subtype, indicative of
strand-break damage. We assessed extent of damage by Comet assay and
yH2AX phosphorylation in mouse tumor cell lines and found increased DNA
fragmentation and high yH2AX signal in hTS/Ink4/Arf/- cells as opposed to
Ink4/Arf/- control. In summary, these studies demonstrate a novel
capacity for TS to promote nucleotide imbalance, increase DNA
susceptibility to damage and chromosomal aberrations, suggesting a new
model where TS overexpression plays a role in the development of genomic
instability and tumorigenesis.

