Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical development and translational research on a novel
antibody-drug conjugate that targets 5T4, an oncofetal antigen expressed
on tumor-initiating cells.


Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) represent a promising therapeutic
modality for the clinical management of cancer. We sought to develop a
novel ADC that targets 5T4 (TPBG), an oncofetal antigen expressed on
tumor-initiating cells (TICs), which comprise the most aggressive cell
population in the tumor. We optimized an anti-5T4 ADC (A1mcMMAF) by
sulfydryl-based conjugation of the humanized A1 antibody to the tubulin
inhibitor monomethylauristatin F (MMAF) via a maleimidocaproyl linker.
A1mcMMAF exhibited potent in vivo anti-tumor activity in a variety of
tumor models and induced long-term regressions for up to 100 days after
the last dose. Strikingly, animals showed pathological complete response
in each model. In a non-small cell lung cancer patient-derived xenograft
in which 5T4 is preferentially expressed on the less differentiated tumor
cells, A1mcMMAF treatment resulted in sustained tumor regressions and
reduced TIC frequency. These results highlight the potential of ADCs that
target the most aggressive cell populations within tumors. An optimized
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) model of tumor growth and drug
kill was used to characterize the ADC concentration response relationship
in mouse. A holistic secondary parameter, tumor static concentration
(TSC), was derived from model parameters to quantify efficacy and support
early clinical trial design. Tumor static concentrations [80% confidence]
of A1mcMMAF ranged from 1.1[0.9 -1.4] g/ml to 11.6 [9.6 - 14.1] g/ml
across tumor models. For comparison, in the clinic T-DM1 has an average
concentration of 14 g/ml at an efficacious dose of 3.6 mg/kg Q3wk (HER+
breast cancer) (Krop et al. 2010) and Brentuximab-vedotin has an average
concentration of 3.65 g/ml at an efficacious dose of 1.8 mg/kg Q 3wk (HL/
ALCL) (Younes et al. 2010). Taken together, the preclinical data
established a promising therapeutic index that supports clinical testing
of A1mcMMAF. Expression analysis profiling using clinical and preclinical
data indicated that lung and breast tumors demonstrated differentially
high expression of 5T4 in comparison to normal tissues. An IHC assay
developed in house confirmed the hypothesis that a broad range of 5T4
expression was measurable in NSCLC patient tumor samples. Additionally,
we developed an assay that measures 5T4 expression on circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) and used this assay to measure and characterize a broad
range of 5T4 expression in CTCs obtained from the blood of NSCLC
patients. We intend to deploy these co-developed immunoassays to guide
A1mcMMAF clinical development.

