Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunoscore of CD8/CD45RO in pre-operative biopsy specimens
predicts TNM-stage in primary colorectal cancer.


Background:Colonoscopy and biopsy are the standard procedure for primary
diagnosis of colorectal cancer (CRC), but prognostic biomarkers based on
biopsy material are still missing. The tumor microenvironment has been
shown to play a major role in the pathogenesis of CRC. Therefore, we
hypothesized that an immunoscore of CD8+ T-effector and CD45RO+ memory
T-cell infiltrates in pre-operative biopsy specimens could have an impact
on the pre-operative management of CRC patients by predicting
TNM-stage.Methods:Intraepithelial (i) and stromal (s)CD8+ and CD45RO+
T-cells were visualized in biopsy specimens of 134 well characterized CRC
patients by immunohistochemistry and quantified in 5 high-power-fields
each of the highest density of immune cell infiltration. Cut-off scores
for prediction of pN, pM and pT in the matched resection specimen were
established using Classification and Regression Tree (CART) analysis.
Infiltration of CD8+ and CD45RO+ T-cells in each compartment was assessed
for prediction of TNM stage, lymphovascular invasion and tumor
grade.Results:High numbers of infiltrating sCD45RO T-cells in biopsy
material were associated with earlier T-stage in the matched resection
specimen(pBackground:Colonoscopy and biopsy are the standard procedure
for primary diagnosis of colorectal cancer (CRC), but prognostic
biomarkers based on biopsy material are still missing. The tumor
microenvironment has been shown to play a major role in the pathogenesis
of CRC. Therefore, we hypothesized that an immunoscore of CD8+ T-effector
and CD45RO+ memory T-cell infiltrates in pre-operative biopsy specimens
could have an impact on the pre-operative management of CRC patients by
predicting TNM-stage.Methods:Intraepithelial (i) and stromal (s)CD8+ and
CD45RO+ T-cells were visualized in biopsy specimens of 134 well
characterized CRC patients by immunohistochemistry and quantified in 5
high-power-fields each of the highest density of immune cell
infiltration. Cut-off scores for prediction of pN, pM and pT in the
matched resection specimen were established using Classification and
Regression Tree (CART) analysis. Infiltration of CD8+ and CD45RO+ T-cells
in each compartment was assessed for prediction of TNM stage,
lymphovascular invasion and tumor grade.Results:High numbers of
infiltrating sCD45RO T-cells in biopsy material were associated with
earlier T-stage in the matched resection specimen(p<0.0001) as well as
with earlier tumor grade (p=0.0223) and absence of distant metastasis
(p=0.0177; specificity=62.5% and positive predictive value (PPV)=93%).
High total (t) numbers of infiltrating CD8-T cells in biopsy material
were strongly predictive of absence of nodal metastasis (p=0.0182) as
well as absence of lymphatic invasion (p=0.0201). Combined analysis of
tCD8 and tCD45RO with pN led to 100% specificity and PPV. No association
of CD8+ and CD45R0+ T-cell-infiltration with vascular invasion was
observed. In contrast, absence of both CD8+ and CD45RO+ T-cells in
pre-operative biopsies predicted frequent nodal and distant metastatic
spread, advanced T-stage and lymphovascular invasion in the matched
resection specimen.Conclusion:Total CD8 counts and sCD45RO in
pre-operative biopsy specimens allows prediction of essential clinical
characteristics of primary CRC in the matched resection specimen
including full TNM-stage and lymphatic invasion. Analysis of total CD8+
and sCD45RO+ in pre-operative biopsies may thereby provide a decisive
indicator for risk stratification of CRC patients in the preoperative
setting.

