Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Akt2 regulates mitophagy in breast cancer cell lines.


The PI3K-Akt signaling pathway is involved in the regulation of cell
growth, proliferation, metabolism, and death by apoptosis and autophagy.
There are three isoforms of Akt (1, 2, and 3) that share over 70%
sequence identity and two activating phosphorylation sites. The
activation of Akt by insulin or insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1)
results in rapid phosphorylation of two amino acid residues that are
conserved among all three Akt isoforms. Phosphorylation of threonine 308
(Thr308) leads to roughly 100-fold higher activity, while phosphorylation
at serine 474 (Ser474) potentiates the activity another 10-fold. The two
phosphorylation events are independent of one another and while
phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1) is accepted as the activating
kinase for Thr308, the kinase that phosphorylates Ser474 has only
recently been confirmed as the target of rapamycin in complex with Rictor
and Sin1 (mTORC2).Among the three Akt isoforms, Akt2 is a particularly
promising breast cancer therapeutic target, as its ablation most
profoundly affects the long-term cell survival rate. Ablation of Akt2
induces autophagy, which increases cancer cell survival and resistance in
response to chemotherapy. In this work, we examined the possibility that
Akt2 may specifically regulate autophagic destruction of the mitochondria
(mitophagy) via the mitophagy activator PINK1. This point of regulation
may represent an attractive therapeutic target to decrease autophagy and
increase cancer cell death. Insulin signaling promotes the
phosphorylation of Akt by mTORC2 via the PTEN-induced putative kinase
(PINK1). PINK1 is a serine/threonine mitochondrial kinase that has been
linked to familial Parkinson's disease. PINK1 was originally classified
in a screen for transcriptional upregulation of genes upon overexpression
of PTEN in two endometrial cancer cell lines, but in the same publication
high levels of PINK1 mRNA were present in ovarian tumours that were
lacking PTEN. No further investigations into this relationship have been
described and it remains unclear as to the relationship between PTEN,
Akt, and PINK1, and how regulation occurs at the transcriptional or
posttranslational level. Normally PINK1 regulates mitochondrial quality
control by targeting defective mitochondria for autophagy (referred to as
mitophagy) via the ubiquitin E3 ligase Parkin.We have identified an
interaction between Akt2 and the major regulator of mitophagy (PINK1). We
suggest that Akt2 normally inhibits mitophagy, and that inhibition of Akt
leads to selective autophagic destruction of the mitochondria. We next
wanted to determine whether Akt2 activation is required for its
mitochondrial localization. Mitochondria isolations were performed using
magnetic labelling of the mitochondria with Anti-TOM22 microbeads. The
results suggest that the key activating residues of Akt2 may not be
required for mitochondrial localization.

