Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth promoting effects of the Toll-like receptor 3 in Head and
Neck carcinoma cells .


We have previously reported an intense expression of the Toll-Like
receptor 3 (TLR3) in malignant cells from EBV-associated nasopharyngeal
carcinomas and other Head and Neck carcinomas (Vrillaud et al.,
Infectious Agents and Cancer, in press). TLR3 is involved in innate
immune response triggered by the binding of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)
of viral origin. Its consistent expression by malignant epithelial cells
suggests that it has some functions in cell proliferation and survival.
The aim of this work was to investigate these functions using 3 cell
lines derived from Head and Neck squamous cell carcinomas : CNE1
(EBV-negative nasopharyngeal carcinoma), SQ20B (laryngeal carcinoma) and
Fadu (hypopharyngeal carcinoma). Cell clones conditionally knocked-down
for TLR-3 were derived from each parental cell line by stable
transfection of a vector encoding a microRNA targeting TLR3 transcripts
and whose expression is regulated by tetracycline. Stimulation of TLR3 in
parental cells was done using small concentrations (250 ng/ml) of the
synthetic TLR3-ligand poly(A/U). Modest but consistent growth enhancing
effects were observed in deficient culture conditions marked by low
concentrations of foetal calf serum and/or low amounts of nutrients
and/or hypoxia. The influence of TLR3 on growth characteristics was
investigated in more details using the CNE1 cells, both parental and
conditionally knocked-down for TLR3. We found that under low-serum
culture conditions, cell doubling time was shortened when TLR3 was
stimulated by poly(A:U). On the opposite, knocking-down TLR3 resulted in
a slower growth. To better understand the mechanism underlying the growth
promoting effects of TLR3 in CNE1 cells, we assessed the metabolic
changes induced by poly(A/U) stimulation or TLR3 silencing . Using the
Seahorse Bioscience XF Glycolysis Stress Test Kit we found that the
glycolytic capacity of CNE1 was significantly increased under stimulation
by poly(A:U), whereas it was decreased under silencing of TLR3. Finally,
we investigated the impact of TLR3-stimulation on the expression of
HIF1-alpha which is a key transcription factor for cell adaptation to
hypoxia and a major regulator of glucid metabolism. Western blot analysis
showed that HIF1-alpha could be detected even in normoxic conditions when
CNE1 cells were treated by poly(A:U) for 24 hours in low serum
conditions. On the other hand, knocking-down TLR3 in CNE1 cells resulted
in a decrease in the cellular concentration of HIF1-alpha under hypoxia.
Overall, these results suggest that TLR3-stimulation induces metabolic
changes favorable to cell growth in deficient culture conditions. Future
investigations will intend to investigate: 1) the in vivo functions of
TLR-3 using xenografted CNE1 cells; 2) the contribution of HIF1-alpha to
the metabolic changes resulting from TLR3 stimulation; 3) the nature and
origin of the endogenous ligands of TLR3.

