Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling circulating tumor cells in the peripheral blood and CSF
of breast cancer patients.


The enumeration of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) using the CellSearch
system (Veridex LLC) is a valuable prognostic clinical tool in several
epithelial malignancies. Surveillance methods for metastatic disease
involving the central nervous system (CNS) lack adequate sensitivity,
specificity, and reproducibility in the clinic. We previously reported a
method to enumerate CTCs in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of breast
cancer patients with metastases involving the CNS. The enumeration of
CTCs in CSF by this method is highly sensitive, accurate, reproducible,
and correlates with disease burden by several measures. Here, we
concomitantly monitor CTCs in the peripheral blood and CSF of five
patients with neoplastic meningitis receiving intrathecal (IT)
chemotherapy. In each patient, CTC counts have been more sensitive than
conventional cytology, and have predicted the course of symptoms and
overall survival more precisely than conventional cytology. We observed a
striking inverse relationship between CTC counts in the peripheral blood
and CSF. This observation generated the hypothesis that CTCs migrate from
the blood to the CSF and the converse as sanctuary sites during
compartmentalized therapy to result in systemic disease recurrence. To
test this hypothesis we created mouse models of these clinical phenomena
including injection of triple-negative breast cancer into the peripheral
blood or intracranially. Injection of luciferase-infected MDA-MB-231 or
MDA-MB-468 human triple-negative breast cancer cells into the brain of
athymic nude mice resulted in primary tumors at the site of injection.
The MDA-MB-231, unlike the MDA-MB-468, generated detectable tumor cell
dissemination into the CSF of inoculated mice that correlated with a
significantly declined survival. CSF collected from the cisterna magna of
inoculated mice corroborated these observations. Current studies are
examining the impact of compartmentalized therapy on the migration of
these tumor cells as well as profiling unique genetic drivers of the
subset of tumors cells that disseminate into the CSF. The
intercompartmental cycling of tumor cells may represent an important
mechanism for disease persistence and recurrence, and suggests that
concurrent systemic and CNS-directed therapy may be warranted.

