Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming acquired resistance to cetuximab by dual targeting of
HER family members using antibody based therapy.


The EGFR is recognized as a key mediator of proliferation and progression
in many human tumors and strategies to inhibit EGFR signaling have
emerged as highly promising cancer therapy approaches. However, many
tumors do not show response to EGFR inhibition and some of the responders
eventually manifest resistance to treatment. In an effort to examine
mechanisms of acquired resistance to anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody we
developed a series of cetuximab-resistant clones using the NSCLC line
NCI-H226. During efforts to elucidate molecular pathways that are
involved in acquired resistance to cetuximab we found that 1) EGFR
ubiquitination and degradation is altered in cetuximab-resistant cells
resulting in increased steady-state expression of the EGFR and 2)
enhanced signaling from the EGFR to HER3 and the PI(3)K/Akt pathway
indicating that activation of HER3 may lead to escape from cetuximab
therapy.To investigate the role of HER3 in acquired resistance to
cetuximab we used both RNAi and targeted approaches using the anit-HER3
antibody U3-1287/AMG888. siRNA directed against HER3 indicated that
resistant cells had a strong dependency on HER3. Further, targeting HER3
using U3-1287/AMG888 showed a dose-dependent anti-proliferative response
in resistant cells. In studies using siRNA against the EGFR and HER3
resulted in robust inhibition of cell proliferation than did silencing of
either receptor alone in resistant cells. Comparable effects on cell
proliferation were observed after combinatorial treatment of cells by the
EGFR antibody cetuximab and the HER3 antibody U3-1287/AMG888. In
addition, combined EGFR and HER3 inhibition by either siRNAs or
antibodies decreased the phosphorylation of downstream signaling pathways
AKT and MAPK. Annexin-V binding assays showed a significant increase in
apoptosis in U3-1287/AMG888 plus cetuximab treated cells as compared to
either agent alone. To determine if U3-1287/AMG888 could have therapeutic
benefit as a combination treatment with cetuximab in vivo, mice harboring
NCI-H226 xenografts will be treated with cetuximab for approximately
70-100 days until cetuximab-resistant tumors develop. At this time mice
with resistant tumors will be divided into two groups that will be
treated with both cetuximab and U3-1287/AMG888 or cetuximab alone.The
work presented herein suggests that cells with acquired resistance to
cetuximab maintain their dependence on EGFR and HER3 signaling via the
AKT and MAPK pathways.

