Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DBP-RB, a novel RNA-binding protein promotes microRNA processing
in the DNA damage response.


Defects in the DNA damage response (DDR) and global dysregulation of
microRNA (miRNAs) are considered hallmarks of many types of human cancer.
Recent studies show that DNA damage such as irradiation, UV and genotoxic
agents induce global changes in miRNA expression profile in a variety of
cell types. DDR-regulated miRNAs are known to be involved in the
initiation and progression of tumorigenesis and also modulate the
sensitivity of cells to DNA damaging agents. However, mechanism about how
miRNA expression is regulated in response to DNA damage stress is largely
unknown. DBP-RB, one of RNA binding protein is known to be overexpressed
or amplified in several types of human cancer including neuroblastoma,
breast and colon cancer and the biological function of DBP-RB in the
cancer is not determined yet. Here, we found that that DBP-RB is
interacted with not only Drosha/DGCR8 but also Dicer microprocessors. We
also found that DBP-RB is colocalized with DNA damage foci after DNA
damage and associated with ATM (Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated), RAD50 and
NBS1 in the DNA damage signaling. DBP-RB knockdown results in increased
resistant to genotoxic drugs and inhibition of cell proliferation. We
investigated the level of 742 human miRNAs in the DBP-RB knockdown cells
and compared with DNA damage induced miRNAs using miRNA quantitative PCR.
DBP-RB knockdown cell showed significant changes in the expression levels
of a subset of miRNA and in particular, 75% of DBP-RB dependent miRNAs
were also regulated in DNA damage-dependent manner.
RNA-Immunoprecipitation (IP) reveals that DBP-RB is associated with that
specific subset of microRNAs and depletion of DBP-RB inhibits the
function of Drosha microprocessor. Taken together, our findings suggest
that DBP-RB function as a mediator by transmitting DNA damage signal to
the miRNA processors to modulate miRNAs processing through binding
Drosha/DGCR8 and Dicer.Citation Format: Cecil Han, Xiongbin Lu. DBP-RB, a
novel RNA-binding protein promotes microRNA processing in the DNA damage
response. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3080.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3080

