Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary compounds EGCG and sulforaphane differentially reactivate
ER- in African American and Caucasian breast cancer cells.


Breast cancer will affect 1 out of 8 women in their lifetimes and is one
of the leading causes of cancer death among women of all races. African
American (AA) women, in particular, have a higher breast cancer mortality
rate than women of other ethnicities, revealing a clear ethnic disparity.
Additionally, AA women tend to have larger, more aggressive tumors and
are more likely to be diagnosed with estrogen receptor- (ER-)- negative
and triple negative breast cancers. While sSocio-economic, cultural and
environmental factors are thought to contribute to these disparitiess;
however, the extent these aspects play in influencing tumor growth and
development is not clearly defined. We sought to address the important
question pertaining to the relative contribution of diet in breast cancer
disparities and epigenetic modifications. We determined theTo do so we
observed the effects of bioactive dietary compounds,
()-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), found in green tea, and
sulforaphane (SFN), found cruciferous vegetables such as broccoli sprouts
and cauliflower, on breast cancer cells. In order to determine whether
ethnicity played a role in these effects breast cancer cells derived from
AA and Caucasian (CAU) women that were treated separately or in
combination with EGCG and/or SFN. Cell lines were evaluated for cell
viability, cellular responses and expression of several genes including
ER- and those associated with epigenetic modifications. We found that AA
breast cancer cells displayed distinct variations in response to ECGG and
SFN treatments when compared to CAU cell lines. In
particular,Specifically, AA-derived cell lines had a delayed ER-
reactivation at a higher dose than did CAU cells. Further, differential
expression of several epigenetic modifiers and cancer-related genes was
observed in AA cells. These results support the hypothesis that
differences variations in gene expression in AA women with breast cancer
may be influenced by diet and that innate biological variances based on
ethnicity may contribute to these dissimilarities.

