Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PPME1 is a potential novel molecular target in gastric and lung
cancer.


Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a human tumor suppressor, and it
accounts for the majority of serine/threonine phosphatase activity which
is tightly regulated via the methylation of carboxy-terminal of PP2A.
Methylation at the carboxyterminal Leu 309 residue by
S-adenosylmethionine-dependent leucine carboxyl methytransferase-1
(LCMT1) leads to the activation of PP2A, whilst demethylation of Leu 309
by specific protein phosphatase methylesterase-1 (PPME1) suppresses the
PP2A activity. Recent evidence showed that PPME1 is up-regulated in
glioblastoma patients and associated with a poor prognosis. In this study
we profiled 131 Chinese gastric cancer (GC) samples and 124 Chinese
non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) samples by Affy and aCGH to
identify potential drug targets, and found PPME1 gene amplification in
3.8% of the GC samples and 3.1% of the NSCLC samples. The
PPME1amplification correlated with its mRNA expression. In addition, we
confirmed that PPME1 protein expressions were also elevated in the
PPME1-amplified tumor samples indicated by immunohistochemistry as
compared with corresponding adjacent non-tumor samples. To further
investigate the role of PPME1 amplification in tumor growth, we utilized
siRNA-mediated gene silencing approaches to specifically knock down PPME1
expression in the PPME1 amplified human cancer cell lines SNU668 (GC) and
Oka-C1 (NSCLC). We found that suppression of the PPME1 expression
resulted in significant inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of
cell death in those cells. In contrast, little effects were observed on
the cell growth and survival of non PPME1-amplified human cancer cells,
MKN1 (GC) and HCC95 (NSCLC). Moreover, we showed that the PPME-1
knock-down also resulted in a decrease of PP2A demethylation at Leu309,
which correlated with down-regulation of phosphorylation of MAPK and AKT
in the cells. Taken together, our data indicate that PPME-1 could be an
attractive therapeutic target for subsets of gastric and lung cancers.

