Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-targeting the IGF1R pathway and compensatory signaling enhances
cytotoxicity in head and neck cancer.


The 5-year survival rate for patients with cancer of the Head and Neck
(HNC) has not significantly improved over the past decade. Clearly, new
therapeutic targets and strategies for employing existing targeted and
cytotoxic therapies are needed. Studies have shown both expression and
phosphorylation of the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) in
both head and neck cancer cell lines and patient tumor samples. We found
that small molecule inhibitors targeting IGF1R, when used as a single
agent, caused varying degrees of cytotoxicity in HNC cell lines. In order
to determine whether the variable biological response to IGF1R inhibition
was caused by differences in the effects of the IGF1R inhibitors on the
cell signaling networks of the HNC cell lines, we performed reverse phase
proteomic array analysis on a panel of HNC cell lines treated with IGF1R
inhibitors. Preliminary results suggest that treatment with IGF1R
inhibitors caused increased expression and/or phosphorylation of a number
of proteins in the array. We hypothesize that these alterations represent
compensatory signaling pathways that provide resistance to cytotoxicity
upon treatment with IGF1R inhibitors. In order to identify possible
mechanisms of compensation for the loss of IGF1R pathway signaling, we
screened a panel of small molecule inhibitors of the IGF1R/PI3K/AKT
signaling pathway against a panel of inhibitors of proteins important in
HNC cell signaling Preliminary results indicate that the inhibition of
epigenetic modifying proteins as well as members of canonical cell
signaling pathways in combination with inhibition of IGF1R signaling
leads to a synergistic increase in cytotoxicity. This suggests that
compensatory mechanisms exist in HNC that serve to blunt the cytotoxic
effect of inhibition of IGF1R. Co-targeting IGF1R and members of these
compensatory pathways may be a viable therapeutic strategy.

