Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Romiplostim promotes platelet recovery in a mouse model of
multicycle chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia.


Chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia (CIT) is a serious complication of
some cancer therapies and can necessitate treatment delay or chemotherapy
dose reduction. Romiplostim is a thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor agonist
approved for the treatment of immune thrombocytopenia (ITP). The ability
of romiplostim to promote platelet recovery in a mouse model of
multicycle chemotherapy/radiation therapy (CRT)-induced thrombocytopenia
was examined. A secondary aim was to determine the optimum dose and
timing of romiplostim treatment. In humans, an inverse relationship
between platelet numbers and endogenous (e) TPO concentrations has been
reported. Studies confirmed a similar relationship in both nave mice and
mice with CIT. Platelet numbers and eTPO concentration were measured
during three 28-day cycles of CRT in mice. eTPO did not increase during
the first five days after each CRT (the eTPO gap time period, eTPO
concentration of 2.8 0.88 ng/mL), then increased to a peak 10 days after
each CRT treatment (6.1 1.5 ng/mL), as platelet numbers decreased. The
window of time before eTPO concentration increased was used to design
dosing paradigms that would supplement eTPO activity while concentrations
were low. Since it was anticipated that patients would be unlikely to
receive primary prophylaxis for first cycle CIT, a model was established
in which romiplostim treatment was administered during the second or
third cycle of CRT. In an attempt to bridge the eTPO gap, mice were
treated with 10 to 1000 g/kg of romiplostim given on day 0, 1 or 2 after
CRT in either cycle 2, cycle 3 or in both cycles, and platelet numbers
were measured throughout that cycle. In some mice the total dose of
romiplostim was divided over three days (i.e. one third on each of days
0, 1 and 2). Platelet recovery occurred faster in animals that received
romiplostim in most conditions tested, with platelet counts significantly
higher for groups that received CRT plus romiplostim compared to CRT
alone (as determined by ANOVA with Dunnett's post-hoc test). Romiplostim
also provided benefit in terms of decreasing the severity of the platelet
nadir. Doses of >100 g/kg given on day 0 significantly lessened the
platelet nadir in both cycle 2 and cycle 3. Fractionating the dose and
administering it over 3 days was effective but not superior to a single
administration on day 0. In summary, an inverse relationship between
platelet numbers and eTPO concentrations was observed during multiple
cycles of CRT in mice. This decrease in eTPO created a eTPO gap in each
CRT cycle, which was effectively bridged by romiplostim treatment. These
data may provide a rationale for clinical studies of romiplostim in
patients undergoing myelosuppressive chemotherapy.

