Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling local network connectivity to identify druggable enzyme
targets.


While targeted therapies have provided extended lifespans to some cancer
patients, the majority of cancers do not have these golden bullet
therapies despite their increasing need. To address this, large-scale
drug screening efforts are conducted to identify novel therapeutic
targets in various cancers. While these screening efforts identify
important nodes in the cancer cell signaling network, they do not
necessarily reflect the druggability of those nodes. We predict that the
local molecular connections surrounding a drug target will be predictive
of inhibitor efficacy and should be considered in drug screening efforts
and prioritizing drugs for clinical development. Towards this end, we
have used computational modeling to survey the behavior of a three-tiered
enzyme cascade configured with all possible one- and two-feedback
interactions. To characterize the effect of local network topology on
pathway inhibition, we compared inhibition by RNAi vs. small-molecules in
the computational models. Our modeling predicts that certain topologies
will be more sensitive to RNAi than small-molecules, and that other
topologies will show the opposite behavior. We next experimentally tested
one network wiring that our modeling predicts will be more potently
inhibited by a small-molecule inhibitor than RNAi inhibition, where the
third enzyme in the cascade negatively feeds back on the first. This
topology is found in the Raf-MEK1/2-ERK1/2 pathway where ERK1/2 can
hyperphosphorylate and inactivate Raf, creating a negative feedback loop.
To test our model hypothesis, we compared the potency of shMEK constructs
relative to equivalent inhibition by a small-molecule inhibitor of
MEK1/2, U0126. We analyzed pathway output (pERK1/2) over time in response
to pathway activation. Our data suggests that pERK1/2 responses are both
qualitatively and quantitatively different for cells inhibited by shMEK
compared to U0126. In U0126-treated cells, pERK1/2 activation after
stimulation is delayed and transient compared to shMEK1/2 cells, which
show reduced pERK1/2 compared to controls but no differences in signaling
kinetics. We further investigated the phenotypic response from this
difference in pERK1/2 signaling and found that upon stimulation the
shMEK-inhibited cells proliferated whereas the U0126-inhibited cells did
not. These results support our model prediction that small-molecule
inhibition of MEK1/2 will more potently inhibit pathway output compared
to RNAi. While global loss-of-function screens can identify new targets
for therapy, it is critical to determine whether drugging such targets
will yield the same outcome as eliminating them. Our work demonstrates
the need to consider local network topology in drug screening and target
identification for drug development. Prioritizing targets for drug
development in this way will reduce the cost of drug development and
allow more effective therapies to reach patients in the clinic.

