Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ovarian cancer chemokine microenvironment is conducive to homing
of CD3/CD28 co-stimulated T cells prepared for adoptive transfer therapy.


Chemokines play a central role in lymphocyte trafficking and therefore
affect the success of immune therapy by supporting the homing of T cells
to the site of disease. We are conducting a phase I study using CD3/CD28
co-stimulated lysate vaccine-primed autologous T cells for advanced
ovarian cancer. Papillary serous ovarian cancer is a very heterogeneous
tumor and little is known about the expression of chemokines in its
microenvironment. We thus mapped the chemokines predominantly expressed
in advanced stage papillary serous ovarian cancer and characterized the
chemokine receptor expression and homing ability of co-stimulated
autologous T-cells of patients participating in our adoptive T cell
transfer trial.The expression of all known human chemokines was analyzed
on a gene expression array dataset from 63 patients with primary ovarian
cancer and validated on publicly available microarray dataset from 222
ovarian cancer samples, as well as on 17 primary ovary cancer lines.
Immunohistochemistry for the 10 most highly expressed chemokines from the
3 databases was performed on tissue microarrays constructed from 50
patients with advanced stage papillary serous ovarian cancer. Slides were
also stained for CD3+, CD8+ and FoxP3+ T cells. Median expression level
of chemokines and T cells were measured at primary and metastatic sites.
Vaccine-primed, ex vivo CD3/CD28 co-stimulated autologous T-cells of 5
patients were characterized for chemokine receptors by flow cytometry.
Chemotaxis assays were performed to assess the functionality of the
receptors.The 10 most highly expressed chemokines found in advanced stage
papillary cancer by gene expression analysis were: CCL2, CCL4, CCL5,
CCL28, CXCL5, CXCL6 CXCL10, CXCL12, CXCL16 and CX3CL1.
Immunohistochemistry confirmed the expression of these chemokines at both
primary and metastatic sites. The expression of CCL4 and CCL5 showed the
strongest correlation with the presence of tumor-infiltrating CD8+ cells,
whereas CCL28, CXCL12, CX3CL1, CXCL5 and CXCL6 expression showed
correlation with increased numbers of FoxP3+ cells in tumor islets. The
three expressed chemokine receptors on vaccine-primed CD3/CD28
co-stimulated T cells were CCR10 (CCL27, CCL28 receptor), CXCR3 (CXCL9-11
receptor) and CXCR4 (CXCL12 receptor). Chemotaxis assays confirmed the
migration of these co-stimulated T cells towards ligands of all three of
these receptors.Chemokines play a paramount role in tumor immune response
and characterization of the tumor microenvironment is key to successful
immunotherapy. Ex vivo expanded tumor specific cytotoxic T cells have
shown promising results for the treatment of small-volume disease, and
our data confirm that these cells are armed with the appropriate
receptors to home to ovarian cancer.

