Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Absolute quantification of EGFR activation and resistance
mutations as well as copy number in circulating nucleic acids by droplet
digital PCR.


Background: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients who harbor
activating mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) such as
L858R and the Exon 19 deletions (E746-A750) are treated with either
erlotinib or gefitinib. However, a large percentage of patients acquire
the gatekeeper resistance mutation, T790M. Limited access to
post-treatment tumor tissue restricts monitoring options, and even when
biopsy specimens are available, sampling bias may confound diagnosis of
the resistance mechanism. Circulating, cell-free DNA (CNA) provides a
solution to circumvent tissue access limitations. Low overall recovery of
CNA requires assays be designed with increased sensitivity and
specificity not currently available. We have developed and optimized a
series of droplet digital PCR assays that can quantify both EGFR
activating and resistance mutations as well as copy number.Methods: The
ddPCR assays were developed on the BioRAD QX100 system. Primers and
probes were designed to optimize quantification of EGFR L858R and T790M
mutations, Exon 19 deletions and EGFR copy number. Genomic DNA from H1975
(L5858R and T790M mutations) and H1650 (Exon 19 deletion) cell lines were
diluted into wild type gDNA to determine the assays limits of detection
(LOD). Patient samples were analyzed as well. Finally, ddPCR data were
compared with qPCR data using the Qiagen EGFR Rotor-Gene (RGQ)
kit.Results: The ddPCR assays were designed to quantify EGFR activating
and resistance mutations in relative to the wild type template. The T790M
and L858R assays displayed linear dynamic ranges from 14000 copies to
LODs of 9 and 6 copies, respectively. In addition, ddPCR assays were
successfully multiplexed to an LOD of 0.2%, or 15 copies based upon a 95%
confidence interval in 20ng gDNA. In healthy donor spiked plasma samples,
the LOD was determined to be 1.2%, or 8 copies in 2.2ng purified CNA. By
comparison, in plasma, the RGQ assays displayed an average LOD of 80
copies with a dynamic range of 8000 copies to 76 copies. Data on Exon 19
deletion and EGFR copy number ddPCR assays will be presented. Spiked
normal plasma samples analyzed for the ratio of T790M to activating
mutations such as L858R and Exon 19 deletion will be
presented.Conclusion: Droplet digital PCR provides sensitive
quantification of low abundance EGFR resistance and activating mutations
in CNA isolated from plasma. These assays provide a useful method for
selecting treatment, monitoring disease progression, and providing early
detection of treatment failure as well as gene amplification associated
with EGFR acquired resistance.

