Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel application for pseudopodial proteomics using excimer
laserablation and two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis.


We developed a novel application to conduct pseudopodia proteomics.
Pseudopodia are ventral actin-rich protrusions and play functional roles
in cell migrations. Identification of pseudopodia proteins leads further
understanding of malignant phenotypes of tumor cells and novel
therapeutic strategies. In our application, tumor cells were placed on a
fibronectin-coated porous membrane to form pseudopodia. According to the
motile potentials of the cells, the cells formed pseudopodial
microprocesses in the pores. An excimer laser, which was used for
ophthalmic refractive surgeries, horizontally ablated cells at the
membrane surface to remove the cell body. The microscopic observations
and the protein expression studies suggested that the laser treatment
caused no apparent damages to pseudopodia. Proteins in whole cells and
pseudopodia fractions were individually solubilized, labeled with a
highly sensitive fluorescent dye, and separated using two-dimensional
difference gel electrophoresis. Among 2508 protein spots observed, 211
had different intensity between whole cells and pseudopodia fractions
(more than 4-fold differences and p value less than 0.05). The protein
enrichment depended on the pore size. Mass spectrometric protein
identification revealed 46 pseudopodia-localizing proteins. The
localization of novel pseudopodia-localizing proteins such as RAB1A,
HSP90B, TDRD7, and vimentin was confirmed using immunohistochemical
examinations. The previous studies demonstrated that these four proteins
may function in the cell migration process. In addition, RAB1A was
indicated to play an important role in forming and extending pseudopodial
microprocesses in human breast cancer cells by overexpression and
knockdown experiments. This method will provide insights into the
molecular details of pseudopodia and further understanding of malignant
phenotypes of tumor cells and novel therapeutic strategies.

