Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting both ornithine decarboxylase and polyamine transport
inhibits tumor growth in neuroblastoma.


Background: Neuroblastoma (NB) is associated with MYCN oncogene
amplification occurring in approximately 30% of NBs and is associated
with poor prognosis. MYCN is linked to a number of genes including
ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), the rate-limiting enzyme in polyamine
biosynthesis. ODC expression is elevated in NB.
Alpha-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO), an ODC inhibitor, is currently
being used in a Phase I clinical trial for treatment of NB. However,
cancer cells treated with DFMO may overcome their polyamine depletion by
the uptake of polyamines from extracellular sources. A novel polyamine
transport inhibitor, AMXT-1501, has not yet been tested on NB. We
proposed that inhibiting ODC with DFMO, coupled with polyamine transport
inhibition by AMXT-1501, would result in increased NB growth
inhibition.Methods: Single and combination drug treatments were conducted
on three NB cell lines in vitro and in a xenograft mouse model in vivo.
Cell viability was measured using Calcein AM fluorescent assay. Real-time
cell proliferation was measured using the xCELLigence system. Western
blot analysis was used to measure cleaved and full PARP, cleaved and full
caspase 3, phosphorylated Rb and MYCN levels. ATP level per cell was
measured using CyQuant fluorescent DNA assay combined with the Cell Titer
GLO luminescent cell viability assay. Reverse-phase HPLC was used to
measure polyamine levels in cells.Results: DFMO IC50 values ranged from
20.76 to 33.3 mM, and AMXT-1501 IC50 values ranged from 14.13 to 17.72 M
in NB cell lines. Low dose combination treatment (2.5 M AMXT-1501, 2.5 mM
DFMO) synergistically inhibited cell viability and proliferation in
vitro. Combination treatment decreased MYCN expression and resulted in
hypophosphorylation of pRb, suggesting cell growth inhibition. Increased
expression of cleaved PARP and cleaved caspase 3 in combination-treated
cells starting at 48 hours suggested apoptosis. The combination treatment
resulted in intracellular polyamine pool depletion and decreased
intracellular ATP. The combination treatment also significantly reduced
tumor size in NB xenograft mice in vivo.Conclusion: Given the current
lack of effective therapies for relapsed/refractory NB patients and the
preclinical effectiveness of DFMO with AMXT-1501, this combination
treatment provides promising preclinical results. DFMO and AMXT-1501 may
be a potential new therapy for children with NB.

