Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction between cetuximab and chemotherapy in colon cancer.


The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed in many
tumours and is a target for cancer therapy. Cetuximab is a monoclonal
antibody targeting EGFR. It is used for the treatment of metastatic
colorectal cancer (mCRC) as monotherapy and in combination with
oxaliplatin or irinotecan-based chemotherapy. Several clinical studies
have shown no benefit when cetuximab is combined with oxaliplatin as
opposed to the positive effects observed with irinotecan. The aim of this
study is to investigate these interactions in cellular models of colon
cancer.The antitumour effects of cetuximab in vitro in combination with
oxaliplatin or irinotecan were determined in the SW 48 colon cancer cell
line and the isogenic KRAS mutant G12A cell line. Combination indices
(CI) describing the interaction of a fixed concentration of cetuximab and
a range of concentrations of oxaliplatin or irinotecan were determined.
Combination of cetuximab (100g/ml) with oxaliplatin (1M) indicated
antagonism in both cell lines tested (CI=4.7 in the KRAS wild type cell
line and CI=19.9 in the KRAS G12A cell line). In contrast, the
combination of cetuximab (100g/ml) with irinotecan (0.1M) showed
synergistic effects (CI=0.28 in the KRAS wild type cell line and CI=0.14
in the KRAS G12A cell line). Preclinical studies have suggested that the
cytotoxic efficacy of oxaliplatin may depend partially on the production
of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS). The combination of cetuximab with
oxaliplatin resulted in a reduction of ROS levels by 30% 2.9 in the KRAS
WT and by 40% 10 in the KRAS G12A cell line compared to those produced by
oxaliplatin alone. Additionally, levels of oxaliplatin-induced apoptosis
measured by caspase 3/7 cleavage, were reduced by 70% 5.4 in the KRAS WT
and by 50% 2.7 in the KRAS G12A cell line with the antioxidant
N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC), suggesting that oxaliplatin induces apoptosis
through the production of ROS. To elucidate the mechanism of the
modulation of ROS by cetuximab and oxaliplatin, RT-PCR arrays analyzing
84 genes involved in oxidative stress response were performed following
cetuximab, oxaliplatin and their combination treatment. Experiments to
determine the contribution of these genes to the antagonism between
oxaliplatin and cetuximab are under investigation.Our results show that
alteration of ROS levels by cetuximab affects efficacy of oxaliplatin and
suggests a key role for ROS in the observed antagonism between the two
drugs.

