Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEK162, an allosteric MEK inhibitor promotes apoptosis and in vivo
antitumor activity against human biliary cancer cell lines.


Biliary cancer (BC), or cholangiocarcinoma, is derived from the malignant
transformation of epithelial cells in the bile ducts. The disease usually
presents at advanced stages and is almost uniformly deadly. Current
therapeutic regimens have limited efficacy for treatment of BC, thus the
need for developing novel and effective targeted strategies is a
priority. This malignancy is characterized by deregulated PI3 kinase/Akt
signaling, upregulated mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway
and an autocrine IL-6/STAT3 signal transduction feedback loop, which can
also drive immunosuppression. A recent report showed clinical responses
for BC patients receiving the MEK inhibitor AZD244, which promoted more
extensive pre-clinical studies to validate the effect of MEK inhibition
and importance of this pathway in BC. In the present study, MEK162, a MEK
inhibitor, was used to assess the growth inhibitory, pro-apoptotic, and
immunomodulatory effects in BC. In vitro studies in a panel of human BC
cell lines (HuCCT1, HuH28, MzCha1) revealed that MEK162 significantly
inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis in a concentration-dependent
manner in all three cell lines. Immunoblot data confirmed decreased
phosphorylated ERK (pERK) in the HuCCT1 BC cell line following a 24 hour
treatment with MEK162. MEK inhibition was also associated with
clinically-relevant immunomodulatory effects. First, culture supernatants
from human BC cells displayed significant reductions in IL-6 protein by
ELISA after treatment with MEK162 at varying concentrations. Second,
MEK162 inhibited in vitro generation of human myeloid derived suppressor
cells from peripheral blood mononuclear cells cultured with IL-6 and
GM-CSF. Finally, in vivo studies in athymic mice bearing HuCCT1
xenografts showed that daily oral administration of MEK162 (30 mg/kg in
1% (w/v) carboxymethylcellulose, 0.5% (v/v) Tween 80) was well-tolerated
and resulted in significant growth inhibition as compared to
vehicle-treated controls (p Biliary cancer (BC), or cholangiocarcinoma,
is derived from the malignant transformation of epithelial cells in the
bile ducts. The disease usually presents at advanced stages and is almost
uniformly deadly. Current therapeutic regimens have limited efficacy for
treatment of BC, thus the need for developing novel and effective
targeted strategies is a priority. This malignancy is characterized by
deregulated PI3 kinase/Akt signaling, upregulated mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) pathway and an autocrine IL-6/STAT3 signal
transduction feedback loop, which can also drive immunosuppression. A
recent report showed clinical responses for BC patients receiving the MEK
inhibitor AZD244, which promoted more extensive pre-clinical studies to
validate the effect of MEK inhibition and importance of this pathway in
BC. In the present study, MEK162, a MEK inhibitor, was used to assess the
growth inhibitory, pro-apoptotic, and immunomodulatory effects in BC. In
vitro studies in a panel of human BC cell lines (HuCCT1, HuH28, MzCha1)
revealed that MEK162 significantly inhibited cell growth and induced
apoptosis in a concentration-dependent manner in all three cell lines.
Immunoblot data confirmed decreased phosphorylated ERK (pERK) in the
HuCCT1 BC cell line following a 24 hour treatment with MEK162. MEK
inhibition was also associated with clinically-relevant immunomodulatory
effects. First, culture supernatants from human BC cells displayed
significant reductions in IL-6 protein by ELISA after treatment with
MEK162 at varying concentrations. Second, MEK162 inhibited in vitro
generation of human myeloid derived suppressor cells from peripheral
blood mononuclear cells cultured with IL-6 and GM-CSF. Finally, in vivo
studies in athymic mice bearing HuCCT1 xenografts showed that daily oral
administration of MEK162 (30 mg/kg in 1% (w/v) carboxymethylcellulose,
0.5% (v/v) Tween 80) was well-tolerated and resulted in significant
growth inhibition as compared to vehicle-treated controls (p < 0.0001).
Immunohistochemical analysis of tumor xenografts revealed significant
decreases in both Ki67 and pERK staining in the MEK162-treated mice as
compared to controls (p = 0.0163 and 0.0132,respectively). Together,
these data suggest that MEK inhibition represents a promising therapeutic
approach with potential for direct antitumor activity and
immunomodulation in BC.

