Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cetuximab downregulates lactate dehydrogenase-A, leading to
inhibition of glycolysis and reversal of the Warburg effect in HNSCC
cells.


Cetuximab is an anti-human epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
monoclonal antibody currently approved for treatment of patients with
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) in combination with
conventional radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Previous studies showed that
cetuximab downregulates the alpha subunit of the transcription factor
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) through inhibition of EGFR-mediated
downstream cell signaling and that downregulation of HIF-1 is required
for cetuximab-induced antiproliferative effects; however, the underlying
mechanism has not been established. In this study, we explored the
mechanism from the perspective of cancer metabolism. HIF-1 plays a
critical role in reprogramming cancer metabolism towards aerobic
glycolysis (i.e., the Warburg effect), which is critically important for
supplying cancer cells with the biomass needed for cell proliferation. We
found that cetuximab downregulated lactate dehydrogenase A (LDH-A) and
inhibited glycolysis in cetuximab-sensitive cells in a HIF-1
downregulation-dependent manner. HNSCC cells with acquired resistance to
cetuximab expressed a high level of HIF-1 and were highly glycolytic.
Overexpression of a HIF-1 mutant conferred resistance to
cetuximab-induced G1-phase cell cycle arrest, which could be overcome by
knockdown of LDH-A expression. Addition of a small molecule LDH-A
inhibitor markedly enhanced the response of cetuximab-resistant cells to
cetuximab. Cetuximab had no noticeable inhibitory effect on glycolysis in
nontransformed cells, in which glycolysis is followed by oxidative
phosphorylation in the mitochondria. These findings provide novel
mechanistic insights into cetuximab-induced antitumor effects from the
perspective of cancer metabolism and suggest novel strategies for
enhancing the response of cancer patients to cetuximab therapy.

