Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) in multiple myeloma with
novel BTK inhibitors.


Multiple myeloma (MM) is a malignant disease that is characterized by an
excess of monotypic plasma cells in the bone marrow (BM). A key clinical
characteristic of MM is the localization of the MM cells to the bone
marrow where they promote osteolytic bone destruction and impaired
hematopoietic function. As a consequence MM patients experience bone
pain, hypocalcaemia, anemia. Although there has been some progress in
recent years in the development of novel drugs, such as proteasome
inhibitors and derivatives of thalidomide, MM remains incurable and the
majority of patients eventually succumb to their cancer. We have recently
identified BTK over-expression in cancer cells taken from patients with
multiple myeloma. In addition we have observed that BTK is also expressed
in the activated osteoclasts of MM patients indicating that targeted
inhibition of BTK might not only effect the MM cancer cells but may also
influence the activity of osteoclasts and the associated osteolytic
lesions. Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) is a cytoplasmic nonreceptor
tyrosine kinase belonging to the Tec family of kinases. BTK has been
extensively studied for its role in B-cell maturation and activation of
B-cells by various ligands is accompanied by the translocation of BTK to
the cell membrane where it binds phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate
through its PH domain. Activation of BTK results in downstream signaling
through the PI3K/AKT, PLC1/2, NFB, and other signaling pathways important
for B-cell development and function. We propose that BTK plays an
important role in multiple myeloma pathophysiology and that
therapeutically targeting BTK will inhibit the growth of cancer cells and
alter the tumor microenvironment in the bone marrow of multiple myeloma
cancer patients. Using a structure-based approach we have developed a
series of irreversible BTK inhibitors with selective and potent low
nanomolar activity. In preclinical studies to date, our compounds have
demonstrated promising activity in biochemical and cell-based
experiments. Our BTK-targeted agents have shown activity in MM cells and
have good pharmacokinetics when delivered IV and oral. MM cells create an
adverse microenvironment from a pathophysiologic and clinical perspective
because of the disruption of bone remodeling and this disruption of
normal bone function has been shown to inhibit the response of MM cell to
drug treatment. Therefore, a strategy to develop new drugs for MM must
take into account the ability of the new agents to partition and
distribute to the bone and function in the bone microenviroment of MM.
Our compounds are being optimized for their ability to partition to bone
and remain active in the BM microenvironment. By inhibiting BTK we seek
to block BTK-dependent growth and migration of multiple myeloma cells and
inhibit of the production of differentiated activated osteoclasts thereby
disrupting the bone marrow microenvironment in MM.

