Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of estrogen receptor modulated gene methylation
network in breast cancer.


While cancer as a complex disease is known to arise from a series of
aberrant genetic and epigenetic profiles, its growth and disease-specific
outcome can often be characterized by status of one oncogene, such as
Estrogen Receptor (ER) of breast cancer. Positive ER appears in around
70% of human breast cancer cases and recent studies dissected the
Estrogen-mediated gene regulation through specific DNA methylation
patterns by comparison between ER+ and ER- tumor samples. However, this
simple approach did not take into consideration the influence of other
confounding regulation factors due to the heterogeneity of breast cancer
and may be limited in uncovering complex underlying mechanism. To address
this problem, we first hypothesize that DNA methylation status and its
inter-gene similarity are modulated by multiple factors including ER. The
disruption of ER will disrupt association of methylation patterns between
two genes which are correlated otherwise. The epigenetic signaling
cascade maintained by specific ER status can be further interpreted from
the co-methylation relationship among genes.Here we proposed a novel
algorithm to identify the modulated gene methylation based on the
modulator of regulation concept. Setting ER as the modulator, an ER
modulated gene pair (ER-GP) was defined as pair of genes with
differential correlation between ER+ and ER- samples. Fisher
transformation on Pearson correlation coefficients was adopted for
statistical power adjustment on sample sizes and the differences of
absolute correlation coefficients were tested for statistical
significance in the Fisher transform domain. By applying the algorithm to
the MBDCap-Seq data of 76 breast tumors (47 ER+ and 29 ER-), we
identified 5,673 putative ER-GPs of co-methylation (co-methyl. ER-GPs)
involving 1,657 unique genes. In order to delineate a comprehensive and
systematic view of interaction between identified ER-GPs, the co-methyl.
ER-GPs were combined to construct the ER modulated gene methylation
network. With an overall connectivity (average number of first-order
neighbors of each gene in a network) of 6.85, genes in the methylation
network were highly linked to each other and formed a branched signaling
cascade. The nucleosome assembly protein 1-like 5 NAP1L5, previously
reported as regulated by both estradiol and tamoxifen treatment, was
identified as the top hub gene, indicating that it may serve as an
important regulator in the ER modulation. Further Gene Ontology analysis
revealed that NAP1L5 and its co-methylated genes were involved in
nucleotide biosynthetic process, chromosome organization, and cell
proliferation.In the present study, we proposed a novel algorithm to
identify the ER modulated methylation regulatory network. The findings
provided biological insights into the underlying mechanism of epigenetic
signaling governed by ER and may contribute to improvement of breast
cancer treatment.Citation Format: Yu-Chiao Chiu, Tzu-Hung Hsiao, Fei Gu,
Yidong Chen, Tim H-M Huang, Eric Y. Chuang. Identification of estrogen
receptor modulated gene methylation network in breast cancer. [abstract].
In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association
for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA):
AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2889.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2889

