Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microtubule stabilization alters tumor secretome and fibroblast
activation.


Microtubules (MTs) represent one of the most effective targets in cancer
chemotherapy. However, drugs targeting MTs, like the taxanes, often fail
in the metastatic setting. Therefore it is of utmost importance to fully
understand the roles of MTs and MT-targeting agents in tumor biology. An
important process during tumor development and metastasis involves the
remodeling of the 3D microenvironment surrounding tumor cells. In order
to successfully proliferate and metastasize, tumor cells need to
dynamically respond and remodel their surrounding microenvironment. We
hypothesized that tumor cells may stimulate residential fibroblasts in
MT-dependent manner, then activated fibroblasts may play a major role in
remodeling of 3D microenvironment. To test this hypothesis, we assessed
the MT-dependence of metastatic MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell activation
of HMF3S human mammary fibroblasts. HMF3S fibroblasts were treated with
either vehicle- or paclitaxel (PTX)-pretreated MDA-MB-231 cell
conditioned media. Vehicle conditioned media activated HMF3S fibroblasts
as shown by increased directional 3D motility towards a serum gradient.
In contrast, PTX-pretreatment abolished the increased directional
motility of the fibroblasts. Importantly, vehicle condition media from
PTX-treated K20T MDA-MB-231 cells, which carry a tubulin mutation at
taxane binding site, did not show reduced 3D motility of fibroblasts.
Together, these results suggest that breast cancer cells produce
fibroblast activation factor(s) in MT dependent manner. In order to
identify the factors responsible for this MT-dependent cell-cell
communication, we performed a differential proteomic analysis of the
conditioned media from vehicle- and PTX-pretreated MDA-MB-231 cells.
Using splitless nanoflow chromatography coupled with quadrupole
time-of-flight (QTOF) mass spectrometry, we identified a total of 2124
proteins within these tumor secretomes. Using on a 2-fold change
threshold, we identified 78 under-represented and 31 over-represented
proteins in the secretome of PTX- versus vehicle-pretreated cells. We
focused on under-represented proteins based on the hypothesis that MT
stabilization would inhibit their secretion. We have identified proteins
involved in cell motility, cell-cell communication, or extracellular
matrix remodeling. TGF-, CTGF, c-Met, fibronectin, and lysyl oxidase 2
were the key down-regulated proteins identified in the tumor secretome
upon PTX-induced MT stabilization. Among the factors identified by mass
spectrometry analyses, TGF- has been known to play an important role in
cell migration. Supporting this idea, treatment of vehicle-pretreated
condition media with TGF- blocking antibody abolished 3D migration of
fibroblasts. These findings shed a light on a novel role of interphase
MTs in tumor biology and may pave the way to enhance our understanding of
taxane clinical efficacy.

