Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SHMT2 modulates DNA methylation and differentially affects
prostate cancer cell response to platinum derivatives.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the leading causes of death from cancer
in men. Several prognostic factors allow differentiating low-grade from
high-grade PCa that are often refractory to chemical castration but are
still treated with hormone therapy to which docetaxel or cabazitaxel are
added when they become resistant to the anti-androgen. Despite many
clinical trials with other chemotherapeutic agents, response rates remain
low, pointing towards the need for new alternative therapies to treat
these aggressive tumors. Using a rational in silico approach based on the
NCI60-cell line panel, we recently identified a signature of 6 genes, the
expression of which could predict at the functional level, sensitivity to
oxaliplatin but not to cisplatin in DU145, LNCaP and C42B prostate cancer
cell lines (Puyo et al. Mol. Pharmacol, 2012). Among them, we focused on
SHMT2, the mitochondrial isoform of serine hydroxymethyl transferase
involved in the biosynthesis of purines. Downregulation of SHMT2 or
absence of SHMT2 catalytic activity was associated with a resistance to
oxaliplatin, whereas it had no effect on cisplatin sensitivity, a
selectivity that was attributed to the DACH moiety of platinum
derivatives. Here, we investigated the role of DNA methylation in this
selective response to platinum compounds since SHMTs can indirectly
regulate the methylation status of DNA. Variations in global level of
methylation as measured by the methylation status of LINE-1
retrotransposon, was associated with differences in sensitivity of PCa
cells to platinum compounds. Using our in silico approach, we found
significant correlations between SHMT2 expression and cell sensitivity to
both demethylating agents azacytidine and decitabine. We also found that
treatment of DU145 cells, with high level of global DNA methylation,
sensitized cells to platinum compounds. In order to evaluate whether
methylation could impair the formation of Pt-adducts in vitro, we used
purified oligonucleotides containing a unique site of platination. We
show that methylation at specific CpG in the vicinity of the platination
site could reduce the kinetics of DNA adducts formation. This inhibition
was more pronounced for DACH platin than for cisplatin. We also assessed
the effect of transient repression of SHMT2 in LNCaP cells on the
methylation status of 450,000 CpG sites using the Infinium Meth450K
beadchip from Illumina. Preliminary results show that significant changes
in methylation status was only observed in a reduced number of CpGs which
were not located in genes that are known to be involved in cell response
to Pt adducts formation. Together our results demonstrate that
SHMT2-mediated specific response to oxaliplatin can be due to both
methylation in the vicinity of the platination site and the modulation of
the expression of genes that are not directly linked to the processing of
DNA-adducts.

