Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progesterone receptor signaling induces cellular senescence in
ovarian cancer cells.


Despite major advancements in surgical techniques and chemotherapeutics,
over 90% of women with advanced ovarian cancer die with recurrent
disease, due to the emergence of chemo-resistant tumors (Bukowski et al
2007). In recent years, the progesterone receptor (PR) has become an
attractive target in ovarian cancer. PR is typically expressed in normal
ovarian surface epithelial (OSE) cells, but the detection of PR mRNA and
protein decreases during the transformation to malignancy. However, up to
35% of ovarian tumors express abundant PR. Several independent studies
have indicated that the expression of PR in ovarian tumors is associated
with longer progression-free survival in ovarian cancer patients
(Hempling et al 1998, Munstedt et al 2000, Sinn et al 2011). The detailed
molecular mechanisms of PR expression in OSE cells and its
anti-tumorigenic effects remain poorly understood. To study the
suppressive role of PR in ovarian cancer in the absence of added estrogen
(i.e. needed to stimulate PR expression), we created ES-2 ovarian cancer
cells stably expressing vector control or GFP-tagged PR-B. Unmodified
ER+/PR+ PEO4 ovarian cancer cells were included to validate our findings.
Progestin stimulation (R5020; 10 nM) of ES-2 cells stably expressing
GFP-PR inhibited the formation of large colonies in soft-agar assays, but
yielded a significant increase in the number of viable, very small
colonies relative to vehicle-treated and PR-null cohorts. Continuous
treatment with R5020 induced cellular senescence characterized by altered
cellular morphology, senescence-associated -galactosidase activity,
irreversible G1 cell-cycle arrest, and upregulation of the cell-cycle
inhibitor, p21, as well as the Forkhead-box transcription factor, FOXO1.
Notably, both PR-B and FOXO1 were detected within the same PRE-containing
regions of the p21 upstream promoter. Stable knock-down using lentiviral
shRNAs targeting FOXO1 inhibited progestin-induced p21 expression and
blocked the development of senescence, suggesting that progestin-induced
cellular senescence in PR+ ovarian cancer cells is mediated by
FOXO1-dependent p21 expression. Overall, these findings support the
concept of PR as a tumor suppressor in ovarian cancer cells that exhibits
its inhibitory effects by inducing cellular senescence. Clinical
targeting of the PR-FOXO1-p21 signaling pathway may provide a useful
strategy to induce irreversible cell cycle arrest and sensitize ovarian
cancer cells to existing chemotherapies as part of combination therapy.
(This work was supported by grants from the Minnesota Ovarian Cancer
Alliance (MOCA), the Cancer Biology Training Grant (NIH T32 CA009138),
and the University of Minnesota Clinical and Translational Science
Institute (CTSI) F&T Pilot Grant.)

