Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia-sensitive dynamic methylation of a CpG island in Intron 1
of the WT1 gene regulates expression of a long noncoding RNA that
controls WT1 expression in myeloid leukemia cells.


The WT1 gene encodes a zinc finger transcription factor that plays a role
in both transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of mRNA
expression. WT1 is overexpressed in a variety of solid tumors, as well as
in both acute and chronic myeloid leukemias. The expression of WT1 is
under tight control in the developing kidney as well as in hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells. WT1 expression is also regulated by hypoxia. A
detailed understanding of the mechanisms regulating WT1 expression is,
however, lacking. There is a CpG island located in Intron 1 of the WT1
gene, and we investigated whether WT1 expression might therefore be
epigenetically regulated. We found that WT1 expression in myeloid
leukemia cell lines correlates with hypomethylation of the Intron 1 CpG
island which leads to expression of an antisense long noncoding RNA
(lncRNA) transcribed from a promoter within Intron 1. Leukemia cell lines
that express WT1 also demonstrate a Histone H3 methylation pattern
associated with transcriptionally active chromatin, while lines that do
not express WT1 have a pattern associated with transcriptionally inactive
chromatin. Making WT1-negative cell lines hypoxic leads to demethylation
of the Intron 1 CpG island, a change in histone methylation from
predominantly H3K9 methylation to predominantly H3K4 methylation,
expression of the antisense lncRNA, and expression of WT1. Prevention of
HIF1 induction using shRNA blocks CpG demethylation, the changes in
Histone H3 methylation, expression of the antisense lncRNA, and WT1
expression. An shRNA that blocks expression of the lncRNA in WT1-positive
cell lines and blocks induction of the antisense lncRNA also blocks WT1
expression, demonstrating that the lncRNA is necessary for WT1
expression. Finally, in primary acute myeloid leukemia samples, WT1
expression correlates directly with hypomethylation of the Intron 1 CpG
island, and hypoxia causes demethylation of the CpG island as well as
induction of WT1 expression. We conclude that WT1 expression is regulated
by an antisense lncRNA transcribed from a promoter in Intron 1, and that
this promoter is regulated by methylation of the CpG island in this
intron. Furthermore, hypoxia leads to demethylation of this CpG island,
allowing transcription of the lncRNA, which results in the expression of
WT1. We propose a novel mechanism of hypoxia-mediated regulation of gene
expression: stabilization of HIF1 leads to demethylation of a specific
CpG island and a change in histone methylation of the surrounding region,
allowing expression of an antisense lncRNA that is necessary for
upregulation of WT1 mRNA expression. Future work will investigate whether
this novel mechanism of hypoxia-mediated regulation of gene expression
affects other genes as well as the specific mechanism by which the
antisense lncRNA controls WT1 expression.

