Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel sirtuin inhibitor, AS4.064, enhances apoptosis and
acetylation of targets in hematological lines in combination with the
novel HDACi, SelSA-1.


Several HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) have proven preclinical and clinical
activity against lymphoid malignancies. Histone deacetylases (HDACs)
remove acetyl groups from histone and non-histone proteins to allow the
transcriptional machinery access to the DNA. HDACs are grouped into four
categories with classes I, II, and IV, constituting the zinc-dependent
family members and class III comprising the NAD+ dependent members (also
known as sirtuins). We have developed compounds that target either the
zinc-dependent or the NAD+-dependent HDACs. SelSA-1 is a novel
selenium-containing hydroxamic acid derivative HDACi and AS4.064 is a
novel selenium analog of thiobarbituric acid and putative SIRT1
inhibitor. We have tested these compounds in several hematological cell
lines. The cells (a Hodgkin Lymphoma line, L540; a CML line, K562; and an
APL line, HL-60) showed decreased viability when treated with single
agents. In combination, the drugs further diminished viability. As
demonstrated by Annexin V staining, L540 cells undergo apoptosis when
treated with 0.25 uM and 0.5 uM SelSA-1, while cells treated with 5 uM
AS4.064 showed little Annexin V staining. The combination dramatically
increased apoptosis.SelSA-1 appears to be acting as an HDACi as cells
treated with the drug showed a dramatic increase in acetylation of
Histone 3 lysine 9 and Histone 4 lysine 8. AS4.064 had minimal effect on
these two sites, but cells treated with the combination showed a dramatic
increase in acetylation at both sites.We have previously demonstrated an
important role for c-Myc inhibition in the activity of HDACi in lymphoid
malignancies. The combination of AS4.064 and SelSA-1 showed enhanced
inhibition of c-Myc protein levels in L540 cells. The acetylation of p53
is important for apoptosis; therefore, we examined the acetylation status
of several lysine residues after treatment with the drugs in L540 cells.
SelSA-1 increased acetylation of lysines 320 and 382 in a dose-dependent
manner, but their acetylation residues was not further enhanced by the
addition of AS4.064. Acetylation of lysine 373 was relatively unaffected
by either single agent, but the drug combination dramatically enhanced
K373 acetylation. Lysine 120 is important for the specific activation of
pro-apoptotic p53 targets. SelSA1 increased K120 acetylation and the
combination further enhanced acetylation. We are currently using qRT-PCR
and SuperArrays to identify other genes important for regulating the
response to this drug combination.In summary, both the novel SIRT1
inhibitor, AS-64, and the novel HDACi, SelSa-1, show growth inhibitory
and pro-apoptotic activity in multiple hematological lines, alone and in
combination. Inhibition of all HDAC classes, including the NAD+ catalyzed
deacetylases, show activity in hematological malignancies. Clinical
development of these agents is warranted.

