Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a Quantitative Immunofluorescence imaging assay to
assess -catenin translocation and multiplex biomarkers for
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) in tumor tissues.


Background: Wnt/-catenin signaling and cadherin-mediated cell adhesion
are two processes that promote cell proliferation and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of carcinomas. Therapeutic
inhibitors of Wnt-induced tumor activation prevent stabilization and
nuclear translocation of -catenin and putatively lead to inhibition of
tumor metastasis by upregulation of E-Cadherin and downregulation of
N-Cadherin and Vimentin.Methods: A multiplex quantitative
immunofluorescence (qIFA) assay was developed to assess changes in levels
of EMT biomarkers (E-Cadherin, N-Cadherin, Vimentin/Pancytokeratin) as
well as monitor intracellular localization of -catenin in tumor tissues.
A panel of highly specific antibodies against EMT targets,
directly-conjugated to various fluorophores, were optimized for multiplex
staining of FFPE tissues using colorectal (CRC) and triple-negative
breast (TNBC) cancer cell lines and xenograft tissues as tumor controls
for target expression. Rat kidney was used as positive control for
endogenous biomarker expression in tissues. Image acquisition was
performed with Confocal and Epifluorescence microscopy. Image
segmentation and quantitative multiplex analysis were performed using NIS
Elements and Definiens Tissue Studio software to obtain total mean
integrated signal per biomarker within a tissue region of
interest.Results: Fitness for purpose evaluation of the biomarkers was
performed in vitro with several cell lines and compounds to demonstrate
nuclear translocation of -catenin as well as EMT-mediated changes in E-
to N-Cadherin ratio. A431 squamous epithelial cell lines treated with
Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) induced Adherens Junction (AJ) dissociation
of membrane E-Cadherin and -catenin while co-treatment with specific
inhibitors to glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) induced a 5-fold
increase in the nuclear to cytoplasmic mean intensity ratio of -catenin
after 24h. TGF-treatment of the NMuMG mouse epithelial cell line induced
a significant decrease in E- to N-Cadherin membrane intensity ratio after
48 and 72h in vitro. Studies with human TNBC or APC-mutated CRC mouse
xenograft models using HDAC or Src/Abl kinase inhibitors to compare pre-
and post-treatment effects on EMT biomarker staining will be
presented.Conclusion: We have developed a quantitative imaging assay that
integrates multiplex changes in EMT biomarkers to assay pharmacodynamic
activities of potential targeted agents currently in development at the
National Cancer Institute (NCI). This assay could also be applied for
retrospective analysis of clinical samples to document drug-induced
changes in tumor phenotypes. Funded by NCI Contract No. HHSN261200800001E.

