Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KDR amplification in NSCLC is associated with sensitivity to VEGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors.


Targeted therapies designed to inhibit the vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) pathway have been extensively evaluated in the treatment of
malignancies including Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC). VEGF pathway
inhibitors such as bevacizumab, or the multitargeted receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) vandetanib and sorafenib, have been shown to
prolong progression-free survival (PFS) and/or overall survival (OS).
These benefits, however, have been modest, seen only in subsets of
patients. Thus, predictive markers for identifying which patients are
likely to benefit are critically needed. Although expression of VEGF
receptor-2 (VEGFR-2, also known as KDR) was initially thought to
primarily occur in endothelial cells, VEGFR-2 has been detected on
malignant cells, including lung cancer cells, and in NSCLC,
overexpression of VEGFR-2 on tumor cells is associated with a poor
clinical outcome. Amplification of KDR has been detected in lung cancer
specimens at a relatively high frequency (9% and 32%). The consequences
of KDR copy number gains (CNGs) are not yet understood. Recently, we have
shown that NSCLC cell lines with KDR copy number gains (CNGs) were
associated with in vitro resistance to platinum chemotherapy, and KDR CNG
predicted worse overall survival in patients who received platinum
adjuvant therapy but not in untreated patients. We investigated the
hypothesis that NSCLC tumor cells with KDR CNG display increased
sensitivity to VEGFR TKIs compared to tumor cells without KDR CNG. In
tumor cell lines with KDR CNG, treatment with exogenous VEGF ligand
enhanced cell motility and this was inhibited by VEGFR blockade with
TKIs. Multiple receptor tyrosine kinases have been shown to drive HIF-1
levels, and NSCLC cells with KDR CNG express elevated levels of HIF-1 in
normoxic conditions compared to NSCLC cell lines without KDR CNG. Here,
we show that in NSCLC cell lines with KDR CNG, VEGFR TKIs decreased
protein levels of HIF-1 and HIF-1- regulated proteins. Furthermore, we
report a clinical case in which a NSCLC patient with KDR CNG as
determined by SNP array had a partial response to VEGFR inhibition with
sorafenib.

