Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting urokinase plasminogen activator: evaluation of
activity-based imaging probes in an orthotopic breast cancer model.


The urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) system is a proteolytic cascade
involved in tumor invasion and metastasis. uPA and its inhibitor PAI-1
are described as biomarkers for breast cancer with the highest level of
evidence. For the screening of uPA in breast tumors with commercially
available ELISA kits that determine the total uPA content (active and
inactive), fresh tumor tissue is required. Molecular imaging with
activity-based uPA probes might overcome this limitation. Therefore we
have developed some highly selective, non-peptidic and specific uPA
activity-based probes based on the irreversible uPA inhibitor UAMC-00150.
In this study we describe the evaluation of a fluorescent Cy5 labeled and
a 18F labeled PET probe in the high uPA expressing MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer mouse model to make the step towards clinical translation of this
imaging biomarker.Orthotopic MDA-MB-231 tumors were established in nude
mice and subjected to uPA imaging at a tumor volume of 150mm3. For the
fluorescent imaging, three test groups were considered (n=5): mice from
the first and the second experimental group received a single dose of
equimolar amounts (0.23 Mol/kg) Cy5-uPA-probe or its inactivated
hydrolyzed variant, respectively. The third group received an injection
with unlabeled uPA inhibitor, 30 min before administration of Cy5-uPA
probe, in a concentration that was 70-fold higher than the probe
concentration. Mice were imaged at different time points for 48 h post
injection (p.i.) and were subsequently sacrificed for ex vivo imaging and
histology. PET imaging (n=15) was performed after i.v. injection of the
radiotracer with a maximum of 0,2ml and/or 0,5mCi per injection,
resulting in a range of 0,15-0,5mCi/injection. Animals were scanned at
15, 45, 90, 240 and 360 minutes p.i. At each time point, 3 mice were
sacrificed to generate ex vivo biodistribution data.The Cy5-uPA-probe
demonstrated good tumor-targeting properties in the high uPA-expressing
breast tumor model, with fluorescent intensities reaching a maximum at 24
h post-probe administration in mice treated with Cy5-uPA-probe alone. The
groups treated with the inactivated probe or the unlabeled inhibitor
showed a significant decrease in the fluorescent tumor signal (p>0,016),
which was also confirmed on histology. PET imaging with the 18F-uPA-probe
showed a peak tumor uptake of 2.76 0.37 %ID/g at 4 h p.i. Further in
vitro PPB and ex vivo HPLC data revealed a high affinity of the tracer
for blood proteins and a high metabolisation rate potentially explaining
the rather moderate to low tumor uptake of the current PET uPa
biomarker.In conclusion, fluorescent imaging data clearly indicate that
the Cy5-uPA-probe enables non-invasive NIR-imaging of uPA expression in
tumors in vivo. The first PET experiments indicate translational
capabilities, for which we are now improving the pharmacokinetics of this
and future uPa radiotracers.

