Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative genomic and transcriptomic analysis in idenfitication
of biomarkers of chemoresistance in serous epithelial ovarian cancer.


Resistance to platinum-based chemotherapy remains a major impediment in
the treatment of serous epithelial ovarian cancer. The objective of this
study was to use gene expression and copy number profiling to delineate
major deregulated pathways and biomarker networks associated with the
development of intrinsic chemotherapy resistance with exposure to
standard first-line therapy for ovarian cancer. The study cohort
comprised 28 high grade serous ovarian cancer patients divided into two
groups based on their varying sensitivity to first-line chemotherapy
using progression free survival (PFS) as a surrogate of response. Twelve
patient tumors demonstrating relative resistance to platinum based
chemotherapy corresponding to shorter PFS (less than 6 months) were
compared to 16 tumors from platinum-sensitive patients (PFS more than
18months). Molecular profiling was performed using Affymetrix
high-resolution microarray platforms to permit global comparisons of gene
expression levels and copy number profiles between tumors from the
resistant group with the sensitive group. Microarray data analysis
revealed a set of 227 discriminating genes of which expression levels may
be influencing differential chemotherapy response between the two groups.
Pathway analysis of these genes showed the,PI3K,NFkB and IGF1 networks as
some of the significant networks distinguishing the chemotherapy
resistant with the sensitive group. Copy number analysis performed using
Nexus copy number version 6.1 revealed differences in the chromosomal
regions, 4q31.22, 5q13.2, 9p24.3, 2p23.2, 16q21, 6q14.1, 7p22.3, 12p13
and Xq.Integrative copy number and gene expression profiling will
delineate the drivers of chemotherapy resistance in patients undergoing
standard platinum-based treatment of ovarian cancer. Future studies to
validate these markers are necessary to apply this knowledge to
biomarker-based clinical trials.

