Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDIP-BAP31 complex bridges endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria
during ER-stress mediated apoptosis.


Resolved ER stress response is fundamentally essential for intracellular
homeostatic balance, but unsettled ER stress can lead to apoptosis. In
addition, imbalances in homeostasis would result in improper cell
functioning that may become an important pathogenic factor in a number of
prevalent diseases, including neurodegenerative diseases, metabolic
disorders, and cancers. However, the molecular mechanisms relating ER
stress to apoptosis still remain largely unfamiliar. Here, we show that a
proapoptotic p53 target, CDIP, acts as a key signal transducer of ER
stress response. Applying a biochemical/proteomics approach, we
characterize BAP31, B-cell receptor-associated protein 31 that is an
integral protein of ER and known to crosstalk with mitochondrial proteins
during the apoptosis process, as an interacting partner of CDIP. Upon ER
stress, CDIP is induced and enhances an association with BAP31 at the ER
membrane. We found that the CDIP-BAP31 complex formation is essential for
ER stress-mediated apoptotic process. CDIP-/- or CDIP knock-down cells
are strongly resistant to ER-stress-induced apoptosis. Moreover, we show
that CDIP up-regulation and binding to BAP31 is required for BAP31
cleavage via caspase-8 activation in response to ER stress and also
responsible for BAP31-Bcl-2 association, then resulting in Bcl-2
sequestration from BAX. The recruitment of Bcl-2 with BAP31-CDIP complex
triggers BAX oligomerization/activation that causes its translocation to
the mitochondria, followed by cyctochrome c release. Genetic knockout of
CDIP in mice also leads to impaired response to ER-stress-mediated
apoptosis, likely through reduced BAX activation. Together, our data
demonstrate that the CDIP-BAP31Bcl-2/BAX regulatory circuit represents a
novel mechanism for establishing an ER-mitochondrial cross-talk for ER
stress-mediated apoptosis signaling.

