Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro effects of 4-OXO-docosahexaenoic ester on cell signaling
in molecular subtypes of human breast cancer cell lines.


In vivo preclinical evidence of a heterogeneous effect of n-3 fatty acids
(N3FA) on cell signaling pathways associated with the reduced growth of
mammary carcinomas (Cancer Res. 2012 Aug 1;72(15):3795-806) is consistent
with the expectation that N3FA will not exert uniform effects on all
molecular subtypes of breast cancer. Similarly, available evidence
indicates that specific metabolites of N3FA are synthesized by mammalian
cells and that they exert metabolite specific biological activities. To
begin to unravel the complex relationships among molecular subtype
specific cell signaling and effects exerted by specific N3FA metabolites
on those pathways, a series of proof-in-concept experiments were
conducted using cell lines representing 5 molecular subtypes of human
breast cancer (BT-474, MCF-7, SKBR-3, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468) and
4-oxo-docosahexaenoic keto ester (4-oxo-DHA), a putative metabolite of
docosahexaneoic acid (DHA) that has superior activity to that of DHA in
inducing PPAR activation in vitro. 4-oxo-DHA induced dose dependent
inhibition of cell number accumulation of all molecular subtypes but the
dose and time responses varied markedly with MCF-7 cells being the least
affected and MDA-MB-468 being inhibited to the greatest extent. Detailed
mechanistic studies in BT-474, SKBR-3, and MDAMB-463 revealed subtype
specific patterns of cell cycle inhibition and apoptosis induction with
apoptosis induction dominating in BT-474 and SKBR-3 and inhibition of
cell proliferation and apoptosis induction accounting for growth
inhibition of MDA-MB-468. While some molecular subtypes were inhibited by
mechanisms involving PPAR activation, others underwent cell growth
inhibition via modulation of multiple regulatory nodes in the mTOR
signaling network. Evidence is consistent with differential sensitivity
among cell types based on whether they are basal or luminal in origin.
The experiments described offer a useful complementary approach to the in
vivo experiments needed to resolve the N3FA-breast cancer conundrum.This
work was supported by grant KG081632 from the Susan G. Komen Foundation.

