Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of PI3K-mTOR pathway using combination of chloroquine
and aspirin regimen leads to apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells.


Pancreatic cancer ranks as the fourth most deadly form of cancer in the
United States with approximately 37,000 deaths each year. The present
study aims to evaluate the combinatorial chemopreventive effects of low
doses of chloroquine (CQ) and aspirin (ASP) alone and in combination CQA
(CQ+ASP) on three pancreatic cancer cell lines, MIA PaCa-2, Panc-1 and
BxPC-3. Results demonstrated that low doses of CQ (6.25M) and ASP (1mM)
alone did not reduce cell viability, whereas combination CQA reduced cell
viability by 80% (PPancreatic cancer ranks as the fourth most deadly form
of cancer in the United States with approximately 37,000 deaths each
year. The present study aims to evaluate the combinatorial
chemopreventive effects of low doses of chloroquine (CQ) and aspirin
(ASP) alone and in combination CQA (CQ+ASP) on three pancreatic cancer
cell lines, MIA PaCa-2, Panc-1 and BxPC-3. Results demonstrated that low
doses of CQ (6.25M) and ASP (1mM) alone did not reduce cell viability,
whereas combination CQA reduced cell viability by 80% (P<0.001). CQA
combination blocked cell cycle progression at G0/G1 checkpoint. The CQA
treatment for 24 h inhibited the NF-B p50 DNA binding activity by 45%
(PPancreatic cancer ranks as the fourth most deadly form of cancer in the
United States with approximately 37,000 deaths each year. The present
study aims to evaluate the combinatorial chemopreventive effects of low
doses of chloroquine (CQ) and aspirin (ASP) alone and in combination CQA
(CQ+ASP) on three pancreatic cancer cell lines, MIA PaCa-2, Panc-1 and
BxPC-3. Results demonstrated that low doses of CQ (6.25M) and ASP (1mM)
alone did not reduce cell viability, whereas combination CQA reduced cell
viability by 80% (P<0.001). CQA combination blocked cell cycle
progression at G0/G1 checkpoint. The CQA treatment for 24 h inhibited the
NF-B p50 DNA binding activity by 45% (P<0.01) in MIA PaCa-2 and BxPC-3
cells, but no NF-B inhibition observed in Panc-1 cells. Mechanistic
studies revealed that treatment with CQA combination increased the
expression of LC3-II protein, indicates inhibition of autophagy. In order
to verify the involvement of PI3K and mTOR pathway in CQA-induced
apoptosis, we used PI3K inhibitor (3-MA) and mTOR inhibitor (Rapamycin)
and analyzed by cell viability assay. The inhibition of PI3K by 3-MA
pretreatment enhanced the cell growth inhibition of CQA treatment,
whereas the inhibition of m-TOR by rapamycin pretreatment attenuated CQA
induced reduction in cell viability. Overall, our results for the first
time, illustrate that low dose CQA combinations impart synergistic
suppressive activity than chemopreventive agents alone, thus confirming
the importance of novel combination chemoprevention strategies against
pancreatic cancer.

