Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The N-terminal projection domain of the microtubule associated
protein tau inhibits TNF signaling.


Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha (TNF) is a multifunctional pro-inflammatory
cytokine implicated in inducing both tumor promotion and tumor
inhibition. This paradoxical effect can be partly explained by the fact
that TNF acts as a regulator of both proliferation and apoptosis; however
the mechanisms and factors associated with how or whether a tumor cell
responds to a microenvironment rich in TNF have not been fully resolved.
Here we provide evidence that the microtubule associate protein Tau
inhibits TNF signaling through its N-terminal domain and implicate it as
a novel regulator of the cellular response to this key cytokine. Our
findings indicate that over-expression of Tau in the human breast cancer
cell lines MCF7, SkBr3 and in the pheochromocytoma cell line PC12
suppresses TNF induced apoptosis evident in the control cells. TNF
induced cell apoptosis in control cells is triggered as early as 6 hrs
post-treatment with hallmark features of cell shrinkage, membrane
blebbing, disruption of tubulin architecture and caspase-3 activation.
While over-expression of wild type full length Tau isoform in these cell
lines, completely abrogates all TNF associated apoptotic phenotypes.
Aside from inhibiting TNF induced apoptosis, Tau over-expression also
interferes with TNF induced NFB activation. This is evident by a
significant decrease in NFB nuclear translocation in Tau over-expressed
cells compared to controls. Suppression of TNF signaling by Tau is not
associated with its tubulin interaction since a truncated N-terminal
projection domain lacking all microtubule binding domains still provides
resistance to TNF induced apoptosis and NFB activation. These findings
lead us to conclude that the functional domain of Tau that regulates TNF
response lies within its N-terminal region and current mechanistic
studies indicate this region inhibits TNF receptor clustering, which is
needed for signaling. Our data provide direct evidence that the
N-terminal domain of the microtubule associated protein Tau can inhibit
TNF signaling in tumor cells. These findings indicate a novel function
for Tau and add to our knowledge of how a tumor cell responds to TNF
signaling.Citation Format: Shawon Debnath, Peter Hannon, Kristina
Toropova, Nelson Nunez Rodriguez, Alejandra Alonso, Jimmie Eugene Fata.
The N-terminal projection domain of the microtubule associated protein
tau inhibits TNF signaling. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2961. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2961

