Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of annexin A8 is a common molecular phenotype of
aberrant breast acinar morphogenesis induced by different genetic factors.


It is estimated that up to 90% of women have benign breast lesions, some
of which are pre-malignant. In situ lesions, particularly the ones that
involve the ducts (ductal carcinoma in situ, DCIS), have the potential to
progress into invasive malignant lesions and become life threatening.
These breast premalignant states are identified because of specific
morphological tissue abnormalities. Three-dimensional (3D) cultures of
human mammary epithelial cells closely recapitulate breast acinar
morphogenesis. While untransformed mammary epithelial cells form hollow
acini, lined by polarized, non-proliferating cells, breast cancer cells
form acini filled with non-polarized, actively proliferating cells,
similar to DCIS. By using a proteomic approach in a panel of
morphologically aberrant acini derived from human breast epithelial
cells, we found that the disruption of acinar morphogenesis by different
genetic factors generates a common proteomic signature. Among the
proteins that we found consistently upregulated, we identified Annexin A8
(ANXA8), a member of the annexin family of calcium and membrane-binding
proteins with a wide range of cellular functions, including cell
division, apoptosis, and cell growth regulation. We tested ANXA8
expression in tissue samples from patients with atypical ductal
hyperplasia (ADH), and tissue microarrays of DCIS, with or without,
history of invasive breast cancer. Interestingly, this analysis detected
ANXA8 increased expression in atypical proliferating ducts relative to
non-proliferative ducts, making ANXA8 a potential marker of breast
pre-malignancies.Acknowledgments: this study was funded by grants of the
Susan Komen Foundation, the Breast Cancer Coalition of Rochester, the
Friends for an Earlier Test of Breast Cancer Foundation.Citation Format:
Stefano Rossetti, Francesca Corlazzoli, Nicoletta Sacchi. Upregulation of
annexin A8 is a common molecular phenotype of aberrant breast acinar
morphogenesis induced by different genetic factors. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2497.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2497

