Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improvement of tissue distribution by the treatment of novel
different double-arms polyethyleneglycol modified liposome encapsulating
doxorubicin.


[Purpose] Polyethyleneglycol (PEG) modification on liposomal membrane
increases therapeutic index by improvement of targeting based on
prolonged blood stream circulation. In contrast, some accumulation of
drug after liposome treatment has also been observed in normal tissues,
it is necessary to improve liposomal composition on the decrease of
adverse reactions. Particularly, doxorubicin (DOX) encapsulated liposome
has some adverse reactions as cardiac toxicity or hand-foot syndrome,etc.
To contribute superior liposome formulation, different double arms PEG in
a molecule(DDA-PEG) was synthesized and was clarified effectiveness in
our previous reports. In this study, we examined physical properties of
novel synthesized DDA-PEG, and the tissue distribution of the DOX
encapsulated liposome with modification of these DDA-PEGs. [Methods] Two
DDA-PEGs with (PEG1000 and PEG500) or (PEG2000 and PEG500) were
synthesized. Critical micelle concentration (cmc) in 10 mM Tris-HCl
buffer (pH7.4) and 10 mM lactate buffer (pH4.0) was measured by the
method of florescent probe using the 8-anilinonaphthalene-1-sulfonate
(ANS). Octanol-buffer partitioning value was determined. DOX encapsulated
liposomes with the modification of each DDA-PEGs were prepared by
DSPC/cholesterol/DSPG-Na/DOX/PEG-lipid =100:100:60:18:7.5 mol according
to the method of Bangham. M5076 ovarian sarcoma cells were transplanted
into the backs of BDF1 mice, and each liposome was injected intravenously
at a dose of 2.5 mg DOX/kg on 15, 18 and 21 day after tumor inoculation.
The mice were sacrificed after 2 day from last administration, and the
tumor was removed and weighted. Moreover, DOX concentrations in each
tissue were determined. [Results and discussion] The cmc of all
PEG-lipids were same level. In PEG(2000, 500)-modified liposome, DOX
concentrations in tumors were equal to that in PEG2000-modified liposome.
On the other hand, DOX concentration in the heart after PEG(2000, 500)
modified liposome and PEG(1000,500)-modified liposome treatments were one
second and one sixth compared with DOX solution group, respectively.
According to these results, it was expected that novel DDA-PEG-modified
liposome was able to reduce the cardiac toxicity which is adverse
reaction by DOX. The DOX concentration in the liver was showed a low
level by PEG (1000, 500) modified liposome. It was suggested that novel
DDA- PEG-modified liposome had the effect of avoiding the uptake into the
liver. In conclusion, it was suggested that PEG(1000,500) modified
liposome could decrease the DOX level in heart, and had ability of
accumulation into tumor and avoidance from reticuloendothelial cells as
same as PEG2000-modified liposome as known liposome.

