Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A Phase 1 dose escalation study to establish the maximum tolerated
dose (MTD), pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) parameters of
hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) in combination with vorinostat (V) in patients
with advanced solid tumors - final results.


Background: Autophagy is a cellular process that generates energy to
assure cell survival in response to insults such as hypoxia, nutrient
deprivation or cytotoxic mediators. Autophagy contributes to cancer cell
survival as well as drug resistance. Several anticancer agents, including
Vorinostat (V) are reported to induce autophagy as a cytoprotective
mechanism. In preclinical models, the addition of Hydroxycholoquine (HCQ)
to V inhibited autophagy and significantly increased the anticancer
effects of V. The objectives of this trial were to determine the MTD of
HCQ in combination with V both administered daily (QD) in patients (pts)
with advanced solid tumors, to evaluate PK and PD parameters, and test
anti-tumor activity. Biomarkers were evaluated in tumors and peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) to investigate synergistic antitumor
activity of V in combination with HCQ.Methods: We used a 3+3 dose
escalation design of V at 300-400 mg QD plus HCQ QD at 400-1000 mg in 21
day cycles. Patients with advanced solid tumors and no available
treatment with ECOG PS 0-2 and adequate organ function were
eligible.Results: 32 patients were enrolled with 27 evaluable for
toxicity studies. No dose limiting toxicity (DLT) was observed in cohorts
1 or 2. In cohort 3 (400 mg V/600 mg HCQ), 1/6 pts had DLT of Gr 3 anemia
and fatigue. In cohort 4 (400 mg V/800 mg HCQ), 4/8 pts had DLT with Gr 3
fatigue (3 pts) and Gr 2 seizure on C1D8 (1 pt). De-escalation to 400 mg
V/600 mg HCQ resulted in no further DLTs, defining the MTD. 10 pts were
treated at the MTD. Treatment-related toxicities were Gr 1-2: nausea (11
pts), diarrhea (8), fatigue (6), anorexia (4), weight loss (4), anemia
(4), and elevated creatinine (4). Gr 3 toxicities were fatigue (3),
anemia, thrombocytopenia and neutropenia (1 each). One pt (renal cell
cancer) had a confirmed PR (cohort 2, completed 43 cycles), and 2 pts
with colorectal cancer had prolonged SD (>4 cycles). HCQ trough and V
plasma concentrations (preliminary) showed no drug interactions compared
to previously published data. PD analyses of biomarkers of HCQ and V in
PBMCs at baseline compared to weeks 1 and 6 confirmed the results from
pre-clinical studies showing accumulation of autophagic vesicles and
induction of LC3-II, p21 and cathepsin D. The results of biopsies from 3
patients at MTD demonstrated greater induction of these PD markers in
tumor compared to PBMC.Conclusions: The MTD was established as HCQ 600 mg
+ V 400 mg. Dose-dependent fatigue represented DLT in several patients.
Anti-tumor activity was seen in one patient with RCC and 2 patients with
CRC had prolonged SD. Based on these data phase II studies are planned in
patients with renal and colorectal cancer.

