Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53 mutation in Rb deficient neuroendocrine lung and thyroid cells
results in high grade neuroendocrine carcinomas promoted by mTOR pathway
activation .


Small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) and medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC)
are aggressive, rapidly metastatic neuroendocrine carcinomas that portend
a dismal prognosis. Rb loss is detected in 90% of SCLC and p53 is mutated
in 80% of cases providing evidence that Rb and p53 suppress SCLC.
Extensive genetic evidence in mouse models also supports a critical role
for Rb in suppressing MTC: however, the mechanisms promoting
tumorigenesis in Rb and p53 deficient cells and their relation to
therapeutic response remain unclear. In this study, a conditional SCLC
and MTC mouse model was generated by targeting Rb and p53 ablation or
mutant protein expression to lung and thyroid epithelial cells. Rb loss
alone resulted in slowly progressing MTC and lung neuroendocrine
hyperplasia. While p53 alteration alone was not sufficient for tumor
initiation, p53 loss or mutation in Rb deficient cells led to MTC and
SCLC with metastases, phenotypically mimicking human disease. Mice
expressing p53 R172H (R175H in human), but not R270H (R273H in human),
mutant protein had a gain-of-function phenotype as evidenced by decreased
survival of Rb/p53R172H as compared to Rb/p53 ablated mice. No dominant
negative effect was detected by comparing Rb/p53+/mutant to Rb/p53+/
mice. Mechanistic studies revealed p53 dependent mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) pathway activation in MTC without coincident AKT or MAPK
pathway activation. Similar mTOR pathway activation was detected in
Rb/p53 deficient and mutant lungs. Rapamycin dramatically inhibited mTOR
pathway signaling in Rb/p53 deficient or mutant thyroid tumors and lungs
in vivo as well as in MTC and SCLC tumor cells in culture. Interestingly,
mTORC1 inhibition was not associated with feedback AKT or MAPK pathway
activation in vitro or in vivo as previously reported for breast and
prostate cancers. Rapamycin inhibited MTC and SCLC tumor cell growth
demonstrating a functional role for mTOR activation in tumor progression.
These studies identify distinct, cooperative Rb and p53 tumor suppressive
functions. The oncogenic stimulus provided by Rb loss induces aberrant
cell growth and leads to a p53 tumor suppressive response that inhibits
tumor progression and mTOR dependent cell growth demonstrating that mTOR
pathway inhibition is a critical p53 tumor suppressive function. Notably,
rapamycin did not result in feedback MAPK or AKT pathway activation
providing evidence this is not a general mechanism limiting therapeutic
response to mTORC1 inhibition. Together these studies provide mechanistic
links between genetic alterations and aberrant signaling pathways
critical in carcinogenesis. In addition to providing mechanistic
insights, this genetically engineered mouse model provides a robust
preclinical platform to explore novel therapeutic strategies and define
mechanisms underlying treatment response and resistance.

