Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of an innovative 3D cell culture system to study
tumor-stroma interactions in cancer cells.


Introduction: We describe a novel 3D co-culture method using non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines in combination with a lung fibroblast
cell line in the hanging drop technology. This method allows the
investigation of tumour-stroma interactions and addresses the importance
of having a more in vivo like cell culture model. Compared to other 3D
models, it better reflects tumour growth in its microenvironment since no
addition of growth factors or artificial extracellular matrix (ECM)
substitutes are required.Methods: 96-well hanging drop microtiter plates
(InSphero AG, Zrich, Switzerland) were used for the production of 3D
mono- and co-cultures. In these hanging drops the two NSCLC cell lines
A549 and Colo699 were cultivated either alone or co-cultured with lung
fibroblasts. The viability of tumour spheroids was confirmed after five
and ten days by using Annexin V/Propidium Iodide staining for
flow-cytometry. Tumour fibroblast spheroid aggregation was displayed
either by scanning electron microscope, semi-thin sections,
immunofluorescence or by immunohistochemistry (IHC). In addition to
conventional histology (H&E), protein expression of e-cadherin, vimentin,
Ki67 and -smooth muscle actin (ASMA) was investigated by IHC.Results:
Lower viability was seen in A549 monocultures compared to co-cultures,
whereas Colo699 monocultures showed better viability compared to
co-cultures. Ki67 expression varied significantly between mono- and
co-cultures in both tumour cell lines. The co-cultivation with
fibroblasts led to an increased expression of this protein indicating
increased proliferation. Furthermore, a vimentin upregulation and an
e-cadherin downregulation could be detected during the course of the
cultivation indicating a transition to a more mesenchymal
phenotype.Conclusion: We demonstrate that the hanging drops technology is
a promising technique for the generation of tumour spheroid co-cultures.
Furthermore, these spheroids allow the investigation of tumour-stroma
interactions and a better reflection of in vivo conditions of cancer
cells in their microenvironment. Our method holds potential to contribute
to the development of anti-cancer agents and support the search for
predictive biomarkers.

