Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stringent analysis of large-scale siRNA screens identifies a
kinase fusion oncogene.


The interpretation of RNAi knockdown experiments can be challenging due
to the extensive off-target effects exhibited by siRNAs and shRNAs. This
has led to the reporting of results that cannot be independently
verified, or to the identification of putative cancer targets that are
insufficiently robust to support industrial drug discovery efforts. The
problems associated with off target effects are particularly acute in
high throughput RNAi screens, whose results often differ wildly between
laboratories using different experimental platforms. As a result, the
validity of published large-scale RNAi screens has recently been called
into question.Here we report results from large scale RNAi screens to
identify genes essential for the proliferation or survival of cancer
cells. To overcome the inherent liabilities of RNAi screens, we have
increased the experimental power by using typically 8, and up to 20 RNAi
triggers per gene, and have developed novel statistical algorithms that
exploit this increased power. Importantly, this approach allows the
calculation of a false discovery rate (FDR) that accurately predicts the
ability of results to be confirmed by independent labs using independent
reagents, solving a key issue of such screens. Using a stringent FDR
cutoff of 5%, known essential genes and driver oncogenes such as KRAS,
ERBB2 and BRAF are readily identified, demonstrating the robustness and
power of the method. We have also identified a number of novel cancer
targets. We present the identification and genetic and pharmacological
validation of one of these targets, a kinase present as a fusion partner
in multiple fusion oncogenes in primary tumors. Our data demonstrate that
large-scale RNAi screens can be a robust and independently verifiable
tool to uncover previously unknown cancer vulnerabilities which have yet
to be characterized despite extensive genomic sequencing efforts.

