Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic landscape of metastatic colorectal cancer.


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) results from the accumulation of
multiple genetic and epigenetic alterations in the genome of colorectal
epithelial cells. Next to large genomic DNA copy number changes, small
focal alterations can be identified, often enriched for known cancer
genes. However, not all tumors present the same pattern of alterations,
as CRC is a heterogeneous disease. The varying underlying biology results
in different clinical outcomes, such as response to treatment. The
present study aimed to document the landscape of DNA copy number changes,
with special focus on focal alterations, in primary tumors of a defined
subset of colorectal cancer patients who develop metastatic disease and
are eligible for systemic treatment. Material and methods: Tumors were
selected from mCRC patients, who participated in two Dutch multicenter
phase III clinical trials, i.e. CAIRO and CAIRO2 and were treated
according to three different regimens . For all patients well-defined
clinical data is available. Alterations were analyzed by high-resolution
array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), with DNA isolated from
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) archival blocks of 349 patients.
As a reference matched normal germ-line material was used. In this way
only tumor specific alterations were identified. Also, frequent copy
number variations present in the general population can be distinguished
from actual somatic alterations. Results: Most frequently observed large
chromosomal alterations were losses of chromosomes 8p and 18 and gains of
chromosomes 7, 8q 13, and 20. Seven genomic regions were significantly
associated with progression free survival (PFS). The focal alterations
detected are significantly enriched for cancer genes and genes frequently
mutated in colorectal cancer. The gene list includes PTEN, TP53, PARK2,
A2BP2 and ATBP2 located in focal losses. On focal amplifications known
drugtargets such as ERBB2, EGFR and VEGF were found. Conclusion: Based on
initial results we hypothesize that DNA copy number profiling may be used
for therapy selection and to guide individualized anticancer therapy.
Chromosomal copy number alterations in CRC have been related to response
to treatment. Moreover focal alterations were enriched for cancer genes.
This study was performed within the framework of CTMM, the Center for
Translational Molecular Medicine

