Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ewing sarcoma-derived iPS cell lines are resistant to chemotherapy
but exhibit EWS-FLI1-independent, increased rapamycin sensitivity.


Ewing sarcoma (EWS) is a highly invasive, undifferentiated tumor of
unknown histogenic origin and is the second most common type of primary
bone malignancy in children and young adolescents. In approximately 85%
of patients, tumor development is associated with the expression of the
EWS-FLI1 fusion protein generated by the t(11;22)(q24;q12) chromosomal
translocation. Although EWS tumors initially respond to aggressive
combination cytotoxic chemotherapy, many tumors recur and metastasize.
Disease relapse is thought to result from the outgrowth of a
subpopulation of chemotherapy-resistant cancer stem cells (CSCs).
Putative EWS CSCs have been identified in EWS-related cell lines and
human xenografts as chemotherapy-resistant stem-like subpopulations
expressing high ALDH. However, CSC isolation has proven to be challenging
due to the low frequency of CSCs in vivo, the absence of specific cell
surface markers for sorting, and the harsh conditions required to isolate
CSCs from tumor tissues. Methods have been developed to induce the
reprogramming of somatic tissues into a stem-like physiologic state
similar to that of embryonic stem (ES) cells. Such strategies have been
utilized to successfully generate induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)
from malignant tissues and have revealed significant similarities in the
molecular and phenotypic characteristics of in vitro-derived iPSCs and in
vivo-isolated CSCs. Thus, iPSCs have begun to serve as a prospective
model for the CSC. We have generated iPSCs from the CHLA10 drug-resistant
metastatic EWS cell line. These EWS iPSCs express characteristic ES cell
surface markers, exhibit comparable DNA methylation patterns to
previously established ES and iPS cell lines, and possess the capacity to
differentiate into embryonic tissues in vivo. EWS iPSCs maintain
expression of the EWS-FLI1 mutant transcript, show elevated ALDH
expression, and exhibit increased drug resistance to vincristine,
etoposide, and actinomycin D compared to the parent EWS cell line.
Notably, EWS iPSCs are more sensitive to rapamycin than parent cells
despite the persistent expression of the oncogenic EWS-FLI1 transcript.
These results demonstrate that EWS iPSCs and EWS CSCs share numerous
molecular and phenotypic characteristics and suggest that the mTOR
signaling network participates in the regulation of iPSC maintenance and
viability despite the presence of EWS-FLI1. This work highlights EWS iPSC
as a potential model for the EWS CSC and provides a molecular foundation
for the use of rapamycin, alone or in combination with other signal
transduction pathway inhibitors, in targeting CSCs in Ewing sarcoma.
Supported by Department of Defense Grant W81XWH-07-1-0580. RJA is
supported by the endowed King Fahd Chair in Pediatric Oncology.

