Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel 4-(2-oxo-3-alkylimidazolidin-1-yl)benzenesulfonates highly
selective against breast cancer cells: Design, synthesis and biological
evaluation.


Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the second
cause of cancer death in women. In United-States, 229 060 new cases of
breast cancers will be diagnosed in 2012 and they will be responsible for
39 510 deaths. Approximately 70% of the women breast cancer tumors are
estrogen receptor positive (ER+). Unfortunately, around 35% of the
patients will develop chemoresistance to antihormone therapy into
aggressive hormone-independent tumors and about 10-20% of breast cancers
are found to be triple-negative (ER-, PR- and HER-) and do not respond to
hormonal therapy (e.g., tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors) and
trastuzumab. In this context, new treatments improving survival and
quality of life are intensively sought.To that end, we recently prepared
new antimicrotubule agents designated as phenyl
4-(2-oxoimidazolidin-1-yl)-benzenesulfonates (PIB-SOs, exemplified by
compound 1) exhibiting IC50 in the low nanomolar range and showing potent
antitumoral and antiangiogenic potency in chick chorioallantoic membrane
tumor assays (CAM assays). The structure-activity relationships studies
of PIB-SOs lead to the addition of an alkyl group onto the free NH group
of the 2-imidazolidone moiety which yielded phenyl
4-(2-oxo-3-alkylimidazolidin-1-yl)benzenesulfonates (PAIB-SOs,
exemplified by compound 2-4) that are highly selective against breast
cancer cell lines.A number of PAIB-SOs were prepared, characterized and
evaluated for their antiproliferative activity on several cancer cell
lines. The most potent compounds were assessed for their ability to
inhibit cell cycle progression and to disrupt the cytoskeleton. The
toxicity of PAIB-SOs was also assessed on chick embryos.Several PAIB-SOs
exhibited antiproliferative activities in nanomolar range several on
several breast cancer cells notably MCF-7, SK-BR-3 and the triple
negative MDA-MB-468 cells whereas they exhibited antiproliferative
activities in the micromolar range on non-sensitive cell lines notably
MDA-MB-231 human breast carcinoma, HT-29 colon carcinoma and M21 skin
melanoma cells showing a high selectivity ratios for the sensitive cells.
PAIB-SOs arrested the cell cycle progression in G2/M phase and disrupted
the cytoskeleton in sensitive lines. The selectivity mechanism of
PAIB-SOs against breast cancer cells has not been identified yet but it
is unrelated to hormone and HER2 receptors interactions suggesting that
these compounds might be prototypes of a new class of drugs targeting
human breast cancers.

