Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-634 restores drug sensitivity in tumor cells derived from
patients with terminal drug-resistant ovarian cancer.


The development of drug resistance is still a major impediment for the
successful treatment of cancer. This is particularly pressing in the case
of advanced ovarian cancer, which has a 5-year survival rate of 30%.
Ovarian cancer is treated with paclitaxel and platinum (e.g cisplatin or
carboplatin) combination chemotherapy. Despite an initial high
chemo-responsiveness, most ovarian cancer patients will relapse and
ultimately die of drug-resistant disease. The molecular processes that
contribute to resistance have been extensively studied, however, not much
is known about the role of microRNAs (miRNAs), small non-coding RNAs that
regulate gene expression.We compared miRNA expression profiles of
isogenic cisplatin sensitive and resistant cell line pairs. The only
miRNA that was consistently downregulated in all three resistant cell
lines was miR-634 (FDRThe development of drug resistance is still a major
impediment for the successful treatment of cancer. This is particularly
pressing in the case of advanced ovarian cancer, which has a 5-year
survival rate of 30%. Ovarian cancer is treated with paclitaxel and
platinum (e.g cisplatin or carboplatin) combination chemotherapy. Despite
an initial high chemo-responsiveness, most ovarian cancer patients will
relapse and ultimately die of drug-resistant disease. The molecular
processes that contribute to resistance have been extensively studied,
however, not much is known about the role of microRNAs (miRNAs), small
non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression.We compared miRNA
expression profiles of isogenic cisplatin sensitive and resistant cell
line pairs. The only miRNA that was consistently downregulated in all
three resistant cell lines was miR-634 (FDR<1%). Overexpression of
miR-634 in ovarian cancer cell lines gave rise to a minor, but
reproducible, cell cycle block and reduced cellular viability by 20-50%.
In addition, miR-634 transfection resensitized cisplatin-resistant
ovarian cancer cell lines. We next investigated whether miR-634
overexpression could enhance therapy response in a more clinical setting.
We isolated and cultured tumor cells from 7 patients that had become
refractory to carboplatin-paclitaxel combination chemotherapy. We show
that miR-634 overexpression causes a two-fold decrease in IC50 for
cisplatin and carboplatin treatment. In addition, a 1.3-fold decrease in
doxorubicin sensitivity was observed upon miR-634 overexpression.
Finally, overexpression of miR-634 resulted in downregulation of its
predicted targets Cyclin D1 and GRB2, ERK2, RSK1 and RSK2, components of
the Ras-MAPK pathway. The combined effect on these miR-634 targets may
explain the effects on the cell cycle, cellular viability and response to
chemotherapy.Altogether, our findings suggest that miR-634 modulates
important cancer relevant targets and that raising miR-634 levels can be
a means to resensitize chemotherapy resistant ovarian tumors.

