Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using three-dimensional (3D) culture systems to delineate the role
of RANKL in metastatic prostate cancer.


Introduction and Objective: While prostate cancer (PCa) is curable at
early diagnosis, metastatic PCa is terminal. Recent studies have shown
that Receptor Activator of NF kappa-B Ligand, RANKL, markedly enhances
bone metastasis (70-100%) by the LNCaP human PCa cell line in mice
compared to neo controls (0%). Multivariable tumor and microenvironmental
factors in vivo make it difficult to identify the specific cellular
response induced by RANKL causing PCa cell homing and growth in bone.
Current in vitro 2D cultures lack mechanical and biochemical properties
mimicking the bone microenvironment. Our preliminary data showed integrin
alpha2 is elevated in RANKL-over-expressing LNCaP cells. PCa interaction
with the major bone matrix protein Col1 may contribute to the metastatic
potential of LNCAP-RANKL cells. This study used 3D systems to explore the
role of RANKL in PCa-bone matrix interactions.Methods: 3D cultures of
RANKL-expressing (highly metastatic) or non-metastatic LNCaP cells were
evaluated in 2D, suspension cultures, on type 1 collagen (Col1) coated
polymeric meshes, embedded in Col1 gel or hydrogel mixed with Col1 for
growth, morphology, motility, and gene expression. Time-dependent cell
migration was assessed by a time-lapse imaging system.Results:
LNCAP-RANKL cells and Neo-expressing controls grew as aggregates in all
3D cultures but not 2D cultures. Col1 promoted less compact and more
widespread aggregation of LNCAP-RANKL cells in the 3D cultures,
exhibiting more motile and directional migratory behavior. A molecular
signature of 3D growth was generated and compared among different
conditions. Consistent with 2D studies, 3D qRT-PCR data showed RANKL
drove epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), shown by increased
expression of vimentin and N-cadherin but decreased E-cadherin. Decreased
expression of androgen receptor and PSA was observed in RANKL-expressing
PCa cells. Supporting the migration data, the presence of Col1 drove
RANKL-expressing PCa cells to express higher levels of c-Met
protooncogene, sensitizing PCa cell responses to the c-Met ligand,
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF).Conclusions: 3D culture systems were
established to study interactions between Col1 and metastatic or
non-metastatic PCa cells. 3D culture systems supported PCa cell growth,
while maintaining their classical markers, validating the reliability of
our 3D systems. Bone metastatic PCa cells preferentially exhibited EMT,
increased expression of 2 integrin, and c-Met protooncogene. These 3D
systems will be used to assess liquid biopsy specimens harvested from
human PCa patients to improve prognosis and therapeutic follow-up.

