Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibiting androgen receptor associated Src signaling with VAL201
inhibits breast cancer growth in an orthotopic xenograft model.


VAL201 is a specific inhibitor of androgen receptor (AR) and estrogen
receptor (ER) associated src signaling that has shown promising effects
to reduce prostate cancer growth in cancer cell cultures and animal
models. Inhibition of src by VAL201 takes place after androgen binding,
allowing inhibition of growth without blocking desirable
receptor-dependent transcriptional activity, and thereby eliminating the
majority of side effects associated with androgen deprivation therapies.
Majority of breast cancers are ER positive, and the hormonal treatment
includes depletion of estrogen by antiestrogens or aromatase inhibitors
(AIs). However, 88% of ER positive and 20-30% of ER negative breast
cancers are AR positive, and recently some have been shown to be
dependent on AR signaling. Furthermore, AI therapy can increase the
androgen levels, as androgens are no longer converted to estrogens. We
have studied the effects of Val201 on breast cancer growth in a xenograft
model using estrogen-dependent, AR expressing MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
Five-week old athymic nude mice were allocated to groups according to
body weight (n=10/group). Slow releasing pellets containing 0.72 mg of
17-estradiol for 60 day release were implanted one day before the cell
inoculation. MCF-7 human mammary adenocarcinoma cells were cultured in
standard cell culture conditions until semiconfluent and inoculated into
the inguinal mammary fat pad at day 0. Vehicle and VAL201 at doses 0.004,
0.04, 0.4 and 4.0 mg/kg were administered sc daily for 28 days starting
at day 1. Tumor growth was monitored by caliper measurements three times
a week, and the tumors were weighed at sacrifice. VAL201 had no effect on
body weight. Tumor volume growth curves demonstrated a dose-dependent
inhibition of tumor growth by VAL201. Similar responses enabled combining
the treatment groups to a low-dose group (including the groups receiving
0.004 and 0.04 mg/kg VAL201) and a high-dose group (including the groups
receiving 0.4 and 4.0 mg/kg VAL201) to increase statistical power in
further analyses. The combined groups demonstrated that VAL201 decreased
tumor volume and weight. As a conclusion, VAL201 showed inhibition of
breast cancer growth in this orthotopic xenograft model, demonstrating
its potential as a novel therapeutic agent for breast cancer. The growth
inhibition was established in the presence of estrogen, underlining the
importance of androgen receptor-associated src signaling even without
estrogen depletion.

