Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the AC1-exemestane resistant cell line to reveal
the underlying mechanism of resistance to aromatase inhibitors in
estrogen-dependent breast cancer .


Estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer depends on the hormone
estrogen for growth and is one of the most common forms of breast cancer
present among postmenopausal women. One type of therapy that has proven
highly effective in treating this type of breast cancer is aromatase
inhibitors. Aromatase is an enzyme that mediates the conversion of
androgens (i.e. androstenedione) into estrogens. Aromatase inhibitors
(AIs) letrozole, anastrazole, and exemestane, are used to treat estrogen
receptor positive (ER+) patients by reducing the levels of estrogen
produced via the Aromatase enzyme. Though AIs are dynamically effective
at treating ER+ cancers, a significant amount of breast cancer patients
become resistant to these drugs over time.The purpose of this study is to
gain a better understanding of acquired AI resistance by 1) developing a
breast cancer cell line (AC1-ExR) that mimics clinical acquired
exemestane resistance; and 2) characterizing this cell line. The novel
cell line was extracted from ER+ tumors of xenograft mouse models. The
xenograft tumors initially regressed, but after long-term treatment, they
became resistant to exemestane, a type of AI, and began to grow. We
characterized the AC1-ExR cell line by analyzing their drug sensitivity.
Aromatase Assays were performed to measure the aromatase activity in
these cells following treatment with 106 M of exemestane. The aromatase
activity in the AC1-ExR cell line, when treated with exemestane, was less
than that of the AC1 parental cell line: average aromatase activity of
31.1 fmol/mg protein*hr compared to average aromatase activity of 72.1
fmol/mg protein*hr in the parental cell line. In addition, AC1-ExR cells
exhibited more cancer stem cell-like properties than the AC1 cells. The
average mammosphere count for AC1-ExR and AC1 cells was 54 and 33.3
mammospheres, respectively.In the ER+ pathway, interactions between
several growth factor signaling pathways have shown to increase
hypersensitivity of the ER-alpha receptor to estrogen stimuli.
Specifically, inhibitors to the insulin-like growth factor receptor
(IGF-1R) have shown to significantly suppress the growth of breast cancer
cells in vitro. Identification of growth factor signaling pathways that
may be relevant to the ER+ pathway and crosstalk between ER-alpha and
IGF-1R, EGFR, and/or other active receptors may reveal their potential
role in aromatase resistance in ACI-ExR cells. Characterization of the
AC1-ExR cell line has revealed decrease in aromatase activity. A
comprehensive understanding of this mechanism may serve as a means of
treatment in patients with ER+ positive breast cancer.This work was
funded in part by NIH/NIGMS MARC U*STAR T34 08663 National Research
Service Award to UMBC and an RO1 CA-62483 Grant by the National Cancer
Institute of the National Institutes of Health

