Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling identifies novel diagnostic
and prognostic biomarkers in early stage prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most prevailing cancer in the male
population and the second-leading cause of cancer-related death in the
Western world. Although genomic alterations during PCa development have
been recently characterized [1], substantial evidence shows that
genome-wide epigenetic insults complement or even precede genetic
alterations [2]. Promoter CpG island methylation frequently correlates
with gene silencing of functional genes. Therefore we hypothesized that
scanning for early-silenced genes by profiling hypermethylation sites of
promoter CpG islands would facilitate identification of novel methylation
biomarkers with potential functions during prostate carcinogenesis.DNA
from 9 primary pT2a tumors and matched normal tissue was subjected to
enrichment of methylated sequences using Methyl CpG Immunoprecipitation
(MCIp) [3], followed by array co-hybridization using Agilent CpG island
arrays. Candidate genes were selected according to 1) hypermethylation in
gene promoter regions in tumor tissue and 2) reduced expression in PCa in
comparison to normal prostate tissue based on published gene expression
datasets. DNA methylation was quantified by mass spectrometry-based
EpiTYPER technology [4].We identified 245 promoter CpG islands
corresponding to 207 genes that were hypermethylated in at least 6/9
early stage PCa. Gene ontology enrichment analyses indicated enrichment
of homeobox genes, and of gene functions such as regulation of
transcription, cellular biosynthesis and morphogenesis, and neuron
development. Quantitative methylation analysis of 9 selected candidate
genes confirmed significant hypermethylation in the range of 20 -50% in
6/9 tumors of the initial discovery set in comparison with normal
prostate tissue. Further validation in 37 sample triplets of matched
normal tissue - prostate intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) - tumor tissue
indicated significant hypermethylation of SPG20 (spastic paraplegia 20,
p=0.023, Wilcoxon signed-rank test), SPATA6 (spermatogenesis associated
6, p=0.017), and DUOXA1 (dual oxidase maturation factor 1 alpha, p=0.017)
already at the PIN stage. Moreover, methylation analysis of 60 prostate
tumor samples with increasing malignancy revealed a significant
correlation between DNA hypermethylation patterns and biochemical
recurrence of prostate cancer (p=0.008, log-rank test).From this
genome-wide study we identified relevant biomarkers for early-detection
and prognosis of early stage prostate cancer. The identified genes might
represent interesting candidates to further investigate their function in
the molecular pathogenesis and development of prostate cancer.

