Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduced pro-inflammatory cytokines and immunosuppressive cells in
patients with prostate cancer following consumption of soy isoflavone
enriched bread.


Soybeans are a rich source of bioactive phytochemcials. Among the
phytochemicals, the isoflavones (primarily genistein and daidzein) have
received the greatest attention regarding cancer prevention. Indeed, we
and others have reported dietary soy has measureable benefit in
experimental tumor models of prostate cancer (PCa). Thus, we and others
are actively investigating the potential of diets rich in soy components
to prevent or slow human PCa progression, particularly in the early
hormone sensitive state. Isoflavones are hypothesized to act through
various pathways to impact PCa progression, such as inhibition of tumor
growth factor signaling, anti-angiogenesis, and cell cycle inhibition.
However, one area that has received very little focus is the impact of
soy components on the immune system. We hypothesized that dietary soy may
benefit prostate cancer (PCa) patients by modulating the balance of
pro-inflammatory cytokines and immunosuppressive cells. A randomized,
phase II trial was conducted in 32 PCa patients with asymptomatic
biochemical failure (rising prostate specific antigen/PSA). Patients were
randomized to 3 slices of soy bread (33 mg isoflavones/slice) or soy
bread containing almond extract daily as a source of -glucosidase. Flow
cytometry was used to study cellular phenotype and bioplex assay to
measure cytokines in peripheral blood on days 0 (baseline) and 56. Soy
isoflavone metabolites in patient urine were assessed by LC-MS/MS.
Adequate blood samples were available from 25 of 32 men completing the
>56 day protocol and evaluated. Phenotypic analysis of Day 0 and 56 blood
revealed no change in percentage of CD8+ T cells, but showed increased
CD56+ NK cells (p=0.038) and reduced CD4+ T cells (p=0.04). Cells with a
natural T regulatory cell phenotype (CD4+CD25+FoxP3+) were significantly
decreased after 56 days consuming either type of soy bread (p=0.035). A
significant decrease in cells with a monocytic (CD33+HLADRlowCD14+) and
granulocytic (CD33+HLADR-CD11b+) MDSC phenotype was observed in patients
consuming both types of soy bread (p=0.0064 and p=0.049). Plasma cytokine
and chemokine levels were significantly decreased on Day 56 compared to
baseline. Subgroup analysis indicated reduction in both Th1 type
cytokines (p=0.0349) and MDSC associated cytokines (p=0.0284). Th2 and
Th17 cytokines were not significantly altered as compared to baseline.
Exploratory analyses using a K-means clustering approach revealed
patients who metabolized soy isoflavones into dihyrdodaidzein and equol
had significantly lower MDSC after soy intervention (p'sSoybeans are a
rich source of bioactive phytochemcials. Among the phytochemicals, the
isoflavones (primarily genistein and daidzein) have received the greatest
attention regarding cancer prevention. Indeed, we and others have
reported dietary soy has measureable benefit in experimental tumor models
of prostate cancer (PCa). Thus, we and others are actively investigating
the potential of diets rich in soy components to prevent or slow human
PCa progression, particularly in the early hormone sensitive state.
Isoflavones are hypothesized to act through various pathways to impact
PCa progression, such as inhibition of tumor growth factor signaling,
anti-angiogenesis, and cell cycle inhibition. However, one area that has
received very little focus is the impact of soy components on the immune
system. We hypothesized that dietary soy may benefit prostate cancer
(PCa) patients by modulating the balance of pro-inflammatory cytokines
and immunosuppressive cells. A randomized, phase II trial was conducted
in 32 PCa patients with asymptomatic biochemical failure (rising prostate
specific antigen/PSA). Patients were randomized to 3 slices of soy bread
(33 mg isoflavones/slice) or soy bread containing almond extract daily as
a source of -glucosidase. Flow cytometry was used to study cellular
phenotype and bioplex assay to measure cytokines in peripheral blood on
days 0 (baseline) and 56. Soy isoflavone metabolites in patient urine
were assessed by LC-MS/MS. Adequate blood samples were available from 25
of 32 men completing the >56 day protocol and evaluated. Phenotypic
analysis of Day 0 and 56 blood revealed no change in percentage of CD8+ T
cells, but showed increased CD56+ NK cells (p=0.038) and reduced CD4+ T
cells (p=0.04). Cells with a natural T regulatory cell phenotype
(CD4+CD25+FoxP3+) were significantly decreased after 56 days consuming
either type of soy bread (p=0.035). A significant decrease in cells with
a monocytic (CD33+HLADRlowCD14+) and granulocytic (CD33+HLADR-CD11b+)
MDSC phenotype was observed in patients consuming both types of soy bread
(p=0.0064 and p=0.049). Plasma cytokine and chemokine levels were
significantly decreased on Day 56 compared to baseline. Subgroup analysis
indicated reduction in both Th1 type cytokines (p=0.0349) and MDSC
associated cytokines (p=0.0284). Th2 and Th17 cytokines were not
significantly altered as compared to baseline. Exploratory analyses using
a K-means clustering approach revealed patients who metabolized soy
isoflavones into dihyrdodaidzein and equol had significantly lower MDSC
after soy intervention (p's<0.02). Finally, patients with prolonged or no
change in PSA doubling time had fewer T regulatory cells or MDSC on day
56 versus baseline. Our data suggests that soy bread modulates immune
suppressor cell biology in humans and may enhance the efficacy of
anti-cancer immune responses.

