Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Musashi 1 stabilizes and blocks translation of Adenomatous
Polyposis Coli mRNA in intestinal cells.


Most colorectal cancers are thought to be initiated by mutation of the
tumor suppressor Adenomatous polyposis coli gene (APC). APC mutations
that result in loss of function lead to deregulation of Wnt signaling and
inappropriate proliferation within intestinal crypts. Understanding APC
regulation within normal intestinal cells is important for developing
methods to restore function in a pathological state. Using cultured human
colonocytes, we have previously shown that translation of APC can be
blocked by the RNA binding protein, Musashi 1 (MSI1) and that MSI1 is a
Wnt target. We propose that a double negative feedback loop between APC
and MSI1 functions in maintenance of intestinal cell homeostasis. To
explore the MSI1/APC interaction in vivo, we analyzed intestinal tissue
from MSI1 knock-out mice (Msi1-/-). We found higher levels of APC and
less Wnt signal activation in intestines from the Msi1-/- mice. There
were also more enterocytes within the intestinal crypts of Msi1-/-mice,
indicating an increase in differentiation. These three observations
provide confirmation of the proposed APC/MSI1 double negative feedback
loop in vivo.Evidence from cultured human cells and mouse models supports
a role for an APC/MSI1 double negative feedback loop in the response of
intestinal cells to Wnt signaling. However, the underlying mechanisms
remain to be determined. Proteins that bind to a specific motif in the
3UTR of target mRNA can induce translation inhibition or promotion as
well as stabilization or destabilization of the mRNA. We already
established that MSI1 blocks APC translation; however, the effect of MSI1
on APC mRNA stability was unknown. Here, we show that MSI1 binding to the
3 UTR of APC mRNA stabilizes the message. In contrast, Numb, another
established MSI1 target, does not appear to be stabilized by MSI1
binding. If MSI1 bound to the 3UTR of APC mRNA stabilizes the message,
but inhibits translation, then something likely leads to MSI1 release
when APC translation resumes. One possibility is that MSI1 protein is
inherently unstable. In this case, MSI1 binds to APC mRNA and blocks
translation but is rapidly degraded and therefore releases APC mRNA for
translation unless additional MSI1 is made. Because MSI1 is a Wnt target,
a cell stimulated by Wnt ligand should continually replace the MSI1,
therefore APC mRNA translation would remain blocked until the Wnt signal
is removed. Our data showing that MSI1 has a relatively long half-life
does not support this model. Current work is aimed to explore whether
MSI1 release from APC mRNA is regulated by post-translational
modifications or other protein-protein interactions.In conclusion, by
acting as a Wnt antagonist, APC blocks MSI1 transcription. On the other
hand, MSI1 binds to and stabilizes APC mRNA while also blocking APC
translation. The MSI/APC double negative feedback loop appears important
for maintaining homeostasis of intestinal epithelial cells.

