Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNAS implicated in the regulation of NF-B activity in glioma
tumors.


Gliomas are among the most prognostically discouraging neoplasia in human
and there is basically no curative option for glioma patients. Nuclear
factor B (NF-B) is a key effector associated with temozolomide (TMZ)
resistance in glioma tumours. This is at least in part due to
down-regulation of TNFAIP3, which is a critical negative regulator of
NF-B activity. Downregulation of this gene is strongly associated with
resistance to TMZ, but the molecular mechanism of dysregulation is
largely unknown. We hypothesize that microRNAs that are implicated in the
NF-B pathway may be important regulators of resistance to alkylating
agents in glioma tumours.TNFAIP3 is a predicted target of brain-enriched
microRNAs miR-125a and miR-125b. Consistent with these findings,
luciferase activity assays of reporter plasmids containing miR-125a/b
target sites revealed that TNFAIP3 is directly regulated by physiological
concentrations of miR-125a/b. In addition, overexpression of miR-125a/b
resulted in reduced mRNA and protein levels of TNFAIP3 and, as a
consequence, also in a significant induction of NF-B activity. Consistent
with these findings, glioblastoma cells overexpressing these miRNAs
showed a strong upregulation of the anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and
BIRC3. Interestingly, this was significantly associated with resistance
of glioma cells to TNFalpha- and TRAIL-induced apoptosis and also
resistance to TMZ. A siRNA directed against TNFAIP3 and miR-125a/b gave
rise to similar phenotypes suggesting that TNFAIP3 is a major target of
miR-125a/b. In glioblastoma tissues, high level expression of either
miRNA was highly correlated with nuclear localisation of NF-B confirming
that miR-125a/b are implicated in NF-B signalling. Most remarkably,
miR-125a/b expression was clearly associated with shorter overall
survival of patients treated with TMZ, suggesting that these miRNAs are
important predictors of response to therapy. However, we found no
correlation between miR-125a/b levels and the MGMT methylation status.In
conclusion, miR-125a/b expression is a predictor of the patient's
response to chemotherapy. Since miR-125a/b confers resistance to TMZ,
antisense miR-125a/b might potentially be used in adjuvant therapy for
the treatment of glioma tumours.

