Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inference of tumor phylogenetic markers from large copy number
datasets.


Understanding tumors as evolutionary systems is an important area of
study with far-reaching implications in diagnostic and treatment
paradigms. Computational phylogenetics is a valuable method for inferring
tumor evolution in terms of evolutionary trees, phylogenies, where paths
in a tree correspond to possible tumor progression pathways. The location
of specific cell-types and patient samples in the tree provide
information on tumor sub-types and development of heterogeneity. We
previously developed a tumor phylogeny inference pipeline for array
comparative genome hybridization (aCGH)-based tumor copy number profiles.
Steps in the pipeline included extraction of robust progression markers
from the data, which could differentiate stages of tumor evolution or the
different paths in the tree, and assigning amplification states to the
inferred markers in those stages. We introduced a novel multi-sample
model for amplicon identification and calling, HMMCNA, which jointly
extracted markers from and assigned amplification states to small sets of
tumor aCGH profiles. HMMCNA employs a Hidden Markov Model (HMM), a
probabilistic model, to classify data into normal and amplified states
based on an underlying distribution for the two copy number states and a
hidden state space of possible amplification states. We assumed two
possible amplification states per sample: normal (0) or amplified (1).
Joint segmentation and calling is performed by identifying a most likely
sequence of amplification states across all genomic sites probes and
samples. This approach limits in the number of samples the HMM can handle
since the number of possible hidden amplification states increases
exponentially with the number of samples.Here, we present an extension of
the approach to handle large datasets. We incorporate a heuristic prior
to the HMM classification to reduce the hidden state space by first
screening out amplification states not strongly supported at any
individual genome coordinates. The introduction of this heuristic reduces
the state space on average by 99%. We further reduce the set of possible
amplification states based on the frequency of occurrence of the states
by only allowing those states occuring at multiple aCGH probes or array
genome coordinate. This step accounts for the presence of random noise in
the data and gives a further reduction of 80%. We demonstrate the method
on a breast tumor aCGH dataset comprising copy number profiles derived
from sectioned biopsy samples (NCBI GEO GSE16672, Navin et al., 2010).
Our method was able to quickly segment the data into sets of robust
normal and amplified segments suitable for downstream phylogeny building.
The amplicons inferred carried several known markers of tumor
progression. Further steps include tuning the parameters of the HMM to
handle noise-levels across different datasets.

