Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CASZ1 haploinsufficiency in murine embryonic stem cells causes
increased MYC expression, aberrant lineage commitment, and prevents
neurogenesis.


Background:Tumor suppressor CASZ1(1p36.22) is often lost in poor
prognosis neuroblastomas (NB) with an undifferentiated histopathology.
Differentiation of NB cells upon CASZ1 restoration indicates CASZ1 loss
may contribute to the undifferentiated phenotype during NB tumorigenesis.
How CASZ1 functions during normal mammalian development is unknown. Using
a murine embryonic stem cell (mESC) embryogenesis model, we investigated
the effects of CASZ1 haploinsufficiency and CASZ1 reconstitution on
differentiation programs.Methods:Differentiation in mESCs, wild-type (WT)
and Casz1 haploinsufficient (CAS+/- mESCs), was evaluated using mESC
embryoid body (EB) neurogenesis and adipogenesis assays. For rescue
experiments, CAS+/- mESCs were transfected with a bacterial artificial
chromosome containing the full human CASZ1 genomic locus (CASBAC). Gene
expression was evaluated by qPCR and western blot.Results:Analysis of
CAS+/- mESCs revealed pluripotency gene expression was relatively
unaffected by CASZ1 loss, but there is higher Myc mRNA (5.5 fold)
compared to WT mESCs. During neural differentiation Myc is aberrantly
expressed as evidenced by increased protein levels compared to the mESC
state. Four days after LIF withdrawal, CAS+/- EBs have 2.5 fold higher
MYC levels as compared to WT EBs that have half the MYC levels as
compared to the mESC state. Coincident with aberrant MYC expression
CAS+/- mESCs exhibit a 2.8 fold increase in Gata4 mRNA (endoderm lineage)
and a 3.2 fold increase in Gata2 mRNA (mesoderm lineage) compared to WT
mESCs. Functionally, CAS+/- mESCs retain adipogenesis potential. However
after neural induction, CAS+/- EBs exhibit decreased neuroectoderm
lineage commitment with neural lineage marker Pax6 mRNA levels some 8.9
fold less than WT EBs. Neurogenesis potential is lost as evidenced by a
failure to extend III tubulin positive neuritic processes. However,
CASBAC mESCs restore Myc regulation, lineage commitment, and neurogenesis
potential. Four days after LIF withdrawal, CASBAC EBs have 0.6 fold MYC
levels as compared to CASBAC mESCs, much like WT EBs. Lineage markers
Gata4 and Gata2 also normalize to 0.7 and 0.5 times WT EB levels,
respectively. Pax6 levels in CASBAC EBs are also restored to 1.8 fold WT
EB levels. Most noticeable is the restoration of full neurogenesis
potential as evidenced by III tubulin positive neuritic
processes.Conclusions:The data shows CAS+/- mESCs are unable to implement
a neural differentiation program. We propose that CASZ1
haploinsufficiency causes misalignment of spatial and temporal
transcription factor networks necessary for proper neurogenesis.
Perturbation of neurogenesis results in latent proliferative states in
neural precursors, which may contribute to tumorigenesis and the
undifferentiated histopathology of poor prognosis NBs.

