Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential therapeutic peptides for neuroblastoma.


Neuroblastoma (NB) is a form of cancer that starts in certain types of
very primitive developing nerve cells found in an embryo or fetus. This
type of cancer occurs in infants and young children. It is rarely found
in children older than 10 years. NB is by far the most common cancer in
infants (less than 1 year old). It accounts for about 7% of all cancers
in children. There are approximately 650 new cases of NB each year in the
United States. The types of treatment used may include surgery,
chemotherapy, retinoid therapy, and radiation therapy. In many cases,
especially when the cancer has spread too far to be completely removed by
surgery, chemotherapy is the main treatment. Most children with NB will
need to have chemotherapy. In most cases, treatment involves a
combination of anticancer drugs. These therapies by-in-large always have
significant side-effects. The goal of all therapies aimed at eradicating
cancer, including NB, is to selectively destroy cancer cells while
sparing normal tissue. Most chemotherapeutic or radiotherapeutic agents
function by damaging DNA or interfering with DNA replication. Rapid
advances in recent years have contributed significantly to identifying
and understanding the roles of key proteins in DNA damage response
pathways. (As a result, the nuclear protein PCNA has been shown to be a
component of all DNA replication/repair processes in the human cell).
Logically then, it is reasonable to assume that by altering the cellular
response to DNA damage, perhaps through manipulating genes or proteins
related to DNA repair, cell cycle checkpoint control, damage tolerance or
apoptosis, the effectiveness of conventional cancer therapy can
potentially be enhanced or used as novel targets for drug discovery. Of
course, also selectively sensitizing cancer cells relative to normal
tissues should improve the therapeutic ratio for anti-cancer treatment.
Our laboratory's recent data indicate that the use of PCNA derived
synthetic peptides promote NB cytotoxicity. The hypothesis driving our
work is that specific peptides derived from the PCNA protein sequence
(caPeptides) have the potential ability to block the binding of several
cellular proteins that participate in DNA replication, repair, cell cycle
control, transcription, and chromosomal recombination in cancer cells to
full length PCNA. By disrupting the naturally occurring interaction
between PCNA and the proteins that bind to, or interact, with PCNA,
cellular functions that recruit PCNA would be disrupted in the NB cell.
These peptides, either alone or in combination with other cancer therapy
agents are potentially useful cancer chemotherapeutics or augmentors of
the pharmacodynamic effect of specific anti-cancer chemotherapeutics.

