Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VRC2, a novel bortezomib re-sensitizing compound for the treatment
of multiple myeloma.


The development of novel agents including the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib (Btz) has significantly improved treatment outcomes in
multiple myeloma (MM). Despite these advances, resistance to therapy
invariably emerges and MM remains an incurable disease. The objective of
this study was to identify new therapeutic agents and combinations with
the ability to overcome resistance to Btz in MM cells. We developed a
high throughput drug screening (HTS) assay system to discover small
molecules that selectively target Btz resistant MM cells as single agents
and/or re-sensitize resistant cells to Btz. For HTS we used isogenic
pairs of Btz sensitive (595 P) and resistant (595 VR) cells derived from
iMycC/Bcl-xL transgenic mouse model of MM. Cell viability was the HTS
assay read-out, and 3 treatment groups (595 P, 595 VR, and 595 VR + Btz)
were included to identify compounds with selective activity against Btz
resistant cells as single agents, and compounds that restore Btz
sensitivity in the presence of Btz. Our screening of multiple
publically-available compound libraries identified several chemical
structures with selective activity against Btz resistant cells. One
compound in particular showed modest but significant selectivity for Btz
resistant cells as a single agent, and most notably, exhibited potent Btz
re-sensitizing activity when the 2 drugs were combined. We named this
compound Velcade Re-sensitizing Compound 2, or VRC-2 for short. The Btz
re-sensitizing activity of VRC-2 was confirmed using multiple human and
mouse cell lines that had been selected for Btz resistance in vitro.
IC50s for VRC-2 in normal mouse and human fibroblasts were 100-fold
higher than that observed in MM cells, suggesting it may have a low
toxicity profile in vivo. We are currently evaluating the activity of
VRC-2 in animal models of MM, alone and in combination with Btz, and
conducting molecular studies to identify its precise mechanism of action.
This study establishes the proof-of-principal for our HTS approach and
demonstrates the potential of VRC-2 in Btz refractory MM.

