Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myeloid-derived suppressor cells as a biomarker of tumor growth
and radiosensitivity: Role of hypoxia-inducible arginase-1.


Introduction: Recent evidence suggests that tumor growth and metastases
are sustained by myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC), which
over-express arginase-1 (ARG) and cause T-cell suppression. We
hypothesize that MDSC impair tumor cell radiosensitivity through
ARG-mediated depletion of L-arginine, an essential substrate for the
biosynthesis of the endogenous radiosensitizer nitric oxide (NO).Aim: We
explored whether MDSC and ARG can be used as biomarkers for tumor growth
in experimental mouse models and in the clinical setting of colorectal
cancer (CRC). We further examined whether low L-arginine levels are
associated with an impaired generation of NO by inducible NO synthase
(iNOS) and a reduced radiosensitivity of hypoxic tumor cells.Materials &
methods: MDSC (CD11b+Gr-1+) and ARG levels in mouse colon CT26 and
mammary 4T1 models were analyzed by flow cytometry (FCM) and RT-PCR. Mice
were inoculated I.M. with either CT26 or 4T1 carcinoma cells. After 17
days, MDSC were quantified in the spleen by FCM. In addition, ARG levels
were analyzed by RT-PCR and FCM. Similar analyses were performed on human
blood MDSC (CD14+HLA-DRlow) derived from CRC patients. To model the
hypoxic tumor microenvironment, mouse splenocytes were cultured in 1%
oxygen. Activation of iNOS was induced by LPS/IFN- and analysed by
RT-PCR, Western blot and Griess assay. Radiosensitivity was analysed in a
model of metabolic hypoxia by colony formation assayResults: The growth
of both CT26 and 4T1 tumors in BALB/c mice was associated with an
accumulation of MDSC in the spleen from 2-4% (in naive mice) to 8 and 35%
respectively. Freshly isolated splenocytes and MDSC showed low ARG
levels. Contrasting, hypoxia-conditioned splenocytes from tumor-bearing
mice revealed a drastic transcriptional activation of ARG (up to
525.000-fold), and ARG+ MDSC. On the other hand splenocytes from
tumor-free mice did not display ARG activation in hypoxic conditions. The
iNOS/NO-mediated radiosensitization of mammary EMT6 tumor cells was
strictly dependent on L-arginine levels, with a marginal effect of
1.2-fold at 10-30 M while approaching a 2.4-fold effect at a
physiological concentration of 125 M. MDSC levels in CRC patients were
increased, as compared with healthy donors (8-12% versus 4-5%). Patients
with locally advanced CRC had 16-fold higher ARG expression in blood
monocytes, as compared to healthy donors. 4 weeks after pre-operative
radiotherapy the ARG levels decreased by 2-fold.Conclusions: Although
tumor progression is clearly associated with the expansion of MDSC, their
hypoxic conditioning appears to be crucial to uncover ARG as a tumor
biomarker in vivo. iNOS/NO mediated radiosensitisation of hypoxic tumor
cells was drastically impaired at low L-arginine levels which could be
depleted by ARG+ MDSC. In a clinical setting, we consider ARG a potential
biomarker in locally advanced rectal cancer.

