Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome Wide DNA methylation profiling in Wilms tumor. Integration
with expression and identification of molecular signatures associated
with high risk blastemal type histology.


Introduction: Wilms tumour (WT) is the most common paediatric renal
tumour, thought to arise from disruption in normal kidney development. WT
typically presents triphasic histology with blastemal, stromal and
epithelial components. The International Society of Paediatric Oncology
(SIOP) categorises Wilms tumours based on their in vivo response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Tumours where a viable blastemal component
predominates at nephrectomy (high risk blastemal type, BT) are associated
with poorer outcome than tumours with primarily stromal, epithelial or
mixed histology (intermediate risk, IR).Although a number of
WT-associated genes have been defined, most tumours do not harbour
mutations in any of these genes. Global hypo-methylation as well as
hyper-methylation and silencing of tumour suppressor genes have been
frequently reported in cancer. In WT, several epigenetic lesions have
previously been identified, particularly loss of imprinting at 11p13 and
11p15. However, to date, no genome wide comprehensive DNA methylation
study in WT has been reported.Aim: To perform genome wide DNA methylation
profiling in WT and identify molecular signatures associated with BT
WT.Methods: Genomic DNA from 69 frozen clinical WT samples was extracted
and bisulphite- converted with the Zymo EZ DNA Methylation Kit. The
methylation levels were assessed on the Infinium HumanMethylation 450
BeadChip array, which interrogates over 480,000 CpG sites. For 56 of the
samples, HumanHT-12 v3 Expression BeadChip data was available.
Bioinformatic and statistical analyses were carried out using the
Bioconductor minfi and limma packages. Preliminary analysis was performed
integrating expression and methylation data.Results: 930 genes showed
differential methylation between BT and IR. Over 70% of the samples
showed aberrant methylation at the 11p15 locus, as previously reported.
75 of these differentially methylated genes were also differentially
expressed. Of interest, the well characterised WT gene, WT1, was
significantly down regulated in IR, and correlated with hypermethylation
in this region. Gene Ontology pathway analysis indicated that almost 50%
of these 75 genes were involved in developmental processes, supporting
the current model of WT.Conclusions: This study highlighted several key
genes and pathways dysregulated in BT compared to IR. Moreover, global
hypomethylation was found in the BT cohort, which could be associated
with genome instability or the dysregulation of DNA methyl-transferase
maintenance enzymes. Further studies are required to validate these
molecular routes as potential biomarkers for high risk WT.

