Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of transcriptional signatures in US African American
and Kenyan TNBC samples identifies differential expression in key
oncogenic pathways.


Strong epidemiological data supports breast cancer (BC) as the second
leading cause of cancer death among US African American (AA) women, with
a 20% greater mortality rate than that in Caucasians (Cauc). Collection
of similar BC incidence and mortality data for Eastern Africa is limited,
however, it is known that BC presents as advanced-stage disease,
comprised mainly of poorly differentiated cancers that are less likely to
be hormone responsive. Our combined investigative team continues to
analyze a cohort of indigenous Kenyan BC patients, in order to begin to
understand biological similarities and differences between BC in native
African and AA patients. Previous related gene expression studies
conducted in a Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) stage-matched
multi-ethnic US cohort suggested differential expression patterns across
ethnicities. We are extending this focus to similar studies involving
native African samples. Archived BC pathology samples (FFPE) were either
obtained from University of Miami or from a native African tumor bank
(Kenya). Forty-seven BC samples were contributed from Kenya, and
re-analyzed (in Miami) for ER/PR/ Her2Neu status, resulting in
confirmation of 29 Kenyan TNBC cases. 10 um sections were cut from each
tumor FFPE block, and following RNA isolation and cDNA preparation,
hybridized to the Almac breast-enriched gene expression array (Breast
Cancer DSA Research Tool). After quality control assessment of array
data, a total of 60,856 gene/probes were analyzed by RMA; normalized, log
transformed to the median, and compared on GeneSpring analytical
software. Data sets were separated by further analysis based on node
status [(N0-Kenyan-7, AA-10); (Mixed Node-Kenyan-16, AA-7)]. Unpaired
student's T-test was performed on all subsets and the resulting p-values
were corrected for Multiple Testing using Benjamin-Hochberg.
Differentially expressed genes/probes were extracted for each subset
using p-value 1.5. These probe/gene lists were further analyzed using
GeneGo pathway analysis and enriched pathways were identified.
Comparisons of transcriptional differences between Kenyan and AA TNBC,
regardless of node status, suggest expression alterations in several key
pathways, including EMT Transition, Cytoskeleton Remodeling, Immune
Response and Epigenetic Control. These preliminary results are being
validated by QPCR and other methodologies. In conclusion, we have
demonstrated that high quality RNA can be extracted from archived FFPE
tumor samples, including samples from East Africa. This observation
raises the possibility of future genomic analyses using archived samples.
We are intrigued by our study observations, which suggest that inherent
gene expression differences exist between Kenyan and AA TNBC samples in
previously-recognized pathways important in onocogenesis.

