Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of (E)-Styrylsulfonyl methylpyridine: A novel kinase
inhibitor targeting mitotic pathways.


ON01910.Na, a styryl benzylsulfone, is a Phase III stage, non-ATP
competitive anti-cancer agent. It is multi-targeted, promoting selective
mitotic arrest and apoptosis in cancer cells. Extensive Phase II/III
trials conducted in patients with solid tumors and hematological cancers
have proved its excellent efficacy and impressive safety profile.
However, incomplete understanding of mechanisms of action and relatively
low drug oral bioavailability remain obstacles to development. By
modifying the structure of ON01910.Na, a novel class of
(E)-Styrylsulfonyl methylpyridines was designed and synthesized. We
report herein the evaluation of a selected compound, TL-77,
(E)-N-(2-methoxy-5-((2,4,6-trimethoxystyrylsulfonyl)methyl)pyridin-3-yl)met
hanesulfonamide, as a potent small molecule inhibitor targeting mitotic
pathways.MTT assays were performed to assess in vitro anti-proliferative
effects. In a panel of 10 tumor and 2 non-transformed human cell lines
following 96 h exposure, TL-77 gave consistent GI50 values in the
sub-micromolar range in tumor cells, whereas, it was non-toxic to
non-transformed human mammary endothelial cells (HMECs). Cell cycle was
analyzed by flow cytometry. TL-77 caused significant G2/M arrest 6 h,
whereas ON01910.Na caused the same effect after longer exposure periods (
12 h). An OD-based tubulin polymerization assay allowed us to explain
obstruction of cell division caused by TL-77. TL-77 retarded tubulin
polymerization between 1M and 6M, intriguingly, microtubules were
stabilizes at TL-77 concentrations > 8M. Western blot analyses of cell
lysates following treatment of cells with TL-77 revealed dose-dependent
reduction of phosphorylated Cdc25c, a known substrate of Plk1 and/or
Chk1/2, indicating Plk1 and/or Chk1/2 inhibition. Finally, dose- and
time-dependent apoptosis triggered by TL-77, detected by Annexin-V
assays, was closely associated with induction of caspase 3/7 activity.
Importantly, pharmacokinetics studies in mice revealed that the oral
bioavailability of TL-77 was optimized to 56% compared with 9% for
ON01910.Na.In summary, TL-77 is a potent anti-cancer agent. It disturbs
tubulin during cell division, resulting in G2/M cell cycle arrest,
followed by caspase-dependent apoptosis. TL-77 appears to share an
analogous mechanism of action with ON01910.Na, but exhibits greater
selectivity towards cancer cells and possesses superior oral
bioavailability. Therefore, further evaluation of TL-77 as a promising
anti-tumor agent is justified.

