Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gliomagenesis via the reactivation of quiescent adult
oligodendrocyte precursor cells.


Malignant gliomas are devastating, incurable brain tumors. Surprisingly,
though the proliferative activity of brain cells decreases precipitously
with age, glioma occurs most frequently in the elderly. Our lab recently
showed that introducing p53 and NF1 mutations into perinatal
oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) can lead to gliomagenesis.
However, perinatal OPCs are highly migratory and proliferative, whereas
adult OPCs are much more quiescent. Therefore, to better understand the
impact of age on gliomagenesis, we asked if adult OPCs can be transformed
into gliomas, and if so, what would be the reactivating mechanisms.Using
NG2-CreER, a temporally controllable Cre, we introduced p53/NF1 mutations
specifically into adult OPCs by giving Tamoxifen (Tmx) to young adult
(P45) and aging mice (P180). We found that gliomas formed with high
penetrance in both groups. Notably, tumor latency of both groups was very
similar (120-180 days post-Tmx), suggesting that OPC transforming
potential does not decrease as the brain ages. Adult OPC-derived tumors
have pathological features of malignant anaplastic (grade III) glioma and
a transcriptional profile similar to human proneural glioma.
Interestingly, these features are comparable to gliomas derived from
embryonic neural stem cells and perinatal OPCs, indicating that the age
at which mutations arise does not influence tumor type. The
transcriptional profile of adult OPC-derived tumor cells closely matched
that of wild type perinatal OPCs, suggesting that tumor OPCs have been
rejuvenated. To identify when mutant OPCs first become reactivated, we
analyzed brain regions where these tumors tend to occur (olfactory bulb,
thalamus, pyriform cortex, amygdala) at various time points after
mutation. At both 50 and 90 days post-Tmx, the number of mutant OPCs was
6-fold higher than that of WT OPCs, indicating pre-malignant
over-expansion of these cells. Surprisingly, mutant OPC proliferation was
not increased at either time point. Further analysis showed that mutant
OPCs have defects in differentiation into mature oligodendrocytes. These
results suggest that mutant OPCs become reactivated soon after
mutagenesis, and that their inability to differentiate might play a role
in malignant transformation. To understand the molecular mechanisms of
adult OPC reactivation, we are currently investigating the involvement of
signal transduction pathways known to play important roles in early OPC
development.In summary, our results show that, despite being mostly
quiescent, adult OPCs have the potential to become reactivated by the
loss of tumor suppressor genes and can give rise to malignant gliomas.
Signaling pathways with known roles in early OPC development might once
again play a role in malignant transformation of these cells in the adult
brain. Therefore, studying gliomagenesis and OPC development in parallel
could lead to novel strategies for treating these deadly tumors.

