Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ezrin is a key regulator in Src-induced angiogenesis and
lymphangiogenesis in breast cancer.


Src kinase plays a critical intrinsic role in metastasis through
disruption of cell-cell junctions and focal adhesions, and extrinsically
by upregulation of paracrine pro-angiogenic factors such as VEGF. Ezrin,
a Src substrate and membrane cytoskeletal crosslinker, acts cooperatively
with Src in the regulation of malignant phenotypes in carcinoma cells.
Ezrin expression has been associated with increased metastatic potential
in various human cancers and it has also been identified as a potential
prognostic/predictive biomarker for an invasive subtype of breast cancer.
To examine the extrinsic role of ezrin in Src-induced tumour
vascularization we performed Matrigel plug assays by injecting human
mammary carcinoma cells subcutaneously into the flanks of immunodeficient
Rag2-/-c-/- and nude mice. On day 12 post-injection, intravital imaging
revealed a potent angiogenic response in MDA-MB-231 cells expressing
activated Src (MDASrc). However, ezrin knockdown (KD) in MDASrc cells was
sufficient to reverse Src-induced tumour vascularization. Microvascular
density, vascular cross-sectional area, and blood (CD31) and lymphatic
(Lyve-1 & podoplanin) vessel immunostaining of harvested Matrigel plugs
(day 12) further confirmed the intravital results. In addition, ectopic
expression of a mutant ezrin (Y477F), which is non-phosphorylatable by
Src, also caused significant reduction in tumour neovascularization. We
further assessed the angiogenic activity of conditioned medium collected
from various cell lines by performing ex vivo aortic ring assays. Again,
Src-induced endothelial cells branching in MDASrc group was significantly
reduced following ezrin KD. To assess lymphangiogenesis, we co-cultured
primary lymphatic endothelial cells (hLEC) with MDASrc in presence and
absence of ezrin. Ezrin KD significantly reduced Src-induced hLEC tube
formation, migration, and permeability in vitro. Results from conditioned
media and co-culture assays also suggested the involvement of paracrine
angio- and lymphangio-genic factors regulated by Src/ezrin signaling axis
in cancer cells. Western blot analysis of cell lysates revealed that
ezrin KD was sufficient to block Src-induced Stat3 activation and VEGF-A
and -C expression in MDASrc cells. In conclusion, our study provides a
novel mechanism for the role of ezrin in breast cancer metastasis as a
key regulator in Src-induced angio- and lymphangio-genesis, and could
lead to improved drug targeting of metastatic disease.

