Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular characterization of captured circulating tumor cells
with a novel cell sorting system.


Background: The number of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) has the
prognostic significance in solid tumor patients. Because of recent
progress in targeted therapies, there is an increasing need to obtain
tumor tissues for companion diagnostics. In some tumor types such as lung
cancer, it is relatively difficult to obtain tumor tissues due to the
tumor location and capturing CTCs could be an alternative approach. The
CellSearch system, the only FDA-approved CTCs enumeration system has an
advantage in detection of CTCs with high reproducibility, but it is not
optimized for capturing tumor cells for subsequent molecular analyses.
Thus we have developed a novel benchtop cell sorting system equipped with
a disposable microfluidic chip (On-Chip Sort, On-Chip Biotechnologies,
Tokyo, JAPAN), which may allow better recovery of CTCs than conventional
cell sorting systems for further characterization.Materials and Methods:
The On-Chip Sort is a disposable microfluidic-chip-based cell sorter. The
sorting is performed by Push-Pull pulse flow in a micro channel, and this
novel cell sorting technique is free of cell damage caused by high
pressure, ultrasonic and electrical charge. To evaluate the performance
of the On-Chip Sort, various numbers of NCI-H1975 human non-small cell
lung cancer cells harboring EGFR mutations (L858R and T790M) were spiked
into 5 x 105 K562 human leukemia cells serving as surrogate cells for
white blood cells. Spiked samples were fixed, stained with
cytokeratin-FITC and CD45-Alexa700, and purified using the On-Chip Sort
cell sorter. Captured tumor cells (defined as CK+/CD45 cells) were
subjected to molecular analyses by pyrosequencing for EGFR mutation after
whole genome amplification.Results: EGFR gene mutations (L858R and T790M)
were successfully detected from formalin-fixed and immunofluorescently
stained single H1975 cell, suggesting captured tumor cells after sorting
process can be used for mutational analyses. Results of in vitro dilution
model revealed that the detection limit for pyrosequencing of 10% to 20%
EGFR mutant allele following whole genome amplification, suggesting
mutations can be detected with a certain amount of normal blood cell
carryover after sorting process. In spike-in experiment using H1975 cells
(10 to 102 H1975 cells spiked into 5 x 105 K562 cells), we observed
recovery and purity rates of 30.4% to 45.0% and 8.6% to 45.0%,
respectively, which was sufficient for mutational analysis by
pyrosequencing. The detection limit for EGFR gene mutations (L858R and
T790M) was observed when twenty-five H1975 cells were spiked into 5 x 105
K562 cells, which was thought to be feasible in the clinical
setting.Conclusions: The novel cell sorting system allowed efficient and
convenient isolation of circulating tumor cells. These data demonstrated
the potential of our capture system and evaluation using clinical samples
should be conducted.

