Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of miR183 and miR21 is associated with down regulation
of cellular signaling in nitrogen mustard mediated inhibition of tumor
cell proliferation.


Nitrogen mustard (HN2) is a chemotherapeutic agent used to treat skin
cancers and lymphomas including squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) and
cutaneous T cell lymphoma. Although HN2 non-selectively alkylates DNA,
many tumors exhibit resistance to HN2 therapy. To evaluate additional
mechanisms potentially underlying the activity of HN2 we tested the
effects of HN2 on Pam 212 murine squamous cell carcinoma cells. We found
that mustard treatment reduced cell viability, and that this result was
associated with an increase in PKC phosphorylation. Furthermore,
cytotoxicity was antagonized by the PKC selective inhibitor, rottlerin,
implicating this PKC isoform in HN2 action. The p38MAPK inhibitor,
SB203580, acted in a similar manner to rottlerin, increasing viability
30% in HN2-treated Pam 212 cells. In contrast, PI3kinase inhibitor,
wortmannin, enhanced HN2-mediated cytotoxicity, suggesting a protective
role for this signaling pathway. Recent reports indicate that the
activity of the p38MAPK and PKC signaling cascades, pathways involved in
regulating glucose uptake and metabolism, growth, motility, and other
essential functions for cell survival, is hallmarked by increases in
levels of miRNAs 21 and 183. Therefore we next evaluated the effects of
HN2 on microRNA (miR) levels using microRNA PCR arrays. In these
experiments we found that HN2 treatment enhanced levels of miR21 and
miR183 in Pam 212 keratinocytes, effects that were time and
dose-dependent dependent. In additional studies we found that
transfection of PAM cells with miR21 and miR183 resulted in enhanced
sensitivity to inhibitors of PI3 kinase and p38MAPK regulated mTOR
activity. Using techniques in real time PCR we observed that HN2-mediated
increases in miRNA 21 and 183 levels were inhibited by the mTOR
inhibitors 3-MA, rapamycin and LY294002 in PAM cells. Taken together
these data indicate that signaling pathways play significant roles in
HN2-mediated inhibition of tumor cell proliferation. We speculate that
PKC, PI3 kinase, p38MAPK and mTOR pathways are important in the
anti-cancer activities of HN2 and may be modified in tumors resistant to
this agent.

