Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the novel tumor suppressor gene, -Defensin-1, in
colorectal cancer cell line models.


Background: Human defensins are antimicrobial linear peptides with broad
anti-microbial activity, organized into two classes, - and -defensins.
Human -Defensin 1 (hBD-1) is encoded by the DEFB1 gene located on
chromosome 8p23 and functions as an antimicrobial peptide involved in the
innate immune response. It is most often expressed in epithelial cells,
including those in the large intestines. Previous experiments have shown
that hBD-1 exhibits tumor suppressor functions in urothelial and kidney
cancer cells. Previous evaluation of germline single nucleotide
polymorphisms in the promoter region of DEFB1 demonstrated CRC stage
specific effects of rs1800972 and rs179946 in predicting time-to-tumor
recurrence in CRC patients. This study examined the cancer specific
expression of hBD-1 in CRC compared to normal cells and further evaluated
the cellular mechanism associated with the effects of hBD-1 expression in
CRC proliferation, cell cycle progression and apoptosis.Methods:
Twenty-two patients colon tissue samples were subjected to
immunohistochemistry (IHC) specific for hBD-1 to examine its expression
in both normal and tumor cells. To gain insight into the effects of hBD-1
expression in CRC, CaCo2, HCT116, HT29 and SW620 CRC cell lines were
transfected with pCMV6-XL4-DEFB1, alongside a control empty vector, to
compare the effect of hBD-1 overexpression on cell viability and
apoptosis at 24 and 48 hr. In addition, recombinant hBD-1 was exogenously
added to CRC cells and analyzed for the effect on cell viability.Results:
Examination of hBD-1 expression from patients colon tissue samples by IHC
demonstrated that hBD-1 expression was present in the normal colon cells,
but its expression was lost in CRC cells. Induction of hBD-1 expression
in CRC cell lines resulted in a significant change in cell viability,
membrane permeability and induction of apoptosis. Further, the exogenous
addition of recombinant hBD-1 to CRC cells resulted in a significant
reduction in cell number at 48 hr.Conclusion: These results demonstrate
evidence of loss of hBD-1 expression in CRC cells and further provide
evidence for hBD-1s potential role as a tumor suppressor. Further studies
are being conducted to determine the pathway of apoptosis that is induced
and to better understand the hBD-1 affects in the CRC cells development
and progression and further evaluate the potential utility of targeting
hBD-1 as a therapeutic strategy.

