Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alterations in FPGS splicing as a plausible underlying mechanism
of MTX resistance in ALL.


The antifolate methotrexate (MTX) is used in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) treatment. Cellular retention and consequent efficacy of MTX is
enhanced by polyglutamylation, a reaction catalyzed by folylpolyglutamate
synthetase (FPGS). It has been shown that loss of FPGS activity can
confer antifolate resistance. However, the mechanism underlying this
phenomenon remains elusive. We have recently shown that alterations in
FPGS mRNA splicing may be a plausible determinant of MTX resistance but a
comprehensive screen of the spectrum of splicing aberrations throughout
the entire FPGS gene is lacking. The aim of the current study was to
evaluate the pattern of FPGS mRNA splicing alterations as a predictor of
MTX resistance and treatment failure in ALL. A PCR-based assay was
devised that allowed for a screen of the entire FPGS mRNA sequence for
splicing alterations. This method was subsequently used to screen
antifolate-resistant human leukemia cell lines and ALL patient samples.
Our results identified multiple FPGS mRNA splicing alterations (Table 1)
in MTX resistant cell lines with marked loss of FPGS activity. Moreover,
the level of partial retention of intron 8 was markedly increased upon a
24 hour exposure to MTX in the antifolate-resistant leukemia cell lines.
Moreover, most of the detected FPGS splicing alterations either
introduced a frame-shift or a premature stop codon, hence resulting in
either transcripts targeted for the nonsense-mediated decay or truncated
proteins devoid of FPGS activity. These in vitro FPGS splicing
alterations where corroborated in vivo as aberrations detected in
leukemic cell lines were also identified in a panel of 30 ALL patient
specimens at diagnosis. In summary, impaired FPGS mRNA splicing could be
responsible for loss of FPGS activity and might offer an opportunity for
the design of reliable molecular tools allowing for identification of
antifolate resistance in leukemia cells.
FPGS mRNA splicing alterations in cell lines and ALL patient samples.

