Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a molecular marker for cetuximab sensitivity and
development of a novel combination therapy for non-small cell lung
cancers.


The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is an important molecular
target for non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs). A recent phase III study
(the FLEX study) revealed that the combination of the anti-EGFR antibody
cetuximab with conventional chemotherapy improved the survival of
patients with NSCLCs. However, the survival benefit was only about 5
weeks. Therefore, the identification of a molecular marker for cetuximab
sensitivity is urgently needed. In this study, we investigated a new
molecular marker for cetuximab sensitivity and developed a combination
therapy to improve the effectiveness of cetuximab. First, we established
a NSCLC cell line that showed resistance to cetuximab by culturing a
parental sensitive NSCLC cell line in the presence of increasing
concentrations of cetuximab. Next, we performed microarray analysis to
compare the gene expression patterns of cetuximab-sensitive and
-resistant cell lines. Using pathway analysis, we found that the Akt and
Wnt pathways were significantly activated in the resistant cell line as
compared to their activation in the sensitive cell line. We confirmed
this result by performing western blot analysis, which showed Akt
phosphorylation and beta-catenin dephosphorylation in the resistant cell
line. Therefore, the activation status of either the Akt or Wnt pathway
is the candidate pathway that influences cetuximab sensitivity. Finally,
we focused on the Akt pathway and treated both resistant and parental
sensitive cell lines with the PI3-K inhibitor LY294002 in combination
with cetuximab. This combination therapy induced a synergistic
growth-inhibiting effect in both cell lines. The data suggest that the
activation status of the Akt pathway is one of the markers for cetuximab
sensitivity and the combination of an Akt pathway inhibitor and cetuximab
would be a promising anti-EGFR therapy for NSCLCs.Citation Format: Miyako
Takata, Hiroki Chikumi, Kosuke Yamaguchi, Jun Kurai, Masaki Nakamoto,
Naoto Burioka, Tadashi Igishi, Eiji Shimizu. Identification of a
molecular marker for cetuximab sensitivity and development of a novel
combination therapy for non-small cell lung cancers. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2385.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2385

