Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the complex cross-talk between the MAPK and PIK3
pathways.


Targeted molecular inhibitors have emerged as a leading anti-cancer
strategy; however, despite promising pre-clinical data, many targeted
inhibitors induce undesirable off-target effects in the clinic. The large
number of off-target effects associated with molecular inhibitors was
recently termed the whack a mole problem because inhibiting one molecular
target often unintentionally activates another molecule. It is
increasingly clear that the high incidence of off-target effects
associated with targeted inhibitors is related to the complex
interactions and emergent behaviors inherent to the highly complex and
dysregulated intracellular networks of cancer. Both the mitogen activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K) pathways
are known to be dysregulated in cancer. In previous work, we and others
have demonstrated that the MAPK pathway promotes motility, invasion, and
angiogenic factors while the PI3K pathway plays an important role in
controlling anchorage independent growth. In addition, the PI3K pathway
plays an essential role in stimulating glucose metabolism and the Warburg
effect. We hypothesize that robust interactions exist between these two
pathways that influence efficacy and potentially also acquired resistance
to targeted therapies. Using a combination of experimental and
theoretical techniques, we developed a predictive network model linking
growth factor signaling to the MAPK and PI3K pathways as well as to
glucose metabolism. Specifically, we constructed a logic-based network of
the cross-talk between MAPK and PI3K signaling that relied on a detailed
literature survey to identify known molecular interactions as well as
proposed interactions and regulatory feedback connections in the
literature. We next performed a set of experiments using a normal-like
breast epithelial cell line and a series of pathway specific inhibitors
with and without growth factor stimulation to validate our model.
Finally, we repeated these experiments using a diverse set of breast
cancer cell lines and integrated this data to produce a series of cancer
networks representative of different stages of breast cancer progression.
Our model was able to recapitulate both our own experimental data and
published data in the literature using a smaller subset of regulatory
feedback mechanisms than we started with. Together, our results suggest
that some proposed interactions and feedback mechanisms attributed to
MAPK and PI3K cross-talk in the literature may not be valid.

