Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of class I histone deacetylases in non-small cell lung
cancer cells by honokiol leads to suppression of cancer cell
proliferation and induction of cell death in vitro and in vivo models.


Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) represents approximately 80% of all
types of lung cancer, and the dismal 5-year survival rate of about 14%
has shown no improvement over the past three decades. Histone
deacetylases (HDACs) regulate many biologic processes, including cell
cycle progression and cell differentiation. Among HDACs, class I HDACs
are frequently overexpressed in various human cancers and this
overexpression correlates with drug resistance and poor prognosis. Thus,
class I HDACs have been considered as potential therapeutic targets for
the treatment of cancers. Here, we report the chemotherapeutic effect of
honokiol, a phytochemical from Magnolia plant, on NSCLC cells and the
molecular mechanisms underlying these effects using in vitro and in vivo
models. Treatment of NSCLC cells (A549, H1299, H460 and H226) with
honokiol (20, 40 and 60 M) inhibited histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity,
reduced the levels of class I HDAC proteins and enhanced histone
acetyltransferase activity in a dose-dependent manner. These effects of
honokiol were associated with a significant reduction in the viability of
NSCLC cells. Concomitant treatment of cells with a proteasome inhibitor,
MG132, prevented honokiol-induced degradation of class I HDACs,
suggesting that honokiol reduced the levels of HDACs in NSCLC cells
through proteasomal degradation. Valproic acid, an inhibitor of HDACs,
exhibited a similar pattern of reduced viability and induction of death
of NSCLC cells. Treatment of A549 and H1299 cells with honokiol resulted
in an increase in G1 phase arrest, and a decrease in the levels of cyclin
D1, D2, and cyclin dependent kinases. Further, administration of honokiol
by oral gavage (100 mg/kg body weight of mice) significantly inhibited
the growth of s.c. A549 and H1299 tumor xenografts in athymic nude mice,
which was associated with the induction of apoptotic cell death and
marked inhibition of class I HDACs proteins and HDAC activity in the
tumor xenograft tissues. Together, our study provides new insights and
previously unrecognized role of class I HDACs in the chemotherapeutic
effects of honokiol on lung cancer cells. These new insights into the
epigenetic mechanism of action of honokiol may contribute to the
chemoprevention or treatment of lung cancer and may have important
implications for epigenetic therapy.Key words: Apoptotic index, cell
cycle, histone, histone deacetylase, histone acetyl transferase,
honokiol, non-small cell lung cancer

