Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic vulnerability of breast cancer based on shifts in the
expression of metabolic enzyme isoforms.


Background & Purpose: Isoforms of metabolic enzymes share similar
catalytic activities. Most cells express several isoforms that likely
represent redundancy and contribute robustness to biochemical processes.
The distribution of isoforms varies by tissue and differentiation stage
and may be altered during neoplastic transformation. Our hypothesis is
iosenzyme expression changes in neoplastic cells, particularly the loss
of isoenzyme diversity, can render cancer cells more vulnerable to
metabolism targeted therapies. Our goal was to identify isoenzyme
expression shifts in breast cancer compared to normal breast tissue to
define metabolic processes in the cancer that rely on the expression of
only one or a few enzyme isoforms due to loss of isoenzyme diversity.
Methods: Metabolic enzymes (n=1,267) were identified in the KEGG database
and we established pair-wise isoform expression distributions in breast
cancer gene expression data sets (n=1,081 cancers) and in 40 normal
breast samples. We looked for isoenzyme pairs that showed loss of
expression in one isoform in cancer compared to normal while the other
isoform was preserved or overexpressed. We assessed the isoform
expression relationships in breast cancer cell lines (n=18) to identify
experimental models for functional studies and used siRNAs to knock down
the preserved isoform in cell lines that showed loss of the other
isoform. Results: We identified 98 pairs of isoenzymes that showed
reduced expression in one isoform in at least 20% of cancer patients
compared to normal tissue (Background & Purpose: Isoforms of metabolic
enzymes share similar catalytic activities. Most cells express several
isoforms that likely represent redundancy and contribute robustness to
biochemical processes. The distribution of isoforms varies by tissue and
differentiation stage and may be altered during neoplastic
transformation. Our hypothesis is iosenzyme expression changes in
neoplastic cells, particularly the loss of isoenzyme diversity, can
render cancer cells more vulnerable to metabolism targeted therapies. Our
goal was to identify isoenzyme expression shifts in breast cancer
compared to normal breast tissue to define metabolic processes in the
cancer that rely on the expression of only one or a few enzyme isoforms
due to loss of isoenzyme diversity. Methods: Metabolic enzymes (n=1,267)
were identified in the KEGG database and we established pair-wise isoform
expression distributions in breast cancer gene expression data sets
(n=1,081 cancers) and in 40 normal breast samples. We looked for
isoenzyme pairs that showed loss of expression in one isoform in cancer
compared to normal while the other isoform was preserved or
overexpressed. We assessed the isoform expression relationships in breast
cancer cell lines (n=18) to identify experimental models for functional
studies and used siRNAs to knock down the preserved isoform in cell lines
that showed loss of the other isoform. Results: We identified 98 pairs of
isoenzymes that showed reduced expression in one isoform in at least 20%
of cancer patients compared to normal tissue (< 3 standard deviations
below the mean of normal expression, the lower boundary of the same gene
in normal tissues), while the expression of the second, larger than its
lower boundary in normal tissues. These included PAPP2B/PAPP2C,
COX7A1/COX7A2, ALDOC/ALDOA, LDHB/LDHA, and ME3/ME2 where the first member
of the pair showed reduced expression in 83.7%, 48.2%, 33.0%, 49.4%, and
46.9% of cancers, respectively. Overall cancers shifted towards
expressing isoforms that are normally high in muscle for many energy
metabolism related enzymes. We tested the functional implication of
knocking down ME2 (malic enzyme 2) expression in MDA435 cells that showed
reduced ME3 expression but high ME2 levels. We observed a 54.0%, growth
inhibition compared to scrambled siRNA control. In the control cell
lines, MDA231 and MDA 468 that have preserved ME3 and ME2 expression, ME2
knockdown had no significant growth inhibitory effect. Conclusions: We
demonstrate shifts in isoenzyme expression in breast cancers compare to
normal breast. These shifts suggest adaptation to hypoxic environment,
rapid metabolism and potential metabolic vulnerabilities. Our siRNA
experiments with anti ME2 siRNA provide proof of concept that loss of
isoenzyme diversity and primary reliance on a single or few isoenzymes to
provide a metabolic function in neoplastic cells may be exploited
therapeutically.

