Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Shared and distinct microRNA-expression alterations in lung
adenocarcinoma from smokers vs. nonsmokers.


Rationale: While lung adenocarcinoma (ADC) is predominantly associated
with the exposure to tobacco smoke, 10-15% of cases arise in never
smokers. Small non-coding RNAs such as microRNAs (miRNAs) often act as
oncogenes or tumor suppressors to regulate gene expression during
disease, and may provide the critical insight needed to address the
clinical and molecular disparities consistently observed in ADC of
smokers and never smokers. We therefore sought to characterize the
similarities and differences in the tumor-associated miRNA transcriptome
between lung tumors from active, former, and never smokers.Methods: Total
RNA was isolated from paired lung adenocarcinomas (purity 70%) and
adjacent-normal lung tissues resected from 32 subjects with varied
smoking statuses (n=8 active; n=11 former; n=13 never). Subjects were
matched for gender and age. Small RNA libraries were generated and
multiplexed 7-8 per lane for sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq 2000.
Through a custom miRNA sequencing analysis pipeline, reads were trimmed,
size-selected, and mapped to hg19 using Bowtie. Counts per mature miRNA
from aligned reads were computed using Bedtools and a list of genomic
features retrieved from miRBase v17. Differential expression analysis was
conducted using a likelihood ratio test between two linear models: one
adjusting for tumor and smoking status, another with an additional
interaction term.Results: Small RNA sequencing generated an average of 10
million high quality miRNA reads per sample. Among the 1906 mature miRNAs
examined, 554 miRNAs had at least an average of 20 counts across all
samples. We identified 97 miRNAs (qRationale: While lung adenocarcinoma
(ADC) is predominantly associated with the exposure to tobacco smoke,
10-15% of cases arise in never smokers. Small non-coding RNAs such as
microRNAs (miRNAs) often act as oncogenes or tumor suppressors to
regulate gene expression during disease, and may provide the critical
insight needed to address the clinical and molecular disparities
consistently observed in ADC of smokers and never smokers. We therefore
sought to characterize the similarities and differences in the
tumor-associated miRNA transcriptome between lung tumors from active,
former, and never smokers.Methods: Total RNA was isolated from paired
lung adenocarcinomas (purity 70%) and adjacent-normal lung tissues
resected from 32 subjects with varied smoking statuses (n=8 active; n=11
former; n=13 never). Subjects were matched for gender and age. Small RNA
libraries were generated and multiplexed 7-8 per lane for sequencing on
the Illumina HiSeq 2000. Through a custom miRNA sequencing analysis
pipeline, reads were trimmed, size-selected, and mapped to hg19 using
Bowtie. Counts per mature miRNA from aligned reads were computed using
Bedtools and a list of genomic features retrieved from miRBase v17.
Differential expression analysis was conducted using a likelihood ratio
test between two linear models: one adjusting for tumor and smoking
status, another with an additional interaction term.Results: Small RNA
sequencing generated an average of 10 million high quality miRNA reads
per sample. Among the 1906 mature miRNAs examined, 554 miRNAs had at
least an average of 20 counts across all samples. We identified 97 miRNAs
(q<0.0001) were differentially expressed between tumor and the
adjacent-normal tissue, independent of smoking status. Importantly, we
also identified 30 miRNAs (pRationale: While lung adenocarcinoma (ADC) is
predominantly associated with the exposure to tobacco smoke, 10-15% of
cases arise in never smokers. Small non-coding RNAs such as microRNAs
(miRNAs) often act as oncogenes or tumor suppressors to regulate gene
expression during disease, and may provide the critical insight needed to
address the clinical and molecular disparities consistently observed in
ADC of smokers and never smokers. We therefore sought to characterize the
similarities and differences in the tumor-associated miRNA transcriptome
between lung tumors from active, former, and never smokers.Methods: Total
RNA was isolated from paired lung adenocarcinomas (purity 70%) and
adjacent-normal lung tissues resected from 32 subjects with varied
smoking statuses (n=8 active; n=11 former; n=13 never). Subjects were
matched for gender and age. Small RNA libraries were generated and
multiplexed 7-8 per lane for sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq 2000.
Through a custom miRNA sequencing analysis pipeline, reads were trimmed,
size-selected, and mapped to hg19 using Bowtie. Counts per mature miRNA
from aligned reads were computed using Bedtools and a list of genomic
features retrieved from miRBase v17. Differential expression analysis was
conducted using a likelihood ratio test between two linear models: one
adjusting for tumor and smoking status, another with an additional
interaction term.Results: Small RNA sequencing generated an average of 10
million high quality miRNA reads per sample. Among the 1906 mature miRNAs
examined, 554 miRNAs had at least an average of 20 counts across all
samples. We identified 97 miRNAs (q<0.0001) were differentially expressed
between tumor and the adjacent-normal tissue, independent of smoking
status. Importantly, we also identified 30 miRNAs (p<0.05) whose
expression levels between tumor and the adjacent-normal tissue varied
with smoking status. This included miR-1246, miR-1307 and miR-320b, which
were up-regulated in the tumor versus adjacent-normal of current and
former smokers, but relatively unchanged in never smokers, suggesting
that these microRNAs are involved in smoking-specific cancer
pathogenesis.Conclusions: Using small RNA sequencing, we have identified
miRNAs that are markedly dysregulated in primary lung ADC tissues as
compared to their histologically normal, adjacent counterparts. Subsets
of these profiles are both shared and distinct between lung cancer cases
that arise in smokers and nonsmokers. The ongoing integration of miRNA
and large RNA sequencing data generated from these samples will inform
our understanding of mechanisms that are specific to carcinogenesis in
the presence or absence of tobacco smoke exposure. These results may
yield novel targeted therapies for smoking or nonsmoking-specific ADC
subtypes.

