Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Target identification in rhabdomyosarcomas induced in mouse
skeletal muscle.


Soft-tissue sarcomas are a group of cancers arising in non-hematopoietic,
mesodermal tissues. Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), the most common soft-tissue
sarcoma in children and adolescents, represents a biologically
heterogeneous category of mesodermal, non-hematopoietic malignancies,
which exhibit evidence of skeletal muscle differentiation. This study
builds on the premise that ex-vivo induction of sarcomas by cell-specific
activation of sarcoma-relevant pathways can be used to model biologically
distinct sarcoma categories in mice and identify novel downstream
targets. Up to 35% of human RMS tumors carry Ras mutations, and we have
demonstrated Ras/ Raf/ Mek/ Erk pathway activation in approximately 50%
of human RMS tumors surveyed. We showed that Kras-expressing; p16p19null
muscle satellite cells gave rise to mouse pleomorphic RMS, whereas
Kras-expressing; p16p19null non-myogenic progenitors typically induced
pleomorphic non-myogenic sarcomas (NMS). Transcriptional profiling
demonstrated that myogenic and non-myogenic Kras; p16p19null sarcomas
recapitulate gene expression signatures of human RMS and share a cluster
of concordantly upregulated genes (many associated with Ras pathway
activation) with human RMS. We used a customized RT Profiler PCR Array
(SA Biosciences) to confirm that 105 out of these 141 candidate genes
were indeed upregulated in Kras;16p19null sarcomas compared to mouse
skeletal muscle. The functional contributions of individual candidate
genes to sarcoma proliferation were evaluated using a customized
shRNA-based proliferation screen in cell lines established from Kras;
p16p19null sarcoma explants. These comprehensive experiments identified a
small group of high-priority candidates that contributed significantly to
the growth of Kras; p16p19null NMS (n=11 genes) and RMS (n=10 genes)
(qSoft-tissue sarcomas are a group of cancers arising in
non-hematopoietic, mesodermal tissues. Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), the most
common soft-tissue sarcoma in children and adolescents, represents a
biologically heterogeneous category of mesodermal, non-hematopoietic
malignancies, which exhibit evidence of skeletal muscle differentiation.
This study builds on the premise that ex-vivo induction of sarcomas by
cell-specific activation of sarcoma-relevant pathways can be used to
model biologically distinct sarcoma categories in mice and identify novel
downstream targets. Up to 35% of human RMS tumors carry Ras mutations,
and we have demonstrated Ras/ Raf/ Mek/ Erk pathway activation in
approximately 50% of human RMS tumors surveyed. We showed that
Kras-expressing; p16p19null muscle satellite cells gave rise to mouse
pleomorphic RMS, whereas Kras-expressing; p16p19null non-myogenic
progenitors typically induced pleomorphic non-myogenic sarcomas (NMS).
Transcriptional profiling demonstrated that myogenic and non-myogenic
Kras; p16p19null sarcomas recapitulate gene expression signatures of
human RMS and share a cluster of concordantly upregulated genes (many
associated with Ras pathway activation) with human RMS. We used a
customized RT Profiler PCR Array (SA Biosciences) to confirm that 105 out
of these 141 candidate genes were indeed upregulated in Kras;16p19null
sarcomas compared to mouse skeletal muscle. The functional contributions
of individual candidate genes to sarcoma proliferation were evaluated
using a customized shRNA-based proliferation screen in cell lines
established from Kras; p16p19null sarcoma explants. These comprehensive
experiments identified a small group of high-priority candidates that
contributed significantly to the growth of Kras; p16p19null NMS (n=11
genes) and RMS (n=10 genes) (q<0.05). The effects of shRNA mediated
silencing of selected candidate genes in human sarcoma cells were
verified using human sarcoma cell lines. We conclude that these genes
have potential broad importance in sarcoma biology and anti-sarcoma
therapy. Future studies will help to illuminate their roles in promoting
RMS growth and may suggest new approaches for therapeutic intervention.

