Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic therapy and sensitization of lung cancer to
immunotherapy.


Epigenetic alterations driving carcinogenesis and cancer progression can
be specifically targeted by the demethylating agent azacitidine (Aza) and
the histone deacetylase inhibitor entinostat. While this treatment
combination has been effective in a limited number of patients (pts) with
treatment-refractory non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), we observed
clinical benefit in 5 of 5 patients who received immunotherapy with
PD-1/PD-L1 pathway blockade immediately following epigenetic therapy.
Three of 5 pts developed partial tumor regressions (RECIST criteria,
duration 10+ to 20+ mo.) and 2 pts had stable disease 6 mo. This compares
to the objective response + SD rates of NSCLC to monotherapy with
anti-PD-1 (18% + 5%) or anti-PD-L1 (10% + 12%). To understand how
epigenetic therapy may synergize with blockade of the immunosuppressive
PD-1 pathway, we used genome wide methylation and expression profiling on
8 NSCLC cell lines treated with low dose Aza. We discovered complex
immunomodulatory effects of Aza with up-regulation of diverse immune
related pathways including Jun/Jnk, NFKB, viral defense, type I
interferon signaling, the inflammasome, antigen processing and
presentation and immune evasion including up-regulation of PD-L1
expression. Multiple cancer-testes antigens were also up-regulated,
thereby conferring de novo antigenicity. Supporting the idea that Aza
acts specifically through inhibition and degradation of DNA
methyltransferase proteins, colon cancer cells genetically
haplo-insufficient for DNMT1 and devoid of DNMT3b mirror the
immunomodulatory effects of Aza. Upstream events potentially controlling
these pathways were defined, and prominent among them was up-regulation
of the transcription factor, interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), a DNA
hypermethylated gene. These data were used to query hundreds of primary
NSCLC samples from the Cancer Genome Atlas project (TCGA). A low basal
expression signature of interferon pathway related genes was
significantly associated with low IRF7 expression and promoter
methylation in squamous tumors. Another hypermethylated transcription
factor, PITX1, which inhibits a subset of type I interferon signaling
genes, tracked with non-squamous cancers. Together, these findings
support a model in which epigenetic modulation activates innate and
adaptive immune responses within the tumor microenvironment together with
induction of counter-regulatory immune checkpoint ligands which can be
therapeutically blocked with antibodies. Based on these findings, a
clinical trial testing the efficacy of DNMT and HDAC inhibition combined
with PD-1 pathway blockade is under development. This work will form the
basis for an immune-classification of NSCLC, as well as biomarker
discovery for a novel therapeutic paradigm combining epigenetic and
immunotherapy with potentially synergistic activity against the world's
most deadly malignancy.Supported by Stand Up to Cancer.

