Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and EGF induce c-Kit ligand/Stem
Cell Factor (SCF) in a -arrestin-1 and E2F1 dependent manner in NSCLC .


-arrestin-1 (ARRB1), a scaffolding protein involved in the termination or
desensitization of signals arising from activated G-protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs) has been shown to play a role in invasion and
proliferation of many cancers, including nicotine-induced proliferation
of human non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs). In this study, we carried
out microarray analysis of cells lacking -arrestin-1 which have been
rendered quiescent and subsequently stimulated with nicotine or EGF.
Nicotine induced and -arrestin-1 dependent genes from the microarray data
were analyzed. We identified 296 genes that were upregulated and 208 that
were downregulated by nicotine in a -arrestin-1 dependent fashion. The
functional pathway analysis tool, MetaCoreTM (Genego, MI, USA) was used
to obtain curated molecular interactions related to the above selected
genes. We selected top 10 genes from both up and down regulated list for
prognosis prediction. Prognostic prediction was carried out using a
subset of NCI Director's Challenge Set. Kaplan-Meier analyses for 5 year
as well as overall survival showed significance for 4 genes namely
COL4A4, NFASC, SCF and ZNF137 by log-rank test. We also examined whether
the expression of these gens correlated with smoking; it was found that
SCF strongly differentiated smokers from non-smokers implying an
important role of this gene in lung carcinogenesis induced by
smoking.Stem cell factor (SCF) is the ligand of the c-Kit proto-oncogene
product. It is a major human cytokine for the self-renewal, proliferation
and differentiation of numerous embryonic, adult hematopoietic and
primordial stem cells. Earlier reports show that uncontrolled activity of
c-Kit contributes to formation of an array of human tumors. This
unregulated activity of c-Kit may be due to overexpression or mutational
activation suggesting that SCF-c-Kit signaling can be a potential target
for cancer therapy. We elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which
nicotine as well as EGF induces the expression of SCF in lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines A549 and H1650. ChIP assays and transient
transfection experiments showed that transcription factor E2F1 can
positively regulate SCF expression at the transcriptional level;
depletion of E2F1 or -arrestin-1 prevented the nicotine-mediated
induction of SCF. Given that the binding of SCF to c-Kit leads to
activation of multiple downstream signaling pathways including Src,
PI3-kinase and MAP/ERK pathways, our data suggest that the SCF/c-Kit
pathway plays a central role in lung carcinogenesis, and may be a
potential therapeutic target for combating NSCLC.

