Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the molecular features of ERG positive tumors in
primary and castration resistant prostate cancer.


Metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) has a poor
prognosis and remains a significant therapeutic challenge. Gene fusions
between the TMPRSS2 gene and members of the ETS family of transcription
factors (ERG, ETV-1 ETV-4 and 5) have been found in prostate cancer
(PCa). In this study we hypothesized that the overexpression of ERG in
PCa promotes the expression of common genes and pathways in nuclear ERG
positive hormone sensitive primary PCa and metastatic CRPC tumors. Our
objective was to identify these common genes and pathways.Using LuCaP PCa
xenografts developed at the University of Washington, specimens obtained
at radical prostatectomy, and metastatic specimens obtained at rapid
autopsy, 3 sets of tissue microarrays were made from 24 LuCaP PCa
xenograft lines, 114 radical prostatectomies and 155 metastases from 50
autopsy patients who died from CRPC (with up to 4 metastases from each
patient). Nuclear ERG expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry
(IHC). In addition, to characterize the molecular features of ERG
expressing PCa, 24 LuCaP PCa xenografts, 24 radical prostatectomies, and
78 corresponding metastases were also assessed by Agilent gene expression
analysis.Consistent with previously published FISH and qRT-PCR analyses,
IHC revealed that 7 of 24 LuCaP xenograft lines were nuclear ERG
positive. Fifty-one of 114 primary prostate cancers were nuclear ERG
positive. However, among the 155 CRPC metastases from 50 autopsy
patients, 15 of 155 metastases had nuclear ERG positivity. These 15
metastases represent 7 of 50 patients with at least 1 nuclear ERG
positive metastasis. This suggests that nuclear ERG expression is less
frequent in CRPC than in hormone sensitive primary prostate carcinomas.
Furthermore, not all metastases in a given patient were nuclear ERG
positive. In addition, gene expression data was generated from 24 LuCaP
PCa xenografts, 24 radical prostatectomies and 78 CRPC metastases, which
were grouped into ERG positive and ERG negative metastases based on
nuclear ERG positivity in the same tissue specimen by IHC. The gene
expression profiles of the ERG positive and ERG negative cancer tissues
are being analyzed to identify ERG regulated genes and ERG regulated
pathways of interest.This study is a comprehensive analysis of ERG
expression and downstream effectors of ERG in xenograft models of PCa,
primary PCa and CRPC. Our data suggest that ERG expression is less
frequent in CRPC and nuclear ERG status can vary from site to site within
a CRPC patient. The gene expression studies will further define the role
of ERG in PCa.

