Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Incidence of intracranial germ cell tumors by race in the United
States, 1992-2009: A potential link with autoimmune encephalitis?.


Introduction: Pediatric germ cell tumors (GCTs) are rare and
heterogeneous tumors that are grouped together due to their presumed
common cell of origin, the primordial germ cell (PGC). GCTs typically
occur in the testes or ovaries; however, abnormal prenatal PGC migration
along with lack of apopotosis can result in tumors in extragonadal
locations, including the central nervous system (intracranial and
intraspinal GCTs; iGCTs). Little is known about the etiology of iGCTs,
although international incidence data suggest that the highest incidence
occurs in Asian countries. Autoimmune encephalitis (AE) is a
paraneoplastic event characterized by abnormal behavior, seizures, and
movement disorders; a number of case reports find AE in conjunction with
GCT. We note with interest that a recent registry based study in
California reported the highest incidence of AE in Asians. In this
analysis, we used 1992-2009 data from the National Cancer Institute's
Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) Program to determine
whether the increased rates of iGCT observed in Asian countries was also
seen in Asian/Pacific Islanders living in the United States. Methods:
Frequencies and incidence rates were evaluated for the entire cohort and
for demographic subgroups based on sex, age category (0-9 and 10-29
years), race (white, black, American Indian/Alaskan Native and
Asian/Pacific Islander), and tumor location (pineal gland vs. other) as
sample size permitted. Analyses were conducted using SEER*Stat 7.1.0.
Results: Two peaks in incidence were observed, the first before age 1
year in both sexes and the second at age 10 years for females and age 18
years for males. We observed a significantly higher incidence rate of
iGCT in Asian/Pacific Islanders compared with whites (RR=1.98, 95% CI
1.51-2.56 for males and RR=3.21, 95% CI 1.99-5.05 for females) in the
10-29 year age group. This difference was observed for tumors located
both in the pineal gland and for tumors in other locations. Conclusions:
The increased rates of iGCT we observed in individuals of Asian descent
in the SEER registry are in agreement with data from the International
Agency for Research on Cancer, where the highest incidence rates were
observed in Japan, Singapore, and the Maori population of New Zealand.
The explanation for these rate differences has not been investigated to
date; however, the increased incidence in individuals of Asian ancestry
in the United States suggests that genetic susceptibility may play a role
in etiology. The higher frequency of AE in Asians and the co-occurrence
with GCT in case reports is also intriguing. It is possible that AE could
be triggered by PGCs abnormally present in the cranio-spatial axis prior
to GCT diagnosis, and it will be of interest to determine whether a
diagnosis of AE precedes iGCT. These differences in incidence patterns by
race and the possible link with AE merit further investigation.

