Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alteration of cancer stem cell-like phenotype by histone
deacetylase inhibitors in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.


Recent progression in the understanding of stem cell biology has greatly
facilitated the identification and characterization of cancer stem cells
(CSCs) from various tumors. In squamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck (SCCHN), various cell surface markers, including CD44, CD133 and
ALDH1, have been identified as the potential markers to isolate CSCs.
Evidence has accumulated indicating that conventional cancer treatments
are potentially ineffective against CSCs.Histone deacetylase inhibitors
(HDACi) have multiple biologic effects consequent to alteration in
patterns of acetylation of histones and are promising new group of
anticancer agents. In this study, we investigate the effects of two
HDACi, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and trichostatin A (TSA) on
two CD44+ cancer stem-like cell lines from SCCHN cultured in serum-free
medium containing epidermal growth factor and basic fibroblast growth
factor. SAHA and TSA inhibited the growth of SCCHN cell lines in a dose
dependent manner as measured by MTS assays. Moreover, SAHA and TSA
induced G2/M cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in these SCCHN cell lines.
Interestingly, the expression of cancer stem cell markers, CD44 and ABCG2
on SCCHN cell lines were decreased by SAHA or TSA treatment. HDACi also
decreased the mRNA expression levels of stemness-related genes (Notch and
Nanog) and TGF-. As expected, HDACi markedly increased the expression of
E-cadherin. In addition, the combination of HDACi and chemotherapeutic
agents, including cisplatin and docetaxel had a synergistic effect on
SCCHN cell lines.Taken together, our data indicate that HDACi not only
inhibit the growth of SCCHN cell lines by inducing apoptosis and cell
cycle arrest, but also alter stem-like properties of the SCCHN cells,
raising the possibility that HDACi may have therapeutic potentials for
cancer stem cells of SCCHN.

