Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic combinations of targeted therapy and chemotherapy for
neuroendocrine cancer.


We previously developed and reported a novel laboratory-derived
chemotherapeutic regimen of capecitabine and temozolomide (TMZ) (CapTem).
The CapTem regimen is highly active, well-tolerated with minor toxicities
and may prolong survival and palliate symptoms in patients with well
differentiated neuroendocrine tumors (NET).Further studies with CapTem in
our laboratory indicated that sunitinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(TKI), was highly synergistic with 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) in killing BON
(NET) cells. (Capecitabine is enzymatically converted to 5-FU in the
tumor). Synergy was observed at a low concentration of 1.0 M 5-FU and 1
nM sunitinib. Addition of 100 nM sunitinib resulted in a 4.5 fold
increase in cell death (14.2 vs 64.5%). In addition, if sunitinib was
combined with the CapTem regimen, (5-FU followed by TMZ), a synergistic
response was observed with both 5-FU and TMZ over a range of
concentrations, giving a maximal cell death of 74.4%. This contrasts with
the cell death obtained with 5-FU, TMZ and sunitinib alone, resulting in
9.0, 6.8 and 10.2% annexin V+ cells, respectively.Sorafinib, a TKI
closely related to sunitinib, not only did not synergize with 5-FU or
TMZ, it inhibited cell death observed with sunitinib and 5-FU/ TMZ. In
addition, K-252a, a potent inhibitor of tyrosine kinases, reduced the
cell death induced by 5-FU/sunitinib suggesting a tyrosine kinase was
involved. Considering the IC-50 of sunitinib for PDGF is 75 nM, whereas
for sorafinib it is 1129 nM, a difference of 15 fold, we hypothsized that
the PDGF- pathway might be involved. Addition of the PDGF- form resulted
in an enhancement of 5-FU/TMZ (CapTem) cell death. However, there was no
effect on sunitinib-induced cell death, suggesting that the PDGF- pathway
may be involved but to an unknown extent in the cell death pathway
induced by CapTem.Exposure of BON cells to TMZ and 5-FU may mimic the in
vivo exposure to these drugs in patients and the resulting cell line
resistance may be similar to resistance in tumors. Preliminary studies
with four resistant BON cell lines: TMZ-Resistant, 5-FU-Resistant,
TMZ+5FU-Resistant, (concurrent exposure to TMZ and 5-FU) and TMZ ->
5FU-Resistant, (sequential exposure to 5FU and TMZ) found that cells
resistant to CapTem still retain sensitivity to sunitinib. This suggests
that addition of sunitinib can overcome CapTem resistance in BON cells.

