Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Opposing effects of the NF-kappaB inhibitor thymoquinone in a
syngeneic mouse model of ovarian cancer.


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy. Most women are
diagnosed with advanced disease characterized by widespread peritoneal
carcinomatosis and abdominal ascites. Activation of inflammatory
processes via nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-B) is involved in ovarian cancer
progression and linked to chemotherapy resistance. The potential of NF-B
inhibitors to suppress tumor progression and sensitize tumor cells to
platinum chemotherapy has led to their successful use in preclinical
tumor models. One such inhibitor is thymoquinone (TQ), a component of
black seed oil, widely used in traditional medicine. However, most NF-B
inhibitors including bortezomib have had disappointing clinical results
in the treatment of solid tumors. It is possible that NF-B inhibition in
inflammatory cells such as macrophages in the peritoneal cavity may
underlie the relatively poor efficacy and toxicity observed in patients.
Therefore, this study aimed to determine the effects of TQ on ovarian
cancer progression in the immunocompetent host. ID8 mouse ovarian cancer
cells expressing the NF-B-dependent GFP/luciferase (NGL) fusion reporter
transgene (ID8-NGL) were injected intraperitoneally (IP) into C57BL/6
mice. Reporter activity was visualized by bioluminescence imaging. TQ or
PBS vehicle (VEH) were injected IP thrice weekly from day 30-60 after
tumor cell injection. Mice were then sacrificed, ascites collected and
tumors harvested. In vitro studies confirmed that TQ inhibited NF-B
activity in ID8-NGL cells, inhibited cell growth, and exerted
co-operative inhibitory effects with cisplatin on cell growth. Consistent
with the observed in vitro growth inhibition, TQ induced approximately
30% reduction in tumor cells expressing the proliferation marker Ki67
compared to VEH tumors in vivo. However, there was no overall difference
in tumor burden (peritoneal and mesenteric tumor nodules). Strikingly,
the volume of ascites collected from TQ mice was 5-fold higher than VEH
mice, and cytospin analysis of ascites showed that TQ induced a 4-fold
increase in the number of macrophages, suggesting an elevated
inflammatory response. TQ also increased NF-B reporter activity by 50%
compared to levels in VEH mice. These data suggest that TQ exerts both
anti- and pro-tumorigenic effects, likely mediated through NF-B
inhibition in tumor cells and host inflammatory cells, respectively.
However, the net effect of treatment is deleterious (increased ascites).
These results caution that treating ovarian cancer patients with systemic
NF-B inhibitors may have unanticipated adverse effects, and that a
greater understanding of the effects of NF-B inhibition is necessary
before performing combination studies with platinum agents such as
cisplatin.

