Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergy between secreted factors promotes a hyper-secretory
phenotype which may fuel ovarian cancer progression.


The challenge in ovarian cancer research is twofold: 1) identification of
early biomarkers of the disease and 2) uncovering targetable molecules to
treat malignancy while minimizing toxicity. Mutations in the BRCA1/BRCA2
gene locus account for approximately 15% of patients with ovarian cancer,
but several other risk factors are known, including increasing age and
obesity. We recently uncovered that a nuclear protein (HMGB1) becomes
secreted when cells undergo cellular senescence and we detect increased
levels in plasma from elderly compared to young individuals.
Significantly, we detect abundant extranuclear HMGB1 staining in tissue
from patients with serous ovarian carcinoma, suggesting the presence of
senescence cells in the tumor.We find elevated levels of circulating
HMGB1 in patients diagnosed with serous carcinoma. Tissue microarray data
analysis correlates with reduced survival in ovarian cancer patients
staining with higher levels of HMGB1.Like aging, obesity is a risk factor
for ovarian cancer but how remains poorly understood. We found that
plasma from mice on high fat diets contained higher levels of HMGB1
compared to mice on normal diets. To extend this observation, we found
that culturing ovarian cancer derived cells with saturated fatty acids
promoted significantly increased secretion of HMGB1, IL-6 and MMP-3.
Moreover, senescent cells which exhibit a secretory phenotype became
hyper-secretory when cultured with saturated fatty acids. Recent data
revealed that the redox state of HMGB1 establishes the protein's
function. Secreted HMGB1 synergizes with other secreted factors to
stimulate secretion of inflammatory molecules. Indeed we found cells
cultured with fatty acid released cf DNA (cell free DNA) which can
complex with secreted HMGB1 to promote cytokine secretion.
Immunocytochemsitry revealed that tissue from serous ovarian cancer
patients exhibited strong FABP-4 expression, a marker for adipoctyes but
also shown to be secreted in obese individuals. Taken together these
results lead to the possibility that multiple cells types synergize to
create a permissive microenvironment to foster ovarian cancer development
and progression.

