Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting MYC-driven medulloblastoma using inhibitors of glutamine
metabolism.


Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor in children.
Currently, treatment consists of surgical resection, chemotherapy, and
whole brain and spine radiation, and is associated with high morbidity.
Medulloblastoma is divided into four subgroups with different associated
mutations and clinical prognoses. Group 3 medulloblastoma tumors are
associated with elevated MYC levels and have the worst clinical prognosis
of all four subtypes. Because MYC over-expression can lead to increased
glutamine metabolism and glutamine addiction in other cancer types, we
hypothesized that MYC-driven medulloblastoma would exhibit increased
glutamine metabolism and be sensitive to inhibitors of glutamine
metabolism. In medulloblastoma cell lines, MYC expression positively
correlates with increased expression of enzymes involved in glutamine
metabolism as measured by western blot and qPCR. Also, forced MYC
expression in the non-MYC driven medulloblastoma cell lines UW228 and
DAOY leads to corresponding increases in glutaminase expression as
measured by western blot. To investigate the hypothesis that inhibition
of glutamine metabolism would preferentially target MYC driven
medulloblastoma, we tested the effects of two glutamine analogsacivicin
and 6-diazo-5-L-norleucine (DON)that inhibit enzymes in the glutamine
metabolism pathway. Acivicin decreased the growth of the high-MYC
medulloblastoma cell lines D425 and D283 by 50% and 75% respectively
compared to vehicle treated cells, but did not significantly affect
UW228, a MYC-negative cell line. Acivicin treatment caused a 36% decrease
in growth in UW228 cells forced to express MYC compared to a 5% decrease
in growth in parental UW228 cells (p=.00029). We next tested the effect
of acivicin on cell proliferation as measured by BrdU incorporation in
neurosphere models of MYC and non-MYC driven medulloblastoma.
MYC-expressing cells had a 30% decrease in proliferation following
acivicin treatment, while MYC negative cells only showed a 7% decrease in
proliferation (p=0.02). Treatment of MYC expressing cells with acivicin
lead to increased apoptosis as measured by flow cytometry. MYC positive
neurospheres treated with acivicin had a 65% increase in the percentage
of cells in the sub2N population, while MYC-negative neurospheres did not
show an increase in the sub2N population. Our laboratory is currently
investigating the in vivo efficacy of glutamine metabolism inhibitors in
orthotopic xenograft experiments using MYC-driven medulloblastoma cell
lines. Taken together, our data suggests that glutamine metabolism may be
a therapeutic target in MYC-driven medulloblastoma and that glutamine
analogs may be useful therapeutic agents.

