Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Syk inhibits the activity of protein kinase A by phosphorylating
tyrosine 330 of the catalytic subunit in breast cancer cells.


Syk is a nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinase with enigmatic roles in
tumorigenesis. Although reported to be a tumor suppressor, Syk also
protects breast cancer cells from oxidative stress induced apoptosis. In
many cancers including subsets of adult myeloid leukemia, chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, diffuse large B cell lymphoma, and non-Hodgkin
lymphoma, Syk acts as a proto-oncogene by promoting cell survival. This
has led to trials of Syk inhibitors as therapeutic agents for the
treatment of hematopoietic malignancies. To identify candidate substrates
of Syk that participate in cell survival and apoptotic pathways, we
carried out a series of mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomic screens
in cancer cells. In these screens, we found that protein kinase A (PKA)
was phosphorylated on a tyrosine (Y330) in the C-terminal tail of the
catalytic subunit (PKAc). PKA is regulated, in part, by cis-elements
located in its C-terminal tail. One of these elements, the active site
tether (AST), acts as a gate for nucleotide entry and egress and is
conserved in sequence and function among members of the AGC kinase
family. Y330 within the AST is important for recognition of both the
nucleotide and peptide substrates and for optimal catalytic efficiency.
Interestingly, the other AGC kinases have a phenylalanine instead of a
tyrosine at the analogous location.In this study, we identified and
characterized PKAc as a substrate of Syk. Syk catalyzes the
phosphorylation of PKAc on Y330 in vitro. Molecular dynamics simulations
suggest that, in the unphosphorylated state, the phenyl ring of Y330 is
tightly packed against the cavity formed by the -1,2 strands, the
nucleotide, and the flanking residues of AST. In contrast, the
phosphorylated tyrosine side chain orients perpendicular to the protein
surface, resulting in an increased time-averaged solvent accessible
surface area. Indeed, we found that the phosphorylation of PKAc on Y330
by Syk or the replacement of Y330 with glutamate strongly inhibits its
catalytic activity. Phosphoproteomic analyses and Western blotting
studies indicate that Y330 can be phosphorylated in a Syk-dependent
manner in MCF7 breast cancer cells. The phosphorylation of a downstream
substrate of PKAc, CREB, is inhibited in cells expressing Syk, but can be
rescued by a selective inhibitor of Syk. Thus, PKA is a novel substrate
of Syk and its phosphorylation on Y330 inhibits its participation in
downstream signaling pathways. This study reveals a new mechanism by
which Syk can regulate signaling pathways in cancer cells.

