Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The nuclear coactivator amplified in breast cancer 1 promotes the
initiation and the development of ductal carcinoma in situ.


Introduction: Ductal Carcinoma In Situ (DCIS) has become the most
diagnosed breast tumor type in North America. Amplified In Breast Cancer
1 (AIB1) is amplified in 5 to 10 % of primary breast tumors. We have
recently demonstrated that AIB1 causes development of DCIS lesions in the
mammary gland of 30% of the AIB1 transgenic mice (1). Our laboratory has
also shown that deletion of one allele of AIB1 prevents HER2-induced
mammary tumor development in mice (2), suggesting a pivotal role of AIB1
during earlier stage of breast cancer. We hypothesize that AIB1-mediated
pathways promote the transformation of the mammary epithelial cells and
the alterations of the functional integrity of the mammary gland. By
contrast, decrease in AIB1 functionality may result in prevented DCIS
initiation and arrested breast tumor progression.Results: We showed by
immunohistochemistry that AIB1 is expressed at low levels in normal human
breast. By contrast, we observed a strong cytoplasmic and/or moderate
nuclear AIB1 protein expression in DCIS lesions in breast cancer patients
tissues. We investigated the impact of decreasing AIB1 expression on the
early transformed MCFDCIS cell line. MCFDCIS cells generate multiacinar
disorganized structures with filling of the lumen, loss of polarization
and escape from the proliferative suppression. Reduction of AIB1 in human
MCFDCIS cells restored a more normal mammary acinar structure with
basement membrane in 3D growth in MatrigelTM. Then, we studied the effect
of regulating AIB1 on the histopathology development of the DCIS lesions
in a xenograft mouse model by subcutaneously injecting MCFDCIS cells
deficient or not in AIB1 into nude mice. The MCFDCIS xenografted tumors
obtained reproduced the human breast cancer progression and displayed
multiple comedo DCIS-like lesions. Decreased levels of AIB1 in MCFDCIS
cells, either prior to DCIS development or in existing MCFDCIS lesions in
vivo, inhibited tumor growth and led to smaller, and necrotic
lesions.Conclusions: Altogether, these data suggest that increased
expression of AIB1 facilitates the genesis and progression of DCIS to
invasive disease. Thus, targeting AIB1 may represent a new therapeutic
paradigm to prevent disease progression especially for women with
AIB1-positive primary tumor. The results of this project will also serve
as basis of human clinical studies that may define new predictive and
prognostic biomarkers that recognize high-risk patients, and prevent
over- or undertreatment of breast cancer patients.1.Nakles et al. (2011).
Mol Endocrinol. 25(4):549-63.2.Fereshteh et al. (2008). Cancer Res.
68(10):3697-706.

