Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of FasL on the tumor endothelium establishes a
selective immune barrier in ovarian cancer.


There is an intimate relationship between angiogenesis and immune
suppression in cancer, and anti-angiogenesis strategies can complement
cancer immunotherapy. Previous research has implicated the tumor
endothelium as a critical regulator of anti-tumor immunity, and our
current work establishes a new role for the tumor endothelium as a
critical barrier to T cell infiltration mediated through FasL. FasL is an
important regulator of immunity and apoptosis, and we have found that, in
contrast to the endothelium of normal tissues, the endothelium of
multiple tumor types expressed FasL. FasL expression was restricted to
tumor islets, and hypoxic tumor cell-conditioned media induced FasL on
endothelial cells in vitro. Combination treatment with proangiogenic
growth factors VEGF and PGE2 induced endothelial FasL expression in
vitro, and COX1 and VEGF expression were associated with endothelial
expression of FasL in ovarian cancer patients. Combinatorial blockade of
VEGF and COX enzymes reduced endothelial FasL expression in mice,
decreased tumor volume, and increased the CD8/FoxP3 ratio. In patients,
low endothelial FasL expression was associated with a high CD8/Foxp3
ratio and increased survival. We found that endothelial FasL contributes
to an unfavorable CD8/FoxP3 ratio through preferential killing of
tumor-reactive CD8 T cells relative to Tregs. Increased intratumoral
CD8/FoxP3 ratio was also observed in tumors grown on gld and lpr mice,
but tumor growth was not robustly inhibited in these mice. Tumor control
was dependent on the induction of an anti-tumor immune response, and CD8
depletion reversed the effects of VEGF and COX blockade. Additionally,
combinatorial VEGF and COX blockade, tumors grown on gld mice, or the use
of anti-FasL antibody all enhanced infiltration of adoptively transferred
anti-tumor T cells and reduced apoptosis of transferred cells. Together,
this work lends mechanistic insights into existing observations regarding
T cells and tumor angiogenesis, and provides additional evidence for the
paradigm that angiogenesis and immune suppression are intricately linked.
Additionally, this work provides new strategies for cancer immunotherapy
that may result in superior tumor control in patients.Citation Format:
Greg Motz, George Coukos. Expression of FasL on the tumor endothelium
establishes a selective immune barrier in ovarian cancer. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 4985.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4985

