Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical study of Dbait, an inhibitor of three DNA repair
pathways, in breast cancer treatment.


Background: Five main types of therapies are available for the treatment
of Breast Cancer (BC): surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, hormone
therapy, and most recently, targeted therapy. Most patients are treated
with surgery in combination with one or more additional therapies for
optimal cancer management. The limit of targeted therapy is that they are
usually directed at specific targets in the body (extracellular
receptors, kinases and enzymes) and therefore apply for limited number of
patients. Herceptin and more recently trastuzumab have been shown to
increase survival of patients over-expressing the HER2/neu receptor
(20-30% of BC). PARP inhibitors that act as synthetic lethal with BRCA
deficiency have shown promising results. These inhibitors that target the
PARP-dependent DNA repair pathway seem however less efficient in patient
with active homologous recombination repair. We have recently developed a
new strategy (DNA repair bait, Dbait in short) that inhibits three
central repair pathways (Homologous Recombination, Non Homologous End
Joining and Single Strand Break Repair). DT01 is the 1st drug candidate
of this family of DNA repair inhibitor already in a phase 1 trial in
local metastatic melanoma. This study demonstrates the efficiency of DT01
in BC treatment.Materials and methods: Twelve BC cell lines were
characterized for DNA repair gene expression and activation of the DNA
damage response DDR (pH2AX and PAR detection) by western blot analysis of
the proteins and classified according to their BRCA status. Clonal
survival to Dbait (the DT01 in vitro variant) was analyzed 10 days after
treatment. Four xenografted models derived from cell lines or patient
samples were assayed for sensitivity to DT01. DT01 (5mg) was
subcutaneousely administered every day for a week (5 sessions) or four
days per week for three weeks (12 sessions of 2mg). In parallel, the PARP
inhibitor ABT-888 was orally administered at the dose of 25 mg/day/kg
during one week to compare efficiencies. Tumor growth and survival of
untreated and treated animals were monitored during 150 days. Tumors were
analyzed for different repair and stress markers by
immunocytology.Results: This study provides the evidences that: i) Dbait
induces death in vitro in BRCA-/- cells but also in BRCA+/+ cells having
a high level of spontaneous DDR; ii) DT01 controls tumor growth in all
the model tested with or without BRCA mutation; iii) DT01 cured 30%
BRCA-/- tumors; iv) DT01 was more efficient that ABT-888 which did not
allow any cure and showed a 73% increase of survival. At the end of the
study 80% of the animals treated by DT01 were still alive.Conclusion:
DT01 is a promising investigational medicinal product to treat Breast
Cancer. Its association with radiotherapy is under investigation.

