Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel gene target involved in tumor growth and
metastasis of non-small cell lung cancer.


We have discovered a potential oncogenic role of a gene in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) using RNAi technology. Silencing of the gene
significantly inhibits soft agar colony formation of NSCLC cell lines,
whereas its inhibition on cell proliferation in liquid culture is modest.
This effect was observed in multiple murine and human NSCLC cell lines
with varied Kras and p53 status. The inhibition on soft agar colony
formation is reversed with ectopic overexpression of a cDNA encoding the
full-length gene. Knocking down the expression of the gene also
significantly impairs migration and enhances detachment-induced anoikis
of NSCLC cells. An investigation of the molecular mechanisms reveals that
silencing of the gene cytoskeleton signaling network. In xenograft
studies using stable luciferase-expressing inducible shRNA cell lines,
silencing of the gene upon doxycycline treatment leads to a modest
reduction in tumor volumes while significantly decreases bioluminescent
signals at metastatic sites including lung and lymph nodes. Furthermore,
gene expression analyses in KrasG12D/p53 deletion-driven mouse tumors and
clinical tumor samples show significantly increased expression of the
gene in lung cancer as well as multiple other cancer types. Taken
together, we have uncovered a novel oncogenic function of a gene in
NSCLC, which could provide a potential new therapeutic target for cancer
intervention.Citation Format: Honglin Chen, James Lee, Noelyn M. Kljavin,
Leisa Johnson, Yuxin Liang. Identification of a novel gene target
involved in tumor growth and metastasis of non-small cell lung cancer.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3015.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3015

