Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cancer-associated fibroblasts-targeted strategycan augment the
potency of the dendritic cell-based vaccine immunotherapy.


The dendritic cell (DC) -based vaccine immunotherapy has been a promising
cancer immunotherapy, but has been insufficient to eradicate the tumor in
patients with advanced cancer. This can result from the complicated tumor
microenvironment (TME) that is implicated in suppression of anti-tumor
immune responses. Several immune cell types in TME, such as Tregs,
myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and tumor-associated macrophages
(TAMs), have been reported to regulate anti-tumor immune responses
negatively. Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are also primary stromal
cells in TME, and contribute to tumor growth and metastases through the
secretion of TGF- and stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1). We
considered that TME-targeted strategies should be innovated for the
development of the potent cancer immunotherapy. On the basis of these
viewpoints, we focused on the role of CAFs in TME, and hypothesized that
inhibition of CAFs would lead to improvement of systemic anti-tumor
immune responses and enhancement of the potency of the DCs-based vaccine
immunotherapy. In this study, we applied tranilast in order to inhibit
CAFs, the anti-fibrotic and -allergic agent that is used clinically and
has been shown to inhibit fibroblast in the scar tissue. In in vitro
studies, we examined effects of tranilast on CAFs that were isolated from
established EG7 (mouse lymphoma cells) tumors. As results, tranilast was
able to suppress the proliferation of CAFs, and decrease the production
of SDF-1 as well as TGF- from CAFs. Regarding the effect on Tregs,
tranilast was able to decrease the induction of them from spleen cells of
normal mice. Based on these results, we confirmed that tranilast could
inhibit the function of CAFs. Next, we examined the association between
inhibition of CAFs and anti-tumor immune responses in tumor-bearing mouse
model. C57BL/6 mice bearing EG7 were administered tranilast into the
established tumor in combination with tumor antigen-loaded DCs
vaccination, and were evaluated anti-tumor immune responses. As results,
the population of CAFs was decreased by targeting them, leading to lower
expressions of TGF- as well as SDF-1 in TME. Inhibition of CAFs in TME
resulted in the decreased distributions of Tregs in TME and
tumor-draining lymph nodes (TDLs). On the induction of effector cells,
antigen-specific CD8+ cells producing IFN- were significantly increased
in TDLs and spleen through inhibition of CAFs in TME. In these mice,
systemic antigen-specific cytotoxic responses were augmented, leading to
suppression of tumor growth as compared with mice in control groups.
These results demonstrate that CAFs are associated with immune
suppression, and inhibition of CAFs functions in TME can augment systemic
anti-tumor immune responses. Our mouse models provide a new rationale
with TME-targeted strategies for enhancing the potency of the DCs-based
vaccine immunotherapy.

