Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A HER3 antibody that blocks ligand-independent HER2-HER3
dimerization sensitizes to HER2 and PI3K inhibitors .


We hypothesized that complete inhibition of HER3 is required for the
optimal action of HER2 or PI3K/Akt inhibitors against HER2+ tumors. The
HER3 monoclonal antibody LJM716 (LJM) inhibits ligand-induced and
ligand-independent dimerization of HER3. Treatment with LJM inhibited
P-HER3 and P-Akt in a panel of HER2+ breast cancer cell lines. In BT474
and SKBR3 cells, LJM inhibited HER2-HER3 dimers as assessed by
coprecipitation of HER2 with HER3 antibodies. Using a DUAL antibody
proximity base assay, formalin-fixed sections of HER2+ xenografts treated
with LJM showed a reduction of HER2-HER3 dimers and P-HER3 compared to
untreated controls. Treatment with LJM alone also induced regression of
established BT474 xenografts. Mice with BT474 xenografts were treated
with lapatinib and trastuzumab (Lap/T), LJM and trastuzumab (LJM/T) or
lapatinib, trastuzumab and LJM716 (Lap/T/LJM). After 3 weeks of
treatment, mice from the 3 groups exhibited nearly complete tumor
regression (volume 80% of mice in all other groups did so (p=0.0009,
Log-rank test). Finally, we hypothesized that LJM would be at least
equivalent to the HER2 antibody pertuzumab (P) in combination with T
against HER2+ tumors. Inhibition of growth in vitro and P-Akt were
superior with LJM/T compared to P/T in vitro. Mice bearing BT474
xenografts treated with either LJM/T or P/T had a similar nearly complete
tumor regression after 4 weeks of treatment. We are currently monitoring
potential tumor regrowth in these mice.In summary, treatment with LJM
inhibited HER2-HER3 dimers, P-HER3 and P-Akt in HER2+ breast cancer cells
with PI3K pathway mutations. As a single agent, LJM markedly inhibited
HER2+ xenograft growth. Treatment with LJM in combination with Lap/T
improved survival of mice with HER2+ xenografts compared to Lap/T.
Further, LJM sensitized breast cancer cells and xenografts to a
p110-specific inhibitor. Finally, the HER3 antibody in combination with T
inhibited PI3K/Akt and xenograft growth as well as the combination of P/T.

