Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen Receptor non-genomic regulation of prostate tumor cell
invasion and metastasis through Src signaling and Matriptase .


Prostate cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in men here in the
U.S. and over 240,000 new cases are predicted to be diagnosed this year.
Initially, tumors arising in this gland rely on the androgen receptor
(AR) and its ligand, dihydrotestosterone (DHT) for growth and survival.
At this stage, androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) can lead to tumor
regression. Unfortunately, patients typically relapse within two to three
years and tumors no longer respond to ADT; this stage is termed
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) for which there is no cure.
At this stage, AR expression is either increased or mutationally
activated and non-responsive to physiological levels of androgen. Several
reports have shown that AR has both genomic signaling within nucleus and
non-genomic signaling within the cytoplasm. Using prostate tumor cell
line PC-3, expressing wild-type AR (PC3-AR), we reported that AR genomic
signaling leads to an increase in integrin 61 transcription and
expression, which in turn increases Bcl-xL expression, a mechanism that
regulates prostate cancer cell survival. However, a role for AR and
integrin 61 in prostate cancer metastasis has not been examined. In
addition to promoting cell survival, integrins are critically important
for cell movement and can activate Src. We observed that in the absence
of androgen, PC3-AR cells have increased Src activity as well as enhanced
cell migration and invasion relative to cells that do not expressing AR.
Androgen responsive prostate cancer cell lines LNCaP, VCaP and C42 which
express AR endogenously, have enhanced invasion and Src activity once
stimulated with androgen. We found that knock-down of AR decreased Src
activity in PC3-AR cells, as well as in LNCaP and C42 cells. We also
found that inhibiting the expression of either AR or Src blocked the
ability of cells to invade through matrix in vitro. However, neither AR
nor Src possess the ability to degrade ECM proteins. Thus, we hypothesize
that AR activates Src in a non-genomic fashion to promote a metastatic
phenotype by the regulation of a downstream protease. To test our
hypothesis, we set out to determine how AR/Src signaling controls the
expression and/or activity of a protease that can degrade proteins in the
ECM to promote metastasis. Our data shows that the protease downstream of
AR/Src signaling is matriptase, a transmembrane serine protease that has
been recently reported to cleave laminin. We observe matriptase cellular
expression levels decrease in androgen responsive cell lines once
stimulated with androgen as early as twenty minutes. This is suggestive
that this is regulated through a non-genomic signaling mechanism. Also
seen in these androgen stimulated cells within twenty minutes is that
matriptase is shed and found within the media at higher levels relative
to the media of non-stimulated cells.

