Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of conditions of lapatinib effectiveness in
prostate cancer.


ABSTRACT Lapatinib has been used in multiple clinical trials of either
hormone-nave men with prostate cancer (PCa) or in patients who have
progressed to castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) following
androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). Although lapatinib as a single-agent
showed no overall positive effect in hormone-naive PCa, a small subset of
unselected CRPC patients experienced PSA decline 50% with lapatinib
treatment, with one patient remaining on this drug >45 months (Whang,
Y.E. et al, 2011. Urol Oncol). The current investigation had been
undertaken to determine whether lapatinib may benefit any select group of
patients with PCa. Studies in vitro and in animal models supported the
observation that lapatinib was ineffective in the presence of androgens;
however, in low-androgen conditions, only androgen-dependent LNCaP PCa
cells, but not CRPC cells, responded to lapatinib. Since lapatinib is a
dual inhibitor of the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) and a closely related member, ErbB2, hence we
investigated the effect of this drug on the EGFR family. Comparison of
the various cell lines that did or did not respond to lapatinib
demonstrated that those that did not respond to lapatinib had very high
inherent EGFR and ErbB3 activity, whereas LNCaP cells did not. More
importantly, unlike its CRPC sublines C4-2 and LNCaP-AI, which were less
responsive to lapatinib compared to LNCaP, the parental line experienced
an increase in ErbB3 during androgen deprivation. Overexpression of ErbB3
induced resistance to lapatinib even in LNCaP cells, indicating an
increase in the levels of RTKs as a potential cause for lapatinib
resistance. Indeed, lapatinib treatment resulted in an overall increase
in the levels of EGFR and/or ErbB2 in all the cell lines tested, even in
LNCaP cells that do respond to lapatinib. Thus, our data demonstrate that
(i) lapatinib is ineffective in PCa expressing high ErbB3 and (ii) among
those with low intrinsic ErbB3, lapatinib is effective only in tumors
where ErbB3 levels increase upon androgen withdrawal. Our results show
that the critical window of opportunity for employing lapatinib and other
dual EGFR/ErbB2 inhibitors is when ErbB3 levels are rising, but not once
they have already increased. Since ErbB3 can be detected in the serum of
patients with PCa, the increase of this RTK during ADT should be tested
in future studies as a predictive marker of lapatinib response.

