Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancers are notched up with a proton pump at their leading
edge.


The H+ vacuolar ATPase is a multimeric complex, which acidifies
intracellular vesicles and extracellular space. Notch signaling is a key
signaling pathway regulating cell proliferation and differentiation
during development and cancer. The expression of both V-ATPases and Notch
signaling is aberrant in most cancers and hence, are potential targets
for therapeutics. It is speculated that the vacuolar ATPases regulate
Notch signaling directly by endosomal acidification and indirectly by
endocytosis. Here, we studied the role of the a2 isoform of vacuolar
ATPase (a2V) in regulating Notch Signaling in Breast cancer. Using
confocal microscopy, we traced the location of a2V in MCF7, SKBR3 and
MDA-MB231 breast cancer cell lines. We found that a2V is present on the
plasma membrane and not on the early endosomes. The amount of a2V
correlated with the invasiveness of the cancer. Most importantly, the
expression of a2V was restricted to one side of the cells marking their
leading edge. Also, no a2V expression was found when cells contacted each
other on the inside. Next, we evaluated the effect of a2V knockdown in
MDA-MB231 cells. Using siRNA, a2V was knocked down. We found that
decrease of a2V enhances the expression of Notch2 and Notch 4
significantly (>1.75 fold). Notch ligands (DLL family) and Notch targets
also increased, supporting the finding. When we looked at Wnt pathway
genes, we found a significant increase in Wnt4 (>2 fold) and c-Myc(3
fold) expression although levels of -catenin were unchanged. Since c-Myc
is known to mediate apoptosis, we looked at apoptotic genes Bax and Bcl2
to after siRNA knockdown of a2V. Although Bax increased, there was no
significant change in apoptosis, as seen in PI-annexin assay. Taken
together, our data suggests that a2V is important for tumor growth and
its presence on leading edge marks aggressiveness of tumors.
Interestingly, a2V depletion results in the activation of Notch and
several proliferative markers in breast cancer. We postulate that this is
due to indirect effects of a2V in endocytosis or in regulating pH
dependent enzymes responsible for Notch and Wnt signal transduction.

