Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of CAST (cancer stromal targeting) therapy.


Although many monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) have been already approved for
the therapy of cancer, they are usually used in the combination with
anticancer agents (ACAs) because of limited anti-tumor activity as single
agent. Antibody-drug conjugate (ADC), a next generation of therapeutic
antibody, is the promising strategy to enhance the cytotoxic effect. Most
human solid tumors, however, possess abundant stroma that hinders the
distribution of ADC. Moreover, conventional ADC is depending on the
enzymatic cleavage following internalization into the cytoplasm or
lysosome. But the process of cell-uptake would be disturbed by stromal
barrier. Heterogeneity of the tumor cells also prevents development of
the ADC therapy based on cell-specific antigen.To overcome this drawback,
we have created a unique type of ADC, namely CAST (Cancer stromal
targeting) therapy, utilizes dense stroma as scaffold for the drug
delivery. It was composed of ACAs conjugated to stroma targeting mAb
(anti-collagen 4 or anti-fibrin mAb) via PEGylated ester-bond linker. We
considered mAb was one of ideal DDS carriers, because IgG in size range
from 10 to 20nm had stronger EPR (Enhanced permeability and retention)
effect as passive tumor targeting activity than albumin being used in
clinics as a carrier. Moreover, our ADC bound to the tumor stroma from
which ACAs were control-released gradually and distributed throughout the
tumor, resulting in the arrest of tumor growth due to induced damage to
both tumor cells and tumor vessels.In addition to xenograft model,
spontaneous mouse cancer models having dense stroma, remarkable fibrin
deposition and abundant collagen e.g. chemically-induced cutaneous cancer
or pancreatic cancer from genetic engineered mouse were used for the
proof concept study of CAST therapy. We also made full use of imaging
technology (fluorescence, PET/CT) for the evaluation of the
biodistribution property and tumor stroma specificity of our anti-stroma
mAbs.We will present the CAST therapy and discuss our development
strategy for the clinical use.[1] Matsumura Y, Maeda H. A new concept for
macromolecular therapeutics in cancer chemotherapy: mechnism of
tumoritropic accumulation of proteins and antitumor agent smancs. Cancer
Res. 46:6387-92. 1986.[2] Yasunaga M, Manabe S, Matsumura Y. New concept
of cytotoxic immunoconjugate therapy cancer-induced fibrin clots. Cancer
Sci. 102:1396-1402, 2011.[3] Yasuanga M, Manabe S, Tarin D, Matsumura Y.
Cancer-stroma targeting therapy by cytotoxic immunoconjugate bound to the
collagen 4 network in the tumor tissue. Bioconjugate Chem.22:1776-1783,
2011.[4] Yasuanga M, Manabe S, Tarin D, Matsumura Y. Tailored
immunoconjugate therapy depending on a quantity of tumor stroma. Cancer
Sci. 2012. [Epub ahead of print][5] Matsumura Y. Cancer stromal targeting
(CAST) therapy.Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 64:710-719, 2012.

