Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Osteopontin-c splicing isoform contributes to ovarian cancer
progression.


Introduction: Ovarian carcinoma (OC) is one of the most aggressive
gynecological diseases and generally diagnosed at advanced stages.
Osteopontin (OPN) is overexpressed in OC and is involved in tumorigenesis
and metastasis. Alternative splicing of OPN generates 3 isoforms, OPNa,
OPNb, and OPNc. Objective: This study aims to characterize the expression
profile and functional role of OPN splicing isoforms (OPN-SI) in OC.
Methodology: The expression patterns of OPN-SI and a series of genes
involved in cancer pathways were analyzed by real-time PCR. In vitro and
in vivo functional assays were performed using the ovarian cancer cell
line OvCar-3, stably overexpressing the three OPN-SI. Results: OPNc, but
not OPNa and OPNb, was specifically expressed on OC samples. We then
demonstrated that OPNc isoform has stimulatory effects on OvCar-3 cell
proliferation, migration, invasion and anchorage independent cells
growth, besides activating tumor formation in nude mice. We also found
that these features are mainly mediated by PI3K/Akt signaling pathway.
Moreover, OvCar-3 OPNc-overexpressing cells are able to modulate the
expression of 34 genes involved in key cancer pathways. Notably, tumors
formed by OPNc-overexpressing cells present high expression levels of
typical angiogenic markers, such as VEGF-A, VEGFR-2 and CD34. Based on
this observation, we also investigated the molecular mechanisms by which
OPNc stimulates angiogenic processes. Our data showed that OPNc
overexpression activates VEGF-A expression and secretion, also through
the PI3K/Akt pathway. This splicing isoform is also able to activate the
expression of c-Fos, c-Jun and phospho-c-Jun. OPNc role on activating the
phosphorylation of c-Jun is mediated by integrin receptor, in an
RGD-dependent manner. In addition, OPNc-conditioned medium is able to
induce HUVEC endothelial cell proliferation, migration and adhesion.
Conclusion: Thus, the specific targeting of OPNc and its regulated
signaling network could be a putative novel strategy to inhibit key steps
involved in OC progression and may represent a putative strategy for
developing new therapeutic approaches using OPNc as interesting target
for OC treatment strategies.

