Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of luminal breast cancer stem cells by HER2 does not
require gene amplification providing a potential molecular explanation
for the efficacy of adjuvant trastuzumab in patients with clinically
HER2-negative breast cancer.


Although current breast treatment guidelines limit the use of HER2
blocking agents such as trastuzumab to women whose tumors display HER2
gene amplification, recent retrospective analysis by several groups have
suggested that in the adjuvant setting a wider group of patients whose
tumors do not display HER2 amplification may also benefit from this
therapy.We hypothesized that these unanticipated results might be
explained by the cancer stem cell (CSC) hypothesis. We previously
demonstrated that HER2 was an important regulator of CSCs in HER2
amplified breast cancers. We now utilize breast cancer cell lines, mouse
xenograft and matched human primary and metastatic tumor samples to
demonstrate that HER2 is selectively expressed in and regulates the
self-renewal of CSC populations in ER-positive luminal breast cancers
which do not display HER2 amplification. In luminal MCF7 and ZR-75-1
breast cancer cells, as well as in primary human tumors, we demonstrate
an association between cells which express HER2 and the stem cell marker
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH1). In vitro trastuzumab reduced the CSC
population as assessed by tumorsphere formation or ALDH expression while
no such effects were scene in basal/claudin-low MDA-MB-231 and SUM159
cells. In mouse luminal tumor xenografts, the effects of trastuzumab were
highly dependent on the timing of administration. While the effects of
trastuzumab on established tumors were limited to those with HER2
amplification, trastuzumab administration begun immediately after tumor
inoculation blocked the growth of luminal tumors which did not display
HER2 amplification. HER2 expression was increased in luminal tumors grown
in mouse bone xenografts, as well as in bone metastasis from patients
with luminal breast cancer compared to matched primary tumors.
Furthermore, this increase in HER2 protein expression was not due to gene
amplification, but rather was mediated by RANK ligand in the bone
microenvironment. These studies suggest that the clinical efficacy of
adjuvant trastuzumab may relate to the ability of this agent to target
the CSC population in a process that does not require HER2 gene
amplification. Furthermore, these studies support a CSC model in which
maximal clinical benefit is achieved when CSC targeting agents are
administered in the adjuvant setting.

