Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-culture induced EMT in breast tumor cells is mediated through
MAPK signaling and microRNA regulation.


Understanding how components of the microenvironment cooperate with tumor
cells to facilitate tumor progression, metastasis, and clinical outcome
is an important aspect of breast tumor biology that remains incompletely
understood. We have previously identified a microRNA (miRNA) signature
indicative of hyperactive MAPK signaling (hMAPK) in primary human breast
tumors. This hMAPK-miRNA signature is significantly associated with poor
clinical outcome and increased tumor aggressiveness. As the hMAPK-miRNA
signature as well as associations with gene and protein expression were
generated from primary tumor specimens comprised not only of tumor cells
but also stromal cells, here we undertook to further elucidate unique
contributions of stromal cells and tumor cells to this hMAPK-miRNA
signature, and to investigate whether these miRNAs facilitate EMT and
subsequent invasion and aggressiveness in the tumor cell
population.Informatic analysis reveals that this hMAPK-miRNA signature
contains several miRNAs which are known and predicted to regulate
modulators of EMT. mRNA expression analysis as well as analysis of RPPA
protein expression data from primary tumors bearing this hMAPK-miRNA
signature reveals increased expression of EMT markers at the protein
level. These data suggest that activation of MAPK signaling may
contribute to breast tumor cell EMT in part through miRNA-mediated
regulation of EMT-related genes.To examine the contributions of tumor
cells and stromal cells to the hMAPK miRNA signature and associated EMT
gene and protein expression, we utilized a panel of primary cultures from
ER-negative breast tumors (DTs) and CAFs derived from dissociated tumors
(CAF-DTs). miRNA expression analysis of DTs and CAF-DTs indicates that
members of this hMAPK-miRNA signature are differentially expressed
between CAFS and tumor cells, suggesting that different cell types within
a solid tumor provide unique contributions to overall miRNA expression.
Co-culture of DTs with CAFs resulted in increased MAPK activity in the
DTs. Co-culture with CAFs also modulates expression of this hMAPK-miRNA
signature in both CAF and tumor cell populations and subsequently alters
expression of EMT markers in the tumor cell population.This work suggests
that interactions between tumor cells and other components of the tumor
microenvironment contribute to tumor aggressiveness by activating MAPK
signaling which establishes a pro-EMT phenotype that is driven in part by
miRNA-mediated regulatory events.

