Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Refining and assessing quality for next generation sequencing of
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues.


With increasing acceptance of the use of formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) for next generation sequencing (NGS),
researchers and clinicians need to choose whether to analyze FFPE or
cryopreserved (CRYO) tissue. In many clinical situations normal tissue
would be available from blood, FFPE normal and tumor tissues from
pathology archives, while fresh or CRYO tumor would require an invasive
biopsy. Options include analysis of either CRYO or FFPE tumor coupled
with either CRYO or FFPE normal tissue. Alternately, analyses could
incude both CRYO and FFPE normal tissue to detect the impact of FFPE on
NGS results, or could defer analysis of normal tissue with identification
of novel mutations by comparisons of variants in tumor with SNP
databases. Little data are available directly comparing results or
tradeoffs resulting from these choices, prompting this study comparing
NGS analysis of matched samples of normal CRYO and FFPE and tumor CRYO
and FFPE.Appropriate kits from Qiagen were used to extract DNA from
sections of CRYO and FFPE tissues of bladder cancers obtained from our
institution's biorepository with informed consent. Libraries were
constructed using Agilent library kits and targeted with SureSelect
Kinome reagents. Libraries were sequenced by 100 bp paired end Illumina
sequencing on a HiSeq. Our analysis pipeline used BWA for alignment and
conducted subsequent analyses in GeneSpring NGS 12.1, including
inspecting tile quality, removing duplicates, filtering on base quality,
post alignment read (alignment score 95 and mapping quality 40 or above),
and read status (mate near required). Comparing a representative specimen
of tumor CRYO with tumor FFPE, targeted sequencing library preparations
yielded 19.9 and 12.8 million reads for CRYO and FFPE respectively. For
this analysis filtering by tile quality was not required. Uniquely mapped
reads to human genome were 92% of CRYO and 86% of FFPE. Out of the total
reads that aligned, 73.5% of CRYO and 74.3% of FFPE reads aligned without
error. Post all filters, 39% of CRYO and 44% of FFPE reads were available
for variant calling. Comparing variant calls from reference sequence to
novel variants, there were no differences comparing normal CRYO vs normal
FFPE, or tumor CRYO vs tumor FFPE. Comparing tumor with normal samples
there were 30 variants for CRYO samples, 25 for FFPE samples, and 23 when
CRYO normal was compared with FFPE tumor. In comparing normal vs tumor,
22 variants calls were the same for all comparisons of tissue types.
Results will be presented for a more detailed analyses of multiple
samplesOverall we found high concordance between results from the CRYO
and FFPE samples. Our results support use of FFPE for NGS of clinical
samples and highlights potential contribution of including sequencing a
normal cryropreserved specimen to ensure analysis quality.

