Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting mTORC1 by epidermal overexpression of PRAS40(T246A)
suppresses TPA-induced epidermal hyperplasia during tumor promotion.


Akt activation is an important event during the early stages of skin
tumor promotion by diverse tumor promoting stimuli. Transgenic mice
overexpressing either wild-type Akt1 (Aktwt) or a constitutively active
form of Akt1 (Aktmyr) exhibit dramatically enhanced susceptibility to
two-stage skin carcinogenesis and skin tumor promotion. Several
downstream Akt targets are modulated (i.e., increased phosphorylation) in
keratinocytes during tumor promotion, including the mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTORC1). Recent experiments show that inhibiting mTORC1 by
using topical rapamycin in both wild-type and BK5.Aktwt transgenic mice
can effectively block TPA-induced activation of mTORC1 signaling,
epidermal hyperproliferation and skin tumor promotion in a dose-dependent
manner. Treatment with rapamycin also inhibited TPA-induced proliferation
and migration of labeling retaining cells (LRCs) of the bulge region from
the hair follicles to upper epidermal compartments. To further examine
the importance of mTORC1 signaling in epithelial carcinogenesis, we
generated BK5.PRAS40mt (PRAS40T246A) mice using the BK5 vector that
targets expression to the basal layer of epidermis. PRAS40 was originally
identified as a novel Akt substrate with a phosphorylation site at Thr246
and acts as a negative regulator when bound to mTORC1. PRAS40T246A
expressed in BK5.PRAS40mt mice remained bound to raptor even after TPA
treatment as determined by immunoprecipitation analysis. BK5.PRAS40mt
mice displayed reduced phosphorylation of both S6K (T389) and 4EBP1 (S65)
in epidermis following treatment with TPA. Furthermore, these transgenic
mice were significantly less sensitive to TPA-induced epidermal
proliferation (measured by both epidermal thickness and labeling index)
compared to nontransgenic siblings. TPA-mediated migration and
proliferation of LRCs was also inhibited in BK5.PRAS40mt mice.
BK5.PRAS40mt mice also expressed lower levels of cell cycle proteins in
epidermis after TPA treatment. Collectively, the current data further
support the hypothesis that downstream signaling pathways through mTORC1
contribute significantly to the process of skin tumor promotion through
effects on proliferation. Supported by CA37111 and 129409.

