Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New fluorescence-based cell assays for visualizing the Raf - Ras
interaction and the Wnt pathway activity.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) belongs to the most frequent cancer types
(Hollande et al. 2010). As molecular mechanism for CRC, several
mechanisms are presumed, including chromosome instability going along
with the inactivation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene, a key
protein of Wnt signaling (Thorstensen et al. 2005). It is widely accepted
that an abnormally activated Wnt pathway is a major cause for non-braked
proliferation and for reduced cell differentiation. The second major
cause of CRC is the deregulation of genes affecting the Ras pathway
(Jeremy R. Jass, 2006).Nevertheless, specific drugs targeting either the
Wnt or the Ras pathways are rare. Therefore, we designed new,
fluorescence-based reporter gene assays either for the Wnt or the Ras/Raf
pathway as tools to simplify the screening for compounds modifying each
pathway. Such cellular systems could be applicable for
high-throughput-screening as well as Live-Cell-Imaging of compound
effects, as shown in preliminary experiments. Therein, stably transfected
HEK 293T cells bearing the new, Wnt-responsive reporter gene vector, were
treated with LiCl, Wnt3a protein or acetylsalicylic acid in order to get
a specific response. Cells showed an increase of the fluorescence level,
which is measurable by a standard ELISA reader and could be visualized
via fluorescence microscopy. In MDCK or MDCK-F3 cells bearing the
Raf-responsive element, treated with EGF or a Raf inhibitor, the
localization of the fluorescence signal changed. Moreover, treating the
cells with different combination of the mentioned Wnt- or Ras-active
compounds also showed a response, indicating a correlation between the
two pathways. These results lead to the conclusion to combine both
reporter gene vectors in order to detect the interplay of the pathways.
Besides sensibilization of the assays and setting up the Live-Cell
imaging experiments, this will be our further steps.In summary, we
designed several assays applicable in a screening assay for new, specific
compounds targeting the two most important cancer-related pathways Wnt
and Ras/Raf. Such an assay is more cost-effective than conventional
assays, and also offers the possibility to characterize directly the
biochemical mechanisms and interplays via Live-Cell-Imaging.

