Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatments of NSCLC-PDX with c-MET gene amplification by c-MET
inhibitors lead to rapid development of drug resistance.


Drug resistance is one of important factors limiting effect of most
cancer therapies. Understanding mechanisms causing resistance can
facilitate overcoming resistance. c-MET gene activation, via either
activating mutations or gene amplification, is an oncogenic driver for
some non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) in patients as well as in
patient derived xenograft (PDX) (1). c-MET gene activation is also one of
the two most dominant TKI-resistance seen among the patients treated with
EGFR-TKI (tyrosine kinase inhibitors) (1, 2). Therefore, c-MET inhibitor
could become an important treatment option for NSCLC patients whose c-MET
is either de nova activated or activated during TKI treatment (1). We
recently demonstrated that Crizotinib (PF2341066), an approved drug
against NSCLC with ALK-fusion and a known c-MET inhibitor, can
effectively treat NSCLC with c-MET gene amplification, including those
resistant to EGFR-TKIs (1), in PDXs. Specifically, we described two
models LU1901 and LU2503 both with amplified gene, accompanied with
over-expression, of c-MET, and both sensitive to Crizotinib (complete
regression in LU2503, while near-complete regression in LU1901) (1),
confirming the c-MET activation as dominant oncogenic driver for these
two tumors.In the present study, interestingly, the treated LU1901 tumors
subsequently re-emerge and re-grow even in the presence of continuous
treatment. In particular, the re-growed LU1901 become completely
resistant to Crizotinib (we call LU1901R), even after it was
re-engrafted. Pharmacodynamic analysis revealed that the LU1901R tumor
has similar level of phosphorylation (or activation) of c-MET as the
parental LU1901. Crizotinib treatment caused nearly-similar inhibition of
c-MET in both LU1901 and LU1901R, as well as the downstream signaling,
including pMEK and pAKT by Crizotinib in both LU1901 and LU1901R tumors
along with c-MET inhibition. All these suggest that the threshold of
c-MET activation for prompting tumor growth/survival is significantly
lower in LU1901R than LU1901. We are currently characterizing the LU1901R
in order to identify the mechanisms of resistance, and attempt to find
approach to overcome them.In summary, we have successfully developed
c-MET inhibitor resistant models that may reflect resistance emergence in
the clinics. These models could be particularly useful in investigating
clinical resistant mechanisms and evaluating new therapy that can
overcome resistance.

