Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetic evaluation and tolerability assessment of
anti-PSMA x anti-CD3 SCORPIONTM molecule in humanized mice and non-human
primates.


Background: Treatment of metastatic, castrate-resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC) remains a highly unmet medical need. We have developed a
bispecific SCORPIONTM (multi-specific protein therapeutic) molecule that
redirects T-cell cytotoxicity against cells expressing PSMA (Prostate
Specific Membrane Antigen), a prostate cancer antigen. SCORPION molecules
are antibody-like therapeutics containing two sets of binding domains
linked to immunoglobulin Fc domains, which extend the half-life of the
molecules in vivo. In these studies, we examine the pharmacokinetics and
tolerability of our bispecific SCORPION molecule in humanized mice and
non-human primates to assess the potential for clinical
development.Materials and Methods: Cross-reactivity of the SCORPION
molecule to cynomolgus antigens was first assessed by measuring binding
to recombinant PSMA and primary cynomolgus T cells in vitro.
Cross-reactivity was further assessed in redirected T-cell cytotoxicity
assays using cynomolgus T cells. Pharmacokinetics of the SCORPION
molecule were determined from single intravenous injections in BALB/c
mice and cynomolgus monkeys. Serum draws at timepoints ranging from 15
minutes to 504 hours were used to determine the serum half-life in each
species. Tolerability was assessed following single intravenous
injections in both humanized NOD scid gamma (NSG) mice and cynomolgus
monkeys. Cytokine release was measured using multiplex immunoassays;
T-cell redistribution was followed using flow cytometry.Results: SCORPION
molecules targeting PSMA and CD3 showed comparable in vitro binding and
cytotoxic activity with human and cynomolgus T cells. Pharmacokinetic
analysis showed an extended serum half-life in BALB/c mice and cynomolgus
monkeys. Tolerability experiments in humanized NSG mice and cynomolgus
monkeys showed a limited dose-dependent effect on cytokine release and T
cell redistribution.Conclusions: These studies show that anti-PSMA x
anti-CD3 SCORPION therapeutics possess suitable characteristics for
further in vivo toxicology studies and merit further investigation as
potential therapeutics in CRPC.

