Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of the microenvironment on drug sensitivity in breast
cancer using a three-dimensional cell culture model.


Three-dimensional (3D) cell culture is an important research tool and an
invaluable alternative to two-dimensional (2D) cell culture as it is more
suitable to represent in vivo conditions. The tumor microenvironment
influences cellular activity and using 3D cell culture allows these
interactions to be studied in vitro. We have evaluated the efficacy of a
novel 3D cell culture model for breast cancer and determined cellular
responses caused by drug activity. We have recently developed and
optimized a miniaturized 3D breast cancer culture model. Our model uses
reconstituted basement membrane from Growth Factor Reduced Matrigel as a
scaffold and is suitable for semi-automated early stage drug discovery.
The newly developed 3D culture model has been extensively characterized
for reproducibility and the activity of known anti-breast cancer
therapies. Notably, anthracyclines and taxanes showed significantly
altered drug sensitivity in 3D when compared to monolayer cell cultures
of breast cancer cell lines. To determine the mechanisms underlying the
altered sensitivity in 3D cell culture, we sought to identify the
differences between untreated and drug treated spheroids, as well as the
differences between 2D and 3D cell culture responses to anthracyclines
and taxanes. We evaluated proliferation, penetration, cellular
architecture and signaling of major cellular pathways in our 3D model. We
will discuss the proliferation rate comparing 2D and 3D cell culture
models and drug penetration (exemplified by doxorubicin) in 3D cell
culture. The effect of anthracyclines and taxanes on the 3D cellular
architecture, without the influence of extracellular matrix proteins in
the microenvironment, will also be presented. In addition, we have
characterized the signaling pathways in 2D and 3D cell culture commonly
associated with enhanced drug resistance and other relevant proteins
including those associated with apoptosis. Deconstructing the cellular
processes in 3D breast cancer cell culture in response to breast cancer
therapies has the potential to elucidate drug resistance mechanisms. The
results obtained from this research illustrate the characteristics and
mechanisms of both monolayer and 3D cell culture with respect to
anthracycline and taxane drug activity. These results demonstrate the
benefits of 3D cell culture in early stage novel compound evaluation for
breast cancer.

