Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a HER2-based GEDI microfluidic device for the
molecular characterization of CTCs from metastatic breast cancer patients.


Microtubule targeting drugs (MTDs) constitute the mainstay of the most
active chemotherapy regimens against breast cancer (BC) and have been
standard therapy for locally advanced and metastatic disease for the last
20 years. However, metastatic BC (MBC) is still incurable mainly because
of acquired drug resistance. The molecular basis of clinical drug
resistance is not well understood which together with the lack of
predictive biomarkers in the clinical setting prevents us from
personalizing MTD-based therapy.Isolation of Circulating Tumor Cells
(CTCs) from the blood of metastatic patients has emerged as a valid
source of tumor tissue in the form of liquid biopsy that is being used as
prognostic biomarker based on CTC enumeration. To be able to perform
molecular CTC analyses we have developed a BC specific microfluidic
device that operates on the principle of geometrically enhanced
differential immunocapture (GEDI), using antibody-coated microposts. We
selected HER2 as BC selective surface antigen to isolate CTCs from MBC
patients as it is expressed in 90% of breast tumors and overexpressed in
30%, while it is minimally affected by epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) often occurring in metastasis. We previously
demonstrated that the ability of the HER2 GEDI microfluidic device to
capture BC cells expressing high and intermediate to low levels of HER2
expression confirming its suitability for BC patients with highly
heterogeneous HER2 levels.We have tested the HER2-based GEDI in MBC
patients and have confirmed CTC capture. To test the performance of our
device we are currently comparing it to the FDA approved CellSearch using
blood from the same patient where CTCs are enumerated by both Cell Search
and our device.Importantly, the retained viability of GEDI-captured CTCs
provides us the opportunity to functionally test CTC response to
chemotherapy directly on the device, in an effort to develop an assay
predictive of clinical response so that we can tailor chemotherapy to the
individual. In this assay, we are treating the GEDI-captured CTCs with
physiologically relevant concentrations of MTDs and are subsequently
assaying drug-induced target modifications. As a proof of principle, we
have demonstrated that taxane sensitive BC cell lines captured on the
GEDI device showed evidence of effective drug-target engagement by the
presence of microtubule bundling following Docetaxel treatment. We are
currently evaluating the response of GEDI-captured BC taxane-resistant
cells to ex-vivo drug treatment to evaluate the dynamic range of our
assay.We are currently conducting a clinical trial that characterizes
GEDI-captured CTCs isolated from MTD treated MBC patients where we will
monitor the molecular characteristics of the CTCs during chemotherapy
treatment and at disease relapse. This approach will give us significant
insight of the mechanisms of resistance of MTDs.

