Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The loss of miR-34a and activation of Notch-1 leads to
aggressiveness of pancreatic cancer cells, which could be attenuated by
CDF.


Studies have shown that Notch-1 plays key roles in early development and
also becomes activated during the development and progression of a
variety of tumors including pancreatic cancer (PC), one of the most
lethal malignant diseases, which is in part due to its potential for
rapid growth, drug resistance, and metastasis. The expression of microRNA
(miRNA) miR-34a, a potential tumor suppressor, has been reported to be
decreased in many human tumors including PC, suggesting that miR-34a is a
critical during tumor development and progression. Several recent
experimental studies have shown an inhibitory role of miR-34a in tumor
cell growth by targeting Notch-1 in various tumor cells lines derived
from prostate cancer, colorectal cancer and pancreatic cancer. However,
the mechanistic interrelationship between the loss of miR-34a and
activation of Notch-1 has not been fully elucidated. Here, we show that
the expression of miR-34a is significantly reduced in a number of PC cell
line. Forced over-expression of Notch-1 by Notch-1 cDNA transfection led
to decreased expression of miR-34a in AsPC-1 PC cells, which was
consistent with increased tumor cell aggressiveness such as increased
cell migration and sphere formation (pancreatospheres). Conversely,
knock-down of Notch-1 by Notch-1 specific siRNA decreased the formation
of pancreatospheres in AsPC-1 cells and cancer stem like cells (CSLCs)
such as those which formed spheres. Re-expression of miR-34a by the
transfection of its precursor decreased the expression of Notch-1 protein
in Notch-1 over-expressing PC cells, which was consistent with a decrease
in the formation of pancreatospheres. Moreover, re-expression of miR-34a
also decreased angiogenesis in vitro, the production of VEGF as well as
mRNA levels of Notch-1 and other CSC markers (Nanog, Oct4, and EZH2) in
pancreatic CSLCs (sphere cells). Finally, we found that CDF, a novel
synthetic analogue of natural compound Curcumin, could decrease cell
growth, cell migration, angiogenesis in vitro, and the formation of
pancreatospheres, consistent with decreased expression of Notch-1 and
VEGF, and increased expression of miR-34a in PC cells and in mouse
xenograft tumor model of PC. In conclusion, our findings suggest that the
inhibitory effect of CDF on PC tumor growth in vitro and in vivo is in
part mediated through deregulations of Notch-1 and miR-34a in PC,
suggesting that further in-depth investigations are warranted.

