Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of synthetic lethal genes to MYCN-amplified
neuroblastoma.


Purpose. Despite the identification of MYCN amplification as an adverse
prognostic marker in neuroblastoma, no drugs that target MYCN have yet
been developed, in part due to the inherent difficulty in designing
therapeutic molecules that can target transcription factors. An
alternative approach is to identify genes that are essential for the
growth of MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma.Methods. We have screened for MYCN
synthetic lethal genes using a highly efficient microRNA-short-hairpin
RNA (miRNA-shRNA) library that contains more than 200,000 shRNAs
targeting almost all predicted genes in the human genome. If a shRNA
leads to cellular death, this shRNA will diminish in the cell population.
The level of each shRNA was measured both by hybridizing genomic PCR
products to microarrays that contain complementary sequence to the shRNA
region and by direct high-throughput sequencing of the shRNA region.
Selected candidates were further validated in MYCN amplified and
non-amplified neuroblastoma cell lines.Results. We have performed an
shRNA screen utilizing the SHEP-21N cell line, which expresses MYCN under
a tetracycline controlled promoter. 396 significantly (PPurpose. Despite
the identification of MYCN amplification as an adverse prognostic marker
in neuroblastoma, no drugs that target MYCN have yet been developed, in
part due to the inherent difficulty in designing therapeutic molecules
that can target transcription factors. An alternative approach is to
identify genes that are essential for the growth of MYCN-amplified
neuroblastoma.Methods. We have screened for MYCN synthetic lethal genes
using a highly efficient microRNA-short-hairpin RNA (miRNA-shRNA) library
that contains more than 200,000 shRNAs targeting almost all predicted
genes in the human genome. If a shRNA leads to cellular death, this shRNA
will diminish in the cell population. The level of each shRNA was
measured both by hybridizing genomic PCR products to microarrays that
contain complementary sequence to the shRNA region and by direct
high-throughput sequencing of the shRNA region. Selected candidates were
further validated in MYCN amplified and non-amplified neuroblastoma cell
lines.Results. We have performed an shRNA screen utilizing the SHEP-21N
cell line, which expresses MYCN under a tetracycline controlled promoter.
396 significantly (P<0.01) depleted or enriched genes by both best shRNA
and integrated gene level were identified. Gene set enrichment analysis
was performed utilizing the Pathway Commons data set. 25 potential
synthetic lethal genes were examined by secondary screening utilizing
Dharmacon SMARTpool siRNAs. The potential synthetic lethal gene
transcription factor AP-4/activating enhancer binding protein (TFAP4) was
further validated in three MYCN amplified cell lines and three MYCN
non-amplified cell lines. Knocking down TFAP4 by siRNA inhibited cell
growth in MYCN amplified cell lines (NGP, SKNDZ, and Be(2)c) by 30%-50%,
96 hours after transfection, while knocking down TFAP4 in MYCN
non-amplified lines (CHP212, SKNSH, and SH-SY5Y) did not affect cell
growth. Utilizing a tetracycline inducible shRNA system, knocking down
TFAP4 significantly reduced colony formation of NGP by70% and Be(2)c by
25%.Conclusions. By the use of a genome wide RNAi screen, we identified
potential synthetic lethal genes to MYCN amplification. The top candidate
TFAP4 was validated to inhibit neuroblastoma cell growth and colony
formation in a MYCN dependent manner. This may provide novel targets for
the treatment of neuroblastoma.

