Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interpatient differences in colon tumors reflected in kinase
activity and inhibition profiles related to KRAS and BRAF mutation status.


Background. Due to the biological heterogeneity, response to systemic
therapy is variable in colon cancer. Chemotherapy improves median
survival from 6-12 months to 18-24 months. Epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) antibodies have shown to improve survival, although
modest, even further. KRAS mutations were identified as negative
predictive markers for EGFR directed therapy. The response rate to EGFR
targeted therapy remains low. Therefore there is an urgent need to find
additional therapeutic options and accompanying biomarkers. The analysis
of kinase activity in colon tumors may yield tumor-specific information
on aberrant cell signaling pathways and may be usefull in a better
patient stratification. Aim of this study is to generate overall kinase
activity profiles from colon cancer tissues to explore if subtypes of
this cancer show distinct kinase activity profiles. This can help to find
new therapeutic options or predictive markers for response to therapy.
Methods. Normal and tumorous colon tissue from patients who had given
informed consent was fresh frozen after surgical resection. All tumor
specimens were analyzed for BRAF and KRAS mutation status. Tissue
cryosections were lysed in buffer with phosphatase and protease
inhibitors. Tyrosine kinase (PTK) and serine/threonine kinase (STK)
activity profiles of normal and tumor tissue were generated on PamChip
peptide microarrays comprising peptide sequences derived from known human
phosphorylation sites. The ex vivo effect of kinase inhibitors on these
kinase activity profiles was also determined. Peptide phosphorylation was
monitored using fluorescently labeled antibodies. Data were analysed with
Bionavigator software. Results. Tumor tissue has a higher PTK activity
than normal tissue, whereas STK activity was equal to or lower than in
normal tissue. STK activity profiles of 23 colon tumors could not be
grouped according to mutation status, percentage of tumor tissue,
differentiation grade or TNM classification. The STK activity profiles
showed that within the group of wild type KRAS tumors, clearly different
clusters were found. In the group with KRAS mutations (G12V, G12D, G12C,
G12R) the STK activity profiles differed between the tumors. A subset of
tumors, (two KRAS mutants, a BRAF mutant and a WT tumor) were tested ex
vivo with a selection of 11 kinase inhibitors and showed different
sensitivity to these inhibitors. Conclusions. Kinase activity and the
response to inhibitors can be measured ex vivo in colon tumor tissue to
capture the diversity in kinase activity and response to inhibitors
between patients. The differences in kinase activity profiles of colon
cancer samples could not be explained by subtypes according to mutation
(KRAS, BRAF) status. Interesting subclusters could be identified using
the kinase activity profiling providing a higher granularity than KRAS
mutation scoring allows.

