Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The immunomodulatory agent L-MTP-PE induces activation and
expansion of human T cells capable of lysing osteosarcoma cells.


The outcome of patients with metastatic osteosarcoma remains poor despite
aggressive multimodality therapy. Liposomal Muramyl Tripeptide
Phosphatidyl Ethanolamine (L-MTP-PE) is a non-specific immune modulator
that activates monocytes and macrophages and has shown antitumor activity
in osteosarcoma. The mechanism of action of L-MTP-PE remains unresolved.
Here we investigated the effects of the agent on lymphocyte
subpopulations.Whole peripheral blood from 9 healthy donors were
stimulated with L-MTP-PE for 24 hours. Compared to non-stimulated
controls, a proliferative response of CD3+ lymphocytes was found
(1.770.06 fold expansion, p=The outcome of patients with metastatic
osteosarcoma remains poor despite aggressive multimodality therapy.
Liposomal Muramyl Tripeptide Phosphatidyl Ethanolamine (L-MTP-PE) is a
non-specific immune modulator that activates monocytes and macrophages
and has shown antitumor activity in osteosarcoma. The mechanism of action
of L-MTP-PE remains unresolved. Here we investigated the effects of the
agent on lymphocyte subpopulations.Whole peripheral blood from 9 healthy
donors were stimulated with L-MTP-PE for 24 hours. Compared to
non-stimulated controls, a proliferative response of CD3+ lymphocytes was
found (1.770.06 fold expansion, p=<0.001). The strongest effect was
observed on the TCR+ CD3+ T cell subpopulation which expanded 5.01.0
fold. To further evaluate the effects of L-MTP-PE on T cell
proliferation, mononuclear cells were isolated from peripheral blood of 5
healthy donors and cultured in the presence of L-MTP-PE. On day 11, T
cells had expanded 4.60.6 fold compared to medium-controls. Addition of
interleukin-2 (IL-2) to the cultures increased expansion of T cells up to
9.81.6. In comparison, the known T-cell stimulatory aminobisphosphonate
agent zoledronic acid (ZA) combined with IL-2 induced 25.87.2-fold
expansion. T cell stimulation by ZA was previously shown to involve
inhibition of the mevalonate pathway enzyme farnesyl diphosphate synthase
and subsequent increase of isopentyl pyrophosphate levels. To explore the
mechanism of T cell expansion by L-MTP-PE, coincubation experiments were
repeated in the presence of the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor mevastatin.
Addition of mevastatin resulted in a 5.11.8-fold reduction of L-MTP-PE
induced T cell expansion, confirming a critical role of the mevalonate
pathway in T cell expansion and thus a mechanism comparable to ZA. To
explore the in vitro antitumor activity of L-MTP-PE activated T cells, 24
hour coincubation experiments were performed with the osteosarcoma cell
lines HOS and SAOS on day 6 of cultures. In a flow-cytometry based
cytotoxicity assay, substantial cytolysis of osteosarcoma cells from both
cell lines was observed after coincubation with both L-MTP-PE- and
L-MTP-PE/IL-2-stimulated T cells. At an effector-to-target-ratio of 1:1,
L-MTP-PE-stimulated T cells reduced viable cell counts of HOS and SAOS to
41.42.7% and 54.07.6%, respectively, and L-MTP-PE/IL-2-stimulated T cells
decreased cell counts to 33.72.0% and 23.00.9%. In comparison,
ZA/IL-2-stimulated T cells resulted in reduced viability to 46.21.0%
(HOS) and 38.93.8% (SAOS).We conclude that L-MTP-PE induces effective in
vitro expansion of T cells via a mechanisms involving the mevalonate
pathway, in a manner similar to aminobisphosphonate agents.
L-MTP-PE-activated T cells have the potential to lyse osteosarcoma cells
and may thus be involved in the antitumor effects of this agents.

