Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol attenuates prostate cancer growth by inhibiting
insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor signaling.


Introduction: Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in
the United States. The etiology of prostate cancer development and
progression is not very clear. Accumulating evidence suggests that an
elevated level of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) is positively
associated with the growth of prostate cancer. IGF-1 exerts its mitogenic
effect by binding to its receptor, IGF-1R, whose expression is also
increased during tumor growth. Resveratrol, a phytoalexin, has been shown
to possess anti-cancer action against various cancers through unknown
mechanism/s. In this study, we examined whether resveratrol mediates its
anti-tumor effects by inhibiting the trophic actions of IGF-1/IGF-1R on
prostate cancer.Methods: In vitro studies were performed on highly
aggressive androgen receptor negative human prostate cancer cells,
PC-3M-MM2. Cell viability was assessed by MTS assays, while apoptosis was
determined by Annexin-FITC and PI staining. Additionally, ELISA and
western blotting techniques were performed to examine the levels of IGF-1
and protein involved in IGF-axis, respectively. In vivo efficacy of
resveratrol was tested in a xenograft model of prostate cancer in severe
combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice. PC-3M-MM2 cells were subcutaneously
injected in these mice and resveratrol was administered by oral gavage
for the assessment of tumor growth. Primary tumors were then excised and
immunohistochemistry was performed on the tumor sections. Results:
Resveratrol significantly inhibited the release of IGF-1 from PC-3M-MM2
cells and reduced the activation of IGF-1R. Inhibition of IGF-1R by
resveratrol suppressed the activation of Akt (pAkt) and increased the
expression of programmed cell death 4 (PDCD4), a pro-apoptotic protein
and a target of Akt. These effects of resveratrol were associated with
reduced cell viability and induction of apoptosis in PC-3M-MM2 cells.
Treatment of cells with short interfering (si) RNA against IGF-1R or PI3
kinase inhibitor (LY294002) mimicked the response of resveratrol on cell
viability, apoptosis and the expression of pAkt and PDCD4. Furthermore,
oral administration of resveratrol in SCID mice that were subcutaneously
injected with PC-3M-MM2 cells suppressed subsequent tumor growth.
Resveratrol also reduced serum and tumor levels of IGF-1 and inhibited
the activation of IGF-1R in these tumors. This modulation of IGF-1/IGF-1R
coincided with the inhibition of pAkt and increase in PDCD4 in the tumor
tissue.Conclusion: Our results indicate that resveratrol effectively
suppressed prostate cancer growth in vitro as well as in vivo by
attenuating IGF-1/IGF-1R signaling pathway. These data demonstrate that
the IGF/IGF-1R represent a relevant target of resveratrol for mediating
its anti-tumor actions against prostate cancer.

