Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of fetal alcohol exposure on tumor development and gene
expression in rats.


Fetal alcohol exposure increases susceptibility to carcinogen induced
mammary tumors in adult rats. These animals exhibit hyperproliferative
mammary glands pre-pubertally, suggesting that early changes are taking
place in the mammary gland. To determine the molecular mechanisms that
underlie these effects, pregnant Sprague Dawley rats were fed a liquid
diet containing 6.7% ethanol, pair-fed an isocaloric liquid diet, or fed
rat chow ad libitum from days 11 to 21 of gestation. Pups were
cross-fostered to ad libitum-fed control dams at birth. At postnatal day
50, offspring were injected with NMU to induce mammary tumors and tissues
were collected at 16 weeks post-injection, the time-point when
approximately half of all animals exhibited tumors in our previous study.
Significantly more tumors were observed in the fetal alcohol group
compared to control groups. Histological analysis indicated that fetal
alcohol exposed rats developed more adenocarcinomas. Interestingly,
mammary tissue from these animals exhibited more adenosis compared to
controls. Since we have previously observed changes in the
estradiol/estrogen receptor (ER) system and a recent study found that
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) genes are altered in the rat
fetal alcohol NMU model, a custom PCR array was designed to examine
expression of genes involved in EMT, estradiol/ER signaling, and
tumorigenesis in tumor samples and mammary tissue collected from
contralateral tumor-free glands. Mammary glands from fetal alcohol
animals had increased expression of EMT genes compared to pair-fed
controls. Snail and Twist, two genes whose increased expression is
considered the hallmark of EMT, exhibited the greatest changes.
Previously, we found that mammary tumors collected at 23 weeks post-NMU
injection were more ER negative in fetal alcohol animals. Therefore, we
were interested in determining if a similar change was evident at 16
weeks post-injection. Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis indicated that
at this earlier time-point, mammary tumors from the fetal alcohol group
were not more ER negative compared to controls. To determine if the ER is
functional, IHC analysis was performed to determine the expression of
progesterone receptor (PR), a downstream target of ER. The majority of
tumors from each treatment group were PR negative. To complete the
receptor status profile, IHC was also performed for HER2. The majority of
all tumors across the three treatment groups were HER2 negative. These
data indicate that fetal alcohol exposure alters expression of several
genes in the mammary gland, which may be involved in the molecular
mechanisms underlying the increased risk in mammary tumorigenesis.

