Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The gastric mucosal tissue interleukin-8 mRNA expression level is
a promising prognostic marker for prognosis prediction in advanced
gastric cancer treatment.


Background : The Interleukin-8 is one of the potent chemokine that plays
the major role in cancer inflammatory and vascular growth pathway. We
conduct this experiment to determine how difference of its level between
non-cancer and cancer location, and its possibility to predict prognosis
and result of advance gastric cancer treatment .Method : We collected 309
gastric tissue samples from 129 Thai advance gastric cancer patients
during January 2007 to March 2012 . Clinical information was prospective
collected on electronic data base. The Interleukin-8 expression levels
were detected by relative quantitation RT-PCR method with Taqman probe
for Interleukin-8 on 7500 series machine, Applied Biosystem . Test of
difference of Mean was done with independent and paired t-test by SPSS
version 17th. Test of difference was considered significant by p value
0.05.Result : The gastric mucosal tissue IL-8 mRNA expression level was
significantly higher in tumor specimen than benign specimen by level of
5469.35 and 565.42 respectively (p =0.13). Its level in diffuse
histologic type,metastatic disease and positive lymph node group are
higher without significant difference. In subgroup analysis for 50 neo-
adjuvant chemotherapy patients, the responder group (partial response and
complete response) had a lower IL-8 expression level than non-responder
group by the means level of1904.02, 24269.31,respectively
(p=0.209).Conclusion : Gastric mucosal tissue IL-8 mRNA expression level
was remarkable increased in advance gastric cancer and signet ring cell
type. We found that the higher expression level is directly correlated
with more advance of histological grading and prognosis of disease
treatment. The chemotherapy response rate was poorer in extremely high
expression. High interleukin-8 expression could be considered as poor
clinical prognostic factor for gastric cancer treatment, and it may be
helpful tool to predict the chemotherapy response in future.

