Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple drug resistance-associated protein 4 (MRP4) may
contribute to breast cancer progression by exporting the COX-2 product
PGE2.


Cancer is becoming the most prevalent disease in developed countries due
to aging populations. Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed
cancer among women accounting for 23% of total cancer diagnoses and 14%
of cancer-related deaths. As with many solid tumors, cyclooxygenase 2
(COX-2) and its enzymatic product, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), are elevated
in breast cancer, and are associated with a poor prognosis. PGE2
initiates various signaling pathways when it binds to each of its four
cognate EP receptors. We have previously shown that PGE2 signaling
through the EP4 receptor increases the metastatic potential of breast
cancer cells. Multiple drug resistance-associated protein 4 (MRP4) is
responsible for the active export of PGE2 from the tumor cells, while the
prostaglandin transporter (PGT) imports PGE2 for 15-hydroxyprostaglandin
dehydrogenase (15-PGDH)-mediated degradation. The role of neither MRP4
nor PGT has been investigated in breast cancer progression. We
hypothesize that increased expression of MRP4 would cause increased PGE2
signaling and, therefore, increased metastatic potential in breast
cancer. Using a panel of breast cancer cell lines, we demonstrate that
highly metastatic tumor cells can express low levels of COX-2, but still
achieve high extracellular levels of PGE2. We used MCF10A (immortalized
normal breast epithelium), MCF7 (luminal), T47D (luminal), MDA-MB-231
(basal B), 4175 (basal B), MDA-MD-468 (basal A), MDA-MB-436 (Basal B),
and SKBR3 (HER2-enriched) cell lines. These cell lines span not only a
range of molecular subtypes, but also a range of metastatic potential.
MRP4 mRNA and protein expression is increased in tumor cell lines with
high metastatic potential while expression of PGT mRNA and protein is
decreased in these cells when compared to cells with lower metastatic
potential. This inverse relationship between MRP4 and PGT should lead to
higher concentrations of extracellular PGE2 in the tumor
microenvironment, and this hypothesis is being tested through
pharmacologic and genetic approaches. Pharmacologic inhibition of MRP4
with MK571 in vitro results in decreased export of two substrates of
MRP4, PGE2 and cyclic-AMP (cAMP). Likewise, genetic suppression by MRP4
shRNA shows that decreased MRP4 expression also results in reduced PGE2
export. This data supports the hypothesis that MRP4 is a critcal step in
the PGE2 signaling pathway that leads to high extracellular PGE2, and
implicates MRP4 as a possible therapeutic target.

