Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of apheresis (Aph) on number and function of lymphocytes in
cancer patients (pts).


It has been suggested that Aph, used for Sipuleucel-T, may negatively
affect the OS of cancer pts by removing circulating lymphocytes and
diminishing host immunity. We explored data from prior clinical trials in
which pts had Aph or simple phlebotomy for evidence to support or
contradict this.We examined data from cancer pts on clinical trials who
had Aph (n=64) or only peripheral blood draws (n=90) as controls for
immune analysis. As the 1 functional analysis, we evaluated the impact of
Aph on the flu specific T-cells using ELISPOT. We also evaluated the
impact on absolute lymphocyte count (ALC), T cells (CD3, CD4, CD8, and
CD4:CD8 ratio). ELISPOT was expressed as number of cells/spot (i.e.
1/10,000 would be expressed as 10,000). For all parameters, baseline
(pre) values were compared to post-treatment (post) values using a
Wilcoxon signed rank test. A large two-tailed p-value would indicate no
significant change in values. Findings from smaller groups who underwent
Aph multiple times are described.In the Aph group, the median age was 63
(range 38-82); 92% male. Comparing the pre and post values within the
groups, with each pt as its own control, there was no significant
difference when comparing ELISPOT, ALC, and T cells (Table). 13 pts had a
3rd Aph with ELISPOT; 7 had improved responses to flu with an even
distribution around no change. 29 pts underwent >2 Aph (range 3-19,
median 4), 20 with matched ALC and 20 with T cell values. There was a
trend toward a slight decrease (It has been suggested that Aph, used for
Sipuleucel-T, may negatively affect the OS of cancer pts by removing
circulating lymphocytes and diminishing host immunity. We explored data
from prior clinical trials in which pts had Aph or simple phlebotomy for
evidence to support or contradict this.We examined data from cancer pts
on clinical trials who had Aph (n=64) or only peripheral blood draws
(n=90) as controls for immune analysis. As the 1 functional analysis, we
evaluated the impact of Aph on the flu specific T-cells using ELISPOT. We
also evaluated the impact on absolute lymphocyte count (ALC), T cells
(CD3, CD4, CD8, and CD4:CD8 ratio). ELISPOT was expressed as number of
cells/spot (i.e. 1/10,000 would be expressed as 10,000). For all
parameters, baseline (pre) values were compared to post-treatment (post)
values using a Wilcoxon signed rank test. A large two-tailed p-value
would indicate no significant change in values. Findings from smaller
groups who underwent Aph multiple times are described.In the Aph group,
the median age was 63 (range 38-82); 92% male. Comparing the pre and post
values within the groups, with each pt as its own control, there was no
significant difference when comparing ELISPOT, ALC, and T cells (Table).
13 pts had a 3rd Aph with ELISPOT; 7 had improved responses to flu with
an even distribution around no change. 29 pts underwent >2 Aph (range
3-19, median 4), 20 with matched ALC and 20 with T cell values. There was
a trend toward a slight decrease (<10%) in ALC and T cell subsets. These
findings supported the statistical analysis, which identified no
consistently positive or negative change in pts who received Aph.This
analysis indicates there is no difference in the number and function of
immune cells post Aph in cancer pts. This data provides evidence that Aph
inflicts negligible effects on a pts immune system, rejecting the
hypothesis that pts immune competence is impacted by the procedure in a
meaningful way.

