Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting cancer-associated fibroblasts using antibodies
recognizing fibroblast activation protein-alpha.


An expanding body of work suggests that the tumor stroma plays an
integral role in the initiation and development of epithelial cancers.
Within the stroma, cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are involved in
several functions that form integral aspects of tumor progression,
including immune suppression, metabolism, and invasion and metastasis.
Despite the demonstrated importance of CAFs within the tumor
microenvironment, targeting CAFs in a therapeutic context remains a
challenge. The work presented here details the isolation and
characterization of antibody fragments targeting multiple epitopes of
fibroblast activation protein-alpha (FAP), a membrane-bound protease
selectively overexpressed on CAFs in numerous epithelial cancers. The
combination of a minimalist antibody fragment library and yeast surface
display allowed for the isolation of more than 50 unique antibodies
recognizing the human or murine forms of FAP, with close to 30 exhibiting
cross-reactivity. To narrow the pool of cross-reactive antibodies to a
biologically relevant subset, the fragments were converted to an
antibody-like format that could be secreted from yeast. Without
purification, the soluble proteins were first used to investigate the
abilities of individual fragments to recognize FAP transiently expressed
on the surface of HEK293 cells. Proteins for which binding to FAP could
be confirmed were then used in combination with antibody fragments
displayed on the surface of yeast in order to determine which sets of
fragments bind distinct epitopes of FAP. Flow cytometry-based assays
revealed that the isolated fragments recognize two or more distinct
epitopes of the antigen. A handful of fragments is currently being
subjected to affinity maturation and conversion to IgGs, and work to
further investigate the in vitro and in vivo characteristics of the
proteins is ongoing. These proteins may allow for the ablation of
cancer-associated fibroblasts or interference with the proteolytic
activity of FAP in the tumor microenvironment, providing biological
insights into the roles of CAFs and therapeutic approaches to cancer
treatment. Furthermore, the general antibody isolation and
characterization approaches used in this work are accessible to many
single-investigator laboratories and should be applicable to the
targeting of numerous cancer antigens.

