Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antisense transcripts and R-loops caused by DNA topoisomerase I
inhibition by camptothecin at human active CpG island promoters.


DNA Topoisomerase I (Top1) is specifically inhibited by camptothecin
(CPT), a natural product with effective anticancer activity. CPT can
stabilize a DNA-Top1 DNA cleavage complex that can lead to irreversible
DNA breakage at replication forks, and transcription-dependent genome
instability. The bulk of cellular Top1 activity is required at
transcribing regions to modulate DNA supercoils generated by elongating
RNA polymerases. However, the molecular effects of CPT inhibition of Top1
at transcriptional levels are not fully established. By next generation
sequencing analyses of bisulfite-treated RNAs extracted from human HCT116
cancer cells, we here show that CPT promoted high levels of antisense
tags specifically at active promoters containing CpG islands (CGI). We
found several not annotated transcripts close to Refseq genes, the
majority of which were promoter-associated antisense transcripts
increased by CPT. We identified 256 and 84 of such transcripts in HCT116
cells and Top1-silenced HCT116-siRNATop1 cells, respectively. We
validated CPT-stimulated antisense transcripts by PCR in both cell lines,
and found that several of them could form R-loops at corresponding
genomic regions by affinity purification with a recombinant inactive
mutant RNaseH1. Drug effects were independent from replication, and
required both Top1 and ongoing transcription. In addition, CPT induced an
immediate burst and a subsequent rapid reduction of Top1-DNA cleavage
complexes at active, but not inactive, promoters indicating a partial,
time-dependent removal of Top1 from chromatin. Our findings demonstrate
that Top1 activity prevents accumulation of antisense R-loops and RNAs at
human active CGI promoters by relaxing negative DNA supercoils. The
transcriptional CPT effects can contribute to drug therapeutic activity
in cancer and other diseases. We will discuss our findings in relation to
transcription regulation and genome instability caused by interference
with Top1 activity.

