Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The difference in the incidence and the trend of hematologic
malignancies in Japan and the United States.


Background: The hematologic malignancies are a collection of
heterogeneous diseases with diverse epidemiologic features for which a
detailed classification of disease subtypes has evolved dramatically. The
incidence of a malignant disease reflects the genetics and cumulative
exposure to the environment of a population. Therefore, evaluation of the
incidence and trend of a disease in different populations may provide
insights into the etiology and pathogenesis of that disease. However, no
detailed data based on population-based cancer registry in Asia to see
each disease entities are available. Aims: The aim of this study is to
assess the incidence and the trend of each hematologic malignancy and to
evaluate the difference between Japan and US. The diseases evaluated in
this study were acute myeloid leukemia (AML), acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL), chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), multiple myeloma
(MM), Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Methods: To
evaluate the incidence of hematologic malignancies, we used
population-based registry data in Japan and the United States (US). The
population-based cancer registry of Japan included 100,637 cases and the
data in the US, SEER included 172,925 cases. The period covered in this
analysis is 1993-2006 in Japan and 1993-2008 in the US. Rates of
sex-specific, age-standardized incidence with 95% confidence intervals
were estimated and standardized by age-adjustment according to the world
standard population. We also estimated the annual percent change using
joinpoint regression analysis and evaluated the significance of the
trend. Results: The overall age-standardized incidence rate of all
hematologic malignancies per 100,000 in 2006 was 14.9 for males and 10.0
for females in Japan, 33.4 for males and 24.3 for females in the US. The
difference in the incidence between Japan and US is impressive for HL,
NHL and MM (approximately 3-10 fold), whereas AML, ALL, and CML have a
similar incidence. The total number of hematologic malignancies was found
to be increasing significantly in Japan whereas no obvious change was
seen in the US {annual percent change (95%CI) Japan; +1.5% (0.9 to 2.1),
US; +0.1% (-0.1 to 0.2)}. As for details, AML and the lymphoid
malignancies (HL and NHL) are increasing significantly in Japan whereas
there has been a marginal change in the US. Interestingly, the incidence
of CML has been decreasing during this period in both Japan and the US,
whereas no obvious change was seen in MM in their country. Conclusion: In
conclusion, we showed the difference in the incidence of hematologic
malignancies between Japan and the US. The incidence of hematologic
malignancies is lower in Japan than the US, but is increasing
significantly. The improvement in the quality of cancer registry systems
and the organization of these registries between countries enables us to
unite the data worldwide that will bring us new insights.

