Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophage Migration Inhibitory Factor (MIF) regulates monocytic
MDSC abundance to contribute to tumor growth and metastasis.


The inflammatory cytokine, Macrophage Migration Inhibitory Factor (MIF)
is a critical mediator of numerous inflammatory disease processes. In
addition, MIF is overexpressed in many cancers and the degree of
expression correlates with tumor aggressiveness. We identified MIF as a
target for inhibition by sulforaphane (SFN), a cancer chemopreventive
agent prevalent in broccoli. Based on this observation and the
correlation between MIF expression and poor prognosis in human patients,
we set out to determine how MIF might contribute to tumor growth and
progression.We hypothesized that, as an inflammatory cytokine, MIF may
regulate the interaction between the tumor and the host immune response,
rather than impacting an intrinsic property of the tumor cells. We are
exploring these questions using the syngeneic 4T1 model of breast
carcinoma. This model recapitulates many aspects of human breast tumor
progression, including spontaneous metastasis from the mammary fat pad to
similar target organs. We found that MIF expression in the tumor cells
increases tumor growth and metastasis in an orthotopic tumor model.
Importantly, the MIF dependent growth differences are only manifested in
vivo, as the MIF depleted cell line is not compromised in growth or
colony formation in vitro, suggesting that MIF may be contributing to the
interaction between the tumor and the host immune response. This was
confirmed by demonstrating that MIF depleted and MIF containing tumors
exhibit similar growth and metastasis properties in immunodeficient
animals. Evaluation of the immune cell infiltrates in the MIF containing
and MIF deficient tumors reveal that the abundance of monocytic MDSC
within the tumor is dependent on MIF expression. Finally, we demonstrate
that depletion of MDSCs abolishes the impact of MIF on tumor growth,
suggesting that these cells are critical for MIF to mediate its effects.
We are currently exploring the mechanisms by which MIF controls the
abundance of monocytic MDSCs in the tumor microenvironment and how this
relates to promotion of tumor metastasis. Our work establishes MIF as a
potentially valuable therapeutic target in tumor metastasis and supports
a potential alternative mechanism for chemoprevention in which SFN may
target the inflammatory tumor microenvironment through inhibition of this
cytokine.

