Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing a predictive cell-based assay for anti-cancer drug
selection.


There is a pressing need of predictive cell-based models for selecting
therapies that would have a high likelihood of success in the clinic.
Cancer evolves through a clonal selection process, which involves the
ability of a cancer cell to survive several rate-limiting steps, and give
rise to progeny under favorable conditions. We hypothesized that the
cancer cells that are endowed with high metabolic adaptability (ability
to survive without critical nutrients) would have significant advantages
in facing multiple challenges in the body, including resisting current
therapies. To develop a realistic cell-based model of aggressive breast
cancer, we reasoned that a robust selection of metabolic adaptability
would enrich metastatic cells in cell culture. Investigating an
aggressive human triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell line SUM149
that harbors mutant p53 and BRCA1 genes, we recently reported that rare
cells (0.01% in population) present in this cell line can be selected
based on their ability to survive and proliferate without glutamine.
These metabolically adaptable (MA) variants proved to be structurally
adaptable as well (highly enriched in mesenchymal phenotype), resistant
to chemotherapeutic drugs, and highly metastatic to multiple organs-
lungs, liver, brain, and skin from fat pad xenografts in nude mice (Singh
et al., PLoS ONE, 2012). Our function-based selection proved to be more
powerful than the biomarker-based selections for isolating the type of
rare cells that drive the disease.We are now investigating a variety of
experimental therapies to identify those which may eradicate most
adaptable breast cancer cells in patients with TNBC. It is noteworthy
that our assessment of response versus resistance to therapies is based
on long-term assays (1-2 months). Short-term assays, which are often used
to assess proliferation and apoptosis, are not good at predicting
response in the clinic. Our studies suggest that the MA cells are
resistant to most drugs tested thus far, supporting the validity of our
cell-based model. To illustrate with an example of evaluation of a
specific drug, we found that a clinically-useful therapy against MET and
ALK signaling in lung cancer, crizotinib, failed to eradicate SUM149-MA
cells under the conditions it eradicated all parental cells. This result
indicates that crizotinib is not suitable for clinical trials if the goal
is to eradicate resistant cells in TNBC. However, if innovative clinical
studies with crizotinib (such as trial of one) appear promising in a
subset of breast cancer (better response than current therapies), our MA
variants provide a suitable model to discover therapies that can be
combined with crizotinib to increase its efficacy. In conclusion, our
approach has a potential of improving therapeutic responses, but this
potential can be best realized with close interaction with clinicians
treating the disease.Supported by a State of Texas Grant for Rare and
Aggressive Cancers.

