Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical outcome of T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma
(T-ALL/T-LBL): the Bologna experience.


Background. Precursor T cell ALL/LBL occurs most frequently in late
childhood, adolescence, and young adulthood, with a 2:1 male
predominance; it comprises 15 and 25 percent of childhood and adult ALL,
respectively, and 2 percent of adult non-Hodgkin lymphoma. In adult
patients prognosis is poor, due to the high incidence of relapse even
after allogenic stem cell transplantation.Design and Methods. We
retrospectively analysed and currently report clinical outcome results
about 52 newly diagnosed and younger than 60 years T-ALL patients (median
age 30 years, range 14-73 years) treated, from 2006 to 2012 according to
standard chemotherapy regimen, including adapted pediatric-like schedule,
BFM protocol, and adult schedules. After induction, all the patients
underwent consolidation for at least one course. All the patients shared
the same strategy for intensification, that consisted, when available, in
allogenic or autologous stem cell transplantation. Detailed data about
cytogenetics and molecular biology will be provided on site.Durations of
complete remission (CR) and overall survival (OS) were estimated
according to the Kaplan-Meier method. The CR duration was calculated from
start of CR to first evidence of disease recurrence.Results. Informed
consent was obtained; after a single induction course 41/52 patients
obtained a CR (78.8%) and 2 patients a partial remission (PR) (3.8%) for
an overall response rate (ORR) of 82.6%. Seven patients (13.4%) had
resistant disease, and 2 (3.8%) died during induction. After a median
follow-up of 22.7 months, 19 patients (36.5%) are still in CR. The median
CR duration and OS were 12.3 and 23.15 months, respectively. The most
common grade 3 adverse events included gastro-intestinal toxicities (i.e.
nausea, vomiting, mucositis and diarrhoea) and liver
dysfunction.Conclusion. Our analysis confirms, in line with literature
data, that, despite intensive chemotherapeutic treatments and stem cell
transplantation, T-ALL and T-LBL adult patients still show a bad
prognosis. The relatively satisfying induction remission rate is
followed, in most cases, by a high relapse rate. Therefore, a molecular
stratification approach, based on gene-expression profile analysis
(Ferrando et al, Cancer Cell 2002) should be routinely performed, in
order to identify new targets, to optimize therapy, to reduce toxicity
and to improve clinical outcome.Acknowledgments. Work supported by
European LeukemiaNet, AIRC, AIL, PRIN, University of Bologna and
BolognAIL.

