Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional deregulation of cMYC as a critical determinant of
estrogen independence and aromatase inhibitor resistance in breast
cancers.


Aromatase inhibitors (AI), which block the synthesis of estrogen and
render an estrogen-deprived environment, are used extensively to treat
postmenopausal ER positive breast cancers (BC). Unfortunately, 15-60% of
breast cancer patients will relapse within 3-5 years of AI treatment.
Therefore, it is crucial to understand the mechanisms involved in
AI-resistance to identify new therapeutic targets. Our laboratory has
previously reported the development of an estrogen-deprivation (ED)
resistant cell line known as MCF7:5C cells which mimic the AI-resistant
BC and can grow spontaneously in vitro as well as form xenograft tumors
in the athymic mice in absence of estrogen (ref: Lewis et al., JNCI,
2005; 97(23):1746-59).Recent clinical studies have indicated
over-expression of a transcription factor, cMYC oncogene and the genes
regulated by cMYC as one of the major predictor in the aromatase
inhibitor resistant BC. However, the mechanism by which the cMYC oncogene
is over-expressed remains largely elusive. Using MCF7:5C cells as a model
for ER positive, AI-resistant BC cells; we investigated the levels of
cMYC oncogene and compared it with the parental MCF7 cells which do not
proliferate in the absence of estrogen. We found that cMYC protein as
well as mRNA levels were approximately 3 fold higher in MCF7:5C cells as
compared to MCF7 cells. Treating the cells with a cMYC inhibitor,
10058-F4, or with cMYC si RNA decreased the proliferation and the number
of S phase cells in MCF7:5C cells. To elucidate the underlying mechanism
responsible for the elevated transcription of cMYC we examined the
promoter of the cMYC gene and found that the recruitment of
phospho-serine-2-RNA pol II (a marker of RNA elongation) was
significantly higher in MCF7:5C cells as compared to the parental MCF7
cells. Further investigation revealed that activated CDK9 levels were
responsible for phosphorylating serine 2 RNA pol II in MCF7:5C cells.
Inhibition of CDK9 decreased the levels of total phospho-serine-2 RNA pol
II and the cMYC mRNA and also inhibited the estrogen-independent
proliferation of MCF7:5C cells. This study strongly suggests CDK9 as a
potential therapeutic target which mediates elevated transcription of
cMYC, which in turn is responsible for estrogen-independent growth of
AI-resistant BC cells.Grant Support: This work (VCJ) was supported by the
Department of Defense Breast Program under Award no: W81XWH-06-1-0590
Center of Excellence; the Susan G Komen For The Cure Foundation under
Award no: SAC100009; National Cancer Institute, Award no: P30CA051008.

