Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer effect of gedunin against pancreatic cancer cell lines.


Pancreatic cancer is 4th leading cause of cancer related deaths. It is
highly aggressive and resistant to most chemotherapeutic treatments.
Unfortunately, treatment options for pancreatic cancer are limited,
leading to a poor prognosis and high mortality rates. The development of
resistance to chemotherapeutic agents is a major obstacle to the
treatment of cancer. Current therapies often target a single oncogenic
protein; due to genetic plasticity/instability, pancreatic cancer cells
are able to circumvent the drug effects. This type of resistance may be
avoided, if multiple cancer signaling pathways are targeted
simultaneously with a single therapeutic agent. Thus, novel therapeutic
approaches are needed to treat pancreatic cancer. Natural products have
been shown to play an important role as anticancer agents. Neem
(Azadirachta indica) tree is known for its medicinal values. All parts of
the tree including leaves, flowers, seeds, fruits, roots and bark are
known to possess a wide range of medicinal properties. Neem leaf
extracts, which are non-toxic and non-mutagenic, have been shown to
possess anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, anticarcinogenic, and potent
immuno-stimulant activities in many cancer cells. We have demonstrated
that ethanolic fraction of neem leaves has potent anticancer effect
against mammary carcinogenesis. Gedunin is a tetraterpinoid isolated from
neem leaves. Gedunin has been established as a potent inhibitor of heat
shock protein 90 (Hsp90). The family of 90 kDa heat shock proteins
(Hsp90) has emerged as a novel drug target that mediates multiple
signaling nodes to combat cancer. In the current study, we investigated
the anticancer effect of gedunin against pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Our preliminary data clearly demonstrates that gedunin inhibits the
growth of pancreatic cancer cell lines. We also explored the molecular
mechanism underlying the anti-cancer effect of gedunin on pancreatic
cancer cells. As expected gedunin decreased the expression of Hsp90.
Gedunin treatment also decreased the phosphorylation of mTOR, 4EBP.
Furthermore, gedunin also induced autophagy and apoptosis simultaneously
by regulating key factors involved in these processes like LC3B, WIPI-1,
VMP-1, pJNK, cleavage of caspases and PARP. Overall, our preliminary
results strongly suggest that gedunin could be a potential anticancer
compound for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.

