Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exome sequencing of hepatoblastoma reveals recurrent mutations in
NFE2L2.


Hepatoblastoma (HB), the most common malignant liver tumor in children,
is a biologically and clinically heterogeneous embryonal malignancy.
Activation of the Wnt pathway is known to occur in the vast majority of
HBs, most frequently through somatic mutation of CTNNB1 and less often
from germline mutation of APC, but knowledge of other gene alterations is
scant. To identify critical genes and pathways in the pathogenesis of HB
and provide insight into potential clinically-relevant targets, we
performed whole exome sequencing on 35 clinically-annotated tumor-normal
pairs. Putative mutations identified through exome sequencing on
Illumina-based instruments were confirmed on a second sequencing
platform. A total of 130 somatic mutations were identified in 24 patients
(3.7 mutations per tumor; range of 0 to 22 mutations), resulting in a
somatic mutation rate of Hepatoblastoma (HB), the most common malignant
liver tumor in children, is a biologically and clinically heterogeneous
embryonal malignancy. Activation of the Wnt pathway is known to occur in
the vast majority of HBs, most frequently through somatic mutation of
CTNNB1 and less often from germline mutation of APC, but knowledge of
other gene alterations is scant. To identify critical genes and pathways
in the pathogenesis of HB and provide insight into potential
clinically-relevant targets, we performed whole exome sequencing on 35
clinically-annotated tumor-normal pairs. Putative mutations identified
through exome sequencing on Illumina-based instruments were confirmed on
a second sequencing platform. A total of 130 somatic mutations were
identified in 24 patients (3.7 mutations per tumor; range of 0 to 22
mutations), resulting in a somatic mutation rate of < 0.2 mutations per
Mb. CTNNB1 mutations were identified in 13 HBs (37%), confirming the
central role of the Wnt pathway in HB. Somatic mutations were also found
in other cancer genes, including the chromatin-remodeling genes MLL2 and
ARID1A. Frequent somatic mutations were identified in genes related to
regulation of oxidative stress, including recurrent point mutations in
NFE2L2 (NRF2) and inactivating mutations in the thioredoxin-domain
containing genes TXNDC15 and TXNDC16. An additional 27 HBs were sequenced
for NFE2L2 mutations, revealing a mutation frequency of 6.5% (4 of 62
tumors). Mutations of NFE2L2 are known to occur in 5-10% of adult
hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) as well as in other tumor types: as in
those tumors, the NFE2L2 mutations identified in HB (p.D29N in one
patient and p.R34G in three patients) are clustered within the Neh2
domain and are expected to inhibit KEAP1-mediated degradation of NRF2,
resulting in stabilization and nuclear accumulation of NRF2 and
activation of downstream oxidative stress response genes. Most
NFE2L2-mutated adult HCCs also contain mutations in CTNNB1 or other Wnt
pathway genes, suggesting a biological link between NFE2L2-mutated HB and
HCC. In addition, whole exome and SNP array data (Affymetrix 6.0 SNPChip)
have revealed copy number alterations in previously-described regions of
the HB genome, including 1q, 4q and 11p15, as well as novel focal
alterations. Finally, germline variants in APC and other Wnt pathway
genes have also been identified in this HB patient cohort. In summary,
next-generation sequencing of HB has provided an unprecedented view of
the genetic landscape of HB, confirmed the primary importance of
dysregulation of Wnt signaling in this tumor type, and revealed recurrent
hotspot mutations in NFE2L2, a potential therapeutic target. Supported by
the Cancer Prevention & Research Institute of Texas (RP101195) and the
National Institutes of Health (CA098543).

