Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo circulating tumor cells in blood, lymph and cerebrospinal
fluid: dynamic cross-correlations and amplification for cancer diagnosis.


We introduced a new platform of multicolor multi-fluid in vivo flow
cytometry for real-time ultrasensitive molecular detection and counting
of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and their subpopulations the blood,
lymph and cerebrospinal fluid's (CSF) flows. To achieve these goals we
integrated multicolor photoacoustic (PA), photothermal (PT) and
fluorescent flow cytometry, and combined this technical platform with
multiplex molecular targeting strategy using low-toxicity, gold-based
functionalized nanoparticles as PA/PT high-contrast agents or genetically
encoded proteins (e.g., green fluorescent protein [GFP]) as fluorescent
labels. This platform can provide also label-free detection mode using
intrinsic (e.g., melanin) molecular labels. The advantages of this new
generation of flow cytometries are (1) improving sensitivity by at least
a two-order of magnitude compared to available CTC-assays, and (2)
significantly extending biomedical applications compared to existing in
vivo flow cytometries.Using preclinical tumor-bearing mouse models of
metastatic melanoma and breast cancer, and spiked human blood samples, we
demonstrated that our technology can overcome great challenge in cancer
research related to monitoring lymph, CSF and blood CTCs at single-cell
levels in the natural environment in vivo over the long-term period of
metastatic disease development from an early micrometastatic stage to
deadly multiple macro-metastases. The obtained results allowed us to
estimate in vivo cross-correlations between lymph, CSF and blood CTC
counts, size of primary tumor and metastasis (micrometastasis)
progression. We also showed that the presented approach can break some
important diagnostic limitations of existing methods (e.g., low
sensitivity) and potentially permits prevention, or at least inhibition,
of metastatic progression. Taking into account the safe nature of the PA
technology, we anticipate its quick translation for use in
humans.Citation Format: Ekaterina I. Galanzha. In vivo circulating tumor
cells in blood, lymph and cerebrospinal fluid: dynamic cross-correlations
and amplification for cancer diagnosis. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of
the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1455. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1455

