Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel bioactive approach to inhibit leptin-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer.


Introduction: Molecular effects of obesity, a well-established risk
factor for breast cancer progression, are mediated by adipocytokine
leptin. Recent studies from our lab reveal that leptin induces
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and tumorsphere formation via
concomitant activation of Akt/GSK3 and MTA1/Wnt1 signaling axes leading
to -catenin activation. Given the important role of leptin in breast
cancer growth and metastasis, novel strategies to antagonize biological
effects of leptin are much desired. We showed previously that honokiol
(HNK), a bioactive polyphenol from Magnolia grandiflora, inhibits breast
carcinogenesis. The present study provides first evidence for the
efficacy of HNK against oncogenic effects of leptin including
EMT.Methods: Efficacy of HNK to inhibit oncogenic effects of leptin was
evaluated by using clonogenicity, anchorage-independent growth, matrigel
invasion and spheroid-migration assays. RT-PCR, Western blot and
immunofluorescence analyses were used to examine the molecular changes
associated with EMT as well as underlying molecular pathways. Functional
importance of MTA1/Wnt1/-catenin axis was examined by using
overexpression, phospho-deficient constructs and specific inhibitors.
Finally, mouse xenografts, immuniohistochemical, RT-PCR and Western blot
analysis of tumors was used.Results: HNK treatment circumvents
leptin-induced EMT-associated phenotypic changes. A biochemical hallmark
of EMT is loss of expression of epithelial markers with a concurrent
increase in mesenchymal marker expression. HNK elicits increased
expression of E-cadherin, occludin and cytokeratin-18 (epithelial
markers) and decreased expression of vimentin, fibronectin and N-cadherin
(mesenchymal markers) in leptin-treated cells providing molecular
evidence for reversal of EMT. HNK also inhibits expression and nuclear
translocation of transcriptional effectors of EMT: Snail, Slug, Zeb1 and
Zeb2. Analysis of underlying molecular mechanisms reveals that HNK
effectively inhibits leptin-induced MTA1/Wnt1/-catenin axis. Furthermore,
using nontoxic doses of HNK, we show that HNK treatment effectively
inhibits leptin-induced breast tumorigenesis in vivo. Analysis of breast
tumors show that HNK treatment reverses leptin-associated signaling
(MTA1/Wnt1/-catenin axis) along with decreased expression of mesenchymal
markers and increased expression of epithelial markers.Conclusions: In
this study, we demonstrate for the first time that HNK is able to abolish
leptin-induced EMT and provide in vitro and in vivo evidence for the
integral role of a previously unrecognized crosstalk between honokiol and
MTA1/Wnt1/ catenin axis. Thus, HNK may be used as a non-toxic and
non-endocrine rational therapeutic strategy for breast carcinoma in obese
patients with high leptin levels.

