Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Household ventilation, cooking fuels and oils, and lung cancer
risk in a prospective cohort of non-smoking Chinese women.


Lung cancer incidence has been on the rise in less-developed countries.
Indoor air pollution caused by poor ventilation, burning of solid fuels,
and cooking oils has been associated with lung cancer risk in developing
poor and rural countries in many retrospective case-control studies.
However, few studies have been conducted in more urban and more
economically developed populations, even less in prospective studies. To
assess the relationship of indoor air quality and risk of lung cancer in
a modern population, a prospective cohort study was conducted in the
Shanghai Women's Health Study. 73,442 women were followed through
December 2009. A total of 469 lung cancer patients were diagnosed during
the follow-up period, but after excluding ever smokers, 71,320 women in
the cohort and 429 women with lung cancer were included in this analysis.
Standardized and structured questionnaires were used to collect
information on all household living and cooking practices: past three
residences lived, cooking fuel utilized, cooking oil utilized,
ventilation conditions, smoking patterns of family at home, and coworker
smoking at work. Effect estimates for household ventilation conditions,
cooking fuels, and cooking oils use for the risk of lung cancer are
presented as hazard ratios (HR) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CI)
from Cox proportional hazards regression. Ever having poor household
ventilation was associated with a 61% increase in lung cancer risk (HR:
1.61; 95% CI: 1.19-2.18), and more than 20 years was associated with a
100% increase in risk (HR: 2.00; 95% CI: 1.32-3.01) compared to always
having good ventilation. Ever use of coal with poor ventilation was
associated with a 71% increased risk of lung cancer (HR: 1.71; 95% CI:
1.19-2.46), and more than 20 years of using coal with poor ventilation
was associated with an 83% increase (HR: 1.83; 95% CI: 1.16-2.89)
compared to gas users with good ventilation. There was some suggestion of
lung cancer risk with vegetable oil use compared to soybean oil use,
although the number of lung cancer cases was few and not statistically
stable. In summary, this prospective cohort study of non-smoking Chinese
women suggests that exposure to poor ventilation and poorly vented
cooking coal increases the risk of lung cancer. These findings were
consistent with past retrospective case-control studies and suggesting
that past exposure to coal use with poorly ventilated conditions pose a
health risk. These results suggest that current modern day cooking
conditions, particularly in poorly ventilated homes, is still a public
health issue.

