Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Cdx transcription factors in intestinal tumorigenesis.


Mutations in the Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene are an early
causative event in human colorectal cancer (CRC). The Min mouse, which
harbors mutations of APC, is a widely used model for CRC, although it
presents with benign polyps restricted largely to the small intestine.The
transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2 are expressed throughout the
intestinal epithelium from early gut development, and persist throughout
the life of the animal. Cdx1 null mice exhibit no intestinal phenotype
while Cdx2 null mice die around embryonic day 3.5. Cdx2 heterozygotes,
however, have an intestinal phenotype characterized by lesions in the
pericaecal region and proximal colon suggestive of a role for Cdx2 in
posteriorizing the intestinal tract. Consistent with this, recent studies
using conditional knockout approaches show loss of Cdx2 from the
developing or adult intestinal epithelium results in an anteriorized
intestinal phenotype.Cdx2 loss has been detected in 30% of human CRC, and
Cdx2 heterozygous-APC mutants exhibit an increase in polyp formation in
the colon; similar results are seen with Cdx2 heterozygotes treated with
the carcinogen azoxymethane. These studies suggest that Cdx2 has tumor
suppressor properties, however the mechanism by which Cdx2 elicits this
effect is unknown.We are using a Cre-lox system to conditionally delete
Cdx2 from the adult intestine alone or in a heterozygous Min background.
The tamoxifen-regulated Cre, under the spatial control of the villin
promoter, is fused to a modified estrogen receptor ligand binding domain
that responds only to tamoxifen. Sub-optimal tamoxifen treatment is used
to effect partial loss of Cdx2 to circumvent the lethality inherent to
Cdx2 loss in the adult intestine. Animals will be sacrificed commencing
at 14 weeks post-treatment for analysis of intestinal lesions and
compound mutants will be compared to mice deficient for Cdx2 or Min
alone.Partial tamoxifen treatment was successful at yielding mice with
chimeric loss of Cdx2. In contrast to germ-line Cdx2 heterozygotes,
chimeric Cdx2 deletion did not produce hamartomas. In contrast, Cdx-Min
compound mutants exhibited a faster trajectory of wasting compared to Min
heterozygotes, necessitating endpointing by 14 weeks post-treatment.
These compound mutant mice exhibited a three-fold increase in tumor
incidence compared to Min controls, with an increased tumors size.
Histologically, the small intestinal tumors that developed in the Cdx-Min
background have an altered histological appearance compared to the
adenomatous Min tumors. Proliferative cells and nuclear beta-catenin
expression, seen within the Min tumors, were expanded in the Cdx-Min
tumors, consistent with activation of the Wnt pathway in both tumor
types.This work illustrates that the conditional Cdx2 allele is an
effective tool for studying the role of this transcription factor in the
adult intestine, and reaffirms an important role for Cdx2 in the genesis
of intestinal cancers.

