Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Li-Fraumeni syndrome: Clinical experience with family
psycho-social issues.


Introduction: Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a hereditary cancer
predisposition syndrome causing a range of cancers across the lifespan.
About 70% of families meeting classical LFS criteria have detectable
germline mutations in the TP53 gene, vs 40% of those classified as
Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL). The psychological, social, and behavioral issues
faced by individuals with LFS/LFL and their relatives comprise an
important, but under-studied, topic.Methods: Ours is a prospective,
cohort study of LFS/LFL. Enrollees are invited to participate in
epidemiologic and lifestyle questionnaires, clinical evaluations, genetic
counseling and testing if indicated, molecular research, cancer screening
and psychosocial assessments, and, of adults, standardized, self-report,
psychological assessments. Those attending clinic also have in-person
interview and social assessments. Results: Two of the first five families
we saw illustrate a wide range of psychosocial issues, which emerged
during the social assessment and family interview.Family 1 included two
adolescents with histories of osteosarcoma, and their unaffected father.
Their biological mother had died a decade earlier from a different type
of cancer and their father had remarried. The adolescent female proband
was struggling with internal conflict, overwhelmed with trying to balance
pleasing her family with the developmentally appropriate task of gaining
independence. The younger male proband focused on short-term goals,
seemingly finding the cancer risk personally irrelevant. The father
worried about raising his children in a highly secular environment, and
about how to manage their medical needs.The proband of Family 2 is a
37-year-old woman who had already survived 4 primary cancers, seen with
her 2 unaffected, mutation-positive children and her mother. She was
divorced from the children's father and raised them as a single mom for
several years with the help of her mother until re-marrying. Pertinent
psychosocial issues included an emotional and practical cut-off between
the biological parents, resulting in the mother's struggle to manage her
children's healthcare needs and communicate with them about their risk
independent of their father, who preferred not to be involved in the
medical system. Additionally, the mother's strong sense of independence
created a communication barrier between her and her own mother, who felt
shut out of her daughter's emotional experience despite wanting to
provide support.Conclusions: There is great breadth of needs in families
with LFS/LFL. Understanding the psychological, social, and behavioral
issues as they are manifest in the context of LFS will help guide our
efforts aimed at alleviating the psychosocial morbidity associated with
this syndrome. We recommend that families receive ongoing psychosocial
evaluation as an integral part of their medical management, preferable by
multi-disciplinary teams.

