Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monoclonal antibodies against novel tumor markers for cancer
diagnosis and treatment .


In our recent research activities, we identified a group of novel
candidate tumor markers for prevalent cancers. Tissue microarray (TMA)
representing breast, lung colon ovary and prostate cancers were analyzed
by a high-throughput immunohistochemistry screening using of a library of
1600 mouse antibodies raised against membrane-associated and secreted
human proteins for which little is known in the scientific literature. 89
proteins were found over-expressed in one or more of the five tumors
under analysis. IHC analysis on TMA representing tissues from 50 patients
per each of the five cancers allowed to select a group of 20 potential
markers over-expressed in cancer with frequencies ranging from 20 to 96%,
with concomitant marginal expression in normal tissues. With the aim at
validating these proteins as novel markers for patient stratification,
prognosis and response to therapy, highly specific monoclonal antibodies
(mAbs) have been generated against them. Currently, mAbs against 4
markers able to selectively detect their target proteins in cancers by
IHC have been already identified (positivity ranging from 15 up to 94%,
and showing membranous or intracellular staining). The target proteins of
these mAbs include:1) a scavenger receptor protein; 2) a putative
metallo-protease, 3) a lectin-binding protein involved in the innate
immune response, 4) a cadherin- homologous protein. The mAb clinical
value is being examines using high-density TMA representing patients with
known history and follow-up for breast (1553 patients), colon (1420
patients), lung (1527 patients), ovary (112 patients) and prostate (553
patients) cancers have been generated. The patient cohorts have been
collected at the biobank of the institute for Pathology of Basel to
select pools of prognostic/predictive monoclonal antibodies capable of
discriminating i) patients with favorable or adverse prognosis, and ii)
patients that respond/do not respond to specific therapeutic
interventions. Available data indicated that these antibodies, alone and
in combinations, show significant association with specific clinical
features (formation of metastasis, progression-free survival, survival
time). Interesting, some of available antibodies show therapeutic
activity in preclinical cancer models. These antibodies are able to bind
the surface of cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Avalable data show that
one mAb targeting the cadherin-like protein inhibits tumor growth in
athymic nude mice bearing HCT15 and HT29 colon cancer xenograft models.
Overall, these novel markers and their specific monoclonal antibodies
could offer new opportunities for cancer diagnosis and treatment.

