Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cross-regulation of polycomb group protein BMI1 and WNT inhibitors.


Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are evolutionarily conserved gene
silencers, which determine cell fate decisions during development. These
proteins are often aberrantly expressed in cancer cells. In particular,
BMI1 and EZH2 are known to be overexpressed in a number of human
malignancies including breast and prostate cancers. In vitro models of
cancer development strongly support oncogenic role of overexpressed BMI1
in cancer and metastasis. BMI1 is known to be required for self-renewal
of neural, hematopoietic, intestinal and mammary stem cells. In addition,
BMI1 is downregulated in senescent cells, and this downregulation may
contribute to age-related pathologies. BMI1 is also suspected to play a
role in cancer stem cell development and increase stem cell-ness of
tumors to promote drug resistance. Despite its role in cancer, stem cell
phenotype, development and aging, very little is known about the
signaling pathways that regulate the expression of BMI1. Here we report
that BMI1 activates WNT pathway and upregulates its target genes such as
Cyclin D1 and c-Myc. Using promoter-reporter assays, quantitative RT-PCR
and Western blot analyses, we show that BMI1 auto-activates its
expression via an E-box present in its promoter. Because auto-activation
of BMI1 depends on E-box sequences present in its promoter, we
hypothesized that BMI1 may regulate expression of c-Myc directly or
indirectly via activation of WNT pathway. Indeed, our data suggest that
BMI1 upregulated expression of c-Myc via activation of WNT pathway.
Further dissection of this regulation revealed that BMI1 represses
expression of WNT inhibitors, in particular DKK family of proteins such
as DKK1, DKK2 and DKK3. Interestingly, we also found that DKK1 inhibits
expression of BMI1, which also depends on E-box present in BMI1 promoter.
Thus BMI1 and WNT inhibitors such as DKK1 cross-regulate each other's
expression. We speculate that such regulation might favor BMI1
overexpression in cancer cells via increased WNT activity and c-Myc
expression. On the other hand, increased expression of WNT inhibitors
such as DKK1 might favor BMI1 downregulation in senescent and aged
tissues. Thus, a fine tuned positive feedback loop controls BMI1
expression via WNT signaling pathway, and this feedback loop may be
relevant to the role of BMI1 in cancer, stem cells and senescence.

