Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -caryophyllene inhibits solid tumor growth and metastasis of
B16F10 melanoma cells in C57BL/6 mice fed on a high-fat diet.


We previously observed that chronic consumption of a high-fat diet (HFD)
increased the melanoma progression and lymph node metastasis in C57BL/6N
mice injected with B16F10 melanoma cells. -caryophyllene (BCP) is a
natural bicyclic sesquiterpene found in many essential oils especially
clove and oregano oils. In the present study, we examined whether BCP
inhibits HFD-induced melanoma growth and metastasis in the B16F10
allograft model. Four-week old, male C57BL/6 mice were fed on a HFD (60
kcal% fat) or control diet (CD, 10 kcal% fat) with or without BCP (0.15,
0.3% in diet) for a period of 21 weeks. Following 16 weeks of either CD
or HFD in the absence or presence of BCP, B16F10 melanoma cells were
subcutaneously injected into mice and all mice were continuously fed
identical diets. Three weeks post-injection, tumors were resected and
mice were sacrificed three weeks post-resection. The body weights and the
growth of solid tumors were markedly increased in the HFD group as
compared to the CD group, and these increases were suppressed by BCP
treatment. The expression of proteins related to cell proliferation
(Ki67, CDK4, cyclin A, and cyclin D1), angiogenesis (VEGF-A, VEGFR-2, and
CD31) and lymphangiogenesis (VEGF-C, VEGF-D, VEGFR-3, and LYVE-1) was
markedly increased in tumor tissues of the HFD group as compared to the
CD group, and these increases were blocked by BCP treatment. HFD feeding
increased the infiltration of CD45+ leukocytes and F4/80+ macrophages
into tumor tissues. The administration of BCP significantly suppressed
HFD-induced the infiltration of the immune cells into tumor tissues. HFD
feeding reduced TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells in the tumor tissues,
which was prevented by BCP treatment. Two weeks after tumor resection,
the mice evidenced lung and lymph node metastasis. Lung and lymph node
metastasis were increased in the mice fed on HFD, and these increases
were markedly suppressed by BCP treatment. The present results
demonstrate that BCP suppressed HFD-stimulated melanoma progression and
metastasis, which may have been mediated via the suppression of cell
cycle progression, angiogenesis and lymph angiogenesis, and induction of
apoptosis in tumor tissues. These results suggest that BCP has potential
as an anti-cancer agent for the prevention of obesity-stimulated melanoma
progression.

