Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor promotes ligand-independent prostate cancer
progression through c-Myc upregulation.


Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men in the United States and
the second leading cause of cancer death. The androgen receptor (AR) is
the central signaling pathway in prostate cancer. Because of this,
androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), which involves reducing levels of
androgen ligands or interfering with binding of ligands to AR, has been
the major therapeutic focus for the past 70 years. However, in many
patients there is no benefit from ADT, and all prostate cancers
eventually progress. At progression on ADT, the AR is ubiquitously
expressed. For this reason, we contend that AR-dependent mechanisms are
critical for prostate cancer progression after ADT. Indeed, recent work
demonstrates that the AR can function independently of ligands to promote
prostate cancer cell survival. However, specific ligand-independent AR
target genes that account for this effect were not well-characterized. We
show here that c-Myc, which is a key mediator of ligand-independent
prostate cancer progression, is a key ligand-independent AR target
gene.Using microarray analysis, we found that c-Myc and AR expression
levels strongly correlated with each other in tumors from patients with
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) progressing despite ADT. We
confirmed that AR directly regulates c-Myc transcription in a
ligand-independent manner, that AR and c-Myc suppression reduces
ligand-independent prostate cancer cell growth, and that ectopic
expression of c-Myc attenuates the anti-tumor activity of AR suppression.
Importantly, treatment with the bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 suppressed
c-Myc function and suppressed ligand-independent prostate cancer cell
survival. Our results define a new link between two critical proteins in
prostate cancer - AR and c-Myc - and demonstrate the potential of AR and
c-Myc-directed therapies to improve prostate cancer control.

