Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heat-induced expression of cytosine deaminase for enzyme-prodrug
therapy.


Introduction: Bacterial cytosine deaminase (CD) mediates the de novo
conversion of the non-toxic prodrug, 5-fluorocytosine (5-FC) to its
cytotoxic form, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Enzyme localization at the tumor
site reduces systemic toxicity while increasing local drug availability.
The in situ cellular expression of enzymes provides greater stability and
control of enzyme activity as compared to isolated enzymes, and their
on-demand expression can be achieved through transcriptional factors
activated by stimuli such as heat. Bacterial PR promoter in conjunction
with the cI857 repressor gene imparts thermoselectivity to enzyme
expression - cloned vectors containing CD gene under the transcriptional
control of this expression system preferentially produce CD at elevated
temperatures, providing a thermal switch to trigger enzyme synthesis.
Such enzyme-prodrug therapy, when timed to perform as an adjuvant to
other treatment modalities such as magnetic nanoparticle hyperthermia,
has the potential to enhance therapeutic index as a combination
therapy.Methods: CD gene was PCR amplified from pbCD540FT vector and
cloned into pLDR20 vector. The CD gene was placed under the
transcriptional control of PR promoter and cI857 thermosensitive
repressor cassette. The cloned vector was transformed into NM522
competent cells. Positive colonies selected from LB-Agar-Ampicillin
plates were cultured in LB-Ampicillin medium. CD gene was characterized
by PCR amplification and cycle sequencing of the isolated plasmid DNA.
Protein expression in cells grown at 30 C and 42 C was analyzed by
SDS-PAGE followed by Coomassie blue staining. Enzyme activity in cells
grown at 30 C and 42 C was compared by incubating engineered cells with
5-FC and spectrophotometrically measuring its conversion to 5-FU.Results
summary: The presence of CD gene in competent cells was verified by PCR
amplification and cycle sequencing. We observed an enhanced expression of
CD gene in the transformed cells at 42 C as compared to 30 C, from
SDS-PAGE. Spectrophotometric analysis of enzyme activity showed an
enhancement in cells grown at 42 C. We are extending our work to combine
enzyme-prodrug therapy with magnetic nanoparticle hyperthermia. We will
coencapsulate our engineered cells with magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles
(IONP) in immunoisolative sodium alginate microspheres. Localized heating
during IONP hyperthermia can be a source of thermal stress for triggering
enzyme expression resulting in the in situ synthesis of 5-FU. This
combined therapy should enhance therapeutic index as compared to each of
the therapies alone.Acknowledgement: pbCD540FT was a kind gift from Prof.
J. M. Brown, Stanford University School of Medicine. This work is
supported by the Dartmouth Center of Cancer Nanotechnology Excellence
pilot project grant, NIH U54 CA151662 (BG, NVK).

