Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Advantages of polyacetal polymer-based antibody drug conjugates
employing cysteine bioconjugation.


The application of polymers to antibody drug conjugate (ADC) design and
preparation can provide numerous advantages, including 1) significantly
higher capacity for drug payload; 2) utilization of alternative payloads
not suitable for direct conjugation approaches; 3) improvement of
physicochemical properties of resulting ADCs; 4) utilization of protein
recognition scaffolds beyond the commonly used IgGs; and 5) improvements
in PK and biodistribution. Herein we present results of a novel,
biodegradable polyacetal polymer-based conjugation system to create
next-generation ADCs. The basis of this new conjugation system is a
hydrophilic, fully biodegradable polyacetal carrier (PHF or
poly(1-hydroxymethylethylene hydroxymethylformal) modified with
chemically orthogonal linkers. One linker is used to covalently attach a
targeting moiety (mAb or alternative) via cysteine conjugation, while a
second, chemically distinct linker is used to attach a drug payload and
to control the mechanism and rate of drug release.Previously we have
reported highly efficacious polyacetal ADCs prepared by utilizing random
lysine modification. In this report we present an alternative
cysteine-based bioconjugation strategy. Conventional, direct
drug-cysteine linked ADCs are destabilized due to loss of inter-chain
disulfide bridges. In contrast, the polyacetal polymer conjugated via
cysteines in the antibody hinge region stabilizes the resulting ADCs
through the formation of inter-chain bridge structures.To demonstrate the
benefits of this approach, we prepared Her-2 targeted ADCs with protein
recognition scaffolds ranging in size from 15 kDa to 150 kDa, all
targeting the Her-2 antigen, and bearing an anti-tubulin agent as the
drug payload. ADCs were highly active and selective in vitro in Her-2
expressing cell lines. These polyacetal cysteine-based ADCs exhibited
prolonged plasma and tumor exposure in the Her-2 expressing BT474 mouse
xenograft model and tumor-specific accumulation. The ADCs were
well-tolerated, and resulted in 100% tumor-free survivors.

