Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Melanoma fights cisplatin with NO: S-nitrosation as a mechanism
supporting drug-resistance.


Melanoma patients experience inferior survival after bio-chemotherapy
when their tumors contain numerous cells expressing the inducible isoform
of NO synthase (iNOS), and elevated levels of nitrotyrosine, a product
derived from nitric oxide (NO). Although several lines of evidence
suggest that NO promotes tumor growth and increases resistance to
chemotherapy, it is unclear how it shapes these outcomes. Here we
demonstrate that modulation of NO-mediated S-nitrosation of cellular
proteins is strongly associated with the pattern of response to the
anti-cancer agent cisplatin in human melanoma cells in vitro. Cells were
shown to express iNOS constitutively, and to generate sustained nanomolar
levels of NO intracellularly. Inhibition of NO synthesis or scavenging of
NO enhanced cisplatin-induced apoptotic cell death. Additionally,
pharmacologic agents disrupting S-nitrosation markedly increased
cisplatin toxicity, whereas treatments favoring stabilization of
S-nitrosothiols decreased its cytotoxic potency. Activity of the
pro-apoptotic enzyme caspase-3 was higher in cells treated with a
combination of cisplatin and chemicals that decreased NO/S-nitrisothiols,
whereas lower activity resulted from cisplatin combined with
stabilization of S-nitrisothiols. Constitutive protein S-nitrosation in
cells was detected by analysis with biotin switch and
reduction/chemiluminescence techniques. Moreover, intracellular NO
concentration increased significantly in cells that survived cisplatin
treatment, resulting in augmented S-nitrosation of caspase-3 and
prolyl-hydroxylase-2 (PHD2), the enzyme responsible for targeting the
pro-survival transcription factor HIF-1 for proteasomal degradation.
Because activities of these enzymes are inhibited by S-nitrosation, our
data thus indicate that modulation of intrinsic intracellular NO levels
substantially affects cisplatin toxicity in melanoma cells. The
underlying mechanisms may thus represent potential targets for adjuvant
strategies to improve the efficacy of chemotherapy.

