Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative genomic profiling of pilocytic astrocytomas reveals
location specific differential methylation and expression of brain
developmental genes.


Pilocytic astrocytomas (PA) are the most common brain tumor in pediatric
patients and cause significant morbidity, particularly related to chronic
neurological deficiencies. They are characterized by activating
alterations in the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, but
little else is known about their development. To map the methylation
profile of these tumors, we have performed a global DNA methylation
analysis on 62 PAs and 7 normal cerebellum samples using Illumina 450K
microarrays. Based on these data we have found two subgroups of PA that
separate according to tumor location (infratentorial versus
supratentorial), and have identified key neural developmental genes that
are differentially methylated between the two groups, including NR2E1 and
EN2. Integration with gene expression microarray data revealed
significant expression differences that were typically associated with a
strong positive correlation between methylation and expression.
Differential methylation was most commonly identified within the gene
body and/or 10 kb upstream/downstream of the gene body, and was, in part,
accounted for by differences in the level of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine. We
also identified a large number of differentially methylated genes between
cerebellar PAs and normal cerebellum, which were again enriched for
developmental genes. In addition, we found a significant association
between differential methylation and SUZ12 binding sites, suggesting
potential disruption of the polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2) in PA
development. Taken together these data suggest the methylation profile of
PA may reflect the cell of origin from which the tumors are derived, and
highlights the potential disruption of key developmental regulators
during tumorigenesis. These findings have implications for future
clinical trials, as they suggest drug sensitivity and response may differ
according to tumor location.

