Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PEDF inhibits bone metastases formation, prolongs survival and
enhances the antitumor efficacy of low-dose chemotherapy in
castration-refractory prostate cancer.


Background: The development of metronomic/low dose administration of
conventional chemotherapeutic drugs has shown great promise in the
treatment of castration-refractory prostate cancer (CPRC). Pigment
Epithelium-Derived Factor (PEDF) is a natural angio-inhibitor which is
down-regulated in prostate cancer. We have previously demonstrated that
the over-expression of PEDF in human CRPC PC3 cells decreased tumor
growth in vivo. In the present study, we further validated PEDF
anti-tumor properties in the highly metastatic CRPC LNCaP-derivative CL1
cells. We also hypothesized that PEDF may enhance the cytotoxicity
effects of low dose docetaxel (DTX) and cyclophosphamide (CTX)
chemotherapies in vivo. Methods: PC3 and CL1 cell lines were genetically
modified to stably express the fluorescent DsRed Express protein with
PEDF. Resulting cells were characterized in vitro for PEDF expression by
western blot and, for proliferation by growth curves and clone formation
in matrigel. PEDF anti-tumor effects were assessed on established s.c.
xenografts in mice treated with DTX (5mg/kg ip every 4 days, 1mg/kg ip
daily for 10 days, 0.5mg/kg every other day), CTX (10-20mg/kg in the
drinking water) or placebo. Survival studies were performed by injecting
CL1-PEDF or -control cells into the left lobe of the dorsal prostate of
anesthetized mice. For bone metastases, CL1-PEDF or -control cells were
injected into the proximal region of the tibia. Results: We showed that
PEDF expression inhibits the proliferation and induces the
differentiation of CPRC cells in vitro, and decreases by 85% and 70% the
development of s.c. PC3 and CL1 tumors, respectively. In vivo, PEDF
expression inhibits the formation of bone metastases and bone
destruction, and prolongs significantly (P=0.01; 95% confidence interval)
the median survival of CL1 tumor-bearing mice (530.001 days versus 571).
Furthermore, we demonstrated that PEDF enhances the cytotoxicity effects
of low dose chemotherapy on established s.c. tumors (best Doc dose:
1mg/kg for PC3 and 5mg/kg for CL1; best CTX dose: 10mg/kg for PC3 and
CL1) and prolongs significantly the survival of tumor-bearing mice
undergoing low dose chemotherapy. Conclusions: These data reinforce the
significance of PEDF as a potent target for the treatment of CRPC. It
also emphasizes PEDF as a promising new agent to enhance the anti-tumor
efficacy of low dose chemotherapies.Citation Format: Thomas Nelius,
Jennifer Hirsch, Stephanie Filleur. PEDF inhibits bone metastases
formation, prolongs survival and enhances the antitumor efficacy of
low-dose chemotherapy in castration-refractory prostate cancer.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5097.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5097

