Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin has an anticancer effect by repressing TWIST/N-cadherin
signaling.


Introduction and Objective. Metformin, one of the most commonly used
medications for treatment of type 2 diabetes, has emerged as a potential
anticancer agent. The molecular mechanisms associated with the
anti-cancer effect of metformin are poorly understood. We demonstrate,
for the first time, that metformin inhibits prostate cancer proliferation
through suppression of TWIST/N-cadherin signaling pathway.Methods. RTPCR,
Western blot, immunofluorescence assays and confocal microscopy were
applied to evaluate protein expression level. MTS assay and FACS analysis
were applied to determine cellular proliferation. N-cadherin and TWIST-1
expression vectors were transfected into PC3 prostate cancer cells to
establish stable cells with over-expression of N-cadherin and TWIST-1,
respectively. Metformin-resistant prostate cancer cells were established
by exposure to higher concentrations (10mM) of metformin over 4
weeks.Results. Treatment with metformin (5mM) inhibited proliferation in
three different types of cancer cells (PC3-prostate cancer cells;
T24-bladder cancer cells and 786-O- kidney cancer cells). Metformin
treatment suppressed expression of N-cadherin in all cell types. Similar
findings were observed by confocal microscopy. In contrast to N-cadherin,
expression of E-cadherin was not affected by metformin.
Metformin-mediated repression of N-cadherin was dose and time- dependent
in prostate cancer cells. PC3 prostate cancer cells with stable
over-expression of N-cadherin became resistant to metformin-mediated
inhibition. Stable PC3 prostate cancer cells, after selection for
metformin, became resistant to metformin-mediated inhibition, and the
metformin-resistant cancer cells had slightly higher baseline level of
N-cadherin. In addition, in the metformin-resistant cells, N-cadherin
levels were unchanged after treatment with metformin. The expression of
AKT and AP-1, the downstream molecules of N-cadherin, closely correlated
with expression of N-cadherin after treatment with metformin. Moreover,
we also found that metformin inhibited expression of TWIST-1, a
transcriptional activator of N-cadherin. Similar findings were observed
by confocal microscopy. PC3 prostate cancer cells with stable
over-expression of TWIST-1 became resistant to metformin-mediated
inhibition.Conclusions. We demonstrate that Metformin's anti-cancer
therapeutic effect may be mediated through repression of the
TWIST/N-cadherin signaling pathway.Citation Format: Ge Rongbin, Zongwei
Wang, Aria F. Olumi. Metformin has an anticancer effect by repressing
TWIST/N-cadherin signaling. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 4965. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4965

