Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ZDHHC14, a potential regulator in peritoneal dissemination of
scirrhous type gastric cancer, identified by CAST method.


Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common malignancies worldwide and
is one of the leading causes of cancer related mortality. Among gastric
cancer subtypes, scirrhous type GC is highly aggressive and has a worse
prognosis because of its diffuse infiltration pattern. Because of such
pathological features, early clinical diagnosis of scirrhous gastric
carcinoma remains difficult. Moreover, peritoneal dissemination occurs
frequently even after radical surgery and is the cause of death in many
patients. A potential diagnostic or therapeutic target to identify or to
inhibit the mechanism of peritoneal dissemination would be an
advantageous in this field and need to be elucidated. Escherichia coli
ampicillin secretion trap (CAST) method is a powerful technique to
identify novel genes that encode secreted or transmembrane proteins. We
previously reported DSC2 (desmocollin 2), identified by this method, as a
key regulator of GC with intestinal phenotype, using MKN-1 and MKN-28 GC
cell lines. In this study, mRNAs were extracted from HSC-44PE and 44As3
scirrhous GC cell lines to analyze the gene expression profile. HSC-44PE
cell line was established from pleural fluid of a patient with scirrhous
GC. 44As3, derived from HSC-44PE cells, by isolating a highly
disseminated clones with a strong capability of inducing ascites in mouse
model. Randomly primed cDNAs ligated with pCAST vector were picked up and
sequenced thereafter. Among the candidate genes, ZDHHC14 (zinc finger,
DHHC-type containing 14) showed higher expression in 44As3 CAST library
than in HSC-44PE library. ZDHHC14 is one of the palmitoyl transferase
family members and is supposed to be associated with substrates linked to
dissemination cascade in scirrhous type GC. Indirect immunofluorescence
microscopic analysis also revealed that ZDHHC14 expression was found
mostly in large cells of both cell lines, however, ZDHHC14 staining was
more frequently observed in 44As3 than in HSC-44PE. High level of ZDHHC14
expression was observed in 27% of GC samples by qRT-PCR. Cell invasion
assay and MTT assay revealed that ZDHHC14 influenced the invasion and
growth capacity of GC cells. Identification of the palmitoylated
proteins, the substrates of ZDHHC14, remain under investigation. ZDHHC14
identified by CAST method, might contribute in the process of peritoneal
dissemination of the gastric cancer cells and it might be a potential
therapeutic target for scirrhous type GC.

