Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and characterization of the fully human chimeric
protein GrB-TWEAK targeting Fn14-positive solid tumor cells.


The TNFR superfamily member Fn14, the receptor for TNF-like weak inducer
of apoptosis (TWEAK), has emerged as a potentially clinically valuable
target for cancer therapy. Specifically, Fn14 expression is relatively
low in normal tissues but elevated in various human solid tumor types,
including brain, breast, lung and melanoma, and can be a negative
prognostic indicator. To target Fn14-overexpressing cancer cells, we
constructed via PCR a novel chimeric protein designated granzyme B
(GrB)-TWEAK, using the human TWEAK receptor-binding domain as the
targeting moiety and the human pro-apoptotic serine protease GrB as the
cytotoxic agent. The fusion construct was expressed in mammalian cells
and purified to homogeneity from conditioned media. BiaCore analysis of
TWEAK and GrB-TWEAK binding to the Fn14 extracellular domain indicated
that these proteins bound to Fn14 with similar affinity, with Kds of 3 nM
and 8 nM, respectively. Confocal immunofluoresence studies showed that
GrB-TWEAK specifically and rapidly (within 3 hrs) internalized into
Fn14-expressing MDA-MB-231 breast cancer and HT-29 colorectal
adenocarcinoma cells. GrB-TWEAK activity was assessed using a panel of 26
human cancer cell lines and it demonstrated impressive and selective
cytotoxicity to Fn14-expressing cells in the low nanomolar range (IC50
ranged from 0.4 nM-330 nM), which was 6- to 1117-fold more potent than
free GrB. Treatment of cells expressing the multidrug resistance protein
MDR1 showed no cross-resistance to the fusion construct in vitro.
Mechanistic studies demonstrated that GrB-TWEAK activated caspase
cascades and cytochrome C-related pro-apoptotic mechanisms consistent
with the known intracellular functions of GrB in target cells.
Preliminary mouse xenograft tumor model studies are ongoing. This work
was conducted, in part, by the Clayton Foundation for Research (MGR) and
supported by NIH grant NS055126 (JAW).

