Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Noncoding RNAs of the 8q24 locus: Consequences of the
over-expression or suppression of miR-1204 and PVT1 in developing B cells.


Immortalized models of the mouse B lymphocyte lineage have proven to be
valuable resources for a wide variety of B cell neoplasms and for the
study of normal B cell differentiation. Whether these models have been
engineered in mice (in vivo) or in cell culture (in vitro), there are
distinct advantages and disadvantages to both. Homogeneity and ease of
accessibility can be considered a benefit of working with cultured cells,
whereas the contribution from accessory or stromal cells can be an
important element not readily available in the in vitro model system. We
originally used immortalized Burkitt's Lymphoma (BL) cells to discover a
cluster of microRNAs, miR-12041208, that map within the noncoding PVT1
locus in the region of human 8q24 region down-stream of MYC. The BL cell
lines allowed us to isolate a large amount of RNA from a homogeneous
resource that enhanced discovery of low-level transcripts. Using probes
for mouse miR-12041208 to examine expression in a panel of mouse cell
lines representing different stages of B cell development, we were able
to show that expression of miR-12041208 appeared to arise at the small B
cell stage and that these higher levels of expression continued through
to the mature plasma cell. This suggested that the pre-B cell or nave
small B cell stages may be most illuminating in assigning targets and
function to miR-12041208 or PVT1.To determine if over-expression of one
of these miRNAs, miR-1204, influences the latency and/or type of B cell
malignancy we used two mouse transgenic (TG) models of B cell malignancy,
H2-Ld-hu-IL6 and iMyc, lentiviral expression of miR-1204 reduced the
latency of tumor development in both models and in the case of iMyc-TG,
there was also a shift in tumor type from late stage plasmacytoma to the
earlier stage of large B cell lymphoma. However, further interpretation
of these results was confounded by heterogeneity of lentiviral
integration and expression among tumors. Thus, we turned to several human
and mouse in vitro models of B cell development, representing pro-B,
pre-B, small B, mature B and plasma cell stages to address the effects of
modulating the expression of miR-1204 and its host noncoding transcript,
PVT1. Over-expression of miR-1204 has been achieved through the use of
lentiviruses or synthetic mimics and suppressed expression has been
achieved through application of synthetic inhibitors. We also
over-expressed PVT1 using a lentiviral vector and suppressed PVT1
expression through the use of siRNA corresponding to various exons of
PVT1. Resultant changes in growth and morphology of these cell lines hint
that microarray expression analyses will reveal functional targets of
miR-1204 in normal and malignant lymphoid development. It will also be of
interest to examine whether over-expression or inhibition of miR-1204
plays an additional role in maturation of the normal B cell.

