Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nucleophosmin regulates centrosome amplification and is associated
with anti-HER2 resistance in HER2-positive breast cancer cells.


Aneuploidy is a hallmark of solid tumors, contributing to tumorigenesis
and resistance to chemotherapy. Aneuploidy is prevented by two
centrosomes directing a bipolar mitotic spindle. Centrosome amplification
(CA), the presence of supranumerary centrosomes within a cell, has been
detected in both premalignant lesions and breast tumors, supporting the
role of this phenomenon in breast cancer initiation and progression.
Moreover, CA has been associated with HER2 overexpression. CA is
initiated by abnormal signals from oncogenes or altered tumor suppressors
that affect regulatory molecules shared by both cell and centrosome
cycles. Elucidating the molecular circuitry and functional consequences
of impaired centrosome cycle is therefore important for a complete
understanding of its role in breast cancer. Nucleophosmin (NPM) is a
widely expressed nucleolar phosphoprotein that has several functions,
including the early regulation of centrosome duplication. Recent reports
from breast cancer patients indicate the presence of NPM antigens in
HER2-negative cases and low NPM expression as a prognostic marker of poor
survival in the luminal A subtype. We therefore hypothesized that NPM
expression and activity might directly impact the CA in HER2-positive
breast cancer cells. To test this hypothesis, we have used genetic
alteration of total and phospho-NPM to investigate its function in human
mammary epithelial cell lines that includes non-tumorigenic and
HER2-positive tumorigenic lines. Our initial findings revealed
significantly elevated CA percentages and higher expression level of
p-NPM (T199) in the HCC1954, JIMT1, and SKBR3 cells (HER2-positive)
compared to other subtypes and non-tumorigenic MCF10A cells. This residue
is known to be responsible for regulating the function of NPM in
centrosome duplication. Conversely, HER2-positive cells displayed lower
protein levels of total NPM compared to the other cell lines
investigated. Expression of a deletion mutant phospho-NPM (T199A) reduced
the percentage of CA in HCC1954 cells. In addition, an HCC1954 derivative
with primary resistance to Herceptin showed augmented frequency of CA
versus sensitive parental cells. Ongoing experiments involve the
inhibition of p-NPM at T199 in JIMT1 and SKBR3 cells as well as the
overexpression of a wild type form in all of the three HER2-positive
breast cancer cell lines followed by the assessment of CA. In parallel,
the non-tumorigenic MCF10A cells have been transfected with a
phospho-mimetic NPM (T199D) and will be subjected to similar
investigations. Finally, the correlation between p-NPM-driven CA and
Herceptin resistance is being studied in all of our HER2-positive cell
models of breast cancer. These results suggest that the high NPM
expression could have a protective effect against CA and a more
aggressive phenotype displayed by HER2-positive breast cancer cells.

