Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin induces ER stress-mediated apoptosis through cell
type-specific interruption of redox balance in cervical cancer cells.


Prolonged accumulation of misfolded or unfolded proteins prompts a
cellular stress condition known as ER stress which activates unfolded
protein response (UPR). The ER stress is usually sustained at higher
level in cancers than in normal cells due to altered metabolism of the
cancer. Recent studies have shown that curcumin, a major yellow pigment
of tumeric derived from Curcuma longa plant, triggers apoptosis through
induction of ER stress in several cancer cells. Here, we found that ER
stress was induced by interruption of redox balance when cervical cancer
cells were exposed to curcumin. We used four cervical cancer cell lines,
C33A, CaSki, HeLa and ME180. Curcumin inhibited proliferation of cervical
cancer cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner and induced apoptotic
cell death (increase of AnnexinV-positive and SubG1 fraction).
Additionally, proteolytic activation of caspase-9 and -3 and PARP
cleavage were shown in cervical cancer cells. We next evaluated
activation of unfolded protein response (UPR) in response to curcumin.
Three ER-resident sensors (PERK, IRE1 and ATF6) and their down-signaling
proteins (XBP1, ATF4 and eIF2) were activated in all cervical cancer
cells (C33A, CaSki, HeLa and ME180), but not in normal cervical
epithelial cell. Also, one of UPR down-signaling proteins CHOP/GADD153,
which is a transcription factor inducing ER stress-mediated apoptosis,
was up-regulated by curcumin. CHOP/GADD153 decreased anti-apoptotic
protein Bcl2 and subsequently promoted apoptosis of cervical cancer cells
exposed to curcumin. Furthermore, curcumin led to elevation of
intracellular ROS in CaSki and ME180 cells, but not in C33A, HeLa and
normal cervical epithelial cell. Pretreatment of N-acetyl-cysteine (ROS
scavenger) resulted in inhibition of ER stress and cell death at least in
part. Taken together, these results show that curcumin promotes ER
stress-mediated apoptosis through cell type-specific ROS generation in
cervical cancer cells.

