Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biologically distinct mammary tumors develop from Trp53 null
tissue transplanted to juvenile versus adult gland.


The biology of the organism is a key regulator of breast cancer
development. Our previous work showed that irradiating the host
accelerated the development of carcinomas from unirradiated Trp53 null
mammary fragments transplanted into the inguinal fat pads previously
divested of endogenous epithelia (Nguyen et al., Cancer Cell, 2011). In
this report, we investigated the age of transplantation by comparing
carcinogenesis in Trp53 null mammary outgrowths that were transplanted
during pubertal, 5 week-old mice compared to 10 week-old adult hosts.
Tumors arising over the course of a year from Trp53 null tissue
transplanted into adult hosts (AH) (n=26), were compared to tumors
arising following transplantation in juvenile hosts (JH) (n=55). The rate
of tumor occurrence was not significantly different as a function of the
transplantation age but once detected, JH tumors grew several times
faster. JH tumors were more perfused, as indicated by 2-fold larger blood
vessels (p=0.015), and exhibited a 2-fold higher mitotic index (p=0.009)
compared to AH tumors. Tumors transplanted at either age were
predominantly ER+ (80% JH vs. 60% AH), but more tumor cells were ER
immunoreactive as measured by the Allred score in JH tumors compared to
AH tumors (p=0.0001). Microarray analysis of 10 JH and 6 AH tumors
identified 119 genes that were modulated by at least 1.5-fold in JH
tumors. Main biological processes enriched in JH tumors were organ
morphology, proliferation, and lipid metabolism. The resulting profile
revealed a luminal transcriptional program in JH tumors that included
expression of Foxa1 and Areg; Foxa1 protein expression in JH tumors was
confirmed by immunohistochemistry. The distinct biology of tumors arising
from tissue undergoing morphogenesis in the context of puberty suggests
that: (1) the window of susceptibility for breast cancer involves host
biology during puberty; and (2) that the tumor intrinsic subtype is not
necessarily epithelial autonomous, but can be influenced by the host
environment. Supported by DOD-BCRP and DOE Low Dose Radiation Program.

