Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDM2 as a therapeutic target: improving upon front-line
chemotherapy for nervous system tumors.


There is a significant unmet medical need to develop more effective
treatments for cancers of the central and peripheral nervous systems.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common form of brain cancer,
and successful long-term treatment has not been realized. Neuroblastomas
(NB) arise in the sympathetic nervous system and are the most common
extracranial solid tumor of childhood. Survival of children with
disseminated, high-risk NB tumors is less than 50%, even with intensive
multimodal treatment. To improve treatment outcome, inhibition of murine
double minute 2 (MDM2) function in the context of front-line therapy is
being explored. MDM2 is a multi-functional protein that plays a critical
role in controlling cell growth and migration. MDM2 is a negative
regulator of p53 and p73 and, under low stress conditions, sequesters
them in the cytoplasm. However, inhibition of MDM2 interactions with p53
and p73 by the MDM2 antagonist nutlin3a can lead to activation of
p53/p73-mediated cell-death in tumor cells. The objective of the present
study was to evaluate the extent to which blockade of MDM2-p53/p73
interactions by nutlin3a, alone or in combination with front-line
therapies, could augment cell death in GBM and NB cells with a variety of
molecular profiles. Using the median effect model, we found that
temozolomide (TMZ) and nutlin3a were synergistic in increasing cell death
in wtp53 U87 and U373 but were predominantly additive in mtp53 U118
cells. Primary patient GBM cells were typically resistant to TMZ relative
to established cell lines. However, resistance to TMZ was decreased in
the presence of nutlin3a. Further, TMZ and nutlin3a were synergistic in
primary GBM10 and GBM43 but not in recurrent primary IU-GBM16, IU-GBM23,
IU-GBM27, and IU-GBM32 cells. Moreover, in NB cells with wtp53, nutlin3a
and cisplatin were synergistic in MYCN nonamplified SK-N-SH and additive
in MYCN amplified IMR5. In mtp53 NB cells, nutlin3a and cisplatin were
synergistic in MYCN nonamplified SK-N-FI as well as in MYCN amplified
SK-N-DZ. Nutlin3a alone produced dose-related increases in cell death of
all GBM and NB cell lines irrespective of p53 status, suggesting that
p53-independent mechanisms play a role in inhibition of cell growth
produced by blockade of MDM2-mediated signaling. Consistent with this
hypothesis, nutlin3a increased p73 protein levels in mtp53 GBM43 cells
that were exposed to TMZ. Inhibition of MDM2 function also inhibited
repair of TMZ-mediated DNA damage in GBM. In comet assays, nutlin3a+TMZ
decreased DNA repair relative to TMZ alone in wtp53 U87 and GBM10 and in
mtp53 GBM43 cells. The present results demonstrate that MDM2 is a valid
therapeutic target in GBM and NB cells with varying genetic profiles. In
conclusion, inhibition of MDM2 signaling by nutlin3a is generally
synergistic to additive in combination with front-line chemotherapeutics
used to treat cancers of the central and peripheral nervous systems.

