Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capture, culture and characterization of viable circulating tumor
cells in a syngeneic breast cancer mouse model system.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) play a critical role in metastasis.
Functional characterization of CTCs is limited by a lack of available
methods to enrich viable CTCs. We have developed a next-generation
(next-gen) platform, modifying our current size-based CTC enrichment
technology, for viable CTC capture. Here, we employed our next-gen
microfilter device for viable CTC capture in a syngeneic breast cancer
mouse model system to show that such cells can be cultured with high
efficiency for further characterization.Balb/c mice received subcutaneous
injection of 4T1 (highly metastatic) or 4T07 (poorly metastatic) mouse
mammary tumor cell lines originally derived from the same spontaneously
arising tumor. Primary tumors were excised on day 21, digested and placed
in culture, and viable CTCs were isolated using the next-gen microfilter
device from 0.5ml whole blood draws for culture directly on-chip.
Successfully established cell cultures were characterized by morphology,
IHC for markers associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT),
and anchorage-independent growth to compare abilities to form
tumorispheres.Tumors developed in 100% (6/6) of mice injected; cultures
were obtained from 100% dissociated primary tumors (n=3 4T1, n=3 4T07),
and isolated CTCs yielded cultures from 33% of mice injected with both
cell lines (1/3 each). While 4T07-CTC cultures demonstrate homogenous
morphology similar to the corresponding primary tumor, 4T1-CTC cultures
demonstrate two morphologically distinct subclones: A," spheroid-like,
different from the primary tumor, and B," spindle-like, similar to the
primary tumor. A cells demonstrate the ability to produce progeny with
spherical as well as spindle-like morphology in vitro. EMT profiling
revealed that both 4T1-CTC subclones demonstrate epithelial and
mesenchymal expression characteristics, while 4T07-CTCs predominately
show mesenchymal character. CTCs had a greater ability to form
tumorispheres in anchorage-independent growth conditions than
corresponding primary tumors, with 4T1 A having greater
tumorisphere-forming ability than 4T1 B.These studies demonstrate our
ability to capture and culture viable CTCs from mice injected with tumor
cells of varying metastatic capability. The characterization of CTCs may
help identify functionally important subsets of CTCs. Molecular and
functional analyses of CTCs are ongoing, and include epigenomic,
transcriptomic and proteomic expression profiling, assessment of stem
cell-like properties, and their mechanistic role in metastatic disease.
Our work could be the basis to establish CTC cultures in human patients,
and provide a transformative approach to the functional characterization
of CTCs, leading to an exciting new technology for improved cancer
research and individualized patient management.

