Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Akt-mTorc2 signaling underlies cellular addiction to HER3
signaling in HER2-amplified cancers.


HER2 amplified breast cancers are characterized by constitutive HER3
phosphorylation. Efforts to target the functionally relevant HER2-HER3
signaling complex in these tumor cells has proven difficult due to robust
feedback signaling mechanisms that restore its signaling in the face of
anything short of the complete inactivation of HER2 kinase activity. To
study this in more depth, we used a combination of genetic and chemical
genetic approaches designed to study the cellular adaptational responses
to network perturbation. We find that positive or negative perturbation
of any signaling node from upstream HER2 or HER3 down to the two mTor
complexes results in compensatory responses that function to maintain
homeostasis. The responses to various perturbations are mechanistically
distinct, but taken together reveal an uncompromising core topology
driven by a concentric Akt-mTorc2 positive-feedback loop buffered by HER3
and PHLPP nodes. While mTorc1 signaling is also subject to feedback
regulation, it is not involved in the core topology and its output is not
always protected in these tumors. The central role of mTor is consistent
with its known functions as a master regulator of cellular homeostasis
highly conserved across eukaryotes. But the inclusion of HER3 in this
central homeostatic network is a tumor cell anomaly. To better delineate
how this homeostatic network is altered in tumor cells, we compared and
contrasted the network topology in a panel of HER2-amplified cancer cells
with a panel of immortalized breast epithelial cells. Much of the
feedback circuitries are preserved across tumor and untransformed cells.
But the driving Akt-mTorc2 positive-feedback loop is lacking in
untransformed cells. This is due to the fact that Akt drives mTorc2
signaling in tumor cells but not in untransformed cells. Consistent with
a central role of mTorc2 in these tumors, knockdown of Rictor, but not
Raptor, is lethal in HER2-amplified SkBr3 tumor cells. These studies
reveal a key alteration of Akt-mTor signaling in HER2 driven tumors that
underlies the pathological incorporation of HER3 into an mTor-driven
network, thus putting the HER2-HER3 tumor driver under the protection of
this evolutionarily ancient pathway, highly competent at homeostasis.

