Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alpha2beta1 integrin regulation of endothelial notch signaling in
the retina.


Angiogenesis expands the vascular network during normal development and
in response to angiogenic stress. Dysregulation of this dynamic process
contributes to tumor progression and to the pathogenesis of many
diseases. Evidence suggests that the alpha2beta1 integrin, a collagen and
laminin receptor, plays an important role in angiogenesis. In the
wound-healing and tumor microenvironment, deletion of the alpha2beta1
integrin has been reported to increase neoangiogenesis. In contrast,
small molecule inhibitor (SMI) targeting of the alpha2 integrin blocks
sprouting angiogenesis.To reconcile these divergent findings and gain a
fuller understanding of alpha2beta1 integrin's role in angiogenesis we
turned to the retina. The retinal model is uniquely suited for
angiogenesis investigations as the retinal vasculature develops
postnatally in a 2-dimensional plane in a well-characterized manner.
Evaluation of the alpha2-null retina reveals a constellation of defects
and delays in vascular development, including delayed vessel outgrowth,
and increased vessel irregularity and decreased plexus density at the
vascular front.Additionally we determined that alpha2 integrin-deletion
has a protective effect in an oxygen-induced retinopathy model of
retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) in mice by inhibiting both
hyperoxia-induced vaso-obliteration and hypoxia-induced pathologic
neovascularization. Confirming this result, our analysis of human
microarray data shows, for the first time, that preterm infants with
lower ITGA2 expression are less likely to suffer from ROP. This work
clarifies the role of alpha2beta1 integrin in sprouting angiogenesis and
raises the intriguing possibility of alpha2 integrin targeted therapies
for prevention of ROP.These changes are reminiscent of changes observed
in other models with dysregulated notch signaling. Recent studies
reported that the alpha2beta1 integrin regulates sprouting angiogenesis
by inducing DLL4 in tip cells. We show, for the first time, notch induced
downregulation of alpha2beta1 integrin expression in stalk cells.
Together these results suggest that the alpha2beta1 integrin coordinates
endothelial notch signaling by stabilizing tip-stalk status. The apparent
discrepancy between the effects of the alpha2 integrin inhibition and
integrin-deletion may reflect differences between acute and chronic
upregulation of notch signaling. We propose that synergistic use of notch
and alpha2 integrin targeted therapies may provide enhanced anti-tumor
angiogenesis.

