Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thiamine deficiency induces HIF-1 stabilization and target gene
expression.


Introduction: Thiamine deficiencies have been reported in a number of
common pathologies including diabetes, neurodegenerative disorders and in
particular, cancer. Deficiencies can arise due to drug mediated
reductions in cellular availability of thiamine or due to limited
diffusion into solid tumors. Biochemically, a metabolic consequence of
thiamine deficiency is a reduction in enzyme activity and expression of
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDH), which converts pyruvate to
acetyl-CoA. Evidence suggests that trans-activation of hypoxia inducible
factor 1-alpha (HIF-1) regulated genes is mediated through stoichiometric
changes in the metabolic intermediate pyruvate, independent of low oxygen
termed pseudo-hypoxia. The resulting dysfunction of PDH and accumulation
of pyruvate during TD may facilitate a pseudo-hypoxic state and mediate
trans-activation of HIF-1 regulated genes. Therefore, we hypothesize that
thiamine deficiency induces a pseudo-hypoxic state resulting in a
stabilization of HIF-1.Methods: The impact of TD treatments on cellular
pyruvate levels was determined after 48h of TD treatment using a pyruvate
assay. Protein expression of HIF-1 was assessed in nuclear lysates of
SK-N-BE cells treated with 1% O2 and TD for 12, 24, and 48h by Western
blot. Expression of the known HIF-1 regulated gene, GLUT1 was measured by
qRTPCR after 12, 24 and 48h hypoxia (1% O2) and thiamine
depletion.Results: An approximately 2 fold increase in cellular pyruvate
was observed after 48h of TD exposure. A corresponding increase in HIF-1
protein expression in both 1% O2 and TD was found after 48h exposure.
SK-N-BE cells demonstrated a 6 and 10 fold increase in expression of
GLUT1 and SLC19A3, respectively after 48h of 1% O2 exposure. TD treatment
exhibited an approximately 2 fold increase in expression of both GLUT1
and SLC19A3 after 48h treatments.Conclusions: An increase in pyruvate
production and the induction of HIF-1 protein expression after TD
treatment suggests the role of TD acting as a feed forward mechanism for
HIF-1 stabilization and gene regulation. These results demonstrate
nutritional regulation of the pro-oncogenic transcription factor, HIF-1
and an important connection of cellular thiamine to adaptive glycolytic
metabolism.

