Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interactively exploring patterns in TCGA data: a web-based
compendium of next-generation clustered heat maps.


Each of the 5 TCGA marker paper published in Nature to date has included
at least one clustered heat map (CHM). We introduced CHMs in the early
1990s for pharmacogenomic analysis (1) and later for integrated
visualization of genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, pharmacological, and
functional data (1). As the ubiquitous first-order way of visualizing
omic data, CHMs have appeared in many thousands of publications (39),
including those from TCGA. We have elsewhere summarized their limitations
(10).One such limitation is that CHMs are generally static images. We
therefore initiated the next-generation CHM (NG-CHM) project, using an
image-tiling technology similar to that in Google Maps for navigation and
extreme drill-down without loss of resolution. Once the CHM has been
zoomed sufficiently, labels (e.g., gene, protein, or drug names) appear
on the image's axes. Clicking on a label produces a menu of link-outs
(e.g., to GeneCards, Google, PubMed). For gene vs. gene maps, each pixel
can represent a color-coded Pearson correlation coefficient. Clicking on
the pixel pulls up the corresponding data scattergram, bootstrap
statistics, literature references, or pathway relationships. Strong
usability features include floating windows, flexible search tools,
cluster selection tools, customizable re-coloring of the CHM, and
high-quality PDF's suitable for publication. NG-CHMs are a major resource
for exploratory analysis and visualization in multiple projects of TCGA
and other large-scale molecular profiling programs. Explore interactive
versions for TCGA breast, colorectal, lung squamous, and glioblastoma
data at http://bioinformatics.mdanderson.org/main/TCGA/NGCHM.Supported in
part by NCI Grant No. U24CA143883, by a gift from the Mary K. Chapman
Foundation, and by a grant from the Michael and Susan Dell Foundation
honoring Lorraine Dell.

