Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design of a novel three-dimensional biomimetic nano bone model for
breast cancer bone metastasis and therapeutics discovery.


Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death in American
women, accounting for more than 200,000 new cases and 40,000 deaths
annually. Most breast cancer patients will eventually develop
complications due to bone metastasis. However, the mechanisms by which
breast cancer metastasizes to bone are not well investigated. Traditional
tumor metastasis models contain many inherent limitations. Therefore, the
objective of this research is to design an innovative biomimetic 3D
tissue engineered in vitro bone model via hydroxyapatites (HA), human
bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell (hMSC) and natural chitosan hydrogel
for breast cancer metastasis study and therapeutics discovery. 3D porous
HA-chitosan scaffolds with different crystalline, size and concentration
of HA (specifically, 10% and 20% nanocrystalline HA, microcrystalline HA
and amorphous HA) were fabricated via a lyophilization procedure.
Metastasis breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231 were seeded on all scaffolds
and cultured for 4h, 1, 3 and 5 days. The cell adhesion and proliferation
results showed that concentration, size and crystallinity of HA have a
significant impact on metastasis breast cancer cell behavior. 10%
nanocrystalline HA can significantly enhance breast cancer cell
attachment when compared to all of other HA. Considering natural bone
also consisting of nanocrystalline HA, 10% synthesized nanocrystalline HA
in porous chitosan scaffold can create a more biomimetic bone environment
for breast cancer bone metastasis study. Furthermore, our bone model was
further modified by inducing hMSC osteogenic differentiation in the
scaffold resulting in deposition of bioactive protein and calcium by MSC.
SEM images of the MSC modified scaffolds revealed that protein and
calcium were deposited on both its surface and inner architecture. Two
different metastatic breast cancer cells with different metastasis
potential (less metastatic MCF-7 and highly metastatic MDA-MB-231) were
evaluated in this modified bone model in vitro. The results showed that
MDA-MB-231 expanded faster than MCF-7 in the scaffold after 24h culture.
Confocal microscopy was used to verify two cells metastasis ability and
showed that MDA-MB-231 could migrate deeper in this modified bone model
compared to MCF-7. Our results revealed that this model can well reflect
the two different metastasis behaviors, making this biomimetic 3D tissue
engineered nano bone model promising for future breast cancer cell
metastasis study and therapeutics discovery.

