Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of H3K9 methylation by the demethyltransferase gene
JMJD1C in multiple myeloma.


Increasing evidence points towards the importance of epigenetic changes
in the pathogenesis of multiple myeloma (MM). The biochemical
modifications that govern epigenetics are DNA methylation, and
post-translational modifications of histone proteins. Histone methylation
is catalyzed by histone methyltransferases (HMT) and histone demethylases
(HDMT). The purpose of our study was to interrogate genomics data to
identify HMT or HDMT genes that are altered in MM. We mined copy number,
gene expression and whole genome sequencing data generated as part of the
Multiple Myeloma Research Consortium Genomics Initiative. Collectively,
the datasets converged on numerous alterations involving histone
methylation of lysine 9 (H3K9). One of these genes, the HDMT JMJD1C, was
over-expressed in approximately 15% of MM samples examined. We validated
over-expression of JMJD1C expression by RT-PCR in over 50 clinical MM
samples and 10 human myeloma cell lines (HMCLs). We also confirmed
over-expression of JMJD1C by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in a tissue
microarray (TMA) consisting of over 60 MM samples. Next we demonstrated a
negative correlation between JMJD1C expression and H3K9 methylation by
IHC and western blot in 6/10 HMCL and in over 60% of clinical samples
examined on the TMA. This validates the H3K9 demethylase activity of
JMJD1C. Furthermore, we demonstrated that, in general, H3K9 methylation,
a repressive mark associated with heterochromatin, is low in a large
percentage of samples. To study the functional significance, we generated
a double knockout isogenic cell line pair in U266 cells using zinc finger
nuclease technology. We performed ChIP-seq and RNA-seq analyses to
identify genes affected by JMJD1C binding to H3K9. Our data indicate that
loss of JMJD1C expression alleviates the repression conferred by H3K9
methylation in MM. Studies are ongoing to realize JMJD1C as a potential
and novel therapeutic target in MM.

