Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of VEGFR-2 in leptin induction of Notch and angiogenic
features of endothelial cells.


We have previously shown that leptin is a pro-survival factor for breast
cancer (BC) cells that reduces the effects of chemotherapeutics. We have
also found that leptin is a pro-angiogenic, pro-inflammatory and
mitogenic factor that induces the expression of Notch and VEGF/VEGFR-2 in
BC and transactivates/phosphorylates VEGFR-2 in endothelial cells (EC).
We hypothesize that leptin-induced transactivation of VEGFR-2 and
upregulation of Notch are essential for the development of angiogenic
features in EC. To assess the role of VEGFR-2 in these leptin-induced
effects we used porcine aortic endothelial cells (PAEC) and human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). PAEC wild type (do not express
VEGFR-2), PAEC-expressing VEGFR-2, PAEC-expressing VEGFR-1 (negative
control) and HUVEC (VEGFR-2+) were challenged with leptin.
Phosphorylation/transactivation of VEGFR-2 and VEGF expression were
determined by ELISA. Leptin-induced formation of EC tubules was
determined using a Matrigel Assay. In a series of experiments, inhibitors
of leptin (leptin peptide receptor antagonist 2, LPrA2), VEGFR-2 (kinase
inhibitor, SU5416) and Notch signaling (g-secretase inhibitor, DAPT) were
added to PAEC and HUVEC cultures. Leptin-dose and time-course effects on
expression of Notch (receptors: Notch1, Notch2, Notch3 and Notch4);
ligands: JAG1, DLL-4 and target: Survivin were determined by Western blot
and Real-Time RT-PCR. In addition, siRNA VEGFR-2 and siRNA Notch 1 and 3
were used to further determine the role of VEGFR-2 transactivation and
leptin-induced Notch in the development of EC angiogenic features. Our
studies reinforce the idea that leptin is a potent inducer of EC
angiogenic transformation via VEGFR-2 transactivation and Notch
expression. Moreover, we show that an intact Leptin-VEGFR-2/Notch
crosstalk is essential for leptin pro-angiogenic actions. Data generated
from the present investigations suggest that leptin secreted either by
adipose tissue or BC cells could be an important factor contributing to
tumor angiogenesis by acting directly on cancer cells inducing VEGF
secretion or through EC inducing VEGFR-2/Notch crosstalk. Combinatory
therapies targeting both Notch and leptin signaling could be a new
strategy for Breast Cancer treatment. Funding: This work was supported by
NIH/NCI 5SC1CA138658-04 and the Georgia Cancer Coalition Distinguished
Cancer Scholar Award (to RRGP), NIH/2G12RR003034-26 and U54 MSM/TU/UAB
Cancer Center Partnership. This research was also supported by facilities
and support services at Morehouse School of Medicine (NIH 1C06 RR18386)
and by the University of Muenster, Germany.

