Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived primary melanoma cells that differentially express
melano-specific antigens as a model for vaccines.


Transformation of pigment producing melanocytes into melanoma is a
complex multi-step process involving the generation and/or over
expression of various immunotherapeutic antigens. Several of these
melanoma associated antigens (MAAs) are directly involved in melanin
biosynthesis and melanosome biogenesis. The precise contribution of
proteins involved in melanin synthesis to the MAA associated immune
response is poorly understood. To this end, we have developed primary
cell lines from human patients and xenograft models to analyze melanin
synthesis and antigen expression. In vitro, from the perspective of
melanin production, these primary cell lines express essential proteins
associated with melanin synthesis, namely tyrosinase, Trp-1, Trp-2, and
gp100, all of which are immunotherapeutic targets in melanoma. When
grafted in nude mice, these cell lines were capable of producing solid
pigmented tumors in vivo. However, three out of the five cell lines that
produced melanin in vivo failed to produce melanin in vitro, even when
cultured with supplementation of either -melanocyte stimulating hormone
(MSH), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), or matrigel. Despite
expression of tyrosinase, Trp-1, Trp-2, and gp100, two of the five cell
lines failed to grow in nude mice or produce melanin in vitro. These
patient derived primary cells and xenografts were also analyzed for
expression of various other significant MAAs, which included MART-1
(Melan-A), MAGE-A1, and NY-ESO-1 as well as antigens not classified as
MAAs but essential for tumor progression such as CD71 (transferring
receptor) and CD146 (MCAM or melanoma cell adhesion molecule). All of the
antigens analyzed in our cell lines, such as gp100, NY-ESO-1, MART-1,
MAGE-A1, have been the targets of clinical trials but our results clearly
indicate that these antigens are differentially expressed by our primary
melanoma cells. Therefore, we believe that in order to develop a
clinically effective immunotherapeutic vaccine, multiple cell lines
expressing a combination of melano-specific antigens and a repertoire of
MAAs that allows for minimal immune evasion may be necessary. To this
end, we are exploring a vaccinia virus antigen retrieval technology,
which incorporates multiple primary cell lines to develop such a
pan-antigen melanoma vaccine.

