Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanotechnology based drug delivery in childhood leukemia therapy:
A novel approach to reduce side-effects.


Despite attaining 5-year survival rates of 90%; more than 60% of
pediatric cancer survivors are affected by at-least one life threatening
event in their lifetime. Childhood leukemia is currently treated with a
combination of chemotherapeutics that are effective in combating the
disease. However, these drugs also affect the normal growing cells in
children causing devastating side-effects. The goal of this study is to
develop nanosized drug delivery formulations that deliver drugs
specifically to leukemic cells and ultimately reduce treatment related
side-effects in children. Multi-step chemical transformations were
employed to construct amphiphilic block copolymers consisting of
hydrophilic polyether (PEG) and hydrophobic polyester (PCL) bearing
pendent cyclic ketals. The functional block copolymers self-assemble into
micelles with a core-shell architecture comprising a segregated PCL core
that encapsulates the steroid drug (Dexamethasone) and a sterically
stabilized PEG shell that provides a platform to conjugate targeting
moieties. Dexamethasone (Dex) and fluorescent-dye encapsulated
nanoparticles (NPs) were formulated by a nanoprecipitation method. The
size and morphology of all formulations were analyzed by dynamic light
scattering (DLS) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) methods. The
non-toxic nature of the blank-NPs was confirmed both in vitro and in
vivo. The drug encapsulated NPs (Dex-NPs) are endocytosed into leukemic
cells and induced cytotoxicity similar to that of free Dex, but at
reduced doses. The Dex-NPs significantly improved survival in preclinical
mouse models of leukemia. A second generation drug encapsulated targeted
NPs with transferrin as the targeting moiety improved NP uptake in
leukemic cells by comparison to non-targeted NPs. The demonstrated
efficacy of such novel nanotherapeutic systems in vitro and in
pre-clinical mouse models of acute leukemia have provided the foundation
to successfully create novel therapeutic delivery systems that target and
treat pediatric hematological malignancies with enhanced efficacy and
reduced toxicity.

