Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular determinants of dasatinib response in uterine carcinoma.


Despite the many attractive features of EphA2 as a therapeutic target in
cancer, approaches to block it have lagged behind. Dasatinib is a
multi-kinase inhibitor and may be useful for targeting EphA2. However,
reliable predictive markers of response are needed. Additionally, the
underlying mechanism deciding whether responsive or resistant to
dasatinib and biological impact of EphA2 function in the context of EphA2
targeted therapy in cancer are not known.We undertook a large number of
studies to fully characterize the effects of dasatinib using in vitro
(cell viability, RPPAs, gene expression, and confocal imaging) and in
vivo uterine cancer models. Molecular markers for response prediction
were identified by using RPPA and immunohistochemistry.In vitro, the
effects of dasatinib treatment varied among the different endometrial
cancer cell lines tested, (IC50 values ranged from 30 nM to 17,792 nM),
which was associated with varying levels of EphA2 and tyrosine
phosphorylation and serine897 phosphorylation of EphA2, and with varying
status of caveolin-1 (CAV-1), PTEN and RAS/MAPK . A set of markers that
are essential for dasatinib response was identified, including EphA2,
CAV-1, pAKTs473, BRAF/CRAF (MAPK pathway) and ppS6s240/244 (mTOR
pathway). A novel mechanism for response was identified by which
dasatinib can drive the BRAF and EphA2 to CAV-1 at the plasma membrane,
resulting in breaking off the BRAF/CRAF heterodimer induced by dasatinib,
and blocking compensatory activation of the MAPK pathway. In vivo data
using orthotopic mouse models of uterine carcinoma were entirely
concordant with our in vitro findings.The efficacy of dasatinib therapy
in uterine carcinoma depends on EphA2 phosphorylation at its S897 site
and high CAV-1 levels are predictive of response to dasatinib. These
findings may have clinical implications for ongoing dasatinib-based
clinical trials.

