Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The significance of vascular endothelial growth factor C in the
lymphangiogenesis and lymph node metastasis of ovarian cancer.


Purpose: Vascular endothelial growth factor-C (VEGF-C) is commonly
expressed in malignant cells, creating a favorable environment for
generation of new lymphatic vessels. It has been recently reported that
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) stimulates tumor-lymphangiogenesis
by inducing the production of VEGF-C. In the current study, we
investigated the significance of VEGF-C in tumor lymphangiogenesis and
lymph node metastasis of ovarian cancer. Moreover, we investigated
whether mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) is involved in the VEGF-C-induced
lymphangiogensis and lymph node metastasis in ovarian cancer.Experimental
design: Using human ovarian cancers, we first performed immunostaining
for VEGF-C, and examined the correlation between VEGF-C expressions and
the extent of lymphvascular space invasion (LVSI) or the number of lymph
node metastasis. Using two pairs of ovarian cancer cell lines producing
different level of VEGF-C (VEGF-C-low and VEGF-C-high cells), we next
investigated the role of VEGF-C in tumor-lymphangiogenesis in a mouse
xenograft model. We then examined whether mTORC1 is involved in the
production of VEGF-C in ovarian cancer cells as well as in
tumor-lymphangiogenesis in a mouse xenograft model. Finally, by using a
mouse model of paraaortic-node metastasis, we investigated whether
inhibition of mTORC1 suppress lymph node metastasis.Results: VEGF-C
expression was significantly associated with the extent of LVSI or the
number of lymph node metastasis in ovarian cancer specimens. In a mouse
xenograft model, tumors derived from VEGF-C-high cells showed greater
lymphatic vessel density than that observed in tumors from VEGF-C-low
cells. Inhibition of mTORC1 by everolimus decreased the expression of
VEGF-C in ovarian cancer cells in vitro, lymphangiogenesis in tumors, and
paraaortic-node metastasis in mouse models.Conclusion: Inhibition of
mTORC1 may represent a novel molecular-targeted approach for lymph node
metastasis prevention in patients with ovarian cancer.

