Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The translation of epigenetic colorectal cancer tissue based
diagnostic biomarkers into both faecal and blood based diagnostic
biomarkers.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the 3rd most common cancer with >1 million new
cases diagnosed annually. It is estimated that there could be up to
20,000 fewer deaths from CRC over the next 20 years if 60% of those
eligible undertook bowel screening.In the UK, the current primary
screening tool is the faecal occult blood test (FOBt). This test
determines the presence of blood within a patients stool. It does not
diagnose CRC directly, a positive test directs patients for further
clinical evaluation. This potentially leads to invasive tests such as
colonoscopy; however, the presence of blood in the faeces can be due to
many factors and thus for every 10 people who undergo a colonoscopy, 7
individuals will have a normal result. The poor positive predictive value
of the FOBt test leads to unnecessary concern for the patient, has
associated morbidity effects and has a huge cost implication for the
healthcare system. Consequently, there is a need for a robust preventive
strategy that can stratify patients into appropriate screening programmes
for the early detection of CRC.There is growing evidence for aberrant
hypermethylation of CpG islands in patients who suffer from CRC.
Molecular diagnostics companies are exploiting the detection of aberrant
DNA hypermethylation of Vimentin in faeces and Septin-9 in blood to
develop assays for CRC diagnosis. Both tests are currently undergoing
clinical trials.Here we present data from a panel of 12 genes with
hypermethylated CpG sites that have been successfully validated in tissue
samples. A subset (6 markers) of this panel has previously been shown to
have extremely high sensitivity (94%) and specificity (98%) for carcinoma
tissues, and importantly this performance is not eroded when tissue from
pre-malignant adenoma samples are analysed (sensitivity 93%, specificity
98%). The areas under the Receiver Operating Characteristic curves were
0.984 for carcinomas and 0.968 for adenomas1.We have developed and
translated these 12 tissue markers, culminating in a multiplex method for
the analysis of all 12 markers in both blood and faecal samples. Here we
present the application of this multiplexed method for the detection of
carcinomas in faecal/blood samples with high sensitivity and specificity.
The resulting method is suitable for a population-based screening
approach which provides enhanced sensitivities and specificities over the
current FOBt test.1. G. Lind et al., Identification of an epigenetic
biomarker panel with high sensitivity and specificity for colorectal
cancer and adenomas, Molecular Cancer, vol. 10, 2011.

