Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapamycin is a chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic agent for
ras-driven epidermal squamous cell carcinoma: evidence from mouse models.


Braf inhibitors are clinically important agents for the treatment of
advanced melanoma however secondary cutaneous tumors are a common side
effect; non-melanoma skin cancers (NMSCs) arise in 15-30% of patients on
Braf inhibitor therapy and 60% of these harbor ras mutations. NMSC also
occurs in 40% of organ transplant patients receiving immunosuppressive
therapy, and switching from a calcineurin inhibitor-containing regimen to
rapamycin reduces the incidence. To examine the effect of rapamycin on
ras-driven epidermal squamous cell tumors, we treated mutant K-RasLA2
mice with rapamycin or vehicle by intraperitoneal injection and found
that rapamycin prevented the development of squamous skin tumors (0/21 vs
6/24; p=0.04), and also rapidly reduced the tumor size. To explore this
effect we employed a syngeneic orthotopic grafting model using H-Ras
mutant primary murine keratinocytes to determine if rapamycin could
hamper the ability of a Braf inhibitor to enhance squamous skin tumor
growth. Similar to results in the K-RasLA2 model, rapamycin alone
diminished the growth of tumors (size difference; 334.5 vs 22.3mm3;
p=0.03), and decreased the volume even more in the presence of a Braf
inhibitor (size difference; 699.6 vs 17.6 mm3; p=0.02). Treatment of
established tumors with rapamycin resulted in significant tumor shrinkage
even in the continuous presence of a Braf inhibitor. Size reduction was
78.7% and 66.7% in Braf inhibitor untreated and treated groups
respectively. In vitro, Braf inhibition enhanced mutant H-Ras-induced
activation of the Raf-ERK and mTOR pathways in keratinocytes, while
rapamycin addition blocked the activation of signaling pathways and
decreased cell proliferation. Taken together, rapamycin prevents murine
skin tumor development arising from oncogenic mutations in two distinct
types of ras gene alleles, and reduced the tumor size by inhibiting
downstream oncogenic pathways. Rapamycin may have clinical application as
a chemopreventive and therapeutic agent for patients at high risk to
develop ras-driven NMSC, including those receiving Braf inhibitors.

