Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RUNX3 is a biomarker for determining sensitivity to pheophorbide
a-photodynamic therapy in human oral squamous cell carcinoma.


Background & Objective: Photodynamic therapy (PDT) with photosensitizer
is one of the promising modalities for cancer treatment. For clinical use
of PDT, the screening process for sensitive cancers to PDT should be
preceded. For this, we investigated a molecular biomarker to determine
the sensitivity to Pa-PDT in immortalized human oral keratinocytes (IHOK)
and OSCC cell lines.Methods: For this study, two immortalized oral
keratinocytes (IHOK-p, IHOK-s) and 8 oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)
cell lines were used. After cells were treated with Pa-PDT, phototoxicity
and the level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) were measured. Apoptosis
was measured using annexin V/PI staining and western blotting. mRNA and
proteins of apoptotic genes were investigated by RT-PCR, real-time PCR,
and western blotting. Transfection was performed using RUNX3-small
interfering RNA.Results: After Pa-PDT, cell viability was more than 50%
reduced and ROS generated in IHOK and OSCC. In addition, apoptosis
occurred in all cell lines. Among apoptosis-related genes, Bim expression
was altered following Pa-PDT. Therefore, mRNA and protein expression of
RUNX3, a gene upstream of Bim were examined by Pa-PDT. We found that
RUNX3 was highly responsive to Pa-PDT. Furthermore, knockdown of RUNX3
expression reduced cytotoxicity by Pa-PDT. In addition, we found that the
cytotoxicity by Pa-PDT was proportional to RUNX3 expression in OSCC cell
lines.Conclusion: This is the first study to find a new target molecule
that enhances Pa-PDT effects in IHOK and OSCC cell lines. These results
should be further proven by animal studies to apply to clinical trials.
Nevertheless, the development of a PDT-dependent biomarker could provide
a novel approach to improve the effects of PDT in oral precancerous and
cancerous lesions.Acknowledgments This study was supported by a grant of
the Korean Health Technology R&D Project, Ministry for Health, Welfare &
Family Affairs, Republic of Korea (No. A100490).

