Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Perioperative detection of circulating tumor cells in patients
undergoing colorectal cancer liver and lung metastasectomy : Comparing
CellSearch and FMSA technologies and investigating the role of EMT .


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) reflect disease burden in metastatic
colorectal cancer (mCRC) and patients with resectable liver and lung
metastases are potentially curable by surgery with a 5-year survival of
30% . Here we report a study where we are detecting CTCs from blood of
such patients collected perioperatively, using simultaneously the
FDA-approved Veridex CellSearch and the Flexible Micro Spring Array
(FMSA) device developed by Penn State Bioengineering and have accrued 12
patients so far. 7.5 ml of blood is collected from the central venous
catheter placed during surgery at incision, at the point of starting
surgical resection of the mass, 30 minutes after complete removal of the
mass and on the day after surgery. Variation in CTC counts between
samples from the same patient is expected to provide valuable answers
about the kinetics of tumor cell shedding and dissemination during
surgery. Tissue from resected liver or lung is appropriately stored for
benchtop studies to correlate molecular signatures with CTC counts.
Preliminary results suggest a mean count of 36 cells per blood sample
detected using FMSA technology, with counts varying between zero to 101
cells / 7.5 ml of blood, in contrast to only zero to 2 cells in similar
samples detected using the CellSearch method. FMSA relies on size-based
isolation of CTCs from blood which are identified as CK+, DAPI +, CD45-
cells on further immunostaining .The trial provides an opportunity to
compare the two technologies in an important clinical setting and
understand the underlying molecular mechanisms for the difference in
counts . Aggressive tumors have been hypothesized to shed cells that have
undergone EMT and thus evade detection by the EpCAM-based CellSearch
detection method . We have noted expression of the mesenchymal marker
vimentin in the CTCs captured by FMSA device thus documenting EMT . We
plan to do additional stem cell and prognostic marker analysis on
FMSA-captured CTCs . Both liver and lung metastases are being studied to
compare two organs with different vascular anatomies and divergent
surgical techniques. Correlating cell counts with disease-free survival
as well as relapse will be helpful in validating intra-operative CTC
isolation technique as means of prognosticating post-surgical recovery
and gain insights into link between possible vascular tumor cell shedding
and the surgical and vascular ligation technique that is followed. Future
directions include comparing results with a patient population undergoing
hepatic or pulmonary surgical procedures for non-malignant disease as
well as extend the trial to include patients who are candidates for
adjuvant chemotherapy and explore the role of intraoperative CTC counts
and marker expression in choice of regime and predicting response.

