Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of androgen receptor function index (ARFI) in prostate
cancer.


Introduction: Initially prostate cancer is driven by the male hormone
androgen through the androgen receptor (AR). However, in some cases
androgen receptor is functionally altered at late stages of
tumorigenesis. Early knowledge of androgen receptor dysfunctions may
assist in patient stratification for emerging therapeutic strategies.
Although AR function can be altered by numerous mechanisms, the net
effect of these changes is reflected in defective transcription factor
functions of the AR. To develop readouts for AR function in prostate
cancer we have evaluated the expression of a functionally relevant panel
of AR-regulated genes in a prostate cancer cell culture model and in
whole-mounted prostate tumor tissues.Methods: In the VCaP cell culture
model of prostate cancer that endogenously express, AR, TMPRSS2-ERG
fusion (ERG), KLK3 (PSA), NKX3.1, PMEPA1, ODC1 and AMD1 genes we have
evaluated the dose and time kinetics of these AR regulated genes in
response to androgen (R1881) treatment at protein and mRNA levels.
Radical prostatectomy specimens representing favorable or poor prognostic
cases were selected for the study. Each prostate was fixed, sectioned and
immunohistochemical (IHC) staining on adjacent four-micron sections of
the whole-mounted blocks were performed by using mouse monoclonal
anti-AR, anti-ERG antibody (clone 9FY), rabbit polyclonal anti-PSA and
anti-NKX3.1 antibodies. IHC intensities were scored and the final score
was determined after multiplying the intensity score and percentage of
positively stained area in the respective lesions.Results: Towards
defining the expression levels of AR regulated genes in prostate cancer
cells we have evaluated and confirmed the androgen dose and time kinetic
response of endogenously expressed KLK3(PSA), PMEPA1, NKX3.1, ODC1, AMD1
and TMPRSS2-ERG (ERG) genes in VCaP cell culture model. Assessment of AR
dysfunction by the immunohistochemical evaluation of AR regulated genes
in whole-mounted prostate cancer specimens showed reduced expression of
AR regulated genes in a sub-set of prostate cancer cases with notable
inter- and intratumoral heterogeneity.Conclusions: Androgen regulation of
examined genes was confirmed in VCaP prostate cancer cell culture model.
Assessment of AR, ERG, NKX3.1 and PSA protein levels by IHC indicated
reduced expression of AR-regulated genes in a subset of the cases. The
analysis revealed inter- and intratumoral heterogeneity, as well as,
challenges in the quantitative assessment of IHC. The observed readouts
of AR dysfunction may provide a new tool for improved prognostic accuracy
and patient stratification at early stages of prostate cancer treatment.

