Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A cell line screen identifies TSPYL5 as marker for resistance to
HDAC inhibitor treatment.


Romidepsin is a class I selective HDAC inhibitor approved for the
treatment of cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL) and peripheral T cell
lymphoma (PTCL) in the US. In contrast to the 30% response rate to
romidepsin in these malignancies, only rare responses have been reported
in solid tumor clinical trials. A molecular understanding of the basis
for romidepsin's anti-tumor effects could lead to the development of
predictive biomarkers to select patients who are most likely to benefit
from this agent. As an initial step towards identifying candidate
predictive biomarkers, we undertook an in vitro screen for romidepsin
sensitivity in over 100 cell lines representing hematologic malignancies
and eight different solid tumors. Here, we report the results of this
screen and its use, in conjunction with gene expression profiling (GEP)
to identify TSPYL5, a novel candidate biomarker, as a predictor of
resistance to romidepsin.A limitation of previously reported cell
viability screens using romidepsin has been the use of prolonged
incubation times which vastly exceed the clinical exposure of tumor cells
to this agent. Moreover, earlier screens have based sensitivity on cell
line EC50/IC50 values, suggesting that romidepsin is broadly active in
solid tumors within a narrow range of sensitivities which is not
consistent with clinical data in solid tumors. For our screen, we
utilized a 6 hour drug exposure which is similar to the exposure of
patients receiving the drug. Sensitivity to romidepsin treatment after 72
hours was assessed by Cell Titer Glo and was expressed as a composite
score incorporating the IC50 and % growth inhibition or cell kill (S
score).As expected, based on clinical data, the most sensitive lines
(lowest S scores) are derived from hematologic malignancies, including T
cell lymphomas. Solid tumor cell lines exhibit a broad range of S scores.
We compared the baseline GEP of sensitive and resistant lines to identify
differentially expressed genes associated with sensitivity or resistance.
Two genes strongly correlated with resistance were ABCB1, encoding a drug
efflux pump implicated in resistance to romidepsin and TSPYL5, encoding a
protein that modulates P53 stability via interaction with the USP7
deubiquitinase. Cell lines with readily detectable expression of TSPYL5
are resistant to treatment with romidepsin. We observed a similar
relationship between TSPYL5 expression and resistance to panobinostat, a
pan-HDAC inhibitor and in primary human tumor cells treated with
romidepsin. Cell lines in which TSPYL5 was knocked down using shRNA show
increased sensitivity to treatment. Our work identifies potentially novel
applications for HDAC inhibitors in the treatment of certain solid
malignancies. These data may be useful to guide clinical development or
as a tool in further research aimed at understanding the mode of action
of HDAC inhibitors.

