Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myc induces lipogenesis and suppresses fatty acid oxidation in
human P493-6 B-lymphoma cells.


Myc has been known to control cell growth and proliferation through
regulating thousands of genes, of which a substantial amount are involved
in metabolism. We have previously shown that Myc increases ribosomal
biogenesis, nucleotide metabolism, mitochondrial biogenesis, glycolysis
and glutaminolysis in cancer cells. However, Myc's role in fatty acid
metabolism is not well-documented, notwithstanding the expectation that
Myc induction of cell growth must be accompanied by membrane biogenesis.
Other studies have shown that fatty acids can be utilized as energy fuel
by cancer cells or as building blocks for proliferation. The P493 human B
cell line contains a tetracycline (Tet)-repressible human MYC transgene,
permitting robust control of cell growth and proliferation through MYC.
Having previously documented that Myc stimulates glucose and glutamine
metabolism, we sought to determine whether Myc affects P493 use of fatty
acids for oxidation and fatty acid synthesis. We found that resting P493
cells, in which ectopic MYC was off, can use labeled palmitate for
respiration, while Myc activated P493 cells demonstrated an inability to
oxidize palmitate. We also observe through microarray analysis and RT-PCR
that Myc increases the levels of mRNAs for lipogenesis genes. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with an anti-Myc antibody documents that Myc
binds to the promoters of lipogenesis genes. Moreover, immunoblot
analyses with antibodies available for selected enzymes also indicate
that Myc increases the protein levels of ACACA and FASN. Uniformly
labeled 13C-glucose and 13C,15N-glutamine were found to be incorporated
into lipids when Myc was induced in P493 cells. Cerulenin, an inhibitor
of FASN, dramatically inhibits Myc-induced P493 cell proliferation.
Similarly, TOFA-inhibition of ACACA suppresses P493 cell proliferation as
well. Our data suggest that in P493 Burkitt lymphoma model cells, Myc
inhibits fatty acid oxidation and upregulates fatty acid synthesis
through transcription of target genes.

