Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) as a new modulator of the JAK/STAT
pathway in melanoma.


There is a crescent interest to understand the cellular and molecular
processes involved in the progression of melanoma. Such knowledge is
crucial for the development of more efficacious treatments and improved
diagnostics. Acetylation and deacetylation of proteins plays a crucial
role in the control of important cellular pathways, such as
transcriptional control, proliferation, apoptosis, immunogenicity, etc.
Specifically, histone deacetylases (HDACs) have garnered significant
interest due to the availability of drugs that selectively inhibits HDAC.
We recently investigated the effect of HDAC6 selective inhibitor(s)
(HDAC6i) in human melanoma cell lines (WM164, WM983A and SKMEL21) with
regards to proliferation and cell cycle profile. Pharmacological
inhibition of HDAC6 resulted in a delayed proliferation and G1 cell cycle
arrest in all melanoma cell lines analyzed. In addition to the
pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6, we explored the effect of HDAC6
knock-down using specific shRNA (HDAC6KD). In agreement with the previous
data from pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6, the proliferation of
HDAC6KD melanoma cells was diminished when compared to wild-type and
non-target shRNA control cells. Likewise, we observed a similar G1 arrest
in the cell cycle that was attained with the use of HDAC6 specific
inhibitors.Our data has also implicated HDAC6 in the regulation of the
STAT1 and STAT3 pathways in melanoma cells. After cytokine IL-6 and IFN-
stimulation of melanoma cells we found significant changes in the
phosphorylation and acetylation status of STAT3 and STAT1 proteins in
KDHDAC6 cells and/or treated with HDAC6i. Supporting this data, we
observed important changes in the expression of STAT1 and STAT3 target
genes, including essential genes involved in cell cycle control and
immune regulation. Moreover, we observed a delay in tumor growth in
C57BL/6 mice challenged in vivo with B16 cells lacking HDAC6 when
compared to wild type B16 cells. These studies provide critical insights
into the molecular pathways and/or partners that are involved in the
regulatory role of HDAC6 in cell proliferation survival and cytokine
signaling of human melanoma cells. Collectively, our data has identified
HDAC6 as an attractive therapeutic target in melanoma due to its ability
to delay tumor growth and target the JAK/STAT pathways, known to be
altered in several melanoma malignancies.

