Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum deprivation induces Ewing Sarcoma cells to adopt a more
invasive phenotype and to upregulate RHO-MKL transcriptional activity.


Background: Ewing sarcoma (ES) is an aggressive and metastatic tumor of
bone and soft tissue that primarily affects children and adolescents. The
primary cause of tumor-related death in patients with ES is metastatic
disease. In epithelial-derived cancers metastasis is dependent on
phenotypic transition of cells from epithelial- to mesenchymal-like
states (EMT). In addition, Rho signaling pathways are primary mediators
of cancer cell motility and can induce cell migration and invasion, in
part through transcriptional activation of MKL/SRF target genes. The
mechanisms of metastasis in non-epithelial tumors such as ES remain to be
elucidated.Objective: We sought to determine whether phenotypic
plasticity between non-invasive and invasive states is also a feature of
ES and to determine the molecular mechanism underlying this
transition.Methods: ES cell lines were subjected to serum deprivation and
phenotypic differences measured using scratch assays, transwell studies,
and the xCelligence system. qRT-PCR, Western blot and immunofluorescence
were used to quantitate or visualize changes in gene and protein
expression, respectively.Results: Serum deprivation induced ES cells to
rapidly adopt a more aggressive phenotype, reflected by changes in cell
shape and increased motility, while proliferation was inhibited. Serum
replenishment rapidly reverted these phenotypic changes. Mechanistically,
markers of EMT were largely unaffected indicating that the observed
phenotypic plasticity in ES cells was not mediated by classic EMT-MET
transitions. Instead, activation of Rho-MKL signaling was apparent as
evidenced by nuclear localization of MKL and upregulation of the
metastasis-associated MKL/SRF target gene MYL9 in serum-deprived
conditions. Exposure of ES cells to a small molecule antagonist of
Rho-MKL signaling inhibited ES cell motility.Conclusions: Serum
deprivation causes reversible transformation of ES cells to a more
migratory phenotype. This is associated with nuclear translocation of MKL
and induction of MYL9, a gene that encodes a regulatory light chain
required for myosin stability. We propose a model of ES metastasis in
which changes to the microenvironment that result in growth-factor
deprivation (e.g. increased tumor size or cytotoxic therapy) induce
expression of Rho-MKL transcriptional targets that contribute to cell
migration and invasion. The Rho-MKL axis may thus be a novel therapeutic
target for prevention of ES metastasis.

