Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multilayer-omics (whole-exome, methylome and transcriptome)
analysis identifies the Wnt/-catenin pathway as a key player in the
development of renal cell carcinoma.


Introduction: Even though recent developments in high-throughput sequence
capture methods and next-generation sequencing technologies have made
exome sequencing technically feasible, the use of an integrated
multilayer-omics approach including exome analysis to examine human renal
cell carcinomas has never been reported. The aim of this study was to
identify pathways that have a significant impact during renal
carcinogenesis by multilayer-omics analysis. Methods: Thirty paired
specimens of non-cancerous renal cortex tissue and tumorous tissue from
patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma, the major histological
subtype of renal cell carcinoma, were subjected to whole-exome, methylome
and transcriptome analyses using Agilent SureSelect All Exon capture
followed by sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform, Illumina
Infinium HumanMethylation27 BeadArray and Agilent SurePrint Human Gene
Expression microarray, respectively. Sanger sequencing and quantitative
reverse transcription-PCR were performed for technical verification.
MetaCore software was used for pathway analysis. The other 37 renal cell
carcinomas were subjected to the validation study. Results: The exome
analysis has revealed for the first time frequent genetic aberrations of
GCN1L1, MACF1, ERC2, ABCA13, and MUC16 in clear cell renal cell
carcinomas. Somatic non-synonymous mutations of GCN1L1, MED12 and CCNC,
which are members of CDK8 mediator complex directly regulating
-catenin-driven transcription, were identified in 17% of the clear cell
renal cell carcinomas. In addition, MACF1 functions in the Wnt/-catenin
signaling pathway. Reduced expression associated due to DNA
hypermethylation of SFRP1, which downregulates Wnt/-catenin signaling by
competing with Frizzled for Wnt binding via their cysteine-rich domain,
was frequent in clear cell renal cell carcinomas. A combination of
methylome and transcriptome analyses further highlighted the significant
role of the Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway in renal carcinogenesis.
Genetic aberrations and reduced expression of ERC2 and ABCA13 were
frequent in renal cell carcinomas. MetaCore pathway analysis revealed
that MTOR mutations were one of the major disrupters of cell signaling
during renal carcinogenesis. MTOR mutation may be a marker for predicting
the sensitivity of clear cell renal cell carcinomas to mTOR inhibitors,
such as rapamycin and its derivatives. Conclusion: Our results confirm
that multilayer-omics analysis can be a powerful tool for revealing
pathways that play a significant role in carcinogenesis.

