Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ganoderma lucidum (Reishi) downregulates key proteins
overexpressed in IBC and chemosensitizes EGFR-overexpressing cells to
erlotinib.


Inflammatory Breast Cancer (IBC) is a unique and aggressive cancer where
tumor spheroids invade the dermal lymphatics causing the inflammatory
phenotype. IBC cell lines and human tissues overexpress plasma membrane
proteins such as E-cadherin and Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR),
which are associated with maintaining tumor spheroid integrity, increased
IBC tumor growth rate, invasion and metastasis. Since IBC tumor cell
emboli are more efficient at forming metastases and are more resistant to
chemo and radiotherapy than single cells, it seems feasible to prevent
IBC with a compound that has the ability to disintegrate the cell
spheroids. Our published data shows that the medicinal mushroom,
Ganoderma lucidum (Reishi), inhibits IBC progression via disintegration
of tumor spheroids. Thus, we aimed to investigate Reishi's in vitro and
in vivo therapeutic potential in IBC, focusing on the regulation of
E-cadherin and EGFR and its contribution to the IBC cellular response
when treated with the EGFR Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor (TKI), erlotinib
(commercially known as Tarceva). Herein, we show that Reishi
downregulates E-cadherin and EGFR abundance in vitro, significantly
reduces tumor growth by 58%, and downregulates in vivo EGFR, and
E-cadherin protein expression. Moreover, a synergistic effect is observed
when erlotinib and Reishi are used simultaneously after 72 hours of
treatment. Since Reishi downregulates the expression of E-cadherin and
EGFR, our subsequent investigations will focus on the identification of
PM proteins using stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell
culture (SILAC). Our results provide evidence that Reishi downregulates
key proteins overexpressed in IBC, and chemosensitizes IBC cells to
erlotinib therapy, highlighting its anti-IBC-therapeutic potential. This
project was sponsored by Title V PPOHA US Dept of Education #P031M105050
to UCC, NIH/RCMI #2G12RR003035 to UCC, NIH/INBRE #5P20RR016470 to
UPR/UCC, NIH/NCRR #U54RR026139 to UPR/UCC, and a research donation from
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico to UCC-Centro Universitario de Medicina
Integral y Complementaria (CUMIC) / MMM.

