Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of lipid bodies on cell cycle progression.


Background: Lipid bodies (also known as lipid droplets) are organelles
involved in lipid turnover, membrane traffic and intracellular signaling.
Lipogenesis has been associated with poor prognosis in several neoplasic
diseases, suggesting a role for these organelles in cancer development.
We have previously reported that lipid bodies are centrally involved in
prostaglandin E2 synthesis and cell proliferation in colon cancer cells,
and may have implications to colon adenocarcinoma pathogenesis (Cancer
Res. 68:1732, 2008). Based on this data, we investigated the role of
lipid bodies in the regulation of cell cycle progression.Materials and
Methods: NIH3T3 cells were synchronized through combination of confluence
and serum starvation, and progression through cell cycle was assayed
before or after 12, 24, 36 or 48 hours of serum supplementation by
propidium iodide staining, by western blot analysis of cell cycle
proteins, and by qtPCR to assess cyclins mRNA expression. Lipid bodies
regulation were assayed in the times indicated, analyzing sub cellular
localization through immunofluorescence microscopy using Bodipy staining,
and quantification through flux citometry and immunofluorescence
microscopy, using respectively Bodipy or Oil Red O staining. NIH3T3 were
synchronized with thymidine to assess regulation of lipid bodies through
S cell cycle phase, and the transformed cell lineage NIH3T3-H-rasV12 were
also maintained in confluence and serum starvation for lipid bodies
analysis.Results: Cell cycle analysis revealed that upon serum
supplementation NIH3T3 cells reached S phase after 24 hours, following to
G2/M phase after 36-48 hours. In accordance to this data, maximum
hyperphosphorylation of pRb and a peak expression of cyclin A protein
were observed at 24 hours of serum supplementation, along with histone H3
phosphorylation after 48 hours. Also, mRNA expression analysis of cyclins
D2, E2, A2, and B2 confirmed that synchronized NIH3T3 progressed
uniformly through cell cycle after serum supplementation. Using this
model, we observed that cells arrested on G1 phase showed a lower number
and perinuclear localization of lipid bodies, whereas an increased number
of lipid bodies with a homogeneous distribution through the cytoplasm
were observed during S phase. These data were confirmed with thymidine
synchronization. Moreover, NIH3T3 cells showed increased number and
dispersed localization of lipid bodies upon transformation with H-rasV12
oncoprotein.Conclusions: Taken together, these results suggest that lipid
bodies are highly regulated during cell cycle, and also that this
regulation is altered in transformed cells. Also, these data provide
evidence for a coordinate mechanism that regulates cell cycle progression
and lipid body biogenesis, which might be deregulated during cancer
development.Financial Support: CNPq, FAPERJ, CAPES, INCA/FIOCRUZ and
INCT-Cancer

