Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYC drives formation of primative neuro-ectodermal tumors in human
neural stem cells derived from multiple brain regions.


Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET) are thought to arise from neural
stem cells. They are highly aggressive tumors, and they can arise in
different regions of the brain. A subset of PNET has genomic
amplification of MYC, and the MYC-regulator LIN28A is known to define a
group of PNET. The AKT/PTEN pathway is commonly altered in aggressive
brain tumors. hTERT is expressed in the majority of PNET. Deletion or
mutation of p53 is also a common event in PNET. We hypothesized that a
combination of dominant negative R248Wp53, c-myc, AKT and hTERT would
transform human neural stem cells into a model for PNET. We used
lentiviral vectors to infect human neural stem cells derived from
hindbrain and cortex with the same packages of oncogenic elements. After
antibiotic selection, we performed western blotting and qPCR to verify
the presence of MYC and constitutively active AKT. Increased TP53
expression on western blot was used as a proxy for inactivation of the
p53 pathway by dominant negative R248W p53. Increased hTERT expression
was verified by qPCR. Hindbrain neural stem cells transduced with
MYC/R248Wp53/AKT/hTERT proliferated at an increased rate compared to
control cells as measured by BrdU incorporation (Hindbrain pBABE vs.
Hindbrain MYC/R248Wp53/AKT/hTERT: 4% vs. 50% BrdU positive, t-test
p=0.001). Similar results were observed in cortex derived human neural
stem cells transduced with MYC/R248Wp53/AKT/hTERT (Cortex pBABE vs Cortex
MYC/R248Wp53/AKT/hTERT: 5% vs. 24% BrdU positive, t-test p=0.027). We
then tested the tumor forming ability of cortex and hindbrain derived
human neural stem cells, by performing orthotopic intracranial injections
on immunocompromised mice. No tumors formed from human neural stem cells
infected with one or two oncogenic elements. However, both hindbrain and
cortex derived human neural stem cells transformed with MYC
/R248Wp53/hTERT, and MYC/R248Wp53/hTERT/AKT formed aggressive orthotopic
xenograft tumors with histologic characteristics of PNET. The latency of
tumor formation decreased with increasing addition of oncogenes. These
PNET-like tumors were synaptophysin positive, GFAP negative, had a high
proliferative index, and showed signs of leptomeningal dissemination.
Taken together, these experiments show that human neural stem cells from
different brain regions, when transduced with the same package of
oncogenes, form PNET-like orthotopic xenograft tumors. These data suggest
that MYC's transforming power may trump loco-regional differences in
neural stem and progenitor cells.

