Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth of patient derived tumor xenograft (PDX) in NOD/SCID mice
reconstituted with human umbilical cord blood (UCB) CD34+ cells.


Patient derived xenograft (PDX) is closely reflective of tumor in patient
for both histopathological and genetic profiles 1, 2. It thus becomes
widely accepted as model of choice to evaluate anticancer agents with
improved predictive power. However, current PDX (HuPrime 1.0/2.0) still
has limitations, including growth in an environment lacking functional
immunity, particularly that of human. Human immune functions have been
successfully reconstituted in the same types of immunodeficient mice that
were also used for engrafting PDX. This type of humanized mice with
functional human immune system are established usually through
engraftment of stem cells containing human CD34+ cells isolated from
fetal liver, peripheral blood or umbilical cord blood (UCB). It is
therefore also plausible to engraft both patient tumor and normal
functional human immune system to a single recipient mouse so that tumors
would grow in an environment even more similar to that of patients, and
yield an even more predictive experimental model. This is particularly so
for evaluating biologics or any immune modulating agents.In the present
study, we engrafted CD34+ UCB (hematopoietic stem cell enriched
population) into NOD/SCID mice and demonstrated full reconstitution of
human hemopoiesis, including myelopoiesis, lymphopoiesis (both T and B
lineages), growth of dentritic cells (DCs), macrophage and monocytes, and
growth of natural killer cells (NKs). These cells can be found in
abundance in bone marrow, spleen as well as peripheral blood. We also
further demonstrated the normal immune functions in the reconstituted
mice (HuMICE), including production of human cytokines such as GM-CSF and
IL-3, etc.Meanwhile, we also engrafted a previously established non-small
cell lung cancer PDX (HuPrime) model (LU25033 and LU0387) into the CD34+
UCB reconstituted NOD/SCID mice. Our preliminary results demonstrated
that the tumor in the normal human immune system grow well, with maybe
slight slower rate than the tumors in mice without reconstitution. We
have observed significant infiltration of various human immune cells into
the xenograft tumors. We are presently evaluating this type of new PDX
models (HuPrime 3.0) by treating them with existing antibody
therapeutics. Our preliminary data showed that the presence of human
immunity, such as human NK-mediated ADCC, may have slight enhanced
anti-tumor effect of antibody drug in HuPrime 3.0 than in HuPrime 2.0 (no
human immune-reconstitute). We are currently assessing the role of the
reconstituted immune function played in a biologic drug effect. We
believe that HuPrime 3.0 could represent a more predictive model than
those without functional immunity.

