Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of microRNAs that target Id-1 in esophageal cancer.


Inhibitor of DNA binding-1 (Id-1) belongs to a family of helix-loop-helix
(HLH) proteins that lack the fundamental domain for DNA binding. Since
Id-1 is overexpressed in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), and
its expression level is associated with cancer invasion and metastasis,
suppression of Id-1 may have therapeutic significance. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs), which constitute non-coding small RNAs of around 22-nucleotides
and negatively regulate gene expression as post-transcriptional
regulator, were reported to be involved in carcinogenesis. However, there
is limited information about the miRNAs that regulate Id-1. This project
aims to identify miRNAs that can target Id-1 and exert tumor suppressive
functions. In this study, several bioinformatics software programs,
including TargetScan, RegRNA, MicroRNA and EMBL-EBI, were used to predict
miRNAs that can directly bind to the 3UTR of Id-1 mRNA. The miRNAs which
have high scores and are predicted to target Id-1 by at least 3 different
target prediction algorithms were chosen as candidates for this study.
These miRNA candidates are: miR-29 family (miR-29a, miR-29b and miR-39c),
miR-330, miR-300, miR-593, miR-654, miR-338, miR-346, miR-632. Plasmids
which can over-express these miRNAs were designed and constructed using
BLOCK-iT Pol II miR RNAi Expression system (Invitrogen). Successful
over-expression of the miRNAs in ESCC cell lines were verified by
qRT-PCR. The transient and stable miRNA over-expressing ESCC cells were
harvested and subjected to western blot analysis for Id-1 protein
expression level. Direct binding of miRNAs to the 3UTR of Id-1 was
analyzed by 3UTR luciferase assay. The pGL3-Id-1 3UTR luciferase reporter
vector was constructed by cloning the Id-1 3 UTR downstream of the
firefly luciferase open reading frame and the luciferase activities were
measured using the Dual Luciferase Assay System. The cell invasion
ability of miRNA over-expressing ESCC cells was analyzed by using BD
BioCoat Matrigel Invasion Chamber. Cell proliferation and colony
formation assays were performed to investigate the anti-proliferation
effect of these miRNAs. In this study, ten miRNA over-expressing plasmids
were constructed and over-expression of several miRNAs was achieved. We
found that miR-29c could directly target the 3UTR of Id-1 and
down-regulate Id-1 protein level. miR-29c exerts tumor suppressing
effects by reducing the ESCC cell invasion ability. Further study using
miR-29c inhibitors in western blot assay, Id-1 3UTR luciferase assay and
cell invasion assay will be conducted. In summary, this study shows that
miR-29c can suppress Id-1 and inhibit cell invasion in ESCC cells.This
study is supported by General Research Funds from Research Grants Council
of the Hong Kong SAR (Project Nos. HKU762610M and HKU763111M)

