Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting multiple components of the mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) signaling: A novel combination therapy to improve pancreatic
cancer treatment.


Background and Aim: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma remains a lethal
malignancy with historically limited success in treatment. This study
aims to (i) develop a Highly Active Anti-Tumor Therapy (HAATT) by
specifically targeting multiple components of the mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) signaling and (ii) attempt to tailor metabolism-targeted
therapy by analyzing the global metaboloic profile of tumors.Methods:
mTOR plays a central role in regulating cell growth, proliferation and
survival. Here we sought to develop a therapy intend to severely harness
mTOR signaling. We formulated a multi-drug regimen comprising Metformin,
Rapamycin, and PP242. We investigated the effect of individual agents or
in combinations, both in vitro as well as in vivo using human pancreatic
cancer cell lines and patient-derived pancreatic cancer xenografts. Mice
with established tumors (both s.c and orthotopically implanted) were
pre-treated with 2 cycles of gemcitabine, randomized and treated with
individual agents or in combinations. Tumors were harvested at various
time-points and used for PD assays and functional screens including
global metabolic profiles.Results: Our studies demonstrate that the
triple combination therapy specifically inactivates mTOR targets,
resulting in durable suppression of tumor cell proliferation. Although,
gemcitabine therapy was initially effective, but tumors resumed growth
upon cessation of gemcitabine treatment. Responses to single agents or
doublets were temporary and tumors grew progressively. Conversely,
addition of triple combination therapy to post-gemcitabine treatment not
only resulted in rapid regression of gemcitabine refractory tumors, which
lasted up to 2 months, but also remarkably delayed tumor recurrence.
Notably in gemcitabine refractory orthotopic model, the triple
combination therapy was effective in inhibiting tumor angiogenesis
resulting in the suppression of primary tumor growth. Analysis of tumor
samples revealed that combination treatment remarkably suppressed tumor
cell proliferation and reversed several key metabolic alterations found
in gemcitabine resistant tumors.Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that
the triple combination therapy is remarkably effective in inhibiting mTOR
targets, resulting in sustained tumor growth inhibition and remarkably
delaying tumor recurrence in clinically relevant models established from
the tumors resected from pancreatic cancer patients. Our findings have
translational relevance and lay framework towards the establishment of a
highly effective therapeutic strategy to substantially improve pancreatic
cancer therapy.Acknowledgement: This study is supported by a Stand Up To
Cancer Dream Team Translational Cancer Research Grant (SU2C-AACR-DT0509)
and funding from Commonwealth Foundation for Cancer Research.

