Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and validation of a screening strategy for the
identification of novel inhibitors of wild type and mutant CARD11
mediated BCR/NF-B signaling.


Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common form of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and can be divided into three distinct subtypes.
The activated B cell-like (ABC) subtype is the most aggressive and is
characterized by constitutive activation of the NF-B pathway. Within the
NF-B pathway, the scaffolding protein CARD11 plays a critical role by
coordinating IB kinase activity and downstream pathway activation. With
mounting evidence that CARD11 is a promising therapeutic target for the
treatment of ABC-DLBCL we developed and executed a compound screening
strategy with the ability to identify B cell receptor (BCR)/NF-B pathway
inhibitors and triage them based on mechanism of action.We began to
screen our compound library by using the TMD-8 (ABC-DLBCL) cell line
engineered with an NF-B-dependent luciferase reporter. In order to bin
the primary hits, different stimuli were evaluated for their ability to
rescue the inhibition of BCR/NF-B activity in TMD-8 cells. This strategy
allowed the identification of 3 potential classes of inhibitors: 1)
inhibitors up-stream of PKC, that could be rescued by PMA/ionomycin; 2)
inhibitors down-stream of IKK; 3) inhibitors acting between CARD11 and
IKK, whose activity could be rescued by TNF but not by PMA/ionomycin.
Following triage, a hit confirmation step was designed using 293T cells
engineered with an NF-B-luciferase reporter construct and the ability to
express wild-type or mutant CARD11 under the control of a Tet-responsive
promoter. Inhibitors up-stream of PKC were confirmed by the ability of
PMA/ionomycin to rescue inhibition of the NF-B reporter. Inhibitors
acting downstream of IKK were confirmed by the inability of TNFa to
rescue. Finally, inhibitors acting between CARD11 and IKK were confirmed
by their ability to inhibit NF-B reporter expression in CARD11 wild-type
and mutant settings without rescue by PMA/ionomycin but with rescue by
TNF.Currently, the majority of pharmacological therapeutics in clinical
trials target constitutive BCR activation upstream of CARD11. As a
result, activating CARD11 mutations pose a threat to the success of these
therapeutics. The 10% of ABC-DLBCL patients with somatic mutations in
CARD11 are likely to be resistant to these therapies and mutation to
CARD11 may prove to be a common mechanism of resistance in tumors that
initially respond to treatment. Consequently, therapies targeting CARD11,
including mutant CARD11, or downstream NF-B signaling components
represent a valuable strategy for the treatment of ABC-DLBCL.

