Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphorylation status of Ascl1 regulates neuroblastoma
self-renewal and differentiation.


Neuroblastoma (NB) is a tumor of infancy that accounts for 15% of all
pediatric cancer mortality. NB bares striking similarity to
undifferentiated neuroblasts of the sympathetic nervous system in gene
expression profiles and histological appearance. In most neuroblastoma
tumors, the cell cycle is hyperactive due to overexpression of cyclin D1
and amplification of MYCN. However, retinoic acid (RA) induces
differentiation and cell cycle exit of some NB cell lines in vitro and
provides significant benefit to patients in the clinic. As neuroblastoma
appears to result from sustained proliferation and inhibition of
differentiation, we sought to understand how cell cycle and
differentiation are linked within NB. We focused our efforts on Ascl1, a
proneural transcription factor that is both necessary and sufficient for
neural differentiation of noradrenergic neurons and has been shown to be
regulated by the cell cycle. Paradoxically, Ascl1 is both highly
expressed and associated with poor prognosis in NB. However, we
hypothesized that Ascl1 phosphostatus critically regulates its ability to
induce differentiation.We show that Ascl1 is highly expressed and
phosphorylated across multiple NB cell lines and is largely
phosphorylated by CDKs. Phosphorylated Ascl1 actively promotes the G1-S
transition by upregulating E2f, Skp2, and Cdk2. These targets all promote
CDK activity, further maintaining Ascl1 phosphorylation. However, a
phosphomutant form of Ascl1, where putative CDK sites are mutated,
arrests cells in the G1 phase by preferentially upregulating Ebf3 and
p27. These targets inhibit CDK activity promoting Ascl1 dephosphorylation
and further upregulation of Ebf3 and p27. We propose a model whereby
Ascl1 sits between two positive feedback loops, both forming a critical
link between cell cycle and differentiation, but also as an agent to
commit cells to either a self-renewing undifferentiated state or a
postmitotic differentiated state.Given this model, we hypothesized that
pharmacologic inhibition of CDK activity when combined with a
pro-differentiation agent such as RA would synergistically cause
differentiation in neuroblastoma. Indeed, CDK inhibitor and RA
combination treatment causes increased differentiation in RA-susceptible
cell lines and induces differentiation in RA-resistant cell lines. Given
that most neuroblastoma tumors have an overactive cell cycle and also
highly express Ascl1, combination therapy of CDK inhibitor and RA may
provide generalized benefit to NB patients.

