Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the role of AR in breast cancer .


Background: In breast cancers, the androgen receptor (AR) is more widely
expressed than estrogen receptor alpha (ER) or progesterone receptor
(PR), and AR has recently emerged as a useful marker for refinement of
breast cancer subtype classification. Approximately 77% of invasive
breast cancer tumors are positive for AR and among the subtypes, 88% of
ER+, 59% of HER2+, and 32% of triple negative breast cancers
(ER-/PR-/HER2-) are positive for AR protein expression by IHC. AR
expression has been associated with resistance to current endocrine
therapies (tamoxifen and aromatase inhibitors) in cell line and
preclinical models, and clinical studies.Hypothesis: We hypothesized that
ER+ breast cancers that become resistant to traditional endocrine
therapies might do so by switching from estrogen to androgen-dependence
and that AR holds potential as a therapeutic target in AR+ breast
cancers, whether ER+ or ER-.Methods: We quantified the percentage of
cells positive for nuclear AR compared to the percentage of cells
positive for ER in a cohort of tamoxifen treated patients with clinical
outcome data. We also examined the effect of dihydrotestosterone (DHT)
and estradiol (E2) in the presence of enzalutamide (formerly MDV3100), a
novel AR inhibitor, in in vitro and in vivo models of ER+, ER-, and Her2+
breast cancer that retain AR.Results: Our clinical data indicate that a
high ratio of AR to ER protein is indicative of a shorter time to relapse
in patients treated with tamoxifen and a lack of response to neo-adjuvant
AI treatment. In ER+ models, bicalutamide and enzalutamide both inhibit
DHT-mediated proliferation, while enzalutamide uniquely inhibited
E2-mediated proliferation. In xenograft tumor studies, enzalutamide
significantly reduced estrogen- and androgen-mediated growth of ER+/AR+
xenograft tumors. Remarkably, enzalutamide demonstrated an
anti-proliferative effect comparable to tamoxifen on tumors in E2 treated
mice and inhibited the expression of classic E2-regulated genes such as
SDF-1. Enzalutamide opposed DHT-stimulated proliferation of ER-/AR+
MDA-MB-453 tumors in vivo and caused decreased nuclear AR localization
and increased tumor cell apoptosis. In Her2+ breast cancer cell lines,
enzalutamide enhanced the response to trastuzumab and decreased the
amount of both phosphorylated and total Her3.Conclusions: Enzalutamide
demonstrated significant anti-tumor activity in preclinical models of
breast cancers that express AR, regardless of ER status. In Her2+ breast
cancer, inhibition of AR with enzalutamide may enhance response to
Her2-directed therapy or overcome resistance to such agents by reducing
levels of Her3. The AR:ER ratio may be a new predictor of response to
traditional E2/ER directed endocrine therapy and may indicate that
patients who relapse while on tamoxifen or AIs might be good candidates
for AR-directed therapy.

