Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of recombinant transcription factor proteins and
antibodies for application in clinical immunoassays.


EMT/stem cell transcription factors have been implicated in the
differentiation of epithelial cells into mesenchymal cells
(epithelial-mesenchymal transitions, EMT) during embryonic development.
EMT transitions are also determinants of the progression of carcinomas,
and their expression patterns are altered by chemotherapy. Methods for
detection and quantitation of these transitions may have clinical
importance. Specialized high quality reagents are an absolute
prerequisite for formulation of stable, high-performance, clinical
immunoassays. A panel of experts in the Division of Cancer Treatment and
Diagnosis (DCTD, NCI) and Whitehead Institute (MIT) have identified 12
key targets in EMT/Stem cells, for which there was an unmet need for high
quality reagents (SNAIL, SLUG, ZEB1, ZEB2, SOX9, LBX1, FOXC2, FOXQ1,
Goosecoid, NANOG, CD133 and FOXO3). Proof of assay analytical performance
and stability require both a purified, characterized antibody, and a
calibrator molecule suitable for generation of an assay "standard" that
may be used in several different contexts. We have developed a strategy
to generate, characterize, and validate reagents for 12 EMT/Stem cell
targets starting with antigen design and selection to improve the utility
and minimize cross-reactivity of the antibodies produced. We have also
designed and produced the corresponding recombinant protein material for
these targets. For many of these we expressed one or two specific domains
that were also tailored to provide maximum utility in target measurement
while avoiding cross-reactivity. We have generated rabbit monoclonal
antibodies to the transcription factors and tumor stem cell markers for
development of pharmacodynamic assays to support both analysis of
transcription factor function and for use in clinical trials for new
anticancer therapies. Initial screening of rabbit bleed titers and
hybridomas was performed using both the designed peptides and recombinant
material. We have also tested the leading candidate hybridomas in
multiple immunoassays and will present data demonstrating utility of the
antibodies in these applications including ELISA, WB, immunoprecipitation
and IFA in FFPE tissues. Funded by NCI Contract No. HHSN261200800001E.

