Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DOK2 suppression by methylation induces platinum resistance via
suppression of apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells.


Ovarian cancers are highly heterogeneous and while chemotherapy is the
preferred treatment, many patients are intrinsically resistant or quickly
develop resistance. Furthermore, all tumors that recur will become
resistant. Recent evidence suggests that epigenetic deregulation may be a
key factor in the onset and maintenance of chemoresistance. To examine
the ovarian epigenome, we first analyzed a set of 43 primary ovarian
tumors and 9 normal ovarian samples. Since therapy response is a
significant issue for ovarian cancer patients we analyzed the epigenetic
differences that segregate with platinum response. We then associated
expression data to identify genes with expression changes potentially
altered by promoter methylation to generate a list of candidate platinum
resistance genes. Next, we developed a tissue culture carboplatin
resistance screen to determine which candidates functionally affect
resistance. The screen utilized pools of shRNAs of the candidate genes to
identify genes that when repressed allowed survival from carboplatin
treatment, in order to validate that our epigenetics screen identified
genes involved in resistance. Of the genes identified in the screen we
further characterized one gene, docking protein 2 (DOK2), an adapter
protein downstream of tyrosine kinase, to determine if we could elucidate
what mechanism was used to increase resistance. Our analysis determined
that loss of DOK2 decreased the level of apoptosis in response to
carboplatin. In addition, we determined that in cells with reduced DOK2,
the level of anoikis was decreased, a mechanism of possible importance in
ovarian cancer where there is a large number of cells floating in
ascites. Functional analysis of the DOK2 genes ability to affect
resistance validates this approach to finding genes involved in
carboplatin resistance.

