Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AltaBluTM and Microfil 3D imaging of tumor vasculature.


As angiogenesis inhibitors have proven to be valuable agents in oncology
there is a need to measure changes in vasculature for these and other
related agents. Many of the angiogenesis inhibitors, though reducing
tumor volume by reducing nutrient access to the tumor, do not always show
decreased density of vasculature. This paradox, however, may be
attributable to the difficulties of measuring the vasculature. One reason
for this problem has been the heterogeneity of vessels in the tumor. With
the ability to now scan 360o by 3D microCT imaging of the tumor, all
image captured vessels can be measured. Another problem is the limitation
of vessel size measured by microCT scanning resolution. Vessels smaller
than 20 microns cannot be distinguished by size at scan parameters of 10
micron voxel resolution. In addition, agents used for imaging have their
own limitations. Microfil is a polymer based radiopaque imaging reagent
whereas AltaBlu is a proprietary formulation of a non-soluble radiopaque
colloid suspension. For reasons not entirely clear, we do not believe
Microfil enters capillaries since we have not observed it in the venous
side of an arterial infusion. We believe AltaBluTM, can pass into smaller
vessels since we have occasionally seen small amounts on the venous side,
but these smaller vessels cannot be adequately measured in diameter by
microCT scanning. We hypothesized that even though we may not be able to
see smaller vessels by AltaBluTM, we might be able to see more of the
smaller vessels due to improved reagent penetration and would therefore
be more sensitive to changes in small vessel populations. Herein, we have
compared perfusion of tumors via AltaBluTM and Microfil to determine the
benefits/detractions of the various agents and used a variety of
measuring parameters such as vessel radius, average vessel length, vessel
density, tortuosity, and vessel branching factors in AltaViewerTM
software to determine the sensitivity of each agent to vascular imaging.

