Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -lapachone suppresses glucose metabolism in a NQO1-dependent,
tumor-selective manner.


-Lapachone (-lap) is a very unique quinone that can be reduced by
two-electron oxidoreductase, NQO1, but unlike most other quinones, its
hydroquinone form is unstable and spontaneously oxidizes back to -lap in
two steps. This redox cycle occurs in a futile manner in which one mole
of -lap generates 120 moles of superoxide in two minutes, causing
predominately DNA base and single strand break damage. This results in
PARP1 hyperactivation and programmed necrosis in an NQO1-dependent
manner. Most solid cancers, such as nearly 90% of pancreatic and
non-small cell lung cancers have 10- to 40- fold of elevated levels of
NQO1. Since -lap causes DNA damage that is dependent on NQO1 expression,
and therefore tumor-selective for most solid cancers, use of this NQO1
bioactivatable drug is perfect for improving efficacy of cancer therapy.
Our recent work also showed that -lap efficaciously kills pancreatic
cancer cells in an NQO1-dependent manner (Li et al., Clin. Cancer Res.,
2011).In mechanism of action studies of -lap, we found that PARP1
hyperactivation led to dramatic depletion of NAD+ and ATP pools in NQO1+
cancer cells (Bentle et al., JBC, 2006). Since NAD+ is a key cofactor for
many enzymes in cellular metabolism, we theorized that NAD+ loss may
significantly affect cellular metabolism and energy generation. To
elucidate how -lap affects metabolism, we examined metabolites using
13C-labeled glucose. After two hours exposure of -lap, glucose
utilization in MiaPaca-2 cells was completely repressed, lasting 12 h
after removal of -lap. -Lap treatment also inhibited lactate generation,
indicating a suppression of glycolysis after -lap treatment. In examining
metabolic recovery, however, we found that the TCA cycle was not, or only
moderately affected by -lap, indicating that this metabolic process was
essential for recovery from this agent. A proportion of 13C-labeled
metabolites (i.e., citrate, fumarate) generated by TCA cycle increased vs
untreated control cells. Consistently, ATP levels in -lap-treated NQO1+
pancreatic cancer cells gradually recovered from -Lapachone (-lap) is a
very unique quinone that can be reduced by two-electron oxidoreductase,
NQO1, but unlike most other quinones, its hydroquinone form is unstable
and spontaneously oxidizes back to -lap in two steps. This redox cycle
occurs in a futile manner in which one mole of -lap generates 120 moles
of superoxide in two minutes, causing predominately DNA base and single
strand break damage. This results in PARP1 hyperactivation and programmed
necrosis in an NQO1-dependent manner. Most solid cancers, such as nearly
90% of pancreatic and non-small cell lung cancers have 10- to 40- fold of
elevated levels of NQO1. Since -lap causes DNA damage that is dependent
on NQO1 expression, and therefore tumor-selective for most solid cancers,
use of this NQO1 bioactivatable drug is perfect for improving efficacy of
cancer therapy. Our recent work also showed that -lap efficaciously kills
pancreatic cancer cells in an NQO1-dependent manner (Li et al., Clin.
Cancer Res., 2011).In mechanism of action studies of -lap, we found that
PARP1 hyperactivation led to dramatic depletion of NAD+ and ATP pools in
NQO1+ cancer cells (Bentle et al., JBC, 2006). Since NAD+ is a key
cofactor for many enzymes in cellular metabolism, we theorized that NAD+
loss may significantly affect cellular metabolism and energy generation.
To elucidate how -lap affects metabolism, we examined metabolites using
13C-labeled glucose. After two hours exposure of -lap, glucose
utilization in MiaPaca-2 cells was completely repressed, lasting 12 h
after removal of -lap. -Lap treatment also inhibited lactate generation,
indicating a suppression of glycolysis after -lap treatment. In examining
metabolic recovery, however, we found that the TCA cycle was not, or only
moderately affected by -lap, indicating that this metabolic process was
essential for recovery from this agent. A proportion of 13C-labeled
metabolites (i.e., citrate, fumarate) generated by TCA cycle increased vs
untreated control cells. Consistently, ATP levels in -lap-treated NQO1+
pancreatic cancer cells gradually recovered from <10% of untreated cells
to 50% in 12 h. These data indicate that -lap predominately represses
glycolysis, while the TCA cycle remains functional and possibly the only
source of ATP production in the cell. Our results indicated that -lap a
very unique DNA damage-inducing NQO1-dependent agent that simultaneously
suppresses glucose metabolism and energy generation. This may explain why
-lap is so potent in cell death induction in comparison with other DNA
damage-inducing agents. Further studies will be performed to elucidate
the exact mechanism how -lap represses glycolysis while apparently
stimulating the TCA cycle. Understanding how cells recover from -lap
exposures should shed light on improved therapies for NQO1 bioactivatable
drugs. This work was supported by an AACR Innovator Award from the George
and June Block Foundation to DAB.

