Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Canonical Wnt signaling mediates resistance of colorectal cancer
cells to radiation therapy.


Background: The clinical response of locally advanced rectal cancers to
preoperative chemoradiotherapy is very heterogeneous. We previously
identified TCF4, the key downstream effector of the Wnt/-catenin
signaling pathway, as over-expressed in tumors that were resistant to
chemoradiotherapy. The aim of this study was to explore the potential
functional relevance of Wnt/-catenin signaling for mediating treatment
resistance.Methods: Using RNA interference, TCF4 and -catenin were
inhibited in the colorectal cancer cell lines SW837 and SW480.
Subsequently, these cell lines were irradiated with varying doses of
X-rays. In addition, normal retinal epithelial cells (RPE) were
stimulated with Wnt-3a for 28 hours, and also irradiated. Wnt/-catenin
activity was assessed using the TOPFLASH/FOPFLASH reporter assay, and
induction of Axin2 was confirmed by Western blotting.Results: Protein
levels of both TCF4 and -catenin were considerably reduced following
RNAi, accompanied by a decreased TOP/FOP reporter activity. Importantly,
silencing of both proteins led to a pronounced radiosensitization in
SW837 and SW480 cells. Exogenous stimulation of canonical Wnt signaling
in RPE cells using Wnt-3a resulted in an increased Axin2 expression and
an increased TOP/FOP reporter activity. Importantly, however, this
activation of canonical Wnt signaling was associated with significant
increase in resistance to radiation therapy.Conclusion: TCF4 was found to
be over-expressed in resistant rectal carcinomas, and its RNAi-mediated
silencing caused a significant radiosensitization. To determine whether
this effect was dependent on canonical Wnt signaling, we inhibited
-catenin, another key factor of this pathway and binding partner of TCF4,
and observed a similar sensitization to radiation therapy. Follow-up
experiments show that external stimulation of canonical Wnt signaling
confers radiation resistance in normal cells. These data suggest that
targeting canonical Wnt signaling may represent a potential therapeutic
strategy for sensitizing tumor cells to radiation. In vivo studies are
ongoing to validate these results.

