Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cross-species array comparative genomic hybridization identifies
novel driver genes in embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma.


Human cancers are often associated with large chromosomal amplifications
and deletions comprising megabases of sequence - making it challenging to
identify drivers of cancer growth and progression. To bypass this
obstacle, we have applied array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH)
to zebrafish embryonal rhabdomyosaroma (ERMS) and utilized cross-species
comparison to identify novel collaborating oncogenes important to human
disease. Because zebrafish ERMS predominantly contain small, focal
amplifications that span only 50-100kb of sequence, candidate oncogenes
were easily identified by cross-species comparisons with human ERMS.
Remarkably, 16 of 19 chromosomal gains identified in zebrafish ERMS also
exhibited focal, copy gains in human disease. Candidate oncogenes found
in these regions were also over-expressed in a majority of human ERMS as
assessed by microarray gene expression analysis and immunohistochemical
stain of primary human ERMS and normal fetal muscle. siRNA and shRNA
knockdown studies identified important roles for candidate ocogenes in
regulating human ERMS growth. For example, knockdown of Cyclin D2,
Homeobox Protein C6, and Plexin A1 (PLXNA1) resulted in reduced
proliferation in both human RD and SMS-CTR cell lines. PLXNA1 knockdown
also resulted in impaired migratory potential in scratch and transwell
migration assays. Moreover, PLXNA1 loss resulted in increased numbers of
terminally-differentiated myosin-expressing myocytes, suggesting that
dysregulated expression of PLXNA1 plays a key role in the differentiation
arrest of human ERMS. Finally, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
was also amplified and over-expressed in a subset of human and zebrafish
ERMS. Chemical inhibition of VEGF in ERMS-bearing zebrafish led to
significantly reduced tumor growth which was associated with decreased
tumor neovascularization. Analysis of human microarray gene expression
data revealed that increased VEGFA expression correlated with poor
clinical outcome in patients with ERMS independent of tumor grade and
stage, indicating high VEGFA expression as an independent prognostic
indicator and implicating inhibitors of the VEGF pathway as a promising
therapy for improving patient survival. In total, our results demonstrate
the utility of aCGH and cross-species comparisons to rapidly identify
candidate genes essential for the pathogenesis of human cancer.

