Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular phenotype of an epithelial-like subset of the NCI-60
human tumor cell lines and relevance to gene expression patterns in TCGA
normal breast and breast cancer tissue samples.


Better cancer therapy is likely to come from molecular characterization
of individual patients tumors that will permit selection and development
of tailored therapies. To that end, many bioinformatic studies have been
carried out on human tumor cell lines and tissue samples. Large gene
expression databases have become available for the National Cancer
institute's 60 human tumor cell lines (NCI-60) and for normal breast and
breast cancer tissue samples from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Research
Network. We aimed to infer functional relationships among
expression-correlated genes based on these data and on published
information about molecular interactions. In addition, we asked how or to
what extent inferences based on cell line data may apply to human tissue
samples.Among the best-defined cell phenotypes are those of epithelia.
Epithelial cells have polarity that distinguishes an apical region,
directed towards a surface or lumen, from a basolateral region resting on
a connective tissue basement membrane. Polarity is created by transport
of appropriate molecular components as cargo in vesicles that are moved
by motor proteins along cytoskeletal tracks to the relevant cell regions.
Epithelial polarity is maintained by molecular structures, such as tight
junctions, that prevent back-flow between the apical and basolateral
surfaces of the cell.We initially defined an epithelial-like phenotype on
the basis of expression of genes coding for tight junction and adherence
junction proteins and their family members. Among the NCI-60, we found 11
cell lines that express a mutually correlated subset of those genes. The
relevant cell lines were breast cancer MCF7 and T47D; colon cancer
COLO205, HCC_2998, HCT_116, HCT_15, HT29, and KM12; lung cancer
NCI_H322M; and ovary cancer OVCAR_3 and OVCAR_4; we call these the NCI-60
epithelial consensus (NEC) cell lines. The following tight junction genes
were selectively expressed in the NEC cell lines: TJP3, CLDN3, CLDN4,
CLDN7, OCLN, MARVELD2, and MARVELD3. Highly correlated with these genes
was the adherence junction gene CDH1/E-cadherin (as expected).We then
assembled an expanded list of 75 genes that were selectively expressed in
the NEC cell lines, and found that many of them function in the
epithelia-specific processes summarized above.With some notable
exceptions, the tight junction and adherence junction genes co-expressed
in the NEC cell lines were also co-expressed in the normal breast and
breast cancer tissue samples. An unexpected finding was that some of the
normal breast tissue samples expressed a different set of tight junction
family genes.This work delineates similarities and differences between
epithelial-like NCI-60 cell lines and TCGA breast tissue samples in
regard to the expression of functionally defined genes.

