Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stem cell and neuroendocrine cell phenotypes of normal and
malignant colonic cells.


In the development of colorectal cancer (CRC), stem cell (SC)
overpopulation underlies tumor initiation and progression, but the
underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. We hypothesized that
neuroendocrine cells (NE) cells play a key role in maintaining the SC
population in the normal colon and, aberrant signaling from NE cells
contributes to tumor initiation and increased stemness. Indeed, NE cells
and SCs reside in close proximity to each other in the SC niche at the
bottom of the normal human colonic crypt. Therefore, it seems feasible
that the communication between NE cells and SCs is crucial to normal
crypt homeostasis and that dysregulation of the interactions between the
two cell types could lead to SC overpopulation during cancer progression.
Our studies on human colonic tissues show that in normal crypts, most
cells (>80%) expressing the colonic SC marker ALDH1 co-express NE markers
such as chromogranin-A (CGA). Neither ALDH1+ nor CGA+ cells co-stained
for markers for proliferating cells. Thus, in normal crypts, many ALDH1+
cells have NE characteristics (likely representing progenitor NE cells).
In APC mutant crypts, the size of the undifferentiated SC population
(ALDH+/CGA-) progressively increased relative to the size of the NEC
population (both ALDH1+/CGA+ and ALDH1-/CGA+) during the stepwise
progression to cancer. The distributions of these populations also
extended father up the crypt (outside the normal SC niche). To evaluate
how NE factors might regulate SCs, we did further studies to assess how
NE factors might be regulating SCs. Because we found, by flow cytometric
analysis, that various CRC cell lines (COL0320, DiFi, LoVo, SW480, HCT116
& HT29) each maintains a unique proportion of SCs and NE cells over time,
we surmised these proportions are maintained constant through feedback
mechanisms involving SC and NEC subpopulations. When these cell lines
were induced to differentiate along the NE lineage upon retinoid
treatment, they showed a decrease in the proportion of ALDEFLUOR+ cells
and an increase in NE cell differentiation and enhanced collagen IV
production. Retinoid treatment to induce NE differentiation also
decreased the sphere-forming ability in terms of the number and sizes of
spheres that were formed from each cell line. Taken together, our
findings indicate that: (1) NE factors contribute to colonic SC
regulation via an autocrine or paracrine mechanism in normal colon, and
(2) dysregulation of these mechanisms contributes to colon cancer
development.

