Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSK690693 enhances Celecoxib mediated apoptosis by an Akt mediated
pathway in colon cancer.


Background: Overexpression and activation of Akt are often associated
with resistance of tumor towards chemotherapy. Celecoxib a selective
Cox-2 inhibitor is found to prevent malignancies by inhibiting Cox-2 and
in a lower extent PI3K-Akt signaling pathway. However, long-term
administration of Celecoxib at high doses is associated with
gastrointestinal and cardiovascular side effects. GSK690693 is a potent
and selective, ATP-competitive, pan-Akt kinase inhibitor currently in
clinical development for patients with various malignancies. The aim of
our study is to investigate the combinatorial effects of Celecoxib and
GSK690693 by means of increased chemo preventive measure by down
regulation of Akt pathway with induction of apoptosis and to minimize
toxicity for prevention of colorectal cancer.Material and Methods: Cell
viability and cell proliferation was measured by MTT assay and FACS
respectively. The morphology analysis in combined or individual drug
treated cells was assessed by DAPI staining and TUNEL Assay. Western blot
experiments were done to check the expression profile of apoptotic
proteins and degree of phosphorylation of Akt and downstream targets.
Cells were transfected with Akt-SiRNA with Lipofectamine and FACS was
performed on both single and combined drugs treated cells.Results:
Combination of Celecoxib and GSK690693 showed an enhanced cytotoxicity on
HT29 and HCT116 cell lines after drug treatment. FACS analysis showed
substantial sub G0/ G1 accumulation of cells indicating apoptosis which
is supported by facts like characteristic morphological changes (cell
shrinkage and nuclear fragmentation) and increase in TUNEL positive
cells. The induction of apoptosis caused down regulation of anti
apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL, increase in proapoptotic proteins
BAX and Caspase-3 mediated poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage. Western
blot analysis showed that the combined drug treatment augmented
suppression of pAKT and its downstream targets. Down regulation of AKT
with Akt SiRNA induced apoptosis and caused subG0/G1 peak in combined
drug treated sample than vector treated sample.Discussion: Here we
demonstrated that the extent of celecoxib induced apoptosis can be
enhanced by combinatorial approach involving GSK690693 which targets Akt.
Besides it also reduces the high dose of celecoxib through an Akt
mediated pathway and thereby decreases the side effects of celecoxib,
thus potentially augmenting the therapeutic benefit of combining
celecoxib and GSK690693 towards treatment of colon cancer.Citation
Format: Ipsita Pal, Mahitosh Mandal, Mandal et al. GSK690693 enhances
Celecoxib mediated apoptosis by an Akt mediated pathway in colon cancer.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1044.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1044

