Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression signature of malignant astrocytomas and its
association with MGMT promoter methylation status.


Background: MGMT promoter methylation has been reported as a predictive
marker, not only for response to temozolomide (TMZ), but also for the
longer survival of the patients with malignant astrocytomas (MAs)
regardless of treatment with TMZ. This led us to hypothesize that
methylation status of MGMT in MAs could somehow associate with epigenetic
modification of other cancer-related gene promoters resulting in
alterations of gene expression profiles and acquisition of therapy-
sensitive characters. In this study, to elucidate the molecular
characteristics that contribute to chemosensitivity and prognosis in MAs,
we conducted gene expression profiling of the tumors with or without MGMT
promoter methylation.Materials and Methods: Forty-seven MAs including 5
anaplastic astrocytomas and 42 glioblastomas were enrolled in this study.
Methylation status of MGMT gene promoter was evaluated by
methylation-specific PCR and subsequent pyrosequencing. Gene expression
profile was analyzed using 13,000 genes-cDNA microarray which was
developed in our institute. Differentially expressed genes between
MGMT-methylated and -unmethylated cases were picked up by statistical
analysis (Wilcoxon test).Results: MGMT promoter methylation was found in
26 out of 47 cases. Among the 13,000 genes examined, 163 genes
demonstrated statistically significant difference in expression between
MGMT-methylated and -unmethylated cases. 22 genes demonstrated lower
expression in MGMT-methylated cases, while the remaining 141 genes showed
higher expression in methylated cases. When we classify the cases into
two groups according to the expression profiles of these 163 genes,
survival of the patients were clearly divided (median survival: 18.9m vs.
9.7m, p=0.039). Annotation analysis indicated that the 22 genes with
lower expression in MGMT-methylated tumors include those which actively
participate in tumor progression, invasion and metastasis, and one of
these showed a significant prognostic power in 47 MAs examined (p=0.049).
Validation of methylation status of these gene promoters is
underway.Conclusion: We identified a gene expression signature strongly
correlated with MGMT methylation in MAs, which might contribute to
predict chemosensitivity of tumors as well as prognosis of the patients
with MA in combination of MGMT methylation.

