Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clusterin downregulation sensitize prostate cancer cells to taxane
by modulating mitosis.


Clusterin (CLU) is a stress-activated molecular chaperone closely linked
to treatment resistance and cancer progression. CLU is a novel
therapeutic anti-cancer target with both preclinical and phase II
clinical proof of concept using the antisense OGX-011 inhibitor; phase
III clinical trials of combination docetaxel + OGX-011 are
underway.Cytotoxic chemotherapy drugs like taxane are believed to gain
selectivity by targeting cells that are in mitosis. When cultured cancer
cells are treated with taxane, only cells that enter mitosis are killed
or rendered senescent. Quiescent cells or cycling cells that do not reach
mitosis during drug exposure are spared. In this sense, sentisizing cells
to taxane can occur through mitosis regulation.In this study, we show
that CLU downregulation enhances cytotoxicity of the new generation
taxane cabazitaxol. Treatment of PC3 human prostate cancer cells with
cabazitaxol induces G2/M arrest followed by mitotic death. Downregulation
of CLU accelerated these G2/M associated events and resulted in reduced
cabazitaxol EC50 and clonogenic survival upon cabazitaxol treatment. To
investigate the mechanisms that allow CLU deficient cells to respond to
taxane and examine whether this response is linked to a role of CLU in
the control of cell cycle progression, we knocked down CLU expression in
PC3 and LNCaP cells and found an accumulation of cells in G2/M phase and
a reduction in cell growth. The screening of different cell cycle
effectors after CLU downregulation in different cell lines and xenografts
shows that CLU specifically regulates Cdc25C, while the two other Cdc25
isoforms, A and B, are not affected. Interestingly Cdc25C is a key
regulator of mitosis initiation and exit. Importantly, we show that
Cdc25C and CLU expression negatively correlate in prostate cancer cell
lines, xenografts and human biopsies. When CLU is down regulated, Cdc25C
transcription increased resulting in protein accumulation; as a
consequence, cells showed G2/M blockage and slower mitotic progression.
Accordingly, we suggest that down regulation of CLU alters sensitivity to
taxane by modulating exit from mitosis, which is controlled by Cdc25C.

