Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional regulation of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
(nAChRs) by E2F family transcription factors in non-small cell lung
cancer.


Nicotine, the addictive component of cigarette smoke, has been shown to
promote cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and angiogenesis in
multiple cancer types. Earlier studies from our lab had shown that
nicotine can promote the growth and metastasis of non-small cell lung
carcinoma (NSCLC) in mouse models. While a broad range of nAChRs have
been found to be expressed on NSCLC cell lines, nicotine-mediated
proliferation, invasion, and migration are facilitated predominantly
through the 7 subunit. Consistent with this, 7 nAChR levels are elevated
in NSCLC in mice that were administered nicotine. Stimulation of 7 nAChR
with nicotine has been reported to activate Src, resulting in
inactivation of the retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor suppressor protein and
enhancing E2F-mediated transcription. The Rb-E2F transcriptional
regulation pathway is known to induce genes involved in cell cycle
progression, angiogenesis, and metastasis implicating it in tumor
survival and progression. Given this background, attempts were made to
elucidate whether nAChR genes are regulated by the Rb-E2F pathway.
Analysis of a 2000bp promoter region of the human 7 gene revealed the
presence of multiple E2F binding sites. Transient transfection
experiments showed 7 to be responsive to multiple E2Fs. E2F1 was found to
associate with the 7 promoter via chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
Depletion of E2F genes via small interfering RNA demonstrated a
differential regulation of 7 by E2F family members 1-5. These results
raise the possibility that exposure to nicotine stimulates the 7
signaling cascade resulting in elevated E2F1-mediated activation of
various proliferative promoters, including that of 7 itself in a positive
feedback mechanism. In addition to the 7 nAChR, recent genome wide
association studies (GWAS) have identified a susceptibility locus for
human lung cancer at 15q25.1 which encodes for nAChR subunits 3 and 5.
Promoter analysis has revealed that both 3 and 5 have multiple potential
E2F binding sites, as well. Preliminary knock down of E2F family members
via small interfering RNA has suggested these subunits may also be
differentially regulated by the E2F family of transcription factors.
Further studies are under way to elucidate the role of E2F in the
regulation of nAChR 3 and 5, and how this impacts nicotine signaling as
well as growth and progression of NSCLC.

