Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The partial tandem duplication of Mll (Mll PTD) is a
gain-of-function in the absence of Mll wildtype (Mll WT) in adult mouse
hematopoiesis.


Cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia (CN AML) patients with a
MLL PTD have a poor prognosis compared to CN AML patients with MLL WT. We
previously reported that the MLL WT gene in MLL PTD+ CN AML is
epigenetically silenced. To investigate in vivo significance of the MLL
PTD in the absence of MLL WT on hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis, we
generated homozygous MllPTD/PTD and hemizygous MllPTD/- mice. These mice
died in utero or as neonates, respectively, precluding further study on
adult hematopioesis and leukemogenesis. In the current study, we crossed
MllPTD/WT mice with Mll-conditional knock-out (cKO) animals to produce
MllPTD/cKO mice. Like the MllPTD/WT mice, the MllPTD/cKO mice survive to
adulthood, as both models express Mll WT and PTD. As previously reported
by Jude et al, (Cell Stem Cell, 2007) Cre activation in hematopoietic
cells of mice carrying the Mll cKO allele resulted in an intragenic
deletion in Mll (deltaN allele) that when expressed, the protein was
unable to translocate to the nucleus and thereby unable to exert normal
Mll function. DNA PCR confirmed the correct MllPTD/deltaN genotype was
generated. MlldeltaN/deltaN mice develop bone marrow (BM) failure (marked
hypocellularity) at a median of 18 days post-Cre activation.
Comparatively, MllPTD/deltaN mice (n=5) survived beyond 52 weeks post-Cre
activation (PCytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia (CN AML)
patients with a MLL PTD have a poor prognosis compared to CN AML patients
with MLL WT. We previously reported that the MLL WT gene in MLL PTD+ CN
AML is epigenetically silenced. To investigate in vivo significance of
the MLL PTD in the absence of MLL WT on hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis,
we generated homozygous MllPTD/PTD and hemizygous MllPTD/- mice. These
mice died in utero or as neonates, respectively, precluding further study
on adult hematopioesis and leukemogenesis. In the current study, we
crossed MllPTD/WT mice with Mll-conditional knock-out (cKO) animals to
produce MllPTD/cKO mice. Like the MllPTD/WT mice, the MllPTD/cKO mice
survive to adulthood, as both models express Mll WT and PTD. As
previously reported by Jude et al, (Cell Stem Cell, 2007) Cre activation
in hematopoietic cells of mice carrying the Mll cKO allele resulted in an
intragenic deletion in Mll (deltaN allele) that when expressed, the
protein was unable to translocate to the nucleus and thereby unable to
exert normal Mll function. DNA PCR confirmed the correct MllPTD/deltaN
genotype was generated. MlldeltaN/deltaN mice develop bone marrow (BM)
failure (marked hypocellularity) at a median of 18 days post-Cre
activation. Comparatively, MllPTD/deltaN mice (n=5) survived beyond 52
weeks post-Cre activation (P<0.001), without evidence of BM failure.
Also, at one year, MllPTD/deltaN animals exhibit equivalent white blood
cell counts and hematocrit when compared to MllWT/WT, MllPTD/WT and
MllPTD/cKO controls. To evaluate whether Mll PTD function was maintained
in bone marrow, qRT-PCR analysis of the Mll transcriptional target Hoxa9
at 12 days post-Cre activation revealed a 20-fold reduction in Hoxa9 mRNA
levels in MlldeltaN/deltaN animals and 4-5 fold increase in MllPTD/deltaN
and MllPTD/cKO BM (P=0.025) compared to WT BM. MllPTD/cKO animals, with
two functional copies of Mll, had nearly equivalent overexpression of
HoxA9 as seen in MllPTD/deltaN mice that maintain only one functional
copy of Mll, supporting our previous hypothesis that the Mll PTD acts as
a gain-of-function mutation. In conclusion, these data demonstrate for
the first time that Mll PTD alone can support adult hematopoiesis. In
conclusion, these data demonstrate for the first time that Mll PTD alone
can support adult hematopoiesis and even though Hoxa9 is upregulated,
another oncogene is required for leukemogenesis. Absence of Mll WT is not
sufficient to promote acute leukemogenesis in Mll PTD+ mice, but appears
to be a contributory factor. We recently reported that MllPTD/WT mice
crossed with Flt3ITD/WT mice, the latter of which also do not develop AML
(Lee et al. Cancer Cell, 2006), generated double mutant mice that do
develop AML. Leukemic blasts from these mice exhibit a reduction in Mll
WT expression (Zorko et al, Blood, 2012), recapitulating what is seen in
human MLL PTD+ CN AML.

