Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stem-like cell characteristics of cancer spheroids grown in a
microfabricated cell array three-dimensional culture system Cell-ableTM
Oncology.


Recently, the cell biology field has come to appreciate the dissimilarity
between two- (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) environments in which cells
routinely operate in vivo. Efficacy of most anti-cancer drugs have been
evaluated in 2D environment but it must be desirable to evaluate it in 3D
environment. We developed a novel 3D cell culture system named
Cell-ableTM Oncology utilizing photo-sensitive materials that change to
hydro-gel after UV irradiation and the optimized molecular design not to
allow the cells adhere to the hydro-gel. In multi-well plates, the
Cell-ableTM Oncology has type I collagen-coated cell-attaching areas on
the each well surface, which are circle in 100 m diameter and arrayed in
every direction at 100 m interval. Most cancer cells are able to attach
these circles and grow to form spheroids of uniform size on the
Cell-ableTM Oncology. In this study, we investigated the stem-like cell
phenotypes of cancer spheroids formed on the Cell-ableTM Oncology in
comparison with that of the 2D monolayer cells. Various cancer cell lines
and patient-derived primary cancer cells proliferated and formed
spheroids on the Cell-ableTM Oncology in serum-containing or serum-free
media. In contrast to the 2D monolayer cells, the inside of the spheroids
formed on the Cell-ableTM Oncology was hypoxic condition like in vivo
tumor tissues in patients. The spheroids grown on the Cell-ableTM
Oncology showed chemo-resistance against conventional chemotherapy,
gemcitabine and paclitaxel compared with cells grown on collagen-coated
2D plates. The chemo-resistance of the spheroid cells was associated with
high population of stem-kike cells (CD44high/CD24low) and high expression
of mRNA for a stem cell marker, NANOG and an ABC transporter ABCG2. The
combination of the Cell-ableTM Oncology and serum-free media showed the
highest population of stem-like cells. These results indicate that the
spheroids characterized by 3D structure formed on the ECM-coated surface
and the hypoxic condition confer enriched the cancer stem-like cells.
Thus, the spheroids on the Cell-ableTM Oncology could be suitable for
research and development of drugs targeting cancer stem cells. The
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic studies using the cancer stem
cell-rich spheroids could provide meaningful information relevant to
clinical conditions.

