Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostaglandin E2 promotes ultraviolet radiation-induced
suppression of immune system in mice via DNA hypermethylation.


Excessive exposure of skin to solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation is known
to suppress the immune system and UV-induced immunosuppression has been
implicated in the promotion of the risk of skin cancer. This notion is
further verified by the fact that chronically immune-suppressed patients
who live in regions of intense sun exposure have an exceptionally high
rate of skin cancer. To identify the molecular targets responsible for
UV-induced immunosuppression, further studies were conducted. We have
found that exposure of the C3H/HeN mouse skin with UV radiation (150
mJ/cm2) for 4 consecutive days resulted in suppression of contact
hypersensitivity (CHS) response, which is considered to be a prototypic
of T-cell mediated immune response, and suppression of CHS was associated
with the enhancement in the expression levels of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
and prostaglandin (PG) E2 production. Topical treatment of mice with
celecoxib (500 g) or indomethacin (50 g), inhibitors of COX-2, or AH6809
(25 g), an antagonist of PGE2, inhibits UV radiation-induced suppression
of CHS. The mice deficient in COX-2 on C3H/HeN background are resistant
to UV-induced suppression of CHS response to a contact sensitizer.
Exposure of C3H/HeN mice with UVB radiation (150 mJ/cm2) for 4
consecutive days resulted in DNA hypermethylation, increase in DNA
methyltransferase (Dnmt) activity, and elevated levels of Dnmt1, Dnmt3a
and Dnmt3b in epidermal skin samples, while treatment of mice with PGE2
antagonist or indomethacin before and during UVB exposure down-regulated
the levels of DNA methylation as well as Dnmt activity compared to the
mice which were not treated with PGE2 antagonist or indomethacin.
Treatment of UV exposed COX-2-deficient mice with PGE2 (150 g in
100l/mouse/day) results in UV-induced suppression of CHS, increase in DNA
methylation, Dnmt activity and the levels of Dnmt1, Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b
were elevated in the skin. Treatment of C3H/HeN mice with
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dc, 1.0 mg/kg body weight, i.p.), a DNA
demethylating agent or an inhibitor of DNA methylation, 1 h before each
exposure of UV irradiation resulted in inhibition of UVB-induced
suppression of CHS which was associated with the reduction in Dnmt
activity, global DNA methylation and reduced levels of Dnmt1, Dnmt3a and
Dnmt3b proteins compared to the mice which were not treated with 5-aza-dc
but exposed to UV. Further, treatment of 5-aza-dc reversed the effect of
PGE2 on UV-induced suppression of CHS response in COX-2-deficient mice.
These findings uncover a previously unrecognized role of PGE2 in the
promotion of UVB-induced suppression of CHS response and that it is
mediated through DNA methylation.

