Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PSMA-specific anti-tumor activity of the targeted-tubulysin
conjugate, EC1169.


Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) is a biomarker that is
overexpressed on prostate cancer, and it's also present on the
neovasculature within many non-prostate solid tumors. We previously
reported on EC0652, a 99mTc-labeled small molecule that specifically
binds to PSMA-positive tumors and is currently being clinically evaluated
for diagnostic imaging applications. Herein, we report on the
construction and biological testing of novel tubulysin B-containing,
companion therapeutic agents for the treatment of PSMA-expressing cancer.
One of these compounds, EC1169, recently emerged as a lead candidate for
preclinical development. This water-soluble conjugate was shown to have
high affinity for PSMA-positive cells. When tested in vitro, EC1169 was
found to inhibit the growth of PSMA-positive cells, but it displayed no
activity against PSMA-negative cells. Brief treatment of nude mice
bearing PSMA-positive LNCaP human xenografts with EC1169 led to complete
remissions in 5/7 mice, and cures (i.e. tumor free >90 days post
implantation) in 2/7 mice. Furthermore, this activity occurred in the
absence of weight loss or major organ tissue degeneration. In contrast,
the non-targeted tubulysin B drug proved to be inactive against the LNCaP
tumor model when administered at doses near to or greater than the
maximum tolerated level. PSMA-negative KB tumors did not appreciably
respond to EC1169 therapy, thereby confirming this compound's targeted
specificity for PSMA-expressing cells. Finally, treatment of
LNCaP-bearing mice with docetaxel (the most active chemotherapeutic agent
approved for prostate cancer), was found to produce only modest
anti-tumor activity (2/4 partial responses, 1/4 cures), and this outcome
was also associated with severe weight loss (18%). Taken together, these
results strongly indicate that PSMA-positive tumors may be more
effectively treated using highly potent, PSMA-targeted small-molecule
drug conjugates using regimens that do not cause unwanted toxicity.

