Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of a long non-coding RNA on epigenetic, genetic and
phenotypic changes in Ewing sarcoma.


Background: Ewing sarcoma is a highly invasive pediatric bone malignancy
with a 30% 5-year survival rate for patients with metastatic disease. The
EWS-FLI1 fusion gene is detected in 90% of these cases, and functions as
a transcription factor that regulates oncogenesis-related gene
expression. The functions of EWS-FLI1 and other oncogenes have been
explored in the past to detect potential therapeutic targets. With a
similar aim, this study looks into the rapidly evolving non-coding genome
of Ewing sarcoma. Methods: Total RNA from 500 tissues including over 100
primary Ewing, other cancers, normal tissues, and modified Ewing cell
lines were run on Affymetrix Human Exon microarrays. RNA-seq data was
generated on a pair of primary and metastatic Ewing cell lines. Data were
analyzed using Genetrix, Partek, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) and
iReport. Functional studies on Ewing cell lines were performed using
various RNAi techniques and viral transductions followed by quantitative
PCR. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was performed to detect direct
interactions of the RNA. Tail vein injection model was developed to study
tumor metastasis model in mice. Results: Expression profiling showed that
many unannotated transcripts were more significantly associated with
Ewing sarcoma than coding genes. Molecular characterization of one such
transcript, AK057037, identified it as a multi-exonic, multivariant,
polyadenylated, long non-coding RNA (lncRNA). It was not expressed in
other tumors or normal adult tissue and was poorly conserved across
various vertebrates and lower organisms. The chimeric oncoprotein,
EWS-FLI1, directly regulated AK057037 expression by binding to the GGAA
microsatellite region in its promoter. Decrease in the lncRNA expression
significantly reduced invasive capability of Ewing cells while an
increase in expression increased anchorage independence. RNA-seq analysis
showed increased transcriptional activity in the metastatic cell line.
Pathway analysis on expression profiling data on the AK057037-knockdown
cells detected involvement of cellular adhesion and movement pathways. In
vivo studies using AK057037-overexpressing cells showed increased tumor
cell engraftment and growth in the mice liver. ChIP studies showed that
AK057037 was bound to Ezh2, a methyltransferase in the polycomb repressor
complex 2 (PRC2). ChIP assays using histone antibodies showed changes in
methylation pattern in promoter regions of genes affected by the lncRNA
knockdown. Conclusion: AK057037, a lncRNA is significantly upregulated in
Ewing sarcoma. Its direct regulation by EWS-FLI1 drives its function as
an oncogene and promotes metastasis of the tumor cells, thus helping with
the tumor pathogenesis. Its association with the PRC2 complex and
perturbation of methylation status of its downstream effectors suggest
chromatin modifying functions of AK057037.

