Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MAGI3-Akt3, a novel fusion protein in the PI 3-K pathway in cancer.


Aberrant activation of the PI3-K/Akt pathway is found in approximately
70% of breast cancers. We recently identified a recurrent rearrangement
that produces an in-frame fusion protein containing Akt3 and the
scaffolding protein MAGI3 (1). MAGI3-Akt3 is the first fusion protein
that has been identified in the PI 3-K pathway. We propose that
MAGI3-Akt3 is a novel oncogene in breast cancer and that the oncogenic
activity of the fusion protein results from disruption of the PI 3-K/Akt
pathway. Within the fusion, Akt3 has a disrupted PH domain prior to
glutamate 17 (E17). As a result the fusion protein is constitutively
phosphorylated in the Akt3 kinase domain and expression of MAGI3-Akt3 in
breast cancer cells enhances Akt substrate phosphorylation. Constitutive
MAGI3-Akt3 kinase activity can be inhibited by ATP-competitive small
molecule Akt inhibitors but is resistant to the allosteric Akt inhibitor
MK2206 which is currently in phase II clinical trials. Our results
indicate that ATP competitive Akt inhibitors should be evaluated in
clinical trials for the treatment of fusion-positive breast cancers.The
fusion protein also contains a severely truncated portion of the
scaffolding protein MAGI3. In particular, the fusion lacks the second PDZ
domain of MAGI3 that has been reported to bind to PTEN and be required
for the inhibitory effect of PTEN on PI 3-K pathway activity. We have
demonstrated that disruption of MAGI3 in breast cancer cell lines does
indeed promote PI 3-K pathway hyperactivity in a PTEN-dependent manner.
In addition, the fusion lacks the fifth PDZ domain of MAGI3 and our
studies indicate that this disrupts the interaction of MAGI3 with PHLPP2,
a phosphatase that directly dephosphorylates Akt at pS473.Our studies
therefore demonstrate that the MAGI3-Akt3 translocation significantly
perturbs PI 3-K pathway activity via activation of an oncogene (Akt3) and
dysregulation of two tumor suppressors (PTEN and PHLPP2). We are
currently continuing studies to elucidate the oncogenic mechanism(s) of
MAGI3-Akt3 in breast cancer.

