Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analysis of clear cell renal cell carcinoma.


Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most common form of adult
kidney cancer. The most frequent genetic event in the evolution of ccRCC
is inactivation of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene.
Recent studies have revealed frequent mutations of PBRM1 as well as other
epigenetic regulators including BAP1, SETD2 and KDM5C, but their impact
on therapeutics remains unclear. In this study, to obtain a better
understanding of molecular pathogenesis of ccRCC, we performed an
integrated genetic study of ccRCC including whole exome sequencing, copy
number analysis as well as transcriptome and methylome analysis. A total
of 106 paired specimens were analyzed by massively parallel sequencing of
whole exomes (Agilent SureSelect, Illumina HiSeq2000) and SNP array-based
copy number analysis (Affymetrix 250K array) as well as gene expression
(Agilent Human Gene Expression 4x44k v2) and methylation (Illumina
Infinium 450K) profiling and RNA sequencing (Illumina HiSeq2000). On
average, 48.8 somatic mutations per sample were identified in whole exome
analysis, in which VHL mutations were most frequent. PBRM1, BAP1 and
SETD2 were also recurrently mutated and were further analyzed in 240
cases together with an additional 80 genes involved in chromatin
regulation. PBRM1 mutations were found in 42% of the cases, while BAP1
and SETD2 were mutated in 12% and 10%, respectively. BAP1 mutations
correlated with poor prognosis and SETD2 mutation was associated with the
risk for metastatic diseases. Pathway analysis revealed frequent
mutations of genes involved in mRNA processing. Among them, mutations of
genes involved in 3 splice site recognition, which were frequently
mutated in MDS, were rare. Most of them were involved in release of
intron, 3-end processing or export to cytoplasm. In expression analysis,
tumors were clustered into two clusters known as ccA and ccB, in which
the ccA type was characterized by overexpressed genes involved in
angiogenesis, whereas expression of genes in cell cycle regulators were a
prominent feature in the ccB type tumors. In methylome analysis, 15
samples were clustered into hypermethylated subtype where all cases were
included in the ccB type and were associated with poor prognosis.
Homeobox genes were differently methylated in hypermethylated subtype
which indicate deregulation of polycomb mediated gene silencing induce
high-grade ccRCC. RUNX1 and SRPX2 were differently methylated between ccA
type and ccB type, which may affect the differences of expression profile
between two subtypes. In RNA sequencing, known fusion gene involving TFE3
and NONO was detected in single case. In total, 34 fusion genes were
detected in 23 samples, although no recurrent fusion genes have been
identified. Our results indicate that genomic analyses are useful for
classification, prognostic prediction and development of treatment
strategy in ccRCC.

