Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide methylation analysis of prostate tissues reveals
global methylation patterns of prostate cancer.


Altered genome methylation is a hallmark of human malignancies. To
investigate the global methylation profile of prostate cancer,
high-throughput analysis of concordant methylation and gene expression
events was carried out for 124 human prostate specimens, including
prostate cancer (T), normal adjacent to tumor (AT), and organ donor (OD).
Methylated DNA in genomic DNA was immunoprecipitated with
anti-methylcytidine antibodies, amplified by adaptor-specific priming
PCR, and detected by Affymetrix human whole genome SNP 6.0 chips.
Pair-wise analyses of methylation-enriched DNA, along with the matched
genome copy number analysis of the same samples, were performed to
determine the differential DNA methylation profiles of the T, AT and OD
samples. A total of 34,413 methylated genome segments were identified.
Among these, 11,481 CpG islands were found in the promoter and exon 1
regions of 9,295 genes. Seven-thousand-six-hundred-forty-one genes were
found to be methylated frequently across the OD, AT and T samples, while
239 genes were found to be differentially methylated in only T and 785
genes were methylated in both AT and T but not OD. Genes with promoter
methylation and concordant suppressed expression were identified by the
pair analyses of T/OD, AT/OD, and T/AT. Pathway analysis suggested that
many of the methylated genes in T and AT had cell growth and mitogenic
functions. Classification analysis of the differentially methylated genes
in T or OD produced a specificity of 89.4% and a sensitivity of 85.7%.
The T and AT groups, on the other hand, were only slightly separated by
the prediction analysis, indicating a strong field effect. A gene
methylation prediction model was developed using the methylation status
of 20 genes, and was shown to predict prostate cancer relapse with a
sensitivity of 80.0% and a specificity of 85.0%. Collectively, these
results suggest methylation patterns may be useful predictive markers of
prostate cancer clinical outcomes.Citation Format: Jian-Hua Luo, Ying
Ding, Rui Chen, George K. Michalopoulos, Joel B. Nelson, George C. Tseng,
Yan P. Yu. Genome-wide methylation analysis of prostate tissues reveals
global methylation patterns of prostate cancer. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5373.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5373

