Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A combination trial of SGN-75 and everolimus in patients with
CD70-positive metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC).


Background. SGN-75 is an antibody-drug conjugate composed of a humanized
anti-CD70 mAb conjugated to the microtubule-disrupting agent MMAF via a
plasma-stable maleimidocaproyl linker. Upon binding to CD70, SGN-75
internalizes and releases cys-mcMMAF, which binds tubulin and induces
G2/M arrest and apoptosis. In a phase 1, dose-escalation trial of SGN-75
in patients with CD70-positive relapsed/refractory NHL or metastatic RCC,
single-agent activity of SGN-75 was observed in both NHL and RCC patients
(Thompson 2011). In RCC, objective responses were observed with SGN-75
administered IV every 3 weeks at doses of 2 and 3 mg/kg. In vitro synergy
in target cell killing was observed when SGN-75 was combined with mTOR
inhibitors (everoliumus, temsirolimus, or sirolimus), a PI3K/mTOR
inhibitor (NVP-BEZ235), or a dual mTORC1/mTORC2 inhibitor (PP242), as
assessed by the Chou-Talalay method (Lewis 2011). Consistent with this
observation, xenograft experiments using RCC cell lines (786-O and
UM-RC-3) and a patient-derived RCC model (108963P) also demonstrated
significantly improved antitumor activity with the combination of SGN-75
and everolimus compared to either agent alone. Based on the clinical
activity of SGN-75 observed in patients with metastatic RCC and the
synergistic effects observed in combination with mTOR inhibitors in
preclinical models, a phase 1b study of the combination of SGN75 and
everolimus was initiated in patients with CD70-positive metastatic RCC
(ClinicalTrials.gov #NCT01677390).Methods. The primary objective of this
phase 1 study is to evaluate the safety and tolerability, and to identify
the MTD, of SGN-75 in combination with everolimus. Pharmacokinetics,
immunogenicity, and antitumor activity will also be evaluated. Eligible
patients are 18 years old with pathologically confirmed CD70-positive
metastatic RCC on archived or fresh tumor biopsy. Patients must have
previously received treatment with 1 or 2 VEGF-receptor TKIs and must not
have received prior treatment with any mTOR inhibitor. Patients must have
measurable disease as defined in RECIST Version 1.1. SGN-75 will be
administered IV every 3 weeks at protocol-defined doses up to 2 mg/kg in
combination with everolimus 10 mg daily. After establishing the MTD, an
expansion cohort of 15 efficacy-evaluable patients will be enrolled and
treated with a dose at or below the MTD to further characterize the
safety and pharmacokinetic profile and to obtain a preliminary estimate
of antitumor activity of the combination. Patients who achieve CR, PR, or
SD will be eligible to continue treatment in the study until disease
progression. Patients who achieve a response of SD or better and
discontinue study treatment prior to disease progression will be followed
for progression-free survival and all patients will be followed for
overall survival.

