Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing of the PMEPA1 gene, a key regulator of androgen receptor
in prostate cancer.


Introduction and Objectives: PMEPA1 is an androgen inducible gene,
abundantly expressed in prostate epithelial cells and controls androgen
receptor (AR) protein levels by recruiting NEDD4-1 E3 ubiquitin ligase to
degrade AR. PMEPA1 gene expression is either reduced or lost in
two-thirds of prostate cancer (CaP). Methylation of the PMEPA1 promoter
may contribute to PMEPA1 gene silencing. Previously we have shown that AR
binds to an Androgen Responsive Element (ARE) in the proximal promoter of
the PMEPA1 gene in a hormone-dependent manner. These results prompted us
to investigate the methylation status of proximal ARE and intronic SP1
enhancer sites in cell lines and in laser capture micro-dissected (LCM)
human prostate tumors.Methods: Methylation status of the PMEPA1 promoter
was evaluated in AR positive LNCaP, VCaP and LAPC4 cell lines and in
LCM-enriched tumor cells using a previously validated method combining
precipitation of methylated-DNA and methylation-sensitive restriction
enzyme digestion (COMPARE-MS). Expression of PMEPA1 at protein and
transcript levels was assessed by Western blot and Q-PCR, respectively in
response to DNA methyl transferase inhibitor
5-aza-2-deoxycitidine.Results: In a panel of LCM derived genomic DNA
(N=50), PMEPA1 promoter sequences were found to be hypermethylated in 44%
of human prostate tumors (N=22). PMEPA1 methylation was consistent with
loss of PMEPA1 gene expression. PMEPA1 methylation was also detected in
androgen-sensitive VCaP, LNCaP and LAPC4 CaP cell lines. Western blot and
Q-PCR analysis revealed that demethylation restores PMEPA1 expression in
CaP cells. Evaluation of proximal promoter sequences of PMEPA1 suggested
that DNA methylation may directly inhibit AR binding to the proximal ARE
and to the downstream intronic SP1 enhancer site of PMEPA1 gene. PMEPA1
methylation status showed a trend towards association with race, with a
very low (12%) incidence of PMEPA1 methylation in African Americans
subjects.Conclusions: PMEPA1 promoter regulatory sequences are
hypermethylated in prostate cancer cell lines and in primary tumors
suggesting that DNA methylation may contribute to the silencing of PMEPA1
gene in a significant subset of prostate tumors. These data, along with
our earlier observation showing elevation of AR levels in response to the
inhibition of PMEPA1 expression suggest a role of DNA methylation in the
silencing of PMEPA1 gene and AR regulation in human CaP. Overall, reduced
or eliminated PMEPA1 expression is likely to interfere with AR signaling
and/ or other pathways in CaP.Source of Funding: This study was supported
by the NIH grant RO CA106653 to S.S.

