Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of the activity of the bryostatin derivative Merle 23
with that of bryostatin 1 and phorbol ester in mouse epidermal cells.


Tumor promoting phorbol esters, such as PMA, are potent activators of the
PKC pathway. The bryostatins, marine natural products, activate PKCs
similarly to phorbol esters but paradoxically inhibit most phorbol ester
responses, including skin tumor promotion. Because of this inhibitory
activity on the PKC pathway, bryostatin 1 has been the subject of
extensive clinical trials. Serious impediments to clinical development,
however, have been the scarcity of natural supplies coupled with great
structural complexity, making synthesis problematic. Recent synthetic
advances are now yielding simplified structural derivatives. Here, we
compare the behavior of the bryostatin derivative Merle 23 with that of
bryostatin 1 and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) in mouse epidermal
cells. While having similar binding activity on PKC as does bryostatin 1,
Merle 23 behaves like PMA rather than like bryostatin 1 in U937 human
leukemia cells but conversely behaves more like bryostatin 1 in the human
prostate cancer cell line LNCaP. As a first step in assessing whether
Merle 23 possesses or lacks skin tumor promoting activity, its activity
in mouse primary keratinocyte cultures was assessed. PMA induces a
prominent, prolonged morphological response in keratinocytes. Bryostatin
1 induces a similar initial response, which is however very transient.
The morphological response to Merle 23 is more prolonged than for
bryostatin 1 but much shorter than for PMA. For initial activation of PKC
or induction of ERK1/2 phosphorylation, all three ligands show similar
activity. By 24 hrs, however, bryostatin 1 is much more potent for down
regulation of PKC, whereas Merle 23 and PMA are similar. For PKC,
bryostatin 1 at higher concentrations protects PKC from down regulation
whereas Merle 23 does not. Transcriptional responses of various
inflammation genes were monitored by qPCR. PMA causes the greatest
increase in transcript levels for all genes investigated. In many cases
bryostatin 1 induces a smaller response and the response to Merle 23
generally resembles that of bryostatin 1. While these studies are
ongoing, they suggest that Merle 23 largely behaves like bryostatin 1 in
the mouse epidermal cells. Our findings emphasize the important role of
cellular context in determining the pattern of behavior of Merle 23. An
important implication is that different cellular environments reveal
different structure activity relations for bryostatin 1-like behavior.
Finally, our studies raise the possibility that Merle 23, which is
significantly simplified relative to bryostatin 1 in its upper two rings,
may be non-promoting, at least in the mouse skin tumor promotion system.

