Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: XPF, a DNA interstrand crosslink (ICL) repair protein, localizes
to telomeres after DNA ICL damage in normal but not Fanconi anemia cells.


Chromosome instability is a hallmark of the genetic disorder, Fanconi
anemia (FA), characterized by bone marrow failure and increased cancer
susceptibility. The underlying basis for the chromosome instability is
not clear, but a defect in repair of DNA ICLs is hypothesized to be a
primary cause. The chromosome instability, in particular after ICL
formation, suggests telomere dysfunction. We have shown that the
structural protein, nonerythroid spectrin (IISp), is present in the
nucleus of normal human cells where it is critical in repair of DNA ICLs
and maintenance of chromosome stability and that in FA cells levels of
IISp are reduced due to its increased cleavage by a protease, -calpain.
Whether chromosomal instability is also linked to defective repair of
ICLs in telomeric DNA and to telomere dysfunction is an important
question addressed in the present investigation. Studies were
specifically carried out to determine whether XPF, a protein involved in
repair of DNA ICLs, localizes to telomeres after ICL damage and, if so,
whether there is a defect in this association in FA cells and whether
this defect can be corrected when levels of IISp are returned to normal.
Normal and FA complementation group A (FA-A) lymphoblastoid cells were
treated with a DNA ICL agent, mitomycin C (MMC), and analyzed using
immunofluorescence and in situ hybridization (IF-FISH). Cells were probed
with a telomeric PNA probe and antibodies against -spectrin, XPF or two
telomeric proteins, TRFI or TRF2. The results show that in normal cells
XPF localizes to damage-induced foci at telomeres after ICL damage. In
these cells, XPF is present in a diffuse pattern in the nucleus, however,
after treatment with MMC a subset of XPF signals colocalize with the PNA
probe as well as with TRF1 and TRF2 at telomeres. IISp was needed for
this colocalization. In cells in which IISp had been knocked down by
siRNA and which were treated with MMC, XPF was present in the nucleus but
did not colocalize with TRF1 at telomeres. This correlates with the
telomere dysfunction observed, characterized by the presence of telomere
dysfunction-induced foci (TIF), dramatic loss of telomeres, and
production of sister chromatid end-to-end fusions. In FA-A cells, XPF was
also present in the nucleus, but it did not localize to telomeres after
MMC damage; this was accompanied by significant loss of telomere
function. However, when levels of IISp were restored to normal in FA-A
cells by knockdown of -calpain, XPF foci colocalized with TRF2 at
telomeres in MMC treated cells. These results correlate with increased
repair of ICLs and restoration of telomere function and chromosome
stability in these cells. These studies indicate that localization of XPF
to telomeres after ICL damage is important for ICL repair and telomere
function and that a defect in repair of ICLs in telomeres in FA cells may
be an important factor in the chromosome stability observed.

