Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic signatures of melanoma progression and maintenance.


Melanoma is one of the most aggressive human cancers. The worldwide
incidence rate of melanoma has increased during the last decade but with
few FDA approved therapeutic options. Patients with lymph node metastasis
can show highly variable clinical outcomes, from several years disease
free survival after excision of the primary lesion to extremely
aggressive metastatic disease; while patients with distant metastasis
show poor clinical outcome. Outstanding outcomes using target therapies
such as B-RAF V600E inhibitor (Vemurafenib) bring hope for possibility of
melanoma cure. Alternatively, since melanoma acquires resistance to
Vemurafenib, the necessity of searching for other candidates and
simultaneously targeting several pathways for long-term survival is
inevitable. Better understanding of the genomic signatures of melanoma
progression and maintenance provides new opportunities for developing
novel therapeutic targets for successful management of this fatal
disease. In this study, we aim to reveal the complex patterns of distinct
molecular aberrations and mechanisms underlying the progression and
maintenance of melanoma using high-throughput sequencing approaches. Our
hypothesis is that there are genetic changes in melanoma which suggest
the survival of the distant metastasis; these genetic changes include
activated oncogenes and suppressed tumor suppressor genes correlated with
melanoma progression and maintenance. As a proof of principal we
initiated this study with a poor prognosis melanoma patient; a 46 year
old man diagnosed with lymph node metastasis and treated with T-cell
vaccination (TCV), who showed the tumor distant metastasis to lung, 14.8
months after complete lymph node dissection. The availability of primary
cell lines established from both lymph node and lung metastatic tissues
represents a major advantage for the functional validation of individual
candidate genes which may serve as novel targets for cancer therapy.
Integration of copy number with structural variation data showed a great
selection for cell lines generation (derived from lymph node and lung
tumors) and we observed that this selection was for a similar clone
embedded in lymph node and lung metastatic tumors. With this data, we
hypothesized that common sets of events which cut across all samples in
this case identify the core sets of putative oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes which drive this patient's cancer cells. The correlation
of these genes with the cancer phenotype will be addressed.

