Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1) enhances bladder
cancer tumor progression.


Introduction: Bladder cancer (BCa) is among the five most common
malignancies worldwide and has the highest recurrence rate of any tumor
type. BCa biology is poorly understood and early detection remains one of
the most urgent issues in BCa research. Previously we have identified a
preliminary molecular signature of BCa in voided urine samples from BCa
patients. Our results revealed aberrant overexpression of the serine
protease inhibitor (serpin) plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1
(PAI-1), both at the genomic and protein level. Increasing evidence
indicate that elevated levels of PAI-1 correlates to a poor prognosis in
many tumor types including breast, colorectal, gastric, ovarian, and more
recently bladder cancer. PAI-1 has emerged as a potential target for BCa
treatment and the aim of this study is to provide a greater understanding
of its role in bladder cancer progression.Methods: PAI-1 expression
levels in UROtsa (benign urothelial cell), KU7 (low-grade papillary
urothelial cancer cell), and UMUC14 and T24 (high-grade invasive
urothelial cancer cell lines) was tested by real-time PCR (RTPCR) and
Western blot analysis. Secreted PAI-1 levels were measured by ELISA. KU7
stable clones overexpressing PAI-1 was established by transfection of
plasmid DNA encoding human PAI-1. T24 and UMUC14 stable clones with shRNA
knockdown of PAI-1 were established by infection with retroviral
particles. Cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and apoptosis assays
were performed in stable clones.Results: RTPCR analysis revealed an
increase of PAI-1 in T24 and UMUC14 cells (27.9 and 5.2 times,
respectively) while KU7 cells exhibited significantly reduced levels as
compared to the UROtsa control. Similar results were observed for PAI-1
protein concentrations in cell culture supernatants and western blot
analysis. While overexpression of PAI-1 in KU7 cells promoted an increase
in proliferation, migration and invasion, these were significantly
reduced upon inactivation of PAI-1 in T24 and UMUC14 cells stably
expressing shRNA PAI-1. Loss of PAI-1 function also led to a substantial
increase in apoptotic cell death.Conclusions: These results suggest that
PAI-1 overexpression in BCa promotes tumor progression and therapeutic
strategies targeting PAI-1 may serve clinically beneficial
outcomes.Funding provided by research grants from Florida Department of
Health James and Esther King Team Science Award 10KT-01 (CJR) and
National Cancer Institute RO1 CA116161 (SG).

