Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: B7-H3 associated with tumor progression and epigenetic regulatory
activity in cutaneous melanoma.


B7-H3 is a transmembrane glycoprotein and a member of the B7/CD28
immunoglobulin superfamily which plays an important functional role in
tumor surveillance by T-cells. High expression of B7-H3 has been related
to a poor prognosis in some tumor types. Melanoma is the most aggressive
form of skin cancer. B7-H3 expression was evaluated by RT-qPCR and IHC
analysis on individual melanoma specimens and then verified in clinically
annotated melanoma stage III and stage IV metastasis tissue
microarrays(TMA) in a double blind study. B7-H3 mRNA expression was shown
to be significantly increased with stage of melanoma(PB7-H3 is a
transmembrane glycoprotein and a member of the B7/CD28 immunoglobulin
superfamily which plays an important functional role in tumor
surveillance by T-cells. High expression of B7-H3 has been related to a
poor prognosis in some tumor types. Melanoma is the most aggressive form
of skin cancer. B7-H3 expression was evaluated by RT-qPCR and IHC
analysis on individual melanoma specimens and then verified in clinically
annotated melanoma stage III and stage IV metastasis tissue
microarrays(TMA) in a double blind study. B7-H3 mRNA expression was shown
to be significantly increased with stage of melanoma(P<0.0001) and
significantly associated with melanoma-specific survival(MSS) in both
stage III(PB7-H3 is a transmembrane glycoprotein and a member of the
B7/CD28 immunoglobulin superfamily which plays an important functional
role in tumor surveillance by T-cells. High expression of B7-H3 has been
related to a poor prognosis in some tumor types. Melanoma is the most
aggressive form of skin cancer. B7-H3 expression was evaluated by RT-qPCR
and IHC analysis on individual melanoma specimens and then verified in
clinically annotated melanoma stage III and stage IV metastasis tissue
microarrays(TMA) in a double blind study. B7-H3 mRNA expression was shown
to be significantly increased with stage of melanoma(P<0.0001) and
significantly associated with melanoma-specific survival(MSS) in both
stage III(P<0.0001) and stage IV(PB7-H3 is a transmembrane glycoprotein
and a member of the B7/CD28 immunoglobulin superfamily which plays an
important functional role in tumor surveillance by T-cells. High
expression of B7-H3 has been related to a poor prognosis in some tumor
types. Melanoma is the most aggressive form of skin cancer. B7-H3
expression was evaluated by RT-qPCR and IHC analysis on individual
melanoma specimens and then verified in clinically annotated melanoma
stage III and stage IV metastasis tissue microarrays(TMA) in a double
blind study. B7-H3 mRNA expression was shown to be significantly
increased with stage of melanoma(P<0.0001) and significantly associated
with melanoma-specific survival(MSS) in both stage III(P<0.0001) and
stage IV(P<0.012) melanoma patients. B7-H3 expression was related to
migration and invasion of melanoma cells; overexpression B7-H3 increased
migration and invasion while knockdown of B7-H3 reduced cell migration
and invasion. MiR-29c expression was shown to inversely regulate B7-H3.
Furthermore, we demonstrated that B7-H3 expression was related to p-STAT3
expression in melanoma. These results suggest B7-H3 may be a useful
biomarker for melanoma progression and patients outcome.

