Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarkers discovery and racial disparity in hepatitis
C-associated hepatocellular carcinoma.


Cancer health disparities represent a major public health concern in the
US. Even when factors such as socioeconomic status, carcinogen exposure,
and access to care are accounted for, disparities persist in the form of
higher overall incidence rates and worse clinical outcomes for minority
populations than for overall population. A case of point is the racial
disparities in liver cancer-related mortality. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is
the most significant contributing factor in the development of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In the US, African Americans (AAs) have
twice the prevalence of HCV/genotype 1 infection, and develop HCC at more
than twice the rate as Caucasian (CA) counterparts. African Americans
are, however, less likely to respond to interferon-based therapy than
CAs, and have considerably lower likelihood of receiving liver
transplantation. While it is evident that viral infection with HCV is
associated with the development of HCC, there are critical gaps in our
understanding of the biological basis for this racial disparity. The aim
of the current study was to define the molecular signatures of HCV
disease progression in liver & tumor tissue samples obtained from AA & CA
patients using 8-plex iTRAQ-based proteomics coupled with bioinformatics
data analyses. The raw data were analyzed by the ProteinPilot v3.0 using
the paragon algorithm. Searches were performed against a comprehensive
database generated from SwissPort, Refseq, and Tremble protein sequences.
The data were normalized for loading error & background correction. The
proteins with confidence score > 90% and with at least 1 peptide of 95%
identification confidence were used for further quality control &
differential expression analysis. The quality control analysis was
performed using pairwise correlation plots, boxplots, principal component
analysis (PCA), and unsupervised hierarchical clustering. Supervised
analysis was performed to identify differentially expressed proteins
(DEP), where the relative protein expression values were compared between
groups (Normal vs. Cirrhosis (CIR), Normal vs. HCC, CIR vs. HCC). Based
on our experimental design, 787 unique proteins were identified. Of
those, 32 were differentially expressed between normal, cirrhosis & HCC
groups. Targets validation using real-time PCR (RT-PCR) or western
blotting (WB) shows racially distinct alteration in the expression of
certain targets. For example, the mRNA expression levels of TF were 2
and18-fold higher in CIR & HCC, respectively in AAs compared to CAs.
Similarly, the expression of APOA1 mRNA levels was 7-fold higher in HCC
of AAs compared to CAs. This trend was similar to their protein
expression levels using WB. However, the level of HNF4 protein was down
regulated in AAs compared to CAs. This indicates that HNF4 does not
regulate TF & APOA1 expression in HCC of AA samples.

