Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional and mechanism analysis of LGR4 in human lung cancer
cells.


LGR4 (leucine-rich repeat containing G protein-coupled receptor 4) and
its two closely related homologues LGR5 and LGR6 (LGR4-6) are members of
the seven transmembrane domain (7TM) receptors with critical functions in
embryonic development and adult stem cells. Recently, we and others
discovered that LGR4-6 function as receptors of R-spondins (RSPO) to
potentiate Wnt signaling. RSPOs are a group of four secreted proteins
(RSPO1-4) with essential roles in organ development, sex determination,
carcinogenesis, etc. Particularly, RSPO2 is required for normal lung
development through enhancement of Wnt signaling and LGR6 is expressed in
adult lung stem cells in the mouse. Among the 900 or so 7TM receptors,
LGR4 was found to be one of the few that were highly upregulated in both
squamous cell carcinoma (SqCC) and adenocarcinoma (AC) of the lung.
Alterations in the Wnt signaling pathways were found in a small
percentage of lung cancer. Concurrent activation of -catenin signaling
enhances tumor growth and metastasis of lung cancer cells with KRAS
mutation. Furthermore, RSPO3 and LGR4 are co-expressed at high levels in
20% of lung cancer cell lines. However, potential roles of RSPO3-LGR4 in
lung carcinogenesis have not been investigated. We developed and
validated a panel of LGR4 antibodies that can detect either native or
denatured LGR4 with high specificity and sensitivity.
Immunohistochemistry analyses confirmed that LGR4 was highly expressed in
the majority of SqCC and AC of the lung. Knockdown of LGR4 in a lung
cancer cell line with high levels of and LGR4 and RSPO3 leads to dramatic
decrease in endogenous Wnt signaling and significant reduction in cell
growth, migration, and colony formation in vitro. The effect of knockdown
on tumor growth in vivo is being tested. Data from these expression and
functional analyses of LGR4 in human lung cancer will be presented and
discussed.

