Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Withaferin A-mediated inhibition of breast carcinoma involves
concomitant activation of CHOP and Elk1 via ERK/ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK)
signaling axis regulating death receptor 5 expression. .


Introduction: Despite significant progress towards screening efforts and
targeted therapies, breast cancer is still a leading cause of
cancer-related mortality among women. Novel therapeutic strategies are
clearly needed for effective targeting of breast cancer. Natural products
continue to generate interest for identification of potential
chemopreventive and therapeutic agents. Withaferin A (WFA) is a bioactive
small molecule that has been proposed as a new-generation molecule
capable of eliciting growth inhibitory effect on cancer cells. The
molecular mechanisms by which WFA mediates inhibition of breast cancer
remain elusive. The present study was designed to systematically
elucidate the underlying mechanisms by which WFA inhibits growth and
metastatic potential of breast cancer cells.Methods: Efficacy of WFA
treatment on cell growth, invasion and, migration potential was evaluated
by using clonogenicity, anchorage-independent growth, matrigel-invasion
and spheroid-migration assays. Western blot and immunofluorescence
analysis were used to examine activation of ERK/RSK (extracellular
signal-regulated kinase/ ribosomal S6 kinase) and downstream signaling
axes. Functional importance of ERK/RSK and CHOP (C/EBP homologous
protein) in the biologic effects of WFA was examined by using
overexpression, phospho-deficient constructs and specific inhibitors.
Finally, mouse xenografts, immunohistochemical, RT-PCR and western blot
analysis of tumors were used.Results: Analysis of the underlying
molecular mechanisms revealed that WFA treatment induced phosphorylation
of ERK which in turn activated RSK. Further, WFA-induced ERK/RSK
signaling resulted in concomitant upregulation of CHOP and Elk-1(ETS-like
transcription factor 1). By using ERK1/2 siRNA and FMK-MEA inhibitor, we
found that ERK/RSK signaling axis is required for WFA-mediated modulation
of CHOP and Elk-1. Intriguingly, we discovered that WFA triggers the
nuclear translocation of CHOP and Elk1 resulting in transcriptional
upregulation of Death Receptor protein (DR5). CHOP and Elk1
overexpression potentiated while phospho-deficient Elk-1 inhibited
WFA-induced DR5 expression exhibiting that CHOP/Elk-1 cooperatively
regulate DR5 expression. Furthermore, using nontoxic doses of WFA, we
showed that WFA treatment effectively inhibited breast tumorigenesis in
vivo. Analysis of WFA-treated breast tumors showed increased activation
of ERK/RSK axis and DR5 along with higher nuclear accumulation of CHOP
and Elk-1.Conclusion: These data provided first in vitro and in vivo
evidence of the integral role of a previously unrecognized crosstalk
between WFA and ERK/RSK and CHOP/Elk-1 axes in breast tumor growth
inhibition. WFA treatment could potentially be a rational therapeutic
strategy for breast carcinoma.

