Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PIK3CA and APC mutations are synergistic in the development of
intestinal cancers.


Background: Human colorectal cancers are known to possess multiple
mutations, though how these mutations interact in tumor development and
progression has not been thoroughly investigated. We have previously
described the FC PIK3ca* murine colon cancer model which expresses a
constitutively activated phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K) in the
intestinal epithelium. The expression of this dominantly active form of
PI3K results in hyperplasia and invasive mucinous adenocarcinomas in the
proximal colon. These cancers form via a non-canonical mechanism without
aberrations in Wnt signaling. Since the Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC)
gene is mutated in the vast majority of human colon cancers and often
occurs concurrently with PIK3CA mutations, we sought to better understand
the interaction between APC and PIK3CA mutations in the mammalian
intestine using novel murine models.Methods: B6 females carrying a
transgene encoding for a chimeric protein with the iSH2 domain of the p85
subunit of PI3K fused to the N-terminus of p110 (PIK3ca*) were crossed to
B6 males carrying the Min allele of Apc (ApcMin/+). The resulting B6
PIK3ca* ApcMin/+ mice were then crossed to mice carrying a transgene in
which the fatty acid binding protein promoter is fused to Cre recombinase
(FC). (FVB x B6)F1 FC PIK3ca* ApcMin/+ progeny express this
constitutively active form of PI3K in epithelial cells of the distal
small bowel and colon, as well as having lost one allele of Apc. An
additional novel model system was developed to induce mutations in the
cells of the mid to distal colon using a minimally invasive technique to
instil adenovirus expressing the Cre recombinase. These tumors could then
be monitored over time with colonoscopy with biopsies taken for
histological and molecular analyses.Results: FC PIK3ca* ApcMin/+ mice
develop multiple small intestinal and colon tumors, including invasive
adenocarcinomas with lymphatic and mesenteric metastases. Tumor
multiplicity and size were increased. Moreover, the tumors appeared less
differentiated and were more invasive as compared to those in controls.
Advanced adenomas and adenocarcinomas were easily detectible with a novel
near-infrared phospholipid ether analog, CLR1502, that selectively
accumulates in tumors. In the proximal colon, mucinous adenocarcinomas
that were initiated by the dominant active PI3K rarely exhibited nuclear
-catenin and when observed, this localization was limited to select
areas. This indicates that in these tumors loss of APC in these cells was
a late event and can be a source of clonal outgrowth. The tumors that
form in this model are microsatellite stable. Interestingly this synergy
appears to be independent of PI3K mediated regulation of GSK-3 and
-catenin signaling.Conclusion: Expression of a dominant active PI3K
synergizes with loss of APC activity resulting in dramatic changes in
tumor multiplicity, size, morphology, and invasiveness.

