Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Poor predictive power of BIM deletion polymorphism for EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor outcome in non-small cell lung cancer patients
harboring EGFR mutation.


Background. Recently, a germline deletion polymorphism of BIM was
reported to predict tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) outcome in patients
with chronic myelogenous leukemia or advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) harboring epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation. In
this study, we examined the predictive role of BIM deletion in a Korean
NSCLC cohort. Also, we explored genetic alteration profile of patients
exhibiting primary resistance to EGFR TKI treatment despite EGFR
mutation. Methods. Data from 197 consecutive patients who had stage
IIIB/IV NSCLC with TKI-sensitive EGFR mutation were collected from the
NSCLC database of Seoul National University Hospital between 2006 and
2011. BIM deletion polymorphism was genotyped with polymerase-chain
reaction (PCR) and visualized with 2% agarose gel electrophoresis.
Additionally, we also examined putative clinical predictors of EGFR TKI
outcome, including line of treatment, EGFR genotype, and smoking status.
For patients who exhibited primary resistance to EGFR TKI treatment, we
performed additional molecular analysis including fluorescence in situ
hybridization for MET amplification and ALK fusion, and targeted deep
sequencing of 46 cancer-related genes to explore the mechanism of primary
resistance. Results. In this cohort, the median progression-free survival
(PFS) for patients receiving EGFR TKIs was 11.9 months, and the objective
response rate was 78.8%. Patients with wild-type BIM (n = 172; 89.1%) and
BIM deletion (n = 21; 10.9%) exhibited no difference in median PFS after
EGFR TKI treatment (11.3 months for wild-type BIM, 11.9 months for BIM
deletion; P = 0.791). Also, the line of treatment, the genotype of the
EGFR-activating mutation, and smoking were not predictive of PFS for EGFR
TKIs. However, patients with recurrent disease after curative surgical
resection had a longer PFS than patients with initial stage IV disease
(16.0 months for recurrent disease, 10.0 months for stage IV disease at
initial presentation; P = 0.007). From the examination of pretreatment
tissue of 11 patients exhibiting primary resistance, de novo EGFR T790M
mutation was identified in one patient. We also found a patient with de
novo MET amplification and another patient with ALK fusion. Targeted deep
sequencing identified no recurrent, coexistent drivers of NSCLC.
Conclusion. BIM deletion polymorphism showed poor predictive role in
EGFR-mutant NSCLC patient cohort, although their initial report indicated
remarkable predictive power. In a small portion of cases with primary
resistance, we identified coexistent genetic alterations of
cancer-related genes that could explain primary resistance. Our result
suggests that the mechanism of primary resistance might be heterogeneous.

