Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serous cancer progenitor cells in the oviduct.


Background: A spectrum of precursors has been identified in the distal
fallopian tube with a relationship to pelvic serous cancer ("ovarian
cancer") and linked to p53 mutations, absence of PAX2 expression (PAX2-)
or both. Because a wide range of precursors are PAX2-, we hypothesized
that the PAX2- immunophenotype was a property of a serous cancer
progenitor cell rather than acquired during neoplastic transformation.
This study explored this concept.Methods: Oviductal epithelia were
immunostained concurrently with PAX2 (a non-ciliated cell marker), FOXJ1
(a ciliated cell marker) and CD3 (lymphocyte marker) to identify PAX2-
secretory cells. Genes over-expressed in PAX2- precursors based on
expression arrays were selected (ALDH1, LEF1, EZH2). Derived antibodies
were used to co-localize expression with the PAX2- cells candidate
progenitor cells, precursor lesions and serous carcinomas.Results:
Immunostaining of human and murine oviducts revealed discrete PAX2- cells
in the epithelium. In the mouse, PAX2- cells were confined to the distal
tube. PAX2- cells were seen individually and in non-stratified epithelium
and accounted for less than 10% of the non-ciliated cell population.
However, PAX2- cell clusters were discovered and larger populations of
PAX2- cells were identified, both in the middle of the epithelium and
adjacent to the basement membrane. Discrete expansions (termed secretory
cell outgrowths or SCOUTs) were common, particularly in fallopian tubes
of women with pelvic serous cancer, and coincided with an ALDH1-, LEF1+,
EZH2+ immunophenotype. This same immunophenotype characterized serous
cancer precursors associated with over-accumulation of p53 (p53
signatures, serous tubal intraepithelial carcinomas) and invasive serous
carcinomas.Conclusion: This report proposes a candidate cell of origin
for both benign proliferations and high grade serous carcinoma in the
oviduct that is a PAX2- secretory cell. The distribution of the PAX2-
cells is emblematic of their role in both physiologic cell proliferation
and clonal expansion, the latter including altered expression of ALDH1,
LEF1 and EZH2, among others. The phenotypic range of PAX2- cell
expansions is consistent with the imposition of multiple stimuli on this
cell, including both preservation and loss of p53 function. This
population of PAX2- cells provides a unique substrate for studying
cell-specific vulnerabilties in serous carcinogenesis and the molecular
underpinnings of the varied differentiation paths that seem to ensue
during clonal expansion of this unique cell type.

