Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arrayed microinjection of a ubiquitin activating enzyme inhibitor
induces PD biomarker effects predictive of in vivo tumor responses to
systemic drug delivery.


Presage technology enables simultaneous analysis of multiple cancer drug
candidates, drug concentrations, and drug combinations within a single
living tumor. The platform employs arrayed tumor microinjection
technology that delivers multiple spatially defined threads of drug
directly into discreet portions of a tumor. This enables rapid, reliable,
and internally controlled cross comparisons of multiple cancer
therapeutics using screening quantities of drug in an in vivo setting in
which the local tumor microenvironment is maintained. Here, as an
example, we apply the platform to investigate tumor responsiveness to an
inhibitor of the ubiquitin activating enzyme UBA1 from Millennium
Pharmaceuticals.The ubiquitin activating enzyme UBA1 regulates ubiquitin
activation and subsequent polyubiquitination of proteins necessary for
their degradation by the proteasome, and functionally impacts cell
signaling, DNA damage repair and cell cycle progression. In vivo tumor
responses were evaluated in two human xenograft models, WSU-DLCL2 and
MCF-7, grown as flank tumors in immune-compromised mice. Microdosing of
multiple concentrations of the UBA1 inhibitor (UBAi) into both models led
to localized, easily detectable, and drug concentration-dependent
biomarker changes indicative of ubiquitin pathway perturbation in the
area proximal to injected drug. This included loss of poly-ubiquitin,
accompanied by the expected accumulation of cMyc in tumor regions exposed
to the UBAi. Localized time-dependent tumor cell death responses were
observed following pathway perturbation as quantified by staining for
cleaved caspase-3 and gamma-H2AX staining. Furthermore, pathological
evidence of UBAi-induced cell death was clearly visible in both tumor
models upon histological examination of H&E stained slides. These results
highlight the capacity of the Presage platform to perform multiplexed
drug studies in live tumor models. This capability could readily be
expanded for use in validating additional biomarker hypotheses,
indication finding studies, or for efficient identification of novel drug
combinations.

