Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNases: Approaching RNA as a target for cancer therapy.


Ribonucleases (RNases) are a unique class of anti-cancer drugs that
target the RNA in cancer cells without the complications of delivering
RNA. Efficacious RNases have diminished binding to the naturally
occurring RNase inhibitor protein in the cytosol of cells. Since human
RNase I binds tightly to the inhibitor, changes to the amino acid
residues in the contact region were made and resulted in the lead
candidate referred to as QBI-139. This variant maintains 95% sequence
identity with the wild type human RNase 1.Broad efficacy and a strong
therapeutic window were seen across multiple tumor types in xenograft
models and QBI-139 was advanced to an ongoing Phase I clinical trial. For
the Investigational New Drug application package, rat and dog toxicology
studies were used to aid in selection of the starting dose for humans.
Exposure levels (pharmacokinetics, PK) are an important factor in
evaluating whether toxicity and efficacy will be comparable across the
species. A complicating issue in the evaluation of the results is the
range of routes of administration across species, specifically
intraperitoneal injection (mice), intravenous injection (rat and dog) and
intravenous infusion (human). One parameter that is consistent is rapid
clearance, which is likely due to the small size of QBI-139 (15
kiloDaltons). With preliminary results from the early stage clinical
trial, the exposure levels across the experiments will be compared. The
results demonstrate that the exposure profiles in the clinic where the
route of administration is intravenous infusion, is most similar to that
in the mouse efficacy models, which is intraperitoneal injection.A human
RNase variant, called QBI-139 provides an innovative drug development
approach to targeting RNA. In model systems, QBI-139 has shown broad in
vivo anti-tumor activity alone and in combination with standard of care
therapies and a strong tolerability profile. The knowledge gained about
the impact of PK on therapeutic effect will be valuable as the method of
administration is selected and confirmed in the next stage of clinical
trials.

