Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FANCA binds to nucleic acids and stimulates endonuclease activity
of FEN1.


Fanconi anemia is a rare autosomal recessive or X-linked genetic disease
characterized by progressive bone marrow failure, various developmental
anomalies, and cancer predisposition. Fanconi anemia complementation
group A (FANCA) gene is one of the 15 disease-causing genes and has been
found to be mutated in 60% of Fanconi anemia patients. Except for its
constituent role in the ubiquitin ligase of the Fanconi anemia core
complex, no other biochemical activity has been identified thus far.Using
purified protein, we observed that human FANCA has intrinsic affinity to
nucleic acids. FANCA binds to both single-stranded and double-stranded
DNA; however, its affinity to single-stranded DNA is dramatically higher.
FANCA also binds to RNA with an intriguingly higher affinity than its DNA
counterpart. A patient-derived FANCA truncation mutant, Q772X, has
diminished affinity to both DNA and RNA. On the contrary, the
complementing C-terminal fragment of Q772X, C772-1455, retains the
differentiated nucleic acids binding activity (RNA>ssDNA>dsDNA),
indicating that the nucleic acids binding domain of FANCA is primarily
located at its C-terminus. Using DNA and RNA ladders, we determined that
the minimum numbers of nucleotides required for FANCA recognition are 30
for both DNA and RNA. By testing the affinity between FANCA and a variety
of DNA structures, we found that a 5 flap or tail on DNA facilitates its
interaction with FANCA. In addition, we observed that FANCA greatly
stimulates the endonuclease activity of flap endonuclease 1 (FEN1), which
processes 5 flap structures.Our study reported that purified human FANCA
binds to nucleic acids with strong preference for single-stranded forms.
Our finding suggests that FANCA FANCA may participate in maintenance of
replication forks by regulating removal of Okazaki fragment during
maturation of lagging strand replication.

