Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of TNBC cell growth by CSPG4-specific mAb 225.28 with a
Sonic Hedgehog pathway inhibitor.


In the US, about 10-20% of breast cancers are found to be triple-negative
breast cancer(TNBC). Because of the lack of estrogen receptor (ER) and
progesterone receptor (PR) expression, and human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 (HER2) amplification, TNBC does not benefit from the currently
available targeted therapies. Furthermore, recent molecular analysis of
TNBC cell lines and lesions has suggested that these tumors might be
enriched with cancer initiating cells (CICs). This possibility is
consistent with the failure of conventional therapies to control disease
progression, because according to the cancer stem cell theory, CICs play
a major role in disease recurrence and metastatic spread, the two major
causes of patient mortality. These findings and the lack of curative
therapy for any TNBC patient with metastatic disease emphasize the need
to develop effective novel therapies for this type of breast cancer. To
address this need, we have developed a combinatorial immunotherapy, which
eliminates both differentiated TNBC cells and TNBC CICs. The tumor
antigen we have selected as a target is chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan
(CSPG)4, since this membrane bound tumor antigen is expressed at high
levels on both differentiated TNBC cells and TNBC CICs. CSPG4 plays a
crucial role in the biology of TNBC cells, since it is involved in ERK
and FAK signaling pathways which are associated with TNBC cell
proliferation and migration. Furthermore, it is upregulated on activated
pericytes in the tumor microenvironment. CSPG4-specific mAb 225.28
inhibits TNBC cell growth and migration. Moreover, it inhibits signaling
pathways associated with TNBC cell growth and survival. It also can
selectively inhibit neoangiogenesis in the tumor microenvironment,
contributing to the elimination of TNBC cells, even those that do not
express CSPG4. To enhance the targeting of TNBC CICs, immunotherapy is
combined with the administration of an inhibitor (cyclopamine/ LDE225) of
the Sonic Hedgehog Homolog (SHH) pathway which is activated in TNBC cells
and, especially in TNBC CICs. Inhibition of TNBC CIC growth by mAb 225.28
is around 10%, but is enhanced up to about 70% when mAb 225.28 is
combined with a SHH pathway inhibitor. Our in vitro findings strongly
suggest that targeting CSPG4 with mAb 225.28 in combination with a SHH
inhibitor may represent an effective strategy to eliminate differentiated
TNBC cells and TNBC CICs.

