Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular characterization of cancer stem cells isolated from
primary colon cancer cells.


Colon cancer is the 3rd most common type of cancer and the 4th leading
cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. OncoTrack is an international
consortium that has launched one of Europe's largest collaborative
academic-industry research projects to develop and assess novel
approaches for identification of new markers for colon cancer (1). To
this end, colorectal tumors and metastases, as well as isolated
circulating tumor cells and cancer stem cells are subjected to
high-throughput sequencing of DNA and RNA. The laboratory data are
combined with clinical data and used for in silico modeling of the
patients' tumors and prediction of biomarkers as well as a tailored
therapy. These predictions are validated using patient-specific in vitro
(primary cells) and in vivo (xenografts) models. Recent data show that a
small subpopulation of cells within different tumors, including colon
cancer, is responsible for tumor growth and maintenance. Due to their
functional similarities to adult tissue stem cells and their likely
origin, these cells have been termed cancer stem cells. We aim at
characterizing patient-derived primary cell cultures and cancer stem
cells isolated from these. Primary tumors and metastases from colon
cancer patients are cultivated in vitro using a matrigel-based,
serum-free culture system. This system allows for long-term expansion of
primary colon cancer cells in vitro (2). Using this methodology, we were
able to establish over 35 novel, patient-specific colon cancer cell
lines, both from primary tumors and metastases. Using previously
established markers of colon cancer stem cells (CD44+, CD133+, CD166+,
EpCAM-high, Wnt-high), cells are sorted by flow cytometry and
subsequently subjected to genome-wide analyses using next-generation
sequencing. These experiments allow for a detailed characterization of
colon cancer stem cells at the level of transcriptome and methylome. It
has been shown that tumors are heterogeneous with regard to gene
mutations and expression of cancer stem cell markers (3). Using molecular
tools such as padlock probes (4), we are analyzing the distribution of
gene mutations identified by next-generation sequencing within primary
cells as well as primary tumors. Moreover, we are addressing the
expression pattern of cancer stem cell markers in these cell types. These
data will help in a better understanding of individual tumors and assist
in design of a personalized therapy.OncoTrack is a project funded by the
Innovative Medicines Initiative Joint Undertaking (IMI JU).1 Elsner M,
Nature Biotechnology 29, 378 (2011); www.oncotrack.eu2 Sato T el al.,
Gastroenterology. 2011 Nov;141(5):1762-72.3 Gerlinger M et al., N Engl J
Med. 2012 Mar 8;366(10):883-92.4 Larsson C, et al., Nat Methods. 2010
May;7(5):395-7.

