Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A 3D high throughput RNA1 screen identifies the TLR4 kinase which
alters spheroid architecture: a promising therapeutic strategy for
pancreatic cancer.


Background: Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDA) ranks fourth among
cancer-related deaths in the United States. The poor prognosis of PDA is
due to resistance to current therapies. Contributing to this resistance
is the tumor architecture comprising dense desmoplastic stroma,
extracellular matrix (ECM), tumor cells and tumor hypoxia. We
hypothesized that destabilizing the compact tumor architecture by
weakening the interactions between tumor cells alone or tumor cells along
with the ECM may result in more effective therapies for PDA.Methods and
Results: Using the pancreatic cell line Panc1, we developed a three
dimensional (3D) spheroid model system, that exhibits oxygen gradients
and hypoxia that mimics the tumor microenvironment. We used the
pancreatic cancer cell line PANC1-HRE that stably expresses
HRE-luciferase and detects HIF-1 activation, and a platform comprising a
non-matrix nano-structured scaffold, to generate compact spheroids with
hypoxic inner cores and HIF-1 activation. A high throughput siRNA screen
using the kinome siRNA library and our 3D spheroid modal system
identified kinases whose silencing reduced both the level of hypoxia and
activity of HIF-1. The positive control, siRNA against HIF-1, reduced
activity of HIF-1 with no effect on the levels of hypoxia within the
spheroids. We identified the kinases Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) and its
downstream target spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) as our lead candidates
following target validation. Image analysis of spheroids transfected with
siRNA against both TLR4 and SYK resulted in the loss of compactness of
the spheroids. In addition, these spheroids also demonstrated a
significant reduction in the levels of hypoxia determined by the hypoxia
probe Lox-1. These findings suggest that the alteration of the spheroid
architecture resulted in the reduction in hypoxia. Previous studies have
shown that SYK is a direct target of TLR4. Therefore to determine the
mechanism through which TLR4 dependent signaling regulates the integrity
of the spheroidal architecture we are generating stable cell lines in
Panc1 of shRNA targeting TLR4 under an inducible system. We will use our
inducible shRNA targeting TLR4 and the two 3D model systems, the hanging
drop system (analogous to a primary tumor) and the nanoculture plate
system (analogous to the progression of a metastatic loci) to further
confirm our findings.Conclusion: TLR4 mediated signaling regulates the
integrity of spheroid architecture. Inhibiting this pathway destabilized
the tumor architecture altering the hypoxic state of the spheroid. Our
long-term goals are to use known pharmacological inhibitors of TLR4 to
study the mechanisms by which this kinase regulates tumor architecture,
determine the pre-clinical significance of targeting TLR4 utilizing
autochtonous mouse models for PDA and develop TLR4-targeted therapy for
PDA.

