Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High resolution characterization of human hepatocellular cancer
(HCC) reveals a novel inactivating mutation in the TGF- pathway that
promotes alcohol induced HCC.


Background: A crucial factor in protection from liver injury, fibrosis
and cancer by agents such as alcohol, aflatoxins and viral hepatitis is
the enforcement of genomic stability. However, sensors for genotoxicity
leading to aberrant DNA repair remain elusive. Because inactivation of
the TGF- pathway results in DNA damage, alcohol toxicity and HCC, TGF-
has been implicated as a critical promoter of genomic stability and tumor
suppression; however, the framework by which this occurs is not known. We
performed Whole-genome (WGS) and Exome sequencing (WES) on 6 pairs human
HCC samples and identified inactivation of TGF-beta pathway members as a
prominent characteristic of alcohol induced HCC, potentially through
inactivation of a TGF-b adaptor, 2SP. We therefore hypothesized that the
TGF-/2SP/Smad3 pathway is crucial for protection against aldehyde
genotoxicity through enforcing genomic stability.Materials & Methods: We
performed Whole-genome (WGS) and Exome sequencing (WES) on 6 pairs human
HCC samples. 2SP mutant mice were treated with alcohol to determine their
susceptibility to aldehyde-induced developmental abnormalities. Primary
MEFs from 2SP+/+, 2SP+/ and 2SP/ mice were treated with colcemid for
cytogenetic analysis, and they were also treated with multiple DNA
damaging agents and -irradiation to evaluate Mdc1, NBS1 and Rad51 foci
formation. ChIP assays were performed to determine the recruitment of
2SP/Smad3/Smad4 at FancD2 promoter.Results: (1) Through our WGS and WES
analyses, we discovered a novel inactivating mutation of TGF-/2SP pathway
in alcohol-associated HCC. This 2SP mutation results in functional
disruption of TGF- signaling. (2) Alcohol treatment in the absence of 2SP
mice results in teratogenicity and spontaneous fetal alcohol-like
phenotype (FAS). (3) Loss of 2SP results in premature replicative
senescence and marked hypersensitivity to DNA interstrand crosslinking
agents, such as mitomycin C (MMC). (4) DNA damage response induces
nuclear localization of 2SP in a TGF--dependent manner. (5) Suppression
of 2SP impairs the recruitment of DNA repair proteins in the nucleus and
consequently the repair of DNA double-strand breaks. (6) Loss of 2SP
correlates with loss of FANCD2 expression, but not of any of the other 12
Fanconi anemia complementation factors. Moreover, our results indicate
that 2SP/Smad3/Smad4 regulate expression of FANCD2 at the transcriptional
level. (7) The expression of 2SP and FANCD2 is correlated in alcoholic
hepatitis and cirrhotic livers.Conclusions: Through whole genome and
Exome sequencing we found a novel inactivating mutation in 2SP which
results in loss of TGF- signaling pathway. Importantly, these results
could potentially lead to new therapeutics targeting toxin-induced DNA
damage and tumorigenesis.

