Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of growth factor signaling through macrophage colony
stimulating factor (CSF-1) and its receptor (FMS) in the bone marrow
stromal microenvironment in acute myeloid leukemia (AML).


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a highly heterogeneous and growth
factor-dependent disease of the bone marrow. The bone marrow stromal
microenvironment plays a critical role in providing growth and survival
signals. hFMS, the human homologue of the Feline (McDonough strain)
Sarcoma virus oncogene, also known as macrophage colony stimulating
factor 1 receptor (CSF1R, FMS, CD115) is a tyrosine kinase receptor found
on mononuclear phagocytes that promotes their growth and differentiation.
The human macrophage CSF-1 ligand (MCSF-1, CSF-1) produced by supporting
cells in the bone marrow acts on FMS. CSF-1 has a full length secreted
isoform v1 and a membrane-bound isoform v3. Upon activation, FMS
modulates the activity of important effectors of growth and survival
pathways such as the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/ERK and
phosphoinositol-3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathways, respectively. There is a
variable association of Fms with the stem cell marker CD34 on AML cells
and this suggests different structures within an AML hierarchy. To better
understand stromal cell interactions mediated by the CSF-1/FMS axis and
examine the high engraftment failures of AML human samples in mice, AML
cells were grown on murine stromal cells that were humanized through
lentiviral-mediated introduction of human CSF-1. The soluble v1 and
membrane-bound v3 isoforms of CSF-1 were investigated. We found that
stroma-presented CSF-1 effectively supports the growth of leukemic cells
in short and long-term growth cultures, with the v3 CSF-1 variant
sustaining better growth than v1. Interestingly the FMS-(low)/CD34+
subpopulation displayed significantly better growth on stroma compared to
the FMS+ populations. Eventually this subpopulation gave rise to FMS+
cells, suggesting that it may harbor stem or initiating properties. In
interrogating molecular signaling events induced by the CSF-1/FMS
interaction, we found that the membrane-bound v3 isoform leads to
increases in phosphorylation of effectors of the MAPK and PI3k/Akt
pathways, namely Akt, p70S6K and 4E-BP1, whereas the v1 variant does not
elicit such signals as robustly in leukemic cells grown on stroma. Taken
together, this indicates that the manner in which the ligand is presented
(soluble vs. membrane-bound) impacts the growth, survival and molecular
signaling arising from the leukemic-stromal cell interaction. Future work
will involve generation of gene and protein expression profiles of
leukemic and stromal cells after grown in co-culture in aims of
identifying targets induced by the soluble vs. membrane-bound forms of
CSF-1. Particular identification of druggable targets in both leukemic
and stromal cell compartments will allow for the design of therapeutic
strategies to interfere with leukemic-stromal cell interactions driven by
the CSF-1/FMS axis.

