Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Studying the significance of human p53-Sin3B interaction under the
condition of DNA damage.


Sin3, a global regulator of transcription plays an important role in
mediating gene regulation, by binding to various transcription factors
through its highly conserved Paired Amphipathic Helices (PAH) domains.
Physical association of Sin3 corepressor molecule with human p53, a
tumour suppressor protein is now well established. In response to stimuli
that activate p53, cells can undergo repair processes, cell cycle arrest
or apoptosis. In order to combat the stress, p53 gets activated by
posttranslational stabilization and modulate the expression levels of its
target genes. There are number of genes which are negatively regulated by
p53, but the mechanism of repression is not well characterized. We hereby
show that p53 interacts with Sin3/HDAC corepressor complex in-vivo and
expression of Sin3B is up regulated in response to DNA damaging stimuli
in p53 dependent manner. Increase in the levels of Sin3B upon different
kind of DNA damage suggests that Sin3B might be an important protein
involved in DNA damage pathway. Sin3/HDAC corepressor complex is
recruited by p53 onto the promoters of its target genes, resulting in the
down regulation of p53 target genes. In our study we propose that the
mechanism of repression of p53 target genes is through recruitment of
Sin3/HDAC corepressor complex which leads to context specific chromatin
modification. Such modifications results in enrichment of epigenetic
marks like H3K9me3, H3K27me3, which are marker of repression under
condition of DNA damage induced by Bleomycin. Knockdown of Sin3B using
shRNA causes derepression of p53 target genes, suggesting that Sin3B is a
key player in p53 mediated transrepression. Based on our studies we
propose that Sin3B is an important corepressor molecule recruited by p53
in response to DNA damage and Increased Sin3B expression is an early
event in DNA damage induced by Bleomycin. We further provide evidence
that p53 regulate its target genes, namely HSPA8, MAD1, CRYZ, ANLN and
CDC25c through its interaction with Sin3/HDAC corepressor complex which
leads to chromatin modification by recruiting proteins involved in
epigenetic modifications.

