Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aptamer-mediated cancer cell-specific delivery of therapeutic
microRNAs and miRNA inhibitors.


The most recent advances in the field of cancer therapy have shown the
great potential of using RNA-based molecules for human cancer treatment.
RNA-based oligonucleotides, such as siRNA, miRNA mimic or miRNA
inhibitors are being developed to modulate the expression of genes
important in cancer, thus blocking tumourigenesis, inhibiting tumour
growth or preventing metastasis. However a major limitation in the
translation to clinic of RNA oligonucleotides is represented by the need
of technologies that mediate their selective delivery improving their
efficacy and safety. Conjugation with nucleic acid aptamers represents an
innovative and promising approach to overcome this obstacle. Aptamers are
single-stranded oligonucleotides that have been shown as high-affinity
ligands and potential antagonists of cancer-associated proteins. They
discriminate between closely related targets and are characterized by
high specificity and low toxicity thus revealing as compounds of choice
for in vivo cell recognition as delivery agents for various secondary
reagents such as nanoparticles, siRNA bioconjugates, chemotherapeutic
cargoes and molecular imaging probes. We have recently generated and
characterized two 2fluoro-pyrimidines containing RNA aptamers, named
GL21.T and Gint4, that bind at high affinity and high specificity to
human Axl tyrosine kinase receptor and PDGFR, respectively. These
aptamers not only bind to their proper RTK but are also rapidly
internalized into target cell, getting about 30% of cell internalization
following 15 min-incubation and reached about 60% following 2h of aptamer
treatment. By using different approaches, we have generated several
completely RNA-based chimeric molecules containing internalizing aptamers
coupled to therapeutic miRNAs that are down-regulated in human tumors and
whose expression results in selective tumour growth inhibition. We have
shown that when applied to cells expressing the specific aptamer target,
the chimeric molecules are internalized and processed by Dicer, thus
increasing miRNA cellular level and inhibiting miRNA target protein. As a
consequence, the depletion of the targeted protein leads to miRNA
herapeutic effect. Remarkably, no binding or functionality of the
chimeras has been detected in cells that do not express aptamer target
receptor. In addition, since miRNAs are frequently up-regulated in
different alignancies, acting as oncogenes, we have developed different
pproaches to conjugate internalizing aptamers to therapeutic miRNA
inhibitors. The ability of these molecules to bind to and internalize in
aptamer target-positive cells has been verified. The characterization in
vitro and in vivo of the different chimeras is ongoing in our laboratory
revealing these hybrid compounds as potential tools for innovative
anti-cancer targeted therapeutics.

