Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a robust preclinical model for studying the
mechanism of azacitidine priming for platin-induced cytotoxicity.


Background: Chemosensitization by azacitidine (AZA) priming has been
demonstrated preclinically and is now supported by clinical data, but the
underlying mechanism for the priming effect is not well understood.
Previous in vitro studies of priming have focused on individual cell
lines and specific epigenetically-silenced genes; however, we show that
sensitization is not a universal effect of AZA pretreatment in all cancer
cell lines or with all combination agents. Studying the molecular
differences between cell lines that are sensitized and those that are not
may yield insights into the mechanisms of priming.Purpose: To identify
solid cancer cell lines that consistently show AZA sensitization to
platin-induced cytotoxicity, for future molecular characterization of the
priming mechanism.Methods: Ninety-two solid cancer cell lines, from seven
indications, were treated with vehicle or 1M AZA for 24h before being
treated with carboplatin (CARB), cisplatin (CIS), or Abraxane (ABX) for
72h. CellTiter-Glo was used to measure cell viability. The fractional
product method and normalized dose-response curves were used to
characterize the drug combination interaction. In subsequent experiments,
various AZA pretreatment durations (4-72h) were tested. DNA was prepared
for DNA methylation (LINE-1) analysis, and cell lysates were harvested
for DNMT1 Western blotting.Results: In a subset of cancer cell lines, AZA
pretreatment resulted in enhanced sensitivity of cells to CARB and CIS.
Seven cell lines across 5 cancer indications consistently showed a
sensitization effect with AZA priming, decreasing the CARB IC50 by a mean
of 59.6% (range 52.9-68.4%) and CIS IC50 by a mean of 44.6% (range
36.2-54.6%). Priming for CARB was concordant with priming for CIS, but
not for ABX, indicating that the AZA pretreatment does not globally
increase the susceptibility of cells to cytotoxic agents through
non-specific toxic effects; rather, these results suggest that priming by
AZA has specific pharmacodynamic effects unique to the combination agent.
Follow-on experiments demonstrated that AZA pretreatment of cells for
18-24h was required for priming, whereas the magnitude of priming was not
increased with longer (48-72h) AZA pretreatment durations. Effects of AZA
on DNMT1 depletion and DNA hypomethylation were detected in all cell
lines tested. The magnitude of these proximal PD effects did not
correlate with priming, suggesting that differences in sensitization
cannot be attributed to differential drug uptake and DNA
incorporation.Conclusions: We identified a panel of solid cancer cell
lines that consistently demonstrate sensitization to CARB and CIS with
AZA priming. By comparing genetic and epigenetic profiles between these
lines and a closely matched set of cell lines that does not show priming,
we hope to generate clinically testable hypotheses for predictors of
sensitization in patients.

