Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CpG methylation abrogates KLF2-mediated transcriptional repression
of telomerase in human T cells.


Many genes in tumor cells are DNA-methylated and transcriptionally
repressed. Constitutive expression of the limiting catalytic subunit of
telomerase, hTERT, is one of the common signatures of tumor cells, even
though its promoter is DNA-methylated. On the other hand, in normal
somatic cells the promoter is unmethylated and transcription of hTERT is
strictly regulated. In this study, we examined transcriptional regulation
of the hTERT gene in normal and tumor cells. We identified a novel
promoter element, which bound the zinc-finger transcription factor
Krpple-like factor 2 (KLF2) in normal human T Lymphocytes. The binding of
KLF2 to the hTERT promoter element paralleled repression of hTERT
transcription in resting normal T cells. T cell growth induced KLF2
release from the element and hTERT transcription. Forced reduction of
KLF2 expression by siRNA in normal resting T cells increased the level of
endogenous hTERT mRNA. The hTERT promoter is methylated in the
KLF2-positive human T leukemic cell line, Kit 225, and KLF2-negative
human T leukemic cell line, Jurkat. Treatment with the DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor, Zebularine, reduced levels of CpG
methylation in the hTERT promoter, resulting in downregulation of hTERT
mRNA expression in KLF2-positive Kit 225 cells, while the Zebularine
treatment did not cause any appreciable effects on hTERT expression in
KLF2-negative Jurkat cells. Methylation of CpG sequences in endogenous
and exogenous hTERT promoter elements inhibited the KLF2 binding to the
element. Furthermore, KLF2 binding to the promoter is associated with
histone H3 repressive marks, indicating KLF2-mediated epigenetic
silencing of the hTERT promoter. Our results suggest that KLF2 partly
controls strict transcriptional regulation of the hTERT gene through
association and dissociation with the promoter in normal T cells, but in
tumor cells these important interactions are prevented by DNA methylation.

