Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HCV infected elderly are at excess risk of pancreatic cancer: a
population based SEER-Medicare study.


Background: Pancreatic cancer is uncommon, however, it is a fatal cancer
that ranks the fourth in mortality in United States. Risk factors of
pancreatic cancer include infections, smoking, hormonal, alcoholism,
genetic, and environmental factors. Pancreatitis is one of the risk
factors of pancreatic cancer which is also, one of the observed
extrahepatic manifestations of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. HCV
infection mortality and morbidity are increasing; therefore it is
important to understand the relationship between HCV infection and
pancreatic cancer and the role of HCV-related pancreatitis.Methods: We
used the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Medicare
linked (SEER-Medicare) database to employ a population-based nested case
control study among United States elder. The study included 29,892
pancreatic cancer cases and 100,000 controls. In this study, we
calculated adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI)
using unconditional logistic regression. Models were adjusted for the
matching variables including age, sex, and calendar year. To examine the
hypothesis that pancreatitis is in the causal pathway between HCV and
pancreatic cancer; and therefore, is a mediator (intermediate endpoint),
we used mediation modeling to calculate the percentage of the total
effect of HCV that is mediated by pancreatitis.Results: HCV infection was
reported in 0.42% pancreatic cancer cases and 0.32% controls.
Pancreatitis was observed in 6.2% of HCV infected, and 1.4% non-HCV
infected. Pancreatitis was reported in 2.6%, and 1.4% of cancer and
controls respectively. Adjusting for matching variables, HCV infection
was associated with higher odds of pancreatic cancer [OR (95% CI);
1.36(1.10-1.68)]. In the mediation modeling, pancreatitis significantly
mediated the HCV effect, such that 11.4% of HCV effect was mediated by
pancreatitis.Conclusion: HCV is a risk factor of pancreatic cancer. HCV
effect is mediated in part by pancreatitis. Further studies are warranted
to understand the various mechanisms that might explain the excess risk
of pancreatic cancer among HCV infected individuals, and to determine the
effect of HCV treatment on pancreatic cancer risk.

