Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in genomic alterations revealed by sequencing of 182
genes in recurrent ovarian cancer specimens compared to TCGA analysis:
rearrangements in PTCH1 and FLT3; high frequency of RAS pathway
alteration.


Recent comprehensive genomic analyses of advanced stage, high grade
serous ovarian carcinomas carried out by TCGA (Nature 274: 609-615, 2011)
have revealed their heterogeneous nature and provide an explanation for
the failure of molecularly targeted drugs evaluated without consideration
of the tumor molecular characteristics of the patients treated. Copy
number (CN) alterations or mutations in RB, RAS-MAPK, and PI3K-AKT
pathway genes occur in 35%, 20%, and 35% of the tumors, respectively.
Activation of these pathways may confer sensitivity to drugs that target
them (e.g., PI3K or AKT inhibitors, MEK inhibitors, CDK inhibitors) as
well as resistance to drugs (e.g., HER2 or EGFR inhibitors) that have
failed in ovarian cancer clinical trials. A comprehensive evaluation of
the genetic aberrations in targetable pathways can therefore inform the
selection of appropriate drugs and combinations for each patient in the
context of clinical trials.As part of molecular profiling analyses
performed for recurrent ovarian cancer patients to inform selection of
their next treatment, the presence of mutations or alterations (e.g., CN
changes) in 182 genes that encode proteins that are key mediators in
oncogenic and tumor suppressive pathways were determined using a
validated exon-capture sequencing platform provided in a CLIA-certified
laboratory setting. 20 serous (4 primary/16 recurrent) and 4 recurrent
mixed or pure clear cell ovarian tumor samples were analyzed. A median of
2.5 (range 0-7) alterations were detected in the serous histology
specimens; frequencies of p53 mutations (16; 80%) and amplifications in
CCND1 (1; 5%), CCND2 (1; 5%), CCNE1 (2; 10%) are consistent with those
observed in the TCGA tumors. In contrast, more frequent RAS pathway
aberrations (45% vs. 20%) corresponding to KRAS amplification (3;15%) and
mutations/truncations in NF1 (5; 20%) or NF2 (1; 5%) were observed,
possibly reflecting the recurrent nature of these samples (TCGA used
primary tumors). Only one PIK3CA amplification was detected (i.e.,5%) in
contrast to the 18% observed in the TCGA dataset. Amplifications of IGF1R
(3; 15%) and ERBB2 (1;5%) were also detected in the serous histology
tumors, while PIK3CA and KRAS mutations were only detected in the tumors
with mixed cc and endometrioid histologies. Interestingly, a predicted
protein-truncating rearrangement in PTCH1 and a kinase-activating exon
duplication in FLT3 were detected in tumors from single patients
suggesting drugs targeting the HH pathway and FLT3 as options for ovarian
cancer patients.While it is important to increase the number of samples
analyzed, these data suggest that selection of patients for clinical
trials should be informed by comprehensive molecular characterization of
recurrent tumor specimens.

