Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYCN-induced TRPM7 mediates calcium influx and promotes
neuroblastoma cell migration.


Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extra-cranial solid cancer in
children. One of the genetic characteristics of advanced stage NB is MYCN
gene amplification, a prognostic indicator of poor outcome. MYCN is a
transcription factor from the myc proto-oncogene family that regulates
fundamental processes by regulating the expression of genes that are
involved in cell proliferation, growth, cell migration, etc. One of the
hallmarks of the malignant progression of primary tumors is uncontrolled
growth and spread of tumor cells, with the consequence of metastatic
cells entering the blood stream or lymphatic system and nesting into
secondary tissues and organs. Metastatic tumors affect the function of
cells and/or organs at the secondary site, and compromise the health and
survival of cancer patients. Recent studies have shown that the multiple
steps involved in cell migration and invasion (such as lamellapodia
formation, focal adhesion turnover, and cytoskeletal dynamics) are
dependent on the availability of free intracellular calcium. Although
significant advances have been made in understanding the role of calcium
during migration and invasion itself, little has been achieved towards
understanding its impact on the progression of diseases such as cancer
where cell motility is critical for the spread of tumor cells. To address
this deficiency, the objective of the current study was to elucidate the
mechanism by which calcium signaling regulates NB migration and invasion.
Our initial results showed that tetracycline-inducible over-expression of
MYCN in NB cells increased TRPM7 expression, enhanced calcium signaling,
and promoted cell migration, compared to control NB cells. In addition,
increasing extracellular calcium augmented these processes. These results
implicate TRPM7 as a potential regulator of calcium-dependent NB cell
migration and invasion. In order to confirm the role of TRPM7 in these
processes, we used pharmacological inhibitors of TRPM7 and TRPM7-specific
siRNA to modulate TRPM7 activity in NB cells, and performed live-cell
calcium measurements, electrophysiological patch-clamp recordings, and
cell migration assays. The results showed that TRPM7 plays a role in
regulating intracellular calcium signaling and NB cell migration.
Overall, the results from this study suggest that MYCN over-expression
and minute changes in extracellular calcium can promote NB cell migration
and invasion through a process that involves TRPM7. Furthermore, this
study identifies a new biomarker for NB (TRPM7) and novel target for the
development of more effective chemotherapeutic drugs for the treatment of
advanced stage NB.

