Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Culturing cancer cells on myoma tissue: Development of a novel
fully human organotypic 3D invasion model applicable as a preclinical
tool for cancer drug development.


Cancer cell invasion has been traditionally studied in three-dimensional
(3D) models composed of rat or mouse extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins.
These models remain artificial due to the lack of various human ECM
components and cell types that are present in the tumor microenvironment
in vivo. Uterine leiomyoma (myoma) is a benign smooth muscle neoplasm
with an incidence of 50% of all women over the age of 30 years in
Finland. Due to its neoplasmic characterization myoma tissue provides an
optimal microenvironment for studying cancer cell invasion and
metastasis. Large amounts of myoma tissue are constantly removed from
patients in routine operations and discarded, providing an unlimited
amount of myoma tissue available for cancer research. We have previously
characterized a novel fully human organotypic model where tongue squamous
cell carcinoma cells (HSC-3) were cultured on myoma tissue, and
demonstrated that the model was useful for studying HSC-3 cell invasion.
We have now studied the model further by culturing various human breast
and prostate cancer cell lines, including the breast cancer cell line
MDA-MB-231 and the prostate cancer cell line PC-3 on myoma tissue. The
myoma tissues were obtained from routine surgery after informed consent
of the patients. HSC-3 cells were used as a reference cell line to
confirm that the model works as expected. The cancer cells were cultured
on top of human uterine leiomyoma tissue discs for 14 days, and invasion
was assessed by histomorphometric analysis of the myoma tissue and
measuring the release of appropriate biomarkers, such as degradation
products of type I and type III collagen. A set of potential reference
compounds, including inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases, such as
1,10-phenanthroline, and cysteine proteases, such as E64, was tested for
their effects on invasion capacity of the tested cancer cell lines. The
results demonstrated that the tested breast and prostate cancer cell
lines were highly invasive in the myoma tissue, and the used reference
compounds inhibited the invasion of the cancer cells into the myoma
tissue. Our results indicate that the myoma model can be applied for
several cancer cell lines. We conclude that the established fully human
organotypic 3D model is a reliable tool for demonstrating the efficacy of
known reference compounds capable of inhibiting cancer cell invasion and
metastasis, and it has the potential to be developed as a clinically
predictive large scale method for identifying novel cancer drug
candidates and confirming their efficacy in early preclinical phase of
cancer drug development.

