Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of microRNA(miRNA) signature genes for
chemoresistance through high throughput profiling of cancer related
miRNAs (OncomiRs) in ovarian cancer cell lines and formalin fixed,
paraffin embedded (FFPE) ovarian tissues.


The standard treatment for ovarian cancer after cytoreductive surgery is
platinum combined with taxane based chemotherapy. However, most patients
quickly develop resistance to these therapies. Many miRNA have been
implicated to play critical roles in regulating genes involved in
chemoresistance.In order to understand mechanism of potential drug
resistance to small molecule agents used in our pipeline antibody drug
conjugates, we first optimized and developed a gene expression panel for
detecting 96 OncomiRs that have previously been identified as either
oncogenic or tumor suppressive genes in multiple cancer types using the
Fluidigm 96.96 dynamic array platform. A synthetic miRNA pool and a
22-tissue totalRNA pool were first titrated and tested against these 96
OncomiRs to determine the feasibility of multiplexing of 96 genes in the
reverse transcription and pre-PCR amplification steps and the dynamic
range of the assay. The slopes of Ct vs. RNA input in most assays showed
over 90% amplification efficiency and more than 1000 fold detection
range. We then profiled 53 ovarian cancer cell lines using this
96-OncomiR panel.Unsupervised hierarchical clustering showed that
expression of 96 genes in these cell lines could separate them into two
distinctive clusters with overexpression of either markers for epithelial
or for mesenchymal subtypes, indicating the OncomiR panel could represent
both molecular subtypes. By correlating miRNA expression levels of these
cell lines with their responses to several chemotherapeutic compounds, we
have identified distinctive miRNA signatures of sensitivity or resistance
to each compound. The overexpression of some miRNAs is consistently
correlated with resistance to multiple compounds implying their target
mRNA genes might confer multidrug resistance. We have also profiled 130
FFPE samples from ovarian cancer patients who were either platinum
treatment sensitive or resistant using the OncomiR panel. miRNA
expression markers for predicting platinum sensitivity and resistance
will be also presented. In conclusion, our OncomiRFluidigm panel can
provide an important tool for predicting clinical outcome and drug
response.

