Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NADH oxidase, Enox1 activity, is required for vasculogenesis in
Zebrafish.


Establishment of an adequate vascular network is a crucial event for
tumor development. Emerging research has implicated the endothelial redox
state as a significant regulator of vascular growth and remodeling. ENOX1
encodes a protein that is expressed in mammalian endothelial cells and
exhibits NADH oxidase activity. Recent research suggests that ENOX1
functions as a positive regulator of angiogenesis. However, direct
genetic evidence supporting this hypothesis is lacking. We used a
zebrafish model to directly examine the role of Enox1 during embryonic
vascular development. Whole mount in situ hybridization coupled with
immunocytochemistry performed on zebrafish cryosections show that enox1
message and the translated protein are expressed in heart and blood
vessels during embryonic development. Furthermore, use of
immunocytochemistry demonstrates that Enox1 co-localizes with vascular
expression of the ETS-domain transcription factor fli in heart and
intersegmental vessels. Using in vivo multiphoton microscopy, we show
that morpholino-mediated knockdown of Enox1 in Zebrafish embryos
increases NADH fluorescence, an expected consequence of loss of Enox1
oxidase activity. Phenotypic manifestations resulting from loss of Enox1
function in embryos include vascular defects, most notably loss of
fli-eGFP and flk-eGFP (receptor kdr, VEGFR2 in mammals) expression in
intersegmental vessels and a loss of blood circulation in the
intersegmental vessels. Pharmacological inhibition of Enox1 activity
using a novel small molecule phenocopies the defects observed following
morpholino-mediated functional knockdown. Together, these results show
that Enox1-mediated redox regulation is essential for vasculogenesis in
vertebrates in vivo. These results, in conjunction with previous work
that demonstrated that inhibition of ENOX1 radiosensitized tumor
vasculature, support the hypothesis that ENOX1 represents a novel target
for impairing tumor angiogenesis.

