Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and preclinical evaluation of single agents with
combination chemotherapy potential.


Antiangiogenic agents target tumor mechanisms involved in blood vessel
formation vital for tumor growth and metastases. However, these agents
are mainly cytostatic and usually not tumoricidal. Several combinations
of antiangiogenic and cytotoxic agents have shown significant promise in
the clinic, and several clinical trials are in progress. Single agents
with both antiangiogenic activities and cytotoxicity would afford agents
that would circumvent pharmacokinetic problems of multiple agents, avoid
drug-drug interactions, could be used at lower doses to alleviate
toxicity, be devoid of overlapping toxicities, and could delay or prevent
tumor cell resistance. We designed, synthesized and evaluated a novel
compound AG119 that inhibits both vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) affording antiangiogenic effects and tubulin for
cytotoxic effects in a single agent. Structural modifications of AG119
afforded AG321 that inhibited platelet derived growth factor receptor-
(PDGFR-) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in addition to
VEGFR-2 and tubulin. The novel compounds AG119 and AG321 were potent
inhibitors (activity comparable to that of combretastatin A-4) of bovine
brain tubulin assembly and of [3H]colchicine binding to tubulin,
indicating that these compounds bind at the colchicine site on tubulin.
Both compounds have potency comparable to those of sunitinib and
semaxinib in tumor cell lines overexpressing VEGFR-2. AG321 has potency
comparable to that of erlotinib in tumor cell lines overexpressing EGFR
and potency comparable to those of erlotinib, DMBI and PD153035 in cell
lines overexpressing PDGFR-. Both AG119 and AG321 also inhibited
angiogenesis in the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay. AG321 is a
unique compound with four separate mechanisms of action in a single agent
including inhibition of tubulin. This is unprecedented and to our
knowledge, is the first of its kind. In mice, AG119 reduced tumor size
and vascularity in two flank xenograft models [the BLBC MDA-MB-435 model
and U251 glioma model] and in a 4T1 triple negative breast orthotopic
allograft model. In these in vivo models, the activity of AG119 was
superior to those of temozolomide (U251), docetaxel and sunitinib
(MDA-MB-435 and 4T1) without overt toxicity to the animals.

