Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Periostin expression in glioma correlates with genes related to
mesenchymal transition and survival.


Background: Gliomas are the most common primary brain tumors and their
prognosis is related to WHO histopathological grade. Glioblastoma (grade
IV astrocytoma or GBM) is characterized by microscopic invasion into
surrounding brain and universally poor prognosis despite treatment with
surgery, radiation and chemotherapy . Recently, the matricellular protein
periostin (POSTN) has been shown to be associated with increased
parenchymal invasion (measured by edema on MRI) and poor prognosis in
GBM. The specific aim of the present analysis was to determine the
mechanistic impact of POSTN on glioma outcome.Methods: We used the gene
expression of POSTN from 559 GBM patients (pts) included in the Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) to build a gene expression model of the expression of
12184 genes to predict POSTN expression using elastic net. This model was
used to predict the POSTN expression in a testing set of 419 pts with
gliomas included in Repository for Brain Neoplasia Data (REMBRANDT) (99
grade II, 71 grade III and 125 grade IV and 124 with no grade).
Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) and survival analysis were
performed to measure the performance of the model, and gene-set
enrichment analysis (GSEA) was used to reveal network topology
perturbations.Results: The gene expression model discovered 721 genes
highly correlated to POSTN expression that predict POSTN in the testing
set with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.96 on ROC curve. GSEA reveals
genes involved in mesenchymal transition, transition of invasive ductal
carcinoma (IDC) from ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) in breast cancer and
stem cell signatures. Survival analysis of the TCGA GBM pts showed that
the cohort with high POSTN had worse survival (median 12 months versus 15
months, log-rank p=0.0002). When applied to all pts in REMBRANDT, the
model predicted classes also had significantly different survival (median
13.4 versus 38 months, log-rank pBackground: Gliomas are the most common
primary brain tumors and their prognosis is related to WHO
histopathological grade. Glioblastoma (grade IV astrocytoma or GBM) is
characterized by microscopic invasion into surrounding brain and
universally poor prognosis despite treatment with surgery, radiation and
chemotherapy . Recently, the matricellular protein periostin (POSTN) has
been shown to be associated with increased parenchymal invasion (measured
by edema on MRI) and poor prognosis in GBM. The specific aim of the
present analysis was to determine the mechanistic impact of POSTN on
glioma outcome.Methods: We used the gene expression of POSTN from 559 GBM
patients (pts) included in the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) to build a gene
expression model of the expression of 12184 genes to predict POSTN
expression using elastic net. This model was used to predict the POSTN
expression in a testing set of 419 pts with gliomas included in
Repository for Brain Neoplasia Data (REMBRANDT) (99 grade II, 71 grade
III and 125 grade IV and 124 with no grade). Receiver-operating
characteristic (ROC) and survival analysis were performed to measure the
performance of the model, and gene-set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was
used to reveal network topology perturbations.Results: The gene
expression model discovered 721 genes highly correlated to POSTN
expression that predict POSTN in the testing set with an area under the
curve (AUC) of 0.96 on ROC curve. GSEA reveals genes involved in
mesenchymal transition, transition of invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC)
from ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) in breast cancer and stem cell
signatures. Survival analysis of the TCGA GBM pts showed that the cohort
with high POSTN had worse survival (median 12 months versus 15 months,
log-rank p=0.0002). When applied to all pts in REMBRANDT, the model
predicted classes also had significantly different survival (median 13.4
versus 38 months, log-rank p<0.0001). Interestingly, this classification
of survival persists in the subset of pts with grade III (n=71, median
survival 17.7 versus 42.4 months, p=0.0125) and grade II (n=99, median
survival 17.9 versus 50.8, p=0.02) gliomas.Conclusions: We have developed
a gene expression model related to POSTN, a gene linked to poor prognosis
in GBM, to investigate the role correlated genes may play in the
aggressive phenotype. Some of the genes found to be highly correlated to
POSTN are related to mesenchymal transition, invasive behavior in breast
cancer and stemness. We verify that high POSTN expression is a strong
prognostic indicator for poor outcome in GBM, and reveal for the first
time that pts with grade II and III glioma with a high POSTN signature
have significantly worse survival. Given that low grade glioma pts often
have less aggressive treatment at time of diagnosis, we propose studying
the role of early chemoradiation in the subset of pts with poor POSTN
signature to potentially improve their outcome.

