Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic potential of T-Oligo and role of tankyrase in its
mechanism of action.


When telomeres are disrupted, exposure of the single stranded 3 overhang
triggers DNA damage pathways resulting in cell senescence and apoptosis.
T-oligo, an oligonucleotide homologous to the 3 overhang, mimics telomere
exposure inducing p53 /p73 associated damage responses in malignant cells
with negligible effects on normal tissues. To test the ability of T-oligo
as a therapeutic agent, subcutaneous NSCLC tumors were established in
nude mice which were given daily intratumoral injections (60 nmoles) of
T-oligo or a complementary oligonucleotide for 6 weeks. SW1573 and H358
tumors treated with T-oligo exhibited a 5.6 and 4.3 fold reduction in
tumor size respectively. Examination of tumor sections for senescence
using -galactosidase revealed that both H358 and SW1573 exhibited strong
staining for senescence compared to controls. Staining for angiogenesis
and vasculogenesis in H358 and SW1573 displayed 2.2 fold and 3 fold
reduction, respectively. These results indicate that T-oligo not only
reduced tumor size and vessel density, but also induced senescence
suggesting that T-oligo, may be a molecularly targeted cancer therapy. To
test the efficacy of T-oligo after IV delivery subcutaneous melanoma
tumors were treated with IV T-oligo (78 nmoles) for 4 weeks which
resulted in a 3.7 fold reduction in T-oligo treated tumor volume. These
tumors are further being evaluated for angiogenesis and vasculogenesis.
The role of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase, tankyrase-1, in T-oligo
mediated DNA damage responses was assessed using XAV939, a tankyrase
inhibitor. Tankyrase-1 parsylates TRF1, releasing it from the telomere,
allowing telomerase to access telomeric DNA thereby increasing telomere
length. TRF1, a protein associated with the protective telomere T-loop
structure, negatively controls telomere length. Since TRF1 plays a role
in the stability of the shelterin complex (a specialized set of proteins
responsible for maintaining the DNA T-loop structure), immunoblots were
made for AN (melanoma) and H358 (lung cancer) cell lines and probed for
TRF1. Preliminary results indicate 1.7 fold downregulation of TRF1 upon
treatment with T-oligo and a negligible difference in the presence of a
combination of T-oligo and XAV939. T-oligo treatment also induced a 2.6
fold upregulation of TRF-2 and treatment with T-oligo and XAV939 reduced
this upregulation to 1 fold suggesting that T-oligo may only stabilizes
part of the free shelterin complex and the rest is degraded by the cell.
These results suggest that tankyrase-1 maybe involved in T-oligo mediated
signaling and maybe associated with the shelterin complex upon
parsylation of TRF1.

