Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a "dual-hit" combination therapy for CML.


Functioning as a constitutively active tyrosine kinase, the oncoprotein
Bcr-Abl, the causative agent of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), requires
homo-oligomerization via a coiled-coil domain present on the N-terminus
of the Bcr portion of the protein. Currently, small molecule therapeutics
that target the tyrosine kinase domain (tyrosine kinase inhibitors, or
TKIs) are administered as the gold standard treatment for CML. However,
evidence shows that the acquisition of mutations in the tyrosine kinase
domain against these small molecules is inevitable, rendering many of the
therapeutics useless against mutated forms of Bcr-Abl. The most recently
discovered TKI, ponatinib (AP24534), has shown to combat nearly all of
the commonly seen mutations, including the previously uncontrollable
T315I mutation. But, ponatinib is not without limitations, as it has been
shown to cause dose-dependent pancreatitis and thrombocytopenia as
adverse side effects. While many small molecules have been created to
target the tyrosine kinase domain, our recent work has shown that
disruption of Bcr-Abl oligomerization can also induce apoptosis and
decrease the oncogenic potential of the disease. This work was done using
a modified coiled-coil domain, termed CCmut3, which was rationally
designed and mutated to bind to the endogenous Bcr-Abl coiled-coil
domain, inhibiting oligomerization and thus preventing Bcr-Abl signaling.
The purpose of this work is to exploit a dual-hit approach to inhibit
Bcr-Abl using two therapeutics with different mechanisms of action. Here,
we show that combining CCmut3 with ponatinib not only increases the
potency of the therapy but also lowers the required therapeutic dose of
ponatinib in vitro using K562 cells (Bcr-Abl-positive, human CML cells).
Western blot analysis shows that both Bcr-Abl phosphorylation and
phosphorylation of downstream signaling targets STAT5 and CrkL can be
decreased using the combination at a ponatinib dose of 100 pM. In
addition, transformative ability (via colony forming assay) very
significantly declines when using a 1 nM dose in combination as opposed
to simply administering 1 nM ponatinib only. Finally, caspase 3/7, 7AAD,
and DNA segmentation assays were performed to show enhanced apoptosis
induction upon combination treatment when compared with either CCmut3 or
ponatinib treatment alone. Currently, this combination is being tested in
a Bcr-Abl-positive Ba/F3 cell line containing the T315I mutation in the
Abl tyrosine kinase domain. Lastly, attempts to truncate and cap the
CCmut3 helix to provide stability and more simple therapeutic delivery
are underway, in addition to elucidating the individual intracellular
mechanisms of action of both CCmut3 and ponatinib.

