Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of Illumina TruSeq Amplicon Cancer Panel with
concordance testing using Ion AmpliSeq Cancer Panel and other methods.


Introduction: The TruSeq Amplicon Cancer Panel (TSACP), a highly
multiplexed targeted resequencing assay for use on the Illumina MiSeq
platform, is designed for detecting the hotspot mutations in 212 Regions
of Interest (ROI) from 48 cancer related genes. Here we report our
validation study on the reproducibility, sensitivity and the specificity
of detecting single base substitutions and small indels by the
TSACP.Methods: We used well characterized cancer cell lines harboring
clinically relevant variants as positive controls and HapMap samples
NA12878 and NA19240 as wild type control samples. DNA from 8 cancer cell
lines was serially diluted into the control DNA NA12878 for validating
the Limit of Detection (LOD) of the TSACP assay. A total of 41 FFPE
patient specimens representing a variety of cancer types were analyzed in
a blinded fashion to evaluate the analytical sensitivity and specificity.
DNA quality was assessed using a qPCR assay. With no gold standard
available as a reference method to detect mutations with comparable
sensitivity, concordance testing was performed using the Ion AmpliSeq
Cancer Panel. Variants detected by both panels were considered as true
positives. Variants that were only covered by one of the two panels were
confirmed by a third method, either Sanger sequencing for variants with
frequencies above 10% or a custom Ion TargetSeq Assay for variants with
frequencies below 10%. Data were analyzed using MiSeq Reporter software
and our proprietary analysis pipeline. In addition to reporting hotspots
mutations, we also report Critical Variants such as non-synonymous coding
mutations and splicing site mutations that fall within the ROI.Results:
95% of our ROIs were sequenced at minimum of 0.2X normalized coverage. A
cell line dilution study showed that the LOD of confirmed variants is 5%.
DNA extracted from 4 of the 41 FFPE specimens failed the template QC by
qPCR and failed in the subsequent sequencing run. A total of 124 unique
critical variants, including single base substitution, single- or multi-
base (up to 21bp) deletion, one- or two- base insertion, were identified
in the cancer cell lines and 37 qualified FFPE samples. The intra-assay
and inter-assay reproducibility was 96%. Using our proprietary analysis
pipeline, the analytical sensitivity and specificity for the FFPE samples
were both 99%. One false negative of TSACP was identified by the Ion
AmpliSeq Cancer Panel and was further confirmed by Sanger sequencing.
This allele drop-off occurred as a result of the capture probe falling on
a SNP. Homopolymer indels in KIT and STK11 were accurately identified
with the Illumina sequencing chemistry.Conclusions: These studies
demonstrate that the TSACP assay is highly specific and sensitive and is
suitable for screening patient FFPE tumor specimens for a spectrum of
clinically relevant somatic mutations.

