Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insulinoma-associated 1 is a key transcriptional regulator of
growth and survival-promoting pathways in small cell lung cancer.


Insulinoma-associated 1 (INSM1) is neuroendocrine (NE) transcription
factor which temporal and spatial expression pattern is restricted to
regions undergoing NE differentiation during embryogenesis. INSM1 is
however re-expressed at high levels in small-cell lung cancer (SCLC)
together with an array of other NE markers. The NE signature of SCLC is a
central diagnostic tool for the disease but recent data pinpoints that
this distinct signature might play a role in SCLC pathogenesis.The
functional role of INSM1 in SCLC was here investigated by shRNA-mediated
silencing of INSM1 in a panel of SCLC cell lines. Upon silencing of
INSM1, significant reduction in cell viability was observed as measured
by MTT assay. This reduction in cell viability was concomitant with
decreased cell proliferation and increased apoptosis as measured by BrdU
incorporation and cleaved caspase 3/7 levels, respectively. Accordingly
with phenotypic growth changes it was demonstrated that INSM1 silencing
caused reduced phosphorylation of members of the growth- and
survival-promoting PI3K/Akt, MAPK and JAK-STAT signaling pathways and
reduced levels of the inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) members
c-IAP1, XIAP and survivin. Importantly, it was shown that INSM1 is an
upstream regulator of signatures previously shown to play a role in SCLC
tumorigenesis, including achate-scute homolog 1 (ASCL1) and Sonic
Hedgehog (SHh) pathway. Upon silencing of INSM1, a decrease in mRNA and
protein levels of ASCL1 and downstream targets aldehyde dehydrogenase 1
(ALDH1) and delta-like ligand 3 (DLL3) was observed. Furthermore, mRNA
levels of the SHh positive mediators Gli2, Gli3 and Smoothened was
downregulated while the SHh inhibitor Patched was upregulated upon INSM1
silencing. Futhermore, overexpression of the Notch1 intracellular domain
in SCLC cells resulted in a significant reduction in INSM1 expression and
cell viability. This suggest that a master inhibitor of the NE signature,
Notch1 signaling, could be an inhibitor of INSM1-driven tumorigenesis.In
conclusion, INSM1 is a potential key driver of growth- and
survival-promoting pathways in SCLC and warrants further investigation of
INSM1 as a therapeutic target.

