Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel natural product disrupts androgen receptor signaling in
prostate cancer cells.


Continued reliance on androgen receptor (AR) signaling is a hallmark of
prostate cancer, including the development of castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC), making it an attractive therapeutic target for
prostate cancer treatment. Mahanine is a novel carbazole alkaloid derived
from the leaves of Murraya koenigii, commonly known as the curry leaf
plant, which grows widely across East Asia. We have reported previously
that mahanine possesses the ability to inhibit prostate cancer cell
growth. Since sustained AR signaling is associated with the development
of CRPC, we investigated the effect of mahanine treatment on AR signaling
in prostate cancer cells. Using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction, we observed that AR signaling was disrupted by mahanine
treatment, leading to a prominent decline in the expression of a number
of AR target genes. Androgen response element-luciferase and PSA
promoter-luciferase assays showed that androgen-induced AR
transcriptional activity diminished by approximately 85% upon mahanine
treatment. Furthermore, mahanine induced the export of the AR from the
nucleus, resulting in its accumulation in the cytoplasm. Cellular levels
of the AR were found to decrease in a time- and dose-dependent manner
following mahanine treatment, without any noticeable change in its
message levels, suggesting that mahanine affected AR protein levels
post-translationally, without any effect on its gene expression.
Concomitant administration of a proteasome inhibitor, MG132,
significantly rescued the decline in AR levels observed upon mahanine
treatment, indicating that mahanine induced proteasomal degradation of
the AR. Collectively, these data demonstrate that mahanine treatment
disrupts AR signaling in prostate cancer cells, leading to its
cytoplasmic accumulation and subsequent degradation by proteasomal
mechanisms, and suggest a potential therapeutic role for mahanine in
prostate cancer treatment. This work is supported by NIH R01 CA131123.

