Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Towards an understanding of the different expression profile of
fibroblasts from distinct subtypes from breast cancer and normal mammary
tissue assessed by transcriptome sequencing.


The highly heterogeneous clinical, histological, biological and genetic
nature of breast malignancies is due in part to their extreme molecular
complexity. During breast carcinogenesis, cancer associated fibroblasts
(CAFs) have active role in the initiation, progression, metastasis and
recurrence of tumors, which adds new levels of complexity to cancer
biology, but also brings new prognostic and therapeutic opportunities. We
implemented a pilot study to explore the postulation that CAFs within the
stroma may exhibit specific gene expression profiles according to the
carcinoma subtype. We enrolled frozen breast tissues from nine human
breast samples representing three normal tissues, three luminal A and
three triple negative subtypes. Fibroblasts were isolated by laser
microdissection. For each subtype studied, a cDNA library was constructed
and submitted to a transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) on the Genome
Sequencer FLX Titanium 454 Plataform. The generated data revealed a total
of 14,950 transcripts sequenced and 10,586 genes identified (53.72% of
the human genome repertoire). A list of 221 differentially expressed
transcripts, obtained by pair wise comparisons among the 3 groups, was
ranked by their probabilities of differential expression from 91%-100%
(greater expression probability), and from 0.09-9.8% (lower expression
probability). Functional similarity interactions (Fun-Net) were
constructed using Gene Ontology (GO) annotations as defined in the Entrez
Gene database to identify biological functions overrepresented. In
addition, 36 differentially expressed genes were selected for technical
and biological validation by RT-qPCR (Taqman Low Density Array - TLDA)
and tissue microarray (TMA) techniques. Until now 10 out of 20
differentially expressed genes were validated by RT-qPCR. Considering the
comparison between fibroblasts associated either to triple negative or
luminal breast carcinoma subtypes, five differentially expressed genes
were confirmed: S100A13, PPIA, HNRNP0, CUL3 and SLC25A32. Our results
indicate that specific changes exist in CAFs derived from breast cancer
subtypes, which in turn may contribute to each tumor subtype specific
clinical behavior. Supported by FAPESP: 05/60333-7, 09/10088-7.

