Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mouse model of epithelial ovarian cancer with defined oncogenic
drivers.


Epithelial ovarian cancers (EOC) represent the gynecologic malignancy
with the highest mortality rate. The Cancer Genome Atlas demonstrated a
high degree of genetic heterogeneity among the papillary serous (PS)
tumors, the most lethal of the EOC subtypes. Aside from almost universal
mutation in TP53, there was a low prevalence of recurrent mutations in
other genes, presenting a challenge to the development of targeted
therapeutics against this aggressive tumor type. We are developing a
mouse model of EOC by introducing defined genetic alterations to mouse
ovarian surface epithelial (MOSE) cells. We had a particular interest in
developing a cyclin E amplified tumor model, as CCNE1 amplification is
found in 20% of human EOC tumors, making this one of the most prevalent
PS EOC subtypes. We infected MOSE cells from p53-/- mice with different
combinations of oncogenes encoded in retroviral vectors including CCNE1,
myc and H-RAS. MOSE cells were infected with one or two oncogenes,
passaged and injected into the peritoneal cavity of nude mice. Myc-HRAS
caused the rapid development of hemorrhagic ascites and intraperitoneal
carcinomatosis in 5 of 5 mice by day 18. HRAS alone and HRAS-CCNE1 both
caused intraperitoneal and omental tumors to develop with clear ascites
by day 35 in 5 of 5 mice. Myc caused bloating due to the development of
frank hemoperitoneum in all 5 mice between days 101 and 150. Only 4 of
the 5 mice had small volume intraperitoneal tumors. Myc-CCNE1 similarly
caused bloating due to ascites in 2 mice and hemoperitoneum in 2 mice.
Three of these four mice had small volume intraperitoneal tumors. One
mouse has not developed any phenotype by 150 days. CCNE1 alone has not
caused tumor formation in any of 5 mice by day 150. Histology of the
Myc-HRAS, HRAS, HRAS-CCNE1, and Myc tumors were all consistent with
high-grade undifferentiated carcinoma. Tumor cells generated in the
Myc-HRAS, HRAS and HRAS-CCNE1 experiments were capable of causing
intraperitoneal tumor development in immunocompetent C57BL/6 mice by day
17, 29 and 54 respectively. Taken together, our data demonstrate a
reproducible mouse model for the development of high-grade epithelial
ovarian carcinomas with defined genetic alterations that are capable of
study in both immunodeficient and immunocompetent mice. Tumor phenotypes
varied based on the combination of activated oncogenes.

