Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of the primary human tumor xenograft (tumorgraft)
mouse model of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), the most common form of
pancreatic cancer continues to be plagued by a low overall 5 year
survival rate, which has remained at a stagnant 5% over the past 30
years. In addition, pancreatic cancer is the 10th leading diagnosed
cancer, yet is the 4th leading cause of cancer related deaths in the US,
in both men and women. Recent research efforts have been focused on
increasing our understanding of the molecular and genetic aspects of
pancreatic cancer, in order to improve outcome for these patients. A
major tool of pancreatic cancer research has been the use of established
cancer cell lines, although the inherent ability of these cell lines to
recapitulate human pancreatic disease is not ideal, due to growth in
artificial environment and homogenous nature. Implantation of primary
human tumor samples into immune compromised mice have been shown to be
more genetically heterogeneous, and allow for more relevant genetic
profiling data when compared to established cell lines. To better
understand the molecular and genetic events in pancreatic cancer, we
established a patient derived primary human tumor xenograft (tumorgraft)
model system. Briefly, non-diagnostic tumor tissue was procured from
previously consented patients at the University of Alabama at Birmingham
Hospital, under IRB approved protocols. The tumors were then examined
grossly by a pathologist, and immediately implanted into the flank of
immune compromised mice. Here we report, a set of 10 PDAC tumors, with a
mean age of patients at diagnosis of 68.3 ( 11.6) years. Primarily, these
tumors were stage II (six IIA and four IIB) and with a histological grade
reported as five moderately differentiated and five poorly
differentiated. Lymph node involvement at the time of surgical resection
was also assessed and six patients were positive, while four patients
were negative. The tumorgrafts retained the morphological and
histological characteristics of the primary tumor, even after serial
passage in mice, as determined by a pathologist blinded to tumor
identity. Currently, we are using next generation sequencing to generate
detailed gene expression, epigenetic, and genotyping profiles of these
established PDAC tumors. This work is supported by UAB/UMN SPORE in
Pancreatic Cancer-Career Development Award and the Department of
Pharmacology/Toxicology, UAB.

