Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TMPRSS4 regulates levels of integrin alpha-5 in NSCLC through
miR-205 activity.


TMPRSS4 is a membrane-anchored protease involved in cell migration and
invasion in different cancer types including lung cancer. We have
previously shown that TMPRSS4 expression is increased in NSCLC and that
its inhibition through shRNA reduces lung metastasis. The goal of the
present study was to elucidate molecular mechanisms involved in the
protumorigenic role of TMPRSS4 in NSCLC. A knock down strategy and
microarray analyses were established to identify genes regulated by
TMPRSS4. Among other genes, miR-205 was identified as an overexpressed
gene upon TMPRSS4 downregulation. Levels of miR-205 were found to be
reduced in NSCLC cells compared to non-malignant cells. miR-205
overexpression promoted the acquisition of an epithelial phenotype with
increased E-cadherin and reduced fibronectin expression, probably through
the regulation of transcription factors ZEB1 and ZEB2. Furthermore,
miR-205 inhibited very significantly (pTMPRSS4 is a membrane-anchored
protease involved in cell migration and invasion in different cancer
types including lung cancer. We have previously shown that TMPRSS4
expression is increased in NSCLC and that its inhibition through shRNA
reduces lung metastasis. The goal of the present study was to elucidate
molecular mechanisms involved in the protumorigenic role of TMPRSS4 in
NSCLC. A knock down strategy and microarray analyses were established to
identify genes regulated by TMPRSS4. Among other genes, miR-205 was
identified as an overexpressed gene upon TMPRSS4 downregulation. Levels
of miR-205 were found to be reduced in NSCLC cells compared to
non-malignant cells. miR-205 overexpression promoted the acquisition of
an epithelial phenotype with increased E-cadherin and reduced fibronectin
expression, probably through the regulation of transcription factors ZEB1
and ZEB2. Furthermore, miR-205 inhibited very significantly (p<0.01)
tumor cell migration, invasion and metastasis formation in vivo. A
further transcriptional and luciferase assays in miR-205-overexpressing
cells identified integrin alpha-5 (a proinvasive protein overexpressed in
tumors) as a new miR-205 target in NSCLC. We have therefore demonstrated
for the first time a new molecular connection between TMPRSS4 and
integrin alpha-5 through miR-205.

