Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of protein tyrosine kinase 7 gene in hepatocellular
carcinoma using a novel triple-combination array analysis.


Background. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the top five causes
of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Recent developments in the treatment
of HCC still have failed to prevent HCC. Genome-wide gene-expression
profile analyses can now detect many candidate genes that are modified by
HCC. We have developed a new technique to identify suppressor genes of
HCC: triple-combination array analysis, which combines gene expression
profile, single nucleotide polymorphism array and methylation
array.Methods. Triple-combination array analysis was performed on one HCC
sample from a 68-year-old female patient, and one candidate of tumor
suppressor gene was selected. Subsequently, we analyzed the identified
gene by quantitative real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) and methylation-specific PCR in samples from 48 HCC
patients and in nine cell lines.Results. Using this method, protein
tyrosine kinase 7 (PTK7) was detected as a candidate of tumor suppressor
gene. PTK7 gene is located on 6q21.2, and expression was reduced in HCC
tissues at the high level of -2.5 compared with normal tissues. PTK7
locus did not show any deletion or amplification in the SNP array. The
methylation value (0-1.0) in the tumor sample was 0.825 compared to 0.047
in normal tissues, indicating high methylation in tumor tissues in the
methylation array. Of the 48 clinical samples, 30 (62.5%) showed PTK7
promoter hypermethylation. The PTK7 promoter hypermethylated cases were
significantly low expressions status (P=0.035), and bad prognosis in both
overall survival (PBackground. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of
the top five causes of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Recent
developments in the treatment of HCC still have failed to prevent HCC.
Genome-wide gene-expression profile analyses can now detect many
candidate genes that are modified by HCC. We have developed a new
technique to identify suppressor genes of HCC: triple-combination array
analysis, which combines gene expression profile, single nucleotide
polymorphism array and methylation array.Methods. Triple-combination
array analysis was performed on one HCC sample from a 68-year-old female
patient, and one candidate of tumor suppressor gene was selected.
Subsequently, we analyzed the identified gene by quantitative real-time
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
methylation-specific PCR in samples from 48 HCC patients and in nine cell
lines.Results. Using this method, protein tyrosine kinase 7 (PTK7) was
detected as a candidate of tumor suppressor gene. PTK7 gene is located on
6q21.2, and expression was reduced in HCC tissues at the high level of
-2.5 compared with normal tissues. PTK7 locus did not show any deletion
or amplification in the SNP array. The methylation value (0-1.0) in the
tumor sample was 0.825 compared to 0.047 in normal tissues, indicating
high methylation in tumor tissues in the methylation array. Of the 48
clinical samples, 30 (62.5%) showed PTK7 promoter hypermethylation. The
PTK7 promoter hypermethylated cases were significantly low expressions
status (P=0.035), and bad prognosis in both overall survival (P<0.01) and
recurrence-free survival (P=0.018) compared to hypomethylated cases. On
the other hand, the cases, of which the PTK7 expressions in tumor tissues
decreased by more than 20% degrees compared to those in normal tissues,
were significantly worse prognosis in overall survival (P=0.0136) than
the other cases, but not in recurrence-free survival
(P=0.3102).Conclusions. We suggest that the PTK7 gene acts as a tumor
suppressor gene in HCC. This present study indicates that
triple-combination array is an available and convenient technique for
detecting the genes with altered expression in disease.

