Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Severity of prostate cancer and socioeconomic status in Hispanics
in Puerto Rico.


In Puerto Rico, prostate cancer age adjusted death rate between
2004-2008, was 30.1 per 100,000 males per year, higher than for Hispanics
(21.2) and white non Hispanics (26.4) in the United States. Increased
mortality could be due to differences in disease biology, exposures or
socioeconomic factors. Recognizing these factors our group is involved in
studying the relationship of Ancestry Informative Markers (AIMs) and
Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms(SNPs) with risk/aggressiveness of
prostate cancer in African American and Puerto Rican cohorts of patients
that underwent a radical prostatectomy. In addition to the genetic and
AIMs analysis, we have assessed the statistical association between
prostate cancer severity and socioeconomic status controlling for
potential confounders. Here we report the results in a group of 244
participants in Puerto Rico. The statistical method of principal
component analysis (PCA) was used to determine the socioeconomic status
(SES) at the geographical area of group level. We used the following four
socioeconomic indicators available in the US Census 2000: unemployment
rate, the inverse of median annual household income, percentage of the
population living below the poverty level, and percentage of the
population aged 25 years or older with less than 12 years of education.
Due the fact that the first principal component (PC) has the cumulative
variance greater than 75%, we selected this PC to define the
socioeconomic profile (SEP) index at the group level as a proxy of the
SES. We categorized the SEP using quintiles to set the scale boundaries,
where SEP1 represents the highest socioeconomic level (lowest social
deprivation) and the SEP5 represents the lowest socioeconomic level
(highest social deprivation). Definition of disease risk groups was :a)
Low risk: pT2 and Gleason score less than or equal to 3+4=7; b) High
risk: pT3, or positive surgical margin, or Gleason score greater than or
equal to 4+3=7.Results: The odds(OR) of being diagnosed with Gleason
scores > 7 is 1.75(95%CI)in SEP5 than in SEP1. A gradient in the odds
ratios is observed as the SEP decreases. The odds of being categorized as
high risk disease among participants in SEP5 was 45% higher (OR: 1.45,
95% CI: 0.60-3.52) the odds of being categorized as high risk disease
among participants in SEP1. This increase was not statistically
significant (p>0.05). Detailed analyses will be presented. Conclusions:
Further analyses are needed with an expanded number of participants to
assess prevalence of high severity of disease in the SEP5.

