Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of GRP78 scFv-Subtilase fusion proteins for
sensitization of melanoma to chemotherapeutics.


GRP78 is an important molecular chaperone in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER). However, GRP78 is aberrantly expressed on the surface of melanoma
cells. Our objective is to characterize cell-surface GRP78 in melanoma
and determine whether immunoconjugates against GRP78 are a viable
treatment strategy. We have demonstrated that cleavage of ER GRP78 by
Subtilase (SubAB), a GRP78-specific protease, sensitizes melanoma cell
lines of different genotypes to melphalan, vemurafenib, and temozolomide.
Our data indicate that SubAB cleavage of GRP78 sensitizes melanoma cells
to melphalan and vemurafenib. We then coupled the catalytic domain of
SubAB, SubA, to GRP78-single chain variable fragments derived from
anti-GRP78 mouse monoclonal antibodies. We have previously published that
these antibodies target GRP78+ mouse melanomas in a syngeneic mouse
melanoma model. These GRP78 scFv-SubA fusion proteins are internalized by
cell-surface GRP78 and the SubA moiety cleaves ER GRP78 inside the cell,
leading to tumor cell sensitization to chemotherapeutics, and in some
instances, tumor cell death. To determine the mechanism by which ER GRP78
cleavage sensitizes melanoma cells to chemotherapeutics, the NH2-terminal
28 kDa and COOH-terminal 50 kDa SubA cleavage products were overexpressed
in melanoma cells, and pull-down experiments were performed to identify
binding partners. Microarray analyses were also performed on
chemotherapy-treated and GRP78 scFv-SubA fusion protein-treated melanoma
cells to obtain a broad view of cellular events that occurred subsequent
to ER GRP78 cleavage by SubAB or GRP78 scFv-SubA fusion proteins. These
fusion proteins will then be tested in mouse melanoma models to determine
whether they sensitize cancer cells to chemotherapeutics in vivo. These
results of these studies may lead to the development of novel melanoma
therapeutics.

