Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of penfluridol as potential treatment for
pancreatic cancer cells.


Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have provided promising anti-cancer
activities, but intrinsic or acquired resistance to these drugs is a
major problem. To overcome this resistance, we have used microarray
analysis to identify a signature of intrinsic drug resistance in human
pancreatic cancer cells, and applied this gene expression profile to
silico drug screening for potential drugs for pancreatic cancer therapy.
The potency of dasatinib (a multiple family TKI) was assessed against a
panel of 14 human pancreatic cancer cell lines. This drug is undergoing
clinical trials for pancreatic cancers. Nine of fourteen pancreatic cell
lines were growth inhibited by dasatinib. Three dasatinib-resistant
(MiaPaCa2, Panc1, SU8686) and three -sensitive (Panc0504, Panc1005,
Panc0403) pancreatic cancer cell lines were used in microarray analysis
to compare the gene expression profiles. A total of 598 genes were
differentially expressed in dasatinib-resistant cell lines compared to
the sensitive cell lines. To discover therapeutic drugs that sensitize
pancreatic cancer cells to dasatinib, we performed in silico drug
screening using the Connectivity Map database (CMAP). The gene signature
induced by thioridazine in CMAP showed a glove in hand pattern to that
found in dasatinib-resistant versus -sensitive pancreatic cancer cell
lines. Thioridazine belongs to the phenothiazine family including
chlorpromazine, perphenazine, penfluridol, and pimethixene. Each was
examined. Assays of cell proliferaton, cell cycle, and Annexin V showed
that each was effective at inhibiting the cell cycle and inducing
apoptosis. Penfluridol (a calcium channel inhibitor) was the most potent
against both the dasatinib-resistant and -sensitive pancreatic cancer
cell lines. Drug combination studies of penfluridol and either dasatinib
or gemcitabine (FDA-approved for pancreatic cancer) showed synergistic
enhancement of cytotoxicity. Mechanistic investigations suggested that
multiple signaling pathways were suppressed by penfluridol. These studies
suggest a potential novel class of drugs for treatment of pancreatic
cancers.

