Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wild-type p53-induced phosphatase 1 (Wip1) prevents cellular
senescence at physiological oxygen levels by regulating DNA damage
signaling during DNA replication.


Wip1 (PPM1D) is a nuclear serine/threonine protein phosphatase that is
induced by p53 following the activation of DNA damage response (DDR)
signaling. Upon repair of damage, Wip1 phosphatase activity dampens
stress signaling and facilitates the return to homeostasis, thus,
regulating recovery from DDR activation. Wip1 is amplified in several
types of human primary cancer and has been shown to promote tumorigenesis
by inhibiting several tumor suppressors, including p53, therefore its
oncogenic potential is now recognized. Interestingly, while Wip1 knockout
(Ppm1d/) mice are resistant to tumorigenesis, they exhibit reproductive
and immune system defects, increased stress sensitivity and a moderately
reduced lifespan. Furthermore, Ppm1d/ Mouse Embryonic Fibroblasts (MEFs)
exhibit premature senescence under conventional culture conditions.
Little is known, however, about the mechanism by which the deletion of
Ppm1d induces premature senescence. Therefore, we have investigated the
role of Wip1 in the regulation of cellular senescence in MEFs. We found
that at physiological oxygen tension (3% oxygen), early passage Ppm1d/
MEFs underwent increased cellular senescence as compared with wildtype
(Wt) MEFs, as shown by reduced proliferation rate, increased number of
flattened enlarged cells, increased SAGal positive cells, and reduced
BrdU incorporation. Moreover, under 3% oxygen, early passage Ppm1d/ MEFs
exhibited more H2AX positive foci, increased activation of p53 and
increased levels of p21 than Wt MEFs. Interestingly, we found that the
increased levels of H2AX in Ppm1d/ MEFs were primarily associated with
Sphase cells. Given that Sphase cells are more susceptible to oxidative
damage, the increased levels of H2AX may result from increased production
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in Ppm1d/ MEFs. However, primary passage
Wt and Ppm1d/ MEFs cultured under 3% oxygen exhibited no significant
difference in intracellularROS levels. Ppm1d/ MEFs did show sustained
activation of DDR signaling (H2AX, pp53Ser15, p21) after H2O2 treatment
compared with Wt MEFs. Furthermore, Ppm1d/ MEFs exhibited increased
activation of Chk1, indicating that there is increased replicative stress
signaling. These findings suggest that Wip1 prevents the induction of
cellular senescence by regulating both oxidative stress and replicative
stressinduced DNA damage signaling during DNA replication.

