Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear liaison between PAK4 and PPAR regulates radiation-induced
MOX-1-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cell migration via a
ROS-dependent mechanism in glioblastoma.


Despite the use of post-surgical radiation and chemotherapy, the mean
survival rate is less than two years in glioblastoma (GBM), the most
lethal human brain tumor. Augmented cell invasion and migration and
increased tumor recurrence after ionizing radiation (IR) treatment is, in
part, attributed to the IR-induced elevation in reactive oxygen species
(ROS) levels and ROS-dependent signaling in tumors. Several reports,
including our own studies, have confirmed the PAK4 oncogenic role in the
regulation of tumor cell migration and invasion in GBM and various other
tumors. However, the potential role of PAK4 in post-irradiated tumor
malignancy and the underlying molecular mechanisms still remain unknown.
Here, we show the significant PAK4 nuclear translocation in correlation
with elevated ROS-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
IR-treated human glioma xenograft cells 4910 and 5310. Surprisingly,
protein-transcription factor (TF) interaction arrays revealed a
significant binding of nuclear-PAK4 with several TFs involved in tumor
progression including AhR/ARNT, GATA1/2, FOXI1, Pax4, PPAR, PPAR and
TCF/LEF. We also observed that the nuclear co-localization of PAK4/PPAR
was elevated in correlation with increasing GBM grades. Most importantly,
IR treatment elevated the PAK4/PPAR nuclear interaction and increased
MOX-1 expression, a PPAR-target gene. In addition, EMSA and ChIP assays
confirmed the presence of PAK4 in the PPAR-DNA binding complex and
recruitment onto MOX-1 promoter, which is further elevated in IR-treated
cells. Stable shRNA-mediated knockdown of PPAR or inhibition with a
specific inhibitor, GW9662, abrogated IR-induced ROS levels, EMT and cell
migration in vitro. siRNA-mediated PAK4 downregulation significantly
decreased PPAR DNA-binding activity and MOX-1 expression and inhibited
EMT. On the other hand, PAK4 overexpression reversed GW9662-inhibited ROS
levels, EMT and migration. In vivo experiments in nude mice showed the
IR-induced PAK4/PPAR nuclear co-localization in tumors. Furthermore,
PAK4.si inhibited tumor growth and ROS-induced MOX-1 levels in IR-treated
tumors. In summary, our studies not only demonstrate a prominent
PAK4/PPAR nuclear interaction but also suggest a novel regulation of
PPAR-mediated EMT by PAK4, thereby indicating the future therapeutic
potential of targeting PAK4/PPAR binding in glioma treatment.

