Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression and functional analysis of LGR4 in normal and cancer
cells of human colon.


LGR4 (leucine-rich repeat containing G protein-coupled receptor 4) and
its two closely related homologues LGR5 and LGR6 have been shown to
function as receptors of R-spondins to potentiate Wnt signaling. The
RSPO/LGR4-6 ligand receptor system has essential functions in embryonic
development, cell proliferation and survival of adult stem cells.
Particularly, LGR4 is required for the survival of intestinal stem cells
and the maintenance of gut epithelium while LGR5 is specifically
expressed in crypt stem cells. Wnt signaling is frequently dysregulated
in various types of cancer, especially in colorectal cancers of which 90%
of cases are mutated within this pathway. Most recently, 10% of colon
cancers were found to contain RSPO gene fusions, but not APC or -catenin
alterations, as an alternative mechanism of Wnt signaling activation.
However, expression pattern and function of LGR4 in normal and cancer
cells of human colon are largely unknown. The underlying receptor
mediating the carcinogenic functions of RSPO gene fusion in colorectal
cancers is also unidentified. We developed and validated a panel of LGR4
antibodies that can detect either native or denatured LGR4 with high
specificity and sensitivity. Immunohistochemistry analyses were carried
out in multiple matched pairs of normal and cancer tissues of human
colon. In normal colon LGR4 is expressed most abundantly in epithelial
cells located at the bottom of the crypts, consistent with expression
data from the mouse intestine. In colon cancer, level of LGR4 is
dramatically increased when compared to that of the crypt cells of the
matched normal tissues. Next, we used an LGR4 antibody to isolate
LGR4-high and LGR4-low cells from a colorectal cancer cell line, and
compared the cell populations in rate of proliferation, migration,
invasion in vitro and tumor formation and growth in xenografts. Data from
these expression and functional analyses will be presented and discussed.

