Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of kidney progenitor cell differentiation status in Wilms
tumorigenesis.


Wilms Tumor (WT) is a pediatric cancer of the kidney and one of the most
common solid tumors of childhood. It is thought to arise from the
undifferentiated renal mesenchyme, however, it is unknown which
mesenchymal cell type can give rise to WT. The recent identification of
different subsets of human WTs with defined gene expression signature,
histology and clinical outcomes suggests that the cell differentiation
status may be an important factor in the etiology of these subsets.
Therefore, we hypothesize that WT can arise from fetal kidney cells at
different differentiation stages and that different progenitor
populations will result in different types of tumors in biology,
pathology and molecular signature.Our lab has generated the first genetic
WT mouse model via somatic and mosaic ablation of Wilms Tumor 1 (Wt1),
using a Wt1 conditional knockout allele with a ubiquitous
tamoxifen-inducible CGH-Cre, and Igf2 biallelic expression. In this
model, all types of embryonic kidney cells were randomly targeted. With
this successful approach, we now have the ability to test the effect of
introducing these alterations (Wt1 ablation in the context of Igf2
up-regulation or activation of -Catenin) into kidney nephrogenic
(Cited1-CreERT2) or stromagenic (Foxd1-CreERT2) progenitor cells. Very
interestingly, when the mutations were introduced into the nephrogenic
progenitors (Cited1-CreERT), WTs develop. These tumors express human WT
markers and show a tubular histology with predominant epithelial cells,
which histologically corresponds to the epithelial subset of human WTs.
To further characterize the biology of these tumors, we will perform gene
expression analysis and proteomic microarray analysis to identify
aberrantly dysregulated signaling pathways.This study will provide
insight into the cellular etiology of WT which may help to identify new
therapeutic approaches.

