Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The potential oncogenic significance of Wip1 in neuroblastoma.


Background:In neuroblastoma (NB) 17q+ is the most powerful genetic
predictor of adverse clinical outcome. We found aberrations of chromosome
17 in 85% in a national study of NB with 17q+ in 46% and whole 17 gain in
39%. Gain of 17q correlated with poor survival in our population-based
material. In NB gain of wild-type p53-induced phosphatase 1 (Wip1) at
17q23 is frequently detected. Wip1 is a serine/threonine phosphatase and
was described as a gatekeeper in the Mdm2-p53 regulatory loop by
promoting Mdm2-mediated proteolysis of p53.Methods:Comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) was used to analyze primary NB tumors and cell lines.
NB cells were examined for Wip1 expression using immunoblotting,
immunohistochemistry and qPCR. Stable Wip1 knockdown NB cells were
generated by shRNA transfections. H2AX phosphorylation and clonogenicity
of Wip1 knockdown were examined using flow cytometry and clonogenic
assay, respectively. In vivo, Wip1 knocked- and non-silenced cells were
injected in nude NMRI mice. Tumor formation was followed by daily
evaluation by digital caliper.Results:Detailed CGH analysis revealed that
Wip1 is present in at least one extra genomic copy in all 63 tumor
samples containing 17q gain. Results from our wide range of NB cell lines
demonstrate 17q aberrations in all samples. These findings have been
confirmed by analyzing the expression pattern of Wip1 using different
immunostaining techniques. Moreover, mRNA levels of Wip1 correlate to
Wip1 protein expression. Transfection experiments with shRNA against Wip1
showed decreased cell viability, proliferation and colony formation in NB
cells. In addition, substantial increase of gamma-H2AX expression after
Wip1 knockdown compared to the non-silencing transfection was observed.
Tumor xenograft development was significantly delayed showing median
tumor development (0.10 mL) to be more than doubled (15 days median, vs.
33 days) after Wip1 downregulation compared to animals injected with
cells transfected with the scrambled construct.Conclusions:Wip1
downregulation inhibits tumor development. Our results showed that Wip1
is present in at least one extra genomic copy in the majority of primary
NB. We identified NB cell lines expressing high, moderate and low levels
of Wip1 where Wip1 knocked cells exhibited decreased cell growth and
clonogenic capacity compared to non-silenced cells. Moreover, knockdown
of Wip1 induced phosphorylation of histone H2AX, indicating a significant
role of Wip1 in the DNA damage response of these tumors. Our data suggest
that Wip1 expression have significant oncogenic function in neuroblastoma
development.

