Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide profiling of the prostate cancer methylome for
biomarker discovery.


Prostate cancer (PC) is the most common malignancy, and the second most
common cause of cancer related death amongst men in the Western world.
The PC biomarkers currently available are unable to distinguish between
aggressive and indolent PC, causing significant over-diagnosis and
over-treatment. Here, by genomewide profiling of the DNA methylome, we
aimed to identify new molecular markers that can improve the accuracy of
diagnosis and prognosis of PC.In total, 21 PC, 9 normal (N), and 12
adjacent normal (AN) prostate tissue samples, as well as 15 prostate
(cancer) cell lines, were run on the Illumina Infinium
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip, which investigates Prostate cancer (PC) is
the most common malignancy, and the second most common cause of cancer
related death amongst men in the Western world. The PC biomarkers
currently available are unable to distinguish between aggressive and
indolent PC, causing significant over-diagnosis and over-treatment. Here,
by genomewide profiling of the DNA methylome, we aimed to identify new
molecular markers that can improve the accuracy of diagnosis and
prognosis of PC.In total, 21 PC, 9 normal (N), and 12 adjacent normal
(AN) prostate tissue samples, as well as 15 prostate (cancer) cell lines,
were run on the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip, which
investigates <485,000 CpG sites. The methylation data was analyzed using
the Mann-Whitney rank-sum test.Identification of differential methylation
between N and AN samples could potentially aid correct diagnosis of
patients with false negative biopsies. However, only 16 probes showed
significant differential methylation in N vs. AN samples (p-value
Prostate cancer (PC) is the most common malignancy, and the second most
common cause of cancer related death amongst men in the Western world.
The PC biomarkers currently available are unable to distinguish between
aggressive and indolent PC, causing significant over-diagnosis and
over-treatment. Here, by genomewide profiling of the DNA methylome, we
aimed to identify new molecular markers that can improve the accuracy of
diagnosis and prognosis of PC.In total, 21 PC, 9 normal (N), and 12
adjacent normal (AN) prostate tissue samples, as well as 15 prostate
(cancer) cell lines, were run on the Illumina Infinium
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip, which investigates <485,000 CpG sites. The
methylation data was analyzed using the Mann-Whitney rank-sum
test.Identification of differential methylation between N and AN samples
could potentially aid correct diagnosis of patients with false negative
biopsies. However, only 16 probes showed significant differential
methylation in N vs. AN samples (p-value <0.05,
Benjamini-Hochberg-adjusted, 0.2), none of which corresponded to the same
genomic locus. Also, multi-dimensional scaling, using the 10,000 most
variable CpG sites, showed that N and AN samples clustered very tightly
together, whereas PC samples showed great heterogeneity. Due to this
similarity in methylation between N and AN samples, these were pooled
into one control group for further analyses.We applied a cutoff value of
0.2 and a p-value of 0.05 (adjusted), which revealed 26,286 significantly
differentially methylated CpG sites between PC and controls (3076
hypomethylated and 23,210 hypermethylated in PC). Global analysis showed
that PC samples were hypermethylated in CpG islands (CGIs), a trend which
was even more pronounced in CGI shores and shelves. Although less common
overall, hypomethylation was also more prominent in shores and shelves
compared to CGIs.Applying a strict cutoff value of 0.6, only 69
significantly differentially methylated CpG sites remained. Of these, 55
sites were gene associated (41 different genes), all were hypermethylated
in PC samples, and all but one were located in CGIs.Out of these 41
genes, we selected 5 candidates for validation. In-house and publicly
available gene expression datasets showed that at least three of the
genes were downregulated in PC, consistent with silencing caused by
aberrant promoter methylation. Initial validation was carried out in PC
cell lines by bisulphite sequencing, which confirmed the array results
for all 5 genes. We are currently validating these findings by
methylation-specific qPCR analysis of a large independent patient cohort
with long clinical follow-up, in order to assess the
diagnostic/prognostic biomarker potential of these 5 novel candidate
methylation markers. These results will be presented at the conference.

