Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Ewing sarcoma with a new small molecule binding to the
EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein.


Ewing Sarcoma (ES) is a rare malignant round-cell tumor growing in bone
or soft tissue that occurs in childhood or early adulthood. Patients with
ES have a high rate of tumor recurrence and poor prognosis, highlighting
the urgent need for new therapies. About 95% of ES harbor a
t(11;22)(q24;q12) chromosomal translocation, resulting in an in-frame
gene fusion between the EWSR1 gene (chr.22) and one of the ETS family
genes, mainly FLI1 (chr.11). Recent studies show that EWS-FLI1 is an
oncoprotein that plays a central role in ES tumor initiation and
development. Given the specificity and critical role of EWS-FLI1 in ES
tumorigenesis, identification of new compounds that bind EWS-FLI1 is of
great significance for the development of new therapeutic approaches for
ES. Unfortunately, the rational design and screening of EWS-FLI1-
targeting small molecules has been hampered due to the poor solubility of
the protein in vitro and limited structural information.Here we report
the results of a small molecule screening aimed at identifying molecules
cytotoxic to ES cells, but not to glioma or non-tumoral control cells. In
this screening, we identified a class of sulfonamides that consistently
yielded ES cell inhibitors. KCN1, the lead compound, significantly
decreased viability of ES cells but not control cells in vitro, as
demonstrated by sulforhodamine B and clonogenicity assays. KCN1 blocked
progression through the cell cycle and triggered apoptosis in ES cells.
Expression profiling revealed that KCN1 prominently upregulated
expression of genes coding for enzymes of the mevalonate (cholesterol
synthesis) pathway, suggesting metabolic reprogramming. Further,
intraperitoneal administration of KCN1 (60 mg/kg) in ethanol/cremophor
formulation 5 times/week inhibited the growth of ES cells in vivo in a
nu/nu mouse model, while being very well tolerated without any overt
toxicity. To identify the molecular target of KCN1, we used an affinity
purification approach with a KCN1-biotin probe on cell extracts.
Following mass spectrometry, we identified that KCN1 interacts directly
with EWS and EWS-FLI1, suggesting binding to EWS N-terminus. ES cell
treatment with KCN1 is accompanied by downregulation of EWS-FLI1
transcriptional targets (NR0B1, cyclin D1, GLI1) and further
characterization of its mechanisms is ongoing.In summary, we identified
arylsulfonamides as a novel class of agents with anti-ES activity. We are
the first to report identification of a small chemical molecule inhibitor
directly interacting with the N-terminus of the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein
(first-in-class). KCN1 inhibits the growth of ES cells in vitro and in
vivo. Considering the lack of targeted therapies and the apparent
non-toxic nature of KCN1, our data warrant further preclinical and
clinical testing of KCN1 and other molecules in the arylsulfonamide class
for treating ES as well as further study of their precise mechanism of
action.Citation Format: Stefan Kaluz, Shaoman Yin, Sarojini N. Devi,
Erwin G. Van Meir. Targeting Ewing sarcoma with a new small molecule
binding to the EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2743. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2743

