Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamin inhibitors as anticancer agent in cervical carcinoma.


Dynamin is a 96 kDa GTPase enzyme involved in membrane constriction and
fission during endocytosis. Among the three human dynamin genes, dynamin
I is expressed in neurons and neuro-endocrine cells, dynamin II is
expressed in most cell types, and dynamin III is strongly expressed in
the testis, brain, and lung tissue. Dynamin II plays an essential role in
the completion of the final stage of mitosis, cytokinesis. MiTMAB
(myristyl trimethyl ammonium bromides) and OcTMAB (octadecyltrimethyl
ammonium bromide) are small-molecule inhibitors of dynamin that
competitively interfere with the ability of dynamin to bind phospholipids
and prevent receptor-mediated endocytosis. In this study, we investigated
whether dynamin inhibitor could inhibit survival, proliferation, and
invasion of cervical cancer cell lines. To evaluate the role of dynamin
II in cell proliferation, we performed MTT assays with Hela and SiHa
cells after incubation with various doses of MiTMAB or OcTMAB. To confirm
the apoptosis after MiTMAB and OcTMAB treatment, active caspase-3 ELISA
and FACS were performed. And to identify the role of dynamin II in cell
invasion, we evaluated the secretion of MMP-9 after dynamin II inhibitor
treatment by ELISA assay. We found that MiTMAB and OcTMAB had a
growth-inhibiting effect at 2 or 3 day after treatment in both cells.
Active caspase-3 expression and Annexin V intensity were increased by
MiTMAB and OcTMAB. And the secretion of MMP-9 was increased after dynamin
II inhibitor treatment. MiTMAB and OcTMAB are the first compounds
reported to exclusively block cytokinesis without affecting progression
through any other stage of the cell cycle. Cytokinesis failure induces
cell death. These data revealed that dynamin II modulates cancer cell
survival, proliferation, and invasion and suggest that dynamin II could
be a key target for new strategies in cervical cancer treatment.

