Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The identification of potentially prognostic microRNAs in human
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.


Purpose/Objective:The majority of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) patients
undergo curative radiation therapy (RT), with concurrent chemotherapy
(CT) in cases of locally advanced disease. Current treatments achieve a
modest 5-year overall survival rate of 70%, underscoring the need for a
better understanding of NPC biology in order to develop novel tools to
target this disease. In recent years, it has become apparent that
micro-RNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in many, if not all human
malignancies. Furthermore, miRNAs have been identified whose expression
is capable of predicting patient outcome in a variety of human cancers;
hence, we proceed to address the primary hypothesis that there is a miRNA
expression signature capable of predicting outcome for NPC
patients.Materials/Methods:The expression level of 734 unique human and
viral miRNAs in 121 fully clinically-annotated NPC samples plus 10 normal
nasopharyngeal epithelial tissues from healthy individuals was analyzed
using the nCounter human microRNA panel from Nanostring. These data were
analyzed in relation to patient clinical and outcomes data (median
follow-up time was 6.9 years), in order to identify associations between
individual and combinations of miRNAs with clinical
parameters.Results:Global miRNA expression analyses identified 49 miRNAs
which were differentially-expressed between NPC and normal nasopharyngeal
epithelial tissues. Using a 2-fold cut-off and Bonferroni correction for
multiple comparisons, 39 miRNAs were significantly over-expressed and 10
were significantly under-expressed (miR-145, -216a, -100, -423, -424,
-99b, -125a, -125b, -30c, -200a). Additionally, the expression level of
21 miRNAs, appeared to be strongly associate with clinical outcome.
Specifically, there were two under-expressed miRNAs which were able to
classify patients into low, medium, or high risk groups for distant
relapse, wherein their 5-year distant relapse rates were: 0%, 10%, and
36%, respectively; p=0.0006).Conclusions:These preliminary data suggest a
potential miRNA signature set which can predict for distant relapse, the
major cause of death in NPC given the excellent loco-regional control
rates with the use of IMRT. Our next step will be to measure the
expression level of these 21 candidate miRNAs in an independent
validation set of 131 NPC patients to confirm whether any of these miRNAs
indeed have prognostic value in NPC. Biological insights will also be
acquired by evaluating these miRNAs in pre-clinical NPC models.
Prognostic signatures acquired could be used to categorize risk groups,
and also facilitate the discovery and development of novel
molecularly-targeted therapies which could improve outcome for future NPC
patients.

