Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel inhibitor of HSP90- PU-H71 exhibits significant activity in
Ewing sarcoma pre-clinical models.


Ewing sarcoma is characterized by multiple deregulated pathways that
mediate cell survival and proliferation. Heat shock protein-90 (HSP90) is
a critical component of the multi-chaperone complexes that regulate the
disposition and activity of a large number of proteins responsible for
the assembly and regulation of cell-signaling systems. We tested the
efficacy of PU-H71, a novel purine scaffold HSP90 inhibitor developed at
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in several Ewing sarcoma cell
lines and primary cultures established from patient samples. We
investigated its effect on cell proliferation and cell viability on
multiple Ewing cell lines, benign epithelial, endothelial and mesenchymal
stromal cells and its effect on colony forming assay using CD34
hematopoietic stem cells . We performed cell cycle analysis, clonogenic
assay, immunoblot analysis and in vivo experiments in NOD scid gamma
(NSG) mice using A673 cell line transduced with GFP luciferase for
bioimaging. We also established a metastatic model by calculating the
mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) in various organs. Our results show
that there is a significant therapeutic window in its activity against
Ewing cell lines and benign cells. PU-H71 treatment resulted in arrest in
G2 phase and diminished S phase in Ewing cell lines. We also noted that
many of the deregulated pathway proteins including IGF1R, AKT, ERK, MYC,
hTERT and EWS-FLI1 are stabilized by HSP90 and exposure to PU-H71
resulted in depletion of the above proteins. We also noted an increase in
cleaved PARP and proapoptotic proteins and a decrease in antiapoptotic
proteins on immunoblot analysis. Based on earlier PK and MTD studies, we
treated mice at a dose of 75mg/kg by intraperitoneal injection, three
times a week for 4 weeks. Our results indicated that Ewing's sarcoma
tumor growth was significantly inhibited and metastatic burden was
significantly decreased in the mice injected with PU-H71 compared to the
mice injected with vehicle, based on MFI, weight and size of the tumors.
Immunohistochemical staining showed that CD31 expression was
significantly reduced in PU-H71 treated mice tumors. Our results suggest
that PU-H71 has the ability to affect multiple critical oncogenic
pathways simultaneously resulting in decreased tumor growth and
metastases and has a strong rationale for clinical evaluation in Ewing
sarcoma.

