Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of the Ion AmpliSeq Comprehensive Cancer Panel (CCP)
using castPCR technologies.


Somatic mutation has been implicated in many aspects of cancer such as
susceptibility, diagnosis, prognosis, drug response and tumor progress.
Detection of somatic mutation is of wide interest in cancer research. The
rapid advances in next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have
transformed cancer research. For example, the Ion AmpliSeq technology
enables the selective amplification of 10s to 1000s of target sequences
in a single multiplexed PCR and meshes seamlessly with the Ion
semiconductor sequencing platform. The Ion Ampliseq Comprehensive Cancer
Panel (CCP) provides ready-access to hundreds of genes, making it ideal
for broad targeted re-sequencing studies. Alternative technologies are in
demand to validate the NGS data orthogonally and screen hundreds or more
cancer samples to evaluate mutation patterns, prevalence and frequencies
in population. Here, we have demonstrated the utility of TaqMan Mutation
Detection Assays using our competitive allele specific TaqMan PCR
(castPCR) technology in validation of Ion Torrent sequencing data. In
this study, we applied the Ion Ampliseq Comprehensive Cancer Panel (CCP)
panel to NCI-60 cell lines (MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, DU-145, PC-3, SK-MEL- 28)
derived from breast, prostate, and skin cancers on Ion Torrent PGM
sequencer. We confirmed previously reported mutations in these cell lines
and identified the mutations that were not reported before, including
missense and non-coding mutations. We then selected a subset of mutation
targets from the cancer panel for castPCR validation including the genes
of KRAS. EGFR, BRAF, NRAS, PIK3CA, PTEN, KIT, TP53, and more. Since
limited sample quantity has been a challenging issue for most cancer
researchers, especially for those who are interested in testing
multi-targets by qPCR, we developed a preamplification method to enrich
the targets of interest prior to running castPCR assays. We compared the
Cq values of on-targets and off-targets from preamplified samples and
non-preamplified samples, and the data indicates that our
preamplification strategy not only provides roughly100 fold target
enrichment but also maintains specificity during the preamplification
process. For mutation detection, we showed that the mutation data from
castPCR and from Ion Torrent PGM sequencer share high concordance for any
given mutations. The detailed comparison and analysis will be presented
and discussed. Our results demonstrate that castPCR technology is a
valuable validation tool for next generation sequencing. The combination
of Ion Torrent sequencing and castPCR validation empowers cancer
researchers to understand the roles that somatic mutation plays in cancer.

