Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Two dimensional acoustic wave technology offers improved label
free prostate cancer cell separation in blood.


There is an unmet need for disease biomarkers that reliably predict
clinical benefit in tumor recurrence in general and in castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) specifically. Isolation of rare
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) has emerged as an increasingly important
non-invasive tool in the pursuit for better-targeted therapies for
patients with disseminating tumors.We exploit ultrasound standing wave
technology in a microchip setting, and have developed a third generation
acoustophoretic microchip, which in time will allow isolation of CTCs
from liquid biopsies from patients with advanced stages of prostate
cancer. The separation device is a silicon/glass microchannel with
trifurcation inlet and outlet, an incorporated pre-alignment channel and
with temperature-stabilization. The novel system is now adapted to permit
processing of sample volumes corresponding to clinical samples. A
pressure driven system has been incorporated and runs the separation
process. It mediates fewer fluctuations, generating even more stable
separation results than previous setup,Previously acoustic separation has
been performed with WBCs diluted 1:10. However in this third generation
setup it is possible to use samples of undiluted WBCs and there are
indications that even concentrated WBC samples might generate similar
results with maintained cancer cell recovery and separation performance.
Larger sample volumes have allowed us to use lower amounts of spiked
cancer cells and we can easily detect concentrations of less than 1000
spiked cancer cells per mL blood. This new setup generates acoustic
separation with prostate cancer cell recoveries around 95% with 0,1% WBC
contamination when processed at a flow rate of 100 l/min.It is possible
to process both PFA fixed and non-fixed cells in the microchip. The
acoustic separation method is gentle and does not affect cell viability,
cell proliferation, androgen receptor function or PSA secretion. It is
therefore an interesting alternative to current available techniques that
require cell fixation. In addition we found that dead prostate cancer
cells display different acoustic properties than viable cells, which
makes it possible to distinguish live from dead cancer cells by
acoustophoresis. This opens up for subsequent cell analysis requiring
viable cells. New progressive techniques are needed to find and identify
CTC populations independent on labeled cell-discrimination capacity, such
as EpCAM negative CTCs. Acoustophoresis allows recovery of cancer cells
independent of antigen expression, which allows for separation of novel
EpCAM negative populations of CTCs with subsequent PCR analysis. It is
therefore a promising method for future non-invasive molecular
interrogation of metastatic cancers.

