Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomics and proteomics reveal inhibition of glycolysis in
withaferin A-mediated prevention of mammary carcinogenesis in MMTV-neu
mice.


Plants used in Ayurvedic medicine, which has been practiced for centuries
in India for the treatment of different ailments, continue to draw
attention for identification of novel small molecule cancer
chemopreventive agents. Withaferin A (WA) is one such promising small
molecule constituent of the medicinal plant Withania somnifera (also
known as Ashwagandha) with in vivo activity against xenografted human
breast cancer cells. We have also shown recently that mammary cancer
development and pulmonary metastasis in MMTV-neu transgenic mice is
inhibited significantly by WA administration. In the present study, we
performed metabolomics profiling using plasma and tumor tissues (n=8) and
proteomics profiling using tumor tissues (n=3) from control and
WA-treated MMTV-neu mice to gain insights into the mechanism underlying
in vivo preventive effect of WA. A total of 320 and 328 biochemicals of
known identity were detectable in the plasma and tumor tissue,
respectively. The WA-mediated mammary cancer prevention in MMTV-neu mice
was associated with a statistically significant alteration (P0.05) in the
levels of 76 biochemicals in the plasma (24 increase, 52 decrease).
Metabolomics using tumor tissues revealed alterations in the levels of 24
biochemicals (2 increase, 24 decrease) upon WA administration. One change
that was highly consistent in the plasma and tumor tissue from WA-treated
mice compared to controls was a decrease in glucose utilization,
glycolysis, and TCA cycle activity. Proteomics using tumor tissues
confirmed downregulation of many glycolysis-related proteins in the tumor
of WA-treated mice compared with control, including M2-type pyruvate
kinase, phosphoglycerate kinase, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase, and fructose-bisphosphate aldolase A isoform 2.
Downregulation of TCA cycle-related proteins in the tumor of WA-treated
mice compared with control included pyruvate carboxylase and isocitrate
dehydrogenase. Other altered biochemicals were reflective of changes in
arginine metabolism, polyamine biosynthesis, glutathione metabolism,
lipid metabolism, and catabolism of branched-chain amino acids. These
observations indicate that WA treatment prevents mammary cancer in
MMTV-neu mice by suppressing glycolysis (Warburg effect) and TCA cycle.
This study was supported by the grant CA142604 awarded by the National
Cancer Institute.

