Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase 1, open-label, dose-escalation studies of SGN-CD19A in
patients with relapsed or refractory B-lineage acute leukemia and
non-Hodgkin lymphoma.


Background. CD19 is a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily that
regulates B-lineage cell development and differentiation. It is not known
to be expressed by any cell outside of the B-lineage and expression is
maintained upon malignant transformation. Due to its restricted normal
tissue expression profile, CD19 is an attractive target for
antibody-based therapeutics for the treatment of B-lineage malignancies.
SGNCD19A is a novel antibody-drug conjugate composed of a humanized
anti-CD19 monoclonal antibody conjugated to the microtubule-disrupting
agent monomethyl auristatin F (MMAF) via a maleimidocaproyl (mc) linker.
Upon binding to CD19, SGNCD19A internalizes and releases cys-mcMMAF,
which binds to tubulin and induces G2/M arrest and apoptosis in the
targeted cells. We describe two first-in-human, dose-escalation studies
of SGNCD19A.Methods. The objectives of both studies include evaluation of
safety, tolerability, the pharmacokinetic (PK) profile, and antitumor
activity of SGNCD19A in patients with relapsed or refractory Blineage
malignancies. SGN19A-001 will evaluate a weekly (days 1 and 8 of 21-day
cycles) and an every 3 week (q3wk) IV dosing schedule in adult and
pediatric patient populations with Blineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia
and aggressive lymphoma. SGN19A-002 will enroll adult patients with
B-lineage non-Hodgkin lymphoma and will test a q3wk IV dosing schedule.
Both trials will employ a modified continual reassessment method (CRM) to
estimate the dose-toxicity relationship, estimate the maximum tolerated
dose (MTD), and allocate patients to dose levels. Each trial has an
additional dose-finding expansion phase that can be initiated to further
evaluate multiple doses and schedules to help identify a recommended
phase 2 dose based on a utility score that weighs both toxicity and
efficacy in different patient populations. The CRM algorithm estimates
the efficacy and toxicity of each patient population and disease subgroup
by borrowing information across groups (age and disease). Exploratory
analyses will include correlation of target (CD19) expression, target
saturation, and apoptotic cellular markers with clinical response and
clearance of leukemic blasts; dose and PK of SGNCD19A will also be
correlated with target saturation and intracellular levels of cys-mcMMAF.
These studies are scheduled to be initiated by late 2012.Expected
Results. The CRM design will allow the MTDs to be identified with high
probability. As designed, we expect 10 pediatric and/or 20 adult patients
to be treated at or around the estimated MTDs during dose escalation.
During the dose-finding expansion portions, refined estimates of the MTDs
and estimates of antitumor activity at multiple dose levels will provide
rationale for the best dosing regimen for future phase 2 trials.

