Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genome-wide association study of prostate cancer in West African
men.


Age-adjusted mortality rates for prostate cancer are higher for Africa
compared with North America or Western Europe. In addition, African
American men are noted to have higher age-adjusted incidence rates of
this malignancy than European American men. Coupled with the fact that
West Africa is the principal ancestral region of African-American men has
led to the hypothesis that there may exist distinct ancestral genetic
profiles which mediate prostate cancer risk. In addition, advantages of
conducting a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of prostate cancer in
African men include a more discrete linkage disequilibrium (LD)
structure, a higher number of private single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), the predominance of symptomatic disease, and assessment of unique
exposures. The Ghana Prostate Study was conducted collaboratively
involving the US National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the University of
Ghana during 2006-2012. The NCI Cancer Genomics Research Laboratory
genotyped 494 prostate cancer cases and 498 population controls using the
Illumina HumanOmni5-Quad BeadChip. Associations were assessed using
multivariate logistic regression adjusted for age and genetic ancestry.
We sought to validate the 30 most promising SNP associations with
prostate cancer through the African American Prostate Cancer GWAS
Consortium. A novel locus at 10p14 for prostate cancer risk was the
strongest signal detected, and the 8 SNPs at this locus were in LD. This
locus is located 360 kb 5 of GATA3 and the 8 SNPs reside within an intron
of LincRNA gene RP11-543F8.2. Analysis of African 1000 Genomes Project
data did not indicate LD between 10p14 SNPs and splice or exonic SNPs of
this gene, while HaploReg found no significant enrichment of enhancer
elements. None of the most promising 30 SNPs replicated in the African
American Prostate Cancer GWAS Consortium. This may be due to chance or
differences in population genetics, environment, and/or proportion of
symptomatic disease. Further genetic studies of prostate cancer in
African men are needed to validate the 10p14 susceptibility locus.

