Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo effects of TSLP in a human-mouse xenograft model of CRLF2
B-ALL.


Pediatric CRLF2 B-cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (CRLF2 B-ALL) is a
high-risk form of leukemia that is associated with relapse and poor
patient survival outcomes. This leukemia occurs five times more
frequently among children of Hispanic/Latino ethnicity than others and
represents the most significant biological component of childhood cancer
health disparities identified to date. CRLF2 B-ALL arises from genetic
alterations that result in overexpression of the CRLF2 gene. CRLF2,
together with the IL-7 receptor , forms a receptor complex that is
activated by the cytokine, TSLP. The JAK-STAT5 pathway is phosphorylated
downstream of receptor activation. The activating JAK mutations found in
some CRLF2 B-ALL have led to speculation that TSLP stimulation is not a
factor in CRLF B-ALL. However, we found that TSLP increases STAT5
phosphorylation, even in CRLF2 B-ALL cells with JAK mutations. Our
studies of normal B cell development show that TSLP stimulation increases
cellular proliferation in early human B lineage cells. We also find that
pediatric bone marrow (BM) stromal cells express TSLP and thus provide an
in vivo source of TSLP that can act on CRLF2 B-ALL cells. We proposed to
evaluate the role of TSLP in human CRLF2 B-ALL using a human-mouse
xenograft model. However, TSLP is different from most other cytokines
produced in the mouse in that it is species-specific and therefore does
not activate the human TSLP receptor complex that contains CRLF2. Thus,
traditional xenograft models do not provide the TSLP-CRLF2 interactions
that we believe to be a contributing factor in CRLF2 B-ALL. To overcome
this hurdle we engineered immune deficient mice to express human TSLP
(hTSLP+ mice) as well as control mice that lack the human TSLP cytokine
(hTSLP- mice). We used this hTSLP+/- xenograft model system to evaluate
the in vivo effects of TSLP on survival and proliferation of transplanted
CRLF2 B-ALL cells harboring a JAK defect (MUTZ5 cell line). Mice were
euthanized at 5 weeks and BM was harvested. Evaluation of BM disease by
flow cytometry showed that the percentage of viable human leukemia cells
in hTSLP+ mice was twice that observed in hTSLP-mice. Evaluation of cell
cycle progression in human CRLF2 B-ALL cells isolated from xenograft BM
showed that the percentage of cycling cells in hTSLP+ mice was 2.5 fold
higher than in hTSLP- mice. These preliminary data suggest that TSLP may
contribute to CRLF2 B-ALL by increasing the survival and proliferation of
CRLF2-B-ALL cells. Ongoing studies are focused on evaluating in vivo
effects of TSLP in primary CRLF2 B-ALL from Hispanic patients. The
identification of genes downstream of TSLP-CRLF2 signaling has the
potential of providing drug targets for combination therapy to
effectively treat CRLF2 B-ALL and reduce cancer health disparities in
Hispanic childhood B-ALL.This work is supported by NIH R21R21CA162259, a
St. Baldrick's Foundation Research Grant, and a LLU GCAT award (KJP)

