Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen signaling promotes cancer stem cell expansion via
microRNA-140 targeting of pluripotency-associated factor SOX2 in ER
positive breast cancer cells.


Multiple reports indicate that the prospective tumor suppressor miR-140
is down regulated in breast tumors compared to normal breast tissues;
however, the role of miR-140 in breast tumorigenesis remains unclear. We
have identified a novel target for miR-140 in mammary epithelium, the
core pluripotency transcription factor SOX2. It is well known that SOX2
regulates the self-renewal of embryonic stem cells, however, less is
known concerning possible oncogenic roles of SOX2 in breast cancer. We
found that miR-140 and SOX2 target mRNA exhibited inverse expression in
breast tumors and normal breast tissues, which was also correlated with
estrogen receptor alpha (ER) status. We investigated the role of ER
signaling in the regulation of miR-140 and SOX2 in breast tumors and
found that estrogen stimulation resulted in decreased miR-140 and
increased SOX2 expression in mammary epithelium and breast cancer cells.
We performed bioinformatics promoter analyses of the miR-140 promoter
revealing several predicted estrogen response elements (ERE) in the
miR-140 promoter. We examined estrogen-induced activation of these
prospective EREs using luciferase reporters for a miR-140 promoter
deletion series. Furthermore, we used chromatin-immunoprecipitation to
reveal that ER binds to an ERE flanking the miR-140 promoter,
consequently suppressing miR-140 transcription. As estrogen signaling was
previously implicated in the regulation of breast cancer stem cells
(CSCs), we investigated whether the miR-140/SOX2 pathway might provide a
mechanistic link between ER signaling and CSC maintenance. We found that
forced activation of the miR-140/SOX2 pathway decreased mammosphere
formation (a surrogate measure of CSC self-renewal) and opposed
estrogen-induced expansion of the well-characterized CD44(high)/CD24(low)
CSC subpopulation in ER+ breast cancer cells. These results indicate that
an ER/miR-140/SOX2 pathway critically regulates breast CSC maintenance in
ER+ breast tumors.

