Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HPV16-positive and HPV16-negative head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas display different patterns of expression of genes involved in
the control of growth and EMT.


Up to 60% of oropharyngeal cancers and 25% of head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas (HNSCC) are high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) positive,
primarily HPV16. Differences in risk factors, age of presentation and
clinical behavior of these tumors indicate that HPV+ and HPV- tumors
develop with different molecular mechanisms and are biologically
distinct. Based upon a gene expression profile comparison of HPV- and
HPV+ HNSCC specimens, obtained from the Medical University of South
Carolina ENT/Head and Neck Surgery clinic, we identified 384 candidate
genes differentially expressed (125 genes up-regulated and 223
down-regulated) in HPV+ in comparison with HPV- tumors. GO analysis of
the microarray data indicated that gene expression changes in HPV+ tumors
affected primarily proliferation and cell cycle control, while HPV-
tumors showed changes in genes involved in EMT, cell motility, and
angiogenesis. We selected five genes (c-MET, TP53, TGF-beta2, BRCA1 and
SIX1) for further analysis in a set of 44 tumor and four normal (tonsil
and uvula) samples. Seventeen tumor samples were from African American
(AA) patients, and 27 from European Americans (EA). The prevalence of HPV
infection was 30% in samples from AA patients, and 65% in those from EA
patients. Most HPV+ tumor samples (20 of 24) were positive for HPV16 and
a subset of the HPV16+ tumor samples (55%) expressed HPV16 E7, as
documented by real-time RT/PCR using tumor-derived RNA. The prevalence of
active HPV infections (where E7 was expressed) was 17% in AA and 50% in
EA patients. These tumor samples were utilized to explore the expression
of the selected genes by real-time RT/PCR. Data were normalized to normal
human keratinocytes based on three reference genes derived from a panel
of seven candidate reference genes, using Normfinder, BestKeeper and
GeNorm. Normalized relative quantities for each gene of interest were
then calculated using qbasePLUS (Biogazelle.) c-MET was overexpressed,
when compared to control tissue, in all tumor samples but levels of c-MET
were the highest in HPV- EA samples, and comparatively lower in HPV+
samples. TP53 was overexpressed in HPV+ samples; TGF-beta2 and Six1 were
clearly overexpressed in all tumor samples, compared to control tissue
samples; and BRCA1 levels were higher in HPV+ samples, compared to HPV-
samples and controls. These data are consistent with our microarray
results that indicate that HPV- tumors exhibit gene expression profiles
indicative of activation of EMT. We are investigating the molecular
interactions that lead to overexpression of SIX1, c-MET and BRCA1 in
these tumors, and the functional consequences of this overexpression in
terms of cell growth and EMT.

