Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Poor performance of published clinical screening criteria for the
population-based identification of endometrial cancer patients with Lynch
Syndrome.


Objective: Clinically based risk assessment tools, targeting those with
young age of cancer onset and family history of specific cancers, have
been used to identify individuals with Lynch Syndrome (LS). Women with LS
are equally likely to develop endometrial carcinoma (EC) as they are
colorectal carcinoma (CRC). To identify women presenting with EC at risk
for LS, the Society of Gynecologic Oncology (SGO) published
recommendations in 2007 regarding which patients would benefit from
further genetic evaluation for LS. These criteria are comparable to the
Revised Bethesda Guidelines. The primary objective of this study was to
evaluate SGO criteria's ability to predict women at risk for LS in the EC
population and to ascertain if alternative criteria exist that can better
identify high-risk patients.Methods: 408 sequential EC cases were
evaluated for immunohistochemical expression of four DNA mismatch repair
(MMR) proteins. Tumors with loss of MSH2, MSH6 or PMS2 were designated as
probable Lynch Syndrome (PLS). Tumors with loss of MLH1 and absence of
MLH1 promoter methylation were also designated PLS. Clinical and
pathologic data were collected from the electronic medical
record.Results: Of the 408 EC cases, 43 (10.5%) of the patients were
defined as probable Lynch Syndrome (PLS). 97/408 (23.7%) of EC cases met
SGO criteria, but only 14 of these 97 cases (14.4%) were PLS. Of the 43
PLS cases, 29/43 (67.4%) did not meet SGO criteria. Comparison of
clinical and pathologic characteristics, including age of cancer
diagnosis and family history of EC and/or CRC, revealed no statistically
significant differences between sporadic and PLS tumors with the
exception of tumors arising from the lower uterine segment. Tumors with
this sight of origin are more likely to be associated with PLS. The
sensitivity and specificity of SGO criteria was 32.6% and 77.2%,
respectively.Conclusions: Existing clinical guidelines for detecting
endometrial carcinoma patients at elevated risk for having Lynch Syndrome
perform poorly in an unselected patient population. With the exception of
tumors arising from the lower uterine segment, there are no statistically
significant clinical or pathological differences between sporadic tumors
and PLS tumors. Lower uterine segment EC occurs in only 3% of all EC
cases and is not a useful screening tool. SGO clinical criteria correctly
identified 32.6% of women with PLS, which results in missed CRC screening
opportunities for 67% of women with increased risk profiles. These
results suggest that the SGO guidelines are inadequate for identifying
LS. Given the lack of effective clinical or pathological screening tools,
MMR IHC and MLH1 methylation testing of all endometrial cancer patients
may be the best way to identify women at risk for having Lynch Syndrome.

