Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired resistance to anti-EGFR mAb ICR62 or afatinib is
accompanied by upregulation of the EGFR in colorectal cancer .


The aberrant expression and activation of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) family of receptor tyrosine kinases (also called HER or
erbB family) have been implicated in a wide range of cancers. These
receptors have emerged as important therapeutic targets in human cancers.
To date, of the two classes of HER inhibitors (i.e. monoclonal antibodies
(mAbs) and small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), cetuximab
and panitumumab have been approved for the treatment of patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer. However, many patients develop resistance
to the EGFR inhibitors and consequently the duration of response to these
treatments is often short. In this study on colorectal cancer cells, we
evaluated whether there was any association between the expression levels
of the HER family members, putative colorectal cancer stem cell (CSC)
markers CD133 and CD44, and ABC transporter and the development of
resistance to anti-EGFR mAb ICR62 or afatinib, an irreversible erbB
blocker. A wide range of techniques were employed in this study including
FACS analysis, Western blot analysis and SRB assay on the EGFR
over-expressing human colorectal tumour cell line DiFi, which is highly
sensitive to treatment with mAb ICR62 (IC50=1.2 nM) and afatinib (IC50=10
nM). Continuous exposure of DiFi cells to increasing doses of mAb ICR62
or afatinib for 6-10 months resulted in the emergence of ICR62 variant
DiFi cells (DiFi62) and afatinib-variant DiFi cells (DiFiAf) with IC50
values of 209 nM and 35 nM respectively. Interestingly, we found that
ICR62 resistant DiFi cells (DiFi62) also become less sensitive to
treatment with 5FU, oxaloplatin and irinotecan, but remained highly
sensitive to treatment with afatinib (IC50=8 nM). In contrast to DiFi62
cells, afatinib-resistant DiFiAf cells were less sensitive to treatment
with 5FU and irinotecan, but like parental DiFi cells remained highly
sensitive to treatment with ICR62 and oxaliplatin. Of the HER family
members, there was only upregulation of EGFR in both DiFi62 and DiFiAf
cells, but no changes in the expression levels of other members of the
HER family or CD133. In contrast, the expression of CD44, the other
putative colorectal CSC marker, was found to be downregulated by around
38% in DiFiAf cells. Of the ABC transporters, there was an increase in
the expression of p-glycoprotein in both DiFi62 and DiFiAf cells and an
increased expression of both MRP2 and ABCG2 in DiFi62, but not in DiFiAf
cells. Taken together, our results suggest that colorectal tumour cells
which acquire resistance to anti-EGFR mAb ICR62 remain sensitive to
treatment with the irreversible erbB blocker afatinib and vice versa,
suggesting that mechanisms underlying the antitumor activity of ICR62 and
afatinib are different in these cells. In addition, upregulation of the
EGFR upon treatment with these inhibitors may contribute to resistance.

