Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: No-lyse no-wash immunophenotyping.


Immunophenotyping whole blood is a primary application in the study of
blood cell populations and their functions. Red blood cells have
traditionally been removed during sample preparation by lysis methods or
density-gradient selection to enable the study of nucleated cell
populations. This processing of whole blood has its draw backs due to the
potential loss of cells of interest thru inadvertent lysis and
unintentional selection of fragile and rare cells including blast cells,
cancer cells, and cancer stem cells. The application of a No-Lyse No-Wash
protocol in human whole blood samples benefit from a streamlined protocol
that reduces cell loss. Testing of mouse whole blood presents additional
challenges for cancer researchers due to the limited sample volume
available (100 L/day/animal), particularly in longitudinal studies.
Specifically, these small volumes limit the ability to perform
immunophenotyping experiments with required controls. This work describes
a No-lyse No-wash method which takes advantage of acoustic focusing
technology. Immunophenotyping panels are shown for both human and mouse
whole blood. A total of 10L of whole blood is stained in a 50 L total
volume and then diluted 400-fold in PBS. A fluorescence threshold is used
to distinguish the white blood cell populations from the more abundant
red blood cell population. In the mouse immunophenotyping example, CD45
is used to threshold on white blood cells. For the human
immunophenotyping example, a cell permeable nucleic acid stain is used to
threshold on all nucleated cells. At this dilution, the coincidence of
the target population with red blood cells is reduced sufficiently so
scatter signals are reliable for population identification. The
significantly higher sample collection rates available with acoustic
cytometry allows for the acquisition of high quality data utilizing a
No-lyse No-wash protocol in a timely manner. Difficult-to-collect and
precious samples like mouse blood can be stained and diluted without
washing or performing RBC removal procedures. Loss of cells due to sample
preparation is essentially eliminated, and ability to detect the cells of
interest is enabled.

