Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Secreted plectin-rich exosomes from pancreatic cancer cells
promote tumor aggressiveness.


Background & Aims: We recently demonstrated that the aberrant
extracellular localization of the cytoskeletal linker protein plectin is
a robust biomarker for the progression of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC), one of the most aggressive malignancies. Exosomes
are nanometer-sized particles containing cytoplasm and plasma membrane
that are secreted by both normal and cancerous cells. Recently the
importance of exosomes in cross-talk in the tumor microenvironment has
been demonstrated. Fusion of exosomes to the cellular membrane in either
a paracrine or autocrine manner can result in aberrant protein
localization. Here, we assess the mechanism for plectin mislocalization
and its functional role in PDAC.Methods: A plectin-binding assay was
developed to assess the presence of cell-surface localized plectin. To
examine their potential contribution to aberrant extracellular
localization of plectin, we determined whether plectin was present in
PDAC-secreted exosomes collected by ultracentrifugation and evaluated by
immunoblotting. Based on these observations, we then determined whether
exosomes with or without plectin altered gross phenotypic tumor
characteristics in vitro in tumor stromal and endothelial cells. Finally,
we tested the ability to alter outgrowth kinetics by directly injecting
exosomes with or without plectin in tumors in vivo.Results: Plectin was
localized on the cell surface as well as present in exosomes derived from
PDAC cell lines but not from non-transformed human pancreatic ductal
epithelial (HPDE) cells. Plectin presence in the exosomes hinged on the
expression of integrin 4, a protein known to interact with cytosolic
plectin. shRNA and overexpression studies collectively demonstrated a
positive role of plectin and its localization in the exosomes in
proliferation, migration, and invasion of PDAC cells and migratory
capacity of microenvironment cells. Finally, plectin-rich exosomes
enhanced in vivo tumor growth.Conclusions: Plectin is expressed in PDAC
and is aberrantly localized to the cell surface via exosomes in an
integrin 4-dependent manner. Additionally, plectin-rich exosomes induce
pronounced increase in tumor growth in vitro and in vivo further they
increased invasion and migration in vitro. Plectin-positive exosomes had
profound effects on stromal and endothelial cells. Because cell surface
plectin has been shown to be a biomarker for transition of pre-invasive
to invasive PDAC, the elucidation of the mechanisms of its deregulation
may provide important insights for successful detection and management of
PDAC.

