Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimized dosing strategies resulting in prolonged pathway
inhibition enhance dinaciclib anti-tumor activity in preclinical
xenograft models.


Dinaciclib is a novel CDK1, 2, 5, and 9 inhibitor currently in clinical
development for CLL. Preclinical studies indicate that dinaciclib may
have activity in a wide variety of indications including hematologic
malignancies and solid tumors. Clinically, dinaciclib is administered by
2 hour intravenous (iv) infusion and achieves plasma concentrations above
100nM for 6 hours; a concentration and duration of treatment which in
vitro provides complete target engagement and induces apoptosis.
Pre-clinically, dinaciclib is administered by intraperitoneal (ip) bolus
injections and achieves plasma concentrations above 100nM for less than 2
hours. To determine whether prolonged plasma concentrations would enhance
dinaciclib activity, we administered dinaciclib to COLO-320DM tumor
bearing mice either as a 40 mg/kg single dose, or as two doses of 20
mg/kg separated by 2 hours. This 20-20 split dosing resulted in prolonged
target engagement, phospho-RNA-Polymerase-2 reduction, decreased MCL-1,
and increased apoptosis relative to the 40mg/kg single dose. Comparing
the in vivo anti-tumor activity of dinaciclib dosed at 40 mg/kg ip every
4 days (q4d) vs. 20 mg/kg bid separated by 2 hours q4d demonstrated that
the 20-20 split dose increased the anti-tumor activity of dinaciclib (25%
Tumor Growth Inhibition (TGI) versus 66% TGI). Dinaciclib single vs.
split dosing was further evaluated in 8 lung cancer xenograft models, 5
of which were insensitive to dinaciclib single dose (TGI >50%) and 3 of
which were sensitive. 20-20 split dosing resulted in increased anti-tumor
activity in all models tested. Split dosing resulted in Dinaciclib is a
novel CDK1, 2, 5, and 9 inhibitor currently in clinical development for
CLL. Preclinical studies indicate that dinaciclib may have activity in a
wide variety of indications including hematologic malignancies and solid
tumors. Clinically, dinaciclib is administered by 2 hour intravenous (iv)
infusion and achieves plasma concentrations above 100nM for 6 hours; a
concentration and duration of treatment which in vitro provides complete
target engagement and induces apoptosis. Pre-clinically, dinaciclib is
administered by intraperitoneal (ip) bolus injections and achieves plasma
concentrations above 100nM for less than 2 hours. To determine whether
prolonged plasma concentrations would enhance dinaciclib activity, we
administered dinaciclib to COLO-320DM tumor bearing mice either as a 40
mg/kg single dose, or as two doses of 20 mg/kg separated by 2 hours. This
20-20 split dosing resulted in prolonged target engagement,
phospho-RNA-Polymerase-2 reduction, decreased MCL-1, and increased
apoptosis relative to the 40mg/kg single dose. Comparing the in vivo
anti-tumor activity of dinaciclib dosed at 40 mg/kg ip every 4 days (q4d)
vs. 20 mg/kg bid separated by 2 hours q4d demonstrated that the 20-20
split dose increased the anti-tumor activity of dinaciclib (25% Tumor
Growth Inhibition (TGI) versus 66% TGI). Dinaciclib single vs. split
dosing was further evaluated in 8 lung cancer xenograft models, 5 of
which were insensitive to dinaciclib single dose (TGI >50%) and 3 of
which were sensitive. 20-20 split dosing resulted in increased anti-tumor
activity in all models tested. Split dosing resulted in <50% TGI in 4 of
5 insensitive models. Split dosing also increased anti-tumor activities
in all 3 sensitive models tested resulting in stasis in 2 models, and
sustained complete regressions in one lung cancer xenograft model. Body
weight measurements revealed that split dosing increased body weight loss
indicating that prolonged pathway inhibition can affect both anti-tumor
activity and tolerability. Taken together, these data suggest that
dinaciclib dosing paradigms that prolong pathway inhibition enhanced
anti-tumor activity in pre-clinical xenograft models.

