Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the interactome of PAX3/FOXO1 in alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma.


About one third of the known cellular oncogenes are transcription factors
(TFs). As many tumors are dependent on continuous activity of these
proteins they represent highly interesting targets for therapeutic
approaches e.g. by inhibition with small molecule inhibitors. Because of
lack of enzymatic activity and accompanied difficulty of direct
targeting, TF have been considered undruggable for a long time. This view
recently changed with the demonstration that, instead of direct
targeting, indirect targeting of protein partners required for TF
activity might represent an appropriate alternative. Among transcription
factors targeted by this approach are Notch, Bcl6 and EWS/FLI, the
oncogenic fusion protein in Ewing sarcoma.In our studies we focus on
alveolar Rhabdomyosarcoma (aRMS), an aggressive and highly metastatic
pediatric sarcoma. ARMS is characterised by the expression of the fusion
TF PAX3/FOXO1 which is essential for the survival of aRMS cells. Here, we
aimed to identify interacting proteins that are involved in modulating
the aberrant activity of PAX3/FOXO1 in aRMS.Towards this end, we purified
the interactome of PAX3/FOXO1 from two different aRMS cell lines and
identified the individual interactors by mass spectrometry. This led to
the description of 150 candidate interactors which were reproducibly
co-purified with PAX3/FOXO1 in four independent experiments. Most of the
identified proteins are transcription factors or transcriptional
regulators. To validate our findings, selected candidate interactors such
as RUNX1 and TFAP2B were further shown to pull down PAX3/FOXO1 in
co-immunoprecipitation studies.To analyse whether some of the candidate
interactors have an influence on PAX3/FOXO1 activity we individually
silenced the expression of a set of 60 candidates by siRNA and measured
the expression of several PAX3/FOXO1 target genes including TFAP2B,
FGFR4, and NMYC. These experiments revealed that interactors can have
different effects on specific PAX3/FOXO1 target genes and suggest that
specific transcriptional complexes are responsible for activating the
transcription of different PAX3/FOXO1 target genes. This potentially
reflects the diversity of mechanisms by which PAX3/FOXO1 regulates target
gene expression including enhancer- and promoter-directed actions.
Further characterization of selected interactors is necessary to
understand the impact of these on the oncogenic function of PAX3/FOXO1 in
more detail.The results of these experiments shed light on the regulatory
pathway(s) and mechanisms involved in PAX3/FOXO1 mediated oncogenesis and
thereby contribute to our understanding of the oncogenic function of
tumor-specific chimaeric transcription factors.

