Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The RNP biogenesis factor Thoc1 is required for proliferative
intestinal stem cell viability.


Thoc1 encodes an RNA binding protein (Thoc1) which interacts with the
tumor suppressor retinoblastoma (Rb1). Thoc1 levels have been found to be
elevated in multiple cancers relative to normal tissue. Additionally
cancer cells but not most normal cells undergo apoptosis following Thoc1
deletion, suggesting Thoc1 may be a good therapeutic target. In normal
tissue, Thoc1 is needed for embryonic inner cell mass viability and Thoc1
hypomorphic mice are small and sterile. Based on these data we
hypothesize highly proliferative cells, possibly those with an extended
replicative potential, such as stem cells, require Thoc1. To test this,
we examined the effect of Thoc1 deletion in the intestine since it
contains well-defined stem cells Thoc1 was deleted in the adult mouse
using the Tamoxifen/CreER system with Rosa26 driving CreER expression.
Mice were treated with 2 mg/day Tamoxifen for 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 days.
Thoc1 deletion completely disrupts small intestine (SI) structure.
Specifically, Thoc1 deletion impairs SI crypt cell function and
viability, which leads to a complete loss of SI epithelial cell turnover.
The SI crypts contain rapidly proliferating intestinal stem (ISC) and
progenitor cells that continuously feed and replace the differentiated SI
villi epithelium every 3-5 days. Within the proliferative crypts,
multiple ISC populations exist. These include the active, homeostatic
Lgr5+ ISCs and the reserve, more quiescent mTert+ and Bmi1+ ISCs. Lgr5+
ISCs are the most actively proliferating ISC population, whereas mTert+
and Bmi1+ ISCs are believed to become proliferative upon tissue insult.
QRT-PCR data of ISC (Lgr5, mTert, Bmi1) marker transcripts from crypt
purified epithelial cells suggests Thoc1 loss initially induces ISC
populations to proliferate and expand (transcripts increase), likely a
direct response to the initial Thoc1 deletion. However, once active it
appears proliferating ISCs become susceptible to Thoc1 deletion, as ISC
marker transcripts ultimately approach zero on day 6 in test mice. In
addition, ISC fate mapping studies show recombined ISCs in test mice are
less likely to give rise to long lived stable progeny than recombined
ISCs in control mice. Despite a similar structure to the SI, Thoc1
deletion does not appear to affect the colon. The colon too contains ISCs
that give rise to all cells in the tissue; however, colon ISCs are more
quiescent versus the SI ISC, which suggests actively proliferating
stem/progenitor cell types may specifically require Thoc1. The results of
this study suggest actively proliferating stem cell types require Thoc1,
most likely to support the coordinated gene expression necessary for
rapid proliferation and differentiation. This finding is significant as
it sheds light on Thoc1 function and may help explain why Thoc1 levels
are increased in various cancers, as proliferating stem cells and cancer
cells share similar traits.

