Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ets2 in tumor fibroblasts promotes angiogenesis in breast cancer.


Objective of studyCancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are often thought
to acquire a modified phenotype and these activated fibroblasts have been
implicated as active partners in tumorigenesis. However, the molecular
mechanisms by which CAFs promote tumor progression remain ill-defined.
Ets2 (v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homologue 2) is an
evolutionarily conserved proto-oncogene overexpressed in breast cancer.
Previous studies indicate that Ets2 specifically acts in the stroma to
promote breast cancer progression. The exact mechanisms of how and from
where in the stroma Ets2 regulates breast cancer tumorigenesis are poorly
understood. The objectives of this study are to determine whether the
function of Ets2 in stromal fibroblasts is critical to promote tumor
progression and to identify novel tumor-dependent stroma-specific target
genes and pathways controlled by Ets2.Our hypothesis is that genetic
deletion of Ets2 specifically in the stromal fibroblasts will delay
mammary tumor progression.MethodsWe used Fibroblast specific protein 1
(Fsp1) promoter-Cre to delete Ets2 in the stromal fibroblasts associated
with mouse mammary tumors. We evaluated the effect of stromal fibroblast
specific deletion of Ets2 on tumor progression and angiogenesis in
MMTV-PyMT and MMTV-Her2/neu spontaneous breast cancer mouse models. Also,
in order to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which stromal Ets2
regulates tumor progression, we profiled the primary fibroblasts isolated
from mammary glands of mice with Ets2 deletion in the context of both
oncogenes.ResultsWe observed a significant delay in tumor progression in
both PyMT and Her2/neu tumor models with fibroblast specific Ets2
deletion. Gene expression profiling of fibroblasts from both models
revealed that Ets2 in tumor fibroblasts selectively regulated the
expression of genes involved in angiogenesis and extracellular matrix
(ECM) remodeling. Functional in vivo angiogenesis assays further
illustrated a significant decrease in tumor angiogenesis when Ets2 is
deleted in fibroblasts.ConclusionsOur study demonstrates that stromal
fibroblast specific Ets2 drives mammary tumorigenesis by promoting
angiogenesis and ECM remodeling. Although the Ets2 deleted fibroblast
gene signatures differ between PyMT and Her2/neu models, the study
identifies similar pathways affecting tumor angiogenesis in both models.
This finding implies a functional role of Ets2 in aiding tumor
progression independent of the oncogenic driver.

