Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemical Proteomics effort identifies PKN1 as a key player in the
canonical NF-B signaling pathway.


Deregulation of NF-B signaling pathway has been identified as one of the
key drivers of many hematological malignancies. Activation of the NF-B
pathway in these cells can happen either through activating mutations
within the pathway, loss of function mutations of inhibitory molecules or
through interaction with the stroma that secrete specific cytokines. The
strategies for blocking the NF-B pathway activation have so far focused
on NF-B pathway kinase inhibitors or the more general proteasome
inhibitors. However, the adverse events associated with available NF-B
pathway modulators in pre-clinical and clinical settings have limited
their general therapeutic use. To discover new targets and modulators of
this key survival pathway, we performed a cellular phenotypic screen that
led to the identification of a novel class of small molecules that
inhibit the activation of the canonical NF-B pathway. The compounds
showed potent inhibition of NF-B activation by multiple receptors
including the TNF, antigen and BAFF/ APRIL receptors. Structure activity
relationship analysis for this novel class of molecules identified pairs
of stereoisomers wherein the cis isoform showed greater than 100 fold
activity than the trans isoform. Detailed interrogation of the mechanism
of action of the active cis isomers using biochemical and cellular
pathway analysis revealed that the compounds are potent inhibitors of RHO
associated kinases, only weakly inhibit IKK1 and IKK2 and strongly
inhibit the induction of phosphorylated IkB upon stimulation. However,
the differential activity of the stereoisomers was not seen for the
inhibition of the RHO associated kinases, suggesting the inhibition of
NF-B pathway was due to modulation of other targets. This raises the
possibility of identifying novel targets associated with this compound.
Using in-lysate affinity chemical proteomics with the active and
in-active enantiomer, we have identified PKN1 as a key efficacy target
for the inhibitors. Knockdown of PKN1 using genetic tools was sufficient
to abrogate the response of cells to TNF stimulation implicating a
critical role for PKN1 in the activation of NF-B pathway. Our findings
therefore present an opportunity to develop novel NF-B inhibitors for the
tumors that depend on this key pathway for survival.

