Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIF1 signaling contributes to an aggressive hypoxic phenotype in
cervical cancer.


Tumor hypoxia is an adverse factor in cervical cancer that would be
valuable to implement in the clinical decision-making. In a previous
study, we identified a hypoxia gene signature associated with
aggressiveness in locally advanced cervical cancer. It consisted of 31
genes, and was predictive of progression free survival in an independent
cohort treated with chemoradiotherapy. The signature could be useful in
the development of a prognostic test to select patients at risk of
failure. The aim of the current study was to obtain a deeper
understanding of the pathways reflected in the signature. This could
provide an increased insight into the hypoxia-related aggressiveness of
cervical cancer and be useful to fully exploit the clinical potential of
the signature.The gene signature included a total of 12 genes which are
known direct targets of HIF1, and 4 genes involved in the unfolded
protein response (UPR), including 3 of the 12 HIF1-targets. To obtain a
metric for comparison with other relevant factors, a score was calculated
from the expression level of the 31 genes in 154 patients. This hypoxia
score correlated significantly with HIF1 protein expression (pTumor
hypoxia is an adverse factor in cervical cancer that would be valuable to
implement in the clinical decision-making. In a previous study, we
identified a hypoxia gene signature associated with aggressiveness in
locally advanced cervical cancer. It consisted of 31 genes, and was
predictive of progression free survival in an independent cohort treated
with chemoradiotherapy. The signature could be useful in the development
of a prognostic test to select patients at risk of failure. The aim of
the current study was to obtain a deeper understanding of the pathways
reflected in the signature. This could provide an increased insight into
the hypoxia-related aggressiveness of cervical cancer and be useful to
fully exploit the clinical potential of the signature.The gene signature
included a total of 12 genes which are known direct targets of HIF1, and
4 genes involved in the unfolded protein response (UPR), including 3 of
the 12 HIF1-targets. To obtain a metric for comparison with other
relevant factors, a score was calculated from the expression level of the
31 genes in 154 patients. This hypoxia score correlated significantly
with HIF1 protein expression (p<0.001). Furthermore, 8 out of the 12
known HIF1 target genes in the signature showed an individual correlation
to the expression of HIF1 (pTumor hypoxia is an adverse factor in
cervical cancer that would be valuable to implement in the clinical
decision-making. In a previous study, we identified a hypoxia gene
signature associated with aggressiveness in locally advanced cervical
cancer. It consisted of 31 genes, and was predictive of progression free
survival in an independent cohort treated with chemoradiotherapy. The
signature could be useful in the development of a prognostic test to
select patients at risk of failure. The aim of the current study was to
obtain a deeper understanding of the pathways reflected in the signature.
This could provide an increased insight into the hypoxia-related
aggressiveness of cervical cancer and be useful to fully exploit the
clinical potential of the signature.The gene signature included a total
of 12 genes which are known direct targets of HIF1, and 4 genes involved
in the unfolded protein response (UPR), including 3 of the 12
HIF1-targets. To obtain a metric for comparison with other relevant
factors, a score was calculated from the expression level of the 31 genes
in 154 patients. This hypoxia score correlated significantly with HIF1
protein expression (p<0.001). Furthermore, 8 out of the 12 known HIF1
target genes in the signature showed an individual correlation to the
expression of HIF1 (p<0.05), including the 3 UPR genes STC2, ERO1L, and
AK2.Cox survival analysis of the hypoxia score was performed on the 154
patients. When stratifying the score on lymph node status, it was
predictive of poor outcome only for the patients without metastases to
the lymph nodes (89 patients) (p=0.001). When assessing the prognostic
value of HIF1 protein expression in the whole patient group, it was not
correlated with survival. However, in patients with no lymph node
metastases, high levels of HIF1 were found to be a prognostic indicator
of poor outcome (p=0.043). Multivariate cox survival analysis was
performed on the lymph node negative patients, including the hypoxia
score, HIF1, and clinical parameters. Only the hypoxia score and FIGO
stage were found to be independently related to patient survival.In
conclusion, it appears that HIF1 is an important mediator of the
aggressive phenotype associated with our hypoxia gene signature. However,
since the hypoxia score emerged as a significantly better prognostic
factor than HIF1, other signaling pathways may also contribute.
Furthermore, this hypoxic phenotype seems to be associated with
aggressiveness particularly in patients with no metastases to the lymph
nodes.

