Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predicting glioblastoma recurrence using novel analysis of
perfusion MRI.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and aggressive primary brain tumor
in humans. Patients diagnosed with GBM have a poor prognosis, with less
than 25% of patients surviving more than two years. Despite intensive,
multimodality treatment with extensive surgical resection, radiotherapy,
and chemotherapy, recurrence of GBM is inevitable. Thus far GBM research
has focused mainly on classification of tumor subtypes, segmentation of
enhancing and non-enhancing tumor tissue on MRI, and distinguishing
treatment-related effects from recurrence. The purpose of this research
is to utilize MR perfusion imaging along with advanced image analysis
methods to predict specific areas of future recurrence in GBM.Forty
patients with glioblastoma (WHO Grade IV), who subsequently experience
recurrence, were utilized for this study. T1, T1CE, T2, FLAIR, and
perfusion images were co-registered and regions of interest (ROIs) were
drawn for each subject on imaging obtained prior to surgery in white
matter, gray matter, CSF, edema, enhancing tumor, non-enhancing tumor and
necrosis. Principal component analysis (PCA) was then employed to extract
the uncorrelated variables that reflect the temporal dynamics of
perfusion. Leave-one-out cross-validation was used when building the PCA
model from a training set and testing it on new patients. The results
demonstrate marked separation between edematous peritumoral regions and
peritumoral regions that later recurred. Hence, this study indicates that
imaging biomarkers predictive of tumor recurrence can be constructed
using advanced imaging and analysis methods, potentially leading to the
creation of a novel, and important, clinical tool.Citation Format: Luke
Macyszyn, Hamed Akbari, Xiao Da, Ragini Verma, Ronald Wolf, Michel
Bilello, Elias Melhem, Donald O'Rourke, Christos Davatzikos. Predicting
glioblastoma recurrence using novel analysis of perfusion MRI.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2669.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2669

