Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly sensitive detection of EGFR T790M on Ion Torrent PGM.


Introduction: EGFR T790M mutation leads to treatment resistance in 50% of
NSCLC patient undergoing TKI treatment. Early detection of the emergence
of this resistance mutation allows for tailoring of the treatment
regimen. Detection of EGFR T790M requires higher sensitivity techniques
than those needed to detect EGFR activating mutations, and quantitative
measurement of T790M may also provide value in monitoring disease
progression. Here we demonstrate that our proprietary amplicon
next-generation sequencing (NGS) on Ion Torrent PGM provides an
attractive solution for T790M detection with the advantage of high
sensitivity, specificity, and quantification capability.Methods: We
developed a proprietary library prep method for amplicon sequencing on
the Ion Torrent PGM. Ion Torrent barcode sequences were refined in our
validation to minimize barcode cross contamination. This optimization of
barcodes allows for accurate mutation quantification, especially critical
for variants with a frequency below 1%. This also added the benefit of
higher throughput and lower cost. We employ this non-enrichment method to
quantitatively measure T790M.DNA from the NCI-H1975 cell line was
serially diluted into wild-type NA19240 DNA to determine the limit of
detection (LOD), sensitivity, specificity, accuracy and reproducibility
of the method. We also used reference FFPE DNA from HorizonDx to validate
the accuracy and robustness of the assay. We further validated the test
by comparing the performance of our NGS method with ddPCR using the same
sample set (serially diluted H1975 into wild-type DNA controls).Results:
Our data demonstrated that the LOD for T790M is 0.2%. And the method
could reproducibly identify variants at these frequencies. With an input
of 10ng of the HorizonDx FFPE DNA, we measured T790M frequency at 6.7%,
which is concordant with the 6.5% mutation frequency reported by
HorizonDx. We cross-validated our NGS assay with ddPCR, and the mutation
frequencies detected by both platforms are nearly identical, and have a
regression coefficient of 0.9995, with comparable LOD of 0.2%.
Furthermore, our NGS assay allows us to detect other variants located in
this amplicon, e.g. SNP Q787Q, with LOD at 1%. The phasing status of
compound mutations can also be determined by this assay.To further
improve the sensitivity, an enrichment method was developed, and the
enriched T790M was sequenced by PGM. This method can semi-quantitatively
measure T790M frequency with LOD of 0.03%.Conclusion: Our EGFR T790M NGS
assay provides a unique option to reliably quantify T790M down to 0.2%
with low DNA input. This highly sensitive and specific detection
capability may enable earlier detection of emerging therapeutic
resistance, particularly if FFPE results reported here extend to a more
accessible specimen type, i.e. plasma circulating DNA, amenable to
periodic patient monitoring.

