Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High resolution imaging mass spectrometry reveals the breast
cancer cell-related profiles of phosphatidylinositol unsaturation.


Lipid metabolism is supposed to be altered in breast cancer, and several
literatures have suggested the possible compositional change of
phospholipids in breast cancer tissues and its correlations with the
tumor grade, sex hormone receptor status and patient's prognosis.
However, the breast cancer cell-related alteration of phospholipid
profiles and its underlying metabolic change remain unclear. The aim of
this study is to investigate the cancer cell-related phospholipid
alteration by using high resolution matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization imaging mass spectrometry (MALDI-IMS). We evaluated
the spatial distributions and the proportions of phosphatidylinositols
(PIs) in seven breast cancer tissues (three luminal cases and four
non-luminal cases including one Her2 positive case) and one normal breast
tissue. MS images of PIs and their mass spectra showed that the fatty
acyl chain compositions of observed PIs remarkably changed in cancer cell
region, compared with those in normal duct epithelium or surrounding
stromal cells. PIs containing polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) were the
major components in normal duct epithelium. In five of seven cancer
cases, PIs containing monounsaturated fatty acid (MUFA) were the most
dominant in the observed PIs and specifically upregulated in cancer
cells. In the rest of the cases, the MUFA upregulation was less obvious
than the aforementioned five cases, and PIs containing PUFA still
constituted a large percentage of observed PIs. In non-luminal cases, the
MUFA upregulation in cancer cells was well correlated with the expression
level of stearoyl CoA desaturase 1 (SCD1), a key enzyme in de novo MUFA
synthesis. This observation suggested that the upregulation of de novo
MUFA synthesis in cancer cells could contribute to the increase of PIs
containing MUFA. In conclusion, high resolution MALDI-IMS revealed the
breast cancer cell-related changes of PI profiles according to the degree
of the fatty acyl chain unsaturation, which implied the existence of
cancer cell-related PI remodeling process.

