Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DCA and metformin synergistically induce apoptosis in breast
cancer cells.


The unusual metabolism of aerobic glycolysis in cancer cells suggests
that this phenomenon can be exploited for improved therapies. Metformin,
a drug used to treat type 2 diabetics, has clinical evidence of cancer
prevention, and some studies show that cancer patients have a better
response when it is used with neoadjuvant therapy. One of the cellular
targets of metformin is the inhibition of Complex I in the mitochondrial
electron transport chain. This leads to an accumulation superoxide
species that can cause oxidative damage to cells and eventually lead to
cell death. Based on this, we hypothesized that drugs which promote
mitochondrial metabolism will synergize with metformin to increase
superoxide production and promote cell death of cancer cells. Cancer
cells using aerobic glycolysis display a high level of glucose uptake
that is processed through glycolysis to pyruvate, which is then converted
to lactate and secreted from the cells. Diverting pyruvate to
mitochondrial metabolism rather than its conversion to lactate was
expected to enhance metformin cytotoxicity. Dichloroacetate (DCA) is well
established drug that has been tested in humans for the treatment of
certain metabolic diseases. DCA works through inhibition of pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase (PDK), thus reducing entry of pyruvate into
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation pathways. Consequently DCA is
expected to promote mitochondrial metabolism and reduce lactate secretion
by cancer cells. We demonstrate that DCA and metformin synergistically
kill cultured breast cancer cells although the drug combination has no
effect on non-transformed MCF10A breast epithelial cells. The enhanced
cell death of the breast cancer cells displayed is through apoptosis, as
shown by caspase-dependent increases in cleaved PARP. DCA treatment was
associated with reduced lactate secretion by the cells and increased pH
of the growth medium which suggested it promoted oxidative
phosphorylation. The combination of two drugs also promoted increased
mitochondrial superoxide production compared to metformin alone which was
associated with increased oxidative damage. These findings indicate that,
as expected, DCA promotes metformin-mediated cell death by enhancing
mitochondrial metabolism of pyruvate. Therefore, it is possible that the
combination of metformin with DCA, or similar compounds, could enhance
cancer therapy.

