Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development program of patient tumor tissue bank to support the
drug and target discovery.


Background: The humanization of mice with various tissues named Chi-mice
aimed to reproduce the human situation to be more predictive than
conventional models. Despite significant progress in identifying
malignancy of cancer cells, a more detailed understanding of tumor
generation is needed. Xenograft of tumor cells into immunodeficient
rodents has constituted the major preclinical screen for the development
of new drugs. These models have identified efficacious agents, but their
chemosensitivity, genetic drift and clonal selection induced by cell
culture have been part of the high attrition rate observed in the
clinical development. Patient-derived tumor xenograft (PDX) obtained in
xenografting fresh patient tumor samples in mice are reported as being
more predictive to the clinical situation in maintaining the
histopathology and molecular diversity of the patient tumors.Methods: The
PDXs collection has been set up under ethical agreement with informed
consent of patients. The patients have been screened for absence of HIV,
HBV and HCV. The anonymized patient's clinical history and tissue banking
(including normal tissue when available) are centralized in our internal
biological resource center. Tumor samples were freshly implanted in nude
or SCID mice.Results:
Cryopreservation of the PDX is performed at early passages allowing using
these PDX only at low passage. The histopathology, EGFR, PSA, AR, HER, ER
and PR statute for lung, prostate and breast carcinoma and tumor growth
characteristics of these PDX are being performed. Lymphoma
characterization was performed using immunohistochemistry (hCD20,
m/hKi67). Lymphoma detection, probably related to EBV infection, leads to
switch to nude mice for xenografting.Conclusion: To create a highly
diversified panel of PDX, we organized a global process from multiple
centers. These PDX are currently being used in preclinical development of
new therapies and clinical positioning including biomarkers
identification.

