Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear accumulation of c-Rel transcription factor is correlated
with the proteasome inhibitor resistance in mantle cell lymphoma.


Purpose: Nuclear factor kB (NF-kB) plays essential roles in survival and
drug resistance of multiple malignancies including mantle cell lymphoma
(MCL) and multiple myeloma (MM). Proteasome inhibitors have been shown to
block constitutively active NF-kB and clinical data indicates a high
overall response of MCL and MM patients to this treatment. The 2nd
generation proteasome inhibitor, carfilzomib (CFZ), has a therapeutic
effect on relapsed or refractory disease and low toxicity to normal
lymphocytes. However, there are increasing numbers of proteasome
inhibitor-resistant cases. Thus, this study was designed to identify the
molecular mechanism that leads to CFZ-resistance.Experimental design: In
this study we have determined the cytotoxic effect of CFZ in a panel of
MM and MCL cell lines, as well as primary tumor cells. The cell growth
inhibition was assessed by the thymidine intake and MTT assay. NF-kB
activity was examined by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)
using nuclear extracts from CFZ-treated and control cells. Nuclear
pattern of NF-kB family members, such as RelA/p50, cRel/p50 and RelB/p52
complexes, was analyzed by supershift and western blot.Results:
CFZ-induced NF-kB inhibition was not observed in two (out of eight)
examined cell lines, even with the highest doses (100 nM). Consistently,
cell growth was suppressed only in cells with a CFZ-sensitive NF-kB
activity (IC50Purpose: Nuclear factor kB (NF-kB) plays essential roles in
survival and drug resistance of multiple malignancies including mantle
cell lymphoma (MCL) and multiple myeloma (MM). Proteasome inhibitors have
been shown to block constitutively active NF-kB and clinical data
indicates a high overall response of MCL and MM patients to this
treatment. The 2nd generation proteasome inhibitor, carfilzomib (CFZ),
has a therapeutic effect on relapsed or refractory disease and low
toxicity to normal lymphocytes. However, there are increasing numbers of
proteasome inhibitor-resistant cases. Thus, this study was designed to
identify the molecular mechanism that leads to
CFZ-resistance.Experimental design: In this study we have determined the
cytotoxic effect of CFZ in a panel of MM and MCL cell lines, as well as
primary tumor cells. The cell growth inhibition was assessed by the
thymidine intake and MTT assay. NF-kB activity was examined by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) using nuclear extracts from
CFZ-treated and control cells. Nuclear pattern of NF-kB family members,
such as RelA/p50, cRel/p50 and RelB/p52 complexes, was analyzed by
supershift and western blot.Results: CFZ-induced NF-kB inhibition was not
observed in two (out of eight) examined cell lines, even with the highest
doses (100 nM). Consistently, cell growth was suppressed only in cells
with a CFZ-sensitive NF-kB activity (IC50<20 nM), as shown by EMSA and
MTT assay. In contrast, the treatment with proteasome inhibitor increased
the nuclear accumulation and DNA binding of NF-kB in CFZ-resistant cells.
Furthermore, we have found that only these cells had upregulated
c-Rel/p50 member of NF-kB family. Supershift analysis revealed that all
examined cell lines and primary cells had constitutively active classical
(RelA/p50 dimer) and/or non-classical (RelB/p52 dimer) NF-kB, excluding
CFZ-resistant cells with prominent nuclear accumulation of c-Rel. This
data suggests that activated c-Rel may trigger resistance to CFZ.
Enhanced nuclear accumulation of c-Rel is also an unwanted molecular
consequence of exposure to CFZ.Conclusion: Our work indicates the need
for new treatment strategies in c-Rel-positive cases. A strategic
combination targeting different signaling mediators, especially upstream
of c-Rel, would enhance the ultimate anticancer effect.

