Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: First interim analysis of a randomized study to evaluate safety
and efficacy of individualized dendritic cell-based cancer immune therapy
for glioblastoma multiforme.


The first line treatment for Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM), surgery,
chemo-, and radiotherapy, gains patients little over one year. This makes
novel treatment strategies highly warranted. One such strategy is cancer
immune therapy (CIT). We conduct a randomised phase II clinical trial
using a completely individualised CIT concept based on dendritic cells
(DC) for the treatment of GBM. The novel feature of our DC-CIT technology
is that exposure to bacterial endotoxins enables DC to prime type 1
T-helper cells, which support cytolytic anti-tumour immune responses.
Such DC cancer vaccines have so far been investigated only in pilot
trials. This randomised study aims at delivering safety as well as for
the first time efficacy data. All patients aged 18-70 years receive
standard first line therapy; in the randomised treatment group the DC-CIT
is applied as add-on. The DC-CIT is inoculated into inguinal lymph nodes:
after 6 weeks of chemoradiotherapy, 4 weekly applications; accompanying
the maintenance chemotherapy 6 more applications every 4 weeks; finally 1
boost immunisation every 3 month as long as DC-CIT is available. We also
include patients 70 in order to demonstrate safety and feasibility.
Paediatric and elderly patients, however, are not randomised and are not
evaluated together with patients 18-70. Primary and secondary objectives
are progression free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Here we
present data from a first interim analysis; about 100 patients were
recruited for the study, so far about one third of patients may be
evaluated for overall survival.As reported for other CIT trials, DC-CIT
treatment shows no improvement in PFS, whereas OS is clearly prolonged.
The meanSD for PFS and OS is 243167 (n=22) and 453180 days (n=11) in the
treatment group; and 226170 (n=21) and 361191 days (n=17) in the control
group. At 12 months, 21/33 (73%) patients in the treatment group and
17/35 (48%) patients in the control group were still alive. At 18 months,
8/15 (50%) patients in the treatment and 6/18 (33%) patients in the
control group were still alive. The treatment is well tolerated; no
serious adverse events were noted that could clearly be attributed to
DC-CIT. Inoculation into inguinal lymph nodes causes local swelling,
redness, and tenderness; some of the patients develop fever of around
40C. Although these are early data, we may already conclude that the
DC-CIT treatment is very well tolerated. The trend in our observations
suggest a good chance for establishing an overall survival benefit for
GBM patients when DC-CIT is applied as an add-on treatment to the
standard therapy in GBM.

