Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Membrane phospholipid asymmetry mediates the selective packaging
of protein factors in cancer microparticles.


Objective: Growing evidence indicates that cancer cell-derived
microparticles (MPs) play important regulatory roles on cellular and
system levels. These activities are attributed to protein factors inside
MPs. It has been known that contents in MPs are not a passive
representation of the host cell, but a collection of factors packaged in
a selective fashion. In the current study, we hypothesize that membrane
phospholipid dynamics promotes the selective packaging of protein factors
by modulating the electrostatic density inside MPs.Methods: The dynamics
of phospholipid species across the membrane bilayer, including
phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), phosphatidylserine (PS) and
phosphatidylinositides (PIs) are characterized using specific molecular
probes. We used exogenous probes, Duramycin and bovine lactadherin, to
stain the presence of PE and PS, respectively, on the outer surface of MP
membrane. Endogenously expressed probes include GFP-tagged C2 domain of
lactadherin (LacC2-GFP), and GFP-tagged 2PH-PLCdelta, are used to assess
the relative density of PS and PI, respectively, in the inner leaflet of
MP membranes. We examined the distribution of small Rho GTPases,
including RhoA, Cdc42 and Rac1, using GFP-labeled reporters. To further
examine the electrostatic interactions, we used RhoA mutants with the
polybasic amino acids mutated to Gln. Additionally, we constructed a
GFP-PBR to validate the electrostatic-dependent packaging
mechanism.Results: PE is externalized to the outer surface of MPs. This
is correlated with a greater density of negatively charged phospholipids,
particularly PS, in the inner leaflet. The process is independent of
apoptosis or the generation of apoptotic bodies. The redistribution of PE
to the MP surface is correlated with an elevated presence of small
GTPases in a PBR-dependent manner. Mutation of PBR abolished RhoA uptake
in MPs. The incorporation of PBR to GFP significantly enhanced GFP
localization in MPs. Conclusion: PE externalization to MP surface likely
results in a greater density of negatively charged phospholipids,
including PS, and to a lesser extent, PIs. An elevated density of anionic
phospholipids provides an electrostatic attraction for
membrane-associated proteins to MPs. This may provide a general mechanism
for the selective sequestration of signal transduction factors in cancer
cell-derived MPs.

