Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct oncogenic reprogramming of adult mouse hepatocytes into
cancer stem cells.


Objective: Primary human liver cancer (PLC), the third most lethal cancer
worldwide, is classified into biologically distinct subgroups, which
suggests origin from different hepatic lineage cells. The existence of
cancer stem cells (CSCs) was reported in PLC, but the cellular origin of
liver CSCs has not been elucidated. Our aim was to investigate the
contribution of different hepatic lineage cells to the evolution of CSCs
and the phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity of PLC. Methods: Three cell
types at different levels of differentiation, including primary mouse
hepatic progenitor cells (HPCs), lineage committed hepatoblasts (HBs) and
terminally differentiated hepatocytes (AHs) were co-transduced with
lentiviral vectors carrying oncogenic H-Ras-Luciferase/EGFP and SV40
large T (LT)-mCherry. CSC properties of FACS sorted
H-Ras-EGFP+/SV40LT-mCherry+ cells were tested by standard in vitro and in
vivo assays. Individual liver tumors derived from intrasplenic injection
of transduced HPCs, HBs and AHs were subjected to immunohistochemistry
and whole transcriptome profiling. Results: HPCs, HBs and AHs were
susceptible to transformation albeit with a different efficiency as shown
by the frequency of tumor initiating cells (1/7, 1/26 and 1/42,
respectively). All transduced cells acquired similar attributes of liver
CSCs in vitro as judged by self-renewal ability, expression of CSC marker
CD133, CD24, CD44 and CD90 and high percentage of side population cells.
HPC-, HB- and AH-initiated liver tumors commonly showed a multi-lineage
differentiation expressing hepatocyte (HNF), hepatic progenitor cell
(EpCAM, cytokeratin 19, A6) and mesenchymal (vimentin) markers and
resembled human PLC. Nevertheless, tumors displayed distinct
morphophenotypes according to their cell-of origin: AH tumors showed
predominantly hepatocellular carcinoma, HB tumors cholangicarcinoma and
HPC tumors epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like features. Gene
expression analyses revealed the activation of EMT- and embryonic
cell-related transcriptional programs in all tumors with the highest
number of significant genetic changes in AH (2826) versus HB (574) and
HPC tumors (906). Hierarchical clustering distinguished tumors of
different cellular origin underscoring the contribution of
lineage-stage-dependent genetic changes in malignant transformation.
Notably, AH-derived tumors showed specific enrichment of c-Myc target
genes. Stable knockdown of c-Myc in transformed AHs reduced their CSC
properties and delayed tumor growth. Conclusions: Our results indicate
that liver tumors with dominant CSC features can originate from any cell
in the hepatocytic lineage. Identification of common and cell-of-origin
specific phenotypic and genetic changes may provide novel therapeutic
targets for treatment of PLC.

