Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunization with CPG in combination with MHC class I and class II
peptides stimulates rapid and strong tumor antigen-specific CTL responses
in melanoma patients.


There is now ample evidence that the toll-like receptor 9 ligand
CPG/PF-3512676 represents a potent adjuvant for peptide/protein-based
cancer vaccines capable of stimulating ex vivo detectable tumor antigen
(TA)-specific CD8+ T cell responses in patients with advanced melanoma.
Although CD4+ T cells appeared to promote the expansion and functions of
CD8+ T cells in experimental models, melanoma-associated helper peptides
have been shown to paradoxically decrease CD8+ T cell responses to a
multipeptide melanoma vaccine emulsified in Montanide, possibly by
inducing antigen-specific Tregs. To further investigate this question, we
have performed one Phase I study of immunization where patients with
advanced melanoma were immunized with CPG, Montanide and the
HLA-A2-restricted analog peptide NY-ESO-1 157-165V either alone (Arm 1,
n=5) or in combination with the pan-DR CD4 helper peptide NY-ESO-1
119-143 (Arm 2, n=7). Patients in both arms exhibited a rapid increase of
NY-ESO-1-specific CD8+ T cells that were detectable ex vivo by flow
cytometry. Strikingly, the mean frequency of vaccine-induced
NY-ESO-1-specific CD8+ T cells after 6 biweekly immunizations was five
times higher in patients who also received the helper peptide. Melanoma
patients immunized with the helper peptide (Arm 2) developed a rapid
increase of Foxp3 NY-ESO-1-specific CD4+ T cells that produced Th-1 type
cytokines and IL-21 ex vivo. As compared to Arm 1, melanoma patients
included in Arm 2 developed vaccine-induced NY-ESO-1-specific CD8+ T
cells that were more differentiated, produced more IFN- and exhibited
higher cytolytic functions in ex vivo assays. Collectively, our data
support the inclusion of well-defined MHC class II peptides in
combination with CPG/PF-3512676 and MHC class I peptides in multipeptide
melanoma vaccines to better augment the expansion, differentiation, IFN-
production and lytic function of TA-specific CTLs in patients with
advanced melanoma.This work was supported by the National Institutes of
Health/National Cancer Institute grants R01CA90360 and R01CA157467 (to
H.M. Zarour).

