Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular-genetic imaging of prostate cancer.


Cancer-specific promoters, such as the progression elevated gene-3 or the
astrocyte elevated gene promoters, PEG-Prom and AEG-Prom, respectively,
can be used as molecular genetic imaging instruments for tumor-selective
imaging of cancer. We have previously shown this in experimental models
of metastatic breast cancer and melanoma using bioluminescence imaging
(BLI) and single photon emission computed tomography with computed
tomography (SPECT/CT). Here we show that we can express PEG-Prom and
AEG-Prom selectively in PC3-ML (human bone metastatic derived prostate
cancer) cells and use these constructs for imaging prostate cancer in
vivo. PC3-ML cells were transfected with firefly luciferase (FLuc) or the
herpes simplex type I thymidine kinase (HSV1-tk), and validated for
suitable transfection through bioluminescence and [125I]FIAU cell uptake
assays, respectively. PC3-ML cells were administered through
intra-cardiac injection to allow widespread metastases. A linear
polyethyleneimine (l-PEI) nanoparticle was used for intravenous (IV)
delivery of the promoter constructs to animals bearing metastases.
PEG-Prom- and AEG-Prom-driven imaging reporter gene expression was
monitored by small animal BLI and by SPECT/CT after IV administration of
D-luciferin or [125I]FIAU, respectively. Both BLI and SPECT/CT imaging
demonstrated tumor-specific PEG-Prom and AEG-Prom activity in the model
of metastatic prostate cancer but not in control. Using the thoracic
cavity and tibia as the regions of interest (ROI), quantification of the
BLI data (n=6) at the 48 h time point after reporter gene delivery showed
a range of 16- to 19-fold higher accumulation of FLuc in the metastasis
group compared to control for PEG-Prom and AEG-Prom, respectively. BLI
results were confirmed by histopathology, immunohistochemistry and
western blot. Quantification of the SPECT/CT data (n=5) at the 56 h time
point after reporter gene and 8 h after [125I]FIAU delivery showed a 3-
to 11-fold higher accumulation of [125I]FIAU, depending on the tumor
burden, in the group bearing metastases compared to control for AEG-Prom.
Metastatic nodules detected by the SPECT/CT imaging were confirmed by
pathology. The results demonstrate the potential of systemically
delivered, PEG-Prom- and AEG-Prom-driven constructs for enabling the
imaging of metastatic prostate cancer in vivo.

