Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetic investigation of unbound vandetanib in patients
with medullary thyroid carcinoma using liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry.


Introduction: Vandetanib is a once-daily oral multikinase inhibitor with
antitumoral activity in patients with advanced medullary thyroid
carcinoma (MTC). Previously, we reported a relationship between high
serum levels of vandetanib and serious toxicity. A significant impact of
the unbound concentration of kinase inhibitors on clinical response
and/or toxicity has been suggested. Here, we report the application of a
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) assay for the
measurement of unbound serum vandetanib level in MTC patients.Materials
and Methods: Serum from 13 MTC patients was prospectively collected
during each course of vandetanib treatment (starting dose 300 mg/day)
from 1 week up to 24 months and stored at -20C before analysis. Total and
unbound exposure monitoring was investigated on 134 and 90 samples
respectively. Unbound serum fraction was obtained by conventional
ultrafiltration with Centrifree YM-30 device. The previously described
LC-MS/MS method was used to quantify total and unbound
vandetanib.Results: We developed and validated a fast and sensitive
LC-MS/MS assay allowing the quantitation of the unbound fraction of
vandetanib in human serum. The calibration curve was linear from 2.5 to
250 ng/mL with a lower limit of quantitation at 5.7 ng/mL. Intraday and
interday CV (%) for unbound vandetanib ranged from 2.7 to 6.5% and from
5.6 to 6.9%, respectively. Median unbound vandetanib serum levels
evaluated in MTC patients indicated a progressive rise from 50 ng/ml (at
1 week) to 70 ng/ml (at 3 months) that persisted over time. Mean
percentage of unbound vandetanib was 8%, in agreement with literature.
Six of the 13 patients presented serious adverse events that required
treatment interruption and/or dose reduction within 3 months of
treatment. As expected, 3 patients with adverse events had a serum
vandetanib level higher by more than 20% above the median level during
the first 3 months of treatment. Interestingly, one patient with serious
adverse event presented higher unbound vandetanib levels than the other
patients, but its total vandetanib level was not increased.Conclusion:
The steady state unbound vandetanib level is close to 70 ng/mL and total
and unbound fraction may be relevant for therapeutic monitoring.
Relationship between free fraction levels and adverse events is currently
under investigation on a larger cohort of patients.

