Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel photoimmunotherapy (PIT) targeting cancer-associated
fibroblasts (CAFs) for esophageal cancer.


Introduction: CAFs are thought to play an essential role in cancer
invasion and metastasis. We have developed the novel therapy targeting
CAFs. Originally, CAFs have been defined as fibroblasts which express
-SMA in cancer tissue. As -SMA express in cytoplasm, it can't become the
target by itself. However recently it was reported that fibroblast
activation protein (FAP) is functional and specific surface protein for
CAFs. The aim of this study is to analyze CAFs and FAP expression of
esophageal cancer and to develop the new therapy that targeted CAFs by
PIT for esophageal cancer. Here we suggest a novel method of an antitumor
effect by killing CAF itself.Matherials and Methods: TE-4 and TE-8
(esophageal squamous cell carcinoma), FEF3 (fetal esophageal fibroblast
3),GEP-FEF3 cell lines were used in this study. 1) The specimens of
esophageal cancer were double immunostained with -SMA and FSP1 antibodies
to count CAFs. 2) In vivo study, TE cells and TE cells+activated FEF3 in
the two groups were compared with tumor progression. 3) The interaction
of activated FEF3 and TE cells was examined about the expression of -SMA
and FAP by western blotting and flowcytometry. 4) We examined the surface
expression of FAP in activated FEF3 by immunohistochemistory(IHC). 5) We
used a target-specific photosensitizer based on a near-infrared(NIR)
phthalocyanine dye, IR700, conjugated to monoclonal antibodies targeting
FAP. In vitro and in vivo, we observed whether cell proliferation and
tumorigenicity are controlled after irradiation with NIR light in FEF3
expressing FAP conjugated FAP-IR700.Results: 1) The expression of CAFs
was recognized as a deeper invasion depth, moreover the CAFs has tended
to express more in the periphery and the leading parts. 2) In vivo, the
tumors co-injected TE cells and CAFs tended to grow more than cancer cell
alone. 3) In western blotting, FAP expression of FEF3 activated by TGF-
and co-cultured with TE cells was detected more than that of normal
status.In flowcytometry, FAP expression of FEF3 activated by TGF-,
co-cultured with TE cells and cultured in TE cells conditioned medium was
detected more than that of normal status. 4) In IHC, FAP expression of
FEF3 activated by TGF- and co-cultured with TE cells was increased more
than that of normal status.5.We could suppress the proliferation of
activated FEF3 cells in vitro with FAP-IR700 mediated PIT. And in vivo,
the tumor with FAP-IR700 was also suppressed.Conclusion: In conclusion,
we demonstrate that CAF contributed to tumor invasion and progression in
surgical specimens and it was represented in vivo, which indicated that
CAF is essential for cancer development. Furthermore, here we suggest
novel therapeutic concept of Targeting CAF by PIT for cancer progression.
The PIT for CAF is a unique strategy and can bring us a new type theory
as combination targeting cancer cells and their fundamental
microenvironment.

