Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of cancer before distant metastasis.


Introduction: The majority of deaths from cancer are due to disseminated
disease rather than the primary tumor. As metastases are often discovered
years after surgical removal of the primary tumor, probably at least one
metastasis was already present at the time of surgery. To establish a
distant metastasis cells must disseminate from the primary tumor and
overcome a series of obstacles, the metastatic cascade. In this study we
develop a mathematical model for this cascade to estimate the technology
requirements for detection of a primary tumor before the first metastasis
has been formed.Methods: The metastatic cascade is described in discrete
steps: 1. local tumor growth; 2. dissemination into circulation; 3.
survival in circulation; 4. extravasation into tissue; and 5. growth into
a metastasis. The model was built using data and relationships described
in the literature to predict the relationship between tumor size and
probability of distant metastasis for 38715 patients with surgically
removed TxNxM0 primary breast cancer from the Netherlands Cancer
Registry. The model was calibrated using primary tumor size, probability
of distant metastasis and time to distant metastasis for 1489 patients
with stage T1bNxM0 (25% of total patients with T1bNxM0). Validation of
the model was done with data for all patients.Results: From the time to
distant metastasis of these 38715 breast cancer patients, we determined a
tumor doubling time of 1.7 0.9 months. Fitting the data for 25% of T1b
patients estimates a metastatic efficiency of 1 metastasis formed per 60
million disseminated tumor cells. Validation of the model to data of
patients in all T-stages shows good agreement between model and
epidemiological data. To reduce the 5-year risk of distant metastasis for
TxNxM0 from 9.2% to 1.0%, the primary tumor needs to be detected and
removed before it reaches a diameter of 2.7 1.6 mm. At this size, the
model predicts that there will be 9 6 CTC/L blood.Conclusions: To reduce
the rate of distant metastasis in surgically treated TxNxM0 breast cancer
to 1%, imaging technology will need to be able to detect lesions of 2.7
mm in diameter or smaller. Before CTC detection can be applied in the
early disease setting, sensitivity will need to be improved by at least
15-fold and combined with technology that minimizes false positives.

