Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lentiviral vector-based insertional mutagenesis identifies new
clinically relevant liver cancer genes.


Next generation sequencing approaches are identifying a plethora of
mutations in a variety of human cancers. However, the clinical
implications of these new findings are still limited, since the
identification of cancer driving mutations is hampered by the
co-occurrence of several bystander and progression related events.Here we
developed a forward genetics approach based on a new lentiviral
vector-based insertional mutagen aimed at identifying cancer initiating
genes that are relevant in human hepatocarcinogenesis. We generated a
replication-defective lentiviral vector (LV) engineered with long
terminal repeats carrying hepatospecific enhancers able to deregulate
genes upon integration. Differently from retroviruses and transposons,
our replication-defective LV provides a single round of integration
shortly after the administration, thus tagging mainly early events in
carcinogenesis. A single administration of LV in newborn mice was able to
induce hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in 3 clinically relevant models of
hepatocarcinogenesis: in 30% of Cdkn2a deficient mice (P=0.005 Vs
untreated), in 27% of liver-specific Pten deficient mice (P=0.04) and in
75% of wild type mice coupled to CCl4 administration (P=0.002). From 30
LV-induced HCCs we retrieved 172 LV integrations that allowed the
identification of Braf, Fign, Sos1 and Rtl1 as candidate cancer loci. The
causative role of these 4 genes in HCC was experimentally validated in
vivo by forced expression in the mouse liver. Whole transcriptome gene
expression analysis allowed unveiling the molecular pathways deregulated
by the newly identified cancer genes. HCC induced by integration at the
paternally expressed gene Rtl1 (mapping within the imprinted Dlk1-Dio3
region) displayed the peculiar upregulation of oxidative phosphorylation
genes. Conversely, LV-mediated upregulation of Braf and Fign caused the
overexpression of the maternally expressed microRNAs encoded within the
Dlk1-Dio3 region in HCCs which display the downregulation of oxidative
phosphorylation genes. These findings highlighted a relevant role of
Dlk1-Dio3 region in HCCs and in the regulation of metabolism.
Additionally, we showed that WNT pathway may represent a target of the
new enigmatic oncogene Fign. We then analyzed different human HCCs
collections induced by HBV or HCV (N tot of HCC=221). We found that all
the newly identified cancer genes were significantly upregulated and
amplified or deleted in human HCCs. Moreover, we showed that the
expression level of the new liver cancer genes or the specific gene
expression signature caused by their upregulation can efficiently
distinguish HCC patients characterized by poor survival. Overall, we
developed a new insertional mutagen by which we identified new clinically
relevant liver cancer genes that may provide novel prognostic markers and
therapeutic targets for the diagnosis and treatment of human HCCs.

