Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing in DNA repair genes in
prostate tumors.


Prostate cancer is the most common malignancy and the second leading
cause of cancer death in men in the United States. The exponential
increase in risk of prostate cancer associated with aging may reflect the
accumulation of DNA damage as a result of a series of processes including
oxidative stress, inflammation or environmental carcinogens or a decrease
in DNA damage-repair response capacity. DNA repair mechanisms are
important for the removal of oxidative DNA compounds or DNA adducts from
damaged genomic sites.We aimed to sequence the entire coding region of
all genes that participate in DNA repair pathways, in prostate tumors,
and in another study to optimize % read coverage for GC-rich exons (i.e.
exon-1)For the first study, 5 primary tumors (Gleason score 7) and 1
matched blood DNA sample from a prostate cancer patient were used for the
assessment. In this study we applied the SureSelectTM Target Enrichment
System. The RNA bait library (total 129 targeted genes with bait length
of 120 bp), was 0.4Mb in size and was hybridized with the genomic DNA
library of tumor samples followed by Illumina Paired-End Multiplexed
Sequencing. Among these genes some genes display GC-rich content in
exon-1. In order to resolve coverage depth in these regions we used
explored the use of TMAC (Tetramethylammonium chloride; (CH3)4N(Cl))
during hybridization in parallel with the standard method of library
preparation.On the average, 48 % of the mapped reads mapped to our target
genes, regardless of tissue type (paraffin embedded or frozen). We
obtained > 500X of coverage, except of exon 1 of some genes, where depth
was 70% GC). A subset of genes was somatically altered across tumors
derived from different individuals, including TP53, MPG, NEIL1, NFKBIA,
XRCC1, CCNE1, ERCC2, E2F1, MLH1, POLQ, OGG1, XPC, NFKB1, CDKN1A, POLB,
E2F5, E2F2, ABL1, NOTCH1, AR, MRE11A, CHEK1, RB1, CCND2 etc. Analysis of
GC rich exon data show that application of TMAC produces libraries with
improved coverage in exon-1 in several genes including GADD45A, PARP1,
POLD1, MSH2, ATR, which have GC content >70%.Although we plan to sequence
40 additional tumor samples and matched controls, these data suggest
associations between DNA repair gene alterations and prostate cancer
progression. Our optimizing condition significantly improves coverage of
GC rich exons. This approach will be significantly helpful in tumor
samples that need amplification due to low mass of DNA.We thank the
Cancer Crusaders Next generation Sequence Analysis Core for their support
in downstream analysis of NGS data.This work was supported by DOD grant
PC094628, and NIH grant 8 P20 GM103518.

