Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of cellular adhesion in escaping prostate cancer tumor
dormancy.


Dissemination of prostate cancer (PCa) cells to the bone marrow appears
to be an early event in the PCa disease process. In some patients, these
disseminated tumor cells (DTC) proliferate to form active metastases
after a prolonged period of undetectable disease following initial
treatment. This time period that precedes recurrence is often referred to
as tumor dormancy. Prevention of PCa recurrence would present a
significant clinical advantage, as patients with bone metastases
ultimately stop responding to second line therapies and eventually
succumb to the disease. Understanding the biology of tumor dormancy and
the mechanism(s) of release from dormancy will allow us to determine
which patients may recur and identify possible targets for therapy to
prevent disease recurrence.The microenvironment significantly influences
tumor cell proliferation and the formation of metastases. With respect to
dormancy, cues from the microenvironment have been shown to regulate
integrin 1 signaling in breast and epidermoid carcinoma to promote cell
proliferation. However, mechanisms of PCa dormancy remain unknown.
Additionally, PCa is a heterogeneous disease, further complicating the
identification of mechanisms pertinent to dormancy. Here, we show that 5
different LuCaP PCa xenografts, which appear dormant in vitro, are
induced to proliferate through contact with each other and activated bone
marrow stroma. Furthermore, this effect can be reproduced by
constitutively activating the phosphorylation of myosin light chain II, a
downstream effector of integrin 1.It has previously been shown that
dormant breast cancer cells lacking integrin 1 signaling experience cell
cycle arrest in the G1 phase. Thus, we examined changes in genes
implicated in cell cycle progression in LuCaP PCa xenografts with
constitutively active myosin light chain kinase (MLCK). We find that
cyclin dependent kinase 6 (CDK6) is consistently upregulated in LuCaP
xenografts with constitutively active MLCK. Furthermore, the
transcription factor E2F4, which is implicated in growth arrest, is
consistently downregulated. CDK6 is important in release from G1, and has
previously been shown to associate with the androgen receptor, a critical
player in PCa growth. Taken together, these data point to a potential
mechanism by which PCa cells are released from dormancy to form lethal
metastases. Targeting this mechanism could provide powerful new treatment
opportunities that could reduce the lethality of PCa.

