Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Augmentation of D,L-sulforaphane-mediated prostate cancer
chemoprevention by pharmacologic inhibition of autophagy using
chloroquine in a transgenic mouse model.


D,L-Sulforaphane (SFN) is a synthetic racemic analogue of broccoli
constituent L-sulforaphane with in vivo evidence of cancer
chemopreventive effect in rodent models. For example, we showed
previously that oral administration of 6 mol (about 1 mg/mouse) SFN
(3x/week) modestly inhibited incidence and/or burden of prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia and well-differentiated cancer, but not
poorly-differentiated (advanced) prostate cancer, in Transgenic
Adenocarcinoma of Mouse Prostate (TRAMP) mice in association with
apoptosis induction. Previous studies from our laboratory have also
revealed that SFN treatment causes autophagy in cultured human prostate
cancer cells, which serves to inhibit apoptotic cell death by delaying
release of cytochrome c due to sequestration of mitochondria in
autophagosomes. However, the in vivo significance of these cellular
observations was unclear. The present study demonstrates, for the first
time, in vivo augmentation of SFN-mediated prostate cancer
chemoprevention by pharmacologic suppression of autophagy using
chloroquine (CQ). A total of 128 four-week old TRAMP mice were randomized
into one of the following four groups: (1) control (n=32), (2) SFN
(n=32), (3) CQ (n=35), and (4) SFN + CQ (n=29). Termination of the
experiment was planned after 18 weeks of treatment, but early sacrifice
was necessary for some mice in each group (mostly from groups 1-3) due to
a variety of reasons but not unique to any treatment group, including
weight loss, premature death, morbidity, or early tumor onset.
Nevertheless, % mice with prostate weight of >1g, an indicator of
advanced (poorly-differentiated) prostate cancer, was significantly lower
in the SFN + CQ group compared with control (P=0.006 by Fisher's exact
test), SFN alone (P=0.017), and CQ alone group (P=0.072). Likewise, the
incidence and burden of microscopic poorly-differentiated prostate cancer
was significantly lower in the mice of the SFN + CQ group compared with
control. Transmission electron microscopy confirmed in vivo autophagy
induction by SFN administration in the dorsolateral prostate.
Augmentation of SFN-mediated prostate cancer chemoprevention by CQ was
associated with reduced cell proliferation. Plasma proteomics indicated
protein level changes unique to the SFN + CQ combination compared with
other groups (control or SFN), including hemopexin, serpina1c protein,
and fructose-bisphosphate aldolase A isoform precursor. Cluster analysis
of proteomics data revealed significant enrichment for gene ontology (GO)
terms proteasome and threonine protease (2.8), protease inhibitor (2.7),
and protein-lipid complex (2.6). These results merit determination of the
efficacy of SFN + CQ combination for prevention of prostate cancer in a
clinical setting. This investigation was supported by the NCI grant
CA115498-07.

