Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction between bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells and
neuroblastoma cells leads to osteoblastogenesis and VEGFA expression.


Bone metastasis in patients with neuroblastoma often heralds a poor
prognosis despite intensive therapy. We previously reported that
neuroblastoma cells interact with osteoclasts and bone marrow mesenchymal
stem cells (BMSC), and that the nature of this interaction is both
osteolytic and pro-tumorigenic. In many cancers, the suppression of
osteoblastogenesis plays a part in increased osteolysis. However, little
is known about the interaction between neuroblastoma cells and
osteoblasts within the bone marrow microenvironment. We have examined
this interaction within the context of BMSC differentiation to
osteoblasts by bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4).To examine the effect
of secreted factors from neuroblastoma cells on the BMP4 induced
differentiation of murine BMSC, we cultured them in the presence or
absence of neuroblastoma cells using culture inserts. We found that the
mRNA encoding the osteoblast marker alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was
increased by 10 fold and ALP protein level and activity were 1.5 fold
higher in the presence versus absence of neuroblastoma cells. The mRNAs
encoding the osteoblast master regulator Runx2 and its target osteocalcin
were increased by 4 and 1.5 fold (p2 fold. Together, these data indicate
that neuroblastoma cells synergise with BMP4 to promote osteoblast growth
and differentiation from BMSC.To understand the mechanism by which
neuroblastoma cells enhance osteoblastogenesis, we compared the mRNA
profile of murine MSC driven to differentiate into osteoblasts by
doxycycline-induced Runx2 expression (ST2Rx2dox) in the presence or
absence of neuroblastoma cells. Triplicate RNA samples were labeled and
hybridized to Illumina BeadChips containing probes for >19,100 genes. In
silico analysis identified 9 genes upregulated when co-cultured with
neuroblastoma cells. Of these, two (Spondin2 and VEGFA) encode proteins
with established roles in osteoblastogenesis. To validate these findings
in primary murine BMSC, we showed by RT-qPCR a 2 fold increase in VEGFA
mRNA in BMSC treated with BMP4 in the presence versus absence of
neuroblastoma cells. ELISA analysis demonstrated a parallel 2 fold
increase in intra- and extracellular VEGFA protein levels. We then found
that the treatment of BMSC with BMP4 and VEGFA together led to a 1.5 fold
increase (p2 fold. Together, these data indicate that neuroblastoma cells
synergise with BMP4 to promote osteoblast growth and differentiation from
BMSC.To understand the mechanism by which neuroblastoma cells enhance
osteoblastogenesis, we compared the mRNA profile of murine MSC driven to
differentiate into osteoblasts by doxycycline-induced Runx2 expression
(ST2Rx2dox) in the presence or absence of neuroblastoma cells. Triplicate
RNA samples were labeled and hybridized to Illumina BeadChips containing
probes for >19,100 genes. In silico analysis identified 9 genes
upregulated when co-cultured with neuroblastoma cells. Of these, two
(Spondin2 and VEGFA) encode proteins with established roles in
osteoblastogenesis. To validate these findings in primary murine BMSC, we
showed by RT-qPCR a 2 fold increase in VEGFA mRNA in BMSC treated with
BMP4 in the presence versus absence of neuroblastoma cells. ELISA
analysis demonstrated a parallel 2 fold increase in intra- and
extracellular VEGFA protein levels. We then found that the treatment of
BMSC with BMP4 and VEGFA together led to a 1.5 fold increase (p<0.05) in
BMSC viability compared to VEGFA alone or no treatment, suggesting that
VEGFA may provide a BMP4 dependent growth advantage.Our data suggest that
in contrast to many cancers that suppress osteoblastogenesis,
neuroblastoma may promote osteoblastogenesis in part by enhancing the
expression of VEGFA in BMSC. We are currently investigating the
consequence of this osteoblastogenic activity on neuroblastoma bone
metastasis.

