Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded melanoma tumors for the
detection of copy number variation by next generation sequencing.


DNA copy number variation (CNV) has been identified in many cancers.
Recent studies have shown that CNV data, in combination with other
high-throughput techniques, can provide novel biological insight to tumor
biology. Although a number of CNV whole-genome studies have been
performed on melanoma using cell lines and frozen tumors, very few have
used formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE)-derived material. Melanoma
tumors are small and rarely frozen, which means that FFPE tumor blocks
would be a very valuable source of genomic material to be used for CNV
analysis if the methodologies were adequately developed. It has been
shown that reliable next generation sequencing data can be produced from
FFPE-derived DNA in lung cancers (Wood et al., 2010). Here, we report a
study showing that DNA from FFPE melanoma tumor blocks can be used for
CNV detection on a next generation sequencing platform. DNA from 20 FFPE
melanoma samples was used to prepare genomic libraries, which were
sequenced on the Illumina GAIIx instrument. Successful library
preparation occurred at DNA levels of at least 30ng, while current
protocols generally suggest 50ng with high quality material and 1g
generally. The use of SPRIworks (Beckman Coulter) and Bravo (Agilent)
robots was compared with the manual method for library preparation with
input DNA mass of 30-150ng. Libraries prepared manually were always of
better quality and yield. We also investigated means of improving library
preparation. Melanin co-purifies with DNA and inhibits downstream
reactions, and indeed lower coverage was seen in our samples if they were
heavily pigmented. To overcome the adverse effects of melanin, 10 DNA
samples (5 pairs) were used for library preparation with and without
bovine serum albumin (BSA). BSA has been shown to bind to melanin, and as
a result the melanin does not inhibit the DNA polymerase reaction. All 5
libraries with BSA were of higher quality and yield when compared to
those prepared without BSA. All comparisons were made after running the
libraries on an Agilent DNA chip.Currently available data from the GAIIx
were used to develop the analysis pipeline. The first 10 samples were
multiplexed together and run twice, while the remaining 10 were
multiplexed at 5 samples per lane and run once. The average coverage
obtained was 0.10x with a range of 0.03x-0.11x. We observed a strong
effect on mapping quality based upon the end-cycle quality scores,
leading us to adopt an aggressive data trimming procedure. More samples
from the Leeds Melanoma Cohort will soon be prepared and sequenced on the
Illumina HiSeq2000 instrument. We aim to identify if tumors with driver
BRAF mutations have different genomic signatures when compared to those
with NRAS mutations. Finally, genomic data will be combined with clinical
data and we will check for the prognostic significance of CNV changes
identified in our samples.

