Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and molecular characterization of cell lines from
Japanese patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma.


Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a poor prognostic malignancy that
is distinctly resistant to the conventional therapies. Cell lines are
useful materials for studying the biological characteristics of the
tumors, thus the establishment of MPM cell lines is valuable for
exploring the new therapeutic strategies of MPM. We established 4 MPM
cell lines (YUMC8, YUMC44, YUMC63 and YUMC64) from Japanese patients,
consisting of 2 epithelioid and 2 sarcomatoid types for histological
subtype. We analyzed the status of methylation, mutation, copy number
gains (CNGs), and protein expression in representative genes and the
sensitivity to several drugs in these 4 cell lines. We detected the
complete methylation of P16 in 3 cell lines, in which the protein
expression of p16 was lost. Methylation of RASSF1A was observed in 3 of 4
cell lines. Copy number gains (CNGs) in EGFR, HER2 and MET were not
detected in all the cell lines. Mutations in various genes including
EGFR, KRAS, HER2, BRAF, and PIK3CA, which are frequently detected in
non-small cell lung cancer, were not detected in all 4 cell lines. As for
microRNA, miR-34b/c was completely methylated in 2 of 4 MPM established
cell lines. About cell adhesion molecules, E-cadherin expression was
detected in two epithelioid type MPM cell lines, whereas N-cadherin
expression was detected in all four established cell lines by Western
blot analysis. Vimentin was strongly expressed in two sarcomatoid type
MPM cell lines. All established MPM cell lines showed no dramatic
responses to the drugs tested including NVP-AUY922, 17-DMAG, Trichostatin
A and Vorinostat. Although new molecular findings were not observed in
the process of the current characterization of these new MPM cell lines,
they seem to be useful for the future extensive analyses of biological
behavior of MPM, so as to the development of new therapeutic strategies.

