Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytomegalovirus infection leads to pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcomas
in Trp53 +/- mice.


Despite not being considered oncogenic, cytomegalovirus (CMV) has been
detected in an increasing number of malignancies. However, recent studies
have suggested mechanisms through which CMV may modulate the tumor
environment, encouraging its study as a positive modifier of
tumorigenesis. In this study, we investigated the effects of CMV
infection in Trp53 heterozygous mice. Animals were infected with murine
CMV (MCMV) after birth at 2 days (P2) or 4 weeks of age via
intraperitoneal injection and then monitored for tumor formation.
Additional control cohorts were mock-infected (saline vehicle) or
infected with HSV-1, a similar herpes virus. Following MCMV infection,
widespread systemic infection ensued followed by immune clearance of the
virus resulting in seroconversion. Mice infected at P2 developed tumors
at a high frequency (43%) by 9 months of age. In contrast, only 3% of
mock-infected or mice infected at 4 weeks developed tumors. The majority
of tumors from P2 MCMV-infected mice were pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcomas
(RMS) as evidenced by MyoD1, Desmin, and Myogenin staining. Importantly,
MCMV-infected tumors contained MCMV DNA, RNA, and protein. An examination
of clinical cases revealed that human RMS (embryonal, alveolar, and
pleomorphic) harbored human CMV IE1 and pp65 protein as well as viral
RNA. All of the cases (n=18) tested positive for CMV genetic material.
CMV protein was found throughout the tumor including pleomorphic cells.
Additionally, perivascular areas demonstrated intense staining consistent
with other reports of linking CMV with angiogenesis. To confirm the
selective presence of HCMV DNA in human RMS, quantitative PCR analysis
showed that tumors expressed an average of 81.1 copies/ng of HCMV-UL83
and of 22.2 copies/ng of HCMV-UL146 compared to 0 and 0.49 copies/ng in
normal muscle, respectively. The amplified products nucleotide sequence
was greater than 95% identical to that of a clinical strain Taken
together, our findings offer support for the hypothesis that CMV
contributes to the development of pleomorphic RMS in the context of Trp53
mutation, a situation which occurs with high frequency in human RMS.

