Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rearrangements of the E-cadherin/B-catenin-based adherens
junctions caused by forced-expression of heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) in
prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer-associated
death in men. Prostatic tumor cell plasticity involves cooperative
changes in the interactions between tumoral cells. The stable
E-cadherin-based Adherence Junctions (AJs) play a pivotal role in the
integrity of the epithelium and the maintenance of tissue homeostasis.
Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) acts as a cell rheostat counteracting oxidative
and inflammatory damage. Given that inflammation is critical for the
development and progression of PCa, we sought to determine whether HO-1
could regulate the adhesive properties of PCa cells, towards the
acquisition of an epithelial-like phenotype. We previously showed that
HO-1 over-expression impairs tumor growth and represses angiogenesis in
vivo. Here we demonstrate that HO-1 over-expression significantly
increased PCa cell adhesion, remodeling the AJs. To better understand the
nature of alterations of cell-cell interactions during neoplastic
evolution, we examined the expression levels of E-cadherin and B-catenin.
Treatment with hemin, a potent and specific inducer of HO-1, increased
E-cadherin and b-catenin protein and mRNA levels in PCa cell lines, shown
by Western Blot, RT-qPCR and flow cytometry analyses. These epithelial
markers were also significantly induced when PCa cells were stably
transfected with HO-1. Immunofluorescence, confocal microscopy together
with a three-dimensional (3D) acquisition process leading to the
collection of image stacks, confirmed the augmented levels of these
proteins under forced-expression of HO-1 and also revealed a striking
rearrangement of their localization pattern towards the cell membrane.
Moreover, quantitative image analysis detected a significant increase in
the percentage of cell-to-cell contact among tumoral cells under HO-1
overexpression. The enhanced levels of E-cadherin and B-catenin in PCa
cells under hemin treatment coincided with a markedly different
morphology compared to untreated cells, observed by bright field
microscopy. While untreated cells displayed an elongated and
fibroblastic-like shape, with increased number of lamellipodia,
HO-1-overexpressing cells showed a spherical cobblestone epithelial
shape. These results define a novel role for HO-1 in modulating the
cellular morphology and the architecture of cell-to-cell interactions,
favoring a less aggressive phenotype and further supporting its
anti-tumoral function in PCa.

