Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting ovarian cancer stem cells using a novel ALDH inhibitor.


Background: Cancer cells with stem cell-like properties (CSC) are
resistant to chemotherapy and are believed to be the source of cancer
recurrence. Aldehyde dehydrogenase enzymatic activity (ALDH), alone and
in combination with the stem cell marker CD133, can be used to define a
hierarchy of Ovarian Cancer Stem Cells (OvCSC). ALDH is functionally
important for stem cells, regulating motile cellular metabolic functions
and the biosynthesis of retinoic acid. ALDH agonists have been
demonstrated to enhance stemness in some tissues. We therefore sought to
determine the impact of ALDH antagonist on OvCSC.Methods and Results: We
screened a variety of novel derivatives with confirmed or potential ALDH
activity based on the molecular homology to the known ALDH inhibitor
DEAB. Using the ALDEFLUOR assay and A2780 cancer cell line as a source of
ALDH+CD133+ cells, we identified a lead compound 673 which effectively
inhibits ALDH activity. Interestingly this compound also potently
depletes CD133+ ovarian cancer cells. Supporting functional depletion of
OvCSC, treatment of primary human ovarian tumor ascites cells with 673
resulted in 4-20 fold decrease tumor sphere formation. 673 treatment is
highly synergistic with cisplatin both in-vitro and in-vivo as assessed
by cell growth curves and tumor growth. Importantly, pre-treatment of
tumor cells with 673 significantly reduced tumor in tumor initiation and
growth rates. Finally, 673 is non-toxic to normal stem cells.Conclusions:
We have identified a novel ALDH inhibitor, 673, which depletes the
ovarian cancer cells expressing CSC markers. CSC marker independent
functional assays, with both cell lines and primary human ovarian cancer
cells, indicate 673 is depleting OvCSC activity. Thus this may be a
powerful new therapeutic approach to target CSC. Future studies will
elucidate the molecular mechanism that underlies 673 OvCSC depletion
activities as well as to identify a specific ALDH isoforms targeted in
ovarian cancer.

