Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of novel insertion polymorphisms of human endogenous
retrovirus in lung cancer patients.


Human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) are members of the long terminal
repeat (LTR) retrotransposon family accounting for about 8% of the human
genome. A complete retroviral sequence includes promoter- and
enhancer-active LTRs at both ends, but most HERV members appear to lack
their mobility because of accumulated mutations within themselves. While
the expression of HERV has long been a topic of cancer research,
significant association between HERV insertion polymorphisms and cancers
has never been reported. Here, we report the analysis of two novel
polymorphic insertions of HERV solo LTR (accession no. AB728590 and
AB728591) in lung cancer patients. To identify HERV insertion sites in
the human genome, we firstly designed primer sequences targeting a
conserved LTR region of HML-2, which is the most recently acquired HERV
group and has the most intact retroviral sequence. Next, by using inverse
PCR, a method amplifying unknown sequences flanking a primer target site,
HERV-flanking sequences were amplified and cloned from lung cancer
specimens. Finally, thirty two sequences were obtained from 178 clones.
While twenty nine sequences were from known HERV loci, three sequences
could not be assigned to any HERV loci in databases. Subsequent genomic
analyses revealed that two sequences of those three sequences were
located in 1p13.2 and 19q12 regions. In fact, we confirmed that HERV
sequences were present in those genomic regions by the genotyping PCR and
sequencing procedures. These two HERV insertions, HML-2_sLTR(1p13.2) and
HML-2_sLTR(19q12), were solo LTRs and were also detected in normal
tissues within the same individual, showing that they are polymorphic
insertions. Furthermore, a retrospective cohort study indicated a
significant prevalence of HML-2_sLTR(1p13.2) homozygosity (LTR/LTR
genotype) among female never-smoking patients with lung adenocarcinoma
(age => 60; in the west area of Shizuoka Prefecture; odds ratio, 1.97;
95% confidence interval, 1.02-3.81). Our results show that the insertion
polymorphism of HML-2_sLTR(1p13.2) is involved in the susceptibility to
lung adenocarcinoma in female never-smokers. Interestingly, acidic
mammalian chitinase (CHIA), the product of which is known to show
anti-apoptotic effects and to be secreted from lung epithelial cells, is
located near HML-2_sLTR(1p13.2), suggesting that HML-2_sLTR(1p13.2) may
regulate cell viability through the expression of CHIA. This report is
the first to indicate an association between an insertion polymorphism of
HERV and cancer and suggests that other HERV insertion polymorphisms
related to cancer diseases may remain to be found in the human genome.

