Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of OBG like ATPase 1 (OLA1) in F-actin polymerization and
cell adhesion.


Cell adhesion and migration, driven by actin cytoskeletal dynamics, are
the fundamental phenomenon in cancer metastasis. However, the molecular
nature that underlies the coordination of actin cytoskeleton at sites of
focal adhesions remains elusive. Obg like ATPase (OLA1) belongs to the
YchF subfamily of Obg like P-loop GTPases. YchF proteins are highly
conserved from yeast to humans, and believed to be regulatory proteins
that interact with their client protein(s) by the conformational switch
between the ADP and ATP bound forms. However, the actual physiological
functions of OLA1 are poorly understood. In our previous studies we
reported that OLA1 functions as a negative regulator in antioxidant
response and knockdown of OLA1 inhibits migration and invasion of breast
cancer cells in vitro. In this study, we have examined the mechanism
underlying the anti-migratory role of OLA1. Expression of OLA1 was
silenced by siRNA transfection (siOLA1) in human breast cancer cells
MDA-MB-231 and human embryonic lung fibroblast cells WI-38, and the rate
of attachment of suspended cells was evaluated against control
siRNA-transfected cells. After plating into fibronectin or laminin coated
plates, siOLA1 cells were attached and spread significantly faster than
the control cells. At the end of 60 min siOLA1 MDA-MB-231 cells showed
profound F-actin fibers on fibronectin coated plates. Immunofluorescence
staining further revealed the co-localization of vinculin with actin at
the spherical leading edges in control siRNA-transfected cells, which
proclaimed that these cells are still trying to spread. In contrast,
siOLA1 cells were fully spread and immensely polymerized actin fibers
were completely dissociated from vinculin. Due to the augmented actin
polymerization, siOLA1 cells are rendered with impaired depolymerization,
a process required for an efficient actin disassembly. Furthermore,
levels of S-glutathionylation, a form of redox sensitive and reversible
posttranslational modification, were measured in these cells by
immunoblot analysis. Consistently, glutathionylation of actin was found
increased significantly in siOLA1 MDA-MB-231 cells at various adherent
growth conditions, as well as in the form of single cell suspension
immediately before the cells were plated. Since earlier studies have
established the impacts of actin glutathionylation in impaired actin
depolymerization and cell adhesion processes, we reason that heavier
glutathionylation on actin attributes to the altered actin dynamics in
siOLA1 cells. These studies provide evidence that focal adhesions are
more stable in the absence of OLA1 and suggest that OLA1 regulates cell
adhesion and migration in part by actin polymerization and
S-glutathionylation of actin. Further studies are warranted to explore
molecular mechanisms by which OLA1 modulates protein S-glutathionylation
either globally or specifically on cytoskeleton molecules such as actin.

