Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MMP3 increases expression of CXCL7.


MMP3 leads to epithelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) and malignant
transformation of cultured cells. Previously, increased expression of the
CXC chemokine CXCL7 was associated with EMT. The hypothesis tested is
that MMP3 increases the expression of CXCL7Methods: Human breast cells
(MCF10AT (proliferative), MCFDCIS.com (in situ), MCFCA1a (malignant))
cultured in serum free medium were exposed to MMP-3 for 4 days, and
washed 3 times with PBS, then cultured in MMP-3 free condition medium for
three more days. Cells were collected every day for RNA extraction, and
analyzed for relative CXCL7 gene expression using RT real time PCR. Cells
sampled from day 0 were used as control to normalize the results. GADPH
was control. Cells culture supernatant also collected every day for CXCL7
protein level expression. Protein concentrations were measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using human CXCL7/NAP-2 Duo set
ELISA Development System.Measurements were done in triplicate; results
are representative of three experiments.Results: When exposed to MMP-3,
the CXCL7 RNA level increased MCF-10AT cells RNA level increased 1.5
fold, and there was no change in CXCL7 protein level in MCF-10AT cells.
For MCFDCIS.com cells, the CXCL7 RNA level increased 2.5 fold, and CXCL7
protein level increased 1.6 fold. For MCFCA1a cells, the CXCL7 RNA level
increased 2.6 fold, CXCL7 protein level increased 1.5 fold. The peak
expression was 3-4 days. Removal of MMP-3 caused CXCL7 expression to
return back to baseline in MCF10AT, DCIS.com and malignant Ca.cl1
cells.Conclusion: The expression of chemokine CXCL7 in breast cell
(MCF10AT, DCIS.com, MCFCA1a) was up regulated at both on RNA and protein
level (except for MCF10AT) when exposed to MMP-3, and removal of MMP-3
caused CXCL7 expression to return to baseline. The stromal influence by
MMP3 on breast cells and breast cancer cells may direct further
progression toward the malignant phenotype and provides another
therapeutic pathway target.

