Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new platform for constructing antibody-cytokine fusion proteins
(immunocytokines) with improved biological properties and adjustable
cytokine activity.


The clinical use of interleukin 2 (IL2) for cancer immune therapy has
been limited by a lack of tumor targeting that requires the
administration of dose levels sufficient to activate anti-tumor effector
cells in the tumor microenvironment. These doses, in turn, are limited by
several side effects including vascular toxicities of hypotension and
vascular leak syndrome. One way to increase the accumulation of IL2 at
the tumor site is to genetically fuse it to the heavy chains of a tumor
specific antibody, and several such molecules (immunocytokines or ICs)
have been shown to have improved anti-tumor activity compared to free
IL2, the targeting antibody, or the combination. This is especially true
of ICs with longer circulating half lives that increase the amount of
drug delivered to the tumor. Unfortunately, this increases the vascular
exposure and toxicity of the IL2 component that, again, limits the amount
that can be dosed and the rate of infusion. One way to reduce the
toxicity of long-acting ICs is to dose them subcutaneously (greatly
reducing Cmax levels in the blood) rather than intravenously. Another way
is to make the IC more selective for the high affinity IL2 receptor
(IL2Rhi) than the intermediate form (IL2Rint) by mutagenesis. Both
approaches are based on the hypothesis that activating cells expressing
IL2Rint should be limited to reduce toxicity, while activating cells
expressing IL2Rhi should be maintained for anti-tumor activity. I have
recently developed a novel method for constructing ICs that utilizes
fusion of cytokines to the C terminus of the Ig light (L) chain, rather
than the traditional method of fusing to the heavy (H) chain. The fusion
junction of IL2, in this case, is located adjacent to the antibody hinge
region, where the L chain forms a disulfide bond through its C-terminal
cysteine residue to the H chain. This constrains both the N-terminal
region of IL2, as well as the hinge-CH2 region of the H chain where both
Fc receptors and the C1q subunit of complement bind when they mediate
antibody-dependent cytotoxic activities (ADCC and CDC). Surprisingly,
such ICs are expressed well in transfected cells, are very stable in
normal buffers and have biological properties that are superior to ICs
made by fusion to the H chain. These properties include longer
circulating half life, increased uptake following subcutaneous dosing,
and similar or improved antibody effector activities of ADCC and CDC,
respectively. Furthermore, the sequestering effect of this fusion
junction allows one to adjust IL2Rint binding and activation by
shortening the N-terminus of IL2 at the fusion point. This appears to
limit access of the critical contact residue Asp20 of IL2 to the chain of
IL2Rint, while maintaining binding and activation of IL2Rhi expressing
cells as well as antibody effector functions.

