Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic value of placental growth factor expression in patients
with metastatic or recurrent non-small cell lung cancer.


Background: Placental growth factor (PIGF) is a proangiogenic factor,
belonging to the VEGF family. It binds to VEGF receptor 1(VEGFR-1) and
stimulates the growth, migration and survival of endothelial cells. PIGF
also activates and attracts macrophages that release angiogenic
molecules. Increased expression of PIGF has correlated with poor survival
of patients in several solid tumors. However, PIGF expression is not
consistently elevated in all malignancies. No reports on the clinical
implications of PIGF expression in metastatic or recurrent non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) are currently available. We investigate the clinical
significance of PIGF expression in metastatic or recurrent NSCLC.Patients
and methods: A retrospective review was done for seventy four patients
with metastatic or recurrent NSCLC. Immunohistochemical staining for PIGF
and its receptor VEGF-R1, neurophilin-1 was performed. Results: Of 74
patients with NSCLC, 73 patients were positive for PIGF, and 72 patients
were positive for neurophilin-1. For PIGF expression, significant
correlations were demonstrated with female (p=0.007) and nonsquamous
histology (p=0.045). Thirty five patients (47%) were classified into low
PIGF expression groups, whereas 38 patients (51%) were grouped as showing
high PIGF expression. Survival time for patients with high PIGF
expressing NSCLC was significantly longer than that for patients
displaying low PIGF expression (median survival time, 15.1 months vs. 9.0
months[log-rank, p=0.01]). However, the difference in time to progression
between two groups was not statistically significant (median time to
progression, 5.1 months vs. 3.9 months [log-rank, p=0.24]).Conclusions:
Low expression of PIGF is associated with poor prognosis in patients with
metastatic or recurrent NSCLC. Further studies on larger patients
populations are warranted to validate the utility of PIGF as a prognostic
biomarker in lung cancer.

