Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silibinin targets stemness and aberrant metabolic signaling in
prostate cancer cells.


Prostate cancer (PCA) is the 2nd leading cause of cancer-related deaths
and accounts for 29% of all the cancers diagnosed in men in the United
States. Although several curative measures including anti-androgen
therapy, radiotherapy and chemotherapy exist for PCA management,
significant morbidity is associated with them and a large number of men
still succumb to this deadly malignancy every year. One of the obstacles
in effectively targeting PCA cells is the limitation of current therapies
to eliminate cancer stem cell (CSC) population, which is mainly
responsible for the uncontrolled primary tumor growth, chemoresistance,
disease relapse and metastasis. Therefore, additional measures are needed
to target CSC in PCA. Silibinin is a bioactive flavonolignan that has
been shown to exhibit potent anticancer effect against several cancers.
We have previously reported that silibinin could inhibit PCA growth and
progression via targeting cell cycle, epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition and angiogenesis. Here, for the first time we analyzed the
efficacy of silibinin against prostate CSCs (PCSCs). Results showed that
silibinin (50-200 M) strongly inhibited the prostaspheres formation (a
measure of stemness) in human PCA PC3 and LNCaP cells. The strong
inhibitory effect of silibinin was also observed against 2nd and 3rd
generation prostaspheres of both the cell lines. Prostasphere
differentiation in the presence of serum generated bulk of attached
proliferating PCA cells which was strongly inhibited by silibinin
treatment. Even when silibinin treatment was withdrawn, silibinin-treated
prostaspheres largely lost their capability to form proliferating mass of
attached cells. These results showed that silibinin inhibits key
characteristics of self-renewal and differentiation of PCSCs. Since
stemness and aberrant metabolism are hard-wired in cancer cells and fuel
each other, next we studied the effect of silibinin on metabolic
signaling in PCA cells. PC3 prostaspheres analyses by Western blotting
revealed that silibinin (100-200 M) treatment inhibited the expression of
glucose transporter GLUT4. Further, silibinin also decreased the
expression of hexokinase II and p-mTOR in prostaspheres. Similarly,
silibinin treatment for 48 h in PC3 cells decreased the expression of
hexokinase II, and pyruvate kinase M2, while increased the expression of
lactate dehydrogenase 1, pyruvate dehydrogenase and phosphorylated acetyl
CoA carboxylase. Together, these results suggest that silibinin targets
the aerobic glycolysis (Warburg effect) while it promotes Kreb cycle and
oxidative phosphorylation in PCA cells. Also, silibinin enforced
metabolic normalization restricts the availability of cellular building
blocks, thereby induces cell division arrest in PCA cells. Overall, these
results suggest that silibinin could be useful against PCA through
targeting stemness and aberrant cancer cell metabolism.

