Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Features of innate immunity dominate serum and tissue protein and
cytokine profiles in both mouse and human inflammatory bowel disease.


Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic and relapsing intestinal
inflammatory disease that arises through unknown genetic, environmental,
and bacterial origins. Ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD)
are the two main forms of IBD, and their incidence is increasing in
industrialized countries. Further, IBD is a significant risk factor for
the development of colon cancer. Though the specific determinants remain
elusive, persistent inflammation is believed to play a significant role
in colon cancer carcinogenesis. To better define the molecular mechanisms
linking colitis to the identity of disease biomarkers, we performed a
translational comparison of protein expression and protein damage
products in mouse and human IBD. Helicobacter hepaticus-infected Rag2-/-
mice emulate many aspects of human IBD, and our recent work with this
model highlights the importance of neutrophils in the pathology of
colitis and colon cancer. Analysis of neutrophil- and macrophage-derived
damage products revealed accumulation of 3-chlorotyrosine (CTyr) and
3-nitrotyrosine (NTyr) in inflamed mice colons that increased with
disease duration. These results were further corroborated in mouse
studies by histological evaluation, which demonstrated strong
infiltration of neutrophils and macrophages to the site of inflammation.
Human studies revealed an increase in CTyr in the colon of UC and CD
tissues relative to serum levels. The nucleic acid chlorination damage
product, 5-chloro-2-deoxycytidine (5-Cl-dC), was quantified in human
colon and found to be present at similar levels to that of inflamed mice
colons. Multivariate analysis of these markers along with serum proteins
and cytokines revealed a general signature of activated innate immunity
in human IBD. UC sera were strongly suggestive of neutrophil activity
while CD and mouse sera were suggestive of macrophage and neutrophil
activity. These data point to innate immunity as a major determinant of
serum and tissue profiles and provide insight into disease activity in
IBD.

