Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt/-catenin transcriptional activation promotes tumorigenesis and
predicts survival in pancreatic cancer.


Mutations in key regulators of Wnt/-catenin signaling lead to its
aberrant hyperactivation and promote oncogenesis in several cancer types.
While Wnt/-catenin signaling is variably increased in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma (PDAC), there is a near absence of activating mutations in
its key regulatory genes in PDAC tumors. As the precise role of
Wnt/-catenin signaling in pancreatic tumorigenesis is unclear, we sought
to clarify the mechanisms by which it is altered and determine its
specific consequences on gene transcription and phenotype in PDAC. Using
a luciferase-based Wnt/-catenin reporter platform to determine relative
levels of Wnt/-catenin transcriptional activation, we found pathway
activation was highly variable across 22 PDAC cell lines, including
distinct subsets with either low or much high levels of baseline reporter
activity. Supervised analysis of microarray data was performed on these
defined subsets to generate a pancreatic-specific gene expression
signature able to discriminate levels of Wnt/-catenin transcriptional
activation in PDAC. This analysis identified a set of 208 genes (median
FDR 3.4%) representing a robust candidate list of mediators or downstream
transcriptional targets. Several genes were validated as bona fide
downstream transcriptional targets of Wnt/-catenin in PDAC cell lines by
observing expected changes in their expression following genetic and
pharmacologic manipulations that activate or inhibit Wnt signaling.
WNT7B, FZD5 and TCF7L2 were among genes commonly overexpressed in Wnt
high lines, representing potential positive mediators of Wnt/-catenin
signaling in PDAC. Likewise, NLK and CSNK1E were among genes
overexpressed in Wnt low lines, representing potentially important
negative regulators of the pathway in PDAC. When primary patient tumors
were dichotomized based on a pancreas-specific Wnt/-catenin
transcriptional signature, PDAC tumors with higher Wnt/-catenin
transcriptional activation had worse disease-specific survival (median
survival time 20.3 versus 43.9 months, log rank P=0.03), suggesting a
possible direct link between Wnt/-catenin transcriptional activation and
aggressive tumor behavior. Furthermore, genetic and pharmacologic
inhibition of Wnt/-catenin signaling in PDAC cell lines significantly
reduced non-adherent growth and tumorsphere formation in vitro.
Inhibition of Wnt/-catenin signaling also increased survival and reduce
metastatic burden in an in vivo orthotopic xenograft model using PDAC
cell lines. This study has defined a pancreatic cancer-specific
Wnt/-catenin transcriptional signature able to predict more aggressive
clinical behavior and with potential utility for stratifying patients
most likely to benefit from Wnt-targeted therapy.

