Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockdown of death receptor 5 promotes cancer cell invasion
through activation of the ERK and JNK signaling pathways.


Death receptor 5 (DR5) is a death domain-containing transmembrane
receptor and can trigger apoptosis upon overexpression or ligation with
tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL). Despite
of the primary function of DR5 in induction of apoptosis, accumulating
evidence suggest that DR5 may also have non-apoptotic function in
regulation of cancer development and progression, which is the focus of
this study. Both transient and stable knockdown of DR5 did not affect the
growth of cancer cells, but significantly promoted the invasive ability
of cancer cells in an in vitro matrigel invasion assay. In contrast, DR5
activation by low doses of the agonistic antibody, AMG655, suppressed
cancer cell invasion. Similar results could not generated by knocking
down DR4 expression. Thus, DR5 negatively regulates invasion of cancer
cells. Knockdown of DR5 expression was accompanied by activation of both
ERK and JNK signaling pathways as evidenced by elevate levels of p-ERK,
p-JNK and p-c-Jun as well as their downstream proteins c-Jun and Fra-1.
Chemical (e.g., with small molecule inhibitors) or genetic (e.g., with
siRNA) inhibition of either ERK or JNK blocked DR5 knockdown-induced
enhancement of cell invasion. In agreement, knockdown of c-Jun and Fra-1
had similar impact on blockage of cell invasion induced by DR5 knockdown.
Hence, DR5 knockdown promotes cancer cell invasion through activation of
the ERK and JNK signaling pathways and subsequent activation of AP-1. Our
findings highlight a novel non-apoptotic function of DR5 as a negative
regulator of cancer cell invasion and provide preliminary mechanisms to
account for this function.(This study was supported by the Georgia Cancer
Coalition Distinguished Cancer Scholar award, NIH/NCI SPORE P50 grant
CA128613 and Winship Cancer Institute Robbins Scholar award. FR Khuri and
SY Sun are Georgia Cancer Coalition Distinguished Cancer Scholars. YT Oh
is a recipient of Winship Cancer Institute Robbins Scholar award)

