Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERK1/2 pathway activation controls epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in NSCLC cells.


Understanding and overcoming the cellular mechanisms that underlie de
novo and acquired therapy resistance remains a challenge in treating many
cancers including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Despite the
prevalence of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) over-activation in
NSCLC and other cancers, most patients are resistant to EGFR inhibitors.
A number of studies have linked mesenchymal cellular phenotypes and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) with resistance to
chemotherapeutics and EGFR inhibitors across cancer types. Here, we
demonstrate in NSCLC cells that MAPK/ERK signaling plays a key role in
determining mesenchymal cellular characteristics and response to the EGFR
inhibitor gefitinib. In cultured NSCLC cell lines, pharmacological
inhibition of MEK pushed cells toward a more epithelial phenotype and
prevented EMT induction by exogenous transforming growth factor beta. In
addition, chronic MEK inhibition synergistically enhanced cellular
sensitivity to gefitinib in a reversible manner and slowed cell migration
in wound healing assays in NSCLC cell lines with both de novo and
acquired resistance to gefitinib. Importantly, our results demonstrate
that the observed cell phenotypic changes occur on a time scale
corresponding to that with which epithelial and mesenchymal marker
expression change in response to ERK inhibition. This time scale is much
larger than that for changes in ERK activity itself, reflecting the need
for downstream ERK-dependent processes to affect phenotypic changes.
Changes in the same cellular phenotypes and associated changes in
epithelial and mesenchymal markers also occurred as a result of KRAS
mutant expression in a MEK-dependent manner. Overall, this study draws a
strong connection between ERK pathway activation and mesenchymal
characteristics in NSCLC and suggests potential new opportunities for
expanding the efficacy of currently available EGFR inhibitors.

