Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo efficacy of the PARG inhibitor Gallotannin against triple
negative breast cancer.


Breast cancer patients whose tumors fall into the triple negative
category have the poorest clinical outcomes. These patients are at high
risk for metastatic recurrence and have poor overall survival. Clearly,
new therapeutic strategies are needed to combat triple negative tumors
both at the time of onset and if necessary, at recurrence. Toward this
goal, we initially tested the anti-proliferative properties of
Gallotannin (GLTN) against a variety of breast cancer cell lines in
vitro. Gallotannin was chosen due to its potent chemotherapeutic effects
against cholangiocarcinoma in mice, and the lack of data concerning its
potential use as an anti-cancer agent in breast cancer models. We
observed potent anti-proliferative properties of GLTN in the low
micromolar range in most breast cancer cell lines tested, but not in
corresponding non-transformed mammary epithelial cells. Notably, triple
negative breast cancer cells displayed the highest level of sensitivity
to GLTN. The loss of proliferative capacity in these cells is due to cell
cycle arrest in S phase. This corresponded with increased Chk1
phosphorylation, decreased Cyclin D1 protein levels, and changes to
growth related genes as determined by Nanostring technology. GLTN may
have several cellular targets that could potentially mediate growth
arrest. The most thoroughly described target of GLTN is PARG, which is
responsible for removing poly(ADP)ribose moieties from target proteins.
GLTN potently inhibits PARG activity both in vitro and in vivo.
Surprisingly, we found that PARG knockdown results in a dramatic growth
inhibition of breast cancer cells, similar to what is observed in cells
exposed to GLTN. To our knowledge, this is the first report indicating
PARG inhibition may be exploited therapeutically to impair breast cancer
growth. Importantly, PARG knockdown cells showed less sensitivity to
GLTN, indicating PARG is a primary effector of GLTN-mediated growth
inhibition. To test the capacity of GLTN to diminish tumor outgrowth in
vivo, we utilized a mouse xenograft model where MDA-MB-468 triple
negative breast cancer cells were injected into the mammary fat pad and
allowed to grow to a palpable size before drug treatment. GLTN was
administered ad libitum orally at 0.05% in drinking water or via
intraperitoneal (IP) injections dosed at 10mg/kg daily. Both orally and
IP administered GLTN greatly reduced tumor outgrowth by approximately 3
fold within a 25 day period without significant signs of weight loss,
morbidity or liver toxicity. Beyond 25 days, orally ingested GLTN
continued to prevent tumor growth by 3-fold, whereas tumors exposed to
GLTN given by IP exhibited decreased sensitivity. In conclusion, these
data strongly suggest that orally administered GLTN represents a novel
approach to treat triple negative breast carcinomas and that PARG may
represent a new therapeutic target for anti-cancer compounds.

