Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-495 functions as a novel regulator of the estrogen and
progesterone receptorsin human breast cancers.


The estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2, also known as ErbB-2 or c-neu)
are the major biomarkers that define the classification and treatment
options for patients with breast cancers. ER and PR positive breast
cancers are more likely to respond to hormonal therapy. HER2 positive
breast cancers are more likely to respond to trastuzumab targeted
therapy. On the other end, triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) which
lack ER and PR and do not overexpress HER2 do not respond well to
hormonal therapy or HER2 targeted therapy and are associated with poor
prognosis. Once patients with TNBC develop chemoresistance or relapse,
there is no additional treatment option available. The key for developing
novel therapeutics in TNBC is to elucidate the exact mechanisms by which
these receptors undergo silencing, especially ER and PR. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs), a class of small noncoding RNAs, have been shown to be
important gene regulators in all biological processes including breast
carcinogenesis and progression. Through an in silico analysis of the
latest miRNAs database with four different miRNA algorithms, we have
identified 11 putative miRNAs that target all 3-untranslated regions
(3-UTRs) of the ER, PR and HER2 genes. miR-495 was one of the putative
miRNAs that has been verified to be a significant regulator of ER and PR.
Ectopic expression of miR-495 mimics in BT474 and MDA-MB-361 breast
cancer cells greatly reduced ER and PR protein expression, but not HER2
expression. Enforced expression of a miR-495 inhibitor or antigomiR-495
in MDA-MB-361 breast cancer cells significantly elevated ER and PR
expression. More importantly, miR-495 markedly inhibited the luciferase
activities of both ER and PR reporters that contained the wild-type
3-UTRs of ER and PR. miR-495 could not, however, affect the luciferase
activities of the mutant ER and PR reporters that had been deleted the
seed sequences in the 3-UTRs of ER and PR, indicating that ER and PR are
direct downstream targets of miR-495. miR-495 expression in primary
breast cancers was assessed by in situ hybridization on a tissue
microarray that containing 97 cases of randomly selected breast cancers.
miR-495 levels were upregulated in thirteen breast cancers (13.4%). Among
these 13 cases, 6 were TNBCs (46.2%), 2 were ER/PR low expressing breast
cancers and 1 was ER/PR negative HER2 positive breast cancer. Therefore,
miR-495 is a novel negative regulator of ER and PR and is upregulated in
primary TNBC. Selective inhibition of miR-495 expression in TNBC with
miR-495 inhibitors or antigomiR-495 may restore ER and PR expression.

