Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phospho-dependent regulation of ERR expression, transcriptional
activity, and Tamoxifen resistance in ER+ breast cancer.


Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) such as Tamoxifen (TAM)
can significantly improve breast cancer-specific survival for women with
ER-positive (ER+) disease. However, resistance to TAM remains a major
clinical problem. Estrogen-related receptor gamma (ERR) is an orphan
nuclear receptor with broad, structural similarities to classical ER that
is widely implicated in the transcriptional regulation of energy
homeostasis. We previously reported that ERR is upregulated during the
acquisition of TAM resistance in ER+ breast cancer cell lines, exogenous
expression of ERR is sufficient to induce TAM resistance, and ERR mRNA is
significantly increased in tumor samples from women with ER+ breast
cancer who relapse following TAM treatment.Because ERR has no known
ligand, our recent studies have focused on understanding how the
expression and activity of this orphan nuclear receptor is regulated, and
how this contributes to the TAM resistant phenotype. We have found that
TAM-resistant breast cancer cells in which endogenous ERR is upregulated
show a concomitant hyper activation of p44/p42 ERK. Furthermore, ERK
activity (but not that of JNK or p38 MAPK) directly enhances ERR protein
stability via Serines 57, 81, and/or 219 of the receptor.
Phospho-deficient ERR is impaired in its ability to induce TAM
resistance, and this is associated with a significant reduction in
transcriptional activity at the estrogen-related response element (ERRE)
half-site, in particular.This led us to hypothesize that ERR action at
ERREs is most relevant to the development of TAM resistance. We examined
a meta-list of validated, ERRE-containing ERR target genes in association
with distant metastasis-free survival (DMFS) within 5 years of primary
diagnosis in each of 3 publicly available clinical datasets comprised of
ER+ breast cancer patients treated with TAM, and obtained a list of 37
differentially expressed targets. The proximal promoter regions of these
37 genes are enriched for binding sites for ELK1, a well-known ERK
substrate. Sub-network analysis reveals enrichment of genes whose protein
products regulate the mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPRmito).
We also performed differential dependency network (DDN) analysis in an
independent dataset using the full meta-list of ERR target genes and also
identified genes associated with UPRmito. These data suggest a
potentially novel role for ERK-mediated regulation of ERR in
mitochondrial protein folding in TAM-resistant breast cancer.

