Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smoking, cancer treatment, and design of clinical trials.


Purpose: Smoking has been associated with poor outcomes in cancer
patients, but a detailed review of the effects of smoking on cancer
treatment outcomes is necessary to effectively implement structured
tobacco assessments and cessation into clinical trials design.Methods: We
searched Pubmed citations between 1950 and 2011 with the objective of
identifying any reports relating smoking with cancer and non-cancer
related outcomes in cancer patients. Our search yielded 34,000 pertinent
citations of on smoking and cancer. Over 5000 of these citations appeared
to include data on smoking as it might be related to cancer treatment
outcomes and of these more than 800 were felt to have sufficient
information to examine how smoking affects cancer treatment outcomes.
Results were cataloged in tables and cross-references according to cancer
disease site.Results: The vast majority of pertinent reports provide
evidence showing that smoking increases the risk of cancer and non-cancer
related mortality as well as treatment related adverse events. The
adverse effects of smoking and treatment outcomes are observed in all
major cancer disease sites (lung, head/neck, breast, gastrointestinal,
gynecologic, leukemia/lymphoma, prostate, and non-prostate
genitourinary). A limited number of studies examine how smoking cessation
affects treatment outcomes and generally these studies show that
cessation of tobacco use is associated with fewer adverse treatment
outcomes. Measurement of smoking behavior is a problem due to the
reliance on self-reported behavior and lack of standardization in
classifying smoking status. In most studies a patients cigarette use is
categorized into ever smoking or current/former/never smoking; however,
there is a broad diversity of definitions used making it less clear
exactly how smoking affects treatment outcomes. Despite methodologic
issues in published reports, results demonstrate a consistent pattern
that smoking increases the risk of adverse outcomes across a broad
spectrum of cancer disease sites. Conclusions: This review provides
evidence that smoking adversely affects cancer related and non-cancer
related outcomes in patients. What is less certain is how past and/or
current smoking might differentially modify treatment outcomes for
patients. Clinical trials must give strong consideration for prior
tobacco history, current tobacco use, and efforts to track tobacco
cessation during and following cancer treatment.

