Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Golgi protein GLG1 coordinates ARF3 activation in tumor cells.


Increasing evidence suggests that endocytosis and membrane trafficking
are deregulated in cancer cells. Because of their dependence on selected
signaling pathways, tumor cells may need to rely on accelerated receptor
recycling and increased secretion of a variety of molecules such as
matrix components, adhesion molecules and growth factors. Mass
spectrometry analysis of proteins associated with separase, recently
shown to be an important regulator of membrane trafficking, identified
the Golgi apparatus protein 1 (GLG1). GLG1 is primarily known as an
E-selectin ligand that mediates the initial step of tethering and rolling
of leukocytes on vascular endothelium. We therefore addressed the
possibility that GLG1 could play a similar role in circulating tumor
cells, facilitating arrest and extravasation into adjacent tissues.
Consistent with this possibility, tail vein injection of stably
GLG1-depleted tumor cells into NOD/SCID mice resulted in reduced numbers
of metastatic nodules. Moreover, metastatic tumor growth was almost
exclusively intravascular, indicating impaired extravasation of tumor
cells. Further investigation, however, showed that, in tumor cells, GLG1
is almost exclusively localized to the Golgi apparatus, challenging the
notion that it plays a direct role in mediating tumor cell adhesion to
endothelium as in leukocytes.To elucidate the molecular mechanisms by
which GLG1 could affect tumor cell migration through interactions at the
Golgi level, we conducted various experiments using GLG1-depleted human
tumor cell lines. Transient silencing of GLG1 by siRNA was observed to
modify cell shape (elongated morphology), to reduce migration of a range
of tumor cell lines and to markedly alter Golgi architecture.
Interestingly, subsequent experiments led to the identification of a new
interactor of GLG1, the Brefeldin A-inhibited guanine nucleotide-exchange
protein 1 (BIG1), an ARF-GEF required to initiate membrane vesicle
formation at the trans-Golgi compartment by promoting guanine-nucleotide
exchange on ARF1 and ARF3. GLG1 was shown to participate in BIG1 and ARF3
recruitment to the Golgi membrane and subsequent ARF3 activation.
Surprisingly, the observed morphological disruption of the Golgi
apparatus and reduced ARF3 activation did not affect the secretory
pathway in general, but rather seemed to impair secretion of selected
molecules including MMP-9.Taken together, our observations provide
insight into a novel and specific role of GLG1 in tumor progression by
affecting, thanks to its privileged position in the secretory pathway,
trafficking of key molecules implicated in cell migration.

