Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A peptide mimicking a region in proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA) specific to key protein interactions is cytotoxic in cancer cells.


A common theory in cancer progression is the mutator phenotype
hypothesis. It is thought that as DNA begins to replicate with less
fidelity in certain cells, errors accumulate,eventually leading to the
incidence of cancer. Although the actual driving force behind this loss
of DNA replication fidelity has yet to be determined, it is very possible
that a malfunction within the replication machinery itself is propagating
the mutations. An important factor in DNA replication and repair is a
highly conserved 29 kDa protein, proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA). PCNA forms a homotrimer that encircles the DNA strand during
replication, slides down the DNA strand, and loads numerous proteins and
enzymes that act in the proper replication of DNA. Molecules requiring
PCNA for activity in cellular processes include, but are not limited to:
polymerase and , flap endonuclease -1 (FEN-1), and xeroderma pigmentosum
G (XPG). Because PCNA is so essential, if its function within the cell is
altered, this could potentially be a contributing factor to the
accumulation of errors in cancer cells.Prior work in the lab has shown
that cancer cells harbor two distinct isoforms of PCNA: the basic isoform
identical to normal cells and an acidic isoform specific to cancer cells
(caPCNA). The caPCNA isoform is the result of post-translational
modifications by methyl esterification on specific glutamic and aspartic
acid residues. A rabbit polyclonal antibody (caPCNAab) has been developed
against a peptide fragment representing the cancer associated domain of
caPCNA. This antibody has been tested against commercially available
antibodies (PC10 and C20), and displays the ability to distinguish
between the PCNA isoforms. In preliminary testing, caPCNAab exhibited the
ability to inhibit both DNA polymerase and SV40 DNA replication activity
using in vitro assays with breast cancer cell extract. By using this
information, a peptide was then developed to mimic the cancer-associated
sequence and compete for binding of accessory proteins to caPCNA, thereby
targeting cells containing caPCNA and inhibiting DNA replication.In the
present study, we characterize the specificity of the caPCNA antibody by
scanning the epitope specific to caPCNA using immunohistochemical
staining of progressive breast cancer tissue samples. We have also
developed a novel peptide (caPeptide) that specifically mimics this
domain specific to caPCNA, competes with full-length caPCNA for its
binding partners, and creates cytotoxicity within cancer cells. The
caPeptide exhibits cytotoxic activity in cancer cells using in vivo
studies that include: MTT, flow cytometry, and colony formation assays.
The caPeptide has also shown to specifically block in vitro DNA
replication using the SV40 DNA replication assay, along with polymerase
and activity assays and surface plasmon resonance (SPR) binding studies.

