Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of vascular endothelial cell tube formation by zinc
nanoparticles.


Tumor angiogenesis, new blood vessel formation induced by cancer cells,
is a rate-limiting step in cancer growth and metastasis, and is therefore
an excellent target for therapy. Currently, the anticancer drugs based on
anti-angiogenic strategies have limited efficacy, and often engender
inherent or acquired resistance. Indeed, there is growing evidence to
suggest that anti-angiogenic treatment of cancer using current inhibitors
may trigger more invasive and metastatic tumors due to the fact that when
one angiogenic signaling pathway is blocked, new signaling pathways are
triggered. We have tackled the problem from a different angle by
targeting the copper ion rather than the many angiogenesis inducing
biomolecules. Copper is a co-factor for more than a dozen key angiogenic
promoters essential for cancer angiogenesis. As such, depletion of copper
should inactivate multiple angiogenic signaling pathways. Specifically,
we have developed a nanoparticle-based drug to selectively sequester
copper ions in order to disrupt tumor angiogenesis, resulting in
inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis. Cellular uptake of
nanoparticles (NPS) was documented by confocal microscopy of HuVEC and
cancer cell lines treated with carboxyfluorescein tagged NPS. Copper
levels were measured by atomic absorption spectrophotometry of lysates of
CuCl2 treated cells, after 8-hr treatment with NPS or control diluent.
Following treatment of HepG2 cells with copper depleting NPS, we observed
that copper levels dropped from 402 fg/cell to undetectable levels.
Although NPS significantly reduced copper levels of CuCl2 treated HepG2
cells, cell viability measured by trypan blue exclusion and MTT assays
was > 89% (for 50 uM NPS). Similar viability was seen for the three cell
lines tested. Using an in vitro model system for angiogenesis, we have
examined induction of tube formation by human Vascular Endothelial cells
(HuVEC) cultured on basement membrane extracts. Following induction by
fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) and vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) treatment, outgrowth and branching of HuVEC cells was measured in
the presence or absence of NPS. We observed that the copper depleting NPS
suppressed FGF2 induction of tube formation and branching by HuVEC cells.
Overall our results have demonstrated that these novel zinc NPS: (i) are
highly effective copper depleting agents able to accumulate in
endothelial cells; (ii) are non-toxic to vascular endothelial and cancer
cells, and (iii) inhibit endothelial cell tube formation in vitro. We
expect these novel copper-depleting agents will significantly impact
tumor angiogenesis in vivo and dramatically enhance cancer therapy in the
future.

