Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between genetic variation at the AKT1 and PTEN genes,
and in the 8q24 locus, and the risk of testicular germ cell tumor.


Background There is strong evidence that genetic variation influences the
risk of testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT). The oncogene AKT1, tumor
suppressor gene PTEN and the 8q24 locus play important roles in cancer
development, and investigation of their role in TGCT is warranted.Methods
We investigated the association between risk of TGCT and genetic
variation in the AKT1 and PTEN genes, and the 8q24 locus in a
Norwegian-Swedish case-parent study. We included 831 triads, 474 dyads
and 712 singletons, and 26 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
genotyped. First, triads and dyads were included in a likelihood-based
association test. To increase the statistical power, case singletons and
3922 unrelated controls from the Swedish TwinGene project were included
in a single test for association. Interaction terms were included in the
statistical model to examine if the allelic effect on TGCT risk was
modified by histological subgroup, country of origin or parent of origin.
Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) were calculated
and Bonferroni correction (Pbonf) was used to adjust for multiple
testing.Results In the case-parent triad analyses, none of the 26 SNPs
were significantly associated with TGCT. Of the 23 SNPs investigated in
the combined study, one SNP in the PTEN gene, the rs11202586, remained
associated with TGCT risk after adjusting for multiple testing (OR=1.16,
95% CI=1.06-1.28, Pbonf=0.040). We found no difference in risk according
to histological subgroup, parent of origin or between
countries.Conclusions Our findings suggest that genetic variation in the
PTEN gene influences the risk of TGCT.
* Reference allele# Bonferroni correction (P multiplied by the number of
total SNPs analyses, n = 23).Table. Odds ratios (ORs) for associations
between polymorphisms in AKT1, PTEN and 8q24 locus and TGCT risk in the
combined case-parent/case-control study.

