Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma cytokine and angiogenic factor (CAF) profiling for
identification of markers associated with clinical benefit from
bevacizumab (BEV) and with primary tumor presence in a phase II
presurgical study of metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC) patients


Purpose: The main objectives of this exploratory analysis were to
identify biomarkers in blood associated with clinical benefit from
bevacizumab, and to assess CAF changes related to nephrectomy (Nx) in
mRCC.Methods: Plasma samples were obtained from 44 pts participating in a
frontline presurgical study of bevacizumab in clear cell mRCC (22 pts
treated with BEV and 22 pts with BEV and erlotinib) (Jonasch et al. J
Clin Oncol 2009), before treatment (BL), after 8 weeks of
therapy/pre-nephrectomy (Nx), after 16 weeks of therapy/postNx, and every
4 weeks thereafter. Multiplex bead suspension arrays and ELISA were used
to measure concentrations of 58 CAFs including VEGF, VEGF-C, placental
growth factor (PlGF), soluble CAIX (sCA9), hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF), osteopontin (OPN), matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9), transforming
growth factor (TGF)b1, endoglin, type IV collagen (ColIV), and multiple
chemokines and interleukins (IL). CAFs were correlated with
progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS), and best response
in primary and metastatic disease (% relative to BL).Results: Of 58 CAFs
available at BL, high (above median) concentrations of TRAIL and ColIV
were associated with longer PFS (7.6 v 2.8 and 8.1 v 2.9 months [mos],
respectively; both P=0.001) and OS (27.9 v 13.2 and 32.8 v 14.3 mos,
respectively; P=0.023 and P=0.025). In addition to high TRAIL, low levels
of VEGF and PlGF also showed a significant association with enhanced
response both in primary disease and metastases (all PPurpose: The main
objectives of this exploratory analysis were to identify biomarkers in
blood associated with clinical benefit from bevacizumab, and to assess
CAF changes related to nephrectomy (Nx) in mRCC.Methods: Plasma samples
were obtained from 44 pts participating in a frontline presurgical study
of bevacizumab in clear cell mRCC (22 pts treated with BEV and 22 pts
with BEV and erlotinib) (Jonasch et al. J Clin Oncol 2009), before
treatment (BL), after 8 weeks of therapy/pre-nephrectomy (Nx), after 16
weeks of therapy/postNx, and every 4 weeks thereafter. Multiplex bead
suspension arrays and ELISA were used to measure concentrations of 58
CAFs including VEGF, VEGF-C, placental growth factor (PlGF), soluble CAIX
(sCA9), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), osteopontin (OPN), matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9), transforming growth factor (TGF)b1, endoglin,
type IV collagen (ColIV), and multiple chemokines and interleukins (IL).
CAFs were correlated with progression-free survival (PFS), overall
survival (OS), and best response in primary and metastatic disease (%
relative to BL).Results: Of 58 CAFs available at BL, high (above median)
concentrations of TRAIL and ColIV were associated with longer PFS (7.6 v
2.8 and 8.1 v 2.9 months [mos], respectively; both P=0.001) and OS (27.9
v 13.2 and 32.8 v 14.3 mos, respectively; P=0.023 and P=0.025). In
addition to high TRAIL, low levels of VEGF and PlGF also showed a
significant association with enhanced response both in primary disease
and metastases (all P<0.05). The combination BEV+erlotinib resulted in
differential modulation of several CAFs relative to BEV from BL to preNx,
including E-selectin, TRAIL and stem cell factor (SCF). Multiple CAFs,
most prominently sCA9, endoglin, OPN, VEGF, HGF, and E-selectin,
significantly decreased postNx, while TRAIL, SCF, and CTACK increased
(relative to BL and also preNx; all PPurpose: The main objectives of this
exploratory analysis were to identify biomarkers in blood associated with
clinical benefit from bevacizumab, and to assess CAF changes related to
nephrectomy (Nx) in mRCC.Methods: Plasma samples were obtained from 44
pts participating in a frontline presurgical study of bevacizumab in
clear cell mRCC (22 pts treated with BEV and 22 pts with BEV and
erlotinib) (Jonasch et al. J Clin Oncol 2009), before treatment (BL),
after 8 weeks of therapy/pre-nephrectomy (Nx), after 16 weeks of
therapy/postNx, and every 4 weeks thereafter. Multiplex bead suspension
arrays and ELISA were used to measure concentrations of 58 CAFs including
VEGF, VEGF-C, placental growth factor (PlGF), soluble CAIX (sCA9),
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), osteopontin (OPN), matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9), transforming growth factor (TGF)b1, endoglin,
type IV collagen (ColIV), and multiple chemokines and interleukins (IL).
CAFs were correlated with progression-free survival (PFS), overall
survival (OS), and best response in primary and metastatic disease (%
relative to BL).Results: Of 58 CAFs available at BL, high (above median)
concentrations of TRAIL and ColIV were associated with longer PFS (7.6 v
2.8 and 8.1 v 2.9 months [mos], respectively; both P=0.001) and OS (27.9
v 13.2 and 32.8 v 14.3 mos, respectively; P=0.023 and P=0.025). In
addition to high TRAIL, low levels of VEGF and PlGF also showed a
significant association with enhanced response both in primary disease
and metastases (all P<0.05). The combination BEV+erlotinib resulted in
differential modulation of several CAFs relative to BEV from BL to preNx,
including E-selectin, TRAIL and stem cell factor (SCF). Multiple CAFs,
most prominently sCA9, endoglin, OPN, VEGF, HGF, and E-selectin,
significantly decreased postNx, while TRAIL, SCF, and CTACK increased
(relative to BL and also preNx; all P<0.05).Conclusions: We identified
TRAIL, ColIV, VEGF and PlGF as candidate CAFs associated with clinical
benefit from BEV in clear cell mRCC. The combination of BEV with
erlotinib resulted in distinct on treatment CAF changes. The integration
of these data with CAF profiling studies in pts with non-metastatic RCC
could help define CAF sets useful to assist in risk stratification of RCC
pts and provide insights into the biology of RCC progression.

