Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging of metastatic B16F10 melanoma in mice using tumor-homing
stem cells.


Tumors, like wounds, recruit cells from surrounding tissues and bone
marrow. Some of these cells provide support and nutrition, while others
participate in an inflammatory response. Bone marrow mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs) exhibit this tropism toward wounds and other areas of
pathology. Consequently, stem cell technology for diagnostic and
therapeutic purposes is an emerging field in cancer biology. Like bone
marrow MSCs, mouse neural progenitor cells (NPCs) tend to migrate toward
cancer sites. We found that these cells migrate toward B16F10 lung
melanomas, making them very good candidates for delivery of
chemotherapeutic drugs, genes of interest, and imaging contrast agents.
Among imaging techniques, bioluminescent imaging is non-invasive. Gaussia
luciferase (Gluc) is particularly useful, as it is non-toxic and has
stronger luminescence than other known luciferases. In the presence of
its substrate coelenterazine (coel), Gluc luminescence peaks near 470 nm.
In this study, we engineered NPCs to secrete Gluc. These Gluc-engineered
cells were injected systemically to C57BL/6 mice bearing metastatic
B16F10 lung melanoma and mice were given coel intravenously. Imaging of
the mice on the Caliper IVIS Lumina II showed bioluminescence in
disseminated areas. The distribution of bioluminescence suggested that
the engineered NPCs migrated to the tumor sites and secreted Gluc. In
confirmation, necropsy revealed black metastatic tumors in the locations
emitting bioluminescence. Although IV injection of metastatic B16F10 lung
melanoma cells usually generates lung tumors, we found dissemination of
melanoma in other parts of the body. The Gluc-expressing NPCs could find
the tumors as early as 2 days post tumor-cell injection, long before
tumors were palpable. Thus, this system offers promise for improving
cancer diagnosis. For improved imaging, this bioluminescence system can
be coupled with other fluorescent dyes for red shifted output. Finally,
the same sensitivity and tumor tropism suggests that the NPCs could be
useful delivery cells for tumor-targeted therapeutics.

