Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor effect of insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor
inhibition in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.


Back ground: Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF1R) activity is
upregulated in a variety of human cancers and IGF1R signaling has been
implicated as a mechanism of resistance to various cancer therapies,
including radiotherapy, cytotoxic chemotherapy, and targeted molecular
therapy. We have demonstrated that IGF1R activation can induce resistance
to targeted therapy of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs)
using epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs). Targeting the IGF1R by selective small molecule kinase inhibition
may thus hold promise as an adjuvant treatment for HNSCC.Aims: (1) To
assess the anti-tumor effects of two IGF1R/insulin receptor TKIs,
BMS-754807 and OSI-906, in multiple HNSCC cell lines in vitro. (2) To
evaluate the effect of combined IGF1R and EGFR inhibition in HNSCC cell
lines in vitro.Methods: The effect of IGF1R inhibition on cell
proliferation, viability, survival, and apoptosis was assessed using
alamarBlue, trypan blue exclusion, clonogenic, and flow cytometric assays
in 9 HNSCC cell lines. Alterations in downstream IGF1R signaling were
assessed by standard immunoblot. The impact of combining an EGFR-TKI with
an IGF1R-TKI was measured.Result: Both BMS-754807 and OSI-906 inhibited
IGF1R phosphorylation at 200 nM. Complete inhibition of the
phosphorylation of IRS-1 and Akt required higher concentrations. Both
inhibitors slowed proliferation, decreased cell viability, and decreased
cell survival in all 9 cell lines. The EC50 to inhibit proliferation was
in the range of X to X microM for BMS-754807 and X to X microM for
OSI-906. Both drugs induced apoptosis in HNSCC tumor cell lines based on
flow cytometric analysis of caspase-3 cleavage and PARP cleavage. In
combination with gefitinib and lapatinib, BMS-754807 and OSI-906 were
capable of synergistic growth inhibition.Conclusion: Inhibition of IGF1R
activity using the selective TKIs BMS-754807 and OSI906 has an antitumor
effect on HNSCC cells in vitro. These drugs are synergistic with
EGFR-TKIs and co-targeting the two receptors may represent an approach to
overcoming clinical resistance to targeted anti-growth factor therapy in
HNSCC.

