Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional repressor Kaiso promotes cancer progression by
targeting miR-31 in prostate cancer.


Metastatic spread of prostate cancer (PCa) is responsible for the
majority of prostate cancer-related deaths. Whereas socioeconomic
factors, different geographic areas and ethnicity contribute to the
incidence and mortality rates of this disease, they cannot fully explain
the tumor biology. Our understanding of the mechanisms that drive PCa
progression and metastasis is still limited. Kaiso belongs to a BTB/POZ
zinc finger protein family and is known as a transcriptional repressor by
binding to sequence-specific Kaiso binding sites or methyl-CpG
dinucleotide pairs. Kaiso expression and localization have been reported
to correlate with the prognosis and metastatic potential in several human
malignancies. Previous studies from our lab showed that the progression
of PCa is closely associated with the over-expression and nuclear
translocation of Kaiso. Our objective here is to explore the potential
molecular mechanisms underlying Kaiso mediated increase in PCa
progression. MicroRNAs play an emerging role in cancer initiation and
progression. Therefore we proposed to investigate Kaiso targeting
microRNAs and their roles in PCa. PC-3 cells, a highly metastatic PCa
cell line, were stably transfected with a shRNA plasmid against human
Kaiso or a scramble control. Two clones exhibited >80% downregulation of
Kaiso in PC-3 cells at either the transcriptional or translational levels
were used for further studies. We determined miRNA expression profiles
correlated with Kaiso knock down and DNMT1 inhibitor 5-Aza de-methylation
treatment using microRNA arrays. Comparative analysis revealed 11 miRNAs
were significantly altered by Kaiso knock down and 32 miRNAs were
significantly altered by 5-Aza treatment (> 2 fold, pMetastatic spread of
prostate cancer (PCa) is responsible for the majority of prostate
cancer-related deaths. Whereas socioeconomic factors, different
geographic areas and ethnicity contribute to the incidence and mortality
rates of this disease, they cannot fully explain the tumor biology. Our
understanding of the mechanisms that drive PCa progression and metastasis
is still limited. Kaiso belongs to a BTB/POZ zinc finger protein family
and is known as a transcriptional repressor by binding to
sequence-specific Kaiso binding sites or methyl-CpG dinucleotide pairs.
Kaiso expression and localization have been reported to correlate with
the prognosis and metastatic potential in several human malignancies.
Previous studies from our lab showed that the progression of PCa is
closely associated with the over-expression and nuclear translocation of
Kaiso. Our objective here is to explore the potential molecular
mechanisms underlying Kaiso mediated increase in PCa progression.
MicroRNAs play an emerging role in cancer initiation and progression.
Therefore we proposed to investigate Kaiso targeting microRNAs and their
roles in PCa. PC-3 cells, a highly metastatic PCa cell line, were stably
transfected with a shRNA plasmid against human Kaiso or a scramble
control. Two clones exhibited >80% downregulation of Kaiso in PC-3 cells
at either the transcriptional or translational levels were used for
further studies. We determined miRNA expression profiles correlated with
Kaiso knock down and DNMT1 inhibitor 5-Aza de-methylation treatment using
microRNA arrays. Comparative analysis revealed 11 miRNAs were
significantly altered by Kaiso knock down and 32 miRNAs were
significantly altered by 5-Aza treatment (> 2 fold, p<0.05). Real-time
PCR confirmed that miR-31 expression was up-regulated in both Kaiso knock
down cells and 5-Aza treated cells. From the analysis of differentially
expressed miRNAs, miR-31 expression was also negatively correlated with
kaiso expression in a set of prostate cell lines. ChIP assay revealed
that kaiso directly binds to miR-31 promoter. The restoration of miR-31
suppressed cell proliferation; induced apoptosis and inhibited tumor cell
invasion and metastasis in vitro. Inhibition of miR-31 in PC-3 shKaiso
cells restored kaiso knock down-inhibited cell proliferation; migration
and metastasis. Xenograft model indicated that miR-31 overexpression
significant suppressed tumor formation in vivo. Taken together, our
studies suggest that Kaiso regulates specific miRNA expression in PCa
cells, indicating that Kaiso could promote cancer progression through
regulating miR-31 expression in a methylation dependent manner.Citation
Format: Honghe Wang, ShaNekkia Black, Wei Liu, Fu Zhao, Timothy Turner,
Clayton Yates. Transcriptional repressor Kaiso promotes cancer
progression by targeting miR-31 in prostate cancer. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3062.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3062

