Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of HER2 in the brain metastatic cascade in breast cancer.


Approximately 20% of brain metastases originate from breast cancer, which
is the most common invasive cancer of women worldwide. HER2 inhibitors
have revolutionized the treatment of HER2 positive breast cancer
patients, but have no or marginal activity against brain metastases yet -
which is becoming increasingly problematic, since 40% of HER2 positive
breast cancer patients will eventually develop this devastating
complication of the disease. Therefore we aimed to understand which step
of the brain metastatic cascade is actually affected by HER2
overexpression; which is crucial for successful growth to a
macrometastasis; and which is most amenable to a prophylactic therapy.
For this we used our novel animal model which allows to non-invasively
follow single metastasizing cancer cells through a chronic cranial window
over time, using in vivo multiphoton microscopy. Human MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer brain-seeking subclones with high HER2 expression or with control
vector have been injected into the circulation of female nude mice. As
shown before for other cancer entities, only a very small proportion of
cancer cells initially arrested in brain capillaries can successfully
form brain metastases, which was similar for both groups (1.02% vs 1.67%
- for HER2 overexpression and vector control, respectively). However,
more of the injected HER2+ cells managed to initially arrest compared
with HER2- cells (47.5 vs. 27.7 per 100,000 injected cells). Moreover,
they extravasated earlier, and showed more early interaction with brain
capillaries leading to intensive vascular remodeling, but no
angiogenesis. We therefore focussed on factors of early breast cancer
cell - blood vessel - interaction, and found integrins to be
overexpressed in HER2+ cells. In ongoing experiments, we test an integrin
v3-5 inhibitor regarding its activity to prevent the early metastatic
steps, and find that these steps are markedly inhibitied in treated
animals. Our results provide a better understanding of the breast cancer
brain metastatic cascade, and the role of HER2. Importantly, they suggest
that inhibition of crucial early steps involving cancer cell - blood
vessel interactions via integrin pathways can serve as a well tolerated
long-term prophylactic treatment for HER2-positive breast cancer patients
which are at risk to develop brain metastases.

