Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vintafolide: a first-in-class small molecule drug conjugate
targeting folate receptor positive tumors.


Targeted anti-cancer therapies offer the promise of more efficacious
treatments with fewer side effects. Vintafolide (also known as EC145) is
a rationally designed small molecule drug conjugate consisting of one
folic acid moiety which serves as a stable high affinity binding ligand
for the folate receptor, and one vinca alkaloid unit
(desacetylvinblastine hydrazide; DAVLBH), which serves as the cytotoxic
warhead. Vintafolide is thus designed to target cancer cells by binding
with high affinity to folate receptors which are more commonly expressed
at high levels on tumors compared to normal tissues. Vintafolide is
internalized following binding to folate receptors and is cleaved in
endosomes to release DAVLBH. Like all vinca alkaloids, DAVLBH binds to
tubulin and disrupts the mitotic spindle which leads to cell death.
Pre-clinical in vitro and in vivo experiments show that vintafolide
requires interaction with the folate receptor for its activity and that
it is more efficacious and better tolerated than untargeted DAVLBH.
Vintafolide is currently being investigated in clinical trials in ovarian
(Phase III) and lung (Phase II) cancer patients who express folate
receptors on their tumors as determined by the investigational companion
imaging agent, etarfolatide. Etarfolatide is also a folate-based
conjugate consisting of folic acid linked to a peptidic metal-chelating
moiety labeled with 99mTechnetium. In a randomized Phase II study in
patients with advanced ovarian cancer, patients treated with vintafolide
had a significantly longer period of progression free survival compared
with the control. This was driven by patients who were identified by
etarfolatide as having tumors with functional folate receptors.
Vintafolide and etarfolatide is the first pair of therapeutic and
non-invasive, imaging diagnostic to be co-developed for the treatment of
cancer.

