Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ex vivo analysis of novel isoflavanoids (ME-143 and ME-334) in
patient derived triple negative breast cancer tumors.


There is an unmet need for novel effective therapeutics to treat triple
negative (ER, PR and Her2 negative) breast cancer in clinics. Phase I
clinical studies of 2 novel isoflavonoid investigational drugs, ME-143
and ME-344 have been shown them to be generally well tolerated in
patients with solid tumors. ME-143, a next analogue of the
investigational anti-cancer drug Phenoxodiol binds at low nanomolar
concentrations to a tumor-specific variant of cell surface associated
NADH oxidase (tNOX), resulting in caspase activation and apoptotic tumor
cell death. ME-344, a second investigational anti-cancer isoflavonoid, is
structurally related to ME-143 but functionally distinct. ME-344 is a
mitochondrial targeting agent that interferes with tumor cell energy
generation resulting in cell death via mitochondrial membrane
destabilization and autophagy induction through the disruption of both
mTOR1 and mTOR2 upstream and downstream signal transduction pathways.
Pre-clinical studies using in vitro cell lines showed significantly high
potency for both compounds either when used as single agents or when
combined with cytotoxic and targeted anti-cancer agents. The present
study investigated the ex vivo efficacy of ME-143 and ME-344 using
patient-derived tumor cells from triple negative breast cancer. Tumor
tissue was disintegrated into single cell suspension and expanded in
mouse as subcutaneous patient-derived xenograft before harvesting for the
studies. Mouse tumor cells were disintegrated into single cells and were
grown as spheroids to mimic the tumor micro-environment and single agent
as well as combination treatments were performed. Using a high content
imaging platform, various endpoints were evaluated to compare the
efficacies of the drugs. Both ME-143 and ME-344 as single agents showed
efficacy in inhibiting cell proliferation as well as colony formation in
patient-derived triple negative breast cancer cells while combination of
these agents with Cisplatin and Gemcitabine demonstrated additive or
synergistic effects. Use of high content imaging has enabled the
identification of patient population that has tumor cells resistant to
very high doses of drugs. Follow-up studies are planned to characterize
the sub-population of cells that are resistant to high dose of these
drugs.

