Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting PI-3K/Akt signaling pathway by a PI-3K inhibitor BKM120
for radiosensitization in murine hepatocellular carcinoma.


Purpose: Tumor control of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by radiotherapy
remains unsatisfactory and the sub-lethal effect associates with
secondary spread. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI-3K)/Akt pathway plays
a critical role in promoting cancer cell proliferation and inhibiting
cell death. Elevated PI-3K/Akt activity is associated with increased
cellular resistance to irradiation. Our aim was to assess if the
inhibition of PI-3K/Akt activity by a PI-3K inhibitor, BKM120,
contributes to the increasing sensitivity of murine liver cancer cells to
irradiation.Methods and Materials: Murine HCC cell line (BNL) was used to
evaluate the in vitro synergism of combining BKM120 with irradiation.
Flow cytometry analyzed the cell cycle changes, whereas Western blot
investigated the protein expressions after the combined treatment. Balb/c
mice bearing ectopic BNL xenografts were treated with BKM120 and/or
radiotherapy for the in vivo response.Results: Clonogenic cell survival
decreased dose-dependently either with irradiation or BKM120 treatment.
Synergisms were achieved in cells treated together with greater or equal
than 0.5M BKM120 and 2 Gy radiation. BKM120 pretreatment significantly
inhibited radiation-induced Akt phosphorylation. Western blots of active
caspase-3 and cleaved PARP revealed that the combined BKM120 and
radiation treatment strongly increased the expression of these apoptotic
markers in response to irradiation compared with radiation alone. In
ectopic xenografts, pretreatment with BKM120 significantly enhanced the
tumor-suppressive effect by radiotherapy.Conclusion: The apparent
synergism between BKM120 and irradiation or effect of pre-treatment with
BKM120 suggests an option to mitigate the activation of Akt by radiation,
leading to increased cell apoptosis in murine liver cancer. These data
suggest that the BKM120/radiation combination be a strategy worthy of
further clinical trials.

