Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obatoclax enhances CDDP and trail-induced apoptosis in epithelial
ovarian adenocarcinoma cells.


Epithelial ovarian cancer comprises the majority of malignant ovarian
tumors in adult women. Ovarian cancer is the fifth cause of death in
women and annually 13,850 deaths are reported in United States. Effective
screening strategies are lacking and the majority of cases are diagnosed
with advanced stage disease. Chemo is the conventional therapy after
surgery but the initial response is between 60 to 80%, however, some
patients that initially responded to the therapy suffer of recurrent
disease or become resistant to the treatment. As a consequence, the
overall 5 year survival is only about 30%. It is important to identify
novel therapies for ovarian cancer to treat or sensitize tumor cells to
the existence therapy. It has been suggested that the tumor cells become
resistance due to an increased expression of antiapoptotic proteins
especially from the Bcl2 family (Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Mcl-1). Obatoclax is a
small molecule that mimics the BH3 domain of the BH3 only family members
and inhibits the effect of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 members. The objective of
this study was to assess the susceptibility of ovarian cancer cell lines
to chemo or immuno therapy mediated apoptosis by obatoclax and also to
elucidate the mechanism. Four different epithelial ovarian
adenocarcinomas cell lines (SKOV3, NIH-OVCAR-3, TOV112D and TOV21G) were
treated with different concentrations of Obatoclax (nM-M), CDDP
(5-50g/ml) or TRAIL (50-1200ng/ml) alone or with a combination of
treatment to assess the viability, measured by the XTT kit (Roche). Basal
and cell treated total protein expressions were assessed by western.
Induction of apoptosis was measured by TUNEL. As a single agent,
Obatoclax or CDDP inhibited the viability of the cells in a dose response
form; TRAIL did not show an evident response. The combination of the
treatment after selecting the IC50 and IC20 response showed an increased
inhibition of the viability. TUNEL positive cells were measured and the
induction of apoptosis was mediated by a caspase dependent manner and
PARP cleavage. Our data suggest that obatoclax in combination with CDDP
or TRAIL can enhance the induction of apoptosis in resistance cell lines,
suggesting to be an optional treatment of patients with ovarian cancer.

