Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) facilitates
the response to DNA-damaging chemotherapy in triple-negative breast
cancer cells.


Introduction. Breast cancer cells frequently develop resistance to
DNA-damaging therapy, and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) may
play an important role in this process. EGFR can modulate the repair of
DNA double strand breaks (DSB) by non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ), by
forming protein complexes that include the catalytic subunit of
DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PKcs). However many ER-negative breast
tumors still respond poorly to DNA-damaging drugs even when combined with
an EGFR inhibitor. IGFBP-3, an intracellular and secreted protein, is
highly expressed in these tumors. Since we previously showed that IGFBP-3
can transactivate EGFR and translocate to the nucleus, the aim of this
study was to determine whether IGFBP-3 forms part of the EGFR-DNA-PK
complex that regulates the DNA damage response to DSB-inducing
chemotherapeutic agents.Results. In the triple-negative breast cancer
cell lines MDA-MB-468 and Hs578T, which express IGFBP-3 highly, protein
complex formation and nuclear localization of EGFR, DNA-PKcs and IGFBP-3
were enhanced by exposure to cytotoxic drugs etoposide or doxorubicin and
reduced by IGFBP-3 knockdown or the EGFR kinase inhibitor gefitinib.
Concomitantly, the co-location of EGFR-IGFBP-3 complexes with lipid
rafts, visualized by proximity ligation assay (PLA) and confocal
microscopy, decreased in response to drug treatment, consistent with the
loss of this complex from the plasma membrane. Furthermore, the
phosphorylation of DNA-PKcs at Ser2056 and its substrate Artemis nuclease
at S516, and DNA repair capacity as measured by a non-homologous
end-joining assay, were all decreased by IGFBP-3 silencing, while H2AX
phosphorylation was increased, suggesting that IGFBP-3 has an obligatory
role in the DNA repair response to DNA-damaging therapy.Conclusion. The
increased intranuclear interaction between EGFR and DNA-PKcs in response
to DNA damage, and the subsequent stimulation of NHEJ activity, require
the presence of IGFBP-3, which also forms part of the nuclear complex.
This demonstrates a previously unrecognized caretaker role for IGFBP-3 in
regulating DNA DSB repair by NHEJ. These novel findings suggests the
possibility of a therapeutic approach for sensitizing ER-negative breast
cancers to chemo- or radiotherapy by targeting the DNA repair function of
IGFBP-3. (Supported by Australian Research Council grant DP0984232 to
RCB).

