Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The importance of dose schedule with Hsp90 inhibitors: Results
from a Phase II study in dogs with mast cell tumors.


Purpose: STA-1474 is the prodrug of ganetespib, currently the most
advanced Hsp90 inhibitor in human clinical trials. In a Phase I clinical
trial, STA-1474 demonstrated biologic activity in dogs with spontaneous
tumors. Data from this trial suggested that longer drug infusion times (8
hours versus 1 hour) were potentially associated with greater biologic
activity. The purpose of the following study was to extend these
observations and identify the optimum dosing schedule of STA-1474 in dogs
with spontaneous mast cell tumors (MCT).Experimental Design: This was a
Phase 2 trial in which dogs with spontaneous MCT received STA-1474 (6
mg/kg, per week) under one of four different dosing schedules: once
weekly with a 1 hour infusion (cohort A) or 8 hour infusion (cohort B),
or twice weekly with a 1 hour infusion given 24 hour (cohort C) or 72
hour (cohort D) between doses. Toxicities, biomarker changes from pre-
and two post-treatment biopsies, and tumor responses were
assessed.Results: Twenty-four chemotherapy and radiation nave dogs with
MCT were enrolled. Toxicities were mild and primarily gastrointestinal in
nature consisting of diarrhea, vomiting, inappetence and lethargy.
Measurable responses were observed from dogs in cohort A (SD=5, PD=1),
cohort B (PR=2, SD=4), cohort C (PR=3, SD=3) and cohort D (PR=2, SD=1,
PD=1). Biopsies are currently being evaluated by reverse phase protein
array and results will be presented.Conclusions: This study provides
further evidence that prolonged exposure to STA-1474 improves biological
activity. Dosing STA-1474 on two consecutive days yielded the greatest
objective responses (50%) and a disease control rate of 100%. Given the
similarities of canine and human cancers with respect to tumor biology
and HSP90 synthesis following its inhibition, it is likely that more
frequent exposure to ganetespib will demonstrate comparable anti-cancer
activity in human patients and is currently being evaluated in a Phase I
study.

