Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SR16388 impairs protein homeostasis and induces autophagy in
diverse human cancer cell lines.


SR16388 is a novel amino steroid that targets estrogen-binding proteins
including genomic estrogen receptors (ERs). Preclinical studies have
demonstrated that SR16388 is a well-tolerated, orally active compound
with compelling properties as an experimental antitumor agent: SR16388
has been demonstrated to 1) inhibit the proliferation and viability of
diverse human cancer cell lines in vitro; 2) have antiangiogenic activity
in vivo; and 3) reduce the growth of human tumor xenografts in mice.
SR16388, which binds to and potently inhibits ER and ER in breast cancer
cells, also inhibits the widely expressed orphan nuclear receptor ERR
that has been implicated in the development of various human
malignancies. ERR is thought to regulate tumor cell energy metabolism
associated with energy stress within solid tumor microenvironments.We
have been exploring potential mechanisms that could explain SR16388s
broad anti-proliferative effects toward human tumor cell lines with
different genotypes and tissues of origin. In these studies, we observed
that SR16388 can initiate a cell-cycle arrest at G1 or G2 and ultimately
cause cytotoxicity (e.g., by apoptosis) even in cells that do not express
ERs or ERR. We recently observed that SR16388 can induce persistent
macroautophagy (autophagy) in diverse tumor cells, including cells from
hematopoietic malignancies (e.g., multiple myeloma/MM cells) in addition
to carcinomas such as prostate and breast cancers. We demonstrated
induction of autophagy by using established assays (e.g., LC3I/II
processing; fluorescent reporters for acidic vacuole formation;
long-lived protein degradation). Here we present results demonstrating
that SR16388 can rapidly and potently induce autophagy in cultures of MM
cells (U266, RPMI-8226) and PC3 prostate cancer cells. Induction of
autophagy in PC3 cells, in particular, was detected in tumor xenografts
as early as 3 hours after dosing of mice with a therapeutic dose level of
SR16388. We will present data supporting the hypothesis that SR16388
exerts its anti-proliferative and anti-tumor effects in part through the
induction of stress pathways modulated by perturbations of protein
homeostasis. These effects could yield therapeutic benefits that derive
from targets within solid tumor microenvironments.

