Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Photonic crystal microarray sensing of biomolecules: Detection of
ZEB1 associated with the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in lung cancer
cells.


We experimentally demonstrate the ability of Photonic Crystal
microcavity-based biosensors to specifically detect the EMT transcription
factor, ZEB1, in minute volumes of sample. Two-dimensional Photonic
Crystals manufactured from silicon-on-insulator (SOI) have recently
demonstrated the ability to confine and guide slow light on length scales
of the wavelength of light. This has led to high sensitivity as well as
miniaturization into compact sensors for chemical and bio-sensing. The
precise wavelength of infrared light trapped by the resonance cavity of a
Photonic Crystal is influenced in a very sensitive fashion by binding
interactions between biomolecules attached to the silicon surface. In
essence, the binding interaction alters the refractive index of the
resonance cavity and this is detected as a shift in the resonance
wavelength trapped by the device. When the sensor surface is derivatized
with a specific antibody, the binding of the corresponding antigen will
generate a resonance shift, revealing the presence of the antigen even
when the antigen is present as a minor component in a complex whole-cell
lysate. The resonance shift is detected directly and does not require any
secondary labeling. The sensor cavity used here is dimensionally
comparable to a mitochondrion, having a surface area of 5-10 m2 which
contacts approximately 13 nL of sample. The device was able to reliably
detect ZEB1 binding in diluted samples of NCI-H358 non-small cell lung
cancer cells containing 10 cells/L. Specificity was demonstrated using a
sandwich assay in which a second antibody was introduced following the
initial binding and washing steps. The resonance wavelength was then
super-shifted, but only when the second reagent applied was a different
ZEB1-specific antibody that recognized a distinct epitope. These Photonic
Crystal waveguides can be multiplexed on a single chip yielding a useful
platform for highly sensitive and rapid detection of several biomolecules
simultaneously in minute samples. Moreover, the sandwich assay principle
can be applied to interrogate post-translational modifications of the
captured proteins, so long as site-specific antibodies are available. The
Photonic Crystal biosensor should be applicable to biomarker detection in
minute biopsies, monitoring of pathway activation states in small
samples, and detection of fusion or mutant proteins in hematological
malignancies and solid tumors.

