Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of genetic variants at 16q12
associated with breast cancer in women of African ancestry.


Introduction: Women in the African Diaspora experience a disproportionate
burden of pre-menopausal breast cancer in comparison to other races for
reasons that remain unknown and understudied. To understand the etiologic
heterogeneity in breast cancer and identify risk factors particular to
women of African ancestry, we conducted a fine-mapping study of breast
cancer susceptibility loci using a large cohort of 1502 cases and 1378
controls, all of African ancestry. We identified significant single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at chromosome 16q12. Because our
association signal within a linkage disequilibrium (LD) block at 16q12 is
close to the TOX3 and LOC643714 genes and some of these SNPs were
reported to be associated with FOXA-1 binding sites, we performed
functional analysis of 16q12 SNPs to investigate biological importance of
the genetic variants in the development of breast cancer.Methods: To
provide functional annotation of SNPs in relation to gene expression, we
isolated DNA and RNA from 19 breast cell lines and genotyped 27 SNPs of
16q12 by sequencing. Expression levels of TOX3 and LOC643714 were
quantified using qRT-PCR. Modulation of promoter activity by allelic
difference was determined by a luciferase reporter gene assay. Modified
histone signature was assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays using antibodies against methylated histones. Local chromosome
abnormalities of 16p12 will be validated through fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH).Results: Based on our fine mapping data and LD block
analysis, we selected 27 SNPs located in the promoter and intron 1 of
LOC643714. To determine the potential of risk-associated SNPs serving as
cis-acting regulatory elements for LOC643714 or TOX3, we performed ChIP
assays and found an active chromatin conformation of the region with
strong enhancer signature. Difference in the promoter activity was also
observed between G and A alleles of rs3104793. Quantification of gene
expression revealed greater expression of LOC643714 and TOX3 in cancer
cells than in normal breast cells. Notably, breast cancer cell lines from
black women showed higher expression of TOX3 compared to cells from white
women. After assessing copy number variation (CNV) of the loci, we will
integrate all the data (genotyping and gene expression) to examine their
correlations. Finally, we will perform eQTL analysis in lymphoblast and
breast cancer cells.Conclusion: Our data suggest a potential biological
role for 16q12 SNPs in regulating gene expression in the development of
breast cancer. This underscores the need for more functional studies on
population-specific common variants to understand their contribution to
breast cancer risks and etiologic heterogeneity in diverse populations.

