Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cucurbitacin B inhibits epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in
breast cancer cells through Snail downregulation.


Metastasis is a primary cause of about 90% of cancer related deaths
worldwide. It is associated with epithelial to mesenchymal
characteristics transition (EMT), which helps in attaining migratory
phenotype by tumor cells. Cucurbitacin B (CuB), a triterpenoid steroidal
compound has been shown to suppress JAK/STAT3 signaling and cause G2/M
arrest in cancer cells. However, the role of CuB as an anti-metastatic
agent still remains to be elucidated. In the present study, we
investigated the effects of CuB on EMT in breast cancer cells. These
cells are known to exhibit significant mesenchymal properties that endow
aggressive nature. Our results show that CuB significantly suppressed
cell migration of MDA-MB-231 cells in wound healing assay. In addition,
we also observed reduced cell invasion with CuB treatment using transwell
invasion assay. To elucidate the mechanism of these effects, western
blotting was performed using whole cell lysates from CuB treated
MDA-MB-231 cells. We observed significantly reduced expression of snail
and twist with CuB treatment. Snail and twist are known to be repressors
of E-cadherin. Generally upregulation of snail and twist mark the
initiation of EMT, and eventually leads to loss of epithelial signature
of cells. Furthermore, with CuB treatment upregulation of E-cadherin was
observed. Transforming growth factor is known to induce EMT in malignant
breast cancer cells. We further investigated the role of CuB on TGF
induced EMT. Interestingly, we observed that TGF induced snail expression
was reversed by CuB in MDA-MB-231 cells. Moreover, CuB treatment also
contributed protection to the loss of E-cadherin caused by TGF treatment.
Taken together our results indicate reversal of EMT by CuB treatment in
breast cancer cells, which lead to suppression of metastasic ability.
However, further in vitro and in vivo mechanistic studies are under
progress. [Supported in part by R01 grant CA129038 (to S.K.S) awarded by
the National Cancer Institute].

