Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of benzo(a)pyrene-7,8-dione and cadmium on early response
to DNA damage in primary human bronchoepithelial cells.


Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and heavy metals often co-exist
in the environment, but despite their significant toxicities little is
known about their combined effects. Cadmium (Cd), a known human
carcinogen, interferes with cellular responses to DNA damage, through
inhibition of DNA repair systems, disturbance of tumor suppressor
functions, or increased resistance to apoptosis. Cd has been linked to
lung cancer in humans and the most common exposure scenarios in humans
involve co-exposure with PAHs. However, studies on combined effects of Cd
and PAHs are mostly limited to marine invertebrates or soil bacteria.
Both PAHs and Cd induce formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the
cell. Mitochondria are the main target for oxidative DNA damage and also
play an important role in programmed cell death. Cytochrome c is an
important component of apoptosis and its translocation from mitochondria
to the cytosol is an indicator of apoptotic activity in intact cells.
Another indicator of the early response to apoptotic signals is the
phosphorylation of H2AX, which also reflects DNA damage. Here, we propose
that the exposure of primary human bronchoepithelial cells (hBEC) to the
mixture of benzo(a)pyrene-7,8-dione (BaPD) and cadmium chloride (CdCl2)
will significantly augment DNA damage and disrupt mitochondrial functions
involving apoptosis. Methods: Cytotoxicity was analyzed by the WST-8
assay. hBEC were exposed to CdCl2 (5 g/ml) and BaPD (10 g/ml) for 24h.
Levels of 8-hydroxy-2-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) and cytochrome c were
quantified using ELISA. Quantification of H2AX phosphorylation (Ser139,
-H2AX) was performed by western blotting. Statistical tests were
conducted using GraphPad Prism software at a significance level of 0.05.
Mean levels across treatment groups were compared using analysis of
variance (ANOVA). Results: IC50 values at 24h for CdCl2 and BaPD were 8.7
and 12.5 g/ml, respectively. Levels of 8-OHdG in nuclear DNA were
significantly higher in hBEC exposed to CdCl2 or BaPD when compared to
controls. We observed an increased release of cytochrome c during the
first few hours after exposure to CdCl2 and BaPD, followed by significant
reductions at 24h. Furthermore, cytochrome c levels in cells exposed to
the combination of BaPD and CdCl2 were substantially lower than those
observed with either treatment alone. Phosphorylation of H2AX increased
in hBEC exposed to CdCl2 or BaPD, with higher levels observed in cells
treated with BaPD. Conclusion: Our results suggest increased DNA damage
in hBEC after 24h of exposure to Cd and BaPD. We also observed decreased
cytochrome c levels after exposure to BaPD and/or Cd, suggesting
disruption of mitochondrial functions. This effect was more pronounced in
cells exposed to the mixture.

