Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of a predictive modeling approach to demonstrate the
relative efficacy of three different schedules of the AKT inhibitor
AZD5363.


Introduction: Simeoni et al., Cancer Res 64, 1094-1101 (2004) published a
mathematical model, widely used pre-clinically to describe the growth and
inhibition by anti-cancer agents of xenografted models. Ribba et al. Eur.
J. Cancer, 47, 479-490 (2011) demonstrated the utility of a mechanistic
model that characterizes the tumor xenograft in terms of non-hypoxic,
hypoxic, and necrotic. This poster demonstrates modeling approaches that
have been utilized when the simplifying assumptions in the Simeoni model
are invalid. We will also extend the model presented by Ribba et al., to
incorporate the spatial features of a tumor in an attempt to better
describe the tumor micro-environment. Here, focused experimentation
coupled with PKPD modeling elucidates the schedule dependence of
anti-tumor efficacy in a xenograted breast cancer cell line
(BT474c).Methods: The Simeoni and Ribba models were adapted to
incorporate features that describe: (1) the utility of biomarkers in cell
signaling pathways as a driver for growth inhibition; (2) multiple
mechanisms of drug action on sub-populations of cells that drive tumor
growth. The model incorporates the concepts of a shell of cells,
sufficiently proximal to blood vessels to be cycling; a hypoxic layer
with the potential to cycle; a necrotic core. The model was calibrated
using data from a dose fractionation experiment where similar weekly
doses were delivered either twice daily continuously or a higher dose
once daily 4 days of a week. The efficacy for untested doses and
schedules were then simulated to identify intermittent doses that would
result in the same efficacy as a continuous twice daily schedule. Further
efficacy studies were then carried out to validate the
prediction.Results: The model described biomarker and tumor volume time
series well for a range of doses. It was found that the model predicted
that a 30% dose increase was required for the 4 days a week schedule and
a 70% increase was required for 2 days per week schedule. Further
efficacy studies validated these predictions with the observed efficacy
of three different schedules having no statistically significant
differences.Conclusions: We demonstrate that adding mechanistic features
to a descriptive model of drug-induced tumor growth inhibition makes it
more representative of the disease biology and drug action. Modeling has
enabled us to elucidate the relative balance of the anti-proliferative
and pro-apoptotic consequences of AKT inhibition in a xenografted breast
cancer cell line. A focused experiment-model-predict approach has
achieved this in an efficient manner, with experimental validation adding
credence to model predictions that will facilitate decision making for
the clinical development program.

