Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of patient non-small cell lung cancer derived models
for test of anticancer drugs.


BACKGROUND Human tumor xenograft models established by transplantation of
human tumor cell lines into immunodifficient mice have been routinely
used for preclinical test of anticancer agents. But tumor cell lines have
a relatively low transplantability and resulted in a limited number of
tumor models available for selection of right models for testing novel
agents based on their antitumor mechanism. Recently, we have developed a
large number of patient primary non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
xenograft models by transplanting patients fresh tumor tissues into nude
mice, which have been employed for preclinical test of anticancer agents.
METHODS The fresh NSCLC tissues were collected from local hospitals. The
tumor fragments of 1-2 mm were subcutaneously implanted in the flanks of
the nude mice by trocar needle. Sixteen tumor fragments were grafted into
four mice from one patient tumor tissue (passage 0). All therapeutic
efficacy experiments used female mice bearing passage 5 xenografts. The
test drugs included cisplatin, carboplatin, paclitaxel, docetaxel,
gemcitabine, erlotinib, gefitinib, and pemetrexed. RESULTS A total of 213
patient primary NSCLC samples were implanted into nude mice, and 107
primary tumor models have been established with a tumor taking rate of
50% for the first passage. The tumor taking rates were higher (80-100) in
the later passages. The therapeutic efficacy of the test drugs in these
models is consistent with their clinical findings. The histopathology and
gene sequence of the established primary tumor xenografts were analyzed;
their architecture, histopathological morphology, and genomic mutation
status from five generations of xenografts retained the patients original
tumor characteristics. CONCLUSIONS The patient primary NSCLC models can
be established in a large number for right models selection in
preclinical setting, and have been employed for test of standard of care
drugs and novel anticancer agents. The primary tumor models retain a
similarity in histology and genomic mutation status to their patients
original tumors. They may predict more relevant clinical response rate
and higher correlation with clinical findings than use of traditional
xenograft models established from long-term cultured cancer cell lines.
Especially, they have advantages for test of target-oriented therapeutics
in new drugs discovery and development programs.

