Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of diet-induced obesity on inflamatory pathways during
prostate cancer progression in Hi-Myc mice.


We have previously reported that diet induced obesity (DIO) enhanced
prostate cancer progression and associated inflammation in the ventral
prostate of the Hi-Myc mice (Blando et al, CAPR, 2011). Here, we further
investigated changes in inflammatory genes as well as cellular changes
associated with DIO effects on prostate cancer progression in the Hi-myc
mouse model. Initial studies were conducted to look at specific cell
populations that are present in the ventral prostate (VP) of Hi-Myc mice
on the 30% CR, overweight control (AIN76A) and DIO diets (60 Kcal% fat).
Staining for perilipin revealed that adipocytes were restricted to the
periphery of the VP of Hi-Myc mice on the 30% CR diet. In contrast,
adipocytes could be seen infiltrating the VP of Hi-Myc mice on the
overweight control diet and especially in mice on the DIO diet. In this
regard, many of the glands in the VP were completely surrounded by
adipocytes. Double IF staining was performed for both perilipin and CD3
(T-lymphocytes) or perilipin and RM0029-11H3 (macrophages). Few if any
inflammatory cells were seen in VP of Hi-Myc mice on the 30% CR diet. In
contrast, adipocytes and inflammatory cells (both T-cells and
macrophages) were seen in close proximity to adipocytes that had
infiltrated into the VP in the overweight control group and this was
particularly prominent in the DIO diet group. Aditionally, staining for
B-cells also showed an increased number in the DIO groups as compared to
the control and CR diet groups. Sections of VP from Hi-Myc mice on the
different diets were also stained for both the IL-23 receptor (IL-23R)
and Cox-2. IL-23R expression was dramatically upregulated in the
epithelial cells of the VP from Hi-Myc mice on the DIO compared to the
other diet groups. Cox-2 expression was also dramatically upregulated in
VP of Hi-Myc on the DIO diet. This finding is consistent with the high
level of NFB activation seen in prostate tissues for the same mice and
diet group. The VP from mice on DIO diets also showed an increase in the
staining of tissue specific cancer stem cell (CSC) markers (SCA-1 and
CD49f) when compared to VP from mice on the overweight control and 30% CR
diets. In summary, changes in the levels of IL-23R and COX-2 and the
increased presence of inflammatory cells together with changes in the
adipose tissue, suggest that the tumor microenvironment may play an
important role in DIO effects on prostate cancer progression in Hi-Myc
mice.

