Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fine mapping and characterization of Emca8.2, a genetic
determinant of susceptibility to estrogen-induced mammary cancer on
chromosome 5 in the rat.


Although estrogens have long been implicated in the etiology of breast
cancer, the mechanisms through which estrogens contribute to breast
cancer development remain poorly defined. Furthermore, many of the genes
that influence the risk of developing breast cancer also remain to be
determined. The ACI rat model of 17-estradiol (E2)-induced mammary cancer
is being used to elucidate the mechanisms through which estrogens
contribute to breast cancer development and to identify novel genetic
determinants of breast cancer susceptibility. Female ACI rats develop
mammary cancer at an incidence nearing 100% when treated with
physiological levels of E2. In contrast, the Brown Norway (BN) rat strain
is resistant to E2-induced mammary cancer. A total of seven quantitative
trait loci (QTL), designated Emca3 (Estrogen-induced mammary cancer)
through Emca9, have been mapped in reciprocal intercrosses between ACI
and BN rats. The purpose of the current study is to fine map the Emca8
genetic determinants of mammary cancer susceptibility, which was mapped
to rat chromosome 5 (RNO5). ACI alleles at this QTL act to increase the
number of mammary cancers per rat and to decrease the latency to the
appearance of the first palpable mammary cancer. A series of congenic rat
strains have been generated by introgressing defined segments of RNO5
from the resistant BN rat strain onto the genetic background of the
susceptible ACI strain. By defining the susceptibility of these congenic
rat strains relative to that of the parental ACI strain, a locus
determining susceptibility to E2-induced mammary cancer, designated
Emca8.2, has now been localized to a 1.1 megabase (Mb) region of distal
RNO5 containing approximately 1200 genetic sequence variants. To help
identify the mechanisms through which Emca8.2 determines susceptibility
to mammary cancer, the expression levels of the candidate genes within
the fine-mapped region have been investigated. The mapping and expression
data that define the genomic architecture of Emca8.2 will be presented
and discussed.

