Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determining extracellular fluid velocity along white matter tracts
with injections of increasing concentrations of intracranial albumin
using both histological and radiological techniques.


INTRODUCTION: Tumor cells are passively carried by extracellular fluid
flow to regional lymph nodes in most systemic cancers including breast
cancer, melanoma and colorectal cancer. Although the brain does not
contain lymphatics, cancer spread within the brain may be a function of
extracellular fluid velocity. As malignant brain tumors are characterized
by a disrupted blood-brain-barrier that leaks albumin from blood vessels
into brain parenchyma, we hypothesize that this albumin influx will pull
water in osmotically and increase flow rates and glioma cell
dissemination down adjacent white matter tracts. High flow rates may
increase tumor dissemination via theWMT. This study sought to determine
if increasing intracranial albumin concentrations affect WMT flow rates.
If true, restricting albumin extravasation (through steroids or VEGF
inhibitors) has the potential to reduce glioma dissemination and may have
implications for future radiation planning and steroid/VEGF inhibitor
dosing. METHODS: Our study examines flow rates in white matter tracts
after intracranial administration of albumin. 0.12-6 mg bovine albumin
were mixed with 20 L of 2% Evans Blue and injected stereotactically into
the right frontal lobe at the gray-white matter junction over 80 minutes
in 15 anesthetizedSprague-Dawley female rats. Seven hours later, the rats
were sacrificed and the brains sectioned into 0.5mm coronal slices, and
imaged to determine interstitial flow rates. RESULTS: Average
anterior-posterior (AP) velocity for rats receiving 0.12 mg and 6.0 mg of
albumin were 0.43 and 1.02 mm/hour respectively (p = 0.029). Correlation
was observed between administered albumin dose and interstitial fluid
velocity (R = 0.57). In vivo MRI results were consistent with ex vivo
Evans blue results and demonstrate markedly increased edema (T2) in the
hemisphere where albumin was injected.CONCLUSIONS: This study
demonstrates higher interstitial fluid flow rates in adjacent white
matter tracts in response to albumin-induced-edema. These observations
provide insight into expected pathways for glioma dissemination which
could be used to tailor radiation plans for individual
patients.Furthermore, these findings provide a rationale for
interventions to reduce glioma dissemination by limiting the
extravasation of albumin through the blood-brain-barrier while local
radiation is being administered.

