Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The EEF1A2-PI3K-AKT-mTOR axis supports the protumorigenic function
of MDM4 in human hepatocellular carcinoma.


Background & Aims: The Mouse Double Minute homolog 4 (MDM4) is one of the
main negative p53 regulators in mammalian cells and mutational
inactivation of p53 is a rare event in Western hepatocellular carcinomas
(HCCs). 1q gains promote the upregulation of MDM4 in HCC, leading to a
negative regulation of p53 activity. However, additional mechanisms might
be involved that explain the increased MDM4 activity observed in HCCs
with balanced MDM4 gene locus. Here we aimed at the identification of
post-transcriptional mechanisms involved in the upregulation of MDM4 in
HCC.Methods: To investigate a potential role of PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling
on MDM4 activity, HCC cell lines were treated with small molecule
inhibitors and siRNAs and expression changes as well as functional
analyses were recorded. Expression changes of central pathway components
were investigated in human liver samples (normal liver, peritumorous
liver tissue, and HCC). An AKT transgenic mouse model was used to show
the involvement of AKT pathway in the regulation of MDM4 in vivo.Results:
The inhibition of both PI3K-AKT and mTOR signaling pathways resulted in
reduced MDM4 protein levels in HCC cell lines, which was associated with
the transcriptional activation of p53-target genes. Biochemical assays
revealed that both AKT-mediated phosphorylation and ubiquitin-specific
protease 2a (USP2a)-mediated deubiquitination protected MDM4 from
proteasomal in human HCC cell lines. In addition, AKT transgenic mice
showed increased MDM4 protein levels indicating that AKT signaling is
involved in the stabilization of MDM4 protein in vivo. Furthermore, the
Eukaryotic translational Elongation Factor 1 alpha 2 (EEF1A2), which is
frequently upregulated in human HCC, sustained the PI3K-AKT-mTOR cascade
both in vitro and in vivo. In human HCCs, a strong positive correlation
between the overexpression of EEF1A2, pAKT, USP2a, and MDM4 was observed,
which was associated with shorter survival of HCC patients.Conclusions:
Our data demonstrate that the EEF1A2/PI3K/AKT/mTOR cascade inactivates
wild-type p53 in human HCC through the stabilization of the MDM4
protooncogene via a post-transcriptional mechanism involving an
AKT-mediated phosphorylation of MDM4 and USP2a-mediated
de-ubiquitination. Since the sustained activation of the
EEF1A2/PI3K/AKT/mTOR/MDM4 axis has impact on the survival probability of
HCC patients, it may thus represent a promising therapeutic target.

