Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived xenograft models reveal a subset of clinically
relevant squamous non-small cell lung cancers that respond to targeted
EGFR inhibition.


BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 85% of lung
cancer cases, carries a poor prognosis and remains an area of high unmet
need. Despite recent advances in treating NSCLC adenocarcinomas with
targeted epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) kinase inhibitors, few
advances have been made in the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC), which accounts for 25% of NSCLC. Although the incidence of EGFR
mutations in SCC is low, a retrospective clinical study of erlotinib in
SCC suggested that a proportion of SCC patients would benefit from
treatment with an EGFR inhibitor (Tseng et al., 2012).METHODS: NSCLC
samples obtained from untreated patients undergoing surgery were
collected with ethical consent, disaggregated and implanted
subcutaneously in MF-1 nude mice (Harlan UK) admixed with a human stromal
cell component to generate patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models (LION
PDX models). Tumour material was diagnosed on the basis of operative
histology and immunohistochemistry (IHC) used to confirm histological
subtype. IHC was also used to evaluate EGFR expression and tumours
characterised for mutations in p53, LKB1, EGFR and K-RAS by direct DNA
sequencing. Patient-derived xenografts were maintained in vivo and study
cohorts of mice dosed when tumours reached 100-200mm3 with either
erlotinib or gefitinib or vehicle placebo. Response to treatment was
evaluated by tumour growth inhibition and waterfall plots.RESULTS: We
have identified a subset of tumours with squamous histology in our LION
panel of patient-derived NSCLC xenografts that respond to treatment with
a targeted EGFR inhibitor. Four out of 11 SCC models tested (36%)
responded to treatment with either erlotinib or gefitinib with greater
than 50% growth inhibition and two SCC models responded with 30% growth
inhibition. Responses correlated well with EGFR expression. Work to
characterise a further 8 LION SCC PDX models is also
underway.CONCLUSIONS: These data support the proposition that a
significant subset of NSCLC patients with squamous histology may benefit
from treatment with targeted EGFR inhibitors. Our LION SCC models could
be valuable for biomarker studies to identify the basis of the EGFR
inhibitor responder subset and for evaluating new agents in a more
clinically relevant setting.

