Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A GWAS-based cross-disease approach suggests genes predisposing to
risk of endometriosis and endometrial cancer.


While endometriosis is a known risk factor for endometrioid and
clear-cell ovarian cancer subtypes, a convincing link between
endometriosis and endometrial cancer has been difficult to establish
epidemiologically. Such a link has been speculated as both are hormonally
regulated diseases of abnormal endometrium growth and they share a number
of risk factors (e.g. early menarche, low parity) and pathological
features (e.g. progesterone resistance). To investigate the genetic
relationship between endometriosis and endometrial cancer, we recently
applied a cross-disease analysis approach utilizing genome-wide
association study (GWAS) data1,2. Genetic prediction analyses revealed
significant (P=7.8 10-10) shared genetic architecture underlying
endometriosis and endometrial cancer, indicating the existence of genetic
loci that influence the risk of both diseases. We then performed a
cross-disease meta-analysis which revealed 102 SNPs at 65 independent
genetic loci with good support (P-values While endometriosis is a known
risk factor for endometrioid and clear-cell ovarian cancer subtypes, a
convincing link between endometriosis and endometrial cancer has been
difficult to establish epidemiologically. Such a link has been speculated
as both are hormonally regulated diseases of abnormal endometrium growth
and they share a number of risk factors (e.g. early menarche, low parity)
and pathological features (e.g. progesterone resistance). To investigate
the genetic relationship between endometriosis and endometrial cancer, we
recently applied a cross-disease analysis approach utilizing genome-wide
association study (GWAS) data1,2. Genetic prediction analyses revealed
significant (P=7.8 10-10) shared genetic architecture underlying
endometriosis and endometrial cancer, indicating the existence of genetic
loci that influence the risk of both diseases. We then performed a
cross-disease meta-analysis which revealed 102 SNPs at 65 independent
genetic loci with good support (P-values < 10-5) for association with
risk of both diseases. To date, we have validation for two of these loci
in an independent sample of 4,400 endometrial cancer cases and 28,000
controls. A gene at one locus, the protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor
type D gene (PTPRD: best SNP P-value =8.8 10-8, Odds Ratio=1.080.03) has
been suggested as a tumour suppressor in neuroblastoma, and as a type II
diabetes candidate. The second locus is in the region of the
transcription factor A-P 2 beta-like 1 (TFAP2D) and beta (TFAP2B) genes
(best SNP P-value 8.2 10-7, Odds Ratio 1.070.03), the latter of which has
been recently associated with metabolic syndrome, BMI and overweight.
These genes are entirely plausible candidates for involvement in
endometrial cancer aetiology given the increased risk of endometrial
cancer with increasing BMI. Imputation to the April 2012 release of the
1000 Genomes project data has revealed additional SNPs in both regions
with equal or better evidence of statistical support, and we are
currently performing bioinformatic analyses to search for potentially
functional SNPs in both regions for genotyping in additional endometrial
cancer samples. In summary, our results from prediction analysis indicate
that genetic loci contribute to both endometriosis and endometrial cancer
susceptibility, and case-control association analyses suggest two
plausible candidate genes for further study. These findings support the
value of cross-disease meta-analyses for finding new genes contributing
to cancer susceptibility.

