Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel microfluidic platform to mimic tumor angiogenesis.


Introduction: Tumor growth and development depend on the ability of tumor
cells to recruit normal host cells within its microenvironment, such as
endothelial cells and fibroblasts. Thus, understanding the relationships
between host and tumor cells is essential to developing new and
complementary approaches to the overall management of the disease.
Previous work has relied on xenograft tumors in mouse models, or
relatively simplistic in vitro cultures. These approaches have provided
valuable insights, but they possess inherent limitations. To address
these limitations we present a novel microfluidic device that recreates
specific features of the complex tumor microenvironment. The platform
includes two discrete, but interconnected cellular environments that can
mimic microvessel recruitment of 3D metabolically active tumor mass.
Methods: The microfluidic device was fabricated by standard
polydimethlsiloxane (PDMS) micro-molding. The design consists of two rows
of diamond-shaped tissue compartments ( 1 mm3) juxtaposed in parallel and
connected via micropores specifically designed to control the flow of
hydrogels during loading. The first compartment is used to simulate a
vasculogenesis-like process, and it consists of fibroblasts (NHLFs) and
endothelial colony forming cell-derived endothelial cells (ECFC-ECs)
seeded in a fibrin matrix. The second compartment is used to simulate
tumor tissue, and it is composed of fibrin matrix alone, or with the
addition of human colorectal adenocarcinoma tumor cells (SW620 cells)
with or without NHLFs. Supplying each tissue channel are intersecting,
fluid-filled microchannels that provide a dynamic supply of culture media
on either side of the tissue compartments. The pressure within these
compartments can be manipulated to control the direction and magnitude of
interstitial fluid flow. This flexibility can manipulate cell behavior
within one compartment over the other, as needed. Results: Cells in the
device remained viable through 3 weeks of culture. Within the first week,
vessel formation was observed in the first chamber, and angiogenesis was
observed in the direction opposite to the direction of interstitial flow,
that is toward, and then directly entering the second chamber as early as
day 4. Addition of SW620s in the second chamber enhanced angiogenesis as
evidenced by an increase in the number of ECFC-ECs sprouts (1.83 vs 2.33)
and sprout length (142+36.6 m vs 196+40.9 m). Discussion: We have
developed a novel microfluidic system of the tumor microenvironment that
allows for real-time visualization of the interaction between sprouting
microvessels, the stroma, and tumor cells in 3D. The device provides
flexibility and reproducibility in a controlled environment, and can
allow for high-throughput screening, which may be useful for the
discovery of anti-cancer drugs.

