Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression and potential role of MUC7 in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma.


Human mucin 7 (MUC7) is the smallest of the mucin core proteins at 39 kD
with fully glycosylated forms ranging from 125-250 kD. This secreted,
non-gel forming mucin is normally expressed by the mucousal and serosal
salivary glands and sub-mucosal glands in the lower respiratory tract.
MUC7 is expressed in allergic-asthma, COPD, cystic fibrosis and bladder
cancer. The tandem repeat domain consists of 5-6 repeats of a 23 amino
acid sequence and MUC7 has a unique histatin-like domain that binds
microbes promoting clearance. We conducted immunohistochemical studies of
MUC7 expression in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and found that MUC7 was
expressed in over 50% of primary tumors, liver metastases, and lymph node
metastases. In lymph node metastases, MUC7 was found to be primarily
expressed by immune cells rather than tumor cells. In contrast, MUC7 was
not expressed by infiltrating immune cells in primary tumors and liver
metastases, but instead by tumor cells. MUC7 was expressed in splenocytes
but not peripheral-blood mononuclear cells, suggesting its expression is
in part due to inflammation or immune cell activation. Characterization
of the immune cells expressing MUC7 in the lymph nodes revealed that the
major types of immune cells expressing MUC7 were CD68 positive
macrophages and CD11c dendritic cells. Expression of MUC7 is upregulated
by IL-1, IL-4, IL-13, TNF-, LPS, and EGF in inflammed airways, and its
minimal proximal promoter contains binding sites for NF-B, AP1 and STAT
transcription factors; all of which are involved in promoting
inflammation. We found that MUC7 expression was up-regulated in the
pancreatic cancer cell line Hs766T and the breast cancer cell line BT474
upon incubation with Th1 cytokines IFN-, IL-1 and TNF- and the Th2
cytokines IL-4, IL-10 and IL-13. MUC7 over-expression was achieved
immediately and was sustained when the cells were treated with the Th1
cytokines showing a slight time-dependent induced MUC7 expression
pattern.Global gene expression by microarray was evaluated on samples of
primary and metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma that expressed or did
not express MUC7 to identify candidate genes affected by or associated
with MUC7 expression. The microarray data revealed that a number of genes
involved in tissue remodeling and inflammation were differentially
expressed by MUC7 positive tumors. Of particular note, systems analysis
showed the galectin-3 pathway to be upregulated with MUC7 expression. We
detected MUC7 and galectin-3 complexes both in pancreatic cancer cell
lines and in pancreatic cancer tissue samples. Together, the data from
the analyses presented here led us to propose that MUC7 interacts with
galectin-3 to establishing a pro-tumorigenic microenvironment possibly
through enhancing components of the inflammatory response and aiding in
tissue remodeling.

