Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toxicology and drug delivery by novel Cucurbit[n]uril-type
molecular containers.


Background. Many drug delivery systems are based on the ability of
certain macrocyclic compounds - such as cyclodextrins - to act as
molecular containers for pharmaceutical agents in water. Cucurbit[n]urils
(CB[n]) are a class of molecular containers that bind to a variety of
cationic and neutral species with high affinity (Ka > 104 M-1) and
therefore show great promise as a drug delivery system (Isaacs, 2009).
Initial in vitro toxicity analysis demonstrated good biocompatibility of
five different CB[n]-type compounds. We hypothesized that these
nanocontainers can be used to increase solubility of hydrophobic small
chemical compound drugs. Methodology. In this study we investigated the
toxicology and bioactivity of one novel cucurbit[n]urils CB[n]-type
container (named Motor1). The container induced no toxicity at
concentrations of up to 10 mM in human cell lines originating from
kidney, liver or blood tissue using assays for metabolic activity and
cytotoxicity. Furthermore, the Motor1 container was tolerated in mice
without any toxicity after intravenous dosing of up to 1.5g/kg
bodyweight. Interestingly, Motor1 was able to bind the cancer drug
paclitaxel and increase its solubility in water by a factor of 2000.
Finally, bioactivity assays showed that the increase in solubility by
paclitaxel via Motor1 led to a more efficient killing of the cervical
cancer cell line HeLa. Conclusion. Our study reveals very low toxicity of
a novel member of the cucurbit[n]uril family of nanocontainers. It
demonstrates the increase in solubility of four commercially available
drugs by the containers by factors ranging from 400-2700fold.
Importantly, the increase in solubility of paclitaxel led to increased
killing of cancer cells in vitro. These results provide initial
proof-of-concept towards the use of CB[n] molecular containers as an
advanced drug delivery system.

