Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced treatment of lung metastasis of triple negative breast
cancer by doxorubicin-mitomycin C co-loaded polymer lipid nanoparticles.


Background: Treatment of triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a big
challenge due to its aggressiveness, metastases, lack of therapeutic
target and receptor proteins. Our laboratory has developed doxorubicin
(Dox) -mitomycin C (MMC) co-loaded stealth polymer lipid hybrid
nanoparticles (DMsPLN) and demonstrated their anti-cancer synergy in
vitro and high efficacy in vivo. The purpose of this study is to evaluate
the biodistribution, in vivo efficacy and safety of DMsPLN in a lung
metastatic human TNBC model.Method: Lung metastasis of breast tumor was
established using MDA-MB 231-luc-D3H2LN, a luciferase expressing cell
line that was derived from spontaneous lymph node metastasis. The cells
were injected via tail vein to develop lung metastasis in SCID mice. The
biodistribution and tumor accumulation of the nanoparticles were examined
by whole animal optical imaging using near infrared fluorescence labeled
nanoparticles. The efficacy and systemic toxicity of DMsPLN were
evaluated against clinically used doxorubicin (Dox). DMsPLN and free Dox
solution were administered intravenously at various equivalent Dox doses.
The tumor burden was monitored weekly by bioluminescence imaging. The
size and number of tumor nodules in the lungs were examined at different
time points and the systemic toxicity was monitored by repeated
measurement of body weight.Results: A lung metastatic breast tumor model
was successfully developed using the MDA-MB 231-luc-D3H2LN which allowed
for non-destructive monitoring of tumor growth and metastases using
bioluminescence imaging. Whole animal imaging demonstrated the
accumulation of the fluorescent nanoparticles in the lung metastatic
site. Treatment with free Dox (10 mg/kg) resulted in severe total body
weight loss over 20% which is ruled as a toxic endpoint. However, the
DMsPLN (10 mg/kg equivalent Dox dose) group did not show any systemic
toxicity. Treatment with DMsPLN at various Dox doses resulted in a
reduction in tumor burden compared to the saline and Dox-treated
groups.Citation Format: Preethy Prasad, Ping Cai, Andrew Rauth, Xiao Wu.
Enhanced treatment of lung metastasis of triple negative breast cancer by
doxorubicin-mitomycin C co-loaded polymer lipid nanoparticles.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5613.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5613

