Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Personalized cancer therapy for ovarian cancer patients.


Introduction: The treatment of ovarian cancer is consists principally in
radical surgery followed by chemotherapy. Patients generally respond well
to first line chemotherapy (70%) but consistently relapse within 18
months, with successive rounds of chemotherapy delivering extremely low
patient benefit. Despite every cancer being unique, generally all cancer
patients are treated by the same chemotherapy regimes. In previous
decades an approach has been to use chemosensitivity assays based on
cells isolated from solid tumors to predict chemotherapy response.
However, it the metastatic cancer cell (not cells in the primary tumor)
that is the true target of chemotherapy. In our laboratory we have
resurrected the concept of chemosensitivity but focusing exclusively on
cells that have escaped the primary tumor and are potentially enriched in
stem-cell like properties. Our objective was to isolate potential ovarian
metastatic cells from patients and coorelate their in vitro response to
the chemotherapy observed in the patient. Materials and methods: Primary
cultures of ovarian cancer ascites (peritoneal fluid) were obtained with
signed informed consent from a network of Chilean hospitals and potential
metastatic cells cultivated. Chemotherapy response was assessed by MTS
and data correlated with CA125 levels, imaging and medical criteria.
Results: Analysis of 39 ovarian cancer patients with clinical follow-up
demonstrated an average progression free survival of 18 months for
patients predicted to respond by our assay, but only 2 months in
predicted non-responders. The assay corrected identified 5 of the 6
patients who did not respond to first line carboplatin-paclitaxel
therapy. Discussion: We demonstrate a clear distinction in time to
relapse between patients predicted to respond in our assay as opposed to
patients with no predicted clinical response, demonstrating the
requirement to take this research to the stage of randomized clinical
trials.Funding BMRC CTU06 & FONDECYT 3120003 and 1120292

