Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA-PKcs dependent phosphorylation of topoI-S10 determines its
ubiquitination by BRCA1/BARD1, rate of topoI degradation and CPT response.


Abstract: The age-adjusted mortality rate for cancer is about the same in
the 21st century as it was 50 years ago. In the past decade, our
understanding of oncogenesis at molecular level has increased greatly.
This has resulted in the development of several targeted drugs and many
more are in the pipeline. However, the lack of predictive biomarkers to
stratify the patient population has restricted the benefits of these new
developments. Camptothecins (CPTs) target topoisomeraseI (topoI) and
represent a highly potent class of anticancer drugs. Two topoI
inhibitors, topotecan and irrinotecan (CPT analogues), are in clinical
use and several other topoI inhibitors are in different phases of
development. SCLC, colon, ovarian, breast and cervical carcinomas are
treated with topoI inhibitors. However, only 13% to 32% of patients
respond to these drugs. TopoI mutations are rare in the patient
population, and CPTs are not substrates for MDR transporters, therefore
the rate of proteolytic degradation of topoI is a potential mechanism
explaining CPT resistance. A differential rate of topoI degradation by
the ubiquitin-proteosomal pathway (UPP) has been linked to CPT response,
but the mechanism is not well understood. Using a functional proteomics
approach, we have isolated a topoI interacting complex and have
determined that: i) Ku70/Ku80/DNA-PKcs associates with topoI, and
DNA-PKcs specifically phosphorylates topoI at S10, ii) S10-phosphorylated
topoI is ubiquitinated by the BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimer, K-48 ubiquitin
linkage indicates polyubiquitination and proteosomal degradation of topoI
in response to CPT, iii) topoI S10 phosphorylation level determines the
rate of topoI ubiquitination and proteosomal degradation in triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) and colon cancer cells. Higher levels of
topoI pS10 ensures rapid degradation of topoI by the UPP and confers
resistance to CPT. These cell based findings have further been tested in
retrospective clinical studies. We have raised a monoclonal
phosphospecific antibody against topoI-pS10 and shown its specificity in
IF and IHC assays. In a retrospective study, we have performed IHC of
FFPE tissues from metastatic CRC patients treated with FOLFIRI
(combination therapy, 5FU, Leucovorin and Irinotecan). IHC analysis was
performed in ten responders and ten non-responders tissues by anti
topoI-pS10. Our preliminary data indicates that non-responders have very
high level of topoI-pS10; in contrast the responders were negative for
IHC staining. A larger retrospective study is underway to develop this
predictive biomarker.Citation Format: Ankur K. Shah, Vibhu Sachdev,
Julian Taylor Parker, Yevnegyia Malinkovich, Yara Hamade Tohme, Yiheng
Hu, Jeffrey D. Parvin, Ajit K. Bharti. DNA-PKcs dependent phosphorylation
of topoI-S10 determines its ubiquitination by BRCA1/BARD1, rate of topoI
degradation and CPT response. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 4653. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4653

