Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo evaluation of anti-tumor activity by an anti-VEGF and
anti-DLL4 bispecific antibody in a humanized model of skin graft.


Both Notch/Delta-like ligand 4 (DLL4) and vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) pathways play a critical role in angiogenesis and tumor
growth. Due to differential regulatory effects of VEGF and DLL4 on the
vasculature, blockage of DLL4 or VEGF inhibits tumor growth by distinct
mechanisms: anti-DLL4 treatment induces an abnormal increase of poorly
perfused blood vessels, which results in a nonproductive angiogenesis
unable to support tumor growth, whereas the anti-VEGF therapy
significantly decreases vasculature reducing the blood supply to tumors.
In our study, we have developed a bispecific monoclonal antibody that
targets both human DLL4 (hDLL4) and human VEGF (hVEGF). In vitro, this
antibody demonstrated nanomolar affinity to hVEGF and hDLL4, and reduced
HUVEC proliferation induced by VEGF (EC50 0.86 ug/ml). To test the
activity of this bispecific antibody in vivo, we developed a human skin
graft model in NOD/SCID mice, and implanted human tumor specimen-derived
colon cancer cells intradermally into these skin transplants. The tumor
model was selected based on its sensitivity to both the anti-human DLL4
antibody, OMP-21M18, and to the human VEGF inhibitor bevacizumab. The
skin graft model provides a suitable human microenvironment for
evaluating anti-tumor efficacy and anti-angiogenesis of the bispecific
antibody directed against the human component of DLL4 and VEGF and allows
a comparison to OMP-21M18 and also to bevacizumab. Each of these
treatments was administered to mice intraperitoneally at a dose of 25
mg/Kg weekly. The bispecific antibody caused a significant inhibition of
tumor growth (87% TGI) compared to control antibody (p=0.00001), and this
effect was superior to either OMP-21M18 (45% TGI) or bevacizumab
(70%TGI). The inhibition of tumor growth by the bispecific antibody was
consistently associated with increased blood vessels, up-regulated VEGFA
and VEGFR2, and enhanced hypoxia and these effects were more pronounced
compared to OMP-21M18. As expected, in this model bevacizumab caused a
significant decrease of blood vessels, down-regulated VEGFR2, and
increased hypoxia. In separate experiments with mice bearing subcutaneous
human colon tumors, the bispecific antibody delayed tumor recurrence
following termination of chemotherapy and impacted tumorigenicity by
decreasing the frequency of tumor initiating cells. These results suggest
that our bispecific anti-DLL4 and anti-VEGF antibody is a potential
candidate in the treatment of tumors driven by both VEGF and Notch/DLL4
signaling pathways.

