Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of intratumoral cell heterogeneity on therapeutic efficacy in
glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma (GBM), the most common and lethal malignancy of the brain,
is typified by high degrees of histologic and molecular heterogeneity.
The majority of GBM harbor amplification and/or mutations of receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs), most frequently EGFR (40-50%) or PDGFRA (15%).
We recently documented that a subset of glioblastoma harbors independent
focal amplification of two or more RTKs, most commonly PDGFRA and EGFR.
This phenomenon lends genetic evidence to support that co-expression of
more than one RTK in the same cell serves a functional purpose in
conferring selective growth advantage to GBM.In this study we demonstrate
that EGF stimulates endogenous interaction between activated EGFR and
PDGFRA, assessed using reciprocal coimmunoprecipitation and proximity
ligation assays in patient-derived GBM tumor-sphere lines of multiple
genotypes. EGF leads to phosphorylation of PDGFRA Y720. This
transactivation and subsequent activation of Shp2 are abolished by EGFR
inhibitors gefitinib or lapatinib at low concentrations. Evidence of
EGFR-PDGFRA interaction was found in the majority of GBM tumorsphere
lines where both receptors were expressed. We used multichannel
phospho-FACS in a panel of tumorsphere lines to characterize the
cell-to-cell heterogeneity of EGFR and PDGFRA expression levels and how
these levels affect p-Akt and p-ERK baseline activity, response to
ligands and response to targeted receptor inhibition. Indeed, high
expression of both EGFR and PDGFRA identifies tumor cells with elevated
MAPK and PI3K pathway activity. Notably, these tumor cells have high
downstream pathway activation in the absence of explicit stimulation by
ligand and appear to be refractory to dual RTK inhibition. Taken
together, these data underscore the role of tumor cell RTK heterogeneity
in therapeutic resistance to RTK inhibitors in GBM. This study also
highlights a possible mechanism that heterotypic RTKs in the same cell
may utilize to achieve growth advantage.

