Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of ATM and PTEN in prostatic carcinogenic dog prostate:
validation of aCGH results.


The canis lupus familiares is the only species besides human that
spontaneously develop prostatic carcinoma (PCa). In addition, the
metastatic sites are similar to those frequently reported in men. For
these reasons, the dog is the best natural model to study the molecular
mechanisms in PCa development providing a natural animal model for
treatment by molecular targets. Previously, we investigated copy number
alterations by arrayCGH (Canine Genome CGH Microarray 4x44K-G2519F,
Agilent Technologies) in canine prostatic lesions: 3 benign prostatic
hyperplasias (BPH), 4 proliferative inflammatory atrophies (PIA), and 14
PCa. Five histologically normal prostatic tissues were used as reference.
Genomic alterations were evaluated using Genomic Workbench Standard
Edition 5.0.14. This previous study revealed significant copy number
losses of Atm and Pten exclusively in PCa. In the present study, ATM and
PTEN immunoexpression were investigated using a tissue microarray (TMA)
containing 149 canine prostatic paraffin-embedded lesions (BPH, PIA and
PCa) collected from 67 animals. Immunohistochemical reactions were
performed using the polyclonal rabbit antibody anti-PTEN (Santa Cruz
Biotech, 1:50) and anti-ATM (Abcam, 1:50). The sections were developed
with diaminobenzidine (DAB) and peroxidase. The immunohistochemical
staining was assessed in each core by the distribution of positive cells
for each antibody per lesion (score 1: 75%) and intensity (1: weak, 2:
moderate, 3: intense). Chi-square or Fisher exact test was used to
determine the association between the categorical variables using
GraphPad Prism 5 (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA). Distribution of
positive cells did not differ among lesions. PCa and PIA showed more
samples with weak intensity for ATM when compared to normal prostatic
tissue and BPH (PCa: p=0,032 and PIA: p=0,025). Benign prostatic
hyperplasia and normal samples presented intense PTEN immunostaining than
PCa (p=0,021) and PIA (p=0,0013). These results suggest that ATM and PTEN
proteins expression in canine prostatic carcinoma are downregulated
possibly by copy number losses. These findings are similar from those
described in prostate carcinomas from human corroborating for the use of
dogs as a natural model to study prostatic disease in men.

