Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: YM155 induces autophagy-dependent cell death in
Tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer cells.


Typically, patients with estrogen receptor positive (ER-positive) breast
tumors will receive Tamoxifen either as a first line treatment or as a
second line treatment after surgery. Despite the benefit of using
Tamoxifen as hormonal therapy in treating ER-positive breast cancers has
been widely demonstrated in patients at early treatment stages, its
effectiveness seems to be significantly reduced in patients after five
years post-treatment. Interestingly, two thirds of the tumors that become
resistant to Tamoxifen continue to express ER. Thus, it is necessary to
develop novel strategies that can be applied to target ER-positive
Tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer cells. On the other hand, it is also in
urgent to develop novel agents that can be used to target triple-negative
metastatic aggressive breast cancers, given that current therapeutic
selection for this cancer is still limited. Survivin is a member of the
inhibitor-of-apoptosis proteins family. It has been shown that expression
of survivin is positively correlated to the breast cancer progression and
inversely correlated to the survival period of patient after
chemotherapeutic/hormonal treatments. YM155 is a small molecule survivin
gene suppressant. Although the functionality of YM155 in targeting
lymphoma and lung cancer cells has been shown in vitro and in vivo, and
the pharmacokinetics and the maximum tolerance dose of YM155 have also
been evaluated in patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and non-small cell
lung cancer, its effectiveness in targeting ER-positive Tamoxifen
resistant breast cancers and triple-negative metastatic aggressive breast
cancers has not yet been determined. Furthermore, the detailed molecular
mechanism of actions of YM155 is still unclear. In this study, the
effectiveness of YM155 in targeting a series of newly-generated
MCF7-derivded ER-positive Tamoxifen-resistant breast cancers (TamR7,
TamR8, TamC3 and TamC6) and the triple-negative Tamoxifen-resistant
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells has been determined. MTT cell viability
assay revealed that YM155 is equally effective in targeting both the
parental MCF7 and MCF7-derivded Tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer cells
in vitro. YM155 is also effective in targeting the triple-negative
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells with an IC50 value in low nanomolar range.
Interestingly, Western blot analysis and MTT assay (3MA or Z-VAD-FMK
co-treated) revealed that YM155 induces autophagy-dependent cell death,
but not caspase-3 dependent apoptosis, in the treated cancer cells,
despite it is widely believed that survivin can functionally inhibit
apoptosis through caspase-3 inhibition. In addition, YM155 also induces
the expression of gamma H2AX, indicating the induction of DNA damage in
the treated breast cancer cells. In conclusion, YM155 is effective in
targeting various types of Tamoxifen-resistant breast cancers through
induction of autophagy-dependent cell death.

