Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Salmonella commensal subspecies: a new model for the treatment of
human cancer.


Salmonella can colonize and survive in both hypoxic and oxygenated
regions of solid tumors. Avirulent Salmonella mutants have been
investigated as anticancer agents in human clinical trials. The strains
used, derived from Salmonella enterica subspecies I (sspI) strains,
proved to be highly toxic. Salmonella non-subspecies I (nsspI) strains
are known as commensals of cold-blooded species and rarely cause disease
in humans. Therefore, nsspI strains could present a safer alternative for
the treatment of human cancer. Here, we explore the potential of nsspI
strains for use as an anticancer therapy. Strains representing the five
nsspI subspecies were tested for virulence and tumor targeting in mice,
and for their ability to invade and kill human breast, prostate, and
colorectal cancer cell lines. We identified nsspI strains that were
successful at tumor targeting and capable of invading and killing a
variety of cancer cell lines in vitro while being incapable of causing
disease in mice. The nsspI strains were engineered to express two key
therapeutic enzymes: cytosine deaminase and uracil
phosphoribosyltransferase. After invading cancer cells in culture,
intracellular bacteria from all five nsspI classes caused significant
cytotoxicity in the presence of 5-FC. We conclude that nsspI strains
could serve as potential improved anticancer vectors, to be used in
combination with a therapeutic gene, for the treatment of primary or
metastatic tumors. Due to their safety profile, nsspI strains present an
excellent alternative to conventional Salmonella sspI strains for the
treatment of human cancer.Citation Format: Vy Khan Ly, Edward Viloria,
Priyanka Saxena, Bossakara Sokhom, Michael McClelland, Nabil Arrach.
Salmonella commensal subspecies: a new model for the treatment of human
cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3299.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3299

