Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Image analysis algorithms for whole-slide counting, regional
assignment, and subtype classification of tumor-associated macrophages
(TAMs).


Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) regulate cancer progression on
multiple levels, including angiogenesis, treatment response, and
metastasis. Additionally, multiple studies have demonstrated a
significant association between clinical outcome and TAM abundance, M1
vs. M2 subtype, and intratumoral distribution into stromal or epithelial
compartments. However, manual counting of TAMs and assignment into tumor
stroma or epithelial nests is laborious, inaccurate, subjective, and does
not provide a statistically optimal sample size. These pitfalls may be
limiting its utility as a diagnostic tool or an endpoint in drug efficacy
studies. Using tissue sections from human breast cancers as a model, we
have developed image analysis algorithms for the rapid automated counting
and compartmental assignment of total TAMs (CD68+) and TAMs of the more
strongly tumor-promoting M2 subtype (CD163+). Using whole slide scanning
and proprietary image analysis tools called Feature Analysis on
Consectutive Tissue Sections (FACTS), we have developed an approach to
not only tally but also map the location of CD68+ and CD163+ macrophages
in serial tissue sections, align those sections, and provide information
about regional distribution of these macrophages. These outcomes can also
be aligned with other serial sections containing relevant biomarkers
associated with macrophage infiltration such as hypoxia or angiongenesis,
using our proprietary multivariate correlation analysis tool
Multivariatemap. Additionally, we have begun investigations into the
association of these regional macrophage densities with clinical outcome
using patient data available for the model set. These approaches
represent a powerful toolkit for elucidating significant quantitative
associations between TAMs and tumor vasculature, hypoxia, or other
relevant features or markers, for the determination of prognostic or drug
efficacy endpoints.

