Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sequencing of breast cancer stem cells and corresponding primary
bulk tumor reveals dominantly overlapping mutational spectra.


Breast cancer cells with phenotypical similarities to adult mammary stem
cells have been shown to initiate and maintain tumor growth and therefore
named cancer stem cells (CSC). Phenotypic markers, such as CD44+/CD24-,
ALDH1 High and PKH26High are all characterizing breast cancer cells with
stem-like traits and ability to initiate tumor growth. There is
substantial overlap of these markers with the biological capacity to form
non-adherent cell spheres in vitro, named mammospheres. Based on the CSC
concept, two alternative and opposing explanations have been proposed to
describe the tumorigenic process governed by CSC; (1) the CSCs are an
early-tumor initiating clone with capacity of asymmetric cell-divisions
and subsequent differentiation to yield intratumoral heterogeneity; (2)
the CSC phenotype is dynamic and reversible and can be adopted by any
cancer epithelial cell through epigenetic de-differentiation.To
understand which of these models is the predominant, governing the
development of breast cancer, we collected paired bulk tumor samples, in
vitro purified mammospheres and normal leukocyte DNA from ten patients.
DNA from mammospheres were amplified to increase the input DNA amount and
in duplicates to control for the introduction of novel mutations. The
sequencing was run with Illumina Hiseq 2000 using an exome capture kit.
The sequence raw data was aligned to the human genome (hg19). Average
target coverage was 53x. Mutations found in only one of the sequenced
mammosphere amplicons and neither in the bulk tumor were considered
artifacts by the DNA amplification and excluded from further
analysis.Across all patients, 80% of the mutations are on average shared
between the tumor and CSC-fraction (range 45%-91%). We hypothesize that
if the two cell populations, differentiated cells and CSC, were strictly
separated, the number of mutations in the CSC would be very low due to
low replication rate of that cell type compared to the continuously
proliferating epithelial cells. In such a scenario, very few mutations
would also be shared between CSC and bulk tumor cells. In contrast, we
see a large degree of shared mutations. A cell-state model where
inter-conversion between cell types occurs, would explain the large
degree of shared mutations. As mutations occur in the rapidly dividing
epithelial cells, they are propagated to daughter cells that are
occasionally converted into CSCs. We also investigated the allele
frequencies of the mutations discovered. There is no trend to larger
frequencies in bulk tumor or in CSC, instead the frequencies are mostly
equal in the two cellular components, pointing towards an
inter-conversion of bulk tumor cells and CSC. Our data points towards the
support of a model where the epithelial cells of the bulk tumor in vivo
are able to phenotypically revert into CSC with stem cell properties and
vise versa (model 2).

