Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacologic targeting of CtBP by established and newly designed
inhibitors.


Breast cancer is not one single entity but a collection of multiple
diseases that affect different populations with varying incidence,
morbidity and mortality. Thus finding a unified marker and associated
biological processes that provide an overall indication of prognosis with
clear insights into therapy opportunities is critically needed. Previous
our studies showed that CtBP drives invasion and metastasis by governing
a mode of gene regulation that is not only reversible and strongly
influenced by environmental factors, like metabolic status, but can be
stably passed on to expanding clones of tumor cells. Recent studies
indicate that this form of epigenetic regulation plays a critical role in
tumor progression. Our most recent finding that CtBP expression can
function as a single predictor of overall poor survival from breast
cancer, independent of current criteria such as hormone receptor status,
suggests that inhibiting CtBP and the pathways it controls may provide a
unifying concept for improving breast cancer diagnosis and
treatment.Using Computer Assisted Drug Design (CADD), we have identified
multiple potential CtBP inhibitors from a panel of library of
commercially available compounds. To validate the efficacy of these
inhibitors, we have used targeted assessment by quantitative gene
expression and ChIP analysis of established CtBP targets. We then scored
compounds that disrupt CtBP controlled processes including EMT and genome
instability at a low micromolar range. We found that some compounds were
able to displace CtBP from endogenous genes and reactivate repressed gene
expression. A smaller subset of these was able to inhibit cellular
reprogramming associated with EMT and the wound healing response.These
findings suggest that CtBP may be an effective target of pharmacological
inhibition to impair tumor invasion and metastasis, and offers a
proof-of-principle that will provide a foundation for more effective
treatment strategies against aggressive forms of breast cancer.

