Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NOX-mediated chronic oxidative stress is inherent in human
papillomavirus positive head and neck cancer cells and is implicated in
radiosensitivity.


An increasing subgroup of oropharyngeal carcinomas is caused by infection
with high risk types of human papillomavirus (HPV). Recent clinical data
suggest that HPV status is an important prognostic factor associated with
a favorable outcome in head and neck cancer patients treated with
radiation therapy alone or in combination with chemotherapy. Although
such data suggest an intrinsic sensitivity of HPV-positive tumors to
radio/chemotherapy, no specific mechanism(s) has been shown to explain
this feature. As DNA damage repair and/or tolerance capacity is one of
the major determinants of sensitivity to DNA damaging agents, we
interrogated a panel of five HPV positive (HPV+) and five HPV negative
(HPV-) head and neck cancer cell lines for endogenous levels of DNA
damage. HPV+ cells display an approximately 100% increase in the level of
DNA damage compared to HPV- cells, as revealed by alkaline comet assays.
As reactive oxygen species (ROS) represent the major endogenous source of
DNA damage, we investigated whether HPV+ cells harbor high levels of ROS.
We observed that HPV+ cells have approximately 100% higher levels of ROS
compared to HPV- cells, measured by flow cytometry analysis. Treatment
with the antioxidant N-acetyl-cysteine resulted in a concomitant
reduction of ROS levels (35%) and endogenous DNA damage (41%) in HPV+
cells, indicating that chronic oxidative stress may contribute to genomic
instability in HPV+ head and neck cancer cells. In addition, we found
that treatment with the NOX inhibitor diphenylen iodonium reduces the
levels of ROS in HPV+ cells (50%), indicating that NADPH oxidases are the
source of the higher levels of ROS in these cells. Consistent with this
mechanism, we observed that NOX-2, an inducible member of the NOXs
family, is expressed only in HPV+ cells, suggesting that HPV infection
may induce the transcription/translation of NOX-2 in head and neck cells.
Collectively these data suggest that HPV infection may induce a state of
chronic oxidative stress in head and neck cancer cells that may render
HPV+ cells more susceptible to certain types of DNA damage. To test this
hypothesis we evaluated the amount of DNA damage induced by exposure to a
dose range of H2O2 or ionizing radiation (IR) in HPV+ and HPV- head and
neck cancer cells. We found that each dose of H2O2 and IR induced a
significantly greater amount of DNA damage in HPV+ cells compared to HPV-
cells, indicating that HPV+ head and neck cells may be more prone to
ROS-mediated DNA damage. This study provides new insights into HPV+ head
and neck cancer cell biology and its sensitivity to IR.Pilot funding for
this project was provided by a grant from the V Foundation.

