Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming of radiochemoresistance in glioblastoma stem cells via
inhibition of lipid catabolism and SIRT1 deacetylase.


Glioblastoma remain resistant to radiotherapy (RT) and chemotherapy. To
elucidate the cellular and molecular basis of glioblastoma resistance to
standard treatment, we isolated and characterized cellular and molecular
properties of glioblastoma stem cell clones (GC) resistance to RT (4Gy x
3) with and without 10 M temozolomide (TMZ) (TRGC-RT, TRGC-RT+TMZ) and
compared to those of treatment-sensitive GSC clones (TSGC). To explore
the protective strategies which drive the super-survivability of TRGC, we
performed comparative analysis of genome-wide gene expression profiles in
TRGC and TSGC (n=3 patients) and have identified 56 defense genes
significantly overexpressed in TRGC that mainly associated with metabolic
stress, suppression of growth, differentiation and inflammation, and
activation of cellular and genomic maintenance and repair networks.
Functional assays confirmed the association of treatment resistance with
reduced glucose uptake, fatty acid oxidation-dependent ATP maintenance,
and increased AMPK activation, NAD+ levels and autophagic activity
accompanied by upregulated mRNA levels of SIRT1/PGC-1 axis and DNA repair
genes. The association of metabolic gene pathways and
radiochemoresisatnce of TRGC were further confirmed by the treatment of
TRGC with three potent inhibitors that blocking of SIRT1/SIRT2 pathway
(tenovin-6), autophagy (3-MA) and fatty acid oxidation (Etomoxir).
Uniquely, all three inhibitors promoted cell apoptosis in a higher degree
in TRGC than that of TSGC, and the combination of inhibitors with RT
further enhance treatment efficacy when compared to RT or RT+TMZ. To
further explore additional gene pathways which contribute to
radiochemoresistance, we performed a loss-of-function RNA interference
(RNAi) screen against 56 genes and had discovered that knockdown of
ribosomal proteins, RPL27A, RPS11, or RPL38, or a spliceosome-associated
protein, SF3B1 alone without RT showed the significantly higher apoptosis
levels by which render in to loss of tumor sphere-initiating ability.
Moreover, combined siRNA therapy with RT further showed the enhancement
of cell depletion, in contrast to RT or RT+TMZ which showed the return of
full-grown tumor spheres. Coincidently, both RPL38 and SF3B1 have a role
in repression of Hox gene expression. These data therefore support the
view that treatment resistance may arise from GSC exhibiting glucose
restriction, lipid catabolism-dependent and cellular quiescent phenotype
and suggest that targeting metabolic pathways and stemness of TRGC may
provide a novel strategy in combination with standard treatment for
glioblastoma.

