Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitors: A comparison of Afatanib, Lapatinib, and Gefitinib in
human tumor primary cultures.


Introduction:Targeting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFr) tyrosine
kinases has provided effective therapies for NSCLC, breast & GI cancers.
However, secondary mutations can confer resistance. New multi-targeted
and/or irreversible inhibitors (TKI's) may overcome these mechanisms. We
used the ex vivo analysis of programmed death (EVA/PCD) to compare the
activity of the irreversible EGFr TKI, BIBW 2992 (Afatanib) with
Gefitinib and Lapatinib and examined downstream signals with inhibitors
of MEK/ERK & PI3K/mTOR. Methods: Human tumor 1 culture microspheroids
isolated from 54 individual-patient specimens obtained at surgery or
aspiration were examined for EGFr-TKI induced programmed cell death,
using morphologic & metabolic endpoints as previously described
(Nagourney R, Curr. Treat Opt in Oncol., 2006). Lethal concentration 50%
(LC50s) interpolated from 5-point dose response curves were compared and
drug correlations were conducted by Pearson-Moment. Results: BIBW
activity favored upper GI, NSCLC and ovary over breast and colorectal
cancer. In NSCLC, EGFr mutation (+) tumors were significantly more
sensitive than wild type to BIBW (P Introduction:Targeting epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFr) tyrosine kinases has provided effective
therapies for NSCLC, breast & GI cancers. However, secondary mutations
can confer resistance. New multi-targeted and/or irreversible inhibitors
(TKI's) may overcome these mechanisms. We used the ex vivo analysis of
programmed death (EVA/PCD) to compare the activity of the irreversible
EGFr TKI, BIBW 2992 (Afatanib) with Gefitinib and Lapatinib and examined
downstream signals with inhibitors of MEK/ERK & PI3K/mTOR. Methods: Human
tumor 1 culture microspheroids isolated from 54 individual-patient
specimens obtained at surgery or aspiration were examined for EGFr-TKI
induced programmed cell death, using morphologic & metabolic endpoints as
previously described (Nagourney R, Curr. Treat Opt in Oncol., 2006).
Lethal concentration 50% (LC50s) interpolated from 5-point dose response
curves were compared and drug correlations were conducted by
Pearson-Moment. Results: BIBW activity favored upper GI, NSCLC and ovary
over breast and colorectal cancer. In NSCLC, EGFr mutation (+) tumors
were significantly more sensitive than wild type to BIBW (P < .05).
Patients relapsing after Erlotinib who carried T790M mutations remained
BIBW sensitive despite Gefitinib resistance. BIBW activity correlated
with Gefitinib (r = 0.35, P= 0.05) and the MEK/ERK inhibitor AZD 6244 (r
= 0.43, P Introduction:Targeting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFr)
tyrosine kinases has provided effective therapies for NSCLC, breast & GI
cancers. However, secondary mutations can confer resistance. New
multi-targeted and/or irreversible inhibitors (TKI's) may overcome these
mechanisms. We used the ex vivo analysis of programmed death (EVA/PCD) to
compare the activity of the irreversible EGFr TKI, BIBW 2992 (Afatanib)
with Gefitinib and Lapatinib and examined downstream signals with
inhibitors of MEK/ERK & PI3K/mTOR. Methods: Human tumor 1 culture
microspheroids isolated from 54 individual-patient specimens obtained at
surgery or aspiration were examined for EGFr-TKI induced programmed cell
death, using morphologic & metabolic endpoints as previously described
(Nagourney R, Curr. Treat Opt in Oncol., 2006). Lethal concentration 50%
(LC50s) interpolated from 5-point dose response curves were compared and
drug correlations were conducted by Pearson-Moment. Results: BIBW
activity favored upper GI, NSCLC and ovary over breast and colorectal
cancer. In NSCLC, EGFr mutation (+) tumors were significantly more
sensitive than wild type to BIBW (P < .05). Patients relapsing after
Erlotinib who carried T790M mutations remained BIBW sensitive despite
Gefitinib resistance. BIBW activity correlated with Gefitinib (r = 0.35,
P= 0.05) and the MEK/ERK inhibitor AZD 6244 (r = 0.43, P < 0.05) and
trended to correlation with Lapatinib, but did correlate with mTOR or
mTOR/PI3K inhibitors, Everolimus & BEZ235. Of 3 patients treated with
Afatanib, 2 of 3 showed benefit, 1 durable SD & 1 durable PR.
Conclusions: BIBW reveals activity in several tumor types including
NSCLC, GI and ovary. In NSCLC LC50s significantly favor EGFr mutation (+)
s with favorable results in T790M(+) patients. Correlations withAZD 6244
but not Everolimus or BEZ235, suggest MEK/ERK pathway to be the operative
survival signal. EVA/PCD analysis in human tumor 1cultures offers a
platform to study novel strategies for EGFr-targeted therapies. Supported
by the Vanguard Cancer Foundation & the Nagourney Institute.

