Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short term reduction in mammographic density predicts survival in
breast cancer.


Back ground: Identification of the factors that predict response to
treatment in breast cancer patients early after diagnosis is important in
guiding the treatment strategy. High mammographic density (MD) is a risk
factor for breast cancer. However no study has examined the association
between change in MD and death in breast cancer survivors. We
hypothesized that a short-term change in breast density may be a
surrogate biomarker predicting risk of death from breast cancer and all
causes.Methods: We evaluated the relationship between reduction in MD and
risk of death from all causes within the Health, Eating, Activity, and
Lifestyle (HEAL) Study. In a prospective observational study, we studied
403 women diagnosed with primary invasive breast carcinoma between 1995
and 1998 and followed until death or September 2009. We collected
mammograms and prognostic, demographic, and lifestyle factors as well as
treatments at the time of diagnosis and two years after the diagnosis was
made. Mammograms were digitized and MD was measured on cranio-caudal (CC)
images of the unaffected breast using a computer assisted program
developed at the University of Toronto. MD reduction (MDR) was evaluated
based on two mammograms; the first was taken 12 months before diagnosis,
and the second approximately 24 months after diagnosis. MDR was defined
as the difference between the MD of these two images (% MDR = % preMD -%
postMD). Reduction in MD was categorized into a binary variable as women
who had a MDR 5% compared to those with less than 5% reduction in MD. Cox
proportional hazards models were used to estimate the Hazard ratios and
95% confidence intervals.Results: Breast cancer patients with 5% or more
reduction in MD were younger (mean age was 55.7 compared to 58.9), more
likely to be premenopausal at diagnosis (36.7% compared to 24.0%), and
more likely to have a history of oral contraception (73.9% compared to
63.3%). Women with MDR 5% were 49% less likely to die from any cause
after adjustment for age, BMI, estrogen receptor status, progesterone
receptor status, menopausal status at baseline, smoking, stage, tamoxifen
use, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and study center (HR=0.51 CI:
0.3-0.86). The results were stronger when we restricted the analysis to
women who were premenopausal at diagnosis. When we restricted the
analysis to women who had taken tamoxifen a similar direction was
observed but the results were not statistically significant.Conclusion:
Result from our data suggests that reduction in mammographic density few
years after breast cancer diagnosis may be used as a predictor of overall
survival.

