Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutations and DNA adducts induced by diesel exhaust particles.


We performed bioassay-directed fractionation and analyzed the polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) levels of a composite sample of diesel-exhaust
particles (C-DEP) generated on site from petroleum diesel with a 30-kW
4-cylinder Deutz BF4M1008 diesel engine connected to an air compressor.
C-DEP was generated to be representative of contemporary DEP. We
extracted particles with dichloromethane (DCM) and determined the
percentage of extractable organic material (EOM), solvent-exchanged
extracts into dimethyl sulfoxide, and evaluated them for mutagenicity in
Salmonella strains TA100 and TA98 +/- S9. More than 50% of the C-DEP EOM
mass eluted in fraction 1, but this fraction was not mutagenic. Fraction
2 contained 6% of the mass of OEM, and had 60% of the TA100+S9 activity,
suggestive of PAHs. The 3rd fraction contained 14% of the OEM mass and
contributed 60% of the TA98-S9 activity, suggestive of nitroarenes. S9
mediated binding of C-DEP extracts was assessed by 32P-postlabeling
analysis. Unfractionated C-DEP EOM was incubated with S9 in the presence
of calf thymus DNA. The modified DNA was enzymatically hydrolyzed and
then subjected to postlabeling analysis using either butanol extraction
or nuclease P1 pre-enrichment. Multiple DNA adducts were produced with
chromatographic mobilities consistent with PAH and nitro-PAH adducts.
Although previous studies of the mutagenicity and adduct-forming
potential of diesel exhaust have been reported, most of those utilized
exhaust particles that were generated by older diesel engines that were
not representative of contemporary diesel exhaust. Data derived from the
C-DEP particles are more relevant to understanding the risks posed by
contemporary diesel engines. This study provides further characterization
of the biochemical potential for these particles to induce DNA damage and
gene mutations, key events in the process of chemical carcinogenesis by
diesel exhausts. [This is an abstract of a proposed presentation and does
not necessarily reflect the views of the U.S. EPA.]

