Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutant B-Raf-mediated activation of deubiquitinases in melanoma
defines Usp5 as a potential therapeutic target.


Melanoma is a lethal form of cutaneous cancer which accounts for 80% of
skin cancer deaths owing to its highly metastatic behavior and few
clinically effective therapies. More than 60% of melanoma patients
present with mutations in B-Raf, a serine/threonine kinase that increases
proliferation and survival through the constitutive activation of ERK
signaling. Inhibition of mutated B-Raf with specific inhibitors like
vemurafenib reduces tumor growth and extends patient survival. However,
clinical responsiveness to vemurafenib is limited in most melanoma
patients, prompting analysis of additional pathways that could be
targeted to extend vemurafenib responsiveness or overcome resistance.
Towards this goal, we examined the impact of vemurafenib on substrates or
cascades activated in B-Raf mutant and wild-type melanoma cells. We were
particularly interested in assessing the impact of mutant B-Raf
inhibition on deubiquitinases (DUBs), which are overexpressed or
activated in many tumor types. DUBs control the stability, activity and
localization of multiple proteins and are emerging as therapeutic
targets. We found that vemurafenib treatment or lentiviral-mediated B-Raf
knockdown reduced the activity of several DUBs in B-Raf mutant melanoma
cells, including Usp9x, Usp14 and Usp5. These DUBs were not affected by
vemurafenib in w/t B-Raf-expressing cells. Interestingly
lentiviral-mediated knockdown of Usp5, but not Usp9x, reduced melanoma
growth and increased vemurafenib sensitivity whereas Usp5 overexpression
suppressed vemurafenib activity. Inhibition of Usp5 activity by
vemurafenib or by Usp5 shRNA KD alone had little effect on melanoma cell
apoptosis. However B-Raf inhibition in Usp5 KD cells resulted in >5-fold
increased melanoma cell apoptosis. Further, Usp5 KD increased
accumulation of p53 and p53-related proteins as well as their
transcriptional targets. Our data clearly shows that mutant B-Raf
activates Usp5 to suppress apoptotic responsiveness to vemurafenib and
kinase inhibition alone was not sufficient to completely suppress Usp5
activity. Silencing studies demonstrate that Usp5 inhibition will enhance
cell killing in response to B-Raf inhibition in melanoma. To address that
potential, we compared anti-tumor activity in mice treated with
vemurafenib and a small molecule DUB inhibitor, WP1130, with activity
against Usp5. Treatment with either agent alone reduced tumor growth
while mice receiving both vemurafenib and WP1130 had enhanced anti-tumor
responses. Together, these results suggest that mutant B-Raf activates
Usp5 activity to suppress p53 induction and apoptotic responsiveness to
vemurafenib. These observations also suggest that further testing and
refinement of Usp5 inhibitors as an additional approach to targeted
therapy for melanoma are warranted.

