Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improvement of the potency of the dendritic cell-based vaccine
immunotherapy through local inhibition of TGF- in tumor-draining lymph
nodes.


The dendritic cell (DC) -based vaccine immunotherapy has been a promising
anti-cancer immunotherapy, but has been unable to elicit anti-tumor
immune responses enough to eradicate the tumor in patients with advanced
cancer. In order to develop the potent DC-based vaccine immunotherapy, it
should be required to focus on the unique environment implicated in the
induction of anti-tumor immune responses. Transforming growth factor-
(TGF-), an immunosuppressive cytokine, is produced in the tumor
microenvironment, and flows into tumor-draining lymph nodes (TDLs),
primary priming sites for generation of anti-tumor immune responses. In
TDLs, TGF- plays a critical role in suppressing the induction of
anti-tumor immune responses. In this study, we focused on TGF--mediated
immunosuppression in TDLs, and examined whether local inhibition of TGF-
in TDLs could improve the potency of the DC-based vaccine immunotherapy
in tumor-bearing mouse model. C57BL/6 mice bearing Lewis lung carcinoma
(LLC1) subcutaneously were vaccinated with DCs loading LLC1-derived
antigen. In order to inhibit TGF- in TDLs, those mice were administered
the plasmid DNA encoding the extracellular domain of TGF- type II
receptor fused to the human IgG heavy chain(TGFR DNA) near the
established tumor intramuscularly. Soluble TGF- type II receptor secreted
from TGFR DNA-transfected cells is expected to function to attenuate TGF-
level in TDLs. After this combination therapy, anti-tumor immune
responses elicited in those mice were evaluated. As results, the level of
TGF- in TDLs was decreased by administrations of TGFR DNA near the
established tumor. The attenuation of TGF- level in TDLs by TGFR DNA was
able to suppress the proliferative activity of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells
in TDLs. Regarding the induction of effector cells in TDLs, tumor
antigen-specific CD8+ cells producing interferon-gamma were significantly
increased by this combination therapy. Next, we evaluated the association
between the local inhibition of TGF- in TDLs and systemic anti-tumor
immune responses. Tumor antigen-specific cytotoxic responses as well as
natural killer activities were significantly enhanced through the local
inhibition of TGF- in TDLs, leading to effective suppression of tumor
growth. Such potent anti-tumor immune responses were not achieved in mice
that had been administered DC-based vaccine alone. Improvement of the
induction of anti-tumor immune responses in TDLs by the local inhibition
of TGF- contributed to enhancement of systemic anti-tumor immune
responses. In conclusion, inhibition of TGF--mediated immunosuppression
in TDLs can enhance the potency of DC-based vaccine immunotherapy. This
animal model provides for a novel rationale with DC-based vaccine
immunotherapy.

