Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Manipulating the ribosomal protein RPL24 by depletion, truncation,
or acetylation alters ribosome formation and inhibits cancer cell growth.


Control of protein synthesis is critical for cell growth and oncogenic
transformation. Inhibiting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway upstream of
ribosomes is one approach currently in clinical trials to treat various
cancers, including breast cancer. However, many cancers are resistant to
such therapies and may respond to translation inhibition via alternate
mechanisms. Our previous studies identify a link between histone
deacetylase inhibition (HDACi) and ribosomes, in that pan-HDAC inhibitors
like Trichostatin A (TSA) induce the decay of HER2 and other oncogeneic
transcripts via a polyribosome-dependent mechanism. In recent studies
using HER2-overexpressing SKBR3 breast cancer cells, we also found that
TSA inhibits phosphorylation of the ribosomal protein S6 and the
translation initiation factor 4eBP1. Thus, we investigated the effect of
TSA on polysome dynamics and post-translational modifications of
ribosomal proteins to better understand how HDACi inhibits cancer cell
proliferation and to identify novel cancer therapeutic targets.We found
that TSA reduces the amount of 80S ribosomes relative to free 40S and 60S
subunits, implicating impaired ribosome assembly. Eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 6 (eIF6) promotes the maturation of nucleolar 60S but
must be released from cytoplasmic 60S in order for the 40S and 60S to
join and form functional 80S ribosomes. Therefore, we asked if TSA
impedes eIF6 release from the 60S and found that eIF6 remains
60S-associated in TSA relative to control treated SKBR3 cells. To
determine how TSA affects ribosomal proteins, we performed immunoblotting
and 2D-electrophoresis/mass spectrometry screening of ribosomal proteins
and identified the large ribosomal subunit protein, RPL24, as acetylated
after TSA treatment. Additional interest in this acetylation candidate
was driven by two recent reports. One provides structural evidence that
the lysine-containing C-terminus of RPL24 resides in proximity to eIF6 on
the 60S and also contacts the 40S subunit. The other reports that mice
haploinsufficient for RPL24 exhibit greater survival of AKT-driven
tumorigenesis. Our analyses produced three additional observations: i)
depletion of RPL24 in SKBR3 cells via shRNA, similar to TSA treatment,
impairs 80S formation and increases the amount of eIF6 associated with
ribosomal 60S; ii) a mutant form of RPL24 with truncated C terminus
increases 60S retention of eIF6; and iii) depletion of RPL24, as well as
TSA treatment, inhibits SKBR3 proliferation. In summary, altering
polysome dynamics by impairing 80S formation and prolonging 60S retention
of eIF6, by TSA and/or altered RPL24 function, inhibits cancer cell
growth and proliferation. Furthermore, RPL24 acetylation may serve as a
biomarker for therapeutic response to pan-HDAC inhibitors and as a drug
target for the design of novel cancer therapeutics.

