Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of microRNA profile in lung adenocarcinoma cell line
following TIMP-1 downregulation.


Non-small cell carcinoma accounts for 85% of lung cancer cases and has a
5 year survival rate of only 17%. In recent years, tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) has emerged as an important prognostic
marker. In several cancers including non-small cell lung cancer, high
serum levels of TIMP-1 have been associated with poor prognosis.
Previously, we have shown that overexpressing TIMP-1 in H2009, a lung
adenocarcinoma cell line resulted in aggressive tumors when implanted in
the mouse brain. In the present study, we have knocked down TIMP-1
expression in the non-small cell lung cancer cell line A549 using shRNA.
In vitro assays using the TIMP-1 knockdown clones defined decreased
migration in wound assays (pNon-small cell carcinoma accounts for 85% of
lung cancer cases and has a 5 year survival rate of only 17%. In recent
years, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) has emerged as an
important prognostic marker. In several cancers including non-small cell
lung cancer, high serum levels of TIMP-1 have been associated with poor
prognosis. Previously, we have shown that overexpressing TIMP-1 in H2009,
a lung adenocarcinoma cell line resulted in aggressive tumors when
implanted in the mouse brain. In the present study, we have knocked down
TIMP-1 expression in the non-small cell lung cancer cell line A549 using
shRNA. In vitro assays using the TIMP-1 knockdown clones defined
decreased migration in wound assays (p<0.01), as well as reduced invasion
(pNon-small cell carcinoma accounts for 85% of lung cancer cases and has
a 5 year survival rate of only 17%. In recent years, tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) has emerged as an important prognostic
marker. In several cancers including non-small cell lung cancer, high
serum levels of TIMP-1 have been associated with poor prognosis.
Previously, we have shown that overexpressing TIMP-1 in H2009, a lung
adenocarcinoma cell line resulted in aggressive tumors when implanted in
the mouse brain. In the present study, we have knocked down TIMP-1
expression in the non-small cell lung cancer cell line A549 using shRNA.
In vitro assays using the TIMP-1 knockdown clones defined decreased
migration in wound assays (p<0.01), as well as reduced invasion (p<0.05)
using Boyden chamber assays. We investigated these functional alterations
by examining microRNAs in these cell lines. MicroRNAs represent a class
of small non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression at the
post-transcriptional level and control crucial signaling and
physiological processes functioning either as oncogenes or
tumor-suppressors. The miRNA expression profile of A549 cell line and its
TIMP1 knockdown clone were evaluated using the Affymetrix miRNA
microarray platform on Gene-Chip miRNA 3.0 array in A549 cell line.
Following hybridization and data acquisition, we used Partek Genomics
Suite software for RNA normalization and to determine statistically
significant differences in miRNA expression between experimental groups
by ANOVA and pairwise comparisons (two-sided=0.05). Using the Affymetrix
miRNA array we have identified altered miRNAs expression in the clones,
with 72 differentially regulated miRNAs following TIMP-1 knockdown. Using
quantitative real time PCR we have selectively validated several of the
miRNAs that showed the maximal difference. We have confirmed a 2 to
4-fold down regulation of MiR-10b, miR-29a and miR-30 and a 3-fold
upregulation of miR-125a-5p. Based on KEGG pathway analysis, this group
of validated miRNAs are involved in the MAPK signaling pathway. Western
blot analysis showed activation of the apoptosis inducing p38 MAPK
pathway in the knockdown clones. Additional mechanistic dissection of
these changes and involved pathways will contribute further to our
understanding of the role of TIMP-1 in lung cancer. (This research was
supported by a Georgia Distinguished Cancer Scholar award to AMR).

