Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro validation of rationally designed therapeutic based on
drug repositioning and combinations.


Background: Drug repositioning - the application of marketed drugs to new
diseases - is a time and cost effective alternative to de novo drug
development. Thalidomide is a hallmark example of drug repositioning
success. Withdrawn from the market in 1961 after causing thousands of
severe birth defects, its newly discovered anti-angiogenic and
immunomodulatory properties cleared the way for Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approval in 2006 for multiple myeloma (MM). Although
thalidomide has demonstrated remarkable success in the treatment of MM,
responses are typically short-lived with the emergence of resistance. For
complex diseases like cancer, multi-target therapeutics are well suited
to address efficacy and drug resistance challenges. Here we have designed
a novel therapeutic combination of drugs for MM that impacts all disease
phenotypes.Methods: Using a computer modeling system from Cellworks that
mimics and simulates cancer disease physiology to predict clinical
outcomes, we identified AT101 (Bcl2 antagonoist) and tesaglitazar (PPAR /
agonist) as a potentially effective drug combination for MM. This
combination was shortlisted from over two hundred pharmacodynamic
dose-response simulation studies using criteria of efficacy and synergy.
Computer modeling predicted that this drug combination mechanistically
targets apoptotic pathways and the combination of the agents provides
greater than additive activity. These predictive findings were assessed
in vitro using OPM2 and U266 human MM cell lines. AT101 and tesaglitazar
growth inhibition was evaluated using the MTT assay and analysis of
synergy was determined using the Bliss Independence model. Apoptotic
induction was analyzed by immunoblotting for cleaved forms of caspases
and PARP.Results: 10 M tesaglitazar and 2 M AT101 display minimal and
moderate growth inhibition respectively as single agents in OPM2 and U266
MM cell lines. Growth inhibition in these cell lines is dramatically
enhanced when the drugs are used in combination, reducing cellular
viability by 88% and 77% in OPM2 and U266 cells, respectively. Based upon
the Bliss Independence model, the relationship between tesaglitazar and
AT-101 is synergistic in both cell lines. Combination treatment in both
cell lines results in increased apoptosis as indicated by enhanced
cleavage of PARP and caspase 3 and 9.Conclusions: Not only do these
experiments identify AT101 and tesaglitazar as a potentially effective
drug combination for the treatment of MM, these results also validate the
use of rationally based, computer modeling to design effective
therapeutics and predict clinical outcomes. Future studies will evaluate
the mechanism of action for the synergistic interaction between
tesaglitazar and AT101 in MM.

