Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Methionine sulfoxide reductase A in metastasis of
breast cancer.


The role of oxidative stress in several human diseases is very well
established, but the effect of oxidative stress on cancer cells,
especially resulting from mitochondrial dysfunction, appears to be quite
complex. Warburg first showed that cancer cells have a defect in
mitochondrial respiration which explains why these cells have a greater
dependency on glycolysis for energy production than normal cells, even in
the presence of adequate oxygen. Cancer cells have been reported to be
more sensitive to reactive oxygen species (ROS) and are known to have
lower levels of several antioxidant enzymes, which are thought to
function as tumor suppressors. In support of this are recent findings
that indicate increased levels of ROS make cancer cells more aggressive
and promote metastasis. However, in contrast there are other studies that
indicate elevated levels of antioxidant enzymes drive tumor cells to
metastasize and also prolong tumor cell survival.Our goal is to clarify
the role of oxidative stress and ROS on cancer cell viability and
aggressiveness. The focus will be on an important protein repair and
catalytic antioxidant enzyme system, methionine sulfoxide reductase
(Msr). The Msr system in mammalian cells (comprised of MsrA, MsrB1,
MsrB2, MsrB3) reduces the oxidized methionine residues (Met(O)) in
proteins back to methionine. Furthermore, the Msr system plays an
important role in scavenging ROS by permitting methionine residues in
proteins to function as catalytic antioxidants. MsrA has been studied in
most detail. This enzyme plays an important role in protection against
increased oxidative stress in a variety of organisms and can affect the
life span of yeast and animals.The objective of our study was to
determine whether the expression of MsrA is altered during tumor
progression and to identify the molecular targets that regulate MsrA. Our
preliminary data show that MsrA is downregulated in several types of
breast cancer. We have used two lines of human mammary epithelial 21T
series that represent different stages of tumor progression from a single
patient and compared with metastatic human breast cancer cell line
MDA-MB-231. Our data indicates that non-metastatic 21PT has higher
protein levels of MsrA compared to both metastatic 21MT-1 and MDA-MB-231
cell lines as evidenced by western blots. MsrA protein levels of
nonmetastatic 21PT are much lower than normal epithelial cells. Levels of
MsrA activity were higher in nonmetastatic 21PT than metastatic 21MT-1 as
determined by enzymatic activity assays. Enzyme activity of MsrA is
nearly two fold higher in nonmetastatic 21PT than the MsrA levels in
metastatic MDA-MB-231 cells. Our preliminary results also indicate
upregulation of oncogenic (c-Myc) protein levels in metastatic lines
suggesting an inverse correlation with MsrA. It is therefore likely that
MsrA may be an important antioxidant enzyme in breast cancer cells whose
regulation drives tumor progression.

