Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel hypermethylated tumor suppressor gene in
human bladder cancer and its implication in non-invasive cancer detection
using voided urine.


Bladder cancer is the sixth most common cancer in the world and the
incidence is particularly high in southwestern Taiwan. Although bladder
cancer patients have a low mortality rate, long term follow-up with
repeated cystoscopy is required due to the high recurrence nature of the
tumor. Therefore, a non-invasive detection assay is urgently required for
bladder cancer patients. Aberrant promoter hypermethylation which is
considered as a hallmark of cancer for over a decade, plays an important
role in controlling cancer progression. Nevertheless, detection of
promoter hypermethylation in bodily fluid has been implicated as a
non-invasive and sensitive tool for cancer diagnosis. In this regard, by
using illumina 27K CpG island methylation array, we identified a novel
gene that are hypermethylated in 7 bladder cancer patient samples but not
in primary normal human urothelim. In vitro promoter methylation assay
and epigenetic treatment confirmed that the expression of this gene is
epigenetically controlled in bladder cancer cell lines. Bisulphite
pyrosequencing demonstrated a significant correlation between higher
methylation level of this gene and cancer grade (PBladder cancer is the
sixth most common cancer in the world and the incidence is particularly
high in southwestern Taiwan. Although bladder cancer patients have a low
mortality rate, long term follow-up with repeated cystoscopy is required
due to the high recurrence nature of the tumor. Therefore, a non-invasive
detection assay is urgently required for bladder cancer patients.
Aberrant promoter hypermethylation which is considered as a hallmark of
cancer for over a decade, plays an important role in controlling cancer
progression. Nevertheless, detection of promoter hypermethylation in
bodily fluid has been implicated as a non-invasive and sensitive tool for
cancer diagnosis. In this regard, by using illumina 27K CpG island
methylation array, we identified a novel gene that are hypermethylated in
7 bladder cancer patient samples but not in primary normal human
urothelim. In vitro promoter methylation assay and epigenetic treatment
confirmed that the expression of this gene is epigenetically controlled
in bladder cancer cell lines. Bisulphite pyrosequencing demonstrated a
significant correlation between higher methylation level of this gene and
cancer grade (P<0.01) and recurrence free survival (PBladder cancer is
the sixth most common cancer in the world and the incidence is
particularly high in southwestern Taiwan. Although bladder cancer
patients have a low mortality rate, long term follow-up with repeated
cystoscopy is required due to the high recurrence nature of the tumor.
Therefore, a non-invasive detection assay is urgently required for
bladder cancer patients. Aberrant promoter hypermethylation which is
considered as a hallmark of cancer for over a decade, plays an important
role in controlling cancer progression. Nevertheless, detection of
promoter hypermethylation in bodily fluid has been implicated as a
non-invasive and sensitive tool for cancer diagnosis. In this regard, by
using illumina 27K CpG island methylation array, we identified a novel
gene that are hypermethylated in 7 bladder cancer patient samples but not
in primary normal human urothelim. In vitro promoter methylation assay
and epigenetic treatment confirmed that the expression of this gene is
epigenetically controlled in bladder cancer cell lines. Bisulphite
pyrosequencing demonstrated a significant correlation between higher
methylation level of this gene and cancer grade (P<0.01) and recurrence
free survival (P<0.05) in bladder cancer patient samples (n=100). To
investigate the diagnostic potential of this novel epigenetic marker in
non-invasive cancer detection, we performed qMSP assay in voided urine
samples from bladder cancer patients (n=27) as well as normal healthy
control (n=19). The sensitivity and specificity of this gene in cancer
detection is 42.3% and 100% respectively. The sensitivity can increase to
93.3% when using combination of this gene and our previously identified
epigenetic markers (IRF8, p14, sFRP1). Re-expression of this gene in
bladder cancer cell line inhibited cancer growth in soft agar colony
formation assay and invasion assay. In conclusion, this gene may be a
potential tumor suppressor in bladder cancer and its potential in
non-invasive diagnosis of bladder cancer using voided urine warrants
further investigation.

