Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide analysis of FOXM1 binding and involvement of FOXM1 in
cancer stem cell and metastasis properties of endocrine-sensitive and
resistant breast cancer cells.


FOXM1 is a transcription factor that coordinates expression of late cell
cycle-related genes. Elevated expression of FOXM1 in breast cancer
correlates with a more aggressive tumor phenotype and, as we have
previously shown, is associated with resistance to endocrine treatment
via 14-3-3 protein signaling (Bergamaschi A. et al. Breast Cancer
Research 2011, 13:R7).To better understand the role that FOXM1 plays in
endocrine resistance and aggressiveness we analyzed its genome-wide DNA
binding and effects on gene expression. We mapped genome-wide FOXM1
binding events, by chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq), in hormone-sensitive and resistant
breast cancer cell lines after estrogen or tamoxifen treatments. We also
investigated the relationship between FOXM1, estrogen receptor- and MAPK
chromatin binding events by clustering analysis of Chip-seq data and
identified specific clusters of colocalized binding events as identifiers
for different functional gene classes. Clusters enriched in colocalized
factor binding sites were associated with genes involved in maintenance
of stem cell properties and genes involved in invasion and metastasis
(Rho-GTPases). Binding profiles were also integrated with expression data
from FOXM1 knockdown experiments, to reveal specific FOXM1
transcriptional networks.Cell studies showed the relevance of FOXM1 in
breast cancer endocrine resistance and development of metastasis. We
modulated the levels of FOXM1 and some newly discovered FOXM1 regulated
genes in MCF7 cells and assessed their roles in hormone resistance and
breast cancer aggressiveness by several functional studies. Increased
expression levels of FOXM1 were associated with an increase in the cancer
stem cell population. Moreover, FOXM1 overexpressing cell lines exhibited
invadopodia which correlated with an increased invasion potential. The
use of a specific and selective FOXM1 inhibitor proved to be especially
effective in restoring endocrine sensitivity and in decreasing breast
cancer aggressiveness. Collectively, our findings define FOXM1 as a
master regulator of Rho-GTPase and stem cell marker expression.
Dysregulation of the FOXM1 pathway promotes breast cancer progression and
therefore makes FOXM1 a relevant therapeutic target to be considered for
reducing invasiveness and enhancing response to endocrine and other
therapies.Supported by Department of Defense grant W81XWH-09-1-0398 and a
grant from The Breast Cancer Research Foundation).

