Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of DNA methylation markers to estimate the fraction of
tumor cells in DNA samples.


Tumor tissues are always contaminated with normal cells. If we can assess
the fraction of tumor cells in DNA samples, a great advancement will have
been achieved, such as exclusion of samples with a low tumor cell content
from a study, and analysis of tumor heterogeneity. Though it has been
reported next generation sequencing data can provide such information,
the method is complicated and expensive. Here, we focused on DNA
methylation levels of specific CpG sites that were fully methylated in
cancer cells and fully unmethylated in normal cells to develop a fraction
marker of tumor cells.First, to find such specific CpG sites of
esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCCs), we performed a genome-wide
methylation analysis of 28 cancerous mucosae from ESCC patients, a pooled
sample of non-cancerous mucosae, a pooled sample of normal esophageal
mucosae from four healthy volunteer, four ESCC cell lines, and one sample
of blood, using an Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip array that
covered 485,577 CpG sites. We searched for CpG sites highly methylated in
the four ESCC cell lines ( value > 0.8) and hardly methylated in the
pooled samples and blood ( value 0.5) in ESCCs (TFAP2B; 24/28, ARHGEF4;
20/28, RAPGEFL1; 19/28). To measure methylation levels of these and
neighboring CpG sites, we designed three primer sets for high-resolution
melt analysis.Next, we analyzed methylation levels of the three genes in
ESCC cells and non-cancerous cells purified from three samples by laser
capture microdissection, and confirmed at least one of the three genes
was almost fully methylated in the ESCC cells, and all the three genes
were almost fully unmethylated in non-cancerous cells. Furthermore, to
exclude an effect of DNA copy number (CN) changes, we analyzed CN changes
of each gene by quantitative PCR of 15 ESCC samples. CN gains of ARHGEF4
or RAPGEFL1 (more than 1.5-fold change) were not observed, but a small
gain of TFAP2B (1.6-fold gain) was observed at a low frequency (3/15).
Therefore, the higher value of either ARHGEF4 or RAPGEFL1 was considered
to better reflect a fraction of ESCC cells. Only when values of these two
genes were extremely low, was the value of TFAP2B considered to reflect
it.Finally, we analyzed methylation levels of 35 ESCC samples using the
three markers, and estimated fractions of ESCC cells. In the biopsy
samples (n=15), a mean fraction of ESCC cells was 46.511.4 % (range,
24.8-72.8%), and, in the surgical samples (n=20), it was 64.111.7 %
(range, 38.4-83.7%). Pathological analysis of three samples showed a
fraction of ESCC cells assessed by the analysis was almost equal to that
obtained by the markers. These results demonstrate we can estimate a
fraction of ESCC cells in a sample with the DNA methylation markers
established here. The use of such methylation markers can be applied to
other types of cancers.

