Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IG-001 utilization of albumin mediated transport and its potential
application in difficult to perfuse tumors.


Study Purpose: nab-paclitaxel (Abraxane), though a breakthrough in
paclitaxel formulation, has inherent problems associated with any
biologics. IG-001, being a chemical polymer bound nanoparticle paclitaxel
instead of biological polymer, is being developed as the next generation
nanoparticle paclitaxel. Its target indications are difficult to perfuse
hypoxic tumors such as pancreatic cancer, taking advantage of its ability
to rapidly deliver paclitaxel to the targeted tissue via albumin mediated
transport. Evidence for its ability to utilize albumin-mediated transport
as previously described for nab-paclitaxel is presented.Methods:
Stability of IG-001 nanoparticles was evaluated in PBS, plasma, and
blood. Tissue pharmacokinetics (PK) and distribution in rodents were also
evaluated. Clinical PK of the various formulations were also compared.
The pharmacokinetic parameters were estimated by using the
noncompartmental open model and the WinNonlin program (Pharsight, CA).
Descriptive statistics were computed for PK assessment. Regression
analysis of AUCinf vs. dose was performed to gain an appreciation of dose
proportionality.Results: The dissolution profile of IG-001 was similar to
that of nab-paclitaxelbeing controlled primarily by the solubility limit
of paclitaxel. The dissolution profile confirmed that once injected into
the circulation, both formulations quickly dissolved into paclitaxel
complexed with endogenous circulating albumin. Hence, both formulations
appear to be equally capable of utilizing the natural albumin transport
system. The PK profiles in rodent and human were similar between the two
formulations with large Vss and low AUC/dose relative to the
Cremophor-based formulation Taxol. In tumor bearing mice, IG-001 has AUC
of 1.54 ug*hr/ml/mg/kg versus Taxol of 4.25 ug*h/ml/mg/kg. Yet tumor AUC
of 74.28 ug*h/ml/mg/kg versus 107.00 ug*hr/ml/mg/kg. The ratio of tumor
AUC/plasma AUC was 48.2 and 25.2 for IG-001 and Taxol, respectively, with
IG-001 having a 1.9 higher tumor penetration than Taxol. In comparison,
the ratio of tumor AUC/plasma AUC was 5.1 and 2.6 for nab-paclitaxel and
Taxol, respectively, with nab-paclitaxel having a 2.0 higher tumor
penetration than Taxol. Nab-paclitaxel and IG-001 exhibit comparable dose
proportionality demonstrating the ability to utilize albumin pathway to
deliver paclitaxel to tissues unhindered by Cremophor micelles of Taxol.
In human, IG-001 exhibited the AUC/dose value of 0.06 uM*h/mg/m2 across
the dose levels of 135-390 mg/m2 a dose proportional characteristic of
nab-paclitaxel.Conclusions: A non-albumin-based paclitaxel formulation
(IG-001) was found to have similar properties to the albumin-based
paclitaxel formulation (nab-paclitaxel). Its clinical development could
give us the next generation paclitaxel nanoparticle formulation that can
be more readily modified than nab-paclitaxel (Abraxane).

