Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOX2 inhibits Wnt driven colon cancer cell proliferation.


APC mutation/s resulting in aberrant Wnt signaling, initiates intestinal
polyposis and drives adenoma to carcinoma progression in human colon.
This represents a target for specific therapeutic intervention and has
generated extreme interest among the scientific community. However, it is
becoming increasingly apparent that though Wnt signaling may cause robust
proliferation, it is the quiescent cell population, defined by stem-ness
related gene signatures, that evades chemo-radio therapy targeted at
rapidly dividing cells, and perpetuates self-renewal ultimately causing
relapse at local site and/or recurrence as distant metastases. We report
that SOX2, an embryonic stem cell transcription factor, counteracts Wnt
driven tumor cell proliferation and maintains quiescence in colo-rectal
cancers (CRC).SOX2 expression increases with progressive staging of colon
cancer patients. Using colon cancer cell lines transduced with Wnt
reporter constructs, we identified distinct sub-populations with varying
degrees of Wnt activity and found that SOX2 expression and Wnt activity
are mutually exclusive in SW480 primary CRC cell line, but co-expressed
in the isogenic SW620 metastatic CRC cell line. Knockdown of SOX2 in
SW620 cell increased anchorage independence in vitro and tumor growth in
xenograft models. This was accompanied by an increase of cells in S-phase
and increased Ki67 index in IHC of xenograft tissue. Over-expression of
SOX2 in SW480 cells resulted in decreased colony formation in soft agar
and primary tumor growth in mice. Over-expression also caused increased
fraction of cells in G0-G1 phase and decreased Ki67 staining in tumor
tissue.In SW620 cell line, SOX2 knockdown not only increased basal Wnt
activity, but also caused acquisition of Wnt activity in hitherto Wnt
negative cells. Intriguingly, over-expression of SOX2 in SW480 cells,
reversed the enhanced Wnt activity gained by loss-of-function APC
mutation. Experiments conducted with both SOX2 silenced and
over-expressed cell lines revealed that SOX2 inhibits phosphorylation
of-catenin at Serine 552 and 675 thereby decreasing its nuclear
sequestration and activation. Screening with protein kinase and
phosphatase inhibitors identified PHLPP and PHLPPL as candidate genes
that are controlled by SOX2 and are responsible for its effects on
-catenin. Western Blot and qPCR analyses showed that SOX2 enhances
PHLPP/L expression. Reporter assays demonstrated that SOX2 controls
PHLPP/L promoter activity while ChIP assays confirmed binding of SOX2 to
various regions of the respective promoters. IHC of SOX2 silenced
xenograft tissue showed decreased PHLPP/L and increased p-catenin
staining while SOX2 over-expression showed reciprocal changes.Our
findings delineate the mechanism by which CRC cells suppress Wnt activity
thereby maintaining a pool of quiescent cancer cells, and lay the basis
for further research to identify and target these cells.

