Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-targeted hyaluronan (HA) imaging with a recombinant HA
binding protein: TSG6dHep-Fc.


A new investigational therapeutic agent, pegylated recombinant human
hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) is a currently under clinical development
for the treatment of tumors that accumulate hyaluronan (HA), a
nonsulfated glycosaminoglycan and a major constituent of the
extracellular matrix (ECM) of many solid tumors. HA accumulation has been
correlated with local invasion, the presence of distal metastasis, higher
tumor grade, and poorer overall survival in multiple malignancies.
Preclinical studies have demonstrated that sustained HA removal,
accomplished with PEGPH20, inhibits tumor growth and enhances
chemotherapeutic activity in HA-rich xenografts and genetically
engineered mouse tumor models.To facilitate non-invasive clinical
selection of patients with HA-rich malignancies, and confirm PEGPH20
enzymatic targeting of these malignancies, we have developed a soluble
recombinant HA binding protein by fusing a tumor necrosis
factor-stimulated gene-6 protein (TSG6) fragment, mutated at the
heparin-binding site, with human IgG1 Fc (TSG6dHep-Fc).In preclinical
proof-of-concept studies, recombinant TSG6dHep-Fc was labeled with the
near-infrared fluorophore DyLight755 (TSG6dHep-FcDL755) and administered
IV to the following xenograft peritibial athymic mouse models: HA-rich
pancreatic BxPC3, HA-poor prostate Du145 and HA-rich prostate Du145/HAS2.
TSG6dHep-FcDL755 HA binding was imaged via fluorescence (IVIS Lumina II,
Caliper Life Sciences, Inc.). Systemic/dermal HA binding was weakly
present, but easily removed via background subtraction to allow tumor
intensity quantification. In the HA-rich xenograft models, pancreatic
BxPC3 and prostate Du145/HAS2, TSG6dHep-FcDL755 strongly labeled the
peritibial tumors, peaking at 2 days post administration and was
completely absent at day 10 post administration. In contrast, the HA-poor
prostate Du145 tumors were very weakly labeled, making background
subtraction of systemic/dermal HA binding difficult. In separate
experiments, mice were treated with a single dose of PEGPH20 (4.5 mg/kg,
IV) or vehicle prior to TSG6dHep-FcDL755 imaging. In all groups dosed
with PEGPH20, TSG6dHep-FcDL755 signal intensity was extremely low and
appeared to be limited to non-specific, whole body labeling. These
results suggest that imaging with labeled TSG6dHep-Fc could be a useful
tool for selecting patients with HA-rich malignancies, thereby enabling
clinicians to noninvasively identify patients who might benefit from
therapies that target HA and the ECM.

