Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying signaling pathways associated with medulloblastoma
subtypes from "omic" data.


Medulloblastoma, the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor,
comprises four subtypes classified by their distinct molecular
signatures. Wnt and SHH subtypes up-regulate those respective signaling
pathways, while Group 3 and Group 4 tumors are less understood and have
the worst prognosis. Treatment is currently limited to surgical
resection, radiation and broad-spectrum cytotoxic chemotherapy drugs that
frequently devastate cognition in survivors. In order to develop
patient-specific targeted therapies we need to understand the underlying
molecular events that drive the tumor in each patient. Previously, our
research group and others sequenced whole exomes from a total 92 primary
tumors from patients in comparison to their matched normal blood. Over
1,700 mutated genes were identified. The overwhelming majority of
mutations occurred only once in the entire cohort, and just 12 genes were
recurrently mutated with statistical significance. Statistically
significant mutated genes include genes involved in subtype-specific
signaling events, such Wnt and SHH which have been shown to be causative
in those subtypes, and others are involved in chromatin and epigenetic
regulation. The diversity of mutations makes it difficult to resolve
which mutations drive oncogenesis, especially in Groups 3 and 4. Most
patients in these subtypes do not harbor a mutation in one of the 12
significantly mutated genes, leaving an open question as to why these
patients developed cancer. The aim of this study is to employ systems
biology to interweave singleton genes into networks to identify candidate
drives in each patient and ultimately resolve the underlying common
pathways that caused each cancer. We have identified singleton mutations
in patients that substitute for the statically significant mutated genes.
Modeling individual patient level data onto networks predicts novel
driver events in each patient. These candidate driver events are then
functionally validated in vitro. In addition to mutation, oncogenic
events can occur via copy number changes, chromatin regulation,
transcription regulation, mRNA processing, or protein degradation. We
hypothesize that common pathways are targeted in multiple tumors of the
same type, despite the obvious differences in the patterns of somatic
mutations.

