Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential targets for siRNA-mediated combinational therapy of
breast cancer cells.


Chemotherapy is an effective approach to curb uncontrolled proliferation
of malignant cells; however, even the most recent molecularly-targeted
drugs lose their effect as a result of resistance development in a short
period of time. Inherent plasticity of transformed cells and diverse
resistance mechanisms enable cells to mount an effective resistance
against the administered drugs. Molecular changes in drug resistant cells
are beginning to emerge, including adjustments in expression level of
proteins involved in cell survival and apoptosis. We are exploring the
potential of siRNA silencing as a new approach to induce apoptosis and/or
overcome drug resistance in breast cancer cells. This study was conducted
to develop a global approach to identify crucial targets and deliver
siRNAs to silence a combination of proteins in order to induce apoptosis
(independent of chemotherapy) and/or sensitize the resistant cells to
chemotherapeutic agents.Resistance was induced in two breast cancer cell
lines by exposure to gradually increasing doses of doxorubicin, and
resistance induction was confirmed by a significant increase in IC50 of
DOX. An apoptosis microarray was used for analysis of mRNA levels of 84
apoptosis related proteins in wild type and resistant cells. While
different members of caspase and TNFR family were among down-regulated
proteins, over-expressed proteins in both resistant cell lines included
Bcl2, survivin, NFB, and Mcl1.Human Apoptosis siRNA library (446 targets)
and kinase siRNA library (719 targets) were screened using PEILA2.1 as
delivery system. siRNAs were selected as hits which induced cell death in
cancer cell lines without significant reduction in cell viability of skin
fibroblast cells. The hits in apoptosis library included BIRC 7, NFB, and
Mcl1. Eight kinases were selected (based on the same criteria and
potential synergistic effect with Mcl-1). In vitro evaluations revealed
that among the selected targets, Mitogen-activated protein kinase 3
(MAP2K3) was the most potent in decreasing cell viability, while
Ribosomal protein S6 kinase (RPS6KA5) showed the most promising potential
for simultaneous silencing with Mcl-1.The combination of Mcl-1 and
RPS6KA5 was evaluated in vivo both as multiple intratumoral (1.5 g for
each siRNA or 75 g/kg) and intraperitoneal (10 g each siRNA or 500 g/kg)
treatments in a MDA-MB 435 WT xenograft model in NCR nu/nu nude mice. In
the intratumoral treatment, a significant inhibition of tumor growth was
observed for Mcl-1 single silencing compared to scrambled siRNA and
Mcl-1/RPS6KA5 double silencing compared to Mcl-1 silencing. IP treatment
showed a similar trend; however, only the combinational silencing of
Mcl-1 and RPS6KA5 showed a significant inhibition of tumor growth. This
study demonstrated the potential for kinase silencing as a therapeutic
strategy in breast cancer therapy, as well as the promising synergistic
effect for Mcl-1 and kinase silencing.

