Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch1 inactivation contributes to PI3Ki resistance in T-ALL.


Tyrosine kinases inhibitors induce genotype-specific regression in
advanced human cancers. However, these responses are almost invariably
transient and patients ultimately relapse due to outgrowth of
drug-resistant clones. Thus, increased knowledge of the mechanisms
underlying de novo and acquired resistance is essential for enhancing
clinical efficacy.T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is an
aggressive cancer for which current therapies are toxic and frequently
ineffective. Mutations in genes encoding components of the Notch1 and
Ras/PI3K/PTEN/Akt signaling networks are prevalent in T-ALL and
frequently coexist in individual patients. Thus, inhibiting these
pathways alone and in combination is a rational therapeutic strategy.
Notch1 inhibition with a -secretase inhibitor (GSI) was recently
evaluated in refractory T-ALL, with disappointing results that may have
been due to dose-limiting gastrointestinal toxicity. We are not aware of
clinical trials of Ras/PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway inhibitors in
T-ALL.Retroviral insertional mutagenesis (RIM) in mice is a robust
strategy for modeling both the clonal heterogeneity that exists within
individual tumors and the genetic diversity found across a population of
patients with the same cancer. We generated transplantable T-ALLs by
performing RIM in mice expressing oncogenic KrasG12D from its endogenous
genetic locus (Mx1-Cre, KrasG12D) and in wild-type (WT) littermates.
These aggressive multi-step cancers are characterized by recurring viral
integrations in known oncogenes such as Ikzf1 and late occurring acquired
Notch1 PEST domain mutations. We have extensively investigated patterns
of response and resistance to targeted inhibitors of PI3K (PI3Ki) and MEK
(MEKi) in this system.Whereas KrasWT T-ALLs respond to either PI3Ki or to
a combination regimen that also include a MEKi, KrasG12D T-ALLs are
largely refractory to PI3Ki, but are sensitive to the MEKi + PI3Ki
combination. T-ALLs invariably relapsed despite ongoing treatment, and we
verified phenotypic drug resistance in relapse leukemias by transplanting
and retreating them in vivo. We unexpectedly identified multiple
independent PI3Ki resistant T-ALLs with markedly reduced levels of
activated Notch1, including some in which Notch1 mutations that were
present at enrollment were absent at relapse. Expression of activated
Notch1 increases the sensitivity of mouse and human T-ALL cells to a
PI3Ki, and loss of activated Notch promotes resistance and enhances PI3K
signaling. Thus, oncogenic Notch1 mutations that promote outgrowth during
transformation unexpectedly switch to become deleterious during in vivo
treatment with a PI3Ki. These data suggest that aberrant Ras/PI3K
signaling plays a dominant role in T lineage leukemogenesis and also
raise the unexpected possibility that administering Notch1 and PI3K
inhibitors sequentially or in combination might inadvertently promote
resistance.

