Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of the deletion of early region 4 (E4) open reading frame
1 (orf1), orf1-2, orf1-3 and orf1-4 on virus-host cell interaction,
transgene expression, and immunogenicity of replicating adenovirus
vaccine vectors.


Cancer vaccines continue to be of global importance. In the HIV/SIV
non-human primate models replicating adenovirus has shown promise as a
vaccine vector. Priming with replicating recombinant host-range mutant
adenovirus (Ad5hr) followed by envelope (Env) protein boosting, elicits
strong cellular, humoral and mucosal immunity, and protection in
non-human primates. Based on the results using Ad5hr in the HIV/SIV
non-human primate models replicating Ad4 vaccines are being developed for
HIV/AIDS, and Influenza. These vectors may also be of value for cancer. A
limitation of replicating Ad vectors is the transgene carrying capacity
which is about 3000 base pairs (bp). Using an Ad5hr encoding full-length
single-chain HIVBal gp120 linked to rhesus CD4 D1D2 domains (rhFLSC;
DeVico et al., PNAS 2007) we systematically deleted the genes encoding
E4-orf1 to E4-orf4. The latter virus with a 1100 bp deletion expands the
total carrying capacity to 4000 bp. Using plaque assays we were unable to
determine any differences in viral progeny production that could be
attributed to the deletions. We assessed the virus-host interactions by
evaluating the cell cycle profile of infected cells over time. Here too
no differences could be attributed to the deletions. The Ad replication
cycle is divided into early and late phases with regard to viral DNA
synthesis. Western blots confirmed that the parental and deleted viruses
expressed similar transgene levels in a temporally regulated manner
similar to Ad late proteins. Splenocytes and sera from mice vaccinated
with the parental, the E4-deleted variants, or with an Ad5hr empty vector
at 0 and 4 weeks were collected at week 6 and used to evaluate whether
the deletions altered transgene or vector immunogenicity. Levels of
Env-specific cytokines responses by T-cells were negligible for mice
immunized with the empty vector yet positive for those immunized with the
parental and E4-deleted viruses. Ad responses were similar in all 6
groups. Interestingly, while the 5 immunization groups yielded similar
binding antibody titers against rhFLSC and gp120 the sera showed
differential binding patterns for Ad antigens. Thus while little to no
host-cell or cellular immunogenicity differences distinguish the E4
deleted viruses from the parent, the differential binding patterns for Ad
antigens opens the possibility that the E4 gene products may influence Ad
antigen recognition. These differences may prove useful in the design of
replicating Ad vaccine vectors.

