Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acetylation of -tubulin contributes to microtentacle formation and
re-attachment in suspended breast tumor cells.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) seed distant and recurrent metastases, the
leading cause of breast cancer-related death. However, few laboratories
are investigating cytoskeletal properties of CTCs or are targeting CTCs
directly. We have shown that detached epithelial cells produce
microtubule-based protrusions called microtentacles (McTNs) that
facilitate CTC re-attachment. These protrusions can be stabilized by
microtubule-associated proteins or post-translational modifications of
-tubulin. Acetylation is a post-translational modification that occurs on
Lysine 40 (K40) of -tubulin by a recently identified -tubulin
acetyltransferase: ATAT1. This modification is understudied in breast
cancer and has not been previously examined in detached tumor cells. It
is also clinically relevant, since HDAC inhibitors and
microtubule-stabilizing drugs increase acetylation of -tubulin in vivo.
We have found that -tubulin acetylation increases with metastatic
potential in a panel of breast tumor cell lines and localizes to McTN
protrusions in suspended metastatic cells. In tumor cells with high
endogenous tubulin acetylation, immunofluorescence showed that cells
transiently transfected with a non-acetylatable K40R -tubulin mutant had
fewer acetylated microtubules compared to adjacent, non-transfected
cells. Functional tests in cells stably expressing K40R demonstrated that
decreased -tubulin acetylation reduced microtentacle formation.
Electrical impedance also revealed decreased tumor cell reattachment in
cells stably expressing the K40R mutant, compared to wild-type
controls.In tumor cells with low endogenous -tubulin acetylation,
transient transfection of the acetyltransferase ATAT1 significantly
increased acetylation of -tubulin, compared to controls on immunoblot and
compared to adjacent/non-transfected cells with immunofluorescence.
Live-cell fluorescence imaging showed transient ATAT1 overexpression also
significantly increased microtentacle frequency. Suspended
immunofluorescence showed acetylated -tubulin localized to McTNs in ATAT1
overexpressing cells but not in controls. ATAT1 overexpression also
increased tumor cell reattachment.Since clinical tumor imaging requires a
foci of more than 5 million tumor cells, current interpretations of drug
effects are limited to large changes in tumor size rather than effects on
metastatic dissemination. The ability of elevated -tubulin acetylation to
increase microtentacles and promote tumor cell reattachment emphasizes
the importance of understanding how -tubulin acetylation influences CTC
metastasis so therapies aimed at tumor growth do not inadvertently
elevate metastatic risk. Further investigation into matched metastatic
breast tumor patient samples will reveal the clinical relevance of this
previously understudied modification.

