Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum cobalamin level and clinical outcome in patients with acute
myeloid leukemia.


Introduction: An elevated concentration of serum cobalamin was found in
one third of patients with acute myeloid leukemia; however, the clinical
implication of elevated level of cobalamin in disease prognosis is not
clear.Procedures: We performed a retrospective analysis of the patients
who were diagnosed to have de novo acute myeloid leukemia at China
Medical University Hospital from January 2003 to December 2011. Two
hundred and six patients were diagnosed as de novo acute myeloid
leukemia, and thirty-four patients (16.5%) had been checked the level of
serum cobalamin at diagnosis. Patients were divided into two groups, one
with serum cobalamin level less than 400 pg/mL (n=10), the other with
serum cobalamin level 400 pg/mL or higher (n=24). The clinical and
cytogenetic characteristics between each group were compared.Findings:
There was no difference in gender, age and cytogenetic risk between the
two groups. Nine of ten patients in lower serum cobalamin group and
eighteen of twenty-four patients in higher serum cobalamin group received
intensive chemotherapy for acute myeloid leukemia (p=0.315). The patients
with lower serum cobalamin had a trend to obtain complete remission (80.0
% vs. 45.8 %, p=0.072). For patients who reached complete remission after
chemotherapy, those in the higher cobalamin group had a trend to have
more disease relapse (81.8% vs. 37.5%, p=0.067). Interestingly, the
relapse-free survival time after complete remission was 42.5 m and 9.2 m
for patients with lower and higher cobalamin, respectively (p=0.010).
Furthermore, serum cobalamin level remained significant in the
multivariate analysis of risk factors for relapse-free survival
(p=0.028). The median overall survival time was 18.3 m and 7.2 m for
patients with lower and higher cobalamin, respectively. However, the
difference in overall survival between the two groups did not reach
statistical significance (p=0.140). In multivariate analysis, intensive
chemotherapy for AML was the most important factor for overall
survival.Conclusions: AML patients with higher serum level of cobalamin
have a trend of worse response to chemotherapy, higher relapse rate and
significantly shorter relapse-free survival time. Targeted therapy to
interfere the cobalamin uptake or related pathways is worth of further
investigation in treating patient with acute myeloid leukemia.

