Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cell-like population from non-small cell lung cancer
is preferentially suppressed by EGFR-TKIs.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of death worldwide with a high
metastasis rate. Non-small cell lung cancer accounts for 75-85% of lung
cancers. Growing evidences show that some, if not all, tumors derive from
a minor subpopulation of cancer cells, also known as cancer stem-like
cells (CSCs), either retain or acquire the capacity for self-renewal and
drug resistance. By the virtue of altered cell signaling pathways related
to cell survival and/or apoptosis, CSCs are able to survive radiation or
chemotherapeutic insults. Thus, the targeting of key signaling pathway(s)
that is active in CSCs is very attractive therapeutic strategy to
treating cancers. However, research has been hampered due to the lack of
distinct molecular makers on CSCs. We take advantage of a rare subset of
cells that can efflux the DNA binding dye out of the cell. These cells,
called side population (SP) cells, are proved to be enriched with CSCs
and have stem cell characteristics.We evaluated the existence of SPs in
PC-9 cells by staining them with Hoechst 33342. SP cells occupied
0.6-2.4% of the total cells in PC-9 cultures. It was noteworthy that the
SP was completely eliminated in the presence of Verapamil. Consistent
with our hypothesis that EGFR-TKIs regulate CSC, constitutive activation
of EGFR increased the subpopulation almost 4.5-fold to 4.0%, whereas
EGFR-TKI almost completely ablated it resulting in only 0.2% or 0.3% of
the total cells. To understand the molecular mechanism(s) that EGF
promote CSC population, the phosphorylation of EGFR at Tyr1068, AKT at
Ser473 and ERK at Thr202/Tyr204 were investigated and they are all
positive. More interestingly, EGFR/PI3K/AKT signaling inhibitors
including Gefitinib, LY294002, U0126 and Erlotinib, significantly reduced
the stem-like cancer cells. These results strongly suggested the
importance of EGFR/PI3K/AKT as a potential target of eliminating CSCs. To
verify that the effect of EGFR-TKIs on CSC phenotypes is mediated through
-catenin signaling, we used CSC-specific siRNAs to suppress -catenin
expression in PC-9 cells. A significant decrease in cancer stem-like
cells was observed following -catenin suppression. The treatment with
Gefitinib dramatically reduced the tumor numbers and size in vivo
xenograft model with PC9 cells. Although there were few SP cells (1.3% as
detected) in Gefitinib-treated mice in the primary tumors, more
discernible numbers of SP cells were detected in Cisplatin-treated
(13.6%) or control-treated tumors (8.3%). Most notably, the reduction of
SP cells by Gefitinib significantly reduced the migration capability. As
a comparison, those primary culture cells derived from Cisplatin-treated
tumors had an increased migration rate. Our discoveries raise an
intriguing question of the role of -catenin in acquired resistance of
EGFR-TKIs-treated cancer stem cell-like population(s) and its potential
as new treatment strategy for NSCLC in the future.

