Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CHK2 and DNAPKc deficiency reduces DNA repair capacity and
increases transformation efficiency in human bronchial epithelial cells.


Reduced DNA repair capacity (DRC) and polymorphisms in genes involved in
the repair pathways are associated with increased risk for lung cancer.
Studies from our lab have demonstrated an association between increased
double strand breaks (DSB) and increased risk for gene promoter
hypermethylation. The goal of this study was to identify genes in the DSB
repair pathway that may be rate limiting for DNA repair and to determine
the effect of gene knockdown on genomic stability, DRC, gene promoter
methylation, and cellular transformation. CHK2 is an important DNA damage
sensor and cell cycle regulator gene that is important in maintaining
genomic stability. DNAPKc is a kinase within the non-homologous end
joining (NHEJ) pathway that participates in DNA repair by inducing
conformational changes that allows access to DSB sites, and reduced
activity is associated with lung cancer. Expression of CHK2 was reduced
in 4 of 10 tumor-derived lung cancer cell lines, while 3 cell lines had
undetectable levels of DNAPKc. We developed an in vitro model using human
telomerase/cyclin dependent kinase 4-immortalized human bronchial
epithelial cell lines (HBECs) to identify key molecular changes that
drive transformation and clonal outgrowth of preneoplastic lung
epithelial cells during exposure to carcinogens. CHK2 and DNAPKc were
stably knocked down in HBEC2 and HBEC3 to determine their role in DRC,
genomic instability and transformation. Knockdown of neither CHK2 nor
DNAPKc affected microsatellite instability, nor was deficiency of either
gene sufficient to induce spontaneous transformation in HBEC2 and HBEC3.
Knockdown of CHK2 or DNAPKc decreased DRC in HBEC2 and HBEC3 in response
to bleomycin, (a DSB-inducing carcinogen) indicating an important role
for both genes in DSB repair. Knockdown cell lines were treated with
bleomycin once a week for 12 weeks to determine the effect of gene
deficiency on transformation. DNAPKc deficiency increased transformation
efficiency in HBEC2 and HBEC3 by 14- and 4.5- fold, respectively, while
CHK2 deficiency increased transformation efficiency in HBEC3 by 6- fold
compared to bleomycin treated controls. Studies are ongoing to determine
changes induced in the transcriptome and methylome in DNA
repair-deficient cells during transformation. These studies will
highlight the roles of CHK2 and DNAPKc in DSB repair, malignant
transformation, and will shed more light on the role of DNAPKc and CHK2
in reprograming the genome.Supported by R01 ES15262 to SAB

