Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of anti-proliferative effects of SIRT1 inhibition in
melanoma cells: a proteomics approach.


An analysis of the SEER (Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results)
program data has suggested that the age-adjusted annual incidence of
melanoma in both young men and women has increased over the past 20
years. The current therapeutic options have shown little success in
melanoma management. Therefore, novel mechanism and target-based
strategies are needed for the management of this disease. The mammalian
SIRT1 or sirtuin (silent mating type information regulation 2 homolog) 1
is a NAD(+)-dependent class III histone deacetylase (HDAC) that has been
shown to play important roles in a variety of biological processes and
diseases including cancer. Previous studies from our laboratory have
demonstrated that 1) SIRT1 is overexpressed in human melanoma cells and
tissues; 2) SIRT1 inhibition by Tenovin-1 resulted in decreased growth,
viability, and clonogenic survival of melanoma cells; 3) Tenovin-1
treatment resulted in decreased level of SIRT1 protein and increased
level of the tumor suppressor p53 (In: AACR Annual Meeting: Proceedings;
2012 March 31-April 4, Chicago, IL; Abstract # 4722). In this study we
employed a proteomics approach using gel free Liquid Chromatography-Mass
Spectrometry (LC-MS) to identify the downstream molecular targets of
SIRT1 in melanoma. The human melanoma G361 cells were treated with
Tenovin-1 (25 M; 48 h) followed by protein extraction. Extracted proteins
were precipitated (using 10% TCA and 0.05% DTT), pelleted and washed with
acetone and air dried. Samples were re-suspended, labelled, trypsin
digested and subjected to LC-MS/MS on a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ)
Orbitrap XL. The resultant peptide sequence data were matched against the
uniprot_human_FR_CP_090710 database using Mascot (Matrix Sciences,
London, UK). Scaffold (version Scaffold_3.6.1, Proteome Software Inc.,
Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein
identifications. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be
established at greater than 95% probability and contained at least two
identified peptides. The differentially expressed protein data were
collected from three different biological replicates. We found 14
proteins (from a total of 1092) which showed +2 fold differential
expressions with statistical significance (T-test, p value An analysis of
the SEER (Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results) program data has
suggested that the age-adjusted annual incidence of melanoma in both
young men and women has increased over the past 20 years. The current
therapeutic options have shown little success in melanoma management.
Therefore, novel mechanism and target-based strategies are needed for the
management of this disease. The mammalian SIRT1 or sirtuin (silent mating
type information regulation 2 homolog) 1 is a NAD(+)-dependent class III
histone deacetylase (HDAC) that has been shown to play important roles in
a variety of biological processes and diseases including cancer. Previous
studies from our laboratory have demonstrated that 1) SIRT1 is
overexpressed in human melanoma cells and tissues; 2) SIRT1 inhibition by
Tenovin-1 resulted in decreased growth, viability, and clonogenic
survival of melanoma cells; 3) Tenovin-1 treatment resulted in decreased
level of SIRT1 protein and increased level of the tumor suppressor p53
(In: AACR Annual Meeting: Proceedings; 2012 March 31-April 4, Chicago,
IL; Abstract # 4722). In this study we employed a proteomics approach
using gel free Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) to
identify the downstream molecular targets of SIRT1 in melanoma. The human
melanoma G361 cells were treated with Tenovin-1 (25 M; 48 h) followed by
protein extraction. Extracted proteins were precipitated (using 10% TCA
and 0.05% DTT), pelleted and washed with acetone and air dried. Samples
were re-suspended, labelled, trypsin digested and subjected to LC-MS/MS
on a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap XL. The resultant peptide
sequence data were matched against the uniprot_human_FR_CP_090710
database using Mascot (Matrix Sciences, London, UK). Scaffold (version
Scaffold_3.6.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to
validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Protein
identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater
than 95% probability and contained at least two identified peptides. The
differentially expressed protein data were collected from three different
biological replicates. We found 14 proteins (from a total of 1092) which
showed +2 fold differential expressions with statistical significance
(T-test, p value <0.05). Among these proteins, three proteins were found
to be newly expressed whereas one was found to completely disappear
following SIRT1 inhibition, under the experimental conditions employed.
The differentially expressed proteins identified in our study are
associated with RNA processing-, mitochondrial checkpoint- and apoptosis-
pathways. Currently, we are in process of validating and ascertaining the
functional relevance of these downstream targets. Our provides an
improved understanding of SIRT1 downstream targets, which may lead to
better strategies for melanoma management.

