Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EMT and cancer stem cells: role in radiation resistance of breast
cancer.


Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) is a key developmental program
that is often activated during cancer invasion and metastasis. During
EMT, epithelial cells lose epithelial characteristics, such as E-cadherin
expression and gain mesenchymal properties, such as vimentin expression.
EMT cells have stem cells properties and possess the characteristics of
cell motility, invasiveness and chemotherapy resistance and these cancer
stem cells may be responsible for mediating tumor metastasis and
resistance to cancer treatments. However, very little is known about the
role of EMT and cancer stem cells in modulating radiation response of
human breast cancer cells. We compared expression levels of E-cadherin
and other EMT related markers in ER-a negative (MDA-MB-231 and Hs578t)
and ER-a positive (MCF-7) human breast cancer cells. Clonogenic cell
survival assays showed that the cell lines expressing estrogen receptor
(MCF-7) were more sensitive to increasing doses of radiation and had high
expression of E-cadherin. In contrast, ER negative cells (MDA-MB-231 and
Hs578t) had no detectable expression of E-cadherin and were more
radioresistant. We transfected MDA-MB-231 and Hs578t cells with a
CDH1-expression vector and isolated stable clones. These clones were
selected and tested for radiosensitivity. MDA-MB-231 and Hs578t cells
transfected with a control vector (pCMV) served as controls. Restoring
E-cadherin expression radiosensitized the cells compared to the control
vector cell line, suggesting that restoration of E-cadherin expression in
mesenchymal-like cells produces a radiosensitizing effect. Our
preliminary data demonstrates that EMT, detected as the loss of
E-cadherin expression, may regulate tumor cell radiosensitivity, i.e.
cells that have undergone EMT are relatively radioresistant compared to
the lines that have retained the epithelial phenotype, which are
relatively radiosensitive. Thus, there was a general correlation between
EMT, based on loss of E-cadherin expression, and radioresistance.
Overall, our results suggest that E-cadherin interacts with radiation and
enhances the radioresponse of human breast cancer cells. Since it has
been demonstrated that the process of EMT contributes to drug resistance
and results in cells with CSC-like characteristics, we compared ALDH1
expression in ER positive (MCF-7) and ER negative (MDA-MB-231 and Hs578t)
cell lines. Our data shows that ALDH1 expression correlates with the ER
status of the breast cancer cells, with a higher number of ALDH1+ cells
in ER negative compared to ER positive cell lines. Our preliminary
investigation leads us to believe that potentially resistant breast
cancer stem cell populations appear to be overrepresented in ER negative
breast cancer cell lines. Our observation concurs with clinical data that
ER negative cancers are resistant to radiation therapy compared to ER
positive breast cancers.

