Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An inducible transgenic porcine model for human cancer.


Common rodent-based models have limitations in terms of modeling human
cancers. Given that pigs share many genetic and physiological
similarities with humans, we investigated the potential of developing
genetic porcine models of cancer. In this regard, we previously reported
that activation of oncogenes like Ras in conjunction with inhibiting
tumor suppressor pathways like p53 were required, in part, to convert
normal porcine cells to a tumorigenic state. Based on this, we chose to
generate transgenic pigs that can be induced to express oncogenic Kras
and dominant-negative p53. First, porcine Kras and p53 wild-type genes
were cloned, sequenced and aligned with porcine, human and murine
homologues to identify porcine-specific mutation sites corresponding to
those commonly found in human cancers. Porcine Kras mutation occurs at
the 12th glycine (G) to aspartic acid (D), whereas p53 arginine (R) at
167th position was mutated to histidine (H). KrasG12D and p53R167H
mutants were linked by internal ribosome entry sites (IRES) for their
simultaneous expression and then inserted into a vector following the
LoxP-polyA(STOP)-LoxP sequence (LSL). Porcine fetal fibroblasts were
transfected in vitro with this vector construct and infected by
adenovirus (Ad) vectors encoding Cre recombinase (Ad-Cre-GFP), which
deletes the LSL sequence and permits transgene expression, or control Ad
vectors without the inserted Cre transgene (Ad-GFP). Cre
recombinase-mediated KrasG12D and p53R167H expression was significantly
induced in porcine fibroblasts transfected with Ad-Cre-GFP virus compared
with Ad-GFP control, which provides an in vitro proof of functional test
of the oncopig construct. We then transfected porcine fibroblasts with
the aforementioned oncopig construct to produce donor cell lines for
nuclear transfer cloning. Transgenic fibroblast cell lines generated from
the cloned pig were subjected to a wound assay through which we observed
a statistically significant difference of in vitro migration capability
between Ad-Cre-GFP cells and Ad-GFP control cells. In a migration time of
24h, the number of cells in the wound area for the Ad-Cre-GFP cells was
184 as for the Ad-GFP cells was only 67 (p-value 0.01). A statistically
significant difference was also observed between the cell cycle length
for these cell lines by flow cytometry. Ad-Cre-GFP cells went through a
greater number of cell divisions compared with Ad-GFP cells. Within a 73h
time period, Ad-Cre-GFP cells divided twice as many times than Ad-GFP
cells (p-value 0.01). Present results demonstrate that induction of the
transgenes in these porcine cells triggered a transformed phenotype. In
the future, these cells will be tested for growth in soft agar, tumor
growth in mice, and then the pigs will be monitored for tumor incidence
following site-specific transgene induction. Such an approach could
provide a porcine model to cancer etiology and the development of
anti-cancer therapy.

