Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer stem and non-stem-like cells express varying levels
of selectin ligand activities.


Cancer stem cells are a subset of tumor cells proposed to possess traits
enabling metastatic invasion. Independently, selectins and their ligands
are believed to play major roles in mediating the adhesion of circulating
tumor cells to vascular endothelium during hematogenous metastasis. We
thus hypothesized that the expression level of selectin ligands on breast
cancer cells is related to breast cancer stem cell (BSC) or non-BSC
phenotypes. Five breast carcinoma cell lines analyzed by flow cytometry
were categorized as BSCs by the surface expression profile
CD44+/CD24-/low, or non-BSCs marked by alternative expression of these
proteins. All cell lines positively expressed E-, P-, and L-selectin
ligand activity by flow cytometric analysis as well as under
physiological flow conditions. Consistent with their E-selectin ligand
activities, all cell lines expressed putative glycans for E-selectin
binding, including sLeX, sLeA, and/or VIM-2 glycans, found by flow
cytometric analysis. Yet the level of selectin ligand activity and glycan
expression in BSCs was conspicuously lower than in non-BSCs. The abundant
production of selectin-reactive glycans in non-BSCs was associated with
-(1,3)- and -(1,4)-fucosyltransferases, as indicated by qRT-PCR analysis.
Importantly, BSCs as well as non-BSCs expressed molecules, such as CD44,
that are capable of carrying carbohydrates necessary for E-selectin
ligand function. Furthermore, BSCs were mesenchymal-like and non-BSCs
were epithelial-like cells, as found by immunostaining of breast cancer
cells for E-cadherin and N-cadherin in fluorescence microscopy.
Significantly, treatment of a non-BSC cell line with TGF- induced
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) marked by changes in cell
morphology, increases in expression levels of N-cadherin, and increases
in E-cadherin suppressor genes. These EMT cells showed reduced levels of
E-selectin ligand activity under physiological flow conditions,
indicating loss of selectin ligand activity upon acquisition of
mesenchymal properties. In summary, the selectin ligand activity of BSCs
is lower than that of non-BSCs, and the level of selectin ligand activity
of breast cancer cells is potentially controlled by BSC and EMT states.

