Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multimodality imaging investigation of response to cabozantinib in
a VCaP model of prostate bone metastasis.


Prostate cancer (PCa) growth is incurable once it has metastasized to the
bone microenvironment (BM). The altered BM provides a permissive niche to
support tumour growth, and therapeutic strategies that target tumour-bone
interactions and/or restore bone homeostasis are being pursued. This
demands preclinical models that faithfully replicate tumour-bone
interactions, and non-invasive imaging methods to interrogate such
orthotopic models in vivo, improving the accuracy of, and accelerating
pre-clinical drug development. We have used a multi-modality imaging
approach to assess the radiology and response of an orthotopic VCaP PCa
bone metastasis model to the c-Met/VEGFR2 inhibitor cabozantinib.Direct
intratibial injection of 2x106 luc-VCaP cells into male castrate SCID
mice resulted in tumour formation within 20 days. The resulting tumours
deregulated normal bone function, exhibited a predominantly sclerotic
phenotype and, importantly, retained a rearrangement of the ERG oncogene,
the most common chromosomal abnormality found in human PCa (40-80% of
cases). Mice bearing established intratibial VCaP prostate tumours were
treated daily with 30mg/kg p.o. cabozantinib (n=7) or vehicle alone (n=7)
for 15 days.Semi-quantitative photon flux measures from BLI showed a 52%
regression after 14 days of treatment (p=0.016). Tumour volume was
quantified from T2-weighted MR images acquired from contiguous transverse
500m slices across the leg, with an in-plane resolution of 156m2, in
which tumour hyperintensity was clearly identifiable. Mean tumour volume
was significantly (p=0.038) smaller in the cabozantinib treated group
after 15 days treatment (21.9 5.1 mm3) compared to the vehicle cohort
(104 43 mm3). These data show that cabozantinib exhibits powerful
anti-tumour activity in this clinically relevant model of PCa.Diffusion
weighted MR images were acquired using a 10 b-value EPI sequence, from
which the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), a biomarker of tissue
cellularity, was calculated for each tumour. From baseline, ADC
significantly increased after 10 (p=0.024) and 15 (p=0.010) days of
treatment, from 492 16 to 556 19 and 644 44 (x106 mm2/s) respectively.
There was no change in the ADC of the vehicle treated group, suggesting
an early increase in tumour ADC may constitute a specific and clinically
translatable biomarker of response in this model.Excised tibias underwent
an 18m resolution CT scan. Both osteosclerotic and osteolytic activity
could be identified in tumour bearing tibias, which had 93% more bone
volume (BV) compared to the contralateral control tibia. Cabozantinib had
no significant effect on gross BV. When trabecular bone was quantified
separately, tumour bearing tibias from treated mice showed a 95% increase
in BV ratio (p=0.001). Moreover, there was significantly less
tumour-related bone growth outside the bone marrow cavity in treated mice
(p=0.048).

