Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multimodality imaging of ovarian cancer using HER2 affibody
conjugated nanoparticles.


Objectives: Specific and sensitive detection of ovarian cancer using
non-invasive or intraoperative imaging approaches holds great promise for
improving survival of the cancer patients through early diagnosis of
ovarian cancer and image-guided surgery. In this study, we have developed
Near infrared (NIR) dye labeled HER2 targeted magnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles (IONPs) that enable detecting orthotopic ovarian cancers in
nude mice using five imaging approaches, including 2D optical imaging,
3D-fluorescence tomography, MRI, spectroscopic imaging, and photoacoustic
imaging.Methods: HER2 affibodies (ZHER2:342) were labeled with a NIR-dye
830 and then conjugated to a 10 nm core size IONP coated with amphiphilic
polymer. Sensitivity of different imaging approaches in cancer detection
was determined by direct injection of 5 x 103 to 3 x 106 of the
nanoparticle probe-labeled tumor cells into the ovary of the mice and
then imaged using 2D Kodak in vivo optical imaging system, MRI, and three
new intraoperative hand-held imaging devices, including Spectroscopic,
3D-fluorescent tomography and photoacoustic imaging. Specificity of
targeted tumor imaging was demonstrated by system delivery of the
NIR830-ZHER2:342-IONP imaging probes in orthotopic human ovarian cancer
xenograft models in nude mice. Histological examination of tumor and
normal tissues further confirmed tumor targeting specificity.Results:
HER2 affibody conjugated IONPs are excellent imaging probes for 2D-NIR
optical, 3D-fluorescence tomography, spectroscopic device, photoacoustic
and MR imaging of HER2 positive ovarian cancer lesions. Both 2D-optical
imaging and MRI were able to detect ovarian tumors as small as 2 mm in
size non-invasively. Photoacoustic imaging showed 5-times higher NIR
signal in the tumor bearing mice injected with HER2 targeted IONPs than
that of non-targeted IONP injected mice. However our handheld
spectroscopic device result illustrated a high sensitivity in detection
of small metastatic tumor lesions in the peritoneal cavity
intra-operatively . Prussian blue staining revealed the presence of HER2
targeted IONPs in the tumor lesion as well as distant metastases lesions.
Similarly all the above imaging systems were sensitive to detect at least
104 tumor cells labeled with HER2 affibody conjugated IONPs and implanted
into the ovary for 24h. The ability of multi-modality tumor imaging
following systemic delivery of single targeted nanoparticle platform make
it possible for taking advantages of different imaging methods to
increase sensitivity and specificity of tumor targeting and imaging.
Conclusion: Based on the above results, the NIR dye-labeled and HER2
targeted IONPs developed by our group have great potential for
development of multimodality imaging approaches that can be applied to
ovarian cancer detection, image-guided and targeted therapy, and
image-guided surgery.

