Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiparameter CTC characterization using dual capture
microfluidic chips.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have become increasingly acceptable as a
prognostic marker in stratifying metastatic cancer patients for treatment
and as a predictive marker in monitoring therapeutic response. CTC
enumeration is an established prognostic marker (gold standard) in
metastatic prostate, breast and colorectal cancer. However, due to the
heterogeneity with respect to CTC phenotypic expression,
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and morphologic variability of
different cancer cells, it is impossible to simply use the counts of well
defined cells to characterize a wide spectrum of cancer status and
progression. In addition, manual counting of CTCs also introduces
operator bias on the size, shape and expression levels. We have developed
an automated CTC characterization system that extracts enumeration, cell
morphology and expression level of all intact, irregular and fragmented
CTCs in an automatic fashion. A multiparameter classification model was
then developed to characterize patient clinical outcome. Whole blood from
advanced stage cancer patients and non-diseased controls was processed
through anti-EpCAM antibody coated OnQChipsTM. Chips were imaged at low
magnification on a fully calibrated rapid automated platform. Captured
CTC candidate events were processed by an automated CTC detection
algorithm using a set of spatial and spectral features to initially
remove non-cellular events and then to indentify CTC subclasses. All CTC
subclasses as well as artifact classes were manually labeled and verified
at high magnification by trained imaging technologists. Manual labels
were used to assess performance of the automated algorithms. A
multivariate model based on CART (Classification and Regression Trees)
was used for the classifier development. A total of 27 prostate cancer
patients and 33 normal controls with 7.5mL blood samples per patient were
used to develop and validate the initial techniques. The preliminary
results show that the automated CTC event detection algorithm achieved a
sensitivity of 96% and specificity of 89%. The CTC subclass
classification algorithm achieved classification accuracy from 82% to 95%
across all subclasses. The algorithms were N-fold cross-validated with
80/20 random sampling. The preliminary clinical model achieved
sensitivity and specificity values of 90% and 82% respectively for
patient vs. normal classification. A method for automated patient CTC
classification and clinical model has been developed. The performance
data from all classification algorithms is very encouraging. The
multivariate patient model discriminates cancer patients from normal
donor samples with high sensitivity and specificity. Future work includes
incorporation of image-based features as well as clinical patient data
into the model to improve sensitivity and specificity and address
specific clinical needs.

