Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BAX and BAK are preferentially activated by BIM and BID,
respectively, affecting clinical chemotherapy response.


Apoptosis is a highly regulated form of cell death that is essential for
maintenance of homeostasis and is controlled by the BCL-2 family of
proteins. Two key members of this family, the effectors BAX and BAK, can
be activated by BIM or BID, which triggers their oligomerization and
permeabilization of the mitochondrial membrane, a crucial event during
apoptosis. Despite their essential and distinct roles in maintaining
homeostasis, BIM and BID are considered to be functionally redundant in
their ability to activate BAX and BAK. However, by separately examining
the activation of BAX and BAK by BIM and BID we find that these
apoptosis-regulating proteins exhibit differing interaction preferences.
Specifically, BIM preferentially activates BAX while BID preferentially
activates BAK in murine and human cells. The preferential activation is
evident when treating cells with BIM and BID BH3 peptides or recombinant,
full-length proteins. Calculated EC50 values demonstrate a nearly
twenty-fold decrease in the BID BH3 concentration required to activate
BAK rather than BAX (0.54M for BAK versus 9.3M for BAX) and a three-fold
decrease in the BIM BH3 concentration required to activate BAX rather
than BAK (6.7M for BAK versus 2.3M for BAX). Based on these findings, we
hypothesized that cells lacking BAK would be resistant to commonly used
topoisomerase inhibitors including topotecan, etoposide and doxorubicin
which can induce apoptosis via activation of BID. We confirm that BAK-/-,
but not BAX-/-, cells are in fact resistant to these agents but not
chemotherapies that induce apoptosis independently of BID activation
including the alkylating agent cisplatin, the microtubule inhibitor
paclitaxel, or the nucleoside analogue gemcitabine. Topoisomerase
inhibitors are frequently used to treat ovarian cancer patients who have
failed initial therapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel, yet clinical
responses to these second-line therapies are varied. Importantly, we
found that 23.8% of ovarian primary tumors possess a heterozygous or
homozygous loss of BAK1, which encodes BAK. These patients exhibit an
vastly inferior overall survival when treated with topoisomerase
inhibitors in the clinic (p=0.0048) while loss of BAX had no effect on
survival (p=0.9534). In addition, BAK1 loss had no effect on response to
treatment with agents that were not topoisomerase inhibitors including
carboplatin and paclitaxel. Thus, BIM and BID have non-overlapping roles
in the induction of apoptosis via BAX and BAK which affect clinical
responses to chemotherapy.

