Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EphB4 as a novel therapeutic target for head-neck SCC.


Introduction: Receptor tyrosine kinase EphB4 and its cognate
trans-membrane ligand EphrinB2 regulate venous-artery determination and
are critically required for fusion of vein and arterial compartments, as
well as vessel maturation in development and in pathological
angiogenesis. Aberrant induction of EphB4 in certain tumors and pro-tumor
cell survival function independent of its role in tumor angiogenesis have
been reported. We have studied the expression and function of EphB4 in
head neck squamous cell cancer.Methods: EphB4 expression in 78 freshly
frozen head/neck squamous cell carcinoma tumor samples were studied by
immunostaining, western blot analysis, gene copy number, and correlated
with stage. Head/neck tumor cell lines also were studied for expression
and significance of EphB4 expression on survival by knock down studies
using EphB4 lentiviral shRNA. Inhibition of EphB4 activation using decoy
soluble EphB4 receptor fused in frame at the C-terminus with human
albumin (sEphB4-HSA) was evaluated for in vivo studies of human tumor
xenografts.Results: EphB4 was expressed in all human tumor tissues, and
the levels correlated directly with stage. High EphB4 also predicted
shortened survival. EphB4 protein levels varied in tumor cell lines, and
loss of cell viability with EphB4 shRNA knock down was highest in cell
lines with highest EphB4 levels (range 25-78%). Tumor xenografts in
sEphB4-HSA treated mice were reduced over 80% compared to the control PBS
treatment. Tissue analysis revealed reduction in tumor vessel density,
reduced recruitment of pericytes, and decreased perfusion of the tumor
vessels. sEphB4-HSA treatment also decreased tumor tissue PI3K activity
manifested by reduced phosphorylated AKT and S6 level. Tumor cell death
by apoptosis was widespread consistent with combined anti-angiogenic
activity and direct tumor cell toxicity.Conclusion: EphB4 receptor
tyrosine kinase is highly expressed in head/neck squamous cell cancer.
EphB4 provides survival signal to the tumor cells directly. Decoy EphB4
inhibitor sEphB4-HSA is highly potent in in vivo tumor xenograft models.
sEphB4-HSA is thus a candidate for investigation in human trials and the
clinical trials are underway.

