Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel CENP-E-selective inhibitor exhibits potent anti-tumor
efficacy by two distinct mechanisms of action dependent on spindle
assembly checkpoint activity.


Centromere-associated protein-E (CENP-E) is a mitotic spindle motor
protein belonging to the kinesin superfamily and controls chromosome
alignment during metaphase by capturing the microtubule plus end at the
kinetochore. Loss of CENP-E function has been reported to result in
misaligned chromosomes at metaphase leading to spindle assembly
checkpoint (SAC) activation. Here, we developed a novel small-molecule
inhibitor of CENP-E (Compound-A), which targets an ATPase domain at the
CENP-E N-terminal motor region. Enzymatic kinetics reveals that
Compound-A is a slow-off rate type of ATP-competitive CENP-E inhibitor.
Treatment of Hela cells with Compound-A induced chromosome misalignment
during the SAC-dependent mitotic arrest, resulting in potent growth
suppression by apoptosis. Furthermore, intraperitoneal administration of
Compound-A displayed potent anti-tumor efficacy in colo205-xenograft
mouse models (T/C=11 % at day 8).Given that SAC activation by CENP-E
inhibition induced mitotic death, we next investigated whether SAC
attenuation by BubR1 knockdown recovers cell viability in these cells.
However, CENP-E inhibition was able to cause apoptosis after mitotic
slippage in the BubR1-knockdown Hela cells, while inhibition of another
mitotic kinesin Eg5, which controls centrosome separation during mitosis,
induced polyploidy instead of apoptosis in these cells. Our data suggest
that asymmetric chromosome segregation accelerated by CENP-E inhibition,
but not polyploidy by Eg5 inhibition, is responsible for apoptosis after
mitotic slippage. A comprehensive gene expression analysis of microarray
comparisons revealed that p53 pathways are activated by CENP-E inhibition
after mitotic slippage, and p53 knockdown suppressed post-mitotic
caspase-3/7 activation by CENP-E inhibition. Furthermore, we found that
both phosphorylation of at Ser-15 by ATM and ATR kinases and accumulation
of p53 protein by unfolding protein response (UPR) were involved in
post-mitotic p53 activation after mitotic slippage.In conclusion, we
developed the novel CENP-E inhibitor, Compound-A, and CENP-E inhibition
by Compound-A induced potent growth inhibition in both SAC-intact and
SAC-defective cancer cells. In the latter case, p53 pathways play
important roles in the induction of apoptosis. Our data demonstrate that
SAC and p53 pathways complementally function to eliminate aberrant
chromosome segregation accelerated by CENP-E inhibition. Thus, SAC
activation and p53 protein accumulation are available for complementary
PD biomarkers of the CENP-E inhibitors, and several molecules in the SAC
and p53 pathways could be potential biomarkers to select sensitive tumors
to the CENP-E inhibitors.

