Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting LSD1-HDACs crosstalk as a potential therapeutic strategy
for triple negative breast cancer cells.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most aggressive type of
breast tumor and one of the major clinical hurdles encountered in the
development of specific treatment for this disease is lack of effective
targeted therapy. Our recent studies demonstrate that lysine-specific
demethylase 1 (LSD1) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) closely interact in
controlling gene expression and growth of TNBC cells. However the
underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. Here we show that knockdown of
LSD1 expression (LSD1-KD) via RNA interference (RNAi) inhibits mRNA
levels of most HDAC isozymes in a TNBC cell line, MDA-MB-231.
HDAC5-targeted RNAi induces the most significant accumulation of H3K4me2,
a specific substrate of LSD1, implicating a necessity for HDAC5 in LSD1
function. Combined treatment with LSD1 inhibitor, pargyline, and HDAC
inhibitor, vorinostat, leads to superior growth inhibition and apoptosis
in TNBC cells, but exhibits additive or antagonistic effect on growth
inhibition in non-TNBC counterparts as well as non-tumorigenic mammary
epithelial cells. Moreover, LSD1-KD augments vorinostat-induced
re-expression of a subset of aberrantly silenced genes such as NR4A1,
PCDH1, RGS16, BIK, and E-Cadherin whose re-expression may be tumor
suppressive in TNBC cells, but not in other breast cancer subtypes. The
re-expression of these genes is associated with increased H3K4me2 and
acetyl-H3K9 marks at gene promoters, indicative of active chromatin.
Integrative analysis of a panel of 36 human breast cancer cell lines of
distinct subtypes shows that the expression of these genes is more
profoundly suppressed in TNBC cells compared with other breast cancer
subtypes. Genome-wide microarray study in MDA-MB-231 cells identifies a
group of tumor suppressor genes (CDKN1A, CDKN1C, CRABP2, TNFAIP3, TP53TG1
and ING1) whose expression is induced by vorinostat and significantly
enhanced by LSD1-KD. We also show that concurrent depletion of RGS16 by
siRNA reduces overall cytotoxicity of vorinostat and blocks the
re-expression of E-Cadherin, CDKN1C and ING1 in LSD1 deficient MDA-MB-231
cells. Furthermore, co-treatment with RGS16 siRNA reverses the
down-regulation of NF-KB expression induced by combined inhibition of
LSD1 and HDACs, suggesting a crucial role of RGS16 in controlling key
apoptotic pathways in response to combination therapy in TNBC cells.
Taken together, these results provide novel mechanistic insight into how
LSD1 and HDACs modulate each other to enhance therapeutic efficacy of
vorinostat in TNBC; and also suggest that inhibition of LSD1-HDACs
axis-mediated histone modifications can be a potential therapeutic
strategy to improve treatment of TNBC.This work is funded by: Breast
Cancer Research Foundation, UPCI CCSG Shared Facilities & the Samuel and
Emma Winters Foundation.

