Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HSP90 inhibitor 17-allylamino-geldanamycin enhances sensitivity to
double-strand DNA break-inducing agents (platinum and PARP inhibitors) in
epithelial ovarian cancer.


Double-strand DNA break (DSB)-inducing agents such as platinum analogues
and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPis) exhibit significant
antitumor activity in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). Approximately 50%
of patients with EOC harbor genetic or epigenetic alterations of the
homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair pathway and are highly
responsive to these agents. However, resistance to DSB-inducing agents
develops in the majority of patients and represents a major limitation
for successful treatment of EOC. We recently defined a gene expression
profile of BRCAness that correlates with responsiveness to double-strand
DNA break-inducing agents (platinum and PARPis) in EOC. We applied this
profile to the Connectivity Map to identify candidate compounds that
might be able to enhance sensitivity to these agents. This analysis
showed that the top-performing compound was the heat shock protein 90
(HSP90) inhibitor 17-allylamino-geldanamycin (17-AAG) with very high
connectivity scores (>0.8) across several cell lines and concentrations
(permutation p value Double-strand DNA break (DSB)-inducing agents such
as platinum analogues and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors
(PARPis) exhibit significant antitumor activity in epithelial ovarian
cancer (EOC). Approximately 50% of patients with EOC harbor genetic or
epigenetic alterations of the homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair
pathway and are highly responsive to these agents. However, resistance to
DSB-inducing agents develops in the majority of patients and represents a
major limitation for successful treatment of EOC. We recently defined a
gene expression profile of BRCAness that correlates with responsiveness
to double-strand DNA break-inducing agents (platinum and PARPis) in EOC.
We applied this profile to the Connectivity Map to identify candidate
compounds that might be able to enhance sensitivity to these agents. This
analysis showed that the top-performing compound was the heat shock
protein 90 (HSP90) inhibitor 17-allylamino-geldanamycin (17-AAG) with
very high connectivity scores (>0.8) across several cell lines and
concentrations (permutation p value < 0.00001). We then evaluated the
ability of 17-AAG to enhance sensitivity to double-strand DNA
break-inducing agents in a panel of ovarian cancer cell lines. Exposure
to increasing concentrations of 17-AAG (0.02-0.1uM) was associated with
increased sensitivity of 36M2 and OVCAR5 cells to carboplatin in a dose
response manner. Similarly, exposure to increasing concentrations of
17-AAG (0.02-0.1uM) was associated with increased sensitivity of 36M2 and
OVCAR5 cells to PARPi olaparib in a dose response manner. Exposure of
these cell lines to combination of 17-AAG with carboplatin induced
increased phosphorylation of H2AX (gamma H2AX) - a surrogate of DNA
double-strand breaks - compared to carboplatin alone, as assessed by
Western blotting. In conclusion, the HSP90 inhibitor 17-AAG enhances
sensitivity of ovarian cancer cell lines to carboplatin and olaparib. The
mechanism of this previously unknown, off-target effect, seems to be due
to increasing DNA double strand breaks.

