Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Snail activation of MAPK pathway may contributes to tumor
insensitivity to tamoxifen chemotherapy in breast cancer cells.


Snail is a zinc finger transcriptional repressor that induces
epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMT) and is expressed at high levels
in tumors. Snail contributes to chemotherapy resistance in ovarian,
liver, colorectal, and breast carcinomas by activating the MAPK/ERK1/2
(ERK1/2) pathway .ERK1/2 controls cell proliferation, survival,
migration, and adhesion.However, a role for MAPK inSnail-mediated EMT in
breast cancer is unclear. We hypothesized that Snail promotes EMT by
decreasing cell adhesion and increasing cell migration through the MAPK
pathway, resulting inresistance to Tamoxifen chemotherapy. Preliminary
results suggest that breast cancer cells express variable levels of Snail
that is higher than in normal MCF10A cells.We utilized MCF-7 breast
adenocarcinoma cells transfected stably with emptyNeo vector control
(MCF-7 Neo) or constitutively active Snail cDNA (MCF-7Snail). MCF-7 Neo
and MCF-7 Snail have previously represented a breast cancerEMT model; we
used this model to examine cell adhesion and cell migration. We injected
these cells into female nude mice to examine tumor size. We also examined
activation of MAPK pathway using phospo-ERK (p-ERK) antibodies in
response to Snail overexpression and the effect of inhibiting this
pathway withUO126 (MEK inhibitor, 20uM). Finally, we tested how Snail
overexpression affects response to UO126 and/or Tamoxifen treatments
using MTS cell proliferation assay. Our results showed that Snail
overexpression led to decreased cell adhesion and increased cell
migration on collagen and fibronectin in vitro, and increased
tumorigenicity in vivo. Interestingly, immunofluorescent analysis
revealed that activated ERK1/2 (p-ERK) had cytoplasmic localization in
MCF-7 Neo, and exclusive nuclear localization inMCF-7 Snail. Inhibition
of activated ERK1/2 with UO126 antagonized cell adhesion primarily in
MCF-7 Neo cells, while it decreased cell migration primarily in MCF-7
Snail cells. This would suggest that cytoplasmic p-ERK may be important
for cell adhesion while nuclear p-ERK may be important for cell
migration. MCF-7 Neo proliferation was consistently higher than MCF-7
Snail indicating that Snail may not play a significant role in cell
proliferation, but other EMT functions like migration and adhesion.
Tamoxifen treatment did not affect MCF-7 Snail cells morphologically, but
led to sickly-appearing MCF-7Neo cells. Additionally, MCF-7 Snail cells
treated with Tamoxifen proliferated at similar rates to control untreated
cells but co-treatment with UO126 greatly inhibited cell proliferation.
This suggests that antagonizing nuclear p-ERK may sensitize breast cancer
cells to Tamoxifen therapy. In conclusion, our study shows that Snail
activation of MAPK pathway specifically within the nucleus promotes
resistance to Tamoxifen and future ERK1/2 inhibition within the nucleus
may sensitize cells to chemotherapy.

